LES TERMS DE LA LEY; OR, Certain difficult and obscure Words and Terms of the
Common Laws and Statutes of this Realm now in use, expounded and explained.

Now Corrected and Enlarged.

With very great Additions throughout the whole Book, never Printed in any
other Impression.

Hor. Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus.
LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, S. Roycroft and M. Flesher, Assigns of Richard
and Edward Atkins Esquires.

For G. Walbanke, S. Heyrick, J. Place, J. Poole, and R. Sare. 1685.

To the READER.
I Need not strive much to prove the necessity of this Book, if you consider,
that the most accomplished Pleader that ever charmed his Author with Eloquence
and Reason, began with it; much less shall I have difficulty to show its
profitableness to any who looks about and sees how many fair Estates are every
day gained by the Professors of this Noble Science, to which this little Book
must open the door and let them in: But least of all need I suspect, that
whoever is convinced of these two Points, its Necessity and Profitableness,
will fail to peruse and esteem it.

Though no name of any Author appears to it, yet my Lord Cook in his preface
to his Tenth Report ascribes it to William Rastal, that reverend Judge; who was
eminently knowing both in the Common and Statute Law of this Land, as appears
by the many Leraned Expositions and Excellent Cases, which every where occur in
it. And we may probably guess it to be written by him originally in French
only, having some cause to suspect the Translation to be done by a less skilful
Hand: For though by the many Impressions of it, and carelessness of Printers, V.
J. Cow. Interpreter.
it has suffered much (as other Books of like nature daily do) yet some
Objection lay against the Translator himself as (to omit others) Chapter is
defined to be Locum in quo fiunt communes tractatus Collegiatorum, which was
Englished thus odly, A Place wherein common Tracts of men Collegiate are made.
And for Errors of the Press, they were very numerous and strangely unhappy: as
disseised for die seized, Common Law for Canon Law, deep for deer, necessary
for accessory, tiel for viel, rather, for either, owner for power, etc. In
devastaverunt, sans compulsion, was Englished by compulsion, In the word Gild
two whole Lines were omitted in the English, and the French imperfect; so
likewise in Garranty, and other words. There was also a mistake in Geography in
the word Pape, where Rome was said to be 1500 miles from hence, full 500 too
much. And still as Impressions were iterated, Errat's increased.

Besides the very many Faults which were thus crept into this Book, it was so
extremely misalphabeted, that some words could not be found without much
difficulty, I had almost said not at all: for if the Reader finds not the word
he seeks in its true place, he commonly lays by the Book with despair.

To remedy these increasing Evils, I was willing to bestow my endeavor: First,
by adding above an hundred Words with Explications in their proper places, and
making references to others, where needful. Secondly, by Correcting the whole
Work in what I found amiss, and retrenching some antiquated and tautological
Expressions as they occurred. Thirdly, by adding to some old words such late
Statutes as alter or concern the Law established by them. And lastly, by
digesting the whole into an exact Alphabet, and taking care to prevent Errors
of the Press.

That I intended well, I can give you but my word: how I have performed, I make
my Reader Judge.

Inner Temple, T. B.

TERMS OF THE LAW EXPOUNDED.
Abate.
ABate seems to come from the French Abbatre, is to destroy or defeat utterly,
and has several significations. As, to Abate a Castle or Fortlet (Old Natura
brev. fo. 45.) which (in Westem. 1. cap. 17.) is interpreted to beat down. And
to abate a Writ, is to defeat or overthrow it, by some Error or Exception.
Britton cap. 48. And, he that steps in between the former possessor and his
Heir, is said to abate in the Lands. See Abatement.

Abatement of a Writ or Plaint.
ABatement of a Writ or Plaint is, when an Action is brought by Writ or Plaint,
wherein is want of sufficient and good matter, or else the matter alleged is
not certainly set down, or if the Plaintiff or Defendant, or Place are
misnamed, or if there appear variance between the Writ and the Specialty or
Record, or that the Writ or the Declaration be uncertain, or for Death of the
Plaintiff or Defendant, and for diverse other like causes; then upon those
defaults the Defendant may pray that the Writ or Plaint may abate, that is to
say, that the Plaintiffs Suit against him may cease for that time, and that he
shall begin again his Suit, and bring a new Writ or Plaint, if he be so
disposed. But if the Defendant in any Action plead a matter in Bar to annul the
Action for ever, he shall not come afterward to plead in Abatement of the
writ; but if after it appear in the Record, that there is some matter apparent
for which the Writ ought to be abated; then the Defendant or any person, as a
friend to the Court, may well plead and show it in Arrest of Judgment.

See the titles of Writ, Misnosmer and Variance, in the Abridgements, and the
Book called The Digests of Writs, in which this matter especially is very well
handled.

There are also other matters Which abate and stay Actions and Writs, that is
to say, Variance between the Writ and the Count.

If the Plaintiff be an alien Enemy.

For want of naming the Defendant of what Town, Trade, or degree he is where
the Suit is by Writ.

That a Woman Plaintiff is married before, or hanging the Suit.

That the Plaintiff has another Action depending for the same cause.

That the Writ is dated before the Action accrued.

For that the Defendant ought to be sued in another Court of which he is an
Attorney or Officer.

For that the Land is ancient demesne.

For that the matter in Suit was done upon the high Sea, in which case the
Admiral has Jurisdiction.

These csuses underneath do not abate the Writ or Action but suspend the
prosecution for a time.

If the Plaintiff in Action personal be out-lawed, or convicted of Recusancy,
or Excommunicated.

Upon a Scire facias against ter' tenants for Debt, plea that there are other
Lands liable to the same Debt, which are not returned, does stay the
Proceedings until they be also returned;

Abatement in Lands.
ABatement in Lands or Tenements is, when a man dies seized of Lands or
Tenements, and one that has no right enters into the same before the Heir;
this Entry is called an Abatement, and he an Abator. But if the Heir enter
first after the death of his Ancestor, and the other enter upon the possession
of the Heir, this last entry is a Disseisin to the Heir. Look in the Book of
Entries fo. 63 c. and 205. d. and 519. c. where this word Abatement is called
in Latin Intrusio. And I think it better to call it in Latin Interpositio, ot
Intratio per interpos ^ ionem, make a difference between this word and Intrusio
after the death of the Tenant for life.

Abbot.
ABbot was the sovereign head or Chief of those Houses which when they stood
were called Abbeys; and this Abbot with the Monks of the same House, who were
called the Covent, made a Corporation. Such a Sovereign of any such House shall
not be charged by the Act of his Predecessor, if it be not by common Seal, nor
for such things which come to the use of his House. Also an Abbot shall not be
charged for the debt of his Monk before his entry in Religion, though the
Creditor have an especialty thereof, except it have come to the use of his
House: but the Executors of the Monk shall be charged therewith.

Look for this in the Abridgements, the same Title, under which you shall see
that some of them were elective, some presentative; and how they were made
Governors, and their Authority. And in this Title are also comprehended all
other Corporations Spiritual, as Prior and his Covent, Friars and Canons, Dean
and Chapter.

Abettors.
ABettors are in diverse Cases diversely taken. One Kind of Abettors are they
that maliciously, without just cause or desert, do procure others to sue false
Appeals of Murder, or Felony against men, to the intent to trouble and grieve
them, and to bring them to infamy and slander. Abettors in Murders are those
that command or procure counsel, or comfort others to Murder. And in some case
Abettors shall be taken as Principals, and in some case but as Accessories: So
in other Felonies. And their presence at the deed doing, and their absence
makes a difference in the case: There are Abettors also in Treason, but they
are as Principals, for in Treason there are no Accessories.

See more in the Book called Pleas of the Crown, made by the Reverend Judge Sir
W. Stamford, in the Titles of Accessories, and Damages in Appeal.

Abeyance.
ABeyance is, when a Lease is made for term of life, the Remainder to the right
Heirs of J. S. who is living at the time of the Grant: now by this Grant the
Remainder passes from the Grantor presently, yet it vests not presently, nor
takes hold in the Grantee, that is, the right Heir of J. S. but is said to be
in Abeyance, or, as the Logicians term it, in posle, or in understanding, and,
as we say, in the Clouds, that is, in the Consideration of the Law, That if J.
S. die, having a right Heir, and living the Lessee for life, then this is a
good Remainder, and now vests and comes to the right Heir, in such sort as,
that he may grant, forfeit, or otherwise dispose the same, and ceases to be any
more in Abeyance, for that there is one now of ability to take it, because J.
S. is dead, and has left a right Heir in life; which could not be living J. S.
for that during his life none could properly be said to be his Heir. Also if a
man be Patron of a Church, and presents one to the same, now the Fee of the
Lands and Tenements pertaining to the Rectory is in the Parson: But if the
Parson die, and the Church become void, then is the Fee in Abeyance, until
there be a new Parson presented, admitted and inducted; for the Patron has not
the Fee, but only the right to present, and the Fee is in the Incumbent that is
presented, and after his death it is in no body, but in Abeyance, till there be
a new Incumbent, as is aforesaid.

See Litt. Lib. 3 cap. 11. fo. 145. and Perkins fol. 12.

Abishersing.
ABishersing (and in some Copies Mishersing) is, to be quit of Amerciaments
before whomsoever of Transgression proved.

Abjuration.
ABjuration is an Oath that a Man or Woman shall take when they have committed
Felony, and fly to the Church, or Churchyard, or to any other place
privileged for safeguard or their lives, choosing rather perpetual Banishment
out of the Realm, than to stand to the Law, and be tried for the Felony: In
which Case, before the Coroner he shall make such Confession which may make a
sufficient Indictment of Felony: Then the Coroner at the Common Law shall make
him forswear the Realm, and assign to him what Port he shall go, and shall
swear him that he go not out of the High way, and that he abide not at the Port
(if he may have good passage) above one flood and one ebb; and if he cannot
have Passage, then he shall go every day during xl. days, in the Sea to the
knees. But if such a Felon as abjures goes out of the High way, and flies to
another place, if he be taken, he shall be brought before the Judge, and there
shall have Judgment to be hanged.

And if he who so prays the privilege will not abjure, then he shall have the
privilege for xl. days, and every man may give him meat and drink. And if any
give him sustenance after xl. days, although it be his Wife, such giving is
Felony. Also he that does abjure shall be delivered from one Constable to
another, and from one Franchise to another, till he come to his Port: and if
the Constable will not receive him, he shall be grievously amerced. See the
Oath in the Treatise De abjuratione Latronum.

This Law was instituted by S. Edward the Confessor, a King of this Realm
before the Conquest, and was grounded upon the Law of mercy, and for the Love
and Reverence he and others his Successors did bear unto the House of God, or
place of Prayer and Administration of his Word and Sacraments, which we call
the Church. Note, this Law is now changed by the Statutes 21 H 8. cap. 2. 22 H.
8. cap. 14. and 32 H. 8. cap. 12. by which it appears, that he at this day
shall not abjure the Realm, but all his Liberty of this Realm, and all his
liberal and free habitations, resorts, and passages from all places of this
Realm, to one certain place in this Realm thereto limited by 32 H. 8. cap. 13.
and 33 H. 8. c. 15. See more in Stamf. li. 2. c. 10. and see the Statutes 1
Jac. c. 25. and 21 Jac. c. 28. for the repeal of all Statutes concerning
Abjured persons, and the taking away of all Sanctuaries.

See the Statutes of 35 El. chap. 12. for the Abjuration of Recusants, and
Stat. 1 Jac. c. 25.

Abridgement of a Plaint or Demand.
ABridgement of a Plaint or Demand is, where one brings an Assise, Writ of
Dower, Writ of ward, or such like: in which cases, for that the Writ of Assise
is, de libero tenemento, as in a Writ of Dower, the Writ is, Rationabilem dotem
quae contingit de libero tenemento W. her husband, and in a Writ of ward the
Writ is, Custo ^ terrarum and haeredis, etc. without showing any certainty in
these Writs; bnt in the Plaint of the Assise, or Demand in the Writ of Dower,
and in the count in the Writ of Ward, the Plaintiff or Demandant is to show the
certainty of the acres or parcels of Land: then if the Tenant pleads Nontenure,
or Ioyntenancy, or some other such like Plea, to parcel of the Land demanded,
in abatement of the Writ, the Plaintiff or Demandant may abridge his Plaint or
Demand to that Parcel, that is, he may leave out that part, and pray that the
Tenant may answer the rest, to which he has not yet pleaded any thing. The
cause is, for that in such Writs the certainty is not set down, but is
generally: and notwithstanding the Demandant has abridged his Plaint or Demand
in part, yet the Writ remains good still for the rest.

Accedas ad Curiam.
ACcedas ad Curiam is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to go to
such a Court of some Lord, or Franchise, where a Plaint is sued for taking of
beasts as a Distress, or any false Judgment is supposed to be made in any Suit
in such a Court, which is not of Record; and that the Sheriff shall there make
Record of the said Suit, in presence of the Suitors of the same Court, and of
four other Knights of the County, and certiffe it into the Kings Court, and at
the day that is limited in the Writ.

This Writ is made out of Chancery, and returnable into the Kings Bench or
Common Pleas.

Accedas ad Vicecomitem.
ACcedas ad Vicecomitem is a Writ directed to the Coroner, commanding him to
deliver a writ to the Sheriff, who having a Pone delivered him, suppresses it.
Regist. orig. 8. 3.

Acceptance.
ACceptance is a taking in good part, and as it were an Agreeing unto some act
done before, which might have been undone and avoided (if such Acceptance had
not been) by him or them that so accepted: for example, if a Bishop, before the
Statute made 1 Eliz. lease part of the possessions of his Bishopric for term
of years, reserving rent, and dies, and after another is made Bishop, who
accepts, that is, takes or receives the Rent when it is due and ought to be
paid; now by this Acceptance the Lease is made perfect and good, which else the
new Bishop might very well have avoided.

The like law is, if a man and his wife seized of Land in right of the wife,
join and make a Lease or Feoffment by Deed, reserving rent, and the husband
dies, she accepts or receives the rent; by this the Feoffment or Lease is made
perfect and good, and shall bar her of bringing a Cui in vita.

Accessories.
ACcessories are of two sorts by the Common Law, and by the Statute Law.
Accessory by the Common Law is also of two sorts, the one before the offense is
done, the other after. Accessory before the Fact is he that commends or
procures another to do Felony, and is not there present himself when the other
does it; but if he be present, then he is called Principal. Accessory after the
offense is he that receives, favors, aids, assists, or comforts any man that
has done any Murder or Felony, whereof he has knowledge. Such an Accessory
shall be punished, and shall have judgment of life and member, as well as the
Principal which did the Felony: but such an Accessory shall never be put to
answer that till the Principal be attaint or convict, or be outlawed thereupon.
In Manslaughter a man cannot be Accessory before the fact, for Manslaughter
ought to ensue upon a sudden debate or affray; for if it be premeditated, it is
Murder, Co. l. 4. fo. 44. ^.

But a Woman in such case shall not be Accessory for helping her husband. In
great or high Treason, as well the commanders as the Assisters and receivers
are always Principals.

If a man councels a Woman to murder the child in her body, and after the
child is born, and then is Murdered by the woman in the absence of him that so
gave the counsel; yet he is Accessory by his counselling before the birth of
the Infant, and not countermanding it. Dyer fo. 186. pl. 2.

Also one may be Accessory to an Accessory; as if one feloniously receive
another that is accessory to Felony, there the Receiver is an Accessory.

Accessory by the Statute is such an one as abets, counsels or receives any may
who commits, or has committed any offense made Felony by Statute: For although
the Statute does not make mention of Accessories, Abettors, etc. yet they are
included by the interpretation of the said Statutes. Stamf. Pl. cor. li. 1. c.
45, 46, 47, 48.

See more of Accessory in the said Book of Plees, lib. 1. cap. 44, 59, and 50.

Account.
Account is a Writ, and it lies where a Bailiff or Receiver to any Lord, or
other man, who ought to render Account, will not give his Account; then he to
whom the Account ought to be given shall have this Writ. And by the Statute of
Westminster. 2. c. 10. if the Accomptant be found in arrerages, the Auditors that are
assigned to him have power to award him to prison, there to abide till he have
made satisfaction to the party. But if the Auditors will not allow reasonable
expense and costs, or if they charge him with more receipts than they ought,
then his next friend that will sue for him shall sue a Writ of Ex part talis
out of the Chancery directed to the Sheriff, to take four Mainpernors to bring
his body before the Barons of the Exchequer at a certain day, and to warn the
Lord to appear there the same day.

Accord.
ACcord is an agreement between two at the least, to satisfy an offense or
Trespass that the one has made to the other, for which he has agreed to
satisfy and content him with some Recompense; which if it be executed and
performed, then, because this Recompense is a full satisfaction for the
offense, it shall be a good bar in Law, if the other after the Accord
performed, should sue again any Action for the same Trespass.

Note, that the first is properly called an Accord, the other a Contract.

Acquital.
ACquital is where there is a Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Tenant holds of
the Mesne certain Lands or Tenements in Frank-almoign, Frank-marriage, or such
like and the Mesne holds over also of the Lord paramount, or above him. Now
ought the Mesne to acquit or discharge the Tenant of all and every manner of
Service that any other would have and demand of him concerning the same Lands
or Tenements, because the Tenant must do his Service to the Mesne only, and not
to diverse Lords, for one Tenement or parcel of Land. The same Law is where
there is Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, as aforesaid, and the Mesne grants to the
Tenant (upon the tenure made between them) to acquit and discharge him of all
Rents, Services and such like. This Discharge is called Acquital.

Like Law is, if the Tenant holds of his Mesne by like Service. as the Mesne
holds over of the Lord, and the Tenant does, or pays his Services to the Mesne,
but the Mesne does not his Services to the chief Lord, wherefore he distrains
the Beasts of the Tenant. In this case the Mesne, for the equalness of the
Services, ought to acquit the Tenant of the Service due unto the Lord. Also
there is Acquital in Law, and acquital in fact. Acquital in Law is, when two
are appealed or indicted of Felony, the one as Principal, the other as
Accessory; the Principal being discharged, the Accessory by consequence is also
acquitted: And in this case, as the Accessory is acquitted by the Law, so is
the Principal in Fact. Stamf. pl. cor. fol. 168.

Acquittance.
ACquittance is a Discharge in Writting of a Sum of money, other Duty which
ought to be paid or done. As if one be bound to pay money upon Obligation, or
Rent reserved upon a Lease, or such like, and the party to whom the money or
duty should be paid or done, upon the Receipt thereof, or upon other agreement
between them had, makes a writing or Bill of his hand in discharge thereof,
witnessing that he is paid, or otherwise contented, and therefore does acquit
and discharge him of the same. Which Acquittance is such a Discharge and Bar in
the Law, that he cannot demand and recover the sum or duty again, if he produce
the Acquittance.

This word differs from that which in the Civil Law is called Acceptance,
because that may be by word without writting, and is nothing but a feigned
Payment and discharge. though no payment be had: Nor can it be said to be
Apocha, which is a witnessing the payment or delivery of money, whch
disscharges not unless the money be paid.

Acre.
ACre is a certain parcel of Land that contains in length forty Perches, and in
breadth four Perches, or of this quantity, be the length more or less. And if a
man will erect a new Cottage, he ought to lay four Acres of Land unto it,
according to this measure, 31 Eliz. cap. 7. And with this measure agrees Master
Crompton in his Jurisdiction of Courts, fol. 222. Yet he says, that according
to diverse customs of several Countries, the Perch differs, being in some places
(and most usually) but sixteen foot and an half: But in the County of Stafford
the Perch is twenty four foot, as was heretofore adjudged in the Exchequer. In
the Stat. made an. 24 H. 8. c. 14 for the sowing of Flax 166 Perches make au
Acre. The Ordinance of Measuring of land made an. 34 E. 1. St. 1. agrees with
this account.

Action.
ACtion is the form of a Suit given by the Law to recover a thing; as an Action
of Debt and such like; or as it is Co. 8. f. 151 a. An Action is a right of
prosecuting to judgment that which is due to any one.

See the Lexicon of the Law, for Action.

Action of a Writ.
ACtion of a Writ is a phrase of speech used when one pleads some matter, by
which he shows that the Plaintiff had no cause to have the writ which he
brought, and yet it may be that he may have another writ or Action for the same
matter. Such a Plea is called a Plea to the Action of the Writ: whereas if by
the Plea it should appear that the Plaintiff has no cause to have an Action
for the thing demanded, then it shall be called a Plea to the Action.

Action upon the Case.
ACtion upon the Case is a writ brought against one for an offense done without
force, as for not performing promise made by the Defendant to the Plaintiff, or
for speaking of words by which the Plaintiff is defamed, or for other
misdemaenour or deceit; where the whole case shall be contained in the Writ.

Trover, Nuisance, Slander of the person, Trade, Title, Escape on mesne Process;
For negligent keeping Fire, for inartificial performing work, for turning an
ancient Watercourse, for a Commoner against one who digs the soil of his
Common, or puts his Cattle into it without right, or incloses part of the
Cemmon.

Action mixed.
ACtion mixed is a Suit given by the Law to recover the thing demanded, and
damages for the wrong done; as in Ass of Novel dis. which Writ (if the
Disseisor make a Feoffm. to another) the Diseissce shall have against the
Disseissor and the Feoffee or other Tertenant, and thereby shall recover his
Seissn of the land, and his damages for the mean profits, and for the wrong
done him. And so is an Action of Waste and Quare impedit. But an Action of
Detinue is not called an Action mixed, although by it the thing withheld is
demanded, and shall be recovered if it may be found, and damages for the
withholding; and if it cannot be found, then damages for the thing and the
detaining.

But that is called only an Action personal, because it should be brought only
for Goods and Chattels, or Charters.

Action upon the Statute.
ACtion upon the Statute is a Writ founded upon any Statute whereby an Action
is given to one in any case where no action was before: As where one commits
perjury to the prejudice of another, who is indamaged shall have a Writ upon
the Statute, and his case. And the difference between an Action upon the
Statute and Action popular is, That where the Statute gives the Suit or Action
to the party grieved, or otherwise to one person certain, that is called Action
upon the Statute: But where by the Statute Authority is given to every one that
will to sue, that is termed Action popular.

Actions personal.
ACtions personal are such Actions whereby a man claims debt, or other Goods
and Chattels, or damage for them, or damages for wrong done to his person, and
it is properly that which in the Civil Law is called Actio in personam, which
is brought against him who is bound by Covenant or Default to give or grant any
thing.

Action Popular.
ACtion popular is an Action given upon the breach of some penal Statute, which
Action every man that will may sue for himself and the King, by information or
otherwise, as the Statute allows, and the case requires. And of these Actions
there are an infinite number; but one for example: as when any of the Jury,
that are impannelled and sworn to pass between party and party indifferently,
do take any thing of the one side or other or of both parties, to say their
Verdicts on that side, then any man that will, within the year following the
offense, may sue a writ called Decies tantum against him or them that so did
take to give his Verdict. And because this Action is not given to one
especially, but generally to any of the Kings people that will sue, it is
called an Action popular. But in this case when one has begun to pursue an
Action, no other may sue it; and in this, as it seems, it varies from an Action
popular by the Civil Law.

Actions real.
ACtions real are such Actions whereby the Demandant claims title to any Lands
or Tenements, Rents or Commons, in Fee simple, Fee-tail, or for Term of life.
Every Action real is either possessory, that is, of his own possession or
seisin; or ancestrel, scil of the seisin or possession of his ancestor. Co.
lib. 6. fol. 3.

Acts.
ACts of Parliament are positive Laws, which consist of two parts, that is to
say, of the words of the Act, and of the sense; and they both joined together
make the Law.

Additions.
ADdition is that which is given to a man besides his proper name and Surname,
that is to show of what Estate, Degree, or Mystery he is, and of what Town,
Hamlet, or County.

Additions of Estate are these, Yeoman, Gentleman, Esquire, and such like.

Additions of Degree are these which we call names of Dignity; as Knight, Earl,
Marquess, Duke.

Additions of Mystery, are Scrivener, Painter, Mason, Carpenter, and all other
of like nature: for Mystery is the craft or occupation whereby a man gets his
living.

Additions of Town, as Sale, Dale; and so of the rest.

And where a man has a household in two places, he shall be said to dwell in
both of them; so that his Addition in one of them does sufice.

By the Statute An. 1 H. 5. c. 5. it was or dained that in Suits or Actions
where process of Vtlagary lies, such Additions should be to the name of the
Defendant, to show his estate, mystery, and place where he dwells; and that
such writs shall abate, if they have not such Additions, if the Defendant take
exception thereto; but they shall not abate by the Office of the Court.

Also Duke, Marquess, Earl, or Knight, are none of those Additions, but names
of Dignity, which should have been given before the Statute.

And this was ordained by the said Statute, to the iutent that one man might
not be grieved nor troubled by the Vtlary of another: But that by reason of the
certain Addition every man might be certainly known, and bear his own burden.

Adjournment.
ADjournment is, when any Court is dissolved and determined for the present,
and afsigned to be kept again at another place or time, and (methinks) is
compounded of two words ( ad, or al, and jour.)

Admeasurement of Dower.
ADmeasurement of Dower is a writ that lies where a woman is endowed by an
Infant or by a Guardian of more than she ought to have; the Heir in such case
shall have this writ, whereby the woman shall be admeasured, and the Heir
restored to the overplus. But if one abate, that is, one who has no right
enter after the death of the husband, and indow the wife of him that is dead,
of more than she ought to have, the Heir shall not have this Writ, but Assise ^
Mort dancestor, against the Woman: and if she plead that she was endowed of the
Land as of the Freehold of her husband, the Heir shall show how she was
endowed by the Abator, and that she had more than she ought to have, and shall
pray that he may be restored to the surplusage; and if it be found, he shall be
restored.

Admeasurement of Pasture.
ADmeasurement of Pasture is a Writ that lies where many Tenants have Common
appendant in another ground, and one overcharges the Common with many Beasts:
then the other Commoners may have this Writ against him. And also it may be
brought by one Commoner only: but then it ought to be brought against all the
other Commoners, and against him that surcharged, for that all the Commoners
shall be admeasured.

And this Writ lies not against him nor for him that has Common appurtenant.
or Common in gross; but those who have Common appendant, or Common because of
vicinage.

See the diversity of all these Commons afterward in the title of Common.

Also this Writ lies not for the Lord, nor against the Lord, but the Lord may
distrain the beasts of the Tenant that are surplusage. But if the Lord
overcharge the Common, the Commoner has no remedy by the Common Law, but an
Assise of his Common.

Administrator.
ADministrator is he to whom the Ordinary commits the Administration of the
goods of a dead man for default of an Executor, and an Action shall lie against
him, and for him, as for an Executor, and he shall be charged to the value of
the Goods of the dead man, and no further, unless it be by his own false Plea,
or by wasting the goods of the dead. If the Administrator die, his Executors
are not Administrators, but it behooves the Ordinary to commit a new
Administration. And if a stranger that is not Administrator nor Executor take
the Goods of the dead, and administer of his own wrong, he shall be charged and
sued as an Executor, and not as Administrator, in any Action brought against
him by any Creditor. But if the Ordinary make a Letter ad colligendum bona
defuncti, he that has such a Letter is not Administrator, but the Action lies
against the Ordinary, as well as if he take the goods in his own hand, or by
the hand of any of his Servants by any other Commandment.

There is also another sort of Administrator, where one makes his will and
makes an infant under the age of 17 his Executor. The Bishop commits
Administration to some friend during the nonage of the Executor, which
Administrator if he sue, does not declare that the deceased died intestate.
Which Administration ceases when the Infant is 17 years old.

Admiral.
ADmiral is a high Officer that has the Government of the Kings Navy, and the
hearing and determining of all Causes, as well civil as criminal belonging to
the Sea; and to that purpose has his Court called the Admiralty. He may cause
his Citation to be served upon the Land, and take the paries body or goods in
execution upon the Land.

Also he has cognizance of the death or maihem of a man, committed in any
great Ship fleeting in great Rivers in the Realm, beneath the Bridges of the
same next the Sea.

Also to arrest Ships in the great Streams for the Voiages of the King and
Realm; and has Jurisdiction in the said Streams during the same Voiages.

Ad quod damnum.
AD quod Damnum is a Writ which ought to be sued before the King grant certain
Liberties, as a Fair, Market, or such like, which may be prejudicial to others.
And thereby it shall be required if it should be a prejudice to grant them, and
to whom it shall be prejudicial, and what prejudice shall come thereby

There is also another Writ of Ad quod damnum, if any one will turn a Common
highway and lay out another way as veneficial. Both which (though found to be
prejudicial) may be traversed in another Action, although the King has made
his grant pursuant to the Verdicts of the Jury.

Advent.
ADvent is a time which contains about a month next before the Feast of the
Nativity of our Savior Christ. In which our Ancestors repossed great reverence
for the nearness of that solemn Feast; so that all Suits in Law were then
remitted for a season: wherefore there was a Statute ordained, Westminster. 1. cap.
48. that, not withstanding the said Solemnity, it might be lawful, in respect
of Justice and Charity, to take Assies of Novel disseisin and Darreigne
Presentment, in the times of Advent, Septuagesima, and Lent. This is one of the
times from the beginning of which until the Octaves of Epiphany the solemnizing
of Marriages is prohibited to be Solemnized without special License, according
to the Verses:

Advent all Marriage forbids,
Hilarys Feast to Nuptials tends:
And Septuagint no Wedding rids,
Yet Easters Octaves that amends.
Rogation hinders hasty Loves,
But Trinity that let removes.
But the Bishop may dispense with a Marriage within these times, and it is good.

Advowson.
ADvowson is, where a man and his heirs have a right to present their Clerk to
a Personage, or other spiritual Benefice, when it becomes void. And he which
has such right to present is called Patron.

In gross is when one is seized of it only by it self. And there is an Advowson
appendant to a Manor, or to a Rectory; and this may be sold by it self and
then it is in gross, and is severed from the Manor and Rectory.

Affeerors.
AFfeerors are such as be appointed in Court-leets, etc. to mulct those who
have committed any fault which is arbitrably punishable, and for which no
express penalty is prescribed by Statute, You may see the form of their Oath in
Kitchen fol. 46. If the Jurors in the Leet receive the Articles, and being
commanded to answer to them and present, they refuse so to do, then they shall
be amerced; yet the Amerciament of every Iuror shall be affeered according to
his offense. So in Assise of Novel disseisin all the Disseisors shall be
amerced, and every one shall be affeered by himself. But if a Town be amerced,
there the Afferance shall be general, for there is not any certain person
named, as in the cases aforesaid. And if a Jury in a Leet tax an Amerciament,
this suffices without any Affeerment; for the Amerciament is the act of the
Court, and the Affeerment is the act of the Jury. Coke lib. 8. fol. 39, 40. b.

Affiance.
AFfiance is, the plighting of troth betwixt a man and a woman upon an
agreement of a Marriage to be had between them; and affidare, from whence this
word is derived, is as much as fidem ad alium dare. And this word Affiance is
used by Littleton, Chap. Dower Sect. 39.

Afforest.
AFforest is, to turn ground into Forest. Charta de Foreseta, cap. 1. and 30.
Anno 9 Hen. 3.

Affray.
AFfray comes of the French word ( effrayer) which signifies to affright or
scare; therefore an Affray may be without word or blow given, and so this word
is used in the Statute of North. 2. E. 3. cap. 3. But it is in our Books many
times confounded with the word Assault, as it appears by Lambert in his
Eirenarch lib. 1. cap. 17. Yet, as it is there said, they differ in this, that
an Assault is but a wrong to the party, but an Affray is a wrong to the
Commonwealth: and therefore an Affray is inquirable and punishable in a Leet.
Also an Assault is made most commonly but on one side; but an Affray is the
fighting of many together.

Age prier.
AGE prier is, when an Action is brought against an Infant for Land which he
has by descent, there he shall show the matter to the Court, and shall pray
that the action may stay till his full age of 21 years, and so by award of the
Court the Suit shall surcease.

But in a Writ of Dower and in Assise, and also in such actions where the
Infant is supposed to come to the Land demanded by his own wrong, he shall not
have his age.

And note well, that there are many diversities of ages. For the Lord shall
have aid of his Tenant in Socage to marry his daughter, when the daughter is
of the age of 7 years, and aid to make his son and Heir a Knight, when he is of
the age of 7 years.

A woman who is married at the age of 9 years, if her husband die seized, shall
have dower, and not before.

And 14 years is the age of a Woman, who shall not be in ward, if she were of
such age at the time of the death of her Ancestor; but if she were within the
age of 14 years, and in ward of the Lord, then she shall be in ward till the
age of 16 years. And 21 years is the age of the Heir male to be in ward, and
after that out of ward.

Also that is the age of male and female to sue and to be sued for Lands, which
they have or claim by descent, and to make all manner of Contracts and
Bargains, and not before: but if such an infant within the age of 21 years give
his goods, and the Donee take them, the infant may have an Action of Trespass:
but otherwise it is if he deliver them himself. See Coke lib. 3. fol 13. a. l.
6. f. 3.

Agent and Patient.
AGent and Patient is, when a man is the doer of a thing and the party to whom
it is done; as where a Woman endows her self of the fairest possession of her
husband. So if a man has ten pounds issuing out of certain land, and he
disseises the Tenant of the Land in an Assise brought by the Disseisee, the
Disseisor shall recoup the Rent in the damages; so that where the mean profits
of the land in such case were to the value of 13 l. the Disseisee shall recover
but three pounds. Also if a man be indebted to another, and after makes the
party to whom he is so indebted his Executor, and dies, the Executor may retain
so much of the goods of the dead in his hands as his own Debt amounts to; and
by this Retainer he is the Agent and the Patient, that is, the party to whom
the Debt is due, and the party that pays the same.

But a man shall not be judge in his own case, as is resolved, Coke lib. 8.
fol. 118. in Bonham's Case, That the Censors cannot be Judges. Ministers, and
Parties. Judges to give sentence or judgment, Ministers to make summons, and
Parties to have the half of the forfeiture. And although an Act of Parliament
yields to any one, to hold or to have conusance of all manner of Pleas arising
before him within his Manor of D. yet he shall hold no Plea to which he
himself is party; Quia iniquum est aliquem suae rei esse judicem.

Agist.
AGist seems to come of the French Giser (i jacere) or of Gister, (i.
stabulari) a word proper to Deer; and therefore Budaeus lib. poster.
Philologiae, says that Gist idem est quod Lustrum vel Cubile And Agist in our
Common Law signifies to take in and feed the Cattle of a stranger in the Kings
Forests; and therefore those Officers in the Forest that thus take in Cattle,
and gather the money for the Feed of them, are called Agistors, and the feed or
herbage of the Cattle is called Agistment; which in a large signification
extends to all manner of Common of Herbage of any kind of ground, or land, or
woods, or the money that is due or received for the same, as well out of
Forests as within them. See Manwood's Forest Laws. c. 11. fol. 80.

Agreement.
AGreement is thus defined or expounded in Plowdens's Commentaries:
Aggreamentum is compounded of two words, namely, Aggregatio and Mentium, that
is, Agreement of minds. So that Agreement is a consent of minds in some things
done or to be done; and by drawing together the two words, Aggregatio and
Mentium, and by the hasty and short pronouncing of them, they are made one
word, to wit, Aggreamentum, which is no other than a joining, coupling, and
knitting together of two or more minds in any thing done or to be done. (See
after in Testament.) And this Agreement is in three manners.

The first is an Agreement executed already at the beginning.

The second is an Agreement after an act done by another, and is an Agreement
executed also.

The third is an Agreement executory, or to be done in time yet to come.

The first, which is an Agreement executed already at the beginning, is such
whereof mention is made in the Stat. of 25 E. 3. c 3. of Clothes, in the 4 th
Sat. which says, That the goods and things bought by forestallers, being
thereof attainted, shall be forfeit to the King, if the buyer have made gree
with the seller. In which case the word ( gree) which is otherwise called
Agreement, shall be extended to Agreement executed, that is, payment for the
things.

The second manner of Agreement is, where one does a thing or act, and another
agrees or assents thereunto afterward: as if one make a Disseisin to my use,
and afterward I agree to it, now I shall be a Disseisor from the beginning.
And such Agreement is an Agreement after an act done.

The third agreement is, when both parties at one time are agreed that such a
thing shall be done in time to come: and this agreement is executory, in as
much as the thing shall be done after, and yet there their minds agreed at one
time. But because the performance shall be afterward, and the thing upon which
the Agreement was made remains to be done, that Agreement shall be called
Executory. And that the Stat. of 26 H. 8. c. 3. does prove, which says, That
every Vicar, Parson, and such liks, etc. before their actual possession or
meddling with the profits of their Benefices, shall satisfy, content, etc. or
agree to pay the King the First Fruits, etc. and if any such Parson or Vicar,
etc. enter in actual possession, etc. this Agreement is to be understood
executory, as common usage proves: for it is used, that he, with one or two
with him, do make two or three Obligations, for it is to be paid at certain
days after. And this Agreement executory is divideded into two points: One is
an Agreement executory which is certain at the beginning, as is said last
before of the First Fruits.

The other is, when the certainty does not appear at the first, and the parties
are agreed that the thing shall be performed or paid upon the certainty known:
as if one sell to another all his Wheat in such a bay of his Barn unthres ed,
and it is agreed between them, that he shall pay for every bushel 3s. when it
is threshed clean and measured.

Aid.
AID is when a Tenant for term of Life, Tenant in dower, Tenant by courtesy,
or Tenant in Tail after possibility of issue extinct, is impleaded; then, for
that they have no estate but for term of life, they shall pray in aid of them
in the Reversion, and process shall be made by Writ against him, to come and
plead with the tenant in the defense of the land, if he will: But it behooves
that they agree in the Plea; for if they vary, the plea of the Tenant shall be
taken, and then the aid-prayer is void: but if he come not at the second Writ,
then the tenant shall answer sole.

Also Tenant for years, Tenant at will, Tenant by Elegit, and Tenant by
Statute-Merchant, shall have aid of him in the Reversion; and the Servant and
Bailiff of their Master, when they have done any thing lawfully in the right of
their Master, shall have aid.

This word is sometimes applied to Subsidies, as in 14 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 1.
Other times to a Prestation due from the Tenants to their Lords; as for relief
due to the Lord paramount or for the making of his Son a Knight, or for
marrying of his Daughter. Glan. lib. 9. c. 8.

This aid the K. or other Lord by the ancient Law of England, may lay upon
their Tenants, to make his son Knight at the age of 15 years, and to marry his
daughter at the age of 7 years, Regist. orig. fol. 87. a. and that at what rate
they please. But the Stat. of West. 1. made An. 3. Ed. 1. ordained a restraint
for any great or large demand made by common persons, being Lords, in this
case, and has tied them to a certain rate; and the Stat. of 25 Ed. 3. Stat. 5.
c. 11. provides that the rate which is appointed by the former Stat. shall be
held in the King as well as in other Lords.

Aid of the King.
AID of the King is in like case as it is said before of a common person, and
also in many other cases where the King may have loss, although the Tenant be
Tenant in fee-simple, he shall have aid; as if a Rent be demanded against the
Kings Tenant who holds in chief, he shall have aid, so he shall nor of a common
person.

And where a City or Borough has a Fee-farm of the King, and any thing is
demanded against them which belongs to the Fee-farm they shall have aid for it
of the King.

Also a man shall have aid of the King in the stead of Voucher. And the Kings
Baliff, the Collector and the Purveyor shall have aid of the King, as well as
the Officers of other persons.

Aile.
AILE is a Writ which lies where Land descends from the grandfather to his
nephews, sc. the son or daughter of the son of the grandfather; the father
being dead before the entry by him, and one abates, the heir shall have against
the Abator this Writ.

Aler sans jour.
ALer sans jour is, (word for word) to go without day, that is, to be dismissed
the Court, because there is no day of farther Appearance assigned.

Ale-Taster.
ALe-taster is an Officer appointed and sworn in every Leet, to look that the
due Assise be kept of all the Bread, Ale and Beer sold within the Jurisdiction
of the Leet.

Alien.
ALien is a Subject born out of the liegeance of our King, and he cannot have
any real or personal Action concerning land, but in every such Action the
Tenant or Defendant may plead that he was born in such a place, which is not
within the Kings liegeance, and demand judgment if he shall be answered.

Every alien friend may by the Common Law have and get within this realm, by
gift, trade, or other lawful ways, any treasure or personal goods whatsoever,
as well as any Englishman, and may maintain any Action for the same. But Land
within this realm or houses (if not for their dwelling only) Alien friends
connot have nor get, nor maintain any Action real or personal for any Land or
House, unless the House be for their necessary dwelling. An Alien enemy cannot
maintain any Action, nor get any thing within this Realm. And the reasons why
aliens born are not capable of inheritance within England, are;

1. The Secrets of the Realm may by this be discovered.

2. The Revenues of the Realm shall be taken and enjoyed by Strangers born.

3. This will tend to the destruction of the Realm. First, in the time of war,
for then Strangers may fortify themselves in the heart of the Realm, and set
in combustion the Commonwealth. Secondly, in the time of peace, for by such
means many Aliens born may get a great part of the Inheritance and freehold of
the Realm, by which there would ensue a want of Justice, the supporter of the
Commonwealth, for this that Aliens cannot be returned of Iuries, nor sworn for
the trial of Issues between the King and Subject, or between Subject and
Subject. Vide Coke lib. 7. Calvin's Case.

Alienation.
ALienation is as much to say as to make a thing another man's, or to alter or
put the possession of Lands or other things from one man to another. And in
some cases a man has power in himself so to do, without the assent or license
of any other, and in some not. As if Tenant in chief alien his estate without
the Kings license, then by the St. of 1 Ed. 3. c. 12. a reasonadle Fine shall
be taken, where at the Common Law before the said St. the Lands and tenements
held in chief of the K. and aliened without license, have been held forfeited.
And if the K's Tenant that holds in chief intended to alien unto C. to the use
of D. and hereupon if he purchase License to alien to C. and accordingly aliens
to C. to the use of D. which use is not mentioned in the License; in this case
he shall pay but one Five, for it is but one Alienation. Coke lib. 6 fol. 28.
But if a man will alien Lands in Fee-simple to an House of Religion, or to a
body incorporate, it behooves him to have the Kings License to make this Grant
or Alienation, and the chief Lords of whom such lands are held, etc. otherwise
the land so alienated in Mortmain shall be forfeited by the Statute of 15 R. 2.
cap. 5.

Allay.
ALlay is the Temper or mixture of Gold and Silver with baser metal, for the
increasing the weight of it so much as might countervail the Kings charge in
the coining. This word is used in the Statute of 9 H. 5. cap. 11. for the
payment of English Gold by the Kings weight.

Almner.
ALmner is an Officer of the Kings house, whose Office is to distribute the
Kings Alms every day; and to that purpose he has the collecting of all
Forfeitures of Deodands, and of the goods of Felons de se, which the King
allows him to dispose in Alms to the poor. And of his Office, see Flets, lib.
2. cap. 22.

Almoin.
ALmoin, See Aumone.

Alnager.
ALnager is an Officer of the Kings, who by himself, or by his Deputy looks to
the Assise of all Cloth made of Wool throughout the Land, and to put a Seal,
for that purpose ordained, unto them. 35 E. 3. Stat. 4. c. 1. Anno 3. R. 2. c.
2. And he is to be accomptable to tae King for every Cloth that is so sealed in
a Fee or Custom hppertaining to it.

Altarage.
ALtarage in Latin, Altaragium, signify Duties and Offerings to holy Altars
mentioned 2 Cro. Rep. 516. that a Vicarage was endowed with it and small Tithes.

Ambidexter.
AMbidexter is he that, when a matter is in suit between men, takes money of
the one side and of the other, either to labor the Suit, or such like; or if
he be of the Jury, to give his Verdict.

Amendment.
AMendment is, When Error is in the Process, the Justices may amend it after
Judgment. But if there be Error in giving Judgment, they may not amend it, but
the party is put to his Writ of Error. And in many cases, where the default
appears in the Clerks that writ the Record, it shall be amended: but such
things as come by information of the party, as the Town, Mystery, and such
like, shall not be amended, for he must inform true upon his peril.

Amercement.
AMercement most properly is a Penalty assessed by the Peers or equals of the
party amerced, for an offense done; as for want of Suit of Court, or for not
amending someting that he was appointed to redress by a certain time before, or
for such like cause; in which case the party who offends puts himself in the
mercy of the King or Lord, and thereupon this Penalty is called Amerciament.

And there is a difference between Amerciaments and Fines, Kitch. 214. For
Fines are Punishments certain, which grow expressy from some Statute; and
Amerciaments are such which are arbitrarity imposed by the Affeerors, which
Kitchen seems to confirm fol ^ 8. in these words, The Amerciament is affeered
by Equals.

Also it appears, Coke lib. 8. fol. 39. That a Fine is always imposed and
assessed by the Court, but Amerciament, which is called in Latin Misericordia,
is assessed by the Country.

Another diversity there is: as if a man be convict before the Sheriff of the
County of a Recaption, he shall be only amerced, but if he be convict of this
in the Common Bench, he shall be fined. And the reason of this diversity is,
That the County Court is not a Court of Record, and therefore cannot impose a
Fine, for no Court can impose a Fine but such a Court as is of Record, Cok.
lib. 8. fol. 41. a. If the Defendant or Tenant plead a false Deed to him, or
deny his own Deed, and this is found against him, or he, leaving his own
Verification, acknowledges the Action; he shall be fined for his falsity,
because we ought to be sure of our own Acts. But if one deny the Deed of his
Ancestor, and this is found against him, yet he shall not be fined, but amerced
only, because it was the act of a Stranger. Co. lib. 8. fol. 60. a. see more
there.

Amercement royal.
AMercement royal is, when a Sheriff, Coroner, or other such Officer of the
King, is amerced by the Justices for his abuse in the Office. Learn if it
should not be called a Fine.

Amoveas manus.
AMoveas manus. See Ouster le main.

An, jour, and wast.
AN, jour, and wast, is a Forfeiture when a man has committed petit Treason or
Felony, and has Lands holders of some common person, which shall be seized for
the King, and remain in his hands by the space of one year and a day next after
the Attainder; and then the Trees shall be pulled up, the Houses razed and
pulled down, and the Pastures and Meadows eyred and plowed up; unless he to
whom the Lands should come by escheat or forfeiture redeem it of the King. A
thing the more to grieve the offenders, and terrify others to fall into the
like, in showing how the Law does detest the offense so far forth, as that it
does execute judgment and punishment even upon their dumb and dead things.

Aniente.
ANiente comes from the French Aneantir, that is, annihiliare; for Aniente in
our Law-language signifies as much as frustrated or made void, and is used by
Littleton in his 741. Section.

Annates.
ANates is a word used in the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 20. and seems to all
one with First Fruits: for so Pol. Virgil. de Inventione rerum, lib. 8. cap. 2.
says, That Annatarum usus multo antiquior est quam recentiores quidam
scriptores suspicantur, and Annatas (more suo) appellant primos fructus unius
anni Sacerdotii vacantis, aut dimidiam eorum partem.

Annua pensione.
ANnua pensione is a Writ by which the King, having due unto him an annual
Pension from any Abbot or Prior for any of his Chaplains which he will name,
who is not provided of a competent Living, demands it of the said Abbot or
Prior for one that is named in the same Writ, until, etc. and also commands
him, for the better certainty of his Chaplain, to give his Letters Patents to
him for the same. See Fitzherb. Not. Bre^ fol, 231. where you may also see the
names of all the Abbeys and Priories which were bound to this in respect of
their foundation or creation, and also for the form of the Letters Patents
usually granted upon such a Writ.

Annuity.
ANnuity is a certain Sum of money granted to another in Fee-simple, Feetail,
for term of Life, or for term of years, to receive of the Grantor, or of his
Heirs, so that no Freehold is charged therewith, whereof a man shall never
have Assise nor other Action, but a Writ of Annuity; and it is no Assets to the
Heir of the Grantee, to whom it shall descend.

There are many differences between Annuities and Rents: For every Rent is
issuing out of Land, but an Annuity is not, but charges the person, that is,
the Grantor or his Heirs, which have Assets by descent, if some special proviso
be not to the contrary: as Littl. Sect. 220.

Also for an Annuity no Action lies, but only a Writ of Annuity against the
Grantor, his Heirs or Successors: and this Writ of Annuity never lies against
the taker of the profits, but only against the Grantor, or his Heirs. Whereas
for a Rent the same Actions he against the Tenant of the Land, and sometimes
against him that is taker of the Rent, that is, against him that takes the Rent
wrongfully. Also au Annuity is not to be taken for Assets, because it is not
any Freehold in Law. And it shall not be put in Execution upon a
Statute-Merchant, or Statute-Staple, or Elegit, as a Rent may. Doct. and Stud.
cap. 30. See Dyer fol 345. pla. 2. Also an Annuity cannot be fevered, Co. l. 8.
fol. 52. b. according to the Verse there:

Let no Judge himself endeavor Annuities or Debts to sever.

Anoysance.
ANoysance is a word used in the Statute of 22 Hen. 8. cap. 5 and signifies no
more than Nuisance, and therefore see Title Nuisance.

Apostata capiendo.
APostata capiendo is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, for the taking of the
body of one who, having entered into, and professed some order of Religion,
leaves his said order, and departs from his house, and wanders in the country:
upon a Certificate of this matter made by the Sovereign of the House in the
Chancery, and the praying of the said Writ, he shall have it directed to the
Sheriff for the apprehending of him, and redelivery of him to the said
Sovereign of the House, or his lawful Attorney. See the form of it in Fitz.
Not. Br. 233. c.

Appeal.
APpeal is where one has done a Murder, Robbery, or Maihem, then the wife of
him that is slain shall have an Action of Appeal against the Murderer; but if
he have no wife, then his next Heir-male shall have the Appeal at any time
within a year and a day after the deed.

Also he that is so robbed or maimed shall have his Appeal: and if the
Defendant be acquitted, he shall recover damages against the Appealer and the
Abettors, and they shall have the imprisonment of a year, and shall make fine
to the King. An Appeal of Mathem is in manner but a Trespass, for he shail only
recover damages.

Appeals are commenced two ways, either by Writ or by Bill. By Writ, when a
Writ is purchased out of the Chancery by one man against another, commanding
him that he shall appeal a third man of some Felony or other offense by him
committed, and to find pledges that he shall do this with effect; and this Writ
is to be delivered to the Sheriff to be recorded.

Appeal by Bill is, when a man of himself gives his accusation of another man
in writing to the Sheriff or Coroner, and takes upon himself the burden of
appealing him that is named in the said writing. Appellant is the Plaintiff in
the Appeal.

Appendant and Appurtenant.
APpendant and Appurtenant are things that by time of prescription have
belonged, appertained, and are joined to another principal thing, by which they
pass and go as accessory to the same special thing, by virtue of these words,
Pertinentiis, as Lands, Advowsons, Commons, Piscaries, Ways, Courts, and diverse
such like to a Manor, House, Office, or such others.

Apportionment.
APportionment is a dividing into parts a Rent which is dividable, and not
entire or whole; and forasmuch as the thing out of which it was to be paid is
separated and divided, the Rent also shall be divided, having respect to the
parts, As if a man have a Rent-Service issuing out of Land, and he purchases
parcel of the Land, the Rent shall be apportioned according to the value of the
Land.

So if a man hold his Land of another by Homage, Fealty, Escuage, and certain
Rent, if the Lord of whom the Land is holden purchase parcel of the Land, the
Rent shall be apportioned.

And if a man let Lands for years, reserving Rent, and after a stranger recover
part of the Land; then the Rent shall be apportioned, that is, divided, and the
Lessee shall pay, having respect to that which is recovered, and to that which
yet remains in his hands, according to the value.

But a Rentcharge cannot be apportioned, nor things that are entire: As if one
hold Land by Service to pay to his Lord yearly at such a Feast an Horse, an
Hawk, a Rose, a Cherry, or such like; there if the Lord purchase parcel of the
land, this Service is gone absolutely, because an Horse, an Hawk, a Rose, a
Cherry, and such other, cannot be divided or apportioned, without damage to the
whole.

In some cases Rentcharge shall be apportioned: as if a man has a Rentcharge
issuing out of Land, and his Father purchases parcel of the Lands charged in
fee, and dies, and this parcel descends to his son who has the Rentcharge;
there this charge shall be apportioned according to the value of the land,
because such portion of the Land purchased by the Father, comes not to the son
by his own act, but by descent and course of Law.

Common appendant is of a common right and severable; and although the Commoner
in such case purchase parcel of the Land wherein the Common is appendant, yet
the Common shall be apportioned: but in this case Common appurtenant and not
appendant by such purchase is extinct. Coke lib. 8. fol. 79.

Appropriations.
APpropriations were, when those Houses of Religion, and those religious
persons, as Abbots, Priors, and such like had the Advowson of any Parsonage to
them and their Successors, and obtained license of the Pope, Ordinary, and
King, that they themselves and their Successors from thenceforth should be
Parsons there, and that it should be from thanceforth a Vicarage, and the Vicar
should serve the Cure. And so at the beginning Appropriations were made only to
those persons Spiritual that could administer the Sacraments and say divine
Service, as Abbots, Priors, Deans, and such like. After by little and little
they were enlarged and made to others, as namely to a Dean and Chapter, which
is a Body corporate, consssting of many, which Body together could not say
divine Service; and (which was more) to Nuns that were Prioresses of some
Nunnery, which was a wicked thing, in regard that they could neither administer
Sacraments, nor preach, nor say divine Service to the Parishioners.

And all this was upon pretense of Hospitality and maintenance thereof. And to
supply these defects a Vicar was devised, who should be Deputy to the Priors or
to the Dean and Chapter, and also at the last to the said Abbots, and others to
say divine Service, and should have for his labor but a little portion, and
they to whom the Appropriations were made should retain the greater revenues;
and they did nothing for it, by means whereof Hospitality decayed in the place
where it ought to have been chiefly maintained, namely, in the Parish where the
Benefice was, and where the profits grew: and so it continues to this day, if
not worse, since not only Friars and Nuns, but Laymen and seculer women are
possessed of them, to the great hinderance of Learning, impoverishment of the
Ministry, and infamy of the Gospel and professors thereof.

The Vicar shall have a certain portion of the Benefice, and the Abbot and the
Covent shall be Parsons, and shall have the other profits. This is called
Appropriation, and then the Abbot and Covent shall be Parsons emparsonees: but
such Appropriation may not be made to begin in the life of the Parson, without
his assent.

And after the Church was appropriated, then was it an incident inseparable to
the House of Religion to which it was so appropriated. And therefore where the
Lands of the Templars in England were given by the general words of an Act of
Parliament of 17 E. 2. to the Hospitallers, it was adjudged, That the
Hospitaliers by the said Act should not have the Appropriation, for it was
inseparably annexed to the Corporation of the Templars: which thing consisting
in an inseparable privity, by the general words of an Act of Parliament shall
not be transferred to others. Coke lib. 7. fol. 13. a.

But if such Advowsons of the Parsonage be recovered by ancient Title, then the
Appropriation is adnulled. And it is called Appropriation, for that they hold
the profits to their own proper use.

Approvement.
APprovement is, where a man has Common in the Lords waste ground, and the
Lord incloses part of the Waste for himself leaving nevertheless sufficient
Common, with egress and regress, for the Comm^ners. This enclosing is called
Approvement. See Reg. Jud. fol. 8, and 9.

Approver.
APprover or Appellor is he who has committed some Felony, which he confesses,
and now appeals or approves, that is, accuses others who were Coadjuters or
Helpers with him in doing the same or other Felonies, which thing he will
approve. And this proof is to be either by Battle, or by the Country, at his
election that appealed. This accusation is often done defore the Coroner, who
either is assigned to the Felon by the Court to take and record that which he
says; or is called by the Felon himself, and required, for the good of the
Prince and Common wealth, to record that which he shall say. The Oath of the
Approver when he begins the combat, as also the Proclamation by the Heralds,
appear in Crompt. page ult.

If a man of good fame be appealed by an Approver, by which he is taken and
kept in prison, yet he may have a Writ to be directed to the Sheriff,
commanding him to suffer the party appealed to be bailed by good Sureties. But
if a man appealed by an Approver be kept in prison, and afterward the Approver
dies, there he may sue a Writ directed to the Sheriff, to suffer him to be
bailed upon good Surety, if he be not a notorious Felon, although he be not of
good fame. Fitz. N. B. 250. d.

The Kings Approvers.
THE Kings Approvers are those that have the letting of the Kings Demeans in
small Manors for the Kings greater advantage. And for such Approvers you may
read in the Stat. 2 E. 3. c. 12. that they were men s ^ nt into diverse
Countries to increase the Farms of Hundreds and Wapentakes. And you may see in
the Statute made in 1 E. 3. c. 8. that the Sheriffs call themselves the Kings
Approvers.

Arbitrament.
Arbitrament is an award, Determination, or Judgment, which one or more makes
at the request of two parties at the least, for and upon some Debt, Trespass,
or other Controversy had between them. And this is called in Latin Arbitratus,
and Arbitrium; and they tha ^ make the Award or Arbitrament are called Arbitri,
in English Arbitrators

To every Arbitrament five things are incident; sc. Matter of Controversy,
Submission, Parties to the Submission, Arbitrors, and giving up of the
Arbitrament. Dyer 217. pl. 62. If the Arbitrament be made, that the one party
shall go quit of all Actions which the other has against him, and nothing is
said of the Actions which he has against the other; this Arbitrament is void
because it was made of the one part, and not of the other. 7 H. 6. ca. 40.

When a Submission to an Arbitrament is general of all Actions, etc. and the
Arbitrator makes an Award only of one; yet this may well stand with the
generality of the words, that there was but one Cause depending between them;
for, A generality implies no certainty. And if the Arbitrament should be for
this avoided, then many Arbitrements might be avoided; for the one might
conceal a Trespass done, or other cause of Action given him, and so avoid the
Arbitrament. Also no party to any Arbitrament shall be by it bound, unless the
Award be delivered unto him, as it is in Co. lib. 5. f. 103. See Co. l. 8. fol.
98.

Arches.
ARches (or the Court of the Arches) is the chief and most ancient Consistory
belonging unto the Archbishop of Canterb. and, it is called from the Arches of
the Church where the Court is kept, namely, Bow-Church in London. And of this
Cour ^ mention is made in Stat. 24 H. 8. cap. 12. touching Appeals.

Arms.
ARms, in the understanding of the Law, is extended to any thing that a man, in
his anger or fury takes into his hand to cast at, or strike another. Cromp.
Justice of Peace. fol. 65. a.

Array.
ARray is the taking or ordering a Jury or Enquest of men that are impannelled
upon any cause, 18 H. 6. cap. 14. from whence comes the Verb, to array a
panel, Old N. B. f. 157. that is, to set forth one by another the men that are
impannelled. The Array shall be quashed, ibid. By Statute every Array in Assise
ought to be made four days before. Brook tit. Panel. number. 10. To challenge
the Array. Kitch. 92.

Arrain.
ARrain is to put a thing in order or in his place: As one is said to arrain an
Assise of Novel Disseisin in the County in which it ought to be brought for
trial before the Justices of that Circuit, Old N. B. fol. 109. And in such
sense Litt. has used the same word, The Lessee attains an Assese of Novel
Disseisin. Also a prisoner is said to be arraigned, when he is indicted and put
to his trial.

Arrerages.
ARrerages are Duties behind unpaid after the days and times in which they were
due, and ought to have been paid, whether they be Rents of a Manor; or any
other thing reserved.

Arrest.
ARrest is when one is taken and restrained for his liberty. None shall be
arrested for Debt, Trespass, Detinue, or other cause of Action, but by virtue
of a precept or commandment out of some Court. But for Treason Felony, or
breaking of the Peace, every man has authority to arrest without warrant or
Precept. And where one shall be arrested for Felony, it behooves that some
Felony be done, and that he be suspected of the same Felony; or otherwise he
may have against him that did so arrest him a Writ of False imprisonment. And
when any man shall be arrested for Felony, he shall be brought to the Goal,
there to abide till the next Sessions, to be indicted or delivered by
Proclamation.

Arretted.
ARretted is he that is convented before any Judge, and charged with a crime.
Sometimes it is used for imputed or laid unto: As no folly can be arretted to
him that is within age, Lit. cap. Remit. This word may come of the Latiu word
Rectus, for Bacton has this Phrase, Ad rectum habere malefactorem, so that he
may be charged and put to his trial. And in another place he says, Rectarus de
morte hominis.

Assach.
ASsach seems to be a British word, and to signify a strange kind of Excuse
or Purgation by the Oaths of 300. men. Anno 1 H. 5. cap. 5.

Assart.
ASsart is an offense committed in the Forest, by pulling up by the Roots the
Woods which are thickets or coverts of the Forest, and by making them as plain
as the arable Land. This Assart of the Forest is the greatest offense or
trespass that can be done in the Forest to Vert or Venison, containing in it
Waste, or more: For where Waste of the Forest is nothing but the felling and
cutting down of the Covert wood, which may in time grow again; an Assart is a
pulling up by the root, by which they can never grow again. Man. part. 2. c. 9.
number. 1. A writ of Ad quod damnum may be awarded, where a man will sue license
to assart his Land within the Forest, and make it several for Tillage; so that
it is no offense if it be done by license. Regist. orig. fol. 257.

Assault.
ASsault (from the French Assaillir) signifies a violent kind of injury offered
to a man's person, of a more large extent than Battery; for it may be committed
by offering a blow, or by a terrifying speech. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 1. cap. 3.

Assayer.
ASsayer is an Officer of the Mint appointed by the Stat. of 2 H. 6. c. 12. to
be present at the taking in of the Bullion as a party indifferent between the
Master of the Mint and the Merchant, to set the true value of the Bullion
according to the Law.

Assets.
ASsets is in two sorts; the one called Assets per descent, the other, Assets
enter maines. Assets ^ descent is, where a man is bound in an Obligation, and
dies secised of Lands in Feesimple, which descend to his Heir, then his land
shall be called Assets, that is, enough or sufficient to pay the same debt; and
by that means the Heir shall be charged as far as the Land so to him descended
will stretch. But if he have aliened before the Obligation be put in Suit, he
is discharged.

Also when a man seized of lands in tail, or in the right of his wife, aliens
the same with warranty, and has in value as much Lands in Fee-simple, which
descends to his Heir, who is also Heir in Tail, or Heir to the woman: now if
the Heir, after the decease of his Ancestor, bring a Writ of Formedon, or Sur
cui in vita, for the land so aliened; then he shall be barred, by reason of the
Warranty, and the land so descended, which is as much in value as that which
was sold, and so thereby he has received no prejudice. Therefore this Land is
called Assets per descent.

Assets enter maines is, when a man indebted (as before is said) makes
Executors, and leaves them sufficient to pay, or some commodity or profit is
come unto them in right of their Testator; this is called Assets in their hands.

Assignee.
ASsignee is he to whom a thing is appointed or assigned to be used, paid, or
done; and is always such a person who occupres or has the thing so assigned in
his own right, and for himself. And of Assignees there are two sorts, namely,
Assignee in Deed, and Assignee in Law.

Assignee in Deed is, when a Lease is granted to a man and his Assignees, or
without that word, Assignees, and the Grantee gives, grants, or sells the same
Lease to another, he is his Assignee in Deed. Assignee in Law is every Executor
named by the Testator in his Testament. As if a Lease be made to a man and his
Assignees (as is aforesaid) and he makes his Executors, and dies without
assignment of the Lease to any other; the Executors shall have the Lease,
because they are his Assignees in Law. And so it is in other cases.

Assise.
ASsise is a Writ that lies where any man is pur out of his lands tenements, or
of any profit to be taken in a certain place, and so disseised of his
Freehold. Freehold to any man is, where he is seized of lands and tenements,
or profit to be taken in Fee-simple, Feetail. for term of his own or another
man's life. But Tenant by Elegit, Tenant by Stat Merchant and Stat. Staple may
have Assise, though they have no Freehold; and this is ordained by diverse
Statutes.

In an Assise it is needful always that there be one Disseisor and one Tenant,
or otherwise the writ shall abate.

Also where a man is disseised and recovers by Assise of Novel Disseisin, and
afterward is again disseised by the same Disseisor, he shall have against him a
Writ of Redisteisin directed to the Sheriff to make inquisition; and if the
Redisseisin be found, he shall be sent to prison. Also if one recover by assise
of Mortduncaster, or by other Jury, or default, or by reddition, and if he be
another time disseised, then he shall have a Writ of Post Disseisin; and he who
is taken and imprisoned for Redisseisin, shall not be delivered without special
commandment of the King. See the Statutes Merton c. 3. Marlebridge cap. 8. and
Westminster 2. c. 26.

There is also another assise, called Assise of Fresh force, and lies where a
man is disseised of tenements which are devisable, as in the City of London, or
other Boroughs or Towns that are Franchises; then the Defendant shall come unto
the Court of the said Town, and enter his Plaint, and shall have a Writ
directed to the Mayor or Batleffs, etc. and thereupon shall pass a Jury in
manner of Assise of Novel Disseisin. But he must enter his Plaint within forty
days, as it is said, or otherwise he shall be sent to the Common Law. And if
the Officers delay the Execution, then the Plaintiff shall have another Writ to
have Execution, and a Sicut alias, and a Pluries, etc. See Littleton cap. Rents.

Assise de darrain Presentment.
ASsise de darrain Presentment. See Quare impedit.

Also there is an Assise of Nuisance called Assisa Nocumenti.

Assise of the last Presentation.

Assise de Mortdancestor.
ASsise de Mortdancastor, Look in the title of Cosinage.

Association.
ASsociation is a Patent sent by the King, either of his own motion, or at the
suit of the party Plaintiff to the Justices of Assise, to have other persons
associated to them to take the Assise: And upon this Patent of Association, the
King will send his Writ to the Justices of Assise, by it commanding them to
admit them that are so sent.

If the King makes three Justices of Assise, and afterward one of them dies,
there the King may make a Patent of Association to another, to associate him to
the two, in place of him that is dead; and a Writ which shall be close,
directed to the two Justices that are alive, to admit him. F. N. B. 185.

Assoil.
ASsoil comes from the Latin absolvere, and signifies to deliver or discharge a
man of an Excommunication; and so it is used by Stamford, in his Plcas of the
Crown, lib. 2. cap 18. fol. 71. b.

Assumpsit. See Nude Contract.
ASsumpsit is a voluntary promise made by word, by which a man assumes and
takes upon him to perform or pay any thing to another. This word contains in it
any verbal Promise made upon consideration, which the Civilians express by
several words, according to the nature of the Promise; calling it sometimes
Pactum, Promissionem, other times Sponsionem, Pollicitationem, or Constitutum.

Attach.
ATtach is a Taking or Apprehending by Command or Writ. There are some
differences between an Arrest and an Attachment; for an Arrest proceeds out of
the inferior Courts by Precept, and Attachment out of the Superior Courts by
Precept or Writ. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 1. cap. 16. Also an Arrest lies only upon
the Body of a man, whereas an Attachment is sometimes upon the Goods only; as
Kitch. fol. 279. b. says, a man may attach a Cow, and in another case, that a
man may be attached by an hundred Sheep; and it is sometimes awarded upon the
Body and Goods together at one and the same.

Attachment differs from a Capias, for Kit. fol. 79. b. has these words, Note
that in a Court of Baron a man shall be attached by goods, and a Capias shall
not go out thence: By which it seems Attachment is more general, extending to
the taking of Goods, where a Capias extends to the taking of the Body only.

An Attachment differs from a Distress, as appears by Kit. fol. 78. a. where he
says, Process in Court Baron is Summons Attachment, and Distress, which are
Process at the Common Law.

There is also an Attachment of Privilege: and this is twofold; either giving
power to apprehend a man in a place privileged, or by virtue of an Office or
Privilege; as to call another to that Court to which he himself belongs, and
in respect of which he is privileged. New Book of Entries, fol. 431. a.

And there is a Process called a Foreign Attachment, which is used to attach
the goods of Foreigners found within any Liberty or City, for a Debt due to the
party himself. And, by the custom of some places, a man may attach goods in
the hands of a stranger: As if A. ows to B. ten pounds, and C owes A. another
Sum of money, B. may attach the goods of A. in the hands of C. to satisfy
himself in part or all, as the Debt is.

Also there is Attachment of the Forest, which is a Court there held every
forty days throughout the year: In which the Verderors have not any authority.
but to receive and inrol the Attachment of offenders against Vert and Venison
taken by the other Officers, that they may be presented at the next Justice
seat in Air. Manwood, part 1. page 93. cap. 22.

Attainder.
ATtainder is a Conviction of of any person of a Crime or fault whereof he was
not convict before: As if a man have committed Felony, Treason, or such like,
and thereof is convicted, arraigned, and found guilty, and has Judgment, then
he is said to be Attainted. And this may be two ways; the one upon Appearance,
the other upon default. The Attainder upon Appearance is by Confession,
Batrail, or Verdict: the Attainder upon Default is by Process until he be
outlawed.

Attaint.
ATtaint is a Writ that lies where false Verdict is given by twelve men, and
Judgment given thereon, then the party against whom they have passed, shall
have a Writ against the twelve men, and when they are at issue, it shall be
tried by twenty four Jurors, and if the false Verdict be found, the twelve men
are attaint; and then the Judgment shall be, That their Meadows shall be eyred,
their Houses broken down, their Woods turned up, and all their Lands and
Tenements forfeited to the King: But if it pass against him that brought that
Attaint, he shall be Imprisoned, and grievously ransomed at the Kings will. See
the Statute 23 Hen. ^. cap. 3. Attaint also is when Judgment is given in
Treason or Felony.

Attendant.
ATtendant is where one ows a duty or service to another, or as it were depends
upon another: As if there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant holds of the
Mesne by a penny, the Mesne holds over by two pence, the Mesne releases to the
Tenant all the right which he has in the Land, and the Tenant dies; his wife
shall be endowed of the land and she shall be Attendant to the Heir of the
third part of one penny, and not of the third part of two pence; for she shall
be endowed of the best possession of her husband. Also where the wife is
endowed by the Guardian, she shall be attendant to the Guardian and to the Heir
at his full age.

Attournment.
ATtournment is, when one is Tenant for term of Life, and he in Reversion or
Remainder grants his right or estate to another, then it behooves the Tenant for
life to agree thereto; and this agreement is called an Attournment. For if he
in the Reversion grant his estate and right to another, if the Tenant for life
attourn not, nothing passes by the grant.

But if it be granted by Fine in Court of Record, he shall be compelled to
attourn. And see thereof after, Title Quid juris c ^ mat, and in Littl. lib. 3.
cap. 10.

Attorney.
Attorney is one appointed by another man to do something in his stead, whom
West has defined thus, Attorneys are such persons as by consent, commandment
or request, take care of, see to, and undertake the Charge of other men's
Business in their absence.

And where in ancient time those of authority in Courts have had it in their
dispose, when they would permit men to appear or sue by any other than
themselves as appears by F. N. B. 25. in the Writ of Dedimus potestatem
Attornato faciendo, where it is showed, that men were driven to procure the
Writs, or Letters Patents of the King to appoint Atturneys for them; it is now
provided by diverse Stat. that it shall be lawful so to do without any such
circuity. And there is great diversity of Writs in the table of the Register,
by which the King commands his Judges to admit of Atturneys.

By which means at last there were so many unskilful Atturneys, and so many
mischiefs by them, that an Act was 4 H. 4 c. 18. ordained for their restraint,
that the Justices should examine them, and put out the unskilful: and An. 33 H.
6. c. 7. that there should be but a certain number of them in Norfolk and
Suffolk.

In what cases a man at this day may have an Attorney, and in what not, see F.
N. B. in the place before cited.

Attorney is either general, or special, Attorney general, is he that is
appointed to all our Affairs or Suits; as the Attorney general of the King.
Attorney general of the Duke, Cromp. 105. Attorney special or particular is he
that is imploi ^ d in one or more things particularly specifyed. Atturneys
general are made two ways, either by the Kings Letters Patents, or by our own
appointment, before Justices in Air in open Court. See Glan. lib. 11. cap. 1.
Brit. 126.

Audience Court.
AUdience Court (Curia audientiae Canturiensis) is a Court belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, of equal Authority with the Arches Court, though
inferior both in dignity and antiquity. Of which you may read more in a Book
entitled, De antiquitate Ecclesiae Britannicae historia.

Audita Querela.
AUdita Querela is a Writ that lies where one is bound in a Statute-Merchant,
Statute-Staple, or Recognisance, or where Judgment is given against him for
Debt, and his body in Execution thereupon; then if he have a Release, or other
matter sufficient to be discharged of Execution, but has no day in Court there
to plead it, then he shall have this writ against him which has recovered, or
against his Executors.

Auditor.
AUditor is an Officer of the King, or some other great person, who, by yearly
examining the Accounts of all Underofficers accountable, makes up a general
Book, that shows the difference between their Receipts or Charge, and their
Payments or Allowances. See the Statute 33 H. 8. c. 33.

There is also another sort of Auditor assigned by any Court wherein a
Defendant is adjudged to Account, who take the Account and put it in form into
Writing, and then it is enrolled, and the Plaintiff pleads to it, and the
Defendant replies, if occasion be, and so go to issue upon diverse points and
particulars of the Account.

Average.
AVerage is that Service which the Tenant owes his Lord, to be done by the
Beasts of the Tenant: and it seems to be derived from the word Averia, because
it is the Service which the Tenants Beasts perform for the Lord by carriage or
otherwise. This word also has another signification, and is much used in the
Statute 32 H. 8. c. 14. for a certain Contribution, which Merchants and others
pay proportionably toward their losses that have their goods cast out in a
tempest for the saving of the Ship, or of the goods or lives of them that are
therein.

Averment.
AVerment is, where a man pleads a Plea in Abatement of the Writ, or Bar of the
Action, which he says he is ready to prove as the Court will award. This offer
to prove the Plea is called an Averment.

Also there is a Writ called a Writ of Averment, which is made out of any of
the Law Courts of Westminster Hall when the Action is depending, when the
Sheriff upon a Distringas returns small issues; then the Judges of Assise may
cause it to be enquired by a Jury if the Sheriff could return more issues of
the Lands of the Defendant, and if it be found he may, then he must return more
issues to force the Defendant to appear to the Plaintiffs suite, or to do what
the Distringas required him to do.

Averpeny.
AVerpeny is, to be quit of diverse sums of money for the Kings arrerages.

Augmentation.
AUgmentation was the name of a Court erected in the 27 year of King Henry the
eighth. And the cause thereof was, that the King might be justly used touching
the profits of such Religious Houses and their Lands as were given him by Act
of Parliament the same year, not printed. For dissolving which Court there was
an Act made in the Parliament held in the first year of the Reign of Queen
Mary, Sess. 2. cap. 10. which she afterward put in execution by her Letters
Patents. The name of the Court arises from this, That the Revenues of the Crown
were so much augmented by the Suppression of the said Houses as the King
reserved to the Crown, and neither gave nor sold to others. But the Office of
Augmentation remains to this day, wherein there are many Records of great use
and importance.

Aumone.
AUmone, or Tenure in Almoin, is Tenure by Divine Service; for so says Britton
fol. 164. Tenure in Aumone is Land or Tenements given for Aims, whereof some
Service is reserved to the Feoffer or Donor.

Auncel weight.
AUncel weight was an ancient manner of Weighing in England, by the hanging of
balances or hooks at each end of a staff, which the party lifted up upon his
finger, or with his hand, and so discerned the equality or difference of the
things weighed. But this weight being subject to much deceit, many Statutes
were made to out it; as the Stat. of 25 E. 3. c. 9. and 34 E. 3. c. 5. and 8 H.
6. c. 5. and others. And it was called Auncel weight, as much as to say
Handsale Weight.

Ancient or Ancient Demesne.
ANcient demesne is a certain Tenure whereby all those Manors that were in the
hands of S. Edward the Confessor, and which he caused to be written in a Book
called Doomsday, sub titulo Regis. and all the Lands holden of the said
Manors, are held; and the Tenants shall not be impleaded out of the said
Manors; and if they be, they may show the matter, and abate the Writ: but if
they answer to the Writ, and Judgment be given, then the Lands become
frank-free for ever, until that Judgment be reversed by writ of Disceit. Ra.
Ent. 100, 221. 2 R. 1. 11 H. 4. 36. 21 E. 3. 20. Also the Tenants in Ancient
demesne are free of T ^ ll for all things concerning their sustenance and
Husbandry in ancient Demesne, and for such Lands they shall not be put or
impannelled upon any Enquest. But all the Lands in Ancient Demes ^ e that are
in the Kings hands are frank-free, and pleadable at the Common Law. See more
after in the Title Sokmans.

Avoir de pois.
AVoir de pois is as much as to say, true or just weight: And it signifies in
our Law Two things; first a kind of weight diverse from that which is called
Troy Weight, which has but 12 ounces to the pound, whereas Avoir de pois has
16. Secondly, it signifies such Merchandises as are weighed by this weight, and
not by Troy weight. As you may see in the Statute of York, 9. E. 3. and 27 E.
3. c. 19, Stat. 2. c. 10. and the Statute of Gloucester, 2 R. 2. c. 1.

Avowry.
AVowry is, where one takes a Distress for Rent or other thing, and the other
sues Replevin; then he that has taken it shall Justify in his Plea for what
cause he took it: and if he took it in his own right he ought to show that, and
so avow the taking, and that is called his Avowry. But if he took it in or for
the right of another, then when he has showed the cause, he shall make
conusance of the taking, as Bailiff or servant to whom in whose right took it.

Avowterer.
AVowterer is an Adulterer with whom a married woman continues in Adultery, the
Crime is called Avowtry, 43 E. 3. 19.

Awme.
AWme is a Vessel that contains 40 galons of Rhen ^ sh wine, and is mentioned
in the Statute made 1 Jac. c. 23.

B Backberind Thief.
BAckberind Thief is a Thief taken with the manner, that is, having that found
upon him (being followed with a Hue and Cry) which he has stolen, whether it
be Money, Linen, Woollen, or other stuff: but it is most properly said, when he
is taken carrying those things that he has stolen in a bundle or fardel upon
his Back.

Manwood in part 2. notes this for one of the circumstances or cases in which a
Forester may arrest the body of any offender against Vert or Venison in the
Forest; which are, Dog-draw, Stable-stand, Back-berind, and Bloody-hand.

Badger.
BAdger is as much as to say Bagger, of the French word Baggage, id est,
Sarcina: And it is used with us for one that is licenced to buy Corn or other
Victuals in one place, and carry them to another; and such a one is exempted in
the Statute made in the 5 and 6 of E. 6. cap. 14 from the punishment of an
Ingrosser within that Statute.

Bail.
BAIL is, when a man is taken or arrested for Felony, suspicion of Felony,
indicted of Felony, or any such case, so that he is restrained of his liberty,
and being by Law bailable, offers Surcties to those who have authority to bail
him; which Sureties are bound for him to the Kings use in a certain Sum of
money, or body for body, that he shall appear before the Justices of
Jail-delivery at the next Sessions, etc. Then upon the Bonds of these Sureties,
as is aforesaid, he is bailed, that is set at liberty, until the day appointed
for his appearance.

Manwood in the first part of his Forest Law, page 167. says, There is a great
diversity between Bail and Mainprise; for he that is mainprised is always said
to be at large, and to go at his own liberty out of ward, after he is put to
Mainprise, until the day of his Appearance, by reason of Common Summons or
otherwise. But it is not so where a man is put to bail by four or two men, by
my Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest, until a certain day: for there he
is always accounted by the Law to be in their ward and custody for the time;
and they may, if they will, hold him in ward or in Prison till that time, or
otherwise at their will: so that he that is bailed ^ hall not be said by the
Law to be at large, or at his own liberty.

Bailement.
Bailement is a Delivery of things, whether Writings, Goods, or Stuff, to
another, sometimes to be delivered back to the Bailor, that is, to him that so
delivered it; sometimes to the use of the Bailee, that is, of him to whom it is
delivered; and sometimes also it is delivered to a third person. This delivery
is called a Bailment.

Bailiff.
BAiliff is an Officer that belongs to a Manor, to order the husbandry, and
has authority to pay Quit-rents issuing out of the Manor, fei ^ Trees, repair
Houses, make Pales, Hedges, distrain Beasts doing hurt upon the ground, and
diverse such like. This Officer is he whom the ancient Saxons called a Reeve,
for the name Bailiff was not then known amongst them, but came in with the
Normans, and is called in Latin Villicus.

There are two other sorts of Bailiffs, that is Bailiffs errant, and Bailiffs
of Franchises. Bailiffs errant are those that the Sheriff makes and appoints to
go about the Country to execute Writs, to summon the County Sessions, Assizes,
and such like: Bailiffs of Franchises are those that are appointed by every
Lord within his Liberty, to do such Offices within his Precincts, as the
Bailiff errant does abroad in the County. This Bailiff distrains for
Amerciaments in Courts held within the Manor of which he is Bailiff. But if
such Court is by prescription to be held within one month after a Feast, and
the Steward holds it after the month, and in this Court Assess a Fine or
Amerciament, and the Bailiff distrains for it; the party that is so distrained
may have an Action of Trespass against the Bailiff.

Bank.
BAnk (in French Banque, i. Mensa) is most usually taken for a Seat or Bench of
Judgment; as Bank le Roy, the Kings Bench, Bank de Common Pleas, the Bench of
Common Pleas, or Common Bench. Kitchen fol. 102. called also in Latin Bancus
Regius, and Bancus Communium Placitorum. Cromp. Jur. f. 67, and 91.

Kings Bench.
KIngs Bench is a Court at Westminster where Pleas of the Crown, Debts,
Trespasses, and personal Actions, Errors, Audita Querela's, etc. are determined.

Bankrupt.
BAnkrupt, by the Statute 1 Jac. c. 15. is thus described; All and every such
person and persons, using, or that shall use the trade of Merchandise by way of
Bargaining, Exchange, Bartery, Chevisance, or otherwise in gross, or by seeking
his, her, or their trade of Living by buying and selling, and being a Subject
born of this Realm, or any of the Kings Dominions, or denizon, which at any
time since the first day of this present Parliament, or at any time hereafter
shall depart the Realm, or begin to keep his or her house or houses, or
otherwise to absent him or her self, or take sanctuary, or suffer him or her
self willingly to be arrested for any Debt, or other thing not grown or due for
money delivered, ware sold, or any other just or lawful cause, or good
considerations or purposes, or has or will suffer him or her self to be
outlawed, or yield him or her self to prison, or willingly or fraudulently has
or shall procure him or her self to be arrested, or him or her goods, money or
chattels, to be attached or sequestered, or depart from his or her
dwelling house, or make or cause to be made any fraudulent grant or conveyance
of his, her, or their Lands, Tenements, Goods, or Chattels, to the intent or
wherehy his, her, or their Creditors, being Subjects born, as aforesaid, shall
or may be defeated or delayed for the recovery of their just and true Debt, or
being arrested for Debt, shall after his or her Arrest lie in prison six months
or more upon that Arrest or Detention in Prison for Debt, and shall lie in
Prison six months upon such Arrest or Detention, shall be accounted and
adjudged a Bankrupt to all intents and purposes. See the Stat. 14 Car. 2. ca.
23.

Banneret.
BAnneret is a Knight made in the Field, with the ceremony of cutting off the
point of his Standard', and making it as it were a Banner. And such are allowed
to display their names in a Banner in the Kings Army, as Barons ^ o. And that
such were next unto Barons in Dignity, appears by the Statute made in the 5
year of R. 2. Stat. 2. cap. 4. by which Statute it seems, such Bannerets were
anciently called by Summons to the Parliament.

Banns.
BAnns is a word common a ^ d ordinary among the Feudists, and signifies a
Proclamation, or any public notice given of any thing. Eract. lib. 3. tra. 2.
cap. 21. makes mention of Bannus Regis for a Proclamation or silence made by
the Crier before the meeting of the Champions in a combat. But we use this word
Banns especially for the Publication of matrimonial Contracts in the Church
before Marriage.

Bargain and Sale.
BArgain and Sale is, when a Recompense is given by both the parties to the
Bargain: as if one bargain and sell his Land to another for money, here the
Land is a Recompense to him for the money, and the money is a Recompense to the
other for the Land; and this is a good Contract and Bargain. And by such a
Bargain and Sale lands may pass without Livery or seisin, if the Bargain and
Sale be by Deed indented, sealed and enrolled either in the County where the
Land lies, or in one of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster, within six
months next after the date of the same writing indented, according to the
Statute in that behalf made in the 27 year of H. 8. cap. 16.

Barcary.
BArcary signifies a Farm house as it seems, Rast. Ent. Tit. Assise en Corpse
politic 2.

Barmote.
BArmote are diverse Courts not of Record within the Hundred of the Peak in
Derby-shire for the regulation of Groves, Possessions, and Trade of the Myners
and Lead.

Barony.
BArony is a certain Royal Lordship where the Kings writ tunneth not, and held
of the King. Rast. Ent. Tit. Assise en Office. 1.

Bar.
Bar is when the Defendant in any Action pleads a Plea which is a sufficient
answer, and destroys the Action of the Plaintiff for ever.

And it may be divided into Bar to common intendment, and Bar special. Bar
to common intendment is an ordinary or general Bar, which commonly disables
the Declaration or Plea of the Plaintiff. Bar special is that which more than
ordinary, and falls out in the case in question, upon some special circumstance
of the Fact: As an Executor, being sued for the Debt of his Testator, pleads,
That he has nothing in his hands at the day of the Writ purchased; this is a
good Bar to common intendment, or at first sight: but yet the case may be
such, that more goods may come to his hands after that time, which if the
Plaintiff can show by way of Replication, then, except the Defendant has a
more special Plea or Bar to allege, he is to be condemned in the Action. See
Plow. fol. 26, 28. And in the same sense Bar is also divided into Bar
material or special, and Bar at large. Kit. fol. 68.

Bar is also in regard of the effect divided into Bar perpetual, and Bar
temporary. Perpetual is that which overthows the Action for ever: Temporary is
that which is good for the present, and may afterward fail; as, Fully
administered is a good Bar, until it appear that more goods came afterward to
the hands of the Executors: which also holds for the Heir, who in an Action for
his Ancestors Debt pleads Nothing by descent. See Brook Tit. Bar. nu. 23.

Bar fee.
Bar fee is a Fee of twenty pence, which every prisoner, acquitted of Felony,
pays to the Sheriff or Jailer: of which see 21 H. 7. 16. b.

Barretry.
IS a word used in Pollices of Insurance, and signifies dissentions and
quarrels among the Officers and Seamen.

Barretor.
BArretor is a Common Mover, Stirrer up, or Maintainer of Suits, Quarrels, or
parts, either in Courts, or in Country: In Courts of Record, and in the County,
Hundred, and other inferior Courts: In Country in three manners; first, in
disturbing the peace; secondly, in taking or detaining the Possessions of
Houses, Lands, or Goods, etc. that are in question or controversy, not only by
force, but by subtilty and deceit, and more usually in suppression of truth and
right; thirdly, by false inventing and sowing of Calumnies, Rumors and Reports,
making discord and disquiet to rise between his Neighbors. See more of this,
Co. lib. 8. fol. 36, 37.

Barter.
BArter seems to come of the French word Barater, which signifies to
circumvent, and this word is used with us for the Exchange of Wares for Wares*
and it is mentioned in the Statutes of 1 R. 3. cap. 9. and 13 Eliz. cap. 7.

Base fee.
TO hold in Fee Base is, to hold at the will of the Lord. And a Base Fee is
also where any has an Estate in Land so long as another shall have Heirs of
his body; of which Estate see Plow. in Walsingham's Case fol. 557. a.

Bastard.
BAstard is he that is born of any woman not married, so that his Father is not
known by order of Law, and therefore is reputed the Child of the People.

When special Bastardy is alleged, it shall be tried by the Country, and not
by the Bishop. But generally Bastardy alleged shall be tried by Certificate of
the Bishop.

And if a Woman be great with child by her husband, who dies, and she takes
another husband, and after the Child is born; this child shall be esteemed the
child of the first husband. But if she were privily with child at the time of
the death of her first husband, then it shall be reputed the Child of the
second Husband. But enquire farther, and see the opinion of Thorp. 21 E. 3. 39.

Also if a man take a Wife who is great with child by another who was not her
husband, and after the child is born within the Espousals; then it shall be
deemed the child of the Husband, though it were born but one day after the
Espousals solemnized.

Baston.
BAston is a French word, and signifies a Staff; but in our Satutes it is taken
for one of the Warden of the Fleet's men, that attends the King's Courts with a
painted Staff, for the taking of such to ward as are committed by the Court,
and for the attending upon such prisoners as go at large by License. And so it
is used in the Statutes 1 R. 2. ca. 12. and 5 Eliz. cap. 23.

Battle.
Battle is an ancient Trial in our Law, which the Defendant in Appeal of
Murder, Robbery, or Felony, may choose, that is, to sight with the Appellant,
for proof whether he be culpable of the Felony or not: which Combat, if it fall
out so well on the part of the Defendant, that he does vanquish the Appellant,
he shall go quit, and bar him of his Appeal for ever. But if one be indicted
of Felony, and an Appeal is brought upon the same Indictment, there the
Defendant shall not wage Battle. Battle also may be in a Writ of Right, as in
Paramour's Case, Dyer 301. pla. 41, 42. where the Champions chosen, and the
Battle awarded, and the Champions were by Sureties and Oath to perform the
Battle at Totchil in Westminster; but by default of appearance in the Demandant
nothing was done therein.

Battery.
Battery is an Act that tends to the breach of the peace of the Realm; as when
a man assaults and beats another, this is against the Law and peace of the
Realm, which ordeins, That no man shall be his own Judge, or Revenger of his
own private wrong, but shall leave this to the censure of the Law, which is
always ready to hear and redress the rightful and just complaints of every
man; wherefore he that is so beaten may either indict the other party who upon
it shall be fined to the King, or have his Action of Trespass of assault and
Battery against him (for every Battery implies an assault) and recover so much
in costs and damages as the Jury will give him by their Verdict; and the
Defendant shall upon the Indictment be fined to the King, and the Action of
Trespass will lie as well before as after the Indiment. But if the Plaintiff in
such action makes the first assault, then the Defendant shall go quit, and the
Plaintiff shall be amerced to the King for his false Suit. And it is to be
observed, that the Record of the Conviction of the party by Indictment may
serve for Evidence in the action of Trespass brought upon the same assault and
battery.

But notwithstanding that the party shall have a twofold punishment for such
offense, that is, shall be punished to the King and to the party; yet some
there are who in respect of their natural, and others who in respect of their
civil power and authrority over others, in a reasonable and moderate manner may
chastise, correct and beat them, as the Parents their child, the Master his
Servant or Apprentice, the Jailer or his Servant, the unruly Prisoners, the
Officer him that is arrested, and will not otherwise obey. Also a man may
justify the beating another in defense of his own person, or of the person of
his Wife, Father, Mother, or Master. And a man may justify the beating of
another in defense of his goods, and in maintenance of Justice. But it is to be
noted, That in these cases, if a man be not urged and constrained by a
necessary cause, he cannot justify the deed.

Beacons and Sea-marks.
ARE Fires maintained on the coasts of the Seas to prevent Shipwracks and
Invasions, Co. 4. Inst. 148. ordered by the Kings Commissioners.

Bedell.
BEdell is derived from the French word Bedeau, which significes a messenger or
an Apparitor of a Court, that cites men to the Court to appear and answer. And
Manw. c. 23. f. 221. a. says, That a Bedell of a Forest is an Officer that goes
through all the Forest, like a Sheriffs special Bailiff.

Is also a Collector of Rents for the King. Plo. Com. 199, 200.

Benefice.
BEnefice (Beneficium) is generally taken for any Ecclesiastical Living, be it
Dignity or other: as An. 13 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 2. where Benefices are divided
into elective, and of gift.

Besaile.
BEsaile is a Writ that lies for the Heir; where his Great-grand-father was
seized the day that he died, or died seized of land in Fee-simple, and a
Stranger enters the day of the death of the Great-grand-father, or abates after
his death, the Heir shall have his Writ against such a Disseisor or Abator: of
which see Fitzh. N. B. 221. d.

Bewpleader.
BEwpleader is a Writ upon the Statute of Marlebridge, and lies where the
Sheriff or other Bailiff in his Court will take a Fine of the party Plaintiff
or Defendant, to the end that he shall not plead fairly, etc. And the Writ
shall be directed to the Sheriff himself, or to the Bailiff or him that will
demand this Fine, and it is as a Prohibition to him, commanding him that he
shall not demand such, a Fine, and may be sued by all the Hundred, or by all
the County, (as it seems) where he will demand such manner of Fine of them.
Fitzh. N. B. 270. a.

Bigamie.
BIgamie was a Counterplea objected when the Prisoner demanded the Benefit of
the Clergy, to wit, his Book, as namely, that he who demands the privilege of
the Clergy was married to such a woman at such a place, within such a Diocese,
and that she is dead, and that he has married another woman within the same
Diocese, or within some other Diocese, and so is Bigamus. Or if he have been
but once married, then to say, that she whom he has married is, or was a
Widow, that is, the Relict of such a one, etc. which shall be tried by the
Bishop of the Diocese where the Marriages are alleged. And being so certified
by the Bishop, the prisoner shall lose the Benefit of the Clergy. But at this
day, by force of the Act made 1 E. 6. ca. 12. this is no Plea, but he may have
his Clergy notwithstanding. So is Brook, titulo Clergy, Placito 20. to the
same purpose.

Bylaws.
Bylaws are Orders made in Court-Leets or Court-Barons by a common consent for
the good of them that are the makers of them. And they are called Bylaws,
quasi Birlaws, or Bawrlaws, of the Dutch word Bawr, that is, a Countryman;
and so Bawrlaws or Bylaws is as much as the Laws of Countrymen.

Bilinguis.
BIlinguis in general is a man with a double tongue; but is commonly used for
that Jury which passes between an English man and an Alien, whereof part ought
to be Englishmen, and part Strangers. And for this cause it is enacted by the
Statute of 28 E. 3. cap. 13. That if any variance chance to be about the
packing of Wool before the Mayor of the Staple, between the Merchants or
Ministers of the same, thereupon, to try the truth thereof, Enquest shall be
taken: and if the one party and the other be Denizons, it shall be tried by
Denizons; or if the one party be Denison, and the other Alien, the half of the
Enquest or of the proof shall be Denizons, and the other half Aliens.

Bill.
BILL is all one with an Obligation, saving that when it is in English, it is
commonly called a Bill, in Latin an Obligation. Also a Declaration in writing
that expresses either the grievance and wrong which the Complainant has
suffered by the party complained of, or else some fault by him committed
against some Law or Statute of the Realm. By a Bill we now ordinarily
understand a single Bond without a Condition; by an Obligation, a Bond with a
Penalty and Condition. West. part. 2. Symbol. tit. Supplications, sect. 52.

Billa vera.
BIlla vera is the Indorsement of the grand Inquest upon any Presentment or
Indictment which they find to be probably true.

Blackmail.
BLackmail is a word used in the Statute of 43 Eliz. c. 13. and signifies a
certainty of Money, Corn, Cattle, or other consideration, given by the poor
people in the North of England, to men of great name and alliance in those
parts, to be by them protected from such as usually rob and steal there.

Black rod.
BLack Rod is the Huissier belonging to the most Noble Order of the Garter; so
called of the Black rod he carries in his hand. He is also Huissier of the
Lords house in Parliament.

Bloodwit.
BLoodwit is to be quit of Amerciaments for Bloodshedding; and what Pleas are
holden in your Court, you shall have the Amerciaments thereof coming; because (
Wit) in English, is Misericordia in Latin.

Bloody hand.
BLoody hand is the apprehension of a Trespasser in the Forest against Venison,
with his hands or other part bloody, though he be not found chasing or hunting.
Of which see Manwood, part 2. c. 18.

Bockland.
BOckland in the Saxons time was that we at this day cail Freehold Land, or
Land held by Charter; and it was by that name distinguished from Folkland,
which was Copyhold Land.

Bona notabilia.
BOna notabilia is where a man dies having goods to the value of five pound in
diverse Diocesses, then the Archbishop ought to grant Administration; and if any
inferior Bishop do grant it, it is void, 37 H. 6. 27. 28* 10 H. 7. 18. Dyer 305.

Bordlands.
BOrdlands signify the Demesns which Lords keep in their own hand ^ for he
maintenance of their Board or Table. Bracton l. 4. Tract. 3. c. 9. number. 5.

Borow.
BOrow (which with us signifies an ancient Town, as appears by Littleton. sect.
164.) is a word derived either of the French Burg, id est Pagus, or of the
Saxon Borhoe, id est, ^ ignus, for that anciently the Neighbors of a Town
became Pledges one for another: and from thence comes Headborow, for the chief
Pledge or Borhoe-Aldere, with us now called the Borow-holder or Bursholder.

Borow English.
BOrow English is a customary Descent of Lands or Tenements in some places,
whereby they come to the youngest son, or if the owner have no issue, to his
youngest brother, as in Edmunton, Kitchen fol. 102.

Borowhead.
BOrohead. See Head-borow.

Bote.
BOte is an old word signifying Help, Succor, Aid, or Advantage, and is
commonly joined with another word, whose signification is does augment; as
these, Bridgebote, Burgbote, Firebote, Hedgebote, Plowbote, and diverse other,
for whose significations look in their proper Titles.

Bottomry vulgo Bomry.
IS when a Master of a Ship in case of necessity does engage his Ship for money
for use of the Ship.

Bribor.
BRibor (Fr. Bribeur, i. Mendicus) seems to signify one that pilfers other
man's goods. Anno 28 E. 2. Stat. 1.

Brief.
BRief (Breve) signifies most properly in our Law, the Process that issues out
of the Chancery or other Court, commanding the Sheriff to summon or attach A.
to answer to the Suit of B. etc. But more largely it is taken for any Precept
of the King in writing under Seal, issuing out of any Court, whereby he
commands any thing to be done for the furtherance of Justice and good order.
And they are therefore called Briefs, because they briessy comprehend the cause
of the action. And some of them are Original, and some judicial, as you may see
at large in the Register of Writs.

Broadhalpeny.
BRoadhalpeny in some Copies Broadhalfpeny, that is, to be quit of a certain
custom exacted for setting up of Tables or Boards in Fairs or Markets; and
those that were freed by the Kings Charter of this Custom had this word put in
their Letters Patents: by reason whereof, at this day the Freedom it self (for
brevity of speech) is called Broadhalfpeny.

Broker.
BRoker seems to come of the French word Broieur, id est, Tritor, he that
grinds or breaks a thing into small pieces. And the true trade of a Broker, as
it appears in the Statute made 1 Jac. c. 21. is to beat, contrive, make and
conclude Bargains between Merchants and Tradesmen. But the word is now also
appropriated to those that buy and sell old and broken apparel and
Household Stuff.

Brugbote.
BRugbote (and in some copies Bridgebote) is, to be quit of giving aid to the
repair of Bridges.

Bull.
BULL is an Instrument so called, granted by the Bishop of Rome, and sealed
with a Seal of Lead, containing in it his Decrees, Commandments, or other Acts,
according to the nature of the thing for which it is granted. And these
Instruments have been heretofore used and of force in this Land: but by the
Statute of 28 H. 8. c. 16. it was e ^ acted, That all Bulls, Breves, Faculties,
and Dispensations of whatsoever name or nature that it was, had or obtained
from the B. of Rome, should be altogether void and of no effect. See Rastal.
328. C. D.

Bullion.
BUllion comes from the French word Billon, which is the place where Gold is
tried. And so Bullion is taken in the Statutes made in 27. E. 3. Stat 2. c. 14.
and in 4 H 4. Stat. 1. c. 10. for the place whither Gold or Silver is brought
to be tried or exchanged. But Bullion is also taken in the Stat. 9 E. 3. Stat.
2. c. 2. for Gold or Silver in the Mass or Billet.

Burbreach.
BUrbreach is, to be quit of Trespasses done in City or Borough against the
Peace.

Burgage.
TO hold in Burgage is, to hold as the Burgagers hold of the King, or of
another Lord, lands or tenements yielding him a certain Rent yearly, or else
where another man then Burgers holds of any Lord, Lands or Tenements in
Burgage, yielding him a certain Rent.

Burghbote.
BUrghbote is, to be quit of giving aid to make a Borough, Castle, City, or
Walls thrown down.

Burgh English.
BUrgh English or Borough English, is a Custom in some ancient Borough, that
if a man has issue diverse sons, and dies, yet the youngest son only shall
inherit, and have all the Lands and Tenements that were his fathers, whereof he
died seized within the same Borough, by descent, as Heir to his Father by force
of the Custom of the same Borough.

This Tenure is also of Copyhold Estates by Custom of diverse Manors.

Burglary.
BUrglary is, when one breaks and enters into the House of another in the
night, with felonious intent to rob or kill, or to do some other Felony; in
which cases, although he carry away nothing, yet it is Felony, for which he
shall suffer death. Otherwise it is if it be in the daytime, or that he break
the House in the night, and enter no therein at that time.

But if a Servant conspire with other men to rob his Master, and to that intent
opens his Masters doors and windows in the night for them, and they come into
the house by that way; this is Burglary in the Strangers; and the Servant is a
Thief, but no Burglar. And this was the opinion of Sir Roger Manwood, Knight,
Lord chief Baron of the Cxchequer, at the quarter Sessions holden at Canterbury
in Jannary 1579. 21 Eliz.

Buttlerage.
IS an old Duty to the Kings of this Realm for Wine imported by Aliens. Moor
Rep. 833.

C Cablish.
CAblish among the Writers of the Forest Laws, signifies Brushwood. Manwood
page 84. Cromp. Jur. fol. 165.

Cantred.
CAntred is as much in Wales as an Hundred in England; for Cantre in the
British tongue signifies Centum. The word is used An. 28. H. 8. c. 3.

Capacity.
CApacity is, when a man, or Body politic or corporate is able to give or take
Lands or other things, or sue Actions: As an Alien born has sufficient
Capacity to sue in any personal Action; but in a real Action it is a good Plea
to say, he is an Alien born, and pray if he shall be answered. Dyer. f. 3. pla.
8.

If a man enfeoff an Alien and another man to the use of themselves, or, etc.
it seems that the King shall have the moiety of the Land for ever, by reason of
the Incapacity of the Alien. Dyer f. 283. pla 31.

By the Common Law no man has Capacity to take Tithes but Spiritual persons,
and the King, who is a person mixed: but a Layman, who is not capable of taking
Tithes, was yet capable of discharge of Tithes in the Common Law in his own
land as well as a Spiritual man. See Coke l. 2. f. 44.

Cape.
CApe is a Writ judicial touching Plea of Lands or Tenements, so called (as the
most part of Writs are) of that word which in it self carries the especiallest
intention or end thereof. And this Writ is divided into Grand Cape and Petit
Cape; both which take hold of things immovable, and seem to differ in these
Points. First, because Grand Cape lies before Appearance, and Petit Cape after.
Secondly, by the Grand Cape the Tenant is summoned to answer to the default,
and over to the Demandant; Petit Cape summons the Tenant to answer to the
default only, and therefore it is called Petit Cape in the Old N. B. 161, 162.
Yet Ingham says, that it is not called Petit Cape because it is of small
force, but because it is a little Writ in words.

This Writ seems to contain in it a Process, with the Civilians called Missio
in possessionem ex primo and secundo Decreto: For as the first Decree seises
the thing, and the second gives it from him that made the second default in his
Appearance; so this Capias seises the Land, and also assigns over to the party
a day of Appearance, at which if he comes not in, the Land is forfeited. Yet
there is difference between these two courses of the Common and Civil Law; for
this Missio in possessionem extends to touch as well Goods movable as
immovable, where a Cape extends only to the immovable.

Secondly, in this, That the party being satisfied of his demand, the residue
is restored to him that defaulted: but by the Cape all is seized without
restitution.

Thirdly, That is to the use of the party agent, the Cape is to the use of the
King. See Bract. l. 5. tract. 3. c. 1. number. 4, 5, and 6, Regist. Judic. fol. 2.
a.

Cape ad Valentiam.
CApe ad Valentiam is a Writ or Execution, and is thus defined in the Old Not.
Brev. fo. 161. 162. This writ lies where the Tenant is impleaded of certain
Lands, and he vouches to Warranty another, against whom the Summons ad
warrantizan ^ has been awarded, and the Vouchee comes not in at the day given:
then if the Demandant recover against the Tenant, he shall have this Writ
against the Vouchee, and shall recover so much in value of the Vouchees land,
if he have so much; and if he has not so much, then the Tenant shall have
Execution by this Writ of such Lands and Tenements as descend to him in
Feesimple; or if he purchase afterward, the Tenant shall have against him a
Resummons, and if he can say nothing, he shall recover the value.

And know, that this Writ lies before Appearance. Of these and their diverse
uses, see the Table of the Reg. jud. the word Cape.

Capias.
CApias is of two sorts. The one before Judgment, called Capias ad
respondendum, in an action personal, if the Sheriff return upon the first Writ,
Nihil habet in Balliva nostra. And the other is a Writ of Execution after
Judgment, which also is of diverse natures, which see in the Title Process.

Capite.
CApite is a Tenure that holds immediately of the King, as of his Crown, be it
by Knights Service or Soccage, and not of any Honor, Castle, or Manor; and for
this it is also called a Tenure which holds merely of the King. For as the
Crown is a Corporation, a Seignory in gross; so the King who possesses the
Crown is in the eye of the Law perpetually King, never in his Minority, and
dies no more than Populus does, whose authority he bears. See Fitz, N. Bre^
fol. 5. Yet note, That a man may hold of the King. and yet not in Capite, that
is, not immediately of the Crown in gross, but by means of some Honor, Castle,
or Manor belonging to the Crown, whereof he holds his Land. Of this Kitchen
says well, That a man may hold of the King by Knight's service, and yet not in
Capite, because it may be he holds of some honor by Knights service, that is
in the Kings hands, by descent from his Ancestors, and not immediately of the
King, as of his Crown, fol. 129. With which agrees Fitzh. Not. Bre^ fol. 5. k.
whose words are to this effect; It plainly appears, that Lands which are held
of the King as of an Honor, Castle, or Manor, are not held in Capite of the
King, because a Writ of right iu this case shall be directed to the Bailiff of
the Honor, Castle, or Manor, etc. But when the lands are held of the King as of
his Crown, then they are not held of an Honor, Castle, or Manor, but merely of
the King as King, as of his Crown, as of a Seignory of it self in gross, and
the chief of all other Seigniories.

And this Tenure in Capite is otherwise called Tenure holding of the person of
the King. Dyer fol. 44. Brook titulo Tenures, number. 65, 99. And yet Ki ^ chen,
fol. 208. says, That a man may hold of the person of the King, and yet not in
Capite. His Case is this; If the King purchase a Manor that J. S. holds, the
Tenant shall hold as he did before, and he shall not render Livery, nor primer
Seisin, nor hold in Capite. And if the King grants his Manor to W. N. in fee,
excepting the services of J. S. then J. S. holds as of the person of the King,
and yet holds not in Capite, but as he held before. By which it seems, that
Tenure holding of the person of the King, and Tenure in Capite, are two diverse
Tenures. To take away which difference, it may be said, That this place of
Kitchen is to be taken as if he had said; Not in Capite by Knights service, but
by Socage, following the usual speech, because most commonly, where we speak of
Tenure in Capite, we intend Tenure by Knight's service. See the Stat. 12 Car.
2. c. 24. by which all Tenures are now turned into free and common Socage.

Cark.
CArk seems to be a quantity of Wool, whereof 30 make a Sarplar. 27 H. 6. cap.
2. See Sarplar.

Carno.
CArno is an Immunity, as appears in Cromp. Jurisd. f. 191. where it is said,
That the Prior of Malton made claim for him and his men, to be quit of all
Amerciaments within the Forest, and also to be quit of Escapes, and of all
manner of Gelds, and of Foot-gelds, Buckstall, Trites, Carno, and Summage, etc.

Carrack or Carrick.
CArrack, alias Carrick, is a Ship of burden, and is so called of the Italian
word Carico or Carco, which signifies a Burden. This word is mentioned in the
Statute, 1 Jac. c. 33.

Carue of Land.
CArue, or Carucate of land is a certain quantity of land by which the Subjects
have been heretofore taxed: whereupon the Tribute so levied is called Caruage.
Bract. l. 2. c. 16. number. 8. Lit. Sect. 119. says, that Soca is the same with
Caruca, sc. a Soke or Plow. Stow in his Annals. p. 251. has these words; The
same time H. the King took Caruage, that is to say, two Marks of Silver for
every Knight's Fee, to the marriage of his sister Isabel to the Empereur. By
which it seems there was raised of every Plow-land so much, and so consequently
of every Knight's free two Marks of Silver. Rastal, in his Exposition of words,
says, that Caruage is to be quit, if the King shall tax all the Land by Plows,
that is, a Privilege by which a man is freed from Caruage.

Skene says, that it contains as great a portion of land as may be eyred or
tilled in a year and a day with one Plow; which also is called a Hild, or Hide
of land.

Castellain.
CAstellain is a Keeper or Captain, sometimes called a Constable of a Castle.
Bracton, l. 5. c. 2. cap. 16. In the same manner it is used an^ 3 E. 1. c. 7.
In the book of Feudis you shall find Guastaldus to be of like signification,
but more large, because it is also extended to those that have the custody of
the King's Mansion-houses, called Courts, notwithstanding they are not places
of defense or force. Manwood part 1. of the Laws of the Forest, p. 113. says,
That there is an Officer of the Forest called Castellanus.

Castle-guard.
CAstle-guard is an Imposition laid upon such of the Kings subjects as dwell
within a certain compass of any Castle, to the maintenance of such as watch and
ward it. Mag. Chart. cap. 2. and an. 32 H. 8. ca. 48. It is sometimes used for
the Circuit it self which is inhabited by such as arc subject to this Service.
See Chivalry.

Casu consimili.
CAsu consimili is Writ of Entry, granted where the Tenant by courtesy, or
Tenant for term of life or for the life of another, aliens in Fee, or in tail,
or for the life of another. And it has this name, because the Clerks of the
Chaucery have framed it by their common consent like the Writ called in casu
proviso according to the authority given them by the Stat. of West. 2. cap. 24.
which wills, That as often as it shall happen in Chancery, that in one case a
Writ is found, and in the like case a remedy is wanting, the Clerks of the
Chancery should agree to make a Writ, etc. And this Writ is granted to him in
reversion against the party to whom the said Tenant so aliened to his
prejudice, and in the life of the Tenant. See more of this, F. N. B. fol. 206.

Casu proviso.
CAsu proviso is given by the Stat, of Gloucester cap. 7. This Writ lies where
Tenant in Dower aliens in Fee, or for life, or in tail, the Land which she
holds in Dower; there he that has the Reversion Fee, or in Tail, or for term
of life, shall presently have this Writ against the Alienee, or him that is
Tenant of the Freehold of the Land, and that during the life of the Tenant in
Dower. F. N. B. 205. n.

Catals.
CAtals or Chatels comprehend all Goods movable and immovable, except such as
are in nature of Freehold, or parcel of it, as may be collected out of Stamf.
Praer. cap. 16. and anno 1 Eliz. cap. 2. Yet Kitch: fol. 32. says, that Money
is not to be accounted Goods or Catals, nor Hawks, nor Hounds, for they are
ferae naturae. But it seems that Money is not a Chattel, because it is not in
it self valuable, but rather in imagination than in Deed.

Catals are either real or personal. Catals real are either such as do not
immediately appertain to the person, but to some other thing by way of
dependence; as a Box with writings of Laud, the body of a Ward, the Apples upon
the tree, or the Tree it self growing upon the ground. Crom. fol. 33. b. Or
else such as are issuing out of some thing immovable to the person, as a Lease
for Rent or term of years.

Personal may be so called in two respects. The one, because they belong
immediately to the person of a man; as a Horse, etc. The other, because when
they are wrongfully detained, we have no other means for their recovery but
personal Actions.

The Civilians comprehend these things, and also Lands of all natures and
tenures, under the word Goods, which are by them divided into Moveable and
Immovable. See Bract. lib. 3. c. 3. number. 3, and 4.

Cepi corpus.
CEpi corpus is a Return made by the Sheriff, that, upon an Exigend or other
Writ, he has taken the body of the party, F N. B. fol. 26.

Certificate.
CErtificate is a Writing made in some Court, to give notice to another Court
of something done there; as a Certificate of the cause of Attaint is a
transcript briefly made by the Clerks of the Crown, Clerks of the Peace, or
Clerks of Assise, to the Court of Kings Bench, containing the tenor and effect
of every Indictment, Outlawry, or Conviction, and Clerk attainted, made or
declared in any other Court.

But note, that this Certificate ought to be made by him that is the immediate
Officer to the Court; and therefore if the Commissary or Official of the Bishop
certify an Excommunication in bar of an action at the Common Law, this is not
good, (as was resolved in Coke, lib. 8. fol. 68.) but such Excommunication
ought to be certified by the Bishop himself. Yet the Certificate of an
Excommunication by special Commissioners Delegates under their Common Seal was
allowed, and held good enough in the Commonplace. Dyer fol. 371. pla. 4.

Certification of Assise.
CErtification of Assise of Novel disseisin, etc. is a Writ awarded to
re-examine or review a matter passed hy Assise before any Justices; and is used
when a man appears by his Bailiff to an assise brought by another, and loses
the day, and having some other matter to plead farther for himself, as a Deed
of Release, or etc. which the Bailiff did not plead, or might not plead for
him, desires a better Examination of the Cause, either before the same or other
Justices, and obtains Letters Pa ^ ents, (see their form F. N. B. 181.) and
then brings a Writ to the Sheriff to call the party for whom the Assise had
passed, and also the Jury which was impannelled upon the same Assise, before
the said Justices, at a day and place certain.

And it is called a Certificate, because therein mention is made to the
Sheriff, that upon the parties complaint of the defective Examination or doubts
remaining yet upon the Assise passed, the King has directed his Letters
Patents to the Justices for the better certifying of themselves, whether all
the points of the said Assise were duly examined or not.

Certiorari.
CErtiorari is a Writ that lies where a man is impleaded in a base Court, that
is of Record, and he purposes that he may not have equal Justice there; then
upon a Bill in the Chancery, comprising some matter of Conscience, he shall
have this Writ to remove all the Record into the Chancery, there to be
determined by Conscience, but if he prove not his Bill, then the other party
shall have a Writ of Procedendo, to send again the Record into the base Court,
and there to be determined. And it lies in many other cases, to remove Records
for the King, as Indictments and others.

This Writ is also granted out of the Court of Kings Bench or Common Pleas to
remove any Action thither out of Inferior Courts of Record; and so the
Plaintiff must declare and proceed in the Superior Court.

Also to certify original writs or proceedings out of any Courts of Record
into the Kings Bench, where nullum tale Recordum is pleaded.

Also upon Writs of Error of a Judgment in the Common Pleas, each party may
have this Writ to bring any of the Proceedings into the Kings Bench upon
alleging Diminution, as appears, Coke Entr. 232, 233, 242. 2 Cro. 131, and 479.

Cessavit.
CEssavit is a Writ that lies where my very Tenant holds of me certain Lands or
Tenements, yielding certain Rent by the year, and the Rent is behind for two
years, and no sufficient Distress may be found upon the Land; then I shall have
this Writ, by which I shall recover the Land: But if the Tenant come into the
Court before Judgment given, and tender the Arrearges and Damages, and find
Surety that he shall cease no more in payment of the said Rent, I shall be
compelled to take the Arrerages and the Damages, and then the Tenant shall not
lose the Land. The heir may not maintain this Writ for Cessure made in the time
of his Ancestor: And it lies not but for Annual service, as Rent, and such
other, and not for Homage and Fealty.

Also there is another Writ called Cessavit de cantaria, which lies where a man
gives Land to a House of Religion, to find for the soul of him, his ancestors,
and his heirs, yearly a Candle or Lamp in the Church, or to say Divine Service,
feed the poor, or other Alms, or to do some other thing; then if the said
Services be not done in two years, the Donor or his Heirs shall have this Writ
against whosoever holds the things given after such Cessure. See the Statute W.
2. cap. 41.

Cession.
CEssion is, when an Ecclesiastical Person is created Bishop, or when a Parson
of a Parsonage takes another Benefice without dispensation or otherwise not
qualified, etc. In both cases their first Benefices are become void, and are
said to become void by Cession. And to those that he had who was created Bishop
the King shall present for that time, whosoever is Patron of them: And in the
other case the Patron may present. See 41 E. 3. 5. and 11 H. 4. 37.

Cestuy a que vie, and cestuy a que use.
CEstuy a que vie, is he for whose life another holds an estate; and cestuy a
que use is he who is a Feoffee for the use of another.

Challenge.
CHallenge is an Exception taken either against Persons or Things. Persons, as
in an Assise the Jurors, or any one, or more of them; or in case of Felony, by
the Prisoner at the Bar against Things, as a Declaration. Old. N. B. 76.

Challenge made to the Jurors is either made to the Array, or to the Polls.
Challenge to the Array is, where Exception is taken to the whole number, as
impannelled partially: Challenge to or by the Poll is, where Exception is taken
to any one or more, as not indifferent. Challenge to the Jurors is also divided
into challenge principal, and challenge for cause, that is, upon cause or
reason. Challenge principal, or peremptory, is that which the Law allows
without cause alleged, or Examination: as a Prisoner at the Bar, arraigned
upon Felony, may peremptorily challenge to the number of twenty, one after
another, of the Jury impanuelled upon him, not alleging any cause at all, but
his own dislike, and they shall be discharged, and new put into their places:
and this is in favor of life. But in the case of High Treason no peremptory
challenge is allowed. See 25 H. 8. cap. 3. And a difference may be observed
between challenge principal and challenge peremptory, because challenge
peremptory seems only to be used in matters Criminal, and merely without any
cause alleged, more than only the Prisoner's fancy, Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 124.
and principal for the most part in Civil Actions, and with the namning of some
Exception, which being found true the Law presently allows. As for example, if
any party says that one of the Jurors is the Son, Brother, Cousin, or Tenant
to the other party, or married to his daughter, this is a good and strong
Exception, if it be true, without farther examination of the credit of the
party challenged. And of how large extent this Challenge of Kindred is, does
well appear in Plow. fol. 425. Also in the Plea of the death of any man, and in
every Action real, and also in every Action personal, where the debt or damages
amounts to 40 marks, it is a good challenge to any of the Jury impanelled, That
he cannot dispend forty shillings by the year of his own Freehold, An. 11 H.
7. cap. 21.

Challenge upon reason or cause is, when the party alleges any such Exception
against one or more of the Jurors, which is not forthwith sufficient upon
acknowledgment of the truth, thereof, but rather arbitrable, and consiverable
by the rest of the Jurors; as if the son of the Iuror had married the daughter
of the adverse party. This Challenge by cause seems to be termed by Kitch. fo.
92. Challenge for favor; or rather Challenge for favor is there said to be a
Species of Challenge by cause: Where you may also read what Challenges are
commonly accounted for principal, and what not.

Chamberdekins.
CHamberdekins are Irish Beggars, which by the Statute of 1 H. 5. c. 8. were by
a certain time, within the said Statute limited, to avoid this Land.

Champertie.
CHampertie is a Writ that lies where two men are impleading, and one gives the
half or part of a thing in plea to a stranger, to maintain him against the
other; then the party grieved shall have this Writ against the stranger. And it
seems that this has been an ancient grievance in our Realm: For
notwithstanding diverse Statutes, and a form of a Writ framed unto them, yet
Anno 4 E. 3. c. 11. it was enacted That where the former Statutes provided
redress for this only in the King's Bench, which then followed the Court; it
should be lawful for the Justices of the Common Pleas likewise and Justices of
Assise in their Circuits, to enquire, hear and determine these and such cases,
as well at the Kings Suit, as at the Suit of the party. Also it was ordained by
the Statute of 33 H. 8. (which was confirmed by the Statute of 37 H. 8. c. 7.)
That Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions should have authority to
enquire, as well by the Oaths of 12 men, as by the information given to them by
any person or persons, of the defaults, contempts and offenses committed
against the Laws and Statutes made and provided touching Champerty,
Maintenance, etc. and to hear and determine the said faults and offenses.

Champertors are they that move Pleas and Suits, or cause to be moved by their
own or oothers procurement, and sue them at their own costs, to have part of
the Lands or gains in variance. See the Stat. Articuli super chartas, c. 11.

Chance-medley.
CHance medley is, when a man without any evil intent does a lawful thing, or
that is not prohibited by Law, and yet another is slain or comes to his death
thereby: as if a man casts a stone, which hits a man or woman, who after dies
thereof; or if a man shoots an arrow, and another that passes by is killed, and
such like; this manner of killing is Manslaughter by misadventure, or
Chance-medley, for which the offender shall have his pardon of course, as
appears by the Statute of 6 E. 1. c. 9. and he shall forfeit his goods in such
manner as he that kills a man in his own defense. But in this case it is to be
considered, whether he that commits this Manslaughter by Chance-medley was in
doing a lawful thing: for if the act was unlawful, as to fight at Barriers,
or run at Tilt without the Kings commandment, or cast stones in a Highway
where men usually pass, or shoot arrows in a Marketplace, or such like,
whereby a man is killed; in all these cases it is Felony at least, that is,
Manssaughter, if not Murder; for the Offender being doing an unlawful act of
his own will, the Law shall construe his meaning and will herein by the success
of the act.

As if two are fighting together, and a third man comes to part them, and is
killed by one of the two, without any malice forethought, or evil intent in him
that killed the man, yet this is Murder in him, and not Manslaughter by
Chance-medley or Misadventure, because they two that fought together were in
doing an unlawful act. And if they were met with prepensed malice, the one
intending to kill the other, then it is Murder in them both.

Chancery.
CHancery is a Court of Law at Westminster for Suits for and against Attorneys,
Clerks, and Officers of this Court, this part of it and also the intelments of
Deeds, and Patents, is of Record. And there is also a Court for Equity, and
their proceedings therein are entered in English, and the Lord Chancellor, or
Keeper of the great Seal, and Master of the Rolls are Judges, and the Writs are
returnable there Coram Rege in Cancellaria. Co. 4. Instit. 78.

Chapter.
Chapter is a Summary or content of all such matters as are enquirable before
Justices in Air, Justices of Assise, or of the Peace in their Sessions: so it
is used 3 E. 1. c. 27. in these words, And that no Clerk of any Justice,
Escheator, or Commissioner in Air, shall take any thing for delivery of
Chapiters, but only Clerks of Justices in their Circuits; and likewise 13 E. 1.
c. 10. in these words, And when the time comes, the Sheriff shall certify the
Chapiters before the Justices in Air how many Writs he has. Also Britton uses
it in the same signification, cap. 3. And at this day Chapiters are called
Articles, for the most part, and are delivered as well by the mouth of the
Justice in his Charge, as by the Clerks in writing, to the Enquest, where in
ancient time they were (after an Exhortation given by the Justices, for the
observation of the Laws of the Kings peace) first read distinctly and openly in
the full Court, and then delivered in writing to the grand Enquest. An example
of these Chapiters there is in the Book of Assizes fol. 138. pla. 44.

Chaplain.
CHaplain is he that performs Divine Service in a Chapel, and therefore is
commonly used for him that depends upon the King or other man of worth, for the
instruction of him and his Family, the reading of Prayers, and Preaching in his
private house, where usually they have a Chapel for that purpose.

And for that they are retained by Letters under the Seal of their Patron, and
thereby by intendment are to be resident with them, the Law has given liberty
for their Non-residency upon their Benefices.

If an Earl or Baron retains a Chaplain, and before his advancement is
attainted of Treason, there the Retainer is determined, and after the Attainder
such Chaplain cannot take a second Benefice, because he that is attainted is by
his Attainder a dead person in Law. What and how many Chaplains Noblemen and
others may respectively retain, the Statute of 21 H. 8. c. 3. does well declare.

The wife of a Baron during the Coverture cannot retain a Chaplain; yet when a
Baronnesse Dowager retains one or two, according to the Proviso of the said
Statute, the Retainer is the principal matter, and as long as the Retainer is
in force, and the Baronness continues a Baronness, the Chaplains may well take
two Benefices by the express letter of the Statute; for it suffices, if at the
time of the Retainer the Baronness were a widow. And herein this rule is to be
observed of a woman that attains Nobility by Marriage, as by marriage of a
Duke, Earl, or Baron, etc. for in such case, if she afterward marry under the
degree of Nobility, by such Marriage she loses the Dignity she had attained,
and after such latter Marriage the power to retain a Chaplain is determined.
But otherwise it is where a woman is Noble by Descent, for there her Retainer
before or after the Marriage with one that is not Noble shall be in force, and
is not countermanded by the Marriage, nor determined by her taking a Husband
under her degree. Coke lib 4. fol. 118, 119.

Chapter.
CHapter in Latin is defined to be An Assembly of Clerks in a
Church-Cathedral, conventual, regular, or Collegiate; and in another
signification, A place wherein the members of that Community treat of their
common affairs: and it has other significations which appertain not to our
purpose. It may be said that this Collegiate company is termed Chapter
metaphorically, the word originally implying a little head; for this Company or
Corporation is as a Head, not only to rule and govern the Diocese in the
vacation of the Bishopric, but also in many things to advise the Bishop when
the Sea is full.

Charge.
CHarge is where a man grants a Rent issuing out of his land, and that, if the
Rent be behind, it shall be lawful for him, his heirs and assigns, to distrain
till the Rent be paid: this is called a Rentcharge. But if one grant a
Rentcharge out of the land of another, though after he purchase the land, yet
the Grant is void.

Charter land.
CHarter-land is such as a man holds by Charter, that is, by Evidence in
writing, which otherwise is called Freehold, Copyhold-lands before the
Conquest were by the Saxons called Folkland, and the Charter-lands Bockland.
And Lambert in the Explication of Saxon words, says, That this land was held
with more easy and commodious conditions then Folkland and Copyhold-land held
without writing: And his reason is, because it is a free and absolute
Inheritance; whereas land without writing is charged with payment and bondage;
so that for the most part Noblemen and persons of Quality possess the former,
and Rusticks the other. The first we call Freehold and by Charter; the other,
Land at the will of the Lord.

If a Riot, Rout, or Unlawful assembly be committed, then by the Statute of 19
H. 7. c. 13. twenty men inhabiting within the County where the Riot, etc. is
made (whereof every of them shall have lands and tenements within the same
County to the yearly value of twenty shillings of Charter-hold or Freehold, or
twenty six shillings of Copyhold) shall make enquiry thereof.

Charter-party.
CHarter-party is an Indenture of Covenants and Agreements made between
Merchants or Mariners concerning their Sea-affairs: and of this you may read in
the Statute, now out of use, made 32 H. 8. cap. 14.

Charters.
CHarters of Lands are Writings, Deeds, Evidences, and Instruments, made from
one man to another, upon some Estate conveyed or passed between them of Lands
or Tenements, showing the names, place, and quantity of the Land, the Estate,
time, and manner of the doing thereof, the Parties to the Estate, delivered and
taken, the Witnesses present at the same, with other circumstances.

Chartis reddendis.
CHartis reddendis is a Writ which lies against him that has Charters of
Feoffment delivered him to be kept, and refuses to deliver them. Old Not. Brev.
fol. 66. Reg. orig. fol. 159.

Chase.
CHase is taken two ways: first, to drive cattle, as to chase a Distress to a
Castle; secondly, for a Receipt for Deer and Beasts of the Forest: and it is of
a middle nature between a Forest and a Park, being commonly less then a Forest,
and not endued with so many Liberties, as with Courts of Attachment, Swainmore,
and Justice seat; and yet of a larger compass, and having greater diversity of
Keepers and Game then a Park. Crompt. in his Book of Jurisdictions, fol. 148.
says, That a Forest may not be in the hands of a Subject, but it presently
looses the name, and becomes a Chase; and yet fol. 197. he says, That a
subject may be Lord and owner of a Forest; which though they seem
contradictory, yet are both his sayings in some sense true: For the King may
give or alienate a Forest to a Subject, yet so, that when it is once in the
Subject, it loses the true property of a Forest, because the Courts of
Swainmote, Justice seat and Attachment, presently vanish, none being able to
make a Lord chief Justice in Air of the Forest but the King, as Manwood has
well showed, as his Book of Forest Laws, cap. 3. and 4. Yet it may be granted
in such large manner, that there may be Attachment and Swainmote, and a Court
equivalent to a Justice Seat, as appears by him in the same Chapter, numb. 3.
So that a Chase differs from a Forest in this, because it may be in the hands
of a Subject, which a Forest in its proper nature cannot be; and from a Park in
this, that it is not enclosed, and has not only a larger compass, and more
store of Game, but of Keepers also and Overseers. See Forest.

Chatels.
CHatels. See Catals.

Chauntry.
CHauntry is a Church or Chapel endued with lands or other yearly revenues for
the maintenance of one or more Priests, to sing Mass daily for the Souls of the
Donors, and such others as they appoint. And of these you may read in the
Statutes made 37 H. 8. c. 4. and 1 E. 6. cap. 14.

Chevage.
CHevage is a sum of money paid by Villains to their Lords in acknowledgement
of their Slavery, which Bracton lib. 1. cap. 10. thus defines; Chevagium
dicitur recognitio in signum subjectionis and dominil de capre suo. It seems
also to be used for a sum of money given by one man to another of power and
might for his avowment, maintenance and protection, as to their head and
Leader. Lambert writes it Chivage, or rather Chiefage.

Chievisance.
CHevisance comes from the French word Chevir, that is, to come to the end or
Head of a business. And because the perfecting of a Bargain is the drawing of
the matter to the head, this word Chevisance is used for Bargaining in the
Statutes of 37 H. 8. cap. 9. and 13 Eliz cap. 7, and 8.

Childwit.
CHildwit, that is, that you may take a Fine of your Bondwoman, defiled and
gotten with Child without your license.

Chimin.
CHimin is the Highway where every man goes, which is called Via Regia; and
yet the King has no other thing there but the passage for him and his people;
for the Freehold is in the Lord of the Soil, and the Profits growing there,
as Trees and other things. And it is divided into two sorts, the King's way, of
which is spoken before, and a private Way, or private Passage; and this is the
Way by which one man or more have liberty to pass, either by prescription, or
by writing, through the land of another: And this is divided into a way in
gross, and a Way appendant, Kitch. fol. 177. Chimin in gross is that Way which
a man holds principally and solely in it self: Chimin appendant is that which a
man has adjoined to some other thing, as appertaining thereunto; for example,
if a man hires a Close or Pasture, and has a Covenant for ingress and egress,
to and from the said Close, through the ground of some other, through which
otherwise he might not pass. Or a Way in gross may he that which the Civilians
call Personal; as when one covenants for a Way through the ground of another
man for himself and his heirs: A way appendant on the other side, may be that
which they call Real, as when a man purchases a Way through the ground of
another man, for such as do or shall dwe ^ in this or that house, or that are
the owners of such a Manor, for ever.

Chiminage.
CHiminage is a Toll paid for a man's passage through a Forest, to the disquiet
of the wild beasts of the Forest.

Chirographer.
CHirographer is he that in the Common-Bench-Office, ingrosses Fines
acknowledged in that Court into a perpetual Record, (after they are
acknowledged and fully passed by those Officers by whom they are first
examined) and that writes and delivers the Indentures, one for the Buyer, and
another for him that sells, and makes another indented piece, containing also
the effect of the Fine, which he delivers over to the Custos Brevium, which is
called the Foot of the Fine. The Chirographer also, or his Deputy, proclaims
all the Fines in the Court every Term, according to the Statutes, and then
repairing to the Office of the Custos Brevium, there endorses the Proclamations
upon the backside of the Foot thereof, and always keeps the Writ of Covenant,
as also the Note of the Fine.

Chivage.
CHivage. See Chevage.

Chivalrie.
CHivalrie is a Tenure of land by Knights service: for the better understanding
whereof it is to be known, that there is no land but is held mediately or
immediately of the Crown by some Service or other; and therefore all our
Free-holds that are to us and our heirs are called Fees, as proceeding from the
bounty of the King for some small yearly Rent, and the performance of such
services as originally were imposed upon the Land at the githing thereof: For
as the King gave to his Nobles, his immediate Tenants, great possessions for
ever, to hold of him for such or such Rent and Service; so they again in time
parcelled out, to such as pleased them, their Lands so received of the Kings
bounty, for such Rents and Services as to them seemed good. And the Services
are all by Littleton divided into two sorts, Chivalry and Socage: the one
material and military; the other clownish and rustical.

Chivalry therefore is a Tenure whereby the Tenant is bound to perform some
Noble or Military Office to his Lord; and is of two kinds, either Regal, that
is, such as may be held only of the King, or such as may also be held of a
common person as well as of the King, That which may be held only of the King,
is properly called S ^ rvitium or Sergeantia, and is also again divided into
Grand and Petit Serjeanty Grand Serjeanty is that, where a man holds lands of
the King by service which he ought to do in his own person, as to carry the
Kings Banner or his Spear, to lead his Army, to be his Marshal, to blow a Horn
when he sees his enemies invade the Land, or to find an armed man to fight
within the four Seas, or to do it himself, or to carry the Kings Sword before
him at his Coronation, or at that day to be his Sewer. Carver, Butler, or
Chamverlain.

Petit Serjeanty is, where a man holds land of the King to pay him yearly a
Bow, a Sword, a Dagger, a Knife, a Spear, a pair of Gloves of maile, a pair of
Spurs of Gold, or to give such other small things concerning the War.

Chivalrie that may hold of a common person as well as of the King is called
Escuage, Service of the shield; and this is either uncertain, or certain.
Escurage uncertain is also of two kinds; first, where the Tenant by his Tenure
is bound to follow his Lord going in person to the Kings wars against his
enemies, either himself, or to send a sufficient man in his place, there to be
maintained at his costs so many days as were agreed upon between the Lord and
his Tenant at the granting of the Fee. And the days of such service seem to
have been rated by the quantity of the land so held: as if it extends to a
whole Knight's Fee, then the Tenant was bound so to attend his Lord 40 days;
and a Knight's fee was so much land as in those days was accounted a sufficient
living for a Knight, and this was 680 acres, by the opinion of some, or eight
hundred, as others think; or fifteen pounds by the year. Cambden's Brit. fol.
110. If the land extends but to the moiety of a Knight's fee, then the Tenant
is bound to follow his Lord but 20 days; if a fourth part, then 10 days. Fitzh.
Not. Brev fol. 83. c. and 84. c e. The other kind of Escuage uncertain is
called Castleward, where the Tenant by his land is bound, either by himself or
some other, to defend a Castle as often as it shall come to his turn.

Escuage certain is, where the Tenant is assessed to a certain sum of money
to be paid instead of such uncertain service; as that a man shall pay yearly
for a Knights Fee 20 shillings, for the half 10 shillings, or any such rate.
And this Service, because it is drawn to a certain Rent, comes to be of a mixed
nature, not merely Socage, for it smells not of the Plow; and yet Socage in
effect, being now neither personal service, nor uncertain. Chivalry has other
conditions annexed thereunto: as Homage, Fealty, Wardship, Relief, and
Marriage, Bract. l. 2. c. 35. and what they signify see in their several
places. Chivalry is either general, or special, Dyer fol. 161. plac. 47.
General seems to be, where it is only said in the Feoffment, that the Tenant
holds by Knights Service, without any specification of Sergeanty, Escuage, etc.
Special is that which is declared particularly what kind of Knights service he
holds by. See the Statute 12 Car. 2. c. 24

Thing in Action.
THing in Action is, when a man has cause, or may bring an Action for some
duty due to him; as an Action of Debt upon an Obligation, Annuity, or Rent,
Action of Covenant, or Ward, Trespass of goods taken away, Beating, or such
like: and because they are things whereof a man is not possessed, but for
recovery of them is driven to his Action, they are called Things in Action. And
those Things in Action that are certain, the King may grant, and the Grantee
may have an Action for them in his own name only: But a common person cannot
grant his Thing in Action, nor the King himself his Thing in Action, which is
uncertain, as Trespass, and such like.

But of late times it is used in London, that Merchants and others there, who
have Bills without Seals for payment of Money assign them to others, who bring
actions in their own names.

Churchesset.
CHurchesset is a word whereof Flet. l. 1. c. 47. in the end thus writes: It
signifies a certain Measure of Wheat, which in times past every man on St.
Martins day gave to Holy Church, as well in the time of the Britains as of the
English. Yet many great persons, after the coming of the Romans, gave that
Contribution, according to the ancient Law of Moses, in the name of the
First Fruits, as in the Work of King Kanutus sent unto the Pope is contained;
in which they call the Contribution Chirchsed, as one would say, Church-seed.

Churchwardens.
Churchwardens are Officers yearly chosen by the consent of the Minister and
the Parishioners, according to the custom of every several place, to see to the
Church, Churchyard, and such things as belong to both, and to observe the
behavior of the Parishioners, for such crimes as appertain to the jurisdiction
or censure of the Ecclesiastical Court. These are a kind of Corporation, and
are enabled by Law to sue for any thing belonging to their Church, or the Poor
of the Parish. See Lambert's Duty of Churchwardens.

Cinque Port.
CInque Port are five Haven-towns, that is, Hastings, Romney, Hythe, Dover, and
Sandwich, to which have been granted long time since many Liverties (which
other Port-towns have not,) and that first in the time of King Edward the
Confessor; which have been increased since, and that chiefly in the days of the
three Edwards, the first, the second, and third, as appears in Doomsday book,
and other old Monuments, too long to recite.

Circuity of Action.
CIrcuity of Action is, when an Action is rightfully brought for a Duty, but
yet about the bush, as it were, for that it might as well have been otherwise
answered and determined, and the Suit saved: and because the same Action was
more then needful, it is called Circuity of Action. As if a man grant a
Rentcharge of x.li. out of his Manor of Dale, and after the Grantee disseises
the Grantor of the same Manor, and he brings an Assise, and recovers the land,
and xxli. damages, which xx.li. being paid, the Grantee of the Rent sues his
Action for x.li. of his Rent due during the time of the Disseisin, which if no
Disseisin had been he must have had: This is called Circuity of Action, because
it might have been more shortly answered; for whereas the Grantor shall receive
xx.li. damages, and pay x.li. Rent, he may have received but the x.li. only for
the damages, and the Grantee might have cut off and kept back the other x.li.
in his hands, by way of deteiner for his Rent, and so thereby might have saved
his Action.

Circumstantibus.
CIrcumstantibus is a word of Art, signifying the Supply and making up the
number of Jurors, if any impannelled do not appear, or are challenged by either
party, by adding to them as many others of those that are present and standers
by. See 35 H. 8. c. 6. and 5 El. c. 25.

City.
CIty is such a Town corporate as has a Bishop and a Cathedral Church, whereof
such words are found: The same place is called Urbs, Civitas, and Oppidum. It
is called Civitas in regard it is governed in justice and order of Magistracy;
Oppidum for that there are therein great plenty of Inhabitants; and Urbs,
because it is in due form begirt about with Walls. But that place is commonly
called Civitas which has a Bishop. Yet Crompton in his Jurisdictions reckons
up all the Cities, and leaves out Ely, although it has a Bishop and a
Cathedral Church, and puts in Westminster, notwithstanding it now has no
Bishop. And 35 El. 6. Westminster is called a City: and Anno 27 ejusd. c. 5 (
of Statutes not printed) Westminster is alternative called a City or Borough.
It appears by the Stat. 35 H. 8. c. 10. that then there was a Bishop of Westminster.
Cassanaeus writes, that France has within its Territories 104 Cities, and
gives this reason, because there are so many Sees of Archbishops and Bishops.

Clack.
CLack, as to clack, force, and bard wool, 8 H 6. cap. 22. whereof the first,
viz. to Clack wool is, to cut off the mark of the Sheep, which makes it to
weigh less, and so to pay the less Custom to the King: To Force wool is, to
clip the upper and most hairy part of it: To Bard or beard wool is, to cut the
head and neck from the other part of the Fleece.

Claim.
CLaim is a Challenge by any man of the property or ownership of a thing which
he has not in possession, but is withholden from him wrongfully: and the party
that so makes this Claim shall have thereby a great advantage; for by it, in
some cases, he may avoid a Descent of lands; and by it, in other cases, he may
save his Title, which otherwise should be lost. As if a man be disseised, and
the Disseisee makes a Continual claim, that is, if he claim the lands whereof
he is disseised within the year and day before the death of the Disseisor, then
may he enter, notwithstanding the Descent.

Also, if a Fine be levied of another man's Land, then he that has right
thereunto ought to make his Claim within five years after the Proclamation had,
made, or certified, by the Statute of 4 Hen. 7. cap 24. But a Stranger that
has no right cannot of his own head enter, or make Claim in the name of him
that has right to avoid the Fine within the five years, without commandment
precedent or assent subsequent: yet Guardian for education, or in Socage, may
enter or make Claim in the name of the Infant that has right to enter or make
Claim; and this shall help the estate of the Infant, without commandment or
assent, for there is privity between them.

Claim of Liberty.
Is a Suit or Petition to the King, in the Court of Exchequer to have Liberties
and Franchises confirmed there by the Kings Attorney General, Co. Ent. 93.

Clergy.
Clergy is taken diverse ways; sometimes for the whole number of Religious
men, sometimes for a Plea to an Indictment or Appeal: and is defined to be an
ancient Liberty of the Church, confirmed in diverse Parliaments. And it is, when
a man is arraigned of Felony, or such like, before a temporal Judge, etc. and
the prisoner prays his Clergy, that is, to have his Book, which in ancient
time was as much as if he desired to be dismissed from the temporal Judge, and
to be d^livered to the Ordinary to purge himself of the same offense. And then
the Judge shall command the Ordinary to try if he can read as a Clerk, in
such a Book and place as the Judge shall appoint. And if the Ordinary certify
the Judge that he can, then the prisoner shall not have judgment to lose his
life. But this Liberty of the Clergy is restrained by the Statute of 8 El. c.
4. an. 14 ejusd. c. 5. an. 18 ejusd. c. 4, 6, 7. and 23 ejusd. cap. 2. and 29.
ejusd. cap. 2 and 31 ejusd. cap. 12. and 39 ejusd. cap. 9, and 15. See Crompt.
Just. of Peace, fo. 102, etc. and Stamf. lib. 2. cap. 41. and the Stat. of 18
Eliz. cap. 7. by which Clerks are not to be delivered to their Ordinaries to be
purged, but now every man, though not within Orders, is put to read at the Bar,
being found guilty, and convicted of such Felony, for which this benefit is
still granted, and so burned in the hand, and set free the first time, if the
Ordinary's Comissary or Deputy says, He reads as a Clerk; or otherwise he
suffers death for his transgression.

Clerk.
CLerk has two significations, one as it is the title of him that belongs to
the holy Ministry of the Church, that is, in these days, either Minister or
Deacon of what other degree or dignity soever; although that in ancient time
not only Sacerdotes and Diaconi, but also Subdiaconi, Can ^ ores, Acoluthi,
Exorcistae and Ostiarii were within this account, as they are at this day where
the Canon Law has full power. And in this signification a Clerk is either
Religious, (otherwise called Regular) or Secular. 4 H. 4. cap. 12.

The other signification of this word denotes such as by their function or
course of life use their pen in any Court, or otherwise; as namely the Clerk of
the Rolls of Parliament, Clerks of the Chancery, and such like.

Clerico admittendo.
CLerico admittendo is a Writ directed to the Bishop for the admitting a Clerk
to a Benefice upon a Ne admittas tried and found for the party that procures
the Writ. Beg. orig. f. 31.

Clerk Attaint.
CLerk attaint is he who prays his Clergy after judgment given upon him of the
Felony, and has his Clergy allowed; such a Clerk might not make his Purgation.

Clerk convict.
CLerk convict is he who prays his Clergy before judgment given upon him of
the Felony, and has his Clergy granted, such a Clerk might make his Purgation.
Note, that this Purgation was made when he was dismissed to the Ordinary, there
to be tried by the enquest of Clerks: and therefore now by the Stat. of 18
Eliz. cap. 7. no such is put to the Ordinary.

Closh.
CLosh is an unlawful Game forbidden by the Statute made in the 17 year of E.
cap. 4. and it is inhibited also by the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 9. But there
it is more properly called Clash; for it is the throwing of a Bowl at nine Pins
of wood or nine shank-bones of an Ox or Horse: and it is now ordinarily called
Kailes, or Nine-pins.

Coadjutor.
COadjutor to the Disseisin is he who with another disseises one of his
Freehold to the use of the other, and he shall be punished as a Disseisor; but
he is not such a Disseisor who gains the Freehold, but the Freehold vests and
is wholly in him to whose use the Disseisin was committed, as appears in
Littleton. l. 3. cap. 3 of Jointenants.

Cocket.
COcket is a Seal pertaining to the King's Custom House, and it signifies also
a Scrowl of Parchment, sealed and delivered by the Officers of the
Custom House to Merchants, as a Warrant that their merchandise are customed.
This word is used in the old Statutes now expired, of 14 E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 21.
and 11 H. 6. cap. 16.

Codicil.
COdicil is the Will or Testament of a man concerning that which he would have
done after his death without the appointing of an Executor. Or it is an
addition or supplement added unto a Will or Testament after the finishing of
it, for the supply of something which the Testator had forgotten, or to help
some defect in the Will. Of this you may read more in Swinbourn's Wills and
Testaments, part. 1. Sect. 5. number. 2, 3, etc.

Coin.
COin is a word collective, which contains in it all manner of the several
stamps and pourtraitures of Money. And this is one of the Royal Prerogatives
belonging to every Prince, that he alone in his own Dominions may order and
dispose the quantity, and fashions of his Coin. And though this is the sinew of
all traffic and commerce, yet the Coin of one King is not current in the
Realms of another King, commonly, unless at great loss.

If a man binds himself to pay an hundred pounds of lawful Money of England to
another, and at the day of payment some of the money chances to be Spanish or
French Coin, there the Obligation is well performed, if those Coins are by
Proclamation made current money of England: For the King by his absolute
Prerogative may make any foreign Coin lawful money of England at his pleasure by
his Proclamation. In case where a man is to pay Rent to his Lessor upon
condition of Re-entry, and the Lessee pays the Rent to the Lessor, and he
receives it, and puts it in his purse, and afterward upon review of it at the
same time he finds that he has received some counterfeit pieces, and thereupon
refuses to take away the Money, but reenters for the Condition broken; there
his Entry is not lawful, for when he has accepted the Money, this was at his
peril, and after this allowance he shall not take exception to any of it.

Collateral.
COllateral is that which comes in, or adheres to the side of any thing; as
Collateral Assurance is that which is made over and beside the Deed it self:
For example, if a man covenants with another, and enters Bond for the
performance, the Bond is called Collateral Assurance, because it is external,
and without the nature and essence of the Covenant. And Crompton, fol. 185.
says, that to be subject to feeding the Kings Deer is collateral to the soil
within the Forest. In like manner we may say, that the liberty to pitch Sheds
or Standing for a Fair in the soil of another man is collateral to the land.
The private Woods of a common person within the Forest cannot be cut down
without the Kings license, for it is a Prerogative collateral to the soil. Man.
part. 1. page 66. Collateral Warranty; See tit. Warrantie.

Collation.
COllation is properly the bestowing of a Benefice by the Bishop, that has it
in his own Gift or Patronage; and differs from Institution in this, for that
Institution into a Benefice is performed by the Bishop at the motion and
Presentation of another, who is Patron of the same Church, or has the Patrons
right for that time: Yet Collation is used for Presentation in 25 E. 3. Stat.
6. and there is a Writ in the Regist. 31. b. called De Collatione facta uni
post mortem alterius etc. directed by the Justices of the Common Pleas,
commanding them to direct their Writ to the Bishop, for the admitting a Clerk
in the place of another presented by the King, who during the Suit between the
King and the Bishops Clerk deceased; for judgment once passed for the Kings
Clerk, and he dying before he be admitted, the King may give his Presentation
to another.

Collusion.
COllusion is, where an action is brought against another by his own agreement,
if the Plaintiff recover, then such Recovery is called by Collusion. And in
some cases the Collusion shall be enquired of, as in Quare impedit, and Assise,
and such like, which any Corporation or Body politic brings against another,
to the intent to have the Land or Advowson whereof the Writ is brought in
Mortmain. But in Avowry, nor in any Action personal, the Collusion shall not be
inquired. See the Stat. of Westminster. 2. c. 32. which gives the Quale jus and
enquiry in such cases.

Color.
Color is feigned matter, which the Defendant or Tenant uses in his bar when
an Action of Trespass or an Assise is brought against him, in which he gives
the Demandant or Plaintiff a Show at first sight that he has good cause of
Action, where in truth it is no just cause, but only a Color and Face of a
cause: and it is used to the intent that the determination of the Action should
be by the Judges, and not by an ignorant Jury of twelve men. And therefore a
Color ought to be a matter in Law doubtful to the common people. As for
example, A. brings and Assise of land against B. and B. says he himself did
let the same land to one C. for term of life, and afterward did grant the
Reversion to A. the Demandant, and after C. the Tenant for term of life died,
after whose decease, A. the Demandant, claiming the Reversion by force of the
Grant, (whereto C. the Tenant for life did never atturn) entered, upon whom B.
entered, against whom A. for that Entry brings this Assise, etc. This is a good
Color, because the common people think the land will pass by the Grant without
Atturnment, where indeed it will not pass, etc.

Also in an Action of Trespass Color must be given, of which there are an
infinite number, one forexample: In an Action of Trespass for taking away the
Plaintiffs Beasts, the Defendant says, that before the Plaintiff had any thing
in them, he himself was possessed of them as of his proper goods, and delivered
them to A. B. to deliver them to him again when, etc. and A. B. gave them unto
the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff supposing the property to be in A. B. at the
time of the gift, took them and and the Defendant took them from the Plaintiff,
whereupon the Plaintiff brings an Action: that is a good Color, and a good
Plea. See more hereof in Doctor and Student l. 2. c. 13.

Color is for this cause viz. where the Defendant justifies by title in
trespass or Assize, if he do not give the Plaintiff Color, his plea amounts
only to not guilty, for if the Defendant has title he is not guilty 1 Co. 79.
108.

Color of Office.
Color of Office is always taken in the worst part, and signifies an act
evilly done by the countenance of an Office, and it bears a dissembling face of
the right of the Office, whereas the Office is but a vail to the falsehood, and
the thing is grounded upon vice, and the Office is as a shadow to it. But by
reason of the Office, and by virtute of the Office, are taken always in the
best part, and where the Office is the just cause of the thing, and the thing
is pursuing the Office, Plo. in Dive and Man. case, sol. 64. a.

Combat.
COmbat, in our ancient Law, was a formal Trial of a doubtful Cause or quarrel
by the Sword or Bastons of two Champions. See Glanvile l. 14. c. 1. Britton c.
22. and Dyer fol. 301. number. 41.

Commandment.
COmmandment is taken in diverse significations: sometimes for the Commandment
of the King, when by his mere motion and from his own mouth he casts any man
into prison, Stamf. Plac. Coron. fol. 72. or of the Justices: And this
Commandment of the Justices is either absolute or ordinary. Absolute, as when
upon their own authority, or wisdom and discretion, they commit any man to
prison for a punishment. Ordinary is, when they commit one rather to be safely
kept, then for punishmenr; and a man committed by such ordinary Commandment is
bailable, Placit. Cor. fol. 73. Commandment is again used for the offense of
him that wills another man to transgress the Law, or to do any such thing as
is contrary to the Law, as Murder, Theft, or such like, Bract. l. 3. tract. 2.
c. 19. The Civilians call this Commandment, Angelus de maleficiis.

Commendrie.
COmmandrie was the name of a Manor or chief Message, with which Lands or
Tenements were used belonging to the late Priory of S. John of Jerusalem,
until they were given to King Henry the eighth by Statute made in the 32 year
of his reign. And he who had the Government of any such Manor or House was
called the Commander, who had nothing to do to dispose of it, but to the use of
the Priory, and to have only his sustenance from it according to his degree,
which was usually a Brother of the same Priory, who had been made Knight in the
Wars against Infidels; and they were lately called Knights of the Rhodes, or
Knights of Malta, of the places where their grand Master did dwell. See the
said Statute, and the old Statute entitled De Templariis, whose decay was, a
great increase of this Order. And many of these Commandries are called in the
Country by the name of Temple.

Commandam.
COmmendam is a Benefice that, being void, is commended to the care of some
sufficient Clerk, to be supplied until it may be conveniently provided of a
Pastor. And the true original of these Commendams was either evident profit, or
necessity. He to whom the Church is commended has the fruits and profits
thereof only for a certain time, and the nature of the Church is not changed
thereby, but is as a thing deposited in the hands of him to whom it is
commended, who has nothing but the Custody thereof, which may be revoked.

Commissary.
COmmissary is a title of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, appertaining to him that
exercises Spiritual Jurisdiction in places of the Diocese so far distant from
the chief City, that the Chancellor cannot call the Subjects to the Bishop's
principal Consistory without their great trouble. This Commissary is called by
the Canonists Commissary, or Officialis foraneus; and is ordained to this
special end, that he should supply the Office and Jurisdiction of the Bishop in
the out-places of the Diocese, or in such Parishes as are peculiars to the
Bishop and exempted from the Archdeacon's Jurisdiction: for where by
prescription, or by composition, there are Archdeacons; who have Jurisdiction
in their Archdeaconries, as in most places they have, there this Commissary is
superfluous, and rather to the prejudice then good of the people.

Commission.
COmmission is as much in the Common Law as the word Delegate in the Civil, and
is taken for the Warrant or Letters Patents which all men, using Jurisdiction,
either ordinary or extraordinary, have for their power to hear or determine any
matter or action. Yet this word sometimes extends more largely then to matters
of Judgment; as the Commission of Purveyors or Cakers, 11 H. 4. c. 28. But
with this Epithete High, it is most commonly used for the High Commission
Court, instituted and founded upon the Stat. of 1 Eliz. c. 1. for the ordering
and reforming of all offenses in any thing appertaining to the Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, but especially such as are of highest nature, or at least
require greater puishment then the ordinary Jurisdiction call afford. See the
Statutes 17 Car. 1. c. 11. and 13 Car. 2. c. 12. by which the said Court is
wholly abolished.

Commission of Rebellion.
Com^ission of Rebellion, otherwise called a Writ of Rebellion, is used when a
man after Proclamation made by the Sheriff, upon an Order or Process of the
Chancery, under penalty of Allegiance to present himself to the Court by a day
certain, appears not. And this Commission is directed by way of command to
certain persons, to the end they, three, two, or one of them, shall apprehend
or cause to be apprehended the party, as a Rebel and contemner of the Kings
Laws, in what place s ^ ever they shall find him within the Kingdom, and bring
or cause him to be brought to the Court upon a day therein assigned.

Committee.
COmmittee is he or they to whom the consideration or ordering of any matter is
referred, either by some Court, or consent of the parties to whom it
appertains: as in Parliament a Bill being read, is either consented unto and
passed, or denied, and referred to the consideration of some certain man
appointed by the House, who hereupon are called a Committee. But this word is
otherwise used by Kitchen. f. 160. where the widow of the Kings Tenant is
called the Committee of the King, that is, one committed by the ancient Law of
the Land to the Kings care and protection.

Common.
COmmon is the right that a man has to put his Beasts to Pasture, or to use
the ground that is not his own.

And note that there are diverse Commons, that is, Common in gross, Common
appendant, Common appurtenant, and Common because of neighborhood.

Common in Gross is, where I, by my Deed, grant to another that he shall have
Common in my Land.

Common appendant is, where a man is seized of certain land, to which he has
Common in another ground, only for those beasts which compost the land to
which it is appendant, excepting Geese, Goats, and H ^ gs; which Common is by
prescription, and of common right, and appendant to arable land only.

Common appurtenant is of the same nature with Common appendant; but with all
manner of beasts, as well Hogs and Goats, as Horses, Kine, and such as compost
the ground. And this Common may be made at this day, and severed from the land
to which it is appurtenant, but so cannot Common appendant.

Common because of neighborhood is, where the Tenants of two Lords are seized
of two Manors adjoining to each other; and the Tenants have time out of mind
intercommoned each with other with all manner of beasts commonable.

Yet the one may not put his Cattle in the others ground, for so they of the
other Town may distrain them Damage fesant, or have an Action of Trespass: but
they may put them into their own fields, and if they stray into the fields of
the other Town, there they ough to suffer them. And the inhabitants of the one
Town ought not to put in as many beasts as they will, but with regard to the
inhabitants of the other, for otherwise it were no good Neighborhood, upon
which all this depends.

Common Fine.
COmmon Fine is a certain sum of Money which the Resiants in a Leet pay unto
the Lord of the Leet; and it is called in some places Head-silver, in some
places Certum Letae, and was (as it seems) first granted to the Lord toward
the charge of his purchase of the Leet, whereby the Resiants had now an ease to
do their Suit royal within the Manor, and not be compelled to go to the
Sherifs Tourn to do it. And for this Common Fine the Lord must prescribe, and
cannot distrain for it without a prescription, as it appears in Godfrey's Case,
in 11. Rep. fo. 44. b.

Common Law.
COmmon Law is for the most part taken three ways. First, for the Laws of this
Realm simply, without any other Law, as Customary, Civil, Spiritual, or
whatever other Law joined to it; as when it is disputed in our Laws of England,
what ought of right to be determined by the Common Law, and what by the
Spiritual Law, or Admirals Court, or such like.

Secondly, it is taken for the Kings Courts, as the Kings Bench, or Common
Place, only to show a difference between them and base Courts; as Customary
Courts, Court-Barons, County Courts, Pipowders, and such like: as when a Plea
of land is removed out of ancient Demesne, because the land is Frank-fee, and
pleadable at the Common Law, that is to say, in the Kings Court, and not in
ancient Demesne, or in any other base Court.

Thirdly, and most usually, by Common Law is understood such Laws as were
generally taken and holden for Law before any Statute was made to alter the
same: as for example, Tenant for life, nor for years, were not to be punished
for doing Waste at the common Law, till the Statute of Gloucester cap. 5. which
gives an Action of Waste against them. But Tenant by the courtesy and Tenant
in dower were punishable for Waste at the Common Law, that is, by the usual and
common received Laws of the Realm, before the said Statute was made.

Common Pleas.
COmmon Pleas is the Kings Court now held in Westminster Hall, but in ancient
time moveable, as appears by Magna Charta, cap. 11.

But Gwyn, in the Preface to his Reading, says, That until the time that
Henry the third granted the Great Charter, there were but two Courts, only
called the Kings Courts, the Exchequer, and Kings Bench which was called Aula
Regia, because it followed the Court; and that upon the grant of that Charter
the Court of Common Pleas was erected and settled in a place certain, viz. at
Westminster; and therefore all the Writs were made with this Return, Quid sit
coram Justiciariis meis apud Westmonasteriu^, where before the party was
commanded by them to appear coram Me vel Justiciariis meis, without any
addition of any place certain.

All Civil causes, as well Real as Personal, are, or were in ancient time,
tried in this Court, according to the strict Law of the Kingdom: And by
Fortescue, cap. 50. it seems to have been the only Court for Real Causes. The
thief Judge thereof is called The Lord chief Justice of the Common pleas,
accompanied with three or four Assistants or Associates, who are created by the
Kings Letters Patents, and as it were installed or placed upon the Bench by the
Lord Chancellor and Lord Chief Justice of the Court, as appears by Fortescue,
cap. 51. who expresses all the circumstances of this Admission.

The rest of the Officers appertaining to this Court are these: The Custos
Brevium, three Prothenataries, Chirographer, fourteen Philasers, four
Exigenters, Clerk of the Warrants, Clerk of the Iuries, Clerk of the Treasury,
Clerk of the Kings Silver, Clerk of the Essoines, Clerk of the Outlawries.

Common day in plea of land.
COmmon day in plea of land, Anno 13 R. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 17. signifies an
ordinary day in the Court, as Octabis Michaelis, Quindena Paschae, etc. as you
may see in the Statute ^ 1 Hen. 3. concerning general days in the Bench.

Commotes.
COmmotes seems to be a compound word, of the Preposition Con, and Motio, that
is, Dictio, Verbum, and signifies in Wales part of a County or Hundred, An. 28
H. 8. cap. 3. It is written Commoithes, Anno 4 H. 4. cap. 17. and is used for a
Gathering made upon the people of this or that Hundred by Welsh Minstrels.

Communi Custodia.
COmmuni Custodia is a Writ which didlie for that Lord, whose Tenant holding by
Knights service dies, his eldest son within age, against a stranger who entered
the land, and obtained the Ward of the body. It seems to take name from the
common Custom or right in this case, which is, That the Lord shall have the
wardship of his Tenant until his full age; or because that it is common for
the recovery both of the Land and Tenant, as appears by the form thereof, Old
N. B. 89. Regist. Orig. 161.

Compromise.
COmpromise is a mutual Promise of two or more parties that are at
controversy, to submit themselves and all differences between them unto the
Award, Arbitrament, or Judgment of one or more Arbitrators, indifferently
chosen between them, to determine and adjudge upon all matters referred, and
upon which the parties differ.

Computation.
COmputation is used in the Common Law for the true and indifferent
Construction of time, so that neither the one party shall do wrong to the
other, nor the determination of times, referred at large, be taken one way or
other, but computed according to the just censure of the Law.

As if Indentures of Demise are engrossed, bearing date the eleventh day of
May, 1665. to have and to hold the land in S. for three years from henceforth,
and the Indentures are delivered the fourth day of June in the year aforesaid:
In this case, from henceforth, shall be accounted from the day of the Delivery
of the Indentures, and not by any computation from the Date. And if the said
Indenture be delivered at four of the clock in the afternoon of the said fourth
day, this Lease shall end the third day of June in the third year; for the Law
in this Computation rejects all fractions or divisions of the day for the
incertainty, which always is the Mother of contention. So where the Statute of
Inrollments made Anno 27 Henr. 8. cap. 16. is, That the Writings shall be
enrolled within six months after the Date of the same Writings indented; if
such Writings have Date, the six months shall be accounted from the Date, and
not from the Delivery; but if they want Date, then it shall be accounted from
the Delivery. Co. li. 5. fol. 1.

If any Deed be showed to a Court at Westminster, the Deed by Judgment of the
Law shall remain in Court all the Term in which it is showed; for all the Term
in Law is but one day. Co. lib. 5. fol. 74.

If a Church be void, and the true Patron does not present within six months,
then the Bishop of the Diocese may collate his Chaplain: but these six months
shall not be computed according to 28 days to the month, but according to the
Calendar. And there is great diversity in our common speech in the singular
number, as a Twelve-moneth, which includes all the Year, according to the
Calendar, and twelve-months, which shall be computed according to 28 days to
every month. See Coke lib. 6. f. 61. b.

Computo.
COmputo is a Writ so called of the effect, because it compells a Bailiff,
Chamberlain, or Receiver, to yield his Account, Old Not. Brev. fol. 53. It is
founded upon the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap 2. which you may for your better
understanding read. And it also lies for Executors, of Executors, 15 Ed. 3.
Star. de Provis. Victual cap. 5. Thirdly, against the Guardian in Secage, for
Waste made in the Minority of the Heir, Malbr. cap. 17. And see farther in what
other cases it lies, Reg. Orig. fol. 135. Old N. B. fol. 58. and F. N. B. fol.
116.

Concealers.
COncealers are such as find out lands concealed, that is, such lands as are
secretly detained from the King by common persons, having nothing to show for
them, Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 22. They are so called a concelando, as Mons a
Movendo, by Antiphrasis.

Conclusion.
COnclusion is, when a man by his own act upon record has charged himself with
a Duty or other thing: As if a Freeman confess himself to be the Villain of A
^^ upon record, and afterward A. takes his goods, he shall be concluded to say
in any Action or Plea afterward that he is free, by reason of his own
confession. So if the Sheriff, upon a Capias to him directed, returns that he
has taken the body, and yet has not the body in Court at the day of the
Return, he shall be amerced: and if it were upon a Capias ad satisfac', the
Plaintiff may have his Action against the Sherif for the Escape; for by such
Return the Sherif has concluded himself.

And this word Conclusion is taken in another sense, as for the End or later
part of any De^^ aration, Bar, Replication, etc. As where to the Bar there
ought to be a Replication, the Conclusion of his Plea shall be, And this he is
ready to affirm. If in Dower the Tenant pleads, that he was never seized so as
to tender Dower, the Conclusion shall be, and upon this he puts himself upon
the Country. And in what manner the Conclusion shall be according to the nature
of several Actions, See Kitch. f. 219, 220, etc.

Concord.
COncord is defined to be the very Agreement between parties that intend the
levying a Fine of Lands one to another, how and in what manner the Lands shall
be passed; for in the form thereof many things are to be considered. See West.
part 2. tit. Fines and Concords, sect. 30.

Concord is also an Agreement made upon any Trespass committed between two or
more, and is divided into a Concord Executory, and Executed. See Plowd. in
Reniger and Fogasie's Case, fol. 5, and 6. where it appears by the opinion of
some, That the one does not bind, as being imperfect; the other, being
absolute, binds the parties. And yet by the opinion of others, in the same
case, it is affirmed, That Concords Executory are perfect, and do no less bind
then Concords Executed, fol. 8. b.

It is lately held, that in as much as Actions on assumpsits are now in use,
which were rarely before the reign of King H. 8. that now an accord with an
Assumpsit upon which an Action lies is a good plea in all those Actions to
which it was formerly a good plea if executed.

Concubinage.
COncubinage is an Exception against her that brings an Action for her Dower,
whereby it is alleged, That she was not lawfully married to the party in whose
lands she seeks to be endowed, but his Concubine. Brit. cap. 107. Bract. lib.
4. tract. 6. cap. 8.

Conders.
COnders are those that stand upon high places near the Seacoast, at the time
of Herring-fishing, to make signs with boughs, etc. in their hands to the
Fishers, which way the shole of Herrings passes: for they who stand upon some
high Cliffe may see it better then those that are in their Ships. These are
otherwise called Huers and Balkers, as appears by the Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 23.

Condition.
COndition is a Restraint or Bridle annexed to a thing, so that by the not
performance, or not doing of it, the party to the Condition shall receive
prejudice and loss, and by the performance and doing of it, commodity and
advantage.

All Conditions are either Conditions actual and expressed, which are called
Concitions in Deed; or else implied or covert, and not expressed, which are
Conditions in Law.

Also all Conditions are either Conditions precedent and going before the
Estate, and are executed; or else subsequent and following after the Estate,
and executory.

Condition precedent does get and gain the thing or Estate made upon Condition,
by the performance of it.

Condition subsequent keeps and continues the thing or Estate made upon
Condition, by the performance of it.

Actual and express Condition, which is called a Condition in Deed, is a
Condition annexed by express words to the Feoffment, Lease, or Grant, either in
writing, or without writing: As if I infeoff a man in lands, reserving a Rent
to be paid at such a Feast, upon Condition, that if the Feoffee fail of payment
at the day, then it shall be lawful for me to re-enter.

Condition implied or covert is, when a man grants to another the Office to be
Keeper of a Park, Steward, Bedle, Bailiff, or such like, for term of life; and
though there be no Condition at all expressed in the Grant, yet the Law speaks
covertly of a Condition, which is, That if the Grantee does not execute all
points appertaining to his Office, by himself or his sufficient Deputy, then it
shall be lawful for the Grantor to enter, and discharge him of his Office.

Condition precedent is, when a Lease is made to one for life, upon Condition,
That if the Lessee will pay to the Lessor xx. li. at such a day then he shall
have Fee-simple: here the Condition preceeds the Estate in Fee-simple, and upon
the performance of the Condition does gain the Fee-simple.

Condition subsequent, and coming after, is, when one grants to J. S. his Manor
of Dale in Fee-simple, upon Condition, That the Grantee shall pay to him at
such a day xx. li. or else that his Estate shall cease: here the Condition is
subsequent and following the Estate in Fee, and upon the performance thereof
does continue the Estate.

See more of this in Cok. lib. 3. fol. 64. and in Lit. li. 3. cap. 5. and
Perkins in the last Title of Conditions.

Confederacy.
COnfederacy is, when two or more confederate themselves to do any hurt or
damages to another, or to do any unlawful thing. And though a Writ of
Conspiracy does not lie, if the party be not indicted, and in lawful manner
acquitted, for so are the words of the Writ; yet false Confederacy between
diverse persons shall he punished, though nothing be put in ure: and this
appears by the Book of 27 Assis. placit. 44. where there is a note, That two
were indicted of Confederacy, each of them to maintain other, whether their
matter were true or false, and though nothing was supposed to be put in use,
the parties were put to answer, because this thing is forbidden in the Law. So
in the next Article in the same Book, Enquiry shall be made of Conspirators and
Confederators, which bind themselves together, etc. falsely to endite or acquit,
etc. the manner of their binding, and between whom: which proves also, that
Confederacy to indite or acquit, although nothing be done, is punishable by the
Law. And it is to be observed, that this Confederacy punishable by Law before
it be executed, ought to have four incidents: First, to be declared by some
matter of prosecution, as by making of Bonds or Promises the one to the other;
secondly, to be malicious, or for unjust Revenge; thirdly, to be false against
on innocent; and lastly, to be out of Court, voluntarily.

Confession of Offense.
COnfession of Offense is, when a prisoner is appealed or indicted of Treason
or Felony, and broughe to the Bar to be arraigned; and his Indictment is read
unto him, and he is demanded by the Court what he can say thereto; then either
he confesses the Offense and the Indictment to be true, or he estranges himself
from the Offense, and pleads not guilty, or else gives an indirect answer, and
so in effect stands mute.

Confession may be made in two sorts, and to two several ends. The one is, he
may confess the offense whereof he is indicted openly in the Court before the
Judge, and submit himself to the censure and judgment of the Law: which
Confession is the most certain answer and best satisfaction that may be given
to the Judge to condemn the Offender, so that it proceeds freely and of his own
accord, without any threats, force, or extremity used; for if the Confession
arise from any of these causes, it ought not to be recorded. As a woman was
indicted for the felonious taking of Bread to the value of two shillings, and
being thereof arraigned, she confessed the Felony, and said, that she did it by
the commandment of her husband; and the Judges in pity would not record her
Confession, but caused her to plead Not guilty to the Felony: whereupon the
Jury found, that she stole the Bread by the compulsion of her husband against
her will, for which cause she was discharged. 27 Assis. pla. 50.

The other kind of Confession is, when the prisoner confesses the Indictment to
be true, and that he has committed the Offense whereof he is indicted, and
then becomes an Approver, that is, an Accuser of others who have committed the
same Offense whereof he is indicted, or other Offenses with him; and then
prays the Judge to have a Coroner assigned him, to whom he may make relation
of those Offenses, and the full circumstances thereof.

There is also a third kind of Confession made by an Offender in Felony, which
is not in Court before the Judge, as the other two are, but before a Coroner in
a Church or other privileged place, upon which the Offender by the ancient Law
of the Realm is to abjure the Realm.

Confirmation.
COnfirmation is, when one who has right to any Lands or Tenements makes a
Deed to another who has the possession or some Estate, with these words,
Ratificasse, Approbasse, Confirmasse, with intent to enlarge his Estate, or
make his possession perfect, and not defesible by him that makes the
Confirmation, nor by any other that may have his right.

Whereof see more in Littl. l. 3. cap. 9. of Confirmation.

Confiscate.
COnfiscate is derived from the Latin Fiscus, which originally signifies a
Hamper or Basket, but metonymically the Princes Treasure, because in ancient
time it was put in the Hampers or Frails. And though our King does not put his
Treasure in such things, yet as the Romans have said, that such goods as were
forfeited to the Emperors Treasury were Bona Confiscata, in like manner do we
say of such goods as are forfeited to the Kings Exchequer. And the title to
have these goods is given to the King by the Law, when they are not claimed by
some other: As if a man be indicted, that he feloniously stole the goods of
another man, where in truth they are the proper goods of him indicted, and they
are brought in Court against him as the manner, and he there asked what he says
to the said goods; to which he disclaimes: by this Disclaimer he shall lose the
goods, although that afterward he be acquitted of the Felony, and the King
shall have them as confiscated. But otherwise it is, if he does not disclaim
them.

The same Law is where goods are found in the Felons possession, which he
disavows, and afterward is attainted of other goods, and not of them; there
the goods which he disavows are confiscate to the King: But had he been
attainted of the same goods, they should have been said to be forfeited, and
not confiscate, notwithstanding his Disavowment. So if an Appeal of Robbery be
brought, and the Plaintiff leaves out some of his goods, he shall not be
received to enlarge his Appeal; and forasmuch as there is none to have the
goods so left out, the King shall have them as confiscate, according to the old
rule, Quod non capit Christus, capit Fiscus. And as in the case aforesaid the
Law punishes the owner for his negligence and connivency, so the Law abhors
malice, in seeking the blood of any without just cause. And therefore if A.
has the goods of B. by delivery, or finding, and B. brings an Appeal against
A. for taking them feloniously, and it is found that they were the Plaintiffs
goods, and that the Defendant came lawfully by them; in this case these goods
are confiscate to the King, because of the false and malicious Appeal.

Congeable.
COngeable comes of the French word Conge, id est, venia, and signifies in our
Common Law as much as Lawful, or lawfully done; and so Littleton uses it in
his 410. sect. where he says, that the Entry of the Dis^ elsee is Congeable.

Conged' eslire.
COnge eslire (i Leave to choose, or Power of choosing) is the Kings Royal
Permission to any Dean and Chapter in time of Vacancy to choose a Bishop; or to
an Abbey or Priory of his own foundation, to choose their Abbot or Prior. Fitzh.
Not. Brev. fol. 169. b. 170. b. c. etc. Master Gwin in the Preface to his
Readings says, That the King of England, as Sovereign Patron of all
Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Benefices, had of
ancient time free disposition of all Ecclesiastical Dignities whenever they
happened to be void, investing them first per baculum and annulum, and
afterward by his Letters Patents; and that in progress of time they gave power
to others to make Election under certain forms and conditions; as namely, that
they upon e ^ ery Vacation should beg of the K. Conge de eslire, that is,
license to proceed to Election, and after to crave his Royal Assent, etc. And
farther he affirms by good proof out of the Common Law Books, that King John
was the first that granted it, and that it was afterward confirmed by Westminster. 1.
c. 1. which Statute was made Anno 3 E. 1. and again by the Statute de Art.
Cleri, c. 2. which was ordained Anno 25 E. 3 Stat. 3.

Conjuration.
COnjuration is a Compact or Plot made by men combining themselves together by
oath or promise to do any public harm. But it is more commonly used for such
as have personal Conference with the Devil or evil Spirit, to know any secret,
or to effect any purpose. Anno 5 Eliz. c 16. And the difference between
Conjuration and Witchcraft may be this: Because the one seems by Prayers and
Invocation upon the powerful Name of God, to compel the Devil to say or do
what he commands; and the other does it rather by a friendly and voluntary
Conference or agreement between him or her, and the Devil or Familiar, to have
his or her desires and purposes effected, instead of blood or other gift
offered him, especially of his or her Soul. And both these differ from
Enchantments or Sorceries, because they are personal Conferences with the
Devil, as is said; but these are but Medicines and ceremonial forms of words,
commonly called Charms, without apparition.

Conservator of the Peace.
COnservator of the Peace is he that has an especial charge by virtue of his
Office to see the Kings Peace kept. Which Peace in effect is defined to be, A
withholding or abstinence from that injurious force and violence that unruly
and boisterous men are in their natures prone to use toward others, were they
not restrained by Laws and fear of Punishment. Of these Conservators Lambert
farther says, That before the time of King E. 3 who first appointed Justices
of Peace, there were sundry persons who by the Common Law had interest in
keeping of the Peace. Of those some had that charge as incident to their
Offices, and so included within the same, and yet notwithstanding were called
by the name of their Office only: others had it simply, as of it self, and were
thereof named Custodes Pacis, Wardens or Conservators of the Peace. And both
these sorts are again subdivided by Lambert in his Eirenarcha, l. 1. c. 3.

Conservator of the Truce.
COnservator of the Truce was an Officer appointed in every Port of the Sea
under the Kings Letters Patents, and had 40 li. for his yearly stipend at the
least. His charge was to enquire of all Offenses done against the Kings Truce
and Sa ^ e conducts upon the main Sea, out of the Countries and Liberties of
the Cinque Ports of the King, as the Admirals have accustomedly done; and such
other things as are declared Anno 2 H. 5. cap. 6. Touching this matter you may
read the other Statute of Anno 4 H. 5. c. 7.

Consideration.
COnsideration is the material cause of a Contract, without which no Contract
can bind the party. This Consideration is either expressed, as when a man
bargains to give twenty shillings for an Horse: or is implied, as when the Law
it self inforces a Consideration; as if a man comes into a common Inn, and
there staying some time, takes meat or lodging, or either, for himself or his
horse, the Law presumes he intends to pay for both, notwithstanding that
nothing be covenanted between him and his Host, and therefore if he discharges
not the house, the Host may stay his horse.

Also there is Consideration of nature and blood, and Valuable Consideration:
and therefore if a man be indebted to diverse others, and yet, in consideration
of natural affection, gives all his goods to his son or cousin, this shall be
construed a fraudulent Gift within the Act of 13 Eliz. c. 5. because this Act
intends a Valuable consideration.

Consistory.
COnsistory is a word borrowed of the Italians, or rather Lombards, and
signifies as much as Tribunal. It is vocabulum utriusque Juris, and is used for
the place of Justice in the Courts Christian or Spiritual.

Consolidation.
COnsolidation is used for the Combining and uniting of two Benefices in one:
And this word is taken from the Civil Law, where it properly signifies an
Uniting of the possession, occupation, or profit, with the property. As if a
man has by Legacy usum fructum fundi, and after purchases the Property or
Fee-simple of the Heir; in this case a Consolidation is made of the Profits and
Property. Vide Brook, tit. Union.

Conspiracy.
Conspiracy, notwithstanding that in Latin and French it is used for an
Agreement of men to do a good or evil thing, yet it is commonly taken in our
Law in the evil part; and is defined in 34 E. 1. Stat. 2. to be an Agreement of
such as confeder or bind themselves by Oath, Covenant, or other alliance, that
every of them shall bear and aid the other falsely and maliciously, to indict,
or falsely to move or maintain Pleas; and also such as cause Children within age
to appeal men of Felony, whereby they are imprisoned and sore grieved; and such
as maintain men in the Country with Liveries and Fees to maintain their
malicious enterprises: and this extends as well to the takers, as to the
givers. Also Stewards and Bailiffs of great Lords, who by their Selgniory,
Office or power, undertake to bear or maintain Quarrels, Pleas or Debates, that
concern other parties then such as touch the Estate of their Lords, or of
themselves. Anno 4 E. 3. c. 11. 3 H. 7. c. 13 And hereof see more, 1 H. 5. c.
3. 18 H. 6. c. 12. also in the old Book of Entries, word Conspiracy.

This word in the place before rehearsed is taken more generally, and is
confounded with Maintenance and Champerty; but in a more special signification
it is taken for a Confederacy between two or more, falsely to indict one, or to
procure one to be indicted of Felony. And the punishment of Conspiracy upon an
Indictment of Felony at the Suit of the King is, That the party attainted shall
lose his frank law, so that he shall not be impanelled upon Iuries or Assizes,
or such like employments, for testifying of the truth: and if he has to do in
the Kings Court, he shall make his Attorney; and his lands, goods and chattels
shall be seized into the Kings hands, his lands estreaped, his trees dug up,
and his body committed to prison. 27 lib. Assise 59 Crompton 156. b. this is
called villainous Judgment. But if the party grieved will sue a Writ of
Conspiracy, then see Fitzh. Not. Brev. 114. d. 115. i. etc.

Constable.
COnstable is diversely used in the Common Law. And first, the Constable of
England, who is also called Marshal, Stanf. Pl. Cor. fol. 65. of whose
authority and dignity a man may find many arguments and signs, as well in the
Statutes, as in the Chronicles of this Realm. His power consists in the care of
the common Peace of the Land, in deeds of Arms, and matters of War, Lamb.
Duties of Constables, number 4. wherewith agrees the Statute of 13 R. 2. c. 2.
Stat. 1. Of this Officer or Magistrate, Gwyn, in the Preface to his Readings,
says to this purpose; The Court of the Coustable and Marshal determines
Contracts touching Deeds of arms out of the Realm, and handles things
concerning Wars within the Realm, as Combats, Blazons of armory, and suth like;
but he has nothing to do with Battle in appeal, nor generally with any other
thing that may be tried by the Law of the Land. See Fortesc' cap. 32. This
Office heretofore was appertaining to the Lords of certain Manors Jure feudi;
and why it is discontinued, see Dyer 285. pl. 39.

Out of this Magistracy (says Lambert) were drawn these inferior Constables,
which we call Constables of Hundreds and Liberties, and first ordained by the
Statute of Winchester 13 Edw. 1. which appoints for the conservation of the
Peace, and view of Armor, two Constables in every Hundred and Liberty; and
these are at this day called High Constables, because the increase of people
and offenses has again under these made others in every Town, called Pe ^ ie
Constables, who are of the like nature, but of inferior authority to the other.

Besides these, there are Officers of particular places called by this name; as
Constable of the Tower, Stan. 152. 1 H. 4. 13. Constable of the Exchequer, 15
H. 3. Stat. 5. Constable of Dover Castle, Camb. Brit. page 239. F. N. B.
otherwise called Castellain. Manw. part. 1. cap. 13. of his Forest Law, makes
mention of a Constable of the Forest.

Customs and Services. See Prescription.
Customs and Services is a Writ, and lies where I or my ancestors, after the
limitation of Assise, (for which see the Title of Limitation in the Collection
of Statutes) were not seized of the Customs or Services of the Tenant before;
then I shall have this Writ to recover those Services.

Also the Tenant may have this Writ against his Lord, but after the Tenant has
declared, the Lord shall defend the words of the Declaration, and replying
shall say, that he distrained not for the Customs whereof the Declaration is;
and then he shall declare all the Declaration of the Customs and Services; and
then the Tenant, who was Plaintiff, shall become Defendant, and shall defend by
Battle or great Assise.

Consultation.
COnsultation is a Writ, whereby a Cause being formerly removed by Prohibition
out of the Ecclesiastical Court, or Court Christian, to the Kings Court, is
returned thither again; For if the Judges of the Kings Court, comparing the
Libell with the Suggestion of the party, find the Suggestion false, or not
proved, and therefore the Cause to be wrongfully called from the Court
Christian; then, upon this Consultation or Deliberation, they decree it to be
returned again; whereupon the Writ in this case obtained is called a
Consultation. Of this you may read the Regist. Orig. fol. 44. until fol. 58.
Old. Not. Brev. fol. 32. and Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 50.

Contenement.
COntenement seems to be the Freehold-land that lies to the Tenement or
Dwellinghouse that is in his own occupation: for in Magna Charta, cap. 14.
there are these words; A Freeman shall not be amerced for a small fault, but
according to the quantity of the fault, and for a great fault, according to the
manner thereof, saving unto him his Conteuement or Freehold: And a Merchant
shall also be amerced, saving to him his Merchandises; and a Villain, saving to
him his Wainage.

Continual Claim.
COntinual claim is, where a man has right to e ^ ter into certain lands
whereof another is seized in Fee, or Feetail, and dares not enter for fear of
death or beating, but approaches as nigh as he dares, and makes Claim thereto
within the year and day before the death of him that has the Lands; if that he
who has the Land die seized, and his Heir is in by descent, yet he that makes
such Claim may enter upon the Heir, notwithstanding such descent, because he
has made such Continual claim. But such Claim must always be made within the
year and the day before the death of the Tenant; for if such Tenant do not die
seized within a year and a day after such Claim made, and yet he that has
right dares not enter, then it behooves him that has such right, to make
another Claim within the year and day after the first Claim, and after such
second Claim, to make the third Claim within the year and day, if he will be
sure to save his Entry.

But if the Disseisor die seized within the year and day after the Disseisin,
and no Claim made, then the entry of the Disseisee is taken away, for the year
and day shall not be taken from the time of the title of the Entry to him
grown, but only from the time of the last Claim by him made, as is aforesaid.
See more hereof in Littl. li. 3. c. 7. and see the Stat. 32 H. 8. cap. 33.

Continuance.
COntinuance in the Common Law is of the same signification with Prorogatio in
the Civil: as Continuance until the next Assise, Fitzh. Not. Brev. 154. f and
244. d. in both which places it is said, That if a Record in the Treasury be
alleged by the one party, and denied by the other, a Certiorari shall be sued
to the Treasurer and the Chamherlain of the Exchequer; and if they do not
certify in the Chancery that such Record is there, or that it is like to be in
the Tower, the King shall send to the Justices, repeating the said Certificate,
and commanding them to continue the Assise. In this signification it is also
used by Kitchen, 202. and 119. also Anno 11 H. 6. cap. 4.

Contract.
COntract is a Bargain or Covenant between two parties, where one thing is
given for another, which is called Quid pro quo; as if I sell my Horse for
money, or if I covenant to make you a Lease of my Manor of Dale, in
consideration of twenty pound that you shall give me, these are good Contracts,
because there is one thing for another. But if a man make promise to me, that I
shall have xx. s. and that he will be debtor to me thereof, and after I ask the
xx s. and he will not deliver it; yet I shall never have any Action to recover
this xx s. because this Promise was no Contract, but a bare Promise, and Ex
nudo Pacto non oritur Actio. But if any thing were given for the twenty
shillings, though it were but to the value of a penny, then it had been a good
Contract.

Contra forma Collationis.
COntra formam Collationis is a Writ that lies where a man has given Lands in
perpetual Alms to any of the late Houses of Religion, as to an Abbot and
Convent, or other Sovereign, or to the Warden or Master of any Hospital and his
Covent, to find certain poor men, and to do other Divine Service, if they alien
the Lands, then the Donor or his heirs shall have the said Writ to recover the
Land. But this Writ shall be always brought against the Abbot or his successor,
and not against the Alienee, although he be Tenant: but in all other Actions
where a man demands Freehold, the Writ shall be brought against the Tenant of
the Land. See the Stat. West. 2. cap. 41.

Contra formam Feoffamenti.
COntra forma^ Feoffamenti is a Writ that lies where a man before the Statute
of Quia emptores terrarum, made 18 Edw. 1. infeoffed another by Deed to do
certain Service; if the Feoffor or his heirs distrain him to do other Service
then is comprised in the Deed, then the Tenant shall have this Writ, commanding
him not to distrain him to do other Service then is comprised in the Deed. But
this Writ lies not for the Plaintiff who claims by purchase from the first
Feoffee, but for the Heir to the first Feoffee.

Contributione facienda.
COntributione facienda is a Writ that lies where there are diverse Parceners,
and he who has the part of the eldest makes all the suit to the Lord, the
others ought to make Contribution to him, and if they will not, he shall have
against them this Writ. In some cases the Heir shall have Contribution, and in
others not, but shall be alone charged: For if a man be seized of three Acres
of Land, and acknowledges a Recognizance or Statute, etc. and infeoffs A. of
one Acre, and B. of another Acre, and the third discends to his Heir; if
Execution be sued against the Heir only, he shall not have Contribution against
any Purchasor, yet he is charged as Terre-tenant, and not as Heir; for the
Land, and not himself, is charged.

Yet if a man be seized of two Acres, the one of the nature of Borough-English,
and binds himself as before, and dies, having issue two daughters, who make
partition; in this case, if the one be charged, he shall have Contribution: for
as one Purchasor shall have Contribution against others, and against the Heir
of the Conusee also; so one Heir shall have Contribution against another Heir,
for they are in equal degree. Also if a man be so bound, and after his death
some of his Land descends to the Heir of the part of the father, and some to
the Heir of the part of the mother; the one alone shall not be charged, but if
he be, he shall have Contribution. In Dower, if the Tenant vouches the Heir in
ward to three several Lords, each of them shall be equally charged.

If two, four, or more men be severally seized of Land, and they all join in a
Recognisance; in this case the Conusee cannot extend the Land of any of the
Conusors alone, but all ought equally to be charged: for though the Land of the
Conusor himself may be only extended when diverse men have purchased any of the
Land subject to the Recognisance, because the Purchasor is in another degree
then the Conusor himself; yet one of the Conusors shall not be solely charged,
for he stands in equal degree with the other Conusors: Also the tertenant of a
Debtor upon an extent shall have contribution of the Heir of the Debtor, which
see 1 Cro. Eyer against Taunton. If Judgment be given against two Disseisors
in Assise for the Land and damages, and one Disseisor dies, the Execution shall
not be awarded against the surviving Disseisor that was party to the wrong, but
as well the Heir as the Disseisor shall be equally charged. But otherwise it is
in personal binding; as if two are bound in an Obligation, there the charge
shall survive.

And where it is said, that the one Purchasor shall have Contribution, it is
not thereby intended, that the others shall give or allow unto him any thing by
way of Contribution; but it ought to be intended, that the party that is solely
extended for all may by an Audita querela, or Scire Facias, as the case
requires, defeat the Execution, and thereby shall be restored to all the mean
profits, and force the Conusee to sue Execution of all the Land: so in this
manner every one shall be contributory, viz. the Land of every Terre-Tenant
shall be equally extended.

Convocation.
COnvocation is commonly taken for the Assembly of all the Clergy to consult of
Exclesiastical matters in time of Parliament: And as there are two Houses of
Parliament, so there are two places called Convocation-houses; the one called
the Higher Convocation-house, where the Archbishops and Bishops sit severally
by themselves; the other, the Lower Convocation-house; where all the rest of
the Clergy sit. Vide Prolocutor.

Conusance.
COnusance of Plea is a Privilege that a City or Tenant has by the Kings
grant, to hold Plea of all Contracts, and of Lands within the precinct of the
Franchise, and that when any man is impleaded for any such thing in the Court
of the King at Westminster. the Mayors or Bailiffs of such Franchises, or their
Atturneys, may ask Conusance of the Plea, that is to say, that the Plea and the
matter shall be pleaded a ^ d determined before them.

But if the Court at Westminster be lawfully seized of the Plea before
Conusance be demanded, then they shall not have Conusance for that Suit,
because they have neglected their time of demand thereof: but this shall be no
bar to them to have Conusance in another Action; for they may demand Conusance
in one Action, and omit it in another, at their pleasure.

And note: that Conusance lies not in Prescription, but it behooves to show the
Kings Letters Patents for it.

Coparceners.
COparceners. See Parceners.

Copyhold.
COpyhold is a Tenure for which the Tenant has nothing to show but the Copies
of the Rolls made by the Steward of his Lord's Court: For the Steward, as he
inrolls all other things done in his Lords Court, so he does also such Tenants
as are admitted in the Court to any parcel of Land or Tenements belonging to
the Manor; and the Transcript of this is called the Court-Roll, the Copy
whereof the Tenant takes from him, and keeps as his only Evidence. Coke l. 4.
fol. 25. This Tenure is called a Base Tenure, because it holds at the will of
the Lord, Kitchen, fol. 80. Fitzh. Not. Brev. f. 12. b. c. who says, it was
wont to be called Tenure in Villenage, and that this Copyhold is but a new
name. Yet it is not simply at the will of the Lord, but according to the
Custom of the Manor; so that if a Copiholder break not the Custom of the
Manor, and thereby forfeit his Tenure, he seems not so much to stand at his
Lords courtesy for his right, as to be displaced when he pleases. The Customs
of Manors are infinite, varying in one point or other almost in every several
Manor.

First, some Copyhold is fineable, and some certain. That which is fineable the
Lord rates at what Fine he pleases, when the Tenant is admitted unto it: that
which is certain is a kind of inheritauce, and called in many places Customary,
because the Tenant dying, and the Hold being void, the next of blood, paying
the customary Fine, cannot be denied admittance.

Secondly, some Copyholders have by Custom the Woods growing upon their own
Land, which by the Law they cannot have.

Thirdly, there are Copyholders that hold by the Vierge in Ancient demesne, and
although they hold by Copy, yet they are in nature of Freeholders; for if such
a one commit Felony, the King has the year, day, and waste, as in case of
Freehold. Some others hold by Common Tenure called mere Copyhold, and if they
commit Felony, their Land presently escheats to the Lord of the Manor.

West. part. 1 l. 2. sect. 646. defines a Copyholder thus; Tenant by Copy of
Court-roll is he who is admitted Tenant of any Lands or Tenements within a
Manor, which time without the memory of man, by use and custom of the said
Manor, have been dimisable to such as will take the same in fee, feetail, for
life, years, or at will, according to the Custom of the said Manor, by Copy of
Courtroll.

Coraage.
COraage is an Imposition extraordinary, growing upon some unusual occasion,
and seems to be of certain Measures of Corn. Bract. l. 2. c. 16. number. 6. uses
Corus tritici for a measure of Corn; and in the same Chapter, numb. 8. has
these words: There are certain common Protestations, which are not called
Services, neither do they arise from Custom, unless some necessary occasion
happen, or that the King comes: such are Hidage, Coraage, and Caruage, and many
others which are performed in cases of necessity, by the common consent of the
whole Kingdom, and which appertain not to the Lord of the Fee; nor is he bound
to acquit his Tenant thereof, unless he has especially tied himself thereto by
his own Deed.

Cordwayner.
COrdiner or Cordwayner comes from the French Cordvannier, that is, a
Shoemaker, from a kind of Leather which the Frenchmen call Cordovan. And it is
a word much used in our Statutes, as in those of 3 H. 8 c. 10. 5 H. 8. c. 7.
and 1. Jac. c. 22.

Cornage.
COrnage is a kind of Grand Serjeanty; the Service of which Tenure is, to blow
an Horn when any Invasion of the Northern enemy is perceived. And by this many
Northward held their Land, about the Wall commonly called the Picts Wall.
Cambdens Brit. perag. 609.

See Littleton fol. 35. where he says, That in the Marches of Scotland some
hold of the King by Cornage, that is to say, by blowing a Horn; to warn the
Country when they hear that the enemies will come; which Service is Grand
Serjeanty.

Corodie.
COrodie is an Allowance of Meat, Bread, Drink, Money, Clothing, Lodging, and
such like necessaries for sustenance. It is sometimes certain where the
certainty of things is set down; sometimes uncettain, where the certainty is
not set down which he shall have.

And some of them began by Grant made by one man to another, and it may be for
life, years, in tail, or in fee: and some Corodies are of common right, as
every Founder of Abbeys and other Houses of Religion had authority to assign
such in the same Houses, for Father, Brother, Cousin, or other that he would
appoint, if it were a House of Monks; and if he were Founder of a House of
Nuns, then for his Mother, Sister, or other woman: and always this was provided
for, that he that had a Corodie in a House of Monks might not send a woman to
take it; nor where Corodie was due in a Nunnery, there it was not lawful to
appoint a man to receive it; for in both cases such Presentation was to be
rejected. And this Corodie was due as well to a common person Founder, as where
the King himself was Founder. But where the House was holden in Frankalmoigne,
there the Tenure it self was a discharge of Corodie against all men, except it
were afterward charged voluntarily; as when the King would send his Writ to the
Abbot for a Corodie for such a one, whom they admit, there the House should be
thereby charged for ever, whether the King were Founder or not. See the Writ of
Corodio habendo in Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 230.

Coroner.
COroner is an ancient Officer of trust, and of great authority, ordained to be
a principal Conservator or keeper of the Peace, to bear record of the Pleas of
the Crown, and of his own view, and of diverse other things, etc. And therefore
in the time of Ed. 1. it was enacted that, Forasmuch as mean men and indiscreet
now of late are commonly chosen to the Office of Coroner, where it is requisite
that wise men, lawful, and able, should execute such Offices; it is provided,
That through all Shires sufficient men shall be chosen to be Coroners, out of
the most wise and discreet Knights which best know, can and will attend this
Office, and which faithfully will make and represent the Pleas of the Crown.

And although the letter of this Statute be not precisely observed, yet at
least the intent should be followed as nigh as might be; so that for the
default of Knights and Gentlemen, furnished with such qualities as the Statute
sets down, (of which sort there are many) others might be chosen, with this
addition, that they be virtuous and good Christians. See hereof in the Writ de
Coronatore eligendo, in Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 163.

When the Coroner is to enquire of the death of any person, or to do other
thing concerning his Office, he ought to do it in person: and upon the sudden
death of any one, he himself ought to see the dead body when he makes enquiry,
or otherwise the enquiry is not good; for if he will enquire of any dead person
without view, this is without authority, and so void. And if the body be buried
before his coming, he ought to record it in his Rolls, to the intent that the
Town where the burying was should be amerced for it before the Justices in
Air, upon the sight of the Coroners Rolls. And nevertheless the Coroner ought
to take up the body out of the ground, and make the enquiry upon view of the
body, as he should do if it had not been buried: and the Town shall also be
amerced, if they suffer it tol ^ e on the ground to putrify or stink, without
sending to the Coroner. And if the Coroner be negligent in coming to do his
office, after the Bailiffs or Contrymen have sent for him, he shall be
punished.

Although by the Law the Coroner cannot enquire of any Felony, but the death of
a man; yet it has been said, that in Northumberland they enquire of all
Felonies; but this authority they maintain by Prescription. If a man be killed
or drowned in the arms or creeks of the Sea, where a man may see land from the
one part to the other, the Coroner shall enquire thereof, and not the Admiral,
for that the Country may well have knowledge thereof.

But the Coroner of the Kings house has an exempt jurisdiction within the
Verge, and the Coroner of the County cannot intermeddle within it; as the
Coroner of the house cannot intermeddle within the County out of the Verege.

If the Demandant or Plaintiff be nonsuited, or if Judgment be given against
the Tenant or Defendant, or such like, the Justices never assess any
Amerciament, but the Clerk of the Warrants makes Estreats thereof, and delivers
them to the Clerks of Assise within every Circuit, to deliver them to the
Coroners in every County, to affeere or assess the Amerciaments, because they
are thought most indifferent, forasmuch as they are chosen by the whole County.

If an Approver says, that he began his Appeal before the Coroner by Duresse,
this shall be tried by the Coroner; and if the Coroner denies it, the Approver
shall be hanged. By which cases it appears, that the Law gives much credit and
authority to Coroners.

Corporation.
Corporation is a permanent thing, that may have succession: And it is an
Assembly and joining together of many into one Fellowship, Brotherhood, and
mind, whereof one is Head and chief, the rest are the Body; and this Head and
Body knit together make the Corporation. And of Corporations, some are
Spiritual, some Temporal: and of Spiritual some are Corporations of dead
persons in Law, and some otherwise; and some are by authority of the King only,
and some have been of a mixed authority.

And of those that are Temporal, some are by the authority of the King also,
and some by the Common Law of the Realm.

Corporation Spiritual, and of dead persons in the Law, is where the
Corporation consists of an Abbot and Covent, which had beginning of the King,
and the Pope when he had to do here.

Corporation Spiritual, and of able persons in Law, is, where the Corporation
consists of a Dean and Chapter, Master of a College or Hospital; and this
Corporation had beginning of the King only.

Corporation Temporal by the King is, where there is a Mayor and Commonalty.

Corporation Temporal by authority of the Common Law is the Assembly in
Parliament, which consists of the King, the Head of the Corporation; the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of the Realm, the Body of the
Corporation.

Bodies politic.
BOdies politic are Bishops Abbots, Priors, Deans, Parsons of Churches, and
such like; which have succession in one person only.

If land be given to a Mayor and Commonalty for their lives, they have an
Estate by intendment not determinable. So it is if a Feoffment be made of land
to a Dean and Chapter, without speaking of Successors. Release of a Mayor for
any sum of money due to the Corporation in his own name is not good in Law. In
case of a sole Corporation, or Body politic, as Bishop, Parson, Vicar, Master
of Hospital, etc. no Chattel either in action or possession shall go in
succession, but the Executors or Administrators of the Bishop, Parson, etc.
shall have them; for Succession in a Body politic is as Inheritance in case of
a body private. But otherwise is in case of a Corporation composed of many, as
a Dean and Chapter, Mayor and Commonalty, and such like; for there they in
judgment of the Law never die.

Yet the case of the Chamberlain of London differs from all these, and his
Successors may in his own name have Execution of a Recognisance acknowledged to
his Predecessor for Orphanagemoney: and the reason is, because in this case the
Corporation of the Chamberlain is by Custom, and the same Custom that has
created him, and made a Corporation in Succession, as to the said special
purpose concerning Orphanage, has enabled the Successor to take such
Recognisances, Obligations, etc. that are made to his Predecessor. And this
Custom is founded upon great reason; for the Executors or Administrators of the
Chamberlain ought not to intermeddle with such Recognisances, Obligations, etc.
which by the said Custom are taken in the corporate capacity of the
Chamberlain, and not in his private. But a Bishop, Parson, etc. or any sole
Corporation, that are Bodies politic by prescription; cannot take a
Recognisance or Obligation, but only to their private, and not in their
politic capacity: for they want Custom to take a Chattel in their politic or
corporate capacity.

Corpus cum Causa, or Habeas Corpus.
COrpus cum Causa is a Writ issuing out of the Chancery, to remove both the
body and the Record of the Cause of any man lying in Execution upon* a
Judgment for Debt, into the Kings Bench, etc. there to lie till he have
satisfied the Judgment. Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 251. e.

It lies also to remove any Action from inferior Courts of Record into any of
the 3 Courts in Westminster.

Corruption of Blood.
COrruption of Blood is, when any one is attainted of Felony or Treason, then
his Blood is said to be corrupt; by means whereof neither his children, nor any
of his blood, can be heirs to him, or to any other Ancestor, for which they
ought to claim by him. And if he were a Noble or Gentleman before, he and all
his children are made thereby ignoble and ungentle, having regard to the
Nobility or Gentry they claim by their father, which cannot be restored by the
Kings Grant, without authority of Parliament.

But if the King will pardon the offender, it will cleanse the corruption of
the Blood of those children which are born after the Pardon, and they may
inherit the land of their Ancestor purchased at the time of the Pardon, or
afterward; but so cannot they who were born before the Pardon. Also he that is
attainted of Treason or Felony shall not be heir to his father: but this
disability shall hinder others to be heir, so that during his life the land
shall rather escheat to the Lord of the Fee, then descend to another.

But if he who is attainted, dies without issue of his body, during the life of
his Ancestor, then his younger Brother, Sister, or Cousin shall inherit: for if
the eldest Son be hanged, or abjure the Realm for Felony, during the life of
the Father, it is no impediment but that the youngest Son may inherit. 27 Edw.
3. c. 77. And if he who is attaint of Treason or Felony in the life of his
Ancestor, purchase the Kings Pardon before the death of his Ancestor, yet he
shall not be Heir to the said Ancestor, but the Land shall rather escheat to
the Lord of the Fee by the Corruption of blood 26 Ass. pla. 2. But if the
eldest son be a Clerk convict in the life of his Father, and after his Father
dies; in this case he shall inherit his Fathers Land, because he was not
attainted of Felony; for by the Common Law he should inherit after he had made
his Purgation. And now by the Statute of 18 El. cap. 6. he shall be forthwith
enlarged after burning in the hand, and delivered out of prison, and not
committed to the Ordinary to make his Purgation; but he is in the same case as
if he had made his Purgation.

If a man that has Land in right of his wife has issue, and his Blood is
corrupt by Attainder of Felony, and the King pardons him; in this case, if the
wife dies before him, he shall not be Tenant by the courtesse, for the
corruption of the blood of that issue. But it is otherwise if he has issue
after the Pardon; for then he shall be Tenant, although the issue which he had
before the Pardon be not inheritable. 13 H. 7. c. 17.

If a man seized of Land has issue two sons, and the eldest is attainted in
the life of his Father of Felony, and therefore executed, or otherwise dies
during the life of his Father, and after the Father dies seized; the Land shall
descend to the youngest son, as Heir unto his Father, if the eldest son has no
issue then alive. But if the eldest son, who was attaint, has any Issue (...),
which should have inherited but for the Attainder, the (...) shall escheat to
the Lord, and shall not descend to the youngest brother, because the Blood of
the eldest brother is corrupt. 32 H. 8. Die. 48.

But it is to be noted, That there are diverse things made Treason by Act of
Parliament, whereof although a man be attainted, yet his Blood is not corrupt,
neither shall he forfeit any thing, but that which he has for his own life; As
if a man be attainted upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 1. ordained against the
maintaining of the authority of the Bishop and See of Rome, this shall not
extend to make any Corruption of blood, the disheritance of any Heir,
forfeiture of any Dower; nor to the prejudice of the right or title of any
person, other then the Offender during his natural life only.

So if a man be attainted by force of the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 11. provided
against the clipping, washing, filing, and rounding of Money, yet there is no
Corruption of blood. In the same manner is it of the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap.
1. 1 Jac. cap. 12. 1 Mar. cap. 12. against Unlawful assemblies, and 5 Eliz.
cap. 14. against the Forging of evidence; and the Statute of 31 Eliz. c. 4.
against the Embezilling of the Queens Ordnance, Armor, or Artillery.

Corse present.
COrse present are words signifying a Mortuary; and the reason why the Mortuary
is so termed, is, because where a Mortuary was wont to be due, the Body of the
best Beast was, according to the Law or custom, offered or presented to the
Priest. See Anno 21 Hen. 8. ca. 6. where among other things it is enacted, That
no Corse present, nor any sum of money, or other thing, for any Mortuary or
Corse present, shall be demanded, received, or had but only in such places and
Towns where Mortuaries have been accustomed to be taken and paid.

Cosinage.
COsinage is a Writ that lies where my great Grandfather, my Grandfathers
Grandfather, or other Cousin, dies seized in Fee-simple, and a Stranger abates,
viz. enters into the Lands; then I shall have against him this Writ or against
his Heir, or his Alienee, or against whosoever comes after to the said Lands:
But if my Grandfather die seized, and a Stranger abates; then I shall have a
Writ of Ayel. But if my Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Uncle, or Aunt die
seized, and a Stranger abates; then I shall have an Assise of Mortdauncester.

Cottage.
COttage is a little House for habitation of poor men, without any Land
belonging to it, whereof mention is made in the first Statute made in 4 E. 1.
And the inhabitant of such a house is called a Cottager. But by a Statute made
in the 31 year of Queen Eliz. cap. 7. no man may build such a Cottage for
habitation, unless he lay unto it four acres of Freehold-land; except in
Market Towns or Cities, or within a mile of the Sea, or for habitation of
Laborers in Mines, Sailors, Foresters, Shepherds, etc.

Coucher.
COucher is a Factor who continues in some place or Country for traffic. an.
37 E. 3. c. 16. It is also used for the general Book into which any Corporation
enters their particular Acts for a perpetual remembrance of them.

Covenable.
COvenable is a French word signifying Convenient or suitable; as Covenably
endowed, Anno 4 H. 8. ca. 12. It is anciently written convenable, as in the
Stat. 27 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 17.

Covenant.
COvenant is an Agreement made by Deed in writing, and sealed between two
persons, where each of them is bound to the other to perform certain Covenants
for his part; and if the one performs not his Covenant, the other shall have
thereupon a Writ of Covenant.

And Covenants are either in Law, or in Fact, Cok. lib. 4. fol. 80. or Covenant
expressed, and Covenant in Law, Cok. lib. 6. fol. 17. A Covenant in Law is that
which the Law intends to be done, though it be not expressed in words: As if a
man demise any thing to another for a certain term, the Law intends a Covenant
of the part of the Lessor, that the Lessee shall hold all his term against all
lawful encumbrances. Covenant in Fact is that which is expressly agreed between
the parties.

Also there is a Covenant merely personal: and Covenant real. Fitzh. Not. Brev.
f. 145. seems to say, that Covenant real is, whereby a man ties himself to pass
a thing real, as Lands or Tenements; as a Covenant to levy a Fine of Land:
Covenant merely personal is, where a man covenants with another by Deed, to
build a house, or to serve him. See the old Book of Entries, the word Covenant.

But note well, That no Writ of Covenant shall be maintainable without
especialty, except in the City of London, or in some other place privileged by
custom and use.

Coverture.
COverture is, when a man and a woman are married together; now whatsoever is
done concerning the wife in the time of the continuance of this Marriage, is
said to be done during the Coverture, and the wife is called a Woman covert,
and thereby is disabled to contract with any one, to the prejudice of her self
or her husband, without his consent and privity, at the least without his
allowance and confirmation. See Brook this Title. And Bract. says That all
things that are the wife's, are the husbands, neither has the wife power of
her self, but the husband, lib. 2. cap. 15. and the husband is the head of his
wife, lib. 4. cap. 24. and again, that in any Law-matter she cannot answer
without her husband, lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 3. And if the husband alien his
wife's Land during the Coverture, she cannot gainsay it during his life.

Covin.
COvin is a secret Assent determined in the hearts of two or more, to the
prejudice of another: As if a Tenant for term of life, or Tenant in tail, will
secretly conspire with another, that the other shall recover against the Tenant
for life the Land which he holds, etc. in prejudice of him in the Reversion.

Or if an Executor or Administrator permit Judgments to be entered against him
by fraud, and plead them to a bond, or any fraudulent assignment or conveyance
be made, the party grieved may plead covin and relieve himself. Vid. Stat. 2 R.
2. cap. 3. 3 H. 7. ca. 4. 13 El. c. 5. and 27 El. 4.

Count.
COunt is as much as the original Declaration in a Process, though more used
in real than personal Actions; as Declaration is more applied to personal than
real. F. N. B. 16. a. 60. d. n. 71. a. 191. e. 217. A Libel with the Civilians
comprehends both. Yet Count and Declaration are confounded sometimes; as Count
in Debt, Kitch. 281. Count or Declaration in Appeal, Pl. Cor. 78. Count in
Trespass, Brit. cap. 26. Count in Action of Trespass upon the Case for a
Slander, Kitch. 252. Contours have been taken for such as a man retains to
speak for him in any Court, as Advocates; and Pledeurs to be another sort, as
Attorneys for one that is present himself, but suffers another to speak for
him. Countours, according to M. Horn, are such Sergeants skilful in the Law,
which serve the common people to defend their Actions in Judicature for their
fee.

Countee.
COuntee (so called a comitando, because they accompany the King) was the most
eminent and high dignity from the conquest, until the 11 year of King Ed. 3.
when the Black Prince was created Duke of Cornwall: and those who of ancient
time were created Countees, were of the Blood Royal; and at this day the King
in all his appellations styles them by the name of Our most dear Cousin. And
for these causes the Law gives them high and great Privileges; and therefore
their body shall not be arrested for Debt, Trespass, etc. because the Law
intends that they assist the King with their counsel for the public good, and
keep the Realm by their prowess and valor. Also for the same cause they shall
not be put in Iuries, although it be for the service of the Country. And if
issue be taken, whether the Plaintiff or Defendant be a Countee or not, this
shall not be tried by the Country, but by the Kings Writ.

Also the Defendant shall not have a day of favor against a Lord of the
Parliament, because he is intended to attend the public. And of ancient time
the Countee was Praefectus, or Praepositus Comitatus, and had the charge and
custody of the County: and now the Sheriff has all the authority for
administration and execution of Justice which the Countee had, Cok. lib. 9.
fol. 49. and therefore he is called Viscount.

Countenance.
COuntenance seems to be used for Credit or Estimation. Old. Not. Brev. 111. in
these words; The Attaint shall be granted to poor men that will take their
oaths they have not any thing whereof to make their Fine, saving their
Countenance. In the same manner it is used 1 Edw. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 4. in these
words; Sheriffs shall charge the Kings Debtors with as much as they may levy
with their oaths, without abating the Debtors Countenance.

Countermand.
COuntermand is, where a thing formerly executed is afterward by some act or
ceremony made void by the party that has first done it. As if a man has made
his last Will, whereby he devises his Land to J. S. and afterward he infeoffs
another of the same Land, there this Feoffment is a Countermand to the Will,
and the Will as to the disposition of the Land is void. If a woman seized of
Land in fee makes a Will in writing, and devises that if A. of B. survives her,
then she devises and bequeaths to him and his heirs her Land, and afterward she
entermarries with the said A. of B. there, by taking him to husband and
coverture at the time of her death, the Will is Countermanded.

But if a Baroness widow retains two Chaplains according to the Statute, and
takes one of the Nobility to husband, and afterward the husband dies, the
Reteiner of those two Chaplains remains, and they without new Reteiner may take
two Benefices, for their Reteiner was not determined nor countermanded by such
Marriage.

If a woman makes a Lease at will, and afterward takes an husband, this
Marriage is no Countermand to the Lease, without express matter done by the
Husband after the Marriage to determine the Will. Also if a Lease be made at
will to a woman, and she takes an Husband, the Lease continues notwithstanding
the Marriage, and is no Countermand thereunto.

Counterplea.
COunterplea is, when one brings an Action, and the Tenant in his Answer and
Plea vouches or calls any man to warrant his Title, or prays in aid of another
who has better Estate than he, as of him that is in the Reversion; or if one
that is a stranger to the Action come and pray to be received to save his
Estate; if the Demandant reply thereto, and show cause that he ought not to
vouch such a one, or of such a one to have aid, or that such a one ought not to
be received; this Plea is called a Counterplea to the Voucher, Aid, or Resceit,
as the case is. But when the Voucher is allowed, and the Vouchee comes in and
demands what cause the Tenant has, and the Tenant shows his cause, and the
Vouchee pleads any thing to avoid the Warranty; that is called a Counterplea in
the Warranty.

County.
County signifies as much as Shire, both containing a compass or portion of
the Realm, into which all its land is divided, for the better government
thereof, and more easy administering of Justice; so that there is not any part
of the Kingdom that lies not within some County: and every County is governed
by a yearly Officer, whom we call Sheriff, who, among other duties belonging to
his Office, puts in execution all the Commandments and Judgments of the Kings
Courts, that are to be executed within the compass. Fortesc' cap. 24 Of these
Counties there are four more remarkable than others, called County Palatines,
as Lancaster, Chester, Durham, and Ely, an. 5. El. c. 23. There was also the
County Palatine of Hexam, an. 33 H. 8. cap. 10. but thereof quaere.

A County Palatine is of so high a nature, that whereas all Pleas touching the
life or maihem of a man, called Pleas of the Crown, are usually held and sped
in the Kings name, and cannot be passed in the name of any other; the chief
Governors of these, by special Charter from the King, heretofore did send out
all Writs in their own name, and did all things touching Justice as absolutely
as the Prince himself in other Counties, only acknowledging him to be their
Superior and Sovereign. But by the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 25. this power
was much abridged, which fee, and Cromp. Jurisdict. 137.

Besides these two sorts of Counties, there are also Counties corporate, as
appears by the Statute of 3 Ed. 4. 5. and these are certain Cities or ancient
Boroughs of the Land, upon whom the Princes of this Nation have bestowed such
extraordinary Liberties, as London, York, Chester, Gloucester, and many others.

County in another signification is used for the County Court which the Sheriff
keeps every month within his charge, either by himself or his Deputy. See for
this Dal ^ ons Office of Sheriffs. Of these Counties or Shires there are
reckoned to be 37 in England, besides the twelve in Wales.

Court.
COurt is diversely taken: sometimes for the House where the King remains with
his ordinary retinue; and also the place where Justice is judicially ministered,
of which you may find 32 several sorts in Cromp. Jurisd. well described. And of
those the greater part are Courts of Record; some are not, and therefore
accounted Base Courts in comparison of the others.

Besides these, there are also Courts Christian, so called, because they handle
matters chiefly appertaining to Christianity, and such as without good
knowledge in Divinty cannot be well judged of; being heretofore held by
Archbishops and Bishops, as from the Pope of Rome; but after his ejection they
held them by the Kings Authority, by virtue of his Magistracy, as the Admiral
of England holds his Court: whence it proceeds, that they send out their
Precepts in their own names, and not in the Kings, as the Justices of the Kings
Courts do; and therefore as the Appeal from those Courts did lie to Rome, now
by the Stat. of 25 H. 8. cap. 19. it lies to the King in his Chancery.

Court Baron.
Court Baron is a Court that every Lord of a Manor has within his own
Precincts. Of this Court and Court Leet Kitch. has writ a learned Book. This
Court, as it seems in Cok. lib. 4. fol. 26. fs twofold: And therefore if a man
having a Manor in a Town grants the inheritance of all the Copyholds therein
to another, this Grantee may hold a Court for the customary Tenants, and accept
of Surrenders to the use of others, and make Admittances and Grants. The other
Court is of Freeholders, which is properly called the Court Baron, wherein the
Suitors, that is, the Freeholders, are Judges; whereas of the other Court the
Lord or his Steward is Judge.

Coutheutlaugh.
COutheutlaugh is he that wittingly receives a man utlawed, and cherishes or
hides him; in which case he was in ancient time subject to the same punishment
as the man utlawed was. Br. l. 3. tr. 2. c. 13. nu. 2. It is compounded of
couth, i. known, and utlaw, outlawed, as we now call them.

Cranage.
CRanage is a liberty to use a Crane for drawing up wares or Goods out of any
Ship, Boat, or Barge, at any Creek or Wharf, and to make profit of it. It is
used also for the Money that is taken for that work.

Creditor.
CReansor or Creditor comes of the French Coryance, that is, Confidence or
persuasion; and it signifies him that trusts another with any Debt, be it
money, wares, or other things. This word is used in the Old N. B. in the Writ
of Audita querela. f. 66. a.

Creek.
CReek is that part of a Haven from whence any thing is landed or disburthened
out of the Sea. And this word is used in the Stat. 5 El. cap. 5. and 4 H. 4.
cap. 20. etc.

Croft.
CRoft is a little Close or Pightle adjoining to an House, used either for
pasture or arable, as the owner pleases. And it seems to be derived from the
old word Creaft, that is Handicraft, because these lands are for the most part
manured with the best skill of the owner.

Cucking-stool.
CUcking-stool is an Engine invented for the punishment of Scolds and unquiet
women; and it was called in old time a Tumbrell, as appears by Lamb. in his
Eirenarc. l. 1. c. 12. And by the Cases and Judgments in Eire, in the time of
Ed. 3. a Pillory and a Tumbrell are appendant to a Leet, without which right
cannot be administered to the parties within the view. Keloway, fol. 140. b.

And in the Stat. 51 H. 3. ca. 6. it is called Trebuchett.

Cui ante divortium.
CUi ante divortium is a Writ that lies when Alienation is made by the husband
of the wifes Land, and after Divorce is had between them; then the woman shall
have this Writ, and the Writ shall say, Whom she before the Divorce might not
gainsay.

Cui in vita.
CUi in vita is a Writ that lies where a man is seized of Lands in Fee-simple,
Fee-tail, or for life, in right of his wife, and aliens the same, and dies;
then she shall have this Writ to recover the Land.

And note, That in this Writ her Title must be showed, whether it be of the
purchase, or inheritance of the woman. But if the husband alien the right of
his wife, and the husband and the wife die, the wifes Heir may have a writ of
Sur cui in vita.

Cuinage.
CUinage. See Cuynage.

Cuntey.
CUntey cuntey is a kind of Trial, as appears by Bract. in these words; The
matter in this case shall be ended by Cuntey cuntey, as between coheirs, l. 4.
tr. 3. cap. 18. And again in the same place; In a Writ of right the business
shall be determined by cuntey cuntey. And thirdly, l. 4. tr. 4. c. 2. The cause
shall be tried by Writ of right, neither by Battle, nor by the great Assise,
but by Cuntey cuntey only; which seems to be as much as by ordinary Jury.

Curfew.
CUrfew comes of two French words, Couvrir, to cover, and Feu, Fire. It is used
with us for an evening Peal, by which the Conqueror willed every man to take
warning for the taking up his Fire, and putting out his Light: So that in many
places at this day, when a Bell is customably rung toward Bedtime, it is said
to ring Curfew.

Curia avisare vult.
CUria avisare vult is a Deliberation which the Court purposes to take upon any
difficult point of a Cause, before Judgment be resolved on. For which see the
New Book of Entries, verbo Curia, etc.

Curia claudenda.
IS a Writ or Action to compel another to make a Fence or Wall, which the
Defendant ought to make between his land and the Plaintiffs.

Currier.
CUrrier is one that dresses or liquors Leather, and is so called of the French
word Cuir, id est, Corium, Leather. The word is used in all the Statutes made
for the good making of Leather, as in 1 Jac cap. 22. etc.

Cursiter.
CUrsiter is an Officer or Clerk belonging to the Chancery, who makes out
Original Writs. 14 and 15 H. 8. cap. 8. They are called Clerks of Course in the
Oath of Clerks of the Chancery, appointed anno 18 Ed. 3. Stat. 5. There are of
them twenty four, to each of whom is allotted certain Shires, into which they
make out such Original Writs as are by the subject required, and are a
Corporation among themselves.

Courtesy of England.
Courtesy of England is, where a man takes a wife seized in Fee-simple, or
Fee-tail general, or seized as Heir of the tail special, and has issue by her,
male or female; be the issue dead or alive, if the wife die, the husband shall
hold the Land during his life, by the Law of England. And it is called Tenant
by the Courtesy of England, because this is not used in any other Realm but
only in England. If the Infant was never alive, then the husband shall not be
Tenant by the Courtesy; but if the issue be born alive, it suffices.

If the woman be delivered of a Monster, which has not the shape of mankind,
this is not Issue in Law: But though the issue has some deformity or defect in
the hand or foot, and yet has humane shape, if suffices to make the husband
Tenant by the Courtesy. And in some cases the time of the birth is material,
and in some not. Therefore, if a man marries a woman Inheritrix, who is great
with child by him, and the issue is ^^ pt forth of her belly alive; there he
shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy, for this ought to begin by the issue, and
consummate by the death of the woman, and the Estate of the Tenant by the
Courtesy ought to avoid the immediate descent. But if the husband has issue by
his wife, and after Land discends to the woman, be the issue then dead or
alive, he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy; for the time of the birth of the
issue is not material, if it be in the life of the woman.

If Lands be given to a woman and the heirs males of her body, and she takes an
hu ^ band, and has issue a daughter, and dies; the husband shall not be Tenant
by the Courtesy, for the issue cannot by any possibility inherit the same
Tenements. Also as a woman alien, marrying one of the Kings subjects, shall not
be endowed, in the same manner a man alien shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy.

Also if a man seized of Land in right of his wife be attainted of Felony,
having issue, and then purchases the Kings Pardon, and after his wife dies;
there he shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy: But if he has issue by his wife
born after the Pardon, in such case he shall.

Curtilage.
CUrtilage is a Garden, Yard, Field, or piece of void ground lying near and
belonging to the Message, West. part. 2. sect. 26. And so it is used 35 H. 8.
c. 4. 39 Eliz. 2 Coke l. 6. fol. 64.

Customary Tenants.
CUstomary Tenants are such Tenants as hold by the Custom of the Manor, as
their special Evidence.

Custom.
Custom may be defined to be a Law or Right not written, which being
established by long use, and consent of our Ancestors, has been and daily is
put in practice. Custom is either general or particular. General is that which
is current through England, whereof you may read in Doctor and Student, l. 1.
c. 7. many very worthy to be known. Particular is that which belongs to this or
that County, as Gavelkind to Kent; or to this or that Lordship, City, or Town.

Custom differs from Prescription, because Custom is common to many, and
Prescription, by the opinion of some, is particular to this or that man. Again,
Prescription may be for a shorter time than Custom, sc. for five years, or
less: As if a Fine be duly levied of Lands or Tenements, and be not gainsaid
within five years, this is a Bar to all Claim for ever.

If a man omits his Continual Claim for a year and a day then the Tenant in
possession prescribes an Immunity against the Entry of the Demandant and his
Heir, Fitzh. Not. Brev. 79. Out of our Statutes you may have greater diversity;
so that this seems to be a true saying, That Prescription is an Exception
founded upon so long time gone and past as the Law limits for the pursuit of
any Action. An example may be taken out of the Statute of 1 H. 8. c. 4. which
enacts That in all Actions popular information shall be made within three years
after the offense committed, otherwise to be of no force.

Custom is also used for the Tribute or Toll that Merchants pay to the King,
to carry in and out Merchandises, 14 E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 21. In which
signification it is called Custuma in Latin, Reg. Orig. 129. a. 138. a.

And lastly, for such Services as Tenants of a Manor owe unto their Lord. Old
Book of Entries, word Custom. See Consuetud. and Servitiis.

Custos Brevium.
CUstos Brevium is the chief Clerk belonging to the Court of Common Pleas or
Kings Bench, whose office is to receive and keep all the Writs, and to put them
upon Files, every Return by it self, and at the end of every Term to receive of
the Prothonotaries all the Records of Nisi prius, called the Postea. The Custos
Brevium also makes entry of Writs of Covenant, and the Concord upon every Fine,
and makes out Exemplifications and Copies of all the Writs and Records in his
Office, and of all the Fines levied. The parts of the Fines, after they are
engrossed, are divided between the Custos Brevium and the Chirographer: whereof
the Chirographer keeps always the Writ of Covenant, and the Note; the Custos
Brevium keeps the Concord, and the Foot of the Fine, upon which Foot the
Chirographer causes the Proclamations to be indorsed when they are all
proclaimed.

Custos Rotulorum.
CUstos Rotulorum is he that has the keeping of the Rolls or Records of the
Sessions of the Peace, and, as some think, of the Commission of the Peace it
self, Lam. l. 4. c. 3. p. 373. He is always Justice of the Peace and Quorum in
the County where he has his Office; and by his Office he is rather termed an
Officer or Minister, then a Judge, because the Commission of the Peace lays
this special Charge by express words upon him, That he should cause the Writs,
Precepts Process and Indictments aforesaid to come and be before him and his
fellow-Justices at the days and places aforesaid.

Guardian of the Spiritualties.
Guardian of the Spiritualties is he that exercises the spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of any Diocese during the Vacancy of the Sea; the
appointment of whom by the Canon Law pertains to the Dean and Chapter, lest in
the Vacancie of the Sea some Innovation should be introduced. But in Engl. the
Archbishop of the Province has it by Prescription. Howbeit many Deans and
Chapters (a ^ M. Gwyn says in his Preface to his Readings) challenge this by
ancient Charters from the Kings of this Land.

Cuynage.
CUynage is a word used in the Statute of 11 H. 7. c. 4. for the making up of
Tin into that fashion as it is used to be framed, for the better carriage of
it into other parts.

D. Damage.
Damage is part of that which the Jurors are to enquire of, in giving their
Verdict for the Complainant or Demandant in an Action real or personal. For
after the Verdict given upon the principal matter, they are also asked their
Consciences touching Costs, which are the Expenses of the Suit, and Damages,
which contain the prejudice which the Plaintiff or Demandant has suffered by
means of the wrong dove him by the Defendant or Tenant.

And forasmuch as Justice and Reason require, that when the life, credit,
lands, goods, corruption of blood, and all that a man has to forfeit in this
world, are put in peril without just cause, but only upon the malicious
Accusation of another by Appeal, that the Appellee should have satisfaction
therefore against his false Accuser, and if he has not sufficient, then
against him or them that abbetted or procured him to pursue the Appeal:
Therefore the Common Law gave Damages to the Defendant in an Appeal, and
assigned him a means for the recovery thereof, when he was acquitted of the
Felony, as it is 48 E. 3. 22. But forasmuch as the Damages against the
Procurors and Abbettors were to be recovered by Original Writ, that is, by Writ
of Conspiracy, and not otherwise, which was not so speedy remedy as the Heinous
quality of the wrong required; the Statute of Westminster. the 2. An. 13 Ed. 1. cap.
12. for the more expeditious redress thereof was ordained.

But if the Defendant bars the Plaintiff of his Appeal then he cannot recover
Damages by the said Statute against the Plaintiff, except the Bar be such as
acquits the Defendant of the Felony. And if the Defendant pleads that the
Appellant is a Bastard, or has an elder Brother, or like Pleas in bar, and
thereby bars the Plaintiff; yet he shall not recover Damages against him,
because the Defendant may be indicted again of the same Felony, and attainted,
notwithstanding any of those Pleas; for by them the innocence of the Defendant
is not tried, and therefore he shall not have Damages. 27 Ass. pl. 25. The
same Law is, if the Defendant bars the Appellant by Demurrer in Law: And so it
is, if in Appeal of the death of a man the Defendant pleads to the issue, and
it is found by Verdict that he killed the man in his own defense, or by
Chance-m ^ dley; in these cases he shall not recover Damages. But if the
Defendant in Appeal has the Release of the Appellant, or the Kings Pardon, and
will wave them, and plead Not guilty, and is acquitted; in this case he shall
recover Damages.

This word Damage is taken in the Law in two several significations; the one
properly and generally, the other strictly and relatively. Properly, as it is
in cases where Damages are founded upon the Statute of 2 Hen. 4. cap. 1. and 8
Hen. 6. cap. 9. where Costs are included within this word Damages; for Damnum
in its proper and general signification is said a demendo, when a thing by
Diminution is made worse; and in this sense Costs of Suit are Damages to the
Plaintiff, for by them his Substance is diminished. But when the Plaintiff
declares the wrong done to him to the Damage of such a sum, this is to be
taken relatively for the wrong which is passed before the Writ brought, and are
assessed by reason of the Trespass aforesaid, and cannot extend to Costs of
Suit which are future, and of another nature. See Co. l. 10. f. 116, 117.

Damage fesant.
Damage fesant is, when a stranger's Beasts are in another man's ground,
without license of the Tenant of the ground, and there do feed, tread and
otherwise spoil the corn, grass, woods, and such like: In which case the Tenant
whom they damage may therefore take, distrain and impound them, as well in the
night as in the day. But in other cases, as for Rent and Services, and such
like, none may distrain in the night.

Danegeld.
DAnegeld is, to be quit of a certain Tribute which the Danes did levy in
England: Also the Tribute it self.

This began first in the time of King Etheldred, who being sore distressed by
the continual Inivasson of the Danes, to purchase Peace, was compelled to
charge his County and people with great Payments; for he first gave them at
five several payments 113000 lib and afterward granted them 48000 lib. yearly.

Darreine Presentment.
DArreine Presentment; an Assise thereof lies where I or mine ancestors have
presented a Clerk to a Church, and after, the Church being void by the death of
the said Clerk, or otherwise, a stranger presents his Clerk to the same Church
in disturbance of me. And how it is otherwise used, see Bract. lib. 5. tract.
2. Regist. orig. fol. 30. If a husband and wife present to an Advowson in right
of the wife, which is appendant to the Manor of the wife, and after the
husband aliens an Acre, parcel of the Manor, with the Advowson in fee, to a
stranger, and dies, and after the stranger presents, and then aliens the Acre
to another in fee, saving the Advowson to himself, and after the Church is
void; there the wife shall present, and if she be disturbed, she shall have an
assise of Darreine Presentment; because the Advowson was severed from the Acre.
But if the Advowson was appendant to the Acre, then the wife ought to recover
the Acre before she presents to the Advowson. Fitz. Not. Brev. 32.

Darrein Continuance.
IS when the Defendant or Tenant ( pendente placito) pleads new matter done
after the last continuance of the plea. See Thelwel. 361. and 2. Cro. 261.

Dean and Chapter.
DEan and Chapter is a Body corporate Spiritual, consisting of many able
persons, as namely the Dean (who is chief) and his Prebends, and they together
make the Corporation. And as this Corporation may jointly purchase Lands and
Tenements to the use of their Church and Successors; so likewise every of them
severally may purchase to the use of himself and his heirs.

And as there are two Foundations of Cathedral Churches in England, the Old and
the New; (the New are those that King Henry the eighth, upon suppression of
Abbeys, transformed from an Abbot, or Prior and Covent, to Dean and Chapter:)
so there are two means of Creation of these Deans: for those of the Old
Foundation are brought to their Dignity like Bishops; the King first sending
his Congee deslire to the Chapter; the Chapter then choosing, the King yiedling
his Royal assent; and the Bishop confirming, and giving his Mandate to instal
him. Those of the New Foundation are by a shorter course enstalled by the
King's Letters Patents, without other Election or Confirmation.

This word is also applied to diverse that are the chief of certain peculiar
Churches or Chapels, as the Dean of the Kings Chapel, the Dean of the Arches,
the Dean of Saint George's Chapel in Windsor, etc.

Debet and solet, See Custom and Prescription.
DEbet and solet are words used in the Old Natura Brevium, fol. 98. The Writ of
Secta molendini, being in the Debet and solet, is a Writ of Right, etc. And
again, fol. 69. A Writ of Quod permittat may be pleaded in the County before
the Sheriff, and may be in the Debet and solet, or the Debet only, as the
Demandant claims. Wherefore note, That these Writs that are brought in such
sort have these words in them, as formal words not to be omitted.

And according to the diversity of the Case, the Debet and solet are used, or
the Debet only, As if a man by Writ sues to recover any right, whereof his
ancestor was disseised by the Tenant or his ancestor; then he uses only the
word Debet in his Writ, and it is not apt to use Solet, because his ancestor
was disscised, and the Custom discontinued: but if he sues for any thing that
is first denied him, then he has both these words, Debet and solet; because
his ancestor before him and himself have usually enjoyed the thing for which he
sues, as Suit to the Mill, or Common of Pasture, until this present refusal of
the Tenant. Reg. orig. fol. 144. a.

Debet and Detinet.
DEbet and Detinet: Much may be said of these words that has been spoken of
the words next before. As, if a man be bound to another, and makes his Executor
and dies, and the money grows due in the time of the Testator, and afterward the
Executor pays it not; the Action brought against him therefore shall be in the
Detinet only: and so in all Actions brought by Executors as Executors, the Writ
shall be in the Detinet only, although the duty accrued in their own time,
because the thing or damages recovered shall be assets.

But if Lessee for years rendering Rent makes his Executors, and dies, and the
Rent incurs after the death of the Testator; there an Action of Debt shall be
brought in the Debet and Detinet: for when an Executor or Administrator takes
the Profits, nothing shall be Assets but the Profits above the Rent. As if the
Land is worth ten pound by the year, and five pound is reserved; in this cas ^
nothing shall be Assets but the five pound above the Rent, and therefore the
Writ shall be for the Rent in the Debet and Detinet. Cokel. 5. fol. 31.

December Tales.
December Tales. See Tales.

Decies tantum.
DEcies tantum is a Writ that lies where a Iuror in any Enquest takes money of
the one part or other, to give his Verdict; then he shall pay ten times as much
as he has received: a ^ d every one that will sue may have Action, and shall
have the one half, and the King the other.

But if the King in such case release by his Pardon to such a Iuror, yet that
shall be no Bar against him that brings the Action, who shall recover the other
half, if this Action be commenced before the Pardon of the King; but if the
Pardon be before any Action, it is a Bar against all men.

And the same Law is of all other Actions popular, where one part is to the
King, the other to the party that sues. And the Embracers, who procure such
Enquests, shall be punished in the same manner, and they shall have
imprisonment a year. But no Justice shall enquire thereof ex officio, but only
at the Suit of the party.

Deciners.
DEciners are such as were wont to have the oversight and command of Ten free
Burgs, for preserving the Kings Peace; and the Limits or Circuit of their
Jurisdiction was called Decenna. Bracton l. 3. tract. 2. c. 15. Also you may
read Flet. l. 1. c. 27. and Reg. orig. fol. 68. b.

These seemed to have large authority in the Saxons time, taking knowledge of
Causes within their Circuit, and redressing wrongs by way of Judgment; as you
may read in the Laws of King Edward, set out by Lambert, number. 32. Also there is
mention of these in Britton cap. 12. who says in the Kings person (as he
writes his whole Book) in this manner: We will that all such as are fourteen
years of age shall make oath that they shall be sufficient and loyal unto Us,
and that they will not be Felons, nor assenting to Felons, and that all be
professed to be of this or that Dozein, and make or offer Surety of their
behavior by these or those Deciners: except Religious persons, Clerks,
Knights, and their eldest sons, and Women. Yet the same Author in his 29. chap.
near the end says, That all at the age of 12 years or above are punishable for
not coming to the Sheriffs Tourn, excepting Earls, Prelates, Barons, Religious
persons, and Women.

The same Law is where the Deciners make presentment, that a Felon is taken for
Theft, and delivered to the Sheriff. And Kitchen out of the Register, and
Britton says thus, Religious persons, Clerks, Knights or Women, shall not be
Deciners, fol. 33. Whence it may be gathered, that this word implies nothiny
else but such a one as by his Oath of Loyalty to his Prince is settled in the
combination or society of a Dozein, for it is not usual at this day to find
Surety so to do. And now a Dozeine seems to extend so far as the Lcet extends,
because in Leets only this Oath is administered by the Steward, and taken by
such as are of the age of twelve years and upward, dwelling within the Precinct
of the Leet where they are sworn. Fitzh. Not. Brev. 161. a. The particulars of
this Oath you may read in Bracton, l. 3. tract. 2. c. 1. number. 1. where he puts
dwon fifteen years for the age of those that are sworn to the Kings Peace; but
l. 3. tract. 2. c. 11. number 5. he names twelve years. See Inlaugh.

From which Premises may be observed the difference detween the ancient and
these our times in this point of Law and Government, as well for the age of
those that are to be sworn, as also that Deciner is not now used for the chief
man of a Dozein, but for him that is sworn to the Kings Peace; and lastly, that
now there are not any Dozeins, but Leets; and that ordinarily no man gives
other Security for keeping the Kings Peace but his own Oath, and therefore no
one shall answer for the transgression of another, but every one for himself.

Declaration.
DEclaration is a Showing in writing the grief and complaint of the Demandant
or Plaintiff against the Tenant or Defendant, wherein he supposes to have
received wrong. And this Declaration ought to be plain and certain, both
because it impeaches the Defendant, and also compels him to make answer
thereto. But note, that such Declaration made by the Demandant against the
Tenant in an Action real is properly called a Count.

Note, That the Count or Declaration ought to contain Demonstration,
Declaration, and Conclusion. And in Demonstration are contained three things,
(that is) him who complains, against whom, and for what matter. And in the
Declaration there ought to be comprised, how and in what manner the Action rose
between the parties, and when, and what day, year, and place, and to whom the
Action shall be given. And in the Conclusion he ought to aver and profer to
prove his Suit, and show the Damages which he has sustained by the wrong done
him.

De deoneranda pro rata. portionis.
DE deoneranda, etc. is a Writ that lies where one one is distreined for Rent,
that ought to be paid by others proportionably with him. Fitz. Not. Brev. Fol.
234.

Dedimus potestatem.
DEdimus potestatem is a Writ that lies where a man sues in the Kings Court, or
is sued, and cannot well travel, then he shall have this Writ directed to some
Justice, or other discreet person in the Country, to give him power to admit
some man for his Attorney, or to levy a Fine, or to take his Confession, or his
Answer, or other Examination, as the matter requires.

Defalt.
DEfalt is an Offense in omitting that which we ought to do; and most commonly
taken for Nonappearance in Court at a day assigned. Bract. lib. 5. tract. 3.
and Fleta lib. 6. cap. 14.

Defamation.
DEfamation is when a man speaks Slanderous words of any other man, Court of
Justice, Magistracy, or Title of land: for which the party shall be punished
according to the nature and quality of his offense; sometimes by Action upon
the Case for Slander, at the Common Law, and other times in the Ecclesiastical
Court. As if a man contrive any False news, or horrible and false Lies of
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, etc. then an Action De Scandalis Magnatum will lie
against him by the Statute of 2 R. 2. cap. 5. and this being proved, the party
offending shall be grievously punished. But for words of Defamation against a
private man, there the party grieved* shall have his Action upon the Case for
the Slander, and shall recover in damages according to the quality of the
fault: wherein the quality of the person who is so defamed is much to be
considered.

But for Defamations determinable in the Spiritual Court, they ought to have
three incidents: First it ought to concern matter merely Spiritual, and
determinable in the Ecclesiastical Court; as for calling him Heretic,
Schismatic, Adulterer, Fornicator, etc. Secondly, that it concern matter
merely Spiritual only: for if such Defamation concern any thing determinable at
the Common Law, the Ecclesiastical Judge shall not have conusance thereof: As
if a Divine is to be presented to a Benefice, and one (to defeat him thereof)
says to the Patron, that he is an Heretic, or a Bastard, or that he is
Excommunicated, whereby the Patron refuses to present him, and he loses his
Preferment; he shall have an Action upon the Case for these Defamations,
tending to such an end. Also if a woman be bound that she shall live continent,
for if a Lease be made to her so long as she shall live chaste; in these cases
Incontinency shall be tried by the Common Law. Thirdly, although such
Defamation be merely and only Spiritual, yet he that is defamed cannot sue
there for amends or Damages, but the Suit ought to be only for punishment of
the fault, for the Soul's health of him that so offends.

And as for the Slander of a Title to Land, if A. says that B. has right in
the Lands of C. whereby C. is damnified, then he may have an Action upon the
Case for the Defamation of his Title, against A. And although B. has a
colorable Title, yet A. shall be punished, forasmuch as he has taken upon him
knowledge of the Law, and meddled in a matter which concerned him not. But if a
man says, that he himself has right to the Land of another; in this case no
Action for Defamation lies, although he knows his Title to be false, Cok lib.
4. fol. 18.

Defeisance.
DEfeisance is a Condition relating to a Deed, as an Obligation, Recognisance,
or Statute, which being performed by the Obligor, or Recognisor, the Act is
disabled and made void, as if it had never been done. And there is no
Warrantie, Recognisance, Rentcharge. Annuity, Covenant, Lease for years, or
such like, but that they may by a Defeasance, made with the mutual consent of
all those who were parties to the creation thereof, by Deed be adnulled,
discharged, and defeated. And the difference between a Proviso or Condition in
Deed and a Defeasance is in this, That the Proviso or Condition is annexed or
inserted in the Deed or Grant; whereas a Defeasance is usually a Deed by it
self concluded and agreed on between the parties, and having relation to
another Deed.

And therefore if the Condition of an Obligation be repugnant to the Deed, the
Condition is void, and the Obligation good: As if the Condition be, that he
shall not sue the Obligation, this is void, as well as it is of a Feoffment,
upon Condition that the Feoffee shall not take the Profits. But a Defeasance is
a Grant that is made after the Obligation, to defeat the same Obligation; and
this is good though it be repugnant, and so not like a Condition. 21 H. 7. fol.
24. b. For the form and manner of Defeasances according to the diversity of the
Case, see West. part. 1. Symb. lib. 2. sect. 230, 231, etc.

Defense.
Defense is that which the Defendant ought to make immediately after the Count
or Declaration made, that is, that he defends all the Wrong, Force and Damage,
where and when he ought; and then to proceed farther to his Plea, or to imparl.

And note, that by defending the Force and Wrong he does excuse himself of the
Wrong against him surmised, and makes himself party to the Plea; and by
defending the Damage, he affirms the Plaintiff able to be answered unto.

And for the residue of the Defense, he accepts the power of the Court to hear
and determine their Pleas of this matter. For if he will plead to the
Jurisdiction, he ought to omit in his Defense these words, ( ou and quant il
devera:) and if he will show any disability in the Plaintiff, and demand
Judgment if the party shall be answered unto; then he ought to omit the Defense
of the Damage.

Defendant.
DEfendant is he that is sued in Action personal, who is called Tenant in an
Action real.

Defendemus.
DEfendemus is an ordinary word in a Feoffment or Donation, and has this
force, that it binds the Donor* and his Heirs to defend the Donee, if any man
go about to lay any Servitude upon the thing given, other then is contained in
the Donation. Braction lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 10. See also Warrantizantibus.

Defender of the Faith.
DEfender of the Faith is a peculiar Title given to the King of England by the
Pope, as Catholicus to the King of Spain, and Christianissimus to the French
King. It was first given by Leo. x. to K. Hen. 8. for writing against Martin
Luther, in behalf of the Church of Rome Stow's Annals p. 863.

Deforceor.
DEforceor is he that overcomes and casts out with Force; who differs from a
Disseisor, first in this, that a man may disseise another without Force, which
act is called Simple Dissesin, Britton cap. 33. Then because a man may deforce
another that never was in possession; as if many have right to Lands as common
Heirs, and one keeps them out, the Law says, that he deforces them, though he
never disseised them. Old Not. Brev. fol. 118. If Tenant in tail makes a
Feoffment in fee by which the Feoffee is in, and afterward the Tenant in tail
dies, and his issue sues a Writ of Formedon against the Feoffee; the Writ shall
say, and also the Count, etc. that the Feoffee wrongfully deforced him etc.
though he did not disseise him, because he entered in the life of the Tenant in
tail, and the Heir had no present right. Lit fol. 138. And a Deforceor differs
from an Intrudor, because a Deforceor keeps out the right Heir, as aforesaid;
and a man is made an Intrudor by a wrongful Entry only in Lands or Tentments
void of a Possessor. Bract. lib. 4. cap. 1.

And because Force and Forcible entry into Lands is so opposite to the Peace
and Justice of the Realm, and a dishonor of the King and his Crown, and
discredit of the Law, that any person by birth and oath obliged to the
obedience of the King and his Laws, should presume of his own authority by
Force and strong hand to resist them both, by violent Intrusion into the
Possession of another before the Law has decided his Tttle therein; therefore
diverse Statutes have been made for the restraint and reformation of these
Abuses; as, among others, the Stat. of 5 R. 2. ca. 7. where the King defends
any Entry into Lands or Tenements; but in case where Entry is given by the Law,
and then not with strong hand, or with a multitude of people, but only in a
peaceable manner. See more of this in Po ^ lt. de pace Reg. f. 34. 35, etc.

Degrading.
DEgrading. See Disgrading.

Delegates.
ARE Commissioners appointed by Letters Patents to determine Appeals upon
things testamentary or matrimonial, in which sentence was given.

Demaines.
DEmaines or Demesnes, generally speaking, are all the parts of any Manor
which are not in the hands of Freeholders, though they be held by Copyholders,
Lessees for years or for life, as well as Tenants at will. And the reason why
Copyhold is accounted Demesnes is, because they who are Tenants to it are
adjudged in Law to have no other Estate but at the will of the Lord, so that it
is still reputed to be in a manner in the Lords hands: yet in common speech
that is ordinarily called Demesnes which is neither free nor copy. And this
word Demesne is sometimes used in a more special signification, and is opposite
to Frank-fee; as those Lands which were in the possession of Edward the
Confessor, are called Ancient demesne, and all others are called Franck-fee,
Kitch. fol. 98. and the Tenants which hold any of those Lands are called
Tenants in Ancient demesne, the other Tenants in Frankfee. And no common person
has any Demesnes in the simple acceptance of the word, because there is no
Land but depends mediately or immediately of the Crown, that is, of some Honor
or other belonging to the Crown, and not granted in fee to any inferior
person; and therefore when a man in pleading will signify his Land to be his
own, he says, That he is or was seized thereof in his Demesne as of Fee,
Littleton, f. 3. whereby it appears, that though his Land be to him and his
Heirs for ever, yet it is not true Demesne, but depending upon a superior
Lord, and holding by Service, or Rent in lieu of Service, or by Service and
Rent together.

Demaines; according to the common speech, are only understood the Lords chief
Mannor-place, which he and his Ancestors have time out of mind kept in their
own hands, with all buildings and houses, meadows, pastures, woods, arable
lands, and such like therewith occupied.

Demand.
DEmand is a word of art, and if one release to another all Demands, this is,
(as Littleton, fol. 117. a. says) the best Release to him to whom the Release
is made that he can have, and shall most enure to his advantage; for by it not
only all Demands, but also all causes of Demands are released. And there are
two manner of Demands, that is, in Deed, and in Law. In Deed, as in every
Praecipe there is express Demand; and therefore in real Actions he is called
Demandant, in personal Plaintiff. In Law, as every Entry in Land, Distress for
Rent, Taking or seizure of Goods, and such like acts in the Country, which may
be done without any words or demands in Law. As a Release of Suits is more
large then a Release of Quarrels or of Actions; so a Release of Demands is more
large and beneficial than either of them, for by it is released all that which
by the others is released, and more. By Release of all Demands, all Freeholds
and Inheritances executory are released: By Release of all Demands to the
Dissetsor, the right of the Entry in the land, and all that is contained
therein, is released: By Release of all Demands, all Executions are released;
and he that releases all Demands, excludes himself from all Actions, Entries,
and Seisures.

Littleton, fol. 170. holds, That if Tenant in tail enfeoffs his Uncle, who
enfeoffs another in fee with Warranty; if after the Feoffee by his Deed
releases to the Uncle all manner of Demands, by such Release the Warranty,
which is a Covenant real and executory, is extinct: and the reason is, because
that by Release of Demands all the means and remedies, and their causes, which
any has to Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels, etc. are extinct, and, by
consequence, the right and interest it self unto the thing. Yet a Release of
all Demands does not extend to such Writs by which nothing is demanded, neither
in Deed nor in Law, but lie only to relieve the Plaintiff by way of Discharge,
and not by way of Demand; as a Release of all Demands is no Bar in a Writ of
Error to reverse an Outlawry, and so of such like. See 18 Edw. 3. 59. Coke.
lib. 8. fol. 153, 154.

Demandant.
DEmandant is he that sues or complains in an Action real for Title of land;
and he is called Plaintiff in an Assise, and in an Action personal, for Debt,
Trespass, Deceit, Detinue and such like.

Demurrage.
IS called the time when a Shi ^ lies idle in a Port or Harbor or on the Sea
in a Calm.

Demurrer.
DEmurrer is when any Action is brought, and the Defendant pleads a Plea, to
which the Plaintiff says that he will not answer, for that it is not a
sufficient Plea in the Law; and the Defendant avers the contrary, that it is a
sufficient Plea; and thereupon both parties submit the Cause to the Judgment
of the Court: which is called a Demurrer, for that they go not forward in
pleading, but rest upon Judgment in that point; and is called in Latin
Records, Moratur in Lege.

For in every Action the difference consists either in Deed or in Law. If in
Fact, it is tried by the Jury; if in Law, then the matter is either plain, or
difficult and rare: if it be plain, then Judgment is presently given; but when
it is hard and doubtful, then is stay made, and time taken either to consider
farther thereupon by the Judges, to agree if they can, or otherwise for all the
Justices to meet together in the Exchequer-Chamber, and, upon hearing of that
which the Sergeants shall say unto both parts, to advise and determine what is
Law; and that which is there concluded on by them shall stand firm, without
further remedy.

There is also a Demurrer to Evidence given to a Jury upon Trial of an Issue,
Plo. Com. 2. 3 Rast. Entr. 607.

Half blood.
HAlf blood is, when a man marries a wife, and has issue by her a son or
daughter, and the wife dies, and then he takes another woman, and has by her
also a son or daughter: Now these two sons are after a sort Brothers, or as
they are termed, Half-brothers, or Brothers of the half blood, that is,
Brothers by the Fathers side, because they had both one Father, and are both of
his blood, and not Brothers at all by the Mothers side, nor of blood nor kin
that way; and therefore the one of them cannot be Heir to the other: for he
that will claim as Heir to one by descent, must be of whole ^ blood to him from
whom he claims. In the same manner it is, if a woman have diverse issues by
diverse husbands, who are called Brothers by one Mother.

Denariata terrae.
DEnariata Terrae. See Fardingdeal.

Denelage.
DEnelage is the Law that the Danes made here in England, cut of which and
Merchenlage and Westsaxonlage William the Conqueror composed certain
Ordinances to be observed by his subjects.

Denizen.
DEnizen, or Donaison, is, where au Alien born becomes the Kings Subject, and
obtains the Kings Letters Patents to enjoy all Privileges as an Englishman:
but if one be made Denizen, he shall pay Customs and diverse other things as
Alien, as it appears by diverse Statutes thereof made.

It seems that Donaison is the true name, so called, because that his
Legitimation is given to him, and not Denizen, as derived from Deins nee. And
the Law is so precise in the making of Denizens, that the King cannot grant
power to any other to make Aliens born Denizens, it is by the Law so
inseparably and individually annexed to his Royal person; for the Law esteems
it an high Prerogative, to make Aliens Subjects of the Realm, and capable of
Lands and Inheritances, as natural born Subjects are.

And therefore the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 24. which reunites many of the most
ancient Prerogatives and Regal Flowers of the Crown, makes no mention of any
authority to make Letters of Denization to be resumed, for that never any
claimed it be any pretext whatsoever, it being so high a point of Prerogative.
See Cok. l. 7. Calvin's Case.

Deodand.
DEodand is, when any man by misfortune is slain by a Horse, Cart, or any other
thing that moves to further his death; such thing which at the time of his
misfortune did move* or cause his death shall be sorfeit to the King, and that
is called Deodand; and that pertains to the Kings Almoner, for to dispose in
Alms and Deeds of Charity.

But it is not forfeited until the matter be found of Record, and therefore
they cannot be claimed by Prescription: and the Jury that finds or presents the
death by such misadventure, ought also to find and appraise the Deodand. Co. l.
5. f. 110.

If a Horse strikes one, and afterward the Owner sells the Horse, and then the
party that was stricken dies of the stroke; in this case the Horse shall be
forfeited as a Deodand, notwithstanding the sale; for relation shall be had to
the stroke which was before the sale. Plow. Com. 260. b.

What move to death, or kill the dead, Are Deodand and forfeited.

Departure from a Plea or matter.
DEparture from a Plea or matter is, where a man pleads a Plea in bar, and the
Plaintiff replies thereto, and he after in his Rejoinder pleads or shows
another matter, contrary, or not pursuing to his first Plea; that is called a
Departure from his Bar. As if a man pleads a general Agreement in bar, and in
the Rejoinder he alleges an especial Agreement; this shall be adjudged a
Departure in Pleading. So in Trespass, if the Defendant will plead a descent to
him, and the Plaintiff says, that after this the Defendant enfeoffed him, and
the Defendant says, that this Feoffment was upon Condition, for the breach
whereof he entered, this is a Departure from the Bar, for it is a new matter.
See Plow. Com. f. 7. and 8.

Departure in despite of the Court.
DEparture in despite of the Court is, when the Tenant or Defendant appears to
an Action, and has a day over in the same Term, or is called after, though he
had no day given him, so that it be in the same Term, if he do not appear, but
make Default, it is a Departure in despite of the Court, and therefore he
shall be condemned.

And it is to be observed, that Departure in despite of the Court is always of
the part of the Tenant or Defendant, and the Entry thereof is, Quod praedictus
A, licet solenniter exactus, non revenit, sed in contemptum Curiae recessit,
and Defaltam fecit: and this is when in judgment of the Law he is present in
Court, and being demanded, departs in despite of the Court; this amounts to a
Bar in respect of the Despite and Contempt of the Court. See Cok. lib. 8. f.
62.

Deprivation.
DEprivation is, when an Abbot, Bishop, Parson, Vicar, Prebend, etc. is
deprived or deposed from his Preferment for any matter in Fact or in Law. As if
a Miscreant or Schismatic be presented, admitted, and inducted, there is good
cause of Deprivation: So if a mere Layman be presented, admitted, instituted,
and inducted, yet he shall be deprived: or if the Incumbent has Plurality of
Benefices; or subscribe not to the Articles of Religion, according to the Stat.
of 13 Eliz. cap. 12.

By the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. it is enacted, That if any person, having
a Benefice with Cure of souls of the yearly value of eight pounds, or more
accepts or takes any other with Cure of souls, and be instituted and inducted
into the possession thereof; the first Benefice shall be void, and the
Incumbent in this case is outed or deprived by Cession. In which case the
Bishop needs not give notice to the Patron, because the Deprivation is by Act
of Parliament, to which every one is party, and ought to take notice at his
peril. But otherwise it is if the first Church be not of the yearly value of
eight pounds, for then it is void merely by the Ecclesiastical Law. See Co. l.
4. f. 76. and l. 7. 43 b

Deputy.
Deputy is he that exercises in another man's right either Office or any other
thing; and his forfeiture or misdemeanor shall cause the Officer, or him whose
Deputy he is, to lose his Office. But a man cannot make his Deputy in all
cases, except the Grant so be: as if it be with these or such like words, To
exercise or use by himself or his sufficient Deputy; or if the words go
farther, To himself or his Deputy, or the Deputy of his Deputy, then he may
make a Deputy, and his Deputy also may make a Deputy, or else not. As if the
Office of a Parkership be granted to one, he cannot grant this over to another,
because it is an Office of trust and confidence, and shall not be forfeited.
And there is great diversity between Deputy and Assignee of an Office: for an
Assignee is a person that has an Estate or interest in the Office it self; and
does all things in his own name, for whom his Grantor shall not answer, unless
it be in especial cases; and a Deputy has not any Estate or interest in the
Office; but is only the shadow of the Officer, and does all things in the name
of the Officer himself, and nothing in his own name, and for which his Grantor
shall answer: and where an Officer has power to make Assigns, he may
implicitly make Deputies, for, He that may do more it ought not to be held
unlawful for him to do less; and therefore when an Office is granted to one and
to his heirs, by this he may make Assigns, and by consequence he may make
Deputies.

The King by his Letters Pattents commits to the Sheriff the Custody of the
County, without express words of making Deputy; and yet he may make an Under
Sheriff, viz. his Deputy. So where before the Statute of Quia emptores
terrarum, the King or other Lord had given Lands to a Knight, to hold of him by
Knights Service, that is, to go with his Lord (when the King makes a Voyage
Royal to subdue his enemies) for 40 days, well and conveniently arrayed for the
War; yet he may find another able person: howbeit in the one case it concerns
the public Administration and execution of Justice in time of Peace; and in
the other, the public defense of the Realm in time of War. See Cok. l. 9. Le
Countee de Salops Case.

Dereine.
DEreine is taken in diverse senses, and seems to come from the French
Disarrayer, that is, to confound or put out of order; or else the Norman word
Desrene, which is the denial of a man's own act; and Lex Deraisnia was the Proof
of a thing which one denies to be done by himself, and his adversary affirms
it, defeating and confounding the assertion of his adversary, and showing it to
be without and against reason or probability. And in our Law it is diversely
used. First generally, to prove; as, Dirationabit jus suum haeres propinquior,
Glanvile l. 2. c. 6. and he, l. 4* c. 6. says, Habeo probos homines qui
viderunt and audiverunt, and parati sunt hoc dirationare. In the same manner
Bracton uses it, Habeo sufficientem Disratiocinationem and probationem*

By the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. 1. Ioyntenants and Tenants in common shall
have Aid, to the intent to deraigne the Garranty paramount. So Plo. in Manxels
Case, fol. 7. b. has this Case, If a man has an Estate in fee with Warranty,
and enfeoffs a stranger with Warranty, and dies, and the Feoffee vouches his
Heir; the Heir shall deraigne the first Warranty. Also this word is used when
Religious men forsake their Orders and Professions; as in Kitch. fol. 152. b.
if a man makes a Lease for life upon condition, that if the Lessor dies without
issue, then the Lessee shall have Fee, the Lessee enters in Religion, and then
the Lessor dies without issue, and after the Lessee is deraigned; he shall not
have Fee, insomuch as at the time of the Condition the Fee cannot vast in him.

De son tort demesne.
DE son tort demesne seem to be certain words of form in an Action of
Trespass, used by way of Reply to the Plea of the Defendant: As if A sues B in
an Action of Trespass, and B answers for himself, that he did this which A
calls Trespass by the commandment of C his Master; A says again, that B did
this of his own wrong, without that that C commanded him in such manner and
form, etc.

Debt.
DEbt is a Writ that lies where any sum of money is due to a man by reason of
Account, Bargain, Contract, Obligation, or other Especialty, to be paid at a
certain day, which is not paid; then he shall have this Writ. But if any money
be due to any Lord by his Tenant for any Rent-service, the Lord shall never
have Action of Debt for that, but he must distrain for it. Also for Rentcharge
or Rent-seek, which any man has for life, in tail, or in see: he shall not
have any Action of Debt as long as the Rent continues; but his Executors may
have an Action of Debt for the Arrearages due in the life of their Testator, by
the Statute 32 H. 8. c. 37.

For Arrearages of Rent reserved upon a Lease for term of years, the Lessor is
at his election to have an Action of Debt, or to distrain: but if the Lease be
determined, then he shall not distrain after for that Rent, but he must have an
Action of Debt for the Arrerages.

And note, That by the Law of the Realm Debt is only taken to arise upon some
Contract or Penalty imposed upon some Statute or pain, and not by other
Offenses, as in the Civil Law, Debitum ex delicto.

If a man enter into a Tavern to drink, and when he has drank, goes away, and
will not pay the Vintner; the Vintner shall not have an Action of Trespass
against him for his Entry, but shall have an Action of Debt for the Wine.

If I deliver Cloth to a Tailor to make a Gown, if the price be not agreed on
in certain before, how much I shall pay for the making; he shall not have
against me a general Action of Debt, but a special one, and shall declare
specially, and it shall be put to the Jury how much he deserves.

But if a Tailor make a Bill, and himself rates the making and the necessaries
thereunto; he shall not have an Action of Debt for his own values, unless it
was so specially agreed; but in such case he may detain the Garment until he be
paid, as an Hostler may his Guests Horse for his meat. Cok. l 8. 147.

Also Debt lies for Fines of Copyholds, and for amerciaments in Court Leet,
and Court Baron, and upon Awards, and upon recoveries in base Courts, or Courts
of Record.

Detinue.
DEtinue is a Writ that lies against him, who having goods and chattels
delivered to him to keep, refuses to re-deliver them. See hereof. F. N. B. 138.

Devastaverunt bona Testatoris.
DEvastaverunt bona Testatoris is, when the Executors will deliver Legacies, or
make restitution for wrongs done by their Testator, or pay his Debts due upon
Contracts or Specialties, whose days of payment are not yet come, etc. and keep
not sufficient in their hands to discharge those Debts upon Records or
Specialties which they are compellable by the Law to satisfy in the first
place; then they shall be constrained to pay these out of their own goods,
according to the value of what they voluntarily delivered or paid: for such
irregular and illegal Payments are accounted in the Law a Wasting of the goods
of the Testator, as much as if they had given them away without cause, or sold
them, and converted them to their own use.

And therefore if A be bound in a Recognisance, or in a Statute Merchant, or
Staple, and after Recovery is had against him in an Action of Debt; and he
makes his Executors, and dies; his Executors are bound by the Law to pay the
Debt due upon the Recovery, although it be later in time, before the Debt due
by Recognisance or Statute, because though both are Records, yet the Judgment
in the Kings Court upon judicial and ordinary proceeding is more notorious and
conspicuous, and of a more high and eminent degree, then a Statute or
Recognisance taken in private, and by consent of parties, and is therefore
preferred in judgment of the Law before Recognisance or Statute: and if the
Executors do not satisfy this first, then if they have no goods of the dead in
their hands, they shall pay it of their own. So the Ordinary having goods of
one that dies intestate in his hands by Sequestration, and an Action of Debt
upon an Obligation to the value of the said goods is brought against him as
Ordinary; he shall not dispose or administer any parcel of the said Goods to
the other Creditors at his pleasure, but is bound to satisfy the Debt first
for which an Action is brought against him. Dyer, fol. 232. placit. 5.

If a Sheriff return ex officio without inquest, that the Executor has wasted
goods, the Execution goes de bonis propriis of the Executor, and if the retorn
be false, then the Executor may have an Action upon the Case against the
Sheriff for his false retorn, because the Executor has no day to plead. But if
the Sheriff retorn a devastavit upon an Inquiry by a Jury, the Executor may
appear and traverse, quod non devastavit, and try it, 1 Cro. Mounson and Bourn,
and Proctor versus Chamberlain.

Devenerunt.
DEvenerunt is a Writ directed to the Escheator, when any of the Kings Tenants
holding in Capite dies, and when his son and heir, within age, and in the Kings
custody, dies, then shall this Writ go forth, commanding the Escheator, that he
by the oath of good and lawful men enquire what Lands or Tenements by the death
of the Tenant come to the King, etc. See Dyer, f. 360. pla. 4. But see the
Stat. 12. Car. 2. cap. 24.

Divest.
Divest is a word contrary to Invest; for as Invest signifies to deliver the
possession of a thing, so Divest signifies the taking it away.

Devise.
DEvise is, where a man in his Testament gives or bequeaths his Goods or Lands
to another after his decease. And where such Devise is made of Goods, if the
Executors will nor deliver them to the Devisee he has no remedy by the Common
Law, but it behooves him to have a Citation against the Executors of the
Testator, to appear before the Ordinary, to show why he performs not the Will
of the Testator: for the Devisee may not take the Legacy and serve himself, but
it must be delivered to him by the Executors. See the Stat. 32 H. 8. ca. 1. and
34 H. 8. ca. 5. and 29 Car. 2. ca. 3. By which last Statute the Law of
Testameuts is altered.

But by the Common Law if a man be sole seized of Lands in fee, and devises
them by Testament; this Devise was void, unless the Lands were in City or
Borough where Lands are devisable by Custom. But if any man were infeoffed to
the use of another and his heirs, and he to whose use he was so seized did make
Devise of his Lands; this Devise was good, though it were not in a Town where
Lands are devisable.

Also if any man devise Lands in City, Town, or Borough, devisable, and the
Devisor dies; if his Heir or any other abate in the Lands, then the Devisee
shall have a Writ of Ex gravi querela. But this Writ shall never be pleaded
before the Kings Justice, but always before the Mayor or Bailiffs in the same
Town.

And here, to the end to show how much the Laws of this Realm, and the discreet
Judges of the same, who are the Interpreters of it, do favor Wills and
Testaments, and Devises, in yielding to them such a reasonable construction as
they think might best agree with the minds of the dead, considering that Wills
and Testaments are for the most part, and by common intendment, made when the
Testatour is very sick, weak, and past all hope of recovery: for it is a
received opinion in the Country amongst most, that if a man should chance to
be so wise as to make his Will in his good health, when he is strong, of good
memory, and has time and leisure to ask counsel (if any doubt were) of the
Learned, that then he should not live long after; and therefore they defer it
to such time when it were more convenient to apply themselves to the
dispositions of their Souls, than of their Lands or Goods, except it were that
by the fresh memory and recital of them at that time, it might be a cause to
put them in mind of some of their goods or lands falsely gotten, and so move
them to restitution, etc. And at that time the penning of such Wills is
commonly committed to the Minister of the Parish, or to some other more
ignorant, who knows not what words are necessary to make an Estate in
Fee-simple, Fee-tail, for term of life, or such like, besides many other
mischiefs: I will therefore here set down some of those Cases that are most
common in ignorant men's mouths, and carry, by the wise interpretations of the
Judges, a larger and more favorable sense in Wills, than in Deeds.

First therefore, if one devise to J. S. by his Will all his Lands and
Tenements; here not only all those Lands that he has in possession do pass,
but all those that he has in Reversion, by virtue of those words, Tenements.

And if Lands be devised to a man to have to him for ever, or to have to him
and his Assigns; in these two cases the Devisee shall have a Fee-simple. But if
it be given by Feoffment in such manner, he has but an Estate for term of life.

And if a man devise his Land to another, to give, sell, or do therewith at his
pleasure or will; this is Fee-simple

A Devise made to one and to his Heirs males does make an Estate-tail: But if
such words be put in a Deed of Feoffment, it shall be taken for Fee-simple,
because it does not appear of what body the Heirs males shall be begotten.

If Lands be given by Deed to J. S. and to the Heirs males of his body, etc.
who has issue a daughter, who has issue a son, and dies; there the Land shall
return to the Donor, and the son of the Daughter shall nor have it, because he
cannot convey himself by Heirs males, for his mother is a let thereto: But
otherwise it is of such a Devise, for there the son of the daughter shall have
it, rather then the Will shall be void.

If one devise to an Infant in his mothers belly, it is a good Devise; but
otherwise by Feoffment, Grant, or Gift; for in those cases there ought to be
one of ability to take presently, or otherwise it is void. See 14. El. Die. 304.

A Devise made in Fee-simple without express words of Heirs, is good in
Fee-simple.

But if a Devise be made to J. N. he shall have the Land but for term of life;
for those words will carry no greater Estate.

If one will that his son J. shall have his Land after the death of his wife;
here the wife of the Devisor shall have the Land first for term of life. So
likewise if a man devise his goods to his wife, and that after the decease of
his wife, his son and heir shall have the House where the goods are; there the
son shall not have the House during the life of the wife: For it does appear
that his intent was, that his wife should have the House also for her life,
notwithstanding it were not devised to her by express words.

If a Devise be to J. N. and to the Heirs females of his body begotten, after
the Devisee has issue a son and daughter, and dies; here the daughter shall
have the Land, and not the son, and yet he is the most worthy person, and Heir
to his father: but because the Will of the dead is, that the daughter should
have it, Law and Conscience will so also.

And herein the very Heathens were precise, as appears by those Verses of
Octavius Augustus, which Donatus reports he made after Virgil at his death gave
commandment that his Books should be burnt, because they were imperfect, and
yet some persuaded that they should be saved; as indeed they happily were; to
whom he answered thus: Let Faith and Law be kept;
and what last Will
Commands to be done,
we must fulfill.


Devoire.
DEvoire is as much as to say a Duty. It is used in the Statute of 2 R. 2. ca.
3. where it is provided* That all the Western Merchants, being of the Kings
amity, shall pay all manner Customs and Subsidies, and other Devoires of
Caleis. See the Stat. 5 Ejusde^ Regis cap. 2.

Devorce.
DEvorce or Divorce, Divortium, dictum est Diversitate mentium, quia in
diversas parts eunt qui distrahunt Matrimonium or else from the verb Diverto,
which signifies to return back, because after the Devorce between the husband
and wife, he returns her again to her father, or other friends, or to the place
from whence he had her.

And though Devorce was never approved of by the Divine Law, but contrariwise
prohibited, as appears by this precept, Let no man separate that which God has
joined together; yet in all ages and well-governed Commonwealths it has been
used and permitted: As at this day with us there are diverse causes for which
the husband and wife may be devorced, as first causa Praecontractus.

Therefore if a man marry with a woman precontracted, and has issue by her,
this issue in Law and in truth bears the surname of his father: but if after
the husband and wife be devorced for the Precontract, there the issue has lost
his surname, and is become a Bastard, and nullius filius. Cok. lib. 6. fol. 66.

Devorce may be causa Frigiditatis: and therefore if a man be married to a
woman, and after they are devorced causa Frigiditatis, and then the man takes
another wife, and has issue by her; yet this issue is lawful, because that a
man may be habilis and inhabilis diversis temporibus, and by the Devorce causa
Frigiditatis the Marriage was dissolved a vinculo Matrimonii, and by
consequence either of them might marry again. Cok. lib. 5. fol. 98. b.

Also a man may be devorced causa Impubertatis, or Minoris aetatis: and in this
case if two are married infra annos nubiles, and after full age Devorce is had
between them; this dissolves the Marriage, and the woman may arraign an Assise
against the Husband for the Lands or Tenements given with her in
Frank-marriage, 19 lib. Assise, Pla. 2. So Devorce may be had causa
Professionis, causa consanguinitatis, causa Fornicationis, and for many other
causes, too long to be now recited.

It is requisite that in the sentence of Devorce the Cause thereof be showed,
because some Devorce dissolves the Matrimony, that is to say, a vinculo
Matrimonii, bastards the issue, and bars the wife of Dower; and some a mensa
and thoro, the which dissolves not the Matrimony, nor bars the Woman of Dower,
nor bastards the issue.

Devorce is a Judgment spiritual, and therefore, if there be cause, ought to
be reversed in the Spiritual Court. See Cok. lib. 7. Kenns Case.

If a Woman Copiholder of certain Land, durante viduitate sua, according to the
Custom of the Manor, sows the Land, and before the severance of the Corn
takes a husband; the Lord shall have the Emblements, and not the husband: But
if a Lease be made to the husband and wife during the Coverture, and the
husband sows the Land, and afterward they are devorced causa Praecontractus;
the husband shall have the Emblements, and not the Lessor.

Dicker.
DIcker is a word used in the Statute of 1 Jacobi, cap. 22. and it signifies
the quantity of Ten Hides of Leather. And it seems to come from the Greek word
Decas, which signifies Ten.

Diem clausit extremum.
DIem clausit extremum is a Writ that lies where the Kings Tenant that hold in
Chief dies; then this Writ shall be directed to the Escheator, to enquire of
what Estate he was seized, who is next Heir, and his age, and of the certainty
and value of the Land, and of whom it is holden; and the Inquisition shall be
returned into the Chancery, which is commonly called The Office after the death
of that person.

And there is another Writ of Diem clausit extremum awarded out of the
Exchequer, after the death of an Accountant or Debtor of his Majesty, to levy
the Debt of his Heir, Executor, Administrators lands or goods.

Dietus datus.
DIes datus is a Respite given to the Tenant or Defendant before the Court.
Brook Tit. Continuance.

Dieta rationabilis.
DIeta rationabilis is sometimes used for a Reasonable Days journey, as Bract.
l. 3. patt. 2. cap. 16. It has in the Civil Law other significations, which
need not be here mentioned. See Vocabul. utriusque Juris.

Dieu son act.
DIeu son act, these are words oftentimes used in our Law, and it is a Maxim,
That the Act of God shall prejudice no man: And therefore if a House fall down
by Tempest, or other Act of God the lessee for life or years shall not only be
quit in an Action of Waste brought against him, but has by the Law a special
interest to take timber to build the House again, if he will, for his
habitation. Cok. lib. 4. 63. and lib. 11. 82. a.

In like manner, when the Condition of an Obligation consists of two parts in
the disjunctive, and both are possible at the time of the Obligation made, and
afterward one of them becomes impossible by the Act of God; the Obligor is not
bound to perform the other part, for the Condition shall be taken beneficially
for him. Coke lib. 5. 22.

Dignity Ecclesiastical.
Dignity Ecclesiastical is a phrase of speech used in the Statute of 26 Hen.
8. cap. 3. and by the Canonists is defined to be Administration conjoined with
power and Jurisdiction.

Diminution.
IS when the Plaintiff or Defendant in a Writ of Error alleges to the Court,
that part of the Record remains in the Inferior Court not certifyed, and prays
that it be certifyed by Certiorari, Co. Ent. 232. 242. 1 Cr. John versus
Thomas, 2 Cro. 479. 131. Rolls Abridg. 765. 20.

Diocese.
Diocese is the Circuit of the Jurisdiction of every Bishop: for this Realm
has two kinds of Divisions; the one in Shires or Counties, in respect of the
Temporal polity; the other in Diocesses, in respect of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.

Disability.
DIsabilitie is, when a man by any act or thing, by himself or his ancestor
done or committed, or for or by any other cause, is disabled or made incapable
to do, inherit, or take benefit or advantage of a thing, which otherwise he
might have had or done.

There are many things by which a man may be disabled; and those are ordinarily
either by the act of the party, or his Ancestor, or by the act of the Law, or
of God.

Disability by the Act of the Ancestor; as if a man be attainted of Treason or
Felony, by this Attainder his blood is corrupt, and thereby himself and his
children disabled to inherit.

Disability by the Act of the party himself; as if a man makes a Feoffment to
another man that then is sole, upon condition, that he shall infeoff a third
man before M. and before M. or the Feoffment made, the Feoffee takes a wife; he
has by that disabled himself to perform the Condition according to the trust
in him reposed, and therefore the Feoffor may enter and out him, as it is
Littl. sect. 357. So if the Feoffee charges the Land, or enters into a
Statute-Staple or Statute-Merchant; by these acts he has disabled himself, and
therefore the Feoffor may enter as in the former case. So if I bind my self,
that upon Surrender of a Lease I will grant a new Estate to the Lessee, and
afterward I grant over my Reversion: in this case, though I afterward
repurchase, and get the whole Reversion to me again, yet I have forfeited my
Obligation, because I was once disabled to perform it. Co. l. 5 f. 21. Also if
a man be excommunicated, he cannot during that time sue any Action, but shall
be thereby disabled, Coke, l. 8. f. 69. and so in many other cases.

Disability by act of Law is, most properly, when a man by the sole act of the
Law, without any former thing by him done, is disabled; and so is Alien born.
And therefore, if a man born out of the ligeance of our Lord the King will sue
any Action, the Tenant or Defendant may say, that he was born in such a Country
forth of the Kings liegeance, and demand judgment if he shall be answered; for
the Law is our Birthright, to which an Alien is collateral and a stranger, and
therefore disabled to take any benefit thereby.

By the act of God; as not to be of whole memory is a Disability in some cases,
and in others not; for which it seems this difference may be taken: that in all
cases where a man of no whole memory gives or passes any thing or Estate out of
him, this after his death may be disanulled and avoided; but where a man Non
sanae memoriae does a thing whereby nothing passes out of him, there he may in
some special cases be bound: as if he be Lessee for years, rendering Rent, and
the Lessor grants the Reversion; there the Lessee non sanae memoriae cannot
make Attornment, for he that is amens, or without mind, cannot make Attornment,
which is Agreement; and yet in such case if the Lessor ejects him, and makes a
Feoffment, and afterward the Lessee non sanae memoriae reenters, this act of
Re-entry does subject him to the Distress and Action of Waste.

And it is a Maxim in Law, That a man of full age shall never be received to
disable his own person. And this incapacity to disable himself, as to some
persons is personal, and extends only to the party himself; and as to others it
is not personal, but shall bind them also.

There are four manner of Privities: scil. Privies in Blood, as Heir; Privies
in Representation, as Executors or Administrators, Privies in Estate, as Donee
in tail, the Reversion or Remainder in fee, etc. and Privies in Tenure, as the
Lord and Tenant: and two of these may disable the person of the dead, which was
non sanae memoriae, or, etc. and shall avoid his Grants or Feoffments, and two
of them not. For Privies in Blood may show the Disability of the Ancestor, and
Privies in Representation the Infirmity of their Testator or Intestate; but
neither Privy in Estate, nor Privy in Tenure can so do, Co. l. 4. f. 123, 124.
See Lit. sect. 405. and Co. l. 8. fol. 43.

Disalt.
DIsalt signifies as much as to Disable. Litleton cap. Discontinuance.

Disceit.
DIsceit is a Writ, sometime Original, and sometime Judicial. When it is
Original, it lies where any Disceit is done to a man by another, by not
performance of a Bargain or Promise, then he that is in such manner deceived
shall have this Writ.

When it is Judicial, it lies where a Scire facias is sued out of any Record
against a man, and the Sheriff returns that he is warned, where he was not; or
where a Praecipe quod reddat, of a Plea or Lands. or a Quare Impedit, of the
Presenting to a Church, is sued against one, and the Sheriff returns that the
Defendant is summoned, where he was not; by which Disceit and false Return the
Demandant or Plaintiff recovers: then the party grieved shall have this Writ
against him that recovered, and against the Summoners, and against the Sheriff;
and the Writ shall be directed to the Coroners of the same County, if he
continue Sheriff that made the Return.

So if a man makes an Attorney in an Action real brought against him, and
afterward it is agreed by Disceit between the Demandant and the said Attorney,
that the said Attorney shall make Default, who does so accordingly, whereby the
Tenant loses his Land; then the same Tenant that loses the Land may have a Writ
of Disceit against the Attorney.

Also if a man brings an action of Trespass against two others, and the
Plaintiff and an Attorney by Disceit, cause two Strangers, not parties to the
Writ, to come into Court, and say that they are the same two Defendants named
in the Writ, and that they appoint the same man to be their Attorney in that
Suit, whereupon the same Attorney, as Attorney to the Defendants named in the
Writ, pleads to the Issue, and after suffers the Enquest to pass by his
Default, by which means the Plaintiff recovers: In this case those that are
indeed Defendants may have a Writ of Desceit against the same Attorney, and
shall recover their damages. Fitzh. Not. Brev. 96.

And as the Law punishes her Officers, as Sergeants, Pleaders, Philizers,
Exigenters, Attorneys, and others, so she renounces and condemns all acts of
greatest importance, if they be intermixed with Disceit and falsehood. As if a
Fine be levied by Disceit, and five years past; by the Statute of 4 H. 7. c.
24. all persons and their rights shall be barred thereby: yet for that it was
by Disceit, th ^ Fine shall be avoided, as is a ^^ dged in Cok. lib. 3. fol.
77. (...) the same manner, if one ^^ cover Land by Disceit, the ^^^ overy for
this shall be fru ^^^ ated and made void, 3 Ed. 3. 2 ^. So if a woman, that
has good cause to be endowed, will by Disceit have the Tenant to be disseised,
and after recovers her Dower by a Writ of Dower against the Disseisor; yet she
shall be adjudged in possession against the Disseis ^ e but as a Disseisoresse,
in respect of the Disceit. Cok. lib. 5. fol. 35.

There is another manner of Writ of Disceit, where Land which is ancient
demesne is impleaded by the Kings Writ at Westminster* Then the Lord of the Manor may
have this Writ, and reverse all the former proceedings, and Judgment, as it
appears Rast. Ent. 100, 221. 2 R. 3. 1, and 11 H. 4. 36.

Descent.
Descent or Descent is in two sorts, either lineal or collateral. Lineal
Descent is, when a Descent is conveyed in the same Live of the whole blood; as
grandfather, father, son, sons son, and so downward.

Collateral Descent is out in another branch drawn from above of the whole
blood, as grandfathers brother, fathers brother, and so downward.

Note, that if one die seized in fee or in tail of Land in which another has
right to enter, and that discends to his Heir, such Descent shall take away the
Entry of him who has right to enter, for that the Heir has it by Descent from
his father, and so by act of the Law; and he that has right cannot put him out
by entering upon him, but is put to sue his Writ, to demand the Land according
to the nature of his Title. See hereof in Littl. lib. 3. cap. 6. and Stat. 32.
H. 8. cap. 33.

Disclaimer.
DIsclaimer is, where the Lord distrains his Tenant, and he sues a Replevin,
and the Lord avows the taking, by reason he holds of him; if the Tenant say,
that he disclaims to hold of him, this is called a Disclaimer; and if the Lord
thereupon bring in a Writ of Right sur Disclaimer, and it be found against the
Tenant, he shall lose his Land. Also if one brings a Praecipe against two
others for the Land, and the Tenant disclaims, and says that he is not thereof
Tenant, nor claims any thing therein; then the other shall have the whole Land:
but if the Praecipe be brought against one alone, and he disclaims, as
aforesaid, the Writ shall abate; yet the Demandant may enter in the Land, and
hold it in his rightful estate, though his Entry was not lawful.

And after the Tenant in an Action brought against him disclaims, he shall not
have a Writ of Error against his own Disclaimer, because by it he has barred
himself of his right to the Land; for the words of the Disclaimer are, He has
nothing neither claims he to have in the Land, neither at the day of the
bringing of the Original Writ aforesaid, etc. had or claimed, but any thing in
the same Land to have he disavows and disclaims: and against this he shall not
have Restitution by a Writ of Error. See Cok. lib. 8. fol. 62.

So if a Lord, in case where he may, disclaims his Seigniory in Court of
Record, his Seigniory by this is extinct, and the Tenant shall hold of the Lord
next above him that so disclaimed. Lit. sect. 146.

If Lands be given to the husband and wife in tail or in fee, and the husband
dies, the wife cannot divest the Freehold cut of her by any verbal Waver or
Disclaimer in the Country: as if before any Entry made by her she says, that
she altogether waves and disclaims the said Estate, and will never take nor
accept thereof; yet the Freehold remains in her, and she may enter when she
pleases. So a Charter of Feoffment was made to four, and Seisin was delivered
to three in the name of all, and after the Seisin was delivered, the fourth
coming sees the Deed, and says by word that he will have nothing of the Land,
nor agree to the Deed, but disclaims: and it was adjudged, that this Disclaimer
by word in the Country shall not divest the Freehold out of him. Cok. lib. 3.
fol. 26.

Discontinuance.
DIscontinuance is, when a man alienates to another Lands or Tenements, and
dies, and another has right to the same Lands, and may not enter into them
because of this Alienation: as if an Abbot alien the Lands of his House to
another in fee, fee-tail, or sor life, or if a man alien the Lands that he has
in right of his wife, or if Tenant in tail makes, of the Lands given to him and
the Heirs of his body, any Feoffment, Gift in tail, or Lease for life, not
warranted by the Statute 32 Hen. 8. by Fine or Livery of seisin; then such
Alienations are called Discontinuances, for such Estates pass away by Livery
and seisin: In these cases the Successors of the Abbot, or the woman after the
death of her husband, or the issue in tail after the death of the Tenant in
tail, and they that have any Remainder or Reversion after the end of the
Estate-tail, may not enter, but every of them is put to his Action.

And as there is Discontinuance of Possession, as is said before; so also is
there Discontinuance of Process or Plea: and this is when the instant is lost,
and may not be regained, but by a new Writ to begin the Suit afresh; for to be
discontinued and to be put without day is all one, and nothing else but finally
to be dismissed the Court for that time. West part. 2. tit. Fines, sect. 115.
So Crompton, in his Jurisdictions, fol. 131. uses it in these words; If a
Justice-seat be discontinued by the not coming of the Justices, the King may
renew it by his Writ.

And if the Justices of any Court do not meet at the day and place appointed,
then the Cause shall be discontinued unto another day; as in Cok. lib. 1 fol.
38. So if a man has an Action in the Court of the Marshalsea, and the King
removes forth of the Vierge, the Pleas shall be discontinued, Cok. lib. 10.
fol. 73.

See more hereof in Litt. lib. 3. cap. 11. and 32 H. 8. cap. 28. which takes
away Discontinuances by the husband seized in right of his wife.

Disgrading.
DIsgrading, or Degrading, is when a man having taken upon him a Dignity
temporal or spiritual, is afterward thereof deprived, be he Knight, Clerk, or
other. Whereof if a Clerk be delivered to his Ordinary, and cannot clear
himself of the Offense whereof he is convicted by the Jury, he shall be
disgraded for it; which is nothing else but the Deprivation of him from those
Orders he has taken upon him, as Priesthood, Deaconship, or otherwise. Stamf.
Pl. Cor. fol. 130, 138.

In like manner there is Disgrading of a Knight, as is aforesaid. See Stow
Annal. page 685. And it is worthy the observation, that by the Canon Law there
are two kinds of Disgradings; the one summary, by word only, and the other
solemn, by Devesting the party disgraded from those Ornaments and Rites which
are the Ensigns of his Order or Degree. See 4 E. 4. 19, 20.

Tithes.
TIthes are the Tenth parts of any thing, but properly of those things that
increase, which for the most part belong to Ministers of the Church for their
maintenance; and they are of three sorts, to wit, Predial, Personal, and mixed.
Predial Tithes are Tithes that are paid of things that come of the Ground
only; as Corn, Hay, Fruits of trees, and such like.

Personal Tithes are Tithes paid of such profits as come by the labor and
industry of a man's person; as by Buying and Seiling, gains of Merchandise, and
of Handycrafts men, Laborers, and such as work for hire, as Carpenters,
Masons, and such like.

Mixed Tithes are Tithes of Calves, Lambs, Pigs, and such like, that increase
partly of the Ground they are fed upon, and partly of the keeping, industry and
diligence of the Owner.

Disparagement.
DIsparagement is a Shame, Disgrace, or Villainy done by the Guardian in
Chivalrie to his Ward within age, in point of his Marriage.

As when the Guardian marries his Ward within age of fourteen years, and within
such time as he cannot consent to Marriage, to a Bondwoman; or to the Daughter
of one that dwells in a Borough, (which is to be understood such whose fathers
profess Handicrafts, and those baser Arts of buying and selling to get their
living) or to one that is lame, or deformed, or has some horrible Disease, as
the Leprosy, French Pox, Falling Sickness, or such like; or marries him to a
woman that is past Childbearing, and diverse such other; then, upon complaint
made by the friends of such Heir, the Lord or Guardian shall lose the Wardship,
and the profits during the Nonage of the Heir, for the Disparagement done him.
See Littl. lib. 2. cap. 4.

Disseisin.
DIsseisin is, when a men enters into any Lands or Tenements where his Entry is
not lawful, and puts him out that has the Freehold.

Disseisin upon Disseisin.
DIsseisin upon Disseisin is, when the Disseisor is disseised by another.

Disseisor and Disseisee.
DIsseisor is he who puts a man out of his Land without order of Law.

But the King cannot be said to be a Disseisor; and with this is a note in 1 E.
5 f. 8. that it was held, the King could not be termed one that did wrong for
if one will disseise another to the use of the King, where the King has no
right, the King cannot be said a Disseisor.

Disseisee is he that is put out of his Land; and if such Disseisee levy a Fine
of the Land whereof he is disseised to a stranger, the Disseisor shall keep the
Land for ever, for the Disseisee against his own Fine cannot claim, and the
Conusee cannot enter, for the right which the Disseisee had was extinct by the
Fine, whereof the Disseisor shall take advantage: and so was the opinion, Cok.
lib 2. fol. 56.

Distress.
DIstress is the thing taken and distrained upon any Land for Rent behind, or
other duty, or for hurt done, although the property of the thing belongs to a
stranger: but if they are Beasts that belong to a stranger, it behooves that
they were levant and couchant upon the same Ground, that is to say, that the
Beasts have been upon the ground a certain space, that they have themselves
well rested there, or else they are not distrainable for Rent or Service.

If one distrain for Rent or other thing without lawful cause, then the party
grieved shall have a Replevin, and upon Surety found to pursue his Action, shall
have the Distress re-delivered. But there are diverse things that are not
distrainable; viz. another man's Gown in the house of a Tailor, or Cloth in the
house of a Fuller, Sheerman, or Weaver, they being common Artificers, and the
common presumption is, that such things belong not to the Artificers, but to
other persons who put them there to be wrought.

Victual is not distrainable, nor Corn in sheaves, unless they are in a Cart;
because a Distress ought to be always of such things whereof the Sheriff may
make Replevin, and deliver again in as good case as they were at the taking.

A man may distrain for Homage of his Tenant, for Fealty and Escuage, and other
Services and for Fines and Amerciaments which are assessed in a Leet, but not
in a Court Baron; and for Dammage-feasant, that is, when he finds the Beasts or
goods of any other doing hurt, or incumbring his Ground. But a man may not
distrain for any Rent, or thing due for any Land, but upon the same Land that
is charged therewith. And in case where I come to distrain, and the other,
seeing my purpose, cases the beasts, or bears the th ^ ng out, to the intent
that I shall not take it for a Distress upon the Ground; then I may well
pursue; and if I take it presently in the Highway, or in another ground, the
taking is lawful as well there as upon the Land charged, to whomsoever the
property of the goods belongs.

Also for Fines and Amerciaments assessed in a Leet, one may always take the
goods of him that is so amerced, in whose ground soever they be within the
Jurisdiction of the Court, as it is said.

Also when one ha ^ h taken a Distress, it behooves him to bring it to the
common Pound, or else he may keep it in an open place, so that he give notice
to the party, that he (if the Distress be a quick beast) may give it food; and
then if the beast die for want of food, he that was distrained shall be at the
loss, and the other may distrain again for the same Rent or duty: But if he
carry the Distress to an Hold, or out of the County, that the Sheriff may not
make deliverance upon the Replevin; then the party (upon Return of the Sheriff)
shall have a Writ of Withernam directed to the Sheriff, what he take as many
beasts or as much goods of the other into his keeping, till deliverance be made
of the first Distress. And also if they be in a Fortlet or Castle, the Sheriff
may take with him the Power of the County, and beat down the Castle, as appears
by the Statute of West. 1. c. 17. Therefore see the Statute.

District.
DIstrict is sometimes used for the Circuit or Territory within which a man may
be compelled to appear, Brit. c. 120. and so also is Districtio in the Reg
orig. fol. 6. v. Distress in the former signification is divided first into
finite and infinite. Finite is that which is limited by Law, how often it shall
be made, to bring the party to trial of the Action, as once or twice, Old. Not.
Brev. f. 43. Distress infinite is without limitation until the party comes;
as against a Jury that refuses to appear upon Certificate of Assise, the
Process is a Venire facias, Habeas corpora, and distress infinite. Old. nar.
Brev. f. 113.

Then it is divided into the grand Distress, as Anno 52 H. 3. c. 7. which
Fitzh. calls in Latin Magnam Districtionem, Not. Brev. 126. a. and an ordinary
distress. A grand Distress is that which is made of all the goods and
chattels which the party had within the County, Brit. c. 6. f. 52. But see
whether it be not sometimes all one with Distress infinite, idem fol. 80. with
whom also the Statute of Marlbridge seems to agree, Anno 52 H. 3. c. 7. 9, and
12. See the Old. Not. Brev. 71. b.

Distringas.
DIstringas is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, or any other Officer, commanding
him to distrain for a Debt to the King, etc. or for his appearing at a day. See
the great diversity of this Writ in the Table of the Reg. judic verbo
Distringas.

Also there is a Writ to distrein Jurors to try an issue in a Suit at Common
Law. And also another Writ to distrein the adjacent Villages to make good
Hedges and fences thrown down in the night by unknown men. Of which see 1 Cro.
Rep. 204. and int' Reg. and Inhabit' de Epworth.

Dividend.
DIvidend is a word used in the Statute of Rutland, Anno 10 E. 1. where it
seems to signify one part of an Indenture. See Anno 28 ejusdem, Stat. 3. c. 2.

Divorce.
DIvorce. See Devorce.

Docket.
DOcket is a Little piece of Payer or Parchment written, that contains in it
the effect of a Greater Writing. See the Statute 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 6. M.
West. part 2. tit. Fines, sect. 106. calls it Dogget.

Dog-draw.
DOg-draw is an apparent Deprehension of an offender against Venison in the
Forest. There are four kinds of them observed by Manwood, part 2. c. 18. number.
9. of his Forest Laws, that is, Dog-draw, Stable stand, Back-bear, and
Bloudy-hand, Dogdraw is, when one is found drawing after a Deer by the sent of
a Hound led in his hand.

Dogger.
DOgger is a kind of Ship, Anno 31 E. 3. Stat. 3. c. 1. Dogger-fish, ib. c. 2
seems to be Fish brought in those Ships to Blackney Haven, etc. Doggermen, Anno
2 H. 8. c. 4.

Dole-fish.
DOlefish seems to be those Fishes which the Fishermen yearly employed in the
North seas do of custom receive for their allowance. See the Statute Anno 35
H. 8. c. 7.

Dominus litis.
IS the Advocate in the Civil Law, who after the death of his Client,
prosecutes a Suit to sentence for the Executors use.

Domo reparan ^^
DOmo reparanda is a Vr. that lies for one against his neighbor, by the fall
of whose House he fears some hurt will come to his own. Reg. orig. fol. 123.

Doom.
DOom (from the Saxon Dom) signifies Judgment; a word much used in References
to Arbitrators.

Doomsday.
Doomsday is a Book that was written in the time of S. Edward the Confessor,
as the Author of Old Not. Brev. says, fol. 15. and before in the title of
Ancient demesne, containing in it not only all the Lands through England, but
also all the names of those in whose hands they were at that time when the Book
was made. Lambert proves that this Book was made in the time of William the
Conqueror, with whom Cambden in his Britan. page 94. agrees, proving it out of
Ingulphus that flourished the same time, who touching the contents thereof has
these words: It describes the whole Land; neither was there one Hide in all
England whose Value and Possessour was unknown, nor any Pool or place not
described in the Kings Roll, and the Rent, profits, Possession it self and
Possessor not made known to the King, according to the fidelity of the Taxers,
who described the same Country wherein they were elected That Roll is called
Rotulus Wint. and by the English, for its generality, in that it contains all
the Tenements contained throughout the Land, it is surnamed Doomsday, And this
Book is sometimes called Liber Judicatorius, because in it is contained a
diligent Description of the Kingdom, and it expresses the value of all the
ground thereof, as well in the time of King Edward, as in the time of King
William, under whom it was compiled.

Doomsman.
SEem to be Suitors in a Court of a Manor in Ancient demesne, who are Judges
there.

Donative
DOnative is a Benefice merely given and collated by the Patron to a man,
without either Presentation to, or Institution by the Ordinary, or Induction by
his commandment, F. N. B. 35. e. See the Statute of 8. R. 2. c. 4. Peter
Gregory de Beneficiis, c. 11. number. 1. has these words: But if Chapels founded
by Laymen were not approved of the Diocesan, and, as they term it,
spiritualized, they are not accounted Benefices, neither can they be conferred
by the Bishop, but remain to the pious disposition of the Founders. Wherefore
the founders and their Heirs may give such Chapels, if they will, without the
Bishop.

M. Gwyn, in the Preface to his Readings, says, That the King might of ancient
time found a free Chapel, and exempt it from the Jurisdiction of the Diocesan:
So also he may by his Letters Patents give license to a common person to found
such a Chapel, and to ordain that it shall be Donative, and not presentable,
and that the Chaplain shall be deprivable by the Founder or his heir, and not
by the Bishop: and this seems to be the original of Donatives in England.
Fitzherbert says, fol. 33. c. that there are some Chauntries which a man may
give by his Letters Patents.

And all Bishoprics were of the Foundation of the Kings of England, and
therefore in the ancient time they were Donative, and given by the Kings; yet
now the Bishoprics are become, by the Grants of the Kings, eligible by their
Chapter, Coke, l. 3. f. 76.

Donor and Donee.
DOnor is he who gives Lands or Tenements to another in tail; and he to whom
the same is given is called Donee.

Dorture.
DOrture is a common Room, place, or Chamber, where all the Religious of one
Covent slept, and lay all night. Anno 25 H. 8. cap. 11.

Double Plea.
DOuble Plea is, where the Defendant or Tenant in any Action pleads a Plea in
which two matters are comprehended, and each one by it self is a sufficient Bar
or Answer to the Action, then such double Plea shall not be admitted for a
Plea, except one depend upon another; and in such case if he may not have the
last Plea without the first, then such a double Plea shall be well received.

Double Quarrel.
DOuble Quarrel is a Complaint made by any Clerk or other to the Archbishop of
the Province against any inferior Ordinary, for Delaying Justice in any Cause
Ecclesiastical, as to give sentence, or to institute a Clerk presented, or such
like: the effect of which is, That the Archbishop, taking knowledge of such
Delay, directs his Letters under his authentical Seal to all and singular
Clerks of his Province, thereby commanding and giving authority to them and
every of them, to admonish the said Ordinary within nine days to do the Justice
required, or otherwise to cite him to appear before him or his Official at a
day in the said Letters prefixed, and there to allege the cause of his Delay;
and lastly, to intimate to the said Ordinary, that if he performs not the thing
enjoined nor appears at the day assigned, he himself without other Delay will
proceed to perform the Justice required. And it seems to be called a Double
Quarrel, because it is most commonly made against the Judge, and him at whose
request Justice is delayed.

Dower.
DOwer, by the Law of the Realm, is a Portion which a Widow has of the Lands
of her husband, which by the Common Law is the third part; but by her husbands
assignment by his fathers assent at the Church-door, she may have so much of
his fathers Land as is so assigned, and so of the husbands assignment of part
of his own Land. And Dower, by the Custom of some places, is to have half the
husbands Land. Dower is also a Writ that lies where a man is sole seized,
during the Coverture between him and his wife, of Lands or Tenements in
Fee-simple or Feetail, where by possibility the issue between them may inherit;
if such a man die, his wife shall recover the third part of all the Lands
whereof the husband was sole seized any time during the Coverture, by a Writ of
Dower unde nihil habet, though he died not seized, and though he made
Alienation thereof in his life.

But if a man, before the Statute of Uses, 27 H. 8. had Lands in which another
man or other men were seized to his use always during the Coverture, and he to
whose use they were seized died before the said Statute, his wife should not be
endowed.

And if before the said Statute two men were seized of Lands to the use of one
of them, and he to whose use, etc. died before the said Statute, his wife
should not be endowed. Also if a woman bring a Writ of Dower, she should
recover Damages for the profit run after the death of her husband, if he died
seized thereof: but if any Alienation or Estate were made during the Coverture,
so that the husband died not seized; then though she should recover the Land,
yet no Damages.

Also there is another Writ of Dower called a Writ of Right of Dower, which
lies where a woman has recovered part of her Dower in one Town, and the other
part she is to recover. But in diverse cases a woman shall not have Dower, as if
the husband commit Treason, for which he is attainted, then his wife shall have
no Dower.

And if she elope from her husband with another man in Adultery, and be not
reconciled to him of her own will without coercion of the Church, she shall not
be endowed. See Lit. l. 1. cap. 4.

And note, where in the Civil Law Dower is that which the husband has with his
wife in Marriage, to maintain the married estate; by the Laws of this Realm the
word ( Dower) signifies such Portion as the wife after her husbands death shall
have to live on.

Dozeine.
DOzeine. See Deciners.

Dry Exchange.
Dry Exchange (Anno 3 H. 7. cap. 5.) Seems to be a subtle term, invented to
disguise Usury, in which something is pretended to pass on both sides, whereas
in truth nothing passes on the one side.

Drift of the Forest.
DRift of the Forest is nothing else but an exact view or Examination taken
once, twice, or oftener in a year, as occasion shall require, what Beasts there
are in the Forest, to the end that the Common in the Forest be not
overcharged, that the Beasts of Foreiners that have no Common there be not
permitted, and that Beasts not commonable may be put out. See for this the
Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 35. and Manwoods Forest Laws, cap. 15.

Right.
RIght is, where one has a thing that was taken from another wrongfully, as by
Disseisin, Discontinuance, or such like; the Challenge or Claim of him that
ought to have it is called Right.

If a woman release all her Right to him in Reversion, her Dower is extinct;
for when the Right, which is the foundation and principal, is released, by
Consequence the Action, which is but the means to recover, is also released. By
Release of all Title to the Land all his Right is extinct.

So when a man has Title either by Condition, or by Alienation in Mortmain,
the Release of all his Right shall extinguish this Title, Cok. lib. 8. fol.
151, 153.

Right of Entry.
RIght of Entry is, when one seized of Land in fee is thereof disseised; now
the Disseisee has Right to enter into the Land, and may so do when he will, or
else may have a Writ of Right against the Disseisor.

Duces tecum.
DUces tecum is a Writ out of the Chancery, commanding a man to appear there,
and to bring with him some piece of Evidence, or other thing that the Court
would have a sight of.

Dum fuit infra Aetatem.
DUM fuit infra aetatem is a Writ that lies where an Infant aliens his Land in
Fee-simple, or for term of life; when he comes to his full age he shall have
this Writ, or he may enter if he will, but he must be of full age the day of
his Writ brought. Also if an Infant alien his Land, and die, his issue at his
full age shall have this Writ, or he may enter; but the issue shall not have
this Writ within his age.

Dum non fuit compos mentis.
DUM non fuit compos mentis is a Writ that lies when a man that is out of his
wit, viz. Mad or Lunatic, aliens his Land in Fee-simple, and dies; then his
Heir after his decease shall have this Writ, but he himself shall not have it,
for that a man shall not be received to disable himself. Also this Writ may be
made in the Per, Cui, and Post

Duplicat.
DUplicat is a Second Letters Patents granted by the Lord Chancellor, in case
where he has granted the same before; and therefore they are held void by
Crompton in his Jur. of Courts, fol. 215.

Duresse.
DUresse is, where one is kept in Prison, or restrained from his Liberty,
contrary to the order of Law, or threatened to be killed, maimed, or greatly
beaten: and if such person so in Prison, or in fear of such Threatenings, make
any Specialty or Obligation by reason of such Imprisonment, such a Deed is void
in Law; and in an Action brought upon such a Specialty, he may say, it was made
by Duresse of Imprisonment. But if a man be arrested upon an Action at the Suit
of another, though the cause of Action be not good nor true, if he make an
Obligation to a Stranger being in prison by such Arrest, yet it shall not be
said by Duresse. But if he make an Obligation to him at whose Suit he was
arrested, to be discharged of such Imprisenment, then it shall be said Duresse.

Duchy.
IS a Court in the Duchy Chamber of Lancaster at West. before the Chancellor
del Duchy de Lanc^ for matters concerning the lands and Franchises of the Duchy
and their proceedings are by English bill, as in Chancery, Co. 4. Inst. 204.

E.
Earlderman.
EAlderman among the Saxons was as much as Earl among the Danes Camb. Brit.
107. And at this day we call them Aldermen, who are Associates to the chief
Officer in the Common Council of the Town, 34 H. 8. c. 13. And in some places
the chief Officer himself is called Alderman.

Earl.
Earl. See Countee.

Easement.
EAsement is a Privilege that one Neighbor has of another, by Writing or
Prescription, without profit; as a Way or a Sink through his Land, or such
like, Kitch. f. 105.

Egiptians.
EGiptians, commonly called Gypsies, are counterfeit Rogues, Welsh or English,
that disguise themselves in speech and apparel, and wander up and down the
Country, pretending to have skill in telling Fortunes, and to deceive the
common people, but live chiefly by filching and stealing; and therefore the
Statutes of 1 and 2 Mar. c. 4. and 5 Eliz. c. 20. were made to punish such as
Felons, if they departed not the Realm, or continued so a mouth.

Ejectione firmae.
EJectione Firmae. Look for that in the Title Quare ejecit infra terminum.

Ejectment de Guard.
Ejectment de Guard. See that in the Title Gards.

Eigne.
EIgne is a French word, and signifies the Eldest or Firstborn. See Enitia pars.

Einecia
EInecia signifies Eldership, Stat. of Ireland, Anno 14 H. 3. See Enitia pars.

Eire Justices.
EIre Justices, or Itinerant, as we call them, were Justices that used to ride
from place to place throughout the Realm, to administer Justice.

And these Justices had authority in ancient times to grant Land that was
seized for the King for Alienation without license; for then Justices in Eire
might have granted such Land in fee, rendering Rent, as Justices of the Forest
(who in effect, as to this purpose, are Justices in Eire) at this day may of
Lands iuclosed within a Forest, without the Kings license, Coke, l. 2. fol. 80.

Election.
ELection is, when a man is left to his own Free will, to take or do one thing
or another, which he pleases: As if A covenants to pay B a pound of Pepper or
Saffron before Whitsontide, it is at the Election of A at all times before
Whitsontide, which of them he will pay; but if he pays it not before the said
Feast, then afterward it is at the Election of B of have his Action for which
he pleases. Dyer, f. 18. pl. 104.

So if a man gives to another his Horse or Cow, the Donee may take the one or
the other at his Election: But if it be that he will give, in the future tense,
then the Donee cannot take the one nor other, for then the Election is in the
Donor. 21 H. 7. 19.

Also if a Justice of Peace direct his Warrant to a Constable, to bring the
party apprehended before him or another Justice, it is in the Election of the
Constable to go to what Justice he pleases, Coke lib. 5. fol. 59. And so in
many other cases.

Elegit.
TO hold by Elegit is, where a man has recovered Debt or Damage by a Writ
against another by confession, or in other manner, he shall have within the
year against him a Writ judicial, called Elegit, to have execution of the half
of all his Lands and Chattels, (except Oxen and Beasts of the plow) till the
Debt and Damages be wholly levied and paid him; and during this term he is
Tenant by Elegit.

If he be put out within the term, he shall have Assise of Novel Disseisin, and
after a Redisselsin, if need be; and this is given by the Statute of Was ^ m.
2. c. 18.

And by the equity of the said Statute, he that has this Estate, if he be put
out, shall have Assise and Redisseisin, if need be. And also if he make his
Executors, and die, and his Executors enter, and after are put out, they shall
have such Action as he himself. And if he be put out, and after make his
Executors, and die, his Executors may enter; and, if they be stopped of their
Entry, they shall have a Writ of Trespass upon their Case.

If he do Waste in all the Land, or parcel, the other shall have against him
immediately a Writ judicial out of the first Record, called Venire facias ad
computandum, by which it shall be enquired if he have levied all the money, or
parcel; and if he have not levied the money, then it shall be enquired to how
much the Waste amounts; and if the Waste amount but to parcel, then as much of
the money as the Waste amounts unto shall be abridged of the aforesaid money
which was to be levied. But if he have done more Waste then the aforesaid sum
of money which was to be levied amounts to, the other shall be discharged
forthwith of all the said money, and shall recover the Land. And for the
superfluity of the Waste made above the said sum, he shall recover his
damages single. The same Law is of his Executors, and of him that has his
Estate.

Or if the Debtor be satisfied by digging Coals, Load, Tyn, or oeher casual
profits.

See the Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 5. If all the Lands extended be evicted from the
Debtor by a better title he may take a new Execution, Co. 4. Rep. 66.

If he alien in fee, for term of life, or in tail, all or parcel of the Land
which he holds by Elegit, if the Alienation be made within the term or after,
he who has right shall have against him an Assise of Novel Disseisin. And they
both must be put in the Assise, the Alienor and the Alience: and though the
Alienor d ^ e presently, yet he who has right shall have Assise against the
Alienee alone, as if the Alienee had been a plain Tenant for term of years. And
that is by the equity of the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 25. for that he has but
a Chattel in effect. And the same Law is of his Executors, and of him who has
his Estate, as is aforesaid.

In Elegit, if the Sherif return that the party has nothing the day of the
Recognizance made, but that he purchased Lands after the time, then the
Plaintiff shall have a new Writ to have Execution thereof. The same Law is of a
Statute-Merchant.

After a Fieri facias a man may have the Elegit, but not contrariwise; for that
the Elegit is of a higher nature then the Fieri facias.

If a man recover by a Writ of Debt, and sue a Fieri facias, and the Sheriff
return that the Defendant has nothing whereof he may satisfy the Debt to the
party; then the Plaintiff shall have Elegit, or Capias sicut alias, and a
Pluries. And if the Sheriff return at the Caplas, Mitto vobis corpus, and he
have nothing whereof he may make satisfaction to the party, he shall be sent to
the prison of the Fleet, and there abide until he have made Agreement with the
party: and if the Sheriff return Non est inventus, then there shall go forth an
Exigent against him.

Note well, That in a Writ of Debt brought against a Parson, who has nothing
of Lay-Fee, and the Sheriff returns that he may not be summoned; then shall the
Plaintiff sue a Writ to the Bishop, to cause his Clerk to come, and the Bishop
shall make him come by Sequestration of the Church.

And if a man bring a Writ of Debt, and recover, and make his Executors, and
die; they shall not have Execution, notwithstanding it be within the year, be a
Fieri facias.

There is another sort of Elegit upon adjudging execution against Terr-tenants,
which Elegits recite the lands against which Execution is adjudged, and
commands the Sheriff to deliver to the Creditor a moyty of those Lands, and
nothing is therein mentioned of any Goods or Chattels as in the other Elegits,

Elopement.
ELopement is, when a married woman departs from her husband, and dwells with
an Adulterer, for which, without voluntary reconcilement to her husband, she
shall lose her Dower, by the Statute of West. 2. cap. 34. Whereupon is this old
Verse, The woman that her husband leaves, And with Adult'ry is defiled.
Her Dower she shall want, unless She first to him be reconciled.


Embleaments.
EMbleaments are the Profits of the Land which have been sowed; and in some
cases he who sowed them shall have them, and in some not: as if Tenant for life
sow the Land, and afterward die, the Executors of the Tenant for life shall
have the Embleaments, and not he in Reversion.

But if Tenant for years sow the Land, and before that he has reaped his term
expires; there the Lessor or he in Reversion shall have the Embleaments. If one
desseises me, and cuts the Embleaments growing upon the Land, and afterward I
re-enter; I shall have an Action of Trespass against him for the Embleaments:
but if my Disseisor makes a Feoffment in fee, or leases the Land whereof he
disseised me, and the Feoffee or Lessee takes the Embleaments, and after I
re-enter; I shall not have Trespass Vi and armis against them who come in by
Title, but against my Disseisor. Cok. lib. 11. f. 51.

If a woman Copiholder, during her Widowhood, according to the Custom of the
Manor, sows the Land, and before severance of the Embleaments she takes a
husband; the Lord shall have the Embleaments. So if a woman seized of Land
during her Widowhood makes a Lease for years, and the Lessee sows the Land, and
the woman takes a husband; there the Lessee shall not have the Embleaments,
although his Estate be determined by the act of a stranger.

And although it is commonly held in our Books, That if a man leases Lands at
will, and after the Lessee sows the Land, and then the Will is determined, that
the Lessee shall have the Embleaments; yet if the Lessee himself determines the
Will before the severance of the Corn. he shall not have the Embleaments. See
Cok. lib. 5. fol. 116.

Embrasour, or Embraceour.
EMbrasour, or Embraceour, is he that, when a matter is in trial between party
and party, comes to the Bars with one of the parties (having received some
reward so to do) and speaks in the case, or privily labors the Jury, or stands
there to survey or overlook them, thereby to put them in fear and doubt of the
matter. But persons learned in the Law may speak in the case for their clients.

Emparlance.
EMparlance is, when a man being to answer to a Suit or Action, desires some
time of Respite, to advise himself the better what he shall answer: and it is
nothing else but a Continuance of the Cause until a fatther day.

And though the Plaintiff (in the Kings Bench) after the Bar pleaded, has
time to reply two or three Terms after; yet no mention shall be made in the
Roll of any Emparlance or Continuance, but the Entry shall be general, and so
intended to be the same Term. But it is otherwise with a Bar, for it contains
the Emparlance or Continuance, and is in this manner: And now at this day, that
is, Friday, etc in the same Term* until which day the aforesaid A had license
to imparle, etc.

But there is no such Entry upon any Replication or Rejoinder. See Coke lib. 5.
fol. 75.

Brit. cap. 53. uses this word for the Conference of a Jury upon the business
to them committed. There is a special Imparlance also for a Defendant salvis
sibi omnibus and omnimodis exceptionibus ad breve and narrationem, or ad billam
which is of use where the Defendant is to plead some matters which cannot be
pleaded after a general imparlance.

Encheson.
ENcheson is a French word much used in our Law Books, as in the Statute of 50
E. 3. cap. 3 and it signifies as much as the Occasion, cause, or reason for
which any thing is done. So it is used by Stamford, lib. 1. cap. 12. in his
description of a Deodand.

Encrochment.
ENcrochment comes from the French word Acrocher, that is, to Pull or draw to:
And it signifies an Unlawful gaining upon the right or possession of another.
And so a Rent is said to be encroched, when the Lord by Distress or otherwise
compells the Tenant to pay more Rent then he ought, or then he need. See
Bucknal's Case, 9 Rep' fol. 33. So when a man sees his Hedge or his Wall too
far into the land or ground of his neighbor that lies next him, he is said to
incroach upon him.

Enditement, or Indictment.
INdictment comes of the French Enditer, that is, to set a man out as he is.
And it is a Bill or Declaration in form of Law, exhibited by way of Accusation
against one for some offense either criminal or penal, and preferred to Jurors,
and by their Verdict found and presented to be true before a Judge or Officer
that has power to punish or certify the Offense.

Endowment.
ENdowment (Dotatio) signifies properly the Giving or assuring of Dower to a
woman. But it is sometimes by a Metaphor used for the Setting out or severing
of a sufficient part or portion to a Vicar for his perpetual maintenance, when
the Benefice is appropriated. And so it is used in the Statutes of 15 R. 2.
cap. 6. and 4 H. 4. cap. 12.

Endowment de la pluis. belle part.
ENdowment de la, etc. is, when a man dies seeised of some Lands held in
Knights-service and others in Soccage, the Widow is sped of her Dower rather in
the Soccage-Lands, as the fairest part. Of this see Littl. lib. 1. cap. 5.

Enfranchisement.
ENfranchisement is, when a man is incorporated into any Society or Body
politic. So if an Alien born be made Denizon of England, he is said to be
enfranchised; and he that is made a Citizen of London, or other Town Corporate;
because he is made partaker of those Liberties which belong to the Corporation
whereinto he is enfranchised.

And when a man is enfranchised into a City or Borough, he has a Freehold in
his Freedom for his life, and with others in their politic capacity, has
Inheritance in the Land of the said Corporation: wherefore the thing which
shall be the cause of his Dis-infranchisement ought to be an Act or Deed, and
not only an Endeavoring or enterprising, whereof he may repent before it be
put in execution. And what shall be sufficient cause to dis-infranchise a
Freeman, and what not, see Cok. lib. 11. in Bagg's Case, fol. 98.

Englesherie.
ENglesherie, or Englecerie, is an old word, which signifies the being an
Englishman: For in ancient time, as appears by Bracton lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap.
15. fol. 134. if a man had been slain or murdered, he was accounted to be
Francigena; which word implies every Alien, until Englesherie were proved, that
is, until it was made manifest that he was an Enlishman: The original whereof
was this:

Kanotus, the Danish King, having established his Estate here in peace, at the
request of our Barons, discharged the Land of his Armies, wherein he reposed
his greatest safety, upon this condition, That the Barons would give consent to
a Law, That whosoever should ^ ill an Alien, and was apprehanded, and could not
acquit himself should be liable to Justice ^ But if the Man-slaier escayed, the
Town where the man was slain should forfeit sixty six Marks to the King; and if
^ he Town was not able to pay it, then the Hundred should forfeit and pay this
to the King's own Tteasury: and farther, That every man murdered should be
accounted Francigena, unless Englesherie were proved; and how it should be
proved, see Bracton in the same chap. number. 7. Also see Horn's Mirror of
Justices, l. 1. cap. of the Office of Coroners, and Fleta, l. 1. c. 30. This
Englesherie, for the abuses and grievances which were afterward perceived to
arise therefrom, was utterly abolished by Stat. An. 14. E. 3. c. 4. See Coke,
l. 7. f. 16. Calvin's Cafe.

Enheritance.
ENheritance is such Estate in Lands or Tenements, or other things, as may be
inherited by the Heir; whether it be estate in Fee-simple, or Tail by Descent
from any of his Ancestors, or by his own Purchase.

And it is divided into Enheritance Corporate, and Enheritance Incorporate.

Enheritance Corporate are Mesuages, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Rents, and such
like, that have substance in themselves, and may continue always: And these are
called Corporal things.

Enheritance Incorporate are Advowsons, Villains, Ways, Commons, Courts,
Fishings, and such like, that are or may be appendant or appurtenant to
Enheritance Incorporate.

The Eldest part.
ENitia or Einecia pars is that Part which, upon Partition among Coparceners,
falls to the Eldest Sister or ancientest Coparcener, as it appears by
Littleton, sect. 245. And it is called Enitia pars from the French word Eigne
or Aisne, that is, the Firstborn.

Enquest.
ENquest is that Inquiry which is made by Jurors in all Causes civil or
criminal touching the matter in Fact. And such Inquiry is either ex officio,
which are called Inquests of Office and are traversable, or at the mise of the
parties. This word is used in the Statutes of 25 E 3. c. 3. 28 E. 3. c 13. and
almost in all Statutes that speak of Trials by Jurors.

Entendment.
ENtendment is an usual word in our Law, when a thing is in doubt, then by
Entendment it shall sometimes be made good. As if an Inquisition be found
before a Coroner, that a man was murdered at A. which is a Liberty, and is not
said in the Inquisition at A within the Liberty of A, yet it shall be good by
Entendment; for peradventure the Liberty may extend beyond the Town, but that
the Town if self shall be presumed to be out of the Liberty of the Town, is a
captious construction: wherefore the Inquisition shall be good by Entendment.
Coke, l. 5. f. 121. See Kitch. f. 224.

Enterpleader.
ENterpleader is, when in any Cause a matter happens which of necessity ought
to be discussed before the principal Cause can be determined: For example, Two
persons be found Heir to Land by two several Offices in one County, by this the
King is in doubt to whom he shall make Livery, for which cause, before Livery
made, he will have them interplead, and thereby determine who is the right
Heir. See Coke, l. 7. f. 45. Stam. Prer. c. 19. Brook, tit. Enterpleader.

Also there is another sort of Interpleader in Detinue in diverse cases, which
see Rast. Entries 213.

Entire Tenancie.
ENtire Tenancie is that which is contrary to Several Tenancy, and signifies a
Sole possession in one man, where the other signifies Joint or common in more.
See Brook, Several Tenancies, and the Old Book of Entries, under this Title.

Entry.
Entry is, where a man enters into any Lands or Tenements, or takes possession
of them.

Also there are diverse Writs of Entry which are in diverse manners. One is a
Writ of Entry sur Disseisin, which lies where a man is disseised, he or his
Heir shall have this Writ against the Disseisor, or any other after Tenant of
the Land. And if the Disseisor alien, and die seized, then the Writ of Entry
shall be against the Heir and the Alienee in the Per; viz. in which the Tenant
has no Entry but by such a one, naming the Disseisor, who him has disseised,
etc.

If the Heir or Alienee die seized, or alien to another, then the Writ shall be
in the Per and Cui; viz. to which the Tenant has no Entry but by such a one,
naming the Heir or Alienee of the Disseisor. to whom such a one (naming the
Disseisor) did let it, who by force disseised him, etc.

And if Land be conveyed over to many, or if the first Disseisor be disseised,
then the Writ of Entry shall be in the Post; viz. that the Tenant has no Entry
but after the Disseisin, which the first Disseisor made to the Demandant or his
Ancestor. See Enter en le Per.

Entry in the Per, Cui, and Post.
A Writ of Entry in the Per lies where a man is disseised of his Freehold,
and the Disseisor aliens, or dies seized, and his Heir enters, then the
Disseisee or his Heir shall have the said Writ against the Heir of the
Disseisor, or against the Alienee of the Disseisor; but living the Disseisor,
he may have an Assise, if he will, and the Writ of Entry shall say, In quod A
non habet Ingressum nisi per B, qui illud ei dimisit, qui inde eum injuste
disseisivit, etc. But if the Disseisor alien, and the Alienee dies seized, or
aliens over to another, or if the Disseisor dies, and his Heir enters, and that
Heir aliens or dies, and his Heir enters; then the Disseisee or his Heir shall
have a Writ of Enter sur Disseisin in the Per and Cui, and the Writ shall say,
In quod idem A non habet Ingressum nisi per B cui C illud ei dimisit, qui inde
injuste, etc.

A Writ of Entry in the Per and Cui shall be maintainable against none, but
where the Tenant is in by Purchase or Descent: For if the Alienation or Descent
be put out of the Degrees, upon which no Writ may be made in the Per, or in the
Per and Cui, then it shall be made in the Post, and the Writ shall say, In quod
A non habet Ingressum nisi Post Disseis ^ nam quam B inde injuste and sine
judicio fecit praef. t. N. vel M. proavo N. cujus haeres ipse est.

Also there are five things which put the Wri ^ of Entry out of the Degrees;
viz. Intrus^on, Succession, Disseisin upon Disseisin, Judgment, and Escheat.

1. Intrusion is, when the Disseisor dies seized, and a stranger abates.

2. Diss ^ isin upon Disseisin is, when the Disseisor is disseised by another.

3. Succession is, when the Disseisor is a man of Religion, and dies, or is
deposed, and his Successor enters.

4. Judgment is, when one recovers against the Disseisor.

5. Escheat is, when the Disseisor dies without Heir, or does Felony, whereby
he is attaint, by which the Lord enters as in his Escheat.

In all these cases the Disseisee or his Heir shall not have a Writ of Entry
within the degrees of the Per, but in the Post, because in those cases they are
not in by Descent, nor by Purchase.

Entry ad Communem Legem.
ALso there is a Writ of Entry ad Communem Legem, which lies where Tenant for
term of Life, Tenant for term of another Life, Tenant by the courtesy, or
Tenant in Dower, aliens and dies, he in the Revetsion shall have this Writ
against whomsoever is in after in the Tenement.

Entry in the Case provided.
A Writ of Entry in Casu proviso lies, if Tenant in Dower alien in fee, or for
term of life, or for another life, living the Tenant in Dower; he in the
Reversion shall have this Writ, which is provided by the Stat. of Gloc. c. 7.

Entry in Casu consimili.
A Writ of Entry in Casu consimili, lies where Tenant for life or Tenant by
the courtesy, aliens in Fee; he in Reversion shall have this Writ, by the
Statute of Westmin. 2. cap. 24.

Entry ad Terminum qui praeteriit.
THe Writ of Entry ad terminum qui praeteriit, lies where a man leases Land to
another for term of years, and the Tenant holds over his term; the Lessor shall
have this Writ.

And if Lands be leased to a Man for term of another life, and he for whose
life the Lands are leased dies, and the Lessee holds over; then the Lessor
shall have this Writ.

Entry without Assent of the Chapter.
A Writ of Entry sine Assensu Capituli lies where an Abbot, Prior, or such as
has Covent or common Seal, aliens Lands or Tenements of the right of his
Church, without the Assent of the Covent or Chapter, and dies; then the
Successor shall have this Writ.

Entry for Marriage in Speech.
A Writ of Entry causa Matrimonii praeloquuti lies where Lands or Tenements
are given to a man upon Condition, that he shall take the Donor to his wife
within a certain time, and he does not espouse her within the said term, or
espouses another woman, or makes himself Priest, or enters in Religion, or
disables himself so that he cannot take her, according to the said Condition;
then the Donor and her Heirs shall have the said Writ against him, or against
whosoever is in the said Land. But this Condition must be made by Indenture,
otherwise this Writ does not lie. And all these, and other Writs of Entry, may
be made in the Per, Cui, and Post.

Entrusion.
ENtrusion, is a Writ that lies where a Tenant for Life dies seized of certain
Lands or tenements, and a Stranger enters; he in the Reversion shall have this
writ against the Abator, or whosoever is in after their Entrusion.

Also a writ of Entrusion shall be maintainable by the Successor of an Abbot
against the Abator, who shall enter in Lands or tenements in the time of
Vacation that belong to the Church, by the Statute of Marlebridge, the last
Chapter.

And it seems the difference between an Intrudor and an Abator is this; that an
Abator is he that enters into Lands void by the death of a Tenant in Fee, and
an Intrudor is he that enters into Lands void by the death of a Tenant for Life
or Years. See F. N. B. fol. 203.

Entrusion de Guard.
ENtrusion de Guard, is a Writ which lies where the Heir within age enters in
his Lands, and holds out his Lord; for in such case the Lord shall not have the
Writ de Communi Custodia, but this Writ of Entrusion of the Ward. Old N. B.

Enure.
ENure signifies to take place or effect, to be available. As a Release shall
enure by way of Extinguishment. Lit. Cha. Release.

Equity.
EQuity is in two sorts, and those of contrary effects; for the one does
abridge and take from the letter of the Law, the other does enlarge and add
thereunto.

The first is thus defined; Equity is the Correction of a Law, generally made
in that part wherein it fails; which correction of the general words is much
used in our Law. As for example, When an Act of Parliament is made, that
whosoever does such a thing shall be a Feion, and shall suffer death; yet if a
Madman or an Infant that has no discretion do the same they shall be no
Felons, nor suffer death there fore.

Also if a Statute were made, That all persons that shall receive, or giv ^ me
^ t and drink, or other succor to any that shall do any such thing, shall be
accessory to his Offense, and shall suffer death, if they knew of the Fact; yet
one does such an act, and comes to his wife, who knowing thereof does receive
him, and gives him meat and drink, she shall not be Accessory nor Felon; for by
the generality of the said words, neither the M ^ d-man, Infant nor Wife, were
included in the intent of the Law.

And thus Equity does correct the generality of the Law in those cases, and the
general words are by Equity abridged.

The other Equity is defined to be an Extension of the words of the Law to
Cases unexpressed, yet having the same reason. So that when the words enact one
thing, they enact all other things that are of like degree. As the Statute
which ordains, That in an Action of Debt against Executors, he that does appear
by Distress shall answer, does extend by Equity to Administrators; for such of
them as appear first by Distress, shall answer by Equity of the said Act;
because they are of the like kind.

So likewise the Statutes of Gloucester gives the Action of Waste, and the
Penalty of it against him that holds for Life or Years; and by the Equity
thereof a man shall have an Action of Waste against him that holds but for one
year or half a year, yet this is without the words of the Statute; for he that
holds but for half a year or one year, does not hold for years; but that is the
meaning, and the words that Enact the one, by Equity Enact the other.

Errant.
ERrant, id est, Itenerans, comes from the French word Errer, id est, Errare,
or if the old word Err, id est, Iter; and is appropriated unto Justices that
go Circuit, and to the Bailiffs at large, who are therefore called Justices
Errants, and Bailiffs Errants, because they go and travel from place to place,
the one to do Justice, and the other to execute Process. See Eire.

Error.
ERror is a Fault in Judgment, or in the Process, or Proceeding to Judgment,
or in the Execution upon the same in a Court of Record; which in the Civil Law
is called, a Nullitie. Error is also the name of a Writ that lies where
Judgment is given in the Common place, or before the Justice in Assise, or Oyer
and Terminer, or before the Major and Sheriffs of London, or in other Court of
Record, against the Law, or upon undue and ill Process; then the party grieved
shall have this Wrft, and thereupon cause the Record and Process to be removed
before the Justices of the Kings Bench, and if the Error be found, it shall be
reversed. But if an erroneous Judgment be given in the Kings Bench, then it
could not be reversed but by Parliament, until the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 8.

Also if such a Default in Judgment be given in a Court not of Record, as in a
County, Hundred, or Court Baron, the party shall have a Writ of False Judgment,
to cause the Record to be brought before a Justice of the Commonplace. Also if
Error be found in the Exchequer, it shall be redressed by the Chancellor and
Treasurer, as it appeas by the Statute E. 3. an. 31. c. 12. and 31 El. c. 1.

Also there is another Writ of Error upon a Judgment in the Kings Bench; and
that is, where the Plaintiff assign matter of Fact for Error: And this lies in
the same Court for this Court, can redress their Errors in Fact, (but not their
errors in Law) But the Court of common B. cannot do so.

Escape.
EScape is, where one that is arrested comes to his liberty before he be
delivered by Award of any Justice, or by order of Law.

Escape is in two sorts; voluntary, and negligent.

Voluntary Escape is, when one does arrest another for Felony or other Crime,
and after he in whose custody he is lets him go where he will.

And if the Arrest were for Felony, then shall it be Felony in him that
suffered the Escape; if for Treason, then Treason in him; and if for Trespass,
then Trespass; and so in all other.

When one is arrested, after escapes against the will of him that did arrest
him, and is not freshly pursued, and taken before the pursuer loses the sight
of him; this shall be said a negligent Escape, notwithstanding that he out of
whose possession he escaped do take him after he lost sight of him. A so if one
be arrested, and after escape, and is at his liberty, and he in whose ward he
was take him afterward, and bring him to the prison; yet it is an Escape in him.

If a Felon be arrested by the Constable, and brought to the Goal in the
County, and the Jailer will not receive him, and the Constable lets him go, and
the Jailer also, and so he escapes; this is an Escape in the Jailer, for that
in such case the Jailer is bound to receive him by the hand of the Constable,
without any Precept of the Justice of Peace. But otherwise it is, if a common
person arrest another upon suspicion of Felony, there the Jailer is not bound
to receive him without a Precept of some Justice of Peace.

There is an Escape also without an Arrest: as if Murder be made in the day,
and the Murderer be not taken, then it is an escape, for which the Town where
the Murder was done shall be amerced.

And it is to be observed, That a man may be said to escape, notwithstanding he
always continues in Prison. As, if a man be in Prison upon two Executions at
the Suit of two several men, and the old Sheriff delivers over this Prisoner to
the new Sheriff by Indenture according to the usual course, and in the said
Indenture makes no mention of one of the said Executions; this Omission shall
be said an Escape in Law instantly, for which the Old Sheriff shall answer,
although the Execution was matter of Record, whereof the new Sheriff might have
taken notice. But otherwise it is where the old Sheriff dies, for in such case
it behooves the new Sheriff at his peril to take notice of all the Executions
that are against any person that he finds in the Gaol: But in the said Case,
where the Sheriff dies, and before another is made, one that is in Execution
breaks the Gaol, and goes at large, this is no Escape; for when a Sheriff dies,
all the Prisoners are in the custody of the Law, until a new Sheriff be made.
See Coke, lib. 3. fol. 72.

If the Sheriff upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum to him directed, makes Return,
That he has taken the Body, and yet has not the Body in Court at the day of
the Return; the Plaintiff may have his Action against the Sheriff for the
Escape, although the party so taken be in the Gaol. See 7 H. 4. 11. Br. 107.

Escheat.
EScheat is, where a Tenant in Fee-simple commits Felony, for which he is
hanged, or abjured the Realm, or Outlawed of Felony, Murder, or Pety Treason,
or if the Tenant die without Heir general or special; then the Lord of whom the
Tenant held the Land, may enter by way of Escheat; or if any other enter, the
Lord shall have against him a Writ called a Writ of Escheat.

Escheator.
EScheator is the name of an Officer that observes the Escheats of the King in
the County whereof he is Escheator, and certifies them into the Exchequer. This
Officer is appointed by the L. Treasurer, and by Letters Patents from him, and
continues in his Office but one year; neither can any be Escheator but once in
three years. An. 1. H. 8. cap. 8. and an. 3 ejusdem cap. 2. See more of this
Officer and his Authority, in Crompton's Justice of Peace. See An. 21 Ed. 1.
The form of the Oath of the Escheator see in the Regist. orig. fol. 301. b. And
the Escheator is an Officer of Record, and may ordain an under-Escheator, as
the Sheriff may an Undersheriff; yet the Escheator cannot return any Office by
virtue of his Office, but he shall be punished. See F. N. B. 100. Office
Escaetriae is the Escheatorship. Reg. orig. fol. 259.

Exchequer.
EXchequer (Scaccarium) comes of the French word Eschequier, id est, Abacus,
which in one signification is taken for a Counting-Table, or for the art or
skill of Counting. And from thence (as some think) the place or Court of the
Receipts and Accounts of the Revenues of the Crown is called the Exchequer.
Others have otherwise derived the name. But the Exchequer is defined by
Crompton in his Jurisd. of Courts, fol. 105. to be a Court of Record, wherein
all Causes touching the Revenues of the Crown are handled.

Escrow.
AN Escrow is a Deed delivered to a third person to be the Deed of the party
upon a future condition, And is called in Latin Schedula. Rast. Ent. 181.

Escuage.
EScuage, in Latin Scutagium, that is, Service of the Shield, and he that held
by Escuage, held by Knight Service; and to that did belong Ward, Marriage, and
Relief, etc.

But see the Stat. 12 Car. 2. c. 24. for taking away the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and turning all Tenures into free and common Soccage.

Escuage was a certain Sum of money levied by the Lord of his Tenant, after the
quantity of his Tenure, when Escuage ran through all England, and was Ordained
by all the Council of England, how much every Tenant should give his Lord; and
that was properly to maintain the wars against Scotland or Wales, and not
against other Lands, for that those Lands did of right belong to the Realm of
England. See Lit. lib. 2. cap. 3.

Eslisors.
ARe persons nominated by a Court of Law, to whom a Venire facias is directed
(by challenge to the Sheriff and Coroners) who return the Writ in their own
names, with a panel of the Jurors names. 15 E. 4. 24. pl. 4.

Esnecy.
ESnecy is a Privilege given the eldest Coparcener, to choose first after the
Inheritance is divided. Flet. lib. 5. cap. 10.

Esplees.
ESplees is the Profit or Commodity that is to be taken of a thing: As of a
Common, the taking of the Grass by the mouths of the Beasts that common there;
of an Advowson, the taking of gross Tithes by the Parson; of Wood, the ^ elling
of Wood; of an Orchard, the selling of Apples and other Fruit growing there; of
a Mill, the taking of Toll, are the Esplees, and of such like. And note, that
in a Writ of Right of Land, Advowson, or such like, the Demandant ought to
allege in his Count, that he or his Ancestors took the Esplees of the thing in
demand, otherwise the Pleading is not good.

Essendi quietum de Tolonio.
ESendi quietum de Tolonio, is a Writ to be quit of Toll, and lies in case
where the Citizens or Burgesses of any City or Borough have been acquitted of
Toll by the Grant of the Kings Progenitors throughout the whole Realm, or by
Prescription; then if any man of the said Cities or Boroughs come with his
Merchandises to any Town, Fair, or Market, and there put them to sale, or buy
any Merchandises, if the Officers of the said Town will demand any Toll of him
against the Kings Charter, or against the Usage and Custom, he may sue and have
such a writ. Fitz. N. B. fol. 226. Regist. original, fol. 258.

Essoine.
Essoine: Where an Action is brought, and the Plaintiff or Defendant may not
well appear at the day in Court, for one of the five causes under specified, he
shall be Essomed to save his default.

There are five manner of Essoins: viz. Essoine De ouster le mere, by which the
Defendant shall have a day by forty days.

The second is, De terra sancta, and upon this the Defendant shall have a day
by a year and a day; and these two shall be laid in the beginning of the Plea.

The third Essoin is, De male vener, and that shall be adjourned to a common
day, as the Action requires; and this is called the Common Essoine: and when
and how this Essoine shall be, see the Statutes, and the Abridgment of
Statutes, where it is well declared.

The fourth is, De malo lecti, and that is only in a Writ of Right, and
thereupon there shall a Writ go out of the Chancery directed to the Sheriff,
that he shall send four Knights to see the tenant, and if he be sick, to give a
day after a year and a day.

The fifth Essoine is, De service del Roy, and it lies in all Actions, except i
^ Assise De Novel Disseisin, Writ of Dower, Darreine presentment, and in Appeal
of Murder: but in this Essoine it behooves at the day to show his warrant, or
else it shall turn to a Default, if it be in a Plea real; or else he shall lose
xx s. for the journey, or more, by the discretion of the Justice, if it be in a
Plea personal, as it appears by the Statute of Gloucest. cap. 8.

Essoino de malo lecti.
ESsoino de malo lecti, is a writ directed to the Sheriff, to send four lawful
Knights to view one that has essoined himself De malo lecti. Reg. Orig. fol.
8. b.

Establishment de Dower.
EStablishment de Dower seems to be the Assurance of Dower made by the husband
or his friends before or at the time of the Marriage: And Assignment of Dower
is the Setting it out by the Heir afterward, according to the Establishment.
Brit. cap. 102, 103.

Estandard.
EStandard or Standard signifies an Ensign in war; but is also used for the
principal or Standing Measure of the King, to the proportion whereof all the
Measures through the Land are and ought to be framed by the Clerk of the
Market, Aulneger or other Officer, according to their Function.

For it was established by Magna Charta, ann. 9 H. 3. c. 25. that there should
be but one scantling of Weights and Measures through all the Realm: which is
since confirmed by An. 14 Ed. 3. cap. 12. and many other Statutes; as also that
all should be ^ itted to the Standard sealed with the Kings Seal.

And there is good reason that it should be called a Standard, because it
stands constant and immovable, and has all other Measures coming toward it
for their conformity; as Soldiers in the Field have their Standard or Colors
for their direction in their March or Skirmish. Of these Standards and Measures
read Britton. cap. 30. See the Statute 17 Car. 1. cap. 19.

Estate.
EState, is that Title or Interest that a man has in Lands and Tenements; as
Estate simple, otherwise called Fee-simple, and Estate conditional or upon
Condition; which is either upon Condition in Deed, or upon Condition in Law.
See Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 5.

Estoppel.
EStoppel is, when one is concluded and forbidden in Law to speak against his
own act or deed, yea, though it be to say the truth.

And of Estoppels there are diverse. One for example is, when J. S. is bound in
Obligation by the name of T. S. or any other name, and is sued afterward
according to the name in the Obligation; now he shall not be received to say
that he is misnamed, but shall be driven to answer according to the name put in
the Obligation, that is, T. S; for peradventure the Obligee did not know his
name but by the report of the Obligor himself: and inasmuch as he is the same
man that was bound, he shall be estopped, and forbidden in Law to say contrary
to his own deed; for otherwise he might take advantage of his own wrong, which
the Law will not suffer a man to do.

If the daughter who is Heir to her father will sue Livery with her Sister who
is a Bastard, she shall not afterward be received to say that her Sister is a
Bastard, insomuch as if her Bastard-sister take half the Land, there is no
remedy by the Law.

Also if a man seized of Lands in Fee-simple will take a Lease for years of the
same Land of a stranger by Deed indented; this is an Estoppel during the term
of years, and the Lessee is thereby barred to say the truth, which is, That he
that Leased the Land had nothing in it at the time of the Lease made, and that
the Fee-simple was in the Lessee: But this he shall not be received to say till
after the years are determined, because it appears that he has an Estate of
years, and it was his folly to take a Lease of his own Lands, and therefore
shall thus be punished for his folly.

Estovers.
Estovers are Nourishment or Maintenance: And Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c. 18.
number. 1. uses it for such Sustenance as a man, taken for Felony, is to have out
of his Lands or Goods for himself and his Family during his Imprisonment. And
the Statute of 6 E 1. c. 3. uses it for an allowance in Meat or Cloth. It is
also used for certain Allowances of wood to be taken out of another Man's wood;
Westminster. 2. c. 15. Anno 13. 1. West. part. 2. tit. Fines, sect. 26. says, That
the name Estovers comprehends House-boot; Hedge-boot, and Plow-boot; as if one
has in his Grant these general words, Reasonable Estovers in the Woods, etc.
he may thereby claim those three.

Estrangers.
EStrangers are sometimes taken for those that are not Parties or Privies to
the levying of a Fine, or making of a Deed; sometimes those that are born
beyond Sea.

Estray.
EStray is, where any Beast or Cattle is in any Lordship, and none knows its
Owner; then it shall be seized to the use of the King, or of the Lord that has
such Estray by the Kings Grant, or by Prescription: and if the Owner make claim
thereto within a year and a day, he shall have it again; otherwise after the
year, the property thereof shall be to the Lord, provided he make Proclamation
of it according to Law.

Estreat.
EStreat is a Figure or Resemblance, and is commonly used for the Copy or true
Note of an Original writing; as Estreats of Amerciaments imposed in the Rolls
of a Court, to be levied by the Balliff, or some other Officer, of every man
that has offended. See F. N. B. 75 and 76. And so it is used in Westminster. 2. c. 2.

Estrepment.
EStrepment is a Writ that lies where one is impleaded by a Praecipe quod
reddat for certain Land; if the Demandant suppose that the Tenant will do Waste
depending the Plea, he shall have against him this Writ, which is a
Prohibition, commanding him to do no waste, depending the Plea.

And this Writ lies properly where a man demands Lands by Formedon, or writ of
Right, or such writs where he shall not recover Damages; for in such writs
where he shall recover Damages, he shall have his Damages, with regard to the
waste done.

Etate probanda.
ETate probanda is a Writ of Office, and it lies for the Heir of the Tenant
that held of the King in chief, to prove he is of full age, directed to the
Sheriff to enquire of his age; and then he shall become Tenant to the King by
the same Services that his Ancestors made to the King. But it is said, that
every one that shall pass in this Enquest, shall be of the age of xlii. years
at least. But see the Stat. 12 Car. c. 2. for abolishing the Court of Wards and
Liveries, etc.

Evesdroppers.
EVesdroppers are such as stand under Walls or Windows by night or day to hear
news, and to carry them to others, to make strife and debate amongst their
Neighbors: those are evil Members in the Commonwealth, and therefore by the
Stat. of Westminster. 1. c. 33. are to be punished.

And this Misdemeanor is presentable and punishable in the Court Leet, Kitch.
f. 11.

Evidence.
EVidence is generally used for any Proof, be it by the Testimony of men, or by
Writing. Sir Tho. Smith, l. 2. c. 17. uses it in both senses, in these words;
Evidence is authentical Writings of Contracts, according to the manner of
England, that is, written, sealed, and delivered.

And l. 2. c. 23. speaking of the Prisoner that stands at the Bar to plead for
his life, and of those that charge him with Felony, thus; Then he tells what he
can say; after him also all those who were at the Apprehension of the Prisoner,
or who can give any Signs or Tokens, which we call in our Language, Evidence
against the Malefactor.

Exaction.
EXaction is a wrong done by an Officer, or by one pretending to have
authority, in demanding or taking any reward or Fee for that matter, cause or
thing, which the Law allows not.

The difference between Exaction and Extortion, is this: Extortion is, where an
Officer demands and extorts a greater Sum or Reward then his just Fee: And
Exaction is, where an Officer or other man demands and wrests a Fee or Reward,
where no Fee or Reward is due at all. See Extortion.

Exception.
EXception is a Bar or Stay to an Action; and is divided into Exception
dilatory, and peremptory. Of these two see Bracton, l. 5. tract. 5. and
Britton, c. 91, 92.

Exchange.
EXchange is, where a man is seized of certain Land, and another is seized of
other Land, if they by a Deed indented, or without Deed, if the Lands be in one
County, exchange their Lands, so that each of them shall have other Lands to
him so exchanged in fee, fee-tail, or for term of Life, that is called an
Exchange, and is good without Livery and Seisin.

In Exchange the Estates to them limited must be egal; for if one should have
an Estate in fee in his Land, and the other an Estate in the other Land but for
term of Life, or in tail, such Exchange is void; but if the Estates be egal,
though the Lands be not of egal value, yet the exchange is good. Also an
exchange of Rent for Land is good. And an exchange between Rent and Common is
good, and that ought to be by Deed. Also it behooves always that this word
Exchange be in the Deed, or else nothing passes by it, except he have Livery
and Seisin.

Exchequer.
EXchequer, See Exchequer.

Excommengement.
EXcommengement is to say in Latin, Excommunicatio, and it is where a man by
judgment in Court Christian is Excommenged, by which he is disabled to sue any
Action in the Kings Court; and if he remain Excommunicate xl. days, and will
not be justified by his Ordinary, then the Bishop shall send his Letter Patent
to the Chancellor to certify this excommunication or contempt; and thereupon
the Sheriff shall be commanded to take the Body of him that is Accursed, by a
Writ called, De Excommunicato capiendo, till he has made satisfaction to holy
Church for the Contempt and Wrong: and when he is justified, the Bishop shall
send his Letters to the King, certifying the same; and then the Sheriff shall
be commanded to deliver him by a Writ called Excommunicato deliberando. See the
Statute 5 Eliz. cap. 23.

Excommunication.
EXcommunication. See Excommengement.

Execution.
EXecution is, where Judgment is given to any Action, that the Plaintiff shall
recover the Land, Debt, or Damages, as the case is; and when any Writ is
awarded to put him in possession, or to do any other thing whereby the
Plaintiff should the better be satisfied his Debt or Damages, that is called a
Writ of Extention; and when he has the possession of the Land, or is paid the
Debt or Damages, or has the Body of the Defendant awarded to prison, then he
has Execution. And if the Plea be in the County, or Court Baron, or Hundred,
and they defer the execution of the Judgment in favor of the party, or for
other cause; the Demandant shall have a Writ De Executione Judicii.

Note, that in a Writ of Debt a man shall not have Recovery of any Lands, but
of those which the Defendant has the day of the Judgment yielded. And of
Chattels, a man shall have execution only of the Chattels which he has the day
of the execution sued.

Executione facienda.
EXecutione facienda, is a Writ commanding Execution of a Judgment; the diverse
uses whereof see in the Table of the Reg. Judic.

Executor.
EXecutor is, when a Man makes his Testament and last Will, and therein names
the person that shall execute his Testament, that is his Executor, and is as
much in the Civil Law as Haeres designatus, or Testamentarius, as to Debts,
Goods and Chattels of his Testator: and such an Executor shall have an Action
against every Debtor of his Testator; and if the Executor has Assets, every
one to whom the Testator was in Debt, shall have an Action against him, if he
have an Obligation or Specialty; but in every case where the Testator might
wage his Law, no Action lies against the Executor. See hereof before in the
Title Administrators.

And if any other person not made Executor, take or sell the Goods of the
deceased, he may be sued as Executor of his own wrong, in the same form as
other Executor. See the Statute of 30 Car. 2. cap. 7.

Exemplification.
EXemplification is, when a man will have any Original Record written out and
exemplified forth of the Court where it remains, to which purpose he may have a
Writ, as appiert by the Reg. orig. f. 290.

And if a man will plead a Record in other Court then where it remains, it
behooves him to have it exemplified under the Great Seal of England; for if it
be exemplified under the Seal of the Common Pleas, Exchequer, or such like, it
will not serve, unless in Evidence to a Jury. See Coke l. 5. f. 53.

See the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 6. and 23 El. 3. The force and use of
Exemplifications of Patents, etc.

Exemption.
EXemption is a privilege to be Free from Service or Appearance: and therefore
a Baron and Baronness, by reason of their Dignity, are exempted to be sworn
upon any Inquest. Coke l. 6. f. 53.

Also Knights, Clerks, and Women are exempted to appear at Leets, or the
Sheriffs Tourn: And that is by the Statute of Marlebridge, c. 10.

And a man may be exempted from being put upon Enquests and Iuries by the Kings
Letters Patents; as the President and College or Commonalty of Physicians in
London, were by the Letters Patents of King H. 8. Coke l. 8. f. 108.

Ex gravi querela.
EX gravi querela. See before in the Title Devise.

Exigent.
EXigent is a Writ that lies where a man sues an Action personal, and the
Defendant cannot be found, nor has any thing within the County whereby he may
be attached or distrained: then this Writ shall go forth to the Sheriff, to
make Proclamation at five Counties, every one after another, that he appear, or
else that he shall be outlawed: and if he be outlawed, then all his Goods and
Chattels are forfeit to the King. In an Indictment of Felony the Exigent shall
go forth after the first Capias. And in a Capias ad computandum, or ad
satisfaciendum, and in every Capias that goes forth after Judgment, the Exigent
shall go forth after the first Capias. And also in Appeal of Death; but not in
an Appeal of Robbery or Mayhem.

With this Exigent issues also a writ by the Statute of 13 El. cap. 3. to make
three Proclamations against the Defendant, which is not in Exigents after
Judgment.

Exigenter.
EXigenter, is an Officer of the Common Pleas, of which there are four. They
make out all Exigents and Proclamations in all Actions, in which process of
Outlawry lies. And they make writs of Supersedeas, as well as the Preignotaries
upon such Exigents as were made in their Office. Of this Officer there is
mention made in the Statutes of 10 H. 6. c. 4. and 18 H. 6. c. 9.

Ex mero motu.
EX mero motu are words frequently used in the Kings Charters, whereby he
signifies, that he does that which is contained in the Charter of his own will
and motion, without Petition or Suggestion made by any other: and the effect of
these words is, to bar all exceptions that might be taken to the Instrument
wherein they are contained, by alleging, that the King in passing that Charter
was abused by any false Suggestion. Kitch. f. 151.

And when the Kings Charter has therein these words, it shall be taken most
strongly against the King; therefore if the King, ex mero motu, pardon to B.
all his debts, all the debts that B. ows as Sheriff are by this pardoned; and
in like manner it is in many other cases, where these words shall be taken as
strongly against the Kings, as if a common person had made the Grant. See Coke,
l. 1. f. 45.

Ex part talis.
Ex part talis. See before, Tit. Account.

Expeditate.
EXpeditate is a word often used in the Forest, signifying to cut out the
Balls of great Dogs feet, for preservation of the Kings Game. And one of the
Articles to be enquired touching the Forest, is, If all great Dogs or Mastives
in the Forest are Expeditated, according to the Laws of the Forest; and if any
be not, the Owner of every such Dog shall forfeit to the King three shillings
and four pence, Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 152. Manwood uses the same word, and (
part. 1. of his Forest Law, fol. 212.) sets down the manner of expeditating
Dogs heretofore, which was, that the three Claws of the Fore-foot on the right
side shall be cut off by the skin; whereunto he also adds out of the Ordinance
called the Assise of the Forest, that the same manner of expeditating Dogs
shall be still used and kept, and none other. Quaere whence it arises that
Crompton and he differ; the one saying the Ball of the foot is cut out; the
other, that the three Fore-claws are cut off by the skin.

Expensis Militum levandis.
EXpensis Militum levandis, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff for levying the
Allowance for the Knights of the Parliament, Regist. orig. fol. 191. b. And
Expensis Militum non levandis de hominibus de Antiquo Dominico, nec a Nativis,
is a Writ to prohibit the Sheriff to levy any Allowance for the Knights of the
County upon such as hold in Ancient Demesne, etc. Ibidem fol. 261. b.

Extend.
EXtend is, to value the Lands or Tenements of one bound by Statute, etc. that
has forfeited it, and to deliver them to the Conusee at such indifferent
rates, as that by the yearly Profits the Conusee in time may be satisfied his
Debt. See Fitz. Not. B. fol. 131. and Coke, lib. 4. fol. 67. Fulwoods Case.

Extent.
EXtent has two significations: The one is a Writ or Commission to the Sheriff
for the valuing of Lands or Tenements; the other, the act of the Sheriff or
other Commissioner upon that Writ. Broke, tit. Extent. fol. 313.

Extinguishment.
EXtinguishment is, where a Lord, or any other, has any Rent or Service going
out of any Land, and he purchases the same Land, so that he has such Estate in
the Land as he has in the Rent; then the Rent is extinct, for that one may not
have Rent going out of his own Land. Also when any Rent shall be extinct, the
Land and the Rent must be in one hand, the Estate indefesible, and he have as
good Estate in the Land as in the Rent; for if he have Estate in the Land but
for Life or Years, and has Fee-simple in the Rent, then the Rent is not
extinct, but in suspense for that time, and after the term the Rent is revided.

If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Lord purchase the Tenancy, the
Mesnalty is extinct; but the Mesne shall have the surplusage of the Rent, if
there be any, as Rentseck. Also if a man have a Highway appendant, and after
purchase the Land wherein the Highway is, then the Way is extinct: and so it
is of a Common appendant.

Extortion.
EXtortion is wrong done by any Officer, Ordinary, Archdeacon, Official, Major,
Bailiff, Sheriff, Escheator, Coroner, Undersheriff, Jailer, or other Officer,
by color of his Office, by taking excessive Reward or Fee for execution of his
Office, or otherwise; and is no other thing indeed then plain Robbery, or
rather more odious then Robbery: for Robbery is apparent, and always has with
it the countenance of Vice: but Extortion, being as great a Vice as Robbery is,
carries with it a countenance of Virtue, by means whereof it is the more hard
to be tried or discerned, and therefore the more odious. And yet some there are
that will not stick to stretch their Office, Credit, and Conscience, to
purchase Money, as well by Extortion as otherwise, according to the saying of
the Poet Virgil, What is it that the greedy thirst of Gol ^ does not constrain
mortals to attempt?

F. Faculty.
FAculty is a word often used in the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21. and it
signifies a Privilege or special Dispensation granted unto a man by favor and
indulgence, to do that which by the Law he cannot do; as to eat Flesh upon days
forbidden, or to hold two or more Ecclesiastical Livings, and the like. And for
the granting of these Faculties, there is a special Officer under the
Archbishop of Canterbury, called, The Master of the Faculties.

Failing of Record.
FAiling of Record is, when an Action is brought against one, who pleads any
matter of Record, and avers to prove it by Record; and the Plaintiff says
there is no such Record; whereupon the Defendant has day given him to bring in
the Record; at which day he fails, or brings in such a one as is no Bar to this
Action: then he is said to fail of his Record; and thereupon the Plaintiff
shall have Judgment to recover, etc.

Faint Action. Faint Pleading.
FAint Action (as Littleton, fol. 154. says) is as much as to say in English,
a Fained Action, that is, such Action, as though the words of the Writ be true,
yet for certain causes he has no title by the Law to recover by the same
Action: And a false Action is, where the words of the Writ are false. So Faint
Pleading is a covinous, false, and collusory manner of Pleading, to the deceit
of a third party. And against such Faint Pleading, amongst other things, the
old Statute in 3 E. 1. cap. 29. seems to be made.

Deed.
DEed is a Writing sealed and delivered, to prove and testify the agreement of
the party whose Deed it is to the thing contained in the Deed: as a Deed of
Feoffment is a Proof of the Livery of Seisin, for the Land passes by the Livery
of Seisin; but when the Deed and the Delivery are joined together, that is a
proof of the Livery, and that the Feoffor is contented that the Feoffee shall
have the Land.

All Deeds are either Indented, whereof there are two, three, or more parts, as
the ease requires; of which the Feoffor, Grantor, or Lessor has one; the
Feoffee, Grantee, or Lessee another; and peradventure some other body a third,
etc. Or else they are Poll Dees, single, and but one, which the Feoffee,
Grantee or Lessee has. etc. And every Deed consists of three principal Points,
(without which it is no perfect Deed to bind the parties) namely, Writing,
Sealing, and Delivery.

1. By Writing is showed the parties Names to the Deed, their Dwelling-places,
their Degrees, the Thing granted, upon what Considerations, the Estate limited,
the Time when it was granted, and whether simply, or upon Condition, with other
such like Circumstances. But whether the parties to the Deed write in the end
their Names, or set to their Marks, (as it is commonly used) it matters not at
all, (as I think) for that is not meant, where it is said, that every Deed
ought to have Writing.

2. Sealing is a farther Testimony of their Consents to what is contained in
the Deed; as it appears in these words, In Witness whereof, etc. or to such
effect, always put in the latter end of Deeds, without which words the Deed is
insufficient.

And because we are about Sealing and Signing of Deeds, it shall not be much
amiss here to show you, for Antiquities sake, the manner of Signing and
Subscribing Deeds in our Ancestors the Saxons time, a fashion Differing from
that we use now, in this, That they to their Deeds subscribed their Names,
(commonly adding the Sign of the Cross) and in the end did set down a great
number of Witnesses, not using at that time any kind of Seal: And we at this
day, for more surety, both subscribe our Names, (though that be not very
necessary) and put to our Seals, and use the help of Witnesses besides.

That former fashion continued absolute until the time of the Conquest by the
Normans, whose manners by little and little at the length prevailed amongst us;
for the first Sealed Charter in England, is thought to be that of King Edward
the Confessor, to the Abbey of Westminster, who being educated in Normandy,
brought into this Realm that and some other of their Fashions with him. And
after the coming of William the Conqueror, the Normans liking their own
Country Custom, (as naturally all Nations do) rejected the manner that they
found here, and retained their own, as Ingulphus the Abbot of Croiland, who
came in with the Conquest, Witnesses, saying; The Normans do change the making
of Writings (which were wont to be firmed in England with Crosses of Gold, and
other holy Signs) into an impression of Wax, and reject also the manner of the
English Writing. Howbeit, this was not done all at once, but it increased and
came forward by certain degrees: so that first and for a season the King only,
or a few other of the Nobility, used to Seal; then the Noblemen, for the most
part, and none other. Which thing a man may see in the History of Battle Abbey,
where Richard Lucie Chief Justice of England, in the time of King Henry the
Second, is reported to have blamed a mean Subject, for that he used a private
Seal, whereas that pertained, (as he said) to the King and Nobility only.

At which time also (as J. Rosse notes it) they used to ingrave in their Seals
their own Pictures and Counterfeits, covered with a long Coat over their
Armors. But after this, the Gentlemen of the better sort took up the Fashion,
and because they were not all Warriors, they made Seals engraven with their
several Coats or Shields of Arms, for difference sake, as the same Author
reports. At length, about the time of King Edward the third, Seals became very
common; so that not only such as bare Arms used to Seal, but other men also
fashioned to themselves Signers of their own devices, some taking the Letters
of their own Names, some Flowers, some Knots and Flourishes, some Birds and
Beasts, and some other things, as we now yet daily see used.

Some other manners of Sealing besides these have been heard of among us; as
namely, that of King Edward the third, by which he gave to Norman the Hunter,
The Hop and the Hop-Town,
With all the bounds upside down:
And in witness that it was sooth,
He bit the Wax with his foretooth,


The like to this was showed me by one of my Friends in a loose Paper, but not
very anciently written, and therefore he willed me to esteem of it as I thought
good: It was as follows.

I William King, give to thee Powlen Royden my Hop and my Hop-Lands, with all
the bounds up and down, from Heaven to Earth, from Earth to Hell, for thee and
thine to dwell, from me and mine, to thee and thine, for a Bow and a broad
Arrow, when I come to hunt upon Yartow. In witness that this is sooth, I bit
this Wax with my tooth, in the presence of Magge, Maud, and Margery, and my
third son Henry,

Also that of Alberick de Vere, containing the Donation of Hatfield, to which
he affixed a short black-hafted knife, like an old halfpenny whittle, instead
of a Seal: with Diverse such like.

But some peradventure will think, that these were received in common use and
custom and that they were not the devices and pleasures of a few singular
persons: such are no less deceived then they that deem every Charter and
Writing, that has no Seal annexed, to be as ancient as the Conquest; whereas
indeed Sealing was not commonly used till the time of King Edw. 3. as has been
already said.

3. Delivery, though it be set last, is not the least; for after a Deed is
written and sealed, if it be not delivered, all the rest is to no purpose.

And this Delivery ought to be done by the party himself, or his sufficient
Warrant; and so it will bind him whosoever wrote or sealed the same: and by
this last act the Deed is made perfect, according to the intent and effect of
it; and therefore in Deeds the Delivery is to be proved, etc.

Thus you see, Writing and Sealing, without Delivery, is nothing to purpose:
Sealing and Delivery, where there is no Writing: work nothing: And Writing and
Delivery, without Sealing, make no Deed, Therefore they all ought jointly to
concur to make a perfect Deed.

Faitour.
FAitour is a word used in the old repealed Statute of 7 R. 2. cap. 5. and it
is there taken in the worser sense, for an Evil doer, or an Idle companion, and
it seems there to be a Synomymon to Vagabond.

Fardingdeale.
FArdingdeal, otherwise Farundel, of Land, signifies the Fourth part of an
Acre, Cromptons Jurisd. fol. 220. b. Quadrantata terrae is read in the Reg.
orig fol. 1 b where you may have Denariata and Obolata, Solidata and Librata
terrae, which by probability must rise in proportion of quantity from
Fardingdeal, as a Halfpenny, Penny, Shilling, or Pound, rise in value or
estimation; then must Obolata be Half an Acre, Denariata the Acre, Solidata
Twelve Acres, and Librata Twelve score Acres. Yet in the Reg. orig. fol. 94,
and 248. you may find viginti Libratas terrae vel reditus; whereby it seems
that Librata terrae is as much as yields twenty shillings by the year; and
centum Solidatas terrarum, tenementorum, and redituum, fol. 249. And in F. N.
B. f. 87. there are these words, Viginti Libratas terrae vel reditus, which
proves this to be so much Land as is rated at twenty shillings by the year. See
Furlong.

Farm, or Ferm.
FArm, or Ferm, is usually the chief Message in a Village or Town, whereto
belongs great Demeans of all sorts, and has been used to be let for term of
Life, Years, or at Will.

The Rent that is reserved upon such a Lease, or the like, is called Farm, or
Ferm.

And Farmor or Fermor, is he that Tenants the Farm or Ferm, or is Lessee
thereof.

Also generally every Lessee for life, years, or at will, is called Farmor, or
Fermor.

And note, That they are calltd Farms, or Ferms, of the Saxon word Feormian,
which signifies to Feed; or yield Victual: For in ancient time their
Reservations were as well in Victuals as Money; until at the last, and that
chiefly in the time of King Henry the First, by agreement, the reservation of
Victuals was turned into ready Money, and so hitherto has continued amongst
most men.

Fate, or Fatt.
FAte, or Fatt, is a Measure mentioned in the Statutes of 1 H. 5. cap. 10. and
11 H. 6. cap. 8. to contain eight Bushels: but the Citzens and Merchants of
London (as it appears by those Statutes) and the Kings Purveyors would have
that measure and a Bushel over for one Quarter; and so they had nine Bushels
for one Quarter of Corn.

Faux Imprisonment.
FAux Imprisonment is a Writ that lies where a man is arrested and restrained
from his Liberty by another against the order of the Law; then he shall have
against him this Writ, whereby he shall recover Damages. See more thereof
before, tit, Arrest.

Faux Judgment.
FAux Judgment. See thereof before, tit. Error.

Fealty.
FEalty is a Service, called in Latin Fidelitas, and shall be done in this
manner; viz. The Tenant shall hold his right hand upon a Book, and shall say to
his Lord; I shall be to you faithful and true, and shall bear to you Faith for
the Lands and Tenements which I claim to hold of you, and truly shall do you
the Customs and Services that I ought to do to you at the terms assigned; So
help me God: and shall kiss the Book: but he shall not kneel, as in doing
Homage. And thereof see after in the Title Homage. Also Fealty is incident to
all manner of Tenures.

Fee.
FEE (Feodum) is in our Law an equivocal word of diverse significations: for it
is most usually taken for an Estate of Inheritance in Lands and Tenements to
one and his Heirs, or to one and the Heirs of his Body. But it is used also for
the Compass, Circuit or Extent of a Lordship or Manor. And from thence comes
the ordinary Plea in Bar to an Avowry, That the Land upon which he avows is out
of his Fee. And thirdly, it is taken for a Reward or Wages given to one for the
execu ^ (...) of his Office; as the Fee of a Forrester, or the Keeper of a
Park, or a Sheriffs Fee sor ^ erving an Execution, lim ^^ s by the Statute of
29 Eliz. cap 4. And it is also taken for that Consideration which is given a
Sergeant at Law, or a Councellor, or a Physician, for their Counsel or Advice
in their profession, which (as it is well observed by Sir Jo. Davies, in his
Preface to his Reports) is not properly Merces, but Honorarium, Yet in our
Law-language it is called his Fee.

Fee expectant.
FEE expectant: Where Lands are given to a man and his wife in Frank-marriage,
to have and to hold to them and their heirs, in this case they have Fee-simple;
but if they are given to them and the heirs of their body, etc. They have Tail
and Fee-expectant, Kitch. fol. 153.

Fee Farm.
FEE Farm is, when a Tenant holds of his Lord in Fee-simple, paying to him the
value of half, or of the third, fourth, or other part of the Land by the year.
And he that holds by Fee-Farm, ought not to pay Relief, or do any other thing
that is not contained in the Feoffment, but Fealty, for that belongs to all
kind of Tanures.

Fee-simple.
FEe-simple is, when any person holds Lands or Rent, or other thing,
inheritable to him and his Heirs for evermore; and these words, His Heirs, make
the Estate of Inheritance; for if the Land be given to a man for ever, yet he
has but an Estate for life.

Also if Tenant in Fee-simple die, his first son shall be his Heir; but if he
have no Son, then all his Daughters shall be his Heirs, and every one shall
have her part by partition: but if he have no Son nor Daughter, then his next
Coufin collateral of the whole Blood shall be his Heir.

Fell de se.
FElo de se, is he that commits Felony by murdering himself. See Crompt.
Justice of Peace, fol. 28.

Felony.
FElony is a general term, which comprehends diverse heinous Offenses, for which
the Offenders ought to suffer death, and lose their Lands. And it seems that
they are called Felonies, of the Latin word Fell, which is in English, Gall, in
French, Fiel; or of the ancient English word, Fell, or Fierce, because they are
intended to be done with a fell, fierce, or mischievous mind. When a man
without any color of Law steals the Goods of another, amounting to the value
of Twelve pence or more, that is Larceny: but if he approaches the Person of
another in the Highway, and robs him of his Goods, although it be but to the
value of one penny, it is Felony; and that is called Robbery, and therefore he
shall be hanged.

Fence-moneth.
FEnce-moneth is a Forest word, and signifies the time of 31 days in the year,
that is to say, 15 days before Midsummer, and 15 days after, in which time it
is forbidden for any man to hunt in the Forest, or to go into it to disturb
the wild Beasts. The reason of which is, because the Female Deer do then Fawn.
And therefore this Month is called the Fence-moneth, or Defence-moneth, for
that the Deer are then to be defended from scare or fear. See Manwood. Forest
Laws, cap. 13. fol. 90. b.

Feodarie.
FEodarie was an Officer in the Court of Wards, appointed by the Master of that
Court, by virtue of the Statute 32 H. 8. c. 46. to be present with the
Escheator in every County at the finding of Offices, and to give in evidence
for the King as well for the Value as the Tenure. And his Office was also to
survey the Lands of the Ward after the Office found, and to return the true
value thereof into the Court; to assign Dower unto the Kings Widows; to receive
all the Rents of the Wards Lands within his Circuit, and to answer them to the
Receiver of the Court. But see the Stat. 12 C ^ r. 2. c. 24. for Abolishing the
said Court.

Feoffment.
FEoffment is, where a man gives Lands, Houses, or other Corporal things which
are Heritable to another in Feesimple, and thereof delivers Seisin and
Possession. Also if one make a gift in tail, or a lease for life, Livery and
Seisin must be given, or else nothing shall pass by the Grant.

Feoffor and Feoffee.
FEoffor is he that infeoffs or makes a Feoffment to another of Lands or
Tenements in Fee-simple: And Feoffee is he who is infeoffed, or to whom the
Feoffment is so made.

Ferdfare.
FErdfare is, to be quit from going to War, Flet. lib. 1. c. 47.

Ferdwit.
FErdwit is, to be quit of Murder committed in the Army, Flet. l. 1. c. 47.

Ferry.
IS a liberty by prescription, or the Kings Grant, to have a Boat for passage
upon a great Stream for Carriage of horses and men for reasonable toll.

Feude.
FEude, or Deadly Feude, is a German word, and signifies implacable Hatred, not
to be satisfied but with the death of the enemy: such is that amongst the
people in Scotland and in the Northern parts of England, which is a Combination
of all the Kindred to revenge the death of any of the Blood upon the Slayer and
all his race. And this word is mentioned in the Stat. of 43 Eliz. c. 13.

Fieri facias.
FIeri facias is a Writ judicial, and lies where a ^^ an recovers Debt or Da ^^
nages in the Kings Court; (...) a he shall have this Writ to the Sheriff,
commanding him that he levy the Debt and Damages of the goods of him against
whom the Recovery is had: and it lies only within a year and a day, and after
the year he must sue a Scire facias; and if the party be warned, and does not
come at the day, etc. or if he come, and can say nothing, then he who recovers
shall have a Writ of Fieri facias directed to the Sheriff, that he make
Execution of Judgment.

But if a man recover against a woman, and she takes a husband within the year
and the day; then he that recovers must have a Scire facias against the husband.

So it is if an Abbot or Prior recover and die, his Successor, within the year
shall have a Scire facias. See thereof more in the Title Scire facias, and
Title Execution.

There is also another manner of Fieri facias against a Rector, where upon a
general Fieri facias the Sheriff returns, quod nulla habet bona seu catalla,
and thereupon a Writ is directed to the Bishop of the Diocese where he is
Rector, and thereupon the Bishop levies the Debt of the Profits of the Gleab
and Tithes of the Rectory.

Fifteenth.
FIfteent ^ See Quinzisme.

F ^ lazer.
FIlazer (of the French word Filace, id est, a Thread) is the name of an
Officer in the Common Pleas, of which there are 14. They make dut all the
Original Process there, and the Distress infinite upon Summons returned in
personal Actions, and the Capias upon the return of Nihil, and all Writs of
View, in cases where the View is prayed. And where the Appearance is with them,
they enter the Impariance, and the general Issue in common Actions, and
Judgments by Confession before Issue joined, and make out Writs of Execution
upon them. And they make Writs of Supersedeas after a Capias awarded, when the
Defendant appears in their Office. And this Officer is mentioned in the
Statutes of 10 H 6. c. 4. and 18 H. 6. c. 9.

File.
FIle (Filacium) is a Thread or Wire upon which Writs and other Exhibits in
Courts are put, for the safer keeping of them together.

Finders.
FInders is a word used in many Statutes, as in 14 R. 2. c. 10. 17 R. 2. c. 5.
1 H. 4 c. 13. and 31 H. 6. c. 5. and seems to be all one with those Officers
which we now call Searchers, employed for the discovery of Goods which are
imported or exported without paying Custom.

Fine.
FIne sometimes is taken for a Sum of money which one is to pay to the King for
any Contempt or Offense; which Fine every one that commits any Trespass, or is
convict that he falsely denies his own Deed, or did any thing in contempt of
Law, shall pay to the King: which is called Fine to the King.

Sometime a Fine is taken for a Final Agreement which is had between any
persons concerning any Land or Rent, or other thing, whereof any Suit or Writ
is between them hanging in any Court; which may be diverse ways: One is, when
any party acknowledges that to be the right of the other, as that he has of
the Gift of him that made the Recognizance, which always supposes a Feoffment
going before, and is called a Fine executed: Or if he acknowledged that to be
the right of another, omitting these words ( come ceo que il eit de son Done)
this being a Fine upon acknowledging of ^ ight only, if it be levied to him
which has the Freehold of the Land, is a Fine upon a Release.

If he that acknowledged it is seized, and he to whom it is levied has not the
Freehold of the Land, then it is called a Fine executory, which he to whom the
Land is acknowledged may execute by Entry, or Scire facias.

Sometime such a Fine Sur conusance de droit only is to make a Surrender:
wherein is rehearsed, that the Reconusor has an Estate for life, and the other
a Reversion.

Sometime it is taken to pass a Reversion, where a particular Estate is recited
to be in another, and that the Reconusor will that the other shall have the
Reversion, or that the Land shall remain to another after the particular Estate
spent.

And sometime he to whom the right is acknowledged, as that which he has of
the Gift of the Reconusor, shall yield the Land, or a Rent out thereof to the
Conusor. And that sometime for the whole Fee; sometime for one particular
Estate with Remainder or Remainders over; and sometime with Reversion of Rents
with Distress and Grant thereof over by the said Fine.

It is called a Fine, because thereby the Suit is ended; and if it be recorded
with Proclamation, according to the Statute 4 H. 7. it bars Strangers.

Fine force.
FIne force, signifies an absolute Necessity; as when a man is compelled to do
that which he can no way avoid, we say he does it de Fine force. So this word
is used in Perk. sect. 321. in Mantel and Woodlands Case, in Plowden, f. 94. b.
and in Eatons Case cited in Foxly's Case in the 6 Rep. f. 111. a.

Finors.
FInors are those that purify Gold and Silver, and part them by fire and water
from courser Metals; and therefore in the Statute of 4 H. 7. c. 2. they are
also called Parters.

Fire-bote.
FIre-bote is necessary Wood to burn, which, by the Common Law, Lessee for
years or for life may take in his Ground, although it be not expressed in his
Lease; and although it be a Lease by Word only, without Writing: But if he take
more then is needful, he shall be punished in Waste.

First Fruits.
First Fruits (Primitiae) are the Profits of every Spiritual Living for a year,
which were anciently given to the Pope; but by the Statute of 26 H. 8. ^. 3.
are now transferred to the King.

Fledwite.
FLedwite is, to be quit from Amerciaments, when an outlawed Fugitive comes to
the Kings Peace of his own will, or being licensed.

Flemeswite.
FLemeswite is, that you may have the Cattle or Amerciaments of your Fugitive
man.

Fletwit.
FLetwit, or Flitwit, is, to be quit from Contention and Convicts, and that you
may have a Plea thereof in your Court, and the Amerciaments; for Flit in
English is Treason in French.

Floatsam.
FLoatsam, or Flotson, is, when a Ship is sunk, or otherwise perished, and the
Goods float upon the Sea, and they are given to the Lord Admiral by his Letters
Patents. See Cok. lib. 5. fol. 106.

Fold, Fould-course.
FOld, Fould-course, In Latin Falda, and Faldae, Is Common for Sheep. See
Shack. Co. Ent. 14, 15. Coke 8. Rep. 125. 1 Cro. Rep. Spooner and Day.

Folkmoot.
FOlkmoot signifies (according to Lambert in his Exposition of Saxon words) two
kinds of Courts; one now called the County Court, the other the Sheriffs
Turn. And in London it signifies at this day celebrem ex omni Civitate
Conventu^. Stows Survey.

Footgeld.
FOotgeld is an Amerciament for not cutting out the Balls of great Dogs feet in
the Forest, for which see Expeditate: And to be quit of Footgeld is a
privilege to keep Dogs within the Forest unlawed without punishment or
control. Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 197. Manwood, part. 1. page 86.

Forcible Entry.
FOrcible Entry is a Violent actual Entry into House or Land; or taking a
Distress weaponed, whether he offer Violence or no. West, part 2. Symb. tit.
Inditements, Sect. 65.

Forest, or Forest.
FOrest is a place privileged by Royal Authority, or by Prescription, for the
peaceable abiding and nourishment of the Beasts or Birds of the Forest, for
disport of the King: For which there have been in ancient time certain peculiar
Officers, Laws and Orders, part of which appear in the great Charter of the
Forest.

Forester.
FOrester is an Officer of the Forest, sworn to preserve the Vert and Venison
of the Forest, to attend upon the wild Beasts within his Bailywick, to watch
and keep them safe by day and by night, to apprehend all Offenders there in
Vert or Venison, and to present them at the Courts of the Forest, to the end
they may be punished according to their Offenses.

Forfeiture of Marriage.
FOrfeiture of Marriage was a Writ that lay for the Lord by Knights Service
against his Ward, who refused a convenient Marriage offered him by his Lord,
and married another within age without the assent of his Lord. And see for this
Fitz. N. B. fol. 141. g. etc.

Forger of false Deeds.
FOrger of false Deeds comes of the French word Forger, which signifies to
Frame or fashion a thing, as the Smith does his work upon his Anvil. And it is
used in our Law for the Fraudulent making and publishing of false Writings to
the prejudice of another man's right. Fitz. in his F. N. B. f. 96. B. C. says
that a Writ of Deceit lies against him that thus forges any Deed.

Forjudger.
FOrjudger is a Judgment given in a Writ of Mesne, brought by a Tenant against
a Mesne Lord, who should acquit the Tenant of Services demanded by the Lord
above, of whom the Tenement is holden, and the Mesne will not appear; then
Judgment shall be given, that the Mesne Lord shall lose his Seignory, and that
the Tenant from thenceforth shall hold of the Lord above by such Su ^^ as the
Mesne held before, and shall be discharged of the Services which he yielded to
the Mesne, by the Statute of Westminster. 2. ca. 9. which is called a Forjudger.

Also if an Attorney or other Officer in any Court be put out and forbidden to
use the same, he is said to be forjudged the Court.

Formedon.
FOrmedon is a Writ that lies where Tenant in tail infeoffs a Stranger, or is
disseised, and dies; his Heir shall have a Writ of Formedon to recover the
Land. But there are three manner of Formedons. One is in the Discender, and
that is in the case before said. And if one give Land in the tail, and for
default of Issue the Remainder to another in the tail, and that for default of
such Issue the Land shall revert to the Donor; if the first Tenant in tail die
without Issue, he in the Remainder shall have a Formedon in the Remainder: But
if the Tenant in the tail die without Issue, and he in the Remainder also die
without Issue, then the Donor or his heirs shall have a Formedon in the
Reverter.

Foreign.
Foreign is a word adjectively used, and joined with diverse Substantives: as
Foreign matter triable in another County, Pl. Cor. 154 or matter done in
another County, Kitch. fol. 126.

Foreign Plea is a refusal of the Judge as incompetent, because the matter in
hand was not within his Precincts, Kitch. fol. 75. and Anno 4 H. 8. cap. 2. and
Anno 22 ejusdem cap. 2. and 14.

Foreign Answer is such an Answer as is not triable in the County where it is
made, Anno 15 H. 6 cap. 5.

Foreign Service is such Service whereby a Mean Lord holds over of another
without the compass of his own Fee, Bro. tit. Tenures, fol. 251. number. 12. and
28. and Kitch. fol. 209. Or else that which a Tenant performs either to his own
Lord, or to the Lord above him out of the Fee. For of such Services Bracton.
lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 7. speaks thus:

Also there are certain Services which are called Foreign, though they be named
and expressed in the Charter of Feoffment, and may therefore be called Foreign,
because they appertain to our Lord the King, and not to the chief Lord, unless
when he goes in Service in Person, or that he satisfies our Lord the King for
the Service by some kind of means; and they are performed at certain times,
when occasion and necessity require, and they have diverse and sundry names: For
sometime they are called Foreign, the word taken largely as to the Kings
Service, sometime Escuage, sometime Service of the King; and it may therefore be
called Foreign, because it is done and taken without, or beside Service done to
the Lord Paramount. See Broke, Tenures 28, 95.

Foreign Service seems to be Knights Service, or Escuage uncertain, Perkins,
sect. 650.

Foreign Attachment is an Attachment of the Goods of Forreiners within any
Liberty or City, for the satisfaction of any Citizen to whom the said
Forreigner owes money.

Foreign Apposer is an Officer in the Exchequer, to whom all Sheriffs and
Bailiffs do repair, by him to be apposed of their Green wax: And from thence he
draws down a charge upon the Sheriff or Bailiff to the Clerk of the Pipe.

Forsechoke.
FOrsechoke seems to signify as much as Forsaken, in our modern Language: It
is especially used Anno 10 Edw. 1. cap. unico, for Lands or Tenements seized by
the Lord, for want of Services due from his Tenant, and so quietly held and
possessed beyond the year and day.

Forestaller.
FOrestaller, is he that buys Corn, Cattle, or other Merchandise whatsoever, by
the way as it comes to Markets, Fairs, or such like places to be sold, to the
intent to sell the same again at a more high and dear price, in prejudice of
the Commonwealth and people, etc.

The pain for such as are convict thereof is, for the first time, two months
Imprisonment, and loss of the value of the thing sold.

The second time, Imprisonment by the space of half a year, and loss of double
value of the Goods, etc.

The third time, Imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, and Judgment of the
Pillory, and to forfeit all his Goods and Chattels. See the Statute 5 Ed. 6.
cap. 14.

Forestall.
FOrestall is, to be quit of Amerciaments and Cattels arrested within your
Land, and the Amerciaments thereof coming.

Founder.
FOunder is he that uses the Art of Melting or Dissolving Metals, and making
any thing thereof by casting in Molds. He seems to have his name from the
Latin word Fundere, and is mentioned in the Statute of 17 R. 2. cap. 1.

Fourcher.
FOurcher is a device used to delay the Plaintiff or Demandant in a Suit
against two, who thereto are not to answer till they both appear, and the
Appearance or Essoin of one will excuse the others Default at that day; and
they agree, that the one shall be essoined or appear one day, and for lack of
the Appearance of the other, have day over to appear, and the other party shall
have the same day; and at that day the other will appear or be essoined, and he
that appeared or was essoined before will not then appear, because he hoped to
have another day by the Adjournment of the party who then appeared or was
essoined. This is called Fourcher, and in some cases the mischief thereby is
remedied by the Statute of Gloucest. cap. 10. and Westminster. 1. cap. 42.

Franchise.
FRanchise is a French word, and signifies in our Law an Immunity or Exemption
from ordinary Jurisdiction; as for a Corporation to hold Pleas within
themselves to such a value, and the like. See of this in the Old Not. Brev.
fol. 4. a, b.

Franchise Royal.
FRanchise Royal is, where the King grants to one and his Heirs that they shall
be quit of Toll, or such like.

Free Alms.
FRee Alms is, where in ancient times Lands were given to an Abbot and his
Covent, or to a Dean and his Chapter, and to their Successors, in pure and
perpetual Alms, without expressing any Service certain; this is
Frank-almoigne; and such are bound before God to make Oraisons and Prayers for
the Donor and his Heirs, and therefore they do no Fealty; and if such as have
Lands in Frank-almoigne perform no Prayers nor Divine Service for the Souls of
the Donors, they shall not be compelled by the Donors to do it, but the Donors
may complain to the Ordinary, praying him that such negligence be no more, and
the Ordinary of right ought to redress it.

But if an Abbot, etc. holds Lands of his Lord for certain Divine Service to be
done, as to sing every Friday a Mass, or do some other thing; if such Divine
Service be not done, the Lord may distrain, and in such case the Abbot ought to
do Fealty to the Lord: and therefore it is not said Tenure in Frank-almoign,
but Tenure by Divine-Service; for none can hold by Frank-almoign, if any
certain Service be expressed.

Frank Bank.
FRank Bank, or Free Bench, are Copihold-Lands, which the Wife being married a
Virgin, has after the decease of her husband for her Dower, Kitch. f. 102.
Bract lib. 4. tract. 6. cap. 13. number. 2. has these words; There is a custom in
those parts, that the Wives, their Husbands being dead, should have Frank Bank
of Lands of Sockmans, and hold it in name of Dower. Fitzh. calls this a Custom
by which in some Cities the Wife shall have all the Lands of her Husband for
Dower, N. B. fol. 150. See Plow. fol. 411.

Frank Chase.
FRank Chase is a Liberty, by which all men having Land within this compass are
prohibited to cut down the Wood, or discover, etc. without the view of the
Forrester, although it be his own. Crom. Jur. f. 187.

Frank Fee.
TO hold in Frank Fee, is, to hold in Fee-simple Lands pleadable at the Common
Law, and not in ancient Demesne.

Frank Law.
FRank Law: See Crom. Just. of Peace, f. 151. where you may find what this is
by the contrary: for he that for an Offense, as Conspiracy, loses his Frank
Law, is said to fall into these Mischiefs. First, that he shall never be
Impanelled upon any Jury or Assize, or otherwise used in saying any Truth:
Also, if he have any thing to do in the Kings Court, he shall not approach
thither in person, but must appoint his Attorney: 3 His Lands, Goods and
Chattels are to be seized into the Kings hands, and his Lands must be
estrepped, his Trees rooted up, and his Body committed to prison.

Free Marriage.
FRee Marriage is, when a man seized of Land in Fee-simple gives it to another
man and his wife, who is the daughter sister, or otherwise of kin to the Donor
in Free Marriage by virtue of which wards they have an Estate in special tail,
and shall hold the Land of the Donor quit of all manner of Services, until the
fourth degree be past, accounting themselves in the first degree; except
Fealty, which they shall do, because it is incident to all Tenures, saving Free
alms. And such Gift may be made as well after Marriage solemnized, as before.
And a man may give Lands to his Soir in Free Marriage, as well as to his
Daughter, by the opinion of Fitzh. in his Writ of Champertie, H.

But it appears otherwise in Littleton, and in Broke, tit. Frank-marriage, pla.
10. And so it was holden clear in Grays-Inne in Lent, an. 1576. 18 Eliz. by M.
Rhodes, then Reader there.

Frank-plege.
FRank-plege. signifies a Pledge or Surety for Freemen, according to the
ancient Custom of England, for preservation of the public Peace. See the
Statute for View of Frank-pledge, Anno 18 Ed. 2. and see View of Frank-pledge.

Freehold.
Freehold is an Estate that a man has in Lands or Tenements, or Profit to be
taken in Fee-simple, Tail, for term of his own or another life, in Dower, or
by the Courtesse of England: and under that there is no Freehold; for he that
has Estate for years, or holds at will, has no Free-ho^ld, but they are
called Chatels.

And of Free-holds there are two sorts; viz. Freehold in Deed, and Freehold
in Law.

Freehold in Deed is, when a man has entered into Lands or Tenements, and is
seized thereof really and actually: As if the Father seized of Lands or
Teuements in Fee-simple dies, and his son enters into the same as heir to his
Father, then he has a Freehold in Deed by his Entry.

Freehold in Law is, when Lands or Tenements are descended to a man, and he
may enter into them when he will, but has not yet made his Entry in Deed: As
in the case aforesaid, if the Father, being seized of Lands in Fee, die seized,
and they descend to his Son, but the Son has not entered into them in Deed, now
befort his Entry he has a Freehold in Law.

Frenchman.
Frenchman was wont to be used for every Outlandishman, Bracton, Lib. 3.
Tract. 2. cap. 15. See Engleshery.

Frendless man.
FRendless man was the old Saxon word for him we call an Outlaw; nam forisfecit
Amcos suos. Bracton, Lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap. 12.

Fresh Force.
FResh Force (Frisca Forcia) is a force committed in any City or Borough, as by
Disseisin, Abatement, Intrusion, or Deforcement of any Lands or Tenements
within the said City or Borough. For the redressing of which wrong, he that
has right may by the Usage of the said City or Borough have his remedy without
Writ, by an Assise or Bill of Fresh Force brought within 40 days after the
Force committed, or Title to him accrued. In which Action he may make his
protestation to sue in the nature of what Writ he will. And see for this matter
Fitzh. Not. Bre. f. 7. C. and Old N. B. f. 4. a.

Fresh Suit.
FResh Suit is, when a man is robbed, and the party so robbed follows the Felon
immediately, and takes him with the manner, or therwise, and then brings an
Appeal against him, and does convict him of the Felony by Verdict; which thing
being enquired of for the King, and found, the party robbed shall have
restitution of his goods again.

Also it may be said, that the party made Fresh Suit, although he take not the
Thief presently, but that it be half a year or a year after the Robbery done
before he be taken; if so be the party robbed do what lies in him, by diligent
enquiry and search, to take him; yea, although he be taken by some other body,
yet this shall be said Fresh Suit.

Fresh Suit is also, when the Lord comes to distrain for Rent or Service, and
the Owner of the Beasts makes rescous, and drives them into another Ground not
holden of the Lord, and the Lord follows presently and takes them. And so in
other like cases.

Friperer.
FRiperer is a word used in the Statute of 1 Jac. c. 21. for a kind of Broker.
And it seems to be a word taken from the French word Fripier, to trick up old
things; and therefore a Friperer is one that uses to dress old Clothes to sell
again.

Frumgyld.
FRumgyld is an old Saxon word, which signifies the first payment made to the
Kindred of a slain person, in recompense of his Murder, L. L. Edmundi, c. ult.

Fugitives goods.
FUgitives Goods are the proper goods of him that flies upon felony, which,
after the flight lawfully found, do belong to the King. Coke, vol. 6. f. 109. b.

G.
Gable.
GAble, Gablum, in ancient Records is an old word that signifies a Rent, Duty,
Custom, or Service yielded or done to the King, or any other Lord See the
Comment upon Littl. fol. 142. a.

Gager de deliverance.
GAger de deliverance is, where one sues a Repleven of goods taken, but he has
not the goods delivered, and the other avows, and the Plaintiff shows that the
Defendant is yet possessed of the goods, etc. and prays, that the Defendant may
gage the Deliverance; then he shall put in Surety or Pledges for the
Redeliverance, and a Writ shall go forth to the Sheriff to redeliver the goods,
etc, But if a man claim property, he shall not gage Deliverance.

And if he say that the Beasts are dead in the Pound, he shall not gage, etc.

Also a man shall never gage the Deliverance before they are at Issue, or
Demurter in the Law, as it is said.

Gainage.
GAinage (Wainagium) seems to come from the French word Gaignage, id est, Gain
or Profit; but in our Law it signifies the Profit most properly that comes by
the Tillage of Land. And therefore in the Statute of Mag. Chart. c. 14. it is
Enacted, that a Villain shall be amerced, saving his Gainage; and in West. 1.
c. 6. saving his Gainure; and in c. 17. it is Enacted, That he that deforces
any of the deliverances of his Beasts by Replevin, shall render unto the
Plaintiff his double Damages which he has sustained in his Beasts, or in his
Gainage disturbed, etc. And by the Statute of Distress of the Exchequer made in
51 H. 3. it is Enacted, That no man of Religion, or other, shall be distrained
by the Beasts that gain his Land.

Galli-halpens.
GAlli-halpens were a certain Coin prohibited by the Stat. An. 3. H. 5. c. 1.

Jail.
Jail, or Gayle, comes of the French word Geole, which signifies a Cage for
Birds, but metaphorically is used for a Prison. And from thence the Keeper of
the Prison is called a Jailer or Gayler.

Garb.
Garb comes of the French Garb vel Gerbe, which signifies a Bundle or Sheaf.
This word is used in the old Stat. called Charta de Foresta, cap. 7. where
Herbas in the Latin is translated Garb in English.

Garble.
GArble, is is to sort and choose the good from the bad, as the Garbling of
Bow-staves, Anno 1 R. 3. c. 11. and the Garbling of Spice is nothing else but
to purify it from the Dross with which it is mixed. See of this at large in
the Statute of 1 Jac. c. 19.

Guard.
Guard, or Ward, is, when an Infant, whose Ancestor held by Knights Service, is
in the Ward or Keeping of the Lord of whom those Lands were holden. And if the
Tenant hold of diverse Lords, diverse Lands, the Lord of whom the Land is holden
by Priority, that is, by the more elder Tenure, shall hade the Wardship: But if
one Tenure be as old as the other, then he that first gets the Ward of the Body
shall keep it: But every Lord shall have the Ward of the Land that is holden of
him. And if the Tenant hold any Land of the King in chief, he by his
Prerogative shall have the Ward of the Body, and of all the Land that is holden
of him, and of every other Lord.

Also there are diverse Writs of Ward. One is a Writ of Right of Ward, and that
lies where the Tenant dies, his Heir within age, and a Stranger enters into the
Land, and happens to have the Ward of the Body of the Infant.

A Writ of Ejectment of Ward lies, where a man is put out of the Ward of the
Land, without the Body of the Infant.

A Writ of Ravishment of Ward lies, where the Body is taken from him only, and
not the Land.

But see the Stat. 12 Car. 2. c. 24. for Abolishing the Court of Wards, etc.

Guardian.
Guardian or Wardein most properly is he that has the Wardship or Keeping of an
Heir, and of his Land holden by Knights Service, or of one of them, to his own
use, during the Nonage of the Heir; and within that time has the bestowing of
the Body of the Heir in Marriage at his pleasure, without disparagement.

And of Wa ^^ ens there are two sorts; namely Guardian in Right, and Guardian in
Deed.

Guardian in Right is he that by reason of his Seigniory is seized of the
Wardship or keeping of the Land and Heir, during his Nonage.

Guardian in Deed is, where the Lord after his Seifin, as aforesaid, grants by
Deed, or without Deed, the Wardship of the Land, or Heir, or both, to another,
by force of which Grant the Grantee is in possession: The Grantee is called
Guardian in Deed.

And this Guardian in Deed may grant the Heir to another also: but that other is
not properly called Guardian in Deed, but Grantee of the Guardian in Right only.

But the Guardian in Socage has the profit only to the use of the Heir, until
he accomplish the age of 14 years, and must yield therefore an account to the
Heir. See more hereof, Littleton, lib. 2. cap. 4, and 5. and Stamford upon the
Statute of Prerogat. cap. 1, 2, and 6.

Churchwardens.
Churchwardens are Officers chosen in every Parish, to have the care and
custody of the Church Goods; and they may have an Action for the Goods of the
Church, and diverse other things they may do for the benefit of the Church: and
by the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 2. they are to join with the Overseers for the
making of Rates and other Provisions for the Poor of the Parish.

Guardian of the Spiritualties.
Guardian of the Spiritualties, by the general Law is the Dean and Chapter of
the Diocese, unless there be a Custom that the Archbishop of the Province
should be the Gardein, sede vacant, His office is to hold Courts, prove Wills,
grant Administrations, and supply the Bishops room.

Garnishment.
GArnishment: If an Action of Detinue of Charters be brought against one, and
the Defendant says, that the Charters were delivered to him by the Plaintiff
and by another upon certain Conditions, and prays. That the other may be warned
to plead with the Plaintiff, if the Conditions be performed or no, and
thereupon a Writ of Scire facias shall go forth against him; this is called
Garnishment: and the other, when he comes, shall plead with the Plaintiff; and
that is called Enterpleader.

Garranty.
GArranty is, when one is bound to another who has Land, to warrant the same
to him; which may be two ways: that is, by Deed of Law; As if one and his
Ancestors has held Land of another and his Ancestors, time out of mind, by
Homage, which is called Homage Auncestrel: Or by Deed of the party, who grants
by Deed or Fine to the Tenant of the Land to Warrant it to him; upon which, if
the Tenant be impleaded by him who ought to warrant or his Heirs, the Tenant
shall bar the Demandant by pleading the Warranty against him, which is called
Rebutter; or if he be impleaded by another in an Action wherein he may vouch,
he shall vouch him who warranted; or his Heirs, and if the Plaintiff recover,
the Tenant shall recover in value against the Voucher.

Garranty is of three sorts; that is, Garranty Lineal, Garranty Collateral, and
Garranty that begins by Disseisin.

Warranty Lineal, is, where a man seized in fee or in tail, makes a Feoffment
to another, and binds him and his heirs to Warranty, and has issue a son, and
dies, and the warranty disceuds to his son. For if no Deed with Warranty had
been made, then the right of the Lands should have descended to the son, as
heir to his father, and he shall convey the Descent from the father to the son.

But if Tenant in tail discontinues the tail, and has issue, and dies, and the
Uncle of the Issue releases to the Discontinuee with Warranty, etc. and dies
without issue; this is a Collateral Warranty to issue in tail, for that the
Warranty discends upon the Issue, who may not convey himself to the tail by
mean of his Uncle.

And in every Case where a man demands Lands in Feetail by Writ of Formedon, if
any Ancestor of the Issue in tail makes a Warranty, and he that sues a Writ of
Formedon, by possibility of matter that may be done, conveys to him Title by
force of his Gift that made the Warranty, etc. that is then a Lineal Warranty,
whereby the Issue in tail shall not be barred, except he have Assets to him
descended in Fee-simple. But if he may not by any possibility convey to him
Title by force of his Gift that made the warranty, then that is a Collateral
Warranty, and thereby the Issue in tail shall be barred without any Assets. And
the cause that such a Collateral Warranty is a Bar to the Issue in the tail is,
for that all Warranties, before the Statute of Gloucester, which descended to
those who are Heirs to the warrantors, were Bars to the same Heirs to demand
any Lands, except the warranties that began by Disseisin; and for that the said
Statute has ordained, That the warranty of the Father shall be no Bar to his
Son for the Lands which come by the Heritage of the Mother, nor the Warranty of
the Mother shall be no Bar to the Son for the Lands which come by the Heritage
of the Father; and neither the Stat. 11 H. 7. cap. 20. nor any other Statute,
has ordained any remedy against any other Collateral Warranty; therefore such
Warranty is yet in force, and shall be a bar to the Issue in tail, as it was
before the Statute.

And it behooves that every Warranty, whereby the Heir shall be barred, descend
by course of the Common Law to him who is Heir to the Warrantor; else it shall
be no Bar: for if the Tenant in Tail of Lands in Borough English, where the
youngest son shall Inherit by the Custom, discontinues the tail, and has
Issue two sons, and the Uncle releases to the Discontinuee with Warranty, and
dies, and the younger Son brings a Formedon; yet he shall not be barred by such
Warranty, causa qua supra. And if any man make a Deed with Warranty, whereby
his Heir should be barred, and after the Warrantor be attaint of Felony; his
Heir shall not be barred by such Warranty, for that such Warranty cannot
descend upon him, the blood being corrupt.

Warranty beginning by Disfeisin is, if the son purchase Lands, and let them to
his Father for years, and the Father by the Deed infeoffs a stranger, and binds
him and his Heirs to Warranty, and the Father dies, whereby the warranty
discends to the son; yet this warranty shall not bar the son, but the son may
well enter notwithstanding, because this Warranty began by Disseisin, when the
Father made the Feoffment, which was a Disseisin to the son. And as it is said
of the Father, so it may be said of every other Ancestor. And the same Law is,
if the Ancestor be Tenant by Elegit, or by Statute-Merchant, and make a
Feoffment with warranty, such Warranties shall be no Bars, because they begin
by Disseisin.

Garranty of Charters.
GArranty of Charters, is a Writ that lies where any Deed is made that
comprehends a clause of Warranty, that is to say, Dedi or Concessi, or this
word Warrantizabo; and if the Tenant be impleaded by a Stranger in Assise or
such Action where he may not vouch to warranty, then he shall hate this Writ
against his Feoffor or his Heir; and if the Land be recovered against him, he
shall recover as much Land in value against him that made the Warranty. But
this Writ ought to be sued depending the first Writ against him, else he has
lost his advantage.

Also upon a Warranty in the Law, as upon Homage auncestrel, or upon Rent
reserved upon a Lease for Life, or a Gift in the tail, a man shall have a Writ
of Warrantia Chartae, but not upon Escuage.

Garrantie del jour.
GArranty del jour. See for that Warrantia diei.

Gavelet.
GAvelet is a special and ancient kind of Cessavit, used in Kent, where the
Custom of Gavelkinde continues, whereby the Tenant shall forfeit his Lands or
Tenements to the Lord of whom they are holden, if he withdraw from his Lord his
due Rents and Services, after this manner:

If any Tenant in Gavelkind withhold his Rent and Services of the Tenement he
holds of his Lord, let the Lord seek by the award of his Court, from three
weeks to three weeks, to find some Distress upon the Tenement until the fourth
Court, always with witnesses. And if within that time he can find no Distress
on that Tenement, whereby he may have Justice of his Tenant, then at the fourth
Court let it be awarded, that he take that Tenement into his hand in name of a
Distress, as if it were an Ox or Cow, and let him keep it a year and a day in
his hand without manuring it: within which Term, if the Tenant come and pay his
arrerages, and make reasonable amends for the withholding, then let him have
and enjoy his Tenement, as his Ancestors and he before held it: and if he do
not come before the year and day past, then let the Lord go to the next
County Court with his Witnesses of his own Court, and pronounce there this
Process to have farther Witnesses; and by the award of his Court (after the
County Court holden) he shall enter and manure in those Lands and Tenements as
in his own.

And if the Tenant come afterward, and will re-have his Tenements, and hold
them as he did before, let him make Agreement with the Lord, according as it is
anciently said,

Has he not since any thing given, nor has he not since any thing paid? then
let him pay v. li. for his Were, before he become Tenant, or Holder again. See
hereof 10 H. 3. Fitzh. Cessavit 60. and Stat. 10 Ed. 2: of Gavelet in London,
in the Collection of Statutes, London 2. matter much tending to this purpose,
that by this word Gavelet, the Lord shall have the Land for the cessing of the
Tenant. And see Westminster. 2. ca. 21. which gives Cessavit.

There be some Copies which have the first Verse thus Written;

Nisith yield, and Nisith gelde: And others thus;

Nighesith yield, and nighesith geld.

But these differ not in signification. Other Copies have it thus;

Nigondsith seld, and nigondsith geld:

That is, Let him nine times pay, and nine times repay.

Gavel-kinde.
GAvel-kinde is a Custom annexed and going with Lands in Kent, called
Gavel-kind-lands, holden by ancient Socage Tenure. And it is thought by the
skilful in Antiquities, to be called Gavel-kinde, of Give all Kin, that is,
to all the Kindred in one Line, according as it is used among the Germans, from
whom we Englishmen, and chiefly of Kent, come. Or else it is called
Gavel-kine, of Give all kind, that is, to all the Male-children, for Kind in
Dutch signifies a Male-childe. And diverse other like conjectures are made
touching Gavel-kinde, which I omit.

The most usual Customs are, That the Land is dividable between the
Heirs-male; and that the Heir of the age of fifteen years may give and sell his
Land; and shall inherit, although his Father be attainted and hanged for
Felony; and his wife shall be endowed of half the Land whereof her husband died
seized; and the husband shall be Tenant by the Curtesse of the half, although
he have no issue by his wife; but the Estate of the husband and wife ceases by
their second Marriage. And diverse other Customs are used in Kent of the Lands
in Gavel-kinde, for which see Lambert's Perambulation of Kent.

Gawgeour.
GAwgeour is an Officer of the King appointed to search all Tuns, Hogsheads,
Pipes, Barrels and Tertians of Wine, Oil, Honey, Butter, and to give them a
Mark of allowance before they are sold in any place. And because this mark is a
Circle made with an Iron Instrument for that purpose, it seems he takes his
name from thence. Touching this Office there have been made many Statutes: the
first is An. 27 E. 3. cap. 8. and the others are, 4 R. 2. cap. 1. 18 H. 6. c.
17. 23 H. 6. c. 16. 1 R. 3. cap. 13. and 28 H. 8. c. 14.

Gersuma.
GErsuma is an obsolete word, for a Fine or Sum of money; it is often found in
ancient Records. See Sir Hen. Spelmans Glossarium.

Gild.
GIld, alias Geld, has diverse significations: as sometimes a Tribute;
othertimes an Amerciament; thirdly, a Fraternity or Company combined together
by Orders and Laws made amongst themselves with the Kings License. Cambden
cites many Antiquities, whereby it appears to signify a tribute or tax; as
page 135, 139, 159, 168, 178. Crompton, in his Jurisdictions, fol. 191. shows
it to be an Amerciament, as Footgeld; yet fol. 197. he says, to be quit of all
manner of Gelds, is to be discharged of all manner of Prestations to be made
for gathering of Sheaves of Corn, young Lambs, and Wool, to the use of the
Foresters.

Also Cambden, page 149. dividing Suffolk into three parts, calls the first
Gildable, because tribute is thence gathered. And the Statutes Anno 27 Edw. 3.
Stat. 2. cap. 13. and Anno 11 H. 7. cap. 9. use Gildable in the same sense; and
so the Statute Anno 27 H. 8. cap. 26. Hence Lambert in the word Contubernalis
is persuaded that the common word Gild or Gild-hall proceeds, being a
Fraternity or Communalty of men gathered in one Combination, supporting their
common charge by a mutual Contribution. And in the Reg. Orig. fol. 219. b.
there is Gildam Mercatoriam, which seems to be a certain Liberty or Privilege
appertaining to Merchants, whereby they are enabled to hold certain Pleas of
Land within their own Precincts. This word Gilds or Guilds is so used Anno 27
E. 3. cap. 51. and Anno 15 R. 2. c. 5. And Guildhalda Teutonicorum is used for
the Fraternity of Easterling Merchants in London called the Stillyard, Anno 22
H. 8. c. 8. See Coke, l. 8. f. 125.

Gisarms.
GIsarms was a certain Weapon, mentioned 13 E. 1. Stat. 3. c. 6. Fleta writes
it Sisarmes, l. 1. cap. 24.

Glebe.
GLebe, are Lands of which the Rector or Vicar are seized in Jurae Ecclesiae.

Gors.
GOrs (Gurges) is a Pool or or Pit of water to keep fish in, by the Grant
whereof the Soil it self passes; and a Praecipe quod reddat lies of it, as you
may see in 4 Ed. 3. 29. b. and 8 E. 3. 13. a. and F. N. B. 191. H.

Granage.
GRanage, is a Duty in London, viz. the twentieth part of Salt Imported by an
Alien, and due to the Mayor, Dyer 352.

Grand Cape.
GRand Cape. Look for it after in the Title Petit Cape.

Grand distress.
GRand Distress. See of that before in the Title Distress.

Grand Serjeanty.
GRand Serjeanty is, where a man holds of the King certain Land by the Service
of carrying his Banner or Lance, or to lead his Host, or to be his Carver or
Butler at his Coronation, or the like; and that is the most Honorable Service
that a Tenant may do, and for that it is called Grand Serjeanty. But Petit
Serjeanty is, when one holds of the King, paying him yearly a Bow, a Sword, a
Spear, or such like; and that is but Socage in effect: but a man cannot hold in
Grand Serjeanty or Petit Serjeanty but of the King. Also if a Tenant by Grand
Serjeanty dies, his Heir, being of full age, shall pay to the King for Relief
the value of the Lands, besides the charges that he pays to the King by Grand
Serjeanty: but he that holds by Escuage shall pay for his Relief but C. 5.

Those that are in the Marches of Scotland, who hold of the King by Cornage,
that is, to blow an Horn when the Scots enter England, are Tenants in Grand
Serjeanty.

Also where a man holds of the King to find a man in his Wars within the Realm,
that is called Grand Serjeanty, because it is done by a man's Body: And if the
Tenant cannot find a man to do it, he is bound to do it himself.

But see the Stat. 12 Car. 2. c. 24. whereby all Tenures are now turned into
Free and Common Socage.

Gree.
GRee comes of the French word ( Gre) good liking; and it signifies in our Law,
Contentment or Satisfaction: as in the Statute of 1 R. 2. c. 15. to make Gree
to the parties is to give them Contentment or Satisfaction for an Offense done
unto them.

Green hew.
GReen hew is all one with Vert, as appears by Manwood in his Forest Laws, cap.
6. sect. 5. And for it see Vert.

Green Wax.
GReen Wax is a word used in the Statutes of 42 E. 3. c. 9. and 7 H. 4. c. 3.
and signifies the Estreats of Issues, Fines and Amerciaments in the Exchequer,
and delivered out to the Sheriffs under the Seal of the Court, to be levied by
them in their several Counties.

Grithbreach.
GRithbreach, that is, the Kings Peace broken; because Grith in English is Pax
in Latin.

Gule of August.
GUle of August is the first day or the Calends of August, which in the time of
E. 1. and E. 3. was called ordinarily the Gule of August, as appears by F. N.
B. f. 62. l. and Plowdens Com. f. 316. b. It is the very day of S. Peter ad
vincula; and the reason why it was called the Gule of August, is conceived upon
a Story recorded by Durandus in his Rationale Divinorum, l. 7. c. 19. of a
Miracle wrought by S. Peter's Chain upon the daughter of one Quirinus a Tribune
of Rome, who by the kissing of that Chain was healed of the Kings Evil in her
Throat ( gula.) And see Hospinian. de origin festornm, f. 85. b.

Gultwit.
GUltwit is an Amends for Trespass, according to Saxton in his Description of
England, c. 11.

H.
Habeas Corpus.
HAbeas Corpus is a writ which a man indicted of any Trespass before Justices of
the Peace, or in a Court of any Franchise, and upon his Apprehenston being laid
in Prisost for the same, may have out of the Kings Bench, thereby to remove
himself hither at his own Costs, and to answer the Cause there. F. N. B. f.
250. h. And the order in this case is, first to procure a Certiorari out of the
Chancery, directed to the said Justices, for the removing of the Indictment
into the Kings Bench; and upon that to procure this writ to the Sheriff, to
cause his Body to be brought at a day, Reg. Judic. f. 81. where you may find
many cases wherein this writ shall be used.

Habeas Corpora.
HAbeas Corpora, is a writ which lies against a Jury, or any of them that
refuse to come upon the Venire facias, for the Trial of a Cause brought to
issue.

Habendum.
HAbendum is a word of form in a Conveyance, to the true understanding whereof
it is to be observed, That in every Deed or Conveyance there are two principal
parts, the Premisse, and the Habendum.

The Office of the Premises is, to express the Name of the Grantor, the
Grantee, and the thing to be granted. The Office of the Habendum is, to limit
the Estate, so that the general Implication of the Estate, which by
construction of Law passes in the Premises, is by the Habendum controlled and
qualified: as in a Lease to two men, Habendum to the one for life, the
Remainder to the other for life, alters the general Implication of the
Joynt-tenancy in the Freehold, which passes by the Premises, if the Habendum
were not. See Coke, l. 2. c. 55.

HAbere facias Seisinam.
Habere facias Seisinam is a Writ Judicial, that lies where one has recovered
certain Lands in the Kings Court; then he shall have this writ directed to the
Sheriff, commanding him to give him Seisin of that Land, and it shall not be
retornable.

Habere facias Visum.
HAbere facias Visum is a writ that lies in diverse Cases, where view is to be
taken of the Lands or Tenements in question. See F. N. B. In Indice, verbo
View; and Bract. l. 5. tract. 3. c. 8.

Half-blood.
HAlf blood. See Demysank.

Half Seal.
HAlf Seal is a Seal used in Chancery for the Sealing of Commissions to
Delegates upon an Appeal in a Cause civil or marine, as it appears by the
Statute made in 8 Eliz. c. 3.

Halymote.
HAlymote is a Court Baron, as appears by Manwood in his Forest Laws, c. 23. f.
217. a. And it is called Halymote, that is, the Meeting of the Tenants of one
Hall or Manor.

Hambling, or Hoxing of Dogs.
HAmbling, or Hoxing, or Hock-sinewing of Dogs, are old Forest terms for the
Lawing of Dogs, when the Custom was (as appears in Manwood's Forest Laws, c.
16. sect. 12.) to cut or gash Dogs in the Hamms; but now they use to do it in
their Feet. Of which see Expeditate.

Hand-gun.
HAnd-gun is an Engine which is prohibited to be used and carried about by the
Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 6. And though a Dag was invented of late time, and after
the making of the said Act, and is not known by the name of Hand-gun, but a
special name; yet the carrying of a Dag is within the said Act, and
comprehended within the word Hand-gun. So whereas Cross-bows are forbidden by
the said Act, thereby Stone-bows are also forbidden. See Coke, l. 5. f. 71, 72.

Hangwit.
HAngwit is, to be quit of a Thief or Felon hanged without Judgment, or escaped
out of your custody.

Hanper.
HAnper of the Chancery, Anno 10, R. 2. c. 1. seems to signify as Fiscus
originally does in Latin.

Haque.
HAque is a little Hand-gun of three quarters of a yard long, and it is
mentioned in the Statutes of 33 H. 8. c. 6. and 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 14. There is
also mention made of an half Haque.

Haquebut.
HAquebut is a Gun mentioned in the Statute of 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 14. and it is
all one with an Harquebuze.

Hariot, or Heriot.
HAriot is of two sorts; Hariot Custom, and Hariot Service.

Hariot Service is often expressed in a man's Grant or Deed, that he holds by
such Service to pay Hariot at the time of his death. And this Hariot is payable
after the death of the Tenant in Fee-simple.

Hariot Custom is, where Hariots have been paid time out of mind by Custom. And
this may be after the death of the Tenant for life, etc. But to speak thereof
generally:

Hariot is the best Beast (whether it be Horse, Ox, or Cow) that the Tenant had
at the time of his death. And a Distress may be either seized or taken for it,
whether it be Hariot Service, or Hariot Custom, to the Lords use of whom the
Tenant held, by his Bailiff or other Officers. But of right neither the Lord
nor his Officer should take Hariot, before it be presented at the next Court
holden after the Tenant is dead, that such a Beast is due for his Hariot.

Haward.
HAward, or Hayward, is an Officer appointed in every Town to be the Common
Herd of the Town: and he is so called, either for that it is one part of his
Office to keep the Hedges of enclosed Grounds, so that they be not cropped or
broken down; or because he keeps the Grass from hurt and destruction of Cattle,
so that Hay may be made thereof. He is an Officer sworn in the Lords Court: For
which Oath, see Kitch. fol. 46.

Hawkers.
HAwkers is a word used in the Statutes 25 H. 8. cap. 9. and 33 Hen. 8. cap. 4.
for Tinkers that go from place to place through the Country, and by color of
the Kings Letters Patents or Placards buy and sell Brass and Pewter, and cozens
the Kings people both in the weight and in the stuff.

Hey-bote, or Hedge-bote.
HEy-bote, ou Hedge-bote, is necessary Stuff to make and mend Hedges, which the
Lessee for years or for life of common right may take upon the Ground to him
leased, although it be not expressed in his Lease, and although it be a Lease
by Word, without Writing.

Heybote also may be taken for necessary Stuff to make Rakes, Forks, and such
like Instruments, wherewith men use in Summer to read and make Hay. And so
Lessee for years took it, and it was allowed him by his Lessor, the rather, as
I suppose, for that such Instruments are commonly made of slendtr Underwood,
which by the Common Law the Lessee for years may cut and take as aforesaid.

Head-borow.
HEad-borow is compounded of two words, Heofed, id est, Head, and Borhe, id
est, Pledge. So that Head-borow signifies the chief of the three Pledges in a
Decennary within a Lect, or he that had the Government of those that are within
his own Pledge. And he was called Head-borough, or Borow-head, or
Boroughs-holder, or Third-borough, or Tithing-man, or Chief-Pledge, or
Borow-Elder, according to the diversity of speech in diverse places. And to this
day he is now called a Constable.

Head-silver.
HEadsilver. See Common Fine.

Heireloome.
HEireloome, is any piece of Household Stuff, which, by the Custom of some
Countries, having belonged to a House for certain discents, goes with the House
(after the death of the Owner) unto the Heir, and not to the Executors.

Herbage.
HErbage is the Fruit of the Earth provided by Nature for the bit or mouth of
the Cattle: But it is commonly used for a Liberty to feed ones Cattle in
another man's ground, as in the Forest, etc. Cromp. Juris. fol. 197.

Heretico, or Haeretico comburendo.
HAEretico comburendo is a Writ that lies against him who is an Heretic, that
is, who having been once convicted of Heresy by the Bishop, and having abjured
it, afterward falls into it again, or into some other, and is thereupon
committed to the Secular Power.

And Brit. lib. 1. cap. 17. says. That by the Common Law those persons who
Feloniously burn the Corn or Houses of others, Sorcerers and Sorcecesses,
Sodomitical persons and Heretics, should be burnt and consumed.

This Writ is taken away by the Statute of K. C. 2.

Hermitage and Hermit.
Hermit is a Religious Man, who devotes himself to live solitary in any
private Place, Church, Monastery, etc. And his place is called an Hermitage.
And of it a Prohibition lies, Not. Br. 34. G.

Hidage.
HIdage is to be quit, if the King shall tax all the Land by Hides.

Note, that a Hide of Land is a whole Plough-land. And this kind of Taxing by
Hides was much used in old time, as well for provision of Armor, as payments
of Money; and that chiefly in King Etheldred's days, who in the year of Christ,
1006. when the Danes landed at Sandwich in Kent, taxed all his Land by Hides
thus; That every 310 Hides of Land should find one Ship furnished, and every
eight Hides should find one Jack and one Saddle, for the defense of the Realm.

Hoblers.
HOblers are mentioned in the Statute of 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 8. to be such
men as by their Tenure are bound to keep a little Nag, to give notice of any
Invasion, or other danger that happens near the Seaside where they dwell.

Hoghenhine.
HOghenhine, is he who comes Guest-wise to a house, and there lies the third
night, after which time he is accounted one of his Family in whose house he
lies; and if he offend the Kings Peace, his Host must be answerable for him.
Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. In the Laws of King E^ward, set forth by
Lambert, he is called Agenhine, where you may read more of this matter.

Homage.
HOmage in our Books is twofold. viz. Homagium ligeum, and that is as much as
Ligeance, of which Bracton speaks, lib. 3. cap. 35. fol. 79. Soli Regi debetur
sine Dominio seu Servitio. And the other is Homagium feudale, which has his
original by Tenure. In Fitzh. N. B. fol. 269. there is a Writ for respiting
this later Homage, which is due by reason of the Fee or Tenure. But Homagium
ligeum is inherent and inseparable, and cannot be respited.

Homage, by reason of Fee or Tenure is defined to be a Service which shall be
made in this manner: The Tenant in Fee or Fee-tail that holds by Homage, shall
kneel upon both his knees ungirded, and the Lord shall sit, and hold the hands
of his Tenant between his hands, and the Tenant shall say, I become your man
from this day forward of life and member, and of earthly honor, and to you
shall be faithful and true, and shall bear to you faith for the Lands that I
claim to hold of you, saving that Faith I owe to our Lord the King: and then
the Lord so sitting shall kiss him.

How Fealty shall be done, look before in Fealty.

The Steward of the Lord may take Fealty, but not Homage. See the Statute 12
Car. 2. cap. 24.

Homage auncestrel.
HOmage auncestrel is, where a man and his Ancestors, time out of mind, held
their Land of their Lord by Homage. And if such Lord has received Homage, he
is bound to acquit the Tenant against all other Lords above him of every manner
Service. And if the Tenant has done Homage to his Lord, and is impleaded, and
vouches the Lord to Warranty; the Lord is bound to warrant him: and if the
Tenant lose, he shall recover in value against the Lord so much of the Lands as
he had at the time of the Voucher, or at any time after. Also if a man that
holds his Land by Homage auncestrel alien the Land in fee, then the Alienee
shall do Homage to his Lord; but he shall not hold by Homage auncestrel, for
that the continuance of the Tenancy in the Blood of the first Tenant is
discontinued.

Homagio respectuando.
HOmagio respectuando is a Writ directed to the Escheatour, commanding him to
deliver Seisin to the Heir of his Lands at his full age, although he has not
made his Homage. Of which see Fitz. N. B. f. 269. A.

Homesoken.
HOmesoken, or Hamesoken, is, to be quit of Amerciaments for Entering into
Houses violently and without license, and contrary to the Peace of the King:
And that you hold Plea of such Trespass done in your Court, and in your Land.

Homicide, or Manslaughter.
HOmicide, or Manslaughter, is the Killing of a Man felonioussy, without
malice forethought It is also defined thus, Homicide is the killing of a man by
a man. But if it be done by a Dog, Ox, or other thing, it is not properly
called Homicide. It is called Homicidium, ab homine and cado, quasi Hominis
caedium.

Homine capto in Withernamium.
HOmine capto in Withernamium, is a Writ to take him that has taken any
Bondman or Woman, and led him or her out of the County, so that he or she
cannot be replevied according to Law. Reg. Orig. fol. 79. a.

Homine replegiando.
HOmine replegiando is a Writ to deliver men out of Prison upon Bail. In what
cases it lies, and in what not, see in Fitz. N. B. f. 66. E. and see here in
the Title of Replevin in the end.

See Replevin.

Honor.
Honor, besides the general signification, is used specially for the most
noble sort of Lordships, whereof other inferior Lordships or Manors depend by
performance of Customs and Services, some or other, to those that are Lords of
them. And it seems there are no Honors but those which originally appertained
to the King; yet they may afterward be given in Fee to Noblemen. The manner of
Creating these Honors, may in part be collected out of the Statutes of Anno 31
Hen. 8. chapter 5. where Hampton Court is made an Honor; and Anno 33 ejusd.
cap. 37, and 38. whereby Amptil and Grafton are likewise made Honors; and Anno
37 ejusd. cap. 18. whereby the King has power given him by his Letters Patents
to erect four several Honors, Westminster, Kingston upon Hull, S. Osithes in
Essex, and Dodington in Barkshire.

Hornegeld.
HOrnegeld is, to the quit of certain Custom exacted by Tillage through all
the Land, of whatsoever horned Beast.

Horse de son Fee.
Horse de son Fee, is an Exception to avoid an Action for Rent issuing out of
certain Land, by him who pretends to be the Lord, or for some Customs or
Services; for if he can justify that the Land is without the compass of his
Fee, the Action falls. Broke hoc Tit. 7, 8. and 1 Institut. 1. b.

Hospitallers.
HOspitallers (Hospitularii) an Order of Knights first founded at Jerusalem,
and called the Joannites or Knights of St. John of Jerusalem; and they were
called Hospitallers, for that they built an Hospital at Jerusalem for the
entertainment of all such as from any part of the world came to visit the Holy
places, and did guard and protect such Pilgrims in their Iourneys. the
Institution of their Order was first allowed by Pope Gelasius the second, about
the year 1118. And they had many Privileges granted them, as Immunities from
payment of Tithes, etc. And for these they are often mentioned in our Books.
You shall find their Privileges reserved to them in Magna Charta, cap 37. And
you shall see the Right of the Kings Subjects vindicated from the Usurpation of
their Jurisdiction by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 34. Their chief abode is
now in the Island of Melita, commonly called Malta, given them by the Emperor
Charles the Fifth: And for that they are now called Knights of Malta. All the
Lands and Goods of these Knights here in England were put in the disposition of
the King by the Stat. of 32 H. 8. cap. 24.

Hosteler.
HOsteler is an Inholder. Coke Entr. 347.

Hotchpot.
HOtchpot, is a blending or mixing together, and a partition of Lands given in
Frank-marriage, with other Lands in Fee-simple descended. For example, A man
seized of thirty Acres of Land in Fee has issue two Daughters, and gives with
one of his Daughters, to a man that marries her, ten Acres of the same Land in
Frank-marriage, and dies seized of the other twenty Acres. Now if she that is
thus married will have any part of the twenty Acres whereof her Father died
seized, she must put her lands given in Frank-marriage in Hotchpot, that is,
she must refuse to take the sole Profits of the Land given in Frank-marriage,
and suffer the Land to be commixt and mingled together with the other Land
whereof her father died seized, so that an equal Division may be made of the
whole between her and her Sister. And thus for her x Acres she shall have xv;
else her Sister will have the xx Acres of which their Father died seized.

Housebote.
HOusebote is necessary Timber that the Lessee for years or for life, of common
right, may take upon the Ground, to repair the Houses upon the same Ground to
him leased, although it be not expressed in the Lease, and though it be a Lease
by Word, without Deed. But if he take more then is needful, he may be punished
by an Action of Waste.

Hue and Cry.
HUe and Cry, is a pursuit of one having committed Felony by the Highway: for
if the party robbed, or any in the company of one that was murdered or robbed,
comes to the Constable of the next Town, and wills him to raise Hue and Cry, or
to make Pursuit after the Offender, describing the party, and showing, as near
as he can, which way he is gone; the Constable ought forthwith to call upon the
Parish for aid in seeking the Felon; and if he be not found there, then to give
warning to the next Constable, and he to the next to him, until the Offender be
apprehended, or at least until he be so pursued to the Seaside. Of this see
Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 5. Smith de Repub. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 20. and the
Statute of Winchester, made Anno 13 E. 1. and the Statute of 28 E. 3. cap. 11.
and An. 27 El. cap. 13.

Huers.
HUers. See Conders.

Hundred.
HUndreds were divided by King Alfred, after he had divided the whole Realm
into certain parts or sections, which of the Saxon word Scyran, signifying to
cut, he termed Shires, or (as we yet spoke) Shares and Portious. These Shires
be also dividid into smaller Parts; whereof some were called Lathes, of the
word Gelathian, which is to assemble together: others Tithings, because there
were in each of them to the number of Ten persons, whereof each one was Surety
and Pledge for others good abearing: others Hundreds, because they contained
Jurisdiction over one Hundred Men or Pledges, dwelling peradventure in two, or
three, or more Parishes, Boroughs, or Towns, lying and adjoining nevertheless
somewhat near together, in which he appointed Administration of Justice to be
exercised severally among them of the same Hundred, and not that one should run
out disorderly into another Hundred, Lathe, or Tithing, wherein he dwells not.

These Hundreds continue to this day in force, although not altogether to the
same purpose whereunto at first they were appointed, yet still to very needful,
both in time of Peace for good order of Government diverse ways, and in War for
certainty of levying men; as also for the more ready Collection of Payments
granted in Parliament to the Kings of this Realm.

Hundred-Lagh.
HUndred-Lagh signifies the Hundred-Court, from which all the Officers of the
Kings Forest were freed by the Charter of Canutus, cap. 9.

Hundredum.
HUndredum is, to be quit of Money or Customs to be paid to Governors and
Hundredors.

Husfastene.
HUsfastene (quasi Domi fixus) is he that holds House and Land. Bract. lib. 3.
tract. 2. c. 10.

Hustings.
HUstings (Hustingum) is a Court of Common Pleas held before the Major and
Aldermen of London, and it is the highest Court they have, for Error or Attaint
lies there of a Judgment or saise Verdict in the Sheriffs Court, as it appears
by Fitzh. N. B. 22 H. etc. and the Statute of 11 H. 7. cap. 21. And other
Cities and Towns have had a Court of the same name, as Winchester, Lincoln,
York, and Sheppy. So called from the Saxon Hus, Domus, and Thing, Causa; quasi,
Domus Causarum.

I.
Idemptitate, or Identitate nominis.
IDemptiatis nominis, is a Writ that lies where a Writ of Debt, Covenant, or
Account, or such other Writ is brought against a Man, and another that has the
same name with the Defendant, is taken for him; then he shall have this Writ,
by which the Sheriff shall make Inquiry before the Justice assigned in the same
County, if he be the same person or not; and if he be not sound to be the
party, then he shall go without day in peace.

Idiot.
Idiot is he that is a Natural Fool from his Birth, and knows not how to count
Twenty pence, or name his Father or Mother, nor tell his own age, or such like
easy and common matters, so that it appears he has no manner of
Understanding, Reason, or Government of himself. But if he can read, or learn
to read by instruction and information of others, or can measure an Ell of
Cloth, or name the Days of the Week, or beget a Child, or such like, whereby it
may appear he has some light of Reason; such a one is no Idiot naturally.

Jeofaile.
JEofaile is, when the parties to any Suit in Pleading have proceeded so far
that they have joined Issue, which shall be tried, or is tried by a Jury or
Enquest; and this Pleading or Issue is so badly pleaded or joined that it will
be Error if they proceed: then some of the said parties may by their Council
show it to the Court, as well after Verdict given and before Judgment, as
before the Jury is charged. And the Council shall say, This Enquest ye ought
not to take. And if it be after Verdict, then he may say, To judgment you ought
not to go. And because such niceties occassioned many delays in Suits, diverse
Statutes are made to redress them, as well in the time of King H. 8. an. 32. c.
30. as of Queen Eliz. whereof we may say as the Civilians, That although
Constantine the Emperor commanded the forms of the Law to be cut off, yet the
daily use of Pleading does seem again to recall them, or rather, some of them
increase as the heads of Hydra. See also now a new Statute of Jeofailes, made
in 21 Jac. c. 13.

Jetsam.
JEtsam is, when a Ship is in danger to be cast away, and to disburthen the
Ship, the Mariners cast the Goods into the Sea: and although afterward the Ship
perish, none of those goods called Jetsam, Floatsam, or Lagan, are called
Wreck, as long as they remain in or upon the Sea; but if any of them are driven
to Land by the Sea, there they shall be reputed Wreck, and pass by the grant of
Wreck. Coke, l. 5. f. 106.

Jettezoons.
JEttezoons, This is mentioned in Policies of Insurance, and signifies Goods
thrown into the Sea in a great Storm.

Unlawful Assembly.
UNlawful Assembly is, where people assemble themselves together to do some
unlawful thing against the Peace, although they execute not their purpose in
deed.

Imparlance.
IMparlance. See Emparlance.

Impeachment of Waste.
IMpeachment of Waste (Impetitio Vasti) is as much as to say as a Demand made
or to be made of Recompense for Waste done by a Tenant that has but a
particular Estate for Life or Years. And therefore he that has such a Lease
without Impeachment of Waste, has by that a property or interest given him in
the Houses and Trees, and may make waste in them, without being impeached for
it, that is, without being questioned or demanded any recompense for the Waste
done. See Coke, l. 11. Bowls Case, f. 82. b.

Implements.
IMplements comes either from the French word ( Employer, to employ) or from
the Latin (Implere, to fill up) and is used for things of necessary use in any
Trade or Mystery, which are employed in the practice of the said Trade, or
without which the work cannot be accomplished. Also for Furniture with which
the House is filled. And in that sense you shall find the word often in Wills
and Conveyances of Movables.

Impost.
IMpost is a French word that signifies Tribute, but with us it is taken for
the Tax that is paid the King for any Merchandise brought into any Haven from
Places beyond the Seas. And it is used in the Statute of 31 Eliz. c. 5. as a
word of the same signification with Custom which Merchants pay.

Imprisonment.
IMprisonment is the Restraint of a man's Liberty, whether it be in the open
Field, or in the Steeks or Cage in the Streets, or in a Man's own House, as well
as in the common Geal. And in all these places the party so restrained is said
to be a Prisoner, so long as he has not his Liberty freely to go at all times
to all places whether he will, without Bail or Mainprise.

Incumbent.
INcumbent comes of the Latin (Incumbere) and signifies him that is presented,
admitted and instituted to any Church or Benefice with Cure; who is therefore
called the Incumbent of that Church, because he does bend all his study to the
discharge of the Cure there.

Indicavit.
INdicavit is a Writ or Prohibition that lies for the Patron of a Church, whose
Clerk is Defendant in Court-Christian in an Action for Tithes, commenced by
another Clerk, and extending to the fourth part of the Church, or of its
Tithes; in which case the Suit belongs to the Kings Court, by Westminster. 1. c. 5.
Wherefore the Defendants Patron (being like to be prejudiced in his Church and
Advowson, if the Plaintiff obtain in the Court-Christian) has this means to
remove it to the Kings Court. Reg. orig. fol. 35. and Britton, c. 109. This
Writ is not returnable; but if they cease not their Suit, he shall have an
Attachment.

Indictment.
Indictment. See Enditement.

Indorsement.
INdorsement is that which is written upon the Back of a Deed, as the Condition
of an Obligation is said to be indorsed, because it is commonly written on the
Back of the Obligation.

Induction.
INduction is a lay act made by prescept of the Ordinary, by which, actual
possession of the Church is given to the Rector or Vicar after his Presentation
and Institution to it.

Infangtheef.
INfangtheef is a Privilege or Liberty granted to Lords of certain Manors, to
judge any Thief taken within their Fee.

Information.
INformation for the King is that which for a common person is called a
Declaration; and is not always done directly by the King or his Attorney, but
rather by some other man, who sues as well for the King as for himself, upon
the breach of some penal Law or Statute, wherein a Penalty is given to the
party that will sue for the same; but no Action of Debt to recover it,
therefore it must be had by Information.

Ingrosser.
INgrosser comes of the French word Grosier, that is, one that sells by
Wholesale. But in our Law an Ingrosser is one that buys Corn, Grain, Butter,
Cheese, Fish, or other dead Victuals, with an intent to sell the same again.
And so he is defined in the Stat. of 5 E. 6. c. 14. made against such
Engrossing.

Inheritance.
INheritance. See Enheritance.

Inhibition.
INhibition is a Writ to inhibit a Judge to proceed farther in the Cause
depending before him.

And there is another Writ, where after the Kings Presentment to a Benefice, he
presents another, and inhibiteth the Bishop to give Induction to the first
Presentee. Plo. Com. 528. See F. N. B. f. 39. where he puts Prohibition and
Inhibition together. Inhibition is most commonly a Writ issuing forth of an
higher Court-Cheistian to a lower and inferior, upon an Appeal, Anno 24 H. 8.
c. 12. and Prohibition out of the Kings Court of Record at Westminster to a
Court-Christian, or to an inferior Temporal Court.

Injunction.
INjunction is an interlocutory Decree out of the Chancery, sometimes to give
Possession to the Plaintiff for defect of Appearance in the Defendant; sometimes
to the ordinary Courts of the King, and sometimes to the Court-Christian, to
stay Proceeding in a Cause upon suggestiou made, that if the rigor of the Law
take place, it is against Equity and Conscience in that Case, See West, part.
2. tit. Proceedings in Chancery, sect. 25.

Inlagary.
INlagary or Inlagation, is a Restitution of one outlawed to the Kings
Protection, or to the benefit and condition of a Subject.

Inlaugh.
INlaugh signifies him that is sub Lege, in some Frankpledge, not outlawed; of
whom see Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c. 11.

Inmates.
INmates are those persons of one Family that are suffered to come and dwell in
one Cottage together with another Family, by which the poor of the Parish will
be increased. And therefore by the Statute of 31 Eliz. c. 7. there is a Penalty
of ten shillings a Month set upon every one that shall receive or continue such
an Iumate.

Inquisition.
INquisition. See Enquest.

Inrolment.
INrolment is the Registring, Recording, or Entering of any Act or Deed in the
Chancery, or elsewhere, as of a Recognizance, Fine, Statute, or Deed indented
by the Statute of 27 H. 8. c. 16. by which a Freehold shall pass.

Instant.
INstant (in Latin, Instans) is defined by the Logicians, A thing not
dividable in Time, which is not any Time, nor part of Time, to which yet the
parts of time are conjoined, and much considered in the Law: and though it
cannot be actually divided, yet in consideration and conceit it may be divided
and applied to several purposes, as if they were several times; whereof see in
Plowdens Commentaries in the Case between Fulmerston and Stuard, where the
Statute of 31 H. 8. (which Enacted, That if an Abbot within a year before the
Statute had letten Lands to one, who at the time of making that Lease had the
same Land to farm for a term of years, then not expired that the Lessee should
have that Land only for twenty one years) is expounded.

And there it is debated, That when the Termor takes the second Lease, he
surrenders his former term; and so at the same instant of taking the second
Lease, the former term is expired. And in the Case between Petit and Hales, he
who kills himself, commits not Felony till he be dead, and when dead, he is not
in being, so as to be termed a Felon, but at the instant is in the Law so
adjudged.

And there are many other Cases in Law, where the instant time, that is not
dividable in nature; in the consideration of the mind and understanding of the
Sages of the Law is divided; upon which arise many arguments of great use and
profound learning.

Institution.
INstitution, is a Faculty made by the Ordinary, by which a Vicar or Rector is
approved to be Inducted to a Rectory or Vicarage.

Interdiction.
INterdiction has the same signification in the Common as in the Canon Law,
where it is thus defined, Interdictio est Censura Ecclesiastica prohibens
administrationem Divinorum. And so it is used, 22 H. 8. cap. 12.

Intrusion.
INtrusion is a Writ that lies against him that enters after the death of
Tenant in Dower, or other Tenant for Life, and holds out him in the Reversion
or Remainder; for which see Fitz. N. B. fol. 203. E. And every entry upon the
possession of the King is called an Intrusion; as where the Heir of the Kings
Tenant enters after Office, and before Livery, this is called an Intrusion upon
the King, as appears in Stanf. Prerog. fol. 40. and many other Books.

Intrusion.
INtrusion. See Entrusion.

Inventary.
AN Inventary is a Catalogue or Recital in Writing of all the Goods and
Chattels of one that is dead, with the Valuation of them by four several
persons, which every Executor and Administrator ought to exhibit to the
Ordinary at the time appointed.

Jointenans.
JOintenants are, where two men come to any Lands and Tenements by one joint
Title; as if a man give Lands to two men, and to their Heirs.

Tenants in common are, where two have Lands by several Titles, or by Feoffment
to two, to have and tohold the one half to one and his Heirs, and the other
half to another and his Heirs: in all these cases none of them knows his
several.

If there be two or three Ioyntenants, and one has Issue and dies, then he or
those Ioyntenants that overlive shall have the whole by Survivorship.

If two Iointenants by agreement make Partition between them by Deed, then they
are several Tenants:

But if one Ioyntenant grant that which belongs to him to a Strange ^^, then the
other Ioyntenantand the Stranger are Tenants in common.

And though two Tenants in common be seized thoroughly and of the whole, and
none knows his several; yet if one die, the other shall not make the whole by
Survivorship, but the Heir of him that dies shall have the half.

And so if there be three Ioyntenants, and one of them makes a Feoffment of his
part to another, and the Feoffee dies; then his Heir shall have the third part,
and the other two are Ioyntenants as they were, because they two are seized by
one joint Title.

Also if Lands be given to the baron and his wife, and the husband aliens and
dies, the wife shall recover the whole: But if they were Ioyntenants before the
Coverture, then he shall recover but the half.

If Land be given to the husband and his wife, and a third person, if the third
person grant that which belongs to him, the one half passes by this Grant; for
that the baron and his wife are but one person in Law, and in this case they
have right but to half.

Also if two Ioyntenants are of Lands in a Town that is Borough-English, where
Land is devisable, and one by his Testament devises that which belongs to him
to a Stranger, and dies; this Devise is void, and the other shall have the
whole by Sutviver, for that the Devise may not take effect till after the death
of the Devisor; and immediately after the death of the Devisor, the right comes
to the other Ioyntenant by Surviver, who claims nothing by the Devisor, but in
his own right by Surviver. But otherwise it is of Parceners seized of Lands
devisable, causa qua supra.

Journies accounts.
JOurnies accounts (Dietae computatae) is a term in the Law which is understood
thus: If a Writ be abated without the default of the Plaintiff or Demandant, he
may purchase a new Writ, which if it be purchased by Journies accounts, (that
is, within as little time as he possibly can after the Abatement of the first
Writ) then this second Writ shall be as a Continuance of the first, and so
shall ouste the Tenant or Defendant of his Voucher, Plea of Nontenure,
Ioyntenancy fully administered, etc. or any other Plea which arises upon matter
happening after the date of the first Writ. And fifteen days have been held a
convenient time for the purchase of the new Writ. See for this Writ by Journies
accounts, Spencers Case, Coke, lib. 6. fol. 9. b.

Jointure.
Jointure is an Estate and Assurance made to a Woman in consideration of
Marriage, for term of her life, or otherwise; as is mentioned in the Statute of
27 H. 8. cap. 10. whether it be before or after Marriage. And if it be after,
then she may at her liberty after the death of her husband refuse to take or
have the Lands so assured for her Ioynture, and demand her Dower at the Common
Law: But if it be made before Marriage, then she may not refuse such Ioynture,
nor have Dower according to the Common Law, unless that when she brings her
Writ of Dower, the Defendant pleads such a Plea as will not bar her of her
Dower; as if he say in Bar, that her husband was not seized of such Estate
whereof she might be endowed, or any such Plea, and does not show that she has
a Ioynture made, etc. and therefore demands Judgment of that Action, or any
such like Plea, etc. And this was the opinion of Master Brograve at his Reading
in Gray's Inn in Summer, An. 1567. 18 Eliz. upon a Branch of the Statute made 27
H. 8. cap. 10. concerning Joyntures and Dowers.

And of those things whereof a Woman may be endowed, she may have Ioynture; as
of Mines, Vesturam terrae, Woods, Towns, Is ^ es, Meadows, and such like. Also
of an Advowson, Reversion depending upon an Estate for Life, Windmill, high
Chamber, Rectory, and such other; and they are called Tenements. Also of a
Villain, for he is an Hereditament. And of all these profit may come to the
woman. But of those things whereof no profit will come, but rather a charge, a
Ioynture cannot be made. See Coke, lib. 4. fol. 1. Vernons Case.

Jurisdiction.
JUrisdiction is a Dignity which a Man has by a power to do Justice in Causes
of complaint made before him.

Juris utrum.
JUris utrum is a Writ that lies for the succeeding Incumbent of a Benefice, to
recover the Lands or Tenements belonging to the Church, which were aliened by
his Predecessor. And see of this Fitz. N. B. fol. 48. R. and see after in the
Title Utrum.

Juror.
JUror is one of those 24 or 12 men which are sworn to deliver a truth upon
such Evidence as shall be given them touching the matter in question: of which
see Fitz. Not. B. fol. 165. D. and the Statute 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. for
returning able and sufficient Jurors.

Justice seat.
JUstice seat is the highest Court that is held in a Forest, and it is always
held before the Lord Chief Justice ^^ Air of the Forest, upon m^^ning 40 ^
ays before. And (...) the Judgments are always given, and the Fines see for
Offenses that were presented at the Courts of Attachments, and the Offenders
indicted at the Swainmotes. See concerning this Court Manwoods Forest Laws,
cap 2 ^. fol. 238. b.

Justices in Eire.
JUstices in Eire. See Eire.

Justicies.
JUsticies is a Writ directed to the Sheriff for the dispatch of Justice in
some special Cases in his County Court of which he cannot by his ordinary power
hold Plea there. And of this you may see Precedents in Fitzh. N. B. fol. 117.
C. in Account, and fol. 152. B. in Annuity, and fol. 119. G. in Debt, and many
others. And it is called a Justicies, because it is a Commission to the Sheriff
to do a man right; and it requires no Return or Certificate of what he has
done.

K.
Keelage.
KEelage, in Latin Killagium, is a Custom paid at Hartlepool in Durham for
every Ship coming into that Port. R of Parl. 21 E. 1.

Kiddle.
KIddle or Kidel, is a Dam or Wear in a River. All Kidels shall from henceforth
be utterly put down in the Thames and Medway, and throughout all England,
except upon the Seacoast. Mag. Char. cap. 24.

KIngs silver.
Kings silver is the Money which is due to the King in the Court of Common
Pleas, for a License there granted to any man to pass a Fine. Coke, lib. 6.
fol. 39, and 43.

Kintal.
KIntal is a Weight, commonly of One hundred pounds, more or less, according to
the Usage of sundry Nations. Mr. Plowden in the Case of Reniger and Fogassa
makes mention of this word.

Knights Service.
KNights Service was a Tenure by which several Lands in this Nation were held
of the King. But it is abolished by Statute 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

L.
Laches.
LAches or Lasches is an old French word signifying Slacknesse or Negligence,
as it appears in Lit. sect. 403. and 726. where Laches of Entry is nothing else
but a Neglect in the Infant to enter. So that I think it may be an old English
word. And when we say, There is Laches of Entry, it is as much as to say, There
L ^ ok is of Entry, or there is Lack of Entry. Yet I find that ( Lascher) in
French is to Loyter, and ( Lasche) signifies one that is idle or lazy: and
therefore it may also come from the French. For Etymoligies are diverse, and
many times ad placitum.

Lagan.
LAgan is such a parcel of Goods as the Mariners in a danger of Shipwreck cast
out of the Ship; and because they know they are heavy, and will sink, they
fasten to them a Boigh or Cork, that so they may find them, and have them
again. If the ship be drowned, or otherwise perish, these Goods are called
Lagan or Ligan, a ligando: and so long as they continue upon the Sea, they
belong to the Admiral; but if they are cast upon the Land, they are then called
a Wreck, and belong to him that has the Wreck, as it appears in Coke, l. 5. f.
106.

Lageman.
LAgeman est Homo Legalis seu legitimus, such as we call Good men of the Jury.
The word is found in Dooms-day-Book.

Land-cheap.
LAnd-cheap is a payment of 10 d. in the Purchase-mony for every Mark thereof,
for all the Lands within the Borough of Maldon in Essex, by prescription, which
see H. 25, 26. Car. 2. Roll 706. in B. R.

Lapse.
LApse (Lapsus) is the Omission of a Patron to present to a Church of his
Patronage within six months after an Avoidance by death, or taking of another
Benefice without qualification, or notice to him given of the Resignation or
Deprivation of the present Incumbent; by which neglect Title is given to the
Ordinary to collate to the said Church.

Larcenie.
LArceny is a wrongful taking away another man's Goods, but not from his person,
with a mind to steal them.

And Theft is in two sorts; the one so called simply, and the other Petit or
Little Theft.

The first is where the thing stolen exceeds the value of 12 d. and this is
Felony.

The other (called Little or Petit Theft) is where the thing stolen does not
exceed the value of 12 d. and that is not Felony.

Last.
LAst signifies a certain Wright or Burden; as a Last of Herring is ten
thousand, Anno 31 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 2. a Last of Hides is twelve dozen, Anno
1 Jae. c. 33.

Lastage.
LAstage is, to be quit of a certain Custom exacted in Fairs and Markets, for
carrying of things where a Man will.

Latitat.
LAtitat is a Writ by which all Men in Personal Actions are originally called
in the Kings Bench to answer. And it is called Latitat, because it is supposed
by the Writ that the Defendant cannot be found in the County of Middlesex, as
it appears by the Return of the Sheriff of that County, but that he lurks in
another County: and therefore to the Sheriff of that County is this Writ
directed to apprehend him.

Law.
LAw. See Ley.

Law-day.
LAw-day signifies a Leet or Sheriffs Tourn, as it appears by the Statute of 1
E. 4. c. 2. where the Sheriffs Tourn is so called, and 9 H. 7. f. 21. b. and
many other Books, where a Leet is so called. See Smiths Commonwealth, l. 2. c.
21.

Lawing of Dogs.
LAwing of Dogs. See Expeditate.

Lawless man.
LAwless man is the who is extra Legem, an Outlaw. Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c.
11. number. 1.

Leases.
LEases are Grants or Demises, by one that has any Estate in any
Hereditaments, of those Hereditaments to another for the lesser time. And they
are in diverse manners; viz. for term of Life, for Years, for another Life, and
at Will.

Also a Lease of Land is as good without Deed, as with Deed.

But in a Lease for term of Life it behooves to give Livery and Seisin upon the
Land, or else nothing shall pass by the Grant, because they are called
Free-holds.

Also a Lease of a Common or Rent may not be good without Deed.

But of a Parsonage that has Glebe it is good without Deed, for that the Glebe
of the Church, which is the principal, may well enough pass without Deed; and
so the Dismes and Offerings, which are as accessory to the Church.

But Dismes and Offerings by themselves may not be let without Deed, as it is
said.

Leet.
LEet is a Court derived out of the Sheriffs Turn, and inquires of all
Offenses under the degree of High Treason that are committed against the Crown
and Dignity of the King. But those Offenses which are to be punished with loss
of life or member, are only inquirable there, and to be certified over to the
Justices of Assise. See Stat. 1. E. 3. c. 16.

Legacy.
LEgacy (Legatum) is a term of the Civil Law, and it is that which we in our
Law call a Devise, viz. Lands or Goods given unto any man by the Will or
Testament of another. See more, Tit. Devise before.

Lessor and Lessee.
LEssor is he that leases Lands or Tenements to another for term of life,
years, or at will: And he to whom the Lease is made is called Lessee.

Levant and Couchant.
LEvant and Couchant is said, when the Beasts or Cattle of a Stranger are come
into another man's Ground, and there have remained a certain good space of time.

Levari facias.
LEvari facias is a Writ directed to the Sheriff for the Levying of a sum of
money upon the Lands, Tenements and Chattels of him that has forfeited a
Recognizance. See F. N. B. fol. 265. D.

Law.
LAw is, when an Action of Debt is brought against one upon some secret
agreement or Contract had between the parties without especialty showed, or
other matter of Records; as in an Action of Detinue for some Goods or Chattels
lent or left with the Defendant; then the Defendant may wage his Law, if he
will, that is, swear upon a Book, and certain persons with him, that he detains
not the Goods, or ows nothing to the Plaintiff, in manner and form as he has
declared

And it is allowed only in cases of Secrecy, where the Plaintiff cannot prove
the surmise of his Suit by any Deed or Open act: for the Defendant might
discharge it privily between them without any Acquittance or Public act. And
therefore in an Action of Debt upon a Lease for years, or upon Arrearages of
account before Auditors assigned, a man shall not wage his Law.

But when one shall wage his Law, he shall bring with him vj, viij, or xij of
his Neighbors, as the Court shall assign him, to swear with him, much like the
Oath which they make who are used in the Civil Law, to purge others of any
crime laid against them, who are called Compurgators.

Note, that the Offer to make the Oath is called Wager of Law; and when it is
accomplished, then it is called the Doing of your Law.

And if the Sheriff in any Action return, that he has summoned the Defendant
to appear in Court at any day to answer the Plaintiff, at which day he makes
Default; Process shall be awarded against him, to come and save, or excuse his
Default; which is as much to say, as to excuse the Delay, or otherwise to lose
the thing demanded: And the Defendant comes, and swears he was not summoned,
which is called waging of Law; then he ought to do it at the day assigned, with
xij others. And in doing of his Law he ought upon his Oath to affirm directly
the contrary of that which is imputed to him: But the others shall only say,
They think he says the truth.

Libel.
LIbel (Libellus) is a term of the Civil Law, signifying the Original
Declaration in any Action; and so it is used in the Statutes of 2 H. 3. cap. 3.
and 2 E. 6. cap. 13. And an infamous Libel signifies properly in our Law a
Scandalous report of any man unlawfully published in writing: of which see Cok.
lib. 5. fol. 125. a.

Liberate.
LIberate is a Warrant issuing out of the Chancery to the Treasurer,
Chamberlains, and Barons of the Exchequer, or Clerk of the Hamper, etc. for the
payment of any yearly Pension or other Sum granted under the Great Seal,
Regist. orig. 193. Sometimes to the Sheriffs, etc. Fitzh. N. B. fol. 132. for
the delivery of Lands or Goods taken upon Forfeiture of a Recognizance, F. N.
B. 131, 132. Cok. lib. 4. Fulwoods Case, fol. 64, 66, 67. Also to a Jailer from
the Justices, for the delivery of a Prisoner that has put in Bail for his
Appearance.

There is also another Writ made out of the Petry-bag Office in Chancery, upon
a Statute Staple, after an Extent thereupon returned; by which the Sheriff
retorns he has delivered the Land extended to the Cognizee; which being filed,
he may then (and not before) bring his Action of Ejectment to recover
possession of the Lands extended.

Liberate probanda.
Liberate probanda. Look for that in the Title Nativo habendo.

Librata Terrae.
LIbrata Terrae contains four Ox-gangs, and every Oxgang 13 Acres of Land.
Skene de verb. signif. verbo bovata Terrae.

Lien.
LIen is a word of two significations, Personal lien, and come being, Covenant
or Contract: And real lien, as Judgment, Statute, Recognizance, or an Original
against an Heir which oblige and affect the Land.

Ligeance.
LIgeance is a true and faithful Obedience of the Subject due to his Sovereign;
and this Ligeance, which is an incident inseparable to every Subject, is in
four manners: the first is natural, the second acquired, the third local, and
the fourth legal. Of all which you may read much excellent Learning in Cok.
lib. 7. Calvin's Case.

Limitation.
LImitation is an Assignment of a space or time, within which he that will sue
for any Lands or Hereditaments ought to prove, that he or his Ancestor was
seized of the thing demanded, or otherwise he shall not maintain his Suit or
Action; which Assignments are made by diverse Statutes: As the Statute of
Merton. cap. 8. Westminster. 1. cap. 38. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 2. etc.

Livery of Seisin.
LIvery of Seisin is a Ceremony used in Conveyance of Lands and Tenements,
where an Estate in Fee-simple, Feetail, or a Freehold shall pass. And it is a
Testimonial of the willing departing of him who makes the Livery from the thing
whereof Livery is made. And the receiving of the Livery is a willing Acceptance
by the other party of all that whereof the other has divested himself. And it
was invented as an open and notorious thing, by means whereof the common People
might have knowledge of the Passing or Alteration of Estates from man to man,
that thereby they might be the better able to try in whom the right and
possession of Lands and Tenements were, if they should be impanelled in Juries,
or otherwise have to do concerning the same.

The common manner of Delivery of Seisin is thus: If it be in the open Field,
where is no Building or House, then one that can read takes the Writing in his
hand, if the Estate pass by Deed, and declares to the standers by the cause of
their meeting there together, etc. and then openly reads the Deed, or declares
the effect thereof; and after that is sealed, the party who is to depart from
the Ground takes the Deed in his hands, with a Clod of the earth, and a Twig or
Bough, if any be there, which he delivers to the other party in the name of
Possession or Seisin, according to the form and effect of the Deed there read
or declared. But if there be a Dwellinghouse or Building upon the Land, then
this is done at the Door of the same, none being left at that time within the
House; and the party delivers all aforesaid, with the Ring of the Door, in the
name of Seisin or Possession; and he that receives the Livery enters in first
alone, and shuts the door, and presently opens it again, and lets them in, etc.
If it be a House whereto is no Land or Ground, the Livery is made and
Possession taken by the delivery of the Ring of the Door and Deed only. And
where it is without Deed, either of Lands or Tenements, there the party
declares by word of mouth, before witness, the Estate that he means to depart
with, and then delivers Seisin or Possession in manner aforesaid; And so the
Land or Tenement does pass as well as by Deed, and that by force of the Livery
of Seisin. It was agreed in Gray's Inn by Master Snagge, at his Reading there
in Summer, Anno 1574. That if a Feoffor deliver the Deed in view of the Land,
in name of Seisin, that is good, because he has a Possession in himself. But
otherwise it is of an Attorney, for he must go to the Land, and take Possession
himself, before he can give Possession to another, according to the words of
his Warrant, etc. And where Livery of Seisin is by View, if the Feoffee do not
enter after, etc. nothi ^ g passes, for he ought to enter in Deed.

Lollards.
LOllards were Dogmatists in Religion in the times of E. 3. and H. 5. and in
those times were reputed Heretics; as appears by the Statutes in 5. R. 2. cap.
5. and 2 H. 5. cap. 7. Which Statutes you shall find repealed in 1 E. 6. cap.
12. and 1 El. cap. 1. They had their name (as some think) from one Gualter
Lolhard a German, who lived about the year 1315. and was the first Author of
this Sect.

Lord in Gross.
LOrd in Gross is he who is Lord without a Manor, as the King in respect of
his Crown, Fitz. Not. Brev. fol. 5. A man makes a Gift in tail of all his Land,
to hold of him, and dies; his Heir has nothing but a Seignory in Gross.

Lotherwit.
LOtherwit is, that you may take amends of him who does deffle your Bondwoman
without your license.

Lushburgh.
LUshburgh was a counterfeit Coin in the time of E. 3. made beyond Seas, in
likeness of English Moneys, and brought in to deceive the King and his
Subjects. And therefore it is declared to be Treason by the Stat. of 25 E. 3.
Stat. 5. cap. 2. for any man to bring it into the Realm, knowing it to be false.

M.
Maegbote.
MAEgbote was a a Recompense for a Kinsman slain.

Maihem or Maime.
MAihem or Maime is, where by the wrongful act of another any Member is hurt or
taken away, whereby the party is made unperfect to fight: As if a Bone be taken
out of the Head, or broken in any other part of the Body, or Foot, or Hand, or
Finger, or Joint of a Foot; or any Member be cut; or by some Wound the Sinews
be made to shrink, or the Fingers made crooked; or if an Eye be put out,
Foreteeth broken, or any other thing hurt in a man's Body; by means whereof he
is made the less able to defend himself, or offend his enemy.

But the cutting off of an Ear or Nose, or breaking of the Hinder-teeth, or
such like, is no Maihem, because it is rather a deformity of Body then
diminishing of Strength; and that is commonly tried by the Justices beholding
the party. And if the Justices stand in doubt whether the hurt be a Maihem or
not, they use and will of their own discretion take the help and opinion of
some skilful Surgeon, to consider thereof, before they determine upon the
Cause.

Mainpernable.
MAinpernable: that may be mainprised or delivered to Mainpernors. See the
Statute of Westminster. 1. Cap. 15. what persons may be mainpernable, what not.

Mainprise.
MAinprise is, when a man is arrested by Capias, the Judge may deliver his body
to certain men to keep, and to bring before him at a certain day; and these are
called Mainpernors: and if the party appear not at the day assigned, the
Mainpernors shall be amerced.

Maintenance.
MAintenance is, where any man gives or delivers to another, that is Plaintiff
or Defendant in any Action, any sum of money or other thing to maintain his
Plea, or takes great pains for him when he has nothing therewith to do; then
the party grieved shall have against him a Writ called a Writ of Maintenance.

Manbote.
MAnbote signifies a Pecuniary Compensation for the killing a man. Lambert.

Mandamus.
MAndamus is a Writ that goes to the Escheator for the finding of an Dffice
after the death of one that died the Kings Tenant; and it is all one with the
Writ of Diem clausit extremum, but that the Diem clausit extremum goes out
within the year after the death, and the Mandamus goes not out till after the
year, and in case where there was never any Diem clausit extremum sued out, or
was not sued out with effect. Fitz. N. B. 253. B. C. See the Stat. 12 Car. 1.
cap. 24.

Also there is another sort of Mandamus granted upon Motion in the Kings Bench,
one to the Bishop to admit an Executor to prove a Will, or to grant
Administration. Styles Reports, 78. Another to command Corporations to restore
Aldermen, and others, to Offices out of which they are unjustly put out. Look
11 Report, James Bag's Case.

Manor.
Manor is compounded of diverse things; as of a House, Arable Land, Pasture,
Meadow, Wood, Rent, Advowson, Court Baron, and such like, which make a Manor.
And this ought to be by long continuance of time, the contrary whereof man's
memory cannot discern: for at this day a Manor cannot be made, because a
Court Baron cannot now be made, and a Manor cannot be without a Court Baron,
and Suitors and Freeholders, two at the least; for if all the Free-holds except
one escheat to the Lord, or if he purchase all except one, there his Manor is
gone, for that it cannot be a Manor without a Court Baron, (as is aforesaid;)
and a Court Baron cannot be holden but before Suitors, and not before one
Suitor: and therefore where but one Freehold or Freeholder is, there cannot be
a Manor properly, although in common speech it may be so called.

Mansion.
MAnsion (Mansio) is most commonly taken for the chief Message or Habitation
of the Lord of a Manor, the Mannor-house where he does most reside, his
Capital Message, as it is called; of which the Wife by the Statute of Mag.
Chart cap. 7. shall have her Quarentine.

Munucaptio.
MAnucaptio is a Writ that lies for him who is arrested or indicted of Felony,
and offers sufficient Sureties for his Appearance; but the Sheriff, or he whom
it concerns, will not suffer him to be bailed: then he shall have his Writ, to
command them to suffer him to be bailed. See of this Fitz. N. B. fol. 249. G.

Manumission.
MAnumission is the making a Bondman free, and may be in two sorts; the one is
a Manumission expressed, the other a Manumission implied.

Manumission expressed is, where the Lord makes a Deed to his Villain to
Infranchise him by this word ( Manumittere) which is as much to say, as to let
one go out of another man's hands or power.

The manner of Manumitting or Infranchising in old time, most usually was thus:
The Lord (in presence of his Neighbors) took the Bondsman by the Head, saying, I
will that this Man be free; and therewith shoved him forward out of his hand,
and by this he was free.

Manumission implied without this word ( Manumitere) is, when the Lord makes an
Obligation to his Villain to pay him money at a certain day, or sues him where
he might enter without Suit, or grants him an Annuity, or Leases Lands to him
by Deed for years, or life, and in diverse like cases the Villain thereby is
made free.

Marchers.
MArchers are the Noblemen dwelling on the Marches of Wales or Scotland, who
in ^ imes past had their private laws, as if they had been Kings; and therefore
in the Statutes of 2 H. 4. c. 28. 26 H. 8. cap. 6. 27 H. 8. cap. 26. and 1 E.
6. cap. 10. they are called Lord Marchers.

Marches.
MArches are the bounds and Limits betwixt us and Wales or Scotland, so called
either from the German word ( March) which signifies a Frontire or Border; or
else from the French word ( Marque) that is, a Sign or Token of Distinction,
these being the notorious Distinctions of two diverse Countries. Of these you
shall read in the Statutes of 4 H. 5. cap. 7. 22 E. 4. cap. 8. 24 H. 8. cap. 9.
and others.

Marshal.
MArshal is a general word for many Officers in England: as the Lord or Earl
Marshal, of whom mention is made in the Statutes of 13 R. 2. cap. 2. and 1 H.
4. c. 7. and 14. the Marshal of the Kings House, of whom you may read F. N. B.
f. 241. B. and in the Statute of Artic. sup. Chart. c. 3. 18 E. 3. c. 7. 2 H.
4. c. 23. 15 H 6. c. 1. and others. There are also other inferior Marshals
mentioned in our Books: as the Marshal of the Kings Bench in the Statute of 5
E. 3. c. 8. and F. N. B. f. 251. l. who has the custody of all the Prisoners
of that Court; and the Marshal of the Exchequer, mentioned in the Statute of 51
H. 3. Stat. 5. called the Statute of the Exchequer. Marshal is a French word,
and is as much to say as Master of the Horse: for it seems to come of the
German (Marschalk) which has that signification.

Marshalsea.
MArshalsea is the Court or Seat of the Marshal of the Kings House, of which
you may read at large in Coke l. 6. f. 20. B. and l. 10. f. 68. B. It is also
taken for the Prison belonging to the Court of the Kings Bench, of which the
Marshal of that Court is the Keeper: for so are the forms of the Bills there,
that A complains of B in the custody of the Marshal of the Marshalsea of our
Lord the King, etc.

Maugre.
MAugre is a word compound of two French words ( Mal) and ( Gree;) so that it
is as much as to say, with an unwilling mind, or in despite of another. And so
it is used in Littleton, sect. 672. where it is said, that the Husband and Wife
shall be remitted maugre the Husband, that is, in despite or against the will
of the Husband.

Maxims.
Maxims are the Foundations of the Law, and the Conclusions of Reason, and are
Causes efficient, and certain universal Propositions so sure and perfect, that
they may not be at any time Impeached or Impugned, but ought always to be
observed, and holden as strong Principles and Authorities of themselves,
although they cannot be proved by force of Argument or Demonstrations Logical,
but are known by Induction by the way of Sense and Memory. For example, it is a
Maxim, that If a man have Issue two Sons by diverse women, and the one
purchases Lands in Fee, and dies without issue, the other shall never be his
Heir, etc.

And it is another Maxim, that Lands shall descend from the Father to the Son,
but not from the Son to the Father, for that is an Ascension, etc. And diverse
such there are, whereof see Doctor and Student.

Maynour.
MAynour is, when a Thief has stolen, and is followed with Hue and Cry, and
taken, having that found about him which he stole, that is called Maynour. And
so we commonly use to say, when we find one doing of an unlawful act, that we
took him with the maynour or manner.

Mean.
Mean. See Mesne.

Mease.
MEase or Message seems to come from the French word Maison or Mansion, which
is no other but a Place of abiding or habitation. And yet Message in our Law
contains more then the very place of habitation: for a House and a Message
differ, in that a House cannot be intended other then the matter of Building;
but a Message shall be said all the Mansion-place, and the Curtelage shall be
taken as parcel of the Message, 20 H. 7. Keloway, fol. 57. a. And by the name
of a Message the Garden and Curtelage shall pass, Plowden, fol. 171. a.

Measondue.
MEasondue is an Appellation of diverse Hospitals in this Kingdom, which are so
named, Anno 2 and 3 P. and M. cap. 23. and 15 Car. 2. c. 7. And it comes of the
French (Maison de Dieu) and is no more but Gods House in English.

Medietas Linguae.
MEdietas Linguae is an Inquest Impannelled upon any cause, whereof the one
half is of Denizens, the other Strangers; and it is used in Pleas between
parties, whereof one is a Denizen and the other a Stranger. And this manner of
Trial was first given by the Statute of 27 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 8. And by the
Statute of 28 E. 3. c. 13. it was granted in cases where the King himself was
party with an Alien.

Melius inquirendo.
MElius inquirendo is a Writ directed to the Escheator for a second Inquiry to
be made, when there is any doubt made of partiality in an Inquiry made upon a
Diem clausit extremum after the death of the Kings Tenant. See F. N. B. f. 255.
C.

Merchenlage.
MErchenlage is one of those three Laws out of which William the Conqueror
framed our Common Laws with a mixture of the Laws of Normandy. And it was the
Law of the Mercians, when they had the Government of the third part of this
Realm.

Mesnalty.
MEsnalty is the right of the Mesne, as the Mesnalty is extinct. Old Not. Br.
f. 44.

Mesne.
MEsne is, where the Owner of Lands or Tenements holds of one by certain
Services, and he holds them of another by like or other Services; then he who
holds the Lands is called Tenant paravail, and he of whom it is held is called
Mesne, and he of whom the Mesue holds is called chief Lord, or Lord Paramount.
And in this case, if the Lord above distrains the Tenant for the Service of the
Mesne, who ought to aequit him to the chief Lord, then the Tenant shall have a
Writ of Mesne, so called, against the Mesne; and if he acquit not the Tenant,
then the Mesne shall lose the Service of the Tenant, and shall be forejudged of
his Seigniory, and the Tenant shall be immediate Tenant to the chief Lord, and
shall do him the same Service and Suits as the Mesne did.

Message.
Message. See Mease.

Metropolitan.
Metropolitan, signifies the Archbishops, of whom Centerbury is styled,
Totius Angliae Primas and Metropol And York the like Title, without the word
Totius.

Miscreant.
MIscreant is one who is perverted to Heresy, or a faise Religion. Bro.
Presentation, 54.

Mise.
MIse is a French word, and signifies as much as Expensum in Latin; and it is
so ordinarily used in the Entries of Judgments in Personal Actions: when the
Plaintiff recovers, the Entry is, that Recuperet damna sua to such a value, and
pro misis and custagis, for Costs and Charges, so much. There is also another
acception or signification of this word in the Law, where it is taken for the
Issue to be tried by Battle of Grand Assise. And so it is used in Littleton,
sect. 478. 482. and diverse others, where joining of the Mise upon the mere
right is putting it in Issue, who has the best or clearest right.

Misericordia.
MIsericordia is used in the Common Law for an Amerciament or Mulct set upon
any for an offense; as where the Plaintiff or Defendant in any Action are
amerced, the Entry is always, Ideo in misericordia, etc. And it is therefore
called Misericordia, as Fitzh. says, N. B. fol. 75. H. for that it should be
but small and less then the fault, and saving his Contenement, as the Statute
of Mag. Charta, cap. 14. speaks. And therefore if a man be outragiously amerced
in a Court not of Record, as in a Court Baron, etc. there is a Writ called
Moderata Misericordia to be directed to the Lord or his Baily, commanding them
that they take moderate Amerciaments according to the quantity of the fault.
And of that see Fitzh. N. B. fol. 75. A. and Moderata Misericordia after.

Misnomer.
MIsnomer is the Mistake of a Name, or the using of one Name for another. See
Broke, tit. Misnomer.

Misprision.
MIsprision is, when one knows that another has committed Treason or Felony,
and will not discover him to the King, or his Council, or to any Magistrate,
but conceals the same. Diverse other offenses are called Misprision: as when a
Chaplain had fixed an old Seal of a Patent to a new Patent of Non-residence,
this was held to be Misprision of Treason only, and no counterfeiting of the
Kings Seal. So it is holden in 37 H. 8. Bro. tit. Treason 3. in Fine: but 2 H.
4. f. 25. A. it is adjudged contrary; and Stamf. Pl. cor. fol. 3. B. cites it
Treason; and so it is holden at this day.

And if a man know Money to be counterfeit, and bring the same from out of
Ireland hither, and utter it in payment, yet this is but Misprision of Treason,
and no Treason: and so it is in diverse like cases.

In all cases of Misprision of Treason, the Party offender shall forfeit his
Goods for ever, and the profits of his Lands for his life, and his Body to
Prison at the Kings pleasure.

And for Misprision of Felony or Trespass, the Offender shall be committed to
Prison, until he have found Sureties or Pledges for his Fine, which shall be
assessed by the discretion of the Justices before whom he was convict.

And note, That in every Treason or Felony is included Misprision; and where
any man has committed Treason or Felony, the King may cause him to be Indicted
and Arraigned of Misprision only, if he will. See more hereof, Stamf. lib. 1.
cap. 39.

Mittimus.
MIttimus is a Writ by which Records are transferred from one Court to another:
sometimes immediately, as it appears in the Statute of 5. R. 2. cap. 15. as out
of the Kings Bench into the Exchequer; and sometimes by a Certiorari into the
Chancery, and from thence by a Mittimus into another Court, as you may see in
28 H. 8. Dyer, fol. 29. a, b. and 29 H. 8. Dyer, fol. 32. a, b.

This word is used also for the Precept that is directed by a Justice of Peace
to a Jailer for the receiving and safe keeping of a Felon, or other Offender,
committed by the said Justice to the Goal.

Moderata Misericordia.
MOderata Misericordia is a Writ that lies where a man is amerced in
Court-Baton or County more then he ought to be; then he shall have this Writ
directed to the Sheriff, if it be in the County, or to the Bailiff, if it be in
Court Baron, commanding them that they amerce him not but with regard to the
quantity of the Trespass: and if they obey not this Writ, then shall go forth
against them a Sicut alias, and Causam nobis significes, and after that an
Attachment.

Modus decimandi.
MOdus decimandi is, Money or other thing of value given annually in lie ^ of
Tithes: The trial of which appertains to the Common Law, and not to any
Court-Christian. Ridley's view del Civil Law, 141. In which he says, There was
one modus decimandi pro omnibus rebus per totum regnum.

Monstrans de Droit.
MOnstrans de Droit is a Suit in Chancery for the Subject to be restored to
Lands and Tenements which he shows to be his Right, but are by Office found to
be in the possession of another that is lately dead, by which Office the King
is entitled to a Chattel, Freehold, or Inheritance in the said Lands. And this
Monstrans de Droit is give by the Statutes of 34 E. 3. cap. 14. and 37 E. 3.
cap. 13. See Coke, lib. 4. fol. 54. B. in the Case of the Wardens and
Commonalty of Sadlers.

Showing of Deeds or Records.
Showing of Deeds or Records is thus: An Action of Debt is brought against A
upon an Obligation by B, or by Executors, etc. After the Plaintiff has
declared, he ought to show his Obligation, and the Executor the Testament, to
the Court. And so it is of Records.

And the diversity between Showing of Deeds or Records, and Hearing of Deeds or
Records, is this: He that pleads the Deed or Record, or Declares upon it, ought
to show the same; and the other against whom such Deed or Record is pleaded or
declared, and is thereby to be charged, may demand hearing of the same Deed or
Record, which his Adversary brings or pleads against him.

Monstraverunt.
MOnstraverunt is a Writ that lies for the Tenants in Ancient Demesne, and is
directed to the Lord, him commanding not to Distain his Tenant to do other
Service then he ought: and they may have this Writ directed to the Sheriff,
that he suffer not the Lord to distrain the said Tenant to do other Service.

If the Tenants cannot be in quiet, they may have an Attachment against the
Lord, to appear before the Justices; and all the names of the Tenants shall be
put in the Writ though but one of them be grieved.

Also if any Land in ancient Demesne be in variance between the Tenants, then
the Tenant so grieved shall have against the other a Writ which is called of
Right close, after the Custom of the Manor; and that shall be always brought
in the Lords Court, and thereupon he shall declare in the nature of what Writ
he will, as his case lies: and this Writ shall not be removed, but for a great
cause, or non-power of the Court.

Also if the Lord in another place out of ancient Demesne distrain his Tenant,
to do other Service then he ought, he shall have a Writ of Right, called Ne
Injuste vexes; and it is a Writ of Right Patent, which shall be tried by Battle
or Grand Assise.

Mortdancester.
MOrtdancester. See before in the Title Cosinage.

MOrtgage, or Morgage.
MOrtgage, or Morgage is, when a Man makes a Feoffment to another on such
condition, that if the Feoffor pay the Feoffee at a certain day 40 li. of
money, then the Feoffor may re-enter, etc. In this case the Feoffee is called
Tenant in Morgage. And as a Man may make a Feoffment in Fee in Morgage, so he
may make a Gift in Tail, or a Lease for Life or Years in Morgage. And it seems
the cause why it is called Morgage is, for that it stands it doubt whether the
Feoffoe will pay the money at the day appointed or not; and if he fail, then the
Land which he laid in gage upon condition of payment of the money is gone from
him for ever, and so dead to him upon condition: but if he pay the money, then
is the gage dead as to the Tenant, that is, the Feoffee. And for this cause it
is called in Latin, Mortuum vadium, as Littleton says; or rather Mortuum vas,
as I think.

Also if a Feoffment be made in Morgage upon condition, that if the Feoffor pay
such a sum at such a day, etc. and the Feoffor dies before the day, yet if the
Heir of the Feoffor pay the sum at the same day to the Feoffee, and the Feoffee
refuses it, the Heir of the Feoffor may enter. But in such case if there be no
day of payment expressed, then such Tender of the Heir is void, because when
the Feoffor dies, the time of Tender is past; otherwise the Heirs of the
Feoffor shall have time of Tender for ever, which would be inconvenient, that
one shall have a Feesimple to him and his Heirs defeasible always at the
pleasure and will of others. But in the first case the time of Tender was not
expired by the death of the Feoffor.

Mortmain.
MOrtmain: where Lands are given to a House of Religion, or to other Company
Incorporate by the Kings Grant, the Land is come into Mortmain, that is in
English; a dead hand; and then the King or the Lord of whom the Land is holden
may enter, as appears by the Statute de Religiosis. And if one make a Feoffment
upon trust to certain persons to the use of a House of Religion, or to the use
of any Guild or Fraternity Corporate, it shall be said Mortmain, and he shall
incur the same penalty, as appears by the Statute, Anno 15 R. 2.

Mortuary.
MOrtuary is that Beast or other Chattel moveable, which, after the death of
the owner, by the Custom of some places, became due to the Parson, Vicar, or
Priest of the Parish, in lieu or satisfaction of Tithes or Offerings forgot, or
not well and truly paid by him that is dead. See now the Statute of 21 H. 8.
cap. 6. which ^ imits the course and order of the payment of these Mortuaries,
or of money for them.

Mulier.
MUlier is a word used in our Law, but how aptly I cannot say: for, according
to the proper signification, Mulier is a defiled Woman, as it is used in
Ulpianus thus; Si ego me Virginem emere putarem, cum esset Mulier, emptio non
valebat. Whereby you may see, Mulier is a Woman that has had the company of a
Man. But to leave the right signification, Mulier is taken in our Law for one
that is lawfully begotten and born; and is always contra-distinguished with
Bastard, only to show a difference between them; as thus: A Man has a Son of a
Woman before Marriage; that is, a Bastard, and Unlawful: and after he marries
the Mother of the Bastard, and they have another Son; this second Son is called
Mulier, that is to say, Lawful, and shall be Heir to his Father; but the other
cannot be Heir to any man, because it is not known nor certain in the Judgment
of the Law who was his Father, and for that cause is said to be, No man's son,
or the son of the people, and so without Father. according to these old verses;

To whom the People Father is, to him is Father none and all:

To whom the People Father is, well fatherless we may him call.

And always you shall find this addition to them, [Bastard eldest, and Mulier
youngest] when they are compared together.

Muniments.
MUniments are Evidences or Writings concerning a Man's Possession or
Inheritance, whereby he is able to defend the Estate which he has. And they
are fo called from the Latin word Munio, which signisies to defend or fortify.
And 35 H. 6. fol. 37. b. Wangford says, That this word Muniment includes all
manner of Evidences, viz. Charters, Releases, and others.

Murage.
MUrage is a Toll or Tribute, levied for the repairing or Building of Public
Walls. See Fitz. Not. Brev. fol. 227. D. and the Statute of 3 E. 1. cap. 30.

Murder.
MUrder is a wilful Killing a Man upon Malice forethought, and seems to come of
the Saxon word Mordren, which so signifies. And Mordridus is the Murderer even
until this day among them in Saxony, from whence we have most of our words, as
has been often said. Or it may be derived of Mort and dire, as Mors dira. See
Stanf. Pleas of the Crown, lib. 1.

Muster.
MUster comes of the French word Monstrer, that is, to show; for to Muster, is
nothing but to show men and their Arms and to In ^ ol them in a Book, as
appears by the Statute of 18 H. 6. cap. 39.

N.
Naam.
NAam is the Attaching or Taking of the moveable Goods of another man: and is
either lawful, or unlawful. Lawful Naam is a reasonable Distress according to
the value of the thing for which the Distress is made. See mo ^ e of this in
Horn's Mirror of Justices, lib. 2.

Nativo habendo.
NAtivo habendo is a Writ that lies where the Villain or Nief of the Lord is
gone from him; then the Lord shall have this Writ directed to the Sheriff, to
cause the Lord to have his Villain or Nief, with all his goods.

In this Writ more Villians or Niefs may not be demanded then two; but as many
Villains or Niefs as will may jointly bring a Writ de Liberate probanda.

And if a Villain or Nief bring his Writ de Liberate probanda before the Lord
bring this Writ, then the Villain Plaintiff shall be in peace till the coming
of the Justices, or else his Writ shall not help him.

Also if a Villain have tarried in ancient Demesne one year and a day without
claim of the Lord, then he cannot seize him in the said Franchise.

Naturalization.
NAturalization. See Denizen.

Ne admittas.
NE admittas is a Writ directed to the Bishop at the Suit of one who is Patron
of any Church, and he doubts that the Bishop will collate one his Clerk, or
admit another Clerk presented by another man to the same Benefice: then he that
doubts it shall have this Writ, to forbid the Sheriff to collate or admit any
to that Church.

Negative Pregnant.
NEgative Pregnant is, when an Action, Information, or such like, is brought
against one, and the Defendant pleads in Bar of the Action or otherwise a
Negative Plea, which is not so special an answer to the Action, but that it
includes also an Affirmative. As for example; If a Writ of Entry en casu
proviso be brought by him in the Reversion of an Alienation by the Tenant for
Life, supposing that he has aliened in Fee, (which is a Forfeiture of his
Estate) and the Tenant to the Writ says, He has not alienated in Fee; this is
a Negative, wherein is included an Affirmative; for though it be true that he
has not aliened in Fee, yet it may be he has made an Estate in Tail, (which
is also a Forfeiture) and then the Entry of him in the Reversion is lawful, etc.

Also in a Quare impedit, the King makes Title to present to a Prebend, for
that the Temporalties of the Bishopric were in his hands by the death of W.
late Bishop, etc. The Defendant says that it was not void, the Temporalties
being in the Kings hand by the death of W. This is a Negative pregnant; for it
may be in the Kings hands otherwise then by the death of W. and it suffices the
King if it be in his hands by any means, etc.

So is it where an Information was brought in the Exchequer against J. S. for
that he bought Wool of J. N. between Shearing-time and the Assu^mption such a
Year. The Defendant says he did not buy any of J. N. as it is alleged, etc.
This is called a Negative pregnant; for if he bought it of any other, yet he is
culpable for the buying.

Neif, or Nief.
NIef is a Woman that is bound, or a Villain Woman: but if she marry a Freeman,
she is thereby made free, because she and her Husband are but one person in
Law, and she ought to be of the same nature and condition in Law to all intents
as her Husband is; but her Husband is free to all intents without any condition
in Law, or otherwise; and so by consequence the Wife ought to be, and is free
according to the nature of her free Husband. And then if she were once free,
and clearly discharged of Bondage to all intents, she cannot be Nief after
without special act done by her, as Divorce, or Confession in Court of Record,
and that is in savor of Liberty. And therefore a Free woman shall not be Bound
by taking of a Villain to her Husband; but their Issue shall be Villains as
their Father was: which is contrary to the Civil Law, for there it is said, The
Birth follows the Belly.

Bondage or Villainage had beginning amongst the Hebrews, and its original of
Chanaan the son of Cham, who, because he had mocked his father Noe to scorn,
lying dissolutely when he was drunk, was punished in his son Chanaan with
penalty of Bondage.

Ne. Injuste vexes.
NE injuste vexes. Look in the Title Monstraverunt.

Next Friend.
NExt Friend. See Prochein Amy.

Nihil dicit.
NIhil dicit is, when an Action is brought against a Man, and the Defendant
appears, the Plaintiff declares, and the Defendant will not answer, or pleads
to the Action, and does not maintain his Plea, but makes Default; now upon this
Default he shall be condemned, because he Says nothing.

Nisi prius.
NIsi prius is a Writ judicial, and lies where an Enquest is empanelled and
returned before the Justices of the Bench; then the Plaintiff or Defendant may
have this Writ directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to cause the Enquest to
come before the Justices in the same County at their coming, and that for the
ease of the Enquest.

Nomination.
NOmination is, where one may in right of his Manor or otherwise, nominate and
appoint a worthy Clerk or man to a Parsonage, Vicarage, or such like Spiritual
promotion. (...) note, that this Nomination ought to be another then the
Ordinary, which other shall present him to the Ordinary.

Non-ability.
NOn-ability is, where an Action is brought against one, and the Defendant
says, that the Plaintiff is disable to sue an Action, and demands Judgment if
he shall be answered. There are six causes of Non-ability in the Plaintiff: as
if he be an Outlaw, or an Alien born, (but that Disability is in Actions real
and mixed only, and not in Actions personal, except he be an alien enemy) or
condemned in Praemunire, or professed into an Abbey, Priory, or Friety, or
Excommunicate, or a Villain, and sues his Lord. But this last is no Plea for
another that is not Lord to the Villain. See more hereof, Littl. l. 2. c. 11.

Nonage.
Nonage is all that time of a man's age under 21 years in some cases, and 14 in
others, as Marriage. See Broke Tit. Age.

Non-claim.
NOn-claim is the Omission or neglect of him that ought to challenge his Right
within a time limited, by which neglect he is either barred of his Right, as
at this day upon Non claim within five years after a Fine and right to him
accrued by the Statute of 4 H. 7. c. 24. or of his Entry by a descent for want
of Claim within five years after the Disseisin made, by the Statute of 32 H 8.
cap. 33.

Non omittas propter libertatem.
NOn omittas propter libertatem is a Writ that lies where the Sheriff returns
upon a Writ to him directed, that he has sent to the Bailiff of such a
Franchise which has Return of Writs, and he has not served the Writ; then the
Plaintiff shall have this Writ directed to the Sheriff, that he himself enter
into the Franchise, and execute the Kings Writ.

Also the Sheriff shall warn the Bailiff that he be before the Justices at the
day contained in the Writ; and if he come not and excuse himself, then all the
Writs judicial which shall pass out of the Kings Court during the same Plea
shall be Writs De non omittas, etc. and the Sheriff shall make execution of
them depending that Plea.

Nonsuit.
Nonsuit is the Renouncing of a Suit by the Plaintiff or Defendant, when the
matter is in probability to proceed, after the Tenant or Defendant has
appeared, etc. And see the Statute of 2 H. 4. c. 7. in what cases a man cannot
be Nonsuit; and 23 H 8. cap. 15. and 8 Eliz. c. 2. and 4 Jac. c. 3. where he
that is Nonsuit shall pay Costs to the Defendant.

Non sum informatus.
NOn sum informatus is a formal Answer made by an Attorney, who is commanded by
the Court to say something in Defense of his Client, by which he is deemed to
leave his Client undefended, and so Judgment passes for the other party.

Novel Assignment.
NOvel assignment is, where a man brings Trespass for breaking his Close: And
the Defendant justifies in a place where no Trespass was done, then the
Plaintiff assigns the Close where it was; to which the Defendant may plead, Not
guilty, or justify by Title. And there are other Replications in Battery, and
other Trespasses; as if the Defendant in Battery justifies by a Writ: The
Plaintiff replies, that after the Retorn of it, the Plaintiff in that Suit
discharged the Plaintiff out of Prison, and that the Defendant after that
Imprisoned him, now the Defendant must answer to that Replication.

Bare or Naked Contract.
BAre Contract, or Naked Promise, is where a Man bargains or sells Lands or
Goods, or promises to give one Money, or a Horse, or to build a House, or do
such a thing at such a day, and there is no recompense appointed to him for the
doing thereof; as if one say to another, I sell or give to you all my Lands or
Goods, and there is nothing appointed, assigned, or agreed upon what the other
shall give or pay for it, so that there is not one thing for another: this is a
Naked Contract, and void in Law, and for not performance thereof no Action
lies, for, Ex nudo Pacto non oritur Actio.

Nuper obiit.
NUper obiit is a Writ, and it lies where one has many Heirs, that is, many
Daughters, or many Sons, if it be in Gavelkind in Kent, and dies seized, and
one Heir enters into all the Land; then the others whom he holds out shall have
this Writ against the Coheir that is in. But a Writ of ^ ationabili part lies
in such ca ^ e where the Ancestor was once seized, and died not seized of the
Possession, but in Revertion.

Nuisance.
Nuisance is, where any Man raises any Wall, or stops any Water, or does any
thing upon his own Ground to the unlawful hurt or annoyance of his neighbor; he
that is grieved may have thereof an Assise of Nuisance: And if he that makes the
Nuisance aliens the Land to another, then this Writ shall be brought against
them both, as it appears by the Stat. of Westminster. 2. c. 24.

It may be also by stopping Lights in an House, or causing water to run over
House or Lands, for remedy whereof, an Action upon the Case or Assise lies.

O.
Oblations.
OBlations are what things soever are offered to God and his Church by pious
and faithful Christians.

Occupant.
OCcupant, Is when a man makes a Lease to another, for the Term of the Life of
a third person: The Lessee dies, He who first enters shall hold the land as
occupant during the life of the third person; To prevent which such Leases are
now made to the Lessee his heirs nnd assigns, 2 Cro. 554. Co. 6. r. 37.

Odio and Atia.
ODio and Atia is an old Writ mentioned in the Statute of Westminster. 1. made in 3
E. 1. cap. 11. and it was directed to the Sheriff, to inquire whether a man
committed to prison upon Suspicion of Murder were committed upon just cause of
Suspicion, or for Malice only. And if upon an inquisition it were found that he
were not guilty, then there came another Writ to the Sheriff to bail him. But
now that course is taken away by the Statute of 28 E. 3. cap. 9. as it appears
in Stamford's Pl. of the Crown, fol. 77. G. And see Coke, lib. 9. fol. 56. a. b.

Ordael.
ORdael is as much as to say as Not guilty, and was an ancient manner of Trial
in Criminal causes: for when the Defendant, being arraigned, pleaded Not
guilty, he might choose whether he would put himself upon God and the Country,
which is upon the Verdict of twelve men, as they are at this day, or upon God
only, and therefore it was called The Judgment of God, presuming that God
would deliver the innocent; and that was, if he were of Free estate, by Fire,
that is to say, to go barefooted over nine Plow-shares fire-hot: and if he
escaped unhurt, he should be acquitted, and if not, then he should be
condemned. And if the party were of Servile condition, then he should be tried
by Water, which was in diverse manners: For which see Lambert, in the word
Ordalium. But now this Trial is prohibited by Parliament. See Coke, lib. 9.
fol. 32. b.

Ordelfe.
ORdelfe is, where one claims to have the Ore that is sound in his Soil or
Ground.

Ordinary.
ORdinary is a term of the Civil Law, and there signifies any Judge that has
authority to take Conusance of Causes in his own Right, and not by Deputation.
But in the Common Law it is properly taken for the Bishop of the Diocese, who
is the true Ordinary to certify Excommunications, lawful Marriages, and such
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual acts within his Diocese, to the Judges of the
Common Law; for he is the party to whom the Court ought to write upon such
occasions. And yet the word Ordinary is usually taken in the Common Law and
Statutes for every Commissary or Official of the Bishop or other Judge
Ecclesiastical that has Judicial Authority within his Iurisdictio ^, as
appears in Coke l. 9. Hensloe's C. fol. 36. b. and the Statute of Westminster. 2.
cap. 19. and 31 E. 3. cap. 11. and many others.

Orfgild.
ORfgild signifies a payment or restoring of Cattle, from the Sax. Orf. Pecus,
and Guild Solut ^ o, Redditio.

Ouster le maine.
OUster le maine is a Writ directed to the Escheator, to deliver Seisin or
Possession out of the Kings hands unto the party that sues the Writ, for that
the Lands seized are not holden of the King, or for that he ought not to have
the wardship of them, or for that the Kings Title is determined, etc. It is
also the Judgment given in a Monstrans de Droit, or upon a Traverse or
Petition: for when it appears upon the matter discussed that the King has no
Right or Title to the thing that he seized, then Judgment shall be given that
the Kings hand be amoved; and thereupon an Amoveas manum shall be awarded to
the Escheator; which is as much as if Judgment were given that the party should
have his Lands again. And see for this Stamf. Prerog. cap. 24.

Outfangtheef.
OUtfangtheef is, that Thieves or Felons belonging to your Land or Fee, but
taken out of it, shall be brought back to your Court, and there judged.

Outlary.
OUtlary. See Utlary.

Owelty.
OWelty is, when there is Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Tenant holds of the
Mesne by the same Service that the Mesne holds over of the Lord above him: as
if the Tenant holds of the Mesne by Homage, Fealty, and xx s. Rent, and the
Mesne holds over of the Lord above by Homage, Fealty, and xx s. Rent also; this
is called Owelty of Services.

Hearing of Records and Deeds, etc.
HEaring of Records and Deeds is, where an Action of Debt is brought against a
man upon an Obligation, and the Defendant appears, and then prays that he may
hear the Obligation wherewith the Plaintiff charges him.

So it is when Executors bring an Action of Debt, and the Defendant demands to
hear the Testament; upon this demand it shall be read unto him. But if it be in
another Term, or after the Defendant has imparled, then he shall not hear it.
And so as is said of Deeds, is to be understood of Records that are alleged
against him. But in the Kings Bench the Defendant may at any time before Plea,
and the Plaintiff have Oyer of Deed and Record. See the Title Monstrans de Fait.

Oyer and Terminer.
OYer and Terminer is a Writ called in Latin, de Audiendo and Terminando, and
it lies where any great or sudden Insurrection is made, or any other sudden
Trespass, which requires hasty Reformation; then the King shall direct a
Commission to certain Justices to hear and to determine the same.

Note, that the Justices of Assise have also one Commission of Oyer and
Terminer directed to them, and diverse other Inhabitants within the Shires
whereunto their Circuit extends, whereof each of the Justices of Assise are of
the Quorum, for the hearing and determining of diverse Offenses which may happen
in their Circuit, which without this Commission they could not do. See Fitzh.
N. B. fol. 110. b.

P.
Pain fort and dure.
Pain fort and dure is an especial Punishment for such as, being arraigned for
Felony, refuse to put themselves upon the common Trial of God and the Country,
and thereby are Mute, or as Mute in Law. See this at large in Stamford Pl. Cor.
fol. 150.

Palace Court.
PAlace-Court, is a Court of Record, erect by King James by his Letters
Patents, and held at Southwark, and is a Court of Common Law. See Marshalsea.

Pannage.
PAnnage. See Paunage.

Panel.
Panel comes of the French word Pan, that is, a Skin, and signifies in our
Common Law a Schedule or Roll containing the names of the Jurors which the
Sheriff has returned to pass upon any Trial. And therefore the Empannelling of
the Jury is nothing but the entering of their Names into the Sheriffs Roll.

Pape, or Pope.
PApe (Papa) is a name that signifies Father, and anciently was applied to
other Clergymen in the Greek Church; but by usage is particularly appropriated
in the Latin Church to the Bishop of Rome: a name very frequent in our ancient
Year-Books, especially in the times of those Kings, who, too much abandoning
their Imperial Authority, and abasing themselves beneath their estate, suffered
an Alien, an Outhlandish Bishop that dwelt 1000 miles off, to take from them
the disposition of many Spiritual preferments, sometimes by Lapse, sometimes by
Provision, or otherwise. For redress whereof diverse Statutes were made while
the Kingdom was of the Roman Communion, but his whole Poer was not taken away
till toward the latter end of Henry the Eighths Reign,

Paramount.
PAramount is compounded of two French words, ( par and monter;) and it
signifies in our Law the Highest Lord of the Fee. For the better understanding
of this, see F. N. B. f. 135. M. in his Writ of Mesne.

Paraphernalia.
PAraphernalia, in Greek (...) praeter, and (...) dos. They are Goods which a
Wife challenges above her Dower. 1 Cro. Lord Hastings against Douglas.

Paravaile.
PAravaile is also compounded of two French words, ( par, and availer;) and
signifies in our Law the lowest Tenant of the Fee, who is Tenant to one that
helds over of another. See for the use of this word, F. N. B. in his Writ of
Mesne, f. 135. M.

Parceners.
PArceners are according to the course of the Common Law, and according to
Custom. Parceners according to the Common Law are, where one seized of an
Estate of Inheritance of Tenements has no Issue but Daughters, and dies, and
the Tenements descend to the Daughters; then they are called Parceners, and are
but as one Heir. The same Law is, if he have not any Issue, and that his
Sisters should be his Heirs. But if a Man has but one Daughter, she is not
called Parcener, but the Daughter and Heir. And if there are no Daughters nor
Sisters, the Land shall descend to the Aunts, and they are called Parceners.

When Lands descend to diverse Parceners, they may make Partition between
themselves by Agreement; but if any of them will not make Partition, then the
others shall have a Writ de Partitione facienda directed to the Sheriff, who
shall make Partition between them by the Oath of xij. lawful men of the
Bailywick.

Also Partition by Agreement may be made by the Law, as well by Word without
Deed, as by Deed. And if they are of full age, the Partition shall remain for
ever, and shall never be defeated.

But if the Lands be to them in tail, though they are concluded during their
lives, yet the Issue of him who has the lesser part in value may disagree from
the Partition; and enter and occupy in common with the other part. And if the
Husbands of the Parceners make Partition, when the Husband dies the Wife may
disagree from the Partition. Also if the Parcener who is within Age makes
Partition, when she comes to full age she may disagree. But she must take good
heed when she comes to her full Age, that she take not all the Profits to her
own use of the Lands which were to her allotted; for then she agrees to the
Partition: and the age shall always be intended the age of one and twenty years.

If there be diverse Parceners that have made Partition between them, and one of
their parts is recovered by lawful Title; then she shall compel the other to
make a new Partition.

Parceners according to Custom are, where a man is seized of Lands in
Gavelkind, as in Kent, and other places franchised, and has issue diverse Sons,
and dies; then the Sons are Parceners by Custom.

Parco fracto.
PArco fracto is a Writ that lies against him that breaks any Pound, and takes
out the Beasts which are there lawfully impounded. See of this F. N. B. 100. E.

Park.
PArk is a place in which by Prescription or by the Kings Grant, a Subject
preservs his Game of Beasts ferae naturae. See Stat. W. 1. 3 E. 1. cap. 20.

Parliament.
PArliament, See the Lord Cook's 4th Institutes, and Mr. Cowels Interpreter,
Title Parliament.

Parson imparsonee.
PArson imparsonee is he that is in possession of a Church appropriate or
presentative; for so it is used in both cases in Dyer, f. 40. b. and f. 221. b.

Parties.
PArties to a Fine or Deed are those which are named in a Deed or Fine as
Parties to it; as those that levy the Fine, and they to whom the Fine is
levied. And they that make a Deed of Feoffment, and they to whom it is made,
are called Parties to the Deed: and so in many other like cases.

Note, that if an Iudenture be made between two as Parties thereto in the
beginning, and in the Deed one of them grants or lets a thing to another who is
not named in the beginning, he is not Party to the Deed, nor shall take any
thing thereby.

Partition.
PArtition is a Dividing of Lands descended by the Common Law, or by Custom
among Coheirs or Parceners, where there are two at least, whether they be
Sons, Daughters, Sisters, Aunts, or otherwise of kin to the Ancestor from whom
the Land descended to them.

And this Partition is made four ways for the most part; whereof three are at
pleasure and by Agreement among them, the fourth is by Compulsion.

One Partition by Agreement is, when they themselves divide the Land equally
into so many parts as there are of them Coparceners, and each to choose one
share or part, the Eldest first, and so the one after the other, as they be of
age; except that the eldest by consent made the Partition, then the choice
belongs to the next, and so the eldest last, according as it is said, Who makes
the Partition, the other must have the Choice.

Another Partition by Agreement is, when they choose certain of their Friends to
make Division for them.

The third Partition by Agreement is, by drawing Lots, thus: First, to divide
the Land into so many parts as there are Parceners; then to write every part
severally in a Little Scroll, or piece of Paper, or Parchment, and put the same
Scroll up close into a Hat, or Cap, or other such like thing; and then each
Parcener, one after another as they are in age, to draw one piece or Scroll
wherein is written a part of the Land which by this Drawing is now severally
alloted to them in Feesimple.

The fourth Partition, which is by Compulsion, is, when one or some of the
Coparceners would have Partition, and other some will not agree thereto; then
they that so would have Partition may bring a Writ De Partitione facienda
against the others that would not make Partition, by virtue whereof they shall
be compelled to part, etc.

In Kent, where the Lands are of Gavelkind-nature, they call at this day their
Partition Shifting, even the same word that the Saxons used, namely Shiftan,
which signifies to make Partition between Coheirs, and to assign to each of
them their portion. In Latin it is called Herciscere.

Partition also may be made by Ioyntenants or Tenants in common by their
assent, by Deed between them, or by Writ, by the Statutes of 31 H. 8. cap. 1.
and 32 H. 8. cap. 32.

Pasport.
PAsport is a word mentioned in the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 2. and signifies a
License made by any that has authority, for the safe passage of any man from
one place to another.

Patron.
PAtron is he that has the Advowson of a Parsonage, Vicarage, Free-chappel, or
such like Spiritual Promotion, belonging to his Manor, or otherwise in gross,
and thereby may or ought to give the same Benefice, or present thereto, when
and as often as it becomes void. And this being Patron, or Patronage, had
beginning for the most part by one of these three ways: namely, either by
reason of the Foundation, for that the Patron or his Ancestors, or those from
whom he claims, were Founders or Builders of the Church; or by reason of
Donation, for that they did endow or give Lands to the same for maintenance
thereof; or else by reason of the Ground, because the Church was set or built
upon their soil or ground: and many times by reason of all three.

Paunage or Pannage.
PAunage, or Pannage, is that money which the Agistors of Forests do gather for
the feeding of Hoggs within the Forest: and it is also taken for all manner of
Mast of trees within the Forest on which the Hogs do feed. See Manw. For. Laws,
chap. 12. fol. 90. a.

Peers.
PEers are those that are impannelled in an Enquest upon any man, for the
convicting or clearing him of any offense for which he is called in question.
The reason of which appellation of the Jury is, for that Peers comes from the
Latin Pares, that is, Equals; and the custom of our Nation is, to try every
man by his Equals, that is to say, by his Peers. And so it appears by the
Statutes of Magna Charta, cap. 29. and West. 1. cap. 6. This word is also used
for the Nobility of the Realm and Lords of the Parliament, who are called the
Peers of the Realm. And of that see Stamf. Pl. of the Crown, lib. 3. cap. 1.
fol. 152.

Perambulatione facienda.
PErambulatione facienda is a Writ that lies where two Lordships lie one nigh
another, and some Encroachment is made by long time; then, by assent of both
Lords, the Sheriff shall take with him the parties and the neighbors, and
shall make Perambulation, and shall make the Bounds as they were before. But if
a Lord encroach upon another, and he will not make Perambulation, then the Lord
so grieved shall have a Writ against the other, which is called de Rationalibus
divisis.

Perjury.
PErjury is a corrupt or voluntary false Oath given in Chancery or in Evidence
to a Jury upon trial of an issue at Common Law. See Stat. 5 El. cap. 9.

Perinde valere.
PErinde valere is a term that belongs to the Ecclesiastical Law, and signifies
a Dispensation granted to a Clerk who not being capable of a Benefice or other
Ecclesiastical Function is de facto admitted to it. And it has the name from
the words which make the faculty as effectual to the party, as if he were
actually capable of the thing for which he has his Dispensation at the time of
his admittance.

Pernor of Profits.
PErnor of Profits is he that takes the Profits. Pernor of Profits and Cestuy
que use is all one, Coke, lib. 1. Casu Chudley, fol. 123.

But one may be Pernor of, etc. and not Cestuy que use by Title, but by Coven,
which see Co. 5. 77, 78. Co. Entr. 698. 2 Leo. rep. 16. 2 Anderson. 25. Stat.
11. H. 6. 3.

Perpetuity.
PErpetuity is used in Law where an Estate is so designed to be settled in
Tail, etc. that it cannot be undone or made void. Which the State cannot bear,
as is said in the end of the case. Moo. rep. 809, 810. Co. 1. 84. 130. Co. 6.
40. and l. 8. 90.

Per quae servitia.
PEr quae servitia is a Writ Judicial, and goes out upon the Note of a Fine;
and it lies for the Conusee of a Manor or Seigniory, to compel him that is
Tenant of the Land at the time of the Fine levied to attourn to him. And of
this Writ see the Old N. B. f. 170. a.

Perquisites.
PErquisites are Advantages and Profits that come to a Manor by casualty, and
not yearly; as Escheats, Harriots, Reliefs, Waifes, Estrays, Forfeitures,
Amerciaments in Courts, Goods and Lands purchased by Villains of the same
Manor, Fines of Copiholds, and diverse other like things that are not certain,
but come by chance, sometimes more often than at other times. See Perkins, fol.
20, and 21.

Personalty
PErsonalty: as the Action is in the Personalty, that is, to say, brought
against the right person, or the person against whom in Law it lies.

Petit Cape.
PEtit Cape is a Writ that lies when any Actios Real, that is to say, of Plea
of Land, is brought, and the Tenant appears, and afterward makes Default; then
this Petit Cape shall go forth to seize the Lands into the Kings hands. But if
he appears not at the first Summons, then a Grand Cape shall go forth; and for
such Defalt the Tenant shall lose the Land. But if he wage his Law of
Non-summons, he shall save his Default, and then he may plead with the
Demandant. And in Grand Cape the Tenant shall be summoned to answer to the
Default, and farther to the Demandant: But in Petit Cape he shall be summoned
to answer to the Default only, and not to the Demandant. And it is called Petit
Cape, for that there is less in this Writ than in the other.

Pettybag.
PEttybag is an Office in the Court of Chancery, for Suits for and against
Attorneys and Officers of that Court; And for process and proceedings by
extents on Statutes, Recognizances, Ad quod dampnum, etc. Parva Baga dicitur.

Petit Serjeantie.
TO hold by Petit Serjeantie is as if a man held Lands or Tenements of the
King, yielding him a Knife, a Buckler, an Arrow, a Bow without string, or other
like Service, at the will of the first Feoffor; and there belongs not Ward,
Marriage or Relief. And mark well, that a man may not hold by Grand or Petit
Serjeanty, but of the King. See the Stat. 12. Car. 2. cap. 24.

Piccage.
PIccage is the payment of money, or the money paid for the breaking of the
ground to set up Booths and Standings in Fairs.

Picle or Pitle.
PIcle, or Pitle, seems to come from the Italian Picco ^ o, Parvus, and
signifies with us a little small Close or Enclosure.

Pillory.
PIllory is an Engine of punishment ordained by the Statute of 51 H. 3. for the
punishment of Bakers; but now used for many other Offenders, and is called in
Latin Collistrigium.

Pipowders.
PIpowders is a Court which is incident to every Fair, for the determination of
differences upon Bargains and disorders therein. See more hereof Crom. Jurisd.
fol. 229. Coke, lib. 10. fol. 73.

Piscary.
PIscary is a Liberty of Fishing in another man's waters, or his own.

Placard.
PLacard is word used in the Statutes of 33 H. 8. cap. 6. and 2 and 3 Ma. cap.
9. and it signifies a License to use unlawful Games, or to shoot in a Gun.

Plaintiff.
PLaintiff is he that sues or complains in an Assise, or in an Action personal;
as in an Action of Debt, Trespass, Disceit, Detinue, and such other.

Pledges.
PLedges are Sureties either real or formal which the Plaintiff finds to
prosecute his suit.

Pleading.
PLeadings are all the Sayings of the parties to Suits after the Count or
Declaration; namely, that which is contained in the Bar, Replication, and
Rejoinder; and not that contained in the Count it self: and therefore defaults
in the matter of Count are not comprised within Mispleading, or insufficient
Pleading, nor are remedied by the Statute of Jeofails, 32 H. 8. but only the
Mispleading or insufficient Pleading committed in the Bar, Replication and
Rejoinder, are there provided for. But see those now remedied also by the
Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 13.

Plenartie.
PLenartie is, when a Benefice is full, directly contrary to Vacation, which
signifies the being void of a Benefice, Stamf. Prerog. cap. 8. fol. 32.

Plevyn. See Replevyn.

Pluralities.
PLuralities are where a Uicar or Rector has two or more Ecclesiastical
Benefices, For which see Stat. 21. H. 8. cap. 13.

Policy of Assurance.
POlicy of Assurance is a course taken by Merchants for the assuring of their
Adventures upon the Sea, by giving a certain proportion in the Hundred for
securing the safe return of the Ship, and so much Merchandise as is agreed
upon. And of this you may read in the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 12.

Upon which an Action lies at the common Law, or in the Court (by the Kings
Patent) sitting at the Royal Exchange in London, the Judges of which are
Civilians, common Lawyers and Merchants.

Pone.
POne is a Writ whereby a Cause depending in the County Court is removed into
the Common Pleas. See for this Old N. B. fol. 2. a.

Pontage.
POntage is a word mentioned in many Statutes: as in Westminster. 1. cap. 25. 1 H. 8.
cap 9. and 39 Eliz. cap. 24. and it signifies sometimes the Contribution that
is gathered for the Repairing of a Bridge; sometimes the Toll paid by the
Passengers to that purpose.

Portgreve, See Viscount

Portmoot.
POrtmoot is a word used in the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 15. and signifies a
Court kept in a Haven-Town.

Possessio Fratris.
POssessio Fratris, is where a man has a son and a daughter by one Woman, and
a son by another Venture, and dies; the first son enters and dies without Issue,
the daughter shall have the Land as Heir to her brother, although the second
son is Heir to the father. Litt. Sect. 8.

Possession.
POssession is twofold; either actual, or in Law.

Actual Possession is, when a man actually enters into lands or tenements to
him descended, or otherwise.

Possession in Law is, when Lands or Tenements are descended to a man, and he
has not as yet really, actually, and in Deed entered into them. And it is
called Possession in Law, because in the eye and consideration of the Law he is
deemed to be in Possession, since he is Tenant to every man's Action that will
sue concerning the same Lands or Tenements.

Post diem.
POst diem is the Return of a Writ after the day assigned for its Return.

Postd ^ sseisin.
POstdisseisin. Look for that before in the Title Assise.

Postea.
POstea is the Record of the proceedings upon a Trial by a Writ of Nisi prius,
which is returned after the Trial by the Judge before whom it was tried into
the Court where the first Suit began, to have Judgment there given upon the
Verdict: and it is called the Postea, because it begins with Postea die and
loco, etc.

Poundage.
POundage is a Subsidy to the value of 12 d. in the pound, which is granted to
the King by every Merchant, as well Denizen as Alien, for all manner of
Merchandise carried out and brought in. And of such Subsidies see the Statute 1
and 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. and 1 Jac. cap. 33. and 14 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Also by Stat. 29 El. cap. 4. every Sheriff is allowed poundage for levying
Debt or Damages by Execution.

Pounds.
POunds are in two sorts; the one Pound open, the other close.

Pound open, is every place wherein a Distress is put, whether it be common
Pound, or Backside, Court, Yard, Pasture, or else whatsoever whereto the Owner
of the Distress may come to give them meat, without offense for their being
there, or his coming thither.

Pound close is such a place where the owner of the Distress may not come to
give them meat without offense; as in a Close house, or whatsoever else place.

Preamble.
PReamble takes his name of the preposition ( prae) before, and the verb
(ambulo) to go; so joined together, they make the compound verb (praembulo) to
go before; and hereof the first part or beginning of an Act is called the
Preamble of the Act, which is a Key to open the minds of the makers of the Act,
and the mischiefs which they intend to remedy by the same. As for example, the
Statute made at Westminster. the first, the 37 chap. which gives an Attaint, the
Preamble of which is thus: Forasmuch as certain people of the Realm doubt very
little to give false Verdicts or Oaths, which they ought not to do, whereby
many people are disherited, and lose their right; It is provided, etc.

Prebend and Prebendary.
PRebend and Prebendary are terms often used in our Books, and they come of the
Latin (praebeo) Prebend is that portion which every member or Canon of the
Cathedral Church receives in right of his place for his maintenance: and
Prebendary is he that has such a Prebend.

Precipe or Praecipe in capite.
PRecipe in capite is a Writ that lies where the Tenant holds of the King in
chief as of his Crown, and he is deforced, that is, put out of his Land; then
he shall have this Writ, and it shall be Close, and shall be pleaded in the
Common Pleas.

Also if any Tenant that holds of any Lord be deforced, it behooves him to sue a
Writ of Right Patent, which shall be determined in the Lords Court. But if the
Land be holden of the King, the Writ of Right Patent shall be brought to the
Kings Court: and the Writ may be removed from the Lords Court unto the County
by a To ^ t, and from the County into the Common Place by a Pone. Look
therefore before in the Title Drolt.

Praecipe.
PRaecipe are of diverse sorts: Quod reddat terras, as dower, formedon, etc.
debitum, bona and catalla. Quod teneat conventionem, Quod faciat sectam ad
molendinum, Quod permittat, etc.

Preignotary.
PReignotary is compounded of two Latin words ( prae and Notarius;) and is
used in our Law for the chief Clerks of the Kings Courts, whereof there is one
in the Kings Bench, and three in the Common Pleas. He in the Kings Bench
records all Actions Civil sued in that Court: and they of the Common Pleas
inrol all Declarations, Pleadings, and Judgments, and make out all Judicial
Writs, they Inroll all Fines and Recognisances, and exemplify all Records the
same Term before the Rolls are delivered out of their hands. In 15 E. 4. 26 b.
This Officer is called Praesignator: And one of the three in the Common Bench,
Praesignator pauperum.

Premises.
Premises. See Habendum.

Praemunire.
PRaemunire is a Writ that lies where any man sues another in the Spiritual
Court for any thing that is determinable in the Kings Court; for which great
punishment is ordained by diverse Statutes; viz. that he shall be out of the
Kings protection, and put in Prison without Bail or Mainprise, till he have
made Fine at the Kings Will, and that his Lands and Goods shall be forfeited if
he come not within two months. And his Provisors, Procurators, Atturneys,
Executors, Notaries and Maintainers, shall be punished in the same manner.
Therefore look the Statute.

Also some say, if a Clerk sue another man in the Court of Rome for a thing
Spiritual, where he may have remedy within the Realm in the Court of his
Ordinary, that he shall be within the case of the Statute.

And upon diverse other offenses is imposed, by Statutes lately made, the
Penalty that they incur who are attainted in Praemunire: As by 13 Eliz. cap 8.
they who are aiding to make a corrupt Bargain whereupon Usury is reserved above
x. l. in the hundred for a year, etc.

Prender.
PRender is the power or right of Taking a thing before it be offered; from the
French prendre, i. accipere.

Prescription.
PRescription is, when a Man claims any thing, because he, his Ancestors or
Predecessors, or they whose Estate he has, have had or used it all the time
whereof no memory is to the contrary.

But one may not prescribe against a Statute, except he have another Statute
that serves for him.

Presentment.
PResentment is of two significations. One is to a Church; as when a man has
right to give any Benefice Spiritual, and names the person to the Bishop to
whom he will give it, and makes a Writing to the Bishop for him, that is a
Presentation or Presentment. If diverse Coheirs cannot agree in Presentment, the
Presentee of the eldest shall be admitted. But if Ioyntenants and Tenants in
common agree not within six months, the Bishop shall present by lapse.

The other is a Presentment or Information by a Jury in a Court, before any
Officer who has Authority to punish any offense done contrary to the Law.

Pretensed Right or Title.
PRetensed Right or Title is, where one is in possession of Lands or Tenements,
and another who is out, claims it, and sues for it: now the pretensed Right or
Title is said in him who so does sue and claim. And if he afterward come to the
possession, his Right or Title is annexed to the Land and possession, and not
then called Right.

Primer Seisin.
PRimer Seisin is used in the Common Law for a branch of the Kings Prerogative,
by which he has the first possession, that is, the entire Profits for a year
of all the Lands and Tenements whereof his Tenant (that held of him in capite)
died seized in his Demesne as of Fee, his Heir then being at full age: and thus
the King takes in lieu of the entire Profits which he may take, if he will,
until Livery be sued, or at the least tendered. Prerog. Reg. c. 3. and Stamf.
f. 11. B. See the Stat. 12 Car. 2. c. 24.

Prisage.
PRisage is that part or portion that belongs to the King of such Merchandises
as are taken at Sea by way of lawful Prise. And this word you shall find in the
Statute of 31 Ell ^. cap. 5.

Prisage of Wines.
PRisage of Wines, mentioned in the Stat. 1 H. 8. c. 5. is a custom by which
the King out of every Bark laden with Wine under 40 Tun, claims to have two Tun
at his own price.

Privy or Privities.
Privy or Privities is, where a Lease is made to hold at will, for years, for
life, or a Feoffment in fee, and in diverse other cases; now because of this
that has passed between these parties, they are called Privies, in respect of
strangers, between whom no such Conveyantes have been.

Also if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant holds of the Lord by certain
Service, there is a Privity between them, because of the Tenure: and if the
Tenant be disseised by a stranger, there is no Privity between the Disseisor
and the Lord, but the Privity still remains between the Lord and the Tenant
that is disseised, and the Lord shall avow upon him, for that he is his Tenant
in right, and in Judgment of the Law.

Privies are in diverse sorts; as namely, Privies in Estate, Privies in Deed,
Privies in Law, Privies in Right, and Privies in Blood.

Privies in Estate is, where a Lease is made of the Manor of Dale to A for
life, the Remainder to B in fee; there both A and B are Privies in Estate, for
their Estates were both made at one time.

And so it is in the first case here, where a Lease is made at will, for life,
or years, or a Feoffment in fee, the Lessees or Feoffees are called Privies in
Estate, and so are their Hairs, etc.

Privies in Deed is, where a Lease is made for life, and afterward by another
Deed the Reversion is granted to a stranger in fee, this Grantee of the
Reversion is called Privy in Deed, because he has the Reversion by Deed.

Privy in Law is, where there is Lord and Tenant, the Tenant leases the Tenancy
for life, and dies without Heir, and the Reversion escheats to the Lord; he is
said Privy in Law, because he has his Estate only by the Law, that is to say,
by Escheat.

Privy in Right is, where one possessed of a Term for years grants his Estate
to another upon Condition, and makes his Executors, and dies; now these
Executors are Privies in Right; for if the Condition be broken, and they enter
into the Land, they have it in right of their Testator, and to his use.

Privy of Blood is the Heir of the Feoffor or Donor, etc.

Also if a Fine be levied, the Heirs of them that levied the Fine are called
Privies.

Privileges.
PRivileges are Liberties and Franchises granted to an Office, Place, Town, or
Manor by the Kings great Charter, Letter Patents, or Act of Parliament: as
Toll, Sake, Socke, Infangtheef, Outfangtheef, Turn, Ordelfe, and diverse such
like; for which look in their proper titles and places.

Also there are other privileges which the Law takes notice of, that is to say,
the privileges of the Commons and Peers of the Parliament, and the privileges
of Attorneys and Officers of the Courts at Westminster. that they shall not be sued
or impleaded in another Court, but in that where they are Attorneys or Officers.

Procedendo.
PRocedendo is a Writ that lies where any Action is sued in one Court, which is
removed to another more high, as to the Chancery, Kings Bench, or Common Place,
by a Writ of Privilege or Certiorari: and if the Defendant, upon the matter
showed, have no cause of Privilege, or if the matter in the Bill whereupon the
Certiorari issued be not well proved, then the Plaintiff shall have this
Procedendo, to send again the matter unto the first base Court, there to be
determined.

Process.
Process are the Writs and Precepts that go forth upon the Original. And in
Actions real and personal there are sundry sorts of Process: For in Actions real
the Process i ^ Grand Cape before Appearance: Therefore see of that in the (...)
Petit Cape.

But in Actions personal, as in Debt, Trespass, or Detinue, the Process is a
Distress: and if the Sheriff return Nihil habet in Balliva, etc. then the
Process is Alias Capias, and Pluries and an Exigent; and they are called Capias
ad respondendum. Also the Exigent shall be proclaimed five times; and if the
party do not appear, he shall be outlawed. But in diverse Actions there are
diverse manners of Process, which at large is declared in N. B.

And there are diverse other Process after Appearance, when the parties are at
Issue, to make the Enquest appear: as a Writ of Venire facias; and if they do
not appear at the day, then a Writ of Habeas corpora Jurat', and after a Writ
of Did ^ ingas Jurat'.

And there are diverse other Process after Judgment; as Capias ad satisfaciendum,
and Capias utlagatum, etc.

Capias ad satisfaciendum lies where a man is condemned in any Debt or Damage,
then he shall be arrested by this Writ, and put in Prison without Bail or
Mainprise, till he has paid the Debt and the Damages.

Capias utlagatum lies where one is outlawed, then he shall be taken by this
Writ, and put in Prison without Bail or Mainprise, for that he had the Law in
contempt.

And there are other Process and Writs Judicial, as Capias ad valentiam, Fieri
facias, Scire facias, and many other: and therefore look for them in their
Titles.

Next friend.
NExt friend is commonly taken for Guardian in Soccage, and is where a man
seized of Land holden in Socage dies, his issue within age of 14 years, then
the next friend, or next of kin, to whom the Lands cannot descend, shall have
the keeping of the Heir, and of the Land, to the only use of the Heir until he
come to the age of 14 years; and then he may enter, and put the Guardian out,
and bring him to account: But in that Account he shall be allowed for all
reasonable costs and expenses bestowed either upon the Heir or his Land.

The next friend, or next of kin, to whom the Inheritance cannot descend, is
thus to be understood: If the Lands descend to the Heir from his Father, or any
of the kin of his Fathers side, then the Mother, or other of the Mothers side,
are called the next of kin, to whom the Inheritance cannot descend; for before
it shall so diseend, it shall rather escheat to the Lord of whom it is holden.

And where the Lands come to the Heir from his Mother, or any of her side, then
the Father, or other of the Fathers side, are called the next of kin, to whom
the Inheritance cannot descend, but shall rather escheat to the Lord of whom it
is holden.

Otherwise Prochein amy is he who appears in any Court for an Infant who sues
any Action, and aids the Infant to pursue his Suit: whereof see the Statutes of
Westminster. 1. cap. 47. and Westminster. 2. cap. 15. that an Infant may not make an
Attorney, but the Court may admit the next Friend for the Plaintiff, and a
Guardian for the Infant Defendant as his Attorney.

Proclamation.
PRoclamation, is Notice publicly given of any thing whereof the King thinks
good to advertise his Subjects: so it is used Anno 7. R. 2. c. 6.

Proclamation of Rebellion, is an open notice given by an Officer, that a man
not appearing upon a Subpoena or Attachment in the Chancery, shall be reputed a
Rebel, except he render himself at the day assigned. Crompt. Jurisdict. fol.
92.

And it is to be noted, that no man may make Proclamation but by authority of
the King, or Majors, and such like as have proviledges in Cities and Boroughs
so to do, or have it by Custom. And therefore where an Executor made
Proclamations in certain Market Towns, that the Creditors should come by a
certain day, and claim and prove their Debts due by the Testator, and because
he did this without Authority, he was committed to the Fleet, and Fined. Brook
Proclamation 10.

Procurator.
PRocurator is used for him who gathers the Fruits of a Benefice for another
man, Anno 3 Ric. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 2.

Prohibition.
PRohibition is a Writ that lies where a man is impleaded in the Spiritual
Court of a thing that touches not Matrimony, nor Testament, nor merely Tithes,
but the Kings Crown. This Writ shall be directed as well to the party, as to
the Judge, or his Official, to prohibit them that they pursue no farther. But
if it appear afterward to the Judges temporal, that the matter is fit to be
determined in the Spiritual Court, and not in the Court Temporal, then the
party shall have a Writ of Consultation, commanding the Judges of the Court
Spiritual to proceed in the first Plea.

Also there are many other Prohibitions to the Admiralty, and to other Courts
of Common Law if they exceed their power.

Properite.
Property is the highest Right that a man has or can have to any thing, which
no way depends upon another man's courtesy: And this none in this Kingdom can
be said to have in any Lands or Tenements, but only the King in right of his
Crown, because all the Lands through the Realm are in nature of Fee, and hold
mediately or immediately of the Town. This word nevertheless is used for such
right in Lands and Tenements as common persons have in the same. And there are
three manner of rights of Property: that is, Property absolute, Property
qualified, and Property possessory: Of which see at large Cok. lib. 7. Case de
Swans, fol. 17.

Proprietary.
PRoprietary is he that has a Property in any thing; but is most commonly used
for him who has the Profits of a Benefice to him and his Heirs, or to himself
and his Successors. as in times past Abbots and Priors had.

Protection.
PRotection is a Writ that lies where a man will pass over the Sea in the Kings
service, then he shall have this Writ, whereby he shall be quit of all manner
of Pleas between him and any other person. except Pleas of Dower, Quare
impedit, Assise of Novel disseisin, Darrein presentment and Attaints, and Pleas
before Justices in Air. But there are two Writs of Protection, one cum
clausula Volumus, and another cum clau ^ ula Nolumus, as appears in the
Register.

But a Protectiou shall not be allowed in any Plea begun before the date of it,
if it be (...) in Veyages where the King himself shall pass, or other Voyages
Royal, or in Messages of the King of affairs of the Realm. Nor shall a
Protection be allowed for Victual brought for the voyage whereof the Protection
makes mention, nor in Pleas of Trespass, or of Contracts made after the date of
the Protection.

Note, that any may attach or begin any Action real against him that has such
Protection, and therein proceed, until the Defendant comes and shows his
Protection in the Court, and has it allowed; and then his Plea or Suit shall
go without day. But if after it appears that the party who has the Protection
goes not about the affairs for which he has it, then the Demandant shall have
a Repeal thereof. And if he go, and return after the business ended, the
Demandant shall have a Resummons to recontinue the former Suit.

Protestation.
PRotestation is a form of Pleading, when any will not directly affirm, nor
directly deny anything that is alleged by another, or which he himself
alleges. And it is in two sorts. One is, when one pleads any thing which he
dare not directly affirm, or cannot plead for doubt to make his plea double: As
if in conveying to himself a Title to any Land, he ought to plead diverse
Discents by diverse persons, and he dare not affirm that all they were seized at
the time of their death, or although he could do it, it shall be double to
plead two Discents; of both which each by it self may be a good Bar. Then the
Defendant ought to plead and alleged the matter, interlacing this word
protestando, as to say, that such a one died (by Protestation) seized, etc. And
that is to be alleged by Protestation, and not to be traversed by the other.
Another Protestation is, when one is to answer to two matters, and yet by the
Law he ought to plead but to one; then in the first part of the Plea he shall
say to the one matter, protestando, and non cognoscendo this matter to be true,
and makes his Plea farther by these words, Sed pro placito dicit, etc. And this
is for saving to the party (that so pleads by Protestation) the being concluded
by any matter alleged or objected against him, upon which he cannot join
issue; and is no other but an exclusion of the Conclusion; for he that takes
the Protestation excludes the other party to conclude him. And the Protestation
ought to stand with the sequel of the Plea, and not to be repugnant, or
otherwise contrary.

Provendry.
PRovendry in the Church of Sarum, is called the lesser part of the Altar in
the Church of St. Mary, 41 E. 3. 5. b.

Provision.
PRovision is used with us as it is in the Common Law, for providing of a
Bishop or other Ecclesiastical person of an Ecclesiastical Living by the Pope
before the Incumbent of it be dead; the great abuse whereof appears by several
Statutes that have been made from the time of E. 3. to the reign of H. 8. for
the avoiding of such Provisions. Rast. Entries. Quare impedit. Roy 17. 20.

Proviso.
PRoviso is a Condition inserted in any Deed, upon the performance whereof the
validity of the Deed consists. Sometimes it is only a Covenant, whereof see
Coke, lib 2. in the Lord Cromwels Case. It has also another signification in
matters judicial: as if the Plaintiff or Demandant desists from prosecuting an
Action, and brings it not to Trial, then the Defendant or Tenant may take forth
the Venire facias to the Sheriff, which has in it these words, Proviso quod,
etc. to this end, that if the Plaintiff takes out any Writ to this purpose, the
Sheriff shall summon but one Jury upon them both. See Old Natura Brevium in the
Writ Nisi prius, fol. 159.

Prove ^ sor. See Praemunire.

Proxy. Procuratio.
PRoxy. Procuratio is a payment to a Bishop by a Religious house, for the
charges of his visitation of such Houses, Davies rep. 2.

Purchase.
PUrchase is the Possession that a man has in Lands or Tenements by his own
act, means or agreement, and not by title of Descent from any of his Ancestors.
See Littl. l. 1. c. 1.

Purlue.
PUrlue is all the Ground near any Forest, which being made Forest by Henry
the second, Richard the first, or King John, was by Perambulations granted by
Henry the third severed again from the same. Manwood part 2. of his Forest
Laws, c. 20. And it seems that this word is composed either of pouralle, that
is, to go or walk about; or purelieu, that is, a pure place, because such Lands
as were by those Kings subjected to the Laws and Ordinances of the Forest, are
now cleared and freed from the same: As the Civilians call that a pure place,
which is not subject unto Burials; fo ^^ kewise this may be called a pure
place, because it is exempted from the servitude and thraldom which was
formerly laid upon it.

Purlue man is he that has Lands within the Purlieu, and being able to dispenh
forty shillings by the year of Freehold, is upon these two points licensed to
hunt in his own Purlieu. Manwood, part 1. p. 151. and 177. See now the Stat.
made 1 Jac. c. 27.

Purpresture.
PUrpresture is a woe ^^ derived from the French ^ ourpr ^^, which signifies to
take from another, and to app ^^ priate to himself: and therefore a Purpresture
in a general sense is taken for any such wrong done by one man to another.

Purpresture in a Forest is every Incroachment upon the Kings Forest, be it
by Building, Enclosing, or using of any liberty without a lawful warrant so to
do. And of this see Manwood in his Forest Laws, c. 10. f. 74. a.

Purveyors.
PUrveyors were ancient Officers to provide Victuals for the King, which Office
is mentioned in the Statute, 28 E. 1. cap. 2. and 36 E. 4. cap. 6. and 14 E. 3.
cap. 19. But it is abolished by the Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Q.
Quadrantata terrae.
QUadrantata terrae is the fourth part of an Acre.

Quae plura.
QUae plura is a Writ that lies in case where the Escheator has found an
Office after the death of the Kings Tenant virtute officii, and has not found
all the Lands of which he died seized; then this Writ shall issue in nature of
a Melius inquirendo; to find what Lands he had more. See F. N. B. f. 255. a.

Quale jus.
QUale jus is a Writ that lies where an Abbot, Prior, or such other, should
have Judgment to recover Land by Default of the Tenant against whom the Land is
demanded; then before Judgment given, or Execution awarded, this Writ shall go
forth to the Escheator, to enquire what right he has to recover: And if it be
found that he has not right, then the Lord who should have the Land if the
Tenant had aliened in Mortmain may enter as into Land aliended in Mortmain, for
this losing by Default is like an Alienation. See the Stat. Westminster. 2. c. 32.

But where one will give Lands to a House of Religion, an Ad quod damnu^ shall
go forth to the Escheator, to enquire of what value the Land is, and what
prejudice is shall be to the King.

Quare ejecit infra terminum.
QUare ejecit infra terminum is a Writ that lies where one makes a Lease to
another for term of years, and the Lessor infeoffs another, and the Feoffee
puts out the Termour; then the Termour shall have this Writ against the
Feoffee. But if another stranger put out the Termour, then he shall have a Writ
De ejectione firmae against him. And in these two Writs he shall recover the
term and his damages.

Quare impedit.
QUare impedit is a Writ that lies where I have an Addowson, and the Parson
dies, and another presents a Clerk, or disturbs me to present; then I shall
have the said Writ. But Assise de darrein presentment lies where I or my
ancestors have preseuted before. And where a man may have art Assise de darrene
presentment, he may have a Quare impedit, but not contratiwise.

Also if the Plea be depending between two parties, and be not discussed within
fix months, the Bishop may present by Lapse, and he that has right to present
shall recover his damages, as appears by the Statute of Westminster. 2. c 5. And if
he that has right to present after the death of the Parson brings no Quare
impedit, nor Darreine presentment, but suffers a stranger to usurp upon him,
yet he shall have a Writ of right of Advowson: But this Writ lies not, unless
he claim to have the Advowson to him and his heirs in Fee.

Quare incumbravit.
QUare incumbravit is a Writ that lies where two are in Plea for the Advowson,
and the Bishop admits the Clerk of one of them within the six months; then he
shall have this Writ against the Bishop. But this Writ lies always depending
the Plea.

Quare intrusit Matrimonio non satisfacto.
QUare intrusit Matrimonio non satisfacto is a Writ that lies where the Lord
profers convenable Marriage to his Ward, and he refuses, and enters into the
Land, and marries himself to another; then the Lord shall have this Writ
against him.

Quare non admifit.
QUare non admifit is a Writ that lies where a man has recovered an Advowson,
and sends his convenable Clerk to the Bishop to be admitted, and the Bishop
will not receive him; then he shall have the said Writ against the Bishop. But
a Writ of Ne admittas lies where two are in Plea; if the Plaintiff suppose the
Bishop will admit the Clerk of the Defendant, then he may have this Writ to the
Bishop, commanding him not to admit him hanging the Plea.

Quarrels.
Quarrels is derived from Querendo, and extends not only to Actions as well real
as personal, but also to the Causes of Actions and Suits; so that by the
Release of all Quarrels, not only Actions depending in Suit; but Causes of
Action and Suit also are released; and Quarrels, Controversies and Debates, are
words of one sense, and of one and the same signification, Coke, lib. 8. fol.
153.

Quarentine.
QUarentine is, where a man dies seized of a Mannour-place and other Lands,
whereof the Wife ought to be endowed; then the woman may abide in the
Mannour-place, and there live of the store and profits thereof the space of
sorty days, within-which time her Dower shall be assigned: as it appears in
Magna Charta, cap. 6.

Que estate.
QUe estate is a term in pleading to avoid prolixity; as if a man pleads a
feoffment in fee to A. cujus statum idem B. modo habet, and no one can plead it
but Tenant of the Fee; nor can it be pleaded of things which pass merely by
grant as Advowsons Franchises, etc.

Quid juris clamat.
QUid juris clamat is a Writ that lies where I grant the Reversion of my Tenant
for life by Fine in the Kings Court, and the Tenant will not attorn; then the
Grantee shall have this Writ to compel him. But a Writ of Quem redditum reddit
lies where I grant by Fine a Rent charge, or another Rent which is not Rent
service, which my Tenant holds of me, and the Tenant will not attorn; then the
Grantee shall have this Writ. And a Writ of Per quae servitia lies in like case
for Rent service.

Also if I grant four diverse Rents to one man, and the Tenant of the Land
attourns to the Grantee by payment of a penny, or of a half penny, in the name of
Attournment of all the Rents; this Attournment shall put him in seisin of all
the Rent. But these three Writs ought to be brought against those who are
Tenants at the day of the Fine levied, and against no other.

Fifteenth.
FIfteenth is a Payment granted in Parliament to the King by the Temporalty,
namely, the fifteenth part of their goods: And it was used in ancient time to
be levied upon their Cattle going in their grounds, which thing was very
troublesome; and therefore now for the most part that way is altered, and they
use to levy the same by the Yard or Acre, or other measure of Land; by means
whereof it is now less troublesome and more certain than before, and every Town
and Country know what sum is to be paid among them, and how the same shall be
raised. We read that Moses was the first that numbered the people, for he
numbered the Israelites; and the first Tax, Subsidy, Tribute or Fifteenth, was
invented by him among the Hebrews, as Polydore Virgil thinks.

Quit claim.
QUit claim is a Release or Acquitting of a man for any Action that he has or
might have against him, Bracton l. 5. tract. 5. ca. 9. nu. 9.

Quo jure.
QUo jure is a Writ that lies where a man has had Common of Pasture in
another Several within the time of memory; then he to whom the Several belongs
shall have this Writ to charge him to show by what Title he claims the Common.

Quo minus.
QUo minus is a Writ that lies where a man has granted to another Housebote
and Heybote in his wood, and the Grantor makes such waste and destruction that
the Grantee cannot have his reasonable Estovers; then the Grantee shall have
the aforesaid Writ, which is in nature of a Writ of Waste.

And note that Housebote is certain Estovers to mend the House; and Heybote
certain Estovers to mend Heyes and Hedges.

There is another Writ called a Quo ^ inus in the Exchequer, which any Termor
or Debtor to the king shall have against any other for Debt or Trespass in the
Excheques Office called the Common Pleas, by which the Plaintiff shall surmise,
that for the wrong which the Defendant does him, he is less able to pay the
King his Debt or Term; which is surmised to give Jurisdiction to the Court of
Exchequer to hear and determine the cause of the Suit between them, which
otherwise should be determined in another Court.

Quo warranto.
QUo warranto is a Writ that lies where a man usurps to have any Franchise upon
the King; then the King shall have this Writ, to make him come before his
Justices, to show by what Title he claims such Franchise.

Quod ei deforceat.
QUod ei deforceat is a Writ that lies where Tenant in Tail, Tenant in Dower,
or Tenant for Life loses by Default in any Action; then he shall have this Writ
against him that recovers, or against his Heir, if he think he has better
right than he who recovered. See the Statute West. 2. cap. 4.

Quod permittat.
QUod permittat is a Writ that lies where a man is disseised of his Common of
Pasture, and the Disseisor aliens or dies seized, and his Heir enters; then if
the Disseisee die, his Heir shall have this Writ

Quod permittat.
Habere Chiminum. Rast. Entr. 538. Co. Entr. 526. Estoverium turbarum. F. N. B.
124. Passagium per aquam. Rast. Entr. 538. Liberam chaceam. 2 Institut. 654.
Liberum raurum. F. N. B. 124. Liberam faldam. Ibid. and 6. E. 4. 1. Liberam
piscar. etc. Ibidem. Prosternere Domum, murum, sepem, 5 Coke 100. Ripam, etc. 9
Coke 53.

R.
Ran.
RAn signifies so open a Spoiling of a man, that it cannot be denied Lambert
Arch. fol. 125.

Ranger.
RAnger comes from the French word Rang, (that is, Ordo vel Series) and
signifies an Officer of the Forest that is appointed to walk every day through
the Purlieu whereof he is Ranger, to drive back the wild Beasts into the
Forest again; to see, hear, and inquire of Offenders there, and to present
their Offenses. See Manwood, cap. 20. fol. 185. etc.

Ransom.
Ransom signifies properly the Sum that is paid for the redeeming of one that
is taken Captive in War. But it is also for a Sum of money paid for the
pardoning of some great Offense; as in the Statute of 1 H. 4. cap. 7. and in
other Statutes: Fine and Ransom going together; 23 H. 8. cap. 3. and elsewhere.

Rape.
RApe has two significations: The first is when it is taken for part of a
County; as Sussex is divided into six parts, which by a peculiar name are
called Rapes, Cambd. Britan. page 225. and these parts in other Countries are
called Hundreds, Tithings, Lathes, or Wapentakes.

In the other sense it is the violent Deflouring a Woman against her will: and
this offense is Felony, as well in the Principal as in his Aidors. See 11 H. 4.
c. 13. 1 Ed. 4. c. 1. West. 2. c. 13. Cro^pt. Just of Peace, f. 43, 44.

Rationabili part bonorum.
RAtionabili part bonorum is a Writ that lies for the Wife against the
Executors of her Husband, to have the third part of his Goods after Debts paid
and Funeral expenses discharged. But whether this Writ lies by the Common Law,
or only by the Custom of some Countries, is a question in our Books, See F. N.
B. fol. 122. L.

Rationabilibus divisis.
RAtionabilibus divisis is a Writ that lies where there are two Lordships in
diverse towns, and one nigh the other, and any parcel of one Lordship, or Waste,
has been incroched by little parcels; then the said Lord from whom the parcel
of Ground or Waste has been incroched shall have this Writ against the Lord
that has so incroched.

Ravishment de Guard.
RAvishment de Guard, is a Writ that lies for the Guardian by Knights Service, or
in Soccage, against him that takes from him the Body of his Ward. And of this
see F. N. B. fol. 140. E. etc.

Rebutter.
REbut ^ er is, when one by Deed or Fine grants to warrant any Land or
Hereditament to another, and he who made the Warranty, or his Heir, s ^ es him
to whom the Warranty is made, or his Heir, or Assignee, for the same thing: now
if he who is so sued pleads the said Deed or Fine with Warranty, and demands
Judgment, if the Plaintiff shall be received to demand the thing which he ought
to warrant, against that Warranty, by Fine or Deed aforesaid, comprehending
such Warranty, such Pleading of the Warranty is called a Rebutter.

This word is also a denomination of a Plea which follows a Rejoinder: And
after the Rebutter follows the Surrebutter. See Cokes Entries fol. 284.

Recaption.
REcaption is a second Distress of one former distrained for the self-same
cause, and that during the Plea grounded upon the former Distress. It is also
the name of the Writ or Remedy that the Law gives him who is thus twice
distrained for one thing: the form and use of which Writ you may see in Fitz.
N. B. fol. 71. E. etc.

Recluse.
REcluse is one that by reason of his Order in Religion may not stir or depart
out of his House or Cloister. And of such Littleton speaks, sect. 434.

Recognizance.
REcognizance is an Obligation made before a Master of the Court of Chancery
for a Debt, or to perform Covenants, or an Order or Decree of the Court, upon
which an Extent issues if the Condition be not performed; But no Capias lies
upon it against the Cognizors or his Executors, Quaere and vide 2 Len. 84.

Recordare.
REcordare is a Writ directed to the Sheriff, to remove a Cause out of an
inferior Court, as a Court of Ancient Demesne, Hundred Court, or County Court,
into the Kings Bench, or Common Pleas. And of this, see Fitz. N. B. fol. 70. B.

Record.
REcord is a Writing or Parchment, wherein are Enrolled Pleas of Land, or
Common Pleas, Deeds or Criminal Proceedings in any Court of Record: But in
Courts not of Record, as Admiralty, Courts Christian, Courts Baron, etc. Their
Registry of Proceedings are not properly called Records: But Courts of Law held
by the Kings Grant, are Courts of Record.

Recovery.
REcovery is commonly intended a common recovery by assent of parties to dock
an Intail, and is founded upon a Writ of Entry. Also every Judgment is a
Recovery by the words Ideo consideratum est quod recuperet.

Recusants.
REcusants are all those who separate from the Church and Congregation, by the
Laws and Statutes established in this Realm, of what opinion or Sect they are
of. As all the Judges have expounded the Statute 35 Eliz. cap. 1. and diverse
other Stat.

Redisseisin.
REdisseisin. Look of that before in the Title Assise.

Reextent.
REextent is a second Extent made upon Lands or Tenements, open complaint made
that the Former Extent was partially performed. Broke tit. Extent, fol. 313.

Regarder.
REgarder comes of the French Regardeur, (id est, Spectator) and signifies an
Officer of the Kings Forest, sworn to take care of the Verr and Venison, and to
view and inquire of all the Offenses committed within the Forest, and of all
the concealments of them; and if all the Officers of the Forest do well
execute their Offices or no. See Manwood's Forest Laws, cap. 21. fol. 191. b.

Regrator.
REgrator is he that has Corn, Victuals, or other things sufficient for his
own necessary use or spending, and does nevertheless ingross and buy up into
his hands more Corn, Victuals, or other such things, to the intent to sell the
same again at a higher and dearer price, in Fairs, Markets, or other such like
places: whereof see the Statute 5 E. 6. cap. 14. He shall be punished as a
Forestaller.

Rejoinder.
Rejoinder is, when the Desendant makes answer to the Replication of the
Plaintiff. And every Rejoinder ought to have these two properties specially;
that is, it ought to be a sufficient Answer to the Replication, and to follow
and enforce the matter of the Bar.

Relation.
RElation is, where, in consideration of Law, two times or other things are
considered so as if they were all one, and by this the thing subsequent is said
to take his effect by relation at the time preceding: As if one deliver a
writing to another to be delivered to a third person, as the Deed of him who
delivered it, when the other, to whom it should be delivered, has paid a sum
of money; now when the money is paid and the Writing delivered, this shall be
taken as the Deed of him who delivered it at the time when it was first
delivered. So Petitions of Parliament, to which the King assents on the last
day of Parliament, shall relate and be of force from the first day of the
beginning of the Parliament. And so it is of diverse other like things.

Release.
RElease is the Giving or Discharging of the Right or Action which any has or
claims against another, or his Land.

And a Release of Right is commonly made when one makes a Deed to another by
these or the like words, Remised, released, and utterly for me and my Heirs
quite claimed to A. B. all my right that I had, have, or by any means may have
hereafter, in one Message, etc. But these words ( whatsoever I may have
hereafter) are void: For if the Father be disseised, and the Son release by his
Deed without Warranty all his right, by those words ( whatsoever I may have
hereafter, etc.) and the Father dies; the Son may lawfully enter in the
possession of the Disseisor.

Also in a Release of Right it is needful, that he to whom the Release is made
have a Freehold or a Possession in the Lands in Deed or in a Law, or a
reverston at the time of the release made; for if he have nothing in the Land
at the time of the release made, the Release shall not be to him available. See
more hereof in Littl. lib. 3. cap. 8.

Relicta verificatione.
RElicta Verificatione is when a Defendant has pleaded, and the issue is
entered of Record. And after that, the Defendant relicta verificatione (que est
son Plea) acknowledges the Action, and thereupon Judgment is entered for the
Plaintiff.

Relief.
RElief is sometimes a certain sum of money that the Heir shall pay to the Lord
of whom his Lands are holden, which after the decease of his Ancestor are to
him descended as next Heir. Sometimes it is the Payment of another thing, and
not money. And therefore Relief is not certain and alike for all Tenures, but
every several Tenure has (for the most part) his special Relief certain in it
self. Neither is it to be paid always at a certain age, but varies according to
the Tenure.

As if the Tenant have Lands holden by Knights Service, (except grand
Serjeanty) and dies, his Heir being at full age, and holding his Lands by the
Service of a whole Knights Fee; the Lord of whom these Lands are so holden
shall have of the Heir an hundred shillings in the name of the Relief: and if
he held by less than a Knights Fee, he shall pay less, and if more, then more;
having respect always to the rate for every Knights Fee Cs. And if he held by
grand Serjeanty, (which is always of the King, and is also Knights Service)
then the Relief shall be the value of the Land by the year, besides all charges
issuing out of the same. And if the Land be holden in Petit Serjeantie or in
Socage, then for the Relief the Heir shall pay at one time as much as he ought
to pay yearly for his Service; which is commonly called the Doubling of the
Rent.

And if a man hold of the King in chief, and of other Lords, the King shall
have the Ward of all the Lands, and the Heir shall pay Relief to all the Lords
at his full age: but the Lords shall sue to the King by petition, and shall
have the Rent for the time that the Infant was in Ward.

But see now that by the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 8. the mesne Lords are not put
unto their Petition, but shall have all the Rents paid them by the Kings
Officers upon request yearly during the Kings possession.

And note, that always when the Relief is due, it must be paid at one whole
payment, and not by parts, although the Rent be to be paid at several Feasts.
See the Statute 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Remainder.
REmainder of Land is the Land that shall remain after the particular Estate
determined: As if one grant Land for term of years, or for life, the Reinainder
to J. S. that is to say, when the Lease for years is determined; or the Lessee
for life is dead; then the Land shall remain or abide with, to, or in J. S. See
Reversion.

Remembrancer del Eschequer.
REmembrancer del Eschequer: there are three Officers or Clerks there called by
that name; one is called the Remembrancer of the King, the other of the Lord
Treasurer, and the third of the First fruits.

The Kings Remembrancer enters in his Office all Recognisances for the Kings
Debts, Apparances, and for observing of Orders: also he takes all Obligations
for any of the Kings Debts, for Apparances, and observing of Orders, and makes
out Process upon them for the breaking of them.

The Lord Treasurers Remembrancer makes out Process against all Sheriffs,
Escheators, receivers and Bailiffs, for their Accounts: he makes the Process of
Fieri sacias, and Exteut for any Debts due to the King, either in the Pipe, or
with the Auditors; and he makes Process for all such revenue as is due to the
King by reason of his Tenures.

The Remembrancer of the First Fruits takes all Compositions for First fruits
and Tenths, and makes Process against such as pay not the same. Of these
Officers see more in Dalton's Book of the Office and Authority of Sheriffs, f.
186.

Remitter.
REmitter is, when a man has two Titles to any Land, and he comes to the Land
by the taste Title; yet he shall be judged in by force of his elder Title, and
that shall be said to him a Remitter. As if Tenant in tail discontinue the
Tail, and after disseises his discontinuee, and dies thereof seized, and the
Lands descend to his issue or Cousin inheritable by force of the Tail; in that
case he is in his Remitter, that is to say, seized by force of the Tail and the
Title of the Discontinuee is utterly adnulled and defeated. And the reason and
cause of such Remitter is, for that such an Heir is Tenant of the Land, and
there is no person Tenant against whom he may sue his Writ of Formedon to
recover the Estate tail: for he may not have an Action against himself.

Also if Tenant in tail infeoff his Son or Heir apparent who is within age, and
after dies; that is a Remitter to the Heir: but if he were full of age at the
time of such Feoffment, it is no Remitter, because it was his folly, that he
being of full age would take such a Feoffment.

If the Husband alien Lands that he has in right of his wife, and after take
an Estate again to him and to his Wife for term of their lives; that is a
Remitter to the Woman, because this Alienation is the act of the Husband, and
not of the Woman; for no folly may be adjudged in the Woman during the life of
her Husband.

But if such Alienation be by Fine in Court of Record, such a taking again
afterward to the Husband and Wife for term of their lives shall not make the
Woman to be in her Remitter; for that in such a Fine the Woman shall be
examined by the Judge, and such Examination in Fines shall exclude such women
for ever.

Also when the Entry of any man is lawful, and he takes an Estate to him when
he is of full age, if it be not by Deed indented, or matter of Record, which
shall estop him, that shall be to him a good Remitter.

Rents.
REnts are of diverse kinds; that is, Rent-service, Rentcharge, and Rent-secke.

Rent-service is, where the Tenant in Fee-simple holds his Land of his Lord by
Fealty and certain Rent, or by other service and rent; and theu if the rent be
behind, the Lord may distrain, but shall not have an Action of Debt for it.

Also if I give Land in tail to a man, paying to me certain Rent, that is
Rent-service. But in such case it behooves that the reversion be in the Donor:
For if a man make a Feoffment in fee, or a Gift in tail, the remainder over in
Fee, without Deed, reserving to him a certain rent, such reservation is void,
and that is by the Statute Quia emprores terrarum; and then he shall hold of
the Lord of whom his Donour held.

But if a man by Deed indented at this day make such Gift in tail, the
remainder over in fee, or lease for term of life, the remainder over, or a
Feoffment, and by the same Indenture reserve to him rent, and that if the rent
be behind, it shall be lawful for him to distrain; that is Rent-chage.

But in such case, if there be no clause of Distress in the Deed, then such a
rent is called Rent-seck, for which he shall never distrain; but if he were
once seized, he shall have Assise; and if he were not seized, he is without
remedy.

And if one grant a rent going out of his Land, with clause of Distress, that
is, a Re^t-charge; and if the rent be behind, the Grantee may choose to
distrain, or sue a Writ of Annuity, but he cannot have both; for if he bring a
Writ of Annuity, then the Land is discharged. And if he destrain, and avow the
taking in Court of Record, then the Land is charged, and the person of the
Grantor discharged.

Also if one grant a Rent charge, and the Grantee-purchases half, or any other
part or parcel of the Land, all the Rent is extinct. But in Rent service, if
the Lord purchase parcel of the Land, the Rent shall be apportioned.

If one has a Rent charge, and his Father purchase parcel of the Land, and
that parcel discends to the Son, who has the Rent charge; then the Rent shall
be apportioned according to the value of the Land, as it is said of
Rent-service; because the Son comes to that not by his own act, but by descent.

Also if I make a Lease for term of years, reserving to me a certain Rent, that
is called a Rent service, for which it is at my liberty to distrain, or to have
an Action of Debt: but if the Lease be determined, and the Rent behind, I
cannot distrain, but shall be put to my Action of Debt.

And note well, that if the Lord be seized of the Service and Rent aforesaid,
and they be behind, and he distrain, and the Tenant rescues the Distress, he
may have Assise, or a Writ of Rescous; but it is not more necessary for him to
have Assise, then a Writ of Rescous; for that by Assise he shall recover his
Rent and his Damages; but by a Writ of Rescous he shall recover only Damages,
and the thing distrained shall be reprised.

If the Lord be not seized of the Rent and Service, and they be behind, and he
distrain for them, and the Tenant take again the Distress; he shall not have
Assise, but a Writ of Rescous, and the Lord shall not need to show his right.

If the Lord cannot find a Distress in two years, he shall have against the
Tenant a Writ of Cessavit per biennium, as it appears by the Statute of Westminster.
2. cap. 21.

And if the Tenant die in the mean time, and his Issue enter, the Lord shall
have against the Issue a Writ of Entry upon Cessavit; or if the Tenant alien,
the Lord shall have against the Alienee the foresaid Writ. But if the Lord have
Issue, and die, and the Tenant be in arrearages of the said Rent and Service in
the time of the Father, and not in the time of the Issue; he may not distrain
for the Arrearages in the time of his Father, and he shall have be no other
Recovery against the Tenant or any other, because such advantage is given by
the Law to the Tenant. And note, that Fealty of common right belongs to Rent
service, but not to Rent charge nor Rent seck.

If a man distrain for Rent charge, and the Distress be rescued from him, and
he was never seized before, he has no recovery but by Writ of Rescous; for the
Distress first taken gives not Seis ^ to him, unless he had the Rent before:
for if he were seized of the Rent before, and after the Rent be behind, and he
distrain, and Rescous be made, he shall have Assise, or a Writ of Rescous.

In every Assise of Rent charge, and annual Rent, or in a Writ of Annuity, it
behooves him that brings the Writ to show an Especialty, or else he shall not
maintain the Assise. But in an Assise of Mortdancestor or Formedon in the
discender or other Writs (in which Title is given or comprised) brought of Rent
charge or annual Rent the Especialty need not be shown.

And note well, that if a man grant a Rent charge to another, and the Grantee
release to the Grantor parcel of the Rent, yet all that Rent is not extinct.

If Rent charge be granted to two jointly, and the one release, yet the other
shall have the half of the Rent. And if the one purchase the half of the Land
whereout the Rent is going, the other shall have the half of the Rent of his
companion. And if the Disseisor charge the Land to a Stranger, and the
Disseisee bring an Assise and recover; the Charge is defeated. But if he that
has right charges the Land, and a Stranger feign a false Action against him
who has no right, and recovers by Default, the charge abides.

In case Partition be between two Parceners, and more Land be allowed to one
then to the other, and she that has most of the Land charges her Land to the
other, and she happeth the Rent; she shall maintain Assise without Especialty.

And it is a Rent seck, where a man holds of me by Homage, Fealty, and other
Services, yielding to me a certain yearly Rent, which I grant to another,
reserving to me the other Services.

If Rent seck be granted to a man and to his Heirs, and the Rent be behind, and
the Grantor die, the Heir may not distrain, nor shall recover the arrearages of
the time of his Father, as it is said before of Rent services.

And in the same manner it is of Rent charge, or annual Rent. But in all these
Rents the Heir may have for the arrerages in his own time such advantage as his
Father had in his life. See the Statute 32 H. 8. cap. 37.

And note well, that in Rent seck, if a man be not seized of the Rent, and it
be behind, he is without recovery, for that it was his own folly at the
beginning, when the Rent was granted him or reserved, that he took not Seisin
of it, as a penny or two pence.

A man may not have a Cessavit per biennium, or any other Writ of Entry sur
Cessavit, for any Rent seck behind by two years, but only for Rent service, as
it appears in the Stat. West. 2. cap. 21.

It behooves him that sues for Rent seck to show a Deed to the Tenant, cise the
Tenant shall not be charged with the Rent, except where the Rent seck was Rent
service before; as in this case: Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and every of them
holds of other by Homage and Fealty, and the Tenant of the Mesne by 10 s. rent;
the Lord paramount purchases the Lands or Tenements of the Tenant, all the
Seigniory of the Mesne, but the rent is extinct: and for this cause this rent
is become Rent seck, and the Rent service changed, for he may not distrain for
this rent; and in this case he that demands the rent shall never be charged to
show a Deed.

Also in a Writ of Mordint-cestor, Ayle or Besayle, of rent seck, it needs not
to show a Specialty, for that these Writs of Possession comprehend a Title
within themselves, that is to say, that the Ancestor was seized of the same
rent, and centinued his possession, in respect of which Seisin the Law supposes
that it is also averrable by the Country.

Yet learn, for some suppose a necessity to show forth a Deed, because rent
seck is a thing against common right, as well as rent charge.

But in Assise of Novel disseisin, and in a Writ of Entry sur disseisin brought
of Rent seck, it is needful to show forth a Deed; for that Rent seck is a thing
against Common Right, except in the case aforesaid, where it was Rent service
before, and by the act of Law it is become Rent seck.

And Assise of Novel disseisin and a Writ of Entry sur disseisin contain within
them no Title, but suppose a Disseisin to be done to the Plaintiff; and by the
intendment of the Law the Disseisin gives no cause of Averment against common
Right, but there is a necessity to show forth a Deed.

Repleader.
REpleader is, where the plea of the Plaintiff or Defendant, or both are ill,
or an impertinent Issue joined, then the Court makes void all the Pleas which
are ill, and awards the Parties to replead. Coke Entr. 152. and 221, 224.

Replevin.
REplevin is a Writ that lies where a man is distrained for Rent or other
thing, then he shall have this Writ to the Sheriff, to deliver to him the
Distress, and shall find Surety to pursue his Action; and if he pursue it not,
or if it be found or judged against him, then he that tooks the Distress shall
have again the Distress, which is called the Return of the Beasts; and he shall
have in such case a Writ called Returno habendo.

But if the Defendant avow for Rent, he may have Judgment for the value of the
Cattle, by the Statute of 17 Car. 2. cap. 7.

If it be in any Franchise or Bailiwick, the party shall have a Replevin of the
Sheriff directed to the Bailiff of the same Franchise, to deliver them again,
and he shall find Surety to pursue his Action at the next County. And this
Replevin may be removed out of the County unto the Common place by Writ of
Recordare.

See more of Replevin in the Title Distress.

Also see Mich. 2 E. 3. pl. 31. and 7 E. 3. 27. pl. 13. the word Plevin, where
Land was taken out of the Kings hands, and are afterward delivered or
replevied out of the Kings hands. For which see Stat. 9. 3. cap. 2.

The Writ of Homine replegiando lies where a man is in Prison, and not by
special commandment of the King, nor of his Justices, nor for the death of a
man, nor for the Kings Forest, nor for such cause which is not replevisable;
then he shall have this Writ directed to the Sheriff, that he cause him to be
replevied. This Writ is a Justcies, and not retornable. And if the Sheriff do
it not, then there shall go forth another Writ, Sicut alias; and afterward
another Writ, Sicut pluries, vel causam nobis significes, which shall be
retornable. And if the Sheriff yet make no Replevin, then there shall issue an
Attachment directed to the Coroners to attach the Sheriff, and to bring him
before the Justices at a certain day; and farther, that they make execution of
the first Writ.

Replication.
REplication is, when the Defendant in any Action makes an Answer, and the
Plaintiff replies to that; that is called the Replication of the Plaintiff.

Reprises.
REprises are Deductions, Payments and Duties that go yearly and are paid out
of a Manor; as Rent chare, Rent seck, Pensions, Corrodies, Annuities, Fees of
Stewards or Bailiffts, and such like.

Reprieve.
REprieve comes from the French Repris, that is, taken back; so that to
reprieve is properly to take back or suspe ^ d a Prisoner from the Execution
and proceedings of the Law for that time.

Requests.
REquests is a Court held in the Kings Palace before the Master of the Requests
by Petition, and it seems is a Court of Equity.

Rere County.
REre County is a word used in the Statutes of Westminster. 2. cap. 39. and 2 E. 3.
c. 5. and seems by those Statutes to be some public place which the Sheriff
appointed for the receiving of the Kings money after his County Court was done.

Resceit.
REsceit is, when any Action is brought against the Tenant for term of life or
years, and he in the Reversion comes in, and prays to be received to defend the
Land, and plead with the Demandant: And when he comes, it behooves that he be
always ready to plead with the Demandant. In the same manner a Wife shall be
received for the default of her Husband in an Action brought against them both.
And Tenant for years shall be received to defend his Right, where, in an Action
brought against the Tenant of the Freehold, he pleads faintly.

Rescous.
REscous is a Writ that lies when any man takes a Distress, and another takes
it again from him, and will not suffer him to carry the Disress away; this is a
Rescous, upon which he may have this Writ, and shall recover damages.

Also if one distrain Beasts for damage Feasant in his Ground, and drives them
in the High way to Impound them, and in going they enter into the House of the
owner, and he withholds them there, and will not suffer the other to impound
them; that withholding is a Rescous.

Also if a Sheriff takes my Debtor by an Execution, or by mesne Process, and J.
S. rescue him out of the Custody of the Sheriff, I may have an Action of
Rescous against J. S. for this wrong, and recover Damages and Debt.

Reservation.
REservation is taken diverse ways, and has diverse natures. As sometimes by way
of exception, to keep that which a man had before in him: As if a Lease be made
for years of Ground, reserving the great Trees growing upon the same, now the
Lessee may not meddle with them, nor with any thing that comes of them, so long
as it abides in or upon the Trees, as Mast of Oak, Chestnut, Apples, or such
like; but if they fall from the Trees to the ground, then they are by right the
Lessees; for the Ground is let to him, and all thereupon not reserved, etc.

Sometimes a Reservation does produce and bring forth another thing which was
not before: As if a man Lease his Lands, reserving yearly for the same xxli.
etc. And diverse other such Reservations there be.

And note, that in ancient time their Reservations were as well in Victuals,
whether Flesh, Fish, Corn, Bread, Drink, or what else, as in Money, until at
last, and that chiefly in the Reign of King Henry 1. by agreement the
Reservation of Victuals was changed into ready Money, as it has hitherto
continued.

Residence.
REsidence comes from the Latin Residere, and is all one with Resiance, but
that this word Residence is oftener appropriated to the Continuance of a Parson
or Vicar upon his Church or Benefice; and so it is used in the Statute of 28 H.
8. cap. 13.

Resignation.
REsignation is, where an Incumbent of a Church resigns or leaves it to the
Ordinary, who did admit him to it, or to his Successors; which differs from
Surrender, since by that he to whom the Resignation is made has no interest in
the thing so resigned, but he to whom the Surrender is made has by that the
thing it self.

Restitution.
REstitution is, when a Judgment is reversed by Error, then a Writ of
Restitution shall issue, to restore to the Defendant in the Action what he has
lost. And there is a Writ of restitution of stolen goods, upon conviction of
the Thief which is made at the Sessions or Assizes, on the Statute of 21 H. 8.
11. Noy rep. 128.

Resummons.
REsummons is a Second Summons of a man to answer an Action, where the first
Summons is defeated by the Demise of the King, or such other cause. And of this
see Coke, lib. 7. fol. 29. b.

Also if a Terr-tenant returned upon a Scire facias, or Defendant in another
Action plead nonage, and the Plea stays until, etc. When he comes of full age,
the Plaintiff, upon a suggestion, may have a Scire facias or resummons: And so
when a Plea is staid by pleadiny Protection, Excommunication, or such other
disability.

Resumption.
REsumption is a word used in the Statute of 31 H 6. c. 7. and is there taken
for the Taking again into the Kings hands such Lands or Tenements as upon false
suggestion or other error he had made Livery of to an Heir, or granted by
Patent to any man.

Retraxit.
REtraxit is the Preterperfect tense of Retraho, to pull back; and is, when the
party Plaintiff or Demandant comes in proper person into the Court where his
Plea is, and says he will not proceed any farther in the same, etc. this will
be a Bar to the Action for ever.

Reve, or Reeve.
REeve is an Officer more known in ancient time then at this day: for almost
every Manor had then a Reeve, and yet still in many Copyhold-Mannors (where
the old custom prevails) the name and office is not altogether forgotten. And
it is in effect that which now every Bailiff of a Manor practices, although
the name of Bailiff was not then in use amongst us, being siuce brought in by
the Normans. But the name of Reeve, anciently called Greeve, (which Particle (
Ge) in continuance of time was altogether left out and lost) came from the
Saxon word Geresa, which signifies a Ruler: And so indeed his Rule and
Authority was large within the compass of his Lords Manor, and among his men
and Tenants, as well in matters of Government in peace and war, as in the
skilful use and trade of Husbandry. For as he did gather his Lords Rents, pay
Reprises or Duties issuing out of the Manor, set the Servants to work, fell and
cut down Trees to repair the Buildings and Enclosures, with diverse such like,
for his Lords commodity; so also he had Authority to govern and keep the
Tenants in peace, and, if need required, to lead them forth to war.

Reversion.
REversion of a Land is a certain Estate remaining in the Lessor or Donor,
after the particular Estate and Possession conveyed to another by Lease for
Life or years, or Gift in tail.

And it is called a Reversion in respect of the possession separated from it:
so that he that has the one, has not the other at the same time; for in one
body at the same time there cannot be said a Reversion, because by the uniting
the one of them is drowned in the other.

And so the Reversion of Land is the Land it self when it falls.

Ribaud.
RIbaud seem to be sturdy Vagabonds. Rot. Par. 50 E. 3. 61.

Right, and Right of Entry.
RIght, and Right of Entry. See in Droit.

Riot.
RIot is, when three (at the least) or more do some unlawful act; as to beat a
man, enter upon the possession of another, or such like.

Robbery.
RObbery is, when a Man takes any thing from the person of another Feloniously;
although the thing so taken be to the value but of a penny, yet it is Felony,
for which the Offender shall suffer death.

Rood of Land.
ROod of Land is a certain quantity of Land containing the fourth part of an
Aere. Anno 5 Eliz. c. 5.

Rout.
ROut is, when people assemble themselves together, and after proceed, or ride,
or go forth, or move by the instigation of one or more, who is their Leader.
This is called a Rout, because they move and proceed in routs and numbers.

Also where many assemble themselves together upon their own quarrels and
brawls; as if the Inhabitants of a Town will gather themselves together to
break Hedges, Walls, Ditches, Pales, or such like, to have Common there, or to
beat another that has done them a common displeasure, or such like; that is a
Rout, and against the Law, although they have not done or put in execution
their mischievous intent. See the Stat. 1 Mar. c. 12.

S.
Sac, or Sake.
SAke is a Plea and Correction of Trespass in your Court; because Sake in
English is Encheson in French, and sake is put for sick.

See Keloway in his Cases incerti temporis, f. 145. a. that the privilege
called Sake is, for a man to have the Amerciaments of his Tenants in his own
Court.

Sacrilege.
SAcrilege is, when one steals any Vessels, Ornaments, or Goods of Holy Church,
which is Felony, 2 Cro. 153, 154.

Salary.
SAlary is a word often used in our Books, and it signifies a Recompense or
Consideration given a man for his pains bestowed upon another man's business.
And it is so called, as Pliny says in the 31 Book of his Not. Hist. cap. 7.
because it is as necessary for a man as Salt, and makes his labor relish as
Salt does his meat.

Sanctuary.
SAnctuary is a Privileged place by the Prince for the safeguard of men's lives
who are Offenders, being founded upon the Law of Mercy, and upon the great
Reverence, Honor and Devotion which the Prince bears to the place whereunto he
grants such a Privilege; which was heretofore so great, that the Princes have
granted the same in cases of Treason committed against themselves, Murder,
Rape, or other Crime whatsoever. Hereof see Stamf. Pl. of the Crown, l. 2. c.
38.

Satisfaction.
SAtisfaction is, when a Defendant has paid a Debt or Damages recovered
against him, it behooves him to have satisfaction, to be entered upon the Record
of the Judgment.

Sarpler.
SArpler is, a quantity of Wool, which in Scotland is called Serplath, and
contains 80 stone; and with us in England a Load of Wool contains (by the
opinion of some) fourscore Tod, and every Tod two Stone, and every Stone
fourteen Pounds; and that a Sack of Wool is in common account equal with a
Load, and a Sarpler the one half of a Sack.

Scandalum magnatum.
SCandalum magnatum is an Evil report invented or dispersed to the prejudice or
slander of any great personage or Officer of the realm. The punishment of which
is enacted by diverse Statutes, viz Westminster. 1. c. 33. 2 R. 2. c. 5. and 12 R. 2.
c. 11.

Scavage.
SCavage or Shewage is a Toll exacted by the Mayors, Sheriffs and Bailiffs of
Cities and Towns Corporate, for wares or merchandise showed to be sold within
their precincts or jurisdiction: which Exaction, being against the privilege
of the Kings subjects, was prohibited by a Statute made in 19 H. 7. c. 8. See
21 H. 7. f. 14. a. and see the Statute of 22 H. 8. c. 8 in the end thereof.

The Mayor, etc. of London brought debt for this duty, by these words, Pro
supervisu a percionis H. 18, 19 C. 2. B. R. roll 625.

Scire facias.
SCire facias is a Writ judicial going out of the record, and lies where one
has recovered Debt or Damages in the Kings Court, and sues not to have
Execution within the year and the day; then after the year and the day he shall
have the said Writ to warn the party: and if the party come not, or if he come
and say nothing to discharge or stay the Execution, then he shall have a Writ
of Fieri facias directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to levy the Debt or
Damages of the goods of him that has lost.

The Writ of Fieri facias lies within the year, without any Scire facias sued.

Also if the sum of the same Debt or Damages may not be levied of the Goods
of him that has lost them, he may have a Writ of Elegit, commanding the
Sheriff to deliver him the one half of his Lands and Goods, except his Oxen and
implements of Plow.

When one has recovered Debt or Damages in an Action personal, (where the
Preces is a Capias) he may have another Writ of Execution, called a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, to take the Body of him that is so condemned, which shall be
committed to prison, there to abide without Bail or mainprise, till he has
satisfied the party.

And when one has Judgment to recover any Lands or Tenements, he shall have a
Writ called Habere facias seisinam, directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to
deliver to him Seisin of the same Land so recovered. See more of that in the
Titles Fieri facias, and Execution.

The Writ abovesaid is given by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 45. But there are
also other manner of Scire facias; Scil. upon Audita Querela, Writs of Error as
well to hear errors, as wherefore the Plaintiff ought to have Execution,
against terrtenants upon Judgments, and the like.

Scot.
SCot is, to be quit of a certain Custom, as of common Tallage made to the use
of the Sheriff or Bailiff.

Scotale.
SCotale is an Extortion prohibited by the Statute of Charta de Forresta, cap.
7. and it is where any Officer of the Forest keeps an Alehouse, to the intent
that he may have the Custom of the Inhabitants within the Forest, to come and
spend their money with him, and for that he shall wink at their Offenses
committed within the Forest.

Second deliverance.
SEcond deliverance, is a Writ made by the Filacer, to deliver Cattle
Distreined, after the Plaintiff is Nonsuit in Replevin, Plow. Com. 274. Dyer
41.

Se defendendo.
SE defendendo is a Plea for him that is charged with the death of another,
saying, that he was driven unto that which he did, in his own defense. Stamf.
Pl. Cor. lib. 1. cap. 7.

Seigniory in Gross.
SEigniory in Gross. See Lord in Gross.

Selion.
SElion comes of the French Sellon; that is, the Ground rising between two
Furrows, in Latin Parca a Ridge; and it is not of any certain quantity, but
sometimes more, and sometimes less. And therefore Crompton in his Jurisdiction
of Courts, fol. 221. says, that a Selion cannot be demanded, because it is
uncertain.

Seneshal.
SEneshal (Steward) is a French word borrowed of the Germans, and signifies one
that has the dispensing of Justice in some particular Cases: as Stamf. Pl. of
the Cor. fol. 152. B. the High Steward of England, or of the affairs of a
Family, as Cromptons Jurisdiction, fol. 102. Steward of the Kings Household, and
25 E. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 21. and others.

He is also a learned man appointed by the Lord of a Manor to hold Courts Leet
or Baron. Co. 1 Inst. 58. 61.

Sequestration.
SEquestration is the Setting aside of a thing in controversy from the
possessson of both those that courend for it. It is used also for the act of an
Ordinary, when no man will meddle with the goods and chattels of one deceased,
as 4 and 5 M. Dyer fol. 160. b. and 7 Eliz. Dyer 232. a. And so it is used also
for the Gathering of fruits and profits of a Benefice void, for the use of the
next Incumbent, by the Statute of 28 H. 8. cap. 11.

Knights Service.
TO hold by Knights Service is, to hold by Homage, Fealty, and Escuage; and it
draws to it Ward, Marriage, and Relief.

And note, that Knights Service is Service of Lands or Tenements, to bear arms
in War in defense of this Realm; and it owes Ward and Marriage, by reason that
none is able, nor of power, nor may have knowledge to bear arms, before he be
of the age of xxi. years. And to the end that the Lord shall not lose that
which of right he ought to have, and that the power of the Realm be nothing
weakened, the Law wills, because of his tender age, that the Lord have him and
his Lands in his Ward till full age, that is to say, xxi years.

But see the Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. whereby all Tenures are turned into free
and common Soccage.

Sessions.
SEssions is a Sitting of Justices in Court upon their Commission: as the
Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, Stamf. Pl. Cor. fol. 67. Quarter Sessions,
otherwise called General Sessions or open Sessions, 5 El. c. 4. opposite
whereunto are Privy or especial Sessions, which are procured upon some especial
occasion, for the speedy expedition of Justice, Cromp. Justice of P. fol. 110.
What things are enquirable in General Sessions, see Cromp. as above, and fol.
109. Petit Sessions, or Statute Sessions, are held by the high Constables of
every Hundred, for the placing of Servants. An. 5. El. cap. 4. in the end,

Severance.
SEverance is the Singling of two or more that are joined in a Writ: As if two
are joined in a Writ De liberate probanda, and the one afterward is nonsuited,
in this case Seveance is permitted, so that notwithstanding the Nonsuit of the
one, the other may alone proceed. F. N. B. fol. 78. See of this Brook, tit.
Severance and Summons, fol. 238. For it is harder to know in what cases
Severance is permitted, then what it is. There is also Severance in Assise, Old
Book of Entries, fol. 81. col 4. And Severance in Attaint, fol. 95. col. 2. And
Severance in Debt, fol. 200. col. 1. And Severance in Quare impedit, Coke, l ^
b. 5. fol. 97.

Sewers.
SEwers seems to be a word compounded of two French words, Seoir, to sit, and
Eau, Water, for that the Sewers are Commissioners that sit, by virtue of their
Commission and Authority grounded upon diverse Statutes, to enquire of all
Nusances and Offenses committed by the stopping of Rivers, erecting of Mills,
not repairing of Banks and Bridges, etc. and to tax and rate all whom it may
concern, for the amending of all defaults which tend to the hindrance of the
free passage of the Water through her old and ancient Courses. See the Statute
of 6 H. 6. cap. 5. and 23 H. 8. cap. 5. for the form of their Commission.

Shack.
SHack is a peculiar name of Common used in the County of Norfolk, and Cattle
go to Shack, is as much to say as to go at liberty, or to go at large. And this
Common called Shack, which in the beginning was but in nature of a Feeding,
because of vicinage, for avoiding of Suits, in some places within this County
is by Custom altered into the nature of Common appendant or appurtenant, and in
some places it retains its Original Nature. Coke, lib. 7. fol. 5.

Showing.
Showing is, to be quit with Attachment in any Court, and before whomsoever, in
Plaints showed, and not allowed.

Soc.
SOC is: Suit of Men in your Court, according to the custom of the Realm.

Soccage.
TO holo in Soccage is, to hold of any Lord Lands or Tenements, yielding him a
certain Rent by the year for all manner of Services.

To hold by Soccage is not to hold by Knights Service, nor does Ward, Marriage,
or Relief belong to it: but they shall double once their Rent after the death
of their Ancestor, according to that that they be wont to pay to their Lord.

And they shall not be above measure grieved, as it appears in the Treatise of
Wards and Relief.

And note well, that Soccage is in 3 manners; that is to say, Soccage in free
Tenure, Soccage in ancient Tenure, and Soccage in base Tenure.

Soccage in free Tenure is, when one holds of another by Fealty and certain
Rent for all manner of Services, as is before said.

And of all Lands holden in Soccage the next of kin shall have the Ward, to
whom the Heritage may not descend till the age of xiv years: that is to say, if
the Heritage come by the part of the Father, they of the part of the Mother
shall have the Ward; and contrariwise.

If the Guardian in Soccage make waste, he shall not be impeached of waste, but
he shall yield account to the Heir when he shall come to his full age of 21
years; for which see the Statutes of Marlebr. ca. 17.

Soccage of ancient Tenure is that where the people held in Ancient Demesne,
who were wont to have no other Writ than the Writ of Right close, which was
determined According to the ^ ustome of the Manor, and the Monstraverunt, to
discharge them when their Lord distrains them to do other Services than they
ought.

This Writ of Monstraverunt ought to be brought against their Lord: and these
Tenants hold all by one certain Service, and are free Tenants of Ancient
Demesne.

Soccage in base Tenure is, where a man holds in Ancient Demesne, that may not
have the Monstraverunt, and for that it is called the base Tenure.

Sockmans.
SOckmans are the Tenants in Ancient Demesne, that held their Lands by Soccage,
that is, by Service with the Plow, and therefore they are called Sockmans,
which is as much to say, as Tenants or men that hold by Service of the Plow, or
Plow-men: For Sok signifies a Plow.

And these Sockmans, or Tenants in Ancient Demesne, have many and diverse
Liberties given and granted them by the Law, as well those Tenants that hold of
a common person, as those that hold of the King in Ancient Demesne; as namely
to be free from paying Toll in every Market, Fair, Town and City, throughout
the whole Realm, as well for their Goods and Chartels that they sell to others,
as for those things that they buy for their Provision. And thereupon every of
them may sue to have Letters Patents under the Kings Seal, directed to his
Officers, and to the Mayors, Bayitffs, and other Officers in the Realm, to
suffer them to be Toll-free: to be exempt from Leets and Sheriffs Turns: also
to be quit of Pontage, Murage, and Passage; as also of Taxes and Tallages
granted by Parliament, except that the King tax ancient Demesne, as he may at
his pleasure, for some great cause: to be free from payments toward the
expenses of the Knights of the Shire that come to the Parliament.

And if the Sheriff will distrain them or any of them, to be contributary for
their Lands in Ancient Demesne, then one of them, or all, as the case requires,
may sue a Writ directed to the Sheriff, commanding him that he do not compel
them to be contributary to the expenses of the Knights. And the same Writ does
command him also, that if he have already distrained them therefore, that he
redeliver the same Distress.

Also that they ought not to be impannelled, nor put in Iuries and Enquests in
the Country out of their Manor or Lordship of Ancient Demesne, for the Lands
that they held there, (except that they have other Lands at the Common Law, for
which they ought to be charged.) And if the Sheriff do return in Pannels, then
they may have a Writ directed to him, De non ponendis in Assisis and Juratis:
And if he do the contrary, there lies an Attachment against him.

And so it is also if the Bailiffs of Franchises, that have return of Writs,
will return any of the Tenants which hold in Ancient Demesue in Assizes or
Iuries.

Sodomy.
SOdomy, in the Indictment for this offense it is said, Rem veneream habuit and
peccatum illud Sodomiticum (inter Christianos non nominandum) felonice commisit.

Spoliation.
SPoliation is a Suit for the Fruits of a Church, or for the Church it self;
and it is to be sued in the Spiritual Court, and not in the Temporal. And this
Suit lies for one Incumbent against another, where they both claim by one
Patron, and where the right of the Patronage does not come in question or
debate. As if a Parson be created a Bishop, and has dispensation to keep his
Benefice, and afterward the Patron presents another Incumbent, which is
instituted and inducted: now the Bishop may have against that Incumbent a
Spoliation in the Spiritual Court, because they claim both by one Patron, and
the right of the Patronage does not come in debate, and because the other
Incumbent came to the possession of the Benefice by the course of the Spiritual
Law, that is to say, by Institution and Induction, so that he has c ^ lour to
have it, and to be Parson by the Spiritual Law: for otherwise, if he be not
instituted and inducted etc. Spoliation lies not against him, but rather a Writ
of Trespass, or an Assise of Novel disseisin, etc.

So it is also where a Parson who has a Plurality does accept another
Benefice, by reason whereof the Patron presents another Clerk, who is
instituted and inducted: now the one of them may have Spoliation against the
other, and then shall come in debate whether he has a sufficiene Plurality or
not. And so it is of Deprivation, etc.

The same law is, where one says to the Patron, that his Clerk is dead,
whereupon he presents another: there the first Incumbent, who was supposed to
be dead, may have a Spoliation against the other. And so it is in diverse other
like cases, whereof see Fitz. Natura Br. f. 36. G. etc.

Stablestand.
STablestand is a term of the Forest Laws, when one is sound standing in the
Forest with his Bow bent ready to shoot at any Deer, or with his Greyhounds
in a Lease ready to slip. See Manw. Forest Laws. cap. 18. fol. 133. b.

Stallage.
STallage signifies money paid for pitching Stalls in Fairs or Markets, or the
right of doing it.

Standard.
STandard See Estandard.

Stannary.
STannary are Courts by ancient custom held in Cornwall for suits concerning the
Trade of Tin.

Statute-Merchant.
TO hold by Statute-Merchant is, where a man acknowledges to pay money to
another at a certain day before the Mayor, Bailif, or other Warden of any Town
that has power to make execution of the same Statute, and if the Obligor pay
not the Debt at the day, and nothing of his Goods, Lands or Tenements may be
found within the Ward of the Mayor or Warden aforesaid, but in other places
without, then the Recognisee shall sue the Recognisance and Obligation with a
Certification to the Chancery under the Kings Seal, and he shall have out of
the Chancery a Capias to the Sheriff of the County where he is, to take him,
and to put him in prison, if he be not a Clerk, till he have made satisfaction
for the Debt. And one quarter of a year after he is taken, he shall have his
Land delivered to himself, to make gree to the party for the Debt: and he may
sell his Land while he is in prison, and his sale shall be good. And if he do
not make satisfaction within a quarter of a year, or if it be returned that he
is not found, and if he be not a Clerk, then the Recognisee may have a Writ out
of the Chancery, called Extendi facias, directed to any Sheriff, to extend his
Lands and Goods, and to deliver the Goods to him, and to scise him in his
Lands, to hold them to him, his Heirs and Assigns, till the Debt be levied or
paid; and for that tune he is Tenant by Statute-Merchant.

Note, that in a Statute-Merchant the Recognisee shall have Execution of all
the Lands which the Recognisor had the day of the Recognisance made, and any
time after, by force of the same Statute.

And when any Waste or destruction is made by the Recognisee, his Executors, or
him that has his Estate, the Recognisor or his Heirs shall have the same Law,
as is before said of the Tenant by Elegit.

If Tenant by Statute-Merchant hold over his term, he that has right may sue
against him a Venire fac' ad computandum, or else enter immediately, as upon
Tenant by Elegit. See the Statute 11 E. 1. and of Acton Burnel, and 13 E. 1. De
Mercatoribus

Starr-chamber.
STarr-chamber was an High Court held in the Star Chamber at Westminster. before the
King, Peers and Judges, abolished per Stat. 17 Car. cap. 10.

Sterbrech.
STerbrech, alias Strebrech, is the Breaking, Obstructing, or or making less of
a Way.

Stilyard.
STilyard is a word used in the Statute of 22 H. 8. chap. 8. where the Ha ^
se-Merchants are called the Merchants of the Sti yard, which is a place in
London where these Merchants or their Brotherhood had their thode. And the
House is said to be so called, because bullt upon a Courtyard near the Thames,
where Steel was wont to be much sold.

Sub poena.
SUb poena is the name of a Writ made in diverse Courts of Law and Equity; viz.
in Chancery, and all other Courts, to summon Witnesses, and in that Court and
in the Exchequer in Law and Equity, and in the Common Pleas upon Informations,
qui tam, etc. to summon Defendants and in the Crown Office upon Informations.

Suffragan.
SUffragan is a word used in the Statut of 26 H. 8. cap. 14. and signifies a
Titular Bishop appointed to aid and assist the Bishop of the Diocese in his
Spiritual Function. And he is called Suffraganeus in Latin, because by his
Suffrage Ecclesiastical Causes are to be adjudged.

Suggestion.
SUggestion, is an Information drawn in Writing, showing cause to have a
Prohibition, which is left in Court, and is mentioned in the Statute 2 E. 6.
cap. 13.

Sumage.
SUmage seems to be Toll for Carriage on Horseback. Cro. Jurisd. f. 191.

Summons ad Warrantizandum, etc.
SUmmons ad Warrantizandum, and Sequatur sub suo periculo:

See of them after in the Title Voucher.

Supercargo, ou Supracargo.
SUpercargo, ou Supracargo, is a Factor or Agent which goes with a Ship beyond
the Seas, by order of the Owner of the Wares therein, and disposes thereof: And
the Master of the Ship is obliged to perform the Orders of such Factor or
Supereargo.

Supersedeas.
SUpersedeas is a Writ that lies in diverse cases, as appears by F. N. B. f.
236. A. but it is always a command to stay some ordinary Proceedings in Law,
which ought otherwise to proceed.

Supplicavit.
SUpplicavit is a Writ issuing out of the Chaucery, directed to the Sheriff and
some Justices of the Peace in the County, or to one or more Justices without
the Sheriff, for taking Surety of such a one as it is prayed against, that he
should keep the Peace: and this is by the Statute of 1 E. 3. c. 16. See F. N.
B. f. 80. C and see the Stat. 21 Jac. c. 8.

Sur cui in vita.
SUr cui in vita is a Writ that lies for the Heir of an Inheritrix, whose
Husband aliened the Inheritance of his Wife, and the Wife died before she
recovered in a Cui in vita. See for this F. N. B. 194. C.

Surplusage.
SUrplusage comes of the French Surplus, that is an Overplus, and signifies in
the Law an Addition of more then needs, which sometimes is the cause that a
Writ shall abate, but in pleading many times it is absolutely void, and the
residue of the Plea shall stand good.

Surrejoynder.
SUrrejoynder is an Answer to the Defendants Rejoinder, or a second enforcing
of the Plaintiffs Declaration.

Surrender.
SUrrender is the Consent of a particular Tenant, that he in the Reversion or
the Remainder shall presently have the possession. And this is either Surrender
in Deed by an actual yielding up of the Estate; or in Law, by the taking of the
new Lease, or such other act. See of this, Perkins c. 9.

Also it is an act done to the Lord of a Manor, or his Steward, of a Copyhold
Estate, or done by special Custom of some Manors to two Copyhold Tenants of
Manors, which surrender, ought to be presented at the next Court Baron.

Swainmote.
SWainmote, or Swannimote, is a Court held thrice in a year within a Forest,
by the Statute of Charta de Foresta, c. 8. for all the Freeholders of the
Forest, for so much the Etymology of the word imports; Mote in the Norman
speech signifying a Court, and Swain in the Saxon a Charterer, or Freeholder:
so that Swannimore is the Court of the Freeholder. See of this Manwoods
Forest Laws, cap. 23. f. 217, etc. at large.

Swainmote, in this Court, Presentiments of Offenses done to the Forest or Game
are made* given into the Justices in Air.

Syb and Some.
SYb and Some, i. Peace and Security. L. L. Eccles. Canuti Regis, c. 17.

Symony.
SYmony is an unlawful Contract made to have a man presented to a Rectory or
Vicarage, which is prohibited by Stat. 31 Eliz. cap. 6.

T.
Fee-tail.
TO hold in the Tail is, where a man holds certain Lands or Tenements to him
and to his Heirs of his Body begotten.

If the Land be given to a man and to his Heirs males, and he has Issue male,
he has Fee-simple; which was adjudged in Parliament. But where Lands are given
to a man and to his Heirs males of his body begotten, then he has Fee-tale,
and the issue Female shall not inherit, as appears in the 14 year of E. 3. in
an Assise 18 E. 3. 45.

Fee-tail is, where the Land is given to a Man and the Heirs of his Body
begotten; and he is called, Tenant in Tail general.

If Lands are given to the Husband and Wife, and the Heirs of their two Bodies
begotten, then the Husband and the Wife are Tenants in Tail especial. And if
one of them die, he that survives is Tenant in Tail after possibility of issue
extinct; and if he make Waste, he shall not be impeached for it. See Littleton.

But if the King give Lands to a man and to his Heirs males, and the Donee
dies without issue male, then the Cousin collateral of the Donee shall not
inherit, but the King shall reenter: and so it was adjudged in the
Exchequer-chamber, 18 H. 8. in an Information made against the Heir of Sir T.
Lovel Knight.

Tail after possibility.
TO hold in the Tail after possibility of Issue extinct is, where Land is given
to a Man and his Wife, and the Heirs of their two Bodies engendered, and one of
them overlives the other without issue between them begotten; he shall hold the
Land for term of his own life, as Tenant in the Tail after possibility of Issue
extinct: and notwithstanding that he do Waste, he shall never be Impeached of
it. And if he alien, he in the Reversion shall not have a Writ of Entry in
consimili casu, but he may enter, and his Entry is lawful, by R. Thorpe, chief
Justice, 28 E. 3. 96. and 45 E. 3. 25.

Tales.
TAles is a Supply of men impannelled upon a Jury or Inquest, and not
appearing, or at their appearance challenged for the Plaintiff or Defendant as
not indifferent, and in this case the Judge upon Petition grants a Supply to be
made by the Sheriff, of some nien there present, equal in Reputation to those
that are impanneled: and hereupon the very act of supplying is called a Tales
de circumstantibus. This Supply may be one or more, and of as many as shall
either make Default, or else be challenged by each party. Stamf. Plac. Cor. l.
3. c. 5. Howbeit he that has had one Tales, either upon default or challenge,
though he may have another, yet he may not have the latter to contain so many
as the former: for the first Tales ought to be under the number of the
principal Panel, except in a cause of Appeal, and so every Tales less then
other, until the number be made up of men present in Court, and such as are
without exception to the party or parties. See Stamford in the place before,
where you may find some exceptions to this general Rule. See Brook, f. 105. and
Coke, l. 10. f. 99. Bewfages Case.

Talwood.
TAlwood is a term used in the Statutes of 34 and 35 H. 8 c. 3. and 7 E. 6. c.
7. and 43 Eliz. cap. 14. and signifies such Wood as is cut into shore Billets,
for the sizing whereof those Statutes were made.

Tax and Tallage.
TAx and Tallage are Payments, as Tenths, Fifteens, Subsidies, or such like,
granted to the King by Parliament.

The Tenants in Ancient demesne are quit of these Taxes and Tallages granted by
Parliament; except the King to tax Ancient demesne, as he may when he thinks
good for some great cause. See Ancient demesne.

Tenant Paravail.
TEnant Paravail. See Paravail.

Tender.
TEnder, is an act done to save a penalty of a Bond, and of Money for Rent or
Contract before Distress or Action brought, and where it may be pleaded, and
where refusal is, peremptory. Vide Coke, 1 Institut. 207, 208, 211. and uncore
prist.

Tenure in Capite.
TEnure in Capite is, where any hold of the King as of his Person being King,
and of his Crown, as of a Lordship by it self in gross, and in chief above all
other Lordships: And not where they hold of him as of any Manor, Honor, or
Castle, except certain ancient Honors; which appears in the Exchequer. See the
Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Term of years.
TO hold for term of years is but a Chattel in effect: (...) no Action is
maintainable against the Termour for recovery of the Freehold, no Freehold
being in him. A Lease for Term of years is a Chattel real, and all Goods which
are removeable are Chattels personal.

Testament.
TEstament is thus defined in Plowdens Commentaries; A Testament is a Witness
of the mind, and is compounded of these two words, Testatio and Mentis, which
so signify. Truth it is, that a Testament is witness of the mind, but that it
is a compound word, Aulus Gelius, lib. 6. cap. 12. does deny to an excellent
Lawyer, Servius Sulpitius, and says, it is a simple word, as are these,
Calceamentum, Paludamentum, Paviamentum, and diverse such like. And much less is
Agreeamentum, a compound Word of Aggregatio and Mentium, as is said before in
the Title of Agreement; for there is no such Latin word, simple or compound:
but it may nevertheless serve well for a Law-Latine word.

And therefore thus it may better be defined; A Testament is the true
Declaration of our last Will, in that we would to be done after our death, etc.

Of Testaments there are two sorts, namely, a Testament in Writing, and a
Testament in Words, which is called a Nuncupative Testament; which is, when a
Man being sick, and for fear lest death, want of memory, or speech, should come
so suddenly upon him, that he should be prevented, if he staid the writing of
his Testament, desires his Neighbors and Friends to bear witness of his last
Will, and then declares the same presently by words before them, which after
his decease is proved by Witnesses, and put in writing by the Ordinary, and
then stands in as good force as if it had at the first in the life of the
Testator been put in Writing: except only for Lands, which are not devisable,
but by a Testament put in Writing in the Life of the Testator.

Thanus.
THanus is a word which sometimes signifies a Nobleman, sometimes a Freeman,
a Magistrate, an Officer or Minister, Lambert in the word Thanus Skene says,
it is a name of dignity, and appears to be equal with the son of an Earl. And
Thanus was a Freeholder, holding his Lands of the King: and a man taken with
the manner accused of Larceny, no sufficient proof being brought against him,
must purge himself by the Oath of 27 men, or 3 Thanes. The Kings Thanage
signifies a certain part of the Kings Lands or property, whereof the rule and
government appertains unto him, who therefore is called Thanus: for the Kings
Demains, and the Kings Thanage signifies one and the same thing.

Theftbote.
THeftbote is, when a man takes any Goods of a Thief, to favor and maintain
him: and not when a man takes his own Goods, that were stolen from him, etc.

The punishment in ancient time of Theftbote was of Life and member: But now at
this day Stamford says it is punished by Ransom and Imprisonment. But enquire
farther, for I think it is Felony.

Them.
THem, that is, That you shall have all the generations of your Villains, with
their Suits and Cattle, wheresoever they shall be found in England, except that
if any Bondman shall remain quiet one year and a day in any Privileged Town,
so that he shall be received into their Communalty or Guild, as one of them, by
that means he is delivered from Villenage.

Tithes.
TIthes. See Dismes.

Title.
TItle is, where a lawful cause is come upon a Man to have a thing which
another has, and he has no Action for the same; as Title of Mortmain, or to
enter for breach of Condition.

Title of Entry.
TItle of Entry is, when one seized of Land in Fee makes a Feoffment thereof
upon Condition, and the Condition is broken: after which, the Feoffor has
Title to enter into the Land, and may so do at his pleasure, and by his Entry
the Freehold shall be said to be in him presently.

And it is called Title of Entry, because he cannot have a Writ of Right
against his Feoffee upon Condition, for his right was out of him by the
Feoffment, which cannot be reduced without Entry, and the Entry must be for the
breach of the Condition.

Toft.
TOft is a place wherein a House once stood, but is now all fallen or pulled
down.

Tol, or Tolne.
TOl, or Tolne, is most properly a payment used in Cities, Towns, Markets, and
Fairs, for Goods and Cattle brought thither to be brought and sold: and is
always to be paid by the Buyer, and not by the Seller, except there be some
Custom otherwise.

There are diverse other Tols; as Turn Tol, which is where Tol is paid for
Beasts that are driven to be sold, although they be not sold indeed.

Tol travers is, where one claims to have a half penny, or such like Tol, of
every Beast driven over his ground.

Through Toll is, where a Town prescribes to have certain Toll for every Beast
that goes through their Town, or for every score or hundred: which seems not to
be so unreasonable a Prescription or Custom as some have thought, though it be
through the Kings Highway, (as they call it) where every man may lawfully go;
if there be one thing for another: As if there be a Bridge, or such like
commodity, provided at the cosls and charges of the Town, for the ease of
Travelers that drive that way, whereby their Journey is either shortened or
bettered, why then may not Toll be lawfully and with good reason demanded of
them? etc.

But diverse Citizens and Townsmen are free from paying Toll, by grant of the
King or his Ancestors, or do claim the same by Prescription or Custom. So also
Spiritual persons and Religious men were quit of paying Toll for their Goods
and Merchandises bought and sold, etc. But now the Statute of 21 H 8. cap. 3.
wills, that they shall not Merchandise.

Also Tenants in ancient demesne ought to be quit throughout the whole Realm of
paying Tol, as appears before in the Title Sockmans. And in all cases where Tol
is demanded of them that should go, buy, and sell Toll-free, there the party or
parties grieved may have a Writ De essendo quietum de Tolonio, directed to him
or them that so demand Toll contrary to the grant of the King or his
Progenitors, or contrary to Custom or Prescription.

Tolt.
TOlt comes from the Latin tollo, and is a Writ by which a Cause depending in
a Court Baron may be from thence removed into the County Court before the
Sheriff. See of this Fitz. Not. Brev. fol. 3. F. and Old Natura Brevium, fol.
2. a.

Tonnage.
TOnnage is a Custom or Impost paid unto the King for Merchandise carried out
or brought in in Tuns, or such like Vessels, according to a certain rate in
every Tun* And of this you may read in the Statutes of 12 E. 4. cap. 3. 6 H. 8.
c. 14. 1 E. 6. c. 13 and 1 Jac. c. 33. but especially 12 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Totted.
TOtted is a term used in the Statute of 42 E. 3. c. 9. and signifies a Note to
be made in the Estreat-Roll that goes out of the Exchequer to the Sheriff, of
all such Debts as are paid unto the Sheriff, to that they be not again demanded
of the party, nor the King deceived. See the Statute.

Transcript.
TRanscript, this most commonly signifies the certification of a Record upon a
Writ of Error from the Kings Bench in Ireland unto the K. B. in England, or
from that Court unto the Exchequer Chamber, for the Record it self is not
certified, but a Transcript: But out of C. B. and other inferior Courts, the
Record is quite taken away by the Writ of Error, and remains in B. R. Co. Ent.
2. 24, 37.

Travers.
TRavers sometimes signifies to Deny, sometimes to Overthrow or undo a thing
done. For the first, Westminster. p. 2. sect. 54. speaking of an Answer to a Bill in
the Chancery, says, It is that which the Defendant pleads or says in bar to
avoid the Plaintiffs Bill or Action, either by confession and avoiding, or by
denying and traversing the material points of it: And again, Sect. 55 A
Replication is the Plaintiffs speech or Reply to the Defendants Answer, which
must affirm and pursue his Bill, and confess, and avoid, deny, or traverse the
Defendants Answer; and the formal words of this Travers are, Without that, ^ in
Latin, Absque hoc. See Kitch. fol. 227.

The other signification is found in Stamf. Prerog. cap. 20. the whole Chapter,
who speaking of Traversing an Office, says, That it is nothing else, but to
prove that an Inquisition taken of Goods or Lands by the Escheator in
defective, and untruly mads. So Traversing an Indictment is, to take Issue upon
the chief matter of it, which is nothing else but to make contradiction or deny
the point of the Indictment: As in a Presentment against A for a Highway
overflows with Water, for default of scowring of a Ditch which he and they
whose Estate he has in certain Land there have used to scowr and cleanse, A
may traverse either the matter, that is to say, That there is not any Highway
there, or that the Ditch is sufficiently scowred; or otherwise he may traverse
the Cause, That he has not the Land, etc. or that he and those whose Estate,
etc. have used to scowr the Ditch, Lamb. Eiren. lib. 4. page 521. of Travers
See the whole Chapter, Kitch ^ ol. 240. and the Old Book of Entries, the word
Travers.

Treason.
TReason is in two manners, that is to say, grand Treason, and petit Treason,
as it is ordai^ ed by the Statutes. And therefore look the Statutes, and
Stamford, lib. 1. cap. 2.

Treasure trove.
TReasure trove (i. Treasure found) is, when any Money, Gold, Silver, Plate, or
Bullion is found in any place, and no man knows to whom it belongs; then the
Property thereof appertains to the King. But if any Mine of Metal be found in
any ground, that always pertains to the Lord of the Soil, except it be a Mine of
Gold or Silver, which shall be always to the King, in whose ground soever it be
found.

Trespass.
TRespass is a Writ or Action of Trespass, whereof there are two sorts. The one
Vicountiel, so called, because it is directed to the Sheriff, and is not
Returnable, but to be determined in the County: The Form whereof differs from
the other, because it has not these words, Quare vi and armis, etc. Fitz N. B.
fol. 85. g. The other is directed to the Sheriff also but is returnable in the
King Bench or Common Plea, and has always in it their words, Quare vi and
armis, or else it shall abate, as it appears in Fitz. N. B. fol. 86. h: if it
be not a Trespass upon the Case, and then the words Vi and armis are left out,
and in lieu thereof the Writ shall say in the end of it, Contra pacem, etc as
appears in Fitz. Not. Brev. fol 92. c. And yet in some cases Trespass upon the
Case shall be Vi and armis also, though not in the point of the Action, or the
causa causata, yet in the Conveyance to the Action, or the causa causante, as
is well distinguished in the Count de Salops Case, in Coke lib. 9. fol. 50. b.

Trial.
TRial, there are many kinds of it: as of matters in Fact, which shall be tried
by the Jurors; matters in Law, by the Justices; matters of Record, by the
Record it self. A Lord of Parliament, upon an Indictment of Treason or Felony,
shall be tried by his Peers, without any Oath, upon their Honors and
Allegiance; but in Appeal at the Suit of any Subject they shall be tried per
probos and legales homines. If Ancient Demesne be pleaded of a Manor, and
denied, this shall be tried by the Record of the Book of Doomsday in the
Exchequer. An Apostata shall be certified by the Abbot or other Religious
Governor to whom he owed Obedience. General Bastardy, Excommengement,
Lawfulness of Marriage, Profession, and diverse other matters Ecclesiastical,
shall be tried by the Bishops Certificate. And a great number of other Trials
there are, whereof see Coke lib 9. the Case of the Abbot of Scrata Marcella,
fol. 23.

By Witnesses De morte viri in Dower, where the Tenant pleads, That the Husband
of the Demandant is alive. Ra ^ En. 128.

Tronage.
TRonage is a certain Toll taken for Weighing. Westminster. 2. cap. 25. and 13 Edw. 1.

Trover.
TRover is an Action which a Man has against another, that having found any of
his Goods, refuses to deliver them upon Demand. See the Old Book of Entries,
word Trover.

Tumbrel.
TUmbrel, see in the Title Cuckingstool; and see the Statute of 51 H. 3. cap.
6. for the use of it.

Turbary.
TUrbary (from the old Latin word Turba, which was use ^ for a Turf) is an
interest of digging Turfs upon a Common: And you shall find an Assise brought
of such a Common of Turbary, in 5 Ass. pl. 9. and 7 E. 3. fol. 43. b.

Sheriffs Turn.
SHeriffs Turn, is a Court of Record in all things that pertain to the Turn,
and it is the Kings Leet through all the County, and the Sheriff is Judge. And
whosoever has a Leet, has the same Authority within the Precinct as the
Sheriff has within the Turn.

This Court is to be kept twice in every year, once after Easter, and again
after Michaelmas, and that within one month after each Feast, Anno 31 Edw. 3.
cap 15. From this Court are exempted only Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, all Religious men and women, and all such as have Hundreds of
their own to be kept. This Court is appertaining and incident to the Office of
the Sheriff, and ought not to be reserved therefrom; and the Sheriff is to
appoint Clerks under him in this Court, such as he will at his peril answer
for: But he cannot prescribe to take any thing for the keeping of his Turn,
because he is an Officer removeable. See Coke, l. 4. 33. and l. 6. 2. and
Daltons Book of Sheriffs, tit. Sheriffs Turn.

V.
Vacation.
VAcation. See Plenartie.

Vagabonds.
VAgabonds, are idle and unprofitable men, punishable by the Statute 39 Eliz.
4. and 1 Jac. 7. and 25.

Value of Marriage.
Valor Maritagii is a Writ that lay for the Lord against his Ward, to recover
against him the Value of his Marriage at his full age, for that he was not
Married by his Lord within age. And this Writ lay although the Lord never
rendered unto the Ward any convenient Marriage. See Palmers Case, Coke. l. 5.
f. 126. b. and the Stat. 12 Car. 2. c. 24.

Venditioni exponas.
VEnditioni exponas, is a Judicial Writ directed to the Sheriff, to sell Goods
seized by a Fleri facias.

Venew, or Visne.
VEne ^, or Visne, is a term used in the Statute of 35 H. 8. c. 6. and often in
our Books, and signifies a Place next to that where any thing that comes to be
tried is supposed to be done. And therefore for the better discovery of the
truth of the matter in Fact upon every Trial, some of the Jury must be of the
same Hundred, or sometimes of the same Parish or Neighborhood, in which the
thing is supposed to be done, who by Intendment may have the best knowledge of
the matter. See Coke, 6 Book, f. 14. a. Arundels Case.

Venire facias.
VEnire facias, it is a Process directed to the Sheriff, or to the Coroners (if
the Sheriff be challenged) to summon a Jury to try an Issue joined between
party and party, or the King and a Subject; and it is also a Process upon an
Audita Querela, or upon an Indictment in the Kings Bench, or Venire facias ad
computandum, against Tenant by Elegit.

Verderor.
VErderor is an Officer in the Kings Forest, chosen by the Freeholders of the
County where the Forest is, by a Writ directed to the Sheriff to do it, as
appears by the Books of the Register, and of the Nature of Writs: and they are
called in Latin, Viridarli, of the word Viridis, in English Green, in French
Verd; for a great part of their Office is touching the Verd, to wit, the Wood
and Grass growing in the Forest; for which see more in the Charter and Laws of
the Forest.

Verge.
VErge is the Compass about the Kings Court, their Bounds, the Jurisdiction of
the Lord Steward, and of the Coroner of the Kings House, so that he cannot
intermeddle in the County forth of the Verge, because his Office extends not
thereunto; as the Coroner of the County cannot intermeddle within the Verge,
which is exempted out of his Office by the Common Law. And it seems against
reason, that their Offices and Jurisdictions being several, should intermeddle
one within the Jurisdiction of the other. And this Verge seems to be twelve
miles. See 13 R. 2. Stat. 1. c. 3. F. N. B. f. 241. Britton f. 86. Fleta, l. 2.
c. 2. Coke, l. 4. f. 46. 33 H. 8. c. 12.

Verge in another signification is used for a Stick or Rod by which one is
admitted Tenant, and holding it in his hand, takes the Oath of Fealty to the
Lord of the Manor, and for that cause is called Tenant by the Verge. See Old
N. B. f. 17. and Littl. l. 1. c. 10.

Vert or Verd.
VErt comes of the French Verd, and signifies with us in the Forest Laws every
thing that does grow and bears a green Leaf within the Forest: And it is
divided into Over Vert and Nether Vert. Over Vert is the Great Woods, and
Nether Vert is the Under Woods. There is also in Forests a Vert called
Special Vert, and that is all Trees that grow in the Kings own Woods within the
Forest; and all Trees that grow there in other Man's Woods, if they be such
Trees as bear Fruit to feed the Deer: which are called Special Vert, because
the destroying of such Vert is more grievoufly punished then the destruction of
other Vert is. See Manwoods Forest Laws, c. 6. f. 52. a.

Vicountiels.
VIcountiels are Farms so called, for which the Sheriff pays certain Rent to
the King, and makes the best profit he can of them. See the Stat. 33 and 34 H.
8. c. 16.

View.
VIew is, when an Action real is brought, and the Tenane knows not well what
Land it is that the Demandant asks; then the Tenant shall pray the View, that
is, that he may see the Land which he claims. But if the Tenant has had a View
in one Writ, and after the Writ is abated in misnaming the Town, or by
Ioyntenure, and after the Demandant brings another Writ against the Tenant;
then the Tenant shall not have the View in the second Writ.

View of Frank pledge.
VIew of Frank pledge (Visus franci plegii) is the power to hold a Turn or
Leet, in which Courts every Freeman in ancient time became bound with Sureties
at the age of fourteen years for his Truth to the King and his Subjects: and
thereupon those Courts were called the View of the free Pledges, that is, of
such Freemen as were Pledges or Sureties one for another. See Deciners.

Vi Laica removenda.
VI Laica removenda is a Writ that lies where Debate is between two Parsons or
Provisors for a Church, and one of them enters into the Church with great power
of Laymen, and holds the other out with force and arms; he that is holden out
shall have this Writ directed to the Sheriff, that he remove the Power which is
within the Church: and the Sheriff shall be commanded, that, if he find any men
there withstanding, he take with him the Power of his County, if need be, and
arrest the Bodies of all those that resist, and put them in Prison, so that he
have their Bodies before the King at a certain day, to answer the Contempt. And
this Writ is returnable, and shall not be granted, before the Bishop of the
place where such Church is, has certified in the Chancery such Resisting and
Force.

Villain and Villainage.
TO hold in pure Villainage is, to do all that that the Lord will him command.

The division of Villainage is, Villain of Blood, and of Tenure. And he is a
Villain of whom the Lord takes Redemption to marry his Daughter, and to make
him Free: and it is he whom the Lord may put out of his Lands or Tenements at
his will, and also of all his Goods and Chattels.

A Sockman is no pure Villain, nor does a Villain owe Ward, Marriage, or
Relief, nor does he any other Services real.

Tenure in Villainage shall make no Freeman Villain, if it be not continued
time out of mind: nor shall Villain Land make a Freeman Villain, nor Free-land
make Villain Free; except the Tenant have continued Free beyond the time of
memory.

But a Villain shall make Free-land Villain by Seisin, or by Claim of the Lord.

If a Villain purchase Land, and take a Wife, and alien, and dies before the
Claim of Seisin of the Lord, the Wife shall be endowed.

In case the Lord bring a Praecipe quod reddat against the Alience of his
Villain* who vouches to warrant the Issue of the Villain which is Villain to
the Lord, he shall have the Voucher. And by protestation the Lord may
(notwithstanding he plead with his Villain) save his Villain from being
infranchised.

A Bastard shall not be judged Villain, but by knowledge in Court of Record.

If Debt be due by a Lord to a Freeman, and he makes two Men his Executors who
are Villains to the said Lord, and dies, the Villains shall have an Action of
Debt against their Lord. And notwithstanding that he plead with them, and if he
make Protestation, they shall not be thereby infranchised; for that they are to
recover the Debt to the use of another person, that is to say, their Testator,
and not to their own use.

And if the Tenant in Dower have a Villain who purchases certain Land in Fee,
and after the Tenant in Dower enters; she shall have the Land to her and her
heirs for ever. And the same Law is of Tenant for term of years of a Villain.

The Lord may rob, beat, and chastise his Villain at his will: save only that
he ^ ay not maim him, for then he shall have an Appeal of Maihem against him.

A Villain may have three Actions against his Lord; that is to say, an Appeal
of the death of his Ancestor, an Appeal of Rape done to his Wife, and an Appeal
of Miahem.

If two Parteners bring a Writ of Niefty, and one of them be Nonsuit, the
Nonsuit of him shall be judged the Nonsuit of both, so that if that Nonsuit be
after Appearance, they shall be barred from that Action for ever; for such is
the Law in favor of Liberty.

If two have a Villain in common, and one of them makes him a Manumission, he
shall not be made free against both.

In a Writ de Nativo habendo, it behooves that the Lord show how the Defendant
comes to be privy of the Blood of the Villain of whom he is Lord, etc. And if
he nor any of his Aucestors were seized of any of his Blood, he shall not gain
by his Action, if the Villain have not acknowledged himself in Court of Record
to be his Villain.

In a Writ of Niefty may not be put more Niefs then two; and this was first
introduced in hatred of Bondage. But in a Writ de Liberate probanda, may be
put as many Niefes as the Plaintiff will.

If the Villain be fled into Ancient Demesne of the King, or other Town
privileged, within a year and a day the Lord may seize him; and if he dwell in
the same Town, or other place Franchised by a year and a day, without seisin of
the Lord, he has no power to seize him after, if he go not out of the foresaid
Franchise.

Some are Villains by title, of Prescription, that is to say, that all their
Blood have been Villains regardants to the Manor of the Lord from time out of
mind.

And some are made Villains by their Confession in a Court of Record. Also the
Lord may make a Manumission to his Villain, and enfranchise him for ever.

If a Villain bring any Action against his Lord, other then an Appeal of
maihem, and the Lord without protestation make answer to it, by this the
Villain is made free.

Also if a Villain purchase Land, and has Goods, and sell the Goods and Lands
before any Entry or Seisin made by the Lord, the sale is good. But the King,
Lord of a Villain, in such case may enter and seize the Land after such sale
made: For no time runs against the King.

Note, that this Title and Tenure are abolished by the Statute of Car. 2. R.

Villainous judgment.
Villainous judgment is that which is given upon an Indictment of Conspiracy,
viz. that the party found guilty shall lose the benefit of the Law, shall never
more be sworn in Iuries or Assizes, nor admitted to give any Testimony cise
where: and if he have to do in the Kings Courts, he shall come by Attorney, and
not in person: that his Lands, Goods and Chattels shall be seized in the Kings
hands, and estreaped, if he find not the more favor, and his Trees dug up,
and his Body imprisoned. See 24 E. 3. fol. 34. b. and 27 Ass. pl. 59.

Virgata terrae.
VIrgata terrae. See Yardland.

Viscount.
VIscount is either the name of a degree or State of Honor under an Earl, and
above a Baron; or else the name of a Magistrate and an Officer of great
Authority, whom we commonly call ( Sheriff,) or, to speak more truly, ( Shire
reve,) and was at the first called ( Shire gereve) that is, the Keeper of the
Shire, or the Reeve or Ruler of the Shire; for ( Gereve) is derived of the
Saxon word Gerefa, i. a Ruler.

And hereof comes ( Portreve, or Portgreve) a name in old time given to the
head Officer of a Town, and signifies the Ruler of the Town; for that ( Port)
coming of the Latin word ( Portus) signifies a Port-town, and ( Greve) being
derived as aforesaid, signifies a Ruler: so that Portgreve, or, as we now
shorter speak, a Portreve, is the Ruler of the Town.

And thus was the Head Officer or Governor of the City of London long since
(before they had the name of Mijor or Bailiffs) called, as it does appear in
diverse old Menuments, but chiefly in the Saxon Charter of William the
Conqueror, which begins thus:

William the King greeteh William the Bishop, and Godfrey the Portreve, and
also the Citizens that in London be, etc.

So also they of Germany (from whom we and our Language first came) call one
Governor Burgreeve, another Margreeve, and another Lansgreeve, with such like,
etc.

Thus much is said only to show the right Etymon and Antiquity of the word (
Sheriff;) to which Officer our Common Law has always given so great Trust and
Authority, as to be a special Preserver of the Peace. And therefore all
Obligations that he takes to that end, are Recognisances in Law.

He is a Judge of Record when he holds the Leets or Turns, which are Courts of
Record.

Also he has the Execution and Return of Writs, and impannelling of Iuries,
and such like, etc.

Uncore prist.
UNcore prist is a Plea for the Defendant in Debt upon an Obligation, who being
sued because he did not pay the Debt at the day, pleads, to save the
Forfeiture, that he rendered the money at the day and place, and that no Body
was there to receive it; and says over, That he is yet ready to pay it. And
where a man ought to plead over, that he is yet ready, and where not, see in
Perkins, sect. 783, and 784. and Coke 9 book, fol. 79. a, b, in Peyto's Case.

Volunt.
VOlunt is, when the Tenant holds at the Will of the Lessor, or Lord: and that
is in two manners.

One is, when I make a Lease to a man of Lands, to hold at my Will, then I may
put him out at my pleasure: but if he sow the Ground, and I put him out, then
he shall have his Corn, with egress and regress till it be ripe, to cut and
carry it out of the ground.

Such Tenant at Will is not bound to sustain and repair the House, as Tenant
for years is: But if he make wilful waste, the Lessor shall have against him an
Action of Trespass.

Also there is another Tenant at Will of the Lord, by Copy of Court-Roll,
according to the Custom of the Manor: and such a Tenant may surrender the
Land into the hands of the Lord, according to the Custom, to the use of another
for Life, in fee, or in tail; and then he shall take the Land of the Lord, or
his Steward, by Copy, and shall make Fine to the Lord. But if the Lord put out
such a Tenant, he has no remedy but to sue by Petition. And if such a Tenant
will implead another of the Lands, etc. he ought to enter a Plaint in the
Court, and shall declare in the nature of what Writ he will, as the case lies.

Voucher.
VOucher is, when a Praecipe quod reddat of Land is brought against a man, and
another ought to warrant the Land to the Tenant; then the Tenant shall vouch
him to Warranty, and thereupon he shall have a Writ called Summoneas ad
Warrantizandum. And if the Sheriff return that he has nothing by which he may
be summoned, then there shall go forth a Writ called Sequatur sub suo periculo.
And when he comes, he shall plead with the Demandant. And if he come not, or if
he come, and cannot bar the Demandant, then the Demandant shall recover the
Land against the Tenant, and the Tenant shall recover as much Land in value
against the Vouchee; and thereupon shall have a Writ called Capias ad Valentiam
against the Vouchee.

See more of Voucher before, in the Title of Garranty.

Uses.
USes of Land had beginning after the Custom of Property began amongst men: as
where one being seized of Lands in Fee-simple, made a Feoffment to another
without any Consideration, but only meaning that the other should be seized to
his Use, and that he himself would take the Profits of the Lands, and that the
feoffee should have the Possession and Franktenement thereof to the same use,
etc.

Now after this, upon good Considerations, and to avoid diverse Mischiefs and
Inconveniences, was the Statute of An. 27 H. 8. c. 10. provided, which unites
the Use and possession together, so that he who has the Use of the Land, has
the Possession thereof, according to the Use he has therein, by virtue of that
Statute.

Usurpation.
USurpation, is most commonly used when any one presents a Rector or Vicar to a
Church without a good Title. Stat. Westminster. 2. cap. 5. Co. 6. Rep. 51. and 11
Rep. 33.

Usury.
USury is a Gain of any thing above the Principal, or that which was lent,
exacted only in Consideration of the Loan, be it as well Corn, Meat, Apparel,
Wares, or such like, as Money.

And here much might be said, and many Cases put concerning Usury, which of
purpose I omit: only I wish they who account themselves Religious and good
Christians, would not deceive themselves by color of the Statute of Usury,
because the Statute says, that it shall not be lawful for any to take above
xi. pound in the C. l. for a year, etc. whereby they gather ( though falsely)
that they may therefore take six pounds for the Loan of an Hundred pounds with
a good Conscience, because the Statute does after a sort dispense with it
(because it does not punish such taking.) For God will have his Decrees to be
kept inviolable, who says, Lend, looking for nothing thereby, etc. by which
words is excluded either the taking of vi. l. v. l. yea or one penny above the
Principal. But rather let such think, that Statute was moved upon like cause
that moved Moses to give a Bill of Divorce to the Israelites, as namely to
avoid a greater mischief, and for the hardness of their hearts.

And the Statute of 21 Jac. cap. 17. has expressly Ordained, That no word in
that Law shall be Construed and Expounded to allow the practice of Usury in
point of Religion or Conscience.

By the Statute of 13 Eliz. c. 8. the Loan of Money was at 10 l. per Cent. by
21 Jac. cap. 17. at 8 l. per Cent. and now by the Statute of 12 Car. 2. c. 17.
it is reduced to 6 l. per Cent.

Utlary.
UTlary is, when an Exigent goes forth against any man, to appear in any Court
to make Answer to any Action or Indictment, and Proclamation made in five
Counties; then if the Defendant appear not, the Coroner shall give Judgment
that he shall be out of the Protection of the King, and out of the aid of the
Law.

By such an Utlary in Actions Personal, the party Outlawed shall forfeit all
his Goods and Chattels to the King.

And by an Utlary in Felony, he shall forfeit as well all his Lands and
Tenements that he has in Fee-simple, or for term of his life, as his Goods and
Chattels.

Also though a man be outlawed, yet if any Error or Discontinuance be in the
Suit of the Process, the party shall have advantage thereof, and for such cause
the Vtlary shall be reversed and adnulled.

If the party Defendant be over the Sea at the time of the Vtlary pronounced,
that is a good cause of Reversal.

If an Exigent be awarded against a man in one County, where he dwells not, yet
an Exigent with Proclamation shall go forth to the County where he dwells; or
else if he be thereupon Outlawed, the Utlary may be reversed, as it appears by
the Statute An 6 and 4 H. 8 c. 4.

And if a man be outlawed in Action personal at the Suit of another, and after
he Purchase his Chatter of Pardon of the King, such Charter shall never be
allowed, till he has sued a Writ of Scire facias to warn the party Plaintiff;
and if he appear, then the Defendant shall answer him, and bar him of his
Action, or else make Agreement with him.

Utlaw.
UTlaw. See Waive.

Utlepe.
UTlepe signifies the Escape of Theives. Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 47.

Utrum.
UTrum is a Writ that lies when the Right of any Church is allened and holden
in Lay-fee, or translated into the possession of any other Church, and the
Alienor dies; then his Successor shall have the said Writ, whereof an Enquest
shall be charged to try whether it be the Free alms of the Church, or Lay-fee.

And note well, that none that have Covent or Common Seal may maintain this
Writ, but a Writ of Enter sine assensu Capitull, for the Alienation made by his
Predecessor.

W.
Wage.
WAge is the Giving Security for the performing of any thing: as to wage Law,
and to wage Deliverance, which see before in Gage. None wages Law against the
King, Brook, tit. Chose en Action, number. 6. See Law.

Waife.
WAife is, when a Thief has feloniously stolen Goods, and being nearly
followed with Hue and Cry, or else overcharged with the burden or trouble of
the Goods, for his ease sake and more speedy Traveling, without Hue and Cry,
flies away, and leaves the Goods or any part of them behind him, etc. then the
Kings Officer, or the Reeve or Bailiff to the Lord of the Manor, (within whose
Jurisdiction or Circuit they were left) who by Prescription or Grant from the
King has the Franchise of Waife, may seize the Goods so waived to their Lords
use, who may keep them as his own proper Goods, except the Owner come with
fresh Suit after the Felon, and sue an Appeal, or give in Evidence against him
at his Arraignment upon the Indictment, and he be attainted thereof, etc. In
which cases the first. Owner shall have Restitution of his Goods so stolen and
waived.

And though, as has been said, Waife is properly of Goods stolen, yet it may
be also of Goods not stolen: As if a man be pursued with Hue and Cry as a
Felon, and he flies and leaves his own Goods, etc. these shall be taken as
Goods waived, and forfeit as if they had been stolen.

But see Foxleys Case, Coke l. 4. l. 109. b. that these are not Goods waived,
but Goods of Fugitives, which are not forfeited till it be found before the
Coroner, or otherwise of Record, that he fled for the Felony.

Waive.
WAive is a Woman that is Outlawed; and she is called Waive, as left out or
forsaken of the Law, and not an Outlaw, as a man is: for Women are not sworn in
Leets to the King, nor to the Law, as men are, who therefore are within the
Law; whereas Women are not, and for that cause they cannot be said Outlawed,
insomuch as they never were within it. See Fitz. N. B. fol. 161. A.

But a man is called utlaw, because he was once sworn to the Law: And now for
contempt he is put out of the Law, and is called utlaw, as one should say,
without benefit of the Law.

Wapentake.
WApentake is all one with that which we call Hundred, as appears by Bract.
lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. number. 1. in the end. Lambert, in his Explication of
Saxon Words, word Centuria, says, That this word Wapentake is more especially
used at this day in the Countries beyond the River Trent: And in the Laws of
King Edward (by him set forth) number. 33. it is most plain in these words, And
what the English term Hundred, the foresaid Counties call Wapentake.

The Statutes An. 3 H. 5. cap. 2. and An. 9 H. 6. cap. 10. and An. 15 H. 6.
cap. 7. make mention of Stainctife Wapentake, and Friendless Wapentake in
Craven in the County of York. See Roger Hoveden, part. poster. Annal. fol. 346.

Warden.
WArden is of the same signification with the French Gardein, and therefore of
this see more in the Title Gardein: But it is the most usual word in English,
for him that has the Custody and Charge of any person or thing by Office; as
Wardens of the Fellowships in London, Anno 14 H. 8. cap. 2. Warden Courts, An.
31 H. 6. c. 3. Warden of the Marches, An. 4 H. 7. cap. 8. Ferry Warden, An. 18
Eliz. c. 10. and An. 27 Eliz. c. 26. Wardens of the Peace, Anno 2 Edw. 3. c. 3.
Wardens of the West Marches, Cambden Brit. p. 606. Warden of the Forest,
Manwood, part. 1. p. 111, 112. Warden of the Alnage, An. 18 H. 6. c. 16. Warden
of the Kings Armor in the Tower, An. 1 E. 4. c. 1. Chief Warden of the Forest,
Manwood part. 1. page 42, 43. Warden of the Kings Wardrove, Anno 5 Hen. 3.
Stat. 5. Wardens of the Tables of the Kings Exchange, Anno 9 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. c.
7. and Anno 9 Hen. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 4. Warden of the Rolls of the Chancery,
Anno 1 Edw. 4. cap. 1, and 5. Wardens and Communalty of Lands contributory to
Rochester Bridge, Anno 18 Eliz. cap. 17. and Wardens of the Stannary Courts, 4
Instit. 230.

Wardmote.
WArdmote is a term mentioned in the Stat. of 32 H. 8. c. 17. and signifies a
Court that is kept in every Ward in London, and is usually called the
Warmote-Court, or the Wardmote-Inquest.

Warrantie.
WArrantie. See Garrantie.

Warrantia chartae.
WArrantia chartae is a Writ that lies for him that is infeoffed with Warranty,
and is afterward impleaded in an Assise or other Action in which he cannot
vouch; then he may have this Writ against the Feoffor or his Heir, to compel
them to warrant the Land unto him. And see of this Fitz. N. B. f. 134. D. See
Garrantie of Charters.

Warrantia diei.
WArrantia diei is a Writ the lies in case where a man has a day in any Action
sue ^ against him to appear in prope ^ person, and the King at that day or
before imploys him i ^ some service, so that he cann ^^ appear at the day in
Court; the ^ he may have this Writ direct ^ to the Iuistices, that they shall ^
not record them to be in Defau ^^ for his not appearing. And see (...) this
Fitz N. B. fol. 17. A. and ^^ the form of the Writ, see G (...) vile, lib. 1.
cap. 8.

Warren.
WArren is a place Privileged by Prescription or Grant of the King, for the
Preservation of Hares, Conies, Partridges and Pheasants, or any of them.

Warwit.
WArwit, (or Wardwit, as some Copies have it) is to be quit of giving money for
keeping of Wards.

Wast.
WAst is, where Tenant for term or years, Tenant for life, or Tenant for term
of another life, Tenant in Dower, or Tenant by the Curtesse, or Guardian in
Chivalry, does make Wast or Destruction upon the Land, that is to say, pulls
down the House, or cuts down Timber, or suffers the House willingly to fall, or
digs the Ground; then he in the Reversion shall have a Writ for that Wast, and
shall recover the place where the Wast is done, and treble Damages.

And if a Man cut down Timber without License, and therewith repairs old
Houses, yet that is no Wast. But if he with the Timber build a new house, the
cutting down of such Timber is Wast. Also the cutting down of Underwood or
Willows, which is no Timber, shall not be said to be Wast, unless they grow in
the sight or shadow of the House.

Wast, by the Civil Law, is called Dilapidation, and for that the Executor of a
Rector or Vicar are answerable in the Court Christian.

There is also a Writ of Wast, permittendo Messuagium vel domum fore in decasu
and ruinosum. Co. Ent. 601.

Wharf.
WHarf is a word used in the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 11. and other Statutes and
is a Broad place near a Crock or Hithe of water, upon which Goods and Wares are
laid which are to be Shipped and Transported from place to place.

Withernam.
WIthernam is the Taking or Driving of a Distress to a Hold, or out of the
County, so that the Sheriff cannot upon Replevin make delivery thereof to the
party distrained; in which case a Writ of Withernam is directed to the Sheriff
for the taking of as many of his Beasts that did thus unlawfully distrain, or
as much Goods of his, into his keeping, until he has made deliverance of the
first Distress. Also if the Beasts (be in a Fortier or Castle, the Sheriff may
take with him the Power of the County, and bear down the Castle, as appears by
the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 20. Brit. cap. 27.

Woodgeld.
WOodgeld seems to be the Gathering or Cutting of Wood within the Forest, or
money paid for the same to the Foresters. And the Immunity from this by the
Kings Grant is by Crompt. fol. 197. called Woodgeld.

Woodmote.
WOodmote is the old name of that Court of the Forest which is now, since the
Statute of Charta de Foresta, called the Court of Attachments, and by the
Statute is held every forty days; but was wont to be held at the will of the
chief Officers of the Forest, and at no certain time. See Manwoods Forest
Laws, cap. 22. fol. 207. a.

Woolferthfod.
WOolferthfod is the condition of such who were Outlawed in the Saxons time,
for not submitting themselves to Justice: for if they could be taken alive,
they should be brought to the King; and if they in fear of apprehension did
defend themselves, they might be slain, and their heads brought to the King;
for they carried a Woolfs Head, that is to say, their Head was no more to be
accounted of than a Woolfs head, being a Beast so hurtful to man. See the Laws
of King Edward by Lambert, f. 127. number. 7. and Bract. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap.
21. This is written Wulve-sheaved by Roger Hoveden, part. poster. Annal. fol.
343.

Wreck.
WReck, or Varech, (as the Normans, from whom it came, call it) is, where a
Ship is perished on the Sea, and no man escapes alive out of it, and the Ship,
or part of it so perished, or the Goods of the Ship, come to the Land of any
Lord, the Lord shall have that as a Wreck of the Sea. But if a Man, or a Dog,
or a Cat, escape alive, so that the party to whom the Goods belong, come within
a year and a day, and prove the Goods to be his, he shall have them again, by
Provision of the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 4. made in King Edw. 1. days, who
therein followed the Decree of H. 1. before whose days, if a Ship had been cast
on shore, torn with Tempest, and were not repaired by such as escaped alive
within a certain time, that then was taken for Wreck.

Y.
Yard-land.
YArd-land (Virgata terrae) in some Counties contains 20 Acres, in some 24, and
in some 30 Acres of Land.

Abate.
ABate semble de vener del Francois Abbatre, i. rescindere, destruere, and ad
pleuseurs significations. Come, abater un Chesteau ou Fortlet. (Vet. Not. br.
fo. 45.) que (en Westminster. 1. ca. 17.) est enterprete to beat down. Et, abater un
brief est pur le defaire ou renverser, per ascun Erreur, ou Exception. Britton
ca. 48. Et luy que s'enterpose enter le prieur possesseur and son Heir, est dit
abater en les Terres. Veies Abatement.

Abatement de Brief ou Plaint.
ABatement de Brief ou Plaint est, quant un Action est port per Brief ou
Plaint, en que fault sufficient and bone matter, ou auterment le matter allege
nest certainment allege, ou si le Plaintiff ou Defendant, ou Lieu sont
misnosme, ou si la appear varience perenter le Brief and le Specialty ou
Record, ou que le Brief, ou Declaration sont uncertain, ou pur mort del
Plaintiff ou Defendant, ou pur diverse auters semblable causes; donques sur ceux
defaults le Defendant poit prier que le Brief ou Plaint abatera, cest adire,
que le Suit del plaintiff envers luy cessera pur cest temps, and que il
commencera auter temps son Suit, and port u^ novel Brief ou Plaint, sil soit
issint dispose. Mes si le Defendant en ascun Action plede un matter en Bar' pur
adnuller de Action a touts jours, il ne viendra apres a pleader en Abatement de
Brief; mes si apres il appiert in le Record, que est ascun matter apparent pur
que le Brief doit estre abate, donque le Defendant ou asc^ auter person, ut
amicus Curiae, poiet bien plede and monstre ceo in Arrest de Judgment.

Veies les titles de Brief, Misnosmer and Variance, en les Abridgements, and le
Livre appel Les Digests del Briefs, en queux cest matter especialment est fort
bien entreat.

Sont auxi auters matters queux abate and stay actions and Briefs,
cestaseavour: Variance ent' Brief and Count.

Si le Plaintiff soit Alien Enemy. ( Titulo Alien.)

Pur default de nosmer le Defendant de quel Vil, ou Trade, ou degree il est, ou
le Suit est per Brief.

Que le Feme Plaintiff est covert devant, ou pendant la Suit.

Que le Plaintiff ad auter Action pendant pur mesme le cause.

Que le Brie ^ est date devant le Action accrue.

Pur ceo que le ^^ fendant doit estre sue euauter Court de quel il est Attorney
ou Officer.

Pur ceo que la ter' est ancient demesne.

Que le matt' en Suit fuit fait sur le haut mere, en quel case l' Admiral ad
Jurisdiction.

Ceux cases suisdits n' abate le Brief ou Action mes suspend le prosecution pur
temps.

Si le Plaintiff en Action personel soit utlage ou convict de Recusancy, o ^
excomenge.

Sur Scire facias versus Tertenants pur debt, plea que sont auters Tenant queux
ou^t terrs liable a mesme le debt, queux ne sont return, siay proceeding tanque
sont auxi return.

Causes de Abatement de Brief ou Plaint.
Fault de sufficient ou bone matter. Le matter nest certainment allege.
Plaintiff, Defendant. ou Lieu. misnosme. Variance enter Brief, and Specialty,
ou Record. Uncertainty del Brief, and Count, ou Declaration. Mort Plaintiff, ou
Defendant.
Abatement en Terres.
ABatement en Terres ou Tenements est, quant un hom' morust seisie de ter' ou
Tenements, and un que and droit entra en mesmes deva^t le Heir; cest Entry
d'luy est appel un Abatement, and il un Abator. Mes si le Heir enter primes
apres le mort de son Ancestor, and le auter enter sur le possession del Heir,
cest dernier entry estun disseism al Heir. Vide livre de Entries, fol. 63. c.
and 205. d. and 519. c. lou cest Abatme^t est appel en Latin Intrusio. Et jeo
extend destre melius d' appel ceo en Latin Interpositio, ou Intratio per
interpositionem, de fair difference enter ceo parol, and Intrusion puis le mort
de le Tenant pur vie.

Abbe.
ABbe fuit le Sovereign Test ou Principale de ceux Measons queux quant ils
estoient fuero^t appel Abbeys; and cest Abbe ove les Moigns de mesme le Meason,
queux fueront appel le Covent, fiere un Corporal'. Et tiel Sovereign de ascun
tiel Meason ne serra charge pur le Act de son Predecessor, sil ne soit per
common Seal, ^ e pur tiel chose que vient al use de son Meason. Auxy u^ Abbe ne
serra charge pur le det en que son Commoign fuit en det devant son enter en
Religion, mesque le Creditor ad de ceo un especialty, si non que il avoit
devenus al use d' son Meason: mes les Executors del Commoigne serra charge ove
ceo.

Vide que ceo en le Abridgment, mesme title, desouth quel veies coment ascuns
de ceux fueront elective, ascuns presentative; and coment fueront Prefects, and
lour authority. Et en cel title sont auxy comprehend touts auters Corporations
Spiritual, come Prior and son Covent, Friars and Canons, Dean and Chapter.

Abettors.
ABettors sont in diverse cases diversment prise. Un kind de Abbetters sont ceux
que maliciousment, sans droit cause ou desert, procur' aut' de suer faux
Appeals de Murder ou Felony envers homes, al intent de troubler and griever
eux, and pur fair eux en infamy and slander. Abettors en Murd' sont ceux que
command, procur', counsel, ou comfort aut' de Murder. Et en ascun case tiel
Abettors serront prise come Principals, and en ascun case forsque come
Accessories: Issint en auter Felonies. Et lour presence a le chose fait, and
lour absence d'la fuit u^ difference en le case. Il y ad Abettors auxy en
Treason, mes ils sont come Principals, car en Treason il ny ad ascun
Accessories.

Vies pluis de ceo en le Livre appelle Les Pleas del Co ^ one, compile per le
tres reverend Judge Sir W. Stamf. en les titles de Accessor ^ es, and Damages
en appeal.

Abeyance.
ABeyance est quant un Lease est fait pur Term de vie, le Remainder al droit
Heirs de J. S. que est en vie al temps del Grant: ore Per cest Grant le
Remainder passa horse del Grantor maintena^t, unc' il ne vesta maintenant, ne
prist effect en le Grantee cest a dire, le droit Heir d' J S. mes est dit
destre en abeyance, cu, come les Logiciens appelle ceo, in potentia, ou in
intellectu, and, come nous dicimus, in nubibus, cestascavoir, en le
consideration de Ley, Que si J. S. morust, ayant un droit Heir en vie, and
vivant le Lessee pur vie, donques ceo est un bone Remainder, and a ore vest,
and vient en le dit droit Heir, en tiel sort, que il poit grant, forfeit, ou
auterment dispose ceo, and cessa destre ore en abeyance pur ceo que il est un a
ore de ability pur pre^der ceo, pur ceo que J. S. est mort, and ad relinquish
un droit Heir en vie; le quel ne poit estre vivant J. S. car durant son vie null
poit properme^t ee^ dit son Heir. Item si un hom' soit patron dun Esglis, and
present aut' a ceo, or est le Fees des ter' ou Tenem^ts perteignant al Rectory
en le Parson: mes si le Parson morust, and le Esglise est devenus void, donque
est le Fee en abeyance, tanque il soit un novel Parson present, admit and
induct; car le Patron and le Fee, mes solement le droit de presenter, and le
Fee est en le Incumbent que est present, and puis son mort il nest en ascun,
mes en Abeyance, tanque il soit un novel Incumbent, come est avaunt dit.

Vies Litt' Lib, 3. c. 11. fo. 145. and Perk. fo. 12.

Abishersing.
ABishersing ( and en ascun Copies Mishersing) est, quiet' esse de
Amerciamentis coram quibuscunque de Transgressione probata.

Abjuration.
ABjuration est un Serement que home ou feme pregnount quant ils ount commisse
Felony, and fue al Esglise, ou Cimitory, ou auter lieu privilege, pur tuition
de lour vies, eslisant pluistost perpetual Banishment horse de Royalm, que a
estoyer a le Ley, and destre try del Felony: En cel case, devant le Coroner il
ferra tiel confession que poit fair sufficient enditement de Felony: donques
le Coroner al Common Ley luy ferra de abjure la Realm, and assignera a luy a
quel il alera, and luy jura, que il ne va horse del haut chimin, and que il ne
demurra a le Port (si il poit aver bone passage) forsque un flood and un ebb;
and si il ne poit aver passage, que il alera chescun jour, durant xl. jours, en
le Mere a son genue. Mes si tiel Felon que abjure ala horse de la chimin and fua
a auter lieu, si il soit prise, il serra amesne devant le Judge, and la avera
judgment destre pendus.

Et sil que issint pria la privilege ne voile abjure, donques il avera
privilege pur xl. jours, and chescun poit luy doner viand. Et si ascun done
luy viand apres xl. jours, mesque il soit sa Feme, tiel doner est Felony. Auxy
cestuy que abjure serra deliver per un Constable al auter, and de un Franchise
al auter tanque il vient a son Port: Et si le Constable ne voit receive luy, il
serra grievousment amercie. Vide Juramentum in tractatu De abjuratione Latronum.

Cest Ley fuit institute per St. Edward le Confessor, un Roy de cest Realm
devant le Conquest, and fuit ground de le Ley de merce, and pur le amor and
reverence que il and auters ses Successors porteront al Meason de Dieu, ou lieu
de Prayers and administration de son parol and Sacraments, le quel nous
appellon ^ s Esglise. Nota, ces Ley est ore change per Statutes 21 H. 8. cap.
2. 22 H. 8. cap. 14. and 32 H. 8. cap. 12. per queux appiert, que il a cel jour
ne abjurera le Realm, mes tout son liberty de cest Realm and tout son liberal
and frank habitations, resorts, and passage de touts lieux de cest Realm, a un
certain lieu en cel Realm a ceo limit per 32. H. 8. ^. 13. and 33 H. 8. c. 15.
Vide plus in Stamf. li. 2. c. 10. and vide ore le Stat. 1 Jac. c. 25. and 21
Jac. c. 28. pur repeal de touts Statues que concern persons que abjure, and le
toller des touts Sanctuaries.

Veies Stat. de 35 El. cap. 1, 2. pur Abjuration de Recusants, and Stat. 1 Jac.
cap. 25.

Abridgement de Plaint ou Demand.
ABridgement de Plaint ou Demand est lou un port un Assise, Brief de Dower,
brief de Guard, ou tiel semblables: en queux cases pur ceoque le brief de Assise
est, de libero tenemento, come en brief de Dower, le brief est, Rationabilem
dotem quae contingit de libero tenemento W. son baron, and en un brief de Guard
le brief est, Custod' terrarum and haeredis, etc. sans monstre ascun auter
certainty en les Briefs; mes en le Plaint del Assise, ou Demand en le brief de
Dower, and en le Count en brief de Guard, le Plaintiff ou Demandant monstra le
certainty des acres ou parcels de Terre: la si le Tenant plead Nontenure, ou
Joyntenancy, ou ascun auter tiel semblable plea, a parcel del ter' dema^d, e^
abatem^t del bre^le Plaintst ou Demandant poit abridger son Plaint ou Demand al
cest parcel, cest adire, il poit omit horse cest part, and pry que le Tenant
responder^ al rest, aq^ il ne ad unc^ plede ascun chose. Le cause est, p^ ceo
q^ en tielx Briefs le certainty nest mis, mes est generalment: and nient
obstant le Demandant ad abridge son Plaint ou Demand en part, uncore le Brief
demurre bone pur le residue.

Accedas ad Curiam.
ACcedas ad Curiam est un Brief direct al Vicount, luy commandant de aler a
tiel Court ascun Seignior ou Franchise, lou un Plaint est sue pur prisel del
avers come Distress, ou ascun faux judgment est suppose destre fait en asc^
Suit e^ tiel Court, quel nest Record; and q^ le Vicont la ferra Record del dit
Suit e^ presence del Suitors ^ mesme le Court, and de quatuor auters Chivalers
de le County, and ceo Record certifera al Court le Roy, and a cel jour quel est
assign en le Brief.

Cest Bre^ est fait horse del Chancery, and returnable in Banco Regis ou en le
Common Pleas.

Accedas ad Vicecomitem.
ACcedas ad Vicecomitem est un Brief direct al Coroner, luy commandant a
deliver un Brief al Vicont, q^ aiant un Pone a luy deliver, ceo suppress.
Regist orig. 83.

Acceptance.
ACceptance est un prendrance en bone gree, and come un Agreement al ascun
chose fait devant, le quel puit aver este u^fait and avoid (si tiel Acceptance
and estre) per luy ou ceux que issint accepta: p^ example, si un Evesque,
devant Statute fait anno primo Eliz. less part del possessions de son
Evesquery pur ans, reservant Rent, and morust, and puis un auter est fair
Evesque le quel accept', cest adire, prist ou receive le Rent qua^t il est due
and doit estre pay; ore per cest Acceptance le Lease est fait perfect and bone,
le quel auterment le novel Evesque poit assers bien avoid.

Semblable Ley est, si un home and sa feme, scisie Ter^ en droit del feme, join
and sont Lease ou Feoffment per Fait reservant Rent, and le baron morust, el
accepta ou receive le Rent: per cel le Feoffment ou Lease est fait perfect and
bone, and serra bar^ a luy de porter Cui in vita.

Accessories.
ACcessories sont en deux sorts per le Common Ley, and per le Statute Ley.
Accessory pere le Common Ley est auxy en deux sorts, lun avaunt le fact est
fait, le auter puis. Accessory devant le fait est celuy que commanda ou procura
auter fair Felony, and nest la present luy mesme quant lauter le fait; mes sil
soit present donques il est auxy Principal. Accessory puis le fait est celuy
que receiva, favor, alda, assist, ou comfort ascun home que ad fait ascun
Murder ou Felony don't il ad conusans. Tiel Accessory serra punish, and avera
judgment vie and member, auxy bie^ come le Principal q^ fist le Felony: mes
tiel Accessory ne serra jammes mis a respondu a ceo tanque le Principal soit
co^vict ou attaint, ou soit utlage de ceo. Manslaughter home ne poit ee^
Accessory deva^t le fait, car Manslaughter covie^t ensuer sur sudden debate ou
affray; car si soit premeditate ceo est Murdr^. Co. l. 4. f. 44. a.

Mes un feme en tiel case ne serra Accessory p^ le aider de son baron. En grand
ou hault Treason, cibien les co^manders come les assisters and receivers sont
tout foits Principals.

Si home counsel un feme a murder lenfant en sa venture, and apres lenfant est
nee, and donque est murder per le feme en le absence de cestuy que issint done
le council; uncore il est Accessory person counselling deva^t le nestr^ del
ensant, and nient ceo countermandant Dyer fo. 186. pl. 2.

Auxy un poit estre accessory al Accessor^; si come un feloniousm^t receive un
aut' q^ est accessory al Felony, la le Receivor est un Accessory.

Accessory per le Statute est tiel que aber, counsel ou receive ascun home que
commit, ou ad commit ascun offense fait Felony pe Statute: Car coment que le
Statute ne fait mention Accessories, Abettors, etc. u^core ils sont include per
le interpretation des dits Stat. Stamf. Pl. cor l. 1. c. 45, 46, 47, 48.

Vies pluis del Accessory in le dit Livre de les Plees, l. 1. cap. 44, 49, and
50.

Account.
Account est un Brief, and gist lou Bailiff ou Receiver dascun Seign^r, ou
daut' hom^, q^ doit render Account, ne unit render son Account; donques celuy
aq^ l' Account doit estre render avera cest Brief. Et per le Statute de Westminster.
2. c. 10. si le Accomptant soit trove en arrearges, les Auditors q^ sont a luy
assigns ont power de agarder luy a prison, la a demurrer tanque il ad fait
gree al party. Mes si les Auditors ne voyllont allower reasonable expense and
costage, ou sils chargeront luy ove plusors receipts quant ne duissent, donques
son prochein amy q^ voit suer pur luy, suera un Brief ^ Ex part talis horse del
Chancery, direct al Vic^ pre^der 4 Mainpernors de render son corpse devant les
Barons del Exchequer a certain jour, and ^ garner le Seignior de appear^ la a
mesme le jour.

Accord.
ACcord est un Agreement parent' deux al meins, p^ satisfy un offense ou
Trespass que le un ad fait al aut', p^ le quel il ad agree de satisfier and
content luy ove Recompense; quel si soit execut' and perform, donques p^ ceo
que cest Recompense est un plene satisfaction pur le Offense, serra un bone
bar^ en le Ley, si lauter, apres l' Acord perform, voit suer arrere un Action
p^ mesme le Trespass.

Nota, q^ le primer est properment appelle un Accord, le auter est un Contract.

Acquital.
ACquital est quant la est Seignior, Mesne, and Tenant, and le Tenant tient de
le Mesne certain Ter^s ou Tenements en Frank-almoign, Frank-marriage, ou tielx
semblables, and le Mesne tie^t oustr^ auxy de Seignior paramount, ou desuis
luy. Ore doit le Mesne acquit ou discharge le Tenant tout and chescun man^ de
Service q^ ascun auter voit aver ou demand luy concerna^t mesmes les Terres ou
Tenements, pur ceo q^ le Tenant doit fair le service a le Mesme tant solem^t,
and nemy al diverse Seigniors, p^ un Tenement ou parcel del Terre. Mesme le Ley
est ou il est Seigu^, Mesne, and Tenant come avaunt dit, and le Mesne grant al
Tenant (sur le tenur^ fait pere^t eux) p^ acquit and discharge luy de touts
Rents, Services, and tiel semblables. Ceo Discharge est appel Acquital.

Mesme le ley est, si Tena^nt tient de son Mesne per autiels Services, come le
mesne tient ouster del Seignior, and le Tenant fait ou paya Services al Mesne,
mes le Mesne ne fesait ses Services al Seignior paramount, p^ que il distrain
les Beasts del Tenant. En cel case le Mesne, per le oveltie des Services, doit
acquit le Tenant del Services due al Seign^r. Auxi la est Acquital en ley, and
Acquital en fart. Acquital e^ Ley est, ou deux sont appeal ou endict de Felony,
lun come Principal. lauter come Accessory, le Principal esteant discharge, le
Accessory per consequent est auxy acquit: Et en cest case, si come l' Accessory
est acquit per le Ley, issint est le Principal e^ Fait, Stamf. pl. cor. fol.
168.

Acquittance.
ACquittance est un Discharge en escript d ^^ Sum de money, ou auter duty q^
dolt estre pay ou fait. Sicome un soit oblige de payer money sur un obligation,
ou Rent reserve sur un Lease, ou tiel semblable, and le party a que le money ou
duty doit estre pay ou fait sur le receipt de ceo, ou sur auter agreement
perenter eux ewe, fait Escript ou Bill de son main en discharge de ceo,
testimoignant q^ il est, pay, ou auterment content, and pur ceo acquit and
discharge luy de ceo. Le quel Acquittance est tiel Discharge and Bar en la Ley,
q^ il ne poit demand and recover m^ le Sum ou duty aut' foits, fill poit monstre
le Acquittance.

Cest parol differe ab hoc quod in Jure Civili Acceptitatio dicitur, quia illud
fi^ri potest verbo sine scripto, and nihil aliud est quam ficta Solutio and
Liberatio, lice ^ Solutio non sit: Nec Apocha dici potest, quae cautio est
solutae dataeve pecuniae, quae non liberat nisi pecunia soluta sit.

Acre.
ACre est un certain parcel de Terre que contain en longeur 40 Perches, and en
latitude 4 Perches, ou a cest quantity soit le longeur pluis ou meines. Et si
un ho^e voile erect un novel Cottage, il devoit amitter quarter Acrers de terre
a ceo, solonq^ cest measure, 31 Eliz. cap. 7. Et ove cest measure agree
Mounsieur Crompton e^ son Jurisdiction de Courts fol. 222. Uncore il dit que,
solonque les diverse customs de several pais, le Perch differt estea^t en asc^
lieux (and plus usualm^t) forsque dixsize pees and demi: Mes en le County de
Staff. le Perch est vint quat' pees com^ fuit cy deva^t adjudge en le
Exchequer. En Stat' fait an^ 24 H. 8. ca. 14. p^ e^bleem^t Flax, 160 Perches
font u^ Acre, le Ordinance de admeasurement de terre fait ann. 34 E. 1. Stat.
1. agree ove cest account.

Action.
ACtion est le form de un Suit do^e per le Ley de recover chose, come Actio^
de Dett, and tielx semblabe; ou come est Co. 8. f. 151. a. Actio est jus
prosequendi in judic' quod alicui debetur.

Vide Lexicon juris, pur Action.

Action del Brief.
ACtion del Brief est un phrase del parlance use quant un plead ascun matter,
per que il monstre que le Plaintiff and cause daver le Bre^ q^ il port, and
unc^ poit estre q^ il poit aver aurer Brief ou Action p^ mesme le matter. Tiel
Plea est appel Plea al Action del Brief: lou si per la Plea appiert q^ le
Plaint' naveroit asc^ cause de aver ascun Action pur le chose demand, donques
ceo serra ult Plea al Action.

Action sur le Case.
ACtion sur le case est Brief port envers un pur ascun offense fait sans force,
come p^ nient performance del Promise fait per le Defenda^t al Plaintiff, ou
pur parlance des parols per queux le Plaintiff est defame, ou pur aut'
misdemeanor ou deceit; lou tout le case serra contenus en le Brief.

Trover, Nuisance Slander de person, Trade, de Title, Escape fur mesne process,
p^ negligent garder de son feu, pur inartificiasm^t performando opera, pro
divertendo antiquum cursum aquae, pro Commoner verse un q^ foder le soil del
Common ou enjetta ses avers en ceo sance droit on enclose parcel de le Common.

Action mixed.
ACtion mixed est un Suit done per le Ley de recover le chose demand, and
demages p^ le tort fait; come en Assise de nov' disseisin. Quel Bre^ (si le
Disseissor fait Feostm^t al auter) le Disseissee avera verse le Diseissior and
le Feoffee ou aut' ter-tena^t, and en ceo recovera son Seisin del ter^, and ses
damages p^ le mean profits, and p^ le tort a ^^ uy fait. Et issint est un
Action Wast and Quare impedit. Mes u^ Action de Detinue nest appel Action mixed,
comment per ceo le chose detenus est demand, and serra recover si poit ee^
trove, and damages p^ le detain^; and si ne poit estre trove, donque damages p^
la chose and le detainer.

Mes ceo est appel solement Action personal, que serra port solement pur biens,
ou Chattels ou Charters.

Action sur le Statute.
ACtion sur le Statute est Brief foundu sur ascun Statute, lou per ascun
Statute Action est done a un en ascun case lou null tiel Action fuit devant:
Come lou un commit Perjury al prejudice du^ auter celuy q^ est damnifie avera
Brief sur le Statute and son Case. Et le difference enter Actio^ sur le Statute
and Action popular est, Que lou le Statute done le Suit ou Actio^ al party
grieve, ou auterment a un person certain, ceo est appel Action sur le Statute:
Mes lou per le Statute authority est done a chescun que voile de suer, ceo est
appel Action popular.

Actions personal.
ACtions personal sont tiels Actions per queux home claim debt, ou auter
biens and chateux, ou damag' p^ eux, ou damage p^ tort fait a son person: and
est properment ce^ q^ e^ le Civil Ley est appel Actio in personam, quae
adversus eum intenditur qui ex Contractu vel Delicto obligatus est aliquid dare
vel concedere.

Action popular.
ACtion popular est un Actio^ que est done sur le breach dascun penal Statute,
le quel Action chescun home que voit polt suer per luy mesme and le Roy, per
information ou auterment, come le Statute allow, and le case require. Et ^ ceux
Actions il y ad infinite number; mes un pur example est: Quant ascun del Jury,
que sont impannel and jurus de passer perenter party and party indifferentment
prist ascun chose de lun part ou lauter, ou de ambideux parties pur lour
Verdict dire al ceo part, donques ascun hom^ q^ voit, deins lan procheine
ensuant le offense, poit suer un ^ rief appel Decits tantum envers luy ou ceux
que issint prist p^ lour Verdict dire. Et pur ceo q^ cest Action nest done al
un home specialment, mes generalm^ al ascun des le; people del Roy q^ voit
suer, il est appel u^ Act popular. Mes en cel case qua^t u^ avoit com^ence ^
p^suer cel Act', null aut' point c^ suer, and e^ c^, come see^, cel vaty ^ l
act' popul' per le civil ley.

Actions real.
ACtions real sont tiels Actions per queux le Dema^da^t claim title al ascun
Ter^s ou Tenements, Rents, ou Co^mo^s, en fee-simple, fee-tail, ou p^ term
vie. Chescu^ Actio^ real est ou possessor^, cestascavoir, de son possession ou
seisin demesne; ou ancestrel, (...). del seisin ou possession de son ancestor.
Co. l. 6. f. 3.

Acts.
ACts Parliament, sont Leys positive, que consist de deux parts, cest adire, de
les parolx del Act, and del sense ^ ceo; and ils ambideux jonyt ensemble font
la Ley.

Additions.
ADdition est ceo que est done al home ouster son proper nosme and surnosme,
ce^ adire, p^ monstrer de quel Estate, Degree, ou Mystery il est, and de quel
Vill, Hamlet, ou County.

Additio^s Estate so^t ceux, Yeoman, Gentleman, Esquire, and tiels samblables.

Additio^s degree s^ot ceux q^ nous appelomus nosmes Dignity; come Chivaller,
Count, Marquess, Duc.

Additions de Mystery sont ceux, Scriven^, Painter, Mason, Carpent', and touts
aut's se^blable nature: car Mystery est le craft ou occupation per que home
gain son living.

Addition Villes, come Sale, Dale; and issint de les auters.

Et lou un home ad household en deux lieux, il serra dit demurrer en ambideux;
issint que son Addition en un de eux suffist.

Fuit ordeine per le Statute An. 1 H 5. c. 5. que en Suits ou Actions ou
process Utlagary gist, tiels Additions serra nosme del Defend', a declarer son
estate, mystery, and lieu ou il inhabit; and que tiels Briefs abateront, sils
ne ount tiels Additions, si le Defendant prist exception a ceo; mes ils ne
abateront per office del Court.

Auxy, Duke, Marq^ss, Count, ou Chivaler, ne sont pas de ceux Additio^s, mes
nosmes ^ Dignity, queux duisloint aver estre done devant le Statute.

Et ceo fuit ordeine per le dit Statute, al intent que un home ne serroit
grieve ne trouble per le Utlegarie de un auter: Mes que per reason ^ le certain
Addition, chescun home poit estre certainment conus, and porter^ sa burden
demesne.

Adjournment.
ADjournment est, quant ascun Court est dissolve and determine a present, and
assign destre guard arreare al auter lieu ou temps, and (moy semble) est
compound de deux par ^ ls ( ad, ou al, and jour.)

Admeasurement de Dower.
ADmeasurement de Dower est un Brief que gist lou un feme est endow per un
Infant ou per un Gardein de pluis q^ devoit aver; le Heir en tiel case avera
cest Brief, per quel la feme serra admeasure, and le Heir restore a le su ^
plusage. Mes si un abate, cest adire, un que and droit enter apres le mort de
baron, and endow le feme de cestuy que est mort de pluis que doit air, le Heir
navera cest Brief, mes Assise de Mort dancestor, verse la feme: and si el plede
que el fuit endow de ceo terre come del Franktenement sa baron, le Heir monstre
coment el suit endow per le Abator, and que el ad pluis que devoit aver, and
priera que il soit restore al surplusage; and si soit trove, il serra restore.

Admeasurement de Pasture.
ADmeasurement de Pasture est un Brief, and gist lou plusors Tenants ont Common
appen ^ en auter ter^, and un surcharge le Com^on ove plusors avers: donques
lauters Commoners poient aver cest Brief verse luy. Et auxy poit ee^ port per un
Com^on solement: mes donques covient estre port verse touts lauters Commoners
and verse cestuy que surcharge, p^ ceo que touts les Com^oners serront
admeasures.

Et ceo Bre^ ne gist verse luy ne pur luy que ad Common appurtenant, ou Common
in gross; mes ceux q^ ont Common appendant, ou Common per cause de vicinage.

Vide le diversity de tout ceux Commons apres en le title de Common.

Auxy cest Brief ne gist p^ le Seignior, ne verse le Seignior, mes le Seignior
poit distrain les avers le Tenant q^ sont surplusage. Mes si le Seignior
surcharge le Common, les Commoners nont remedy per le Common Ley, mes un Assise
de son Common.

Administrator.
ADdministrator est celuy a que le Ordinary commit le Administration des biens
le mort pur default de Executor, and un Action giser' verse luy, and p^ luy,
come pur Executor, and serra charge jesques al value des biens le mort, and
nient ouster, sil ne sont per son faux Plea, ou p^ ceo que il ad wast les biens
le mort. Si le Administrator devie, ses Executors ne sont Administrators, mes
covient al Ordinary de comitter novel Administration. Et si un Estrange, que
nest Administrator ne Executor, prists' les biens del mort, and administer de
son tort demesne, il serra charge and sue come Executor, and nemy come
Administrat', en ascun Action que est port verse luy per ascun Creditor. Mes si
le Ordinary fait un Brief ad colligendum bona defuncti, celuy q^ ad tiel Lett'
nest Administrator, mes le Action gist verse le Ordinary, auxy bien come sil
priest le biens en son main demesne, ou per le main de ascun de des servants
per ascun auter commandment.

Est auxy un auter sort de Administrator, lou un fist son volunt, and fist un
infant deins age de 17 son Executor. Le Evesque commit administration al ascun
amy durant le nonage de le Executor, quel Administrator sil sue, ne count q^ le
mort devy intestate, quel administration cessa quant l' enfant est 17 ans age.

Admiral.
ADmiral est un haut Officer que ad le Regiment de la Navy del Roy, and l'
audition and termination de tout Causes cybien civil com^ criminel appurtenant
al Mere; and pur cest purpose il ad son Court appel le Admiralty. Il poit
causer son Citation destr^ serve sur le Ter^, and prender le corpse del party ou
biens en Execut' sur Terre.

Item il ad cognizance del mort ou maihem de un home, fait en ascun grand Nief
fleetant en grand Rivers en le Realm, debase les Ponts de eux prochein al Mere.

Auxy p^ arrest Niefs en les grand Streams pur les voiages del Roy and Realm;
and ad jurisdiction en les dits Streams durant mesmes Voiages.

Ad quod dampnum.
AD quod dampnum est un Brief q^ doit estr^ sue devant le Roy grant certain
Liberties, come Fair, Market, ou tielx semblables, q^ux poiet estr^
prejudicial al auters. Et per ceo serra inquire si serroit prejudice a granter
eux, and a que serra prejudicial, and que prejudice ent aviendra.

Est auxy un auter Brief de Ad quod damnum, si un voil divert un common chymin,
and fair un novel chymin cy beneficial. Ambideux queux (coment trove destre
nient prejudicial) poient estre travers en auter Action, coment que le Roy ad
fait son grant pursuant al Verdict del Jury.

Advent.
ADvent est un temps que contein environ un moys prochein devant le Feast del
Nestr^ de nostre Savior Christ. En que nr^e Ancestors ont repose grand
reverence p^ le propinquity de cel solemn Feast, issint que touts Suits en ley
fuer^ donques remit pur un season. Pur quoy la fuit un Statute ordein, West. 1.
c. 48. que nient obstant le dit Solemnity, puit estre Loyal, en respect Justice
and Charity a prender Assizes de Novel disseisin and Darreine presentment, en
le temps de Advent, Septuagisima, and Quadragesima. Cest un des temps de le
commencement q^l usque a les Octaves de l' Epiphany le solemnizing Espousals
sont prohibit destre solemn sans especial License, accordant a les Verses:

Conjugium Adventus prohibet,
Hilarique relaxat:
Septuagena vetat, sed Paschae
Octava reducet.
Rogatio vetitat, concedit
Trina potestas.
Mes l' Evesque poit dispense ove un Marriage deins ceux temps and ceo est bien.

Advowson.
ADvowson est, lou un home and ses heirs ont droit de presenter lour Clerk al
un Parsonage, ou aut' Espiritual Benefice qn^t il devient void. Et celuy q^ ad
tiel droit de presenter est appel Patron.

En gross est lou home est seisie de ceo est solement per luy mesme. Et est
Advowson appendant al un Manor ou al un Rectory, etc. poit estre vend a per
luy, and tunc est En gross and sever del Manor and Rectory.

Affeerors.
AFfeerors sont tiels que sont design en Courtleets, etc. a mulcter tiels que
ont commit ascun peche que est arbitrablem^t punishable, and p^ quel null
express penalty est prescribe per Statute. Poies veier le form de lour Serem^t
en Kitch. so. 46. Si les Jurors en un Leet recevont les Articles, and esteant
command a respon ^ al eux and present, ils refuse isint a fair, donque ils
serront amercie; uncore l' Amerciam^t de chescun Juior serra affeere solonque a
son offense. Issint en Assise ^ Novel disseisin touts les Disseisors serront
amercie, and chescun ser^a affeera per luy. Mes si un Ville soit amercie, la l'
Affeer^ace ser^a general, car la nest asc^ certain person nosm^, come en les
cases peravant dit. Et si un Jury en un Leet tax un amerciam^t, ceo suffist
sans asc^ Affeerm^t, car le Amerclam^t est le act del Court, and le Affeerm^t
le act del Jury. Co. lib. 8. f. 39, 40. b.

Affiance.
AFfiance est le plight del foy ent' home and feme sur un Agreement dun
Marriage dee^ sclemnize ent' eux; and affidare, de quel cest parol est derive,
est tant a dire come fidem ad alium dare. Et cest parol Assiance est use per
Littleton, Chap. de Dower, Sect. 39.

Afforest.
AFforest est, converter terre en Forest. Charta de Forest. cap. 1. and 30. An.
9 H. 3.

Affray.
AFfray venust del parol Francois ( effrayer) que signify terrere sive
horrificare; and issint un Affray poit estre sans parol ou buffe done and
issint cest parol est use e^ile Stat' ^ North. 2. E. 3. c. 3. Mes en nostre
livres c^ parol est plus foits confound ove le parol Assault, come appiert per
Lambert en son Eirenarch. lib. 1. c. 17. Mes uncore, come est la dit, ils
differont en ceo, q^ un Assault nest forsque un tort al party, mes un Affray
est un tort al bien public: and pur ceo un Affray est inquirable and
punishable en u^ Leet. Auxy un Assault est fait plus tossed forsque sur lun part:
mes un Affray est le combatre de plusors ensemble.

Age prier.
AGE prier est, quant Action est port verse un Enfant de Terre que il ad per
descent, la il monstra le matter al Court, and prayera que le Action demur
tanque a son plein age de 21 ans, and issint per agarde de Court le Suit
surcessera.

Mes en Brief de Dower and en Assise, and auxy en tiels Actions lou le Infant
est suppose a vener al Terre en demand de son tort demesne, il navera sa age.

Auxy nota, que sont plusors diversities de Ages. Car le Seignior avera aid de
son Tenant en Socage pur marrier sa file, quant la file est del age de sept
ans; and aid pur fair son fits and heir Chivaler, quant il est del age de
sept ans.

Feme que est Espouse al age de 9 ans, si sa baron morust seisie, avera Dower,
and nemy devant.

Auxy 14 ans est le age de feme, que ne serra en Guard, si el fuit de tiel age
al temps del mort son Ancestor; mes si el fuit deins age de 14 ans, and en Guard
son Seignior, donques el serra en Guard tanque al age de 16 ans. Et 21 ans est
le age de Heir male destre en Guard, and apres ceo horse de Guard.

Et auxy il est le age male and female de suer and destr^ sue des Terres que
ils ont claim^ per descent, and fair touts. manners de Contracts and Bargains,
nient dev ^ nt: m s si tiel enfant deins age de 21 ans done ses biens, and le
Donee eux prist, le enfant poit aver un Action de Trespass: mes auterment il
est sil deliver eux. Vide Coke l. 3. fol. 13. a. l. 6. f 3.

Agent and Patient.
AGent and Patient est, quant un home est le feasor de un chose, and le party
a que il est fait; come lou fe ^ ^ ^ endow luy mesme de la pluis belle part de
possession de sa baron. Issint si home ad dixe livers issuant horse de certain
ter^, and il disseise le Tenant del ter^ en Assise port per le Disseisee, le
Disseisor recoupera le Rent en le Damages; issint que ou le mesne profits del
ter^ en tiel case fueront al value ^ 13 livres, le Disseisee recovera forsque
trois livres. Auxy si un home endette a un auter, and puis fait le party a que
il est issint endette son Executor, and morust, le Executor poit retain tant
des biens del mort en ses mains come son Debt demesne amountera; and per ceo
deteiner il ^ st le Agent and le Patient, cesiacavoir, le party a que le Debt
est due, and le party que ceo paya.

Mes home ne serra judge en son cause demesne, com^ est resolve, Cok. lib. 8.
fo. 118. en Bonhams Case, Que les Censors ne povent estre Judges, Ministers,
and Parties; Judges a doner sentence ou judgment, Ministers a fair summons, and
Party de aver le moiety del forfeiture. Et com^t q^ Act de Parliam^t done a
asc^, a tener ou de aver conusans de touts manners des Pleas devant luy surda^t
deins son Manor de D uncore il tener^ null Plea a q^ il mesme est party; Quia
iniquam est aliquem suae rei esse juaicem.

Agist.
AGist semble de vener del Francois giser (i. jacere) ou del g ^ ster (i.
stabulari) un parol proper as Dames; and p^ ceo Budaeus lib. poster.
Philologiae, dit q^ Gist idem est quod Lustr' vel Cub ^ le. Et Agist en nor^e
Com^on Ley signify pre^der eins and de pasture les avers dun estranger deias
les Forests le Roy; and p^ ceo les Officers en le Forest q^ en tiel manner
prent eins avers, and collect les deniers p^ le pasturage ^ eux, sont appelle
Agistors, and le pasturage and herbage de avers est appel Agistment; q^ en un
large signification extend al touts man^ers del Com^on del Herbage de ascun
kind ter^, ou bois, ou les deniers que sont due and receive pur ceo cybien horse
de Forests come deins eux. Vide Manw. Forest leys, cap. 11. fo. 80.

Agreement.
AGreement est en cest manner define ou expound en Plowden's Commentaries:
Aggreamentum est compound de deux parolx, cestascavoir, de Aggregatio and
Mentium, cest adire, Agreement de ments. Issint q^ Aggreamentum est Aggregatio
mentium in re aliqua fac^ta vel facienda; and per le contraction de les deux
parolx, Aggregatio and Mentium, and per le corrupt and brief parlance ^ eux,
ils sont fait un parol, cestasc^, Aggreament', le quel nest aut' chose que un
union, copulation, and conjunction ^ deux ou plusors ments in asc^ chose fait
ou destr^ fait. (Veies apres en Testament.) Et cest Agreement est en 3 manners.

Le prim^ est un Agreement execut' en fait al com^encem^t.

Le second est un Agreem^t puis un act fait per auter, and est un Agreem^t
executed auxy.

Le tierce est un Agreem^t executory, ou destre fait en temps uncore a ven^.

Le prim^ q^ est un Agreem^t executed en fait al com^encement est tiel de que
mention est fait en le Star. de 25. E. 3. cap. 3. de Pannis, en le quart Star.
q^ dit que les biens and chooses achates, per Forestallers, que de ceo serront
attaints, soient forfeits al Roy, si le achator ent ust fait gree al vendor. En
quel case cest parol ( gree) que est auterm^t appel agreem^t, serra entende
Agreement execute, viz. payment pur les chooses.

Le second man^er Agreement est, lou un fait un chose ou act, and un auter
agree ou assent a ceo apres: come si u^ fait Disseisin a mon use, and apres jeo
agree a ceo, ore jeo serra Disseisor ab initio. Et tiel Agreement est un
Agreement puis un act fait.

Le tierce Agreem^t est, q ^ ^t ambideux parties a un temps, sont accords que
tiel chose serra fait en temps a ven^: and ceo agreement est executorie, entant
q^ le chose serra fait apres, and uncore la lour ments accord a un temps. Mes
entant que le performance serra apres, and issint le chose sur q^ l'agreement
fuit fait remain a fair, ceo Agreem^t serra dit executorie. Et ceo le Stat.
26 H. 8. Stat. 3. prove, ou il dit, Que chescun Vicar, parson, and autiels,
etc. devant lour actual possession ou meddling ove les profits de lour Benefice,
satisfiera, co^tentera, etc. ou agree era a payer al use le Roy les prim^
fruits, etc. Et si ascun tiel Parson, Vicar, etc ent' en actual possession,
etc. Ceo Agreement est destre entend executorie, come le common usage prove:
car est use q^ il, ove un ou deux ove luy, fait deux vel trois Obligations p^
ceo destre pay en certain iours apr^s Et cest Agreement executory est divide en
deux points: Un est Agreement executory q^ est certain al com^encement, come
est dit darrein devant del Primier-fruits.

Lauter est, lou le certainty ne appiert al primes, and les parties sont
accords que le chose serra perform ou pay sur le certainty conus: come si un
ven ^ al auter tout son Wheat e^ tiel tasse en son Barn nient thresh, and il
est agree parent' eux, que il payera p^ chescun bushel 3 s. quant il est thresh
clean and measure.

Aid.
AID est, quant Tenant a term de vie, Tenant en dower, Tenant per le courtesy,
ou Ten^t en tail apres possibility ^ issue extinct, est emplede; do^ques p^
ceo q^ ils no^t estare forsque p^ term vie, ils prieront Aid cestuy en le
Reversion, and Process serra fait per Brief verse luy, de vener and pleder ove
le Tena^ in defense del Terre, si voile, Mes ils covient que ils accord en
Plea, car sils vary, le Plea le Tenant serra prise, and donques l' Aid-prier
est en vain; mes sil ne vient al second Brief, le Tenant respondera sole.

Aux' Tenant p^ ans, Tenant a volunt, Tenant per Elegit, and Tenant per
Statute-Merchant averont aid de cestuy en le Reversion; and le Serva^t and
Baily de lour Master, quant ils ont fait asc cho ^ e loyalm^t en le droit lour
Master, averont aid.

Cest parol est asc^ foits apply al Subsidies, come en 14 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap.
1. Auter foits a un Prestation due de les Tenants a lour Seigniors; come p^
relief due al Seignior paramount, ou p^ le feisance de son fits Chival. ou p^
l' espousing de sa file. Glan. l. 9. c. 8.

Cest Aid le Roy, ou auter Seign^ per l'ancient Ley Anglit^rre, puit giser sur
lour Tenants, p^ fair son fit; Chival' al age 15 ans, and espouser sa file al
age sept an^, Reg. orig. f. 87. a. and a quel rateils pleiront. Mes le Stat. de
uest. 1. fait An. 3. E. 1. ordein un restraint p^ ascun grand ou large demand
fait per common persons, esteant Seigniors, en cest case, and ad lie eux a un
ceartain rate. Et le Statute ^ 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. c. 11. provide, que le rate
que est mise per le prim^ Stat. serra tenus en le Roy cybien come en auters
Seigniors.

Aid de Roy.
Aid de Roy est en semble case come est dit deva^t de common person, and auxy
en plusors aut' cases lou le Roy puit aver perde, com^t q^ le Tenant soit
Tenant en see simple, il avera Aid; come si un Rent soit demand verse Tenant le
Roy que tient en chief, il avera aid, and issint navera de aut' person.

Auxy lou un City ou Borough ad un Fee-farme del Roy, and asc^ chose est demand
verse eux que appertain al Fee-farme, ils averont aid pur ceo del Roy.

Auxy home avera aid de Roy en lieu de Voucher. Auxy le Bailiff, Collector and
purveyor del Roy averont aid del Roy, auxibien come les Officers de auters
persons.

Aile.
AILE est un brief que gift lou Terre descend de layel a son Nephews, viz.
fitz ou file del fitz del ayel; le pier esteant mort devant entry per luy, and
un abate, le Heir avera verse le Abater cel Brief.

Aler sans jour.
ALer sans jour est, (verbatim) ire sine die, cestascavoir, dee^ dismiss horse
del court, p^ ceo que nest asc^ aut' jour del Appearance assign.

Ale-Taster.
ALe-Taster est un Officer appoint and jure deins chesc^ Leet, de veier q^ le
due Assise soit observe de tout le Pane, Ale and Cervoise vendus deius le
Jurisdiction Leet.

Alien.
ALien est un Subject nee horse del ligeance de nostre Roy. Et il ne poit aver
ascun real ou personal Action concernant Ter^, mes en cheseu^ tiel Actio^ le
Tenant ou Dese^da^t puit plede que il fuit nee en tiel pais q^ nest deins le
ligeance del Roy, and dema^d Judgment, fill serra respondu.

Chesc^ Alien amie puit per le Com^on Ley aver and acquirer deins cest Realm,
perdone, chivi ^^ ns, ou aut' loyal voyes, as ^ treasure ou biens personal
quecunque cybien come asc^ ho^e Englois, and puit maintain asc^ Actio^ p^ y cel
Mes tei^s deins cest Realm ou Measons, si no^ solem^t p^ lour habitation, alie^
amies ne poie^t aver ne acquirer, ne maintain asc Action real ou personal p^
ascun Terre ou Meason, sinon q^ le meason soit pur lour necessary habitation.
Un Alie^ enemy ne poit maintain asc^ Act', ou acquir^ asc^ chose deins cest
Realm. Et les reasons p^ q^ Aliens nee ne sont capable de inheritance deins
Angleterre, sont;

Primerm^t, Les secrets del Royalm poie^t per ceo ee^ co^.

Secundment, Les Revenues del Royalm serront prise and enjoy per Estrangers nee.

Tiercem^t, Ceo voile tend al destruct' del Royalm. Primerm^t en le temps de
guerr^, car donq^s estra^gers poie^t fortify eux mesmes en le ever ^ l Royalm,
and co^buster le Commonweal. Secundm^t, en le te^ps peace, car per tiels mea^s
plusors Asie^s nee poie^t acquirer un grand part del inheritance and
franktenement del Royalm, per q^ la voile ensue un failer Justice, le supporter
^ l Commonweal, p^ ceo q^ Aliens ne poient estre return ^ Juries, ne jure p^
le trial de issues perent' le Roy and le Subject, ou perenter Subject and
Subject. Vide Coke lib. 7. Calvin's Case.

Alienation.
ALienation idem est quod alienum facere, ou de alter ou mitt' le possession ^
Terres ou auter chose de lun home al auter. Et en ascun cases home ad poier en
luy. mesme issint a fair, sans lassent ou license dascun auter and en ascun
nemy, Come si Tenant en capite alien son estate sans co^ge le Roy. donq^ per le
Stat. de 1 Ed. 3. cap 12. un reasonable Fine serra prise, ou al Common Ley
devant le dit Stat. les Terres and tenem^ts tenus en chief del Roy, and alie^
sa^s, co^gee, o^t este tenus forfeit. Et si Tenant le Roy q^ teigne e^ capite
intend de aliener al C. al use de D. and sur ceo si il purchase license de
aliener al C. and accordant il alien a C. al use de D. quel use nest mention e
le License: en cest case il payer^ forsque u^ Fin^, car est forsque un
Alienation, Cok. lib. 6. fol. 28. Mes si home voile alien^ terr^ en fee-simple
a un Meason de Religion, ou a un Corpse incorporate, covient a luy daver conge
le Roy de fair cest Grant ou Alienation, and le chief Seigniors queux tiels
Terr^ sont tenus, etc. auterm^t le terr^ issint alien en Mortmaine serra
forfeit per le Stat. de 15 R. 2. cap. 5.

Allay.
ALlay est le Temper ou mixture de Or and Argent ove plus base metal, pur
l'augmenter del pois de ceo entant que poit countervaile le charge del Roy en
le coynage. Cest parol est use en le Statute 9 H. 5. cap. 11. pur le payment
del Or Anglois per le pois le Roy.

Almner.
ALmner est un Officer del Hostel le Roy, and son Office est pur dispense les
Alms le Roy chescun jour; and a cest purpose il ad le collect' des touts
Forfeitures des Deodands, and des biens des Felons de se, que le Roy luy allow
p^ disposer e^ Alms as povers. Et de son Office, vide Fletam, l. 2. c. 22.

Almoin.
ALmoin, Veies Aumone.

Alnageor.
ALnageor est un Officer del Roy que per luy mesme ou per son deputy vey al
Assise de tout le Pane que est fait de Lane per tout le Terre, and a mitter
Signets, pur tiel purpose ordeignes, al eux 35 E. 3. Stat. 4. c. 1. Anno 3. R.
2. c. 2. Et il est destre accomptable al Roy pur chescun Pane que est issint
seal en un Fee ou Custom a ceo apperteignant.

Altarage.
ALtarage en Latin, Altaragium, signify Duties and Offerings al saint Altars,
mention 2 Cro. Rep. 516. que un Vicarage fuit endow ove ceo and petit disms.

Ambidexter.
AMbidexter est celuy que, quant un matter est en suit pernter homes, prist
argent de lun part and del aut', ou pur labor le Suit, ou tiels semblables; ou
sil soit del Jury, pur dire son Verdict.

Amendment.
AMendment est, quant Error est en le Process, les Justices poie^t c^ amen ^
apres Judgment. Mes si Error soit e^ Judgment done, ils ne poie^t amender ceo,
mes le party est mis al Bre^ de Error. Et en plusors Cases lou le default
appiert en le Clerk q^ escria le Record, il serra amend: mes tiels chooses que
vient per information del party, come le Ville, Mystery, and hujusmodi, ne
serra amend, car il doit informer uray a son peril.

Amercement.
AMercement pluis properment est un Penalty assess per les Peers ou pares del
party am^cie, pur un offense fait; come p^ default ^ Suit de Court, ou pur non
amend asc^ chose q^ il fuit appoint de redresser devant, ou pur tiel semblable
cause: en quel case le party que offend soy mist en le mercy del Roy ou
Seignior, and sur ceo cel Penalty est appel Amerciament.

Et la est un difference perenter Amerciam^ts and Fines, Kitch. 214. Car Fines
sont punishments certain, que cresceront expresment de ascun Statute; and
Amerciaments sont tiels que sont arbitrablement impose per les aff ^ eerors,
quel Kitch. semble a confirm^ fol. 78. en ceux parolx, Amerciament est affere
per Pares.

Auxy il appiert, Coke lib. 8. f. 39. que un Fine est touts foits impo ^ e and
assesse per le Court; mes Amerciament q^ est appel en Latin Misericordia, est
assesse per Pays.

Auter diversity la est: come si home soit convict devant le Vicount en le
County ^ un Recaption, il serra forsque amercie, mes sil soit convict de ceo en
le Common Bank, il serra fine. Et le reason de cest diversity est, Que le
County Court nest pas Court de Record, and pur ceo ne poit imposer un Fine, car
null Court poit imposer Fine mes tiel Court q^ est de Record, Coke lib. 8. fo.
41. a. Si le Defendant ou Tenant plead un faux Fait a luy, ou deny son fait
demesn^, and ceo est trove verse luy, ou sil, relicta verificatione, cognoscit
Actionem; il serra fine pur fauxism, Quia certi debemus esse de proprio facto.
Mes si ua deny le Fait son Ancestor, and ceo est trove verse luy, uncore il ne
serra fine, mes amercie solement, Quia de alieno facto. Co. lib. 8. fol. 60. a.
Vide pluis la.

Amercemement royal.
AMercement royal est, qua^t un Vicount, Coroner, ou auter tiel Officer del
Roy, est amercy per les Justices pur son misdemeaning en le Office, Quaere si
ne serra dit Fine.

Amoveas manus.
AMoveas manus. Veies Ouster le Mayn.

An jour, and waste.
AN jour, and wast, est un Forfeiture quant un home ad fait petit Treason ou
Felony, and ad Terres queux il tient de ascun common person, queux serra seisi
pur le Roy, and remain en son maines per la space de un an and un jour
prochein apres le Attain ^; and donques les Arbres serront defosse, les Measons
rases, and le Pastures and Prees airs and plowed; si non que il a que Terre
devenera per leschete ou forfeiture ne ceo redeem^ del Roy. Un chose le pluis
de greever le Offenders, and terrify auters de cader en autiel, en
demonstrance coment le Ley detest lour offense cy avaunt, issint que il execute
Judgment and punishment sur lour mute and mort chosez;

Aniente.
ANiente venust del Francois Aneantir, (id est) annihilare; car Aniente en
nostre Ley signify tant come frustrate ou defeat, and est use per Littleton,
Sect. 741.

Annates.
ANnates est un parol use en le Stat. 25 Hen. 8. cap. 20. and semble dee^ tout
un ove Primitiae: car issint Pol. Virgil. de Inventione rerum, lib. 8. cap. 2.
dit, Quod Annatarum usus multo antiquior est quam recentiores q ^ idam
scriptores suspicantur, and Annatas (more suo) appellant primos fructus unius
anni Sacerdotii vacantis, aut dimidiam eorum partem.

Annua pensione.
ANnua pensione est un Brief per que le Roy, aiant due a luy un annual Pension
de ascun Abbot ou Prior pur ascun de ses Chapleins que il voile nosmera, que
nest provide dun competent Benefice, ceo demand del dit Abbot ou Prior pur un
que est nosme en mesme le Brief, jesque, etc. and auxy luy comman ^, pur le
meux assurance de son Chaplein, a doner ses Letters Patents a luy pur icel.
Vide Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 231. ou poyes auxy veyer les nosmes de touts les
Abbeys and Priories que fueront lie a ceo en respect de lour foundation ou
creation, and auxy pur le form des Letters Patents usualment grant sur tiel
Brief.

Annuitie.
ANauitie est un certain Sum de money grant a un auter en Fee-simple, Feetail,
pur term de vie, ou pur term de ans, a receiver del Grantor, ou ses Heirs,
issint que null Franktenement est charge de ceo, de que home navera unques
Assise ou auter Action, forsque Brief de Annuity; and nest ascun Assers al
Heir le Grantee, a que il descendera.

La sont plusors differences perenter Annuities and Rents: Car chescun Rent est
issuant horse de Ter^, mes un Annuity nest, mes chargera le person,
cestascavoir, le Grantor ou ses Heirs, que ont Assets per descent, sinon que
special proviso soit al contrary: come Littl. Sect. 220.

Auxy pur un Annuity null Action gist^, forsque solem^t un Brief de Annuity verse
le Grantor, ses Heirs ou Successors: and cest Brief de Annuity ne unques gist
verse le pernor des profits, mes solem^t verse le Grantor ou ses Heirs. Lou pur
un Rent mesmes les Actions gisont envers le Tenant del Ter^, and ascun foits
envers celuy q^ est pernor del Rent, cestascavoir, verse luy que prist le Rent
torciousm^t. Auxy un Annuity nest destr^ prise pur Assets, pur ceo q^ nest asc^
Frankteneme^t en Ley. Et ne serra mis in Execution sur un Stat. Mercha^t, Stat.
Staple, ou Elegit, sicome un Rent puit. Doct. and Stud. cap. 30. Vide Dyer fol.
345. pla. 2. Auxy un Annuity ne poit estre sever, Co. li. 8. f. 52. b.
accordant al Meter la:

Annale aut debitum Judex nec separet ipse.

Anoysance.
ANoysance est un parol use en le Statute 22 H. 8. cap. 5. and signify nient
plus que Nuisance, and pur ceo vid. Tit. Nuisance.

Apostata capiendo.
APostata capiendo est un Bre^ direct al Viscount, pur le pren ^ del corpse du^
q^, aiant ent' and profess asc^ Order de Religion, relinquy le dit Order, and
wave son Meason, and est Vagrant en le pais: and sur un Certificate ceo matter
per le Sovereign del dit Meason de Religion fait en le Chancery, and le prier
del dit Bre^, il avera ceo direct al Viscount p^ la apprehender luy, and
redeliver al dit Sovereign del Mease ou son loyal Attorney. Vid. le form del
Bre^ en Fitz. Not. Bre. 233. c.

Appeal.
APpeal est lou un ad fait Murder, Robbery, ou Mayhe^, donq^s le feme cestuy q^
est tue avera un Action de Appeal verse le Murderer; mes fill and feme adonques
son prochein Heir male avera le Appeal a ascun temps deins lan and jour apres
le fact.

Auxy cestuy que est issint rob' ou maimed avera son Appeal: and si le
Defendant soit acquit, il recovera damages verse le Appellour and l' Abettors,
and ils averont imprisonm^t du^ an, and ferra fin al Roy. Appeal de Maihem nest
en manner forsque Action de Trespass, car il ne recovera forsque damages.

Appeals sont com^ence deux voyes, ou per Brief, ou per Bill. Per Brief, quant
un Brief est purchase horse del Chancery per un ho^e verse aut', luy com^andant
q^ il appealera un tierce home dasc^ Felony ou auter ^ f ^ ence per luy commit,
and a trover pledges que il ceo ferra ove effect; and cest Brief est destre
deliver al Vicount destre Record.

Appeal per Bill est, quant u ^ home de luy mesme done son accusation dauter
home en escript al Vicount ou Coroner, and prist sur luy le burden ^ appealing
cestuy que est nosme en le dit escript. Appellant est le Plaintiff en le Appeal.

Appendant and Appurtenant.
APpendant and Appurtenant sont chooses que per temps de prescription ont
belong, appertain, and sont join al u^ aut' principal chose, ove que ils
passont and va com^ accessar^ al m^ principal chose, (...) virtue ^ ceux
parols, Pertinentiis, come Ter^, Advowsons, Com^ons, Piscaries, Chimins,
Courts, and diverse tiels se^blables, al u^ Man^, Meason, Office, ou tiels aut'.

Apportionment.
APportionment est un dividing en parts un Rent le quel est dividable, and
nient entire ou whole; and entant q^ le chose horse de quel il fuit destre pay
est separate and divide, le Rent auxy ser^ divide, aiant respect a les parts.
Sico^e un home ad un Rent-Service issuant horse de Terres, and il purchase
parcel de le Terre, le Rent serra apportion accordant al value del Terre.

Issint si ho^e tient son Terre dun aut' (...) Homage, Fealty, Escuage, and
certain Rent, si le Seign^r de q^ Terre est tenus purchase parcel del Terre, le
Rent serra apportion.

Item si home lessa terres p^ ans, reservant Rent, and apres un estrange
recover part de le ter^ donques le Rent serra apportion, cest adire, divide,
and le Lessee paiera, aiant respect a ceo q^ est recover, and a ceo que ore
remain en ses maines accordant al value.

Mes u^ Rentcharge ne poit ee^ apportion, ne chooses q^ sont entire: Sicome un
tient Ter^s per service de payer a son Su^r annuelment a tiel Feast un Chival,
Esperver, u^ Rose, un Cherry, ou tiels semblables; la si le Su^r purchase
parcel de la ter^, cest Service est tout ale, pur ceo que un Chival, Esperver,
Rose, ou un Cherry, and tielx auters, ne poyent estre divide on apportion, sans
damage al entierty.

En asc^ cases Rentcharge serra apportion: Come si home ad Rentcharge issuant
horse delter^, and son pere purchase parcel de les Terres charges en fee, and
morust, and cel parcel descend a son fits que ad le Rentcharge; ore cel charge
serra apportion solonque le value de la terre, p^ ceo que tiel portion de la
ter^ purchase (...) le pere ne vient al fits (...) son fait demesne, mes (...)
descent, and (...) course de Ley.

Common appendant est de common droit and severable; and coment que le Commoner
en tiel case purchase parcel del terre en que le Common est eppendant, unc^ le
Common serra apportion: mes en tiel case Common appurtenant and nemy appendant
per purchase est extinct. Coke lib. 8. fol. 79.

Appropriations.
APpropriations fuer^, quant ceux Measons (...) Religion, and ceux Religious ^
sons, come Abbots, Priors, and tiels semblables, avoie^t le Advowson ^ ascun
Parsonage al eux and a lour Successors, and obtain license de le Pape,
Ordinary, and Roy, q^ ils mesmes and lour Successors de ceo en avaunt doient
estre Parsons la, and il serra en avaunt un Vicarage, and q^ le Vicar servera le
Cure. Et issint al com^encem^t Appropriations fueront faits solement a ceux
persons Spirituals que puissoient minister les Sacraments, and dire divine
Service, come Abbes, Priors, Deans, and tiels semblables. Apres per petit and
petit ils fueront enlarge and fait as auters, come nosment al Dean and Chapter,
quel est Corpse corporat, consisting ^ plusors, and Corpse ensemble ne puissont
dire divine Service; and, que pluis fuit, al Nuns que fueront Prioresses ^ asc^
Nunnery quel fuit chose horrible, entant que ils ne puissoient minister
Sacram^ts, ne preach, ne dire divine Service al Parochians.

Et tout ceo fuit sur pretense de Hospitality and maintenance de ycel. Et de
supplier ses defects, un Vicar fuit devise, quel serroit Deputy al Priors, ou
Dean and Chapter, and auxy al darrein al dit Abbes, and auters a dire divine
Service, and il averoit pur son labor forsque petit portion, and ils a quel le
Appropriations fueront fait reteigneront le grand revenues; and ils feloyent
riens p^ ceo, (...) means de quel Hospitality decay en le lieu ou il doit estre
chiefment guard, nosmement e^ le Parish ou le Benefice fuit, and ou les profits
cressoyent: and issint il continue tanque a cest jour, si non pis, ven que non
seulment les Freres and les Nuns, mais les Laiques tant homes q^ femes en ont
la possession, al grand hinderance del Erudition, ai impoverishment de le
Ministry, and le infamy de la Gospel and les Professors de ycel.

Le Vicar avera un certain portion del Benefice, and le Abbe and le Covent
ferront Parsons, and averont les auters profits. Cest appelle un Appropriation,
and donques le Abbe, and le Covent serront Parsons imparsonees: mes tiel
Appropriation ne poit ee^ fait a commencer en le vie le Parson, sans son assent.

Et apres l' Esglise fuit appropriate, donques fuit ceo un Incident inseparable
al Meason de Religion a q^ ceo fuit issint appropriate. Et p^ ceo ou les Terres
des Templars en Angleterre fueront done (...) les general parols dun Act (...)
Parliament (...) 17 E. 2. al Hospitallers, fuit adjudge, Que les Hospitallers
per le dit Act naveront l' Appropriation, car ceo fuit inseparablement annex al
Corporation des Templars: quel chose consistent en inseparable privity, per
general parols dun Act de Parliament ne serra transfer al auters. Coke lib.
7. fol. 13. a.

Mes si tiel Advowson del Parsonage soit recover (...) ancient title, donques
l' Appropriation est adnulle. Et est appelle Appropriation, p^ ceo q^ ils
teigne les profis a lour proper use.

Approvement.
APprovement est, lou un home ad Common en le Waste terre (...) Seignior, and
le Sn^r enclose part del Waste ter^ p^ luy mesme, relinquishant nie^t obsta^t
sufficient Com^on, ove egresse and regresse, pur les Com^oners. Cest Enclosure
est appel Approvement. Vide ^ e Reg. Jadic. fol. 8, and 9.

Approver.
APprover ou Appel ^^ est cestuy que ad fait ascun Felony, le quel il confess,
and a ore appel ou approve, cest adire, accuse auters que fueront Coadjutors ou
A^dors ove luy en fesans, (...) ceo ou aut' Felonies, le q^l chose il voile
approver. Et cest proof est destre ou (...) Battle, ou per le Pais, a son
election que approve. Cest accusation est plusors fo ^ ts fait deva^t le
Coroner, que ou est assign al fe ^ on per le Court a pre^der and recorder c^
q^ il dit; ou est appel (...) le Felon luy mesme, and require pur le bone del
Prince and Public weal, a recorder ceo q^ il dirra. Le Serement del Approver
quant ^ il com^ence le comba ^, come auxy le proclamation per les Heralds,
appearont en Crompt. page ult.

Si home que est de bone same foit appeal (...) un Approver, ^ q^ il est prise
and deteign en prison, uncore il poit aver un Brief destre direct al Vicount
luy com^anda^t a ^ mitter le Party appeal dee^ bail ^ bone Mainpernors. Mes si
home appeal (...) un Approver soit deteign en Prison, and apres le Approver
devie, la il puit sue un Brief direct al Visc^, a ^ mitter l ^ y de aler a
mainprise sur bone Surety, fill ne soit notorious Felon, com^t q^ il ne soit
(...) bone fame. Fitz. N. B. 250. d.

Approvers le Roy.
APprovers le Roy sont ceux que ont le demiser des Demeans le Roy deins petits
Manors le Roy pur le plus avail le Roy. Et des tiels Approvers poies veier en
le Stat. 2. E. 3. c. 12. que fuero^t homes mises en diverse Counties p^ increase
les Farms des Hundreds and Wapentakes. Et est a veier en le Stat. 1 E. 3. c.
8. que les Visc^ appel eux mesmes les Approvers le Roy.

Arbitement.
Arbitrament est un Award, Determination ou Judgment, quel un ou plusors sont
al request de deux parties al meines, pur and sur ascun Det, Trespass, ou auter
Controversy ewe ^ enter eux. Et cest appel en Latin Arbitratus, and Arbitrium;
and ils que font le Award ou Arbitrament sont appel Arbitri, en Anglois
Arbitrators.

A chesc^ Arbitrament cinq^ chooses sont incident; sc. Matter de Controversy,
Submission, Parties al Submission, Arbitors, and Render suis del Arbitrament.
Dier 217. pl. 60. Si l' Arbitrament soit fait, q^ lun party alera quit de
touts Actions que lauter ad verse luy, and riens est dit des Actions que il ad
verse lauter; cest Arbitrament est void, p^ ceo que fuit fair de lun part, and
nemy de lauter 7 H. 6. c. 40.

Quant un Submission a un Arbitrem^t est general (...) touts Actions, etc. and
le Arbitrat' fait un Award solement de un, uncore ceo bien poit estoyer ove le
generality des parols q^ la ne fuit forsque un Cause dependant ^ ent' eux; car,
Generale nihil certi implicat. Et si le Arbitrem^t serroit p^ ceo avoid,
donques plusors Arbitrem^ts poient ee^ void; car lun poit conceal un Trespass
fait, ou aut' cause de Action done a luy, and issint avoid l' Arbitrem^t. Auxy
null party al asc^ Arbitrem^t ser^ ^ ceo lie, finon (...) le Agard foit a luy
deliver, coe est Cok. l. 5. f. 103. Vide Cok. l. 8. f. 98.

Arches.
ARches (sive Curia de Arcubus) est le principal and plus a^cient Consistory q^
ap^ tain al Archevesque de Can. and est appel de les Arches del E ^ glise lou
le dit Court est tenus, viz. Ecclesia B. Mariae de Arcub e Londres. Et de cest
Court mention est fait en Stat: 24 H. 8. c. 12. touchant Appeals.

Arms.
Arms, en le intelligence del Ley, est extend a toutes chooses q^ un home, en
son ire ou fury, prend en sa main pur jetter ou ferier un autre. Crom. Just.
P. f. 65. a.

Array.
ARray est le disposing ou ordering du Jury ou Enquest de hom^s q^ sont
impannel sur asc^ cause, 18 H. 6. c. 14. de q^ veint le verb, al arrayer un
Panel. Vet. N. B. f. 157. cest adire, a mitter horse un ^ aut' les homes q^
sont impanel. Le Array serra quash, ib. Per Statute chesc^ Array en Assise
devoit destr^ fait quater jours devant. Brook. tit. Panel, number. 10. A challenge
le Array, Kitch. 92.

Arrain.
ARrain est a mitter un chose en or ^ ou en son lieu: Sicom^ il est dit arrain
un Bre^ de Novel Disseisin en un County en que il devoit estre port (...) trial
devant les Justices de cel Cireuit. Vit. N. B. fol. 109. Et en tiel sense Litt.
ad use mesme l' parol, le Lessee arraign^ un Assise de Novel Disseisin. Auxy un
prison^ est dit destre arraign^, quant il est indict and mis a son trial.

Arrerages.
ARrerages sont Duties arere nient pay apres le jours and temps en que ils
fueront dues, and doyent aver estre pays, soyent ils Rents de Manor, ou ascun
auter chose reserve.

Arrest.
ARest est quant un est pris and restrain a son liberty. Null serra arrest p^
Det, Trespass, Detinue, ou auter cause de Action, mes (...) virtue dun Precept
ou Com^andment horse de asc^ Court. Mes p^ Treason, Felony, ou debruser del
Peace, chesc^ hom^ ad authority ^ arrester sans Garrantie on Precept. Et lou
serra arrest p^ Felony, il covient, q^ ascun Felony soit fait, and que il
soit suspect de m^ le Felony; ou auterment il poit aver envers luy que issmt
luy arrest u^ Brief (...) faux Imprisonment. Et quant asc^ ho^e est arrest pur
Felony, il serra amesne a le Goal, la a demurre tanque al prochein Session,
p^ estre indict, ou deliver (...) Proclamation.

Arretted.
ARretted est cestuy q^ est appel devant ascun Judge, and charge ove un crime.
Asc foits cest use pur impute ou laid unto: Sicome null folly puit estre arret a
luy que est deins age, Lit. cap. Remit. Cest parol poit vener (...) Latin parol
Rectus, car Bracton ad cest Phrase, ad rectum habere malefactorem, issint que
il poit estre charge and mis a son trial. Et en aut' lieu il dit, Rectatus de
morte hominis.

Assach.
ASsach semble estre un British parol, and signify un estrange espece (...)
Excuse ou Purgation per les Sacraments de trois cents homes. An. 1. H. c. 5.

Assart.
ASsart est un offense commit en le Forest per attachment le Boys que sont
thickets ou coverts del Forest and (...) feasance de eux cy plain com^ le ter^
arable. Cest Assart del Forest est pluis grand offense ou trespass q^ puit
estr^ fait en le Forest al Vert ou Venison conteignont en ceo Wast, ou pluis:
Car ou Waste del Forest nest forsq^ le felling and succiding del Covert Boys,
q^ poit en temps recrescer; un Assart est un arrachm^t (...) le root, (...) q^
ils ne unques poie^t crescer. Manw. part. 2. cap. 9. n ^. 1. Un Brief (...) Ad
quod dampnum poit estre agard, lou un home voile sue pur un license dassart son
ter^ deins le forest, and fair c^ Several pur Agriculture; issint que nest
asc^ offense sil soit fait per license. Regist. orig. f. 257.

Assault.
ASsault (du Francois Assaillir) signify un violent faco^n de Injury offer a
la person de un ho^e, (...) un nature plus exte^due q^ Battery; per ceo q^ il
poit estre co^mis en offrant un coup, ou (...) les parols menaceants. Lamb.
Eiren. l. 1. cap. 3.

Assayer.
ASsayer est un Officer del Mint appoint per le Statute 2 H. 6. c. 12. destre
present al receipt del Bullio^, come un party indifferent enter le Master del
Mint de le Merchant pur determine le uray value de Bullion solonque le Ley.

Assets.
ASsets est en deux sorts; lun appel Assets per deseent, laut' Assets enter
maines. Assets per des ^ ent est, lou un home est oblige en un Obligation, and
morust seisie de terres en Fee-simple, queux descend a son Heir, donques cest
ter^ serra appel Assets, cest adire, sufficient de payer cest dett; and (...)
cest means le Heir serra charge cy avaunt q^ le ter^ issint a luy desce^d voil
stretch. Mes sil alien devant que le Obligation soit mise en suit, il est
discharge.

Auxy quant un home seisie de ter^ en tail, ou en droit ^ son feme, alien ceo
ove Garranty, and ad en value tant terre en Fee-simple, que descend a son Heir,
q^ est auxy Heir en Tail, ou Heir al feme: ore le Heir, apres le mort son
Ancestor, port u^ Brief de Formedon, ou Sur cui in vita, p^ le terre issint
alien; donques il serra Barr^, per reason dun Garranty, and terre issint
descend, que est tant en value come ceo que fuit vende, and issint per ceo il
and receive ascun ^ judice. Pur ceo cest terre est appel Assets per descent.

Assets enter maines, est qua^t un home en dett (com^ deva^t est dit) fait
Executors, and relinquist a eux sufficient de payer ou ascun com^odity ou
profit est venus al eux en droit lour Testator; cest appel Asets en lour maines.

Assignee.
ASsignee est celuy a que un chose est appoint ou assign^ destre occupy, pay,
ou fait; and est touts foits tiel person que occupy ou ad le chose issint
assign en son droit demesne, and p^ luy mesme. Et ^ Assignees il y sont deux
sorts, nosment, Assignee en Fait, and Assignee en Ley.

Assignee en Fait est, quant un Lease est grant al un and a ses Assignees, ou
sans cest parol, Assignees, and le Grant' done, grant, ou vend le dit Lease al
aut', il est son Assign^ en Fait. Assignee en Ley est chesc^ Executor nosme per
le Testator en son Testam^t. Come si un Lease soit fait al u^ home and a ses
Assignees, (sicome est avantdit) and il fait ses Executors, and morust sans
assignm^t del Lease al asc^ auter; les Executors avera mesme le Lease, p^ ceo
q^ ils sont ses Assignees en Ley. Et issint est en autors semblables cases.

Assise.
ASsise est un Bre^ que gist ou asc^ hoane est mis horse de son ter^ ou
tenements, ou (...) asc^ profit and prender en certain lieu and issint
disseisie (...) son Franktenem^t. Franktenem^t a asc^ ho^e est, lou il est
seisie (...) terr^ ou tenem^ts, ou profit a pre^ ^ er en Fee-simple, Fee-tail,
pur term de son vie demesne ou p^ aut' vie. Mes Tenant pro Elegit Tenant (...)
Stat. Merchant and Stat. Staple poie^t aver Assise, com^t que ils nont
Franktenement; and cest ordein per diverse Statutes.

En Assise il covient touts ^ oits que il soit un Disseisor and un Tenant, ou
auterment le Brief abatera.

Auxi lou un ho^e est disseisie, and recovera (...) Assise de Novel Disseisin,
and puis est auter folts disseisie (...) mesme le Disselsor, il avera verse luy
un Brief (...) Redisseisin direct al Visc^ de fair inquisition; and si trove
soit le Redisseisin, il serra mis en prison. Aux' si home recovera per Assise
de Mortdauncastor, ou (...) aut' Jury, ou (...) default, ou (...) reddition,
and sil soit auterfoits disseisie, il avera donques u^ Brief de Post D ^
sseisin; and cestuy q^ est pris and imprison p^ Redisseisin, ne serra deliver
sans especial com^andm^t le Roy. Vides les Statutes Mert ^ n c. 3. Mar ^^
bridge c. 8. and Westminster 2. c. 26.

Auxi il est un aut' Assise, nosm assise de Fresh force, and gist lou ho^e est
disseisie (...) tenem^ts queux sont devisables, come en le City de Londres, ou
auter Boroughs ou Villes que sont Enfranchises; donques le Defendant viendra e^
le Court del dit Ville, and enter son Plaint, and avera un Bre^ direct al Major
ou Bailiffs etc. and sur ceo passera un Jury en manner de Assise de Novel
disseisin. Mes il covient q^ il ent' son Plaint deins quadragint jours, ut
dicitur, ou aut'm^t, il serra miss a le Com^on Ley. Et si les Ministers delay
Execution, donques le Plaintiff avera un auter Brief daver Execution, and sicut
alias, and un Plures, etc. Vide Littleton cap. 10.

Assise de darreine Presentment.
ASsise de darrain Presentment. Vide Quare impedit.

Auxi est un Assise de Nuisance appel Assisa Nucumenti.

Assisa ultimae Praesentationis.

Assise de Mortdancestor.
ASsise de Mortdancesior, Vid. Tit. Cosinage.

Association.
ASsociation est un Patent mis (...) le Roy, ou de son motion demesn^, ou al
suit del party Plaintiff, al Justices de Assise, pur aver auters persons
associes al eux de prender le Assise: Et sur ceo Patent de Association, le Roy
mander^ son Bre^ as Justices de Assise, eux com^andant per icel de eux admitter
q^ sont issint mis.

Si le Roy fait trois Justices Assise, and puis un de ceux devie, ore le Roy
poit fair un Patent a un auter de Association, de associer luy a les deux, en
lieu de cestuy que est mort; and un Brief, que serra close, direct a les deux
Justices que sont en vie, luy admitter. F. N. B. 185.

Assoyl.
ASsoyl venust del Latin absalvere, and signify pur bail ou discharge ascun
del Excommunication; and issint est use per Stamford, Pleas de Coron. lib. 2.
cap. 18. fol. 71. b.

Assumpsit. Vide Nude Contract.
ASsumpsit est un voluntary promise fait per parol, per q^ home assume ou prist
sur luy a payer ascun chose al auter. Cest parol contein en ycel ascun verbal
Promise fait sur consideration, que les Civilians express per plusors parols,
accordant al nature del Promise; ceo appellant asc^ foits Pactum, Promissionem,
auter foits Sponsionem, Pollicitationem, ou Constitutum.

Attach.
ATtatch est un Prisure ou Apprehending (...) com^and ou Brief. La sont ascuns
d ^ fferences perenter un Arrest and un Attachment; car un Arrest proceed horse
del inferior Courts per Precept, and Attachment horse del superior Courts (...)
Precept ou Brief. Lamb. Eiren. lib. 1. cap. 16. Auxy un Arrest gist solement
sur le Corpse (...) un home, lou uu Attachment est ascun foits sur ses biens
solement; come Kitch fol. 279. b. dit, que home poit attach un Vache, and en
auter lieu, que home poit estre attach per 100. Barbits; and il est ascun foits
agard sur le Corpse and Biens ensemble al un and m^ le temps.

Attachment differ a un Capias, car Kitchen fol. 79. b. ad ceux parols, Nota
que en Court Baron home serra attach per biens, and ne issera Capias la: Per
que il semble Attachment est pluis general, extendant al prisure des biens, lou
Capias extend al prisure del Corpse solement.

Un Attachment differ a un Distress, come appiert per Kitch. fol. 78. a. ou il
dit, Process en Court Baron est Summons, Attachment, and Distress, que sont
Process al Common Ley.

La est auxi un Attachment de Privilege: and ceo est en deux mann^s; ou donant
poyer ^ apprehender un hom^ en un lieu privilege, ou (...) virtue dun Office
ou Privilege; com^ de appeller un aut' a cel Court a q^ il mesm^ est
attendant, ct en respect de quel il est privilege. Novel Livre de Entries,
fol. 431. a.

Et la est Process appel Foreign Attachment, q^ est use al attacher les biens
del Foreigners trove diens ascun Liberty ou City, pur un Dett due al party
mesme. Et (...) le customs dascu^s lieus, hom^ poit attach biens en les maines
dun Estranger: Come si A. devoit al B. 10 livres, etc. devoit al A. un auter
sum de argent, B. poit attacher les biens de A. en les maines de C. a luy
satisfier ou en part ou en tout, come le Dett est.

Auxy la est Attachment del Forest, que est un Court la tenus chescun 40 jours
per tout le an: En que le Verderors nont ascun auctority, forsque de receiver
and inroller les Attachments del offenders encounter Vert and Venison prise per
les auters Officers, q^ ils poie^t ee^ present al prochein Justice seat e^ Air
Manwood part 1. p. 93. cap. 22.

Attainder.
ATtainder est un Conviction dascun person dun crime ou fault don't il ne fuit
convict devant: Sicome un home fait Felony, Treason, ou tiels semblables, and
de ceo est indi ^, arrain^, and trove guilty, and ad Judgment, donques il est
dit destre Attaint. Et ceo poit estre deux voyes; le un sur Appearance, le
auter sur Default. Le Atta nder sur Appearance est per Confession, Battle, ou
Verdict: le Attainder sur Default est per process tanque il soit utlage.

Attaint.
ATtaint est un Brief que gist lou faux Verdict est done per douze homes, and
Judgment done sur ceo, donques le party verse que ils avoient pas, avera cest
Brief verse les douzes homes; and quant ils sont a issue, il ferra try per vint
quarter Jurers, and si faux Verdict soit trove, les douz Jurors sont attaint;
and donques le Judgment serra, que lour Prees serront eyrs, lour Measons
debruses, lour Bois subvertes, and touts lour Terres and Tenements fo ^ feit al
Roy: Mes sil passa encounter celuy que port cest attaint, il serra imprison,
and grievousment ransom al volunt le Roy. Vide le Stat ^ 23 Hin. 8. cap. 3.
Attaint auxy est quant Judgment est done en Treason ou Felony.

Attendant.
ATtendant est ou un doit un Duty ou service al a ^ ter, ou come il fuit depend
sur auter: Come si la soit Seignior, Mesme, and Tenant, le Tenant tient del
Mesne pur u^ denier, le Mesne tient ouster (...) deux deniers, le Mesne release
al Tenant tout le droit que il ad en le terre, and le Tenent morust; sa feme
serra endow del terre, and el serra Attendant al Heir del tierce part dun
denier, and nemy del tierce part del deux deniers; car el serra endow del mieux
possession de sa baren Auxi ou le feme est endow (...) le Guardian, el serra
Attenaant al Guardian, and al Heir a son plein age.

Attournment.
ATtournment est, quant un est Tenant pur term de vie, and cestuy en
l'Reversion ou Remainder gra^ ^ a son droit ou estate a un aut', donques il
covie^t q^ ^ e Tenant p^ vie agree a ceo; and cest agreement est appel
Attournment. Car si cest ^ y en le Reversion grant son estate and son droit a
u^ auter, si le Tenant p^ vie ne attourna, riens pas (...) le grant.

Mes sil soit grant per Fine en Court de Record, il serra compel (...)
attourne. Et vide de ceo apres, Titulo Quid ^^ ris clamat, and Littl. lib. 3.
cap. 10.

Attorney.
Attorney est un design per auter home a fair ascun chose en son lieu, le
quel ^ est issint ad define, Atturneys sont tiels Persons q^ per consent,
commandment, ou request, caveont, veieront al, and prendront sur eux le charge
de besoigns de au ^ ers homes en lour absence.

Et lou en ancient temps ceux (...) authority e^ Courts o^t aver ceo e^ lour
arb trem^t, ou ils voilent ^ mitter homes de appearer ou suer (...) ascun aut'
q^ eux mesmes, come appiert ^ F. N. B. 25. en le Brief de Dedimus potestatem de
Attornato faciendo, ou il est monstre, q^ hom^s fuer^ chase a procurer les
Briefs ou Letters Patents del Roy, al appointer Atturneys pur eux; il est ore
provide ^ diverse Stat. q^ il serra loyal issint a fair sans asc^ tiel circuit.
Et la est grand diversity de Briefs e^ le table del Register, ^ q^ le Roy
com^and ces Judges al admit' (...) Atturnys.

Per quel mea^s al darrein la fueront cy plusors imperite Atturneys, and cy
plusors mischiefs ^ eux, q^ un Act fuit 4 H. 4. 18. ordeigne p^ lour restraint
que les Justices examineront eux, and mittront horse le imperites: and An. 33 H.
6. c. 7. q^ la ne serront mes un certain number de eux en Norfolk and Suffolk.

En queux cas ^ s home a cest jour poit aver u^ Attorney and en queux nemy,
veies F. N. B. en le lieu devant cite.

Attorney est ou general, ou special, Attorney general est cestuy que est
design a touts nostre affairs ou Suits, com^ le Attorney general del Roy,
Attorney general del Duke, Crom. 105. Attorney special ou particular est cestuy
que est employ en un ou plusors chooses particularm^t specifies. Atturneys
ge^eral sont faits deux voyes, ou per les Letters Patents del Roy, on per
nostre appointment devant Justices en Air en overt Court. Veies Glan. l. 11.
c. 1. Brit. 126.

Curia de Audience.
CUria de Audience est un Cur^ appertient al Archevesque de Canterbury, de
legal authority; avec le Curia de Arches, bien q^ inferieur en digni ^ y and
antiquity. De quel vous pois lire pluseurs en un Livre entitule, De antiquitate
Ecclesiae Britannicae Historia.

Audita Querela.
AUdita Querela est un Brief que gist lou un est oblige en un
Estatute-Merchant, Estatute-Staple, ou Recognisance, on lou Judgm^t est done
verse luy p^ Dett, and son corpse en Execution sur c^; donques sil ad un Releas,
ou aut' sufficient matter destr^ discharge del Execution, mes and jour en Court
de ceo pleader, donques il avera cest Brief verse cestuy que ad recover, ou verse
ses Executors.

Auditeur.
Auditeur est un Officer del Roy ou del auter grand person, que per annuel
Examination del Accounts de tout inferior Officers accountable, fait un general
Livre, que monstre le difference perenter lour Receptions ou Charge, and lour
Payments ou Allocations. Veies le Stat. 33 H. 8. c. 33.

Est auxy un auter sort ^ Auditors assign (...) asc^ Court en quel un
Defendant est adjudge ^ Accounter, queux pristeront l'account, and mise ceo en
form en escript, and donque ceo est enrol, and le Plaintiff plede a ceo, and le
Defendant reply si mistier soit, and issint aleront al issue sur diverse points
and particulars del account.

Average.
AVerage est le Service que le Tenant doit a son Seign^, destre fait (...) les
Avers le Tenant: and semble destre derive del parol Averia, p^ ceo que est le
Service que les Avers le Tenant ^ form pur le Seignior (...) carriage ou
auterment. Auxy ceo parol ad un auter signification, and est mult use en le
Statute 32 H. 8. c. 14. pur un certain Contribution, que Merchants and auters
payont proportionalment pur les perdes de eux que ont leur biens ejects en un
tempest p^ le safeguard del Niefe ou des biens and vifes de eux que sont en le
Niefe.

Averment.
AVerment est, lou un home plead un Plea en Abatement del Brief, ou Barr^ de
Action, que il dit est prist de prover come le Court voit agard. Cest offer de
prover son Plea est appel un Averment.

Auxy est un Brief appel Brief de Averment, que est fait horse ^ ascun Court del
Ley a Westminster Sale, ou un Action Depend quant le Viscount sur un Distringas
return petits issues donques les Judges al Assizes poit cause ceo destre
enquise (...) un Jery si le Viscount poit return pluis issues des terres le
Defendant, and si soit trove q^ il poit, donques il doit return pluis issues a
compel le Defendant de appear al suit del Plaintiff, ou a fair ceo que le
Distringas require luy a fair.

Averpeny.
AVerpeny est, quietum esse de diversis denariis pro arreragiis Domini Regis.

Augmentation.
AUgmentation suit le nosme de un Court erect en le 27 An. del Roy Henry le
huict. Et le cause de ceo fuit, q^ le Roy puit estre vierment use touchant les
profits de tiels Religious Measons and lour Terr^ que fueront done a luy (...)
Act ^ Parliam^t mesme le an. nient imprimee. Pur le dissolving le quel Court le
fuit un Act sait en le Parliament tenus en le prim^ an del Reign del Roign
Mary, Sess. 2. Cap. 10. que el puis mis en Execution per sa Letters Patents. Le
nosme del Court surde (...) ceo, Que les Revenues del Corone fueront tant
augment ^ le Suppression des dit Measons quant le Roy reserve al Corone, and
nient done ou vende al auters. Mes le Office de Augmentation remain a cest
jour, en que la sont plusors Records de grand use and importance.

Aumone.
AUmone, ou Tenure en Almoin, est Tenure per Divine Service; car issint Brit.
dit, fol. 164. Tenure en Aumone est terre ou tenements do ^ e a Aumone, don't
ascun Service est retenue al Feoffor ou Donor.

Auneel weight.
AUncel weight fuit un ancient manner de poiser en Angleterre, (...) le pender
des balences hooks al chescun fine ^ un baston, le quel le party elevate sur
son digit, ou ove sa main, and issint discern le equality and difference des
chooses poises. Mes ceo weight esteant subject al mult deceit, diverse Statutes
fueront faits q^ ceo ouster, com^ le Statute 25 E. 3. c. 9. and 34 E. 3 c. 5.
and 8 H. 6. c. 5. and auters. Et fuit appel Auncel weight, quasi Handsale
weight.

Ancient ou ancient Demesne.
ANcient Demesne est un certain Tenure per quel touts ceux Manors queux fueront
en maines de S Edward le Confessor, and les queux il fist escrier en un Livre
appel Doomsday sub tit ^ lo Regis, and touts les ter^ tenus de dit Manors sont
tenus; and les Tena^ts ne serra implead horse del di ^ Manors, and sil soyent,
ils poyent monstre le matter, and abater le Brief: mes sil responder al Brief,
and plead, and Judgment soit done, donques les terre sont devenus frank-see a
touts jours, Tantque ceo Judgment est reverse per Bre^ de Disceit. Rast. Ent.
100, 221. 2 R. 3. 1. 11 H. 4. 36. 21 E. 3. 20. Auxy touts Tenants e^ Ancient
demesne sont frank (...) Toll p^ touts chooses concernont lour viand and
husbandry en aucient demesne, and p^ tiels terres ils ne serra mis ne empan^el
sur ase^ Enquest. Mes touts les terres en Ancient demesn^ queux sont en maines
le Roy sont frank-fee, and pleadable al Com^ Ley. Veies plus apres en le Title
Sokmans.

Avoir de pois.
AVoir de pois est tant adire, very sive justi ponderis; Et signify en nostr^
Ley deux chooses; Primerment, un kind (...) pois different (...) ceo q^ est
appel Troy Weight, que and forsque 12 ounces al liver, lou le Avoir de pois
contein 16. Secondment, signify tiel Merchandises queux sont poises ^ cest
weight, and nemy per Troy weight. Come est a veier en le Stat. de York, 9 E. 3.
and 27 E. 3. c. 9. Stat. 2. c. 10. and le Stat. (...) Gloucester, 2 R. 2. c. 1.

Avowrie.
AVowrie est lou un prist Distress pur Rent ou auter chose, and lauter sua
Replevin; donques celuy que avoit ceo prise justifiera e^ son Plea pur quel
cause il prist ceo: and si il prist ceo en son droit demesne, il doit ceo
monstre, and issint avow a le prisel, and ceo est appel son Avowrie. Mes sil
ceo prist en ou p^ droit ^ un auter, donques quant il avoit monstre le cause,
il ferra conusance del prisel, come Bailif ^ ou servant a celuy en q^ droit il
prist ceo.

Avowterer.
AVowterer est un Adulterer ove que un feme Covert continue en Adultery, le
Crime est appel Avowtry. 43 E. 3. 19.

Awme.
AWme est un Vessel que contain 40 broces de vine Rhenish and est mention en
Statute fait 1 Jac. 23.

B Backberind Thief.
BAckberind Thief est un Laron prise ove le man^, cest adire, aiant ceo trove
sur luy (esteant pursue ove le Hue and Cry) le quel il ad emblee, soit il mo ^
ey, linen, woollen, ou aut ^ stuff: mes il est pluis propermm^t dit, quant il
est prise portant tielx chooses q^ il ad emblee en un bundle ou fardel sur son
Dorse.

Manwood en part 2. ceo note (...) un des quater circumstances ou cases en que
un Forester poit arrest le Corpse ^ asc^ offender encounter Vert ou Venison en
le Forest; q^ux sont, Dog-draw, S ^ able-stand, Back-berind, and Bloody-hand.

Badger.
BAdger est tant adire com^ Bagger, del Francois parol Baggage, id est,
Sarcina: Et est use ove nous p^ un que est license de achater Corn ou auters
Victuals en un lieu, and de eux transporter al auter; and tiel home est exempt
en le Statute fait An. 5 and 6 E. 6. cap. 14. del punishment ^ un Ingrosser
deins ceo Statute.

Bail.
BAIL est, quant u^ hom^ est prise ou arrest p^ Felony, suspicion (...) Felony,
indict ^ Felony, ou asc^ tiel case, issint que il est restrain (...) son
liberty, and esteant (...) le Ley bailable, offera Surety al eux q^ ont
auctority de luy Bailer; queux Sureties sont oblige p^ luy al use le Roy en
certain sum^ (...) arge^t, ou corpse p^ corpse, q^ il appiera devant les Justices
^ Jail-delivery al prochein Sessions, etc. Donques sur les Bonds (...) ceux
Sureties (come est avantdit) il est bail, cest adire mis al liberty, tanque le
jour appoint p^ son Appearance.

Manwood in le prim^ part ^ son Forest Ley, page 167. dit, Que la est u^ grand
diversity ^ ent' Bail and Mainprise; car ceftuy que est mainprise est touts
foits dit destre a large, and daler a son liberty demesn^ horse de guard, puis q^
il est mis al Mainprise, jesque le jour ^ son appeara^ce, (...) reason (...)
common Sum^ons, ou auterm^t Mes nest issint ou home est mis al Bail (...) quat'
ou deux homes, ^ le Sn^r chief Justice en Air del Forest, jesque un certain
jour: car la il est touts foits account (...) le Ley dee^ en lour guard and
custody p^ le temps, and ils poient, sils voilont, tener luy en guard ou en
prison au c^ temps, ou auterm^t a lour volunt: issint q^ il q^ est bail ne
serr^ dit (...) le Ley dee^ a large, ou a son liberty demesne.

Bailement.
BAilment est un Delivery de chooses, soyent ils Escrips, Biens, ou Stuff, al
auter, ascun foits destre redeliver arrere al Bailor, cest adire, al celuy q^
issint deliver, ceo asc^ foits al use del Bailee, cest adire, de luy a q^ il
est deliver; and asc^ foits auxy il est deliver a u^ tierce person. Cest
delivery est appel un Bailment.

Bailiff.
BAiliff est un Officer que appertient a un Manor, p^ order le husbandry, and
ad authority de payer Quit-rents issuant horse del Man^or, succider arbres,
repair les Measo^s, fair pales, haies, distrain avers damage feasant sur le
terr^, and diverse tiels semblables. Cest Offic^ est celuy que les ancient
Saxons appel u^ Reeve, car le nosme Bailiff ne fuit donques conus enter eux,
mes vient' eins ove les Normans, and est appel en Latin Villicus.

La sont deux aut' sorts de Bailiffs, cest adire, Bailiffs errant, and Bailiffs
de Franchises. Bailiffs errant sont ils q^ le Vicount fait and design daler
e^viron le County a executer Briefs, a summon le County Sessions, Assizes, and
tiels s ^^ blables. Bailiffs de Franch ^^ sont tiels que sont desig ^^ chescun
Sn^r deins son (...) berty, a fair tiels offices deins son Precincts q^ le
(...) errant fait a large en le County. Cest Bailiff distrain pur Amerciaments
assesse en les Courts tenus deins le Manor de quel il est Bailiff. Mes si ti
^^ Court est (...) prescription (...) tenus deins un mois apres (...) Feast,
and le Seneschal (...) ceo apres le mois, and en (...) Court assesse un Fine ou
Amerciament, and le Bailiff distrain p^ ceo; le party q^ est (...) sint
distrein puit aver u^ (...) de Trespass verse le Bailiff.

Bank.
BAnk (en Francois Banque, ^. Mensa) est usualment pri ^ pur un Selle ou Bank
(...) Judgment; come Bank le Rey, Bank de Common Pleas, (...) Common Bank,
Kitchen fol. 102. appel auxy en Latin Bancus Regius, and Bancus Communium
Placitorum. Crompt. Jur. fol. 67, and 91.

Bank le Roy.
BAnk le Roy est un Court a Westminster lou les Pleas del Corone, Debts,
Trespasses and personel Actions, Errors, Audita Quer ^ la, etc. sont determine.

Bankrupt.
BAnkrupt, per le Statute 1 Jac. c. 15. est issint describe; touts and chescun
tiel ^ son and persons, usa^t, ou q^ useroit le Trade de Merchandise ^ voye
(...) Exchanges, Barterie, Chevisa^ce, ou auterm^t e^ gross, ou (...) queront
son, sa, ou lour Trade de viver (...) emption eu ve^ditio^, and esteant un
subject nee de cest Realm, ou asc^ des dominion del Roy, ou denize^, q^ al
ascun temps citra le p ^ im^ jour (...) cest pre ^ e^nt Parliam^t, ou al asc^
te^ps e^ apres departer a le Royalm, ou com^ence a retain^ son ou sa meason ou
measons, ou auterm^t (...) absent' luy ou sa m^, ou prendra sanctuary, ou
suffer luy, ou sa mesme volu^tarim^t destr^ arrest (...) asc^ Debt, ou asc^
chose nie^t cressant ou due p^ argent deliver, wares vend, ou asc^ aut' just ou
loyal cause, ou bo^ co^siderac^ ou purposes, cu ad ou voile suffer luy ou sa m^
destre utlage, ou do^ luy ousa m^ al prison, ou volu^tarim^t ou fraudule^tm^t
ad ou procurera luy ou sa mesme dee^ arrest, ou ses ou sa biens, argent ou
chattels, destre attach ou sequestre, ou departera de son ou sa meason inhabit,
ou faiera ou causera destre fait ascun fraudulent Grant ou Conveyance de son,
sa, ou lour Terr^s, Tenements, biens ou Chattels, al intent ou (...) q^ son,
sa, ou lour Creditors, esteant Subjects nee, come avantdit, serra ou poient
estre defeat ou delay per le recovery de lour just and voyer Dett, ou esteant
arrest p^ Dett, apres son ou sa Arrest gisera in prison siz moys ou pl' sur ce^
arrest, ou ascun aut' Arrest ou Detenc^ en Prison pur Dett, and gisera en
Prison size moys sur tiel Arrest ou Detention, serra account and adjudge u^
Bankrupt a chescu^ intents and p^poses. Veies le Stat. 14 Car. 2. ca. 23.

Banneret.
BAnneret est un Chivaler fait en le Camp, ove le Ceremony del amputer le
point de son Standard, and feasant ceo sicome un Banner. Et tiels sont allows
pur display lour arms en un Banner en le army le Roy, come Barons font. Et que
tiels fueront procheins as Barons en dignity, appiert per le Statute fait en le
5 an R. 2. State. 2. ca. 4. per quel Statute semble que tiels Bannerets fueront
ancientment appels per summons al Parliament.

Bannum.
BAnnus sive Bannum est un parol frequent and ordinary enter les Feudists, and
signify un Proclamation, ou asc^ publiq^ notice done asc^ chose. Bra. l. 3.
tra. 2. cap. 21. fait. mention de Banno Regis p^ un Proclamation, ou silence
fait per le Crier deva^t le congresse des Champions en un combat. Mes nous
nosm^ cest parol Banns principalm^t p^ le Publication des Contracts matrimonial
en les Esglise devant Marriage.

Bargain and Sale.
BArgain and Sale est, quant un Recompense est done per ambideux les parties al
Bargain: Com^ si un bargain and vend son Ter^ al auter p^ arge^t, icy le ter^
est un Recompense a luy p^ le argent, and le arge^t est un Recompense al aut'
p^ le Terre; and ceo est un bone Contract and Bargain. Et per tiel Bargain and
Sale Terres poient pass sans Livrie de seisin, si le Bargain and Sale soit per
Fait indent, seal and inrolle, ou en le County lou le terre gist, ou en un des
Courts del Roy de Record al Westminster, deins size moys prochein apres le date
de mesme le Escript indent, etc. accordant al Statute en ceo case fait en le 27
an. ^ H. 8. cap. 16.

Barcary.
BArcary signify un Farm meason come semble, Rast. Ent. Tit. Assise en corpse
politic

Barmote.
BArmote sont diverse Courts nient de Record deins le Hundred del Peak in
Derbyshire pur le regulation des Groves, Possessions and Trade del Miners and
Plumb.

Barony.
BArony est quoddam Dominium regale ubi Breve Domini Regis non currit, and
tentum de Domino Rege. Rast. Ent. Tit. Assise en Office 1.

Bar.
Bar est, quant le Defendant en ascun Actio^ plead u^ Plea q^ est un
sufficient Respons, and ceo adnulle l'Action de Plaintiff a touts jours.

Et ceo poit estre divide en Bar al common intendment, and Bar special. Bar
al common intendment est un ordinary ou general Bar, que communement disable
le Count ou Plea del Plaintiff. Bar special est ceo que est pluis que
ordinary, and happa en le case en question, sur ascun special circumstance del
fact: Come un Executor, esteant sue p^ le Dett de son Testator, plede que il ad
riens en ses maines al jour quant le Brief fuit purchase; ceo est un bone Bar
al common intendm^t, ou prima facie: mes uncore le case poit estre tiel, que
plusors biens poient ven^ a ses maines puis cel temps, que si le Plaintiff poit
monstre per voy de Replication, donq^ sinon que le Defendant ad un pluis
special Plea ou Bar (...) alledger, il est desire condemn e^ l' action. Veies
Plow, fo. 26, 28. Et en mesme le sense Bar^ est auxy divide e^ Bar material ou
special, and Bar alarge. Kit. fo. 68.

Bar est auxy en regard del effect divide en Bar perpetual, and Bar
temporary. Perpetual est ceo que quash le Action a touts jours: Temporary est
ceo que est bone pur le present, and puit apres faller: come, Plene
administravit est bone Bar jesque puit appearer q^ plusors biens viens puis al
maines des Executors: queux auxy tient p^ le Heir, que en un Acc^ de son
Ancestors Dett plede Reins p ^ r descent. Veies Brook tit. Bar. nu. 23.

Bar fee.
Bar fee est un Fee de vint deniers, q^ chescu^ prisoner q^ est acquit de
Felony, paler^ al Viscount ou Gaolar: and de ceo veies 21 H. 7. 16. b.

Barretry.
EST un parol use en Pollices (...) Insurance, and signify dissentions and
quar^els perenter les Offic^ and Seamen.

Barretor.
BArretor est Common Mover, Excitor, ou Maintainer de Suits, Quarrels, ou
parts, ou en Courts ou en Pays: En Courts de Record, and en le County, Hundred,
and aut' inferior Courts: En Pays, en trois manners; primerm^t, en disturbance
del peace, secondm^t, en prisel ou deteiner des possessions des measons, terr^,
ou biens, etc. q^ sont en question ou controversy, non solem^t per force, mes
auxy per subtilty and deceit, and pluistost en suppression de verity and droyt;
tercem^t, per faux inve^tion and sowing (...) Calumniations, Rumors, and
Reports, faisant discord and disquiet surg' inter ses vicines. Veies pluis ^
ceo, Co. lib. 8. fol. 36, 37.

Barter.
BArter semble de vener del Francols parol Barate (i. e.) circumvenire: and
cest parol est use ove nous pur le Exchange des Wares pur Wares, and est
mention en les Statutes 1 R. 3. cap. 9. and 1; Eliz. cap. 7.

Base fee.
TEner en Fee Base est, a tener a volunt le Seignior. Et un Base Fee est auxy
lou ascun ad Estate en terre per cy long temps come auter avera heirs de son
corpse; de quel Estate veies Plow. en Walsinghams Case fol. 557.

Bastard.
BAstard est celuy que est nee de ascun feme nient espouse, issint que son pere
nest conus per le order del Ley, and pur ceo il est dit Filius populi.

Quant especial Bastardie est allege, il serra try per le Pays, and nemy per
l'Evesque. Mes generalment Bastardie allege serra try per le Certificate del
Evesque.

Et si un Feme soit gross de Enfant per son Baron, que morust, and el prist
auter Baron, and apres le enfant est nee, cest enfant serra dit le enfant de
primer baron. Mes si el fuit privement enseint al te^ps del mort sa primer
Baron, donques il serra dit le enfant de second Baron. Sed quaere, and veies le
opinion de Thorp, 21 E. 3. 39.

Auxy si hom^ prent feme que soit grossement enseint per ascun auter que ne
fuit sa baron, and apres le Enfant est nee deins les Espousels; donques il
serra dit le enfant de baron, mesque il fuit nee forsque un jour apres les
Espousals.

Baston.
BAston est un parol Francois, and significat Baculum; mes en nr^e Statutes est
prise pur un des servants del Gardein le Fleet, q^ attend les Courts le Roy ove
un colored Baston, pur le prender (...) eux al guard que sont com^ise (...) le
Court, and pur le attender sur eux q^ estea^ts priso^ners so^t permises per
aler alarge (...) license. Et issint est use en le Statutes 1 R. 2. c. 12. and
5 Eliz. c. 23.

Battle.
Battle est un ancient Trial en nostr^ Ley, q^ le Defendant en u^ appeal (...)
Murder, Robbery, ou Felo^y, poit eslier cestascovoir, a combater ove l'
Appellant, pur proof sil soit culpable del Felony ou non: quel Combat sil
succeed cybien del part le Defendant, que il vanquish le Appellant, il alera
quit, and luy barrera de son Appeal a rout jours. Mes si un soit indict de
Felony. and un Appeal est port sur mesme le Indictment, la le Defendant ne
gagera le Bartall. Battle auxy poit estre en un Brief de Droit, come est en
Paramour's Case, Dyer, 301. pla. 41, 42. ou les Champions fueront eslies, and
la Battle agard, and les Champions fueront (...) Mainprise and Jures de
performer le Battle al Totchil en Westminister; mes per default de appearance
en le Demandant riens fuit fait en ceo.

Battery.
Battery est un act que tend al Breach del peace del Royalm; sicom quant un
home assault and batter u^ auter, ceo est encounter le Ley and peace del
Royalm, le quel ordeigne, Que null hom^ serra son Judge demesne, ou Reve^ger de
son private tort, mes ceo laisera al censure del Ley, que est touts foits prist
de oyer and redresser les droitural and just querels de chescun hom^: pur q^
cestuy q^ est issint assault poit ou inditer lauter party, que sur ceo serra
sin^ al Roy, ou aver son Actio^ ^ Trespass de Assault and Battery verse luy (car
chescun Battery imply un Assault) and recover tant en costs and damages que le
Jury voile doner a luy per lour Verdit; and le Defendant sur cest Indictm^t
ferra fine al Roy, and le Action ^ Trespass voile giser cybien devant come
apres le Indictment. Mes si le Plaintiff en tiel Action fist le prim^ asfault,
donques le Defendant alera quit, and le Plaintiff serra amerce al Roy pur son
faux Suit. Et est destre observe que le Record del Conviction del party per
Indictment poit serve p^ evidence en le action de Trespass port sur mesme le
Assault and Battery.

Mes nient obstant que le party avera un double punishm^t p^ tiel offense, cest
adire, serra, punish al Roy and al party; uncore ascuns y sont que en respect
de lour natural, and auters q^ en respect ^ lour civil power and auctority
ouster aut', e^ un reasonable and moderate man^er poie^t eux chastiser,
correcter, and batter; come le Parent lour Puer, le Master son Servant ou
Apprentice, le Jailer ou son Servant les turbulent priso^ers, le Offic^ cestuy
q^ est arrest, and ne voile autm^t obeyer. Auxi hom^ poit justify le batture
du^ auter e^ defense (...) son person demesn^, ou (...) l' queso^ (...) so^
fem^, pere, mier^, ou master. Et hom^ poit justify le batture que u^ aut' en
defense (...) ses biens, and en maintenance de Justice. Mes est destre note,
Que en ceux cases, si hom^ ne soit urge and constrain per un necessary cause,
il ne poit justify le fait.

Beacons and Seamarks.
SOnt Fews maintain sur les coasts del mere a preventer Shipwracks and
Invasions. Co. 4. Inst. 148. order ^ Commissioners del Roy.

Bedell.
BEdell est derive del Francols parol Bedeau, q^ signify le Messenger dum
Court, ou un q^ cite homes a ceo pur appear and responder. Et Manwood ca. 23.
f. 221. a. dit, que un Bedell del Forest est un Officer que ala per tout le
Forest semble al special Bailiff le Viscount.

Est auxy un Collector des Rent p^ le Roy. Plo. Com. 199. 200.

Benefice.
BEnefice (Beneficium) est generalm^t pris pur ascun Living Ecclesiastiq^, soit
Dignity ou aut': come An. 13. R. 2 Stat. 2. c. 2. ou Benefices sont devise en
elective, and de don.

Besaile.
BEsaile est un Brief que gist pur le Heir; lou son Besaile fuit seisie jour
que il morust, ou morust seisie de terre en Fee-simple, and un Estranger enter
jour del mort le Besaile, ou abate apres son mort, le Heir avera cest Brief
verse tiel Disseisor ou Abator: and veies de ceo Fitzh. N. B. 221. d.

Bewpleadre.
BEwpleader est un Brief sur le Statute de Marlebridge, and gist ou le Viscount
ou auter Bailiff en son Court voile prender u^ Fine del party Plaintiff ou
Defendant, p^ ceo que il ne pleadera bellement, etc. Et le Brief serra direct
al Viscount mesme, ou al Bailiff, ou cestuy q^ voil demand cest Fine; and est
come un prohibition a luy, com^andant luy que il ne demandera tiel Fine, and
puit estre sue per tout he Hundred, ou per tout le County, come semble, lon il
voile demand tiel manner ^ Fine (...) eux. Fitz. N. B. 270. a.

Bigamie.
BIgamie fuit un Counterplea object quant le Prisoner demand le Benefit del
Clergy, cestascavoir, son Livre come nosmement, que il que demand le
privilege del Clergy fuit marry a tiel feme en tiel Lieu, deins riel
Diocese, and que el est mort, and q^ il ad apres marry un auter feme deins
mesme le Diocese, ou deins ascun auter Diocese, and issine Bigamus. Ou sil
and estre forsque un temps marry, do^ques adire, q^ el que il espouse est, ou
fuit un Viefe, cest adire, la Relict dun tiel, etc. Le quel chose serra try
per le Evesque de le Diocese ou le Epousels sont allege. Et esteant issint
certify per le Evesque, le prisoner perdera le Benefit del Clergy. Mes al
cest jour, per force de le Act fait 1 E. 6. c. 12. cest null Plea, mes que il
puit aver son Clergy ceo nient obstant. lisint est Brook. titulo Clergy,
placito, 20. al mesme purpose.

Bylaws.
Bylaws sont orders faits en Court-Leets ou Court-Barons per le com^on consent
p^ le bien (...) eux. Et sont les feasors de eux q^ sont appels Bylaws, quasi
Birlaws, ou Bawrlaws, de parol Germanols Bawr, id est, Rusticus; issint que
Bawrlaws ou Bylaws est tant adire com^ Leges Rusticorum.

Bilinguis.
BIlinguis en general est un hom^ ove u^ double langu; un ^ ^ il est com^unem^t
use pur cest Jury q^ passont perenter un home (...) Angleterre, and un Alien de
que part convient ^ e^ homes de Angleterre, and part Estrangers. Et p^c ^ o est
enact per le Statute (...) 28 E. 3. c. 13. Que si asc^ debate happa destr^ sur
le packing de Lane devant le Major del Staple, ent' les Merchants ou Ministers
del mesme, sur ceo, de prover la verity de ceo, Enquest serra prise: and si
lun party and laut' soit Denizen, il serra try per Denizens; ou si lun party
soit Denizen, and lauter al ^ en le Moiety (...) l'Enquest ou del proof serra
D^nizens, and lauter Moiety d ^ Aliens.

Bill.
BILL est la mesme chose ove un Obligation, f ^ rsque quant il est en Anglois,
il est com^unement appel un (...) en Latin, un Obligation. Auxy un Declaration
en escript, q^ express ou le grievance and injury que le Plaintiff ad su ^^ er
per le party de q^ le plaint est fait, ou asc^ fault per luy com^se contre
asc^ Ley ou Statute de le Royalm. Per un Bill nous maintenant entendons un
single Bond sans Condition; per un Obligation, un Bond ove un Penalty and
Condition, West. part. 2. Symbol. tit. Supplications, sect. 52.

Billa vera.
BIlla vera est le Endorsement del grand Inquest sur ascu^ Presentm^t ou
Indictment q^ ils trovont estre probablement voyer.

Blackmail.
BLackmail est un parol use en le Stat. 43 Eliz. c. 13. and signify u^ certain
rate des Deniers, Blees, Cattle, ou auter consideration, done per les povers
homes en le North parts de Angleterre, as homes (...) grand nosm^ and alliance
en ceux parts destre per eux pertects del eux q^ usualm^t rob and embler la.

Black rod.
BLack rod est le Huissier appurtein a tres Noble Order ^ Jarter; issint appel
de la Black rod q^ il port en son main. Il est auxi Huissier (...) la Meason
des Peers en Parlam^t.

Bloodwit.
BLoodwit est, quietum ess as Amerciamentis de Sanguine fuso; and quae
teneantur Placita in Curia vestra, habebitis Amerciamenta inde provenientia;
quia ( Wit) en Anglois est Misericordia en Latin.

Bloody hand.
BLoody hand est l' apprehension ^ un Trespasser en le Forest verse Venison, ove
ses maines ou asc^ part (...) luy embrues en sank, com^t q^ il ne soit trove
chasing ou hunting. De quel veies Manw. par. 2. c. 18.

Bockland.
BOckland en temps de Saxons fuit ceo terr^ q^ nous a ceo jour appellom^
Franktenem^t, ou ter^ tenus per Charter; and fuit per ceo nosme distinguish del
Folkland, q^ fuit terre tenus per Copy.

Bona notabilia.
BOna notabilia lou un home devy ayant biens al value de 5 l. en diverse
Diocesses, donque le Archievesque doit commit Administration; and si ascun
inferior Evesque grant ceo, est void. 37 H. 6. 27, 28. and 10 H. 7. 18. Dyer
305.

Bordlands.
BOrdlands signify le Demesnes que Seigniors tenent en leur maines demesne, p^
le maintenance de leur Bords ou Tables. Bracton l. 4. tract. 3. c. 9. number. 5.

Borow.
BOrow (q^ ovesque nous signify un ancient Ville, com^ appiert per Littleton,
sect. 164.) en u^ parol derive ou del Fra^cois Burg, id est Pagus, ou del Saxon
parol Bo hoe, id est, Pignus, p^ ceo q^ en ancient temps vicines dun Ville
deveignont Pledges lun p^ lauter: and (...) ceo venust Headborow, p^ le chief
Pledge ou Borhoe-Aldere, que nous appellomus le Borow-holder ou le Bursholder.

Borow E ^ glish.
BOrow English est un custumary Descent del Terres ou Tenements en quelques
lieus, per la quel ils vient a la pluis june fits, ou si le proprieteur ad null
issue, a le pluis june friar; com^ en Edmunton. Kitch. in fol. 102.

Borowhead.
BOrowhead. Veies Headborow.

Bote.
BOte est un veil parol, and signify Help, Succor, Aid, ou Advantage; and est
com^unem^t join ove un aut' parol, q^ signification il augm^t; come ceux,
Bridgebote, Burgbote, Firebote, Hedgebote, Plowbote, and diverse tiels
semblables, p^ queux significations veies e^ lour proper Titles.

Bottomry vulgo Bomry.
EST quant un Master ^ un Neise en case de necessity gage ceo p^ denyers p^ le
use de le Neife.

Bribor.
BRribor (Fr. Bribeur, i. Mendicus) semble (...) signifier luy q^ pilfer les
biens des aut' hom^s. An. 28 E. 2. Stat. 1.

Brief.
BRief (Breve) signify plus proproperm^t e^ nostre Ley, le Process que issuist
horse del Chancery ou auter Court, commandant le Visc^ de summoner ou attacher
A. p^ responder al Suit B. etc. Mes pius largem^t est prise p^ ascun Precept
del Roy en escript south Seal, isiuant horse (...) asc^ Court, per q^ il com^and
ascun chose dee^ fait pur le furtherance del Justice and bone order. Et ils
font appel Briefs (Brevia) p^ ceo q^ ils briefm^t comprehend l' cause del
Actio^, and rem brevit' enarra^t. Er asc^ ^ eux sont Originals, and ascu^
Judicials, come poies veier alarge en le Register des Bre^s.

Broadhalpeny.
BRoadhalpeny en ascun Copies Broadhalfpeny, hoc est, quietum esse de q ^ adam
consuetudine exacta pro Tabulis levy ou Boords en Faires ou Markets; and ceux
q^ esteont enfranchised per le Charter le Roy de cest cust ^ m ont cest parol
mise e^ lour Let' Patents: per reason (...) quel, a cest jour le Enfranchisem^t
mesme (p^ ^ le brevity (...) elocution) est appel Broadhalfpeny.

Broker.
BRoker semble de vener del parol Francois Broieur, id est, Tritor, cestuy q^
grind ou rumper un chose en petit parcels. Et le voyer office dun Broker, come
appiert per le Stat. falt 1 Jac. c. 21. est de bar^, contriver, fair and
concluder bargains ent' Merchants and Tradesmen. Mes le parol est ore auxi
appropriate as eux que achate and vende vieux and broken apparel and
Household Stuff.

Brugbote.
BRugbote (and en ascuns Copies Bridgebote) est quietum esse de auxilio dando
ad reficiendum Pontes.

Bull.
BULL est un Instrum^t issint appel, grant per l'Evesque ^ Rome, enseal ove un
Seal de plumbe, and conteinent en c^ ses Decrees, Com^andments, ou aut' Acts,
accordant al nature del chose p^ que il est grant. Et ceux Instruments ont
estre cy devant use and de force en cest Terre: mes per le Statute de 28 H. 8.
c. 16. fuit enact, Que touts Bulls, Breves, Faculties, and Dispensations, de
quelque nosme ou nature que il fuit, ad ou obtain del Evesque de Rome, serront
tout ousterment void, and del null effect. Vide Rastal. 328. C. D.

Bullion.
BUllion venust del parol Francois Billon, que est le lieu lou Or est try. Et
issint Bullion est prise en les Statutes faits en 27 E. 3. St. 2. c. 14. and en
4 H. 4. St. 1. c. 10. p^ le lieu a que Or ou Argent est port destr^ try ou
excha^ge. Mes Bullion est auxy prise en le Statute 9 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 2. p^ Or
ou Argent en le Mass ou Billet.

Burbreach.
BUrbreach est, quiet' esse de Transgressionibus factis in Civitate vel B ^ rgo
contra pa ^ e ^.

Burgage.
TEn^ e^ Burgage, est a ten^ sicome les Burgers teign^t ^ Roy ou (...) auter
Seign^r, Terres, ou Tenem^ts re ^ da^t a luy un certain Rent per an; ou
auterm^t lou un aut' hom^ q^ Burgers tient dasc^ Seign^r Terres ou Tenem^ts en
Burgage rendant a luy un certain Rent.

Burghbote.
BUrghbote est, quietum esse de auxilio dan ^ o ad faciendum Burgum, Casirum,
Civitatem, Muros prostrat'.

Burgh English.
BUrgh English, ou Borough English, est u^ Custom en un ancient Borough, que
si un hom^ ad issue diverse fits, and morust, uncore le puisne fits solem^t
inherit', and avera touts les Terr^s and Tenements q^ sueront de son pere,
(...) que il morust seisie deins mesm^ le Burgh, per descent, come Heir a son
pere, per force del Custom de le mesme le Burgh.

Ceo tenure est auxy de Copyhold Estates per Custom de diverse Manors.

Burglarie.
BUrglarie est, quant un debruse and enter en le meason un auter en le nuit,
ove felonious intent de robber ou occider, ou de fair auter Felony; en queux
cases, nient obstant il import riens, uncore il est Felony, p^ que il serra
pendue. Auterm^t est sil soit en le jour, ou que il debruse le meason e^ le
nuit, and ne entra pas en ceo a cest temps.

Mes si un Servant conspire ove auters de robber son Master, and a ^cel intent
il over les doors and senestres de son Master en le nuit p^ eux, and ils vient
en le measo^ per cest voy; cest Burglarie en les estrangers, and le Servant est
un Laron, mes nemy un Burgler. Et ceo fuit le opinion de Sir Roger Manwood,
Chivaler, Seignior chief Baron de le Exchequer, a la quarter Sessions tenus en
Canterbury en January 1579. 21 Eliz.

Buttlerage.
EST un veiel Duty a Roys de cest Royalm p^ vine import per Aliens. Moor Rep.
833.

C Cablish.
CAblish enter les Escrivers des les Forest Leys signify Brushwood. Man. p.
84. Cromp. Ju. fol. 165.

Cantred.
CAntred est cybien en Gaul come un Hundred en Angleterre; car Cantre en le
British league signify Centum. Le parol use an. 28 H. 8. c. 3.

Capicitie.
Capacity est, quant home, ou Corpse politic ou corporate, est capable a done
ou prender ter^s ou auter chooses, ou a suer Action: Sicom^ un Alien nee ad
sufficient Capacity a suer e^ asc^ personal Actio^; mes e^ real Action est bo^
Plea. adir^ il est Alien nee, and prier sil serra respondu. Die. f. 3. pl. 8.

Si home enfeoffe un Alien and un auter home al use de luy, ou etc. semble q^
le Roy avera l' moiety del ter^ a touts jours, per reason del Incapacity del
Alien. Dyer fo. 283. pla. 31.

Per le Common Ley null home ad Capacity (...) prender Dismes forsque Spiritual
persons, and le Roy, q ^ i est persona mixta: mes Lay-home, q^ nest capable ^
Dismes e^ perna^ce, fuit uncore capable (...) discharge de Dismes al Common Ley
e^ son ter^ demesne cybien come Spiritual ho^o. VI. Cok. l. 2. f. 44.

Cape.
CApe est un Bre^ judicial touchant Plea (...) terres ou Tenements, issint
appel (sico^e les plusors (...) Briefs sont) de cest parol q^ en luy m^ port le
pluis especial intention ou fine de ceo. Et cest Bre^ est divide e^ Grand Cape
and Petit Cape; q^ux ambideux prendo^r des chooses im^ovables, and semble a
disagree en ceux points. Primerment, p^ ceo q^ Grand Cape gift devant
Appearance, and Petit Cape puis. Secundment, per le Grand Cape le Tenant est
summon a respon ^ al Default, and ouster al Demandant; Petit Cape sum^on le
Tenant a respon ^ al default solem^t, and p^ C^ est appel Petit Cape en le Veil
N. B. 161, 162. Uncore Ingham dit, que il nest appel Petit Cape p^ ceo q^ il
est (...) petit force, mes p^ ceo q^ il est petit Brief en parols.

Cest Brief semble a co^tein e^ c^ un Process ove les Civilians appel Missio in
possessionem ex primo and secund ^ Decreto: Car sicom^le prim^ Decree seisist
le chose, and le second donast ceo (...) luy q^ fist le second default en son
Appearance; issint cest Cape seisist le ter^, and auxy assign ousler al party un
jour ^ Appearance, a quel sil ne vient eins, le ter^ est forfeir. Uncore la est
difference perre^t ceux deux Courses del Common and Civil Ley; car cest Misseo
in possessionem extend a toucher cybien biens movables come immovables, lou un
Cape extend solement al immoveables.

Secondment, en ceo, Que le party esteant satisfy de son demand, le residue
est restore a luy que defaulta: mes per le Cape tout est selfie sans
restitution.

Tiercem^t, Cestuy est al use del party agent, le Cape est al use le Roy. Veies
Bract. l. 5. tract 3. c. 1. number. 4, 5, and 6. Regist. Judic. f. 2. a.

Cape ad Valentiam.
CApe ad Valentiam est un Bre^ (...) Execution, and est issint define en le
Veil Not. Brev' f. 161, 162. Cest Brief gist ou le Tenant est impleade de
certain terres, and il vouche a Garrantie un auter, verse que les Summons Ad
warrantizandum ad este agarde, and le Vouchee ne vient eins al jour done:
donques si le Demandant recover verse le Tenant, il avera cest Brief envers le
Vouchee, and recovera tant en value de terre del Vouchee, sil tant ad; and sil
and tant, donque le Tenant avera Execution per cest Brief de tiels terres and
tenements que descend a luy en Fee-simple; ou sil purchase apres, le Tenant
avera verse luy un Resummons, and sil riens poit dire, il recovera le value.

Et saches, Que cest Brief gist devant Appearance. De ceux and leur diverse uses,
vei ^ s le Table Rel Reg. jud. le parol Cape.

Capias.
CApias est del deux sorts, Lun devant Judgment, appel Capias ad respondendum,
en un Action personal, si le Visc^ sur le primer Brief return, Nihil habet in
Billiva nostra. Et laut' est un Brief (...) Execution apres Judgm^t, q^ auxi
est ^ diverse natures, queux veies en le Title Process.

Capite.
CApite est un Tenure q^ tie^t immediatemet del Roy, come (...) son Corone,
soit ceo per service (...) Chivaler, ou Socage, and nient dasc^ Honor, Castle,
ou Manor; and p^ c^ il est auxi appel u^ Te^nureq^ tie^t meerem^t del Roy. Car
com^ le Corone est un Corporation, un Seigu^ry en gross; issint le Roy q^
possess le Corone est en le oyel ^ l Ley perpetualm^t Roy, and ne unques est en
son Minority, ou morust, nient pluis q^ Populus fait, l' authority ^ queux il
port. Veies Fitz. Not. Brev. f. 5. Uncore nota. Que un hom^ poit tener del Roy,
and uncore nient en Capite, cest adire, nient im^ediatem^t del Corone en gross,
mes per means dascun Honor, Castle, ou Manor appurteina^t al Corone, (...) q^
il tient sa ter^. De ceo Kitchen bien dit, Que hom^ poit ten^ ^ l Roy per
servic' ^ Chival', and unc^ nient e^ Capite, p^ ceo q^ poit ee^ q^ il tient
dasc^ Honor per service (...) Chival', q^ est e^ le mains ^ l Roy, per descent
(...) son Ancestors, and nie^t im^ediatem^t ^ l Roy, com^ ^ so^ Coron^, fol.
129. Ove que agree Fitz. Not. Bre. fol. 5. k. queux parols sont a cest effect;
il plainm^t appiert, q^ terres queux sont tenus del Roy come (...) un Honor,
Castle, ou Manor, ne sont tenus en Capite del Roy p^ ceo que un Bre^ de droit
en cel case serr^ direct al Bailiff del Honor, Castle ou Manor, etc. Mes
quantles terres sont tenus del Roy com^ (...) son Corone, donq^ ils ne sont
tenus de u^ Honor, Castle, ou Manor, mes meerem^t del Roy com^ Roy and (...)
son Coron, com^ de un Seign^re de luy mesm^ en gross, and le chief ^ touts
auters Seigniories.

Et cest Tenure en Capite est auterment appel Tenure tiendrant del person del
Roy, Dyer fol. 44. Brook tit. Tenures, number. 65, 99. Et uncore Kitch. fol. 208.
dit. Que hom^e poit tener dei person del Roy, and uncore nient en Capite. Son
Case est tiel; Si le Roy purchase Manor que J. S. tient, le Tenant tiendra come
il teignoit devant, and il ne rendra Liverie, ne prim^ Seisin, ne tiendra en
Capite. Et si le Roy grant son Manor al W. N. en fee, exceptant les Services de
J. S. donques J. S. tient del Roy come del person del Roy, and uncore ne tient
e^ Capite, mes come il tenoit deva^t. Per q^ il semble, q^ tenure tiendrant del
person del Roy, and Tenure e^ Capite sont deux diverse terr^. A toller quel
difference poit ce^ dit, q^ ceo lieu ^ Kitch. est dee^ prise com^ sil ad dit,
Nemy en Capite per service ^ Chivaler, mes per Socage, pursuant le usual
parlance, p^ ceo q^ pluis communement, ou nous perleroms (...) Tenure e^
Capite, nous intendom^ Tenure per Service (...) Chivaler. Vies le Star. 12 Car.
2. c. 24. per quel touts Tenures sont ore verse e^ fra^k and com^ Socage.

Cark.
CArk semble destre un quantity de Lane, de que troysiem^ font un Sarpler. 27
H. 6. c. 2. Vid. Sarpler.

Carno.
CArno est un Immunitie, come appiert en Cromp. Jur. fol. 191. ou est dit, Que
le Prior de Malton fait claim p^ luy and ses homes, de e^ quit de touts
Amerciam^ts deins le Forest, and auxi destr^ frank de Scapes, and de touts
man^ers de Gelds, and (...) Pecgelds, Buckstall, Trites, Carno, and Summage,
etc.

Carrack ou Carrick.
CArrack, alias Carrick, est un Niefe de faix, and est issint appel del parol
Italionis Ca ^ ico vel Carco, id est, Onus. Cest parol est mention en le
Statute 1 Jac. c. 23.

Carue de terre.
CArue ou Carucat de terre est un certain quantity de terre per que les
Subjects ont este cydeva^t tax: sur q^ le Tribute issint levy est appel
Caruage, Bract. l. 2. c. 16. number. 8. Littleton Sect. 119. dit, que Soca est
mesme ove Caruca, sc. un Soke ou Carue. Stow en so^ Annals, p. 271. ad ceux
perols; Mesme le te^ps H. le Roy prist Caruage, cest adire, deux Marks d'
argent d' chesc' Fee dun Chivaler, al marriage de son soer Isabel al Emperor.
Per que il semble que la fuit raise de Chescun Carue de terre ta^t, and isiint
per consequent de chesc' Fee de Chivaler deux Marks (...) argent. Rast. en son
exposition de parols dit, que Caruage est destre quit, si le Roy taxera tout le
Terre per Carues, cest adire, u^ Privilege per que un home est exempt de
Caruage.

Skene dit, que c^ contain cv grand portion de terre q^ poit estre eyred ou
tilled en un an and jour ove un Carue; que auxy est appel Hilda ou Hida terrae.

Castellaine.
CAstellaine est un Keeper ou Captain, asc' soits appel u Constable (...) un
Castle. Bra. l. 5. tra 2. c. 16. En mesm^ le man^ est use an. 3 E. 1. c. 7. En
les livers de Feudis vous troveres Guastaldus destre de tiel signification, mes
pluis large, pur c^ que il est aux' extend a ceux q^ ont le custody de les
Mansion-measons del Roy, appel Courts, nient obstant q^ ils ne sont lieus de
defense ou force. Manw. part. 1. del Leys del Forest, p. 113. dit, que la est
un Officer del Forest appel Castellanus.

Castle-guard.
CAstle-guard est un imposition impose sur tiels subjects del Roy queux
inhabitant deins un certain compass dasc^ Castle, al maintenance de tielx q^ux
vigilo^t and gardo^t l' Castle. Mag. Cha. c. 2. and an. 32. H. 8. c. 48. Il est
asc^ foits use p^ le Circuit m^ q^ est inhabit per tiels q^ux sont subject a
cest Service. Veies Chivalry.

Casu consimili.
CAsu consimili est un Brief de Entry, grantus ou le Tenant per courtesy, ou
Tenant p^ term (...) vie, ou p^ aut' vie, alien en fee, ou en tail, ou pur term
daut' vie. Et il ad cest nosme, p^ ceo que les Clerks del Chancery ont ceo
fram^ per lour com^on consent ensemble al Brief appel In casu proviso,
accordant al auctority done al eux per le Statute de Westminister 2. cap. 24.
que voit, Quotiescunque evenerit in Cancellaria, quod in uno casu reperitur
Breve, and in Consimili casu indigente remedio, concordent Clerici de
Cancellari a de Brevi faciendo, etc. Et cest Brief est grant al cestuy en
reversion verse le party a q^ le dit Tenant issint alien a son prejudice, and en
le vie del dit Tenant. Veies pluis de ceo, F. N. B. f. 206.

Casu proviso.
CAsu proviso est done per le Stat. de Gloucester, c. 7 Cest Brief gift lou
Tenant en Dower alien en Fee, ou a term de vie, ou en tail, la terre que el
t^ient en Dower; ore cestuy que ad le Reversio^ en Fee, ou en Tail, ou a term^
^ vie, maintenant avera cest Br ^ ve verse le Alienee, ou cestuy q^ est Tenant
del franktenement del terre, and c^ durant la vie le Tenant e^ Dower. F. N. B.
fol. 205. n.

Catals.
CAtals ou Chattels comprehend touts biens movable and immovable, forsque tiels
que sont en nature de Franktenem^t, ou parcel de c^, com^ poit estre collect
horse Stamf. Praerog. ca. 16. and an. 1 El. c. 2. Unc^ Kitch. fol. 32. dit, que
Money nest dee^ account biens ou Catals, ne Espervers, ne Chie^s, car ils sont
ferae naturae. Mes il semble q^ Money nest Catal, p^ ceo q^ nest de luy m^
chose valuable, mes pluis en imagination q^ en Fait.

Catals sont ou real ou personal. Catals real sont ou tiels que ne apperteinont
immediatement al person, mes al asc^ auter chose per voy (...) dependancie;
come un Box ove Chartes de terre, le corpse dun Guard, les Pom^s sur l' arbr^,
ou l' Arbre mesme cressant sur le terre. Crom. f. 33. b. Ou auterm^t tiels q^
sont issuant horse ^ asc^ chose immovable al person, come u^ Lease pur Rent ou
term (...) ans.

Personal polent estr^ issint appel en deux respects. Le un p^ c^ que ils
appent immediatement al person (...) u^ ho^e; come u^ Chival, etc. lautr^, p^
c^ que quant ils so^t tortiousme^t deteigne, nous ne avom^ pas asc^ aut' means
pur lour recoverie forsque per personal Actions.

Les Civilians comprehendont ceux chooses, and aux' Tr^s de touts natures ou
tenures, desouth le parol Bona, que est per eux divide in Mobilia and
Immobilia. Vid. Br. lib. 3. c. 3. number. 3, and 4.

Cepi corpus.
CEpi corpus est un Return fait per le Viscount, que, sur un Exigend ou auter
Brief. il a pris le corpse del party. Fitzb. Not. br. f. 26.

Certificate.
CErtificate est un Escript fait en ascun Court, a doner notice al auter Court
dasc^ chose fait la; come un Certificate del cause de Attaint est un tra^script
briefm^t fait per les Clerks del Corone, Clerk del Peace, ou Clerk de Assise,
al Court del Bank le Roy, conteinant le tenor and effect de chesc^ Indictment,
Utlagarie, ou Conviction, and Clerk attaint, fait ou declare en asc^ auter
Court.

Mes nota, que cest Certificate doit estre falt per cestuy que est I'immediate
Officer al Court; and p^ c^ si le Commissarie ou Official del Evesque certify
un Excommengement en barr^ de un Action al Common Ley, ceo nest bon^, (come
fuit resolve en Coke lib. 8. fol. 68.) mes tiel Excommengement doit estre
certify per le Evesque mesme. Uncore le Certificate dun Excommengement per
special Commission^s Delegates desouth lour common Seal fuit allow, and tenus
assets bon^e e^ le Common Bank Dyer, fol. 371. pla. 4.

Certification de Assise.
CErtification d'un Assise d' Novel disseisin, etc. est un Brief agard a
re-examin^ ou reviser u^ chose pass per Assise devant asc^ Justices; and est
use quant home appiert per so^ Bailife al un Assise port per un aut' and perde
le jour, and ayant asc^ aut' chose ouster a plea ^ per luy mesme, com^ un Fait
^ release ou, etc. que le Bailiff ne plederoit, cu ne puit pleader p^ luy
apris, un mieux Examination del Cause, ou devant mesme les Justices ou auters,
and acquire Letters Patents, (vide lour form F. N. B. 181.) and donque port un
Bre^ al Vicount (...) appeller le party p^ que le Assise ad pass, and auxi le
Jury que suit impannel sur mesme le Assise, devant les dits Justices, a un jour
and lieu certain.

Et est appel un Certificate, p^ ceo que en ceo mention est fait al Vicount,
que sur le partles complaint del defective Examination, ou awrust uncore
remainant lur le Assise pass, le Roy ad direct ses Letters Patents a les
Justic. s, p^ le mieux certification (...) lour mesmes, ou touts les points del
dit Assise fueront examine ou nemy.

Certiorari.
CErtiorari est un Brief que gist lou un est implead en un base Court, que est
de Record, and il suppose q^ il ne poit aver equal Justice la; donques sur un
Bill en le Chancery, comprisant ascun matter en Conscience, il avera cest Brief
p^ remover tout le Record en le Chancery, and la destre determine per
Conscience; mes fill ne proya son Bill, donques l' auter party avera un Brief de
Procdendo, a reman ^ le Record en le base Court, and la destre determine. Auxy
il gist en plusors auters cases, pur remover Records pur le Roy com^
Indictments and auters

Cest Brief est auxy grant horse del Court del Bank le Roy ou Common Pleas a
remover ascun Action al eux horse de inferior Courts de Record; and issint le
Plaintiff doit declare and proceed en le superior Court.

Auxy a certifyer Original Briefs ou proceeds horse dascu^ Courts de Record en
Bank le Roy ou Nullum tale Recordum est plede.

Auxy sur Briefs de Error dun Judgment en le Common Pleas, chescun party poit
aver cest Brief, a remover ascun proceedings en Bank le Roy sur alleger
diminution, com^ appiert Co. Ent. 232, 233, 242. 2 Cro. 131, and 479

Cessavit.
CEssavit est un Brief que gist lou mon very Tenant tient de moy certain
terres ou tenements, rendant certain Rent per an, and le Re^t est arrere per
deux ans, and null sufficient Distress poit estre trove sur le terre; donques
jeo avera cest Brief, per que jeo recovera le tetre: Mes si le Tenant vient en
Court devant Judgment, and tendra les Arrerages and les Damages, and trove
Surety que il ne cessera pluis en payment de dit Rent, jeo serra compel de
prender les Arrerages and les Damages, and donques le Tenant ne perdera la
terr^. Le Heir ne poit maintain cel Brief pur Cesser fait en temps son
Ancestor: Auxy ne gist mes pur Annual service, come Rent, and huju ^ nodi, and
nient pur Homage and Fealry.

Auxy il y ad auter Brief appel Cessavit de Cantaria, and gist ou un done
terr^s a Meason de religion, a trover pur lalme de luy, de ses ancestors, and
de ses heirs, an^ualn^it un Chandel ou Lamp e^ Esglise, ou p^ fair Divine
Service, de paster les povers, ou auters Alms, ou auter tiel chose fair;
donque si les di ^ s Services ne sont pas fait per 2 ans, le Donor ou ses
Heirs aver^ ces brief verse quecunque est eins apres tiel Cesser. Vide le
Statute W. 2. cap. 41.

Cession.
CEssion est, quant un Ecclesiastical person est cree Evesque, cu quant un
Parson ^ un Parsonage prist un auter benefice sans dispensation, ou autern^it
nient qualified, etc. En ambideux cases lour primer benefices sont devenus
void, and sont appelle destre void per Cession. Et al ceux que il ad que fuit
cree Evesque le Roy presentera pro illa vice, quicunque soit Patron de eux: Et
en lauter case le Patron poit presenter. Vies 41 E. 3. 5. and 11 H. 4. 37.

Cestuy a que vie, and cestuy a que use.
CEstuy a que vie est il pur quel vie un auter teigne un estate, and cestuy a
que use est il q^ est un feoffee pur le use ^ un auter.

Challenge.
CHallenge est un Exception prise ou envers Persons ou Chooses. Persons, come en
un Assise, les Jurors, ou asc^ un, ou pluis de eux; ou en case (...) Felony,
per le Prison^ al Bar verse Chooses, com^ un Declaration. Vet. N. B. fol. 76.

Challenge faits a les Jurors est fait ou al Array, ou a les Polls Challenge al
Array est, ou Exception est prise al entire number, come impanel pertialment:
Challenge al ou per le Poll est, ou Exception est prise al ascun un ou pluis,
come nient indifferent. Challenge a les Jurors est aux' divide en Challenge
principal, and Challenge pur cause, ces ^ adire, sur cause ou reason. Challenge
principal, ou peremptory, est ceo que le Ley allows sans cause allege, ou
examination, com un Prison^ al Bar, arraine sur Felony, poit peremptoriment
challenge al nombre de vint, un apres auter, del Jury impanel sur luy, nient
alledgant d ^ sc^ cause, mes son dislike demesne, and ils serront discharge,
and novels mise en lour lieus: and ceo est in favorem vitae. Mes en le case de
hault Treason null peremptory Challenge est allow. Vide 25 H. 8. cap. 3. Et un
difference poit estre observe perent' challenge principal and challenge
peremptory p^ ceo que challenge peremptory semble solem^t destre use e^ chooses
criminal, and merement sans ascun cause allege, pluis que le sole fantasy
del Prisoner, Stamf. Pl. Co. f. 124. and principal p^ le greinder part en civil
Actions, and ove le nosmant de ascun Exception, q^ esteant trove voyer, le ^ ey
maintenant allow. Come p^ Example, si ascun party dit que un des Jurors est le
Fits, Friar, Cousin, ou Tenant al auter party, ou espouse son file, ceo est un
bone and fort Exception, fill soit voyer, sans pluis examination del credit del
party challenge. Et de q^ large extent cest Challenge, de Consanguinity est,
bien applert, Plow. fol. 425. Auxi en le Plea del mort de ascun home, and en
chescun Action real, and auxy en chescun Action personal, ou le dett ou damages
amount al 40 marks, il est bone Challenge al ascun del Jurie impannel, qui il
ne poit dispender 40 s. per le an de son Franktenement demesne. An. 11 H. 7.
cap. 21.

Challenge sur reason ou cause est, quant le party allege asc^ tiel Exception
verse un ou pluis del Jurie, que nest immediatem^t sufficient sur conusance del
voierty de ceo, mes arbitrable and considerable per le residue de Jurors; com^
si le fits le Juror ad espouse le file del adverse party. Cest Challenge pur
cause semble per Kitch. fol. 92. destre dit Challenge pur favor; ou potius
Challenge p^ favor est la dit destre un Species de Challenge per cause: Ou
poies auxy lier queux Challenges sont communement account pur principal, and
queux nemy.

Chamberdekins.
CHamberdekins sont Irish Beggars, que per le Statute de 1 H. 5. c. 8. fueront
per un certain temps, deins mesme le Statute express, (...) avoid cest Terre.

Champerty.
CHampertie est un Bre^, and gist lou deux homes sont impleadants, and l'un
done la moietie ou part del chose en plee a un estranger, pur luy mainteiner
encounter l'auter; donques le party grieve avera cest Bre^ devers l'estranger.
Et semble que ceo ad este un ancient grievance en nostre Terre: Car nient
obstant diverse Statutes, and un form de un Bre^ frame a ceux, uncore Anno 4 E.
3. c. 11. fuit enact, Que ou les primer Statutes provide redress pur ceo
solement en Bank le Roy, que donques attend le Court, il serroit loyal pur les
Justices del common Plees ensement and Justices Assizes en lour Circuits,
enquirer, oyer and determiner ceux and tiels cases, cybien al Suit le Roy, come
al Suit del party. Auxy fuit ordelgne per le Statute de 33 H. 8. (que fuit
confirm per le Statute de 37 H. 8. c. 7.) Que Justices l Peace a lour Quarter
Sessions averont authority enquirer, cybien per les serem^ts 12 homes, come per
l' enformation done a eux per ascun person ou persons, des defaults, contempts
and offenses com^ise encount' les Leys and Statutes fait and purview touchant
Champerty, Maintenance etc. and a oyer and determiner les ditsfaults and
offenses.

Champertors sont ceux que mova Plees and Suits, ou cause destre move per lour
ou auters procurem^t, and sue a lour costages and charge demesne, p^ aver part
del terre ou gains e^ variance. Veies le Stat. Articuli super chartas, c. 11.

Chance-medley.
CHance-medley est, quant un home sans asc^ male intent fait un loyal chose, ou
q^ nest prohibit per Ley, and uncore auter est tue ou vient a son mort per ceo:
sicome ho^e jet un pierre, q^ percusse ho^e ou feme, q^ apres de ceo morust; ou
si home sagitte un fle ^ ch, and auter q^ pass est occide, and tiels
semblables; cest manner (...) occision est Homicide per misadventure, ou
Chance-medley, pur que l' Offender avera son pardon de course, come appiert per
le Statute de 6 E. 1. c. 9. and il forfeitera ses biens en tiel manner come
cestuy q^ tuera un home e^ son defense. Mes e^ c^ case est desir^ consider, ou
cestuy q^ commit cest homicide per Chance-medley fuit e^ feasa^s (...) un loyal
chose; car ^ sil' act fuit illoyal, come a pugner al Barriers, ou currer a Ti ^
te sans com^andem^t le Roy, ou jett' pierres en u^ Hault-voy ou ho^es usualm^t
pass, ou sagitta^t flerches en u^ Market-lieu, ou tiels semblables, per q^ u^
hom^ est occide; en touts ceux cases il est Felony al meins, cestascavoir,
Homicide, sinon mur ^; car l' Offender estea^t feasant de un illoyal act per
son volunt demesne, le Ley construa son meaning and volunt e^ c^ per le success
del act.

Com^ si deux sont pugna^ ^ s ensemble, and u^ tierce hom^ vient a severer eux,
and est occide per u^ (...) eux deux, sans asc^ malice propence ou male intent
e^ luy q^ occide le hom^, uncore ceo est Murder en luy, and nemy Homicide per
Chance-medly ou misadventure, p^ c^ q^ ils deux que co^bateront ensemble
fueront e^ feasance (...) u^ illoyal act. Et si ils fueront assemble ove malice
propense, lun intendant de occide laut', donque il est Mur ^ en eux ambideux.

Chancery,
CHancery est un Court a Westminster de Ley pur Suits p^ and envers Attorneys,
Clerks, and Officers (...) cel Court, and ceo part de ceo and auxy inrolments
de Faits and Patents est de Record. Et est auxy u^ Court p^ Equity and lour
proceedings en ceo sont enter en Anglois, and le Seignior Chancellor ou Keeper
del grand Seal, and Master des Rolls sont Judges, and les Briefs sont
returnable coram Rege in Cancellaria. Coke 4 Inst. 78.

Chapter.
Chapter est un Summarie ou content de touts tiels chooses que sont destr^
enquire deva^t Justices e^ Air, Justices ^ Assise, ou del Peace en lour
Sessons: Issint est use 3 E. 1. c. 27. en ceux parols, Et q^ null Clerk dasc^
Justice, Escheator, ou Com^issioner en Air, prendre asc^ chose p^ delivery de
Chapiters, mes solement Clerks de Justices en lour Circuits; and ensem^t 13 E.
1. c. 10. en ceux parols, Et quant le temps vient, le Vicount certifera les
Chapiters devant les Justices en Air quel nombre des Bre^s il ad. Auxy Britton
en mesme signification use cest parol, cap. 3. Et a cest jour Chapiters sont
appelles Articles, pur le grien ^ part, and sont deliver cybien per la bouche
del Justice en son Charge, com^ per les Clerks en escript, al Enquest, ou en
ancient temps ils fueront (apres u^ Exhortation done per les Justices p^ le
bone observation del Leys and Peace del Roy) primerm^t lie distinctm^t and
apertm^t en le plein Court, and donq^ deliver en escript al grand Enquest. Un
example ^ ceux Chapters la est e^ Livr^ ^ Assizes, fol. 138. pla. 44.

Chaplain.
CHaplain est celuy q^ fait Divine Service en un Chapel, and pur ceo est
communm^t use p^ celuy q^ depend fur le Roy ou auter home de quality, p^ l'
enstruction de luy and son Family, le lection de Orisons and Sermons e^ son
private meason, ou com^uneme^t ils ont en Chapel pur cel purpose.

Et p^ ceo q^ ils sont retain per Letters desouth le Signet ^ lour Patrons,
and per ceo sont per entendment destre resiant ove eux, le Ley ad done liberty
p^ lour Non-resiance sur lour Benefices.

Si un Count ou Baron reteigne u^ Chaplein, and devant son advancem^t soit
attaint de Treason, la le Reteigner est determine, and ap^s l' Attainder tiel
Chaplein ne poit accept u^ second Benefice, p^ ceo que cestuy q^ est attaint
est per son Attain ^ u^ mort person e^ Ley. Et queux persons (...) Nobility
and auters poient reteiner, and quant Chapleins ils severalm^t poyent retain,
l' Act de 21 H. 8. c. 13. bein declare.

La feme (...) un Baron dura^t le Coverture ne poit reteigne u^ Chaplein,
uncore quant un Baron^esse dotate reteigne un ou deux, solonque le Proviso del
dit Act, cest retigner est le principal matt', and si long come le Reteigner
est e^ force, and le Baron^esse continue un Baron^esse, les Chapleins bien
poyent accept' deux benefices per l' express letter del Act; car il suffist,
si al temps del Reteigner le Baronnesse fuit widow. Et en ceo cest rule est
destr^ extend (...) un feme q^ atteigne Nobility per Marriage, come per
marriage (...) un Duke, Count, ou Baron, etc. car en tiel case, si el apres
marry desouth le degree de Nobility, per tiel Marriage el perde le dignity a
que el ad attain, and apres tiel darreine Marriage le poyar de reteiner un
Chaplein est determine. Mes auterment est ou feme est Noble per Disce^t, car la
sa Reteigner devant ou apres le Marriage ove u^ que est ignoble serra en force,
and nemy countermaund per le Marriage, ne determine per sa pris l (...) un
baron desouth sa degree, Coke lib. 4. fol. 118, 119.

Chapter.
CHapter en Latin est define destre Congregation ^ Clericorum in Ecclesia
Cathedrali, conventuali, regulari, vel Collegiata; and en aut' signification,
Locum, in quo fiunt communes tractatus Collegiatorum: and il ad auters
significations q^ ne pas appent a nr^e purpose. Poit estre dit que cest
Collegiate society est appell Chapter metaphorice, le parol originalm^t
impliont un petit test; car cest Society ou Corporation est sicome un Test;
non solem^t a gar ^ and govern^ le Diocese en le vacation del Evesquery, mes
aux' e^ plusors chooses (...) ad ^ iser l' Evesque quant le See est pleine.

Charge.
CHarge est lou un home granta un Rent issuant horse de son tr^e, and q^, si le
Re^t soit arere, que serra loyal a luy, ses heirs and assigns, a distrein^
tanq^ le Rent soit pay: cest appel un Rentcharge. Mes si u^ grant u^
Rentcharge horse del terre d'un aut', com^t puis il purchase la terre, uncore
le Grant est void.

Charter-terre.
CHarter-terre est tiel que home tient per Charter, cest adire per Evidence en
escript, q^ auterment est appel Franktenem^t. Copihold terres devant le
Conquest fueront per les Saxons appel Folkland, and les Charter-terres,
Bockland. Et Lambert, en son Explication de Saxon parols, dit, Que cest terre
fuit tenus ove pluis sacile and com^odius conditions q^ Folkland ou Copihold
tr^e tenus sans Escript: Et son reason est, pur ceo q^ il est un frank and
im^une Inheritance, ou t're sans Escript est charge ove paym^ts and servitude
issint que le griend' part (...) ho^es de Nobility and bone Quality
possessont le primer, laut' Rustic homes. Le prim^ nous appellomus
Franketenem^t, and per Charter; lauter, Terre al volunt del Seignior.

Si Riot, Rout, ou Illoyal assembly soit commise, donques per le Act de 19 H.
7. c. 13. vint homes inhabitant deins le County ou le Riot, etc. est fait (de
que chescun de eux avera terres and tenem^ts deins mesm^ le County al annuel
value de vint soulz de Charter-hold ou Franktenem^t, ou vint and siz soulz ^
Copihold) ferront enquiry de ceo.

Charter-party.
CHarter-partie est un Indenture des Covenants and Agreements faits ent'
Merchants ou Mariners touchant lour maritime affairs: Et de ceo poyes liere^ le
Statute, ore obsolete, fait 32 H. 8. cap. 14.

Charters.
CHarters de Terres sont Escripts, Faits, Evidences and Instruments, fait (...)
un home al auter, sur asc^ Estate conveyed ou passed parenter eux (...) Terres
(...) senements, (...) le nosmes, lieu, and (...) le Estate, (...) and manner
del feasans (...) el, les Parties a l' (...), deliver and prise, les Te ^
moignes p^sent al ceo, ove auters circumstances.

Chartis reddendis.
CHartis reddendis est un Br^e q^ gist envers luy q^ ad Charters del Feofme^t
deliver al luy p^ conserve, and il refuse deliver ceuxs. Veil Not. Brev. fol.
66. Reg. Orig. f. 159.

Chase.
CHase est prise deux voyes: primerm^t a driver cattle, s ^ come a chaser u^
distress a un Fortlet; secondem^t, est use p^ un Receipt p^ Dames and Avers del
Forest: and est dun nature parent' un Forest and un Park, esteant co^munem^t
meins q^ u^ Forest, and ne^y e^dow ove touts Liberties, come ove Courts de
Attachment, Swainmote, and Justice seat; and unc^ dun pluis large co^pas, and
aya^t pluis diversity del Gardia^s and Game q^ u^ Park. Crompt. en son Liv' de
Jurisdictions, fo. 148. dit, Que u^ Forest ne poit estre e^ les maines du^
Subject, mes il immediatm^t perde le nosme, and devient u^ Chase: and unc' fo.
197. il dit, Que un Subject poit estr^ Sn^r and own^ dun Forest; le quels nient
obsta^t que semble contrary, uncore sont ambideux ses dits e^ asc' sense voyer:
Car le Roy poit done ou aliener un Fore st a u^ Subject, uncore issint q^ qua^t
il est u^ folts e^ le Subject, il perde le voyer property dun Forest, p^ ceo
q^ les Courts de Swainmote, Justice seat and Attachment, immediatm^t vanie, null
esteant able de fair un Sn^r chief Justice en Air del Forest forsq^ le Roy,
sico^e Manwood ad bien monstre e^ son Liver de Forest Leyes, c. 3. and 4.
Uncore poit estre grantus en tiel large man^er, que la poit estre Attachment
and Swainmote, and un Court equivalent a un Justice seat, come appiert per luy
en m^ le cap. numb. 3. Issint q^ un Chase differt de un Forest en ceo, pur ceo
que poit estr^ en les maines dun Subject, que un Forest en son proper and voyer
nature ne poit estre; and de un Park en ceo, q^ nest enclose, and ad non
soleme^t un pluis large co^pas, and pluis stor^ ^ Game, mes de Gardia^s aux'
and Supervisors. Vide Forest.

Chatels.
CHatels. Veies Catals.

Chauntry.
CHauntry, Cantaria, est u^ Esglise ou Chapel e^dow ove t'res ou auter annual
revenews p^ le maintenance dun ou plusors Priests, de chaunt' Massee de jour en
jour pur les Ames des Donor, and tiels auters q^ ils appint Et (...) ceux poyes
lier en les Statutes 37 H. 8. c. 4. and 1 E. 6. c. 14.

Chevage.
CHevage est un sum de argent pay per Villeins a lour Sn^rs en conusans (...)
lour Villenage, le quel Bract. l. 1. c. 10. issint define e^ Latin; Chevagium
dicitur recognitio in signum subjectionis and dominii de capite suo. Se^ble
aux' destr^ use pur un sum (...) argent done per u^ home al aut' (...) poyer
and potencia per son avowment, maintenance and protection, sicome a lour Test
ou Conductor. Lambert ceo escrie Chivage, ou potius Chiefage.

Chevisance.
CHevisance venust del parol Francois Chevir, id est, devener al Chief de
quelque chose. Et pur ceo que le perfection dun Bargain est le porter del
matter al fine, c^ parol Chevisance est use pur Bargainer en le Statures 37 H.
8. cap. 9. and 13 Eliz. cap. 7, and 8.

Childwit.
CHildwit, hoc est, quod capiatis Gersumam de nativa vestra, corrupta and
praegnata sine licentia vestra.

Chimin.
CHimin est le Haut voy lou chescun ho^e passa, q^ est appel Via Regia; and
uncore le Roy and aut' chose la forsq^ le passage pur luy and son people; car
le Franktenement est en le Seignior del soil, and touts les Profits cressans
la, come Arbres and auters chooses. Et ceo est divide en deux sorts, Via Regia,
de que est parle devant, and Via private, ou Chiminus privatus; and ceo est un
Voy per que home ou pluis ont liberty a passer, ou per prescription, ou per
charter, sur le terre dun aut' home: Et ceo est divide en Chimin en gross, and
Chimin appendant, Kitch. f. 177. Chimin en gross, est ceo Voy que home tient
principalm^t and solem^t en luy m^: Chimin appendant est ceo que home ad
adjoin^ a ascun auter chose, come appertina^t a ceo; pur example, si home prist
un Close ou Pasture, and ad covenant pur ingresse and egresse, al and de mesme
le dit Close, per ascun auter terre, p^ que auterm^t il ne poit passer. Ou
Chimin en gross poit estre ceo q^ les Civilia^s appel Personal; come quant un
covenant p^ un voy sur le terre dun auter home pur luy mesme and ses heirs:
Chimin appendant, e converso, poit estre ceo que ils appel Real; sicome quant
home purchase un voy per le soil dun auter home, pur tiels que inhabitont ou
inhabiteront en cest ou cest measo^, ou que so^t les owners de tiel Manor, a
touts jours.

Chiminage.
CHiminage est un Toll done pur passage per un Forest, en disturbance des feres
del Forest.

Chirographer.
CHirographer est celuy que en le Office del common Bank engrosse Fines conus
en cest Court, en un perpetual Record, (puis que ils sont conus and pleinment
pass per ceux officers per queux ils sont primerme^t examine) and que escrie
and deliver les Indentures, un pur le Purchasor, and auter pur le Vendor, and
fait un auter Escrow endented, conteinant auxy le effect del Fine, que il
deliver ouster al Custos Brevium, que est appel le Pee del Fine. Le
Chirographer auxy, ou son deputy, proclaim touts les Fines en le Court chescun
Term, accordant al Statute, and donques en alant al Office del Custos Brevium
la endorse les Proclamations sur le dorse del Pee de ceo, and touts foits
retain le Brief de Covenant, come auxy le Note del Fine.

Chivage.
CHivage. Veies Chevage.

Chivalrie.
CHivalrie est u^ Tenure de tr^e per service (...) Chivaler: p^ le meux
intelligence (...) que est destre conus, que la nest ascun terre mes il est
tenus mediatement ou immediatement del Corone per ascun Service ou auter; and
pur ceo touts nostr^ Franktenements que sont a nous and a nostr^ heirs sont
appel Fees, come ensuants de le bounty del Roy pur petit an^ual rent, and le
performance de tiels services que originalment fueront impose sur le terre al
donation de ceo: Car sicome le Roy done a ses Nobles, ses immediate Tenants,
graund possessions a touts jours, a tener de luy pur celuy ou tiel rent and
service; issint ils arere en te^ps divide ouster, a tiels que pleist a eux,
lour terres issint receive del bou^tie le Roy, p^ rents and services come a eux
semble bie^. Et ceux Services sont touts per Liitleton divide en deux sorts,
Chivalrie and Socage, lu^ martial and military, le auter rural and rustical.

Chivalrie pur ceo est un Tenure per que le Tenant est lie a performer ascun
noble ou military office a son Seignior; and est de eux sorts, ou Regal,
cestascav' tiel que poit estre tenus solement del Roy, ou tiel que poit auxy
estre tenus dun common person cybien come del Roy. Ceo que poit tener solement
del Roy, est properm^t appel Servitium ou Serjeantia, and est auxy arer^ divide
en Grand and Petit Serjeantie. Grand Serjeanty est ceo, ou ho^e tient terres
del Roy per service q^ il devoit fair en son person demesne, come a porter le
Banner le Roy ou son Lance, ou de amesner son Host, ou destre son Marshal, ou
a ventier un Cornu quant il veit ses enemies invade le Tr^e, ou de trover un
ho^e array de pugn^ deins le quater meres, ou de fair ceo luy m^, ou (...) port
l Espee le Roy deva^t luy a son Coronatio^, ou a cel jour destr^ so^ Sewer,
Carver, Butler, ou Chamberlain.

Petit Serjeanty est, ou un ho^e tient tr^e del Roy (...) render a luy
annuelm^t un Arc, un Espee, un Dagger, un Cuttel, un Lance, un pair de Gants
de far, un pair (...) Spors ^ ore, ou de render auters tiels petit chooses
touchant le Guerre

Chivalrie q^ poit tener (...) un common person cybien come del Roy est appel
Escuage, Servitium s ^ uti; and cest ou uncertain, ou certain. Escuage
uncertain est auxy de deux sorts; primerm^t, ou le Tenant per son Tenure est
lie ^ attender son Seignior alant e^ person al guerres le Roy envers ses
enemies, ou luy mesme, ou mitter un sufficient home en son lieu, la destre
maintain a ses costs tants des jours come fuer' agree perent' le Sn^r and son
primer Tenant al grant' del Fee. Et les jours ^ tiel service semble destr^
assesse per le quantity del tr^e issint tenus, Come si ceo extend a un ent ^ e
^ Fee de Chivaler, donq^ le Tenant fuit lie issint ^ attender son Sn^r 40
jours; and un Fee de Chivaler fuit tant (...) tr^re come e^ ceux jours fuit
account un sufficient viver p^ un Chivaler, and ceo fuit 680 acres, per
l'opinion de asc^, ou 800 come aut's semblont, ou 15 livers per l' an Cambde ^
Brit. fol. 110. Si le tr^e extend forsque al moiety (...) un Fee (...)
Chivaler, donq^ le Tenant est lie (...) atten ^ son Sn^r mes 20 j urs; si a un
quart pert, donq^ 10 jours. Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 83. c. and 84. c. e. Laut'
kind (...) Escuage uncertain est appel Castle-gard, ou le Tenant per son tr^e
est lie, ou per luy mesme ou perasc' aut', a defe^der un Castle si toft come
aven^a a son course.

Escuage certain est, ou le Tenant est assesse a un certain sum (...) arge^t
destre pay e^ lieu de tiel uncertain service; come q^ un ho^e payera annua^m^t
p^ un Fee Chivaler 20 s. p^ le moiety 10 s. ou asc' tiel rate. Et cest Service,
p^ ceo q^ est trahe a un certain rent, vient destre (...) un mixed nature; nient
meerme^t Socage, car ne olet pas del Carue; and uncore Socage e^ effect,
estea^t jammes neq^ personal service, neque uncertain. Chivalrie ad auters
conditions annexe a ceo; come Homage, Fealty, Gardship, Relief, and Marriage,
Bract. l. 2. c. 35. and q^ ils signifies veies e^ lour several lieus. Chivalrie
est ou general, ou special, Dyer fo. 161. pla. 47. General semble destr^, ou
est soleme^t dit e^ le Feoffme^t, q^ le Tenant tient per Servitium militare,
sans asc' specification ^ Sergeantie, Escuage, etc. Special est ceo q^ est
declare particularme^t per quel kind de service de Chivalrie il tient. Veies le
Statute 12 Car. 2. cap. 2 ^.

Chose en Action.
CHose en Action est, quant un home ad cause, ou poit porter un Action p^ asc'
duty due a luy; come un Action de Dett sur un Obligation, Annuitie, ou Rent,
Action de Covenant, ou Guard, Trespass des biens import, Battery, ou tielx
semblables: and p^ ceo q^ ils sont chooses (...) queux u^ ho^e nest possess,
mes p^ recoverie ^ eux est mis a son Action, ils sont appelles Chooses en
Action. Et ceux Chooses en Action que sont certain, le Roy poit graunter, and le
Grauntee poit user un Action p^ eux en son nosme demesme soleme^t: Mes un
common person ne poit grant son Chose en Action, ne Roy luy m^ son Chose en
Action, quel est uncertain, come Trespass* and tiels semblables.

Mes de tardiffe temps est use en Londre, q^ Merchants and auters la queux ont
bills sans Seals pur paym^t (...) argent eux assign al autersqueux assigns
porteront actions en lour nosmes demesnes.

Churchesset.
CHurchesset est un parol de q^ Flet. l. 1. c. 47. e^ le fine issint escrie:
Certam Mensuram bladi tritici significat, qua^ quilibet olim Sanctae Ecclesiae
die S. Martini, tempore tam Britonum quam Anglorum, contribuerunt. Plures tamen
Magnates, post Romanorum adventum, illam Contributionem, secundum vet. Legem
Moysi, nomine Primitiarum dabant, prout in Brevi Regis Kanuti ad summum
Pontificem transmisso continetur; in quo illam Contributionem Chirchsed
appellant, quasi Semen Ecclesiae.

Gardians d' Esglise.
GArdians d' Esglise sont Officers annualm^t elect per le consent del Minister
and les Parochians, accordant al custom de chesc^ several lieu, a veier al
Esglise, Cemiter, and tiels chooses queux appent al ambideux, and (...) observer
le gesture des Parochia^s, p^ tiels crimes q^ appertain al jurisdiction ou
censure del Court Ecclesiastical. Ceux sont un kind de Corporation, and sont
enable per Ley de suer p^ ascun chose apperteignant a lour Esglise, ou les
Povers ^ l Paroche. Veies Lambert del Duty des Gardians del Esglise.

Cinque Ports.
CInque Ports sont cinque Haven-villes, cestascavoir, Hastings, Romney, Hyth,
Dover, and Sandwich, a queux ad este grant long temps pass mult Liberties (q^
aut'rs Fort-villes nont,) and ceo primerm^t en le temps del Roy Edovart appel
le Confessor; and fuer^ increase apres, and ceo especialm^t en les jours del
troys Edovart, le prim^, second, and le tierce, come appiert e^ le livre
Doomsday and aut' vieux Momuments, trop long recite.

Circuitie de Action.
CIrcuitie de Action est, quant un Action est droituralm^t port p^ un Duty,
mes uncore circum le bush, come semble, p^ ceo q^ ceo poet cible^ estre
auterm^t respondue and determine, and le Suit save: and p^ ceo q^ mesme
l'Action fuit pluis q^ besoigne, il est appel Circuitie de Action, come fi un
home grant un Rent charge de xli. horse de son Manor Dale, and apres le Grantee
disseisist le Grantor de mesme le Manor, and il port un Assise, and recover le
terre and xx.l. damages, le quel xx.li. esteant pay, le Grantee del Rent sue
son Action p^ x.li. son Rent due dura^t le te^ps le Disseisin, le q^ final
Disseisin ad esse il doit aver ewe: Cest appel Circuitie de Action, p^ ceo q^
il poit aver este pluis briefment respondue; car lou le Grantor doit receive
xx.li. damages, and pay x.li Rent, il puit aver receive forsq^ le xli. solem^t
p^ les damages, and le Grantee puit aver recoup. and retain arere le aut' x.l.
e^ ses maines per voy de deteiner pur son Rent, and issint per ycel poet aver
save son Action.

Circnmstantibus.
CIrcumstantibus est un perol ^ Art, expressent le Supply and addition del
nombre ^ Jurors, si asc' impan^el ne appearont pas, ou sont challenge per asc'
pertie, per adding a eux cy plasors auters de eux q^ sont p^sent and
circumstantes. Veies 35 H. 8. c. 6. and 5 Eliz. 25.

City.
CIty est tiel Ville corporate q^ ad un Evesq^ and un Esglise Cathedral, and de
c' tiels parols sont trove: Idem locus Urbs, Civitas, and Oppidum appellatur.
Civitas enim dicitur, quatenus cum justitia and Magistratuum ordine gubernatur;
Oppidum, quatenus est ibi copia Incolarum; and Urbs, quatenus Muris debito modo
cingitur. Proprie autem dicitur Civitas quae habet Episcopum. Uncore Crompton
en son Jurisdictions mention touts les Cities, and omit Ely, nient obstant q^
ad un Evesque and un Esglise Cathedral, and mitta eins Westminster, nient
obstant que jammes and asc' Evesq^. Et 35 El. c. 6. Westminster est appel u^
City: and Anno 27 ejusd. c. 5. ( ^ Statutes nie^t imprime) Westminster est
equalm^t appel u^ City ou Borough Il appiert per l' St. 35 H. 8. c. 10. q^
do^q^s la fuit u^ Eves ^ ^ Westminster. Cassanaeus escrie, q^ France ad deins les
Territories 104 Cities, and il ren ^ c^ reason, p^ ceo q^ la sont cy plusors
Sees (...) Archievesq^s and Evesq^s.

Clack.
CLack, sicome a Clacker, forcer, and bard' lane 8 H. 6. c. 22. De q^ le prim^,
viz. de Clacker lane, est, (...) scinder les marks des Barbits, q^ fait ceo
destre (...) mein ^ poys, and issint ^ payer le mein ^ Custom al Roy: De sorcer
lane est, de clip per le ouster and pluis crineous part (...) ceo: De Bard ou
beard lane est, (...) scin ^ l' ^ este and coile del aut' p^te ^ l Toiso^.

Claim.
Claim est un Challenge per ascun home de le property ou ownership de un
chose que il and en possession, mes est deteigne de luy tortiousment: and le
party que issint fait son Claim p^dra per ceo un grand advantage; car en ascun
cases il poit per ceo avoider un Descent (...) terres; and en ascun cases il
per ceo savera son Title, que auterment serroit perde. Come si home soit
disseisie, and le Disseisee fait Continual claim^, cest adire, sil claimer les
terres don't il est disseisie deins le an and jour devant le mort le Disseisor,
donque poit il enter, nient obstant le Descent.

Auxy si Fine soit levy del terre a un auter home, donq^ cestuy que ad droit a
ceo doit fair son Claim deins cinq^; ans apres le Proclamation ad, fait, ou
certify, per le Statute de 4 H. 7. c. 24. Mes un estranger que null droit ad ne
poit de son test demesne enter, our fair Clam^ en le no ^ m^ de cestuy q^
droit ad de avoider le Fines deins les cinque ans, sans com^andm^t precedent ou
assent subsequent: uncore Guardian pur nurture, ou en Socage, poit enter ou
fair Claim' en le nosme del Enfant que ad droit de enter ou fair Claim; and
c' aydera le estate del Enfant, sans ascun co^mmandment ou assent, car la est
privitie enter eux.

Claim de Liberties
Estu^ Suit ou Petition al Roy en le Court (...) Exchequer ^ aver liberties,
and Franchises ^ estre confirm la per l'Attorney Geneneralle Roy. Coke Ent. 93.

Clergy.
Clergy est prise diverse voyes; ascun foits p^ tout le nombre de homes de
Religion, asc' foits p^ un Plee a un Indictment on Appeal: and est define
destre un ancient Liberty de Esg ^ ise, confirm en diverse Parliament. Et est,
qua^t un home est arraign^ de Felony, ou tiels semblables, devant un temporal
Judge, etc. and le prisoner pria so^ Clergy, cest adir^, p^ aver so^ Liver,
q^l e^ ancient temps fuit autant sicome il ust pry destre dismiss del
temporal Judge, and destre deliver al Ordinary de purger luy mesm de m^
offense. Et donques le Judge com^ander^ le Ordinar^ (...) trier sil poit lier
come u^ Clerk, en tiel Livre and lie come le Judge assignera. Et si le Ordinary
certisie le Judge q^ il poit, donq^s le prisoner navera judgment de perder so^
vie. Mes c ^ st Liberty de Clergy est restrain per les Stat. de 8 El. cap. 4.
an. 14. ejusd. c. 5. an. 18 ejusd cap. 4 6, 7. and 23 ejusd. c. 2. and 19
ejusd. c. 2. and 31. ejusd c. 12. and 39 ejusd. ca. 9. and 15. Veies Crompt.
Justice de Peace, fol. 102. etc. and Stam. li. 2. ca. 41. and Stat. de 18 El.
cap. 7. p^ que Clerks ne sont destr^ deliv' a lour Ordinaries destr' purg', mes
jam^es chesc' ho^ ^, com^t nie^t deins Orders, est mis a lier al Bar, esteant
trove culpable, and convict de tiel Felony, p^ q^ cest benefit uncore grant,
and issint arse en le main, and enlarge p^ le primer te^ps, si l' Com^issary ou
Deputy del Ordinar^ dit, Legit ut Clericus; ou auterm^t il suffer mort pur son
peche.

Clerk.
CLerk ad deux significations, un com^ est l' title de celuy q^ ap pertie^t al
sa^ct Ministry de le Esglise, cestascavoir e^ ceux jours, ou Minister ou
Deaco^ de quecu^q^ aut' degree ou dignity, nie^t obsta^t q^ en pristin^ te^ps
no^ solem^ Sacerdotes and Diaconi, mes aux' Subdiaconi, Cantores, Acoluthi,
Exorcistae and Ostiarii fueront deins cest accom^t, si come ils so^t a cest
jour ou le Ley Canon ad pleine poyar. Et e^ cest signification Clerk est ou
Religious (auterm^t appel Regular) ou Secular. 4 H. 4. c. 12.

Laut' signifi a ^ ion ^ cest parol denote tiels q^ per lour function ou course
^ vie usont lour plum' e^ asc' Court, ou aut m^t; come nosmeme^t le Clerk des
Rotules ^ l Parliam^t, Clerks del Chancery, and tiels se^bles.

Clerico admittendo.
CLerico admittendo est un Brief direct al Evesque p^ l' admittance de un Clerk
a un Benefice, sur un Ne admittas try and found p^ le party q^ procure le
Brief. Reg. orig. f. 31.

Clerk attaint.
CLerk attaint est celuy q^ pria son Clergy apres judgeme^t sur luy done de
Felony, and ad son Clergy allow; tiel Clerk ne poit fair son Purgation.

Clerk convict.
CLerk convict est celuy q^ pris son Clergy devant judgment done sur luy (...)
le Felony, and ad le Clergy grant; tiel Clerk puit fair son Purgation. Nota,
q^ cel Purgation fuit fait quant il fuit dimisse al Ordinary, la destre try
del enquest del Clerks: and pur ceo ore per le Stat. 18 Eliz. cap. 7. null tiel
est miss al Ordinary.

Closh.
CLosh ou Closse est un illoyal Game prohibit per le Stat' fait en l' an 17 E.
4 c. 3. and est inhibit aux' per le Statute de 33 H. 8 c. 9. Mes icy est plus
properm^t appel Clash; car est le mitter dun Boul as neuf Espingles de boys, ou
neuf shank bones (...) un beef ou chival: and est ore usualm^t appel Kailes,
ou Nine-pins.

Coadjutor.
COadjutor al Disseisin est celuy que ove auter disseise un de son
Frankteneme^t al use del aut' and il serr^ punie come un Disseisor; mes il nest
tiel Disseisor que gain le Frankteneme^t, mes le Franktenem^t vest and est
tout en celuy a que use le Disseisin fuist com^it, come appiert e^ Littleton l.
3. c. 3. de Joyntenants.

Cocket.
COcket est un Seal' q^ apperteln^ al Custom House le Roy, and signify auxy
un Escrowle del parchment, seal and deliver per les Officers del Custom-house
as Merchants, come un Garrant q^ lour merchandises sont customs. Cest perol
est use e^ les veux Stat. ore expires, faits 14 E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 21. and 11 H.
6. c. 16.

Codicil.
COdicil est le Volunt ou Testam^t dun home toucha^t c^ que il voit aver destre
fait apres son mort sa^s l' nomination dasc^ Executor: Ou auterm^t il est un
addition ou supplem^t add al u^ Volunt ou Testament ap^s le fini de c ^ o, p^
le supply dasc chose que le Testa ^ or ad oblie, ou p^ ayder asc' defect en le
Testament. De ceo poyes lier plus en Swinbourne des Volunts and Testaments,
part. 1. Sect. 5. number. 2, 3, etc.

Coigne.
COigne est un perol collective, q^ co^tain e^ c^ touts manners del several
sta^ps and portraitures ^ Numm^. Et c^ est un des Royalx Preroga ^ ives
appe^da^t a chesc' Prince, q^ il solem^t e^ ses tr^es demesu^ poit order and
dispose le quantity, and fashions de son Coigne. Et coment que ceo est le
nerve (...) tout merchandise and commerce, uncore le Coigne ^ un Roy nest
current e^ les Royalms (...) un aut' Roy com^unem^t, sinon al grand perde.

Si home oblige luy mesme ^ render cent livers de loyal Coigne (...) Angleterre
a un auter, and al jour (...) paym^t ascun ^ argent happa destr^ Coigne de
Espaigne ou de Francois, ore l'Obligation est bien perform, si per
Proclamation ils sont faits current money de Angleterre. Car le Roy per son
absolute Prerogative poit fair ascun foreign Coigne loyal Coigne de Angleterre
a son pleasure per son Proclamation. En case ou home est de pay Rent a son
Lessor sur condition de Re-entry, and le Lessee paya le Rent a son Lessor, and
il ceo receive, and mitta ceo en son burse, and puis en reviewant de ceo a
mesme le temps il trova q^ il ad receive asc' counterfeit pieces, and sur ceo i
^ refuse de emport' les Deniers, mes re-enter pur le Condition enfreint; ore
son Entry nest loyal, car quant il ad accept les Deniers, ceo fuit a son
peril, and puis cest allowance il ne prendra exception al ascun de eux.

Collateral.
COllateral est ceo que vient eins, ou adhere al later' ^ un chose; come
Collateral Assurance est ceo q^ est fait ouster and p^ter le Fait mesme: Pur
example, si home covenant ove un auter, and luy oblige p^ le performance,
l'Obligatio^ est appel Collateral Assurance, p^ ceo q^ est external, and sans
le nature and essence del Covenant. Et Cromp ^ o ^ fol. 185, dit q^ destre
subject al de pasturing des Da^es le Roy est collateral al soil deins le
Forest. En mesme le man^er poyomus nous dire, que liberty a pitcher Sheds ou
Stalls pur un Fair e^ le soil ^ un au ^ ' home est collateral al terre. Le
private Bois (...) un com^on person deins le Forest ne poit estre succide sans
le license del Roy, car il est un Prerogative collateral al soil. Man. part.
1. page 66. Collateral Garrantie; Veies tit. Garranty.

Collation.
COllation est properment le Donation de un Benefice per l'Evesque, q^ ceo ad
en son Done ou Patronage demesne; and differ ^ de Institution en ceo, pur ceo
que Institution en un Benefice est perform per l'Evesque al motion and
Presentation ^ un auter, q^ est Patron de mesme Esglise, ou ad le droit del
Patron pro hac vice: Uncore Collatio est use p^ Presentation en 24 E. 3. Stat.
6. and la est un Brief en le Regist. 31. b. appel De Collatione facta uni post
mortem alterius, etc. direct al Justices del Com^on Bank, eux commandant a
directer lour Br^e al Evesq^, p^ l'admittance (...) un Clerk en le lieu (...)
un auter p^sent per le Roy, que devant le Suit perenter le Roy and le Clerk del
Evesque morust; car judgment un foits p ^ sse p^ le Clerk le Roy, and il
morant devant q^ il soit admit, le Roy poit done son Presentation al auter.

Collusion.
COllusion est, lou un Action est port verse un auter per son agreement demesne,
si le Plaintiff recover, tiel Recoverie est dit per Collusion. Et en ascun
cases le Collusion serra inquire, come en un Quare impedit, and Assise, and
tiels semblables, queux ascun Corporation ou Corpse politic port envers aut'
al intent ^ aver le Tr^e ou Advowson don't le Br^e est port en Mortmain. Mes en
Avowrie, ne en asc' Action personal, le Collusion ne serra enquire. Veies le
Stat. de Westminster. 2. c. 32. que done le Quale jus and inquiry en tiel case.

Color.
Color est un fained matter le quel le Defendant ou Tenant use en son bar
qua^t un Action de Trespass ou un Assise est port envers luy, en le quel il
done le Demanda^t ou Plaintiff un show prima facie que il ad bone cause de
Action, lou en verity il nest just cause, mes tantfoleme^t un Color and
Visour (...) un cause: and il est use al intent que le determination del Actio^
doit este per les Judges, and nemy per un ignorant Jurie de douze homes. E p^
ceo un Color doit estre un matter en Ley difficult al lay gentes. Come p^
example, A. port u^ Assise ^ terre envers B. and B. dit que il mesme less
mesme le terre al un C. p^ term de vie, and apres grant le Reversion al A. le
Demandant, and puis C. Tenant p^ term de vie morust, apres que decease, A. le
Demandant, claimant le Reversion per force del Grant, (ou C. le Tenant p^ vie
ne unques attourne) entra, sur q^ B. entra, envers que A. pur mesme entry port
cest Assise, etc. Cest un bone Color, q^ ceo que les lay gentes pensant q^ le
terre voile pass per le Grant sans Atturnment, lou en fait il ne voile pass,
etc.

Auxy e^ un Action (...) Trespass Color doit estre done, and ^ eux sont u^
infinite number, un pur Example: En un Action de Trespass pur prise de Avers
del Plaintiff, le Defendant dit, que devant le Plaintiff reins avoit en eux, il
mesme fuit possess de eux come de les propter biens, and eux deliver al A. B.
pur eux rebailer a luy quando, etc. and A. B. eux dona al Plaintiff, and le
Plaintiff supposant le property destre en A. B. al temps del done, prist eux,
and le Defendant eux reprist del Plaintiff, sur que le Plaintiff port l'
Action: cest un bone Color, and un bon Plea. Veies de ceo pluis en Doctor and
Student, l. 2. c. 13.

Color est pur ceo cause, viz. lou le deft. justify per title en transgr^ ou
assize, sil ne done le Plaintiff Color son plea amount tanq^ al general issue,
car si le Defendant ad title il n'est culpable, 1 Co. 79. 108.

Color de Office.
Color de Office est touts foits prist in malam partem, and signify un act
malement fait per le countenance ^ un Office, and il port un dissimulant visage
del droit del Office, lou le Office nest que veil del fauxitie, le chose est
ground sur vice, and le Office est come u^ shadow al ceo. Mes ratione Officii,
and virtute Officii, sont prises touts foits in bonam partem, and lou le Office
est le just cause del chose, and le chose est pursuant al Office. Plo. en Dive
and Man. case 64. a.

Combat.
COmbat, e^ nr^e antiq^ Ley, estoit un formal Trial ^ un ambigieux Case ou
controversy per l'Ense ou Bastons ^ deux Champions. Veies Glanvile l. 14. c.
1. Britton c. 22. and Dyer fol. 301. numb. 41.

Commandment.
COmmandment est prise per diverse significations: alc' foits p^ le Commandment
le Roy, qua^t per son mere motion and de son bouche demesne il jette asc' ho^e
e^ prison, Stamf. Plac. Cor. fol. 72. ou des Justices: Et ceo Commandm^t des
Justices est ou absolute, ou ordinary. Absolute, sicome quant sur lour
authority demesne, ou lour sapie^ce and prudence, ils com^ittont asc' ho^c a
prison p^ u^ punishm^t. Ordinary est, quant ils com^ittont un pluis destre
safem^t guard, q^ p^ punishm^t; and ho^e com^it per tiel ordinary Com^andm^t
est mainpernable, Placit. Cor. fol. 73. Commandm^t est use arere p^ l'offence
(...) celuy q^ com^and aut' home (...) transgresser le Ley, ou (...) fair asc'
tiel chose que est encounter le Ley, come Murder, Larcenie, ou tiels
semb'ables, Bract. l. 3. Tract. 2. c. 19. Les Civillians appel cest Commandm^t,
Angelus de maleficiis.

Commandrie.
COmmandrie fuit le nosme ^ un Manor ou chief Message, ove q^ Tr^es ou
Tenem^ts fueront occupies perteignont al Priorie per S. Johan de Jerusalem,
tanque fueront done al Roy Henry le huict ^ Statute fait en l'an 32 de son
reign. Et cestuy q^ avoit le Governm^t (...) asc' tiel Manor ou Message fuit
appel le Commander, q^ navoit rien a fair ou disposer de ceo, forsq^ al use
del Priorie, and ^ aver solem^t son sustenance de ceo solonque son degree, q^
fuit usualm^t un Friar de mesme le Priorie, que eust este fait Chivaler en les
guerres encount' Infidels: and fueront jades appel Knights de le Rhodes, ou
Knights de Malta, de lieus lou leur grand Master inhabit. Veies le dit
Statute, and le Statute entitled De Templaris, le decay des queux fuit grand
increase de cel Order. Et plusors de ceux Commandries sont e^ le Pais nosmes le
Temple.

Commendam.
COmmendam est un Benefice q^ esteant void, est commend al care (...) asc'
sufficient Clerk, destre supply jesque il poit estr^ convenim^t provide (...)
u^ Pastor. Et le voyer original de ceux Commendams fuit ou pur cause de evident
utilitie, ou necessity Cestuy a que l'Esglise est com^end ad les fruits and
profits de ceo solement per un ^ certain temps, and le nature del Esglise nest
alter per ceo, mes est sicome un chose deposite en les maines per cestuy a que
il est com^end, que and forsq^ le Custody de ceo, que poit estre revoke.

Commissary.
COmmissary est un nosme de Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, apperteinant a cestuy
que exercise Jurisdictio^ Spiritual en lieus del Diocese de cy grand distance
del principal Ci ^ y, q^ le Chancellor ne poit appeller les Subjects al chief
Consistory del Evesque sans lour grand molestation. Cest Commissarie est appel
per les Canonists Commissarius, ou Officialis foraneus; and est ordeigne a cel
special fine, q^ il executera l'Office and Jurisdiction del Evesq^ e^ les
Boundaries del Diocese, ou e^ tiels Paroches que so^t peculiars al Evesque, and
exempt del Jurisdiction del Archdeacon: car ou per prescription, ou per
composition, la sont Archdeacons que ont Jurisdiction en lour Archdeaconries,
sicome en plusors lieus ils ont, la cest Commissarie est superfluous, and pluis
al detriment que al bone des gents.

Commission.
COmmission est tant en le Com^on Ley come le parol Delegate e^ l' Civil, and
est prise p^ le Garrant ou Letters Patents que touts homes, ayant jurisdiction,
ou ordinary ou extraordinary, ont pur lour poyar de oyer ou termin^ asc'
cause ou action. Uncore cest parol est asc' foits extend pluis largem^t que al
chooses (...) Judicature; sicome le Commission ^ Purveyors ou Prisors, 11 H. 4.
c. 28. Mes ove cest Epitheton Alt, il est pluis co^munem^t use p^ le
Alt-Commission Court, institute and foundue sur le Stat. de 1 El. c. 1. p^
l'ordina^ce and reformation de touts offenses en asc' chose appertinent al
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, mes especialm^t tiels q^ so^t (...) pluis alt
nature, ou al meins requir^ pluis grand punishment q^ ordinary Jurisdiction
poit afford. Veies les Stat. 17 Car. 1. c. 11. and 13 Car. 2. c. 12. per q^l
l'ava^tdit Court est per tout abolie.

Commission de Rebellion.
COmmission de Rebellion, auterme^t appel un Brief de Rebellion, est use quant
u^ ho^e apres Proclamation fait per le Viscount, sur u^ Or ^ ou Process del
Chancerie, south penal, y (...) so^ Allegea^ce a p^ sent' luy mesme al Court
per u^ jour certain, ne appiert pas. Et cest Com^ission est direct per voy de
command al certain persons, a fine que ils, ou trois, (...) ux, ou un de eux,
apprehendont ou causont destre apprehend le party, come un Reb ^ l and
contemner de Leys le Roy, en quelcunque lieu que ils luy troveront deins le
Royalme, and de presenter luy ou luy cause destre present al Court sur un jour
en ceo assign.

Committee.
COmmittee est cestuy ou ils a que le consideration ou ordinance (...) asc'
chose est refer, ou per ascun Court, ou consent des parties a que il
appertient: sicome e^ Parlm^t un Bill esteant lie, est ou admit and pas, ou
deny, ou refer al consideration (...) asc' certain ho^es appoint per le
Meason, les queux sur ceo sont appelles un Committee. Mes cest parol est
auterme^t use per Kitchen, fol. 160. ou le relict del Tenant le Roy est appel
le Committee le Roy cest ascavoir, un Co^mise per l' ancient Ley del Terre al
care and protection le Roy.

Common.
COmmon est le droit q^ home ad de mitter se^ Beasts a Pasture, ou de user le
terre que nest son proper soil.

Et nota q^ sont diverse Commons, cest adire, Common en gross, Common
appendant, Common appurtenant, and Common per cause de vicinage.

Common en gross est, lou jeo, per mon Fait, grant a un auter que il avera
Common en ma terre.

Common appendant est, lou home est seisie de certain terre, a que il ad
Common en auter soil, solement per ceux beasts que compost la terre a que il
est appendant, except Oysons, Chivers, and Porceaux; quel Common est per
prescription, and de common droit, and li est appendant al ter^e arable
solement.

Common appartenant est de mesme nature ove Common appenda^t; mes est ovesque
touts manners des avers, cybien Porceaux and Chivers, come Chival^, Vaches, and
tiels que compost le terre. Et tiel Common poit estre fait a ceo jour, and
several del terre a que il est appurtenant, mes issint ne poit Common appendant.

Common pur cause de vicinage est, lou les Ten^nts de deux Seigniors sont
seisies de deux Seigniories don't l'un gist p^s l' auter, and chescun de eux ont
use de temps don't memory ne courr^ de aver Common en aut' Ville ovesque touts
beasts commonable.

Mes l'un ne poit mitter ses Avers en le terre ^ 'auter, car la ceux de l'auter
Ville poient eux distraine Dam^age feasant, ou aver Action de Trespass: mes
ils eux mittera en lour camps demesne, and si ils estray en les ca^ps del aut'
Ville, ils doint eux sufferer. Et les inhabitra^ts de l' u^ Ville ne doient
mitter eins beasts tants come ils voile, mes ayant regard al Fra^kerenem^t del
inhabitants de le auter, car aut'ment il ne serroit bone Vicinity, sur que tout
depend.

Common Fine.
COmmon Fine est un certain sum^ des deniers q^ les Resiants deins un Leet
payont al Sn^r del Leet; and est appel en ascuns lieus Capitagium vel Capitale
argentum, en ascuns lieus Certum Letae, and fuit al primes (come semble) grant
al Sn^r verse le charge de son purchase del Leet, per que les Resiants avoyent
ore un aise p^ fair lour Suit royal deins l' Man^or, and nemy destre compells
(...) alter al Turn le Viscount de fair^ ceo. Et p^ cest Common Fine le Sn^r
doit prescriber, and ne poit distre ^ n p^ ceo sans Prescription, come appiert
en Godfrey's Case, en 11 R ^ p. fo. 44. b.

Common Ley.
COmmon Ley est p^ le pluis part prise 3, voyes. Prime ^ m^t, p^ les Leyes de
cest Realm^ simply, sans ascu^ aut' Ley, come Customarie, Civil, Spiritual, ou
quecunque auter Ley join a ceo; come quant est dispute en nostre Leyes de
Engleterre, quid doit de droit estr^ determine per le Common Ley, and quid per
Spiritual Ley, ou le Court del Admiral, ou tielx semblables.

Secondarim^t, il est pris p^ les Courts le Roy, come le Bank le Roy, ou Com^on
Place, ta^tsolem^t p^ monstre un difference perent' eux and less base Courts;
come Customary Courts, Court-Barons, County Courts, Pipowders, and tielx
semblables: come quant un Plee de terre est remove horse de ancient Demesne, p^
ceo que le terre est Frank-fee, and pleadable al Common Ley, cest adire, en le
Court le Roy, and nemy en ancient Demesne, ou en ascun aut base Court.

Tiercem^t, and pluis usualm^, ^ Common Ley est enten due tielx Leyes q^
fueront generalm^t prise and tenus p^ Ley devant q^ asc' Stat. fuit fait p^
alt' ceo: come p^ example, Tenant p^ vie, ^ e p^ ans, ne fueront destre punish
p^ fesans Wast al Common Ley, tanq^ le Statute de Glouc. c. 5. le quel done u^
Action de Wast envers eux. Mes Tenant per le courtesy and T ^ nant en dower fu
^ ront punishable pur Wast al Common Ley, cest adire, per le usual and common
received Leys le Realm, devant le dit Sta ^ ute fuit fait.

Common Pleas.
COmmon Pleas est le Court le Roy jam^es tenus en le Sale de Westminster, mes
en ancient te^ps moveable, sico^e appiert per Mag. Char. c. 11.

Mes Gwyn, en le Preface a son Lecture, dit, Que jesque le temps que Henry le
tierce grant le Grand Charter, la fuer^ forsq^ deux Courts solem^t appel les
Courts le Roy, de que u^ fuit l'Eschequer, and l'auter le Bank le Roy, quel
fuit appel auxly Aula Regia, p^ ceo que el ensue le Court; and q^ sur le grant
de cel Chart' le Court (...) Common Pl ^ es fuit erect and settle e^ un lieu
certain viz. al Weminster; and p^ ceo touts les Briefs fueront faits ove cest
Return, Quod sit coram Justificariis meis apud Westmonasterium, ou devant le
party fuit command per eux de appearer coram Me vel Justiciariis meis, sans
ascun addition de ascun lieu certain.

Touts Civil causes, cybien Real come Personal, sont, ou fueront e^ ancient
temps, try en cest Court, accordant al strict Ley del Royalm^: Et per
Fortescue, cap. 50. il semble daver este le sole Court pur Real Causes. Le
primer Judge de ceo est appelle Seigniour Chief Justice del Common Plees,
accompany ove trols ou quater Assistants ^ u Associates, que sont create per
Letters Patents del Roy, and sicome fuit enstalle ou place sur le ^ ank per le
Seigniour Chancellor and Seigniour Chief Justice del Court, come appiert per
Fortescue ca. 51. que express touts les circumstances de cel Admission.

Le residue des Officers appertinant a cel Court sont ceux; Le Custos Brevium,
trois Prothonotaries, Chirographer, dixe quater Philasers, quater Exigenters,
Clerk des Garrants, Clerk des Juries, Clerk del Treasury, Clerk de Argent le
Roy, Clerk des Essoines, Clerk des Utlagaries.

Common jour en plee de terre.
COmmon jour en plee de terre, Anno 13 R. 2. Stat. 1 cap. 17. signify un
ordinary jour en le Court, come Octabis Michaelis, Quindena Paschae, etc. come
poies veier en le Statute 51 H. 3. concernant gener. l jours eu le Bank.

C ^ mm ^ tes.
COmmotes semble destre un parol composit, del Preposition C ^^, and Motio, i.
e. Dictio Verbum, and signify en Gales le part dun County ou Hundred, Anno 28
H. cap. 3. Il est escrie Commoithes, An. 4. H. 4. ca. 17. and est use pur un
Collection fait sur les gents de ce ^ ou cest Hundred per Minstrels de Gales.

Communi Custodia.
COmmuni custodia est un Brief que gisoit pur cel Seigniour, le Tenant de quel
reindrant p ^ r service de Chivaler morust, son eigne fills deins age, envers un
estranger, que enter le terre, and obtain le Guard del Corpse. Il semble de
prender le nosme del common Custom ou droit en ceo case, que est, Que le
Seigniour avera le Guard de son Tenant jesque son pleine age; ou p^ ceo, que est
common pur recoverie ^ l Terre and Tenant, come appiert per le form de ceo, V
^^ l N. B. 89. Regist. Orig. 161.

Compromise.
COmpromise est un mutual Promise de deux ou plusors parties que sont al
controversy, pur submitter eux mesmes and touts differences ent' eux al Agard,
Arbitreme^t, ou Judgment ^ l ua ou plusors Arbitrators, ent' eux
indifferentment essi ^ u, p^ determiner and ad ^ udger des touts matt's refe ^
es, and sur que les parties differont.

Computation.
COmputation est use en le Common Ley pur le voyer and indiff ^ rent
Construction de temps, issint que ne le un party ferra tort al auter, ne le
determination de terms referr^ a large, deste prise un voy ou auter, mes
compute accordant al droitural censure de la Ley.

Come si Indentures de Demise sont i ^ gross, portont date le unisme jour de
May, 1665. de aver and tener le terre en S. pur tro ^ s ans de cest temps, and
les Indentures sont deliver le quart jour de June en le an avantdit: En cest
case, de cest temps, serra account del jour del Deliverie des Indentures, and
nemy per asc' computation del Date. Et ^ i le dit Indenture soit deliver al
quart de la horologe puis meridie le dit quart jour, cest Leas finiera le
tierce jour de June en le tierce an; car la Ley en cest Computation reject
touts fractions ou divisions del jour, pur le incertainty, que touts foits est
le mere de contention. Issine ou le Statute de Enrolments fait Anno 27 Henr. 8.
cap. 16. est, Que les Escripts serront inrolle deins size moyes apres le Date
de mesme les Escripts indent, si tiels Escripts ont Date, les size moyes
serront account del Date, and nemy del Deliverie: mes si fault Date, donque il
serra account del Deliverie. Cok ^ li. 5. fol. 1.

Si ascun Fait est monstre a un Court al westminster. le Fait per Judgment del
Ley remain en Court tout le Term en que ceo est monstre; car tout le Term en
Ley nest que un jour. Coke l. 5. f. 74.

Si un Esglise happa void, and le very Patron ne p^senta deins size moyes,
donques le Evesque del Dioces poit collate son Chaplein: mes ceux size moyes ne
serra account accordant al vine huict jours al moyes, mes accordant al Kalen ^.
Et la est grand diversity en nostre common parlance en le singular number;
come un Twelvemonth, que enclude tout lan solonq^ le Calendar, and
Twelve-moneths, que serra compute solonque vint huict jours a chescun moyes.
Veies Co. l. 6. f. 61. b.

Computo.
COmputo est un Brief issint appel del effect* pur ceo q^ il enforce un Bailif,
Cha^berlain, ou Receiver, a render son Account. Veil N. B. f. 58. Il est
foundue sur le Statute de West. 2. c. 2. le quel pour vostre mieux intelligence
vous poyes lier. Et il auxy gist p^ Executors de Executors. 15 Ed. 3. Stat. de
Provis. Victual. cap. 5. Tierceme^t, envers le Gardein en Socage, pur Wast fait
en le minority del Heir^, Marl. cap. 17. Et veies pluis en queux auters cases
il gist, Reg. Orig. f. 135: Veil N. B. f. 58. and F. N. B. 116.

Concealers.
COncealers sont tiels q^ trovont terres conceal, ceo est, tiels terresq^ sont
privime^t detein^ del Roy per common persons, ne ayant pas ascu^ chose de
monstre p^ eux, An. 39. El. c. 22. Ils sont issint appel a concelando, come
Mors a movendo, per Antiphrasin.

Conclusion.
COnclusion est, quant home per lon fait demesne sur record ad charge luy m^
ove ascun Duty ou auter chose; Come si home que est frank confess luy m^
destr^ Villain de A. sur record, and ap^s A. prist ses bie^s, il serra conclude
adire e^ ascu^ Action ou Plea en ap^s que il est frank, per reason de son
confession demesne. Issint si le Viscount, sur un Capi as a luy direct, return
quod Cepit corpus, and uncore and le corpse e^ Court al jour del Retorn, ill
serra amercie: and sil fuist sur un Capias ad satisfaciend', le Plaintiff poit
aver son Action envers le Viscount pur le Escape; car per tiel Retourn le
Viscount ad conclude luy mesme.

Et cest parol Conclusion est prist en un auter sense, come p^ le Fine ou
darrein pert de ascun Declaration, Bar, Replication, etc. Come ou al Bar
covient estre un Replication, le Conclusion de son Plea serra, Et hoc paratus
est verificare. Si en Dower le Tenant pleda, Ne unques seisie que Dower doit
render, le Conclusion serra, Et de hoc ponit se super Patriam. Et en quel
manner le Conclusion serra accordant al nature des several Actions, veies
Kitch. f. 219, 220, etc.

Concord.
COncord est define destre le voyer Agreem^t ent' perties que entendont le
levying ^ un Fine de Terres un al auter, quel voy and en quel manner les Terres
serront pass: car en le form' de ceo plusors chooses sont destre consider. Vide
west. part. 2. tit. Fines and Concords, sect. 30.

Concord est auxy un Agreem^t fait sur ascun Trespass commit perent' deux ou
plusors, and est divide en un Concord Executorie, and Execute. Vid. Plow. Casu
Reniger and Fogasse, fo. 5, and 6. ou il appear' per le opinion ^ ascuns, Que
l'un ne lia pas, come esteant defective; l' aut', esteant absolute, oblige le
perties. Et uncore per le opinion de auters, en m^ le case, il est affirm, Que
Concords Executorie sont perfect, and ne meynes lyeront pas q^ Concords
Executed, fol. 8. b.

Est teign de tardiff temps, q^ entant que actions sur assumpsits sont ore en
use queux sueront rare devant le reign de Roy H. 8. que ou un accord ove un
assumpsit sur quel un action gist est bone plea en touts ceux actions, a queux
ceo devant fuit bone plea si fuit execute.

Concubinage.
COncubinage est un Exception verse luy q^ port Action pur sa Dower, per q^ il
est allege, Que el ne fuit loyalment espouse al party en queux terres el
quere destr^ endowe, mes son Concubine. Brit. cap. 107. Bract. li. 4. tract. 6.
cap. 8.

Conders.
COnders sont tiels q^ estoia^t sur les alt lieus prochein al coast del Mere,
al te^ps del piscary p^ Haleques, a fair signs ove ramaus, etc. en lour
maines al Piscarers, quel voy le troop des Haleques passont; car ils q^
estoyant sur ascun alt Petre poyent ceo mieux veier q^ tiels que sont en lour
Neifes. Ceux sont auterment appel Huers and Balkers, come appiert per le
Statute de 1 Jac. cap. 23.

Condition.
COndition est un Restraint ou Bridle annex al chose, issint q^ per le non
performance, ou feasans de ceo, le party al Condition receivera prejudice and
perde, and per le performance and fair^ de ceo, commodity and advantage.

Touts Conditions sont ou Conditions actual and express, q^ux sont appel
Conditions en Fait: ou ils sont implicit ou tacit', and nient express les
queux sont Conditions en Ley.

Auxy touts Conditions sont ou Conditions precedent and vaiant devant l'Estate,
and sont execute ^; ou subsequent and venient apres l' Estate, and executorie.

Le Condition precedent gain and obtain le chose ou Estate fait sur Condition,
per le performance de le Condition.

Le Condition subsequent guard and continue le chose ou Estate fait sur
Condition, per le performance del ycel.

Actual and express Condition, q^ est appelle un Condition en Fait, est un
Condition annexe per express parols a Feoffm^t, Lease, ou Grant, ou e^
escript, ou sauns escript; Si come jeo enfeoffe un ho^e e^ terres, reservant
Rent destre paid a tiel Feast, sur Condition, que si le Feoffee fail de
payment al jour donques il serra loyal pur moy de reenter.

Condition implicit ou tacit' est, quant ho^e grant al aut' le Office destre
G ^ rde in (...) un Park, Seneschal, Bedle, Bailif, ou tiels semblables, p^
term de vie: and nient obstant que la ne soit ascun Condition express en le
Grant, uncor' le Ley parle covertme^t (...) un Condition, quel est, Que si le
Grantee ne executa pas tou ^ s points apperteignont a son Office, per luy mesme
ou son sufficient Deputy, donque serra loyal pur le Grantor de ent', and
discharge luy de son Office.

Condition precedent est, qua^c un Lease est fait al un pur vie, sur Condition,
Que si le Lessee voyle payer al Lessor xx. li. a tiel jour, donques il avera
Fee-simple: icy le Condition precede l' Estate en Fee-simple, and sur le
performance de Condition gain Fee simple.

Condition subseq ^ ent, and veniens apres, est, quant un grant a J. S. son
Manor de Dale en Fee-simple, sur Condition, Que le Grauntee payer a luy a tiel
jour xx. l. ou auterment que son Estate cessera: icy le Condition est
subsequent and ensuant le Estate en fee, and sur le performance ^ y ^ el
continue l'Estate. Veies pluis de ceo en Cok. li. 3. fo. 64. and en Lit. li. 3.
cap. 5. and Perkins Titulo ultimo ^ Conditions.

Confederacy.
COnfederacy est, quant deux ou plusors luy mesmes confedre de fair^ ascn^ male
ou damage al auter, ou de fair ascun chose illoyal. Et coment q^ Br^ de
Conspiracy ne gist, sinon q^ le pertie soit endite, and en loyal manner
acquit, car issint sont les perols del Breve; uncore faux Confederacy inter
diverse persons serr^ punie, com^t que null chose soit mise en ure: and ceo
appiert per le Livre de 27 Assis. pla. 44. ou la est un note, Que deux sueront
endire de Confedracie, chescun de eux a mainta ^ n auter, le q^ lour meistre
soit very ou faux; and nient obstant que null chose fuit suppose destre mise en
ure, les parties fueront mis a responder, pur ceo que ce^ chose est defendue en
la Ley. Issint en le prochein Article en m^ le Livre, Inquiry serr^ fait de
Couspirato ^ s and Confederators, q^ soy enter eux illiount, etc. de fauxeme^t
endit' ou acquitt', etc. le manner del alliance, and ent' queux: q^l prove
auxy, que confederacy de enditor ou acquitt', com^t que rien soit execute, est
punishable per la Ley. Et est d ^ str^ observe, que ceux Confederacies
punishable per Ley devant que ils sont execute, covient de aver quater
incidents; Primerment, estre declare per ascun matter de prosecutio^, come per
f ^ asant de Bo^ds ou Promises l'un al aut'; seconderm^t, estr^ malicious, come
pur unjust Revenge; tiercement, estre faux encont' un innocent; and dernierm^t,
estr^ horse de Court, voluntarime^t.

Confession del Offense.
COnfession del Offense est ^ quant un prisoner est appeal ou indite de Treason
ou Felony, and trahe al Bar destr^ arraigne, and son Indictment est lie a
luy, and il est demand per le Court que il voyle dire a ceo; donque ou il
confess le Offense and le Enditement destre voyer, ou il estrange luy m^ del
Offense, and plede Nient culpable, ou auterment done un indirect respons, and
issint en effect estoia mute.

Confession poit estre fait en deux sorts, and a deux several fines, L'un est,
il poit Confess le Offense de que il est indict appiertment en le Court devant
le Judge, and submit luy mesme al censure and judgment de Ley; quel Confession
est le pluis certain respons and meux satisfaction que poit estr^ deliver al
Judge a condemuer le Offender, issint q^ il proceda frankment and de son volunt
demesne, sans ascun menace, force, ou extremicie use; car si le Confession
surde de ascun de ceux causes, il ne doit estre recorder. Come feme fuit indict
pur le felonious embleer de Pane al value de 25. and esteant de ceo arraigne,
el confess le Felony, and dit que el ceo fait per le commandment (...) sa
Baron; and les Judges en compassion ne voillent recorder sa Confession, mes
cause luy le pleader Non culpable al Felony: sur que le Jurie trove que el
emblee le Pane per le compulsion de sa Baron encounter sa volunt, p ^ r quel
meistre el fuit discharge. 27 Ass. pl. 50.

L' auter sort de Confession est, quant le prisoner confess l' Endictm^t
destre voyer, and q^ il ad commit le Offense de q^ il est endict, and donq^
devient un Approver cest adire, un Accuser de auters queux ont commit m^ le
Offense de q^ il est endict, ou auters offenses ove luy; and donq^ pria le
Judge daver un Coroner assign a luy, a que il poit fair relation de ceux
Offenses, and del pleine circumstances de eux.

La est auxy un tierce sort ^ Confession fait per un Offender en Felony, q^
nest en Court devant le Judge, come l' auters deux sont, mes devant l' Coroner
en un Esglise ou aut' lieu privilege, sur que l' Offender per l' ancient Ley
del Roialm est de fair son abjuration horse del Royalme.

Confirmation.
COnfirmation est, quant un que avoit droit al ascun Terres ou Tenements fait
un Fait a un auter que voit ent le possession ou ascun estate, ovesque ceux
parolx, Ratificasse, Approbasse, Confirmasse, ove intent de enlarger son
estate, ou fair' son possession perfect, and nie^t defeasible per luy que fait
le Confirmation, ne per ascun auter q^ poit aveigner a son droit.

Don't veies pluis e^ Lit. lib. 3. cap. 9. de Confirmation.

Confiscate.
COnfiscate, cest parol est prise del Latin perol Fiscus, que originalment
signify un Hanaper ou Frail, mes per implication le Treasure del Sovereign,
p^ ceo q^ en veiel temps il fuit mis en Hanapers ou Frailes. Et nient obstant
que nostre Roy ne mis so ^ Treasure en t ^ else chooses, uncore come les Romans
ont dit, que tiels biens q^ fueront forfeit al Treasure del Emperor esteant
Bona Confiscata en mesme le manner nous diomus de tiels biens que sont forfeit
al Eschequer de nostre Roy. Et le title de aver ceux biens est done al Roy per
le Ley, quant ils ne sont claim per ascun aut'; Come si home soit indite, q^
il felonyousme^t emblee les biens dun aut' home, lou en verity ils fontles
proper biens l' endltee, and ils sont mises en Court verse luy come maneur, and
la dema^d est de luy, que il dit as dits biens; as queux il disclaima: per cel
Disclaimer il perdra les biens, coment que apres ils soit acquit del Felony,
and le Roy eux avera come confisq^. Mes auterment est, sil ne disclayma en eux.

Mesm^ le Ley est ou biens sont troves en le possession dun Laron, queux il
disavowa, and puis est attaint de aut's biens, and nemy de ceux; icy les biens
queux il disavowa sont al Roy confisques: Mes ussoit il attaint de mesmes les
biens, ils serroient aver este appelles forfeits, and nemy confisques, nient
obstant son Disavowment. Issint si Appeal de Robbery soit port, and le
Plaintiff interlessa ascun de ses biens, il ne serra receive de enlarger son
Appeal; and entant que null est icy daver les biens issint interlessee, le Roy
eux avera come confisque, accordant al veil dit, Quod non capit Christus, capit
Fiscus. Et come en le ease avantdit le Ley punie l' owner p^ son negligence ou
connivencie, issint le Ley abhor malice, en querance le sanke dascun sans
just cause. Et p^ ceo si A. ad l' biens de B. per bailm^t, ou trover, and B.
port Appeal verse A. p^ prender eux feloniousme^t, and est trove q^ eux fueront
les biens le Plaintiff, and que le Defendant vient a ceux loyalment; en cest
case ceux biens serro^t confisque al Roy p^ le faux and malicious Appeal.

Congeable.
COngeable veigne del perol Francois Conge, id est, venia, and signify en nr^e
Common Ley tant come Loyal, ou loyalm^t fait; and issint est use per Littleton
en son 410. sect. lou il dit q^ l' Entry del Disseisee est congeable.

Conge de Eslire.
COnge de eslire, Venia eligendi, est le Permission Royal de Roy a asc' Deane
and Chapter e^ temps de Vacation eslire un Evesq^, ou a u^ Abbey ou Priorie son
foundation demesn^, eslire lour Abbot ou Prior. Fitzh. Not. Breu. fol. 169. b.
170. b. c. etc. Monsieur Gwyn e^ le Preface a ses Lectures dit, Que le Roy
Angleterre, come Sovereign Patro^ touts Archievesqueries, Evesqueries, and
aut's Benefices Ecclesiastical, ad de ancient temps frank disposition de touts
Dignities Ecclesiastical, oucunque ils happa destre void, investant eux
primerm^t per baculum and annul' and puis per ses Letters Patents; and q^ en
progress de temps ils do^e poyer as ^ aut's a fair Election south asc' forms
and conditions; come nosmem^t, q^ ils a chesc' Vacation dema^deront del Roy
Conge de eslire, cestascavoir, license a proce ^ al Election, and puis de
obsecrer son Royal Assent, etc. Et ouster il affirm per bone probation horse des
Livres del Common Ley, q^ le Roy Joan fuit le primer que granta ceo, and que il
suit puis confirm per Westminster. 1. c. 1. quel Statute suit fait Anno 3. E. 1. and
arere per le Statute de Art. Cleri, c. 2. q^ fuit ordain Anno 25 E. 3. Stat. 3.

Conjuration.
COnjuration est un Compact ou Piot fait per homes combinant eux mesmes
ensemble per serement ou parol a fa ^ r asc' public leide. Mes il est pluis
communem^t use p^ tiels queux o ^ t personal Parlance ove le Diable ou male
Esperit, a cognostre ascun secret, ou de fair asc' chose. Anno 5 Eliz. c. 16.
Et le difference perenter Conjuration and Witchcraft poit este ceo: Pur ceo q^
l' un semble per Orizons and Invocation sur le potent Nosme ^ Dieu, (...)
compeller l' Diable a dire ou fair q^ il luy command; and l' aut' fait plus
per un amicable and voluntary Parlance ou Concord perenter luy ou el, and le
Diable ou Esperit, daver sa ou so^ volunt and chooses effect e^ lieu de sangue
ou aut' done offer a luy, p^merm^t (...) so^ ou sa Soul. Et ambideux ceux
differont de Enchantments ou Sorceries, pur ceo q^ sont personal Parlances ove
le Diable, com est dit; mes ceux sont forsque Medicines and ceremonial forms
de parols, communeme^t appel Charms, sans apparition.

Conservator del Peace.
COnservator del Peace est celuy que ad un especial charge per virtue (...) son
Office a veier le Peace le Roy observe. Quel Peace e^ effect est define destre,
Un detention ou abstinence (...) cel injurious force and violence q^ homes
irregular and indomit sont e^ lour natures apt (...) user envers auters, sinon
q^ ils fuer^ restrain per Leys and pavor (...) Castigac'. De ceux Conservators
Lambert ouster dit, Que devant le temps del Roy E. 3. q^ primerment constitute
Justices del Peace, la suer^ diverse persons q^ per le Common Ley aver^ interest
e^ le gardiancy del Peace. De ceux, ascun ont ceo charge come incident a lour
Offices, and issint include deins m^, nie^t obsta^t ils fuer^ appel per l'
nosm^ de ^ our Office soleme^t: asc' aut's ont ceo folem^t, come (...) luy m^,
and fuer^ de c^ nosm^ Custodes Pacis, Gardians ou Conservators del Peace. Et
ceux ambideux sorts sont areres subdivide per Lambert en son Eirenarcha, l. 1.
c. 3.

Conservator del Truce.
COnservator del Truce fuit un Officer constitute en chescun Port del Mere
south les Letters Patents le Roy, and ad 40 l. p^ son annual salarie al meins.
Son charge fuit ^ enquirer de touts Offenses saits envers le Truce and Safe
conducts del Roy sur le plein Mere, horse des pais and horse des Franchises del
Cinque Ports le Roy, come les Admirals de custom ont use de fair: and tiels
aut' chooses come sont declare Anno 2 H. 5. c. 6. Touchant cest chose poyes lier
l' auter Statute de Anno 4 H. 5. c. 7.

Consideration.
COnsideration est l' essential cause (...) un Contract, sans le quel null
Contract poit lier le parties. Ceo Consideration est ou express, sico^e qua^t
un ho^e bargain a done vint soulz p^ u^ Chival: ou est imply, sico^e qu ^ le
Ley m^ enforce u^ Consideration; come si un ho^e vient e^ u^ common Hostel, and
la co^morant asc' te^ps, prist viands and gisure; ou asc', p^ luy mesme ou son
chival, le Ley presume q^ il entend a payer p^ ambideux, nient obstant riens
soit covenant perenter luy and son Hostler, and p^ c^ sil ne discharge pas le
meason, le Hostler poit retain^ son chival.

Auxy la est Consideration ^ nature and sanke, and valuable Consideration: and
p^ ceo si ho^e soit endet a diverse, aut's, and nien obstant, e^ consideration ^
natural affection, done touts ses biens a son fits ou cousin, ceo serra entend
destre un fraudulent Done deins l' Act de 13 Eliz. c. 5. p^ ceo q^ cest Act
entend u^ Valuable Consideration.

Consistory.
COnsistory est u^ parol emprent del Italianois, ou pluis tossed Lombards, and
signify tant come Praetorium. Est vocabulum utriusque Juris, and est use p^ le
lieu del Justice e^ les Courts Espirituals eu Christians.

Consistory.
COnsolidation est use p^ le Combinancie and unificence per deux Benefices e^
un: and cest perol est pris de le Ley Civil, ou il properm^t signify u^
Uniting del possession, occupation, ou profit, ove le property. Come si home
ad per Legacy usum fructum fundi, and puis purchase le Property ou Fee-simple
del Heir; en cest case un Consolidation est fait des Profits and Property. Vide
Brook tit. Union.

Conspiracy.
Conspiracy, nient obstant q^ e^ Latin and Francois est use p^ u^ Agreement
des ho^es a fair un chose bone ou male, uncore il est co^munem^t prise e^ nr^e
Ley e^ le male part; and est define en 34 E. 1. Stat. 2. destre un Agreement
(...) tiels q^ confederont ou lieront eux mesmes per Serem^t, Covenant, ou aut'
alliance, q^ chesc' de cux portera and aidera lauter fauxm^t and maliciousm^t,
(...) enditer, on fauxm^t a mover ou maintainer Plees; and aux' tiels q^
causant Enfants deins age ^ appealer ho^es (...) Felony, per q^ ils sont
imprison and dureme^t grieve; and tiels q^ reteignout gentes e^ le Pais ove
Liveries ou Fees de maintainer lour Actions malicious: and ceo extend cybien a
les prisors, come les donors. Aux' Seneschals and Reeves (...) grand Sn^s, q^
per lour Seign^rie, Office, ou poyar, assume (...) port' ou maintainer
Quarrels, Plees ou Debares, q^ concernout aut' parties que tiels que toucha^t
l'Estate de lour Sn^rs, ou de eux mesmes. Anno 4. E. 3. c. 11. 3. H. 7. c. 13.
Et de ceo veies pluis, 1 H. 5. c. 3. 18 H. 6. c. 12. auxy en le veiel Livre de
Entries, verb' Conspiracy.

Cest perol en les lieus deva^t rehearse est prise pluis generalme^t, and est
confound ove Maintenance and Champerty; mes en u^ pluis special signification
il est prise p^ un Confederacy perent' deux ou plusors, fauxm^t endit' u^, ou
(...) proeurer un destre endict' (...) Felony. Et le punishm^t ^ Conspiracy
sur un Indictm^t de Felony al Suit le Roy est, Que le party attaint perdera
sont frank ley, al intent q^ il ne soit impannel sur Juries ou Assizes, ou
tiels semblables employm^ts, p^ le testification del voyertie: and sil ad a
fair e^ le Court le Roy, q^ il fait son Attorney; and q^ ses t'res, bie^s and
chattels sont seisie e^ les mains le Roy, ses t'res estreape, ses arbres
defosse, and son corpse commise al prison. 27 lib. Assise 59. Crompton 156. b.
ceo est appel villainous Judgment. Mes si si le party grieve voyle suer un
Brief de Conspiracy, donque veies Fitzh. Nature. Brev. 114. d. 115. i, etc.

Constable.
COnstable est diversement use e^ le Common Ley. Et primerm^t, le Constable
(...) Angleter' q^ est auxy appel Marshal, Stanf. Pl. Cor. fol. 65. de l'
authority and dignity de quel home poit trover plusors arguments and signs,
cybien e^ les Statutes, come les Chronicles ^ c'Royalm Son poyer consist en le
care del common Peace del Ter^e, e^ Faits marshal, and chooses de Chivalry,
Lamb. Duty de Constab. numb. 4. ove que agree le Statute de 13 R. 2. cap 2.
Stat. 1. De ceo Officer ou Magistrate, Gwyn, en le Preface a ces Lectures, dit
a tiel effect; Le Court de Constable and Marshal finist Contracts touchant
Faits de chivalrie horse del Royalme, and treat chooses concernont Guerres deins
le Royalme, come Combats, Blasons de armory, and tiels semblables; mes il and a
fair^ ove Battle en appeal, ne gen^alme^t ove ascun aut' chose que poit estr^
try per les Leyes de Ter^e. Veies Fortescue cap. 32. Cest Office en temps par
devant fuit apperteynant al Sn^rs de certain Manors Jure feudi; and pur quel
cause ceo discontinue veies Dyer 385. Pl. 39.

Horse de cel Magistracy (dit Lambert) ^ uer^ trahe ceux south Constables, les
quels nous appellomus Constables des Hundreds and Franchises, and primerm^t
ordein per l'Statute de Winchest. 13 E. 1. le quel appoint p^ le conservation
del Peace, and view (...) Armor, deux Constables e^ chesc' Hundred and
Franchise; and ceux sont a cest jour appel Alt Constables, p^ ceo que le
increase des gents and peches ad arrere south ceux fait aut's en chesc' Vill',
appel Petit Constables, queux sont de semblable nature, mes de inferior
authority al auter.

Ouster ceux, la sont Officers de particular lieux appel' per cest nosme; come
Constable ^ l Tower, Stanf. 152. 1 H. 4. 13. Constable de Exchequer, 15 H. 3.
St. 5. Constable de Dover Castle, Camb. Brit. p. 239. F. N. B. aut'me^t appelle
Castellaine. Manwood part 1. c 2. 3. de ^ es Leys del Forest, fait mention
(...) un Constable del Forest.

Consuetudinibus and Servitiis. Vide Prescription.
COnsuetudinibus and Servitiis est un Breve, and gist lou jeo ou mes ancestors,
depuis le limitation (...) Assise, (p^ quel veies le Title (...) Limitation en
le Collection de Statutes) ne Fueront seises des Customs ou Services de Mon
Tenant devant; donques jeo aver cest Br^e p^ recover' ceux Services.

Anxy le Tenant poit aver cest Br^e verse son Seigniour; mes apres que le Tenant
ad count, le Seigniour defendera les motes del Count, and repliant dirra, que
il ne distreina pas pur les Customs don't le Count est; and donques il countera
tout le Count de les Customs and Services; and donques le Tenant, que fuit
Plaintiff, deviendra Defendant, and defendra per Battle ou grand Assise.

Consultation.
COnsultation est un Breve, per q^ u^ Cause esteant per devant remove per
Prohibition horse del Court Ecclesiastical, ou Court Christian, al Court le Roy,
est la return arere: Car si les Judges del Court le Roy, comparont le Libell
ove le Suggestion del party, trovant le Suggestion faux, ou nient prove, and
pur ceo le Cause destre tortiousment appel del Court Christien; donque, sur ceo
Consultation ou Deliberation, ^ s decree ceo destr^ return arere; sur que le
Brief en ceo case obtain est appel un Consultation. De ceo vous poyes lier le
Regist. Orig. fo. 44. jesque fol. 58. Vet. Not. Br. fo. 32. and F. N. B. fol.
50.

Contenement.
COntenement semble destre le Frankteneme^t terre q^ gist al Teneme^t ou Meason
q^ est en son occupatio^ demesne: car en Magna Charta, cap. 14. la sont ceux
parols; Un Frank home ne serra amercie pur un petit offense, mes accordant al
quantity del offense, and pur un petit offense, mes accordant al manner de
ceo, savant a luy son Contenement ou Franktenement: Et un Merchant serra auxy
amercy, savant a luy ses Merchandises; and un Villein, savant a luy son Gainage.

Continual Claim.
COntinual claim est, lou home ad droit de enter en certain terres don't un
aut' est seisie en Fee, ou Fee-taile, and il ne osast enter pur pavour de mort
ou battery, mes approach cy pres come il osast, and fait Claim a ceo deins le
an and jour devant le mort de cestuy que ad le terre; si apres cestuy que ad le
terre devie seisie, and son Heir est eins per descent, uncore cestuy que fait
tiel Claim poit enter sur le Heir, nient contristeant tiel descent, p^ ceo q^
il ad fait tiel Continual claim. Mes il covient que cest Claim touts foits
soit fait deins l' an and jour devant le mort le Tenant; car si tiel Tenant ne
morust seisie deins l' an and jour apres tiel ^ Claim fait, and uncore il que
ad droit nosast enter, donques covient al cestuy que ad tiel droit de fair
auter Claim deins l' an and jour apres l'primer Claim^, and apres tiel second
Claim, de fair le tierce Claim deins l' an and jour, si il voit este sure de
saver son Entry.

Mes si le Disseisor devie seisie deins l' an and jour apres le Disseisin, and
null Claim fait, donques le Entry le Disseisee est toll, car l' an and jour
ne serra prise de le temps del title de Entry a luy accrue, mes solem^t de le
temps del darrain^ Claim per luy fait, come est avantdit. Veies pluis de c'en
Littl. l. 3. c. 7. and veies le Stat. 32 H. 8. cap. 33.

Continuance.
COntinuance en le Common Ley est de mesme signification ove Prorogation en le
Civil; come Continuance jesq^ le procheine, Assise, F. N. B. 154. f. and 244.
d. e^ queux ambideux lieus il est dit, Que si un Record en le Treasury soit
allege per l'un party, and deny per laute^r, un Certiorari serra sue al
Treasurer and le Chamberleine de Exchequer; and sils ne certify pas en le
Chancerie que tiel Record est la, ou que est semblable destre en le Tower, le
Roy mittera al Justices, recitant le dit Certificate, and commandant eux de
continue ^ le Assise. En ceo signification est auxy use per Kitchen. 202. and
199. auxy An. 11 H. 6. cap. 4.

Contract.
COntract est u^ Bargain ou Covenant perent' deux parties, lou un chose est
done pur auter, que est appel Quid pro quo; come si jeo vende mon Chival pur
argent, ou si jeo covenant de fair Lease a vous de mon Manor de Dale, en
consideration de xx. l. q^ vous dones a moy, ceux sont bone Contracts, pur ceo
q^ il ad un chose pur auter. Mes si un home fait promise a moy, q^ jeo avera
xx. s. and q^ il voile este dettour a moy de ceo, and puis jeo demand xx. s.
and il ne voyle a moy deliver; uncore jeo navera jam^es Action pur recover cest
xx. s. pur ceo que cest Promise ne fuit Contract, mes nudum Pactum, and Ex nudo
Pacto non oritur Actio. Mes si ascun chose fuit done pur le xx. s. mesque il
fuit forsque al value ^ un denier, donques il fuit bone Contract.

Contra formam Collationis.
COntra formam Collationis est un Brief q^ gist lou home done Terres en
perpetual Almoigne a ascun Meason de Religion, come a un Abbe and la Covent, ou
auter Sovereign, ou al Gardien ou Master de ascun Hospital and sont Covent, de
trover certain pover hime, and de fair aut' Divine service; fills alien^ les
Terres, donq^s le Donor ou ses heirs averont le dit Brief p^ recover le Terre.
Mes cest Brief serra touts foits port verse le Abbot ou so^ successor, and nemy
verse l'Alience, com^t que il soit Tenant: mes en touts auters Actions lou ho^e
demand Franktenement, le Brief serra port verse le Tenant del Terre. Vide le
Stat. West. 2. cap. 41.

Contra formam Feoffamenti.
COntra formam Feoffamenti est un Brief q^ gist lou un hom^ devant le Statute
de Quia emptores terrarum, fait 18 Ed. 1. infeoffe aut' per fait de fair
certain Service; si le Feoffor ou ses heirs distrain luy de fair auter
Service que est comprise en le Fait, donques le Tenant avera cest Br^e, luy
commandant que il ne distrain luy de fair^ auter Service que nest comprise
deins le Fait. Mes cest Brief ne gist pur le Plaintiff que claim per purchase
del primer Feoffee, mes pur le Heir al primer Feoffee.

Contributione facienda.
COntributione facienda est un Brief, and gist lou sont diverse Parceners, and
celuy que ad le part del eigne fait tout le suit al Seigniour, les auters
doyent fair Contribution a luy, and sils ne voylent, il avera verse eux le dit
Breve. En ascuns cases le Heir avera Contribution, and en auter nemy, mes
serra solement charge: Car si home soit seisie de troys Acres de terre, and
conust un Recognizance ou Statute, etc. and enfeoffe A. d'un Acre, and B. (...)
un auter Acre, and le tierce descend a son Heir; si Execution soit sue
solement verse le Heir, il ne avera Contribution verse Purchasor, uncore il est
charge come Terre-tenant, and nemy come Heir; car le Terre, and nemy luy
mesm^, est lie.

Uncore si home soit seisie de deux Acres, l'un de nature de Borough-English,
and lie luy mesm^ come devant, and morust, ayant issue deux files, queux font
partition; en cest case, si l' un soit charge, el avera Contribution; car
sicome un Purchasor avera Contribution verse auters, and verse le Heir le
Conusee auxy; issint un Heir avera Contribution verse auter Heir, car ils sont
in aequ ^ li gradu. Auxy si home soit issint lie, and puis son mort asc' de son
terre descend al Heir del part le pere, and ascun al Heir del part le mere,
l'un solement ne serra charge, mes sil soit, il avera Contribution. En Dower,
si le Tenant vouch le Heir en guard a troys several Seigniors, chescun serra
owelme^t charge.

Si deux, quat', ou plusors homes soye^t severalm^t se ^ sie ^ Terre, and ils
touts joyn^ e^ un Recognisance; en cest case le Conusee ne poit extend le Terre
del asc' des Conusors solement, mes touts doient owelment estre charge: car
com^t que le Terre del Conusor mesme poit este solement extend q^nt diverse
ho^es ont purchase ascun del Terre subject al Recognisance, pur ceo q^ le
Purchasor est en auter degree ^ ue le Conusor mesme; uncore un de les Conusors
ne serra solement charge, car il estoyt en owel degree ove les auters Conusors.
Auxy le terrenant d'un Debtor sur un extent avera contribution de l'heir del
Debtor, quel veies 1 Cro. Eyer versus Taunton. Si Judgment soit done verse deux
Disseisors en Assise pur le Terre and damages, and lun Disseisor morust, l'
Execut' ne serra agard verse le surviving Disse^sor que fuit party al tort, mes
cybien le Heir come le Disseisor serra owelment charge. Mes auterment est en
personal lien; come si 2 sont lie en u^ Obligat', la le charge survivera

Et ou est dit, que l' un Purchasor avera Contribution, nest per ceo entend, q^
les auters doneront ou alloweront a luy ascun chose per voy de Contribution;
mes doit estre entend, q^ le pertie q^ est solem^t extend per tout poit per
Audita querela, ou Scire facias, come le case require, defeat le Execution, and
per ceo serra restore a touts les mesne perfits, and chaser le Conusee de suer
Execution de tout le Terre: issint en cest manner chesc' serr^ contributorie,
cestascavoire, le Terre de chesc' Terre-tenant serra owelment extend.

Convocation.
COnvocation est communement prise pur le Assembly de Clerks p^ consult' ^
chooses Ecclesiastical e^ te^ps de Parlem^t: Et sico^e la sont deux Measons de
Parliament, issint la sont deux lieus appel Measons de Convocation l' u^ appel
le pluis Alt Meason ^ Cnvocation, ou les Archiovesq^s and Evesques sedont,
severalment per eux mesm^s; laut' l'Inferior Meason de Co^vocation, ou tout le
residue des Clerks sedot. V. Prolocutor.

Conusance.
COnusance de Plee est un Privilege que un City ou ville ad per grant le Roy,
de ten^ Plee de touts Contracts, and des Terres deins le precinct del
Franchise, and q^ quant ascu^ home est impleade p^ asc^ tiel chose en le Court
le Roy al westmin', les Majors ou Bailiffs de tiels Franchises, ou lour
Attorneys, poient demander Conusance del Plee, cestascovoir^, que le Plee and
le matter serra plead and determine devant eux.

Mes si le Court al Westminster soit loyalment seisie del Plee devant que
Conusance soit demand, donques ils ne averont Conusance pur cest Suit, p^ c^
que ils ont neglige lour temps (...) deman ^ c^: mes cest ne serra bar al eux
^ aver Conusa^ce e^ aut' Action; car ils poyent demand Conusance en un Action,
and omit ceo e^ un auter, a lour pleasure.

Et notes, que Conusance ne gist en Prescription mes il covient monstre Letters
Patents le Roy pur ceo.

Coparceners.
COparceners. Veics Parceners.

Copyhold.
COpyhold est un Tenure pur quel le Tenant ad riens a monstre forsq^ les Copies
des Rolls fait per le Seneschal del Court son Sn^r: Car le Seneschal, sicome
il enroll' touts aut's chooses faits en le Court le Sn^r, issint il auxy fait
tiels Tenants q^ sont admit e^ le Court a asc' parcel de Tr^e ou Tenements
apperteynant al Manor; and le Transcript (...) c^ est appel Court-Roll, le
Copy de q^ le Tenant prist de luy, and detinet come son sole Evide^ce. Co. li.
4. fol. 25. Cest Tenure est appel Base tenure, p^ ceo q^ tient al volunt le
Sn^r. Kitchen, fol. 80. Fith. Not. Brev. fol. b. c. que dit, q^ fuit accustom
destre appel Tenure en Villenage, and que cest Copyhold nest forsque un novel
nosme. Uncore nest meerement al volunt le Sn^r, mes accordant al Custom del
Manor; issint q^ si un Copyholder ne pas infreint le Custom del Manor, and per
se forfeit son Tenure, ne semble tant destoyar al volunt son Sn^r pur son
droit, come destre dislieu quant a luy pleist. Les Customs Manors sont
infinite variant en un point ou auter fere en chesc' several Manor.

Primerm^t, ascun Copyhold est fineable, and ascun certain. Ceo q^ est fineable
le Seign^r assesse a quel Fine q^ il voyle, quant le Tenant est a ceo admit:
ceo q^ est certain est un sort enheritance, and appel e^ plusors lieus
Customary, p^ c^ q^ le Tenant morant, and le Tenure esteant void, le prochein
du sangue, paya^t le customary Fine, ne polt estr^ deny destre admit.

Secondm^t, asc' Copyholders ont per Custom les Boys crescant sur lour t're
demesn^, quel per le Ley ils ne poyent aver.

Tiercement, la sont Copyholders que tient per le Verge en Ancient demesne, and
nient obstant ils tient per Copy, uncore ils sont en nature de Franktenants;
car si tiel home fait Felony, le Roy ad an, jour, and vast, come en case de
Frankteneme^t Ascun aut's tient per Common Tenure, appell mere Copyhold, and
sils commit Felony, lour terre jammes escheatera al Sn^r del Manor.

West. part. 1. l. 2. sect. 646. issint define un Copyholder; Tenant per Copy
de Courtroll est celuy q^ est admit Tenant ascun Tr^es ou Tenements deins un
Manor, que temps ouster le memory du home, per use and custom del dir Manor,
ont este dimisable as tiels q^ p^ndero^t mesme e^ fee, fee-taile, p^ vie, ans,
ou a volunt, accordant al Custom del dit Manor, per copy de Court roll.

Coraage.
COraage est un Imposition nient ordinary, foundue sur asc' nient usual chose
and semble destre de certain Measures de Grain. ^ ract. l. 2. c. 16. numb. 6.
use ceux parols, Corus tritici, destre u^ measure ^ Grain; and e^ mesme le
Capit', number. 8. ad ceux parols: Sunt enim quaedam communes Praestationes, quae
Servitia non dicuntur, nec de Consuetudine veniunt, nisi cum necessitas
intervenerit, vel cum Rex venerit: sicut sunt Hidagia, Coraagia, and Caruagia,
and alia plura de necessitate, and ex consensu communi totius* Regni
introducta, and quae ad Dominum Feudi non pertinent; and de quibus nullus
tenetur tenent' suum acquietare, nisi se ad hoc specialiter obligaverit in
Charta sua.

Cordwayner.
COrdiner vel Cordwayner venust cel Francois Cordvannier, id est, Suitor
calcearius, a Corti genere quod Cordovan apud Gallos nominat ^ r. Et est u^
perol mult use e^ nostre Statutes, come e^ 3 H 8. c. 10. and 5 H. 8. c. 7. and
1 Jac c. 22.

Cornage.
COrnage est un sort de Grand-Serjeanty, le Service ^ quel Tenure est, (...)
ve^tier u^ Cornu qua^t asc' Invasion des enemies del Pais Artiq^ est discrie.
Et (...) c^ plusors ko^es tiendront lour t're e^ les perts Septentrionals,
environ le Pariet co^munem^t appel l' Pariet des Picts. Came. Bri. p. 609.

Veies Littleton, fol. 35. ou dit, Que en le Marches de Escoce asc' teignont
del Roy per Cornage, cestascovoir, per ventier u^ Cornu, pur garner homes (...)
Pais quant ils oyent que enemies veignont; quel Service est Grand Serjeanty.

Corodie.
COrodie est un All ^ wance de Meat, Pane, Boyer, Argent, Vestments, Lodging,
and ^ iels chooses necessary pur sustena^ce. Ceo asc' soits est certain, ou le
certainty des chooses limit; asc' foits uncertain, lou nest l ^ mit certainty
que il aver.

Et asc' de eux commence ^ Grant fait per asc' home al aut', and poet estre p^
vie, ans, c tail ou fee: and asc^ Corodies sont de common droit, sicome chesc^
Founder (...) Abbyes and aut's Measons (...) Religion Papistick avoyent
authority ^ assigner e^ mesme les son Pere, Friar, Cousin, ou aut' q^ il voit,
sil fuit un Meason de Moignes; and si il soit Founder del Meason de Nuns,
donques ceo p^ sa mere, Soer, ou aut' mulier: and touts jours cest proviso
fuit, q^ il q^ ad Corodie e^ un Meason de Moignes, ne duist mitter un feme de
prender ceo, ne ou Corodie fuit due en un Nunnerie, la il ne fuit loyal (...)
appointer un home de receiver ceo; car en ambideux cases tiel Presentation fuit
destre reject. Et cest Corodie fuit due cybien a un Common person Founder,
sicome ou le Roy m^ fuit Founder. Mes ou le Meafon fuit tenus en Frankalmoigne,
la le Tenure m^ fuit un discharge (...) Corodie encounter touts homes, sinon q^
il fuit ap^s charge voluntarlm^t; come ou le Roy voit mitter son Br^e al Abbey
p^ un Corodie p^ un tiel, le que ils admit, la le Meason doit este charge per
ceo a touts jours, si le Roy soit Founder ou nemy. Veies Brief de Corodio
habendo en Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 230.

Coroners.
COroner est un ancient Officer de trust, and de grand authority, ordeine
destre un principal Co^servator ou guardian ^ le Peace, a port' record des Plees
del Corone, and del son view demesne, and de diverse aut's chooses, etc. Et p^
ceo en temps de Ed. 1. fuit enact q^, Pur ceo q^ petit gentes meins sages
soyent eslieus ore (...) novei communem^t al Office del Coroner, ou mestier
serroit q^ perbes ho^es, loyalx, and sages, se entermellant (...) cel Office;
purview est Que per ^ outs les Counties soient eslieus sufficient ho^es
Coroners, (...) pluis loyalx and pluis sages Chivalers, q^ mieulx sachant,
puissent and voilent a cel Office entender, and q^ loyalm^t attachent and
representent les Plees del Corone.

Et nient obstant le letter de cest Statute ne soit p^cisement observe, uncor'
al meins l' intent doit estre pursue cy pres come poit; issint q^ pur le
default des Chivalers and Gentlehomes, furnished ove tiels qualities sico^e le
Statute parle, (de que ils y ad diverse) auters poient este eslieu, ove cest
addition, que ils soyent virtuous and bone Christians. Veies de ceo en le Br^e
de Coronatore eligendo, in Fitzh. N. B. fol. 163.

Quant le Coroner est d'enquirer del mort (...) ascun person, ou fair aut'
chose concernant son Office, il doit ceo fair en person: and sur le subit
mort' d' ascun, il mesme doit veyer le mort corpse qua^t il fait inquiry, ou
auterment l' inquiry nest bone; car sil voile enquirer (...) ascun mort person
sans luy veyer, cest sans authority, and issint void. Et si le corpse soit
enterre devant son venu, il doit ceo Recorder en ses Rolls, al intent q^ le
Ville ou l'enterrement fuist fait serra amerce pur ceo devant les Justices en
Air, sur le view des Rolls del Coroner. Et nient meins le Coroner doit
defover le corpse horse ^ l terre, and prendre l'enquirie sur view del corpse,
come il ferroit sil navoit este enterre: and la ville serra aux' amerce, sils
suffront luy giser sur la terre a putrefaction ou grand ordeur, sans mander al
Coroner. Et si le Coroner soit negligent en venir a fair son office, apres que
les Bailiffs, ou homes de Pais ont mande p^ luy, il serra punie.

Com^t per le Ley q^ Coroner ne puit enquirer (...) asc' Felony, forsq^ de
mort de home; tamen ad este dit, que e^ Northumberland ils enquiront de touts
Felon^; mes cel authority ils maintenont per Prescription. Si ho^e foit occise
ou merge e^ les braches ou sauses del mere, lou home poit veier terre de un
part and de auter, le Coroner enquirera de ceo, and nemy l' Admiral, pur ceo
que le Pais poit bien de ceo aver conusance.

Mes le Coroner del hostel le Roy ad un exempt jurisdiction deins le Veirge,
and le Coroner del County ne poit entermeddle deins c^; sicome le Coroner del
hostel ne poit entermeddle deins le County horse del Vierge.

Si le Demandant ou Plaintiff soit non-sute, ou si Judgem^t soit done verse le
Tenant ou Defendant, ou semblables, les Justices ne unques assesseront asc^
Amerciame^t, mes le Clerks des Garrants fait Estreats de eux, and deliver eux
aux Clerks de Assise deins chesc' Circuit, a deliver eux al Coroners en chesc^
County, ^ afferer ou assesser l'Amerciame^ts, p^ ceo q^ ils sont pense pluis
indifferent, entant q^ ils sont elect per tout le County.

Si un Approver dit, que il commence son Appeal deva^t le Coroner per Dures,
ceo serra try per le Coroner; and si le Coroner ceo deny, l'Approver serra
pendus. Per queux cases il appiert, q^ le Ley done grand credance and
authority al Coroners.

Corporation.
COrporation est u^ chose permanent, q^ poit avera succession: Et est un
Assembly and joining ensemble (...) diverse en u^ Fellowship, Fraternity, and
meant, de q^ un est le Test and principal, les aut's sont le Corpse; and cest
Test and Corpse joint ensemble font le Corporation. Et de Corporations, asc^
sont Spirituals, ascuns Temporals; and (...) Spirituals, asc^ fueront
Corporations de mort persons en Ley, and ascuns auterment; and asc^ sont per
authority del Roy solement, ascuns ont este ^ un mixed authority.

Et de ceux queux son Temporal, ascuns sont per authority de Roy auxy, and
ascuns per le Common Ley del Royalm.

Corporation Spiritual, and de mort persons en le Ley, est lou le Corporation
consist ^ u^ Abbe and Covent, queux ont lour commencem^t del Roy, and le Pape,
quant il y ad a fair cy.

Corporation Spiritual, and del able persons en Ley, est, lou le Corporation
consist (...) un Dean and Chapter, Master del College ou Hospital; and cest
Corporation ad com^enceme^t de Roy solement.

Corporation Temporal per le Roy est un Mayor and Com^unaltie.

Corporation Temporal per authority del Common Ley est le Assembly en
Parliament, le quel consist del Roy, le Test del Corporation; les Seigniours
Spirituals and Temporals, and les Commons del Royalm, le Corpse del Corporation.

Corpse politic.
Corpse politic sont Evesq^s, Abbes, Priors, Deans, Parsons d'un Esglise, and
tiels semblables, queux ont succession en un person solem^t.

Si terre soit done al Mayor and Communaltie p^ lour vies, ils ont Estate per
entendment nient determinable. Issint est si Feoffm^t soit fait de terre al
Deane and Chapter, sans parlance de Successors. Release d'un Mayor p^ ascun
sum de argent due al Corporation en son nosme demesne nest bone en Ley. En
case de un sole Corporation, ou Corpse politic come Evesque, Parson, Vicar,
Master (...) Hospital, etc. null Chattel ou en Action ou possession alera en
succession, mes les Executors ou Administrators del Evesq^, Parson, etc. eux
avera; car Succession e^ corpse politiq^ est come enheritance en case d'un corpse
private. Mes auterm^t est en case ^ un Corporation aggregate de plusors, come
Deane and Chapter, Mayor and Com^unaltie, and semblables; car la ils e^
judgment del Ley ne unques deviont.

Uncor^ le case del Cha^berlain ^ Londres differt (...) touts ceux, and son
Successor poit e^ so^ nosme demesne aver Execution ^ un Recognisance conust a
son Predecessor p^ Orphanage money: and le reason est, p^ ceo q^ e^ cest case
le Corporarion del Chamberlain est per Custom, and m^ le Custom q^ ad luy
create, and fait u^ Corporation e^ Succession qua^t al dit special purpose
concerna^t Orphanage, ad enable le Successor a p^nder tiels Recognisances, Ob ^
igations, etc. que sont faits a son Predecessor. Et tiel Custom est foundue
sur grand reason; car les Executors ou Administrators del Chamberlain ne doient
ent'meddle ove tiels Recognisances, Obligations, etc. queux per le dit Custom
sont prise e^ le corporate capacity del Chamberlain, and nemy e^ son private.
Mes Evesque, Parson, etc. ou asc' sole Corporation, q^ sont Corpse politic per
p^scription ne poyent prender Recognisance ou Obligation, mes solem^t a lour
private, and nemy e^ lour politic capacity; car la fault Custom a prender
Chattel en lour politic o ^ corporate capacity.

Corpus cum Causa, vel Habeas Corpus.
COrpus cum Causa est un Brief issuant horse del Chancery, a remover tant le
corpse q^ le Record del Cause ^ ascun home en Execution sur Judgment pur Dett,
en Banque le Roy, etc. cy remaner donque il ad satisfy le Judgment. Fitzh.
Not. Brev. fol. 251. e.

Ceo gist auxi a remover un acco^ horse des inferior Courts de Record en ascuns
Court del ley en Westminster.

Corruption de Sanke.
COrruption de Sanke est, quant asc' est attaint de Felony ou Treason, donques
son Sanke est dit destr^ corrupt; per reason de quel ses enfants, ne asc' (...)
son sanke, ne poient estre heirs a luy, ne al ascun auter Ancestor, pur ceo q^
ils doyent claim per luy. Et sil fuit Noble ou Gentlehome devant, il and touts
ses enfants per ceo sont faits ignoble and ungentle, ayant regard al Nobility
ou Gentry ils claim per lour pere, q^ ne poit este fait sane arere per Grant
le Roy sans authority (...) Parliament.

Mes si le Roy voile pardon l'offendor, il voile purger le Corruption del Sanke
des tiels issues queux sont nee puis le Pardon, and ils poyent inherit le terre
de lour Ancestor purchase al temps del Pardon, ou apres; mes issint ne poyent
ils queux fueront nee devant le Pardon. Auxy il q^ est attaint de Treason ou
Felony ne serra heir a son pere: mes cest disabilitie estoppera auters destre
son heir, issint que durant son vie le terre potius eschetera al Seigniour del
Fee, que discen ^ al auter

Mes si il que est attaint morust sans issue de son corpse, durant le vie son
Ancestor, donque son puisne Frete, Soer, ou Cousin inheritera: car si leigne
fits soit pendus, ou abjure le Terre p^ Felony, durant le vie le Pere il nest
impedim^t mes que le puisn^ fits puit inheriter. 27 Ed. 3. c. 77. Et sil que
est attaint de Treason ou Felony en le vle de son Ancestor, purchase le Pardon
le Roy devant le mort son Ancestor, uncore il ne serra heir al dit Ancestor,
mes la Terre potius eschetera al Seigniour del Fee per le Corruption del sanke,
26 Ass. placit. 2. Mes si leigne fits soit Clerk convict en le vie son Pere,
and puis son Pere morust; en cest case il inheritera la Terre son Pere, pur ceo
que il ne fuit attaint de Felony; car per le Common Ley il serroit inherit
puis q^ il ad fait son Purgation. Et jammes per le Stat. de 18 Eliz. cap. 6. il
serra subit enlarge puis le arser en le maiue, and deliver horse de prison, and
nient commit al Ordinary a fair son Purgation; mes il est en mesme plite come
il ad fait son Purgation.

Si home que ad Terre en droit la feme ad issue, and son Sank est corrupt per
Attainder de Felony, and le Roy luy pardon; en cest case, si le feme morust
devant luy, il ne serra Tenant per le courtesy, pur le Corruption del sank de
cel issue. Mes auterment est sil ad issue puis le Pardon; car donque il serra
Tenant, nient obstant que le issue que il avoit devant le Pardon ne soit
inheritable. 13 H. 7. c. 17.

Si home seisie de Terre ad issue deux fits, and leigne est attaint en le vie
son Pere de Felony, and pur ceo execute, ou auterment morust durant le vie de
son pere, and puis le pere morust seisie; le Terre discendra al puisne fits,
come Heir a son pere, si leigne fits and issue donques en vie. Mes si le eigne
fits, que fuit attaint, ad ascun issue en vie, que inheritera mes pur le
attainder; le Terre escheatera al Seigniour, and ne discendera al puisue friar,
pur ceo que le Sank del eigne friar est corrupt, 32 H. 8. Die. 48.

Mes est destre observe, Que la sont ascuns chooses fair Treason per Act de
Parliament, de queux com^t q^ ho^e soit attaint, uncore son Sanke nest corrupt,
and il forfeitera riens, forsque ceo que il ad pur son vie demesne: Come si
home soit attaint sur le Stat. de 5 Eliz. cap. 1. ordeigne envers le
maintenance del authority del Evesque and See de Rome, ceo ne extendera a
fair ascun Corruption de sanke, le disheritance dasc' Heir, forfeiture dasc'
Dower, ne al perjudice del droit ou title dasc' person, aut' q^ le Offender
dura^t son natural vie solement.

Issint si home soit attaint per force del Statute de 5 El. ca. 11. provide
encounter le Clipping, washing, filing, and rounding de Argent, uncore la nest
ascun Corruption de sanke. En m^ le manner est del Stat. de 18 El. cap. 1. 1
Jac. cap. 12. 1 Mar. ca. 12. encounter illoyal assemblies; and 5 El. ca. 14.
encounter le Forger de faits; and le Stat. de 31 Eliz. cap. 4. encounter le
Embeasilling le Ordnance. Armor, and Artillery le Roigne.

Corse present.
COrse present sont parols significant un Mortuarie; and le reason p^ q^ le
Mortuarie est issint appel est, pur ceo q^ ou un Mortuarie soloit destre due,
le Corpse del mieux des Avers fuit, solonque le Ley ou Custom, offer^ ou
present al Priestre. Veies an. 21. H. 8. c. 6. ou enter aut' chooses est enact,
Que null Mortuary ne Corse present, ne ascun sum ^ argent ou auter chose, pur
ascun Mortuarie ou Corse present, serra demand, receive, ou ad, mes solement
en tiels lieus and Villes ou Mortuaries ont estre accustom desire prise and
pay.

Cosinage.
COsinage est un Brief q^ gist lou mon Besayel, mon Tresayel, ou aut' Cousin,
devie seisie in Fee-simple, and un Estranger abata, cest adire, ent' en les
Tr^es; donques jeo avera verse luy cest Brief, ou envers son Heir, ou son
Alienee, ou envers q^cunque que aveign^ apres a les dits T ^ rres. Mes si mon
Ayel devie seisie, and un Estranger abate; donques jeo avera un Brief de Ayel.
Mes si mon Pere, Mere, Friar, Soer, Uncle, ou Aunt, devie seisie, and un
Estranger abata; donques jeo avera un Assise de Mortdancester.

Cottage.
COttage (Cotagium) est un petite Meason pur le habitation des povers homes,
sans asc' Terre a ceo apperteinant, do^t mention est fait en le prim^t Stat.
fait e^ 4 E. 1. Et le inhabitant en tiel meason est appelle un Cottager. Mes
per un Stat. fait en 31 le Roigne Eliz. ca. 7. null ho^e poit edifier tiel
Cottage pur habitation, sinon q^ il fait giser a ceo quat' acres de Terre de
Franktenem^t; except e^ Cities and Market-Boroughs, ou deins un mill ^ l Mere,
ou p^ le habitation des Laborers en Mines, Sailers, Foresters, Pastors, etc.

Coucher.
COucher est un Factor que remain en asc' lieu ou Pais p^ chivisance. An. 37 E.
3. c. 16. Il est auxy use p^ le common Livre en que ascun Corporat' entrast
lour particular Faits pur un perpetual register de eux.

Covenable.
COvenable est un perol Francois q^ signify convenient ou suitable, come
Covenably endowed, An. 4. H. 8. c. 12. Ceo est antiq^me^t escri convenable,
come e^ le Stat. 27 Ed. 3. St. 2. c. 17.

Covenant.
COvenant est un Agreem^t fait per Fait en escript, and ensele perenter ^ eux
persons, lou chesc' de eux est tenus al auter de performs certain Covenants
pur son part; and si lun de eux ne tient pass son Covenant, le auter ^ era
ent un Brief de Covenant.

Et Covenants sont ou en Ley, ou en Fait, Cok. lib. 4. fol. 80. ou Covenant
express, and Covenant en Ley, Cok. lib. 6. fol. 17. Un Covenant en Ley est ceo
q^ le Ley entend destre fait, nient contresteant que en parols ne soit
express: Come si home demise un chose al aut' p^ un certain t'me, le Ley
entende un Covenant del pert le Lessor, que le Lessee tiendra tout son term
enconter tout loyal encumbrance. Covenant en Fait est ceo que expressement est
agree perenter les parties.

Auxy la est Covenant meerm^t personal, and Covenant real. Fitz. Not. Brev.
fol. 145. semble adire, que Covenant real est, per q^ ho^e luy oblige de passer
un chose real, come Terres ou Tenements; sicome Covenant d' levier un Fine de
Tr^e, Covenant meerment personal est, ou home covenant ove auter per fait, de
edifier un meason, ou de server luy. Veies le veil Livre de Entries, verbo
Covenant.

Mes nota bien, Que nal Br^e de Covenant serra mainteinable sans especialty,
sinon en le City de Londres, ou en ascun auter tiel live privilege per custom
and use.

Coverture.
COverture est, qua^t un home and un feme sont espouse ense^ble; ore asc' chose
que est fait concernount la feme en le temps de le continuance (...) cest
Marriage, est dit destre fait durant le Coverture, and le feme espouse est
appel un Feme Covert, and per ceo disable ^ contracter ove ascun, al perjudice
d ^ sa mesm^ ou sa baron, sans son consent ou privitie, al meins sans son
allowance ou confirmation. Veies Brook cest Title. Et Bracton dit, Que touts
chooses q^ sont la femes, sont le barons, nec ad la feme poyar de sa mesme, mes
le baron, lib. 2. cap. 15. and que le baron est le test sa feme, lib. 4. cap.
24. and arere, que en ascun Chose legal el ne poit responder sans sa baron,
lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 3. Et si le baron alien le Terre fa feme durant le
Coverture, el ne poit ceo dedire e^ le vie sa baron.

Covin.
COvin est un secret Assent determine en le les coeurs de deux ou plusors, al
prejudice dun auter: Come si Tenant p^ term de vie, ou Tenant en le tail,
secretm^t conspire ove un auter, que lauter recovera verse le Tenant pur vie le
Terre que il tient etc. en prejudice de celuy en le Reversion.

Ou si Executor ou Administrator permit Judgm^ts ^ estre enter envers luy per
fraud and plead eux al obligation, ou si ascun fraudulent assignm^t ou
conveiance soit fait, la party greive poet plead Covin and relieve luy mesm^.
See the Stat. 2. R. 2. c. 3. 3 H. 7. c. 4. 13. El. c. 5. and 27 El. c. 4.

Count.
COunt est tant come l'original Declaration e^ un Process, uncor^ pluis toft use
e^ real q^ personal Actions; come Declaration est pluis apply al personal que
real. F. N. B. 16. a 60. d. n. 71. a. 191. e. 217. a. Libel ove les Civilians
comprehend a^bidexu. Et uncor^ Count and Declaration sont asc' foits confound;
come Count en Det, Kit. 281. Count ou Declaration en Appeal, Pl. Cor. 78. Count
en Trespass, Brit. c. 26. Count e^ Action de Trn^s sur le Case p^ Slander,
Kitch. 252. Conteurs ad este prise pur tiels queux home receive de perler p^
luy en asc' Court, come Advocates; and Pledeurs destr^ un auter sort, come
Artornies pur un que est present en person, mes souffre un auter a dire pur
luy. Countours, per M. Horn, sont tiels Sergea^ts erudite e^ les Leyes, que
servont les lay gents de defender lour Actions en Judicature pur lour fee.

Countee.
COuntee dicitur a comitando, quia comitantur Regem; and fuit le pluis emine^t
and supreme dignity del Conquest, jesque le unzisme an del Roy Ed. 3. ou le
Black Prince fuit create Duke de Cornwall: and ceux q^ de ancient temps fuero^t
create Cou^tees, fueront de Sanke-Royal; and jesque a cest jour le Roy en touts
ses appellations style eux per le nosme Charissimi consanguinei nostri. Et p^
ceux causes le Ley do^e a eux haut and grand Privileges; and pur ceo lour corpse
ne serra arrest p^ Det, Trn^s, etc. p^ ceo q^ le Ley entend q^ ils assistont le
Roy ove lour counsel p^ le weal public, and gardont le Royalm en safety
per lour prowess and valor. Auxy pur mesme le cause ils ne serr^ mise en
Juries, coment q^ ceo soit pur le service del Pais. Et si issue soit prise, si
le Plaintiff ou Defendant soit un Countee ou nemy, ceo ne serra try per Pais,
mes per le Brief le Roy.

Auxy le Defendant navera jour de grace verse le Seigniour del Parliament, pur
ceo que il est intend (...) attender le public. Et (...) ancient temps le
Countee fuist Praefectus, seu Praepositus Comitatus, and ad le charge and
custody del County: and ore le Viscount ad tout l'authoritie p^
administration and execution de Justice que le Countee avoit, Cok. lib. 9. fol.
49. and p^ ceo est appelle Viscount.

Countenance.
COuntenance semble destre use pur Credance ou Esteem. Veil N. B. 111. in ceux
perols; L' Attaint serra grantus as povers ho^es q^ p^ndront lour serem^t que
ils ont reins de q^ ils poyent fair lour Fine, ouster lour Countenance. En
mesm^ le manner est use 1 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 4. en ceux perols; Visconts
chargeront le Dettors le Roy ove tant q^ ils poye^t levier ove lour serem^ts,
sans abatement del Countenance des Dettors.

Countermand.
COuntermand est, quant chose execute per devant est apres per ascun act ou
ceremony frustrate per le party que ad ceo primes fait. Come si home ad fait
son darreine Volunt, per que il devise son Terre al J. S. and pulls il enfeoffe
auter home (...) mem^ le Terre; ore ceo feoffm^t est un Countermand al Volunt,
and le Volunt quant al disposition del Terre est void. Si feme seisie de Terre
en fee fist sa volunt en escript, and per ceo devisa que si A. de B. luy
survivera, donque el devise and bequeath a luy and a ses heirs sa Terre, and
apres el entermarrie ove le dit A. de B. ore, pur prisel de luy a baron and
coverture al temps de sa mort, le Volunt est countermand.

Mes si un Baroness widow retain deux Chapleins solonque le Statute, and prist
un de Nobility a baron, and puis le baron mo rust, le Reteiner de ceux deux
Chapleins remain, and ils sans novel Reteiner poient prender deux Benefices;
car lour Reteiner ne fuit determine ne countermand per tiel Marriage.

Si feme fist Lease a volunt, and puis prist baron, ceo Marriage nest
Countermand al Lease, sans express matter fait per le baron apres le Marriage
a determiner le Volunt. Auxy si Lease soit fait al feme a volunt, and el prist
baron, le Lease continue nient obstant le Marriage, and il nest Countermand al
ceo.

Counterplee.
COunterplee est, lou un port un Action, and le Tenant en son Respons and Plee
vouch ou appel asc' home pur garrant son Title, ou prayer aid de auter que ad
melior Estate come de cestuy en la Reversion; ou si un estrange al Action vient
and priera destre rescev' de saver son Estate; si le Demandant reply a ceo, and
monstr^ cause que il ne doit tiel home voucher, ou de tiel home aid aver, ou
que tiel home ne doit este rescev' cest Plee est appel u^ Counterplee al
Voucher, Aid, ou Resceit, come le case est. Mes quant le Voucher soit allow,
and le Vouchee vient eius and demand quel chose le Tenant ad de luy voucher,
and le Tenant monstr^ son cause, and le Vouchee plede ascun matter de avoid le
Garrantie; c^ est appel Counterplee del Garrantie.

County.
County est tant en significat' come Shire, ambideux continent un circuit ou
portion del Royalm^, en q^ tout le terre est apporc', p^ le mieux governance de
c^, and pluis facile administrat' de Just' issint q^ la nest ascun pert ^ l
Royalm q^ ne pas gist deins asc' County: and chesc' County est govern per un
annual Officer, le quel nous appellomus Vic' q^ ent' aut's duties apperteinant
a son Office, mit en execut' touts les Mandats and Judgments des Courts l' Roy,
q^ux so^t destr^ execute deins le circuit. Fort. ca. 24. De ceux Counties la
sont 4. pluis observe q^ auters, appel County Palatines; come Lancast.
Chester, Durham, and Ely, an. 5 El. cap. 23. La fuit auxy le County Palat' de
Hexam, an. 33 H. 8. cap. 10. mes de ceo quaere.

County Palat' est Jurisdiction de cy alt nature, q^ ou touts Plees toucha^t
le vie ou maihe^ du^ ho^e, appel Plees ^ l Corone, sont usualment tenus and
execute e^ le nosm^ le Roy, and ne poit estre fait en le nosm^ dascun aut'; le
primer Guardian de ceux, per especial Charter del Roy, en temps par devant
mitteront horse touts Briefs en lour nosm^ demesne, and fairont touts chooses
touchant Justice cy absolutement come le Roy mesme en aut's Counties, solem^t
conusant luy destre lour Superior and Sovereign Mes per le Statute de 27 H.
8. cap. 25. cest poyar fuit mult abridge, le q^l veies, and Cro. Jurisdict. 137.

Ouster ceux deux sorts de Counties, la sont aux' Counties corporate, come
appiert per le Statute de 3 Ed. 4. 5. and ceux sont ascun Cities ou veil Burghs
del Terre, sur queux les Roys de cest Gent ^ nt don tiel Franchises
extraordinaries; come Londres, Eborum, Chester, Gloucester, and plusors auters.

County en un auter signification est use p^ le County Court que le Viscount
tient chescun moys deins son liberty, ou per luy mesme ou per son Deputy.
Veies p^ ceo Dalton's Officium Vicecom'. De ceux Counties ou Shires la sont
account destre 37 en Angleterre, ouster les 12 en Gales.

Court.
COurt est diversm^t prise: asc^ foits p^ le Meason ou le Roy est p^sent ove
son ordinary attendants; and auxy le lieu ou Justice est judicialment ministre,
(...) q^ux vous poies trover 32 several sorts en Cromp. Jurisd. bien describe.
Et de ceux le greinder sort sont Courts de Record; ascuns ne sont, and p^c^
esteem Base Courts en respect des auters.

Ouster ceux auxy la sont Courts Christein, issint appel p^ c^ q^ ils treat
chooses especialment apperteln^t al Christianisme, and tiels que sans boa^
science en Theology ne poie^t estre pas bien decide; esieant tenus cydevant
per Archievesq^; and Evesq^s, come ^ l Pape de Rome; mes ap^s son ejectme^t ils
tiendront eux per l' Authority le Roy, Virtute Magistratus sui, come l'
Admiral ^ Angleterre tient son Court: sur q^ ils proceed, q^ ils mittont horse
lour Citations en lour nosmes demesne, and nemy en le nosme le Roy, come les
Just, des Courts le Roy font; and p^ c^ com^ l' Appeal de ceux Courts gisera al
Rome, jamm^s per le Stat. de 25 H. 8. cap. 19. il gist al Roy en son Chancery.

Court Baron.
Court Baron est u^ Court q^ chescun Sn^r dun Man^or ad deins son Precincts
demesn^. De c^ Court and Court Leet Kitch. ad escrie un Livre plein^ de bon
erudition. Cest Court, come semble e^ Cok. l. 4. f. 26. est double: Et p^ c^ si
home ayant un Man^or en un Vil' granta le inheritance des touts les Copyholds a
ceo appertenants a un aut', ceo Grantee poit tener^ un Court p^ le customary
Tenants, and accepter Surrenders al use (...) auters, and fair Admittances and
Grants. L' auter Court est del Franktenants, q^ est properm^t appel le
Court Baron, en q^ les Suitors, cest adire, les Franktenants, sont Judges; ou
de aut' Court le Sn^r ou son Seneschal est Judge.

Coutheutlaugh.
COutheutlaugh est celuy q^ voluntarim^t receive ho^e utlage, and relieva ou
cacha luy; e^ quel case il fuit e^ veil te^ps liable al m^ le punishment que le
ho^e utlage m^ fuit. Br. l. 3. tra. 2. c. 13. n. 2. Il est compose (...) ^
outh, i. conus and utlaw, utlage, come nous ^ am^es eux appellomus.

Cranage.
CRanage est un liberty p^ user un Crane p^ le extrair^ des Wares ou biens horse
dun Niefe, Bareau, ou Nassele, al ascun Creek ou Wharf, and de fair^ benefit de
c^. Est use auxy p^ les Deniers q^ux sont prises p^ ceo labor.

Creansor.
CReansor venust del Francois Cariance, id est, Persuasio; and signify cestuy
que confist auter ove ascun Det, soit c^ en deniers, wares, ou auters chooses.
Ceo parol est use en le Veil N. B. en le Br^e de Audita querela, fol. 66. a.

Creek.
CReek est c^ pert dun Havr^ ^ quel asc' chose est discharge ou disburden horse
del Mere. Et cest perol est use en le Stat. 5. an del Roigne El. c. 5. and 4 H.
4. cap. 20. etc.

Croft.
CRoft est un petite Clause ou P ^ ghtle adjoynant al un Mease, use ou p^
pastur^ ou arable, come c^ pleist le owner. Et semble destre derive del veux
parol Creaft, id est, Handicraft, p^ ceo que ceux terres sont p^ le plus part
manures ove le principal craft del owner.

Cucking-stool.
CUcking-stool est un Engin^ invent pur le punishment des Scolds and inquiet
femes; and suit appel en ancient te^ps un Tumbrel, come appiert per Lamb. en
son Eirenarch. l. 1. c. 12. Et per les cases and Judgment en Eire, en le temps
E. 3. Pillory and Tumbrel sont appendant al un Leet, sans queux droit ne poit
estr^ sait as parties deins l' view. Keloway fol. 140. b.

Et en le Stat. 51 H. 3. ca. 6. ceo est appel Trebuchet.

Cui ante divortium.
CUi ante divortium est un Br^ que gist quant Alienation est fait per le baron
del Terre la feme, and puis Divorce est ew inter eux; donques la feme avera
cest Brief, and le Brief dirra, Cui ipsa ante Divortium contradicere non potuit.

Cui in vita.
CUi in vita est un Br^e que gist lou home est seisie ^ Terres en Fee-simple,
Feetaile, ou pur vie, en droit sa feme, and aliena mesme le Terre and dev ^ e;
donques el avera cest Brief pur recoverer la Terre.

Et nota, Que en cest Brief son Title doir estre monstre, si soit de purchase,
ou inheritance le feme. Mes si le baron alien le droit sa feme, and le baron
and la feme deviont, le Heir la feme avera un Brief de Sur cui in vita.

Cuinage.
CUinage. Veies Cuynage.

Cuntey.
CUntey cuntey est un kind ^ Trial, come appiert per Bract. en ceux parols;
Negotium in hoc casu terminabitur per Cuntey cuntey, sicut inter Cohaeredes, l.
4. tr. 3. c. 18. Et arer e^ m^ le lieu; In Brevi de recto negotium terminabitur
per Cuntey cuntey. Et tiercem^t, l. 4. tr. 4. c. 2. Terminabitur negotium per
Breve de recto, ubi nec Duellum, nec magna Assisa, sed per Cuntey cuntey
omnino; le quel semble destr^ tant come per l' ordinary Jury.

Curfew.
CUrfew vie^t des deux parols Francois Courir, cover, and Feu, Fire. Est use
ove nous p^ un Peale vespre, per q^ le Conqueror com^and chesc' home de prender
garnie p^ le coverture de son Feu, and l' extinguishme^t de son Lumen: issint
que en plusors lieus a cest jour un Campan^ est usualment tinta prochein temps
du Lect, il est dit de ^ inter Curfew.

Curia avisare vult.
CUria avisare^ vult est un Deliberation q^ le Court ente^d pre^dre sur asc'
difficile point ^ un Cause, devant Judgm^t soit resolve. Pur q^l veies le Novel
Livre de Entries, verbo Curia, etc.

Curia claudenda.
EST un brief ou action a compeller auter a fair un fence ou mure q^ le def'
doit fair ent' son terr' and la terr' del Plaintiff.

Currieur ou Courroieur.
COuroieur est un que dress and liquor Cuir, and est issint appel del Francois
parol Cuir, id est, Corium. Cest perol Currier est frequent en touts les
Statutes faits p^ le bon feasance de Cuir, come en 1 Jac. cap. 22. etc.

Cursiter.
CUrsiter est un Officer ou Clerk apperteynant al Chancerie, que fait horse
Original Briefs, 14 and 15 H. 8. cap. 8. Sont appel Clerks del Course e^ le
Serem^t des Clerks del Chancerie, appoint an. 18 Ed. 3. Stat. 5. La sont de
ceux vint quat', q^ ont allotta a chescun (...) eux ascun Counties, en le quel
ils font horse tiel Original Breves que iont per le subject require, and sont un
Corporation int' eux mesmes.

Courtesy de Angleterre.
Courtesy de Angleterre est, lou home prent feme seisie e^ Fee-simple, ou
Fee-tail general, on seisie come Heir de la tail special, and ad issue per la
feme, male ou female; soit issue mort ou e^ vie, si la feme devie, le baron
tiendra le Tr^e dura^t sa vie, per la Ley (...) Angleter' Et est appel Tenant
per le Curtesied' Angleterre, p^ c^ q^ est use e^ null auter Royalme forsq^
ta^tsolem^t e^ Angleterre. Si l ^ Enfant ne unques soit vise, donque la baron
ne serra Tenant per le Courtesy; mes si le issue soit nee en vie, ceo suffist.

Si la feme soit deliver (...) un Monster, que and le shape de homes, ceo nest
pas Issue en Ley; Mes coment le issue ad ascun deformity ou defect en le maine
ou pee, and uncore ad humane shape, ceo suffist de fair le baron Tenant per le
Courtesy. Et en ascun cases le Temps del nestre est material, and en ascun
nemy. Pur ceo, si home prist feme Enheretrix, q^ est grandment enseint per luy,
and le issue est rippe horse (...) sa ve^ter en vie; ore il ne serra Tenant per
le Courtesy, car ceo doit commencer per le issue, and consummate per le mort la
feme, and le Estate de Tenant per le Courtesy covient a toller le immediate
descent. Mes si baron ad issue per sa feme, and puis Tr^e descend al feme, soit
le issue donque mort ou en vie, il serra Tenant per le Courtesy; car le temps
del nestre del issue nest mat^rial si ceo soit en la vie sa seem.

Si Terres sont dones al seem and al heirs males de sa corpse, and el prist
baron, and ad issue file, and morust; le baron ne serra Tenant per le Courtesy,
car le issue ne poit per asc' possibility enherit' mesme les Tenements. Auxy
come un feme alien, espousant u^ subject ^ Roy, ne serra endowe; en mesme le
manner un home alien ne serra Tenant per le Courtesy.

Auxy si home seisie de Tr^e en droit sa feme soit attaint ^ Felony, ayant
issue, and donque purchase le Pardon le Roy, and puis son seem morust; la il ne
serra Tenant per le Courtesy: Mes sil ad issue per son feme nee puis le Pardon,
en tiel case il serra.

Curtilage.
CUrtilage est un Garden, Yard, Camp, ou piece de vacant tr^e gisant prochein
and apperteina^t al Message, West. part. 2. sect. 26. Et issint est use 35 H.
8. c. 4. 37 Eliz. 2. Coke l. 6. fol. 64.

Customary Tenants.
CUstomary Tenants sont tiel Tenants que tient de la Custom del Man^or, come
lieur special Evidence.

Custom.
Custom poit este define dee^ un Ley 'ou Droit nient escrie, q^ esteant
estable per veil use, and le consent de nostre Ancestors, ad este and jourem^t
mise en ure. Custom est ou general ou particular. General est ceo q^ est
approve per tout Angleterre, de queux vous poyes lier e^ Doctor and Student, l.
1. c. 7. plusors fort digne destre conus. Particular est c^ q^ appertient a ceo
ou tiel County, come Gavelkind al Kent; ou a c^ ou tiel Sn^rie, City, ou
Ville.

Custom differt del Prescription, p^ ceo q^ Custom est common a plusors, and
Prescription, per l' opinion (...) ascun, est particular a celou tiel home Auxy
Prescription poit estre p^ un pluis curt temps q^ Custom, sc. pur cinque ans
ou meins. Come si Fine soit duement levy (...) Tr^es ou Tenements, and ne soit
dedit deins cinque ans, c^ est Barr^ a chesc^ Claim a touts jours.

Si home omitra son Continual claim pur un an and jour, donque le Tenant en
possession prescribe u^ Privilege envers l' Entry le Demandant and son Heir,
Fitzh. Not. Brev. 79. Horse de nostre Statutes vous poyes aver pluis grand
diversity: issint que ceo semble destre un voyer dit, Que Prescription est un
Exception foundue sur tant temps ale and pass que le Ley limita p^ le
pursuance (...) ascun Actlon. Un example poit este prise horse del Statute (...)
1 H. 8. c. 4. que enact, Que e^ touts Actlons populars informatio^ serra fait
deins trois ans pulls l' offense commi, auterm^t destre de null vigor.

Custom est auxy use p^ le Tribute ou Toll que Merchants payont al Roy de
porter eins and horse Merchandises, 14 E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 21. En quel
signification est appel Custuma en Latin, Reg. Orig. 129. a. 138. a.

Et de ^ erm^t, p^ tiels Services que Tenants de un Manor doiont a lour Sn^r.
Veiel livre ^ Entries, verb' Custom. Veies Consuetud. and Servitiis.

Custos Brevium.
Custos Brevium est le primer Clerk apperteinant al Court (...) Com^on Pleas;
ou Bank le Roy, l' office de quel est de receive and tener touts les Briefs and
mitter eux sur Files, chescun Return per luy mesme, and al fine (...) chesc^
Term (...) receiver del Prothonotaries touts les Records de Nisiprius, appel
le Postea. Le Custos Brevium aux' fait entry des Br^es ^ Covenant, and le
Concord sur chesc' Fine, and fait horse Exemplifications and Transcripts de
touts les Br^es and Records en son Office, and de touts les Fines levy. Les
Fines, puis q^ ils sont engrosse, les parts de ceo sont divide perent' le
Custos Brevium and le Chirographer: ^ q^ le Chirographer reteigna touts foits
le Brief de Covenant and le Note; le Custos Brevium, reteina le Concord, and
Pee del Fine, sur quel Pee le Chirograph' causa le Proclamations destre indorse
qua^t ils touts sont perclaime.

Custos Rotulorum.
CUstos Rotulorum est celuy q^ ad le Custody ^ s Rolls ou Records des Sessions
del Peace, and, come ascuns semble, del Commission del Peace mesme, Lam. l. 4.
c. 3. p. 373. Il est touts foits Justice del Peace and Quorum en le County ou
il ad son Office; and per son Office il est piuistoft appel un Officer ou
Minister, que un Judge, pur ceo que le Commission del Peace impose ceo especial
Charge per express parols sur luy, Quod ad dies and loca predicta Brevia,
Praecepta, Processus and Indictamenta praedicta coram te and dictis Sociis tuis
venire facias.

Custos des Spiritualities.
CUstos des Spiritualties est celuy q^ exercisa le Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction ^ ascun Diocese durant le Vacancie del See; l'appointment de quel
per le Ley Canon appertein^ al Dean and Chapter, Ne Sede vacant aliquid
innovetur. Mes en Angleterre l' Archievesque del Province ad ceo per
Prescription. Uncore plusors Deanes and Chapiters (come dit M. Gwyn en le
Preface a son Lectures) demand ceo per veils Charters des Roys de cest Terre.

Cuynage.
CUynage est un parol use e^ le Statute 11 H. 7. c. 4. p^ le framer (...)
Estaigne en tiel form come solont (...) ceo framer, p^ le pluis apt portage de
ceo en auters lieus.

D. Damage.
Damage est un part per ceo q^ les Jurors sont enquir^, donant lour Verdict,
p^ le Plaintiff ou Demandant en u^ Action real ou personal. Car puis le Verdict
done sur le principal cause, ils sont auxy demand lour consciences touchant
Costs, queux sont les Expenses del Suit, and Damages, que co^tein le parde q^
le Plaintiff ou Demandant ad sustain per cause del tort a luy fait per le
Defendant ou Tenant.

Et enta^t q^ Justice and Reason vollont, q^ quant le vie, le credit, les tres,
les beins, le eorruption de son sanke, and tout ceo q^ home ad a forfeit' e^
cest monde, sont mise e^ peril sans voyer cause, mes solem^t sur le malicious
Accusation dun aut' per Appeal, q^ l'Appellee averoit satisfaction p^ ceo
envers son faux Accuser, and sil and sufficient, donque verse luy ou ceux que
luy abbetta ou procura de pursuer le Appeal: Pur ceo le Common Ley donast
Dam^ages al Defendant en un Appeal, and assign a luy un mean pur le recoverie
de eux, quant il fuist acquit del Felony, come est 48 Edw. 3 22. Mes entant
que les Dam^ages verse le Procurors and Abbettors fueront destre recover per
Original Brief, cestascavoir, per Brief de Conspiracy, and nient auterment, que
ne fuist cy curt remedy come le heinous degree del tort require, le Statute de
Westminster le 2. An. 13. Ed. 1. cap. 12. pur le pluis subite redress fuit
ordain.

Mes si le Defendant bar le Plaintiff de son Appeal, donque il ne poit
recover Dam^ages per le dit Stat. envers le Plaintiff, forsque le Bar soit
tiel q^ acquit le Defend' ^ l Felony. Et si le Defendant plead que le
Appellant est ou Bastard, ou ad un Eigne friar, ou tiels Pleas en bar, and
per eux bar le Plaintiff; uncore il ne recovera Damages verse luy, pur ceo
que le Defendant poit estre endite arere de mesme le Felony, and attaint,
nient obstant ascun de ceux Pleas; car per eux le innocence del Defendant nest
pas try, and pur ceo il navera Dam^age. 27 Ass. pla. 25. Mesme le ley est, si
le Defendant bar le Appellant per Demurrer en Ley: Et issint est, si en
Appeal del mort du^ home le Defendant plead al issue, and est trove per Verdict
que il occide le ho^e en so^ defense demesne, ou per Misadventure; en ceux
cases il ne recovera Dam^ages. Mes si le Defendant en Appeal ad le Release del
Appellant, ou le Pardon le Roy, and voile eux waiver, and pled' Nient culpable,
and est acquit; en cest case il recovera Dam^ages.

Cest parol Damna est prise en la Ley en deux several significations; l'un
properm^t and generalment, l' auter relative and stricte. Properment, come est
en cases ou Dam^ages sont foundue sur le Stat. de 2 H. 4. cap. 1. and 8 H. 6.
c. 9. ou Costs sont enclude deins cest parol Dam^ages; car Damnum en son proper
and general signification dicitur a demendo, cum Diminutione res deterior fit:
and en cest sense Costs de Suit sont Damages al Plaintiff, car per eux res sua
diminuit'. Mes quant le Plaintiff monstr^ le tort fait a luy a Damage de tiel
sum, ceo est destre prise relative pur le tort que est pass devant le Brief
port, and sont assesse occasion Transgressionis praedict and ne poit extender
al Costs del Suit que sont future, and d' un auter nature. Veies Co. l. 10. f.
116, 117.

Damage fesant.
Damage fesant est, quant les Beasts de un estrang' sont en auters ter^s, sans
license del Ten^t d' la tr^e, and la mangeront, trea ^ ou auterment spoilont
les blees, grass, bois, ou tiels semblables: En quel case le Tenant que ils
issint damage poit pur ceo prender, distrain^ and impound eux, cybien en le
nuict come en le jour. Mes en auters cases, come pur Rent and Services, and
tiels sembles, null poit distrainer en le nuict.

Danegeld.
DAnegeld est quiet' esse de quodam Tributo q ^ quide^ Dani levaveru^t in
Anglia: Auxy le Tribute mesme.

Ceo com^ence primerment en te^ps le Roy Etheldred, q^l esteant en grand
distress per le continual Invasion de les Danes, p^ purchaser Paix, fuit
compell' (...) charge son Pais and people ove grand Payments; car il primerm^t
done eux al cinque several paim^ts 113000. li. and puis grant al eux 48000 li.
annualment.

Darreine Presentment.
DArreine Presentment, Assise de ceo gist ou jeo ou mon ancestors ad p^sent un
Clerk al un Esglise, and puis, le Esglise esteant void per le mort del dit
Clerk, ou auterment, un estranger present son Clerk al mesme Esglise en
disturbance de moy. Et coment ceo est auterment use, veies Bract. lib. 5.
tract. 2. Regist. orig. fol. 30. Si baron and feme present al Advowson en droit
la feme, que est appendant al Man^or la feme, and puis le baron alien un Acre,
parcel de Man^or, ove le Advowson en fee, a un estranger, and devie, and puis
le estranger presenta, and puis alien le Acre a un auter en fee, savant le
Advowson a luy mesme, and puis le Esglise voida; ore la feme presentera, and
s'el soit disturb, el avera Assise de Darreine Presentment; p^ ceo que le
Advowson suit sever del Acre. Mes si le Advowson fuit appendant. al Acre,
donque covient al fem^ a recover le Acre avaunt que el presentera al Advowson.
F. N. B. 32.

Darreine Continuance.
EST quant Defendant ou Tenant pendant le suit plead novel matter fait post
ultimam continuationem placiti. V. Thelwel. 361. and 2. Cr. 261

Dean and Chapter.
DEan and Chapter est un Corpse corpor^ Spiritual, co^sista^t (...) plusors able
persons, come nosmem^t de Deane (q^ est principal) and ses Prebends, and ils
ensemble font le Corporation. Et sicome cest Corporation poye^t joyntment
purchase Terres and Tenements al use de lour Esglise and Successors; issint
auxy chescun de eux severalment poit purchase al use de luy and ses heirs.

Et sicome la sont deux Foundations ^ Esglises Cathedral e^ Angleterre, le
Veiel and l'Novel, (l'Novel so^t ceux queux le Roy Henry le huict, sur
suppression (...) Abbeys, transform^ de Abbot, ou Prior and Covent, al Dean^
and Chapter:) issint la sont deux means del Creation de ceux Deanes: car ceux
del Veiel Foundation sont conferr^ a lour Dignity semble al Evesques; le Roy
primerment mittant horse son Conge desltire al Chapter, le Chapter donque
esliant, le Roy renda^t son Royal assent, and l'Evesque luy confirmant, and
dona^t son Mandate de luy installer. Ceux del Novel Fou^datio^ so^t per un voy
pluis curt enstall' per les Letters Pat' del Roy, sans aut' Election ou
Confirmation.

Cest parol est auxy apply aux diverse q^ sont les prim^s de certain peculiar
Esglises ou Chapels; come le Dean del Chapel del Roy, le Dean del Arches, le
Dean del Chapel de S. George en Windsor, etc.

Debet and solet, Vide Custom and Prescription.
DEbet and solet sont parols use en le Veiel Natura Brevium, fol. 98. Le Brief
de Secta molendini, esteant en le Debet and solet, est un Br^e de Droit, etc.
Et arrere, fol. 69. Un Brief de Quod permittat poit estr^ plead en le County
devant le Visc', and poit e^e en le Debet and solet, ou le Debet solement, come
le Demanda^t claim^. Pur q^ nota, Que ceux Br^es q^ so^t port e^ tiel sort ont
ceux perolx e^ eux, come formal parolx nient destre omit.

Et accordant al div ^ rsity del Case* le Debet and solet sont use, ou le Debet
tentum. Come si ho^e per Br^e sue de recover^ asc' droit de que son ancestor
suist dispereperse (...) le Tenant ou son ancestor; donque il use solement le
parol Debet en son Br^e, and nest apt de user Solet, p^ ceo q^ son ancestor
fuist disseise, and l' Usage discontinue: mes sil sue p^ asc' chose que est
primerment deny a luy, donque il ad ambideux ceux parols, Debet and solet; p^
ceo que ses ancestors devant luy and luy mesme ont usualm^t enjoy le chose p^
q^ il suist, come Suit al Molin, ou Com^on de Pasture, jesque cest p^sent
refusal del Tenant. Reg. orig. fol. 144. a.

Debet and Detinet.
DEbet and Detinet: Mult poit estre dit (...) ceux parols que ad estre dit des
perols prochein adevant. Come, si home soit oblige a un auter, and fait son
Executor, and morust, and l'argent fuist due e^ le temps del Testator, and
apres l'Executor ceo ne renda pas; la l' Action port verse luy pur ceo serra e^
le Detinet tantu^: and issint en touts Actions port per Exec ^ tors come
Executors, le Br^e serra e^ le Detinet tantum, com^t^ q^ le duty acrue en lour
temps demesne, p^ c^ que le chose ou damages recover serra Assets.

Mes si Lessee pur ans rendant Rent fait ses Executors, and morust, and le Rent
incur puis le mort del Testator; ore Action (...) Debt serra port en le Debet
and Detinet: car quant Executor ou Administrator prist les Profits, rien serra
Assets mes les Profits ouster le Rent. Come si le Terre vault dixe livers per
an, and cinque livers est reserve; en cest case rien serra Assets forsque le
cinque livers ouster le Rent, and pur ceo le Br^e serra pur le Rent en le Debet
and Detinet. Coke lib. 5. fol. 31.

December Tales.
December Tales. Veies Tales.

Decies tantum.
DEcies tantum est un Brief q^ gist lou u^ Juror e^ asc' Enquest prist arge^t
(...) un pertie cu (...) aut', p^ done son Verdict' donques il payera dixe
foits a tant' q^ il ad receive: and chescun que voile suer poit aver l'Action,
and avera l'un moietie, and le Roy l'auter.

Mes si le Roy en tiel case release per son Pardon a tiel Juror, uncore ceo ne
serra Bar ves cestuy que port l'Action q^ recover l'aut' moietie, si non
Action soit co^me^ce devant le Pardon le Roy: mes si le Pardon soit devant asc'
Action, il est Bar encounter touts gents.

Et mesme le ley est (...) touts Actions populars, lou un part est al Roy,
l'auter al party q^ suera. Auxy les Embracers, que percuront tiels Enquests,
serront punie en mesme le man^er, and ils averont Imprisonment ^ un an. Mes null
Justice enquirera de ceo de Office, mes solement al Suit del party.

Deciners.
DEciners sont tiels queux soloyent d'aver le survey and check de Dixe
friburgs, p^ le maintenance del Peace le Roy; and les Limits ou Circuit de lour
Jurisdiction fuit appel Decenna. Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c. 15. Aux'poyes lier
Flet. l. 1. c. 27. and Reg. orig. fol. 68. b.

Ceux semble d'aver grand authority en le temps des Saxons, p^ndant conusance
de Causes deins lour Circuit, and reformant torts per voy de Judgem^r, come
poyes lier e^ les Leyes del Roy Edw. publie per Lambert, number. 32. Auxy la est
mention fait de ceux en Britton, b. 12. q^ dit e^ le person le Roy (come il
escria tout son Livre) en tiel manner: Nous voillomus q^ touts tiels que sont
14 ans d'age fairont serem^t q^ ils serront sufficient and loyal a Nous, and q^
ils ne voilent estr^ Larons, ne assentant a Larons, and q^ touts soyent
profess destr^ de c^ ou tiel Dozeine, and fair ou offer Bail de lour Behavior
per ceux ou cells Deciners; exceptant Religious persons, Clerks, Chivalers, and
lour eigne fits, and Femes. Uncore mesme le Author e^ so^ 29. Chap. prochein al
fine dit, Que touts al age ^ 12 ans and desuis sont punishable p^ nient vener
al Tourn de Visc', exceptant Countees, Prelates, Barons, Religious persons, and
Femes.

Mesme le Ley est ou les Deciners font presentment, que un Laron est prise pur
Larcinie, and deliver al Visc'. Et Kitchen horse del Regist. and Britton issint
dit, Religious persons, Clerks, chivalers, ou Femes ne serront Deciners, fol.
33. Horse de quel poit estre collct, q^ cest perol riens auterm^t implie mes
tiel q^ per son Serem^t de Loyalty a son Prince est settle e^ le fraternity
ou society dun Dozeine, car nest usual a cest jour ^ trover Surety issint a
fair^. Et jam^es un Dozeine semble ^ exten ^ cy tant come le Leet extenda, p^
ceo q^ e^ Leets solem^t cest Serm^t est administer per le Seneschal, and prise
per tiels q^ sont ^ age (...) 12 ans and desuis resident deins le compass del
Leet ou ils sont jurus. Fitzh. Not. Brev. 161. a. Les particulars de cest
Serement poyes lier e^ Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c. 1. number. ou il mitta eins
quindixe ans pour l' age de ceux q^ sont jurus al Peace le Roy; mes l. 3.
tract. 2. c. 11. number. 5 il nosme douze ans. Vles Inlaugh.

Horse de queux premises poit estre observe le diversity perenter l'ancient and
ceux de nr^e temps e^ cest point (...) Ley and Government, cybien p^ le age
(...) ceux q^ sont destre jure, come aux' q^ Deciner nest james use pur le
primer home ^ un Dozeine, mes pur luy que est jure al Peace le Roy; and
denierment, q^ jammes la ne sont asc' Dozeines, forsque Leets; and q^ null home
communem^t done aut' Security p^ gar ^ le Peace le Roy mes son Serem^t
demesne, and que pur c^ null respondera pur l'offence ^ un auter, mes chescun
pur luy mesme.

Declaration.
DEclaration est un Monstrance en escript de le grief and complaint de le
Demanda^t ou Plaintiff envers le Tenant ou Defendant, en q^ il suppose (...)
aver receive tort. Et cest Declaration doit estre plain and certain, pur ceo q^
il impeach le Defendant, and auxy chose celuy a responder. Mes nota, que tiel
Declaration fait per le Demandant verse le Tenant en Action real est properm^t
appel un Count.

Nota. Que le Count ou Declaration doit contain Demonstration, Declaration,
and Conclusion. Et en Demonstration sont conteynes troys chooses, (cest adire)
que se pleynte, envers que, and de quel chose. Et en le Declaration doit estre
comprise, coment and en quel manner le cause del Action surdit enter les
parties, and quant, and quel jour, an, and lieu, and a que l'Action serra done.
Et en Perclose il doit aver and profer de prover son Suit, and monstr^ les
Damages queux il sustain per le tort a luy fait.

De deoneranda pro rata portionis.
DE deoneranda, etc. est un Brief q^ gist lou u^ est distrein p^ Rent, doit
estre paia per auters proportionablement ove luy. Fitzh. Not. Brev. fol. 234.

Dedimus potestatem
DEdimus potestatem est un Br^e quel gist lou un ho^e sua en le Court le Roy,
ou est sue, and ne puit bien traveiler, donques il avera cest Br^e direct a
ascun Justice, ou aut' discreet person en le Pays, de doner a luy power pur
admit ascun p^ son Atturny, ou ^ levy Fine, ou de prender son Confession, ou
son Respons, ou auter Examination, come le matter require.

Defaut.
DEfaut est un Offense en omitting ceo que doit estre fair; and pluis
com^unement pris p^ Non-apparence en Court a jour assign. Br. lib. 5. tract.
3. and Fleta lib. 6. cap. 14.

Defamation.
DEfamation est quant home perle Scandalous perols de asc' auter ho^e, Court de
Justice, Magistracy, ou Title ^ t're: p^ quel le party serra punie accordant
al nature and quality (...) son offense; ascun foits per Action sur le Case
pur Slander, al Common Ley, and auter foits en le Court Christian. Come si home
contrive ascun Faux novels, and horribles and faux Messoinges de Prelates,
Dukes, Counts, etc. donq^ un Action De Scandalis Magnatum gisera verse luy per
le Statute ^ 2 R. 2. cap. 5. and ceo esteant perve, le party offendant serra
grievousment punie. Mes p^ parols de Defamation verse un private home, la le
party grieve avera son Action sur le Case pur le Slander, and recovera en
damages accordant al quality del peche; en que le quality del person que est
issint defam^ est destre fort considre.

Mes pur Defamations determinable en le Court Christian, ils covie^t de aver
trois incide^ts: Prim^me^t, covie^t concern^ matt' meerm^t Spiritual, and
determinable e^ le Ecclesiastical Court; come p^ appell' luy Heritique
Schismatique Advouterer, Fornicator, etc. Secundem^t, q^ il concern^ matt'
meerm^t Spiritual solement: car si tiel Defamation concern^ ascun chose
determinable al Common Ley, le Ecclesiastical Judge navera conusans de ceo:
Come si un Divine est destre present a un Benefice, and un (a defeater luy de
ceo) dit al Patron, que il est un Heritique, ou un Bastard, ou que il est
Excommenge, per q^ le Patron refuse a presenter luy, and il parde son
Preferment; il avera Action sur le Case pur ceux Defamations, tendant tiel
fine. Auxy si feme soit oblige que el vivera contine^t, ou si Lease soit fait a
luy quamdiu casta vixerit; en ceux cases Inco^tine^cie serr^ try per le Com^on
Ley. Tiercem^t, com^t q^ tiel Defamation soit meerment and solement Spiritual,
uncore cestuy que est defame ne poit suer la pur amends ou Damages, mes le
Suit covient estre solement pur punishment del peche, pro falute animae cestuy
que issint offend.

Et quant al Slander de un Title al terre, fi A. dit q^ B. ad droit en les
Terres de C. per que C. est damnifie, donque il poit aver Action sur le Case,
p^ le Defamatio^ de son Title, verse A. Et nient obstant q^ B ad un colorable
Title, uncore A. serra punie, entant q^ il ad imprise sur luy notice del Ley,
and intromit en un matr^ q^ ne luy pas concerna. Mes si home dit, q^ il mesme
ad droit al Terre de un auter; en cest case null Action p^ Defamation gist,
nient obstant que il conust que son Title est faux, Coke lib. 4. fol. 18.

Defeisance.
DEfeisance est un Condition q^ relate a un Fair, come a un Obligation,
Recognisance, ou Statute, q^ estea^t perform per le Obligor ou Recognisor, le
Act est disable and fait void, sico^e sil ne unques pas ad este fait. Et la
est null Garranty, Recognisance, Rentcharge, Annuity, Covenant, Lease p^ ans,
use al Common Ley, ou tiels semblables, mes q^ ils poyent per u^ Defesance,
fait ove le mutual consent de touts ceux q^ sueront perties a le creation de
eux, per Fait estre adnul, discharge, and defeat. Et le difference perent' u^
Proviso ou Condition en fait and un Defeasance est e^ c^, Que le Proviso ou
Condition est annexe ou ensert e^ le Fait ou Grant; ou un Defeasance est
usualment un Fait per luy m^ conclude and agree perent' les perties, and ayant
relation a un auter Fait.

Et pur ceo si le Condition de un Obligation soit repugnant al Fait, l'
Condition est void, and l' Obligation bone: Come si le Condition soit, que il
ne suera Obligation, c^ est void, auxy bien come est (...) un Feoffment, sur
Condition que le Feoffee ne prendra my les Profits. Mes un Defeasance est un
Grant q^ est fait apres le Obligation, pur defeat' m^ le Obligation; and c^ est
bon^, com^t que il soit repugnant, and issint nient semble a un condition, 21
H. 7. f. 24. b. Pur le form and man^er de Defeasances accordant al diversity
^ l Case veies West. part. 1. Symb. lib. 2. sect. 230, 231, etc.

Defense.
Defense est ceo que le Defenda^t doit fair immediateme^t apres le Count ou
Declaration fait, cest adire, que il defenda tout le Tort, Force and Damage,
lou and quant il devera; and donques de proceed ouster a son Plee, ou de
imparler.

Et nota, que entant que il defend Tort and Force, il se excuse del Tort verse
luy surmise, and fait se party al Plee; and per tant que il defend les
Damages, il affirm le Plaintiff able destre respondue.

Et pur le residue del Defense, il accept le power del Court de oyer and
determiner les Plees de cel matter. Car sil voil pleader al Jurisdiction, il
doit omitter en son Defense les parols ( ou and quant il devera.) and sil voil'
monstre asc' disabilitie en le Plaintiff, and demand Judgment si le party
serra respondue; donques il doit omitter le Defense del Damage.

Defendant.
DEfendant est celuy que est sue en Action personel q^ est appel Tenant en un
Action real.

Defendemus.
DEfendemus est un usual parol en un Feoffment ou Donation, and ad cest force,
q^ il lia le Donor and ses Heirs a defender le Donee, si ascun ho^e endeavor
de imposer asc' Servitude sur le chose done, auter que est contein en le
Donation. Bract. lib. 2. cap. 16. nu. 10. Veies auxy warrantizabimus.

Defensor Fidei.
DEfendeur de la Foy est un peculiar Title don a Roy (...) Angeleterre per le
Pape, come Catholicus a Roy (...) Espaigne, and Christianissimus a Roy (...)
France. Il fuit primerme^t don per Leo x. a Roy H. 8 p^ escriva^ verse Mart.
Luther, en part del Esglise de Rome. Stow's Annals, p. 863.

Deforsour.
DEforsour est celuy que prevail and ject horse ove Force; que differt ^ un
Disseisor, primerment en c^, que hom^ poit disseise un aut' sa^s Force, quel
act est appel Simple Desseisin, Brit. cap. 33. Donque pur ceo q^ hom^ poit
deforce un auter q^ ne unques fuit en possession; come si plusors ont droit al
Terres come common Heirs, and un tient eux horse, le Ley dit, q^ il eux deforce,
nient obstant q^ il ne eux disseisa pas. Veiel N. B. fol. 118. Si Tenant en
tail fait Feoffment en fee, per que le Feoffee est eins, and puis le Tenant en
tail morust, and son issue suist Br^e de Formedon envers le Feoffee; le Br^e
dirr^, and auxy le Cou^^, etc. que le Feoffee a tort luy deforce, etc. com^t q^
il ne luy disseisa, pur ceo que il ent' en le vie le Tenant en tail, and le
Heir ad null present droi^. Littl^ton f. 138. Et un Deforsor differt de un
Intrudor, p^ ceo que un Deforsor tient horse le droit Heir, come avantdit: and
home est fait un Intrudor per son tortious Entry solement en Terres ou
Tenements void de un Possessor, Bract. lib. 4. c. 1.

Et pur ceo que Force and Forcible entry en Terres est cy opposite al Peace
and Justice del Royalm^, and u^ dishonor del Roy and son Corone, and le
scandal de Ley, que ascun pers^n p^r nestre and serement oblige al ob^dience
del Roy and ses Leyes, presumera de son authority per Force and fort main^
resister eux a noideux, per violent Intrusion enl le Possession un auter devant
le Ley ad deci son Title ea ceo; p^ ceo diverse Statutes on este faits p^ le
restraint and reformation de ceux Abuses; come, ent' auters, le Stat. de 5 R.
2. cap. 7. ou le Roy defend asc^ Entry en Terres ou Tenements; mes en case ou
Entry est done pro le Ley, and donq^ nemy ove fort main^, ou ove multitude de
gents, mes solem^t en un peaceable manner* Veies plus de ceo (...) P^ul. de
pac. Reg. f. 34. 35. etc.

Degrading.
DEgrading. Veis Disgrading.

Delegates.
SOnt Com^issioners appoint per Letters Pat' a determiner Appeal sur chooses
testamentary ou matrimonial, en q^ sentence fuit rendue.

Demaines.
DEmaines ou Demesnes, generalment a parler, sont touts les parts de asc' Man^
q^l ne sont en mains del Freeholders, com^t soyent occupy per Tenant Copy
(...) Court Rol', Lessees pur ans ou p^ vie, cybien com^ Ten^ts a volu^t. Et le
reason que Copihold est account Demesns est, p^ ceo que ils q^ sont Ten^ts a
ceo sont adjudge en Ley ^ aver null auter Estate forsque al volu^t del Sn^r,
issint que il est jamm^s repute destre e^ u^ manner e^ les mains le Sn^r:
uncore en comm^ perla^ce il est usualm^t appell Demesnes que nest ou free ou
copy. Et cest parol Demesne est asc' soits use e^ un pluis special
signification, and est opposite al Frank-fee; sicome ceux Terres q^ux fueront
en l'possessio^ de Ed. le Confessor sont appel Ancient demesne, and touts
auters sont appel Frank-fee, Kitch. fol. 98. and les Tenants q^ tient asc'
(...) ceux Terres sont appel Tenants en Ancient demesne, les auters Tenants en
Frank-fee. Et null com^on person ad asc' Demesnes en le simple prisance del
perol, p^ ceo que la nest asc^ Terre mes depend mediatem^t ou immediatem^t del
Corone, ceo est, de asc^ Honor ou auter appertie^t al Corone; and nemy grant en
fee al asc' inferior person; and p^ c^ quant un ho^e en pledant voile enferre
son Terre destre son Demesne, il dit, Que il est ou fuit seize de ceo e^ son
Demesne come de Fee, Littleton, fol. 3. per que appiert, q^ nient obsta^t son
Terre soit a luy and ses Heirs a touts jours, uncore il nest voyer Demesne, mes
dependant sur un Seignior paramount, and tiendrant per Service, ou Rent en lieu
de Service, ou per Service and Rent ensemble.

Demaines, solonq^ le common perlance, sont solem^t entend le principal
Man^or-place del Seignior, q^ il and ses Ancestors ontewe de temps horse de
memory en lour maines demesne, ove touts edifices and measo^s, prees,
pastures, boys, terres eyrable, and tiels semblables ove ceo occupy.

Demand.
DEmand est vocabulum Artis, and si un release a u^ auter touts Demands, ceo
est (sicome Littl. fol. 117. a. dit) le pluis melior Release a luy a q^ le
Release est fait que il poit aver, and plus enurera a son advantage; car per c'
non solem^t touts Demands, mes aux' touts causes de Demands so^t release. Et
so^t deux man^s ^ Demands, cestascavoire, en Fait, and en Ley. En Fait, come en
chescun Praecipe la est express Demand; and p^ c^ e^ real Action il est appell
Demandant, en personal Plaintiff. En Ley, come chescun Entry en Terre,
Distress p^ Rent, Prisel ou seizure des biens, and semblable acts e^ Pays, q^
poient estr^ fait sans asc' perols ou dema^ds e^ Ley. Sico^e Release de Suits
est pluis large q^ Release des Querels ou de Actions; issint Release des
Demands est pluis large and beneficial q^ asc' de eux, car per e'est release
tout ceo q^ per les auters est release, and pluis. Per Release de touts
Demands, touts Franktenements and Enheritances executorie sont release: Per
Release de touts Demands al Disseisor, le droit de Entry en le terre, and tout
q^ est contain deins ceo, est release: Per Release de touts Demands, touts
Executions sont release: and cestuy que release touts Demands, exclude luy m^
de touts Actions, Entries, and Seisures.

Lit. f. 170. teign^, Que si Tenant en tail enfeoffe son Uncle, l'q^l enfeoffe
un aut' e^ fee ove Garrantie; si apres le Feoffee per son Fait relessa a son
uncle touts man^ers (...) Demands, per tiel Release le Garrantie, que est
Covenant real and executorie, est extinct: and le reason est, p^ ceo que per
Release des Demands touts les means and remedies, and les causes de eux, que
ascun ad al tr^es. tenem^ts, biens, chattels, etc. sont extinct, and per
consequence, le droit and interest m^ al chose. Uncore Releas ^ touts Demands
ne extend a tiels Br^s per queux riens est demand, neque en Fait neque en Ley,
mes gisont solement a reliever le Plaintiff per voy de Discharge, and nemy per
voy (...) Demand; come Releas (...) tout Demands nest Barr^ in Br^e de Error de
reverser un Utlagarie, and issint des semblables. Veies 18 Ed. 3. 59. Cok. lib.
8. fol. 153, 154.

Demandant.
DEmandant est celuy que sue ou complain^ e^ Action real p^ Title de terre; and
il est appel Plaintiff e^ un Assise, and e^ un Action personal, p^ Det, Trn^s,
Disceit, Detinue, and tiels semblables.

Demurrage.
EST dit le temps que un Neif gist idle en un port ou Harbor ou sur le mere en
un calm.

Demurrer.
DEmurrer est, quant ascun Action est port, and le Defendant plead un Plee, a
q^ le plaintiff dit q^ ne voile respon ^, p^ ceo que il n'est sufficient Plee
en Ley; and le Defendant aver le contrary, que il est sufficient Plee; and sur
ceo ambideux mitteront le Cause al Judgm^t del Court: que est appel un
Demurrer, p^ c o que ils ne vaont ouster en pleading, mes demurrer sur
Judgment de cel point; and dicitur en Latin Records, Moratur in Lege.

Car en chesc' Action le difference consist ou en Fait, ou en Ley. Si en Fait,
il est try per le Pais: si en Ley, donque le matter est ou facile, ou dure and
rare: si il soit facile, donque Judgment est immediatement done; mes qn^t il
est dure and en awrust, donque la est Demurrer fait, and temps prise ou de
consider ouster sur c^ per les Judges, (...) agreer si ils poyent, ou auterment
per touts les Justic' (...) vener ensemble en le Exchequer-Chamber, and, sur
oyer de ceo que les Sergeants dieront de ambideux parts, (...) adviser and
determiner que est Ley; and ceo que est la conclude per eux estoyera firm,
sans auter remedy.

Est auxy un Demurrer al Evidence done a un Jury sur Trial ^ un issue, Plow.
Com. 2. 3. Rast. Entr. 607.

Demi sanke, ou sangue.
Demi sanke est, quant un home marie un feme, and ad issue per luy un fitz ou
file, and le feme morust, and donques il prist un aut' feme, and ad per luy
auxy un fitz ou file: Ore ceux fitz sont solonque un man^er Freres, ou, come
ils sont appells Demy-freres, ou Freres del demi sanke, cest adire, Freres per
le part de Pere, pur ceo que ils ont ambideux un pere, and sont ambideux de son
sangue, and nemy Freres per le part le Mere, ne de ascun sanke ou kin cest
voy: and pur ceo le un de eux ne po ^ t estre Heir al auter: ear il que voile
claim come Heir al un per descent, doit esire de Entire sanke a luy de que il
claim. En mesme le manner est, si ^ eme eyte diverse issues per diverse barons,
qui Fratres uterini dicuntor.

Denariata terrae.
DEnariata terrae. Veies Fardingdeal.

Denelage.
DEneloge est le Ley que les Danes fesoient icy en ^ rgleterre, horse de q^ and
Mer^ h ^ nlage and Wastsaxonlage Gulielme le Conqueror compose certain
Ordinances desire observe per ses subjects.

Denizen.
DEnizen, ou Donaison, est, lou Alien nee devient le Subject le Roy, and obtain
les Letters Patents le Roy pur enjoy touts Privileges come un home Anglois:
mes si un soit fait Denizen, il payer^ Customs and diverse auters chooses come
Alien, come appiert per diverse Sta^ utes de ceo fait.

Il semble que Donaison est le voyer nosme, issint appel, pur ceo que son
Legitimation est dona a luy; and nemy Denizen, come derive de Deins nee. Et le
Ley est cy precise e^ le feasans de Donaisons, que le Roy ne poit grant' al
ascu^ auter a fair de Aliens nee Donaisons, il est per la Ley cy
inseperablem^t and individualm^t an^ex aso^ Royal Person; car le Ley esteem c'
un hault Prerogative, a fair Aliens subjects del Royalme, and capable de
Terres and Inheritances, come natural Subjects nee sont.

Et p^ ceo le Stat. de 27 H. 8. c. 24. q^ reunite plusors del pluis ancient
Prerogatives and Regal Flowers del Coron^, ne pas mention ascun authority de
fair Letters de Donaisation destr^ resume, pur c^ q^ asc' ne unque ceo claim^
pas per asc' p^text quecunque, il esteant cy hault point (...) Prerogative.
Veies Co. lib. 7. Calvin's Case.

Deodand.
DEodand est, quant ascun home per misfortune est occi ^ per un Chival,
Charret, ou auter chose moveant ou aydant son mort; cel chose que est le cause
de son mort, and que al temps de la misfortune mova, serra forfeit al Roy, and
ceo est appel Deodand; and ceo perteine al Almon' le Roy, pur disposer en Alms
and overs de charity.

Mes il nest forfeit tanque le chose soit trove (...) Record, and pur ceo ils
ne poyent este claim per Prescription: and le Jurie que trove ou present le
mort per tiel misadventure, doient auxy trover and apprise le Deodand. Co. l.
5. f. 110.

Si un Chival percust un home, and puis le Owner vend le Chival, and donq^ le
party q^ fuit percusse morust del stroke; en ceo case le Chival serra forfeit
come Deodand, nient obstant le vendition; car relation serra al stroke que fuit
paravant le vendition. Plow. Com. fo. 260. b.

Omnia quae movent ad mortem sunt Deodanda. Departure de son Plee ou matter.
DEparture de son Plee ou matter est lo^ un ho^e plede un Plee e ^ barr^, and
le Plaintiff reply a ceo, and il apres en son Rejoinder plede ou monstre auter
matter, contrary, ou nient pursuant a son primer Plee en barr^; ceo est appel
un Departure de son Bar. Come si home plead u^ gen^al Agreem^t en barr^, and
en le Rejoinder il allege un especial Agreement; ceo serra adjudge un
Departure en Pleading. Issint en Trespass, si le Defendant voil' pleader
descent a luy, and le Plaintiff dit, que puis ceo le Defendant infeoffe luy,
and le Defendant dit, que ceo Feoffment fuit sur Condition, pur le enfrien ^ de
que il enter; ceo est Departure del Bar, car est novel chose. Veies Plow.
Com. f. 7, and 8.

Departure en spite del Court.
DEparture en spite del Court est, quant le Tenant ou Defendant appear al
Action, and ad jour ouster en mesme le Term, ou est demand apres, coment null
jour soit en mesme le Term, sil ne appear^, mes fait Default, cest un
Departure en despite de Court, and pur ceo il serra condemn.

Et est destre observe, que Departure en despite del Court est touts soits del
part del Tenant ou Defendant, and le Entry de ceo est, Quod praedictus A, licet
solenniter exactus, non revenit, sed in contemptum Curiae recessit, and
Defaltam fecit: and ceo est quant en judgment del Ley il est present en Court,
and esteant demand, depart en despite del Court; ceo amount a un Bar en
respect del Despite and Contempt al Court. Veies Co. l 8 f. 62.

Deprivation.
DEprivation est, quant un Abbe, Evesque, Parson, Vicar, Preben ^. etc. est
deprive ou depose de son Preferm^t pur ascun chose en Fait ou en Ley. Come si
un Miscreant ou Schismatique soit p^sent, admit, and induct, la est bone cause
de Deprivation: Issint si mere Lasius soit p^sent, admit, institute, and
induct, uncore il serra deprive: ou fi l'Incumbent ad Plurality des Benefices;
ou ne subscribe a les Articles de Religion, solonque l' Statute de 13 Eliz.
cap. 12.

Per le Statute de 21 H. 8. cap. 13. est enact, Que si asc. person, ayont un
Benefice ove Cura animarum del annuel value (...) huict livers ou ouster,
accepta ou p^ndra ascun aut' ove Cure des ames, and soit institute and induct
en le possession de ceo; le prim^ Benefice serra void, and le Incumbent en ceo
case est ouste ou deprive per Cession. En q^l case ne besoigne al Evesque a
doner notice al Patron, p^ ceo que le Deprivation est per Act ^ Parliam^t, a
que chescun est party, and doit prender notice a son peril. Mes aut'ment est
si le primer Esglise ne soit de annuel value de huict livers, car donq^ ceo est
void merem^nt per l' Ecclesiastical Ley. Veies Cok. lib. 4. f. 76. and lib. 7.
43. b.

Deputy.
Deputy est celuy que exercise en aut' droit, soit ceo Office ou asc' aut'
chose: and son forfeiture ou misdemeanour causer^ l' Officer, ou celuy q^l
Deputy il est, de perder son Office. Mes u^ ne poit fair son Deputy en touts
cases, nisi le Grant soit issint: sicome silsoit ove ceux ou tiels se^blables
parolx, Exercendo per se, vel sufficientem Deputatum suum; ou si les parolx
ouster, Per se, vel Deputatum suum, aut Deputat. Deputati, donq^s il poit fair
un Deputy, and son Deputy auxy poit fair u^ Deput' aut'm^t nemy. Come si l'
Office de Parkership soit grant a un, il ne poit grant' ceo ouster a un auter,
pur ceo q^ est Office de trust and confidence, and ne serra forfeit. Et la est
grand diversity inter Deputy and Assignee (...) un Office: car un Assignee
est person que ad estate ou interest en l' Office m^, and fait touts chooses e^
son nosme demesne, p^ que son Grantor ne respondera, si non que soit en
especial cases; and un Deputy and ascun Estate ou interest en l' Office, mes
est forsque l' umbre del Officer, and fait touts chooses en le nosme del Officer
mesme, and rien en son nosme demesne, and pur que son Grantor respondera: and
quant un Officer ad power a fair Assigns, il poit implicit saire Deputies,
car, Cui licet quod majus est, non debet quod minus est non licere; and pur ceo
quant Office est grant a un and a ses heirs, per ceo il poit fair Assigns,
and per consequence il poit fair Deputies.

Le Roy per ses Letters Patents com^it al Vis' Custodiam Comitatus, sans
express parols de fair Deputy; and uncore il poit fair un Southvisc',
cestascavoire, son Deputy. Issint quant devant le Statute de Quia emptores
terrarum, le Roy ou aut' Sn^r ad done Terres a un Chivaler, a ten^ de luy per
Service de Chivalre, cest adire, (...) aler ove son Seign^r (quant le Roy fait
Voyage Royal a subduer ses enemies) pur 40 jours, bien and covenablement array
p^ le Guerre; ore il poit trover aut' able person; uncore e^ l'un case il
concerna le public Administration and execution del Justice e^ temps de
Peace; and e^ l'aut' le public Defense ^ l Royalme e^ temps de Guerre. Veies
Coke l. 9. Le Countee de Salops Case.

Dereine.
DEreine ou Deraigne est prise en diverse senses, and semble a vener del
Francois Disarrayer, ceo est, confounder ou mitter horse (...) or ^, ou aut'm^t
del Norman perol Desrene, q^ est le denial del proper fait ^ un home; and Lex
Deraisnia fuist le Proof (...) un chose que u^ denia destre fait per luy mesme,
and son adversary affirm, defeatant and confoundant le assertion de son
adversary, and monstrant ceo destre sans and envers reason ou probability. Et
e^ nr^e Ley il est variousm^t ufe. Primerm^t generalm^t, de prover; come,
Dirationabit jus suum haeres propinquior, Glan. l. 2. c. 6. and il l. 4. c. 6.
dit, Habeo probos homines qui hoc viderunt and audiverunt, and parati sunt hoc
dirationare. En m^ le mann^ Bract. c^ use, Habeo sufficientem
Disratiocinationem and probat'.

Per le Statute de 31 H. 8. c. 1. Joyntenants and Tenants en common averont
Aid, al intent a deraigner le Garrantie paramount. Issint Plo. in Manxels Case
fol. 7. b. ad cest Case, Si home ad Estate en fee ove Garrantie, and enfeoffe
estranger ove Garrantie, and morust, and le Feoffee vouch son Heir; le Heir
deraignera le primer Garrantie. Auxy cest parol est use qua^t Religious homes
waiva lour Orders and Professions: come en Kitch. fol. 152. b. si home fait
Lease p^ vie sur condition, q^ si le Lessor devie sans issue, que donques le
Lessee avera Fee, le Lessee enter en Religion, and puis le Lessor devie sans
issue, and puis le Lessee est deraigne; il navera Fee, entant, q^ al temps del
Condition le Fee ne poit vest en luy.

De son tort demesne.
DE son tort demesne semble destr^ certain perols ^ form^ e^ un Actio^ (...)
Trespass, usa per voy (...) Reply al Plee ^ l Defe^dant: Come si A suist B e^
un Action de Trespass, B respo^due p^ luy mesme, que il ad c' fait q^ A appel
Trespass per le commandm^t (...) C son Master; A dit arere, q^ B ad ceo fait de
son tort demesne, sans ceo que C luy co^manda modo and forma, etc.

Det.
DEt est un Brief que gist lou asc' sum (...) arge^t est due a un per reason
(...) Account, Bargain, Contract, Obligat', ou aut' Especialtie, a estre pay a
asc' certain jour, le quel nest paya; donques il aver^ cest Br^e. Mes si asc'
argent soit due a asc' Sn^r per son Tenant p^ asc^ Rent-service, le Sn^r ne
unques avera Actio^ de Det p^ ceo, mes il faut distrein p^ ceo. Auxy p^
Rentcharge ou Rent-seck, quel home ad p^ term de son vie, en tail, ou en
fee, il navera Action de Det cy long come le Rent endure; mes ses Executors
poyent aver un Action de Det p^ les Arrerages due e^ le vie lour Testator, per
le Statute 32 H. 8. c. 37.

Pur Arrerages de Rent reserve sur u^ Lease p^ term ^ ans, le lessor est a son
election ^ aver Action de Det, ou pur distreiner: mes si le Lease soit
determin^, donques il ne distreinera ap^s p^ cel Rent, mes covient luy ^ aver
un Action de Det p^ les Arrerages.

Et nota, Que per le Ley del Realm Det est soleme^t prise de surder sur asc'
Contract ou Penalty impose per asc' Statute ou pain, and nemy p^ aut'
offenses, come en le Civil Ley, Debitum ex delicto.

Si home enter Tavern a boyer, and quant il ad boya, il de ala, and ne voet
pay le Taverner; le Taverner navera Action de Trespass verse luy pur son
Entry, me ^ avera Action de Det pur le Vine.

Si jeo deliver Drape a un Tailor a fai ^ e un Toge, si le price ne soit agree
en certain devant, come bein jeo payera pur le feasance; ^ l navera verse moy un
general Action de Det, mes un special Action u^ Debt, and countera specialm^t,
and il serra mis al Jurie quant il deserve.

Mes si u^ Tailor fait u^ Bill, and il m^ rate le feasance and les necessaries
a ceo; il navera Action (...) Det p^ ses values demesn^, si non q^ fuit issint
especialm^t agree; mes en tiel case il poit detein^ le Garm^t tanq^ il soit
satisfi ^, come un Hostler poit le Chival do son Guest p^ son viands. Cok. l ^.
147.

Auxi det gist pur fines de Copyholds and p^ amerciaments en Courts Leet, and
Court Baron and sur agards and sur recoveries, en base Court ou Coverts de
record.

Detinue.
DEtinue est un Br^e q^ gist verse luy, q^ ayant biens and chattels deliver a
luy de gar ^, refusa de restorer eux arere, Vide (...) c^ F. N. B. 138.

Devastaverunt bona Testatoris.
DEvastaverunt bona Testatoris est qua^t les Executors voil' deliver Legacies,
ou fair restitution pur torts faits per lour Testator, ou pay ses Debts deu
sur Contract ou Specialties, q^ux jours (...) paym^t ne so^t uncor^ venus, etc.
and ne guard sufficient e^ lour mains p^ discharg' ceux Dets sur Records ou
Specialties q^ ils sont compellable primerm^t per le Ley de satisfier; donques
ils serront constrain de payer ^ lour biens demesne ceux duties, accordant al
value (...) c^ q^ ils deliveront ou pay sans co^pulsion: car tiel irregular and
illoyal Paym^ts sont account en le Ley u^ Vastant des biens del Testator, cy
tant come si ils ad done eux sans cause, ou vend eux, and convert a lour proper
use.

Et pur ceo si A soit lie en Recognisance, cu en Statute Merchant ou Staple,
and puis Recoverie est ewe verse luy en Action de Det, and il fait ses
Executors, and morust; ses Executors sont tenus per la Ley a payer le Det due
sur le Recoverie, com^t q^ soit puisne, devant le Det due per Recognisance ou
Statute, p^ ceo q^ coment q^ ambideux sont Records, uncore le Judgm^ e^ le
Court le Roy sur judicial and ordinary proceeding est pluis notorious and
conspicuous, and de pluis hauit and eminent degree. q^ u^ Statute ou
Recognisance prise en private, and per consent des parties, and p^ ceo p^ferre
en jugem^t del Ley deva^t Recognisance ou Statute: and si l'Executors ne ceo
primerm^t satisfy, donq^ s ^ ls nont ^ s bie^s le mort e^ lour mains, ils
responderont ceo de lour biens demesn^. Issint l'Ordinarie ayant biens (...) un
q^ mo^ st intest' e^ ses mains per Sequestration, questration, and un Action de
Det fur un Obligation al value des dits biens soit port verse luy come
Ordinary; il ne disposera ou administera ascun percel de les dits biens a les
auters Creditors a son pleasure, mes est tenus a satisfier le Det primes de que
un Action e^ attempt verse luy. Dyer, fol. 232. placito. 5.

Si un Viscount return ex officio sans Enquest q^ l'Executor ad degast biens,
l'Execution issue envers les proper biens del Executor. Et si le retorn soit
faux, donques l'Executor poit aver un Action sur le Case versus le Viscount pur
son faux return, pur ceo q^ l'Executor ad null jour a pleder. Mes si le
Viscount retorn devastavit sur un Enquest per Jury, l'Executor poit appear and
traverse quod ipse non devastavit and try ceo, 1 Cr. Mounson and Bourne, and
Proctor versus Chamberlain.

Devenerunt.
DEvenerunt est un Br^e direct al Escheator, qua^t ascun Tenants le Roy q^
tient en Capite morust, and qn^t son fi^s and heir^, deins age, and en custody
le Roy, morust, donq^ cest Brief isiera, com^andant l' Escheator, que il per le
serement de probes and loyals homes enquire q^ Terres ou Tenements per le mort
le Tenant deve ^ gne al Roy, etc. Veies Dyer. fol. 360. pla. 4. Mes veies le
Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Divest.
Divest est un perol contrary al Invest; car come Invest signify a trader le
possession d'un chose, issint Divest signify lauferance (...) ceo.

Devise.
DEvise est, lou un en son Testament done ou grant ses Biens ou ses Terres a un
aut' apres son decease. Et lou tiel Devise est fait des Biens, si les Executors
ne voylent deliver eux a le Devisee, il and remedy per le Common Ley; mes il
covient de aver un Citation verse les Executors le Testator, de appearer devant
le Ordinary, de monstrer p^ que il ne perform le Volunt le Testator: car le
Devisee ne poit prender le Legacy and luy m^ server, mes il doit estr^ deliver
a luy per les Executors. Vide Stat. 32 H. 8. cap. 1. and 34 H. 8. 5. and 29
Car. 2. cap. 3. per quel darreine Stat. le ley des testaments est alter.

Mes per le Common Ley, si home fuit sole seisie (...) Terres en fee, and
devisa eux per son Testam^t; cest Devise fuit void; si non les Terres fueront
en un City ou Borough lou Terres son devisable per Custom. Mes si asc' home
fuissoit enfeoffe al use (...) un aut' and ses heir^s, and cestuy a q^ use il
fuit issint sell ^ ie fesoit Devise (...) ses Terres; cest Devise suit bon^,
com^t que il ne fuit en Ville lou Terres sont devisable.

Aux' si asc' home devise Terres en City, Ville, ou Borough, devisable, and le
Devisor devie; si son Heir ou asc' aut' abate en les Terres, donq^s le Devisee
avera Br^e de Ex gravi querela. Mes cest Br^e ne serra jamm^s plede devant le
Justice le Roy, mes touts foits devant le Mayor ou Bailife en le dit Ville.

Et ore, al fine de monstre q^nt les Leys de cest Royalm, and les discreet
Judges de ceo, queux sont les Interpreters, ont favor Volunts and Testaments,
and issin ^ Devises, en yielding al eux tiel reasonable construction come ils
pensent poit bien agree ove les mentes de les morts, considerantes que Volunts
and Testaments sont p^ le pluis part, and per common intendment, fait quant le
Testator est ore en grand languor, feeble, and passa tout sperans de recoverie:
car il est un opinion en le Pays inter le greinder nombre, que si un home
perchance soit cy prudent com^ de fair^ son Volunt en son bon^ sanitie, qua^t
il est strong, (...) bon^ memory, and ad temps and opportunity deman ^
counsel (si asc^ doubt soit) de l' Learned, q^ donq^s il ne doit viver long
apres; and p^ c' ils c^ defer tanq^ tiel temps quant ceo soit pluis
co^venie^t de applier eux mesmes a le disposition de lour Ames, q^ de lour Tr^s
and Biens, si non q^ il soit q^ (...) fresh memory and recital per eux a cest
temps, il poit un estre cause de mitt' eux en m^t de asc' ^ lour biens ou t'res
fauxem^t purchase, and issint move eux al restitution, etc. Et a cest te^ps l'
escriptur' (...) tiels Volunts est co^munem^t commit al Minister del Paroch, ou
al ascun auter pluis ignorant, que ne scavoit queux perols sont necessary p^
fair^ un Estate en Fee-simple, Fee-taile, p^ t'me de vie, ou tiels se^blables,
preter diverse auters mischiefs: Jeo voile pur ceo mis cy ascu^s (...) ceux
Cases queux sont pluis common e^ les bouches de les ignorant ho^es, and
portant, per le scavient interpretations de les Judges, un large and pluis
favorable sense en Volunts, que en Faits.

Et pur ceo primerm^t, si un devise al J. S. per son Volunt touts ses Terres
and Tenem^ts; icy non soleme^t tous ceux Terres que il ad en possession
passo^t, mes auxy touts ceux q^ il ad en Reversion, per virtue de ceux parols,
Tenem^ts.

Et si Terres sont devise a un ho^e a aver a luy imperpetuum, ou aver a luy and
ses Assigns; en ceux deux cases le Devisee avera Fee-simple. Mes si soit done
per Feoffment en tiel man^er, il and forsque Estate pur term de vie.

Auxy si un home devise ses Tr^s al ^ ut', pur doner, vender, ou fair de ceo a
son volunt and pleasure; c' est Fee-simple.

Un devise fait alun and a ses Heir^s males fait un Estate tail: Mes si tiels
parolx so^t mis en un Fait del Feoffme^t, il serra prise p^Fee-simple, pur ceo
que il nappiert de que corpse les Heirs males serra engender.

Si Terres sont done per Fait al J. S. and a les Heirs mal ^ s de son corpse,
etc. que ad issue file, que ad issue fits, and morust; la le Terre revertera al
Donour, and le fits de file navera ceo, pur ceo que il ne poi ^ a luy mesme
conveyer per Heirs males, car la mere est un obstacle a ceo: Mes auterment est
de tiel Devise, car la le fitz del file ceo avera, plustoft que le Volunt serra
void.

Si un devise al Enfant en ventre matris suae, cest bone Devise; mes auterm^t
per Feoffem^t, Grant, ou Done; car en ceux cases il doit estre un del
ability p^ prender maintenant, auterment il est void. Veis 14 El. Die. 304.

Un Devise fait en Fee-simple sans express parols del Heirs, est bone en
Fee-simple.

Mes si u^ Devise soit al J. N. il avera les Terres forsque pur term (...)
vie; car ceux parols ne voilent porter greinder Estate.

Si un voile que son fits J. avera son Terre puis le mort sa feme; icy le feme
le Devisor avera le Terre primes pur term de sa vie. Issint si home devise ses
biens a sa feme, and que apres le decease de son feme, son fits and heir avera
le Meason ou les biens sont; la le fits navera le Meason durant le vie de le
feme: Car il appiert que son intent fult, que sa feme doit aver le Meason auxy
pur sa vie, nient obstant il ne fuit devise a luy per express parols.

Si un Devise soit al J. N. and a les Heirs females de son corpse engendres,
apres le Devisee ad issue fits and file, and morust; icy le file avera le
Terre, and nemy le fits, and uncore il est pluis digne person, and Heir al son
pere: mes pur ceo que Volunt del mort est, que le file doit ceo aver, Ley and
Conscience voet issint auxy.

Et en cest point les Heathens fuero^t p^cise, come app^ert per ceux Verses
(...) Octavius Augustus, q^ Donatus report il fesoit apres q^ Virgil a son mort
donoit com^andem^t que ses Livres doint estre combure, p^ ceo q^ ils fueront
imperfect, and uncor^ ascu^s persuadont que ils doient estre save, come en fait
ils happim^t fueront; a que il respo^ ^ issint;

Sed Legum servanaa Fides; suprema Voluntas.

Quod mandat, fierique jubet, parere necesse est.

Devoire.
DEvoire est ta^t adire come Duty. Ceo est use en le Statute de 2 R. 2. cap.
3. ou est purview, Que touts Merchants del West, esteant del amity le Roy,
payera touts man^ers des Customs and Subsidies, and auters Devoires de Caleis.
Veies le Stat. 5 ejusd. Regis cap. 2.

Devorce.
DEvorce, Divortium, dict' est a Diversitate mentium, quia in diversas parts
eunt qui distrahunt Matrimonium; ou auterm^t del verb Diverto, q^ signify de
returner arere, pur ceo q^ puis le Devorce parent' le baron and feme, il luy
return arere a sa pere, ou auter amies, ou al lieu de que il luy prist.

Et com^t q^ Devorce ne unq^s fuit approve per le Divine Ley, mes al contrary
prohibit, come appiert per cest mandat, Quod Deus conjunxit homo non separet;
uncor^ e^ touts ages and bien dispose Com^onweales il ad este use and permit:
Et issint a cest jour ove nous la sont diverse causes pur q^ux baron and feme
poient estre devorce, come primerment causa Praecontractus.

Pur ceo si home marry ove feme precontract, and ad issue per luy, cest issue
en Ley and en verity port le surnosm^ de so^ pere. mes si puis le baron and
fem^ sont devorce pur le Precontract, ore le issue ad perde son surnosm^, and
est devenus Bastard, and nullius filius. Cok. lib. 6. fol. 66.

Devorce poit estre causa frigiditatis: and pur ceo si ho^e soit espouse a un
fem^, and puis ils sont devorce causa Frigiditatis, and donque le home prist
auter feme, and ad issue per luy; uncore cest issue est legitimate, pur ceo q^
ho^e poit estre habilis and inhabilis diversis temporibus, and per le Devorce
Causa Frigiditatis le Marriage fuit dissolve a vinculo Matrimonii* and per
consequence chescun de eux poit marry arere. Co. l. 5. f. 98. b.

Auxy ho^e poit estre devorce causa Impubertatis, ou Minoris aetatis: and en
ceo case si deux sont espouse infra annos nubiles, and apres le pleine age
Devorce soit prise inter eux; ceo dissolve l'Espousals, and le fem^ poit suer
u^ Assise verse le baron pur Terres ou Tenem^ts done ove luy en Frank-marriage,
19 lib. Assis Pla. 2. Issint Devorce poit estre causa Professionis, causa
Consanguinitatis, causa Fornicationis, and pur plusors aut's meistres, pluis
tedious destr^ jamm^s recite.

Covient q^ en le sentence de Devorce le Cause de ceo soit monstre, pur ceo que
ascun Devorce dissolve le Matrimony, cest adire, a vinculo Matrimonii, bastard
le issue, and bar le feme de Dower; and ascun a mensa and thoro, le quel ne
dissolve le Matrimony, ne bar le feme de Dower, ne bastard le issue.

Devorce est Judgment spiritual, and pur ceo, sil soit cause, covient estre
reverse en le Spiritual Court. Veies Cok. lib. 7. Kenne's Case.

Si feme Copiholder de certain Terre, durante viduitate sua, solonque le
Custom del Man^or, emblea le Terre, and devant le severance des Emblements
prist baron; ore le Seigniour avera l' Emblements, and nemy le baron: Mes si
Lease soit fait al baron and feme durant le Coverture, and le baron emblea le
Terre, and puis ils sont devorce causa Praecontractus; le baron avera les
Emblements, and nemy le Lessor.

Dicker.
DIcker est un parol use en l' Statute 1 Jacobi cap. 22. and signify le
quantity des Dize Hides de Cuir. Et semble de vener del Greek parol Decas,
que signify Dize.

Diem clausit extremum.
DIem clausit extremum est un Brief que gist lou le Tenant le Roy que tient en
Chief morust; donque cest Brief serr^ direct al Escheator, d' enquirer de quel
Estate il fuit seisie, que est prochein Heir, and de quel age, and de la
certainty and value del Terre, and de que c' est tenus; and cel Inquisitio^
serra return en le Chancerie, and est communement appel Le Office apres le
mort del tiel person.

Et est auter Brief de Diem clausit extremum agard horse del Exchequer, apres
mort del un Accomptant ou Dettor al Roy, a levier le Dett de son Heir,
Executor, Administrators terres ou biens.

Dies datus.
DIes datus est un Respite done al Tenant ou Defendant devant le Court. Brook
Tit. Continuance.

Dieta rationabilis.
DIeta ranionabilis est ascun foits use pur le Reasonable Journey (...) un
jour, come Bra. l. 3. part. 2. c. 16. Il ad e^ le Civil Ley auters
interpretations, q^ ne besoigne destre cy insert, Veies Vocab. utriusque Juris.

Dieu son act.
DIeu de son act, ceux sont parols plusors foits use e^ nostre Ley, and la est
u^ Maxim^, Que le Act de Dieu serra prejud ce a nulluy: Et pur ceo si Meason
eschiust per Tempest, ou auter Act de Dieu, le Lessee p^ vie ou pur ans non
solem^t serra quit en Action de Waste port verse luy, mes ad per le Ley u^
special interest a p^nder l' merism^ p^ edifier l' Meason arer^, sil voit, p^
son habitat' Co. li. 4. 63. and lib 11. 82. a.

En mesm^ le manner, quant le Condition dun Obligation estoya sur deux parts e^
le disjunctive, and ambideux sont possible al temps del Obligation fait, and
puis lun de eux deveigne impossible per le Act de Dieu; le Obligor nest tenus a
performer l'auter part, car le condition serra prise beneficialment pur luy.
Cok. lib. 5. 22.

Dignity Ecclesiastical.
Dignity Ecclesiastical est un phrase de parlance use en l' Stat. de 26 H. 8.
c. 3. and per les Canonists est define destr^ Administratio cum Jurisdictione
and potestate aliqua conjuncta.

Diminution.
EST quant le Plaintiff ou Defendant en un brief d Error allege al Court q^
part del Record remain en l' Inferior Court nient certify, and pry q^ ceo
serra certify per Cerciorari, Co. Ent. 232, 242. 1 Cro. John versus Thomas 2
Cr. 479, 131. Rolls Abridg. 765, 20.

Diocese.
Diocese est le Circuit del Jurisdiction de chescun Evesque: car est Royalme
ad deux sorts de Divisions, l' un en Shires on Counties, en respect del
Temporal policy; l'aut' en Diocesses, en respect del Jurisdictio^
Ecclesiastical.

Disabilitie.
DIsabilitie est, qua^t ho^e per asc' chose ou act per luy m^ ou son ancestor
fait ou commit, ou per asc' aut' cause, est disabbe ou fait incapable a fair^,
de inheriter, ou de prender benefit ou advantage d' u^ chose, que auterment il
puit aver do^e ou fait.

La sont plusors chooses per queux ho^e poit estre disable; and ceux sont
communeme^t ou per le act del Party, ou son Ancestor, ou per l'act del Ley, ou
de Dieu.

Disabilitie per act del Ancestor; come si home soit attaint de Treason ou
Felony per cest Attainder son sangue est corrupt, and per ceo luy mesme and
ses issues disable d' inherit'

Disabilitie per le act del Party mesme; come si u^ home fait Feoffment al
aut' home q^ adonque est sole; sur condition, q^ il enseoffer^ un tierce home
devant M. and deva^t M. ou le Feoffm^t fait, le Feoffee prist feme; il ad per
ceo luy disable de performer le Condition accordant al trust en luy repose, and
p^ ceo le Feoffor poit enter, and luy ousta, come est Lit. sect. 357. Issint si
le Feoffee charge le Terre, ou enter en Statute-Staple ou Statute-Merchaut; per
ceux acts il ad luy mesme disable, and le Feoffor p^ ceo poit enter, come en le
prim^ case. Issint si jeo moy oblige, q^ sur Surrender ^ un Lease jeo voile
fair un novel Estate al Lessee, and puis jeo gran ^ a ouster mon Reversion; en
ceo case, com^t que jeo en apres ceo repurchase, and acquire tout le Reversion
a moy arere, uncore jeo aye forfeit mon Obligat', p^ c' q^ jeo fuy un foits
disable de ceo perform, Cok. l. 5. f. 21. Aux' si ho^e soit excom^enge, il ne
poit durant ceo temps suer asc' Action, mes serra per ceo disable, Co. l. 8. f.
69. and issint en plusors auters cases.

Disabilitie per act del Ley est, puis properm^t, quant ho^e per le sole act
del Ley, sans ascun original ou prim^ chose per luy fait, est disable; and
issint est Alien nee. Et pur ceo, si home nee horse de la liegeance de nostre
Seignior le Roy voile suer asc' Action, le Tenant ou Defendant poit dire, q^ il
fuit nee en tiel Pays horse de la liegeance le Roy, and demand judgment sil
serra respondue; car le Ley est nr^e Birthright, a q^ un Alien est collateral
and estrang', and p^ ceo disable pur prender ascu^ benefit per ceo.

Per le Act de Dieu; come destre Non compos mentis est un Disabilitie e^ asc'
cases, and en asc' nemy; p^ q^ semble que ces^t difference poit estr^ prise:
que en tours cases un home non compos mentis done ou pass asc' chose ou Estate
horse de luy, ceo poit apres son mort estr^ anient and fait void; mes ou home
uon sanae memoriae fait un chose per que riens pass horse de luy, la il poit en
ascuns especial cases estr^ lie: come si il soit Lessee p^ ans, renda^t Rent,
and le Lessor gra^ta le Reversio^; ore le Lessee non compos mentis ne poit
fair^ Attorn^ment, car cestuy q^ est amens, ou sans meant, ne poit fair
Attornem^t, que est Agreem^t; and uncore en tiel case si le Lessor eject luy,
and fait Feoffment, and puis le Lessee non sanae memoriae re-enter* cest act de
Re-entrie subject luy mesme al Distress and Action de Waste.

Et il est u^ Maxim^ e^ la Ley, Que ho^e (...) plein age ne unq^s serra receive
a disabler son person demesne. Et cest incapacitie a disabler luy mesme, quant
al ascun persons est per`onal, and extend solem^t al pertie mesme; and quant al
aut's nest personal, mes liera eux auxy.

Sont quater man^er de privities; scil. Privies en Sank, come Heir; Privies en
Representation, come Executors ou Administrators; Privies e^ Estare, coms Donee
en tail, le Reversion ou Remainder en fee, etc. and Privies e^ Tenure, come
Sn^r and Tenant: and deux de ceux poient disabler le person del mort, que ne
fuit compos mentis, ou etc. and avoidera ses Gra^ts ou Feoffme^ts, and deux
nemy. Car Privies en Sanke poient monstre le Disabilitie del Ancestor, and
Privies en Representation l' Infirmity de lour Testator ou Intestate; mes
neque Privy en Estate neque Privy e^ Tenure ceo ferra. Coke, l. 5. f. 123,
124. Veies Lit. sect. 405. and Coke, l. 8. f. 43.

Disalt.
DIsalt signify auxy mult come Disable. Littleton cap. Discontinuance.

Disceit.
DIsceit est un Brief, ascun foits Original, and ascun foits Judicial. Quant il
est Original, gist lou asc' Disceit est fait a asc' home per un aut' per non
performance ^ un Bargain ou Promise, donq^s celuy q^ est e^ tiel man^ disceive
avera cest Brief.

Quant il est Judicial, il gist ou Scire facias est sue horse d'ascun Record
verse un, and le Viscount return que il est garnie, ou il ne fuit garnie; ou
lou un Praecipe Quod reddat, de Plee de Tr^es, ou Quare Impedit, del
Presentment al Esglise, est sue verse un, and le Viscount return que le
Defendant est summon, lou il ne fuit; per quel Disceit and faux Return le
Demandant ou Plaintiff recover: donques le party greeve avera cest Brief verse
luy que recovera, and verse les Summoners and verse le Viscount: and le Brief
serra direct al Coroners de mesme le County, si il continue Viscount que fist
le Return.

Issint si home fait Attorney en un Action real port verse luy, and puis est
agree per Covin perenter le Demaundant and le dit Attorney, que l' Attorney
fayera Default, que issint fait accordant, per q^ le Tenant perde son Tr^e;
donque mesme le Tenant que perda le Terre poit aver un Brief de Disceit envers
l'Attorney.

Auxy si home port Action ^ Trespass verse deux auters, and le Plaintiff and un
Attorney per Covin causant deux Estrangers, nient parties al Br^e, a vener en
le Court, and dire q^ ils sont mesm^ les deux Defendants nosme en le Brief, and
q^ ils design mesme le ho^e dest ^ e lour Attorney e^ cel Suit, sur q^ mesme
l' Attorney, come Attorney al Defenda^ts nosm^ en le ^ r^e, pledont al Issue,
and puis suffront l'Enquest a pa^ser per son Default, per quel means le
Plaintiff recover: En cest case ceux q^ sont voyerm^t Defendants poye^t aver u^
^ r^e (...) Disceit envers mesm^ le Attorney, and recuperont lour damages.
Fitzh. Not. Brev. 96.

Et sicome le Ley punie son Officers, come Sergeants, Pleadors Philisers,
Exigenters, Attorneys, and aut's; issint il reject and dampne touts acts del
pluis grand importance, sils sont enterlayse ove Disceit and fauxitie, Come si
un Fine soit levy per Disceit, and cinq^ ans pass; per le Statute de 4 H. 7.
c. 24. touts persons and lour droits serr ^ nt per ceo bar: uncore p ^ r ceo
que fuit per Disceit, le Fine serra avoid, come est adjudge en Cok. lib. 3.
fol. 77. En mesme le manner, si un recover Terre per Disceit, le Recoverie pur
ceo serra anie^t and sait void, 3 Ed. 3. 28. Issint si feme, q^ ad bon^ cause
destr^ endow, voile per Disceit aver l' Ten^t destr^ disseisie, and puis
recover sa Dower per Br^e de Dower envers le Disseisor; uncore il serra adjudge
en possession envers le Disseisee lorsque come un Disseisoresse, en respect del
Dissceit. Cok. lib. 5. fol. 35.

Et est auter manner de br^e de Disceit, ou Terre q^ est ancient demesne est
implede per br^e del Roy al Westminster. donque le Seignior del Manor avera ceo br^e
and reverse touts les form' proceedings and Judgm^t come appiert Rast. Entr.
100, and 221. 2 R. 3. 1. 11. H. 4. 36.

Descent.
Descent est an deux sorts, ou lineal ou collateral. Lineal Descent est, q^nt
l' Descent est convey en mesme le Line de entire sanke; come ayei, pere, fits,
fits del fits, and issint debassa.

Collateral Descent est dehors en un auter branch dehault dentier sangue; come
le friar del ayel, friar del pere, and issint debassa.

Nota, que si un devie seisie en fee ou en tail de Terre en que aut' ad droit
de ent', and ceo descend a son Heir, tiel Descent tollera l'Entrie de cestuy
que droit avoit ^ enter, p^ c' que le Heir ad ceux per le Descent (...) son
pere, and issint per act de Ley; and cestuy que droit ad ne puit luy ouster per
entry sur luy, mes est mise de suer son Br^e, a demander le Terre solonq^ le
nature de son Title. Veies de c' Littl. 3. cap. 6. and Stat. 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 33.

Disclaimer.
DIsclaimer est, lou le Seignior distreine son Tenant, and il sua Replevin, and
le Seignior avowa le prisel, per reason que il tient de luy; si le Tenant dit,
q^ il disclaim de teu^ (...) luy, cest appelle un Disclaimer, and si ie Sn^r
sur ceo port Brief de Droit sur Disclaimer, and il soit trove encounter le
Tenant, il perdra le Terre. Auxy si un port un Praecipe verse deux auters p^
Terre, and le Tenant disclaim, and dit que il nest de c' Tenant, ne claim
rien en ceo; donques lauter avera tout le Terre. Mes si le Praecipe soit envers
un sole, and il disclaim, come avaunt est dit, le Brief abatera; uncore le
Demandant poit enter en le Terre, and ceo tener en son droitural estate, com^t
son Entry ne fuit loyal.

Et apres q^ le Ten^t e^ un Actio^ port verse luy disclaim, il navera Brief de
Error encount' son Disclaimer, p^ ceo q^ per son Disclaimer il ad bar luy
mesme del droit del Terre; car les parols del Disclaimer sont, Nihil habet, nec
habere clamat in Terra illa, nec die impetrationis Brevis Originalis predictae,
etc. habuit sive clamavit, sed aliquid in Terra illa habere deadvocat and
disclamat: and encounter ceo il navera Restitution per Brief de Error. Veies
Cok. lib. 8. fol. 62.

Issint si u^ Sn^r, en case ou il poit, disclaim son Sn^rie en Court de Record,
son Sn^rie per ceo est extinct, and le Tenant tie^dra del Sn^r prochein
paramount cestuy que issint disclaim. Lit. sect. 146.

Si Terres sont done al baron and feme en tail ou e^ fee, and le baron morust,
la l' feme ne poit divest le Frank-Tenem^t horse de luy per ascun verbal Waiver
ou Disclaimer en Pais: come si devant ascun Entry fait per luy el dit, que el
ousterment waive and disclaim die Esta ^ e, and ne unques voile prender ou
accepter de ceo; uncore le Franktenement remain en luy, and el poit ent' quant
a luy pleist. Issint un Charter (...) Feoffm^t fuit fait a quarter, and Seisin
fuit deliver a trois en nosme de touts, and apres le Seisin fuit deliver, le
quater veigna^t view le Fait, and dit per perol que il voi ^ e aver riens del
Terre, ne agrea al Fait, mes disclaima: and fuit adjudge, que cest Disclaimer
per parol en Pais ne devestera le Frank-tenement horse de luy. Cok. lib. 3. fol.
26.

Discontinuance.
DIscontinuance est, quant un home alien a un auter Terres ou Tenements, and
morust, and un auter ad droit a mesme les Terres, and ne puit enter en eux per
cause de cel Alienation; si come un Abbot alien les Terres de son Meason a un
auter e^ fee, seetaile, ou pur vie, ou si un ho^e alien les Terres que il ad en
droit sa feme, ou si Tenant en tail fait, de les Terres done a luy and a ses
Heirs de son corpse, asc^ Feoffm^t, Done en tail, ou Leas p^ vie, nient
garrant per Statute 32 H. 8. per Fine ou Liverie (...) seisin; do^que tiels
alienat ons sont appel' Discontinuances, car tiels Estates passont touts foits
per Liverie and seisin: En ceux cases les Successors del Abbe, ne la feme apres
le mort sa baron, ne l' issue en le tail apres le mort le Tenant en le tail,
and ceux en Remainder ou Reversion puis le fine del Estate tail, no po ^ ent
enter, mes chescun de eux est mise a son Action.

Et sico^e la est Discontinuance de Possession, come est dit avaunt; issint auxy
la est Discontinuance de Process ou Plee; and ceo est quant l' instant est
perde, and ne poit estre prise arere, mes per novel Brief a co^mencer le Suit a
novel; car destre discontinue and destr^ mis sans jour est tout un, and nient
auterment que destre finalment dismiss l' Court de cel instant. West part. 2.
tit. Fines, sect. 115. Issint Crompton, en son Jurisdictions, fol. 131. ceo use
en ceux perolx; Si un Justice-seat soit discontinue per le nient vener des
Justices, le Roy poit c'renuer per son Brief.

Auxy si les Justices de asc^ Court ne viendront al jour and lieu appoint,
donque le Cause serra discontinue tanque al aut' jour; come est en Cok. lib. 1.
fol. 38. Issint si home ad un Action en le Court del Marshalsea, and le Roy
remove horse del Vierge, les Pleas serront discontinue, Cok. lib. 10. fol. 73.

Veies pluis de ceo en Lit. lib. 3. cap. 11. and 32 H. 8. cap. 28. que toll
Discontinuances per baron seize en droit son feme.

Disgrading.
DIsgrading est, quant un hom^ ayant prise sur luy un Dignity temporal ou
Ecclesiastical, est enap^ (...) ceo deprive, soit il Chivaler; Clerk, ou auter
home. Pur que si un Clerk soit deliver a son Ordinary, and ne poit acquit' luy
mesme del Peche ^ que il fuit convict per le Jurie, il serra pur ceo disgraded;
q^ riens aut' est forsque le Deprivation ^ luy de ceux Orders que il ad sur luy
prise, com^ Priesthood, Deaconship, ou auterment Stanf. Pla. Co. fol. 130, 138.

Et en mesme le man^ la est Disgrading un Chivaler, come est avantdit. Veies
Stow. Annal. page 685. Et est digne l' observation, q^ per le Canon Ley la sont
deux sorts (...) Disgradings; l'un summarie, per parol solem^t, and laut'
solemn^, per Devestant le party disgrade de ceux Ornaments and Rites que sont
les Ensigns ^ son Order ou Degree. Veies 4 E. 4. 19, 20.

Dismes.
DIsmes sont les Disme parts de ascun chose, mes properment de ceux chooses que
increase, queux pur le pluis part perteign^ al Ministers ^ Esglise p^ lour
maintenance; and ils sont divides en 3 sorts, nosmement, Predial, Personal, and
mixed. Predial Dismes sont Dismes q^ sont paid de chooses queux vie^t (...) de
Terr^ soleme^t; come Blees, Fene, Fruits del arbres, and tiels semblables.

Personal Dismes sont les Dismes que sont paid de tiels profits que veign^ per
le Labor and industry del person (...) un ho^e; come per Emption and Vendition,
gain (...) Merchandise, and de Manuel-crafts homes, Laborers, and tiels que
labor pur salary, come Carpenters, Masons, and tiels sembables.

Mixed Dismes sont les Dismes ^ Vitels, Agnes, Porcels, and tiels semblables,
que increase partment del Terre sur q^ ils sont depasture, and partm^t ^ l
garding, industry and diligence del owner.

Disparagement.
DIsparagement est u^ Ho^te, Disgrace, ou Villainy fait per le Gardeln^ e^
Chivalrie a son Guard deins age, per reason de son Marriage.

Come quant le Gardein marry son Ward deins age de xiv. ans, and deins tiel
temps q^ il ne poit consent al Marriage, al un Niese, ou al file (...) un q^
demurt en un Borough, (q^ est destre entend tiels queux peers perfesse
Maincrafts, and tiels baser Arts de emption and vendition p^ gain lour viver)
ou al un que est decrepit, ou deform^, ou aya^t horrible disease, come le
Leprosy, les Pocks de Franks, Falling Sickness, ou tiels semblables, ou marry
luy a un feme q^ est pas le age de Infanter, and diverse tiels aut's; donques,
sur le complaint fait per les amies de tiel Heir, le Seignior ou Gardein
perdera le Gardship, and les profits durant le Nonage de le Heir, pur le
Disparagement fait a luy. Veies Litt. lib. 2. cap. 4.

Disseisin.
DIsseisin est, quant un home enter en ascun Terres ou Tenements lou son Entry
nest pas congeable, and ousta celuy que ad le Franktenement.

Disseisin sur Disseisin.
DIsseisin sur Disseisin est, quant Disseisor est disseisie per un auter.

Disseisor and Disseisee.
DIsseisor est celuy que mist ascun home horse de son Terre sans order le Ley.

Mes le Roy ne serra dit destr^ un Disseisor; and ove ceo est un note en 1 E.
5. fol. 8. que fuit tenus, le Roy ne poit estre dit un que fist tor ^, car si
un voet disseise un aut' al oeps le Roy, lou le Roy and droit, le Roy ne poit
estre dit Disseisor.

Disseisee est cestuy que est mis horse (...) so^ Terr^; and si tiel Disseisee
levy Fine del Terre de que il est disseisie al un estranger, l' Disseisor
retein^ l' Terr^ a touts jours, carl' Disseisee encont' so^ Fine demesne ne
poit claim, and le Conusee ne poit ent', car l' droit que le Disseises ad fuit
extinct per le Fine, don't l' Disseisor prendra advantage: and issint fuit le
opinion, Co. l. 2. fol. 56.

Distress.
Distress est le chose prise and distreine sur asc' Terr^ pur Rent arere, ou
pur auter duty, ou pur tort fait, com^t que le property de chose soit
perteigne al stranger: mes si sont Avers q^ perteigne al estrange', il covient
que ils sont levant and couchant sur mesm^ le Terr^, cest adire, que les Avers
avoient este sur le terre per certain space, que ils ont eux bien repose sur la
terre, ou auterment ils ne sont distreinable pur Rent ou Service.

Si u^ distreine pur Rent ou auter chose sans cause loyal, donques le party
grieve avera un Replevin, and sur Surety trove de pursuer son Action, avera le
Distress re-deliver. Mes sont diverse chooses q^ ne sont distreinable, viz. Robe
de auter home en le meason de un Taylour, ou Drape en le meason de u^ Fuller,
Sheerman, ou Weaver, p^ ceo que fls sont common Artificers, and le common
presumption est, que tiels chooses ne sont perteignont al Artificer, mes al
auters persons q^ eux mittont la a overer.

Vian ^ nest pas distreinable, ne Blees en sheaves, sino^ q^ ils sont en un
Chariot; p^ c^ q^ Distress covie^t estr^ touts foits de tiel chose don't l'
Viscount poit fair^ Replevin, and redeliver en auxy bone case que il fuit al
prisel.

Home poit ^ istreine pur Homage de son Tenant, p^ Fealty and Escuage, and
auters Services, and p^ Fines and Amerciaments que sont assesse en un Leet, mes
nemy en un Court Baron; and p^ Damage feasant, cestascavoire, qn^t il trove
les Beasts ou biens ^ s aut's feasons tort, ou incumbrant son Terre. Mes home
ne poit distreine p^ asc' Rent, ou chose due p^ ascun Terre, mes sur mesme le
Terre que est charge ovesque ceo. Et en case lou jeo veigne a distreiner, and
lauter, veyant mon purpose, chase les beasts, ou port le chose dehors, al
intent que jeo ne prendra ceo p^ un Distress sur le Terre; donq^s jeo poy bien
pursue; and si jeo prise ceo maintenant en l'Hault chimin, ou en aut' soil, le
prisel est loyal auxybn^ la come sur la Terre charge, a quecunque la property
des biens sont.

Auxy p^ Fines and Amerciaments assesse en un Leet, un poit touts foits prender
les biens celuy que est issint amerce, en quecunque soil que ils sont deins le
Jurisdiction del Court, ut dicitur.

Et quant un ad prise un Distress, il covient luy de amesn^ ceo al common
Pound. ou auterment il poit gardere^ overt licu, issint que il done notice al
party, que il (si le Distress soit vive avers) poit done a luy viand; and
donques fi l'avers morust p^ default ^ viand, celuy q^ fuit distreine serra a
le pard, and donques laut' poit distrein auterfoits pur m^ le Rent ou duty.
Mes sil amesna le Distress a u^ Fortlet, ou horse del County, q^ le Vise' ne
poit bie^ fair^ deliverance sur Replevin; donq^s le pertie (sur le Return del
Visc') avera u^ Br^e (...) Withernam direct al Visc, q^ il prendra tant des
avers ou tant des biens lauter en son guard, tanque il ad fait deliverance de
le prim^ Distress. Auxy si sont en un Fortlet ou Castle, le Vise' poit prender
ove luy le Power del County, and abat' le Castle, come appiert per le Statute
de West. 1. c. 17. Ideo vide Statut.

Districtus.
DIstrictus est asc' foits use p^ le Circuit ou Territory deins quel ho^e poit
estr^ compel (...) appear^, Brit. c. 120. and issint auxy est Districtio e^ le
Reg. orig. f. 6. b. Distress e^ le prim^ signification est divide primerme^t
e^ finite and infinite. Finite est c^ q^ est limit (...) Ley, q^ tossed il serra
fait, a traher le pertie al trial del Action, come u^ foits ou deux foits,
Veil. Not. Brev. f. 43. Distress infinite est sans limitation tanque le party
vient; come verse un Jurie que refuse (...) appearer sur le Certificate (...)
Assise, le Process est un Venire facias, Habeas corpora, and Distress infinite.
Veil Not. Bre. f. 113.

Donque il est divine en le grand Distress, come Anno 52 H. 3. c. ^. q^
Fitzberbet appele^ Latin Magnam Districtionem; Not. Brev. 126. a. and un
ordinary Distress. Un grand Distress est ceo que est fait de touts les biens
and chattels que le party ad deins le County, Brit. c. 6. f. 52. Mes quaere
ou il ne soit asc' foits tout u^ ove u^ Distress infinite, idem fol. 80. ove
que auxy le Statute ^ Marlbridge semble (...) agreer, Anno 52 H. 3. c. 7, 9,
and 12. Veies le Veil Not. Br. 71. b.

Distringas.
DIstringas est un Br^e direct al Visc' ou as ^ aut' Officer, luy co^mandant a
distreine u^ p^ u^ Det al Roy, etc. ou p^ son appeara^ce al u^ jour. Veies le
grand diverfitie de cest Br^e e^ le Table del Reg. judic. verbo Distringas.

Auxi est un Writ ad distringendu^ Juratores ad triandu^ Exitum en un Suit al
com^on ley. Auxy est un aut' Brief de distringas Villatas circumjacentes ad
levandu^ sepes and fensuras noctanter per ignotos prostrata. De quel V. 1 Cro.
rep. f. 204. Et int' Reg. and inhabit' de Epworth.

Dividend.
DIvidend est un parol use en le Stat. de Roteland, Anno 10 E. 1. ou il semble
signifier un part (...) un Indenture. Veies Anno 28 ejusdem, Stat. 3. c. 2.

Divorce.
DIvorce. Vies Devorce.

Docket.
DOcket est un Petit quantity ^ Pa ^ ou Parchm^t escrie, q^ contein e^ luy
l'effect de plus Grand Escript. Veies le Stat. (...) 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 6. M.
West. part. 2 tit. Fines, sect. 106. appelle ceo Dogget.

Dog-draw.
DOg-draw est un manifest Dep^hension (...) un offen ^ envers Venison en le
Forest. La sont quater sorts de ceux note per Manwood, part. 2. c. 18. number. 9.
de ses Forest Leys, cestascavoire, Dog-draw, Stablestand, Backbear, and
Bloudyhand. Dog-draw est, qua^t u^ est trove traha^t ap^s u^ Dame per le sent
(...) un Brache tient en son maine.

Dogger.
DOgger est u^ sort (...) Neife, Anno 31 E. 3. Stat. 3. c. 1. Dogger-fish,
ibid. c 2. semble destre Pissons port en ceux Niefes al Blackney Haven, etc.
Doggermen, Anno 2. H. 8. c. 4.

Dolefish.
DOle-fish semble destr^ ceux Pissons que les Fisherhomes annualme^t employ e^
le North mere (...) custom receivont p^ lour allowance. Veies le Statute Anno
35 H. 8. c. 7.

Dominus litis.
EST un advocate en le Civil Ley que puis le mort de son Client prosecute un
suit al sentence pur l' use del Executor.

Domo reparanda.
DOmo reparanda est un Brief q^ gist p^ un envers ^ on vicine, per le chier
(...) quel Meason il suppose ascun leid vo ^^ happer a son meason demesne Reg.
orig. fol. 123.

Doom.
DOom (del Saxon dom) signify Judgm^t; un parol mult use en References al
Arbitrateurs.

Doomsday.
Doomsday est u^ Livre q^ fuit escrie e^ le temps de S. E ^ ward le Confessor,
come le Autheur de Veil Not. Brev. dit, fol. 15. and deva^t e^ le title Ancient
demesne, conteinant e^ ceo non solem^t touts les Tr^es pro Angleterre, mes aux'
touts les nosmes (...) ceux e^ queux mains ils fueront a cel temps quant le
Livre fuit fait. Lamb. prova q^ cest Livre fuit fait en le temps de Gulielme le
Conqueror, ove q^ Cambden en so ^ Britain. page 94. agreea, ceo prova^t horse
(...) Ingulphus q^ flourie mesme le temps, q^ touchant les contents (...) ceo
ad ceux parolx: Totam Terram descripsit; nec erat Hida in tota Anglia, quin
Valorem ejus and Possessorem scivit, nec Lacus nec locus aliquis quin in Regis
Rotulo extitit descriptus, ac ejus Redditus and Prove ^ tus, ipsa Possessio and
ejus Possessor Regiae notitiae manifestatus, juxta Taxator' fidem, qui electi
de qualivet Patria territorium proprium describebant. Iste Rotulus vocat' est
Rotulus Win. toniae; and ab Anglis, pro suae generalitate, quod omnia Tenementa
totius Terrae continuit, Doomsday cognominatur. Et cest Livre est asc foits
appel Liber Judicatorius, qui in eo Regni Descriptio diligens conti ^ etur, and
tam de tempore Regis Edwardi, quam de tempore Regis Gulielmi, sub quo factus
est, singulorum fundorum valentia exprimitur.

Doomsman,
SEmble destre Suitors en le Court ^ un Manor en ancient demesne queux sont
judges la.

Donative.
DOnative est un Benefice merement done and collate per le Patrona un home,
sans ou Presentation al, ou Institution per le Ordinary, ou Induction per son
Commandment, F. N. B. 35. e. Veies le Statute de 8. R. 2. c. 4. Peter Gregor.
de Beneficiis, c. 11. number. 1. ad ceux parols: Si tamen Capellae fundatae per
Laicos non fuerint a Diocesano approbatae, and, ut loquuntur, spiritualizatae,
non censentur Beneficia, nec ab Episcopo conferri possunt, sed sunt sub pia
dispositione Fundatoris. Pur que les Founder and lour heirs poient doner tiels
Chapels, sils voilont, sans le Evesque.

M. Gwyn, en le Preface a ses Lectures, dit, Que le Roy puit do veil temps
founder un frank Chapel, and ceo exempter del Jurisdiction del Diocesan:
Issint auxy il puit per ses Letters Patents doner congee a un common person de
founder tiel Chapel, and de ordeigner q^ il serra Donative, and nient
presentable, and q^ le Chapleine serra deprivable per le Founder and ses heir,
and nemy per l'Evesque: and ceo semble destre le original de Donatives en
Angleterre. Fitzherbert dit, fol. 33. c. que la sont ascuns Chauntries q^ ho^e
poit doner per ses Letters Patents.

Et touts Evesqueries fueront del Foundation (...) Roys ^ Angleterre, and p^
ceo en ancient temps ils fueront Donative, and dones (...) les Roys; uncore
jam^es l'Evesqueries sont deveigne, (...) les Grants del Roys, eligible per
lour Chapter. Coke l. 3. f. 76.

Donor and Donee.
DOnor est celuy que done Terres ou Tenem^ al aut' en tail; and celuy a q^ il
est done est appel le Donee.

Dorture.
DOrture est un common Room, lieu, ou Chamber, lou touts les Religieux d' un
Covent dormont, and giseront tout le nuit. An. 25 H. 8. c. 11.

Double Plee.
DOuble Plee est, lou le Defendant ou Tenant en ascun Actio^ plede un Plee e^
q^ deux matters so^t comprehendus, and chescun per luy mesme est un sufficient
Bar ou Respons al Action, donq^s tiel double Plee ne serra admit pur Plee,
sinon que un depend sur l'auter; and en tiel case si il ne poit aver le
darraine Plee sans le primer Plee, donques tiel double Plee serra bien recev'.

Double Quarrel, ou Querele.
DOuble Quarrel est u^ Complaint fait per asc' Clerk out aut' al Archievesq^ ^ l
Province e^vers asc^ inferior Ordinary p^ delaier ^ e Justice e^ asc^ Cause
Ecclesiastical, come a doner sentence, ou dinstitut' un Clerk presentus, ou
tiels semblables: l'effect de q^ est, que l'Archievesque, prendant conusance de
tiel Delay, directa ses Letters south son Seal authentiq^ a tout and singular
Clerks de son Provinee, per ceo eux commandant and donant eux authority and
chesc' de eux, de admonisher le dit Ordinary deins neufe jours a fair^ le
Justice dema^d, ou auterm^t de citer luy (...) appearer devant luy ou son
Official al un jour en les dits Letters prefixe, and la (...) alledger le
meistre (...) son Delay; and dernierment de intimat' al dit Ordinary, que sil
ne performa pas le chose enjoyn^, ne apparust al jour assign, il luy mesme
sans auter Delay procederoit de performer le Justice require. Et ceo semble
destre term un Double Querele, pur ceo que est pluis communement fait envers
le Judge, and celuy a que petition Justice est delay.

Dower.
DOwer, per le Ley del Realm, est un Portion que Fern ad del Terres del
baron, quel per Common Ley est le tierce part; mes per assignement del baron
(...) assent son pere al huis del Esglise, poit aver tant del Terre son pere
come est issint assign, and issint del assignement son baron de part son Terre
demesne. Et Dower, per Custom ^ ascun lieux, est de aver le moietle del Terre
le baron. Dower est auxy un Brief que gist lou home est sole seisie, durant le
Coverture perenter luy and sa feme, de terres ou Tenements en Fee-simple ou
Feetaile, lou per possibility le issue ent' eux poyo^t enheriter si tiel home
devie, sa feme recovera le tierce part de touts les Terres don't le baron fuit
sole seisie ascun temps durant le Coverture, per Brief de Dower unde nihil
habet, mesque il ne morust seisie, and mesque il ad fait Alienation de ceo en
sa vie.

Mes si home, devant le Statute de Uses, 27 H. 8. ad Ter^s en queux auter ho^e
ou auters homes fuerent seisies a son oeps touts foits durant le Coverture, and
cestuy a q^ oeps ils fueront seisies devie devant le dit Statute, sa feme ne
serroit endow.

Et auxy si devant le dit Statute deux homes sont seisies de Terr^s al oeps de
un ^ eux, and cestuy a que oeps, etc. devie devant le dit Statute, sa feme ne
serra endowe. Auxy si feme port Brief de Dower, el recovera Da^mages pur le
profit incurrus apres le mort la baron, sil morust de ceo seisie: mes si ascun
Alienation ou Estate soit fait durant le Coverture, issint que le baron ne
morust seisie; donque mesque el recovera la Terre, uncore el ne recovera
da^mages.

Auxy il est un auter Brief de Dower appel Brief de Droit de Dower, que gist
lou feme ad recover part de sa Dower en mesme le Ville, and auter part el est a
recover. Mes en diverse cases feme navera Dower; sicome le baron fait Treason,
pur que il est attaint, donque sa feme navera Dower.

Et si el elopa de sa baron ovesque un auter home in Advoutry, and si el ne
soit reconcile a son baron de son bone volunt sans coercion del Esglise, el ne
serra endow. Veies Lit. l. 1. c. 4.

Et nota, que lou per Civil Ley Dower est ceo que le baron eyt ove sa feme pur
le Marriage, de mainteiner lour joined estate; per les Leyes del Realm per le
parol ( Dower) est intend le Portion que le feme puis le mort del baron avera
pur sa viver.

Dozeine.
DOzeine. Veies Deeiners.

Dry Exchange.
Dry Exchange (An. 3. H. 7. ca. 5.) semble estre un subtle term invente a
disguiser Usury, en quel quelque chose est pretendu a passer en ambideux party
lou en verity rien passa sur l' un party.

Drift del Forest.
DRift del Forest nest riens forsque un exact V ^ ew and examination prise un
foits, deux foits, ou pluis foits en un an, come occasion require, queux Avers
sont deins le Forest, al intent que le Common en le Forest ne soit surcha ^
ge, que les Avers des Forreiners ne sont permits de commoner la, and que Avers
que ne so^t co^monables poient estr^ expell'. Veies p^ c^ l'Statute 32 H. 8.
cap. 35. and Manwoods Forest Leys, c. 15.

Droit.
DRoit est, lou un ad chose que fuit toll ^ auter per tort, come per
Disseisin, discontinuance, ou tiels semblables; le Challenge ou Claim de luy
que doit aver est term Droit.

Si feme release tout sa Droit a cestuy en Reversion, sa Dower est extinct; car
qua ^ le Droit, que est le foundation and le principal, est release, per
consequence le Action, que nest forsque le mean a recover ceo, est auxy
release. Per Release de tour Title al Terre tout sont Droit est extinct. Issint
quant home ad Title ou per Condition, ou per Alienation en Mortmaine, le
Release de tout son Droit extinctera cest Title, Cok. lib. 8 f. 151, 153.

Droit de Entry.
DRoit de Entry est, quant un seisie de Terre en fee est de ceo disseisie; ore
le Disseisee ad Droit d' enter en le Terre, and poit quant il voile, ou il poit
aver Brief de Droit envers le Disseisor.

Duces tecum.
DUces tecum est un Brief horse del Cha^cery, commaundant home pur appear la,
and de porter ove luy ascun piece de Evidence, ou auter chose que le Court
voiloit veier.

Dum fuit infra aetatem.
DUM fuit infra aetatem est un Bries q^ gist lou Enfant alien son Terre en
Feesimple, ou pur term de vie; quant il vient a son pleine age il avera cest
Brief, ou il puit ent' sil voile, mes il covient que il soit de pleine age jour
de son Brief purchase. Auxy si Enfant alien son Terre, and devie, son issue a
son pleine age avera cest Brief, ou poit enter; mes le issue navera cest Brief
deins son age.

Dum non fuit compos mentis.
DUM non fuit compos mentis est un Brief q^ gist lou home que est horse de son
bone memory, cest adire, Insane ou Lunatic, alien ses Terres en Fee-simple,
and devie; donques son Heir ap^s son decease avera cest Br^e, mes il m^ navera
cest Br^e, p^ c^ q^ home ne serra receive a disable luy mesme. Auxy cest Brief
puit este fait en le Per, Cui, and Post.

Duplicat.
DUplicat est un Second Letters Patents grantus per le Sn^r Chancellor, en case
lou il ad grant le mesme devant; and pur ceo sont tenus voyds per Crompton en
son Jur. des Courts, fo. 215.

Duresse.
DUresse est, lon un home est guard en Prison, ou restrain (...) son Liberty,
contrary al order de Ley, ou menasse destre occide, mayheme, ou graundement
batue: and si tiel person issint en Prison, ou pavor pur tiel Menasse, fait
asc' Especialty ou Obligation per reason del tiel Imprisonm^t, tiel Fait est
void en le Ley; and en Action port sur tiel Especialty poit dire, q^ il fuit
fait per Duresse de son Imprisonment. Mes si home soit arrest sur asc^ Action
al Suit ^ un auter, mesque le cause del Action ne soit bone ne voier, sil fait
asc^ Obligation al un Estraunge esteant e^ prison per tiel Arrest, uncore il ne
serra dit per Duresse. Mes sil fait Obligation a luy a q^ Suit il fuit arrest,
destre discharge de tiel Imprisonm^t, donques il serra dit Duresse.

Duchy.
EST un Court en le Duchy Chamber de Lancaster a Westminster. devant le Chancellor
del Duchy de Lancaster pur matters concernant les terres, and Franchises del
Duchy, and leur procedure est per English Bill come en Chancery, Coke 4. Inst.
204.

E.
Ealderman.
EAlderman enter les Saxons fu ^ st tant come Count ent' les Danes, Camb. Brit.
p. 107. Et a cest jour nous appellomus ceux Aldermen, q^ sont Associats al
prim^ Officer en le Common Council del Ville, 24 H. 8. c. 13. Et en asc^ lieus
le prim^ Officer luy m^ est appel Alderman.

Earl.
Earl. Veies Countee.

Easement.
EAsement est u^ Immunitie q^ un vicine ad ^ un auter, per Charter ou
Prescription, sans profit; come un Voy ou u^ Chanel per son Terre, ou tiels
semblables, Kitch. f. 105.

Egiptians.
EGiptians, vulgarit' vocati Gipsi ^ s, sont counterfeit Vagabonds, Wallois ou
Anglois, q^ eux mesmes disguise e^ roabes and language, and vagueront ro^t per
le Pais, pertendant daver science e^ Palmestry, and issint deceive le vulgar,
mes vivont principalm^t per embler and embeasiler des b ens; and p^ ceo le
Statutes 1 and 2 Mar. c. 4. and 5 Eliz. c. 20. fueront faits p^ le punishm^t de
tiels persons come Felons, sils ne departont le Realm, ou issint continue per
un moys.

Ejectione firmae.
EJectione Firmae. Vide de ceo e^ le Title Quare ejecit infra Terminum.

Ejectment de Guard.
EJectment de Guard. Veis ^ ceo e^ le Title Gards.

Eigne.
EIgne est u^ parol Francois, and signify le Eldest ou Prim^ nee. Veies Enitia
pars.

Einecia.
EInecia signify Primogenitur ou Eldership, S ^ at. de Hib. An. 14 H. 3. V.
Enitia pars.

Eire Justices.
EIre Justices, ou Itinerant, come nous appel' eux fueront Justices q^ use
(...) equitate de lieu al lieu per tout le Realm, p^ administer Justice.

Et ceux Justices avoyent authority en ancient temps a granter Tr^e que fuit
seisie p^ le Roy pur Alienation sans License; car adonq^s Justices e^ Eire
puissoyent aver grant tiel Tr^e e^ fee, rendant Rent, come Justices del
Forest (q^ e^ effect, quant a cest purpose, sont Justices en Eire) a cest jour
poyent de Tr^es enclose deins un Forest, sans conge le Roy. Coke l. 2. fol. 80.

Election.
ELection est quant home est laise a son Frank arbiterm^t demesne, de p^nder ou
fair un chose ou auter, q^ il voile. Come si A covenant ^ payer al B un liver
de Pepper ou Saffron devant Pentecost, est al Election de A tout temps devant
Pentecost, q^ de eux il voile payer; mes sil ne ceo paya devant le dit Feast,
donque enapres est al Election de B p^ aver son Action p^ quel a luy pleist.
Dyer, f. 18. pl. 104.

Issint si ho^e done a un aut' son Chival ou Vache, le Donee poit p^der l'un ou
l' aut' a son Election: Mes si soit q^ il donera, en le future temps, la le
Donee ne poit prender l' un ou l'auter, car donque l' Election est en le Donor.
21 H 7. 19.

Aux' si un Justice (...) Peace direct son Garrant a un Constable, ademes ^ le
party attach devant luy ou aut' Justice, est al Election del Constable de al' a
quel Justice que a luy pleist, Coke l. 5 f. 59. Et en mesme le man^er est e^
plusors auters cases.

Elegit.
TEner per Elegit est, lou home ad recover Det ou Damage per Br^e devers un
auter per conusance, ou en aut' manner, il avera deins l' an devers luy un Br^e
judicial, nosme Elegit, ^ aver Execution de moiet ^ e de touts ses Terres and
Chattels, (except Boe ^ s and Avers a la carue) tanque le Det ou Damages
soyent ousterment levies ou pays a luy; and durant cest term il est Tenant
per Elegit.

Sil soit ousta deins le t'me, il avera Assise (...) Novel Disseisin, and apres
un Redisseisin, si besoigne soit; and cest done p ^ r le Statute de West. 2. c.
18.

Et per l' equity de mesme l'Statute, celuy q^ ad c^ Estate, sil soit ousta,
avera assise and Redisseisin, si besoigne soit. Et auxy sil face ses Executors,
and devie, and ses Executors entront, and puis soyent oustes, ils averont tiel
Action come luy mesme. Mes sil soit ouste, and puis fait ses Executors, and
devie, ses Executors puront enter; and sils soient estoppes de lour Entry, ils
averont u^ Br^e de Trespass sur lour Case.

Sil face Waste en tout le Tr^e, ou e^ parcel, lauter avera envers luy
maintenant un Br^e judicial horse (...) le primer Record, appelle Venire facias
ad computandum, per force de quel serra inquise sil ad levy touts les deniers,
ou parcel; and sil and levy les deniers, donques serra inquise a quant le
Waste amount; and si le Waste amount si non a parcel, donques tants des deniers
que le Waste amounte serra abridge de les suisdits deniers queux fueront destre
levies. Mes sil ad fait pluis Waste q^ l' avantdit sum d' argent que fuit
estre levy amount, lauter serra discharge maintenant de touts les deniers
suisdits, and recovera le Terre. Et p^ la superfluity (...) Waste fait ouster
le dit sum, il recovera ses damages single. Mesme le Ley est de les
Executors, and de cestuy que ad son Estate.

Ou si le Dettor soit satisfy per foder de Coals, Lead, Tyn, ou auters casual
profits.

Vide Stat. 32 H. 8. c. 5 Si touts les terres extend sont evict del Debtor per
mieulx title, il poit prender novel execution, Co. 4 Rep. 66.

Sil a ^^ en e^ fee, ou a term per vie, ou e^ tail, tout le Tr^e ou parcel de
le Tr^e q^ il tient per E ^ egit, si l Alienatio^ soit fait deins le term ou
ap^es, cestuy que ad droit avera verse luy un Assise de Novel Disseisin. Et
covient que ils soient mis en l Assise ambid ^ ux, auxybien l' Alienor come l'
Alienee: and non obstant que l'Alienor devie may ^ tenant, uncore cestuy que ad
droit avera verse l' Alienee sole Assise, come sil ust este son simple Te^ a^t a
term (...) ans Et ceo est per l'equitie del Statute de West. 2. cap. 25. pur
ceo que il ad forsque Chattel en effect. Et mesme l' Ley est de ses Executors,
and de cestuy que ad son Estate come est s ^^ sdit.

En Elegit, si le Viscount return que le party avoit riens jour de la
Recognisance fait, mes que il purchase Terres puis le temps; adonq^s le
Plaintiff avera novel Br^e de aver Execution de ceo. Mesme le Ley est sur un
Statute-Merchant.

Apres le Fieri facias un home poit aver le Elegit, ^ es non c ^ nt', ^ ntant
que Elegit est (...) pluis hault nature que le Fieri facia ^.

Si home recover per Brief de De ^ and sue un Fieri facias, and le Viscount
return que le Defendant and riens don't il poit fair Gree a le party; donques
le Plaintiff avera un Elegit, ou un Capias sicut alias, and Pluries. Et si
Viscount return a le Capias, Mitto vobis Corpus, and il and riens don't il poit
fair^ gree al party; il serra maund al jail del Fleet, and illonques demurre
tanque il ad ^ ait Gree al party: and si le Viscount return Non est inve^tus,
adonques issera l' Exigent envers luy.

Nota, Que en Brief de Det port devers Parson, q^ and rien de Lay-fee, and le
Viscount return que il and rie^s per que il poit estre summon^; adonques le
Plaintiff suera Brief al Evesque, que il face v ^ ner son Clerk, and l'Evesque
luy ferra vener per Sequestration del Esglise.

Et si home port Brief de Det, and recover, and face ses Executors, and devie;
ils naveront Execution, non obstant que il soit deins l' an, per un Fieri
facias.

Est un aut' so ^ t (...) Elegit for adjudgant (...) execution envers
Terr-Tenants, Quel El ^ git recite les Terres enve ^^ queux execution est
adjudge and maund al Viscou ^^ deliver al Creditor un moiety de ceux terres and
rien enc^ est mention des biens ou chateaux come en auters Elegits.

Elopement.
ELopement est, quant feme espouse departa de son baron ove un Adulterer, and
ove le Adulterer demurra, sans voluntary Reconcilem^t a sa baron, per ceo el
perdra sa Dower, per le Statute de Westminster. 2. cap. 34. Sur que cest veil Verse,
Sponte virum mulier fugiens, and adultera facta,
Dote sua carea^, nisi sponso sponte retracta.


Emblements.
EMblements sont les Profits de Terre q^ ad esta^ semy; and en ascuns cases
cestuy que ceo emblea eux avers. and en ascuns nemy. come si Tenant pur vie
emblea le Terre, and apres morust, les Executors del Tenant pur vie avera les
Emblements, and nemy cestuy en Reversion.

Mes si Tenant pur ans emblea le Terre, and devant que il ad sever, son term
expire; ore le Lessor ou cestuy e^ Reversion avera les Emblem^ts. Si un
disseise moy, and succide les Emblem^ts cressans sur le Terre, and pulls jeo
re-enter; jeo avera Action de Trespass verts luy pur les Emblements: mes si
mon Disseisor fait Feoffment en fee, ou lessa le Terre don't il moy disseisist,
and le Feoffee ou Lessee prist les Emblesments, and puis jeo re-enter; jeo
navera Trespass Vi and armis verse eux queux veignont eins per Title, mes verse
mon Disseisor, Cok. lib. 11. fol. 51.

Si feme Copiholder, durante Viduitate sua, solonque le Custom del Man^or,
emblea le Terr^, and devant le severa^ce des Emblem^ts el prist baron; le Sn^r
avera les Emblements. Issint si feme seisie de Terre durante Viduitate fait un
Lease pur ans, and l ^ Lessee emblea le Terre, and puis la fem^ prist baron;
ore le Lessee navera les Emblements, coment que son Estate est determine per
l'act ^ un estranger.

Et nie^t obsta^t q^ est communem^t tenus e^ nostr^ Livr^s. Que si home lessa
Terres a volunt, and puis le Lessee emblea le Terre, and puis le Volunt est
determine, que le Lessee avera les Emblements; uncor^ si le Lessee luy mesme
determine le Volunt devant le severance des Blees, il navera les Emblements.
Veies Cok. lib. 5. fol. 116.

Embrasour, ou Embraceour.
EMbrasour, ou Embraceour, est celuy que, quant un matt' est e^ trial perent'
pertle and pertie, vient al Bar ove u^ ^ l perties, (ayant receive ascun
Reward pur issint fair) and perle en le case, ou privim^t labor le Jurie, ou
estola la pur surveier ou surview eux, per cest means de mitter eux en pavor
and dout del matt'. Mes ho^es erudite e^ Ley pole^t perler en le case p^ lour
Clie^ts.

Emparlance.
EMparlance est, quant home esteant a responder al Action ou Suit, pria ascun
temps de Respite, de luy mesme adviser le meux que il respondera: and nest aut'
forsq^ Continuance del Cause al un jour ouster.

Et coment le Plaintiff (en Ban ^ e le Roy) apres le Bar ^ e plede, ad jour de
reply deux ou trois Terms ap^s; uncor^ null mention serra fait en le Roll ^
ascun Em perlance ou Continuance, mes l' Entry serra generalment, and ente^d ^
estr^ mesm^ le Term^. Mes auterm^t est de un Bar, car ceo contain (...)
Imparla^ce ou Continuance, and est en tiel form: Et modo ad hunc diem,
scilicet, diem Veneris etc. isto eodem Termino, usque ad quem diem praedictus A
habuit licentiam interloquendi, etc.

Mes null tiel Entry est la fait sur ascun Replication ou Rejoinder. Veies Cok.
lib. 5. fol. 75.

Brit. cap. 5 ^. usa cest perol pur le Conference ^ un Jurie sur le Cause a eux
commise.

Est un special Imparlance auxi pur un Defendant salvis sivi omnibus and
omnimodis exceptionibus ad breve and narrationem, ou ad billam, Quel est use
lou le Defendant doit plede ascun matters queux ne poient estre plede puis
general Imparlance.

Encheson.
ENcheson est un perol Francois mult use e^ les Livres de nr^e Ley, come e^ le
Statute 50 E. 3. cap. 3. and signify tant come Occasion, cause, ou reason pur
que ascun chose est fait. Issint est use per Stamford, lib. 1. cap. 12. en son
description dun Deodand.

Encrochment.
ENcrochment venust ^ l parol Franco ^ s Acrocher, id est, Apprehendere: Et
signify un Illoyal gainer sur le droit ou possession ^ un aut'. Et issint un
Rent est dit estr^ encroch, qn^t le Sn^r per coercion del Distres ^ e ou
auterment compel le Tenant pur paier plus Rent que besoigne, ou que doit. Veies
Bucknal's Case, 9 Rep. fol. 33. Issint quant home mist son Hay ou Mure en le
terre son vicine que gist prochein a luy, il est dit pur incrocher sur luy.

Enditement.
ENditement venust del Francois Enditer, id est, Indicare. Et est un Bill ou
Declaration in form del Ley, exhibit per voy del Accusation verse ho^e pur
ascun Offense ou criminal ou penal, and prefer as Jurors, and per lour
Verdict trove and presentus destre voyer devant u^ Judge ou Officer que ad
poyar de punier ou certifier l' Offense.

Endowment.
ENdowment (Dotatio) signify properm^t le Doner ou assurer del Dower al fem^.
Mes est ascun foits use per un Metaphor pur le Mitter horse ou severance dun
suffieient part ou portion al un Vicar pur son perpetual maintenance, quant le
Benefice est approprie. Et issint est use en les Statutes 15 R. 2. cap. 6. and
4 H. 4. cap. 12.

Endowment de la pluis belle part.
ENdowment de la, etc. est, quant un home morust seize de ascun Terres tien en
Chivalry and de auters e^ Soccage, la Vidue est acco^mode de so^ Dower e^ les
Tr^s tiem en Soccage, come le pluis belle part. Veies Littl. lib. 1. cap. 5.

Enfranchisement.
ENfranchisement est, quant ho^e est e^corporate e^ ascun Society ou Corpse
politiq^. Issint si Alien nee soit fait Denison ^ Angleterre, il est dit destre
enfranchise; and cestuy q^ est fait un Citizen de Londres, ou aut' Ville
Corporate; pur ceo que il est fait pernour de ceux Franchises queux appent al
Corporation en que il est enfranchise.

Et qua^nt home est enfranchise e^ un City ou Borough, il ad Frank-tenement en
son Freedom pur son vie, and ove auters en lour politic capacity, ad
Enheritance en les Terres del dit Corporation: pur que le matter que serra
cause (...) son Dis-infranchisement covient estre un Act ou fait, and nemy
Conation ou enterprise, don't il poit repent devant l'Execu ^ ion ^ ceo. Et que
serra sufficient cause de dis-infranchiser un Frank home, and que nemy, veies
Cok. lib. 11. en Bagg's Case, fol. 98.

Englesherie.
ENglesherie, ou Englecerie, est un veil parol, q^ riens aut' imply forsque
destr^ u^ home Anglois: Car en auncie^nt te^ps, come appiert per Bracton, lib.
3. Tract. 2. cap. 15. fol. 134. si u^ home ad este tue ou murdre il fuit
account destr^ Francigena; quel perol emplia chesc' Alien, jesque Englesherie
fuit prove, ceo est, jesque il fuit fait manifest que il fuit un home Anglois:
Le commencement de quel fuit tiel:

Kanutus, le Roy des Danes, ayant establie son Estate cy en peace, al prier de
nostre Barons discharga le Terre de ses Armies, en que il reposa son greinder
safety, sur cest condition, Que les Barons voilent doner consent a un Lev, Que
quecunque tuera un Alien, and fuit attache, and ne puit luy mesm^ acquiter,
serroit subject al Justice: Mes si le Homicide escap ^, le Ville ou le home
fuit (...) forfeitera 66. Merques al Roy: and si le Ville ne fuit able de ceo
paier, donque le Hundred forfeitera and paiera ceo al Trea ure le Roy: and
ouster, Que chescun home murdre serroit account Francigena, sinon que
Englesherie fuit prove; and coment il serroit prove, veies Bracton e^ mesme le
chap. number. 7. Aux' veies Horn's Mirror de Justices, l. 1. cap. l Office del
Coroner, and Fleta, l. 1. c. 30. Cest Englisherie, p^ les abuses and torts q^
fuero^t enap^s perceive a sur ceo, fuit tout ousterment abolish per Statute
Anno 14. E. 3. c. 4. Veies Coke, l. 7. f. 16. Calvin's Case.

Enheritance.
ENheritance est tiel Estate en Tr^es ou Tenem^ts, ou autres chooses, q^ poe^t
estre inherit per le Heir; soit ceo d'Estate e^ Fee-simple, ou Tail, per
Disce^t d'asc' ses Ancest', ou per son Purchase demesne.

Et est divide en Enheritance Corporate, and Enheritance Incorporate.

Enheritance Corporate sont Mesuages, Terres, Prees, Pastures, Rents, and tiels
semblables, que ont substance en eux mesmes, and point continuer tout temps: Et
ceux sont appel chooses Corporal.

Enheritance Incorporate so^t Advowsons, Velleines, Ways, Com^ons, Courts,
Piscaries, and tiels se^blables, q^ so^nt ou poient estr^ ap perendant ou
appurtena^t al Enheritance Iocorporate.

Enitia pars.
ENitia aut Einecia pars est ceo Part que, sur Partition enter Coparceners,
eschew al eigne Soer ou eigne Coparcener, come appiert per Littleton, sect.
245. Est appeile Enitia pars del parol Francois Eigne ou Aisne, id est,
Primogenitus.

Enquest.
ENquest est ceo Inquiry q^ est fait per Jurors en touts Causes civil ou
criminal touchant le matter en Fait. Et tiel Enquest est ascun foits ex
officio, queux font appells Enquests (...) Office and sont traversable, and
ascun foits ex prece partium. Cest parol est use en les Statutes de 25 E. 3. c.
3. 28 E. 3. c. 13. and fere en touts Statutes queux parlont des Trials per
Jurors.

Entendment.
ENtendment est un common parol en nr^e Ley, quant ascun chose est en aurust,
donque per Entendment il serra ascun foits fait bone. Come si Inquisitio^ soit
trove devant le Coroner, q^ un ^ o^e fuit murdre al A, q^ est un Franchise, and
nest dit en le Inquisition al A deins le Franchise de A, uncore ceo serra bone
per Extendment; car peradventure le Franchise poit exten ^ ouster le Ville, mes
q^ le Ville mesm^ serra presume destre horse del Franchise ^ l Ville, est u^
captious construction: p^ q^ l'Inquisition serra bone per Entendm^t. Coke l. 5.
f. 121. Veies Kitch. f. 224.

Enterpleader.
ENterpleader est, quant en ascun Cause un chose eschia q^ de necessity doit
estre discuss deva^t le principal Cause poit estre determine: Pur example,
Deux persons sont trove Heir al Tr^e per deux several Offices en un County,
per ceo le Roy est en aurust a q^ il serra Liverie, p^ quel cause, devant q^
Liverie soit fait, il voile eux aver enterpleader, and per ceo determine que
est le droit Heir. Veies Coke l. 7. f. 45. Stam. Prer. c. 19. Brook, tit.
Enterpleader.

Auxi est un auter sort de Enterpleder en detinue en diverse cases queux veies
en Rast. Entr. 213.

Entire Tenancie.
ENtire Tenancie est ceo que est contrary al Several Tenancie, and implie un
Sole possession en un ho^e, ou laut' impiia Joint ou common en plusors. Veies
Brook, Several Tenancy, and le Ve ^ l Livre de En ^ ries, south cest Title.

Enter.
Enter est, lou un home enter en ascun Tr^es ou Tenements, ou prist possession
^ ceux.

Auxy sont diverse Br^es d' Enter quex sont en diverse manners. Un est Br^e d'
Enter sur Disseisin. que gist lou home est disseise, il ou son Heir l'avant dit
Brief avera verse mesme le Disseisor, ou asc' auter apres Tenant del Terre. Et
si le Disseisor alien, ou devie seisie, donques le Br^e d' Enter serra verse
l'Heir ovesq^ l'Alienee e^ le Per; cest adire, e^ q^ le Tenant non habet
Ingressum nisi per tiel, nosmant le Disseisor, q^ luy avoit disseisie, etc.

Si l'Hier ou Alienee devie seisie, ou aliena al auter, donques le Br^e serra
en le Per and Cui; cest adire, en q^ le Tenant non habet Ingressum nisi per
tiel (nosmant l'Heire ou l' Alienee del Disseisor) cui tiel (nosmant le
Disseisor) il dimisit, q^ luy per tort disseisie, etc.

Et si Tr^e soit convey ouster al plusors, ou si le primer Disseisor soit
disseisie, donq^s le Br^e d' Enter serra e^ le Post; cest adire, q^ le Tenant
non habet Ingressum nisi post Disseisinam, quel le prim^ Disseisor fait al
Demandant ou son Ancestor. Veies Enter en le Per.

Enter en le Per, Cui and Post.
BRief d' Enter en le Per gist lou ho^e est disseise (...) son Frank-tenement,
and le Disseisor alien, ou devie seisie, and son Heir entra, donques le
Disseisee ou son Heir avera le dit Br^e verse l'Heire le Disseisor, ou verse
l'Alienee le Disseisor; mes vivant le Disseisor, il poit aver Assise, si il
voile, and le Br^e d'Entre dirra, In quod A non habet Ingressum nisi per B, qui
illud ei dimisit, qui inde eum injuste disseisivit, etc. Mes si le D ^ sseisor
alien, and l'Alienee devie seisie, ou alien ouster a un aut', ou si le
Disseisor devie, and son Heir entra, and celuy Heir aliena ou devie, and son
Heir entra; Donques le Disseisee ou son Heir avera Br^e d' Enter sur
Disseisin en le Per and Cui, and le Br^e dirra, In quod idem A non habet
Ingressum nisi per B, cui C illud ei dimisit, and inde injuste, etc.

Brief d'Entre en le Per and Cui serra mainteinable verse nulluy, me lou le
Tenant soit eins per Purchase ou per Descent: Car si l'Alienation ou Descent
soit devenus horse des Degrees, sur quel null Br^e poit estre sait en le Per, ne
en le Per and Cui, donques serra fait e^ le Post, and le Br^e dirra, In quod A
non habet Ingressum nisi post Disseisinam, quam B inde injust ^, and sine
judicio fecit praef. N. vel M. proavo N. cujus haeres ipse est.

Auxy sont cinque chooses q^ mittont le Br^e d' En ^ re horse des Degrees; cest
adire, Intrusion, Succession, Disseisin sur Disseisin, Judgment, ou Escheat.

1. Intrusion est, quant le Di ^^ e ^ sor d ^ vie seisie, and un estranger
abata.

2. Disseisin sur Disseisin est, quant le Disseisor est Disseisie, per u^ aut'.

3. Succession est, lou le Disseisor est un home de R ^ ligion, and devie, ou
est depose, and so ^ Successor entra.

4. Judgment est, quant un recover verse le Disseisor

5. Escheat est, quant le Disseisor devie sans Heir, ou fait Felony, per q^
il est attaint, per q^ le Seignior entra come e^ son Escheat.

En touts ceux cases le Disseisie ou son Heir navera Brief d' Entry deins les
degrees e^ le Per, mes en le Post, p^ ceo q^ en ceux cases ils ne sont eins per
Descent, ne per Purchase.

Enter ad Communem Legem.
AUxy il y ad un Brief del Enter ad Communem Legem, and gist lou Tenant a term
de vie, Tenant a term d'auter vie, Tenant per le courtesy, ou Tenant en Dower,
alien and devie; celuy en le Reversion avera cest Br^e devers quecunque q^
soiteins apres en le Tenement.

Enter en Casu proviso.
BRief d' Enter en casu proviso gist, si Tenant en Dower alien en Fee, ou p^
term de vie, ou p^ aut' vie, vivant le Tenant en Dower; celuy en le Reversion
avera cest Br^e, q^ est purview per le Statute de Gloc. c. 7.

Enter in Casu consimili.
BRief de Enter in Casu consimili gist, si Tenant pur vie ou Tenant pur la
courtesy alien en Fee; celuy en le Reversion avera cest Brief per l'Stat. de
West. 2. cap. 24.

Enter ad terminum qui praeteriit.
BRief de Entry ad terminum qui praeteriit gist, si un home lessa Terres a un
auter pur term de ans, and le Tenant tient ouster son term; le Lessor avera
cest Brief.

Et si Terres sont lesses a un home p^ term d'aut' vie, and cestoy p^ que vie
les Terres sont lessees devie, and le Lessee tient ouster; donques le Lessor
avera cest Brief.

Enter sine Assensu Capituli.
BRief de Enter sine Assensu Capituli gist lou un Abbe, Prior, on tiel que ad
Covent ou common Seal, aliena Terres ou Tenements del droit de son Esglise,
sans le Assent del Covent ou Chapter, and devie; donques son Successor avera
cest Brief.

Enter causa Matrimonii praeloquuti.
Brief de Enter causa Matrimonii praeloquuti gist ou Terres ou Tenements sont
done a un home sur condition, que il prendra la Donour a sa feme deins certain
temps, and il ne luy espousa deins la dit temps, ou espouse aut' feme, ou luy
fait Priestre, ou enter en Religion, ou luy disable issint que il ne puit luy
prender, accordant a le dit Condition; donques la feme Donour and ses Heirs
avera le dit Brief verse lui, ou verse quecunque est eins en le dit Terre. Mes
cest Condition doit estre fait per Endenture, auterment cest Brief ne gist. Et
touts ceux and auters Briefs (...) Enter poient este fait en le Per, Cui, and
Post.

Entrusion.
ENtrusion est un Brief que gist lou Tenant pur vie devie seisie de certain
Terres ou Tenements, and un Estrange entra; celuy en ia Reversion avera cest
Brief verse l'Abator, ou quecunque que soit eins apres lour Entrusion.

Auxy un Brief de Entrusion serra maintainable pur le Successor de un Abbe verse
l'Abator, que enter en ascun Terres ou Tenements Tempore vocationis que appent
a la Esglise, per le Statute de Marlebridge, cap. u^timo.

Et il semble que le difference perenter un Entrudor and un Abator est en ceo;
Que un Abator est celuy que entra en Terres void per le mort de un Tenant en
Fee, and un Entru ^ or est celuy que entra en Terres void per le mort de un
Tenant p^ vie ou ans. Veies F. N. B. fol. 203.

Entrusion de Guard.
ENtrusion de Guard, est un Brief que gist ou le Heir deins age entra en ses
Terres, and tient horse son Seignior; car en ti ^ l case le Seignior navera le
Brief de commun. Custodia, mes cest Brief de Entrusion (...) Guard. Veil. N. B.
fol. 90.

Enure.
ENure signify Prendre place ou effect, estre available. Come un Release enura
per voy d'Entinguishment. Lit. Ca. Release.

Equity.
Equity est en deux manners, and ceux de contrary effects; car un abri ^ ge
and ^ ol le letter del Ley, l' auter enlarge, and add a eo.

Le primer est issint define; Equilas est Correctio Legis generatim latae qua
part deficit; le quel Correction del general ^ ols est mult use en nr^e Ley.
Sicome pur exampleo Quant Act de Parliament est fait, quecunque q^ fait tiel
act serra Felon, and serra mise al mort; uncor^ si home de Non sane memory ou
Enfant que and discretion le fait, is ne serront Felons, ne mise al mort.

Auxy si Statute soit fait, Que touts persons que receiveront, ou donero^t
maunger ou boyer ou aut' aid a cestuy que fera tiel act, serront accessory a
son Offense, and serront mise al mort, si ils conusteront del fact; uncor^ l'un
fait tiel act* and veigne a sa properfem^, q^ scia^t ceo luy receive, and done
maunger and boyer a luy; el ne serra Accessory, ne Felon; car per le
generality ^ les dits parols cestuy de Non sane memory, Enfant, ne feme
fueront enclude en Intent de Ley.

Et issint Equity correct le generaltie del Ley e^ ceux cases, and les parols
generals so^t per Equity abridge.

Laut' Equit ^ e est defin^ estre un Extension des parols de la Ley al Cases
non exprimez, ayant neantmoins la mesm ^ raison. Ainsi qn^t les parols enact un
chose, ils enact touts chooses que sont e^ semblables degrees. Sico^e le Statute
que ordeigne, Que en Action de Det verse Executors, cestuy que vient per
Distress respondera, extenda per Equite al Administratours; car cestuy de eu ^
que vient primes per Distress, respondera per Equity del dit Act; quia sunt
in aequali genere.

Issint le Statute de Gloucester done l' Action de Waste and le Punishment de
ceo verse cestuy que tient pur vie ou ans; and per l' Equity de ceo home avera
Action de Waste verse cestuy que tient sorsque pur un an ou demi an, uncore ceo
est horse del parols del Statute; car cestuy que tient sorsque pur demi an ou un
an, ne tient pur ans; mes ceo est l' intent, and les parol: quel enact l'un,
per Equity enacteront l' auter.

Errant.
ERrant, id est, Intinerans, ven ^ st del parol Francois Errer, id est, Errare,
ou del vieux parol Err, id est, Iter; and est appropriate as Justices que
alont en Circuit, and as Bailies a large, que pur ceo sunt appelle Justices
Errants, and Bailies Errants, eo q^ ils alont and travailont del un lieu al
auter, l' un pur fair Justice, and auter per executer Process. Veies Eire.

Error.
ERror est un Fau ^ t en un Judgment, ou en le Proceste ou Proceeding al
Judgment, ou e^ Execution sur ceo en Court de Record; quel Fault en le Civil
Ley est appel u^ Nullitie. Auxy Error est le nosm^ (...) u^ Brief, and gist lou
Judgm^t est done e^ le Com^on Bank, ou devant Justice en Assise, ou devant
Justice de Oyer and Terminer, ou deva^t le Mayor ou Viscou^t de Londres, ou en
aut' Court de Record, contra le Ley, ou sur undue ou male Process; donques le
pertie grieve avera cel Brief, and per ceo causera le Record and Process destr^
remove deva^t les Justices de Bank le Roy; and ia fill Error soit trove, il
serra reverse. Mes si erroneous Judgment soit done en Bank le Roy, donques il
ne poit este reverse forsque per Parliament, tanque le Statute 27 Eliz cap. 8.

Auxy si tiel Default soit en Judgment done e^ Court q^ nest de Record, com^ en
County, Hundred, ou Court Baron, donque le pertie avera Brief de Faux
Judgment, pur fair le Record vener devant Justice de Com^on Bank. Auxy si
Error soit trove en i'Exchequer, il serra redress per le Chauncelor and
Treasurer, ut patet per Statute Ed. 3. an. 31. c. 12 and 31 Eliz. c. 1.

Est auxi un aut' brief d'error sur Judgm^t en Bank le Roy: Et cest ou le
Plaint' voil assign matter e^ fait pur Error. Et c^ gist e^ mesme le Court car
cest Court poit redress lour errors e^ fait (mes nemy lour lour Errors en ley)
mes le Court de Com. B. ne poit issint fair.

Escape.
EScape est, lou un que est arrest deveigne a son liberty devant que il soit
deliver per Agard de ascu^ Justice, ou per order de Ley.

Escape est en deux sorts; voluntary and negligent.

Voluntary Escape est, qn^t un arrest auter pur Felony ou auter crime, and
puis celuy en que custody il soit luy lesser aler lou il voit.

Et si l'Arrest fuit pur Felony, ceo serra dit Felony e^ cestuy que luy
lesser (...) escaper; si pur Treason, il serra Treason en luy; and si pur un
Trespass, donque Trespass; and sic d ^ singulis.

Quant un est arrest, and puis escape encounter le volunt de cestuy que luy
arrest, and ne foit freshment pursu ^, and reprise devant que le pursuor perdra
le view de luy; ceo serra dit negligent Escape, non obstant que cestuy horse de
que possession il escape luy reprist apres le vieu perdu. Aux y si un soit
arrest, and puis escape, and est a son liberty, and cestuy en que guard il
fuist luy reprise apres, and luy amesne a le prison; uncore il est Escape en
luy.

Si un Felon soit arrest per le Constable, and amesne a le Gaol en le County,
and le Jailer ne voit luy receiver, and le Co^stabl luy demit, and le Jailer
auxy, and issint il escape; cest est un Escape en le Jailer pur ceo q^ en tiel
case le Gao ^ er est tenus de luy receiver per le main del Constable, sans
ascun Precept de le Justice de Peace Mes auterm^t est, si un com^on person
arrest auter pur suspicion de Felony, la le Jailer nest tenus de luy receiver
sans Precept de ascun des Justices de Peace*

Il y ad un E ^ cape auxy sans Arrest: come si Murder soit fait en le jour, and
le Muderer ne soit prise, d ^ nque il est Escape, pur que le Ville ou le Murder
fuit fait serra amercie.

Et est destre observe, Que home poit estre dit (...) escaper, nient obstant q^
il touts foits remain en Prison. Come, si home soit en Prison sur deux
Executio^s a Suit de deux several homes, and l' ancient Viscount deliver ouster
cest Prisoner al novel Viscount per Indenture, accordant al usual manner, and
en le dit Inde^ture ne fait ascun mention (...) un des dits Executions, cest
Omissio^ serra dit u^ Escape e^ Ley immediatment, p^ que le ancient Viscount
respondera, nient obstant que l' Execution fuit matt' de Record, de que le
novel Viscou^t puit aver prise notice. Mes aut'm^t est lou l'ancie^t Viscount
morust, car en tiel case covie^t al novel Viscount a so^ peril de pre^der
notice de tout les Executions que sont verse ascun person que il trova en le
Jail: Mes en le dit case, ou le Viscount morust, and devant que auter est
fait, un que est en Execution enfreint Ie Jail, and depart a large, ceo est
null Escape; car qn^t un Viscount morust, tout les prisoners sont en le custody
del Ley, tanque novel Viscount soit fait. Veies Co. lib. 3. fol. 72.

Si le Viscount, sur un Capias ad satisfaciendum a luy direct, fait Return
Quod cepit Corpus, and uncore and le Corpse en Court al jour de le Return; le
Plaintiff poit aver son Action verse le Viscount pur l' Escape, nient obstant
que le party issint prise soit en le Jail. Veies 7 H. 4. 11. Br. 107.

Escheat.
EScheat est, lou un Tenant en Fee-simple face Felony, pur que il pendue, ou
abjure le Realm, ou utlage de Felony, Murder, ou Pe ^ it Treason, ou si le
Tenant morust sans Heir general ou special; donque le Sn^r de que le Terre est
tenus per le Tenant poit enter per voy de Escheat; ou si ascun auter home
enter, le Seignior avera verse luy un Brief appel Brief de Escheat.

Escheator.
EScheator est le nosme del Officer que regarda les Escheats del Roy en
l'Countie de que il est Escheator, and certifia, ceux en le Exchequer. Cest
Officer est design per le Sn^r Treasurer, and per Letters Patents de luy, and
continua en son Office forsque un an; neque poit asc' estr^ Escheator forsque
un foits en trois ans. Anno 1. H. 8. cap. 8. and an. 3. ejusdem, cap. 2. Veies
pluis de cest Officer and son authority en Cromptons Justice de Peace. Veies
An. 21 Edw. 1. Le form del Serem^t del Escheator veies en l' Reg. orig. fol.
301. b. Et l Escheator est un Officer de Record, and puit ordein un
south-Escheat come le Visc' poit un south-Vise'; unc' l' Escheator ne poit
return asc' Office virtute Officii, mes il serra punie. Veies F. N. B. fol.
100. Officium Escaetriae est l' Escheatorship. Reg. orig. fol. 259.

Eschequer.
ESchequer Scaccarium venust del perol Francis Eschequier, id est, Abacus, q^
en un signification est prise p^ un Counting Table, ou pur l' art ou science
del Compt'. Et de ceo (come ascuns pensoient) le lieu ou Court des Receipts ou
Accounts des Revenews del Corone est appel l' Eschequer. Auters ont auterm^t
derive le nosme de ceo. Mes l' Eschequer est define per Crompton en son Jurisd.
des Courts, fol. 105. destre un Court del Record, en q^ touts les Causes que
concern^ les Revenews l' Coro^ so^t tracts.

Escrowle.
UN Escrow est un fait deliver al tierce person d'estre le fait del party sur
future condition, Et est appell en Latin Schedula. Rast. Entr. fol. 181.

Escuage.
EScuage, en Latin Scutagium, cest adire, Servitium Scuti, and cestuy que
tient per Escuage, tient per Servic ^ de Chival; and a ceo appe^t Guard,
Marriage, and Relief, etc

Mes veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. p^ abolishing le Court de Gards and
Liveries, and turning touts les Tenures en frank and com^on Soccage.

Escuage fuit un certain Sum de Argent levy per le Sn^r de ses Tenants,
solonque l' quantity de son Tenure, qn^t l' Escuage courge per tout
Angleterre, and fuit ordeigne per tout le Council d' Angleterre, qn^t chesc'
Tenant don^a a son Sn^r; and ceo fuit properm^it pur susteiner le Guerr^ co^tre
Escoce ou Gales, and no^ pas co^tre aut's Tr^s, pur ceo q' les avantdit Tr^s
serro^t de droit appenda^t a le Realm^ d' Angleterre. Vide Lit. l. 2. c. 3.

Eslisors.
SOnt persons nominate per u^ Court del com^on Ley, al queux un venire facias
serroit direct (per challeng al Viscount and Coroners; queux return le br^e en
lour nosmes ove, un panel ces nosmes des Jurors. 15 E. 4. 24. fol. 4.

Esnecy.
ESnecy e^ un im^unitie done al pluis eigne Coparcen^, de Eslier primerment
puis l' Inheritance est divide. Flet. l. 5. c. 10.

Esplees.
ESplees est le Profit ou Commodity que est a prender dun chose: Come de un
Common, l' prender l Grass per les bouches de les Beasts que common la; de un
Advowson, le pren de gros Dismes per le Parson; de Bois, ie vender de Bois;
d'un Orchard, le vender de Pomes and auters Fruits cressant la; d'un Molin, le
prisel de Toll, sont les Esplees, and de tiels semblables. Et nota, que en
Brief de Droit de Terre, Advowson, ou tiels semblables, le Demaundant doit
allege en son Count, que il ou ses Ancestors prise les Esplees chose e^
dema^d* auterment l' Count nest bon^.

Essendi quietum de Tolonio.
ESsendi quietum de Tolonio, est un Brief destre quit Toll, and gist en case
ou les Citizens ou Burgesses de ascun City ou Borough ount estr^ quit de Toll
per Grant des Progenitors del Roy per tout le Royalme, ou per Prescriptio^;
donque si asc' ho^e des dits Cities ou Boroughs veigno^t oves ses Mercha^dises
a asc' Ville, Fair, ou Market, and la eux mitt' a vender, ou achatont ascuns
Merchandises, si les Officers del di ^ Ville voile demaunder ascun Toll de luy
encount' l'Charter le Roy, ou encounter le Usage and Custom, il puit suer and
aver tiel Br^e. F. N. B. f. 226. Regist. orig. fol. 258.

Essoine.
Essoine: Lou un Action est port, and le Plaintiff ou Defendant ne poit bien
appear^ al jour en Court pur un de cinque causes desouth express, il serra
Essoine de saver son Default.

Sont cinque mann^s de Essoines: cest adire, Essoine, De ouster le mere, per
quel le Defendant avera jour per xl. jours.

Le second est, De terrae sancta, and sur ceo le Defendant avera jour per un an
and un jour; and ces deux serront gist al commencement del Plee.

Le tierce Essoine est; De male vener, and ceo serra adjourne al common jour,
come Action require; and cest appel' le Common Essoine: and quant and coment
cest Essoine serra, veies les Statutes, and Livre de Abridgement de Statutes,
lou il est been declare.

Le quater est, De malo lecti, and ceo est solement en Brief de Droit, and sur
ceo issera Brief horse del Chauncerie direct al Viscount, que il mandera quat'
Chivalers de veier le Tenant, and sil il soit mala ^, de done a luy jour ap^s
un an and jour.

Le cinq' Essoine est, De service del Roy, and gist en touts Actions, forsque
en Assise De Novel Disseisin, Brief de Dower, Darreine presentment, and en
Appeal de Murder: mes en cest Essoine il covient al jour de monstre son
Garrant, ou auterment il turnera a un Default, si soit en Plee real: ou
auterment il perdera xx s. pur le journey, ou pluis per le discretion del
Justice, si soit en Plee personel, ut patet per le Statute de Gloucest. cap. 8.

Essoino de malo lecti.
ESsoine de malo lecti, est un Brief direct al Viscount, pur le mitt' quat'
loyal Chivaliers a veyer un que ad essoin luy mesme De malo lecti. Reg. Orig.
fol. 8. b.

Establishment de Dower.
EStablishment de Dower. semble destre l' Assurance de Dower fait per le Baron
ou ses amies devant ou al temps del Espousels: Et Assignment de Dower est le
Mittant ceo horse per le Heir ap^s, accordant al Establishment. Brit. cap. 102,
103.

Estandard.
EStandard ou Standard implia u^ Ensign en l' guerre; mes est auxy use p^ le
prlm^ ou Certain Measure del Roy, proprortion del que touts les Measures per
le Terre devoient estre fait per le Clerk del Market, Aulneageor, ou auter
Officer, accordant a lour Function.

Car il fuit estable per Magna Charta, an. 9 H. 3. ca. 25. que la serroit
forsque un Assise de Poys and Measures per tout le Royalme; le quel est jammes
confirm per An. 14 Ed. 3. c. 12. and plusors aut's Statutes; come auxy que
touts serroyent fait al Estandard seal ove le Seal le Roy

Et bone cause la est que il serroit appel Estandard, p^ ceo que il estoia
constant and immove, and ad touts auters Measures vient a icel pur lour
conformity; en mesme le man^er come Soldiers en le champe ont lour Estandard
ou Colors pur lour direction en lour March ou Battle. De eux Estandards and
Measures lies Brit. cap. 30. Veies le Stat. 17. Car. 1. c. 19.

Estate.
EState est cel Title ou Interest que home ad en Terres ou Tenements; come
Estate simple, auterment appell Fee-simple, and Estate Conditional ou sur
Condition; que est ou sur Condition en Fait, ou sur Condition en Ley. Veies
Littl. lib. 3. cap. 5.

Estoppel.
EStoppel est, quant un est conclude and deny en Ley (...) ^ arlar encounter
son act ou fait dem^, nient obstant il soit p^ dire le verity.

Et de Estoppels il y ad un grand number. Un pur example est, quant J. S. est
oblige en un Obligation per le nosme de T. S. ou ascun aut' nosm^, and est sue
apres accorda^t al mesme le nosme mis en l' Obligation, ore il ne serra receive
a dire que il est misnosme, mes ferra chase a respon ^ accor ^ al nosme mis e^
l'Obligation, cest adire, T. S; car peradventure l' Obligee ne scavoit pas son
nosme mes per le report tantsolement del. Obligor mesm^. and entant q^ il, est
m^ le ho^e que fuit oblige, il, serra estoppe, and deny en Ley, p^ adire le
contrary encont' son fait demesne; car auterm^ il poit prend advantage (...)
son tort demesne, le quel le Ley ne voit suffer u^ ho^ne de fair.

Si le file que est Heir a son pere voit suer Liverie ove sa soer que est un
Bastard, el ne serra apres receive pur dire que sa soer est un Bastard, entant
que si la Bastard soer prist le moietie del Terre, il and Remedy per le Ley.

Auxy si un home seisie de Tr^e en Fee-simple voit prender un Lease p^ ans de
mesme le Tr^e d'un estranger per Fait indent, cest un Estoppel durant le term
d'ans, and le Lessee est per ceo bar a dire le verity, car le verity est,
Que il que lessa le Tr^e and riens en ceo al temps le Lease fait, and q' le
Fee-simple fuit e^ le Lessee: Mes ceo il ne serra receive adire tanque ap^s les
ans serra determine, p^ ceo que il appiert que il ad Estate pur ans, and il
fuit son folly de prender un Lease de ses Tr^es demesne, and pur ceo serra
issint punie p^ son folly.

Estovers.
EStovers sont Nutriment ou Maintenance: Et Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c. 18. number.
1. ceo usa pur tiel Nutrim^t q' home, attach p^ Felony, est d' aver horse de
ses Tr^es ou biens pur luy mesme and son family durant son dures. Et le
Statute ^ 6 E. 1. c. 3. ceo usa p^ u^ Allowance en Viands ou Pan. Il est anxy
use pur certain Allowances de Boys destre prise horse del boys d'un auter ho^e,
Westminster. 2. c. 15. Anno 13 E. 1. West. part. 2. tit. Fines, sect. 26. dit, Que le
nosme d' Estovers conteigne House-bote, Heybote, and Carue-bote; come sil ad en
son Grant ceux general parols, De rationabili Estoverio in boscis, etc. il poer
per ceo claimer ceux trois.

Estrangers.
EStrangers sont ascun foits prise pur ils q^ ne sont Parties ne Privies al
Fine levy, ou feasans d'un Fait; ascuns foits ils que sont nee ouster le mere.

Estray.
EStray est, lou ascun Beast ou Cattle est en ascun Sn^tie, and null conust
l'Owner ^ ceo; donques ceo serra seisie al oeps le Roy, ou de le Sn^r que ad
tiel Estray per grant le Roy, ou per prescription: and si l' Owner fait claim a
ceo deins an and jour, il ceo reavera; ou auterment apres l' an le property de
ceo serra al Snr^, issint que le Sn^r face Proclamation de ceo accordant a le
Ley.

Estreat.
EStreat est u^ Emblem ou Resemblance, and est communen^it use pur le Copy ou
vioer Note d'un Original Escripture; come Estreates de Amerciaments impos enles
Rolls d'un Court, destr^ levy per le Reeve, ou aut' Officer, de chesc' home p^
son peeche. Veies F. N. B. 75, and 76. Et issnt il est use e^ Westminster. 2. c. 2.

Estrepment.
EStrepment est un Br^e que gist lou un est emplede per un Praecipe quod reddat
p^ certain Tr^e; si le Demandant suppose que le Tenant voile fair Waste
pendant le Plee, il avera verse luy cest Brief, q^ est un Prohibition, luy
com^andant ne fair^ Wast pendant le Plee.

Et cest Brief gist properment lou un home demand Tr^es per Formedon, ou Brief
de Droit, ou tiels Briess lou il ne recover Damages; car en riels Briefs lou
il recovera Damages, il avera ses Damages, oves regard al Wast fait.

Etate probanda.
ETate probanda est un Br^e d'Office, and gift p^ l'Heir le Tenant que tient
del Roy en capite, p^ prove que il est de plein age, direct al Viscount pur
inquirer de son age; and donques il deviendra Tenant al Roy per mesme les
Services que son Ancestors fist al Roy. Mes il est dit, q' chesc' que passer en
cest Enquest serra del age de xlii. ans al meins. Mes veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2.
pur Abolition del Court de Wards and Liveries, etc.

Evesdroppers.
EVesdroppers, sont tiels queux estoyent desouth Mures ou Fenestres per nuict
ou jour a oyer novels, and a carrier eux al auters, a fair strife and debate
int' lour Vicines: ceux sont male members en le Com^on-wealth, and p^ ceo per
le Stat. per Westminster. 1. c. 33. sont destre punie.

Et cest Misdemeanour est ^ sentable and punishable en le Court Leet, Kitch. f.
11.

Evidence.
EVidence est use gen^alm^t p^ asc' Proof, soit il per le Testimony (...)
ho^es, ou per Escript Sir Too. Smith, l. 2. c. 17. ceo usa e^ ambideux senses
en ceux perols; Evidence est authentic Escripts de Contracts, solonque le
man' d Angleterre, cest adire, escrie, enseale, and deliver.

Et l. 2. c. 23 perlant del Prisoner q^ estoia al Barr^ a plead p^ son vie, and
de ceux q' charga luy ove Felony, issint; Donque il monstre qui il poit dire;
puit luy auxi touts ceux queux fueront al Apprehension del Prisoner, ou que
poient doner ascuus Indices ou Tokens, queux nous appellomusen nostre parlance
Evidence envers le Malefactor.

Exaction.
EXaction est un tort fait per u^ Officer, ou per un p^tendant d'aver
authority, e^ demaundant ou prendant ascun Reward ou Fee p^ cell matter,
cause, ou chose, q^ le Ley ne pas allowa.

Le difference perenter Exaction and Extortion est ceo: Extortion est, lou un
Officer demanda and extorta u^ greinder Sum ou Reward que son voier Fee: and
Exaction est, lou un Officer ou auter home demaunda and urger un Fee ou Reward,
lou null man^er (...) Fee ou Reward est due. Veies Extortion.

Exception.
EXception est un Bar ou Stop a u^ Action; and est divide u^ exception
dilatorie, and pere^ptorie. De ceux ambideux veies Bracton, l. 5. tract. 5. and
Britton, c. 91, 92.

Exchange.
EXchange est, lou u^ ho^e est seize de certain Tr^e and un auter est seisie
d'auter Tr^e; siils per un Fait indent, ou sans Fait, si le Terres sont en un
County, exchange lour Tr^es, issint q^ chescun d'eux avera auters Tr^es a luy
issint exchange en fee, en fee-taile, ou a term de vie, ceo est appel un
Exchange, and est bone sans Liverie and Seisin.

En Exchange il convient q^ les Estates a eux limit sont egalls; car si u^
averoit Estate en fee en sa Terre, and l'auter Estate e^ auter Terre forsque p^
term de vie, ou en tail, tiel Exchange est void; mes fi les estates sont egal
and les Terres ne sont d' egal value, uncore l Exchange est bone. Auxy un
Exchange de Rent p^ Tr^e est bone. Et Exchange int' Rent and Com^on est bone,
and ceo covient estre per Fait. Auxy il covient touts foits q^ cest parol
Exchange soit en le Fait, ou auterment rien passa per la, sinon q^ il ayt
Liverie and Seisin.

Exchequer.
EXchequer. Veies Eschequ ^ r.

Excommengement.
EXcommengement est adire en Latin Excommunicatio, and est lou un home per la
judgem^t en Court Christian est Excommenge, p^ quel il est disable de suer asc'
Action en Court le Roy; and sil remain Excommenge xl. jours, and ne voile este
justify per son Ordinary, donques l' Evesque mandera son Letter al
Chancellor, de certifier l'Excommunication ou Contempt; and sur ceo serra
command al Viscount de prendre le corpse le Excommenge, per un Brief appel De
Excommunicato Capiendo, jesque il ad fait gree al saint Esglise pur le Contempt
and tort: and quant il est Justice, l' Evesque maundera ses Letters al Roy,
certificant ceo; and donques serra maunde al Visc' de luy deliver, per un Brief
appel Excommunicato deliberando. Veies le Statute 5 Eliz. cap. 23.

Excommunication.
EXcommunication. Veies Excommengement.

Execution.
EXecution est, lou Judgment est done en ascun Action, que le Plaintiff
recovera le Tree, le Det, ou Damages, come le case est; and quant asc' Bri ^ f
est agard de luy mitter en possession, ou ^ fair ascun chose per que le
Plaintiff serra le mieux satisfy son Det ou Dam^ages, ceo est appel Brief d'
Execution, and quant il ad le Possession de le Terre, ou est pay le Det ou
Damages, ou ad le Corpse le Defendant agard al prison, donques il ad Execution.
Et si le Plee soit en County, ou Court Baron, ou Hundred, and ils delaiont
l'Execution del Judgm^t en favor de party, ou p^ auter encheason; le
Demandant avera Brief De Executione Judicii.

Nota, que en Brief de Det home navera Recoverie de null Terre, mes de ceux que
le Defendant avoit jour de Judgment rendue. Et de Chateux, home avera Execution
solement des Chateux queux il avoit jour d' Execution sue.

Executione facienda.
EXecutione f ^ cienda est un Brief commandant Execution d'un Judgment; le
diverse uses de quel veies en le Table de Reg. judic.

Executor.
EXecutor est, quant un ho^e fait son Testament and darreine Volunt, and en ceo
nosma le person que executera son Testament, il est son Executor, and est a
tant en le Civil-Ley come Haeres designatus, vel Testamentarius, come al Det,
Biens and Chattels son Testator: and tiei Executor avera Action verse chescun
Dettor de son Testator; and si l' Executor ad Assers, chescun a que le Testator
fuit indett avera Action verse l' Executor, si ad Obligation ou Especialtie; mes
en chescu^ case lou le Testat' puissoit gager son Ley, null Action gist verse
Executor. Veres pluis de ceo deva^t Titulo Administrators.

Etsi ascun aut' person nie^t fait Executor, prist ou vend les biens del mort
p^ estre fue come Executor de son tort en mesme le form come auters Executors.
Vide Stat. 30 Car. 2. cap. 7.

Exemplification.
EXemplification est, ou ho^e vo ^ le aver asc' O ^ iginal Record transcript
and exemplify horse del Court lou il remain, a quel purpose il poit aver un
Brief, come appiert per le Reg. orig. fol. 290.

Et si ho^e voile leader un Record en auter Court q' ceo lou il remain^, il
covient a luy d'aver exemeplifie south le Grand Seal d' Angleterre; car sil
soit exemplify south le Seal (...) Com^on Bank, Excheq', ou tiels
semblables, ceo ne servera, forsper e^ Evidence al Jurie. Veies Coke l. 5. f.
53.

Veies le Stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 6. and 23 El. 3. le force and use d'
Exemplifications de Patents, etc.

Exemption.
EXemption est un privilege destre Frank de Service ou A ^^ arance. and p^ ceo
un Baron and Baroness, per reason de lour Dignity, sont exempts destre jure
sur asc' Enques ^. Coke l. 6. f. 53.

Aux' Chivalers, Clerks and Femes sont exempts d' appearer al Leets ou Turn
del Visc': Et ceo est per le Statute de Marlebridge, c. 10.

Et home poit estre exempt destre mis sur Enquests ou Juries per les Letters
Patents le Roy; come le President and College ou Communaltie de Physicians e^
Londres fueront per les Letters Patents del Roy, H. 8. Coke, l. 8. f 108.

Ex gravi querela.
EX gravi querela. Veies devant Tit. Devise.

Exigent.
EXigent est un Br^e q^ gist lo ^ ho^ ^ sue Action personal, and le Defendant
ne ^ oit este trove, ne ad ^ iens deins le County per que il puit este attach
ou distreine; donques cest Brief issera al Viscount, de fair Proclamation al
cinq' Counties, chescun apres auter, que il appear, ou auterm^t il serra
utlage: and si soit utlage, donques touts ses biens and chateux sont forfeits
al Roy. En un Endictment de Felony l' Exigent issera apres le primer Capias.
Et en Capias ad computandum ou ad satisfaciendum, and en chescun Capias que
issist apres Judgment, l' Exigent issera apres le primer Capias. Et auxy en
Appeal de Mort; mes nemy en Appeal de Robbery ou Mayhem.

Ove ceo Exigent issuist un br^e per le Stat. 13 El. cap. 3. a fait trois
Proclamations envers le Defendant, quel n' est en exigents puis Judgment.

Exigenter.
Exigenter est u^ Officer del Common Plees, and (...) ceux sont quarre. Ils
font touts Exigents and Proclamations en touts Actions e^ queux process d'
Utlagarie gist. Et ils font Br^es de Supersedeas cybyen come les Protonotaries
sur tiels Exigents come fueront faits en lour Office. Et ^ cest Officer mention
est fait en les Statutes (...) 10 H. 6. c. 4. and 18 H. 6. c. 9.

Ex mero motu.
EX mero motu sont parols usualm^t mis e^ les Charters le Roy, per q^ux il
implie, que il fait ceo q^ est contain en le Charter de son volunt and motion
demesne, sans Prier ou Suggestion fait per ascun auter. Et l' effect de ceux
parols est, d'ou ^ er touts Exceptions q' poiero^t este prise al Instrument en
que ils sont conteinus, per alledger, que le Roy en donont de c' Charter fuit
abuse per ascun faux Allegation. Kitcb. f. 151.

Et quant u^ Charter le Roy ad e^ ceo ceux parols, il serra prise pluis
fortment verse le Roy; p^ que si le Roy pardon a B touts ^ es Dets ex mero motu,
touts Dets que B doit come Viscount sont per ceo pardon; and en mesme le manner
est en plusors auters cases, lou ceux ^ arols serra prise cy fort verse le Roy,
come si un Common person ad fait le Grant. Veies Coke l. 1. f. 45.

Ex part talis.
EX part talis. Veies devant Tit. Account.

Expeditate.
EXpeditate est un perol piusors foits use e^ le Forest, impliant de pren ^
horse les Balls des pees de grand Chie^s, pur le preservation de Sport l' Roy.
Et un des Articles destre enquire concernant le Forest est, Si touts grand
Chiens ou Mastives deins le Forest sont expeditate, accorda^t al Leys del
Forest; and si ascuns ne sont, l' Owner de chesc' tiel Chien forfeitera al Roy
trois souls and quat' deniers, Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 152. Manwood ufast mesm^ le
perol, and ( part. 1. de son Forest Ley, fol. 212.) relata le ancient manner
de expeditating de Chiens, que fuit, que les trois Ortelles del Primer pee del
dext' latere serro^t abscindus per le pelle; a que il auxy add horse del
Ordinance appel l' Assise del Forest, que m^ le manner de expeditating des
Chie^s serra jamm^s use and observe, and null auter. Quaere de que il surde que
Crompton and il differont; l'un disant que le Ball del pee est abscinde; l'
aut', q' les trois primer Ortilles so^t desumus per le pelle.

Expensis Militum levandis.
EXpensis Militum levandis, est un Br^e direct al Viscount pur levier le
Allowance pur Chivalers del Parliam^t, Regist. orig. fo. 191. b. Et Expensis
Militum non levandis ab hominibus de Antiquo Dominico, nec a Nativis, est un
Brief de perhibit l' Viscount ^ levier ascun Allowance pur les Chivalers del
County sur tiels queux tiendront en Ancient Demesne, etc. ^ bidem, fol. 261. b.

Extend.
EXtend est, appraiser les Terre ^ ou Tenements ^ un oblige per Statute, etc.
que ad ceo forfeite, and deliverer eux al Conusee a tiel endifferent rate, come
per l' annuel Profits le Conusee en temps poit estr^ satisfy son Det. Veies
Fitz. N. B fol. 131. and Cok. lib. 4. fol. 67. F ^ lwoods Case.

Extent
EXtent ad deux significatio^s: L'un est un Br^e ou Com^ission al Viscount pur
le valuing del Terres ou Tenements; l' auter, l' act del Viscount ou auter
Comissioner sur m^ Brief. Broke, tit. Extent, fol. 313.

Extinguishment.
EXtinguishment est, lou un Sn^r ou asc' aut' ad ascun Rent ou Service issua^t
dascu^ Terr^, and il p^chase m^ le Terr^, issint q^ il ad tiel Estate en le
Terr^ come il avoit e^ le Rent; donques le Rent est extinct, p^ ceo que un ne
poit aver Rent issuant horse son Terr^ demesn^. Auxy qn^t ascun Rent seera
extinct, il covient q^ le Terr^ and le Rent sont en un main^, and auxy q^
l'Estate q^ il ad ne soit defeasible, and auxy q^ il ayt auxi bon^ Estate en le
Terr^ com^ en le Rent; car sil ad Estate e^ le Terr^ forsque p^ vie ou pur ans,
and ad un Feesimple en le Rent, donques le Rent nest extinct, mes est en
suspense pur cel te^ps, and apres le term le Rent est revive.

Si soit Sn^r, Mesne, and Tenant, and le Seignior purchase le Tenancie, l'
Mesnaltie est extinct; mes le Mesne avera le surplusage del Rent, si ascun
soit, come Rent secke; Auxy si home ad Chimin appendant, and puis purchase le
Terre en que le Chimin est, donques le Chimin est extinct; and issint est de un
Common appendant.

Extortion.
EXtortion est un Tort fait per un Officer, Ordinary, Archdeacon, Official,
Major, Bailife, Viscount, Escheator, South-Viscount, Coroner, Jailer, ou auter
Officer, Color Officii sui, en prendant excessive Reward ou Fee p^ execution
de son Office, ou auterm^t; and nest auter chose en fait que plain^ Robbery,
mes pluis odible q^ Robbery: car Robbery est apparent, and tout temps ad ove
luy le countenance de Vice; mes Extortion, esteant cy hault Vice q^ Robbery
est, port ove luy u^ countenance del Virtue, per reason ^ quel il est le pluis
dure destr^ try ou discern, and pur ceo le pluis odible. Et uncor^ ascu^s il
y ad que ne voiloient demuri^ mes stretch lour Office, Credit, and Conscience,
p^ purchaser Money, cybie^ per Extortio^ come auterm^t, accordant al disans de
le Poet Virgil, Quid non mortalia pectora cogis, Auri sacra fames?

F.
Faculty.
Faculty est un perol plusors soits use e^ le Statute de 25 H. 8. c. 21. and
il signify un Privilege ou special Dispensation grant al home per favor and
indulgence, ^ fair^ ceo q^ per le Ley il ne puit fair^; sico^e de manger Chair^
e^ jours prohibits, ou p^ tener deux ou plusors Ecclesiastical Benefices
ensemble, etc. Et p^ le grant' de ceux Faculties la est un especial Officer
desouth l' Archevesque de Canterbury, que est appel le Master des Faculties.

Failer de Record.
FAiler de Record est, qn^t un Action est port envers un, que plede ascun
matter de Record, and aver de ceo prove per le Record; and le Plaintiff dit
null tiel Record; sur que le Defe^da^t ad jour don a luy p^ amesn^ eins le
Record; a quel jour il fail, ou amesn^ eins un tiel que nest Bar al cest
Action: donques il est dit pur failer de son Record; and sur ceo le Plaintiff
avera Judgment de recoverer.

Faint Action. Faint Pleader.
FAint Action (come Littleton, fol. 154. dit) est auta^t adire en Ang ois, un
Fained Action, cestascavoire, tiel Action, que com^t que les perols de le Br^e
sont voyers, uncore pur certain causes il and title per la Ley de recover per
mesm^ l' Action: Et faux Action est, Iou les parols del Brief sont faux. Issint
Faint Pleader est un covinous, faux and collusorie manner de Pleading, al
deceit (...) un tierce pertie. Et encounter tiel Faint Pleader, ent' auters
chooses, le vieux Statute en 3 E. 1. c. 29. semble destre fait.

Fait.
FAit est un Escript enseale and deliver, a prover and testifier l' Agreement
del party quel Fait il est al chose contain en le Fait: come un Fait de Feo
^^ meant est un Prove del Liverie de Seisin, car le Terre pass per le Liverie
de Seisin; mes quant le Fait and le Liverie est joynte en ^ emble, cest un
Prove del Liverie, and que le Feoffor est cont ^ nt que le Feoffee avera le
Terre.

Touts Faits s ^ nt ou ^^ aint, de quel sont de ^ x, trois ou plusors parts,
come le case require; de que le Feoffor, Grantor, ou Lessor ad un; le Feoffee,
Grantee, ou Lessee, un auter; and peradventure asc' aut' pererson auxy un
tierce etc. Ou auterm^t ils sont Faies Poll, single and forsque un, le quel le
Feoffee, Grantee, ou Lessee ad, etc. Et chescun Fait consist de trois principal
chooses, (sans quel il nest perfect Fait de lier les parties) nosmement,
Escripture, Sigillation, and Deliverie.

1. Per Escripture est declare les Nosmes del parties al Fait, lour
Habitations, lour Degrees, le Chose grauntus, sur queux Considerations, l'
Estate limit, le Temps qn^t il fuit grauntus, and si simplem^t, ou sur
Condition, ove auters tiels semblables Circumstances. Mes si les parties al
Fait escript en le fine escriont lour Nosmes, ou mis a ceo lour Marks, (come
il est communement use) il ne fait ascun matter, (come jeo suppose) car ceo
nest entende, ou il est dit, que chescun Fait covient de aver Escripture.

2. Sigillation est pluis Testimony de lour Consents al ceo contain e^ le
Fait; come appiert per ceux ^ arols, In cujus rei Testimonium, etc. ou a tiel
effect, mis en le fine de Faits, sans queux ^ arols le Fait est insufficient.

Et pur ceo que nous sumus en Sigillation and Signing de Faits, il ne serra
dehors icy a monstre a vous, pur l'amour del Antiquity, le manner del Signing
and Subscribing de Faits en nostre Ancestors le Saxons temps, un fashion
disferent ^ ceo que nous use en ceux nostre jours, en ceo, que ils a lour Faits
subscribe lour Noimes, (communement adding le Sign del Cross) and en le fine
mis; u^ graund number de Testmoignes, nient usant a cel temps ascun man^ ^
Sigil: Et nous a cest jour, pur pluis surety, auxybien subscribe nostre Nosm^,
(nie^t obsta^t ceo nest mult necessary) and mis nostre Sigille, and use le
aid des Testmoignes auxy.

Cest primer fashion continue per tout tanque al temps del Conquest per les
Normans, quel manners per petite and petite al darreine prevail enter nous;
car le primer Charter Sigil en Angleterre est pense destre ceo del Roy Edward
le Confessor, al Abbey de Westminster, que estea^t educate en Normandy, port
e^ cest Realm ceo and ascun auter de lour guises. Et apres le veniens de
Guilliam le Conqueror. les Normans estimants de le Custom d' lour Pays, (come
naturalme ^ touts Nations font) reject le man^er que i ^ s trovont cy, and
rereignont lour proper, come Ingulphus l' Abbot de Croiland, que vient eins o ^
e l' Conquest, resmoigne, dicens; Normanni Chirographorum confectionem, (cum
Crucibus aureis and aliis signaculis sacris in Anglia firmari solitam) in Ceram
impressam mutant, modumque scribend' Anglicum rejiciunt. Mes nient obstant ceo
ne fuit fait tout al un temps, mes il increase and vient eins per certain
degrees: issint que primes and pur un season le Roy solem^t, ou un peu aut' ^
le Nobility, use de Sigiller; donques le Noble-homes p^ le pluis part, and null
auters. Quel chose un home poit veier en le History de Battle Abbey, lou Rich.
Lucie Chief Justice de Angleterre, en la temps del Roy Hen. le Second, est
report de aver blame un mean subject, p^ ceo que il use un private Sigile,
quant ceo pertain (come il dit) al Roy and Nobility solement.

A quel te^ps auxy (come J. Rosse note ceo) ils use de ingrave en lour Sigils
lour Pictures demesne and cou^terfeits, cover ove long Tunicle super lour
Armours. Mes apres ceo les Gentlehomes ^ l Meliour sort prist l' fashion, and
p^ ceo q^ ils ne fuero^t touts Guerriours, ils fesoient Sigills ingrave ove
lour several Coats ou Shields de Arms, p^ difference, come mesme l' Author
report. Al darreine, en temps del Roy Ed. le 3. Sigils fueront mult common;
issint que non solement tiels que portant Arms use de Sigiller, mes auters
ho^es auxy ^^ soie^t al eux mesm^s Signets de lour devises demesne, ascu^s
p^ndrants les Letters de lour Nosmes demesne, ascuns Flowers, ascuns Knots and
Flourishes, ascuns Oyseaux and Beasts and ascu^s auters chooses, come nous ore
unc' journalment veiomus en use.

Ascuns auters manners de Sigillation ouster ceux ad este oye euter nous; come
nosmement ceo del Roy Edward le tierce, per que il done al Norman le Hunter, Le
Hop, and le Hop-ville,
Ove touts les bounds upside down:
Et en testimoign' que il soit very,
Il mord' le Cere ove son fore dent.


Le semblable d cest fuit mo^stre a moy per un de mes amies e^ un loose chart',
mes no^ mult ancientm^t escript, and p^ ceo il voile moy q^ jeo esteema (...)
c' come jeo penie bien: Il fuit come enfuist.

Jeo Guilliam King done a vous Powlen Royden ma Hop and ma Hop-terres, ove
touts les bounds up and down, de Coelo al Terre, de Terre ad Infernum, pur toy
and vestres a demurrer d' moy and mes, al toy and vestres, pur un Arc and un
broad Sagit, quant jeo veign' pur hunt (...) Yarrow, In testimaign' que ceo est
very, Jeo morde cest cere ove mon dent, en presence de Magge, Maud, and
Margery, and mon tierce fitz Henry.

Ite^ ceo d' Alberick d' Vere, conteignont le Donation de Hatfield, al quel il
fix u^ curt noyer-haft Cuttle, semblable al u^ vieux demy-denier whittle, en
steed de un Seal: ove diverse tiels semblables.

Mes asc' peradventure voilent pense que ceux fueront receive en common use and
custom, and que ils ne fueront les devises and pleasures (...) un peu singular
persons: tiels ne so^t meines deceive que ils que pensont chescun Charter and
Escript, que ne ad Sigille annexe, destre cy ancient come l'Conquest; lou e^
verity Sigillation ne fuit communem^t use tanque al temps del Roy Ed. 3. come
ad este dit.

3. Deliverie, nie^t obst' il soit mis darreign, nest l' meanest; car ap^s q^
u^ Fait soit escript and sigille, si ne soit deliver, tout le residue est a null
purpose.

Et cest Deliverie doit estre fait per le Party luy mesme, ou son sufficient
Garrant; and issint il luy liera quecunque escript ou sigil ceo: and per cest
darreine act le Fait est fait perfect, accordant al intent and effect de ceo;
and p^ c' en Faits le Liverie est destre prove, etc.

Issint poyes veyer, Escripture and Sigillation, sans Deliverie, est a null
purpose: Sigillation and Deliverie, lou est asc' Escripture work null chose: Et
Escripture and Deliverie, sans Sigillation, auxy fait null Fait. Et pur ceo ils
touts doient jointm^t concur p^ fair un perfect Fait.

Faitour.
FAitour est u^ parol q^ est use en le vieux repeal Statute de 7 R. 2. cap. 5
and est la prise e^ l' pire sense, p^ u^ Male feasor, ou un Oisif companion,
and semble icy destr^ un Synonymon al Vagabond.

Fardingdeale.
FArdingdeale, auterment Farundel, de Terr^, implia le Quart part ^ u^ Acre,
Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 220. b. Quadrantata terrae est lie en le Regist. orig.
fol. 1. b. lou vous aves auxy Denariata and Obolata, Solidata and Librata
terrae, que per probability surderoit en proportion de quantity de
Fardengdeal, come un Male, Denier, Soulz, ou Liver surdont en value and
estimation; donque Obolata est un Demi Acre, Denariata l' Acre, Solidata Douze
Acres, and Librata Douze score Acres. Uncor^ e^ l' Reg. orig. fol. 94. and 248.
vous poyes trove viginti Libratas terrae vel reditus; per q^ il semble que
Librata terrae est tant que dona vigint soulx per l' an; and centum Solidatas
terrarum, tenementorum, and redituum, fol. 249. Et en F. N. B. fol. 87. la sont
ceux parols, Viginti Libratas terrae vel reditus, que prova ceo destre tant
Terre come est rate al vigint soulz per l' an. Veies Furlong.

Farm, ou Ferme.
Farm, ou Ferme, est usualment le chief Message e^ u^ Village ou Town, a que
apertinent grand Demeans de touts sorts, and ad este use destre less pur term
de vie, ans, ou a volunt.

Le Rent que est reserve sur tiel Lease, ou semble est appelle Farm ou Ferme.

Et Farmour ou Fermour est celuy que occupia le Farm ou Ferme, ou est Lessee
de ceo.

Auxy gen^alm^t chesc' Lessee p^ vie, ans, ou al volunt, est appel Farmour, ou
Fermour.

Et nota, Que ils sont appelles Farms, ou Fermes, del Saxon parol Feormian,
que signify pur feed, ou rend Victual: Car en ancient temps lour Reservations
fueront cybien en Victual come Argent; tanque al darrein^, and ceo ^
rincipalm^t e^ le te^ps de Roy H. 1. per agreem^t, le Reservation de Victuals,
fuit convert en ready Argent, and issint uncore ad continue ent' plusors homes.

Fate, ou Fatt.
FAne, ou Fatt, est un Measure mention en les Statutes de 1 H. 5. cap. 10. and
11 H. 6. cap. 8. pur conteiner huict Boisseaus: mes les Citizens and Merchants
de Londres (com^ appiert per ceux Statutes) and les Purveiors le Roy voilont
aver ceo Measure and un Boissean ouster pur un Quartier; and issint il avoient
neufe Boisteaus pur un Quartier de Blee.

Faux Imprisonment.
FAux Imprisonment est un Brief que gift lou home est arrest and restrain de
son Liberty per un auter encounter Order de Ley; donques il avera verse luy
cest Brief, per que il recovera Damages. Veies pluis de ceo devant, tit.
Arrest.

Faux Judgment.
FAux Judgment. Veies de ceo devant, tit. Error.

Fealty.
Fealty est un Service, appelle en Latin Fidelitas, and serra fait en tiel
manner; cestascovoire, le Ten^t tiendr^ la mam^ dextre sur un Livre and dirra a
son Sn^r, Jeo a vous serra foyal and loyal, and Foy a vous portera des
Tenements que jeo claim de tener de vous, and verament a vous ferra les
Customs and Services que fair vous doy al terms assigns; Si come moy aid
Dieu: and basera le Livre: mes il ne genuler^, come en fesant Homage. Et de ceo
veies apres en le Title Homage. Auxy Fealty est incident a touts manners de
Tenures.

Fee.
FEE (Feodum) est en nostre Ley vox aequivoca des diverse significations: car
est plus communement prise pur un Estate del inheritance en Terres ou Tenements
al un and ses heirs, ou al un and les heirs (...) son corpse, Mes est use auxy
pur le Compass, Circuit ou Extent (...) un Seigniorie ou Manor. Et de ceo
venust l' ordinary Plee e^ Bar al un Avowry, Que le Terre sur que il avow
est horse de son Fee. Et tiercem^t, il est prise pur le Reward ou Salarie done
al u^ pur l' execution de son Office; come le Fee dun Forrester, ou le Gardein^
dun Park, ou le Fee dun Visc' pur l'server dun Execution, come est limit per
l'Statute 29 El. c. 4. Et issint est auxy prise pur ceo Consideration q^ est
done al un Sergea^t al Ley, ou al un Pleader, ou un Physician, pur lour Counsel
ou advise en lour profession, que (come est bien observe per Sir J. Davies, en
son Preface a ses Reports) nest properm^t Merces, forsque Honorarium. Mes
uncore en le dialect de nr^e Ley c' est appel son Fee.

Fee expectant.
FEE expectant: Lou Terres sont done al home and son feme en Frank-marriage, a
aver and tener al eux and lour heirs, en cest case ont Fee-simple; mes si sont
done a eux and les heirs de lour corpse, etc. ont Tail and Fee expectant.
Kitch. fol. 153.

Fee Ferm.
FEE Ferm est, quant un Tenant tient de son Seignior en Fee-simple, rendant a
luy value del moietie, ou de tierce, pr^t, ou auter part el Terre per an. Et il
que tient en Fee Ferme ne doit payer Relief, ou fair auter chose, me ficome
est contein^ en le Feoffment, forsque Fealty, car c' appent a touts manners
Tenures.

Fee-simple.
FEe-simple est, quant ascun person tient Terre ou Rent, ou auter chose,
inheritable a luy a and ses Heirs a touts jours; and ceux perols, Ses Heirs,
font l'Estate (...) inheritance; car si Terre soit done a ho^e a touts jours,
unc' il and forsque Estat' p^ vie.

Auxy si Tennant en Fee-simple devie, son primer Fits serra son Heir; mes sil
and Fits, donque touts les Files fetront son Heir, and chescun avera son part
per partl c': mes sil and Fits ne File, donques son prochein Cousin collateral
de l' entire sanke serra son Heir.

Felo de se.
FElo de se est il que commit Felony per murdering soy mesme. Veies Cromp.
Justic, de Paix, fol. 28.

Felony.
Felony est un general term, que comprehend diverse heinous Offenses, pur que
l'Offendors dolent suffer mort, and perder lour Terres. Et semble que eux sone
appelles Felonies, del Latin parol Fell, que est en Anglois Gall, en Francois,
Fiel; ou del ancient parol Anglois, Fell, ou Fierce pur ceo que sont entends
destr^ faits f ^ lleo animo, ove fell, fierce, ou mischievous mind. Quant home
sans asc' color de Ley emblea les biens (...) un aut', amountant al value de
xii deniers ou pluis, ceo est Larceny: mes si un approcha a le Person (...) un
aut' en le Haultchimin, and luy robba de ses biens, mesque ils ne sont sorsque
al value de un denier, il est Felony; and ceo est appel Robbery, and pur ceo
il serra pendue.

Fence-moys.
FEnce-moys est un parol del Forest, and signify le space ^ 31 jours en l'
an, cestascavoire, 15 jours devant Midsummer, and 15 jours apres, en quel temps
est prohibit pur ascun home de chaser en l ^ Forest, ou de passer en ceo pur
disturber les feres. Le reason de que est, pur ceo que a ceo temps parturiunt
Damae. Et p^ ceo cest Moys est appel le Fence-moys, ou Defence-moys, co que les
Dames sont ado^que destre defends del fright ou terror. Veies Manw. Forest
Leys, c. 13. fol. 90. b.

Feodarie.
FEodarie fuit un Officer en le Court de Gards, appoint per le Mr. de ceo
Court, per virtue del Statute 32 H. 8. cap. 46. destre present ovesque l
Escheator en chesc' County al trover des Offices, and a doner evidence pur le
Roy cybien pur le Value come pur le Tenure. Et son Office fuit auxy pur survey
les Tr^ ^ s le Guard apres l'Office trove, and pur return le very value d'eux
en le Court, ^ ^ assigner Dower as Vefues le Roy; pur receiver touts les Rents
des Terres les Gardes deins fon Circuit, and pur eux responder al Receiver le
Court. Mes veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2. c. 24. p^ Abolir le dit Court.

Feoffment.
FEoffment est, lou un done Terre, Measons ou tiel chooses corporal heriditable,
a un aut' en Fee-simple, and de ceo deliver Seisin and Possession. Aux' si un
fait Done en le tail, ou Lease de vie, il covient de done Liverie and Seisin,
ou auterment riens passera per le Grant.

Feoffor and Feoffee.
FEoffor est ce ^ uy que enfeoffee ou fait Feoffment al aut' de Tr^es ou
Tenem^ts en Fee-simple: Et Feoffee est celuy que est enfeoffe, ou a que le
Feoffm^t est issint fait.

Ferdfare.
FErdfare, hoc est, quietum esse de eundo in Exercitum, Flet. l. 1. c. 47,

Ferdwit.
FErdwit, hoc est, quietum esse de Murdro in Exercitu facto, Flet. l. 1. c. 47.

Ferrie.
ESt un liberty per prescription ou grant del Roy d'aver boat pur passage sur
un grand stream de caryages ou chivals and homes pur reasonable toll.

Feude.
FEude, ou Mortal Feude, est un parol Germanois, and signify u^ Haine
emplacable, q^ ne poit estre satisfy forsque ove le mort del enemy: tiel est
ceo ent' les ho^es (...) Scotland and en le Nord parts d' Angleterre, q^ est u^
Co^binatio^ de tout le Consanguinity p^ le vengeance del mort d' asc' (...)
lour sanke sur l'Homicide and tout son race. Et cest perol est mention e^ le
Stat' (...) 43 El. c. 13.

Fieri facias.
FIeri facias est un Brief judicial, and gist lou home recovera Det ou Damages
en Court le Roy; donques il avera cest Brief al Viscount, luy commandant que il
levy le Det and les Damages des biens celuy verse que le Recoverie est ewe,
and gist solement deins l'an and jour, and apres l'an luy covient suer un Scire
facias; and si le party soit garnie, and ne vient al jour, etc. ou sil vient,
and ne scavoit rien dire, donques celuy que recovera avera Brief de Fieri
facias direct al Viscount, que il face Execution de Judgment.

Mes si home recovera verse un feme, and el prist baron deins l'an and jour;
donques il covient que cestuy que recovera avera Scire facias verse le baron.

Auxy est si Abbot ou Prior recover and devie, son Successor deins l'an avera
Scire facias. Vide de ceo pluis en le Title Scire facias, and Title Execution.

Auxy est un auter manner de Fieri facias versus Rector, lou sur un general
Fieri facias le Viscount return sur ceo, quod nulla habet bona seu catalla,
and sur ceo Brief est direct al Evesque del Diocese ou il est Rector. Et sur
ceo le Evesque levy le Debt des profits del gleab and dismes del Rectory.

Fifteenth.
FIfteenth. Veies Quinzisme.

Filazer.
FIlazer del (parol Francois Fi^ace, id est, Filum) est le nosme dun Officer en
le Common Plees, des queux sont icy 14. Ils fonts touts les Original Process
la, and le Distress infinite sur Summons return en Actions personals, and le
Capias sur le return del Nihil, and touts Briefs de View en cases lou le View
est pry. Et lou le Appearance est ove eux, ils enter l' Imparlance, and le
general Issue en common Actions, and Judgments per Confession devant Issue
j^yne, and font Briefs d'Execution sur eux. Et ils font Briefs de S^pers^deas
apres Capias agard, quant le Defendant appear en lour Office. Et cest Officer
est mention en les Statutes de 10 H. 6. c. 4. and 18 H. 6. c. 9.

File.
FIle (Filacium) est Fi^um vel Chorda qua Brevia and ali ^ Curiis Exhibita
trajiciuntur, pro meliori conservatione eorundem.

Finders.
FInders est un perol mention e^ mults Statutes, come en 14 R. 2. c. 10. 17 R.
2. c. 5. 1 H. 4. c. 13. and 31 H. 6 c. 5. and semble destr^ to^ut un ove ceux
Officere queux ore nous appellomus Scrutatores, imployes p^ le Trover des biens
imports ou exports sans prayer del Custo^.

Fine.
FIne asc' foits est prise pur un Sum d'argent quel asc' est de payer al Roy
p^ ascu^ contempt ou offense; quel Fine chesc' que com^it asc' Trespass, ou que
est co^vict que il fauxme^t deny son fait, ou fesoit ascun chose en contempt
de Ley, payera al Roy: que l est appel Fine al Roy.

Ascun foits Fine est prise pur un final Concord quel est ewe enter ascuns
persons touchant asc' Tr^e ou Rent, ou auter chose, don't asc' Suit ou Brief est
enter eux pendant en asc' Court; quel poit este en diverse manners. L'un est,
quant l'un party r ^ conust ceo estr^ le droit del aut', come ceo que il eit
del Done cestuy que fesoit le Reconusans, quel touts foits suppose un Feoffment
precedent, and est dit Fine execute: Ou si il reconust ceo destre le droit del
auter, omittant les parols ( come ceo que il eit de son Done) c' esteant Fine
sur conusans de droit tant', si soit levy a cestuy que eit le Franktenement
del Terre, est Fine sur R ^ lease.

Si cestuy que ceo conust est seisie, and celuy a que est levy n'eit le
Frank-tenement del Tr^e, donques est dit Fine executorie, quel cestuy a que le
Tr^e est conus poit executer per Entry, ou Scire ^ acias.

Ascun foits tiel Fine Sur conusance de droit tantum est p^ fair un Surrender:
lou en ceo est repeat, q' le Reconusor eit Estate p^ vie, and l' aut' en
Reversion.

Ascun foits ceo est ewe de passer un Reversion, lou particular Estate est
recite destr^ en auter, and que le Reconusor voit que l' auter avera le
Reversion, ou que le Terre remain al auter apres le particular Estate finie.

Et ascun foits celuy a que le droit est conus, come ce ^ q^ il ad del Done le
Reconusor, rendra (...) u^ Rent horse de ceo al Conu ^^ r. (...) ceo asc' foits
pur l'entire Fee* ascun foits pur un particular Estate, ove Remainder ou
Remainders ouster; and asc' foits ove Reservation (...) Rents ove Distress and
Grant (...) ceo oust ^ r per mesme Fine.

Est appel Fine, quia per ceo le Suit est determine; and si ceo soit record ove
Proclamation, solonque le Statute 4 H. 7. ceo bar Estrangers.

Fine force.
FIne force, signify un absolute Necessity; fico^e lou ho^e est constreine
(...) fair asc' chose le q^l ne poit per asc' voy avoi ^, nous diso^ q^ il
fist c' (...) Fine force. Et issint cest perol est use e^ Perk. sect. 321. e^
Woodland and Mantels Case, e^ Plow f. 94. b. and e^ Eatons Case cite en Foxlys
Case e^ le 6. Re. f. 111. a.

Finors.
FInors sont ceux que purifiont Or and Argent, and eux sever per feu and eau
del Metals plus base and vile; and pur ceo en le Statute de 4 H. 7. c. 2. sont
auxy appels Parters.

Fire-bote.
FIre-bote est necessary Boys p^ arder, quel, per le Common Ley, Lessee pur ans
ou pur vie poit prender en son Terre, nient obstant il ne soit express en son
Lease; and nient obstant il soit un Lease per Parol tantum sans Fait: Mes sil
prist pluis que besoigne, il serra punie en Waste.

First Fruits.
First Fruits (Primitiae) sont les Revenues de chescun Spiritual Benefice pur
un an, queux e^ ancient temps fueront dones al Pape, mes per le Statute de 26
H 8. c. 3. sont ore transferres al Roy.

F ^ edwite
FLedwite est, quietum esse de Amerciamentis, cu^ quis utlagatus Fugitivus
veniat ad Pacem Domini Regis sponte vel licenciatus.

Flemeswite.
FLemeswite est, quod habeatis Catalla five Amerciam^ hominis vestri Fugitivi.

Fletwit.
FLetwit, ou Flitwit, est, quietum esse de Contententione and Co^victis, and
quod habeatis Placitum inde in Curia vestra, and Amerciamenta; car Flit Anglice
est Treason Gallice.

Floatsam.
FLoatsam, ou Flotson est, quant un Niefe est submerge ou auterment perish, and
les biens float sur la Mere, and ils sont dones al Seigniour Admiral per ses
Letters Patents. Veies Coke lib. 5. fol. 106.

Fold, Fould-course.
FOld, Fould-course, en Latin Falda, and Faldae cursus, est com^on per
barbits, vid. Shack. and Co. Ent. 14, 15. Co. 8. Rep. 125. 1 Cro. Rep. Spooner
and Day.

Folkmoot.
FOlkmoot signify (selon Lambert en son Exposition del Saxon parols) deux
kinds del Courts; l'un ore appel le County Court, l' auter le Sheriffs Turn.
Et en Londres il signify a cest jour celebrem ex omni Civitate Conventum.
Stows Survey.

Footgeld.
FOotgeld est un Amerciam^t p^ nient prendrant horse les Bals des pees d'grau^d
Chiens e^ l' Forest, p^ que veies Expeditate: Et destr^ quit de Footgeld est
un privilege de aver Chie^s irregular deins l' Forest sans pain ou controlle
Crompt. Jurisd. fol. 197. Manwood, part. 1. page 86.

Forcible Entry.
FOrcible Entry est un Violent actual Entry en Meason ou Terre; ou prend
Distres oves arms, soit q^ il offer Violence ou nemy. West, par. 2. Symb. tit.
Indictment, Sect. 65.

Forest, on Forest.
FOrest est un lieu priviu ledge per authority Royal, ou per Prescription, pur
le peaceable abode and nourishment del Beasts, ou Oiseaux del Forest, pur le
disport del Roy: Pur q^x ont este en ancient temps certain peculiar Officers,
Leyes and Orders, part de q^x appearont en le graund Charter de le Forest.

Forester.
FOrest ^ r est un Officer del Forest, que est jure pur perserve le Vert and
Venison del Forest, pur attend ^ r sur les Feres deins son Bayliwick ^ eux
veiller and safement guard ^ per jour and per nuict pur attacher touts
Offenders la ou en Vert ou en Venison, and eux de pretenter as Courts del
Forest, al intent per poient estre la punies solonque lour Delicts.

Forfeiture del Marriage.
FOrfeiture del Marriage fuit un Brief que gisoit p^ le Seignior en Chivalry
verse son Guard, per refuse un convenable Marriage tender a luy per son Seignior,
and deins age marry un auter sans l' assent son Seignior. Et veies pur ceo
Fitzh. N. B. fol. 141. g. etc.

Forger des fauxs Faits.
FOrger des faux Faits venust de perol Francois Forger, que signify Fabricare,
framer and fashioner, come un Forgeron son overage sur le Enclume. Et est use
in nostre Ley, pur l' fraudulent feasance and publisher de faux Faits al
prejudice del droit dun auter. Fitz. en son N. B. fol. 96. B. C. dit que Brief
d' Disceit gist verse celuy que issint forge ascun fait.

Forjudger.
FOrjudger est un Judgment done en un Brief de Mesne, port per un Tenant envers
le Mesne Seignior, per doit acquiter le Tenant des Services demandes per le
Seignior paramount, de que le Tenem^t est tenus, and le Mesne ne voile appear;
donques Judgment serra done, que l' Mesne Sn^r perdra son Seigniorie, and que
le Tenant dillonques tiendra del Seignior paramount per tiels Services come le
Mesne tenoit devant, and serroit discharge del Services q^ux il rendoit al
Mesne, per le Statute de West. 2. cap. 9. q^ est appel un Forjudger.

Et auxy si un Attorney ou auter Officer en ascun Court soite ouste and
prohibit de user ceo, il est dit destre forjudge le Court.

Formedon.
FOrmedon est un Brief, and gist lou Tenant en le tail infeoffa un Estrang',
ou est disseisie, and devie; son Heir avera Brief de Formedon p^ recover le
Terre. Mes sont trois Briefs ^ e Formedon. Un est en le Discender, and ceo est
en le case avantdit. Auxy si un done Terre en le tail, and pur default de
issue le Remainder a un aut' en le tail, and que pur default de tlel issue le
Terre revertera al Donor; si le primer Tenant en le tail ^ evie sans issue,
cesty en le Remainder avera un Brief de Formedon en le Remainder: Mes si le
Tenant en le tail devie sans issue, and cestuy en le Remainder auxy devie sans
issue, donques l'Donor ou ses heirs avera un Formedon en le Reverter.

Foreign.
Foreign est un parol adjective use, and join ove diverse substantives: come
Foreign matter triable en aut' County, Pl. Cor. 154. ou matt' fait en auter
County, Kitch. fol. 126.

Foreign Plee est un refusal del Judge come incompetent, pur ceo que le matter
dependant ne fuit deins ses Limits, Kitch. fol. 75. and Anno 4 H. 8. cap. 2.
and An. 22 ejusdem c. 2, and 14.

Foreign Respons est tiel Respons que nest triable en le County ou il est
fait, Anno 15 H. 6. cap. 5.

Foreign Service est tiel Service per q^ un Mesne Sn^r tient ouster ^ un aut'
dehors le circuit ^ son fee demesn^, Bro. tit. Tenures, fol. 251. number. 12, and
28. and Kitch. fol. 209. Ou auterm^t ceo que un Tenant perform ou a son Sn^r
demesne, ou al Sn^r Paramount horse del fee. Car de tiels Services Bract. lib.
2. cap. 16. number. 7. issint parle:

Item sunt quaedam Serve. quae dicuntur Forinseca, quamvis sunt in Charta de
Feoffamento expressa and nominata, and quae ideo dici possunt Forinseca, quia
pertinent ad Dom. Regem, and non ad Dominum Capitalem, nisi cum in propria
persona profect' fuerit in Servitio, vel nisi cum pro Serve. suo satisfecerit
Domino Regi quocunque modo; and fiunt in certis temporibus, cum casus and
necessitas evenerit, and varia nomina habent and diversa: Quandoque enim
nominatur Forinesca, large sumpto vocabulo, quod Servitium Domini Regis,
quandoque Scutagium, quandoq ^^ Servitium Domini Regis; and ideo Forinsecum
dici potest, quia fit and capitur foris, five extra Servitium quod fit Domino
Capitali. Veies Bro. Tenures 28, 95.

Foreign Service semble destre Service de Chivaler, ou Escuage non certain,
Perkins, sect. 650.

Foreign Attachment est un Attachment des biens de Forreiners deins ascun
Franchise ou City, p^ le satisfaction de asc' Citizen a que le dit Forreiner
doit argent.

Foreign Apposer est un Officer en le Exchequer, a que touts Viscounts and
Balliffs viendront, per luy destre appose de lour Green wax: Et de ceo il
treit un charge sut le Viscount ou Balliff al Clerk del Pipe.

Forsechoke.
FOrsechoke semble de signifier fi moult come forsaken, en nostre modern^
language: Il est especialment use Anno 10 Ed. 1. c. unico, p^ Tr^es ou
Tenements seisie per le Sn^r, p^ defalt del Services due a son Tenant, and
issint quiet ten^ and possess pass le an and jour.

Forestaller.
FOrestaller, est celuy que achat' Blees, Avers, ou aut' Merchandise quecunque,
per le chimin qn^t il vient al Markets, Faires ou tiels semble lieux destre
vende, al intent a vender ceo al un pluis hault and chare price, en prejudice
de le Commonweal and gents, etc.

Le Penalty p^ ceux queux sont convict de ceo est, le primer temps,
Imprisonment p^ deux moys, and per ^ de le value del chose vende.

Le second temps, Imprisonment per le space de demi an, and per ^ de double
value des biens, etc.

Le tierce temps, Imprisonment durant le pleasure le Roy, and judgem^t del
Pillory, and forfeit' (...) touts ses biens and chateux. Veies le Statute 5 Ed.
6. cap. 14.

Forestall.
FOrestall est, quietum esse de Amerciamentis and Catal' arrestatis infra
Terram vestram, and Amerciam^ta inde provenientia.

Founder.
FOunder est celuy que use l'art ^ l Amolir ou dissolver Metals, and de fair
ascuu chooses d' eux per jecter en Molds. Semble daver son nosme del Latin
parol Fandere, and est mention en le Stat. de 17 R. 2. cap. 1.

Fourcher.
FOurcher est un devise use a delayer l' Plaintiff ou Demandant en un Suit
envers deux, q^ux a ceo ne sont (...) respon ^ tanque ils ambideux appear, and
l'Appearance ou Elsoin^ ^ u^ de eux voile excuser le Defalt del aut' a cel
jour; and eux agrea, que l'un de eux solement serra essoine ou appearera al un
jour, and pur default del Appearance del aut', avoit jour ouster de appearer,
and l' aut' pertie avera mesme le jour; and a c' jour lauter voile appearer ou
estre essoine, and cestuy q' devant ap caro ^ t ou fuit essoin^ ne voile
donques appear^, p^ ceo que il esperoit daver aut' jour per le Adjournm^t del
party q' donques appiert ou est essoine. Ceo est appel Fou ^ cher, and en
ascuns cases le mischief per ceo est remedy per le Statute de Gloucest. cap.
10. and Westminster. 1. cap. 42.

Franchise.
FRanchise est un perol Francois, and signify e^ nr^e Ley (...) Im^unitie ou
exemption ^ l ordinary Jurisdiction; come p^ un Corporation de ten^ Pleas
deins eux mesmes a tiel value, etc. Veies de ceo en- Vieux N. B. fol. 4. a, b.

Franches Royal.
FRanches Royal est, lou le Roy grant al un and a ses heirs que ils serr^ quit
de Toln^, vel hujusmodi.

Frank-almoigne.
FRank-almoigne est, lou en ancient temps Terres fueront dones a un Abbot and
son Covent, ou a un Deane and a le Chapt', and a lour Successors, en pure and
perpetual Almoigne, sans expresser ascun Service certain^; ceo est
Frank-almoigne; and ils sont tenus devant Dieu, de fair Oraisons and Prayers
pur la Donor and ces Helres, and pur ceo ils ne ferront Fealty: and si tiels
que ont Terres en Frank-almoigne ne font ascun Prayers ne Divine Service pur
les Ames le Donors, ils ne serront per les Donors a ceo compelles, mes les
Donors poyent complain al Ordinary, luy preyant que tiel negligence ne soit
pluis avaunt, and l'Ordinarie (...) droit c' doit fair.

Mes si u^ Abbe, etc. tie^t Tr^s de son Sn^r pur certa ^ n^ Divine Service
destr^ fait, come (...) cha^ter chesc' Venderdie u^ Mass, ou de fair auter
chose certain^; si tiel Divine Service ne soit fait, le Sn^r poit distrein, and
en tiel case l' Abbe doit fair a le Sn^r Fealty: and p^ ceo il nest pas dit
Te^ure en Frank-almoigne, mes Tenure per Divine Service; car null poit tener en
Frank-almoigne, si soit express ascun certain Service.

Frank Bank.
Frank Bank sont Copihold-terres que le feme, esteant espouse un Virgin, ad
apres le mort sa baron p^ sa Dower, Kitch. fol. 102. Bract. lib. 4. tract. 6.
cap. 13. number. 2. ad ceux perols; Consuetudo est in partibus illis, quod uxores
maritorum defunctorum habeant. Francum Bancum de Terris Sockmannorum, and
teneant nomine Dotis. Fitz. appel c' un Custom, per q^ en ascuns Cities le
feme avera touts les Terres de sa baron p^ sa Dower, N. B. fol. 150. Veies
Plow. fol. 411.

Frank Chase.
Frank Chase est un Franchise, per q^ touts homes ayant Tr^e deins cel
compass so^t prohibit de succider le Bois, ou discover, etc. sans le view del
Forrester, nie^t obstant q^ soit so^ demesn^. Crom. Jaris. f. 187.

Frank Fee.
TEner in Frank Fee est, a ten^ en Fee-simple Tr^s pleadable a la Common Ley,
and nient en Ancient Demesne.

Frank Ley.
Frank Ley: Veies Crom Just. de Peace, f. 151. ou vous poys trove q^ c' est
per le contrary: car celuy q^ p^ un offense, come Conspiracy, perde son Frank
Ley, est dit de ca ^ en ceux males. 1. Que il ne unques serra impanel fur asc'
Jurie ou Assise, ou auterm^t use en disant asc' voiertie: Auxy sil ad asc'
chose a fair en le Court le Roy, il ne ceo ven^a en person, mes covient a ^
esign^ son Atturnie: 3. Ses Terres, Biens and Chateux sont destre seize en les
maines le Roy, and ses Terres serroint estreape, ses Arbres radicate, and son
Corpse commise al prison.

Frank Marriage.
Frank Marriage est, qn^t un home seisie de Terre en Fee-simple do^e ceo al
aut' home and sa feme, q^ est file, soer, ou auterment de kin al Donor, in
Frank-Marriage, per virtue de queux parols ils ont un Estate en special tail,
and tiendr^ le Terre del Donor quitte (...) touts man^ers des Services, tanque
le quart degree soit pass, accountant eux mesmes e^ l'prim^ degree; fi non
Fealty, queux ils serront, ^ ur ceo q^ est incident a touts Tenures, sorsque
Frankalmoigne. Et tiel Done poit estre fait cybien apres Marriage solemnize,
come devant. Et home poit done Ter^s a son fits en Frank Marriage, cybien come
a son File, per le opinion de Fitzherbert en son Br^e de Champerty, H.

Mes il appiert auterment en Littleon, and en Broke, tit. Frank-marriage, pla.
10. Et issint il fuit tenus clear en Greys Inn en Lent, An. 1576. 18 El. per
M. Rhodes, donques Lector la.

Frank-plege.
FRank-plege signify un Plege ou Surety pur Frank homes, solonque le ancient
Custom d' Angleterre, pur preservation del public Paix. Veies le Stat. pur
Vieu de Frank-plege, Anno Ed. 2. and Veies Vieu de Frank-plege.

Frank-Tenement.
FRank-Tenement est un Estate que home ad en Terr^s ou Tenements, ou Profit a
prender en Fee-simple, tail, p^ term de son vie demesne ou daut' vie, en
Dower, ou per le Curte ^^ e d' Angleterre: and south ceo il nest Frank
tenemente; car il que ad Estate p^ ans, ou tient a vol', and asc'
Frank-tenement, mes ils sont appels Chatels.

Et de Frank-tenement il y ad deux sorts, viz. Frank-tenement en fait, and
Frank-tenement en Ley.

Frank-tenement en fait est, q^nt un home ad enter de Terres ou Tenements, and
est seisie de ceo realment and actualment. Sicome le pere seisie de Terres ou
Tenements en Fee-simple devie, and son fits enter en eux come heir a son pere,
donques il ad u^ Frank-tenement en fait per son Entry.

Frank-tenement in Ley est, qn^t Terres ou Tenements sont discendus al un home,
and il poit enter en eux quant a luy pleist, mes and unc' fait son Entry en
fait: Come en le case avantdit, si le pere, esteant seisie de Terr^s en fee,
devie seisie, and ils descend a son fits, mes l' fits and unc' enter en fait en
eux; ore devant son Entry il ad un Frank-tenement en Ley.

Frenchman.
FRench man fuit use pur chescun Alien. Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap. 15.
Veies Engleshery.

Frendless man.
FRendless man fuit le veil Saxon perrol p^ luy que nous appel' u^ O ^ tlaw;
nam forisfecit Amicos suos. Bracton, lib. 3. Tract. 2. cap. 12.

Fresh Force.
FResh Force (Frisca Forcia) est un Force comise deins asc' City ou Borough,
come per Disseisin, Abatement, Intrusion, ou Deforcement des ascuns Terres ou
Tenements deins le dit City ou Borough. Pur redresser de q^l tort, cestui q,
droit ad poit p^ l'Usage del dit City ou Borough aver son remedy sans Brief,
per un Assise ou Bill ^ e Fresh Force port deins 40 jours apres le Force
co^mise, ou Title a luy accrue. En quel Action il poit fair son protestation
de suer en le nature ^ quel Brief que il voit. Et veies p^ ceo matter Fitzh. N.
B. f. 7. C. and Vi ^ ux N. B. f. 4. a.

Fresh Suit.
FResh Suit est, quant un home est rob, and le party issint rob pursua le
Felon immediatement, and luy prist ove le manner, ou auterment, and donques
port u^ Appeal envers luy, and luy convince del Felony per Verdict; le quel
chose esteant enquire pur le Roy and trove, le party rob avera restitution
de ses by ^ ns arere.

Item il poit este dit que le party fait Fresh Suit, nient obstant que il ne
prist le Felon presentment, mes que il soit demi an ou u^ an apres le Robbery
fait devant que il soit prise; si soit issint que le party rob fait tant q^
en luy est per diligent inquiry and search, luy prender; nient obstant que il
est prise per un auter home, uncore c'serra dit Fresh Suit.

Fresh Suit est auxy, quant le Sn^r vient pur distreine pur Rent ou Service,
and l'Owner des Beasts fait rescous, and enchase eux en auters Terres que nest
tenus del Seignior, and le Seignior ensue persentm^nt, and reprist eux. Et
issint en auter semblables cases.

Friperer.
FRiperer est un parol use en le Statute de 1 Jac. c. 21. pur un sort des
Brokers. Et semble destre un parol prise del Francois Fripier, Interpolar; and
p^ ceo un Friperer est un que use de Polir vieux Vestiments p^ vender arere.

Frumgyld.
FRumgyld est un veil Saxon parol, que signify le prime Payment fait al
kindred de un person occise, en recompense de son Murder. L. L. Edmundi c. ult.

Fugitives goods.
FUgitives goods sont les proper goods de luy que sue sur Felonle, le quel,
apres le Flight loyalm^t trove, appertein a Roy. Coke, vol. 6. f. 109. b.

G.
Gable.
GAble, Gablum, est en ancient Records un vieux perol per signify u^ Rent,
Duty, Custom, ou Service yield ou fait al Roy ou asc' auter Sn^r. Veies le
Com^ent in Littl. f. 142. a.

Gager de deliverance.
GAger de deliverance est, lou un sua Replevin de biens prise, mes il n'ad
Deliverie des biens, and l'auter avowa, and le Plaintiff monstra q'le Defendant
est uncor^ possess des biens, etc. and pria q' Defendant gagera Deliverance;
donques il mittera eins Surety ou Plege pur le Redeliverances, and un Brief
issera al Viscount pur redeliverer les biens, etc. Mes si home claim
property, il ne gagera Deliverance.

Auxy sil dit que l'Avers sont morts en le Pound, il ne gagera, etc.

Auxy home ne gagera jammes l'Deliverance avaunt q^ ils soient a Issue, ou
Demurrer en Ley, ut dicitur.

Gainage.
GAinage (Wainagium) semble de vener del parol Francois Gaignage, id est,
Questus sive Lucrum; mes en nostre Ley il signify le Profit plus properment
que venust del Tillage del Tr^e. Et p^ ceo en le Statute (...) Mag. Chart. c.
14. est enact, que un Villain serra amerce salvo Wainagio suo; and en West. 1.
c. 6. save son Gainage; and c. 17. est enact, Que celuy q^ deforce asc' del
deliverance des Avers per Replevin, rendra al Plaintiff le double des dam^ages
queux il ad receive de ses Avers, ou de son Gainage disturb, etc. Et per le
Statute de districtione Scaccaria falt en 51 H. 3. est Enact, Que null home de
Religion ou aut' serroit distreine per les Avers que gain son Terre.

Galli-halpens.
GAlli-halpens fueront certain Coin prohibit per le Stat. Anno 3 H. 5. c. 1.

Jail.
Jail, ou Gayle, venust de parol Francois Geole, id est, Caveola, mes
metaphorice est use pur un Prison. Et de ceo le Guardian del Prison est appel un
Jailer ou Gayler.

Garb.
Garb venust del Francois Garb ou Gerbe, id est, Fascis. Cest parol est use
en le vieux Stat. appel Charta de Foresta c. 7. lou Herbas en le Latin est,
translate Garb en Anglois.

Garble.
GArble est de Sorter and selecter le bone chose de le male; come le Garbling
de Bow-staves, Anno 1 R. 3. c. 11. and le Garbling (...) Spice est riens auter
forsque (...) Purify ceo del Dross ove q^ il est mix. Veies de ceo a large
en le Statute 1 Jac. c. 19.

Guard.
Guard est, quant un Enfant, quel Ancestor tient per Service de Chivalri, est en
le Guard and Custody de le Seignior de que ils fueront tenus. Et si le Tenant
tient de diverse Seigniors diverse Tr^es, celuy Seignior de que il tient per
prioritie, cestascavoire, per le pluis ancient Tenure, avera le Guard: Mes fi un
Tenure soit auxy ancient q^ l'auter, donques celuy q^ primes gain^ le Guard de
le corpse gardera ceo: Mes chescun Seignior avera le Guard del Tr^e que est tenus
de luy. Et si le Tenant tient ascun Tr^e del Roy en chief, le Roy per son
Prerogative avera le Guard del Corpse, and de tout le Tr^e que est tenus de luy,
and de chescun auter Seignior.

Auxy sont diverse Briefs de Guard. Un est Brief de Droit de Guard, and gist lou
le Tenant devie, son Heir deins age, and un Estranger entra en le Terre, and
happa d'aver le Guard le Corpse de l' Enfant.

Brief (...) Ejectment de Guard gist, lou home est ouste de le Guard de Terre,
sans le Corpse ^ l'Enfant.

Brief de Ravishment de Guard gist, lou le Corpse est prise (...) luy solement,
and nient le Terre.

Mes veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. pur Abolishing le Court del Wards, etc.

Gardeine.
GArdein ou Wardein plus properment est celuy que ad le Guard ou Custody d'un
Heir, and de son Tr^e tenus per Service de Chivaltie, ou d'un d'eux, a son use
demesne, durant le Nonage del Heir; and deins cest temps ad le bestowing del
Cor ^ s del Heir; en Marriage al son vol', sans disparagement.

Et de Gardens il y ad deux sorts; nosmem^ ^, Gardein en Droit, and Gardein en
Fait.

Gardein en Droit est celuy que per reason de son Seigniorie est seisie del
Gardship ou custody del Terre and del Heir, durant le Nonage del Heir^.

Gardein en Fait est, lou le Seigniour apres son Seisin, come avantdit, granta
per Fait, ou sans Fait, le Gardship del Terre, ou del Heir, ou de ambideux, a
un auter, perforce de quel Grant le Grantee est en possession: Le Grantee est
appel Gardein en Fait.

Et cest Gardein en Fait poit grant le Heir^ al aut' auxy: mes cest auter nest
properment appel Gardein en Fait, mes Grantee del Gardein en Droit solement.

Mes le Gardein en Socage ad le profit solement ad use del Heir, jesque il ad
accomplish l'age de 14 ans, and rendr' pur ceo account al Heir. Vide pluis de
ceo, Littl. lib. 2. cap. 4, and 5. and Stamford. sur Statute de Prerogat. cap.
1, 2, and 6.

Gardens del Esglise.
Gardens del Esglise sont Officers elects en chescun Paroisse, pur aver l'
care and custody des biens del Esglise; and ils poient aver un Action p^ les
biens del Esglise and diverse auters chose ^ ils poient fair p^ l'benefit
l'Esglise and perl Statute de 43 El. cap. 2. ils doient joinder ovesque les
Surveyors en le feasance des Rates and auters provisions pur les Povres del
Paroisse.

Gardein des Spiritualties.
GArdein des Spiritualties per la general Ley est le Deane and Chapter del
Diocese, si ne soit un custom q^ l' Archivesque del Province soit le Gardein
sede vacant; Son Office est a tener Court, prover Testame^ts, granter
Administrations and a supply le lieu del Evesque.

Garnishment.
GArnishment: Sicome un Action (...) Detinue des Charters est port verse un, and
le Defendant dit, que les Charters fueront deliver a luy per le Plaintiff and
per un auter sur certain Conditionss. and pry que l' auter soit garnie de
pleader ove le Plaintiff, si les Conditions sont perimple, ou nemy, and sur ceo
un Brief de Scire facias issera verse luy; ceo est appel Garnishment: and
l'auter quant il vient eins pledera ove le Plaintiff; and c' est appel
Enterpleader.

Garranty.
GArranty est qn^t un est lie al aut' que ad Terre, de garrant le m^ a luy; le
q'l poit estr^ per deux means: cestasea voir^ per Act del Ley, Come si un and
ses Ancestors out tenus Terre del auter and ses Ancestors per temps don't
memory ne court per Homage, que est appelle Homage Auncestrel: Ou per l' Act
del Party, que grant per fait ou Fine al Tenant del Terre de garrant ceo a
luy; sur quel si le Tenant soit impleade per luy que doit garrant ou ses
heirs, le Tenant barra le demandant per pleader de Garranty verse luy, que est
appel Rebutter, ou si soit emplede per auter en Action en que il poit vouch, il
vouchera cestuy que garrant', ou ses Heirs, and si le Plaintiff recover, le
Tenant recovera en value verse le Vouchee.

Garrantie est en trois manners; cestascavoir^, Garrantie Lineal, Garranty
Collateral, and que commence per Disseisin,

Garrantie Lineal est, lou home seisie en fee, ou en tail fait Feoffment a un
auter, and oblige luy and ses heirs a Garrantie, and ad issue fitz, and
morust, and le Garrantie descend a son fitz. Car si null Fait ove Garrantie ust
esse fait, donques le droit des Terres disceuderoit al fitz, come Heir a son
pere, and il conveicroit le Descent de le pere a le fitz.

Mes si Tenant en le tail discontinua le tail, and ad issue, and devie, and
le Uncle del issue relessa al Discontinuee ove Garrantie, etc. and morust sans
issue; ceo est Collateral Garrantie al issue en le tail, p^ ceo que le
Garrantie descend sur le issue, le quel ne poit soy conveyer a le tail per le
mean de son Uncle.

Et en chescun case lou ho^e demanda Terres en Fee-tail per Brief de Formedon,
si asc' Ancestor del issue en le tail fait un Garrantie, and cestuy q' sue le
Brief de Formedon, per possibility ^ l matt' q' puissoit estre fait, convey a
luy Title per force del son done q' fist le Garrantie, etc. ceo est donq^s un
Lineal Garrantie, per quel le issue en le tail ne serra bar, sinon que il ad
Assets a luy descendus en Fee-simple. Mes si il ne poit per asc' possibility
convey a luy Title per force ^ l Done (...) celuy que fist le Garrantie,
do^ques ceo est un Collateral Garrantie, and per la le issue e^ le tail serra
bar sans ascuns Assets. Et le cause que tiel Collateral Garrantie est un
Bar al issue en le tail est, p^ ceo que touts Garranties, devant le Statute
(...) Gloucester, q'ux discendant a ceux queux sont Heir^s a ceux que fesoient
les Garranties, fueront Bars a mesm^ les Heir^s a demander asc' Terres,
forsprise les Garranties que co^mence per Disseisin; and pur ceo que le dit
Statute ad ordain, Que le Garrantie del Pere ne serra Bar a son Fits p^ les
Tr^s que veigne del heritage le Mere, ne le Garrantie de le mere les serra
Bar al Fits pur les Terres que veigne del heritage del Pere; and le Statute
de 11 Hen. 7. cap. 20. and null de les Statutes, ad ordain^ ascun remedy
encounter asc' auter Collateral Garrantie; ideo tiel Garrantie est uncor^ en sa
force, and serra Bar al issue en le rail, come il fuit devant le Statute.

Auxy il convient que touts Garranties, per que ascun Heir serra Bar,
descend per course del Common Ley a celuy que est Heir a Garrantor; ou
auterment il ne serra Bar: car si le Tenant en le tail des Terres en Borough
English, lou le puisne fits inheritera per le Custom, discontinua le tail,
and ad issue deux fits, and le Uncle relessa al Discoctinuee ove Garrantie, and
devie, and le puisne fits port Formeaon; uncore il ne serra bar per t ^ el
Garrantie, causa qua supra. Auxy si ascun home fait un Fait ove Garrantie, per
quel son Heir serrolte bar, and celuy que sist le Garrantie soit at ^ int de
Felony; son Heir ne serra bar per tiel Garrantie, p^ ceo que tiel
Garra^tie, ne puit discender sur luy, le sanke esteant corrupt.

Garrantie commenceant per Disseisin est, si le fits purchase Terres; and lessa
les Terres a son pere pur ans, and le pere per son Fait c' de enfeoffa un
estrang' and oblige luy and ses heirs a Garrantie, and le pere devie, per quel
le Garrantie descend al fits; uncore cest Garrantie ne barrera my le fits, mes
le fits bien poit ent' nient obstant, pur ceo que cest Garrantie commensast per
Disseisin, quant le pere fist le Feoffem^t, que fuit un Disseisin al fits. Et
come est dit de Pere, Issint poit estre dit de chesc' aut' Ancestor. Et mesm^
le Ley est, si l' Ancestor soit Tenant per Elegit, ou per Statute-Merchant, and
fait ascun Feoffement ove Garrantie, tiels Garranties ne serront Bars, pur
ceo que ils commenceont per Disseisin.

Garrantie des Charters.
GArrantie des Charters est un Brief quel gist lou asc' Fait est fait que
comprehend clause de Garrantie, cestascavoir^, Dedi ou Concessi, ou cest parol
Warrantizabo; and si le Tenant soit implead per un Estrang' en Assise ou tiel
Acc' lou il ne poit vouch a Garrantie, donques il avera cest Br^e verse son
Feoffor ou son Heir^; and si le Terre soit recover verse luy, il recovera tant
del Terre en value verse cestuy que fist le Garrantie. Mes cest Brief covie^t
estr^ sue pendant le primer Brief verse luy, auterment il ad perde son advantage.

Auxy sur Garrantie en Ley, come sur Homage auncestrel, ou sur Rent reserve sur
Lease de vie ou Done en le tail, home avera Brief de Garrantie de Charters,
mes nemy sur Escuage.

Garrantie del jour.
GArrantie del jour. Veies p^ ceo Warrantia diel.

Gavelate.
GAvelate est un special and ancient kind de Cessavit, use en Kent, lou le
Custom^ de Gavelkind continue, per quel le Tenant forfeitera fes Terres and
Tenements al Seigniour de que ils font tenus, sil deteine de son Seignior ses
due Rents and Services, solonque cest mann^:

Si ascun Tenant en Gavelkind Retain sa Rent and ses Services de le Tenement
que jl tient de son Seigniour, querge le Seigniour pur agarde de sa Court, de
trois semaign^s en trois semaignes, de trover Distress sur cel Tenement iesque
a le quart Court, a touts foits per Testmoignes. Et si deins cel temps ne Trove
Distress en cel Tenement, per queux il puisse son Tenant justifier, donques a
la quart Court soit agarde, que il preigne cel Tenem^t en sa main^ en nosm^ de
Distress, auxy come fuit Boefe ou Vache, and le tient un an and un jour en sa
maine sans mainoverer: deins quel term si le Tenant vient, and ren ^ ses
arrearages, and fait reasonable amends de la reteigner, adonque eyt and enjoy
sont Tenement, sicome ses Ancestors and luy avaunt tiendront: and sil ne vient
devant l' an and le jour pass, donque aler' le Seigniour al prochein
County Court suivant ove Testmoignes de sa Court, and face la pronuncer cel
Process pur Testmoignage aver; and per agard de sa Court (apres ceo County
tenus) ent' and maineovera en cells Terres and Tenements sicome en son demesne.

Et si le Tenant vient apres, and voile re-aver ses Tenements, and tener sicome
il fist devant, face Agree al Seigniour, si come il est antientment dir,

Neghesith selde, and neghesith gelde, and v. li. for the were, er he become
Healder. Vide de ceo 10 Henry 3. Fitzberlert, Cessavit 60. and Statute 10
Edward 2. de Gavelet en L ^ ido ^, en le Collection del Statutes, London 2.
matter tendant mult a cei (...) que per cel parol Cave ^ t le Seigniour avera
le Terre pur cesser le Tenant. Et veies Westmonast. 2. cap. 21. que done
Cessavit.

Il y ad ascuns Copies que ad le primer Verse issint escript;

Nisith yield, and nisith gelde: Et auters issint;

Nigesith yield, and nighesith geld.

Mes ceux ne differ en signification. Auters Copies o^nt ceo solonque cest sort;

Nigondsith seld, and Nigonth geld:

Cest adire, Payera il novies foits, and novies foites repay.

Gavel-kinde.
GAvel-kinde est un Custom annexe and current ove terres en Kent, appel
Gacel-kinde-terres, tenus en ancient Socage Tenure. Et est pense per les
erudite en Antiquities, destre appel Gavel-kinde de Give all Kin, cest adire,
a touts les Kin en un line, accordant come est use enter les Germans, de que
nous Anglois, and especialment de Kent, venomus. Ou est appel Gavel-kinde de
Give all Kind, cest adire, al touts les Males, car Kind en Dutch signify un
Male. Et diverse auters semble conjectures sont fait touchant Gavel-kinde, le
quel jeo omit.

Les pluis usual Customs sont, Que le Terre est dividable enter les
Heires-males; and que le Heir al age de 15 ans poit done and ven ^ sa Terre;
and serra Inherit', coment son perre soit attaint and pendue pur felony; and
sa feme serra endowe del demie del Terre don't son baron devie seisie; and le
baron serra Tenant per le Courtesy del demie, coment ne avoit issue per sa
feme; mes l'Estate del baron and feme cease per lour second Marriage. Et diverse
auters Customs sont uses en Kent de Terres en Gavel-kinde, pur queux veyes
Lambert's Perambulation de Kent.

Gawgeour.
GAwgeour est un Officer ^ l Roy defigne de searcher touts Tuns, Hogsheads,
Pipes, Barrels and Tertians de Vine, Oil, Honey, Butter, and a done eux un
Note (...) allowance devant ils sont vendus en ascun leiu. Et p^ ceo que est
mark est un Circle fait ove un instrument de far pur cel purpose, il semble
q^ Il prist son nosme de ceo. De cest Office la ad este fait plusors Statutes:
le primer est An. 27 E. 3. cap. 8. and les auters sont 4 R. 2. cap. 1. 18 H. 6.
cap. 17. 23 H. 6. Cap. 16. 1 R. 3. cap. 13. and 28 H. 8. cap. 14.

Gersuma.
GErsuma est un obsolete parol, pur un fine ou Sum d' argent; il est sovent
trove en veil Records. Veies Sir Hen. Spel. Glossarium.

Gild.
GIld, alias Geld, ad diverse significations: come ascun foits un Tribute; auter
foits un Amerciament; tiercem^t, un Fraternity ou Company combine ensemble
per Orders and Leys fait int' eux mesmes ove le congee le Roy. Cambden cita
plusors Antiquities per que il appiert de signifier un Tribute ou Tax; come
page 135, 139, 159, 168, 178. Crompton, en ses Jurisdictions, f. 191. monstre
ceo destre un Amerciament, come Footgeld; uncore fol. 191. il dit, Destre quit
de touts manners de Gelds est, destre discharge de touts manners de Prestations
destre fait pur le prisure de Garbes de Corn, ^ juvene Barbits, and de Lane,
al use del Forresters.

Auxy Cambden, page 149. dividant Suffolk en trois parts, appel le primer
Gildable, p^ ceo que Tribute est de ceo collect. Et les Statutes Anno 27 Edw.
3. Stat. 2. c. 13. and Anno 11 Hen. 7. cap. 9. usont Gildable en m^ le sense;
and issint Stat. Anno 27 H. 8. cap. 26. De ceo Monsieur Lambert verbo
Contubernalis est persuade que l' common perol Gild ou Gild hall preceda,
esteant un Fraternity ou Communaltie de homes aggregated en un Combination,
supportant lour common charge per un mutual Contribution. Et en le Reg. Orig.
f. 219. b. la est Gildam Mercatoriam, que semble destre un certain Liberty ou
privilege appertinent al Merchants, per que ils sont enable de tener certain
Plees de Terre deins lour Precincts demesne. Cest perol Gilds ou Guilde est
issint use Anno 27 E. 3. c. 51. and An. 15 R. 2. c. 5. Et Guildhalda
Tentonicorum est use p^ le Fraternity de Easterling Merchants en Londres appel
le Still-yard, Anno 22 H. 8. c. 8. Veies Coke, l. 8. f. 125.

Gisarms.
GIsarms fuit un certain Weapon, mention 13 E. 1. Stat. 3. c. 6. Fleta escrie
le m^ Sisarmes l. 1. c. 24.

Glebe.
GLebe, so^t les terrs de queux un Rector ou Viccar est seisie in Jure
Ecclesiae.

Gors.
GOrs (Gurges) est un Estange ou Gulf d'eau p^ le p^server des pessons, per le
grant de que le Soil m^ passer^; and un Praecipe quod reddat gist de ceo, come
est a veir en 4 E. 3. 29. b. and 8 E. 3. 13. a. and F. N. B. 191. H.

Granage.
GRanage, Duty en Londres, viz. le 20th. part de Salt import per un Alien, due
al Mayor, Dyer, 352.

Grand Cape.
GRand Cape. Veies de ceo apres en le Title Petit Cape.

Grand Distress.
GRand Distress. Veies de ceo devant en le Title Distress.

Grand Serjeanty.
GRand Serjeantie est, lou un home tient del Roy certain Terres per le Service
de porter son Banner ou Lance, ou amesner son host, ou destre son Carver ou
Butler a son Coronm^t, and tiels semblables; and ceo est la pluis digne Service
q^ le Tenant poit fair^, and p^ ceo est appel Grand Serjeantie. Mes Petit
Serjeanty est, quant u^ tient Roy, rendant a luy annualm^t un Arc, un Coteau,
un Lance, ou tiel semblable; and ceo nest forsque Socage en effect: mes ho^e
ne poit tener e^ Grand Serjean^ie ne per Petit Serjeantie si non de Roy. Auxy
si Tenant per Grand Serjeantie morust, son Heir, esteant plein age, payera al
Roy pur Relief le value des Tr^es, oust' les charges que il pay al Roy, p^
Grand Serjeanty: mes cestuy q' tient per Escuage payera p^ son Rel ^ of
forsque. C. s.

Ceux que sont en les Marches de Scotland, que tient del Roy per Cornage, ceo
est, p^ ventiler un Cornu quant les Scots entront Angleterre, sont Tenants per
Grand Serjeantie.

Aux' ou un home tient del Roy p^ trover un home en sa Guerre deins le Realm,
c'est dit Grand Serjeantie, p^ ceo que il est fait per Corpse d'u^ home: Et si
le Tenant ne poit trover home de fair ceo, il est tenus de fair ceo luy mesme.

Mes veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2. c. 24. per quel touts les Tenures sent ore turn
e^ frank and common Socage.

Gree.
GRee venust del Francois parol ( G^e) Beneplacitum; and signify en nostre Ley
Contentment ou Satisfaction: come en le Statute 1 R. 2. c. 15. de fair Gree as
parties est a doner eux contentment ou Satisfaction pur un Offense as eux fait.

Green hew.
GReen hew est tout un ove Vert, co^eappiert per Manwood en ses Leys del
Forest, c 6. sect. 5. Et p^ ^ c veies Virt.

Green Wax.
GReen Wax est un parol use en les Statutes (...) 42 E. 3. c. 9. and 7 H. 4. c.
3. and sign fie les Estreats des Issues, Fines and Amerciaments en l'
Eschequer, and bailes horse as Viscounts south le Seal del Court, destre per
eux levies en lour several Counties.

Grithbreach.
GRithbreach, hoc est, Pax Domini Regis fracta; quia Grith Anglice, Pax Latin.

Gule de August.
Gule de August est le prim^ jour ou les Calends del August, q^ en le temps E.
1. and E. 3. fuit usualment appel de Gule de August, come appiert per F. N. B.
f. 62. l. and Plowden Com. f. 316. b. Est le very jour S. Petri ad vineula;
and le reason pur que est appel le Gule de August est conceive sur un History
record per Durandus en son Rationale Divinorum, l. 7. c. 19. d'un Miracle
effect per le Chain de S. Peter sur le file d'un Quirine un Tribune del Rome,
que per le baiser del dit Chain fuit cure des Escrovel en sa Gule ( gula.) Et
veies Hospin: de origin festorum, f. 85. b.

Gultwit.
GVltwit est un amends pur Trespass, solonque Saxton en son Description del
Angleterre, c. 11.

H.
Habeas Corpus.
HAbeas Corpus est un Br^e le quel home endite d'asc' Trespass devant Justices
del Peace, ou en un Court d'asc' Franchise, and sur son Prisure esteant gist en
Prison pur m^, poit aver horse del Bank le Roy, per c' d'amesner luy mesme la a
ses costs demesne, and de respon ^ le Cause ley F. N. B. f. 250. h. l'order ^ n
ceo case est, primerment (...) procurer un Certiorari horse del Chancerie,
direct al dits Justices, pur le remover del Endictment e^ le Bank le Roy; and
sur ceo de procurer cest Bre al Visc', de causer son Corpse destre amesne al un
jour Reg. Judic. f. 81. ou vous poies trover plusors cases e^ queux cest Brief
serra use.

Habeas corpora.
HAbeas corpora est un Br^e que gist contre un Jurie ou ascun d'eux que
refusont de venur sur le Venire facias, pur le Trial d'un Meistre port al issue.

Habendum.
HAbendum est un parol de form en un Conveyance, al voyer intelligence de que
est destre observe, que en chesc' Fait de Conveyance la sont deux principal
darts, le Premises and l' Habendum.

Le Office des Premises est, d' expresser le nosme del Grauntor, le Grantee,
and le Chose destre grauntee. L' Office del Habendum est, (...) limitter
l'Estate, issint que le general Implication del Estate, que per construction
del Ley passa en les Premises, est per le Habendum controlle and qualify:
Sico^e en un Lease a deux homes, Habendum a l'un p^ vie, ie Remainder al auter
pur vie, alter le gen^al Implication del Joynt-tenancie en le Franktenem^t, que
passera per les Premises, si l' Habendum ad este omis. Veies Coke, l. 2. f. 55.

Habere facias Seisinam.
HAbere facias Seisinam est un Brief Judicial que gist lou un ad recover
certain Terres en Court le Roy; donques il avera cest Brief direct al
Viscount, luy commandment de done a luy Seisin del Terre, and ne serra
retournable.

Habere facias Visum.
HAbere facias Visum est un Br^e que gist en pluseurs Cases, lou View est estre
pris del Tr^es ou Tenements e^ question. Veies. F. N. B. in Indice, verbo View;
and Br. l. 5. tra. 3. c. 8.

Half-bloud.
HAlf-bloud. Veies Demysank.

Demi Seal.
Demi Seal est un Seal use e^ le Cha^cerie p^ le sealer de ^ Commissions as
Delegates sur un Appeal en un Cause civil ou marine, come appiert per le Stat.
fait en 8 Eliz. c. 5.

Halymote.
HAlymote est un Court Baron, come appiert per Manwood, e^ ses Forest Leys, c.
23. f. 217. a. Et est appel Halymote, cestascavoit, le Concurse des Tena^ts
d'un Hall ou Man^or.

Hambling, ou Hoxing des Chiens.
HAmbling, ou Hoxing, ou Hock-sinewing des Chiens, sont ancient t'mes del
Forest p^ le Lawing des Chiens, quant le custom^ fuit, (come appiert per Manw.
Fo. Leys, c. 16. sect. 12.) ^ couper ou berluffer Chiens e^ lour Jareds; mes
ore est use destre fait en lour Pieds. De q^ veies Expeditate.

Hand-gun.
HAnd-gun est un Engine q^ est perhibite destre use and emport per le Statute
de 33 H. 8. c. 6. Et com't que un Dagge fuit envent de tardife te^ps, and puis
le fesans del dit Act, and nest conust per le nosm^ ^ Hand-gun, mes per u^
especial nosme; uncore le carrying d'un Dagge est deins le dit Act, and
comprehend deins le parol Hand-gun. Issint ou Crosse-bowes sont perhibite per
le dit Act, per ceo Stone-bowes sont auxy prohibit. Veies Coke, 5. f. 71, 72.

Hangwit.
HAngwit est, quietum esse de Latrone suspenso sine Judicio, vel extra
Custodiam vestram evaso.

Hanper.
HAmper del Chancerie, Anno 10 R. 2. c. 1. semble de signifier come Fiscus
originalment en Latin.

Haque.
HAque est un petit Hand-gun al longeur des trois quartiers d' un verge, and
est mention e^ le Stat. (...) 33 H. 8. c. 6. and 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 14. La est
aux' parle d'un demi Haque.

Haquebut.
HAquebut est un Gunne mention en le Stat. de 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 14. and est tout
un ove un Arquebuse.

Hariot.
HAriot est on deux sorts; l'un Hariot Custom, l' auter Hariot Service.

Hariot Service est mult fo ^ ts express e^ le Grant d'un ho^e ou e^ son Fait,
que il tient per tiel Service pur payer Hariot al te^ps (...) son mort. Et cest
Harior est payable apres le mort del Tenant en Fee simple.

Hariot Custom est, lou Hariots ont este pays te^ps horse de memory per
Custom. Et ceo poit este apres le mort ^ l Tenant p^ vie, etc. Mes a parler de
ceo genera ^ meant:

Hariot est le melieur Beast (soit il Chival, Boefe, ou Vache) que le Tenant ad
al temps de son mort. Et u^ Distress poit estr^ seisie ou pris p^ ceo, soit il
Hariot Service, ou Hariot Custom, al use del Seignior de q^ le Tenant tient,
per son Bailiff ou auters Officers. Mes de droit le Seignior ne son Officer ne
doit prender Hariot, devant que il soit present al perehein Court tenus apres
le Tenant est mort que tiel Beast est due p^ son' Hariot.

Haward.
HAward, ou Hayward, est un Officer design en chescun Ville ^ estre le common
Herd del Ville: and il est issint appel, ou pur ceo que un part de son Office
est pur gar ^ er les Hayes de terres enclose, issint que ils ne soient croppe
ne enfringe; ou pur ceo que il guard le Grass del parde and destruction des
Avers, issint que Hay poit estre fait de ceo. Il est un Officer jurus en le
Court del Seignior: Pur que Serement, veies Kitch. fol. 46.

Haukers.
HAukers est un term use en les Statutes de 25 H. 8. c. 9. and 33 H. 8. cap.
4. pur Tinkers quieux alont de lieu en lieu per le Pais, and per color des
Letters Patents le Roy ou Plachards achatont and vendont Airain and Peweter,
and deceive les lieges le Roy and en le poise and en le substance.

Heybote, ou Hedgebote.
HEybote, ou Hedgebote, est necessary Stuff pur fair^ and amend Haies, q^
Lessee pur ans ou p^ vie de common droit poit prender sur le Tr^e a luy less,
nient obstant il ne soit express en son Lease, and nient obstant que il soit
un Lease per Parol, sans Escript.

Heybote auxy poit estre prise pur necessary stuff pur fair^ Rakes, Forks, and
tiels se^bl' instrum^ts, ove queux ho^es uso^t e^ Somm^ per tedder and fair^
Felne. Et issint un Lessee pur ans prist c', and fuist luy allow per son
Lessor, pluis tossed, come jeo suppose, pur ceo que tiels Instruments sont faits
de slend Subbois, que per le Common Ley, l'Lessee p^ ans poit succider and
prender, come est avantdit.

Head-borow.
HEad-borow est compound des deux parols Heofed, id est, Caput, and Borhe, id
est, Pignus. Issint que Headborow, signify le chief des Frank-pledges en un
Decennarie deins un Leet, ou celuy que avoit l'governance des eux q^ so^t deins
so^ Pledge demesne; and il fuit appel Headborough, ou Borow-head, ou
Borough-holder, ou Third-borow, ou Tithing-man, ou Chief-Pledge, ou
Borow-Elder, solo^q. le diversite des dialects des diverse lieus. Et a ceo jour
est ore appel un Constable.

Head-silver.
HEad-silver. Veies Com. Fine.

Heireloome.
HEireloome est ascun parcel des Utensils du^ mease, que, per le custom del
asc' Pais, esteant apperteina^t al un Mease pur certain discents, ala ove le
Mease (apres le mort del Owner) al Heir, and nemy as Executors.

Herbage.
HErbage est le Fruit del terre provise per nature pur le bit ou bouch del
Cattle: Mes il est com^unem^ use pur u^ Liberty a pascer le Cattle d'un hom^ en
le fund del aut', come en le Forest, etc. Crom. Jurisd. fol. 197.

Heretico, ou Haeretico comburendo.
HAEretico comburendo est un Brief que gist verse luy que est un Heretic, ceo
est, que ayant estre un foits convince de Heresy per l' Evesque, and ayant c'
adjure, puis en ceo relapse arere, ou en ascun auter, and est sur ceo commise
al Lay poyar.

Et Brit. lib. 1. cap. 17. dit, Que per le Common Ley ceux persons queux
seloniousment arseront auters Blees ou auters Measons, Sorciers and
Sorcieresses, Sodomites, and Heretics, serront combures and arses.

Cest Brief est toll per Stat. Car. 2.

Hermitage, and Hermit.
Hermit est un Religious home que devote luy mesme a viver solitary e^ ascu^
private lieu e^ un Esglise on Mo^astery, etc. and son lie^ est appel Hermitage.
Et de ceo Prohibition gist. Not. Br. 34. G.

Hidage.
HIdage est quietum esse, si Dominus Rex talliaverit totam Terrum per Hidas.

Nota, Que un Hide de Tr^e est un entire Plough-land. Et cest kind de Taxing
per Hides fuit mult use en veil temps, cybien pur provision de Armor, come
payments de Argent; and c' principalm^t en les jours del Roy Etheldred, que en
l' an de Christ 1006. qn^t les Danes pristera terre al Sandwich en Kent, tax
tout son Tr^e per Hides en cest man^; Que chesc' 310 Hides (...) Tr^e doie^t
trover un Nief furnish, and chesc' 8 Hides doient trover un Jacke and un
Sallet, pur le defense del Realm.

Hoblers.
HOblers sont mention en le Statute de 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 8. estre tiels
queux per lour Tenure sont lies de maintainer un petit Chival, pur doner notice
^ l asc' Invasion ou aut' peril que happa prochein al Mere lou ils demurront.

Hoghenhine.
HOghenhine est celuy que vient a un meason en l' guise dun Guest, and la
reposa l'tierce nuict, puis quel temps il est account un (...) son Family en
que meason il reposa; and sil offend le Peace l' Roy, son Host covient de
respond p^ luy. Bract. lib. 3 tract. 2. cap. 10. En l'Leys (...) Roy Edward,
edite per Monsieur Lambert, il est appell' Agenhine, ou vous poyes lier pluis
de cest meistre.

Homage.
HOmage en nostre Livres est deux-fold. Cest adire, HOmagium ligeum, and c'est
tant come ligeance, ^ que Bract. parle, l. 3. c. 35. f. 79. Soli Regi debetur
sine Dominio seu Servitio. Et lauter est Homagium feudale, que ad son original
per Tenure. En Fitz. Not. Brev. f. 269. la est un Brief p^ respecture de cest
darreine Homage, que est due per reason del Feud ou Tenure. Mes Homagium ligeum
est inherent and inseparable, and ne poit estre respectus.

Homagium ratione Feodi sive Tenurae est define destre un Service que serra
fait en tlel manner: Le Tenant en fee ou fee-taile que tient per Homages,
genulera sur ambideux genues discincte, and le Seigniour serra seat, and
tiendra les maines son Tenant enter ses maines, and le Tenant dire, Jeo devigne
vostre home de cest jour en avaunt de vie and de member, and de terrene honor,
and a vous serra foyall and loyal, and foy vous portera des Terres que jeo
claim de ten' de vous, salve le foy que jeo doy a nostre Seigniour le Roy: and
donques le Seigniour issint seant luy basera.

Com^t Fealty serra fait, veies devant en Fealty.

Le Seneschal le Sen^r poit p^der Fealty, mes nemy Homage. Veies le Stat. 12
Car. 2. cap. 24.

Homage auncestrel.
HOmage auncestrel est, lou un home and ses Ancestors ^ temps don't memory ne
courge ont tenus le Terr^ ^ l Seignior per Homage. Et si tiel Sn^r ad receive
Homage, il est ten' (...) acquiter le Tenant verse touts auters Seigniors
paramount luy (...) chescun man^ Service. Et si l'Tenant ad fait Homage a son
Sn^r, and soit implead, and vouche le Seignior a Garrantie; le Seigniour est
tenus de luy garrant': and si le Tenant perde, il recovera en value verse son
Seignior tant des Terres que il avoit al temps de la Voucher, ou unques puis.
Auxy si home que tient sont Terre per Homage auncestrel alien l' Terr^ en fee,
donques l' Alienee ferra Homage a son Seignior; mes il ne tiendra per Homage
auncestrel, pur ceo que le continuance deI Tenancie en ^ e sanke ^ l primer
Tenant est discontinue.

Homagio respectuando.
HOmagio respectuando est un Brief direct al Escheatour, luy mandant pur
deliver Seisin al Heir de ses Terres a son plein age, coment que son Homage ne
soit fait. De que veies Fitzh. N. B. fol. 269. A.

Homesoken.
HOmesoken, ou Hamesoken, est, quietum esse de Amerciamentis de Ingressu
hospitiorum violenter and sine licentia, and contra pacem Dom^ Regis: Et quod
teneatis Placit' de hm^di Transgres. facta in Curia vestra, and in Terris
vestris.

Homicide, ou Manslaughter.
HOmicide ou Manslaughter, est l' Occider de un home seloniousment, sans
malice perpense. Il est auxy define issint, Homicidium est hominis occisi ab
homine facta. Si autem a Cane, Bove, aut alia re fiat, non dicitur proprie
Homicid'. Dicitur Homicidium ab homine and caedo, quasi hominis cadium.

Homine capto in Withernamium.
HOmine capto iu Withernam. est un Brief (...) per ^ der luy que ad prise ascun
Villain ou Nief, and trahe luy ou el horse ^ l County, issint que il ou el ne
poit estre replevie accordant al Ley. Reg. Orig. f. 79. a.

Homine replegiando.
HOmine replegiando est un Brief pur le bailer des homes horse del prison. En
queux cases gist, anden queux nemy, veies Fitz. N. B. f. 66. E. and veies hic
Tit. Replevin, in fine.

Vide Replevin.

Honor.
Honor, pret' le gen^al signification, est use specialm^t p^ le pluis noble
sort de Seignorie, de que auter inferior Seigniories ou Manors dependant per
performance des Customs and Services, un ou auter, al ceux que sont Seigniours
de ceux. Et semble que la sont nuls Honors sorsque ceux que originalment
apperteinont al Roy; uncore ils poient en ap^s estre done en fee al
Noble-homes. Le manner del Creation de ceux Honors poit en part estre collect
horse des Statutes de An. 31 Hen. 8. cap. 5. lou Hamton-Court est fait un
Honor; and Anno 33 ejusd. cap. 37. and 38 per que Amp ^ il and Grafton sont
auxy faits Honors; and Anno 37 ejusd. cap. 18. per que le Roy ad poyar done a
luy per ses Letters Patents de erecte quater several Honors, Westminster,
Kingston sur Hull, S. Osithes en Essex, and Dodington en Barkshire.

Hornegeld.
HOrnegeld est, quietum esse ^ quadam Consuetu ^ exacta per Tallagium per totam
Terram, de quacunque Bestia cornuta.

Horse de son Fee.
Horse de son Fee est un exception pur avoider un Action pur Rent issuant horse
del certain Terre, per luy que pretend de estre Sn^r, ou pur quelque Customs ou
Services; car si il poit justify que le Terre est horse de son Fee, le Action
morust. Broke, hoc Tit. 7, 8. and 1 Institut. 1. b.

Hospitallers.
HOspitallers (Hospitularii) un Order des Chivalers primes foundue al
Jerusalem, and appelles Joannites ou Chivalers (...) S. John de Jerusalem; and
fueront appelles Hospitallers, p^ ceo que ils edify un Hospital al Jerusalem
p^ l'interteinment de ceux que vigno^t ^ s touts parts ^ l munde pur Visiter
les Sacred lieus, and ils guardo^t and defend tiels Pilgrims en lour journies.
Le Institution de cest Order fuit primes allow per Pape Gelasius 2. entour l'an
1118. Et ils avoient mults Privileges grantus as eux, come im^unities ^ l
paym^t des dismes, etc. Et per ceux ils sont plusors foits me^tions en nostre
Livres. Trovers lour Privileges as eux reserves in Mag. Char. cap. 37. Et poies
veier l'Droit des subjects l' Roy vindicate ^ l usurpation de lour Jurisdiction
per l' S ^ atute Westminster. 2. cap. 34. Lour chief Residence est ore en le Isle de
Melita, usualment appel Malta, done as eux per l'Emperor Charles le cinquiesm^:
Et p^ ceo sont appels ore Chivalers d'Malta. Touts les Tetres en biens de ceux
Chivalers icy en Angeleterre fueront mises en le disposition le Roy, per le
Stat. de 32 H. 8. cap. 24.

Hostler.
HOstler est un Inholder. Coke Entr. 347.

Hotchpot.
HOtchpot est un Meddling ou mixing ensemble, and and un partition, de Terres
done en Frank-marriage, ovesque auters Terr^ e^ Fee-simple discendus. Pur
example, Un ho^e seifie de 30 acres de Terre en Fee ad issue deux Files, and
done ovesque un (...) ses Files, al un home que luy marry, 10 acres de c'
Terre en Frank-marriage, and morust seisie de les auters 20 acres. Ore si el
que est issint marry voilloit aver asc' part d' les 20 acres d' que sa Pere
morust seisie, el doit mit' ses Terres done en Frank-marriage en Hotchpot, c'
est adire, el doit refuser d' p^der les sole Profits ^ l Terre dona en
Frank-marriage, and suffer le Terre de estre commixt and mingle ensemble
ovesque le aut' Terre de que sa Pere morust seisie, issint que un equal
Division poit estre fait (...) lentire perenter luy and sa Soer. Et issint p^
sa x acres el avera xv; auterment sa Soer voit aver les les xx acres de queux
lour Pere morust seisie.

Housebote.
HOusebote est necessaire Merisme q^ le Lessee pur ans ou pur vie, de common
droit, poit prender sur le Terre, a repairer les Measons sur m^ le Terre a luy
lessa, nient obstant il ne soit express en l' Lease and nient obstant il soit
un Lease per Parol, sans Fait. Mes si il prist pluis q^ besoign^, il poit estre
punish per un Action de Waste.

HUe and Cry.
Hue and Cry, est un Pursuit de u^ aiant com^it Felony per le Haut chimin:
car si le party rob, ou ascun en l' company de u^ que fuit murdr^ ou rob,
vient al Constable del prochein Ville, and luy commanda de fair Hue and Cry,
ou de fair Pursuit puis l'Offendor, describant le party, and cy pres q^ il
poit, monstra^s quel voy il est ale; le Constable doit immediatement de
appeller sur le Paroche p^ ai en querance le Felon; and si il ne soit trove la,
donque de doner garrein al perchein Constable, and il ad prochein a luy, jesque
le Offender soit apprehend, ou al meins jesque il soit este pursue al latere de
Mere. De ceo veies Bract. l. 3. tr. 2. c. 5. Smith de Repub. Angl. l. 2. c. 20.
and le Statute de Winchest. fait, An. 13 E. 1. and le Stat. de 28. E. 3. c. 11.
and An. 27. El. c. 13.

HUers.
Huers. Veies Conders.

Hundred.
HUndreds fueront divide per Alfred le Roy, apres q^ il ad divide le entire
Realm^ en certain^ perts ou sectio^s, le q' l ^ le Saxon perol Scyran,
significa^ ^ scinder, il term Shires, ou (sico^e nous uncor^ perle) Shares and
Portions. Ceux Shires il auxy divide en petlts perts; ^ queux ascuns fueront
appelles Lathes, de le perol Gelathian, q^ est de assembIer ensemble: aut's
Tithings, pur ceo q^ la fuero^t en chesc' de eux al number ^ Dize persons;
(...) que chesc' fuit Surety and Pledge pur auters bone behavior: auters
Hundreds, p^ ceo que ils contain^ Jurisdiction sur un Hundred ho^es ou Pledges,
^ murra^t peradvent' en deux, ou trois, ou pluis Paroches, Boroughs, ou Villes,
esteant and adjoynant niens meines procheine ensemble, en le quel il appoint
administration de Justice destre exercise severalment enter eux de mesme le
Hundred, and nemy q^ l'un irra horse disorderment en l'auter Hundred, Lathe, ou
Tithing, en que il ne demurt.

Ceux Hundreds continue a cest jour en force, nient obstant ne en tout al m^ le
purpose pur que al primer ils fueront ordeine, uncore a ore mult necessary,
and en tem^ps de Peace pur bon^ order de Governm^t diverse voies, and en Guerre
p^ certainty de levying de ho^es; come auterm^t p^ le pluis speedy Collection
des Payments grant en Parliament a les Roys de ceo Realm.

Hundred-Lagh.
HUndred-Lagh signify le Hundred-Court, de quel touts les Officers ^ l Forest
l' Roy fueront exempt per le Chartre de Canutus, cap. 9.

Hundredum.
HUndredum est, quietum esse de Denariis vel Consuetudinibus faciendis
Praepositis and Hundredariis.

Husfastene.
HUsfastene (quasi Domi fixus) est il q^ tient Meason and Tr^e. Br. l. 3. tr.
2. c. 10.

Hustings.
HUstings (Hustingium) est un Court de Common-Plees tenus devant le Mayor and
Aldermen de Londres, and est le plus hault Court que ils ont, car Error ou
Attaint gist la dun Judgment ou faux Verdict en le Court le Viscount, come
appiert per Fitzh. N. B. 22 H. etc. and per le Statute de 11 H. 7. c. 21. Et
auters Cities and Boroughs o^t ew u^ Court de m^ le nosm^, come Winchester,
Lincoln, York, and Sheppy. Issint appel' (...) le Saxon Hus, Domus, and Thing,
Causa, quasi, Domus Causarum.

I.
Idemptitate, ou Identitate nominis.
IDemptitate nominis est un Brief q^ gist lou^ Brief de Det, Covenant, Account,
ou tiel semblable Brief est port verse un home, and un auter que ad mesme le
nosme ove le Defendant est pris pur luy; donques il avera cest Brief, per que
le Viscount ferra inquiry devant le Jestice assign in mesme le County, si
soit mesme le person ou memy; and ^ i ne soit trove le party, donques il alera
sans jour en peace.

Idiot.
Idiot est celuy que est un Sot natural de sa neisture, and ne scavoit d'
accompter xx. d. ou nosme son Pere ou Mere, ne de quel age luy mesme est, ou
tiel semblable plain and common chooses, issint q' il appiert que il and ascun
man^er d'Intendment, reason, ou governm^t ^ luy mesm^. Mes si il poit lier, ou
apprehender de lier per instruction and information des auters, ou poit measure
un Ulne ^ e drape, ou nosme les Jours en le semaigne, ou engen ^ un Enfant, ou
tiel semblable, per q^ il poit appear que il ad asc' lumen de Reason; tiel nest
Idiot naturalme^t.

Jeofaile.
JEofaile est, quant les parties al ascun Suit en pleadant ont a tant proceed
que ils ayant join Issue, quel serra try, ou est try per un Jurie ou
Enquest; and cel Pleading ou Issue est cy malement plede ou join, que il serra
Error si eux proceed: donque ascun del dits parties poit per lour Council
monstre c' al Court, auxy bien apres Verdict done and devant Judgment, come
devant le Jurie soit charge, Et le Council dirra, Cest Enquest ne doit prend'.
Et si soit apres Verdict, donques il poit dire, al Judgment ne deves aler. Et
p^ ceo que per tiels niceties mults delays fueront en Suits, diverse Statutes
so^t faits de redresser ceo, auxy bien en temps (...) Roy H. 8. an. 32. c. 30.
come en le temps le Roigne Eliz. de queux come piot dire come les Civilians,
Quod tametsi Juris formulas amputari jusserit Constantinus Imperator,
quotidianus tamen forensis usus eas revocasse videtur, vel potius quod crescunt
ut Hydrae capita. Veies auxy ore un novel Statute de Jeofailes, fait en 21 Jac.
c. 13.

Jetsam.
JEtsam est, quant un Niefe est en peril destre merge, and p^ disburden le
Neife les Mariners jetta les biens en le Mer: and puis nient obstant le Niefe
perish, null (...) ceux biens que sont appel Jetsam, Floatsam, ou Lagan, sont
appel Wreck, cy long come ils remain en ou sur le Mer; mes si asc' d' eux sont
mise al tr^e per l'Mer, donque ils serront dit Wreck, and pass per le grant ^
Wreck. Coke, l. 5. f. 106.

Jettezoons.
JEttezoons, ceo est mention e^ Policies d' Insurance, and signify biens eject
en le mere, en un grand storm.

Illoyal Assembly.
Iloyal Assembly est, lou people eux assemble insimul p^ fair illoyal chose
enconter le Peace, nient obstant que ils ne execute lour purpose en fait.

Imparlance.
IMparlance. Veies Emparlance.

Impeachment de Waste.
IMpeachment de Waste. (Impetitio Vasti) est tant adire come un Demand fait ou
destre fait p^ Waste fait p^ u^ Tenant que and forsque un particular Estate p^
vie ou p^ ans. Et p^ ceo cestuy que ad tiel Lease sans Impeachment de Waste, ad
per ceo u^ property ou interest a luy done e^ les Measons and Arbres, and poit
fair Waste en eux sans estre impeach p^ ceo, cestascavoir, sans estre question
ou ascun Recompense ^ luy demand p^ le Waste fait. Veies Coke, l. 11. en Bowls
Case, f. 82. b.

Implements.
IMplements venust ou del parol Francois (Employer) ou del Latin (Implere) and
est use p^ chooses necessary destre use en asc' Trade ou Mystery, queux sont
imployes en le practice del dit Trade, ou sans queux l'ouvrage ne poit estre
accomplish. Auxy p^ le Furniture quibus impletur Domus. Et en ceo sense vous
trovers le paro ^ plusors foits e^ darreine Velunts and auters Conveyances des
Movables.

Impost.
IMpost est un parol Francois q^ sign ^ fie Tribute, mes ove nous est prise pur
le Tax pay al Roy pur ascun Merchandise emport en ascun Havre horse des lieus
ouster le Mer. Et est use en le Statute de 31 Eliz. cap. 5. come un Synonymon
ove Custom que Merchants payont.

Imprisonment.
IMprisonment est le Restraint del Liberty d'un home, soit c' e^ l'over
Champs, ou en le Cippes ou Cage en les Streets, ou en le prooper Meason d' un
home, cybien come en le common Coal. Et en touts ceux lieus le party issint
restrain est dit destre un Prisoner, cy longement come il and son Liberty
frankm^t d' ire a touts te^ps and lieus lou il voit, sans Bail ou Mainprise.

Incumbent.
INcumbent venust del Latin (Incumbere) and signify cestuy que est persent,
admit, and institute al ascon Esglise ou Benefice ove Cure; que est p^ ceo
appel l' Incumbent de ceo Esglise, eo quod incumbit ad Curam animarum ibid.
omni studio.

Indicavit.
INdicavit est un Br^e ou Prohibition q^ gist p^ un Patron d'un Esglise, quel
Clerk est Defendant en Court-Christian e^ un Action p^ Tithes, commence per un
aut' Clerk, and extendant al quart part del Esglise, ou ses Tithes; en quel
case le Suit appertein al Court le Roy, per Westminster. 2. c. 5. Et p^ cest cause le
Patron del Defendant (esteant en peril destre perjudice en son Esglise and
Advowson, si le Plaintiff gain e^ le Court-Christian) al cel means il remover
al Court de Roy, Reg. orig. f, 35. and Brit. c. 209. Cest Brief nest
retornable; mes sils ne cestont lour Suit, il avera un Attachment.

Indictment.
INdictment. Veies Enditement.

Indorsement.
INdorsement, est c' q^ est escr^ sur le Dorse d'un Escript; come le Condition
d'un Obligation est dit destre indorse. p^ ceo que est communem^t escrie sur le
Dorse del Obligation.

Induction.
INduction est un lay act fait per precept del Ordinary per quel Actual
possession de Esglise est done al Rector ou Viccar puis son Presentation and
Institution a ceo.

Infangtheef.
INfangtheef est un Privilege ou Liberty concede al Sn^rs del certain Manors,
p^ juger ascun Larons prife deins lour Fee.

Information.
INformation pur le Roy est ceo q^ p^ un com^on person est appel un
Declaration; and nest touts foits fait directm^t per le Roy ou son Attorney,
mes per un auter home, qui tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso sequitur, sur le
breach d'ascun penal Ley ou Statute, en que un Penalty est done al party que
voit suer pur ceo; mes null Action de Det p^ recover c', donque il doit estre ew
per Information.

Ingrosser.
INgrosser venust del parol Francois Grosier, id est, Solidarius venditor. Mes
en nr^e Ley u^ Ingrosser est u^ que achare Blees, Grain, Butre, Formage,
Poisson, ou auter mort Victuals, ove un intent p^ ceux ven ^ arrere. Et issint
il est define en le Stat. de 5 E. 6. c. 14. fait encounter tiel Ingrosser.

Inheritance.
INheritance. Veies Enheritance.

Inhibition.
IInhibition est un Br^e d' inhibit' un Judge de proceder ouster en le Cause
dependant devant luy.

Et e^ auter Brief lou puis Presentment le Roy al Benefice il present auter and
inhibite l' Evesque a fair Induction al primer Presentee. Plo. Com. 528. Veies
F. N. B. f. 39. ou il mitta Prohibition and Inhibition ensemble. Inhibition est
pluis communement un Br^e issuant horse d'un pluis haut Court-Christian a un
pluis base and inferior, sur un Appeal, Anno 24 H. 8. c. 12. and Prohibition
horse del Court le Roy de Record al Westminster a u^ Court-Christian, ou a un
inferior Court Temporal.

Injunction.
INjunction est un interlocutorie Decree horse del Cha^cerie, ascun foits a done
Possession al Plaintiff pur defect de Appearance en le Defendant, asc' foits al
ordinar e Court del Roy, and ascun foits al Court-Christian, d'estop Proceeding
en un Causesur suggestion fait, q^ si le rigor del Ley prend lieu, est
encounter Equity and Conscience en cel Case. Veies westminster part. 2. tit.
Proceedings in Chancerie, sect. 25.

Inlagarie.
INlagarie ou Inlagation est Je Restitution d'un Utlawe al Protection del Roy
ou al benefit ou condition d'un Subject.

Inlaugh.
INlaugh signify luy que est sub Lege, en quelque Frankplege, nemy utlaw;
(...) quel veies Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c. 11.

Inmates.
INmates sont ceux persons d'un Family que sont permittes p^ vener and
inhabiter en u^ Cottage ensemble ove un auter Family, per q^ les povers del
Parish serront increase. Et p^ ceo per le Statute de 31 Eliz. c. 7. la est u^
Penalty (...) dize souls per mois impose per ehescun que receivera ou
continuera tiel Inmate.

Inquisition.
INquisition. Veies Enquest.

Inrolement.
INrolment est le Register, Recorder, ou Entrer d'asc' Act ou Fait en le
Chancerie ou auters, come d'un Recognisance. Fine, Statute, on Fait indent per
le Statute de 27 H. c. 16. per q^ un Frank-tenement passera.

Instant.
INstant (en Latin, Instans) est define per les Logicians, Unum indivisible in
Temp', quod non est Tempus, nec pars Temporis, ad quod tamen parts Temporis
copulantar, and mult consider en Ley: and com^t ne poit actualment estr^
divide, uncore en considerat' and conceit il poit estre divide, and apply al
several purposes, sicome fueront several temps; de quel veies en Plowden's
Commentaries en le Case enter Fulmerston and Stuard, lou le Statute 31 H. 8.
(que enact, Que si Abbe deins an devant cest Statute lessa Terre al un, que al
temps del feasance de mesme le Lease eyt mesme le Terre al ferme pur term de
ans, donque nient expire, que le Lessee avera cest Terre solement pur vint un
ans) est expound.

Et la est debate, Que quant Termor prent ie second Lease, il surrender son
form' term, and sic al mesme temps del prisel del second Lease le former term
est expire. Et en le Case enter Petit and Hales, cestuy que occide luy mesme,
tanque soit mort ne fesoit Felony, and quant fuit mort, ne est en esse, issint
que poit estre dit Felon, mes al instant est en Ley adjudge Felon.

Et sont mults auters Cases en Ley, lou l' instant temps, que est indivisible
en nature, ^ n consideration del meant and intendment del Sages del Ley est
divide; sur queux surde mults arguments de grand use and profound learning.

Institution.
INstitution est un Faculty fait per l'Ordinarie per quel un Vicar ou Rector
est approve de estre induct al Rectorie ou Vicarage.

Interdiction.
INterdiction ad le m^ signification en le Common come en le Canon Ley, ou il
est issint define, Interdictio est Censura Ecclesiastica prohibens
administrationem Divinorum. Et issint il en use, 22 H. 8. c. 12.

Intrusion.
INtrusion est un Brief que gist verse celny que enter apres le mort Tenant en
Dower, ou ascun auter Tenant pur vie, and tenust horse celuy en le Reversion ou
Remainder. Veies p^ ceo Fitz. N. B. fol. 203. E. Et chescun Entry sur le
possession le Roy est appel un Intrusion; come lou le Heir^ le Tenant le Roy
enter apres Office, and devant Liverie, ceo est dit un Intrusion sur l'Roy,
come appiert en Stanf. Prerog. fol. 40. and mults auters Livres.

Intrusion.
INtrusion. Veies Entrusion.

Inventary.
INventarie est un Catalogue ou recital en escript des touts les Biens and
Chattels dun que est mort, ove le valuation de eux per quat' credible persons,
le quel chesc' Executor and Administrator doit exhibit al Ordinary al temps
appoint.

Joyntenants.
JOyntenants sont, lou deux homes vient a asc' Tr^es ou Tenements per un joint
Title; come si home done Terres a deux homes and lour Heirs.

Tenants en common sont, lou deux ont Terres per several Titles, ou per
Feoffment al deux, a aver and tener l'un moyetie al un and ses Heirs, and
lauter moyetie al auter and ses Heirs: en touts ceux tases null de eux scavoit
son several.

Si sont deux ou trois Joyntenants, and un ad issue and devie, ^ onques cestuy
ou ceux Joyntenants que surviv' avera lentiertie per Surviver.

Si deux Joytenants font Partic' enter eux per Fait per agreement, donques ils
sont several Tenants.

Mes si un Joyntenant grant c' que a luy appent a un Estranger, donques l'auter
Joyntenant and l'Estrange' sont Tenants en common.

Et mesque deux Tenants en common sont seize per my and per tout, and null
conust son several; uncore si un devie, lauter ne avera l'entiretie per
Surviver, mes l'Heire de celuy que devie avera le moyetle.

Et issint fi sont trois Joyntenants, and un de eux fait Feoffment de son part
a un auter, and le Feoffee devie; do^ques son Heir^ avera le tierce part, and
les auters deux sont Joyntenants come ils fueront, p^ ceo que eux deux sont
seisies per un joint Title.

Auxy si Terre soit done al baron and sa feme, and le baron alien and devie, le
feme recovera lentiertie: Mes si ils fueront Joyntenants devant le Coverture
do^ques en tiel case il recovera forsque le moietie.

Si Terre soit done al baron and sa feme, and al tierce person, si le tierce
person grant ceo que a luy appent, la mo ^ tie passa per cel Grant; p^ ceo que
le baron and sa feme sont forsque un person en le Ley, and en cest case ils
nount en droit forsque le moietie.

Auxy si deux Joyntenants sont des Terres en Vilie que est Borough-English, lou
Terre est devisable; and l'un per son Testament devisa ceo que a luy appent a
un Estranger, and devie; cest Devise est void, and le auter avera lentiertie
per Surviver, pur ceo que le Devise ne poit p^nder effect tanque apres le mort
le Devisor; and im^ediatem^t apres le mort le Devisor le droit devient al auter
Joyntenant per Surviver, que ne claim riens per le Devisor, mes en son droit
demesne per Surviver. Mes auterm^t est de Parceners seisies des Terres
devisables, causa qua supra.

Journies accounts.
JOurnies accounts (Dietae computatae) est un term en le Ley que est entendu
en cest mann^: Si un Brief soit abate sans le default le Plaintiff on Demandant,
il poit purchase un novel Br^e, que si soit purchase per Journies accounts,
(cestascavoire, deins cy petite temps come il poit apres l'Abatem^t ^ l primer
Br^e,) donque cest second Br^e serra come u^ Continuance del prim^ Br^e, and
issint oustera l'Tenant ou Defendant de son Voucher, Plee de non-tenure,
Joyntenancy pleinment administer, etc. ou ascun aut' Plee que accrue sur matter
apres le date del prim^ Brief. Et quinze jours ont estr^ reputes un convenient
temps pur le purchase del novel Brief. Veies pur cest Brief per Journies
accounts, Spencers Case, Coke lib. 6. fol. 9. b.

Jointure.
Jointure est un Estate and Assurance fait al un Feme en consideration de
Marriage, p^ term de sa vie, ou auterm^t; come est mention en l'Statute 27
Hen. 8. cap. 10. soit il devant ou apres Marriage. Et si soit apres, donques el
poit a sa liberty apres le mort de sa baron refuser d'prender ou aver les
Terres issint assure p^ sa Jointure, and demand sa Dower a le Common Ley: Mes
si il soit fait devant Marriage, donque el ne poit refuse tiel Jointure, ne
aver Dower accordant al Common Ley, si non que quant el port sa Brief de Dower,
le Defendant plead tiel Plee que ne voile luy bar de sa Dower; sicome il d t
en Bar, que sa baron ne fuit seisie de tiel Estate de que il poit estre
endowe, ou ascun tiel Plee, and ne monstre que el ad un Jointure fait, etc. and
pur ceo demand Judgment de cel Action, ou ascun tiel semblable Plee, etc. Et
ceo fult le opinionn de Monsieur Brograve al son Lecture en Grays-Inne en
Summer, An. 1567. 18 Eliz. sur un branch del Statute fait, An. 27 H. B. cap.
10. concernant Joyntures and Dowers.

Et de ceux chooses de que un feme poite este endowe, el poit aver un Jointure;
come de Mines, Vesturam terrae, Boys, Villes, Isles, Meadows, and tiels
semblables. Item de un Advowson, Reversion dependant sur un Estate pur vie,
Windmill, hault Chamber, Rectory, and tiels auters; and ils sont appels
Tenements. Item dun Villeine, car il est Hereditament. Et de touts ceux profit
poit ven^ al feme. Mes de ceux chooses de que null profit poit vener, mes
plustoit un charge, un Jointure ne poit estre fait. Veies p^ c' matter Co. lib.
4. fol. 1. Vernon's Case.

Jurisdiction.
JUrisdiction est un dignity q^ un home ad per un povoir fair. Justice en
Causes de complaint fait devant luy.

Juris utrum.
JUris utrum est un Brief q^ gist pur le Successor Incumbent dun Benefice, pur
recover les Terres ou Tenem^ts apperteinants al Esglise, que fueront aliens per
son Predecessor. Et veies de ceo Fitz. N. B. fol. 48. R. and veies ap^s Tit.
Utrum.

Juror.
JUror est un de ceux 24 ou 12 homes q^ sont jure al ^ eliver le volerty sur
tiel Evidence come ils serra don touchant le matter en question: de queux veies
Fitz N. B. fol. 165. D. and l' Stat. 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. for returning able
and sufficient Jurors.

Justice seat.
JUstice seat est le plus hault Court q^ est (...) e^ un Forest, and cest
touts temps te^us devant le Sn^r Chief Justice en Air del Forest, (...) un
(...) mons per 40 jou ^ s devant. Et la les Judgments sont touts soits dones,
and Fines assesses p^ Offenses que fueront present as Courts del Attachments,
and les Offenders indicts as Swainmotes. Veies de cest Court Manw. Forest
Leys, cap. 24. fol. 238. b.

Justices en Eire.
JUstices en Eire. Veies Eire.

Justicies.
JUsticies est un Brief direct al Viscount pur l' dispatch del Justice en
ascuns special cases en son County Court, des queu ^, il ne poit per son
ordinary poyar tener Plee la. Et de ceo poies veier Precedents en Fitzh. N. B.
fol. 117. C. en Account, and fol. 152. B. en Annuity, and fol. 119. G. en Det,
and plusors auters. Et est appel un Justicies, pur ceo que est un Com^ission al
Viscount ad justiciandum aliquem; and ne require ascun Return ou Certificate
de c' que il ad fait.

K.
Keelage.
KEelage, en Latin Killagium, est un Custom pay al Hartlepoole en Durham, pur
chescun neif veignant en ceo Port. Rot. Parl. 21. E. 1.

Kiddle.
KIddle ou Kidel, est un Dam ou Wear en un River. Omnes Kidalli deponantur de
caetero penitus per Thamesiam and Medweyam and per totam Angliam, nisi per
costeram Maris. Magna Char. cap. 24.

Kings silver.
KIngs silver est, l' Argent que est debite al Roy en le Court de Common Plees,
p^ un License y concesse al ascun home a passer un Fine. Coke, 6. fol. 39, and
43.

Kintal.
KIntal est un Pois, communement d'Cent livres, greinder ou meins, selon le
Usage de diverse Nations. Monsieur Plowden en l' Case de Reniger and Fogassa
fait mention de c' parol.

Knight Service.
Knight Service fuit un Tenure per quel pleusures Terres en cest Nation fuer^
tenus del Roy. Mes il est abolie per Statute 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

L.
Laches.
LAches ou Lasches, est un veil parol Francois, que signify Negligence, come
appiert en Littl. sect. 403, and 726. lou Laches del Entry nest riens forsque
un Neglect en le infant p^ enter. Issint que moy semble que poit estre un vieux
parol Anglois. Et qo^t nous diomus, Icy est Laches d'Entrie, est tant adire
come, ley est Lache del Entry. Uncore jeo trove que ( Lascher) en Francois est
Laxare, and ( Lasche) significat Ignavum vel Flaccidum: and pur ceo poit vener
auxy del Francois. Car Etymoligies so^t diverse, and plusors foits ad placitum.

Lagan.
LAgan est tiel parcel des Biens come les Mariners en le peril del Naufrage
jectont horse del Niefe; and p^ ceo que ils scavoient que les biens sont
ponderous, and voilont sink, ils liont as eux un Boy ou Cork, al intent que
poient eux trover, and re-aver. Si l' Niefe soit merge, ou auterm^t perish,
ceux biens sont appels Lagan ou ligan, a ligando: and cy longem^t come ils
continue sur le Mer, ils appertinent al Admiral; mes sils sont jects sur le
Tr^e, adonque ils sont appels Wreck, and apperteinent a celuy que avoit le
Wreck, come appiert en Coke, l. 5. f. 106.

Lageman.
LAgeman est Homo Legalis seu legitimus, tiel que nous appellom', Good men of
the Jury. Le parol est trove en Dooms day-book.

Land-cheap.
LAnd-cheap est un payment de 10 d. les deniers pur chescu ^ Mark del purchase
des terrs deins le Borough de Maldon e^ Essex, per perscription. Quel vide H.
25, 26. Car. 2. Roll 706. en. B. R.

Lapse.
LApse (Lapsus) est l'Omission del Patron p^ presenter al Esgilse de son
Patronage deins size mois apres Voydance per mort, ou prisel del auter Benefice
sans qualification, ou notice a luy done del Resignation ou Deprivation del
present Incumbent; per que Neglect Title accrue al Ordinary pur collater al
dit Esglise.

Larcenie.
LArcenie est un tortius Prisel des biens d'un auter ho^e, mes nemy de son
person, ove un meant d'eux embi.

Et Larcenie est en deux sorts; l'un issint appel simplem^t, and l'auter Petit
Larcenie.

Le primer est lou le chose emblee exceeda le value de 12 d. and ceo est
Felony.

L' auter (que e ^ t appel Petit Larcenie) est lou le chose emble ne exceda le
value de 12 d. and ceo nest Felony.

Last.
LAst signify un certain Pois ou Burden; come un Last de Herring est 10000,
Anno 31 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 2. un Last de Hides est douze dozen, Anno 1 Jac. c.
33.

Lastage.
LAstage est, quietum esse de quadam Consuetudine exacta in Nundin' and Market,
pro rebus cariandis ubi homo vult.

Latitat.
LAtitat est un Br^e per que touts homes en Personal Actions sont orig ^
nalment appels en Bank le Roy ^ e responder. Et est appel Latitat, p^ ceo que
est suppose per le Br^e que le Defendant ne poit estre trove en le County del
Middlesex, come appiert per le Return del Viscount de c' County, mes que
Latitat e^ a ^ ' County: and p^ ceo al Visc' de ceo County est cest Br^e
direct p^ luy prender.

Law.
LAw. Veies Ley.

Law-day.
LAw-day signify un Leet ou Turn del Visc', come appiert per le Stat. 1 E.
4. c. 2. lou le Turn le Visc' est issint appel, and 9 H. 7. f. 21. b. and
plusors aut's Livres, lou u^ Leet est issint appel. Veies Smith de Repub.
Anglorum, l. 2. c. 21.

Lawing of Dogs.
LAwing of Dogs. Veies Expeditate.

Lawless man.
LAwless man est il q^ est extra Legem, un Outlaw. Br. l. 3. tract. 2. c. 11.
number. 1.

Leases.
LEasis sont Graunts ou Demises, per un q^ ad ascun Estate e^ Hereditaments,
(...) ceux Hereditaments al auter p^ mein ^ temps. Et c' sont en diverse
manners; cestascavoire, p^ term de Vie, p^ Ans, p^ auter Vie, and a Volunt.

Auxy un Lease de Tr^e est auxy bone sans Fait, come per Fait.

Mes en u^ Lease p^ term de Vie il covient de done Liverie and Seisin sur le
Terre, ou auterment riens passera per le Grant, p^ ceo q^ ils sont appelles
Frank-tenements.

Auxy u^ Lease d'un Com^on ou Rent ne poit este bone sans Fait.

Mes d'un Parsonage que ad Glebe il est bone sans Fait, pur ceo q^ le Glebe del
Esglise, que est le Principal, poit assets bien passer sans Fait; and issint
les Dismes and Offerings, que sont come accessorie al Esglise.

Mes Dismes and Offerings per soy ne poient este lesses sans Fait, ut dicitur.

Leet.
LEet est un Court derive horse del Turn le Visc', and inquire des touts
Offenses south l'degree (...) Hault Treason qu'x sont com^ises encont' le
Coro^e and Dignity le Roy. Mes ceux Offenses queux sont punies per perde de
vie ou member sont solement inquirables la, and destre certifies ouster as
Justices del Assise. Veies Stat. 1 E. 3. c. 17.

Legacy.
Legacy (Legatum) est un t'me del Civil Ley, and est ceo q^ nous en nostre Ley
appellomus un Devise, viz. Tr^es ou Biens done al asc' per le Volunt ou
Testament d'un auter. Veies pius Tit. Devise devant.

Lessor and Lessee.
LEssor est celuy que lessa Tr^es ou Tenements al aut' pur term devie, ans, ou
a volunt: Et celuy a que le Lease est fait est appel Lessee.

Levant and couchant.
LEvant and Couchant est dit, quant les Beasts ou Cattle d'un Estranger sont
venue e^ le Tr^e d'un aut' home, and la ont remain un certain bone space de
temps.

Levari facias.
LEvari facias est un Brief direct al Viscount p^ le Levier d'un sum des
deniers sur les Tr^es, Tenem^ts, and Chattels cestuy que ad forfeit un
Recognisance, Veies F. N. B. f. 265. D.

Ley.
LEy est, quant Action de Det est port verse un sur asc' secret Agreem^t ou
Contract ewe perent' les parties sans Especialtie mo^stre, ou aut' mtter de
Record; come en un Action de Detinue per ascuns biens ou chattels accommoda ou
relinque ove le Defendant; donques le Defendant poit gager son Ley, sil voile,
cestascavoire, jurer sur un Livre, and certain persons ove luy, q^ il ne
detain les biens, ou doit riens al Plaintise, en manner and form come il ad
declare.

Et c'est allow solement en cases de Secrecy, ou le Plaintiff ne poit prover
le Surmise de son Suit per ascun Fait on Overt actio^: car le Defendant poit
ceo discharge secretment perenter eux, sans asc' Acquittance ou Public act.
Et p^ ceo en Action (...) Det sur un Lease per ans, ou sur Arrearages d'
Account devant Auditors assign, home ne gagera son Ley.

Mes quant un gagera son Ley, il amesnera ovesque luy vj, viij, ou xij de ces
Vicines, come le Court luy assignera, de jurer ovesque luy; mult semble al
Serem^t que eux fesoient que son uses en le Civil Ley, de purger auters d'ascun
crime al eux impute, que sont appel Compurgators.

Nota que l' Offer de fair le Serem^t est appel le Gager del Ley, and quant il
est accomplish, donques est appel le Fesans del Ley.

Et si le Viscount en ascun Action return, que il eyt summon le Defendant
d'appeare en Court a ascun jour a responder le Plaintiff, a quel jour il fait
Default; Process serra agard verse luy, de vener and save, ou excuse son
default; que est tant adire, come a purgare moram, ou auterment de perder le
chose demand: Et le Defendant vient, and jure que il ne fuit summon, que est
appel gager del Ley, donques il doit ceo fair al jour assign, ove ^ ij
auters. Et en fesans del Ley il doit sur son Serement affirmer directment al
contrary de c'q^ est impute a luy: Mes les auters dirra seulm^t, que eux
entende que il dit le verity.

Libel.
LIbel (Libellus) est un term del Civil Ley, and signify l' Original
Declaration en ascun Action; and issint est use en les Statutes, 2 Hen. 3. cap.
3. and 2 E. 6. cap. 13. Et famosus Libellus signify properment en nostre Ley
u^ Scandalous report ^ l asc' home illoyalment publie en escript. Veies (...)
ceo Coke l. 5. f. 125. a.

Liberate.
LIberate est un Garrant issuant horse del Chancerie al Treasurer, Chamberlains,
and Barons ^ l Exchequer, ou Clerk del Hamper, etc. p^ le Paym^t d' ascun
annual Pension, ou auter Sum grant south le Grand Seal, Regist. orig. 193.
Ou ascun foles al Viscount, etc. F. N. B. fol. 132. pur le deliverie ^ Terres
on Biens prise sur Forfeiture dun Recognisance, Fitz. N. B. 131, 132. Coke,
lib. 5. Fulwoods Case, fol. 64, 66, 67. Auxy a un Jailer del Justices, pur le
deliverie ^ un Prisoner que ad mitta eins Bail pur son Appearance.

Est auxi un auter Brief fait horse del Petty-bag Office en Chancery, sur Stat'
Staple, puis u^ extent sur ceo return; per quel le Viscount return q^ il aver
liver la terr extend, al Conuzee: Quel esteant file, il poit donques (and nient
devant) porter son Action d Ejectment a recover possession des terrs extend.

Liberate probanda.
Liberate probanda. Vi ^ de ceo en le Title Nativo habendo.

Librata Terrae.
LIbrata Terrae contein^ quater Ox-gangs, and chescun Ox-gang 13 Acres (...)
Ter^. Skene deverb. signif. verbo Bovatae Terrae.

Lien.
LIen est paroll de deux significations, Personal lien come Bond, Covenant ou
Contract. Et real lien come Judgment, Statute, Recognizance, ou Original br^e
versus un Heir queux oblige and affect la trree.

Ligeance.
LIgeance est un voir^ and loyal Obedience del Subject due a son Sovereign;
and cest Ligeance, Ligeance que est un incident inseparable a chesc' Subject,
est en quater manners: le primer est natural, le second acquirus, le tierce
local, and le quart legal. De touts queux vous poies lier mult bone erudition
en Coke lib. 7. Calvin's Case.

Limitation.
LImitation est un Assignment de space ou temps, deins quel cestuy que voil'
suer p^ ascuns Terres ou Hereditements doit prover, que il ou son Ancestor fuit
feisie del chose demand, ou auterment ne mainteinera son Suit ou Action; quel
Assignments sont faits per diverse Statutes: Com^ le Stat. de Merton, cap. 8.
Westminster. 1. cap. 38. 32. Hen. 8. cap. 2. etc.

Liverie de Seisin.
LIverie de Seisin est un Ceremony use en Conveyance de Terres ou Tenements,
lou un Estate en Feesimple, Fee-taile, ou u^ Franktenement passera. Et il est
un Testmoigne de le voluntary Departing (...) luy que fait le Liverie del
chose de que Liverie est fait. Et le resceit del Liverie est un voluntary
Acceptance per le auter party de tout ceo de que auter ad luy deveste. Et fuit
invent come un overt and notorious chose, per means de que le common people
poient aver Intelligence de Passing ou Alteration de Estates de ho^e al home,
que per ceo ils poient estre le melieur able pur trier en que le droit and
possession de Terres and Tenements fueront, sils doient estre empanel en Jures,
ou auterment one a fair concernant ceo.

Le com^on manner de Liverie de Seisin est en cest sort Si il foit en l'overt
Champe, ou ne sont Edifices ou Meason, donques un que poit lier prist le Fait
en son main^ si l' Estate passera per Fait, and declara al eux que la soit le
cause de lour vener la ensemble, etc. and donq's overtm^t lia le Fait, ou
declare l'effect de ceo; and apres que il est seal, le party que est a
departer ove le Terre prist le Fait en sa main^s ovesque un Clod del terre, and
u^ Twigge ou Bough, si y ad ascun la, q^ il deliver al auter party en le nosme
de Possession ou seisin, accordant al form and effect del Fait la lie ou
declare. Mes sil soit un Habitation ou Edifiee sur le Terre, donques ceo est
fait a Door de ceo, null edeant relinquish a cest temps deins le Meason; and le
party deliver touts les avantdits, ovesque l' Annuel de le Door, en nosme de
Seisin ou Possession; and il que receiva le Liverie entra primes sole, and
shutta le door, and presentment overt ceo, and lessa eux eins, etc. Sil soit
de un Meason a que est null Terre, le Liverie est fait and Possession prise per
le deliverie del Annuel de le Door and Fait solement. Et lou il est sans Fait,
de Terres ou Tenements, la le party declare per Parol, devant resmoignes, l'
Estate ovesquell entende de departer, and donques deliver Seisin ou Possession
en manner avantdit: Et issint le Terre ou Tenement passera cybien come per
Fait, and ceo per force de Liverie de Scisin. Il suit agree en Gray's Inn per
Master Snagge, al son Lecture la en Summer, Anno 1574. Que si un Feoffor
deliver la Fait en view del Terre, en nosme de Seism, que il est bone, pur ceo
que il ad un Possession en luy mesme. Mes auterment est dun Attorney, car il
doit aler al Terre, and prise Possession luy mesme ^ devant que il poit doner
Possession al auter, accordant al parols de son Garrant, etc. Et lou Liverie ^
e Seisin est per le View, si le Feoffee ne entra pas puis, etc. null ohose
passa, car il doit enter en fait.

Lollards.
LOllards fueront Dogmatists en Religion en le temps E. 3. and H. 5. en ceux
temps fueront reputes Heretics; come appiert per le Stat. en 5 R. 2. cap. 5.
and 2 H. 5. cap. 7. Queux Stat. vous troveres repealed en 1 E. 6. c. 12. and 1
El. cap. 1. Avoient lour denomination (come ascuns pensolent) del un Gualt.
Lolhard un Garmanois, qui vixit circa An. Dom. 1315. and fuit l' prim^ author
(...) cest Sect.

Lord en Gross.
LOrd en Gross e^ il que e^ Sn^r sans Man^or, come le Roy e^ respect de son
Coron^, F. N. B. fol. 5. Un ho^e fait Done en tail de tout son Terre, a tener
de luy, and morust; son Heir and rien forsque Seigniorie en Gross.

Lotherwit.
LOtherwit est, quod capiatis emendas ab ipso qui corrumpit vestram Nativam
sine licencia vestra.

Lushborow.
LUshborow fuit un counterseitde Coin^ en le te^ps E. 3. fait ouster le Mer, en
similitu ^ es deniers Anglois, and port eins pur deceiver le Roy and ses
Subjects. Et p^ ceo est declare destre Treason per le Statute 25 E. 3. Stat. 5.
c. 2. p^ ascun home de ceo porter deins le Realm, sil scavoit q^ est faux.

M.
Maegbote.
Maegbote Compensation pro Cognato interfecto.

Maihem ou Maime.
MAihem est, lou per l' cortious act (...) auter ascun Member est damnifie ou
toll; per que le party est fait imperfect a combat: Come si un Osse soit
prise horse del Test, ou un debruise en ascun auter pert del Corpse, ou un Pee,
ou Main^, ou Digit, ou joint ^ un Pee; ou asc' Member soit scy; ou per asc'
plage les Nerves sont fait (...) shrinker, ou les Digits fait curve; ou si un
Oyel soit mise horse, anterior Dents ^ bruise, ou asc' auter chose en le Corpse
dun home; per reason de quel il est fait le meins able pur defender luy mesme,
ou offend son enemy.

Mes le scier de un Orial ou Nase, ou lenfriendrer ^ l De^ts moliers, ou tiels
semblables, nest asc' Maihem, p^ ceo q^ il est plus un Deformity de le corpse
q^ u^ Defect ^ l Strength; and ceo est communement try per l' inspection del
party per les Justices. Et fi les Justices sont en doubt si le damage soit un
Maihem ou nemy, lls use and voilent de lour grand discretion prender' aid and
opinion de ascun credit Surgeon, pur consider de ceo, devant que ils determine
sur le Case.

Mainpernable.
MAinpernable: q^ poit estr^ mainprise ou delivered al Mainpernors. Veies le
Statute de Westminster. 1. Cap. 15. queux persons sont mainpernable, queux nemy.

Mainprise.
MAinprise est, quant un home est arrest per Capias, les Judges poient deliver
son corpse a certain homes pur garder, and de luy mesne devant eux a certain
jour; and eux sont appelles Mainpernors: and si le party ne appear al jour
assign, l' Mainpernors serro^t amercie.

Maintenance.
MAintenance est, lou asc' home done ou ^ liver a u^ aut', que est Plaintiff ou
Defendant en asc' Action, asc' snmme d' argent ou aut' chose pur maintainer son
Plee, ou fait extreme labor pur luy qn^t il and riens a ceo fair; donq's
laut' pertie grieve avera verse luy un Brief appelle Br^e de Maintenance.

Manbote.
MAnbote signify u^ Pecuniarie co^pensation p^ le occider d'un ho^e. Lambert.

Mandamus.
MAndamus est un Br^e que issuist al Escheator p^ le trover dun Office apres le
mort dun que morust Tenant le Roy; and est tant u^ ove le Br^e de Diem clausit
extremum, sinon que le Br^e de Diem clausit extremum issuist deins l' an apres
le mort, and le Mandamus ne issuist tanque apres le an, and en case lou ne fuit
ascun Diem clausit extremum sue horse, ou al meins nient sue cum effectu. Fitz.
N. B. fol 253. B. C. Veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Sont auxi auter sort de Mandamus, grant sur motion en B. le Roy, al Evesque
d'admit Executor a prover un Testament, ou a granter Administration. Styles
Rep. 78. Et u^ auter a maunder al Corporatio^s a restituer Aldermen, and auters
al Officers horse de qu'x ils sont illoyalm^t expel. Veies 11 Rep. James Bag's
Case.

Manor.
Manor est compound de diverse chooses, come de un Meason, Terre arable,
Pasture, Pree, Boys, Rents, Advowson, Court-Barou, and tiels semblables, queux
font u^ Manor. Et ceo doit estre per ancient continuance de temps, cujus con ^
rarium memoria hominum non existat: car a ceo jour un Manor ne poit estr^
fait, p^ ceo q^ un Court Baron ne poit estr^ fait ore, and u^ Manor ne poit
estr^ sans u^ Court Baron, and Suitors ou Franktenants, deux al ^ meins; car si
touts les Frank-ten ^ ments forsque un escheate al Seignior, ou sil purchase
touts preter un, la son Manor est ale, pur ceo que il ne poit estre u^ Manor
sans un Court Baron, (come avantdit;) and un Court Baron ne poit estre tenus
mes devant Suitors, and nemy devant un Suitor; and ideo lou forsque un
Frank-tenem^t ou Frank-tena^t est, la ne poit este Manor properme^t, com^t en
com^on parlant ceo poit estr^ issint appel.

Mansion.
MAnsion (Mansio) est plus usualment prise pur le chief Message ou Habitation
del Senior dun Manor, le Mease del Manor en que il plustoft reside, Capital
Messuagium, come est appel; de que le feme per le Statute de Mag. Chart. cap.
7. avera sa Quarentine.

Manucaptio.
MAnucaptio est un Brief que gist pur ce ^^ uy que est arrest ou indire d'
Felony, and offer sufficient Sureties pur son Appearance; mes le Viscount, ou
cestuy que concern, ne voit luy admit destre bail: donque il avera cest
Brief, eux mandant de luy lesser a Manprise. Veies de ceo Fitz. N. B. fol. 249.
G.

Manumission.
MAnumission est le fesans dun Villein destre franhe, and puit estre en deux
sorts; le un est un Manumission explicita, lauter un Manumission implicata.

Manumission Explicita est quant le Sn^r fait un Fai ^ al son Villein pur luy
enfranchiser per cest parol ( Manumittere,) quod idem est quod extra manum vel
extra po ^^ statem al ^ erius ponere.

Le manner de Manumitting ou Enfranchising en re^ps pass plus usualment fuit
issint: Le Sn^r (en presence de ses vicines) prist le Villeine per le Test,
disant, Jeo voile que cest home soit frank; and ove ceo il luy mise avaunt horse
de ses maines, and per c'il fuit frank.

Manumiffion implicita sans cest parol ( manumittere) est, quant le S ^ r fait
un Obligation a son Villein a payer a luy money al un certain jour, ou luy sue
lou il poit enter sans Suit, ou grant luy un Annuitie, ou lessa Terre a luy per
Fait pur ans, ou vie, and en diverse semblables cases; le Villein per ceo est
fait frank.

Marchers.
MArchers sont les Noblehomes inhabitants sur les Marches d' Gales and Escose,
q^ e^ te^ps deva^t avoie^t lour private Leys, sicome fuissent Roys; and pur ceo
en Statutes d' 2 H. 4. c. 28. 26 H. 8. c. 6. 27 H. 8. c. c 26. and 1 E. 6. c.
10. ^^ s so^t appels Seigniors Marchers.

Marches.
MArches sont les Limits enter nous and Gales ou Escose, issint appels ou del
parol German ^ is (March) que signify Li ^^ tem, ou del parol Francois
(Marque) cest ascavoire, un Sign del distinction, ceux esteants le notorious
Distinctions de deux diverse Regions. De ceux poies lier en les Statutes de 4
Hen. 5. cap. 7. 22 E. 4. cap. 8. 24 H. 8. cap. 9. and (...).

Marshall.
MArshall est un gen^al perol pur mults Officers en Angleter': come l' Sn^r ou
Count Marshal, de q l me^tio^ est fait e^ les Statutes (...) 13 R. 2. c. 2. and
1 H. 4. c. 7, and 14. le Marshal del Hostel le Roy, de que poies lier en F. N.
B. f. 241. B. and en le Stat. de Artic. sup. Chart. c. 3. 18 E. 3. c. 7. 2 H 4.
c. 23. 15 H 6. c. 1. and auters. Sont auxy auters inferior Marshals mentions
e^ nr^e Livres: come le Marshall de Bank le Roy, en le Statute 5 E. 3. c. 8.
and en F. N. B. f. 251. l. que avoit le custody ^ s touts les prisoners de ceo
Court; and le Marshal del Exchequer, mention en le Statute de 51 H. 3. Stat. 5.
appel le Statute del Eschequer. Marshall est un parol Francois, and est tant a
dire come Magister equitum: car semble que venust del parol Germanois
(Marschalk) que ad ceo signification.

Marshalsea.
MArshalsea est le Court ou seat del Marshal del Hostel le Roy, de que poies
lier a large en Coke, l. 6. f. 20. B. and l. 10. f. 68. B. Est auxy prise pur
le Prison pertinant al Court del Bank le Roy, de que le Marshal de ceo Court
est le Guardian; car issint sont les forms des Bills la, que A queritur de B in
custodia Marescalli Marescalciae Domini Regis, etc.

Maugre.
MAugre est un parol compound des deux parols Francois (Mal) and ( Gree:)
issint q^ est tant adire come invito animo, ou en despite d' u^ auter. Et
issint est use en Littleton, sect. 672. lou est dit, q^ le Baron and Feme
serront remits maugre le Baron, cestacavoire, en despite ou enconter le volunt
le Baron.

Maxims.
Maxims sont les Foundations del Ley, and les Conclusions (...) Reason, and
sont Causes efficient, and certain universal Propositions cy sure and perfect,
q^ ils ne poient estr^ a ascun temps impeach ou impugn, mes doient touts foits
estr^ observe, and tenus come fort Principles and Authorities de luy mesmes,
nient obstant ils ne point estr^ prove per force d' Argument ou Demonstration
Logical, mes sont conus per Induction per le voy de Sense and Memory. Pur
example, il est un Max. q^ Si un hom. ad issue deux Fits per diverse venters,
and l'un purchase Terres en fee, and morust sans issue, l' auter ne unques
serra son Hei ^, etc.

Item il est un aut' Maxim, que Terres discendera del Pere al Fits, mes nemy
del Fits al Pere, car ceo est un Ascension, etc. Et diverse tiels semblables il
y ad, don't veies le Doctor and Student.

Maynour.
MAynour est, quant un Laron ad emblee, est p^sue ove Hue and Cry, and prise,
ayant ceo trove ovesque luy que il ad emblee, ceo est appelle Maynour. Et
issint nous communem^t use p^ dire, quant nous trovomus un fesant d'un illoyal
act, que nous luy prist ovesque le Maynour ou manner.

Mean.
Mean. See Mesne.

Mease.
MEase (M ^ ssuagium) semble de vener del parol Francois Maison ou Mansion, q^
nest aut' forsque u^ Lieu de abider ou habitation. Et unc' Message en nr^e Ley
comprehend plus q^ le very Lieu del habitation: car Domus and Messuagium
differ en ceo que Domus ne poit estre intend aut' que les chooses en Building;
mes Messuagium serra dit tout le Mansion-lieu, and le Curtelage serra prise
come parcel d'un Message, 20 H. 7. Keloway, f. 57. a. Et per le nosme d'un
Message le Garden and le Curtelage passera, Plowden, f. 171. a.

Measondue.
MEasondue est un appellation done as diverse Hospitals en cest Realm, que
issint so^t appel, An. 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 23. and 15 Car. 2. c. 7. Et venust
(...) Francois (Maison de Dieu) and nest plus que Dom. Dei ou Gods house e^
Anglois.

Medietas Linguae.
MEdietas linguae est un Inquest impannel sur ascun cause, de que l'un moietie
est des Denizens, l'auter A ^ iens; and est use en Plees enter parties, don't
l'un est un Denizen, and auter un Alien. Et cest manner de Trial fuit primes
done per le Stat. de 27 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 8. Et per le Statute de 28 E. 3.
cap. 13. fuit grant en cases lou le Roy mesme fuit party ove un Alien.

Melius inquirendo.
MElius inquirendo est un Br^e que est direct al Escheator pur un second
Inquisition destre fait, quant est asc' suspicion del partiality en un
Inquisition fait sur un Diem clausit extremum ap^s le mort le Tenant le Roy.
Veies F. N. B. fol. 255. C.

Merchenlage.
MErchenlage est un de ceux trois Leys horse des queux Gulielme le Conqueror
frame nostre Common Ley, ove le mixture des Leys de Normandy. Et fuit le Ley
des Mercians, quant ils avoient le regiment del tierce part de cest Realm.

Mesnaltie.
MEsnaltie est le droit de Mesne; come le Mesnaltie est extinct. Veil N. B. f.
44.

Mesne.
MEsne est, lou l'Owner del Terres ou Tenements ceux teigne d'un per certain
Services, and il ceux tenoit dun auter per autiels ou auter Services; la cestuy
que tient les Tr^es est appel Tenant peravail, and cestuy de que il reign est
appel Mesne, and cestuy de que le Mesne tenoit est appel Seignior Paramount. Et
e^ cest case, si le Seignior Paramount distraine le Tenant pur le Service le
Mesne, que luy doit acquit al Seignior Paramount, donques le Tenant, avera un
Br^e verse le Mesne, q^ est appel Brief de Mesne; and si il ne acquit' le Tenant
donques le Mesne perdra le service le Tenant, and serra forejudge (...) son
Seigniorie, and le Tenant serra Tenant immediate al chief Seignior, and ferra
luy mesmes les Services and Suits come le Mesne fist.

Message.
Message. Veies Mease.

Metropolitan.
Metropolitan, signify les Archievesques, de queux Canterbury, est nosme
totius Anglicae Primas and Metropol. Et York semble sans le parol, Totius.

Miscreant.
MIscreant est, un q^ est pervert al Heresy ou faux Religion. Bro.
Presentation 54.

Mise.
MIse est un parol Francois, and signify tant come Expensum en Latin; and
issint est frequentment use en les Entries des Ju ^ gments ou Personal Actions:
quant le Plaintiff recover, l' Entry est, quod Recuperet damna sua a tiel
value, and tant pro misis and custagiis La est auxy un auter acception ou
signification de cest parol en Ley, lou est prise pur l' Issue ^ estre try per
Battle ou Grand Assise. Et issint est use en Littleton, sect. 478, 482. and
diverse auters, lou joinder del Mise sur le m ^ re droit est mitter ceo en
issue, que avoit le melieur ou plus clear droit.

Misericordia.
MIsericordia est use en le Common Ley pur un Amerciament ou Peine mife sur
asc' p^ un offense; come lou le Plaintiff ou Defendant en asc' Action est
amerce, l' Entry est touts foits, Ideo in misericordia, etc. Et est p^ c'appel
Misericordia, come Fitzh. dit N. B. fol. 75 H. eo que doit estr^ forsque petite
and meins que le offense, and salvo Contenemento, come le Statute de Mag.
Chart. cap. 14. perle. Et pur ceo si home soit outragiousment amercie en un
Court que est de Record, come en Court Baron, etc. la est un Br^e appel
Moderata Misericordia destre direct al Sn^r ou Baily, eux commandant que ils
prenderont moderates Amerciaments solonque le quantity del trespass. Et de ceo
veies Fitz. N. B. fol. 75. A. and Moderata Misericordia apres.

Misnomer.
MIsnomer est le Mistake ^ un Nom^, ou le using de un Nom^ p^ un auter. Veies
Broke, tit. Misnomer.

Misprision.
MIsprision est, qn^t ascun sciet que un auter ad fait Treason ou Felony, and
il ne voile luy discover al Roy, ou son Council, ou a asc' Magistrate, mes
conceala son offense. Diverse auters offenses sont appelle Misprision: sicom^ un
Chaplein ad fix un ancient Seal dun Patent a un novel Patent de Non-residence,
ceo fuit tenus des ^ re Misprision de Treason tantum, and null counter ^ eit del
Seal del Roy. Issint e^ tenus en 37 H. 8. Bro. tit. Treason 3. in fine: mes 2
H. 4. fol. 25. A. est adjudge contra; and Stamf. Pl. cor. fol. 3. B. cite ceo
p^ Treason; and issint est tenus a cest jour.

Item si un auter sc ^ et Money destre faux, and port ceo horse de Ireland en
Angleterre, and utter ceo en paym^t, ceo est forsque Misprision de Treason, and
nemy Treason: and issint est en diverse semblables cases.

En touts cases de Misprision de Treason, le party offender forfeitera ses
Biens a touts jours, and les profits de ses Terres pur son vie, and son Corpse
al prison al pleasure del Roy.

Et pur Misprision de Felony ou Trespass, l' Offender serra commit al Prison,
tanque il ad trove Sureties ou Pledges p^ son Fine, que serra assesse per le
discretion de les Justices devant que il fuit convict.

Et nota, Que en chescun Treason ou Felony est include Misprision; and lou
asc' ad fait Treason ou Felony, le Roy poit causer luy destre endicte and
arraigne forsque de Misprision solement, si il voile. Vide plus de ceo Stamf.
lib. 1. cap. 39.

Mittimus.
MIttimus est un Brief per q^ Records sont transfer^ del un Court al auter:
ascun foits immediatement, come appiert en le Stat. 5 R. 2. cap. 15. come horse
del Bank le Roy en l' Exchequer; and asc' foits per un Certiorari en le
Chancerie, and dillonques per un Mittimus en auter Court, come poies veier en
28 H. 8. Dyer, fol. 29. a, b. and 29 H. 8. Dyer, fol. 32. a, b.

Cest parol est auxy use pur le Precept que est direct per un Justice del Peace
al Jailer p^ le receiver and safement garder dun Felon, ou auter Offender,
commit per le dit Justice al Jail.

Moderata Misericordia.
MOderata Misericordia est un Brief que gist lou come est amercie en
Court Baron ou County plus que devoit est re: donques il avera cest Brief
direct al Viscount, si soit en le County, ou al Bailiff, si soit en
Court Baron, eux commandant que ils ne luy amerciont mes eyent regard al
quantity del Trespass: sils ne obey cel Br^e, donques issera verse eux un
Sicut alias, and Causam nobis significes, and apres ceo un Attachment.

Modus decimandi.
MOdus decimandi est, denyers on auter chose de value done antiuaiment en lieu
de dismes: Le trial de quel appertain al common Ley, and nemy al ascun Court
Christian. Ridleys view of the Civil Law, 141. En quel il dit que en le temps
de William le primer Roy fuit un modus decimandi per totum regnum pro omnibus
rebus.

Monstrans de Droit.
MOnstrans de Droit est un Suit en le Chancery p^ le Subject destr^ restore as
Tr^s and Tenements queux il monstre destr^ son Droit, mes sont per Office
troves destre en le possession dun q^ darreinment morust, per quel Office le
Roy est entitle al un Chattel, Frank- ^ enement, ou Inheritance en les dits
Terres. Et cest Monstrance de Droit est done per les Statutes (...) 34 E. 3.
cap. 14. and 36 E. 3. cap. 13. Veies Coke, lib. 4. fol. 54. B. en le Case del
Wardens and Communaltie des Sadlers.

Monstrans de Faits ou Records.
MOnstrans de Faits ou Records est sicome, pur example, un Action (...) Det
soit port envers A sur un Obligation per B, ou per Executors, etc. Apres le
Plaintiff ad delcare, il doit monstre son Obligation, and le Executor le
Testament, al Court. Et issint est de Records,

Et le diversity perenter Monstrance de Faits ou Records; and Oyer de Faits ou
Records, est issint: Il que plead le Fait ou Record; ou declare sur ceo, doit
monstre ceo; and lauter verse que tiel Fait ou Record est plead ou declare, and
est per ceo destre charge, poit demand Oyer de ceo Fait ou Record, que son
adversary port ou plead verse luy.

Monstraverunt.
MOnstraverunt est un Brief que gist pur l' Tenants en Ancient demesne, and est
direct al Seignour, luy commandant que il ne distraine son Tenant p^ fair auter
Service que il doit: and ils poient aver cest Brief direct al Vic', que il ne
suffer le Seigniour a distraine les dits Tenant pur fair auter Service.

Si les Tenants ne poient estre en quiet, ils poient aver un Attachment verse le
Sn^r, de appearer devant les Justices; and touts les nosmes des Tena^ts serront
mise en le Brief, coment que forsque un de eux foit grieve.

Auxy si a ^ cun Terre en Ancient demesne soit en variance enter les Fenants,
donques le Tenant issint grieve avera verse auter Brief quod vocatur Droit
close, secundum Confuetudinem Manerit; and ceo serra touts foits port en le
Court le Seigniour, and sur ceo il countera en le nature de quel brief il voit,
come son case gist: and cest Brief ne serra remove, si non p^ grand cause, ou
non-power de le Court.

Auxy si le Sn^r en auter lien horse de ancient Demesne distraine son Tenant de
fair auter Service que il doit, il avera Brief de Droit, appelle Ne injuste
vexes; and cest un Brief de Droit Patent, que serra try per Battle ou Grand
Assise.

Mortdancester.
MOrtdanc st ^ r ^ Vide devant en le Title Cosinage.

Mortagage, ou Morgage.
MOrtgage, ou Morgage est, quant un fait un Feoffment a un auter sur tiel
condition, que si le Feoffor paya al Feoffee a certain jour 40 l. ^ argent, que
adonque le Feoffor poit re-enter, etc. En ceo case le Feoffee est appel Tenant
en Morgage. Et ficome un home poit fair Feoffment en Fee en Morgage, issint il
poit fair Done en tail, ou Lease p^ vie ou p^ ans en Morgage. Et il semble
que la cause p^ que il est appel Morgage est, pur ceo que il estdit en anrust
si le Feoffor voile payer al jour limit l' argent ou non; and si il ne paya
pas, donque le Terre que il mist en gage sur condition (...) paym^t ^ le money
est ale de luy a touts jours, and issint mort a luy sur condition: mes si il
paya le money, donques est le gage mort qn^t a le Tenant, cestascavoit, le
Feoffee. Et p^ cest cause il est appel en Latin Mortuum vadium, come Littleton
dit; ou Mortuum vas, come jeo pense.

Auxy si Feoffm^t soit fait e^ Morgage sur condition, que si le Feoffor paya
tiel sum a tiel jour, etc. and le Feoffor. morust devant le jour, unco ^ si
le Heir le Feoffor paya le sum a mesme le jour al Feoffee, and le Feoffee
ceo refusa, le Heir le Feoffee poit enter, Mes en tiel case, si n ^ soit ascun
jour de payment express, donques tiel Tender del Heir est void, pur ceo que
quant le Feoffor morust, le temps del Tender est pass; auterm^t les Heirs le
Feoffor averont temps del Ten ^ a touts jours, que serra inconvenient, q^ un
avera un Fee-simple a luy and ses Heir^s defeasible touts foits a le pleasure
and volunt de auters. Mes en le primer case l' te^ps del sender ne fuit expire
per la mort le Feoffor.

Mortmaine.
MOrtmaine: lou Terres sont dones a Meason (...) Religion ou a un auter
Company q^ sont corporate per le Grant le Roy, cest Tre^ est devenus e^
Mortmaine, cest adire en Anglois, a dead hand; and donque le Roy ou le Sn^r de
que le Tr^e est tenus poit enter, come appiert per le Statute de Religiosis.
Auxy cy un fait Feoffment sur confidence a certain persons al oeps de un meason
de Religion, ou al oeps de ascun G ^ ld ou Fraternity corporate, il serra dit
Mortmain, and il encourage mesm^ le pain, ut patet per l' Statute, Anno 15 R. 2.

Mortuary.
MOrtuary (Mortuarium) est ceo Aver ou auter Chattel moveable, que, apres le
mort del owner, per le Custom des ascuns lieus, accrue al Parson, Vicar, ou
Priest del Paroche, en lieu ou satisfaction des Dismes ou Oblations oblites on
nient duement pays per cestuy que est mort, Veies ore l' Statute de 21 H. 8.
cap. 6. que limit le course and order del payment de ceux Mortuaries, ou de
deniers pur eux.

Mulier.
MUlier est up perol use en nostre Ley, mes come aptm^t jeo nepoy dier: car,
accorda^t al proper signification, Mulier est Foemina corrupta, sicome il est
use per Ulpianus en tiel man^; Si ego me Virgin^ emere putarem, cum esset
Mulier, emptio non valebat. Per c' poyes veir, que Mulier est un Feme que ad ew
le company ^ u^ ho^e. Mes a relinquisher l' droit significant, Mulier est
prise en nostre Ley pur u^ que est loyalment enge^der and nee; and est touts
foits contradistinguished ovesque u^ Bastard, solem^t p^ monstre un difference
pent' eux;come p^ example: Un ho^e ad un Fitz per un Feme devant Marriage; cest
issue est un Bastard, and illoyal: and ap^s il marry ove le Mere del Bastard,
and ont un aut' Fitz; cest second Fitz est appelle Mulier, cest adire, loyal,
and serra Heir a son pere; mes le auter ne poit estre Heir al ascun home, pur
ceo que il nest conus ne certain en le judgment del Ley que fuit son Pere,
and pur cest cause est dit destre nullius filius, ou filius populi, and issint
sans Pere, accordant al cestuy veil verses;

Cui Pater Populus, Pater est sibi nullus and omnis:

Cui Pater est Populus, non habet ipse Patrem.

Et touts foits vous troves cest addition al eux (Bastard eigne, and Mulier
puisne] quant ils sont compare ensemble.

Muniments.
MUniments (Munimenta) sont Evide^ces ou Escripts touchants le Possession ou
Inheritance dascun home, per queux il est able pur def^nd' l'E^^ate que il ad
Et ils sont issint appels del Latin parol Muvio, que signify pur defender ou
fortifier. Et 35 H. 6. f. 37. b. Wangford dit, que cest parol Muniment include
touts manners des Evidences, viz. Charters, Releases, and auters.

Murage.
MUrage (Muragium) est un Toll ou Tribute levy pur l' Repairer ou edifier des
public Mures. Veies Fitzh. N. B. fol 227. D. and l' Stat. 3 E. 1. cap. 30.

Murder.
MUrder est un voluntary Occider (...) un home sur malice prepense, and semble
^ e vener de le Saxon parol Mordren, que issint signify. Et Mordridus e^ le
Murderer tanque al cest jour ent' eux in Saxony, ^ que nous avomus mults (...)
nostr^ parolx, come ad estre sovent dit. Ou poit estre derive de Mort and dire,
quasi Mors dira. Veies Stanf. Plees del Coron. lib. 1.

Muster.
MUster venust del parol Francois Monstrer, id est, Monstrare; car de muster
nest riens forsque de monstre homes and lour Arms, and d'eux inroller en un
Livre, come appiert per l'Stat. de 18 H. 6. cap. 19.

N.
Naam.
NAam est le Pursuer on Apprehension des biens movables de un auter home: and
il est ou loyal, ou illoyal. Naam loyal est un reasonable Distress accordant
al value del chose pur que Distress est fait. Veies puis de ceo en Horns
Mirror de Justices, lib. 2.

Nativo habendo.
NAtivo habendo est un Brief que gist lou le Villeine ou Nief de un Seigniour
est ale ^ luy; donques le Seigniour avera cest Brief direct al Vic', que il
face le Sn^r aver son Villein ou Niefe, ovesque touts ses chateux.

En cest Brief plusors Villeins ou Nieses ne purront estr^ demandes que deux;
mes cy tant des Villeins ou Niefes que voilent joyntm^t poie^t porter Br^e de
Liberate probanda.

Et si un Nief port Brief de Liberate probanda avaunt que le Seigniour port
cest Brief, donques le Villein Plaintiff ou Niefe serra en peace jesque al venue
des Justices, ou auterm^t son Brief ne luy aidera.

Au ^ y si un Villein ad demur en Ancient demesne per un an and jour sans
claim del Seigniour, donques il ne poit luy seiser deins le dit Franchise.

Naturalization.
NAturalization. Veies Denizen.

Ne admittas.
NE admittas est un Brief direct al Evesque al Suit de un que est Patron de
ascun Esglise, and il doubta que l'Evesque voit collate un son Clerk, ou admit
un auter Clerk p^sent per auter home al dit Benefice: donques il q^ c' doubta
avera cest Brief, de inhibiter le Viscount de collater ou admitter ascun a son
Esglise.

Negativa pregnans.
NEgativa pregnans est, quant un Action, Information, ou tiel semblable Suite,
est port envers un, and le Defendant plead en Bar del Actio^ ou auterment un
Negative Plee, que nest cy special answer al Action, mes que il enclude auxy
un affirmat ^ ve. Come p^ example; Si u^ Br^e de Enter en casu proviso soit
port per cestuy en le Reversion sur Alienation per le Tenant pur vie, supposant
que il ad alien en Fee, (que est un Forselture de son Estate) and le Tenant al
Brief dit que il and alien en Fee; cest un Negative, en que est include un
Affirmative: car nient obstant il soit very que il and alien en Fee, uncore il
poit estre q' il ad fait un Estate en tail. (le q^l est auxy un Forfeiture)
and donques l' Entry de celuy en l'Reversion est loyal, etc.

Item en un Quare impedit, l'Roy fist Title de presenter a un Prebend, ratione
que les Temporalties de l'Evesquerle fueront en sa mains per le mort ^ W. nuper
Episcopum, etc. Le Defendant dit que ne voida pas, esteants les Temportalties
e^ les maines ^ l Roy per le mort de W. Cest un Negative pregnant; car il poit
estre en les maines del Roy auterment que per le mort de W. and il suffist al
Roy si soit en sa maines, etc.

Issint est lou un Information fuit port in Scaccario verse J. S. pur ceo que il
achate lanes pere^ter Sheringtemps and Assumption tali anno de J N. Le
Defendant dit quod non emit de J. N. come il est allege, etc. Ceo est appelle
un Negative pregnant; car sil ceo achate de auter, uncore il est culpable pur
achater.

Neif, ou Nief.
NIef est un Feme que est bond, ou u^ Villein Feme: mes si el marry un
Frankhome, el est per ceo fait frank, pur ceo que el and sa Baron sont forsque
un person en Ley, and el covient estre de mesme le nature and condition en Ley
a touts entents come sa Baron; mes sa Baron est frank a touts entents sans
ascun condition en Ley, ou auterm^t; and issint per consequens le Feme covient
estre, and est frank accordant al nature son frank Baron. Et donques si el soit
un foits frank and cleerement discharge de Villenage a touts entents, el ne
poit estre Niefe apres sans especial act fait per luy, come Divorce, ou
Conusans en Court de Record, and c' est en favor de Liberty. Et p^ ceo un
Frank feme ne serra Villeine per prisel del Villein a sa Baron; mes lour issue
serra Villeines come lour Pere fuit: que est contrary a le Ley Civil, car la
est dit, Partus sequitur Ventrem.

Bondage ou Villeinage ad son co^mencem^t enter les Hebrews, and son original
de Chanaan le fits de Cham, q^, p^ ceo que il avoit derise son Pere Noe, gisant
dissolutement quant il fuit ebrle, fuit punie en son fits Chanaan ovesque
penalty d'Bondage.

Ne Injuste vexes.
NE injuste vexes. Vide Titulo Monstraverunt.

Next Friend.
NExt Friend. Veies Prochein Amy.

Nihil dicit.
NIhil dicit est, quant un Action est pore envers un home, and le Defendant
appear, and le Plaintiff declare, and le Defendant ne voile responder, ou
plead al Action, and ne maintain son Plee, mes fait Default; ore sur cest
Default il serra condemn, quia Nihil dicit.

Nisi prius.
NIsi prius est un Br^e judicial, and gist quant l'Enquest est impanell' and
return devant les Justices en Bank; donques le Plaintiff ou Defendant poit
aver cest Br^e direct al Vil ^ ', luy commandant q^ il face vener la Enquest
devant les Justices en m^ le County a lourvener, and ceo p^ easement del
Enquest.

Nomination.
NOmination est, lou un poit, en droit de son Manor ou auterment, nominate and
appoint un able Clerk ou ho^e al un Parsonage, Vicarage, on tiel Spiritual
promotion. Et nota que cest Nomination poit estre al auter que l' Ordinary,
que auter luy presenter^ al Ordinary.

Non-ability.
NOn-abilitie est, lou un Action est port verse un, and le Defendant dit, que le
Plaintiff est non able de suer asc' Action, and demand Judgment sil serra
responde. Il y ad 6 causes de Non-abilitie en le Plaintiff: come sil soit
Utlage, ou Alien nee, (mes cest Disabilitie est en Actions reals and mix
solement, and non en Actions personals, si non que il solt un Alien enemy) ou
condemn en Praemunire, ou profess en un Abbie, Priorie, ou Frierie, ou
Excommenge, ou un Villeine, and sue son Seignoir. Mes cest darreine nest Plee
pur auter que nest Seignior al Villeine. Vide de ceo Littl. l. 2. c. 7.

Nonage.
Nonage est tout les temps de l'age del home desouth 21 ans en ascun cases,
and 14 en auter, come Marriage. Veies Broke, Tit. Age.

Non-claime.
NOn-claime est l' Omissio^ ou neglect de cestuy que doit challenger son Droit
deins un temps limitte' per quel neglect il est ou bar de son Droit, come a
cest jour sur Non-claime deins cinque ans apres un Fine and droit a luy accrue,
per le Statute de 4 H. 7. c. 24. ou de son Entry per un descent pur default
del Claim deins cinque ans ap^s le Disseisin fait, per le Statute de 32 H. 8.
c. 33.

Non omittas propter libertatem.
NOn omittas propter libertatem, est un Brief que gift lou le Viscount return
sur Brief a luy direct, que il ad maund al Bailiff de tiel Franchise que aver
Return des Briefs, and il and serve ^ e le Brief; donques le Plaintiff avera
cest Brief direct al Viscount, que il luy mesme enter en le Franchise, and
execute le Brief le Roy.

Auxy le Viscount garnera le Bailiff, que il soit devant les Justices al jour
contenus en le Brief; and sil ne vient and luy acquit, donques touts les
Briefs judicial que passeront horse del Court le Roy durant mesme le Plee
serront Briefs De non omittas, etc. and le Viscount ferra execution d' eux
pendant cel Plee.

Nonsuit.
Nonsuit est le Renouncer del Suit per le Plaintiff on Demandant; quant le
matter est en probability p^ proceed, apres le Tenant ou Defendant ad appear,
etc. Et vide le Statute 2 H. 4. c. 7. en queux cases ho^e ne poit estre
Nonsuit; and 23 H 8 c. 15. and 8 Eliz. c. 2. and 4 Jac. c. 3. lou cestul qui
est Nonsuit payera Costs al Defendant.

Non sum informatus.
NOn sum informatus est un formal Response fait per un Attorney, que est command
per le Court dire ascun chose en Defense (...) son Clie^t, per quel il est
adjudge lascher son Client sans Defense, and issint judgment pass p^ l' auter
party.

Novel Assignment.
NOvel Assignment est, ou home port trespass de son close debruse: Et le
Defendant justify en un lien on null trespass ^ fuit fait, Donque Plaintiff
assign le close ou c' fuit, a q'l le Defendant poit plead, de rien culpable ou
justify per title. Et auxi sont aut's Replications en Battery, and aut's
Trespasses; come si Def. en Battery justify per un Brief, le Plaintiff reply
que puis le Return de ceo le Plaintiff en ceo suit discharge le Plaintiff horse
de Prison, and puis le Defendant luy prist and Imprison, ore le Defendant
respond a ceo Replication.

Nude Contract.
Nude Contract, ou Nude Promise, est, lou un ho^e bargain ou vende ses Terres
ou Biens, ou promise p^ done al auter money, ou un chival, ou ed fire un
meason, ou fair tiel chose a tiel jour, and la est null recompense appoint a
luy p^ le fair de ceo; come si un dit al auter, Jeo vende ou done a vous touts
mes Terres ou Biens, and la est null chose appoint, assign, ou agree, que l'
auter donera ou payera pur ceo, issint que il and quid pro quo: cest u^ Nude
Cantract, and void en Ley, and p^ nonperformance de ceo null Action gist, car,
Ex nudo Pacto non oritur Actio.

Nuper obiit.
Nuper obiit est un Brief, and gist lou un ad plusors Helrs, cestascavoir,
plusors Files, ou plusors Fits, sil foit en Gavelkind en Kent, and devie
seisie, and un Heir entra en tout la Terre; donques les auters que sont tenus
dehors averont cest Brief verse le Coheir que est deins. Mes Brief de
Rationabili part gist en tiel case ou l'Ancestor fuit un foits seisie, and ne
morust ^ elsie de Possession, mes del ^ Reversion.

Nusans.
Nuisance est, lou asc' home levy ascun Mure, ou estoppe ascun Ewe, ou fait
ascun chose sur son Tr^es demesne al annoya ^ ce son prochein; cestuy que est
grieve avera un Brief appel Assise de Nusans: Auxy si il que fist le Nusans
alien le Terre a un auter, donques cest Brief serra port envers ambideux, come
appiert per le Statute de Westminster. 2. c. 24.

Poit estre auxi per estopper de Luminers en u^ mese, ou p^ causer d'ewe de
flow sur mese auters pur remedy de quel un Action sur le Case ou Assise gist.

O.
Oblations.
OBlationes sunt quaecunque a piis fidelibusque Christianis offeruntur Deo and
Ecclesiae.

Occupant.
OCcupant, est quant un home fist un Lease al auter pur Term del Vie de tierce
person: Le Lessee morust, Il que primes enter, tener la terr come occupant
durant' la vie del tierce person; Quel a preventer tiels leases sont ore faits
al Lessee ses heirs and assigns. 2 Cro. 554. Co. 6. Rep. 37.

Odio and Atia.
ODio and Atia est u^ vieux Brief mention e^ le Statu ^ e de Westminster. 1. fait en
3 E. 1. cap. 11. and fuit direct al Viscount, pur inquire si ho^e commise al
prison sur Suspicion del Murder fuit commise sur un just Suspicion, ou pur
malice solement. Et si sur enquiry fuit trove que ne fuit culpable, adonques un
auter Brief venust al Viscount p^ luy bailer. Mes cest course est ore toll per
le Statute de 28 E. 3. cap. 9. come appiert en Stamford's Pl. Cor. fol. 77. G.
Et veies Coke, lib. 9. fol. 56. a. b.

Ordael.
ORdael est tant adire come Expers criminis; and fuit ancient manner de Trial
en Criminal causes: car quant le Defendant, esteant arraine, plede Rien
culpable, il puit es ^ ier le quel il voet mitter luy mesme sur Dieu and le
Pais, que est sur le Verdict de Douze homes, come il sont jesque a cest jour,
ou sur Dieu solement; and pur ceo fuit appel Judicium Dei, presumant q^ Dieu
voille deliver le innocent; cestascavoir^, sil fuit de Frank estate, donq^s
per Feu, cestascavoir^, a passera ouster novem Vomeres ignitos nudis pedibus:
and sil escape illaesus, il serra acquit; and sil nemy, il serra condemn. Et
si le party fuit (...) u^ Servile condition, donque il serra try per Ewe, que
fuit en diverse man^ers: Pur queux veies Lambert, verbo Ordalium. Mes jammes
cest Trial est ouste per Parlemente. Veies Coke, lib. 9. fol. 32. b.

Ordelfe.
ORdelfe est, lou un claim^ de aver le Ore que est trove en son Soil ou Terre.

Ordinary.
ORdinary (Ordinarius) est u^ term^ del Civil Ley, and en ceo signify ascun
Judge q^ ad authority p^ prender Conusance de Causes e^ son droit dem^, and
nemy per Deputation. Mes en le Com^on Ley est properm^t prise p^ l' Evesque de
chesc^ Dioces, q^ est le voier Ordinary p^ certifier Excommengement, loyal
Matrimony, and tiels Ecclesiastical and Spiritual acts deins ses Dioces, as
Judges ^ l Com^on Ley; car il est le party a q^ le Court doit escrier sur tiels
occasions. Et uncore cest parol Ordinary est usualment prise en le Common Ley
and les Statutes p^ chescun Commissarie ou Official ^ l Evesque ou auter Judge
Ecclesiastic^al que ad Judicial Authority deins son Jurisdiction, come appiert
en Coke, l. 9. Henfloe's C. fol. 36. b. and le Statute Westminster. 2. c. 19. and 31
E. 3. c. 11. and plusors auters.

Orfgild.
ORfgild est Pecudis Solutio vel redditio, de Sax. Orf. Pecus, and Gild,
Solutio, Redditio.

Ouster le maine.
OUster le maine (Amoveas manum) est un Brief direct al Escheator, pur deliver
Seisin ou Possession horse des maines le Royal party que sue le Brief, pur ceo
que les Terres seisies ne sont tenus del Roy, ou pur ceo que il ne doit aver le
Guard de eux, ou pur ceo que le Title le Roy est determin^, etc. Est auxy le
Judgment done en un Monstrance de Droit, ou sur un Travers ou Petition: car
quant appie ^ t sur le matter discuss q^ le Roy and Droit ou Title al chose
que il seize, adonque Judgment serra done que l ^ s maines le Roy sont oustes;
and sur ceo un Amoveas manum serr^ agard al Escheator; que est tant sicome
Judgment fuit done que le party averoit son Terre arere. Et veies pur ceo
Stamford Praerog. cap. 24.

Outfangtheef.
OUtfangth ^ of est, quod Latrones de Terra vestra vel Feodo vestro extra
Terram vestram vel Feodum vestrum capti, ad Curiam vestr^ revettantur, and
ibidem judicentur.

Outlary.
Outlary. Veies utlary.

Owelty.
OWelty est, quant il y ad Seignlour, Mesne, and Tenant, and le Tenant tient
del Mesne per mesme les Services que le Mesne tient ouster de le Sn^r
Paramount: come si le Tenant tient del Mesne per Homage, Fealty, and xx s. de
Rent annuelment, and le Mesn^ tient ouster de l' Sn^r Paramount per Homage,
Fealty, and xx s. Rent auxy; cest appelle Owelty de Services.

Oyer de Records and Faits, etc.
OYer de Records and Faits est, ou un Action de Det est port envers un home sur
un Obligation, and le Defendant appear, and donques pry que il poit Oyer le
Obligation ovesque que le Plaintiff charge luy.

Issint est quant executors port un Action de Det, and le Defenda^t dema^d Oyer
del Testament; sur cest demand il serra lie al luy. Mes si soit en un auter
Term, ou apres que le Defendant ad imparle, donq^s il navera le Oyer. Et
issint come est dit de Faits, est destr^ entende de Records que sont allege
envers luy. Mes en B. R. le Defendant poit al ascun temps devant Plea, and le
Plaintiff aver Oyer del Fait ou Record. Veies le Title Monstrans de Faits.

Oyer and Terminer.
OYer and Terminer est Brief appel en Latin de Audiendo and Terminando, and
gist qn^t asc' grand ou sodain^ Insurrection est fait, ou asc' auter sudden
Transgression, que requir^ hasty reformation; donque le Roy directera un
Commission a certain Justices de Audiendo and Terminando.

Nota que les Justices de Assise ont un Commission de Oyer and Terminer direct
al eux, and diverse auters inhabitants deins les Counties as queux ^ ut Circuit
extend, don't chesc' de les Justices de Assile sont del Quorum, pur le meulx
oyer and determiner de diverse Offenses queux poient avener en lour Circuit,
quel sans cel Commission cux ne poient fair'. Veis Fitzh. N. B. fol. 110. b.

P.
Pain fort and dure.
Pain fort and dure est un particular Punishment pur tiels que esteant
arraign^ pur Felony, refusont de mitter eux mesmes fur le usual Trial de Dieu
and le Pais, and per ceo sont Mute, ou come Mute en Ley. Veies ceo a large en
Stamford. Pl. Cor. fol. 150.

Palace-Court.
PAlace-Court est un Court de Record erect per le Roy James, per ses Letters
Pattents teigne a Southwark, and est un Court de Common Ley. Veies Marshalsea.

Pannage.
PAnnage. Veies Paunage.

Panel.
Panel venust del parol Francois Pan, id est, Pellis, and signify en nostre
Com^on Ley un Schedule ou Roll que contain les nosm^s des Jurors queux l'
Viscount ad retorn de passer sur ascun Trial. Et pur ceo le Impanneller del
Jury nest riens forsque le Entry de lour nosmes en le Roll le Viscount.

Pape.
PApe (Papa) est un nosme q^ signify Pater, and ancientment fuit apply al
auter Clergymen en le Grec Esglise; m. s. per usage est particulerment
approprie en le Latin Esglise al Evesque de Rome: nn nosme mult frequent en
nostre ancient Annuels Livres, specialm^t en le temps de ceux Roys, queux,
grandm^t abandonants leur Imperial Authority, and abasans eux mesmes debase
lour Estate, suffer un Alien, un outlandish Evesque, que inhabit 1000 miles
d'eux, ne toller d'eux le disposition de pluseurs Spiritual Preferm^ts, ascun
temps per Lapse, and ascun temps per Provision, ou auterm^t. Pur redress (...)
quel diverse Statutes ont este fait pendant que le Royalme fuit de la Roman
Communion; mes tout son Povoir ne suit toll iesque verse la fin del Roigne de
Roy Henry le huict.

Paramount.
PAramount est un perol compou^d ^ s deux perols Francois, (par, i.e. per, and
monter, i. e. ascendere;) and signify e^ nr^e Ley le plus Hault S ^ ^t del
Fee. Pur le melieur entelligence de ceo, veies F. N. B. f. 135 M. en son Br^e
(...) Mesne.

Paraphernalia.
PAraphernalia, Graece (...) praeter, and (...) dos. Quare Paraphernalia sunt
bona que sponsa secu^ fert praeterco^stituta^ dote^. 1 Cro. D. Hastengs verse.
Douglas.

Paravaile.
PAravaile est u^ perol q^ auxy est co^pound de deux perols Francois, (par i.
e. per, and availer, i.e. dimittere;) and signify en nr^e Ley le plus Base
Tenant del Free, que est Tenant al u^ que tenust oust' del aut' Veies p^ l use
de cest perol F. N. B. en son Br^e de Mesne, f. 135. M.

Parceners.
PArceners sont solonque le course de Common Ley, and solonque le Custom.
Parceners solonque le Common Ley sont, lou un seisie d'un Estate d'enheritance
des Tenements ad issue forsque Files, and devie, and les Tenements discendont a
les Files; donque ils sont appel Parceners, and sont forsque un Heir. Mesme le
Ley est, si neyt ascun Issue, and que ses Sores serroint ses Heirs. Mes si
home ad frrsque un File, el nest dit Parcener, mes ^ a File and la Heir. Et fi
ne sont Files ne Sores, les Terres descenderont a les Aunts, and else sont
Parceners.

Quant Tr^es discendont a diverse Parceners, else poient fair Partition enter
eux per Agreement; mes si asc' d'eux ne voilent fair Partition, donque les
auters averont un Brief de Partitione facienda direct al Viscount, que ferra
Partition enter eux per le serement de xij. loyals homes de sa Bailywike.

Auxy Partition per Agreement poiet estre fait per le ^ ey, auxy bien per Parol
sans Fait, come per Fait. Et si ils sont ^ pleine age, la Partitio^ touts jours
demurrera, and ne serra unques defete.

Mes si les Tr^es sont a eux en le tail, com^t que ils sont concludes durant
lour vies, uncore l' Issue cestuy que ad le meinder part en value poit disagree
a la Partition, and ent' and occupier e^ common ovesque l' auter part. Et si
les Barons des Parceners sont Partition, quant le Baron devie la Feme poir
disagreer a la Partition. Aux' si le Parcener que e ^ deins age fait Partition,
quant el vient a son pleine age el poit disagreer. Mes el covient b ^ en garder
quant el vient a son pleinage, q^ el ne preigne routs les Profits a sou use
demesne des Tr^es que fueront a luy alottes; car donques el soy agree al le
Partition: and le pleine age serra touts foits entende al age de 21 ans.

Auxy si sont diverse Parceners que ont fait Partition enter eux, and le part
d'un soit recover verse luy per Title loyal; donques el compellera les auters de
fair novel Partition.

Parceners solonque le Custom sont, lou home est seisie de Tr^es en Gavelkind,
come en Kent, and auters lieux franchises, and ad issue diverse Fits, and devie;
donque les Fits sont Parceners per le Custom.

Parco fracto.
PArco fracto est u^ Br^e que gist verse cestuy q^ enfreint asc' Pound, and
prist horse (...) ceo ascuns avers queux sont la loyalment impounds. Veies de
ceo F. N. B. fo. 100. E.

Park.
PArk est un lieu en q^ per perscripc^on ou per grant de Roy, un Subject
preserve son game des avers ferae naturae. Veies Stat. Westminster. 1. 3 E. 1. cap.
20.

Parliament.
PArliament, Veies le Sn^ ^ Cooks 4 Institut. and Monsieur Cowels Interpreter,
title Parliament.

Parson imparsonee.
PArson imparsonee est cestui q' est e^ possession dun Esglise appropr ou
persentative ^ car issint est use e^ a^bideux cases e^ Dyer, f. 40. b. and f.
221. b.

Parties.
PArties al Fine on Fait so^t ceux queux sont nosmes en Faits ou Fines come
Parties a ceo; come ceux queux levy le Fine, and ils a que le Fine est levy.
Et ils que sont un Fait de F ^ offm^t, and ils a que il est fait, sont appelles
Parties al Fait: and issint en auters semblables cases.

Nota, que si un Indenture soit fait enter deux come Parties a ceo e^ le
co^mencement, and en le Fait un d' eux grant' ou lessa un chose al un auter que
nest nosme en le co^mencement, il nest Party al Fait, ne prendra riens per ceo.

Partition.
PArtition est un Division de Terres descendus per se Common Ley, ou per
Custom, perenter Coheirs ou Parceners, ou ils sont deux al meines, soient ils
Fitz, Fills Soers, Aunts, ou autenment de kin al An ^ e our de que le Terre
discende al eux.

Et cest Partition est sait quater voies p^ le pluis part; de que trois sont al
pleasure and per Agreement perenter eux, le quart est per Compulsion.

Un Partition per Agreement est, qua^t ils mesmes divide le Tr^e equalment en
tants parts come la sont d'eux Coparceners, and chesc' d' eslier un share ou
part, l'eigne primerm^t, and issint l'un apres l'auter, come ils sont d'age; si
non que le eigne per consent fait le Partition, donques l'Election appertie^t
al procheine, and issint al eigne darreinement, accordant come il est dit,
Cujus est Partitio, alterius est Elictio.

Un aut' Partition per Agreement est, quant ils essiont certain de lour Amies
de fair Division pur eux.

Le tierce Partition per Agreement est, per trahens de Lots, issint: Primerm^t
de divider le Tr^re en tants des perts come la sont Parceners; donques a
scriber chesc' part severalme^t e^ u^ petit Scroll, ou piece (...) paper ou
parchm^t, and ^ mitter ceux Scrolls close en un Hat, Cap, ou auter tiel
semblable chose; and donq^s chesc' Parcener, un ap^s auter, come ils sont d'
age, a traher un piece ou Scroll e^ que est escript un part del Tr^e, que per
cest Trahens est ore severalment allotte al eux en Fee-simple.

Le quart Partition, que est per Compulsion, est, lou un ou ascuns d' les
Coparceners violent aver Partition, and auters ne voilent agreer a ceo; donques
ceux que issint voilent aver Partitio^ poyent porter un Brief De Partitione
facienda envers les auters queux ne voilent fair Partition, per virtue (...)
quel ils serront compel ^ parter, etc.

En Kent, lou les Terres so^t d' Gavelkind-nature, ils appel a cest jour lour
Partition Shifting, il mesme parol que les Saxons use, nosmem^t Shiftan, que
signify pur fair Partition perenter Coheires, and p^ assigner a chescun (...)
eux lour portion. En Latin est appelle Herciscere.

Partition auxy poit estr^ fait per Joyntenants ou Tenants en common per lour
assent, per Fait enter eux, ou per Brief, per les Statutes (...) 31 H. 8. cap.
1. and 32. H. 8. cap. 32.

Pasport.
PAsport est un parol mention en le Statute 2 E. 6. Cap. 2. and signify un
License fait per asc' que ad authority, pur le safe passage ^ ascun ho^e del un
lieu al auter.

Patron.
PAtron est celuy q^ ad l'Advowson d' u^ Parsonage, Vicarage, Fra^k-chappel, ou
tiels se^bl' Spiritual Promotio^s, appertient a son Manor, ou auterment en
gross, and per ceo poit ou doit doner mesme l' Benefice, ou present a ceo,
quant and cy toft q^ il devient void. Et cest esteant Patron, ou Patronage, ad
commencement pur l' pluis part per un (...) ceux troies voyes: nosmem^t, ou
ratione Fundationis, pur ceo quel' Patron ou ses Ancestors, ou ceux (...) q^
il claim, fueront Founders ou Edifiers de l' Esglise; ou ratione Donationis,
pur ceo q^ ils endowe ou done Terres al ceo pur maintenance; ou auterm^t
ratione Fundi, pur ceo q^ le Esglise fuit mis ou edify sur lour soil ou
terre: and diverse temps per reason de touts trois.

Paunage ou Pannage.
PAunage ou Pannage, (Pannagium) est ceo argent que les Agistors des Forests
collect pur l' feeder des Porcels deins l' Forest, and est auxy prise pur
touts manners del Mast des arbres deins l' Forest, ^ q^ les Porcels feed.
Veies Manw. For. Leys, c. 12. f. 90. a.

Peers.
PEers sont ceux q^ sont impan^els en un Enquest sur ascun home, pur l'
convicter ou acquiter d' luy d' asc' offense pur que il est en question. Le
reason d' ql' appellation de Jury est p^ ceo, que Peers venust del Latin Pares,
id est, Egals; and le custom (...) nostr^ Nation est, pur trier chescun home
per ses Egals, cestascavoire, per ses Peers. Et issint appiert per l' Statutes
de Mag. Charta, cap. 29. and West. 1. cap. 6. Cest parol est auxy use pur le
Nobility del Realm and les Seigniours del Parliament, queux sont appelles les
Peers del Realm. Et de ceo veies Stamf. Pl. Coron. lib. 3. cap 1. fol. 152.

Perambulatione facienda.
PErambulatione facienda est un Br^e q^ gist lou 2 Sn^ries gisont un pres
lauter, and ascun Encrochment est fait per long te^ps; donq^s per assent (...)
ambi ^ Seigniours, l' Viscount prendera ovesq, luy les parties and les vicines,
and fieront Perambulation, and fieront les Meres come ils fueront a devant. Mes
si un Seigniour encroach sur lauter, and ne voile fair Perambulation, donques
le Seigniour issint grieve avera Brief verse lauter, que est appelle de
Rationalibus divisis.

Perjury.
PErjury est u^ corrupt ou voluntary faux serement done en Chancery ou en
Evidence al Enquest sur trial ^ un issue al Common ley. Vide Stat. 5 El. cap. 9.

Perinde valere.
PErinde valere est u^ term que appent al ley Ecclesiastical, and signify un
Dispe^sation grant al u^ Clerk, que nesteant capable ^ un Benefice ou auter
Ecclesiastical Function est de facto a ceo admit. Et avoit cest appellation des
parols que sont l' faculty cy effectual al party, sico^e il fuit actualment
capable del chose pur que il ad son Dispensation al temps de son admittance.

Pernor de Profits.
PErnor de Profits est il que pren ^ les Profits. Pernor de profits and Cestuy
que use est tout mesme, Coke, lib. 1. Casu Chudley, fol. 123.

Mes un poit. e^e pernor, etc. and non cestuy q^ use per title mes per Covyn,
quel veies Coke 5. 77, 78. Co. Ent. 698. 2 Leo. rep. 16. 2 Anderson. 25. Stat.
11. H. 6. 3.

Perpetuity.
PErpetuity est use en Ley ou un estate est issint design destre settle en
tall, etc. q^ ceo ne poet e^e defait ou anient. Quel le state Angleterr ne poit
porter, come est dit in fine casus, Moo. rep. 809, 810. Cok. 1. 84. 130. Co. 6.
40. and lib. 8. 90.

Per quae servitia.
PEr quae servitia est un Brief judicial, q^ issuist del Note ^ un Fine; and
gist pur l'Conusee d'un Man^or ou Seigniory, pur compel cestuy que est Tenant
del Terre al te^ps del Fine levy p^ attourne a luy. Et de cest Brief veies
Vieux N. B. fol. 170. a.

Perquisites.
PErquisites sont Advantages and Profits queux vient al un Man^or per casualty,
and non annuelment; come Escheats, Harriots, Reliefes, Walfes, Estrayes,
Forfeitures, Amerciam^ts e^ Courts, Bie^s and Terres purchase per Villeins de
m^ l' Man^or, Fine del Copiholds, and diverse semblables chooses queux ne sont
certain, mes hap per chance, ascun temps pluis often que a auter temps. Vide
Perkins fol. 20 and 21.

Personalty.
PErsonalty: come le Action est e^ Personalty, cest ascavoir, port envers le
droit person, ou le person envers q^l en Ley il gist.

Petit Cape.
PEtit Cape est un Brief q^ gist quant ascun Action Real, cestascavoire, de
Plee de Terre, est port, and le Tenant appear, and puis fait Default; donques
issera cest Petit Cape, de seiser les Terr^s in maines le Roy. Mes sil ne
apper' al primer Sum^ons, donques issera un Graund Cape; and pur tiel Default
le Tenant perdra la Terre. Mes sil gage son Ley de Non-summons, i will saver son
Default, and donques il poit plead ovesque le Demandant. Et in Graund Cape, le
Tenant serra summon pur responder al Default, and ouster al Demandant: Mes en
Petit Cape il serra summon pur responder al Default solement, and nemy al
Demandant. Et est appelle Petit Cape, pur ceo que il ad minus en cel Brief que
en lauter.

Pettybag.
PEttybag est un Office en le Court de Chancery pur suits, pur and envers les
Attorneys and Officers de cel Court. Et pur process and proceedings per extents
sur Statutes and Recognisances: Ad quod damnum, etc. Parva baga dicitur.

Petit Serjeantie.
TEner per Petit Serjeantie est sicome un home tie^t de Roy Terres ou
Teneme^ts, rendant a luy un Cuttel, un Escue, un Setr', un Arc sans cord, ou
aut' semb' Service, a la volunt le primer Feoffor; and la nappent Guard,
Marriage ne Relief. Et nota, que hom^ ne poit tener per Grand Serjeantie ne per
Petit Serjeantie, si non del Roy. Veies le Stat. 12. Car. 2. cap. 24.

Piccage.
PIccage (Piccagium) est le payment des deniers, ou les deniers paies pur le
infriender del soil p^ erecter Tents ou Settles en Faires.

Picle ou Pitle.
PIcle ou Pitle, semb' de ven^ del Italian Piccolo, Parvus, and signify
ovesque nous un Petit Close ou Enclosure.

Pillory.
PIllory est u^ Engine ^ l penance ordein^ per le statute de 51 H. 3. p^ le
punishm^t des Pistors; mes a ore use p^ plusors auters Offenders. Et est appel
en Latin Collistrigium.

Pipowders.
PIpowders est un Court que est incident a chesc' Fair^, p^ le determination de
differences sur contract and routs disorders en c^ commise. Veies pluis de ceo
Cromp. Jurisd. fol. 229. Coke. lib. 10. fol. 73.

Piscary.
PIscary est un Liberty del Pischer en le ewe ^ un auter, ou de soy mesme.

Placard.
PLacard est un parol use en les Statutes de 33 H. 8. cap. 6. and 2 and 3 M.
cap. 9. and signify un License pur user illoyal Games, ou de shooter en un
Bombarde.

Plaintiff.
PLaintiff est celuy que sue ou complain en un Assise, ou en un Action
Personal, come en un Action de Det, Trespass, Disceit and Detinue, and tiels
semblables.

Pledges.
PLedges sont Sureties (...) real ou formal queux le Plaintiff trove a
prosecuter son suit.

Pleading.
PLeadings sont touts Acts del Parties al Suits apres le Count ou Declaration;
nosemement ceo que est contain en le Bar, Replicat', and Rejoyn ^, and non
ceo conteiu^ en le Count m^: and p^ ceo Defaults e^ le matt' del Count ne sont
comprise deins Mispleading, ou insufficient Pleading, ne sont remedy per le
Statute de Jeosailes, 32 H. 8. mes sole ^ t ceo mispleading ou insufficient
Pleading commit en le Bar, Replication, and Rejoinder, sont la provide. Mes
veies ceux auxy ore remedies per le Statute 18 Eliz. cap. 13.

Plenartie.
PLenartie est qn^t un Benefice est plene, directm^t opposite al Vacation, q^
signify l' avoidance ^ ' un Benefice. Stamf. Prerog cap. 8. fol. 32.

Plevyn, See Replevyu.

Pluralities.
PLuralties sont ou Vicar ou Rector avoit deux ou plusors Ecclesiastical
Benefices pur ^ quel vide Statute, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

Policy del Assurance.
POlicy del Assurance est un course prise per Merchants pur l' assurer des lour
Adve^tures sur le Mer, per doner un certain proportion pro centum pur le
securer del safe retourn^ del Neife and tant des Merchandises sur que est
agree. Et de ceo poies lier e^ le Statute de 43 Eliz. cap. 12.

Sur quel un Action gist al common Ley ou en le Court (per literes Patents le
Roy) seant a le Royal Exchange en Londre, les Judges de quel sont Civilians,
Common Lawyers and Merchants.

Pone.
POne est un Brief per que un Case q^ depend en le County Court est remove en
le Commen Plees. Veies pur ceo Veil. N. B. fol. 2. a.

Pontage.
POntage est un parol mention en diverse Statutes: com^ e^ Westminster. 1 cap. 25. 1
H. 8. cap. 9. and 39 Eliz. cap. 24. and signify asc' soits le Contribution
collect pur le Reparation dun Pont; ascun foits le Toll pay per passengers a
ceo purpose.

Portgreve, Veies Viscount,

Portmoot.
POrtmoot est un parol use en le Statute de 43 Eliz. c. 15. and signify un
Court tenus en un Port-ville.

Possessio Fratris.
POssessio Fratris, est ou un home ad fits and file per un venture, and un fits
per auter venture, and morust, le primer fits enter and devy sans Issue, la file
avera la terr' come heir a son friar coment q^ le second fits est heir a son
pere. Litt. Sect. 8.

Possession.
POssession est deux voies; ou actual, ou en Ley.

Actual Possession est, qua^t un home enter en fait en Terres ou Tenements a
luy discende, ou auterment.

Possession en Ley est, quant Terres ou Tenements so^t discende al un home, and
il and uncore realment, actualment, and en fait enter en eux. Et il est appell'
Possession en Ley, pur ceo que en le oiel and consideration del Ley il est
pense destr^ en Possession, entant que il est Tenant a chescun Actio^ que asc'
voit suer concernant mesm^s les Tr^es ou Tenem^ts.

Post diem.
POst diem est le Return d' un Brief apres le jour assign p^ le Return de ceo.

Postdisseisin.
POstdisseisin. Vide de ceo devant en le Title Assise.

Postea.
POstea est le Record des proceedings sur un Trial per un Brief de Nisi prius
que est return apres le Trial per le Judge devant que fuit try en le Court
lou l' Action primerment commence, daver Judgment la done sur le Verdict: and
est appelle le Postea pur ceo que, etc.

Poundage.
POundage est un Subsidy al value de duodize deniers en le liver, q^ est grant
al Roy per chescun Merchant cy^ ie^ Denizen come Alien, p^ touts manners des
Merchandises exports and imports. Et des tiels Subsidies veies le Statutes de 1
and 2 E. 6. c. 13. and 1 Jac. c. 33. and 14 Car. 2. c. 24.

Auxi per le Statute de 29 El. cap. 4. chescun Viscount est allow poundage p^
levier Debt ou Damages per Execution.

Pounds.
POunds sont en deux sorts; lun Pound overt, le auter Pound close.

Pound overt est chescun lieu en que un Distress est mis, soit ceo common
Pound, ou Backside, Court, Yard, Pasture, ou auterment quecunque lou le owner
del Distress poit vener a doner eux viand, sans offense pur lour esteant la,
ou son vener la.

Pound close est tiel lieu lou le owner del Distress ne poit vener a doner eux
viand sans offense; come en un Close meason, ou quecunque auter lieu.

Preamble.
PReamble ad son nosme de le Preposition ( prae) devant, and le verb ( ambulo)
pur vaer; issint joint ensemble, ils sont un compound verb ( praeambulo) p^
vaer devant; and de ceo le primer pert ou co^mencement de un Act est appelle le
Preamble de le Act, le quel est un cliffe de overer les ments del feasors del
Act, and les mischiefs que ils entende de remedy per ceo. Come p^ example, le
Statute fait al Westminster. le primer, le 37 cap. que dou^ Attaint, le Preamble de
q^ est issint: Pur ceo que ascuns gents de la Terre doutant meins faux Serement
fair^, que faite ne duissent, per que multes des gents sont disherites, and
perdent lour droir Purvey, etc.

Prebend and Prebendary.
PRebend and Prebendary sont parols piusors soits uses en nr^e Livres, and ils
veignont del Latin ( Praebeo) Prebend est ceo part ou portion que chescun
member ou Canon dun Cathedral Esglise receive en le droit son lieu pur son
maintenance: and Prebendary est cestuy q^ avoit tiel Prebend.

Praecipe ou Praecipe in capite.
PRecipe in capite est un Brief que gist lou le Tenant tient del Roy en chief
come de sa Corone, and il est deforce, cest adire, ouste de son Terre; donques
il avera cest Brief, and il serra Close, and serra plede en le Common Bank.

Auxy si ascun Tenant que tient de ascun Seignior soit deforce, luy covient
suer Brief de Droit Patent, que serra determine en le Court le Seignior. Mes fi
le Terre soit tenus del Roy, le Brief de Droit Patent serra port al Court le
Roy: and cest Brief poit estre remove de la Court de Seignior en le County per
un Tolt, and de le County en Common Bank per un Pone. Ideo veies devant
Titulo Droit.

Praecipe.
PRaecipe sont de diverse sorts, Quod reddat terras, come dower, formedon, etc.
debitum, bona and catalla. Quod teneat conventionem, Quod faciat sectam ad
molendinum, Quod permittat, etc.

Preignotary.
PReignotary est compound des deux parol' Latinois (prae and Notarius;) and est
use en nostre Ley pur le chief Clerks des Courts le Roy, don't la est un e^ Bank
le Roy, and trois en le Common Bank, Cestuy en Bank le Roy record touts Actions
Civils sues en ceo Court: and ceux ^ l Common Bank inrolle touts Declarations,
Pleadings and Judgments, and font horse touts judicial Briefs, ils inrolle touts
Fines and Recognisances, and exemplifiont touts Records m^ le Term^ devant que
les Rolls sont ball horse de lour malu^s. En 15 E. 4. 26 b. cest Officer est
appel Praesignator: Et un des trois e^ Common Bank, Praesignator pauperum.

Premises.
Premises. Veies Habendum.

Praemunire.
PRaemunire est un Brief q^ gist lou ascun home sue ascun auter e^ Court
Christian pur ascun chose que est determinable en le Court le Roy; per quel
grand punishment est ordain per pleuseurs Statutes; cestascavoire, que il serra
horse de protection le Roy, and mis en prison sans Bail ou Mainprise, tanque il
ad fait Fine al volunt le Roy, and que ses Terres and chateux serront forfeits
si il ne veigne deins deux mois. Et son Provisors, Procurators, Attorneys,
Executors, Notaries, and Maintainers, serront punish en mesme le manner. Ideo
vide Statutum.

Auxy ascuns diont, que si un Clerk sue auter home en Court de Rome pur chose
Spiritual, lou il poit aver remedy deins cest Realm en Court son Ordinary,
que il serra en le case de le Statute.

Et sur diverse aut's offenses est impose, per Statutes depuis fait, le penalty
que eux incur queux fueront attaints en Praemunire: Come per 13 El. cap. 8.
ceux que aidont a fair^ corrupt Bargain, sur que Usurie est reserve ouster 10
l. en le Hundred pur l'an etc.

Prender.
PRender est Potestas aut jus quicquid accipiendi antequam offertur; a Francois
prendre, i. accipere.

Prescription.
PRescription est, quant un person claim asc' chose, pur ceo que il, ses
Ancestors ou Predecessors, ou eux que Estate il ad, ont ew ou use ceo don't null
memory curt al contrary.

Mes un ne poit p^scribe encounter un Statute, si non que il ad auter Statute
que serve pur luy.

Presentment.
PResentment est aequivocum. L'un est al Esglise: come^t quant ascun home ad
droit a doner ascun Benefice Spiritual, and nosme le person al Evesque a que il
voet le doner, and fait un Letter al Evesque pur luy, ceo est un Presentation
ou Presentment. Si diverse Coheirs ne poyent accorder en Presentment, le
Presentee de l'eigne serra admit. Mes si Joyntenants and Tenants en common ne
accordant deins les size moys, l'Evesque presentera per laps.

L'auter est un Presentment ou Information per ascun Jurie en un Court, devant
asc' Officer la q^ ad authorite de punisher asc' offense fait contrary al Ley.

Pretensed Droit ou Title.
PRetensed Droit ou Title est, lou un est en possession de Terres ou Tenements,
and un auter que est horse claim ceo, ou sue pur ceo: ore le pretensed Droit ou
Title est dit en luy que issent sue ou claim. Et si il pluis vient a le
possession, son Droit ou Title est annexe al Terre and possession, and nient
donque appel Droit.

Primer Seisin.
PRimer Seisin est use en le Common Ley p^ un branch del Prerogative le Roy,
per que il ad le Prim^ possession, cestascavoir^, les entire Profits p^ un an
des touts les Terres and Tenements don't son Tenant (que tenus de luy e^ chief)
morust seisie en son Demesne come de Fee, son Heir adonque esteant ^ plein
age: and c' le Roy prist en lieu des entire Profits queux il poit p^nder, sil
voit, tanques Liverie soit sue, ou al meins tender. Prerog Reg. c. 3. and
Stanf. f. 11. B. Veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2. c 24.

Prisage.
PRisage est ceo part ou portion que appertein al Roy horse des tiel
Merchandises queux sont prises al Mer per voy le loyal Prise Et cest parol vous
trovers en le Statute 31 Eliz. c. 5.

Prisage des Vins.
PRisage des Vins, mention e^ le Stat. 1 H. 8. c. 5. est u^ custom per que le
Roy horse chesc' Bark lade ove Vine, south 40 Tun, claim d' aver deux Tun a
son prise demesne.

Privy, ou Privities.
Privy ou Privities est, lou un Lease est fait a tener a volunt, p^ ans, p^
vie, ou un Feoffment en fee, and en diverse auters cases; ore per cause ^ ceo
que a ^ pass perenter ceux parties, ils sont appellus Privies, en respect de
strangers, perenter queux null tiel conveyances ad estre.

Auxy si soit Seignior and Tenant, and le Tenant tient del Seignior per
certain Service, il y ad un Privitie perenter eux, per cause (...) Tenure: and
si le Tenant soit disseise per un estranger, il ad null Privitie perenter le
Disseisor and le Seignior, mes le Privitie uncore demurt perenter le Seignior
and le Tenant que est disseisie, and le Seignior avowra sur luy, p^ ceo que il
est son Tenant en droit, and en le judgment del Ley.

Privies sont en diverse sorts, come nosment, Privies en Estate, Privies en
Fait, Privies en Ley, Privies en Droit, and Privies en Sanke.

Privies en Estate est, lou un Lease est fait del Manor de Dale, al A p^ vie,
le Remaind' al B en see; la and A and B sont Privies en Estate, car lour
Estates fuer^ faits ambideux al un temps.

Et issint est en le prim^ case cy, ou un Lease est fait al volunt, pur vie, ou
ans, ou un Feoffment en fee, les Lessees ou Feoffees so^t appels Privies en
Estate, and issint sont lour Heirs, etc.

Privies en Fait est, lou un Lease est fait pur vie, and ap^s per un auter Fait
le Reversion est grant al un stranger en fee* cest Grantee del Reversion est
appel Privy en Fait, pur ceo que il ad le Reversion per Fait.

Privy en L ^ y est, lou il est Seignior and Tenant, le Tenant lessa le
Tenancie p^ vie, and morust sans Heir, and le Reversion escheat al Seignior; il
est dit Privy en Ley, p^ ceo que il and son Estate solem^t per le Ley, cest
adire, per Escheat.

Privy en Droit est, lou un possess d' un term pur ans granta son Estate al
un auter sur Condition, and fait ses Executors, and morust; ore ceux Executors
so^t Privies en droit; car si le Condition soit enfreint, and ils entront en le
Tr^e, ils averont ceo e^ le droit de lour Testator, and a son use.

Privy de Sanke est l' Heir de le Feoffor ou Donor, etc.

Item si un Fine soit levy, les Heirs de celuy que levy le Fine sont appel
Privies.

Privileges.
PRivileges sont Liberties and Franchises grant al un Office, Lieu, Ville, ou
Manor per le grand Charter del Roy, Letters Patents, ou Act de Parliament:
come Toll, Sake, Socke, Infangtheefe, Outfangtheefe, Turn, Ordelf, and diverse
tielx, semblables; p^ q^ux veies en lour proper Titles and lieus.

Auxi sont auters Privileges d'ont le Ley prist cognuzance cest ascavoir, les
Privileges des Commons, and Peers del Parliament, and privileges des Attorneys
and Officers des Courts a Westminster. q^ ils ne serront sue ou implead en auter
Court, q^ en ceux ou ils sont Artorneys ou Officers.

Procedendo.
PRocedendo est un Brief que gist lou ascun Action est sue en un Court, que est
remove a un pluis hault, come al Chancerie, Bank le Roy, ou Common Bank, per
Brief de Privilege ou Certiorari: and si le Defendant, sur le matter monstre,
and cause de Privilege, ou si le matter en le Bill sur que le Certiorari issu
st ne soit bien prove, donques le Plaintiff avera cest Procedendo pur remaunder
le matter al primer base Court, la destre determine.

Process.
Process sont les Briefs and Precepts que issuont sur l'Original. Et en Actions
real and personal sont diverse sorts de Process: Car en Actions real le Process
est Grand Cape d ^ vant Appearance: Ideo vide de ceo en le Title Petit Cape.

Mes en Actions personal come en Debt Trespass, ou, Detinue, le Process est u^
Distress: and si le Visc' return Nihil habet in Balliva, etc. donques le
Process est Alias Capias and Plures, and un Exigent; and ils sont appelles
Capias ad respondendum. Auxy le Exigent serra cinque soits proclaim; and si le
party n' appear, il serra utlage. Mes en diverse Actions sont diverse manners
de Process, que est pluis alarge declare en N. B.

Auxy sont diverse auters Process apres Appearance, quant les per ^ ies sont al
issue, pur fair l'Enquest appearer: come un Venire facias; and sils ne
appearont al jour, donques un Brief de Habeas corpora Jurat' and apres un
Brief de Distringas Jurat'.

Auxy sont diverse auters Process apres Judgm^t; come Capias ad satisfaciendum,
and Capias utlagatum, etc.

Capias ad satisfaciendum gist lou home est condemn en ascun Det ou Damages
donques il serra arrest per cest Brief, and mis en prison sans Bail ou Mainpr ^
se, tanque il ad pay le Det and les Damages.

Capias utlagatum gist lou un est utlag ^, donq's il serra prise per tiel
Brief, and mis en prison sans Bail ou Mainprise, p^ ceo que il ad fait
contempt encounter le Ley.

Auxy sont auters Process and Briefs judicials, come Capias ad valentiam, Fieri
facias, Scire facias, and plusors auters: and ideo vide c'en lour Titles.

Prochein amy.
PRochein amy est communement prise pur Guardian en Soccage, and est lou un home
seisie de Terres tenus en Socage morust, son issue deins age de 14 ans, donques
le procheind' sank, a que les Tr^es ne poient discender, avera le guard del
Heir, and del Terre, al use solem^t del Heir tanque il vient al age d' 14
an^s; and donques le Heir poit enter, and luy ouste, and amesner luy de
accompter: Mes en cest Account il avera allowance p^ touts reasonable costs and
expenses bestow ou sur le Heir ou son Terre.

Le Prochein amy, ou prochein de sanke, a que le Inheritance ne poit descend,
est issint destre entende: Si les Terres discenda al Heir de son Pere, ou
ascun del sanke del part son Pere, donques l' Mere, ou aut' del part l'Mere,
sont appelle prochein de sanke, a q^ le Inheritance ne poit discender; car
devant que il issint discendra, il pluis tossed escheater^ al Sn^r d' que il est
ten^.

Et lou les Terres vient al Heir de sa Mere, ou ascun del sa part, donque le
Pere, ou auter del part son Pere; sont appelle le prochein de sanke, a que le
Inheritance ne poit ^ iscend, mes pluis tossed escheatr^ al Seignior (...) que il
est tenus.

Auterment Prochein Amy est celuy que appiert en ascun Court pur un Enfant que
sue ascun Action, and que aid le Enfant de pursuer son Suit: don't vide les
Statutes de Westminster. 1. c. c. 47. and Westminster. 2. cap. 15. que un Enfant ne poit
fair Attorney, mes le Court poit admitter le prochein amy pur le Plaintiff,
and un Guardian pur le Enfant Defendant come son Attorney.

Proclamation.
PRoclamation est un Notice appertment done de ascu^ chose de que le Roy soi
pleirot d' advertiser ses Subjects: issint il est An. 7. R. 2 c. 6.

Proclamation de Rebellion est un overt notice done per l' Officer, que un home
nient apparent sur un Subpoena ou attachm^t en le Chancery, serra repute destre
un Rebel, sinon que il loy mesme render al jour assign, Crompt. Jurisd. fol.
92.

Et est destre observe, que null poit fair Proclamation mes per authority del
Roy, ou Majors, and hujusmodi que ont privileges en Cities ou Boroughs de ceo
fair, ou ont ceo use per custom. Et pur c' ou un Executor fist Proclamation
en certain Marketvilles, que les Creditors veigneta, per certain jour, and
claim and provera ^ our dets due per le Testator, and pur ceo que il ceo fist
sans authority, il fuit commit al Fleet, and mise a un Fine. Broke Proclamation
10.

Procurator.
PRocurator est use pur luy que collige les Fruits de un Benefice pur un auter
home. Anno 3 Ric. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 2.

Prohibition.
PRohibition est un Brief q^ gist lou ho^e est emplede en Court Christian de
chose q^ ne touch Matrimony, ne Testam^t, ne merem^t Dismes, mes l' Coron^
nostr^ Seigniour le Roy. Cest Brief serra direct auxybien al pertie, come al
Judge, ou son Official, de eux prohibit q^ ils ne pursue ouster. Mes si il
appear apres a les Judges temporal, que le matter est destre determine en
l'Spiritual Court, and nemy en le Court Temporal, donque le party aver^ un Br^e
de Consultation, commandant les Judges de le Court Spiritual de proceeder en la
primer Plee.

Auxi sont mults auters prohibic^ons sicome al Admiralty, and la ascun Court de
Common ley s'ils exceed lour poiar.

Property.
PRoperty est le pluis halt Droit q^ ho^e ait ou poit aver al asc' chose, q^
riens depend sur l' courtesy dasc' auter home: Et ceo nulluy en cest Realm
poit estre dit daver en ascun Terres ou Teneme^ts, forsq^ solem^t le Roy e^ le
droit de son Corone, pur ceo que touts les Terres per le Realm sont en le
nature de Fee, and tiendront mediatem^t ou immediatem^t del Coron^. Cest parol
nient obstant est ufe pur tiel droit e^ Terres and Tanem^ts q^ common persons
ont en m^. Et la sont trois man^ers de droits de Property; cestascavoire,
Property absolute, Property qualified, and Property possessory: De q^x veies a
large Cok. l. 3. Case de Swans, f. 17.

Proprietary.
PRoprietary est celuy q^ ad u^ Property en asc^ chose: mes il est pluis
co^munement use pur luy que ad les Profits dun Benefice a luy and ses Heirs, ou
a luy m^ and ses Successors, come en te^ps par deva^t Abbots and Priors avolent.

Protection.
PRotection est un Brief q^ gist lou home voit passer ouster le me in le
service le Roy, donq^s il avera cest Br^ ^ e. and per cest Br^e^ il serra quite
de touts manner des Pleas enter luy and ascun auter person, except Plees de
Dower, Quere impedit, Assise de Novel disseisin, ultime praesentationis, and
Attaints, and Plees devant Justices en Air. Mes sont deux Briefs de
Protection; un cum clausula Volumus, and lauter cum clausula Nolumus, come
appiert en le Register.

Mes Protection ne serra allow en ascun Plee commence devant le date de ceo, si
ne soit en Voyages ou le Roy mesme passa, ou auters Voyages royals, ou en
Messages le Roy pur besoignes de Realm. Protection ne serra allow pur Vitailes
achates pur voyage don't le Protection fait mention, ne in Plees de Trespass,
ou de Contracts fait puis le date de mesme le Protection.

Nota, que ascun poit attacher ou commencer ascun Actio^n real verse cestuy
q^ayt tiel Protection, and en ceo proceder, tanque le Defendantveigne and
monstre son protection en le Court, and ayt ceo allow, and donque son plee ou
Suit serra mis ians jour. Mes si ap^s il appierit que le party que ad le
protection ne ala entour le besoigne pur que il ayt ceo, donq^s le Demandant
ave^r un Repeal de ceo. Et sil va, and return apres le besoigne finie, le Deman
^ ant avera un Resummons de recontinue le former Suit.

Protection.
PRotestation est un form^ d' Pleading, qn^t ascun ne voit directm^t affirmer,
ne directment denier ascun chose q^l est allege perpauter, ou que il m^
allege. Et est en deux manners. L'un est, qn^t un plead ascun chose que il ne
ofast directment affirmer, ou ne poit pleader pur doubt de fair^ son Plee
double. Come si en conveying a luy Title a ascun Terre, il doit pleader diverse
Discents per diverse persons, and il nosast affirmer que eux touts fueront
seisies al te^ps de lour mort, ou coment il ceo purroit, ceo serra double a
plead deux Discents; de queux ambideux chescun per luy poit estre bone Bar.
Donques le Defendant doit pleader and alleges le matter, enterlacing cest
parol protestando, come adire, que tiel obiit ( protestando) seisie, etc. Et
ceo est destr^ allege per Protestation, and nemy traversable per lauter. Auter
Protestation est, qn^t u^ est de responder al deux chooses, and tamen per le Ley
il doit plead forsque al un; donq^s en le primer pert del Plee il dirra al un
matter, protestando, and non cognoscendo cel matter estre voyer, and fair son
Plee ouster per ceux parols, Sed pro placito dicit, etc. Et ceo est pur
salvation al party (que issint plead per Protestation) destre conclude per asc
matter allege ou object encounter luy, sur que il ne poit joyner issue; and
fiest auter chose mes un exclusion del Conclusion; car il que prist
Protestation exclud' laut' pertie de co^cluder luy. Et cest Protestation doit
estoyer ove le sequel del Plee, and nemy destr^ repugnant, ou auterment
contrary.

Provendry.
PRovendry e^ l'esglise de Sarum est appel minor pars Altaris in ecclesia
beatae Maria Sarum, 41 E. 3. 5. b.

Provision.
PRovision est use ovesque nous com^ est e^ le Canon Ley, pur le provider dun
Evesque ou auter Ecclesiastical person dun Ecclesiastial Benefice per le Pape
deva^t q^l Incumbent de ceo soit mort; le grand abuse (...) q^ appiert per
pluseurs Statutes q^ ont este faits en touts ages del temps E. 3. tanque le
reign H. 8. per le avoid' des tiels Provisions. Ra. Entr. Qua. Impedite Roy
17. 20.

Priviso.
PRoviso est un Condition ensert en asc' Fait, sur le performance de q^ tout le
vigor del Fait consista. Ascun foits il solem^t est u^ Covenant de que veies
Cok. lib. 2. en le Sn^r Cromwels Case. Il ad aux' u^ aut' signification e^
chooses judicial: come si le Plaintiff ou demandant delaya de prosecuter un
Actio^, and ne ceo port al Trial, donque le Defendant ou Tenant poit prender
horse le Venire facias al Viscount, que ad e^ ceo ceux parols, Proviso quod,
etc. a cest fine, que si le Plaintiff prist horse ascun Br^e a cel purpose, le
Viscount ne garnera forsque un Jurie sur euk ambideux. Veies Vet. Not. Br. en
le Br^e Nisi prius, fol. 159.

Provisors. Veies Praemunire.

Proxy. Procuratio.
PRoxy. Procuratio, est un payment al Evesque per un Religious meason p^ ses
charges de son visitac^on de tiels measons, Davies rep. 2.

Purchase.
PUrch ^ se est le Possession q^ u^ ho^e ad en Tr^es ou Tenements per son act
demesne, means, ou agreem^t, and nemy per title de Descent ^ ascun de fes
ancestors. Veies Littl. l. 1. c. 1.

Purlue.
PUrlue est tout cest Terre prochein ascun Forest, q^ esteant fait Forest per
Henry le second, Richard l' printer, ou Joan le Roy, fuist per Perambulations
grantus per Henry le tierce sever^ arer^ del mesm^. Manwood part 2. de ses
Forest Leys, c. 20. Et semble, q^ cest parol est fait ou de pouralle, ceo est,
perambulare, ou purelieu, ceo est, purus locus, p^ ceo que tiels Tr^es queux
fueront per ceux Roys subject al Leys and Ordinances del Forest, sont jammes
ciere and frank del mesme: Come les Civilians appel ceo purum locum, qui
Sepulchrorum religioni non est obstructus; en meim^ le man^er e' puit estr^
appeal pure lieu, p^ ceo q^ est exempt del servitude ou thraldom q^ fuist par
devant sur ceo impose.

Purlue home est cestuy que ad Tr^es deins le Purlieu, and esteant able a
dispender 40 soulz per l'an de Franktene. meant, est sur ceux deux chooses
license de chaser en son Purlieu demesne. Manwood, part. 1. p. 151. and 177.
Veies le Statute 1 Jac. 27.

Purpresture.
PUrpresture est un ^^ arol derive de Franco ^ Pourpris, q^ signify de pre ^
der del auter, and p^ approp ^^^ a luy mesme: and p^ ceo un Purpresture e^ un
general sense est prise p^ asc^ tiel tort sait per un home al auter.

Purpresture en un Forest est chescun Encrochment sur le Forest le Roy, soit
ceo per Edifier, Incloser ou per user d' ascun liberty ou privilege sans un
loyal garrant issint fair. Et de ceo veies Manw. For. Leys, c. 10. f. 74. a.

Purveyors.
PUrveyors suer' ancient Offices a provider Victuals pur le Roy Quel office
est menc^on en Stat. 28 Ed. 1. cap. 2. and 36 Ed. 4. cap. 6. and 14 Ed. 3. cap.
19. Mes est aboly per Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Q.
Quadrantata terrae.
Quadrantata terrae est le quarte part d'un Acre.

Quae plura.
QUae plura est un Brief que gist en case lou le Escheator ad trove un Office
virtute officii apres le mort le Tenant le Roy, and and trove touts les Tr^es
des queux il morust selsie, ado^ques cest Br^e issera e^ nature d'un Melius
inquirendo, p^ trover q^ux Tr^es il avoit plusors. Veies F. N. B. 255. a.

Quale jus.
QUale jus est un Brief q^ gist lou ascun Abbot, Prior, ou tiels auters,
averont Judgment de recover Tr^e per le Default del Tenant verse q^ le Terre est
demand; donque devant judgment done, ou Execution agard, cest Br^e isse ra al
Escheator, p^ enquirer quel droit il ad a recover: Et si soit trove que il and
droit, donques le Seignior q^ duist aver le Terre le Tenant ust alien en
Mortmain^ poit enter come en Terre alien en Mortmaine, car cel perder per
Default est semble a un Alienation. Vide le Statute de Westminster. 2. c. 32.

Mes lou un voile doner Terres ad Meason de Religion, un Ad quod damnum issera
al Escheator, pur enquirer de que value le Terre est, and quel prejudice il
serra al Roy.

Quare ejecit infra terminum.
QUare ejecit infra terminum est un Br^e que gist lou un fait Lease a un auter
pur term d' ans, and le Lessor enfeoffa un auter, and le Feoffee ousta le
Termour; donques le Termour avera cest Brief verse le Feoffee. Mes si un auter
estranger ouste le Termour, donques il avera Brief De ejectione firmae verse
luy. Et en ceux deux Br^es il recovera le term and ses damages.

Quare impedit.
QUare impedit est un Br^e que gist lou jeo ay Advowson, and le Parson devie,
and un auter present son Clerk, ou disturb de presenter; donq^s jeo avera le
dit Brief. Mes Assise de darrein presentment gist lou jeo ou mon ancestors ount
present devant. Et lou home poit aver Assise de darrein presentment, il poit
aver un Quare impedit, mes nemy contrary.

Auxy si l' Plee solt dependant enter deux parties, and ne soit discuss deins
size moys, l' Evesque presentera per laps, and cestuy que ad droit de presenter
recovera damages, come appiert per le Statute de Westminster. 2. c. 5. Et si cestuy
que ad droit de presenter ap^s le mort del Parson ne porta Quare impedit, ne
Darreine presentment, mes suffer un estranger d'usurper sur luy, uncore il
avera un Brief de Droit d' Advowson. Mes cest Brief ne gist si il ne claim ^
aver le Advowson a luy and ses heirs en Fee.

Quare incumbravit.
QUare incumbravit est un Brief que gist lour deux sont en Plee pur l'
Advowson, and l' Evesque admit le Clerk d'un d'eux deins le size moys; donques
il avera ceo Br^e verse l' Evesque. Mes ceo Brief gist touts soits pendant le
Plee.

Quare intrusit Matrimonio non satisfacto.
QUare intrusit Matrimonio non satisfacto est un Brief que gist lou le Seignior
profera convenable Marriage a son Guard, and il refusa, and entra e^ le Terre,
and soy marry a un auter; donques le Seignior avera cest Brief verse luy.

Quare non admisit.
QUare non admisit est un Brief que gist lou home ad recover un Advowson, and
il manda son convenable Clerk al Evesque pur admit, and l' Evesque ne voile
luy receiver; donques il avera le dit Brief verse l' Evesque. Mes Brief de Ne
admittas gist lou deux sont en Plee; si le Plaintiff suppose que l' Evesque
voit admit le Clerk le Defendant, donques il poit aver cest Br^e al Evesque,
luy comman ^ ane que il ne luy admit pendant le Plee.

Quarrels.
Quarrels est derive a Querendo, and extend non solem^t al Actions cybien real
come personal, mes auxy al Causes de Actions and Suits: issint que per Release
de touts Quarrels, non solement Actions dependant en Suit, mes Causes (...)
Action and Suit auxy sont release; and Quarrels, Controversies and Debates so^t
Synonyma, and de un mesme signification. Coke, lib. 8. fol. 153.

Quarentine.
QUarentine est, lou home devie seisie (...) un Man^or-place, and de auters
Terres, don't sa Feme doit estre endow, donques la feme tiendra se en le
Mannour-place, and la vive de le store and profits de ceo per quarant jours,
deins quel temps sa Dower serra a luy assign: come appiert en Magna Charta,
cap. 6.

Que estate.
QUe estate est un Term en pleading p^ avoider prolixity, si come un plead un
feoffment en see al A. Cujus quidem A. statum idem B. modo habet, and null poet
ceo plead forsque Tenant dei fee, nec poit estree plead de choies queux passont
merement per grant come Advowsons ou Franchises, etc.

Quid juris clamat.
QUid juris clamat est un Br^e q^ gist lou jeo grant le Reversio^ de mon
Tenant a term de vie per Fine en Court le Roy, and le Tenant ne voit atturner;
donques le Grantee avera cest Br^e p^ luy chaser, Mes Brief de Quem redditum
reddit gist lou jeo grant per Fine un Rent charge, ou auter Rent que nest Rent
service, quel mon Tenant tient de moy, and le Tenant ne voit attorner; donques
le Grantee avera cest Brief. Et Br^e de Per quae servitia gist en semble case
pur Rent service.

Auxy si jeo grant iv. diverse Rents a un home, and le Tenant de Terre attourna
al Grauntee per payment de un denier, ou un maile, en nosme de Attournment de
touts ceux Rents; cest Attournm^t luy mittera en seisin de tout cest Rent. Mes
ceux trois Briefs covient estr^ port verse eux que sont Tenants a jour del Fine
levy, and verse null auters.

Quinzisme.
QUinzisme est un Payment grant en Parliem^t al Roy les Lays gents,
cestascavoir, l' quinzisme part de lour Biens: Et fuit use en ancient temps
destre levy sur lour avers esteaunts en lour terres, que chose fuit mult
troublous; and p^ ceo a ore pur le pluis part cest voy est alter, and ils use
de levy ceo per le Verge ou Acre, ou auter measure de Terre; per reason de que
il est a ore meins troublous and plus certain q^ devant, and chesc^ Ville and
Pays scient q^l sum est destre pay perenter eux, and comment ceo serra raise.
Nous legemus que Moses fuit le pri ^ et q^ number le people, car il number les
Israelites; and pur c^ le primer Tax, Subsidy, Tribute, ou Quinzisme, fuit
invent per luy enter les Hebrews, come Polydore Virgil suppose.

Quit claim.
QUit claim est u^ Release ou Acquitting d un ho^e p^ asc ^ n Action q^ il ou
poit aver envers luy. Bracton l. 5. tract. 5. ca. 9. nu. 9.

Quo jure.
QUo jure est un Brief que gist lou home ad ewe Common de Pasture en auter
Several deins le te^ps de memory; donques celuy a que appertient l' Several
avera cest Brief, a charge luy de monstrer per quel Title il claim le Common.

Quo minus.
QUo minus est un Br^e que gist lou home ad grant a un auter Housebote and
Heybote en son boys, and le Grantor fait tiel Wast and destruction que le
Grantee ne poit aver so^ reasonable Estovers; donque l'Gra^tee avera le avaunt
dit Brief, que est en natura de Brief de Wast.

Et nota que Housebote est certain Estovers pur amender le Meason; and Heybote
est certain Estovers p^ amender Heyes and Hedges.

Est auter Brief appelle Qu ^ minus en l' Exchequer, quel ascun Termour ou
Dettour al Roy avera verse ascun auter pur Debt ou Trespass en le Exchequer
Office appelle le Common Pleas, pur que le Plaintiff surmittera, que pur le
tort que le Defendant fait a luy, il est meynes able a payer le Roy son Dett ou
Term; quel est surmise a doner Jurisdiction al Court d' Exchequer d' oyer a
terminer la cause del Suit enter eux, quel auterment serroit determine en auter
Court.

Quo warranto.
QUo warranto est un Brief q^ gist lou home usurp daver aseun Franchise sut le
Roy; donques le Roy avera cest Brief, de fair luy vener devant ces Justices,
pur monstre per quel Title il claim tiel Franchise.

Quod ei deforceat.
QUod ei deforceat est u^ Br^e que gist lou Tenant en Tail, Tenant en Dower, ou
Tenant a Vie perde per Default en ascun Action; do^ques cestuy avera cest Brief
verse celuy que recovera, ou verse son Heir, si il entende que il avoit melior
droit q^ i ^ q^ recovera. Veies l' Stat. West. 2. c. 4.

Quod permittat.
QUod permittat est un Brief q^ gist lou home est disseise de son Common de
Pasture, and l' Disseisor alien ou devie seisie, and son Heir entr^; donques
si l' Disseisee devie, son Heir avera cest Brief.

R.
Ran.
RAn significat tam apertam Rapinam, quae negari non potest. Lamb. Arch. fol
125.

Ranger.
RAnger venust del parol Francois Range, (id est Ordo, vel Series) and signify
un Officer del Forest que est appoint se pourmen ^ r chesc' jour per le
purlieu don't il est le Ranger, pur rechaser les Feres horse ceo en le Forest
arrere; de veier, oyer and enquire des Offenders la, and de presenter lour
Offenses. Veies Manw. cap. 20. fol. 185. etc.

Ransom.
Ransom signify properment ceo Sum que est pay pur le Redemption dun q^ est
pr ^ se captive en guerre, Mes est auxy use use pur un Sum des deniers pay
pur le pardoner dascun grand Offense; come en le Statute de 1 H. 4. cap. 7. and
en auters Stat. Fine and Ransom alants insemble; 23 H. 8. cap. 3. and aylors.

Rape.
RApe ad deux significations: Le primer est quant il est prise p^ le part del
County; come Southsex est divide en size parts, que per un peculiar no^e sont
appel' Rapes, Cambd. Britan. p. 225 and ceux parts en auters pays so ^ t app'
Hundreds, Tythings, Lath 5, ou Wapentakes.

En laut' sense il est l' violent Conusance du^ ^ e^e encount' sa volunt: and
cest offense est Eelo^ie, cybie^ e^ l Principal come e^ les Accessories. V. 11
H. 4. c. 13. 1 Ed 4. c. 1. Westminster. 2. c. 13. Cromptons Just. de Peace, f. 43, 44.

Rationabili part bonorum.
RAtsonabili part bonorum est u^ Br^e que gist p^ u^ Feme verse les Executors
sa baron, daver le tierce part de ses beins apres Detts pays and Funeral
Expenses discharge. Mes si cest Brief gisera al Common Ley, ou solem^t per le
Custom dascun Pais, est un question en nostre Livres. Veies F. N. B. 122. L.

Rationabilibus divisis.
RAtionabilibus divisis est un Brief que gist lou sont deux Seigniories en
diverse Villes, and un pres de auter, and ascun parcel de un Sn^rie, ou de Wast,
ad este encroche per petits parcele; donques celuy Seignior de que le parcel de
Terre ou le Wast ad este encroche avert cest Brief envers le Seignior que ad
issint encroche.

Ravishment de Guard.
RAvishment de Guard est un Brief que gist pur le Guardian en Chivalry, ou
Soccage, verse cestuy que prist de luy le corpse son Guard. Et de c' veies F. N.
B. fol. 140. E. etc.

Rebutter.
REbutter est, quant un per Fait ou Fine grant d' garranter ascun Terre ou
Hereditame^t a un auter, and cestuy que fist le Garrantie, oy son Heir^, sua
celuy a que le Garrantie est fait, ou son Heir, ou Assignee: guee: si celuy
que issint sue plead le dit Falt ou Fine ove Garrantie, and demand Judgment,
si le Plaintiff serra receive a demander le chose que il doit garrant',
enconter cel Garrantie, per le Fait ou Fine avaunt dit, compernant tiel
Garrantie, tiel Pleader en Garrantie est appelle un Rebutter.

Cest paroll est auxi un denomination d'un Plea q^ succeed le plea appel
surrejoinder, and puis le Rebutter succeed Surrebutter. Queux veies Cokes
Entries, fol. 284.

Recaption.
REcaption est un second Distress dun que fuit auterfoits distrein devant p^
m^ le cause, and c' durant le Plea ground sur le former Distress. Est auxy le
nosme del Brief ou Remedy que le Ley done p^ cestuy q' est issint deux foits
distrein p^ u^ chose: le form^ and use (...) q^l Br' poies veier en F. N. B. f.
71. E. etc.

Recluse.
REcluse est cestuy que per le reason de son Order en Religion ne poit mover ou
departer horse de son Meason ou Cloister. Et dun tiel, Littleton parle sect. 434.

Recognizance.
REcognizance est un Obligation fait devant un Master del Court de Chauncery
pur un Debt, ou a performer Covenants, ou uu Order ou Decree del Court sur q^
un Elegit issue si les conditions ne sont perform, mes null Capias sur ceo gist
versus le cognisor ou ses Executors. Quaere and vide 2 Len. 84.

Recordare.
REcordare est un Brief direct al Viscount, p^ remover un Cause horse du^
inferior Court, com^ Court ^ l Ancient de^esne, Hundred Court, ou County Court,
en Bank le Roy, ou Common Bank. Et de c'veies F. N. B. f. 70. B.

Record.
REcord est un Esctipt en Parchment, ou sont enroll Pleas de Terre, ou Common
Pleas, Faits, ou Criminal Proceedings en ascun Court de Record; mes en Courts
nient de Record come Admiraltie, Courts Christian, Courts Baron, etc. lour
Registrie de procedure ne sont proprement dits Records: Mes Courts de Ley teign
per Grant ^ l Roy so^t Courts de Record.

Recovery.
REcovery est commenm^t intend un common Recocovery per assent des parties a
docker un Entaile, and est foundue sur un Brief ^ entry Auxi chescun judgment
est recovery per les parols Ideo consideratum est quod recuperet.

Recusants.
REcusants sont touts ceux queux separate de l'Esglise and congregac^on per Ley
and Statutes establies en cest Roialm de q^l opinion ou sect lis sont, come
touts Judges ont ceo expound super Statute 35 El. cap. 1. and diverse auters
Stat.

Redisseisin.
REdisseisin. Veies de ceo devant en le Title de Assise.

Reextent.
REextent est un second Extent fait sur Terres ou Tenements, sur complaint fait
que le prieur Extent fuit partialment perform Broke, tit. Extent. fol. 313.

Regarder.
REgarder venust del Francois Regardeur, (i. e. Spectator) and signify un
Officer del Forest le Roy, jure de prender le regard del Vert and Venison, and
de veier and inquire des touts Offenses co^mises deins le Forest, and des
touts les co^cealm^ts (...) eux; and si touts les Officers del Forest bien
executo^t lour Offices ou nemy. Veies Manw. For. Leys. c. 21. f. 191. b.

Regrator.
REgrator est ce uy que ad Blees, Victuals, on auters chooses sufficient pur son
necessary ops ou expenses, and nient obstant engress and achate en ses mains
plus Blees, Victuals, ou auters tielx chooses, al intent de ven ^ c^ arere al un
pluis hault and chare price, en Faires, Markets, ou tiels semblable lieux: de
que veies le Stat. 5 E. 6. cap. 14. Il serra punie come Forestaller.

Rejoinder.
Rejoinder est, qn^t le Defendant fait respons al Replication del Plainriff.

Et chescun Rejoinder doit aver ceux deux properties specialment:
cestaseavoire, il doit estre sufficient Respons ad Replication, and de
subsequent and e^force le matter del Bar.

Relation.
RElation est, lou, en consideration del Ley, deux temps ou auters chooses sont
consideres tielment come si fueront tout un, and per ceo le chose subsequent
est dit de prendr' son force per relation al temps precedent': Sicome un
deliver un Escript al un destre deliver al auter, come Fait cestuy q^ ceo
deliver, qn^t lauter, a que serroit deliver, ad pay ascun sum de money; ore
quant le money est pay, and l' Escript deliver, ceo serra repute come Fait
cestuy q^ ceo delivera al temps quant fuit primes delivera. Issint Petitions de
Parliament, as q^x le Roy assent al darrein^ jout Parliam^t, avero^t relation
and prendront lour force del prim^ jour del commencem^t l Parliament Et issint
est diverse auters chooses semblables.

Release.
RElease est le Done on Discharge del Droit ou Action q^ ascun eyt ou claim
envers auter, ou son Terre.

Et un Release de Droit est co^muneme^t fait qn^t un fesoit u^ fait a u^ auter
per ceux ou tiels parolx, Remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro me and Hered'
meis quiet' clamasse A. B. totum jus meum quod habui, habeo, seu quovismodo in
f ^ turo habere potero, in uno Messuagio, etc. Mes ceux parols ( quovismodo
habere potero ^) sont voids: Car si le Pere soit disseisie, and le Fits release
per son Fait sans Garrantie tout son droit, per ceux perols ( quovismodo in
fut. habere potero, etc.) and le Pere morust; le Fits poit loyalment enter sur
le possess. le Disseisor.

Auxy en un Release de Droit il covient que il a que le Release est fait ad un
Frank ^ enement ou Possession en les Terres en Fait ou en Ley, ou un Reversion
al temps del Release fait; car sil ad riens en le Terre al temps del Release
fait, le Release ne serra a luy availeable. Veies pluis de ceo. Littl. lib. 3.
cap. 8.

Relicta verificatione.
RElicta verificatione est quant un Defendant ad plead, and l' issue est enter
de record. Et puis ceo le Defendant relicta verificatione (que est son plea)
cognoscit actionem, and sur ceo Judgment est enter pur le Plaintiff.

Relief.
RElief est ascun foits un certain sum de money que l'Heir payera la Sn^r ^
que ceux Terres sont tenus, queux apres le decease de son Ancestor sont a luy
discende come prochein^ Heir. Ascun foits il est le Paym^t d' u^ auter chose,
and nemy money. Et pur ceo Relief nest certain and semblable pur touts Tenures,
mes chescun sundry Tenure ad (pur le pluis part) son special Relief certain en
luy mesme. Neque est c^ destre pay touts foits al un certain age, mes il vary
accordant al Tenure.

Come si le Tenant ad terr ^ tenus per Service de Chivaler, (forspris grand
Serjeantle) and morust, son Heir esteant de pleine age, and tient ses Terres
per le Service de un entier Fee de Chivaler, le Seignior de que ceux Terres
sont issint renus avera del Heir C s. nomine Relevii: and si il tient per
meins q^ un Fee de Chivaler, il payera meins, and si pluis, donques pluis;
aiant respect touts foits al rate p^ chesc' Fee de Chivaler un cent soulz. Et
si tient per grand Serjeantie, (que est touts foits del Roy, and est auxy
Service de Chivaler) donq^s le Relief serra le value del Terre per an, preter
touts charges issuant horse de c'. Et si l' Terre soit tenus en Petit Serjeantie
ou e^ Socage' donques p^ le Relief le Heir payera al un foits ta^t que il doit
payera an^uelment p^ son Service; q^ est co^munement appelle le Doubling ^ l
Rent.

Auxy si un home tient del Roy en chief, and des auters Sn^rs, le Roy avera le
Guard de touts les Terres, and le Heir^ payera Relief a touts les Seigniours a
son plein age: mes les Seigniours suera al Roy per petition, and avera le Rent
pur le temps que le Enfant fuit en Guard.

Mes veies ore que per le Statute de 2 E. 6. cap. 8. les mesne Sn^rs ne sont
mises a lour Petition, mes averont touts les Rents as eux pays per les
Officers le Roy sur request annuelment durant le possession le Roy.

Et nota, q^ touts foits qn^t le Relief est due, il doit estre pay al un entier
payment, and nemy per parts, nient obstant que le Rent soit destre payer al
several Feasts. Veies le Statute 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.

Remainder.
REmainder de Terre est l' Terre que remainera apres le particular Estate
determine: Come si un grant Terre p^ term de ans, ou p^ vie, le remainder al
J. S. cest adire, quant le Lease p^ ans est determin^, ou le Lessee pur vie est
mort, donques le Terre remainera ou abide ove, al, ou en J. S. Veies Reversion.

Remembrancer del Eschequer.
REmembrancer del Eschequer: la sont trois Officers ou Clerks la appel per tiel
nosme; l' un est appelle Remembrancer del Roy, l' auter del Seignior Treasurer,
and le tierce del Primer fruicts.

Le Remembrancer del Roy enter en son Office touts Recognisances pur les Dets
le Roy, Apparances, and pur observer Orders: auxy il prist touts Obligations
pur ascun des Dets le Roy, pur Apparances, and observances d' Orders, and fist
Process sur eux p^ le enfreinder de eux.

Le Remembrancer del Seignior Treasurer fist Process verse touts Viscounts,
Escheators, Receivers, and Bailifes pur lour Accounts; il fist le Process de
Fieri facias, and Extent pur ascun Dets due al Roy, ou en le Pipe, ou ove les
Auditors: and il fist Process pur tout tiel Revenue que est due al Roy per
reason de ses Tenures.

Le Remembrancer de les Primer fruicts prist touts Compositions p^ Primer
fruicts and Dismes, and fait Process envers ceux q^ ne pas paya m^. De ceux
Officers veies pluis e^ Da. Livre del Office and Authority de Viscounts, f.
186.

Remitter.
REmitter est, quant un home ad deux Titles a ascun Terre, and il vient al
Terre per le darreine Title; uncore il serra adjudge ein s per force de son
pluis eigne Title, and ceo serra dit a luy u^ Remitter. Come si Tenant e^ le
tail discontinua le Tail, and puis disseisie son Discontinuee, and morust ent
selsie, and les Terres discendont a son issue ou Cousin enheritable per force
del Tail; en ceo case il est e^ son Remitter, cestascavoir, seisie del per
force del Tail, and le Title del Discontinuee est ousterment anient and defete.
Et le reason and cause de tiel Remitter est, p^ ceo q^ tiel Heir est Tenant
del Tr^e, and nest ascun person Tenant verse que il poit suer son Brief de
Formedon p^ recover l' Estate tail: car il ne puit aver Action verse luy mesme.

Auxy si Tenant en le tail enseoffa son Fitz ou Heir apparent q^ est deins
age, and puis devie: ceo est u^ Remitter al Heir, mes si il fuit (...) plein
age al temps de tiel Feoffm^t, il nest Remitter, p^ c^ q^ il fuit son folly,
q^ il esteant (...) plein age voile p^nder tiel Feoffm^t.

Si le Baron alien Terre que il ad en le droit son Feme, and puis reprist
Estate a luy and a son Feme p^ term de lour vies; ceo est un Remitter al Feme,
pur ceo que cest Alienqtion est l'act le^ Baron, and nemy l' act de la Feme;
car null folly poit estre adjudge en Feme durant le vie le Baron.

Mes si tiel Alienation soit per Fine en Court de Record, tiel Reprisel apres
al Baron and Feme pur term de lour vies ne ferra la Feme destre en sa
Remitter; pur ceo que en (...) la Feme serra examine (...) Judge, and tiels
examina ^^ ons en Fines excluderont tiels Femes a touts jours.

Auxy quant l' Entry d'asc' home est congeable, and il prist Estate a luy
quant il est de plene age, si ne soit per Fait indent', ou matter de Record,
que luy estoppera, ceo serra a luy bone Remitter.

Rents.
REntsso^t (...) diverse kinds; ces ^ ascav', Rent-service, Rentcharge, and
Rent-secke.

Rent-service est, lou le Tenant in Fee-simple tient sa Tr^e de son Sn^r per
Fealty and certain Rent, ou per auter Service and Rent; and donques si le
Rent soit arere, le Sn^r poit distraine, mes il jammais navera Action de Det
pur ceo.

Auxy si jeo done Tr^es en le rail a u^ ho^e, paya^t moy certain Rent, ceo est
Rent-service. Mes en tiel case il covient que le Reversion soit en le Donour:
Car si home fait Feoffment en Fee, ou un Done en tail, le Remainder ouster en
Fee, sans Fait, reservant a luy un Rent, tiel reservation est void, and ceo
est per force del Statute Quia emptores terrarum; and donques il tiendra de le
Sn^r de q^ son Donour tenoit.

Mes si home per Fait indent a cel jour fait tiel Done e^ le tail, le
Remainder ouster en Fee, ou lessa pur term de vie, le Remainder ouster; ou un
Feoffm^t, and per m^ l' Endenture reserva a luy un Rent, and q^ si le Rent soit
arrere, que bien lirroit a luy a distrainer; ore tiel Rent est Rentcharge.

Mes en tiel case, si la ne soit clause de Distress en le Fait donques tiel
Rent est appel Rent-seck, p^ quel il ne jammais distrainera; mes si fuit un
foits seisie, il avera Assise; and si il jammais ne suit seisie, est sans
remedy.

Aux' si u^ grant u^ Rent issua^t horse (...) sa Tr^e, ove clause ^ Distress,
cest u^ Rentcharge, and si le Rent soit arrere, le Grantee poit es ^ ier (...)
distrainer, ou suer' u^ Br^e (...) Annuitie, mes il ne poit aver ambideux; car
sil port Br^e d'Anuitie, donques le Tr^e est discharge. Et si il distr^, and
avow le prisel en Court de record, donque, le Tr^e est charge, and ie person ^
l Grantor discharge.

Auxy si un grant un Rent charge, and le Grantee p^chase le moietie, ou asc'
auter part ou parcel de le Terre, tout le Rent est extinct. Mes e^ Rent
service, si le Seign or p^chase parcel del Terre, le Re^t serra apportion.

Si un ad un Rent charge, and son Pere purchase parcel del Terre, and cel
parcel discenda a le Fitz, q^ ad le Rent charge; ore cel Rent serra apportion
solonque le value del Tr^e, come est dit de Rent service; p^ ceo que le Fitz ne
vient a ceo p^ son act demesn^, mes per descent.

Aux'si jeo face un Lease p^ term d' ans, reservant a moy un certain Rent, cest
appel u^ Rent service, pur quel il est mon liberty a distrainer p^ le Rent, ou
aver un Action de Det: mes si le Lease soit determine, and le Rent soit arer^,
jeo ne puisse distraine, mes serr^ mis a mon Actio^ (...) Det.

Et nota, que si le Seignior soit seisie de Service and Rent avandits, and ils
soyent aderere, and il distrain, and le Tenant rescue le Distress, il poit aver
Assise, ou Brief de Rescous; mes il est pluis necessary pur luy d' aver
Assise, que Brief de Rescous: pur tant que per Assise il recovera son Rent and
ses Damages; mes per cest Brief de Rescous il ne recovera mes Damages, and le
chose distraine serra reprise.

Si le Seigniour ne soit my seize del Rent and Service, and ils sont aderere,
and il distrein pur eux, and le Tenant reprent le Distress; il ne poit my aver
Assise, mes Brief de Rescous, and ne covient my al Sn^r de mr^e son droit.

Si le Seignior ne poit my trover Distress per deux ans, il avera verse le
Tenant Brief de Cessavit per biennium, ut patet per le Statute de Westminster. 2.
cap. 21.

Et si le Tenant devie en le mean temps, and son Issue enter, le Sn^r avera
verse le Issue Br^e de Entry sur Cessavit; ou si le Tenant alien, le Sn^r avera
verse le Ali ^ nee le avantdit Brief. Mes si le Sn^r ad Issue and devie, and le
Tenant soit en arrearages del dit Rent and Services en le temps le Pere, and
nemy en le temps del issue; il ne poit my distrein pur arrearages en temps son
Pere, and navera ascun auter Recoverle verse le Tenant ou ascun auter, pur ceo
que tiel advantage est done per le Ley al Tenant. Et nota q^ fealty appent de
common droit a Rent-service, mes nemy a Rent charge ne Rent seck.

Si home distrein pur Rent charge, and le Distress soit rescue de luy, and il
ne fuit my seisie adevant, il ne ad my Recoverie forsque per Br^e (...)
Rescous; car le Distress primerm^t fait ne done a luy Seisiu, forsque sil and
le Rent adevant: car si il fuit seisie del Rent adevant, and puis le Rent soit
adecere, and il distrein, and Rescous soit fait, il avera Assise, ou Brief de
Rescous.

En chescun Assise de Rent charge, and annual Rent, ou en un Brief de Annuity,
covient a celuy que port le Brief de monstre avaunt un Especialty, ou auterm^t
il ne maintainera le Assise. Mes en Assise de Mortda^cester ou Formedon e^ le
discender, and auters Briefs (en les queux Title est done ou co^prise) port de
Rent charge ou de annual Rent, nest besoigne de monstre Especialty.

Et nota bien, que si home grant Rent charge a un auter, and le Gra^tee relessa
al Grantor parcel de le Rent, uncore tout le Rent nest extinct.

Si Rent charge soit grant a deux joyntment, and le un relessa, uncore le auter
avera le moietie del Rent. Et si l'un p^chace le moietie de le Ter^ don't le
Rent est issuant, lauter avera le moietie del Rent de son compaignion. Et si le
Disseisor charge la Terre a un Estranger, and le Disseiscee port le Assise and
recover; le charge est defeat. Mes si celuy que ad droit charge la Terre, and
un Estranger feign un faux Action envers luy que and dro ^ t, and recover per
Default; le charge demurra.

En case Purparty soit perent' deux Parceners, and pluis Terre soite allotte a
lun que a lauter, and el que ad pluis del Terre charge sa Terre al auter, and
el hap le Rent; el maintainera Assise sans Especialty.

Et est un Rent seck, lou ho^e tient de moy per Homage, Fealty, and auter
Services, rendant a moy un certain Rent per an, q' jeo grant a un auter,
reservant a moy les auters Services.

Si Rent seck soit grant a un home and ses Heirs, and le Rent soit arere, and
le Grantor devie; le Heir ne purra my distrainer, ne recoverales arrearages de
temps son Pere, sicome est avantdit de Rent service.

Et in m^ le manner est de Rent charge ou annual Rent. Mes e^ touts ces Rents
le Heir pro ^ t aver p^arrearages en son temps demesne tiel advantage come
avoit son Pere en sa vie. Vide Statute 32 H 8. cap. 37.

Et nota bien, que en Rent seck si home ne soit seisie del Rent, and il soit
aderere, il est sans recovery, pur c' que il fuit son folly demesne al primer,
quant le Rent fuit grant a luy ou reserve, que il ne prist my Seisin del Rent,
sicome un denier ou deux.

Hom^ ne poit aver^ Cessavit per biennium, ou un auter Br^e d'entry sur
Cessavit, p^ ascun Rent seck aderere per deux ans, mes il p^roit tant solement
p^ Rent service, ut patet in le Stat. Westminster. 2. cap. 21.

Il covient p^ luy que sue p^ Rent seck monstr^ Fait al Tenant, auterm^t le le
Tenant ne serra my charge del Rent, sorsque lou le Rent seck fuit Rent service
adevant; come en cest case: Sn^r, Mesne, and Tenant, and chesc' de eux tient de
auter per Homage and Fealty, and le Tenant de Mesne per 10 ^. de Rent; le
Seignior paramount p^chase les Terres ou Tenements (...) Tenant, tout le
Seigniorie del Mesne, forsprise le Rent extinct: and pur cest cause cest Rent
est devenus Rent seck, and le Rent service change, car il ne poit distraine pur
cest Rent; and en cest case celuy q^ dema^da le Rent ne serra jammes charge de
monstre Fait.

Auxy en Brief (...) Mortdancestor, Ayle ou Besayle, de Rent seck, il ne
besoigne de monstre Especialtie, pur ceo que ceux Briefs de Possession
comprehendont un Tir'e delns eux mesmes, cestascavoire, que le Ancestor fuit
seifie de mesme le Rent, and continua son possession; per cause de quel Seisin
le Ley suppose q^ est auxy averrable per le Pays.

Tame^ quaere, car ascu^s supposant u^ fine sorce a mo^str^ ava^t Fait, p^ ceo
que Rent seck est u^ chose e^count' common droit, auxy bien come Rent charge.

Mes en Assise de Novel disseisin, and en Brief de Entry sur disseisin port de
Rent seck, il covient de Fine fore mr^e avaunt Fait; p^ ceo que Rent seck est un
chose encounter common droit sinon en le case suisdit, ou il fuit Rent service
adeva^t, and per le act del Ley est devenus Rent seck.

Et Assise de Novel disseisin, and Brief de Entry sur disseisin ne conteigne
deins eux null Title, mes supposant un Disseisin de^e fait en le Plaintiff; and
de entendment del Ley le Disseisin ne done null cause de Averment encounter
common droit, mes de fine force il monstre avaunt Especialy.

Repleader.
REpleader est, ou le plees de Plaintiff ou Defendant, ou ambi-deux sont male,
ou un impertinent Issue join, donque le Court annul touts ceux pleas queux
sont male, and agard quod parts replacitent Co. En. 152. 221, 224.

Replevin.
REplevin est un Brief que gist quant un home est distreine pur Rent ou auter
chose, donques il avera cest Brief al Viscount, pur deliver a luy le Distress,
and trovere Surety de pursuer son Action; and si il ne pursua, ou si soit trove
and judged encounter luy, donques cestuy que prist le Distress re-avera
Distress, que est appel' Return des Avers; and il avera en tiel case Brief
appel Returno habendo.

Mes si le Defendant avow pur Rent il poit aver judgment pur le value des
avers per le Statute 17 Car. 2. cap. 7.

Si soit en ascun Franchise ou Bailiwicke, le party avera un Replevin del
Viscount direct al Bailiff de m^ le Franchise, pur eux redeliver, and il
trovera Surety de pursuer son Action al prochein County. Et cest Replevin poit
estre remove horse del County en le Common bank per Brief de Recordare.

Vide plus de Replevin devant Title Distress.

Auxi vide Mic. 2. E. 3. pl. 31. and 7 E. 3. 27 pl. 13. un parol Plevin, ou
terr' fuit prist en la main le Roy. Et puis sont deliver ou Replevy horse des
mains le Roy, per que veies Stat. 9 E. 3. cap. 2.

Brief de Homine replegiando gist lou un home est en Prison, and nemy per
especial commandment le Roy, ne de ses Justices, ne p^ le mort de home, ne pur
le Forest le Roy, ne pur tiel cause que nest replevisable; donques il avera
cest Brief direct al Vicount, que il luy fair estre replevy. Et cest Brief est
un Justicies, and nient retournable. Et si Vicount ne ceo face, donques issera
auter Brief, Sicut alias; and apres auter Brief, Sicut pluries, vel causam
nobis significes, que serra retornable. Et si le Viscount uncore ne face
Replevin; donques issera un Attachment directed al Coronors dattacher le
Vicount, and de luy amesner devant les Justices a un certain jour, and ouster
ceo que ils facent execution del prim^ Brief.

Replication.
REplication est, quant le Defen ^ en ascun Action fait Respons, and le
Plaintiff reply a ceo, ceo est appel le Replication del Plaintiff.

Reprises.
REprises sont Deductions, Payments and Duties que va annuelm^t and sent pay
horse de un Manor; come Rent charge, Rent seck, Pensions, Corrodies,
Annulties, Fees de Seneschals ou Baylifes, and tiels semblables.

Reprieve.
REprieve venust del Francois Repris, Resumptus; issint que repriver est
properment ^ resumer un Prisoner sooner del Execution and proceeding del Ley pur
ceo temps.

Requests.
REquests est un Court teigne en le Palace del Roy, devant le Master de
Requests per Petition, and semble estre un Court d' Equity.

Rere County.
REre County (Retrocomitatus) est un perol use en les Stat. Westminster. 2. c. 39.
and 2 E. 3. c. 5. and semble per ceux Stat. destre asc' public lieu que l'
Viscount appoint p^ le receipt des deniers le Roy apres le fine de son County
Court.

Resceit.
REsceit est, quant ascun Action est port verse Tenant pur term de vie ou de
ans, and cestuy en le Reversion vient eins, and pria destre receive p^ defen ^
le Terre, and p^ pleader ovesque le Demandant: Auxy quant il vient, il covient
que il soit touts foits prist a pleader ove le Demandant. En mesme le manner un
Feme serra receive pur default sa Baron en Action port verse ambideux. Et Tenant
pur ans serra receive a defend' son droit, lou, en un Action port verse Tenant
del Frank-tenement, il plede faintment.

Rescous.
REscous est un Brief que gist quant ascun home prent Distress, and un auter
repriss Distress de luy, and ne voile suffer luy amesner l' Distress; ceo est
un Rescous, sur quel il poit aver cest Brief, and recovera damages.

Auxy si un distrein Beasts pur damage feasant en sa Terre, and les enchasea
per le hault chimin pur eux enparker, and en alant ils entront en le meason de
celuy a que ils sont, and il eux detient la, and ne voile suffer le auter de
eux enparker; ceo detainer est Rescous.

Auxi si le Viscount prist mon dettor per Execution ou mesne Process, and J. S.
rescue luy horse del Custody del Viscount, Jeo avera acc^on de Rescous versus J.
S. pur cest tort and recovera Damages and Debt.

Reservation.
REservation est prise diverse voyes, and ad diverse natures. Come ascu^ foits
per voy de exception, (...) reserve ceo que un home ad devant en luy: Come si
u^ Leaf soit fait pur ans de Terre, reservant les grand Arbors cressant sur
ceo, ore le Lessee ne poit meddle ovesque eux, ne ovesque asc' chose q' vient
(...) eux, cy long come il demurt e^ ou sur les Arbors, come Mast ^ Oak,
Chestnut, Pomes, ou tiels semblables: mes sils chient del Arbors al terre, donq
s ils sont en droit l'Lessees, car le Terre est Less a luy, and tout sur c'
nient reserve, etc.

Ascun foi ^ s un Res ^ rvation obtain and port horse un auter chose que ne
fuit devant: Come fi un home lessa ses Terres reservant annualm^t pur c' xx. l.
etc. Et diverse auters tielx Reservations y sont.

Et nota, que en ancient temps lour Reserv ^ tions fuero^t cybien en Victuals,
soit ceo Carne, Pishe, B ^ ees, Pane, Boyer, ou auterment, come e^ Money,
tanque al darreine, and specialment en le temps del Roy Henry le 1. per
agreement le Reservation de Victuals fuit change en prist Money, come il ad
tanque cy continue.

Residence.
REsidence venust ^ l Latin Residere, and est tout un ove Resiance, si non que
cest parol Residence est plus tossed appropriate al Continuance dun Parson ou
Vicar sur son Esglise ou Benefice; and issint est use en le Stat. de 28 H. 8.
cap. 13.

Resignation.
REsignation est, lou un Incumbent de un Esglise resign ou relinquish ceo al
Ordinary, que luy ait admit a ceo, ou a ses Successors; que differ del
Surrender, quant per cel il a que le Resignation est fait and ascun Interest en
le chose issint resign, mes cestuy a que surrender est fait avoit per ceo le
chose mesme.

Restitution.
REstitution est quant un Judgment est reverse per Error donque Brief de
Restitution issera p^ le Defendant en l' Action a restorer a luy tout ceo q^ il
ad produs. Est auxi un Brief de Restitution de Biens emblees sur Conviction
d'un laro^, quel est fait al Session on Assizes. Sur Stat. 21 H. 8. 11. Noy
rep. 128.

Resummons.
REsummons est un Second Summons d'un home p^ responder al un Action, lou le
primer Summons est defeat per le Demise le Roy, ou tiel semblable cause. Et de
ceo veies Coke, lib. 7. fol. 29. b.

Auxi si Terr-tenant return sur Scire facias, ou auter Action plead nonage,
and le parol demurr tanque, etc. Quant il veign de p'ein age, le Plaintiff, sur
suggestion p^ aver Scire facias ou resum: Et issint ou plea est stay per pleder
de Protection, Excomengement, ou auter tiel disability.

Resumption.
REsumption est un parol use en le Stat. de 31 H. 6. c. 7. and est la prise p^
le Reprendre en les maines le Roy de tiels Terres ou Tenements come sur faux
suggestion ou auter error le Roy ussoit deliver al un Heir, ou grant per
Patent al ascun home.

Retraxit.
REtraxit est le Preterperfect tense de Retraho, pur evulser arere; and est,
quant le Plaintiff ou pertie Demandant veient e^ proper person e^ le Court lou
son Suit est, and dit que il ne voit ulterius prosequi in placito illo, etc.
ceo serra un Bar al Action a touts jours.

Reve, ou Reeve.
REeve est un Officer pluis conous en ancient te^ps q^ a cest jour: car chesc'
Manor ad donques un Reeve, and uncore en diverse Copihold-Mannors (ou le veiele
custom p^vaile) le nosme and office nest en tout oblie. Et est en effect ceo q^
a ore chesc' Bailiff d'un Man^or practice, nient obstant le nosme de Bailiff ne
fuit donq^s e^ ure enter nous, esteant puis port eins per les Normans. Mes le
nosme de Reeve, ancientment appel Greeve, (quel particle ( Ge) en continuance
del temps fuit ousterment omise and perde) vient del Saxon parol Gerefa, que
signify un Ruler: Et issint verament son Rule and Authority fuit large deins
le compass del Man^or son Seignior, and enter ses homes and Tenants, cybien en
chooses de Governm^t en peace and guerre, come en le skilful use and trade de
Husbandry. Car sicome il collect ses Rents del Sn^r, pay Reprises ou Duties
issuant horse del Manor, appoint les Servants de worker, succide and decoupe
Arbres p^ repairer les Edifices and Enclosures, ovesque diverse tiels
semblables, p^ le commodity del Seign^t; issint auxy il ad authority de
governer and guard les Tenants en paix, and, sil besoigne, (...) conducter eux
en guerre.

Reversion.
REversion de Terre est un certain Estate remainant en le Lessor ou Donor,
apres le particular Estate and Possession convey al un auter per Lease p^ vie
ou ans, ou Done en tail.

Et est appel un Reversion en respect de le possession separate de ceo: issint
que il que ad l' un and l' auter a mesme le temps; car en un corpse simul la ne
poit estre dit un Reversion, pur ceo que per l'uniting l' un est merge en l'
auter.

Et issint le Reversion del Terre est le Tr^e mesm^ quant il eschuest.

Ribaud.
RIbaud semble d'estre sturdy Vagabonds, Rot. Parl. 50 E. 3. 61.

Right, and Right de Entry.
RIght, and Right de Entry. Veies en Droit.

Riot.
RIot est, Ioutrois, (al meins) ou plures font asc' illoyal act, come de bater
un ho^e, enter sur le possession d'un auter, vel hujusmodi.

Robbery.
Robbery est, quant un home prent asc' chose del person d'un auter
feloniousm^t; coment q^ la chose prise soit al value sorsque d'un denier,
uncore il est Felony, p^ quel l' Offender suffera mort.

Rood de Terre.
ROod de Terre est un certain quantity (...) Terre contein^ le quatre part
d'un Acre. Anno 5 Eliz. c. 5.

Rout.
ROut est, quant people assemble eux m^, and puis procedant ou chivauchant, ou
alant avaunt, ou movent per instigation d'un ou plusors, que est Conductor
d'eux. Cest appel un Rout, p^ c' q^ ils movent and proceed en routs and numbers.

Item ou plures assemble eux sur lour quarrels and braules demesne; come si les
inhabitants d'un Ville voille ass ^ mbler eux p^ disbruiser Heys, Mures,
Fosses, Pales, ou tiels semblables, d'aver Common l ^, ou de bater un auter que
ad fait eux un common displeasure, vel hujusmodi; cest un Rout, and encounter
le Ley, coment q^ ils nont fait ou mis en execution lour male intent. Veies le
Statute 1 Mar. c. 12.

S.
Sac, ou Sake.
SAke est Placitum and Emenda de Transgr^ hominum in Cnria vestra; quia Sake
Anglice est Encheson Gallice, and sake est mis pur sick.

Veies Keloway Casus incerti temporis, f. 145. a. que le privilege appel Sake
est, d' aver les Amerciaments de ses Tenants en son Court demesne.

Sacrilege.
SAcrilege est quant un emblee ascun Vessels, Ornaments ou biens de Saint
Esglise q^ est Felony, 2 Cro. 153, 154.

Salary.
SAlarie (Salarium) est un parol mult use en nr^e Livres, and signify un
Recompense ou Consideration done al asc' pur son labor implie sur les besoign'
d'un aut'. Et est issint appel, come Pliny dit l. 31. Not. Hist. c. 7. quia
tam necessarium est quam Sal homini, and labores suos sapit ut Sal cibos.

Sanctuary.
SAnctuary est un Lieu privilege per le Sovereign p^ le garder des vies des
homes queux sont pechers, esteant foundue sur le Ley de Mercy, and sur le grand
reverence, honor and devotion q^ le Sovereign port al lieu a que il granta
tiel Privilege: q sult st grand en temps pass q^ les Sovereigns ont grant
mesm^ en cases de Treason perpetres encounter eux mesmes, Murder, Rape, ou
auter crime quecunque. De ceo veies Stamf. Pl. del Cor. l. 2. c. 38.

Satisfaction.
SAtisfaction est, quant un Defendant ad pay Debt ou Damages versus luy
recover, il covient a luy d' aver satisfaction d' estre enter sur le record del
Judgment.

Sarpler.
SArpler est un quantity de Lane, que en Escose est appel Serplath, and
contain 80 Stone; and ove nous en Angleterre un Cord de Lane consista (per l'
opinion d' ascuns) de 80 Todde, and chesc' Todde containa deux Stone, and
chescun Stone 14 Livers; and que u^ Sack ^ lane est en usual estimation egal
ove u^ Cord, and un Sarpler le moietie d'un Sack.

Scandalum magnatum.
SCandalum magnatum est un Male report inve^t ou disperse al prejudice ou
slander d' ascun grand personage ou Officer ^ l Realm. Le punishm^t p^ que est
enact per diverse Statutes, viz. Westminster. 1. c. 33. 2 R. 2. c. 5. and 12 R. 2. c.
11.

Scavage.
SCavage ou Shewage est un Toll exact per les Majors, Viscounts and Bailiffs
des Cities and Boroughs corporate, pur wares ou merchandise monstres destre
vendus deins lour p^cincts and jurisdiction: quel Exaction, estea^t encont' le
privilege des subjects le Roy, suit inhibite per un Statute fait 19 H. 7. c. 8.
Veies 21 H. 7. f 1 ^. a. and veies le Stat. de 22 H. 8. c. 8. in fine.

Major, etc. de London port dett p^ cel duty, hiis verbis Pro supervisu
apertionis H. 18, 19. C. 2. B. R. Roll. 625.

Scire facias.
SCire facias est un Brief judicial issuant horse de Record, and gist lou un ad
recover Debt ou Damages en Court le Roy, and il ne sue pas d' aver Execution
deins l' an and le jour; donq^s apres l' an and jour l' avera il dir Brief a
garner le party: and si le partia ne vient, ou sil vient and ne scavoit riens
dire encounter Execution, donques il avera un Brief de Fieri facias direct al
Viscount, luy commandant que il levy le Debt ou les Damages des Biens (...)
celuy q^ avoit perdue.

Le Br^e de Fieri facias gist deins l' an, sans ascun Scire facias suer.

Auxy si le sum^e (...) mesme le Debt ou Damages ne poit estre levy des
Biens de celuy q^ avoit perdue, donques il poit aver un Br^e d' Elegit, direct
al Viscount, que il face luy deliver la moietie de sa Terre and Biens, except
ses Boves and affries de sa Carue.

Quant un ad recover Det ou Damages en Action personal, (lou le Process est u^
Capias) il poit aver u^ auter Br^e d' Execution, appel Capias ad
satisfaciendum, pur prender le Corpse celuy q^ est issint condemn, que serra
commit al prison, illonques a demurrer sans Bail ou mainprise, tanque il ad
satisfy le party.

Auxy quant u^ ad Judgm^t de recover ascun Terres ou Tenements, il avera un
Br^e appel Habere facias scisinam, direct al Viscount, luy commandant deliver a
luy Seisin de mesme le Terre issint recover. Veies pluis de ceo en les Titles
Fieri facias, and Execution.

Le Brief supra est done per Statute Westminster. 2. cap. 45. Mes auxi sont auters
manners de Scire facias; scil. super Audita Querela Brevia de Erroribus
corrigendis, tam ad audiendos errores, q^ quare Executione^ habere non debeat,
and versus terrtenent super Juditiis and hujusmodi.

Scot.
SCot est, quietum esse de quadam Consuetudine, sicut de communi Tallagio facto
ad opus Vic' vel Balliv' ejus.

Scotale.
SCotale est un Extortion prohibit per le Charta del Forest, cap. 7. and est
lou ascun Officer del Forest tenust un Alehouse, al intent que poit aver le
custom des Inhabitants deins le Forest, de vener and expender lour deniers
ove luy, and pur ceo il coniver^ a lour offenses commise deins le Forest.

Second deliverance.
SEcond deliverance, est un Brief fait per le Filacer a reliver avers distreine
puis q^ le Plaintiff est Nonsuit en un Replevin. Plo. Com. 274. Dyer 41.

Se defendendo.
SE defendendo est un Plee p^ luy que est charge ove mort de un auter, disant
que il fuit compelle a ceo que il faisoit, en son defense m ^ sme. Stamf. Pl.
Cor. lib. 1. cap. 7.

Seigniorie en Gross.
SEigniorie en Gross. Veies Lord en Gross.

Selion.
SElion (Selio) venust del Francois Sellon, id est, Terra elata inter duos
fulcos, en Latin Parca; and nest dascun certain quantity, mes ascun foits
contain plus, and ascun foits meins. Et p^ c' Crompton en son Jurisdiction des
Courts, fol 221. dit q^ un Selion ne poit estre demand, eo que est uncertain.

Seneshal.
SEneshal (Seneschallus) est u^ perol Francois emprant del Germonois, and
signify u^ q^ avoit le dispensation del Justice e^ asc' particular cases; come
Stamf. Pl. Cor. fo. 152. B. le grand Seneschal del Angleterre, ou des affairs
dun Family come Cromptons Jurisdiction, f. 102. Seneschal de Hostel le Roy,
and le Stat. de 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. c. 21 and auters.

Est auxi home erudite appoint per le Seignieur de un Manor a tener Courts
leet ou Baron, Coke 1 Inst. f. 58. 61.

Sequestration.
SEquestration est le Mitter apart du^ chose in controversy del possession
(...) ambideux q^ contend pur ceo. Est use auxy p^ le act dun Ordinary, qn^t
null voit intromitter oves les biens and chat' dun q^ est mort, come en 4. and
5. M. Dyer fol. 106. b. and 7 El. Dyer fo. 232. a. Et issint est use auxy p^ le
Collect' des fruits and profits dun Benefice q^ est void, al use del prochein
Incumbent, per le Statute de 28 H 8. cap. 11.

Service de Chivaler.
TEner per Service de Chivaler est, a tener per Homage, Fealty, and Escuage;
and treit a luy Guard, Marriage, and Relief.

Et nota, q^ Service de Chivaler est Service (...) Terres ou Tenements, pur
arms porter en Guerre en defense del Royalm^; and doit Guard and Marriage
appent, per reason q^ null est able, ne de power, and ne poit aver conusa^s de
arm^s porter, devant q^ il soit del age de 21 ans. Et al fine que le Sn^r ne
perdera ceo que de droit il poit aver, and q^ la power de la Royalme en rien ne
soit enfeeble, la le Ley voet, per cause de son tender age, q^ le Sn^r luy
avera en la Guard tanque al pleine age de luy, cestascavoire, 21 ans.

Mes veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. per quel tout 'Tenures sont very en
free and common Soccage.

Sessions.
SEssions est un Seiance des Justices en Court sur lour Commission: come les
Sessions de Oyer and Terminer, Pl. Cor. fo. 67. Quarter Sessions. auterm^t
appel' General Sessions, ou overt Sessions, 5 El. c. 4. encounter q^ux sont
Private ou especial Sessio^s, queux sont procure p^ asc' especial occasion, p^
le pluis subite fesa^ce de Justice, Cromp. Just. de P. fo. 110. Queux chooses
sont enquirable en General Sessions, veies Cromp. ut supra, and fo. 109. Petit
Sessions, ou Statute Sessions, sont tenus per le hault Constable de chesc'
Hundred, pur le placing de Servants. An. 5. El. c. 4. in fine.

Severance.
SEverance est le Mitt' horse de un ou plusors que sont join en un Brief: Come
si deux sont joyn^ en un Br^e De liberate probanda, and puis lun soit nonsuit,
en cest case Severance est permit, issint q^ nient obstant le Nonsuit de lun le
auter poit severalm^t proceed, F. N. B. fol. 78. De c' veies Brook tit.
Severance and Summons, f. 238. Car est pluis dur^ a cognostre en queux cases
Severance est permit, q^ quel y est. La est auxy Severance en Assise, Veil
Livre d' Entries, f. 81. col. 4. Et Severance en Attaint, f. 95. col. 2. Et
Severance en Det, f. 200. col. 1. Et Severance en Quare impedit, Coke, lib. 5.
f. 97.

Sewers.
SEwers semble destre un parol compound des deux parols Francois, Seoir,
sedere, and Eau, Aqua, pur ceo que les Sewers sont Commissioners que seont, per
virtue de lour Commission and authority foundue sur diverse Statutes, d' inquire
de touts Nusances and Offenses faits per lestopper des Rivers, erecter des
Molins, non repairer des Banks and Bridges, etc. and pur taxer and rat' touts
queux poit concern, p^ le ame^der des touts defaults que sont al hindrance del
frank passage del Eau per ses vieux and ancient currants. Veies le Stat. 6 H.
6. cap. 5. and 23 H 8. cap. 5. pur le form de lour Commission.

Shack.
SHack est un peculiar nosm^ de Com^on use en le pays de Norfolk, and Avers, de
aler a Shack, est rant adire come de aler a liberty, ou de aler alarge. Et
cest Common appelle Shack, q^ en le Commencem^t fuit forsque en nature de un
Feeding, pur cause de vicinage, p^ avoiding (...) Suits, en ascun lieus dein
cest Pays est per custom alter en nature dun Common appendant ou appurtenant,
and en ascun lieu ^ c' retain son Original Nature. Coke l. 7. f. 5.

Showing.
Showing est, quietum esse cum Attachiamento in allqua Curia, and coram
quibuscunque, in Querelis ostensis, and non advocatis.

Soc.
SOC est Secta de homin^ in Curia vestra, secundum co^suetud Regni.

Soccage.
TEner en Soccage est, a tener ^ ascun Seigniour Terres ou Tenements, rendant a
luy un certain Rent per an p^ touts man^ers des Services.

Tener per Soccage nest pas ten^ per Service de Chivaler, ne la appent Guard,
Marriage, ne Relief: mes ils doubleront un foits lour Rent apres le mort lour
Ancestor, solonque ceo q^ soloyent payer a lour Seigniour.

Et ils ne serront ouster measure greeves, come il appiert en le Treatise de
Gards and Relief.

Et nota, que Soccage est, en trois manners; cestasc' Soccage en frank Tenure,
Soccage en ancient Tenure, and Soccage en base Tenure.

Soccage en frank Tenure est quant un tient de un per Fealty and certain Rent
pur touts manners d' Services, come devant est dit.

Et de touts Terres tenus en Soccage le procheine amy avera le Guard, a que le
Heritage ne purra my discender tanque al age le Heir del 14 ans: cestascavoir,
si le Heritage veign^ per le part le Pere, ceux del part le Mere averont le
Guard; and contra.

Si Guardian en Soccage fait Waste, il ne ferra my impeache de Waste, mes il
rendra account al Heir quant il viendra al pleine age (...) 21 ans. Et veies
l' Stat. de Marlebridge ca. 17. pur cest matter.

Soccage de ancient Tenure est ceo lou les genes tenoyent en Ancient Demesne,
que ne soloyent auter Br^e avoir q^ le Br^e de Droit close, que fuit determine
Secundum consuetudinem Manerii, and l' Monstraverunt; pur eux discharge quant
lour Sn^r eux distreine pur fair auter Services que duissent.

Cest Brief d' Monstraverunt doit estre port envers lour Sn^r: and ceux Tenants
teignent touts per un certain Service, and sont frank Tenants de Ancient
Demesne.

Soccage en base Tenure est, lou home tient en Ancient Demesne, que ne poit
aver le Monstraverunt, and pur ceo il est appel le base Tenure.

Sockmans.
SOckmans sont les Tenants e^ Ancient Demesne, queux tient lour Terres per
Soccage, cest adire, per Service ^ l Carue, and p^ ceo ils sont appelle
Sockmans, que est tant adire come Tena^ts ou homes queux tient per Service del
Carue, ou ho^es del Carue: Car Sok signify un Carue.

Et ceux Sockmaus, ou Tenants en Ancient Demesne, ont plusors and diverse
Liberties done and grant a eux per l' Ley, cybien ceux Tenants q^ux tient de un
common person, come ceux q^ux tient del Roy e^ Ancient Demesne; come nosmement
destre quite de payer Toll en chescun Market, Fair, Ville, City, per tout le
Royalme, cybien p^ lour Biens and Chattels que ils vende as auters, come pur
ceux chooses que ils achateront p^ lour provision. Et sur ceo chescun de eux
poit suer de aver Letters Patents desouth le Seal le Roy, direct a ses
Officers, and al Majors, Bailiffs, and auters Officers en le Royalme, de suffer
eux destre quit de Toll: destre exempt del Leers and (...) Turns de Vic': item
destre quit de Pontage, Murage, and Passage; and auxy de Taxes and Tallages
grant per Parliament, s ^^ on que l' Roy tax Ancient Demesne, come il poit a
son pleasure, pur grand cause: destre quit de payment a les expenses del
Chivalers del Shire, queux vient al Parliament.

Et si le Viscount voil distreyner eux ^ ou ascun de eux, destre contributorie
pur lour Terres en Ancient Demeine, donques l' un de eux, ou touts, come le
case require, poir suer un Brief direct al Viscount, luy commanda ^ t que il
ne compelle eux destre co tributories al expenses de Chivalers Et m ^ sme le
Brief luy command auxy, que si il ad distrain eux pur ceo, que il redeliver m^
le Distress.

Item que ils ne deveront estre impannel, ne mis en Juries and Enquests en le
Pays h ^ rs de lour Manor ou Seigniory de Ancient Demesne, p^ les Terres queux
ils teigne la, s ^ non que ils out auters Terres al Common Ley, pur queux ils
deveront estre charge.) Et si le Viscount return eux en Pannels, donques ils
poyent aver un Brief direct a luy De non ponendis in Assisis and Juratis: Et
sil face al contrary, y gist Attachment envers luy.

Et issint est auxy si les Bailiffs des Franchises, queux ont Retorn des
Briefs, voile return ascun del Tenants queux reign en Ancient Demesne en
Assizes ou Juries.

Sodomy.
SOdomy, en le Indictment p^ ceo offense est dit, Rem veneream habuit and
peccatum illud Sodomiticum (inter Christianos non nominandum) felonice commisit.

Spoliation.
SPoliation est un Suit p^ les Fruits dun Esglise, ou pur le Esglise mesm^; and
est destre sue en le Spiritual Court, and nemy en le Temporal. Et cest Suit
gist pur un Encumbent envers un auter, lou i ^ s ambideux claim per un Patron,
and lou le droit del Patronage ne vient en question ou debate. Come si un
Parson soit cree u^ Evesque, and ad dispensation de ten^ son Rectorie, and puis
l' Patron persent aut' Encumbe^t, q^ est institute and induct: ore Evesque poit
aver envers cestuy Encumbe^t un Spoliati^n en le Spiritual Court, pur ceo que
ils ambideux claim per un Patron, and le droit del Patronage ne vie^t en
debate, and p^ ceo q^ le auter Encumbent vient al possession del Benefice per
le course del Ley Spiritual, cestascavoir, per Institution and Induction,
issint que il ad color de aver ceo, and destre Parson per le Spiritual Ley:
car anterment, sil ne soit institute and induct, etc. Spoliation ne gist envers
luy, mes pluistost un Brief de Trespass, ou un Assise de Novel disseisin, etc.

Issint auxy est lou un Parson que ad Plurality accept auter Benefice, per
reason de que le Patron present un aut' Clerk a que est institute and induct:
ore le un de eux poit aver Spoliation envers le auter, and donques viendra en
debate si il ad un sufficient Plurality ou non. Et issint est de Deprivation,
etc.

Mesme le ley est, ou un dit a le Patron, que son Clerk est mort, sur que il
present un auter: la le primer Encumbent, que fuit surmise destre mort, poit
aver un Spoliation envers le auter. Et issint en diverse auters se^blables
cases, de ques veies Fitz. Not. Br. fo. 36. ^. etc.

Stablestand.
STablestand est un term del Forest Leys, quant un est trove esteant en le
Forest ove son Arc tend prist de escocher, al un Dame, ou ovesque ses Levriers
en un Less prist de glisser. Veies Manw. For. Leys, Ca. 18. fo. 133. b.

Stallage.
STallage signify argent pay pur pitching Stalles in Nundinis and Mercat', ou
le droit de ceo faisant.

Standard.
STandard. Veies Estandard.

Stannary.
STannary sont Courts per ancient Custom teigne en Cornwall p^ suits concernant
le Trade de Tin.

Statute-Merchant.
TEner per Statute-Merchant est, lou ho^e conust a payer deniers a un auter a
certain jour devant l' Mayor, Bailiff, ou auter Gardein de ascun Ville que ad
poyar de fair execution de mesme le Statute, and si le Obligor ne pay a le Det
a le jour, and rien de ses Biens, Terres ou Tenements ne purront estre troves
deins le Guard le Mayor ou Gardein avantdit, mes en auters lieux dehors, donques
le Recognisee suera le Recognisance and Obligation ove un Certification a la
Chancerie desouth le Seal le Roy, and il avera horse de la Chancerie un Capias
al Viscount del County lou il est, de luy prender, and mitter luy en prison, si
il ne soit Clerk, tanque il ad fait gree de la Debt. Et un quarter de le an
apres ceo que il serra prise, il avera sa Terre deliver a luy mesme, pur fair
gree a le party de le Debt: and il poit vender sa Terre tanque il est en
prison, and son vendition serra bone. Et si il ne face gr ^ e deins le quarter
dun an, ou sil soit return que il nest trove, and sil ne soit Clerk, adonques
le Recognisee, poit aver Brief de le Chancery, appel Extendi facias, direct al
ascun Viscount, de ^ extender les Terres and Biens, and les Biens a luy
deliver, and luy seiser en ses Terres, a tener eux a luy, ses Heirs and
Assigns, tanque le Dett soit levy ou pay; and pur cel temps il est Tenant per
Statute-Merchant.

Nota, que en un Statute-Merchant le Recognisee avera Execution de touts les
Terres que le Recog^^ sor avoit jour de la Recognisance fait, and ascun temps
puis, per force de m^ le Statute.

Et quant ascun Wast ou destruction est fait per le Recognisee, ses Executors,
ou celuy que ad son Estate, le Reconisor ou ses Heirs averont mesme la Ley,
come est suisdit ^ le Tenant per Elegit.

Si le Tenant per le Statute-Merchant rient ouster son term, cestuy que ad
droit poit suer envers luy un Venire fac' ad computandum, ou enter tantost,
sicome sur Tenant per Elegit. Veies l' Statute 1 ^ E. 1. and de Acton Burnel,
and 13 E. 1. de Mercatoribus.

Starr-chamber.
Star Chamber fuit un haut Court teigne in Camera stellata a Westminster. deva^t le
Roy, les Peers and Judges, abolish per Stat. 17. Car. 2. cap. 10.

Sterbrech.
STerbrech, alias Strebrech, i. Viae Fractio, Obstructio, vel diminutio.

Stilyard.
STilyard est un parol use en le Statute de 22 H. 8. cap. 8. lou les Merchants
Teutonicks sont appelles les Merchants del Stilyard, que est un lieu e^ Londres
lou ceux Merchants ou le Fraternity deux ad lour abode. Et c' Mease est dit
destre issint appel, p^ c' q^ edefie sur un Court pres le Thames, ou Aeier
soloit destre usualment vendus.

Sub poena.
SUb poena est le nosm de un Brief fait en diverse Courts de Ley and Equity;
viz. in Chancery and touts auters Courts a su^moner tesmoins, and en ceo Court
and en le Exchequer en Ley and Equity, and in le Common Pleas sur Informatio^s,
qui tam, etc. and issint en le Crown Office sur Informations.

Suffragan.
SUffragan est un parol use en le Statute de 26 H. 8. cap. 14. and signify un
titular Evesque, ordeine de ayder and assister l' Evesque des Dioces en son
Spiritual Function. Et est appel Suffraganeus en Latin, pur ceo q^ per son
Suffrage Ecclesiastical causes sont estr^ adjudges.

Suggestion.
SUggestion est, un Information trahe en Escript, monstrans cause per aver un
Prohibiton, quel est relinque en Court, and est mention en le Sat. 2 Ed. 6.
cap. 13.

Sumage.
SUmage semble destre Toll pur Carriage per chival. Crompt. Jurisd. f. 191.

Summons ad Warrantizandum, etc.
SUmmons ad warrantizandum, and Sequatur sub suo periculo: Veies de ceux apres
en le Title Voucher.

SUpercargo ou Supracargo.
SUpercargo ou Supracargo, est un Factor ou Agent q^ ale ove un neif ouster le
mere per order del Proprietor des Merchandises en ceo, and dispose d'eux: Et le
Master del neif est oblige a performer les Orders de tiel Factor ou Supercargo.

Supersedeas.
Supersedeas est un Br^e que gist en diverse cases, come appiert per F. N. B. f.
236. A. mes est touts foits un Precept p^ tarier asc' Process en Ley, q^
auterm^t doit ordinariment queceder.

SUpplicavit.
Supplicavit est un Brief issuant horse del Chancery direct al Viscount and
ascons Justices del Peace en le County, ou al un ou pluis Justices del Peace
sans le Visc' p^ le prender del Surety d'un tiel verse que est pry, que il
gardera le Peace: and ceo est per le Scatute 1 E. 3. c. 16. Veies F. N. B. f.
80. C. and veies ore le Statute de 21 Jac. c. 8.

Sur cui in vita.
Sur cui in vita est u^ Br^e q^ gist p^ l' Heir d' un Inheritrix, lou le baron
alien l'Inherita^ce sa feme, and le feme morust devant que el ad ceo recover en
un Cui in vita. Veies de ceo F. N. B. f. 194. C.

SUrplusage.
Surplusage venust del Francois Surplus, id est, Additamentum, and signify e^
le Ley, u^ Addition plus q^ besoigne, que ascun foits est le cause que u^ Br^e
abater^, mes en pleader mults foi ^ s est absolutement void, and le residue del
Plea estoyera bon.

Surrej ^ ynder.
SUrrej ^ ynder est un Respons al Rejoin ^ del Defenda^t, ou un second
enforceme^t del Declaration le Plaintiff.

Surrender.
SUrrender (Sursumre ^ ditio) est le Consent d'un particular Tenant, que cestuy
en le Reversion ou le Remainder viendr^ maintenant al possession. Et ceo est ou
u^ Surren ^ e^ Fait per un actual redoner ^ l Estate; on e^ Ley, per acceptance
d'un novel Lease, ou tiel aut' act. Veies de ceo Perkins, c. 9.

Auxi est un act fait al Seineur del Manor ou son senescal de Estate
Copyhold, ou fait per special Custom d'ascun Manors, a deux Copyhold
Tenants del Manors, quel surrender, doit estre present al percheine Court
Baron.

Swainmote.
SWainmote, ou Swannimote, est un Court tenus trois toits en un deins un
Forest, per le Statute de Charta de Foresta, c. 8. p^ touts les Fra^ktenants
del Forest; car issint l' Etymology del parol monstr^, Mote en le language
Norma ^ nis significant un Court, and Swain en le Saxon un Charterer, ou
Franktenant: issint que Swainmote est le Court des Franktenants. Veies (...) c'
(...). Fo. L ^ is, c. 23. (...) 2 ^ (...) etc. ^ large.

Swainmote, e^ cest Court, Presentm^ts ^ Offenses al Forestou Game sont faits
and dones eins Justices en Eyr.

Syb and Some.
SYyb and Some, i. Pax and Securitas. L. L. Eccles. Canuti Regis, c. 17.

Symony.
SYmony est un Contract illoyal fait p^ aver un home present al Rectory ou
Vicarage, quel est prohibit per Stat. 31 Eliz. cap. 6.

T.
Fee-tail.
TEner en le Tail est, lou home tient certain Terres ou Tenements a luy and a
ses Heirs de son corpse engendres.

Si le Terre soit done a un home and a ses Heirs males, and il ad issue male,
il ad Fee-simple; que fuit adjudge e^ Parliam^t. Mes lou Tr^s ou Tenements sont
dones a un ho^e and a ses Heirs males de son corpse engendres, il ad Fee-tail,
and l'issue female ne serra inherit; ut patet Anno 14 E. 3. en un Assise, 18
E. 2. 45.

Fee-taile est, lou Terre est done a u^ home and a ses Heirs de son corpse
engendres; and il est dit Tenant en le Tail gen ral.

Si Terre soit done al baron and feme, and al Heirs de lour deux corpse
engendres, ore le baron and la feme sont Tenants en le Tail especial. Et si un
d'eux devie, cestuy q^ survive est Tenant en le Tail apres possibility d'
issue extinct; and si il face Waste, il ne serra impeach de ceo. Vide Littleton.

Mes si le Roy done Terres a un home a fes Heirs males, and le Donee devie
sans issue male; donques le Cousin collateral del Donee ne enheritera, mes le
Roy re-entra: and issint fuit adjuge en l'Exchequer-chamber 18 H. 8. en un
Information fait verse l' Heir de Sir T. Lovel Chivaler.

Tail apres possibility.
TEner en le Tail apres possibility d' issue extinct est, lou Terre est done
a un home and sa feme, and a les Heirs de lour deux corpse engendres, and l' un
d'eux survive l' auter sans issue enter eux issuant; il tiendra le Terre a
term de sa vie demesne, come Tenant en le Tail ap^s possibility d' Issue
extinct: and non obsta^t que il fait Waste, il ne serra jammes impeach de ceo.
Et si il alien, celuy en le Reversion ne avera Brief d' Enter in consimili
casu, mes il poit enter, and son Enter est congeable, per R. Thorpe chief
Iues;tice, 28 E. 3. 96. and 45 E. 3. 25.

Tales.
TAles est un Supply de homes impannel' sur un Josie ou Enquest, and nient
apparent, ou a ^ lour appearance challenge pur le Plaintiff ou Defendant come
nient indifferent, and en ce ^ t case le Judge sur petition granta an Supply
destre fait per le Vic', d'ascuns homes la persent, egal en reputation ove ceux
que fueront impannel: and sur c' le very act ^ suppliant est appel Tales de
circumstantibus. Cest supply puit estre d'un ou pluis, and de cy plusors come
ou ferront default ou serront challenge per asc' per ^^ e. Stamf. Plac. Cor. l.
3. c. 5. Uncore cestuy q^ avoit ad un Tales, ou sur default ou challe^ge, com^t
il ne poit aver un aut' uncor^ il ne poit aver le darreine de container cy
plusors come le prim^: cur le prim^ Tales doit estre desouth le no^bre del
principal Pan^el, sinon en un cause d' Appeal; and issint chesc' Tal' meins
que aut', jesque le nombre soit repleit d homes present en Court, and tiels que
sont sans exception al party ou parties. Veies Stamford e^ le lieu devant, ou
vous poyes trover ascuns exceptio^s, al cest general Rule. Veies Brook, f. 105.
and Coke, l. 10. f. 99. Bewfages Case.

Talwood.
TAlwood est un term use en les Statutes 34 and 35 H. 8. c. 3. and 7 E. 6. c.
7. and 43 El. c. 14. and signify tiel Bois q^ est coup en brief Billers, pur
le sizer des queux ceux Statutes fueront ordeines.

Tax and Tallage.
TAx and Tallage sont paym^ts, come Dismes, Quinzisms, Subsid, ou tiels
se^blables, grant al Roy per Parliam^t.

Les Tenants en Ancient demesne sont quites de ceux Taxes and Tallages grants
per Parliament; sinon que le Roy tax Ancient demesne, come il poit quant a luy
pleist pur grand cause. Veies Ancient demesne.

Tenant Paravail.
TEnant Paravail. Veies Paravail.

Tender.
TEnder est un act fait a saver un penalty d'obligation, and des denyers due p^
rent ou contract devant distress ou Action port, and ou doit estre plead, and
ou refusal est peremptory. Vide Coke, 1 Instit. 207, 208, 211. and Uncore prist.

Tenure in Capite.
TEnure in Capite est, lou asc' tient del Roy come de son Person esteant Roy,
and de son Corone, come dun Seigniorie per luy mesme en gross, and en chief
desuis touts auters Seigniories: Et nemy lou i ^ s tient de luy come de ascun
Manor, Honor, ou Castle, sinon certain ancient Honors; ut patet in S ^^
ccario. Veies le Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 14.

Term dans.
TEner a term dans nest forsque Chattel en effect; car null Action est
maintainable envers Termor qn^t a recoverer le Franktenement, null Franktenement
esteant en luy. Lease a Term dans est Chattel real, and tou ^ s Biens
movables sont Chattels personal.

Testament.
TEstament est issint define ou expound en Plowdens Commentaries; Testamentum
est Testatio mentis, and est compound de ceux deux parols, Testatio and Mentis,
que issint signify. Very il est, que un Testament est Testatio mentis, mes
que il est un compound parol, Aulus Gellius, lib. 6. cap. 12. deny ceo al un
excellent Lawyer, Servius Sulpitius, and dit, q^ il est un simple parol, come
sont ceux, Calceamentum, Paludamentum, Paviamentum, and diverse tiels
semblables. Et mult meins est Agreementum un compound parol de Aggregatio and
Mentium, com^ est dit en le Title de Agreement; car il ny ad null tiel Latin
parol, simple ou compound: mes il poit nient obstant serve bien pur un Ley-
Latin parol.

Et p^ c' il poit issint estre melior define; Testamentum est ultimae
Voluntatis justa sententia, eo quod quis post mortem suam fieri vult, etc.

De Testaments il y ad deux sorts, sc. un Testament en Escript, and un
Testament per Parol, q^ est appelle un Nuncupative Testament; q^ est, quant un
home esteant malade, and pur pavor que mort, ou fault de memory, ou de parler,
voyt vener cy sodainment sur luy, que il serra prevent, si il demurt le
scripture de son Testament, request ses vicines ou amies de porter testmoigne
de son darreigne Volunt, and donques declare ceo presentm^t per parols devant
eux, q^ apres son decease est prove per Testmoignes, and mis en script per le
Ordinary, and donques il est e^ cy bone force come si c' ad al prim^ en le vie
del Testator e ^ r^ mis en escript: except solem^t p^ Terres, que ne sont
devisable forsque per un Testament mis en escript en la vie del Testator.

Thanus.
THanus est un perol q^ asc' foits implya un Noble hom^, asc' foits un
Frank-ho^e, un Magistrate, un Officer ou Minister, Lambert verbo Thanus Skene
dit, que est u^ nosm^ ^ dignity, and appiert desire equal ove le fitz de un
Count. Et Thanus fuit un Frank-tenant tiendront ses Terres del Roy: and un hom^
prise ove le frang accuse de Larcenie, null bon^ testmoign^ esteant port verse
luy, devoit purger luy m^ per le serement de 27 ho^es, ou de 3 Thanes.
Thanagium Regis implia un certain pert des Terres le Roy ou property, de que
le Rule and government appertient a luy q^ p^ ceo est appel Thanus; car Demania
D ^ gis and Thanagia significant un and mesme le chose.

Theftbote.
THeftbote est, quant home prist ascun biens dun Laron, de luy favourer and
maintainer: and nemy quant home prist ses biens demesu^ que fueront emblees de
luy, etc.

Le punishment en ancient temps de Theftbote fuit de Vie and de member: Mes a
ore Stamf dit que il est punish per Ransom and Imprisonment. Sed quaere, car
jeo pense ceo estre Felony.

Them.
THem, hoc est, Quod habeatis totam generationem Villanorum vestrorum cum eorum
Sectis and Catallis, ubicunque in Anglia fuerint inventa; excepto quod si
aliquis Nativus quiet' per unum annu^ and diem in aliqua Villa privilegiata
manserit, ita quod in eoru^ Communiam vel Gildam, tanquam unus illorum,
receptus fuerit, eo ipso a Villenagio liberatus est.

Tithes.
TIthes. Veies Dismes.

Title.
TItle est, lou loyal cause est veigne a un home de aver chose que auter ad,
and il and ascun Action pur ceo; come Title de Mortmain, ou de enter pur
Condition enfreint.

Title de Enter.
TItle de Enter est, quant un seisie de Terre en fee fait Feoffment de ceo sur
Condition, and le Condition est enfreint: apres quel, le Feoffor ad Title de
enter en le Terre, and issint poit qua^t a luy pleist, and per son Entry le
Franktenement serra dit en luy maintenant.

Et est appel Title de Enter pur ceo que il ne poit aver Br ^ of de Droit
envers son Feoffee sur Condition, car son droit fuit horse de luy per le
Feoffment, le quel ne poit estre reduce sans Entr^, and le Entr^ doit Estr^ pur
le enfreinder de le Condition.

Toft.
TOft est un lieu en que un Mease fuit un foits esteant, mes est ore tout
eschew ou erase.

Tol, ou Tolne.
TOl ou Tolne est pluis proper ^ ent un payment use en Cities, Villes, Markets
and Fairs, pur biens and cattals port la destre achate ou vende: and est touts
foits destre pay per le Achatour, and nemy per le Vendor, finon que soit ascun
Custom al contrary.

Il y ad diverse auters Tols; come Turn Tol, que est lou Tol est pay pur Avers
queux sont drives destre vendus, coment que ils ne sont vendus.

Tol travers est, lou un claim daver un ob. ou tiel semble Tol, de chescun
Beast drive sur son terre.

Through Tol est, lou un Ville prescribe de aver certain Tol pur chescun Beast
que ale through lour Ville, ou pur chescun vint ou cent: que ne appiert destre
cy unreasonable Prescription ou Custom, come ascuns ont suppose, nient obstant
il soit per le Hault chimin del Roy, (sicome ils ceo appel) lou chesc' poit
loyalm^t pass, si y ad quid pro quo: Come si la soit un Pont, ou tiel semblable
commodity, purvey al costs and charges del Ville, pur le ease ^ travailers que
chase mesme voy, per que lour journey est ou abridge ou fait le melieur, pur
que donques ne poit Tol estre demand loyalm^t and ove bone reason de eux? etc.

Mes diverse Citizens and Burgesses sont quite de payer Tol, per le grant del
Roy ou ses ancestors, ou claim c' per Prescription ou Custom. Issint auxy
Spiritual persons and Religious homes fueront quite de Tol pur lour biens and
merchandises achate and vendus, etc. Mes ore le Statute del 21 H. 8. c. 13.
voit que ils ne merchandisera.

Item Ten^ts en ancient demesne doient estre quite per toute le Realm (...)
payer Tol, come appiert deva^t en le Title Sockman. Et en touts cases ou Tol
est demand de eux que doyent aler, achate, and vende quire de Tol, la le party
ou parties greeve poyent aver un Brief De essendo quietum de Totonio, direct a
luy ou ceux que issint demand Tol contra al grant le Roy ou ses progenitors, ou
contra al Custom cu Prescription.

Tolt.
TOlt (Tolta) venust del Latin tollo, and est un Brief per que un Cause
dependant en un Court Baron poit estre illonques remove en le County Court
devant le Viscount Veies de ceo Fitz Not. Brev. fol. 3. F. and Veil. N. B. f l.
2. a.

Tonnage.
TOnnage est un Custom^ ou Impost pay al Roy pur merchandise import ou export
en Tuns; ou asc' tiels vessels, solonque un certain rate en chesc' Tun. Et de
c' poies lier en les Statutes de 12 E. 4. c. 3. 6 H. 8. c. 14. 1 E. 6. c. 13.
and 1 Jac. c. 33. mes especialment 12 Car. 2. c. 4.

Totted.
TOtted est un term^ use en le Statute de 42 E. 3. cap. 9. and signify un Note
destre fait en le Roll des Estreats que issuit horse del Exchequer al Visc',
des touts tiels Debts come sont pays al Visc' issint que ne poye^t estr^ aut'
foits deman ^ del party, ne le Roy deceive. Veies le Statute.

Transcript.
TRanscript, ceo pluis com^unem^t signify le certification d'un Record sur
Br^e d' Error horse de B. le Roy en Ireland en B. R. en Angl', and de cel Court
en la Court de Exchequer Chamber, car le Record mesme nest certify, mes un
transcript: Mes horse de C. B. and auters inferior Courts le Record, est tout
oustrement toll per le Br^e d' Error, and remain in B. R. Coke Entr. 2. 24, 37.

Travers.
TRavers asc' foits implia a Denyer, ascun foits a Subverter ou defaire un
chose fait. Pur le prim^, Westminster. p. 2. sect. 54. parlante d'un Respons a un
Bill en le Cha^cery, dit, Que il est c' q^ le Defendant plead ou dit en bar
de avoider le Bill del Pl' ou Action, ou per confession and avoydance, ou per
deniant and traversant des material points du yeel; Et arere Sect. 55 un
Replication est le parlance del Pl' ou Reply al Respons del Defendant, q^ doit
de affirmer and pursuer son Bill, and conusire, and avoyder, denyer, ou
traverser le Respo^s del Defendant; and les formal parols de cest Travers sont,
Sans ceo, ou en Latin, Absque hoc. Veies Kitch. fol. 227.

L'auter signification est trove en Stamf. Prerog. cap. 20. per tout le
Chapter, que parla^t del Traversing d'un Office, dit, Que c' est ^ lens auter
forsque approver que un Inquisition fait de biens ou terres per le Esch aror
est defective, and fauxment fair. Issint Traversing d'un Indictment est, a
prender Issue sur le prim^ matter du yeel, que est riens auter que a fair
contradiction, ou denyer le point ^ l Endictment: Com^ en Presentment verse A ^
ur un Hauit chimin surround ove eau, pur defaulte de escourance d'un Fosie que
il and ceux que Estate il ad en certain^ Terres l ^ ont use d' escowrer and
clenser, A poit traverser ou le matter, cest adire, Que la nest asc' Hault
chimin la, ou que le Fosse est sufficient escowre, ou auterment il poit
traverser le Cause, Que il and le Terre, etc. ou que il and ceux que Estate,
etc. ont use de ^ scowrer le Foste, Lamb. ^ t Eirenarci ^. l ^ b. 4. page 521.
de Travers. Veies tout le Chapter en Kitch. fol. 240. and le Veil Livre de
Entries, verbo Travers.

Treason.
TReason est en deux manners, cestascavoire, hault Treason, and petit Treason,
com^ est ordeine per les Statutes. Et ideo vide Statuta, and Stamford, lib. 1.
cap. 4.

Treasure trove.
TReasure trove est, quant asc' Money, Ore, Argent, Plate, ou Bullion est trove
en asc' lieu, and null conust a que le property est; donques le property de
c'appertient al Roy. Mes si ascun Mineral de Metal soit trove en ascun terre,
ceo touts foits pertient al Seignior del Soil, forsque que il soit Mineral del
Ore ou Argent, queux serroit touts foits al Roy, en quecunque soil q^ il soit
trove.

Trespass, Transgressio.
TRansgressio est un Brief ou Action de Trespass, de queux la sont deux sorts.
L' un Vicountiel, issint appel, pur ceo q^ il est direct al Visc', and nest
returnable, mes destr^ determine en le County: Le form de que differt ^ l
auter, p^ c' que and ceux parols, Quare vi and armis, etc. F. N. B. fol. 85. g.
L' auter est direct al Visc' auxy, mes est returnable en Bank le Roy ou le
Common Bank, and avoit touts foits en ceo ceux parols, Quare vi and armis, ou
auterment il abatera, come appiert en Fitz. N. B. fol. 86. h; sinon que soit un
Trespass sur le Case, and adonq' les parols, Vi and armis sont waive horse, and
en lieu d'eux le Brief dirra en le fine de c', Contra pacem, etc. come appiert
en F. N. B. fol. 92. c. Et uncore en ascuns cases Trespass sur le Cise serra
Vi and armis auxy, coment que nemy en le point del Action, ou le causa causata,
uncore en le conveyance al Action, and le causa causante, come est by ^ n
distinguish e^ le Count de Salops Case, in Coke, l. 9. 50. b.

Trial.
TRial, la sont plusors mannersd ceo: come des matters en Fact, que serront
try per les Jurors; matters en Ley, per les Justices; matters de Record, per
Record m^ Un Seignior de Parliament, sur Indictment de Treason ou Felony,
serra try per ses Peers, sans ascun S ^ rement, sur lour Honors and
Allegiances; mes en Appeal al Suit de ascun subjects is serra try per pro^
os, and legales homines. Si Ancient Demesne soit plead de un Manor, and
deny, c' serra try per le Record del (...) de (...) en l' Eschequer. Un
Apostata serra certify per le Abbot ou auter Rel ^ g ^ ous Governor a que il
doit Obedience. General Bastardie, Excon mengement, ^ oyaltie de Matrimony,
Profession, and diverse auters matters Ecclesiastical, serront tries per le
Certificate del Evesque. Et un grand number des auters Trials la sont, de queux
veies Coke lib. 9. le Case (...) le Abbot del Strata Marcella. fol. 23.

Per testes De morte viri in Dower, ou le Tenant plead q^ le Baron del
Demandant est vivant. Rast. Entr. 228.

Tronage.
TRonage, est un certain Toll prise p^ Weighing. Westminster 2. c. 25. and 13 Edw. 1.

Trover.
TRover est un Action que home ad verse un auter, que aiant trove ascun de ses
biens, refusa a deliver eux sur demand. Veies le Veil Livre de Entries, parol
Trover.

Tumbrel.
TUmbrel, veies en le Title Cuckingstool; and veies le Statute de 51 H. 3. cap.
6. pur le use de ceo.

Turbary.
TUrbary (Turburia, del vieux Latin perol Turba, q^ fuit use pur un Turf) est
un interest de foder Turfs sur un Common: Et trovers un Assise port dun tiel
Common de Turbary en 5 Assise, pl. 9. and 7 E. 3. fol. 43. b.

Turn del Viscount.
Turn del V ^ scount est un Court de Record en touts chooses que pertain^ al
Turn, and est le Leet le Roy per tout le County, and le Visc' est Judge. Et
quecunque ad un Leet, ad mesme le authority deins le Precinct sicome le
Viscount ad deins le Turn.

Ce ^^ Court est destre tenus deux foits chescun an, un foits apres Pasche, and
arere puis Michaelm^, and c' deins un mois apres chesc' Feast, An. 31 E. 3.
cap. 15. De cest Court sont exempt solement Archievesques, Evesques, Abbots,
Priors; Countes, Barons, Religious homes and femes, and touts ceux queux ont
Hundreds de lour demesne destre tenus. Cest Court est apperteinant and incident
al Office ^ l Visc' and ne doit estre sever de ceo; and le Vise' est de
constituer Clerk south luy en c' Court, tiels p^ que il voile a son peril
responder: Mes il ne poit perscriber de prender asc' chose p^ le tener (...)
son Turn, p^ ceo que il est un Officer removeable. Veies Coke, l. a. 33 and l
6. 12. and Daltons Livre de Viscounts. tit. Sheriffs Turn.

V.
Vacation.
VAcation. Veies Plenartie.

Vagabonds.
VAgabonds, sont idle and inutile homes, puniable per Stat. 39 El. 4. and 1
Jac. 7. and 25.

Value del Marriage.
Valor Maritagii est un Br^e que gisoit p^ le Sn^r verse son Guard, p^ recover
verse luy le Value de son Marriage a son plein age, p^ ceo que ne fuit marry
per son Sn^r deins age. Et ceo Br^e gisoit coment que le Seignior ne unques
tender al Guard ascun convenable Marriage. Veies Palmers Case, Coke l. 5. f.
126. b. and le Stat. 1 ^ Car. 2. c. 24.

Venditioni exponas.
VEnditioni exponds, est un Judicial Brief direct al Viscount a vender biens
seize per un Fieri facias.

Venew.
VEnew (Vicinetum) est un term use en le Stat. (...) 35 H. 8. c. 6. and
frequentm^t e^ nr^e Livres, and signify un lieu prochein a ceo lou ascun chose
que venust destre try est suppose destre fait. Et pur ceo pur le mellor
discovery del verity del matter en fait sur chesc' Trial, ascun des Jurors
serront del mesme le Hundred, ou asc' foits de mesme le Parish ou
Neighborhood, en que le chose est suppose destr^ fait, queux per entendment
poient aver le melieux conusance ^ l chose. Veies Arundels Case, Coke, l. 6. f.
14 a.

Venire facias.
VEnire facias est un Process direct al Viscount, ou as Coroners (si le Viscount
est estallenge) a summon un Jury a tryer un Issue join perenter party and
party, ou le Roy and un Subject; and est auxy un Process super Audita Querela,
ou sur Indictment en Bank le Roy, and Venire facias ad computandum verse Tenent
per Elecit.

Verderor.
VErderor est un Officer e^ les Forests del Roy, essieu per les Franktenants
del County lou le Forest est, per Brief direct al Visc' (...) c' fair, come
appiert per les Livres del Register, and del Natura des Briefs: and sont
appelles en Latin Viridarii, de le parol Viridis, en Anglois Green, en
Francoes Verd; car u^ grand pert de lour Office est touchant le Verd,
cestascavoir, le Boys and Herbs cressant en le Forest; p^ quel veies pluis
en le Charter and Leys del Forest.

Verge.
VErge est le Compass environ le Court le Roy q^ limit le Jurisdiction del
Seignior Seneschal and del Coroner del Hostel le Roy issint q' il ne poit
intermeddle deins le County horse del Verge, p^ ceo que son Office ne extend a
ceo; come le Coroner del Cou^tie ne entermedler^ deins le Verge, que est exempt
horse de son Office per le Common Ley. Et semble enconter reason, que lour
Offices and Jurisdictions esteant several, l' un entermedlera deins le
Jurisdiction del auter. Et cel Verge semble destre douze milliares. Veies 13 R.
2. Stat. 1. c. 3. F. N. B. f. 241. Britton, f. 86. Fleta, l. 2. c. 2. Coke, l.
4. f. 46. 33 H. 8. c. 12.

Verge en un auter signification est use p^ un Stick ou Rod per que un est
admit Tenant and tiendront ceo en son maine, fait Serement de Fealty al
Seignior del Manor, and pur ceo est appel Tenant per le Verge. Veies Veil N.
B. f. 17. and Littl. l. 1. c. 10.

Vert.
VErt venust de Francois Verd, and signify ovesque nous en les Leys del
Forest chescun chose que cresce and port un fueille verde deins le Forest:
and est divide en over Vert and nether Vert. Over Vert est le Hault Bois, and
nether Vert est le South Bois. La est auxy en Forests un Vert appel special
Vert, and c'est touts Arbres crescants en les demesne Bois le Roy deins le
Forest, and touts Arbres queux cresco^t ley e^ les Bois ^ s aut's, sils sont
tiels Arbres queux portont fruicts p^ le fod ^ des Dames: and ceux sont dits
special Vert, p^ ceo q^ le destroyer de tiel Vert est pluis grandm^e punie q^
le destruction d' auter Vert est. Veies Manwoods For. Leys, c. 6. f. 5 2. a.

Vicountiels.
VIcountiels sont Fermes issint appelle, p^ quel le Visc' pay certien Rent al
Roy, and fait le melieur profit ^ ceux q^ il poit. Vies le Stat. 33 and 34 H.
8. c. 18.

View.
VIew est, quant ascun Action real est port, and le Tenant ne scavoit bien quel
Terre il est que le Demandant demand; donques le Tenant priera le View, sc. que
il poit veier le Terre q^ il claima. Mes si le Tenanc ad ew le View en un
Brief, and puis le Brief est abatus per misnosmer de le Ville, ou pur
Joyntenure, and puis le Demandant port un auter Brief verse le Tenant; donques
le Tenant navera le View en le second Brief.

View de Frank pledge.
VIew de Frank pledge (Visus franci plegii) est le poyar ^ ten^ un Tourn^ ou
Leet, en queux Courts chesc' Fra^ke-ho^e en ancient temps deveigne lie ove
Sureties al age de 14 ans pur son Fidelity al Roy and ses subjects. Et sur ceo
ceux Courts fueront appels le View de Frank pledges, cestascavoir, des tiels
Frank-homes queux deveignont icy Pledges ou Sureties l'un p^ l'auter. Veies
Deciners.

Vi Laicaremovenda.
VI Laica removinda est un Brief que gist lou Debate est perenter deux Parsons
ou Provisors d'un Esglise, and l'un enter en l'Esgllse ove grand power (...)
Lay-ho^es, and tient l' auterdehors ove force and arms; celuy que est tenus
deliors aver^ le dit Brief direct al Visc', que il remova cest power que est
deins l'Esglise: and serra command al Visc', q^ sil trove asc' ho^es luy
resistant, q^ il p^ndra ovesque luy la Poyar de son County, si besoigne soit,
and ferra attache per lour corpse touts ceux luy resistants, and les mittera en
prison, issint q^ il eyt lour corpse devant le Roy a certain jour, de responder
del Contempt. Et cest Brief est retournable, and ne serra grant, devant que l'
Evesque del lieu lou tiel Esglise est eyt certify en le Chancerie tiel
Resistance and Force.

Villein and Villeinage.
TEner en pure Villeinage est, a fair^ tout ceo que le Sn^r luy voit commander.

Le division de Villainage est, Villeine de sanke, and de tenure. Et il est
Villein de que son Sn^r prent Redemption de sa file marrier, and soy mesm^
enfranchise: and le Seigniour puit luy ouste de ses Terres ou Tenements a sa
Volunt, and auxy de touts ses Biens and Chateux.

Sockman nest pas puer Villein, ne Villein doit pas Guard, Marriage, ne Relief,
ne fair auters Services reals.

Tenure en Velleinage ne ferra Frank home Villein, sil ne soit continue ouster
le te^ps de memory: ne villein terre ferra Frank home Villein, ne frank terre
ferra Villein frank; sinon que le Tenant avoit continue frank ouster le temps
de memory.

Mes un Villein ferra Frank terre villein per Seisin, ou per Claim de son
Seignior.

Si Villein purchase Terre, and prent feme, and alien, and devy devant le
Claim ou Seisin de son Seigniour, la feme serra endowe.

En case le Seigniour port Praecipe quod reddat envers le Alienee son Villein,
le quel vouch a garranter le issue de le Villein q^ est Villein al Seigniour il
avera le Voucher. Et per protestation le Seigniour poit (non obstant que il
plede ove son Villein) save que son Villein ne ferra my enfranchise.

Bastard ne serra jammes adjudge Villein, sinon per conusans en Court de Record.

Si Det soit due per un Sn^r a un Frank home, and il face deux homes ses
Executors les queux sont Villeins al dit Seigniour, and devie, les Villeins
averont Action de Det envers lour Seigniour. Et nient obstant que il plede
ovesque eux, and if face protestation, ils ne serront pur tant enfranchise; pur
ceo que ils sont de recover le Det al use de u^ auter person, cestascavoir,
lour, Testatour, and nient a lour use demesne.

Et si le Tenant en Dower eyt un Villein, le quel purchase certain Terre en
fee, and puis le Tenant en Dower enter; el avera le Terre a luy and fes heirs
a touts jours. Et mesme le Ley est de Tenant a term de ans de un Villein.

Le Seigniour poit rob, nau frer, and chastifer son Villein a son volunt: salve
que il ne poit luy maim, car donques il avera Appel de maihem envers luy.

Un Villein poit aver trois Actions envers son Seigniour; cestascavoir un
Appeal de mort son ancestor, un Appeal de Rape fait a sa fem^, and un Appeal
(...) maime.

Si deux Parceners port Brief de N ^ efty, and l'un de cuu soit Nonsuit, le
Nonsuit de luy serra adjudge le Nonsuit ^ ambideux, issint que si le Nonsuit
soit ap^s Appeara^ce, ils serront bar de cest Actio^ a touts jours; car le
Ley est tiel in favorem Libertatis.

Si deux ount un Villein en common, and l' un (...) eux fait a luy Manumission,
il ne serra my infranchise envers ambideux.

En Brief de Nativo habendo, il covient que le Sn^r monstre coment le Defendant
aveigne privy de sank a celuy Villein de que il est Seigniour, etc. Et si il ne
null de ces ancestors ne soit seisie de null de son sanke, il ne gainera per son
Action, si le Villein and pas conus en Court de Record luy estre son Villein.

En un Brief de Niefty ne puro^t estr^ mis plusors Niefes que deux; and hoc
introductum fuit prius in odium Servitutis. Mes en Br^e de Liberate probanda,
purront estre mis tants Niefes come le Plaint voudera.

Si le Villein soit fue en Ancient Demesne del Roy, ou auter Viile privilege,
deins lan and jour le Seignior poit luy seiser; and sil demurt en la dit Ville
ou lies Franchise per un an and jour, sans le seisine de son Seignior, il and
my power (...) luy seisie apres, si il ne va dehors de suisdit Franchise.

Ascuns sont Villeins per title de Prescription, cestascavoire, que tout lour
sanke ont este Villeins regardants a le Manor du Sn^r de temps don't memory ne
eurr.

Et ascuns sont fait Villeins per lour Confession e^ u^ Court de Record. Auxy
le Sn^r poit fair un Manumission a son Villein, and luy infrachise a tout
jours.

Si le Villein port ascun Action verse son Sn^r, si ne soit Appeal de maihem,
and le Seignior a ceo sans protestation fait respons, per ceo le Villein est
franches.

Auxy si un Villein p^chase Terre, and ad Biens, and vend les Terres and Biens
devant ascun Enter ou Seism fait per le Sn^r, la vender est bon^. Mes le Roy.
Sn^r de Villein en tiel case poit enter and seisier le Terre apres tiel ven
itio^ fait: Quia nullum tempus occurrit Regi.

Note, que cel title and tenure sont abolie per Statute Car. Secundi R.

Villenous judgment.
VIllenous judgment est ceo que est done sur un Indictment del Conspiracy,
scilicet, que le party trove culpable perdera son frank Ley, ne serra plus
mise en Juries ou Assizes, ne aylors en Testmoignance del verity: and sil ad a
fair en Courts le Roy, que face son Attorney, and nemy vien^ en son person
demesn^: que ses Terres, Biens and Chattels sont seisies en maines le Roy, and
estrepes, sil ne poit melior grace aver, and ses Arbres erases, and son Corpse
imprison. Veies 24 E. 3. fol. 34. b. and 27 Ass. pl. 59.

Virgata terrae.
Virgata Terrae. Veies Yardland.

Viscount.
VIscount est ou le nosme de u^ degree ou state de Honor soubs u^ Cou^tee, and
paramount u^ Baron; ou le nosm^ (...) u^ Magistrate and Officer del grand
Authority, que nous communement apellom^ ( Sheriff) ou, de parler pluis
veraime^t, ( Shire reve,) and fuit al prim^ appel ( Shire gereve) cest adire,
Custos Comitat', ou le Reve ou Ruler del County; car ( Gereve) est derive de
Saxon perol ( Gerefa) i. un Ruler.

Et de c' vient ( Portreve ou Portgreve,) un nosme en veil te^ps done al chief
Officer d'un Ville, and signify le Governor del Ville; p^ ceo que ( Port)
veniens de Latin perol ( Portus) signify un Port-ville, and ( Gereve) esteant
derive come est avantdit signify u^ Ruler: issint que Portgreve, ou, come nous
a ore briefment perle e', Portreve est le Governor del Ville.

Et iffint fuit le chief Officer ou Governor del City de Londres long temps
past (devant que ils ad le nosme del Mayor ou Bailiffs) appel come il appiert
en diverse vieulx minuments; mes principalm^t en le Saxon Charter de Guilliam le
Conqueror, que issint commence:

William le King greit William Biscop, and Godfrey ges Portgerefant, and dalle
tha Burwatren theon Lon ^, beon, etc.

Issint is de Germany (de que nous and nour^ Language primerm^t vient) appel un
Governor Burgreeve, u^ auter Margreve, and u^ auter Landsgreeve, ove tielx
semblables, etc.

Cest tant est dit tant solement p^ monstre le droit Etymon and Antiquity de
parol ( Sheriff;) a quel Officer nostr^ Common Ley ad touts foits done si grand
confidence and authority, come destre un special Preserver del Peace. Et p^ ceo
touts Obligation que il prist a m^ le purpose, sont come Recognisances en Ley.

Il est un Judge de Record quant il tient les Leets ou Turns, les queux sont
Courts de Record.

Item il ad le Execution and Return des Bri ^ fs, and impannelling des Juries,
and tiels se^blables, etc.

Uncore prist.
UNcore prist est un Plee pur le Defendant en Det sur Obligation, que esteant
sue pur ceo, que ne paya le Det al jour, plead, pur saver le Forfeiture, q^ il
render, les deniers al jour and lieu, and que null fuit la pur receiver, and dit
ouster, que il est uncore prist, de payer. Et lou home doit pleader ouster
uncore prist, and lou nemy, veies en Perkins, sect. 783, and 784. and Coke,
lib. 9. fol. 79. a, b. en Peytor's Case.

Volunt.
VOlunt est, quant le Tenant tient a le Volunt del Lessor, ou Sn^r: and ceo est
e^ deux manners.

Un est quant jeo face Leaf a un hom^ de Terres, a ten^ a ma Volunt, donques
jeo puisse luy oust' a mon pleasure: mes si il emblee le Tr^e, and jeo luy
ousta, donques il avera son Embleement, and egresse and regresse jesques ils
sont mature, pur eux scier and carier horse del terre.

Tiel Tenant a Volunt rest pas tenus de sustainer and repairer le Meason,
sicome Tenant a term de ans est tenus: Mes si il fait voluntary Waste, le
Lessor avera verse luy un Action de Trespass.

Auxy la est auter Tenant a Volunt del Seigniour, per Copy de Court-Roll,
solouque le Custom de Manor: and tiel Tenant poit surrender le Terre en les
main^s le Sn^r, per le Custom, al use d'un auter p^ vie, en fee, ou fee tail;
and donques il prendra le Terre del Seigniour, ou son Seneschal, per Copy, and
ferra Fine al Seigniour. Mes si le Seignior ousta tiel Tenant. il and remedy
mes de suer per Petition. Et si tiel Tenant voile impleade un auter des Terres,
etc. il covient enter un Plaint en le Court, and countera en le nature del quel
Brief il voit, sicome le case gist.

Voucher.
VOucher est, quant un Praecipe quod reddat de Terre est port verse un home, and
un auter doit garrant le Terre al Tenant; donques le Tenant luy vouchera a
Garrantie, and ^ ur ceo il avera un Brief appel Summoneas ad Warrantizandum. Et
si le Viscount return que il and ri ens per que il poit estre summon, donques
issera, Brief appel Sequatur sub suo periculo. Et quant il vie ^, il pleadera
ovesque le Demandant. Et sil ne vient, ou vient, and ne poit bar le
Demandant, donques le Demandant recovera le Terre verse le Tenant, and le Tenant
recovera tant de Tr^e en value verse le Vouchee; and sur ceo il avera un Brief
appel Capias ad valentiam verse le Vouchee.

Vide plus de Voucher devant, Tit. Garrantie.

Uses.
USes de Terre ad son commencement apres que le custom de Property commence
enter homes: come ou un esteant seisie de Terres en Fee-simple, fait un
Feoffm^t al un auter sans asc' Consideration, mes solem^t meaning que l' auter
serroit seisie al son Use, and que il mesm^ voile p^nder les Profits de les
Tr^es, and que le Feoffee doit aver le Possession and Franktenem^t de ceo al
mesme le use, etc.

Ore ap^s ceo, sur bone Considerations, and p^ avoider diverse mischiefs and
inconveniences, fuit le Statute de An. 27 H. 8. c. 10. purview, quel unite le
Use and Possession ensemble, issint que il que ad le Use de Terre, ad le
Possession de ceo, accordant al Use q^ il avoit en ceo, per virtue de cest
Statute.

Usurpation.
USurpation est, pluis communement use quant ascun present un Rector ou Vicar
al Esglise sans bon title. Stat. Westminster. 2. cap. 5. Co. 6. Rep. 51. and 11 Rep.
33.

Usury.
USury est un Gain d'asc' chose ouster le Principal, ou ceo que fuit lent,
exact solem^t en consideration de le Loan, soit il (...) Corn, Viand, Apparel,
Wares, ou tiels semblables, come de Money.

Et icy mult poit estre dit, and diverse Cases mis concernants Usurie, le q'ux
(...) p^pose jeo omit: solem^t jeo pria, q^ ceux que account eux mesmes
religious and bone Christians ne voilent deceive eux mesm^s per color de le
Statute de Usury, p^ ceo q^ le Statute dit, q^ il ne serra loyal p^ ascun de
prender ouster vi. l. en le C. l. pur un an, etc. per que ils collect (mes
fauxment) que ils poyent per ceo prender vj. l. pur le Loan d' un C. l. ove un
bone Conscience, pur ceo que le Statute solonque un manner dispense ove ceo,
(p^ ceo q^ il ne punish tielx pre^dors.) Car Dieu voile aver ses Decrees
observe inviolable, q^ dit, Lend, expectant null chose pur ceo, etc. Per queux
perolx est exclude le prisel de vj. l. v. l. ou de un denier ouster le
Principal. Mes plus pensant tiels, q^ cest Statute fuit fait sur tiel semblable
cause que movant Moses de doner uu Bill de Divorce a les Israelites, come
nosmem^t p^ avoider un greinder mischief, and p^ le duritie de lour coeurs.

Et le Statute de 21 Jac. c. 17. ad Ordeine expressement, que null parol en cest
Ley serr^ construe ou expound p^ allower le practice del Usurie en point de
Religion ou Conscience.

Per le Statute de 13 Eliz. c. 8. le Loan Money fuit 10. l. per Cent. per 21
Jac. c. 17. 8. l. per Cent. and ore per le Statute 12 Car. 2. c. 17. ceo est
reduce al 6. per Cent.

Vtlary.
UTlary est, quant Exigent issist verse ascun home, d' appearer en asc' Court de
fair Respons al asc' Action ou Indictment, and Proclamation fait en cinque
Counties; si le Defendant ne appear, donques le Coroner donera Judgm^t que il
serra horse de protection de Roy, and horse del aid le Ley.

Per tiel Utlary en Actions personals, le party utlage forfeiter^ touts ces
Biens and Chateux al Roy.

Et per Utlarie en Felony, il forfeitera auxybien touts ses Tr^es and Tenem^ts
que il ad en Fee-simple, ou pur term de sa vie, come ses Biens and Chateux.

Auxy mesque un home soit utlage, uncore si asc' Discontinuance ou Error soit
en la Suit del Process, le party de ceo avera l' advantage, and per tiel cause
l' Utlagarie serra reverse and adnulle.

Si le party defendant soit ouster la Mer al temps del Utlagarie pronounce,
ceo est bone cause de Reversal.

Si un Exigent soit agard verse un home en un County lou il ne demurrer pas,
uncore un Exigent ove Proclamation issera al County lou il demurre; ou
auterment sil soit sur ceo utlage, Utlagarie poit estre reverse, come appiert
per le Statute fait An. 6. and a H. 8. cap. 4.

Auxy si un soit utlage en Action personal al Suit d'un auter, and puis il
purchase son Charter de Pardon de Roy, tiel Charter ne serra jam^ais allow,
tanque il ad sue un Brief de Scire facias de garner le pertie Plaintiff; and
sil appear, donques le Defendant respondera a luy, and luy barrer^ (...) sa
Action, ou auterment ferra Agreement ovesque luy.

Vtlaw.
UTlaw. Veies Wave.

Vtlepe.
UTlepe significat Escapium (hoc est Evasionem) Latronum. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 47.

Vtrum.
UTrum est un Brief que gist quant le Droit d'ascun Esgllse est aliene and
tenus en Lay-fee, ou translate en possession d'auter Esgllse, and Alienor
devie; donques son Successor avera le dit Brief per que un Enquest serra charge
de trier, Utrum sit Libera eleemosina Ecclesia, vel Laicum feodum.

Et nota, que null que ad Covent ou Common seal poit mainteiner cest Brief, mes
Brief d' Enter fine assensu Capituli, d' Alienation fait per son Predecessor.

W.
Wage.
WAge est le Donant security pur le performance d' asc' chose: come a gager
Ley, and a gager Deliverance, queux veies devant en Gage. Null gagera Ley
encounter le Roy, Brook tit Chose en Action, number. 6. Veies L ^ y.

Waife.
WAife est, quant un Laron ad felouioufment emblee Biens, and esteant neerment
pursue ove Hue and cry, ou auterment surcharge ove le burden ou trouble des
Biens, p^ son ease and plus speedy travail, sans Hue and cry, fua, and waiva
les Biens ou asc' part d'eux arere luy, etc. donques l'Officer del Roy, ou le
Reeve ou Bailiff al Seignior del Manor, (deins que Jurisdiction ou Circuit ils
fueront waife) que per Prescription ou Grant de Roy ad le Franchise de Waife,
poyent seiser les Biens issint Waife al use de lour Seignio ^ s, que poyent
retain eux come ses proper Biens, sinon que l'Owner vient ovesque fresh Suit
apres le Felon, and sue un Appeal, ou done en Evidence envers luy al son
Arraignme^t sur l'Indictment, and il est attaint de ceo, etc. En queux cases le
primer Owner avera Restitution de ses Biens issint emblee and waife.

Mes nie^t obst' come^t ad este dit, Waife est properm^t (...) Biens emblees,
unc' Waife poit estr^ auxy de Biens nient emblees: Come si un ho^e soit p^sue
ovesque Hue and Cry come un Felon, and il sue and relinquish ses Biens demesne,
etc. ceux serr^ prise come Biens Waife, and forfeit come sils ad este emblees.

Mes veies Foxley's Case, Coke l. 4. f. 109. b. que ceux ne sont bona waviata,
sed bona Fugitivorum, queux ne sont forforfeits tanque soit trove deva^t le
Coroner, ou auterm^t (...) record, que il fua p^ le Felony.

Waive.
WAive est un Feme que est Utlage; and il est appelle Waive, quasi relicta a
Lege, and nemy Utlage, come home est: car femes ne sont jures en Leets al Roy,
ne al Ley; come homes sont, que pur ceo sont deins le Ley; and pur cest cause
ils ne poyent estre dit Utlage, entant que ils ne unques fueront deins ceo.
Veies Fitz. N. B. fol. 161. A.

Mes un home est die utlage, pur ceo que il fuit un foits jure a le Ley: Et a
ore pur contempt il est mis horse del Ley, and dictus utlagatus, quasi extra
Legem positus.

Wapentake.
WApentake est tout un ove c' q^ nons appellomus Hundred, come appiert per
Bract. l. 3. tract. 2. c. 1. number. 1. in fine. Lembers, en son Explication ^
Saxon perols, verbo Centuria, ^ it, Que cest parol Wapentake est plus
especialme^t use a cest jour en les Pays ouster le fluve de Trent: Et en les
Leyes del Roy Edw. (per luy publie) number. 33. il est fore plain en ceux parols,
Et quod Angli vocant Hundredum, suprad' Comitat' vocant Wapentakium.

Les Statutes An. 3 H. 5. c. 2. and An. 9 H. 6. c. 10. and Anno 15 H. 6 c. 7.
sont mention ^ Stainctise Wapentake, and Friendless Wapentake en Craven en le
County (...) Everwicke. Veies Roger Hoveden, part. poster. Annal. fol. 346.

Warden.
WArden est de mesme signification come est le parol Fran ^ ois Gardeine, and
p^ c' veies pluis en le Title Gardein: Mes il est le pluis usual parol in
Anglois, pur luy q^ ad le Custody ou charge de ascun person ou chose per
Office; come Wardens (...) Fraternities en Londres, Anno 14 H. 8. c. 2. Warden
Courts, An. 31 H. 6. c. 3. Warden del Marches, Anno 4 H. 7. cap. 8. Ferry
Warden, An. 18 Eliz. c. 10. and An. 27 Eliz. cap. 26. Wardens del Peace, An. 2
Ed. 3. cap. 3. Wardens del West-Marches, Cambden Brit. page 606. Warden del
Forest, Manwood part 1. p. 111, 112. Warden del Alnage, An. 18 H. 6. cap. 16.
Warden del Armor le Roy en l' Tower, An. 1. E. 4. c. 1. Chief Warden del
Forest, Manwood part. 1. page 42, 43. Warden del Wardrobe le Roy, An. 5 H. 3.
Stat. 5. Wardens des Tables del Exchange le Roy, An. 9 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. c. 7.
and An. 9 H. 5. Stat. 2. c. 4. Wardens des Rolls del Chancery, An. 1 E. 4. c.
1, and 5. Wardens and Communaltie des Terres contributory ad Rochester Bridge,
An. 18 Eliz. c. 17. Et Wardens des Courts de Stannaries, 4 Instit. 230.

Wardmote.
WArdmote est un term mention en l' Stat. d 32 H. 8. c. 17. and signify u^
Court que est ten' e^ chescun Ward en Londres, and est usualment appel
Wardmote-Court, ou l' Wardmote-Inquest.

Warrantie.
WArrantie. Veies Garrantie.

Warrantia chartae.
WArrantia chartae est un Brief q^ gist pur cestuy que est infeoffe ove
Garra^ty, and est apres implead en u^ Assise ouauter Action e^ q^ ne poit
vouch; donques il avera cest Brief verse le Feoffor ou son Heir, pur compel eux
de garranter le Terre a luy. Et vies (...) ceo Fitz. N. B. fol. 134. D. Vies
Garranty des Charters.

Warrantia diei.
WArrantia diei est un Brief que gist en case lou home ad jour en asc' Action
sue verse luy (...) appear en proper person, and le Roy a cest jour ou devant
luy maund en asc' service, issint que ne poit appear al jour en Court; donques
il poit aver cest Brief direct as Justices, que ils ne record luy destre en
Default p^ son non appearance. Et veies de ceo Fiz. N. B. fol. 17. A. and pur
le form del Br^e veies Glanvile lib. 1. cap. 8.

Warren.
WArren est un lieu privileged per Prescription, ou Grant del Roy, p^ le
perservation del Leverers, Cunicles, Perdices, and Phesants, ou ascun de eux.

Warwit.
WArwit, (ou Wardwit come asc' Copies ad c') est quietum esse de denariis
dandis pro Wardis faciendis.

Wast.
WAst est, ou Tenant a term dans, Tenant de vie, ou Tenant pur term dauter
vie, Tenant e^ Dower, ou Tenant per le Courtesy, ou Gardein en Chivalry, fait
Wast ou destruction sur al Terre, cestascavoir, sil debrusa Meason, ou coupe
Merisme, ou suffer le Meason voluntariment p^ eschier, ou foder la Terre;
donques cestuy en le Reversion avera un Brief pur cest Wast, and recovera le
lieu ou le Wast fuit fait, and treble Damages.

Et si home coupe Merisme sans License, and ovesque ceo repair les ancient
Measons, uncore ceo n'est pas Wast. e Me ^ si il ovesque le Merismeun difiun
novel meason, le couper de tiel Merisme est Wast. Auxy le couper ce Subboys ou
Willows, que nest pas Merisme, ne serra dit Wast, sinon que cressont en le view
ou seit del Meason.

Wast per le Ley Civil est appel Dilapidation: and pur c' l'Executor d'un
Rector ou Vicar and sont respoignable en Court Christian.

Est auxi un Brief de Wast permittendo Messuagium vel domum, etc. fore in
decasu and ruinosum. Co. Ent. 601.

Wharf.
WHarf est un parol use en le Statute de 1 Eliz. c. 11. and auters Statutes,
and est un Ample lieu procheine al Creek ou Hithe del eau, sur que Biens and
Wares sont jects queux sont destre eskipts and transports del un lieu al auter.

Withernam.
WIthernam est le Prisure ou chaser dun Distress a un Fortress, ou horse del
County, issint que le Viscount ne poit sur Replevin fair deliverance de ceo al
party distraine en q'l case un Brief de Withernam est direct al Viscount p^ le
prise (...) tants de ses Avers que issint illoyalment distraine, ou tants de
les Biens, en son custody, jesque il ad fait deliverance de le primer Distress.
Auxy si les Avers sont en un Fortlet ou Castle, le Viscount puit prender ove
luy le Power del County, and debruser le Castle, come appiert per le Statute de
Westminster. 1. cap. 20. Brit. cap. 27.

Woodgeld.
WOodgeld semble destr^ l' Collection ou succider d' Boys deins le Forest, ou
argent prise p^ m^ al use de Forresters. Et le privilege de ceo per le Grant
l'Roy, est per Crompt. fol. 197. appel Woodgeld.

Woodmote.
WOodmote est le veil, nosme de ceo Court del Forest que a ore, apres le
Statute de Charta de Foresta, est appel le Court des Attachments, and per ceo
Statute est tenus chescun 40 jours; mes soloit destre tenus al volunt des chief
Officers del Forest, and nemy al ascun temps certain. Veies Manw. For. Leys,
c. 22. fol. 207. a.

Woolferthfod.
WOolferthfod est le condition de tiel que fueront utlage en le temps dels
Saxons p^ nient submitterant eux m^s al Justice: car sils poyent estre prise en
vise, ils serroient port al Roy; and sils en pavor de apprehension eux mesmes
defenderont, ils poient estre tue, and lour testes port al Roy; car ils
porteront le Test dun Woolf, cest adire, lour Test ne fuit plus destre regard
q^ le test d' un Woolf, q^ fuit un Beast cy tortious al home. Veies l'Leys de
Roy Edovart per Lamb' si 127. (...) 7. and Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2 c. 11. Ceo
est escrie. Vulvesheaved per Roger Hoveden, part. poster. Annal. fol. 343.

Wreck.
WReck, ou Varech, (come les Normans, de que il vient, appellont ceo) est quant
un Niese est perish, sur le Mer, and null home escape vive horse de ceo, and le
Nief ou part del ceo issint perish, ou les Biens del Nief, vient al terre de
ascun Sn^r, le Sn^r les avera com^ un Wreck de l' Mer. Mes si un Hom^, ou un
Chien, ou Chatte, escape vive, issint que le party a q^ les Biens sont veign^
dans lan and jour, and prove les Biens destre ses, il avera arere, per
provision del Statute de Westminster. 1. cap. 4. fait en les jours del Roy Edw. 1.
que en ceo followed le Decree de H. 1. devant que jours, si un Nief ad estre
ject sur l'shore, torn ove Tempest, and nemy repair per eux que escapont en
vie deins un certain temps, donques ceo fuit prise come Wreck.

Y.
Yard-land.
YArd-land (Virgata terrae) en asc' Counties contein 20 Acres, en asc' 24, and
en asc' 30 Acres de Terre.

FINIS.

