NEW Practical Observations IN SURGERY, Containing diverse remarkable CASES AND
CURES.

By HUGH RYDER Surgeon in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for James Partridge, Stationer to his Royal Highness Prince
George of Denmark at the Post House between Charing Cross, and Whtie-hall, 1685.

Mr. Partridge,
AT your request I have perused these Observations in Surgery, and Judge them
very ingenious, elaborate and worthy of remark: Observations being the best
Maps all Surgeons can Sail by to a safe and good Port. Moreover by the contents
of this Treatise, it appears that the Practice of Surgery in England is
parallel to that of France, Italy, or other Nations.

Dec. 1st. 1684. GIDEON HARVEY. M.D. Med. Ord. Regis.

SIR,
I Have read over part of your Practical Observations in Surgery (as my time
would permit) and find you have taken great pains and care in your own
Collections, made good Observations, and expressed much Art; therefore I cannot
but encourage you to make them public, by which you will oblige many, who are
friends to Surgery, amongst whom give me leave to reckon,

December. 2. 1684. SIR, Your affectionate Friend to serve you James Molins, M.D.
Regius Chirurgus Ordinarius.

This 3. of December. 1685.
WE have perused this small Treatise Entitled Practical Observations in
Surgery, in which we find nothing repugnant to the Doctrine of our best
Authors; but do approve the same to be laudable Practice; and commend it as
very useful,

Witness our Hands, George Horsnell Wardens. Robt. Sanderson Wardens. Tho. Page
Assistant of the Company of Surgeons.


To the Right Worshipful Sir John Godwin Knight, One of the Principal Officers and
Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy.
SIR,
I Make bold to present you with this little New Years Gift; the Subject is
Surgery. You being one of the Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, Surgery a
part of Naval furniture, falls off right into your Province for Protection; the
matter is plain but useful. I am not a stranger to the ill usage good
endeavors commonly meet with; however I presume the number of my Enemies will
be less, when they shall perceive I have shelter under a shield so capable to
defend me. If any little Zoile or Mome will be making Grimaces, and carping, my
regard of them shall be less than of those small Insects, which let alone would
spoil the best meat, if not corrected with a Fly-flap. Sir, I have had the
honor to be known to you many years in the discharge of my employments by Sea
and Land; where the multiplicity of Favors conferred on me, imposes the
obligation on him, who subscribes eternally,

Your most humble Servant HUGH RYDER.

Some Books Printed for James Partridge, and sold at his Shop at the
Post House, between Charing Cross and Whitehall.
A New Discourse on the Smallpox and Malignant Fevers, with an exact
discovery of the Scorvey; together with Observations and Discourses on
Convulsions, Palsies, Apoplexies, Rheumatisms and Gouts, with their several
Methods of Cure, and Remedies by Gideon Harvey, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to
his Majesty, in 120.

The French Pox with all its Kinds, Causes, Signs and Prognostics; also the
Running of the Reins, Shankers, Buboes, Gleets, and there Cures, and what is the
chief: An Appendix of New Observations never yet discovered by any, all
comprised in this Fifth Edition of Little Venus Unmasked, by Gideon Harvey in
120.

The Unsatisfied Lovers, a New English Novel in 120.

INTRODVCTION.
THE Head for its curiosity of frame, structure, situation and diversity of
Organs, may not unfitly be styled the Citadel or watch Tower of the Microcosm,
whence the Sentinels visive and auditory give, and receive information of
amicable, or inimical objects, which being by the least accident disordered,
deduces trouble to the whole Body. How careful then ought the Chyrurgeon to be,
into whose Hands shall happen Wounds, and Fractures of the same, sometimes
attended with dreadful symptoms, as may appear in some of these following
Cures, and Observations, to which I refer.

CHAP. I. A Wound of the Brain Cured.
IN an Engagement with the Hollanders, in which our Ship was boarded by four of
their capital Men of War, we were reduced to our close Fight, our Forecastle
and Steeridge doors being made fast, one of our Men was so unfortunate, as to
be left out upon the Deck, who calling for quarter, one of the assailants, with
a large Cutlace, struck him into the Head, from whence with two endeavors he
could hardly pluck it forth; the wounded party lay on the Deck as dead, but the
Fight being over, and our Ship taken, he crawled down into the hold, where
several with large lacerated Wounds, others with compound Fractures, and some
requiring amputation, seemed fitter for speedy attendance, leaving him to be
the last dressed, as supposing it only a simple Incision; but looking well upon
the Wound, which was in length about five inches, and full of a white matter,
which spued out, I could not conceive digestion could be so soon procured, viz.
in the space of two hours; I therefore concluded it to be the substance of the
Brain, and so it proved; for with my Spatula I removed from the surface of the
Wound about a spoonful of the Cerebrum, the hair being removed from the sides
of the Wound: it was dressed with a Stegnotick Medicine, for it bled largely,
taking care withal, to defend the edges of the Cranium with dry lint, for fear
the access of such earthy Medicines that are Stegnotick, should fowl them,
which I would have all Surgeons take notice of in all parts, where Bones lie
bare, and is occasion to apply restringents, that they cover the boney parts
with lint, as I said before, the better to secure them from the injury of the
restringents, the not taking care of which is the cause, that many times the
Patient is longer delayed in his Cure than reasonable, and to wait the
Exfoliation of Bones, fowled by such Terrene Medicines. He had ill symptoms, as
delirium and dotage, which latter has not yet left him, if living; he lost
eight ounces of Blood next day out of the right Arm, and cupping Glasses were
applied to his Neck, and Shoulders; a fomentation always made use of at
dressings, and to the wound applied Thereb. lot. Tinct. Traumatic. cum Sir. de
Ros. Siccis; so in six weeks time the Wound was cured, convenient bandage being
fitly applied, and greatly conducing to the Cure. I saw this person several
times, and several years after in Southwarke, and observed in him a very great
depravation, and but little right use of his senses. I have the more freely set
down this Cure, to encourage other Surgeons, that they should not despair of
dressing any Man, though never so dangerously wounded, but use his best
endeavor and means, leaving the success to God, who often gives a miraculous
blessing, even when our greatest reasons fail us. If any one doubts the
possibilty of a Cure of this nature, let him consult the Learned Sir Charles
Scarborow, who can inform him of a Captain in the King's Army, that received a
wound on the occiput, carrying a large part away, and cerebellum with it, and
yet was beyond expectation recovered.

CHAP. II. A small wound of the Head by a blow with its symptoms.
A Gentleman of the Guard, in the Night, received a terrible blow on the Head,
depriving him of his Speech and Senses at the same minute; the next day coming
to him, I found a very small wound on the left Bregma, he had bled but little
at the wound; wherefore I took away nine ounces of Blood out of the left Arm,
and applied cupping Glasses to the Scapula and Spine on each side. I should
have told you, he had also lost the use of his right Arm, by the same Paralysis
of his Head and Tongue: the second day I dilated the wound a fingers length,
the fifth day I made a large triangular incision, leaving the Skull bare for
the applying a Trefine, which I did on the seventh day, although nothing
appeared on the Skull of fracture, or seeds; before the seventh day he fell
into dangerous Convulsions, and frequent Lypothymies, for remedy whereof were
administered Cardiac, and Antiepileptick Juleps, etc. too long to be here
inserted, as also a Cephalic Plaster to the Head, after the application of
the Trefine: through the perforated part of the Skull, came forth a large
quantity of black grumous Blood, which by pressing upon the Meninges and Brain,
and sending forth putrid steams, had been the occasion of these ill symptoms,
which said grumous clots came forth for several days together at dressing, and
the Meninge black and discolored, to which I applied Therebin. lot. cum Tinct.
Trauma. and melle Ros. and always a hot Fireshovel held over the Head, to
correct the coldness of the Air, and hot Stupes to the Head, dry lint to the
Cranium, and to the edges of the wound a digestive of Thereb. vitell. ou. and
mel. Ros. cum ol. Rosar. every day, or other day, was a Glyster administered: So
with these dressings he every day grew better, and in a short time recovered
the use of his Tongue and Arm, which before had been lost by his Palsy, and
Convulsions mentioned.

CHAP. III. A wound of the Head, with the Fracture of the Collar-bone,
dislocation of the Shoulder, compound Fracture of the Leg, and general
contusion of the Body.
IN the Year 78. when I was Surgeon to the Honorable Sir Tho. Allen, then
Admiral in the Royal James, one of our Men fell down from the Foreyard upon a
piece of Ordnance on the Forecastle, a large piece of the Scalp from the hinder
part of the Head being cut clearly off by the breech of the Gun; with a
Fracture of the left Clavicle, Dislocation of the Shoulder, and a compound
Fracture of the Leg on the same side, such as we call Fracture ascialis, the
bones of the Leg coming through his stockins. I first dressed the wound of his
Head, least the Skull being bare the Air might prejudice it, then reduced the
Dislocation of the Shoulder, next the Clavicle, and afterward the Leg and
placed it on a pillow in a box, or case with hinges, to turn down, to come at
and dress the wounded places, which I had at convenient interstices left open
for that purpose; I bled him largely, and kept him to a spare diet, giving him
inwardly some Irish-slate in Spruce-beer, and Sperma-ceti in Balsam. Lutatelli
(not of the commonpreparation) the wound of the Head from the edges incarned,
and grew up in a short time, without any exfoliation of the Skull, by carefully
preserving it from the Air, whereas perhaps some might with their Desquamatory
powders, needlessly applied, made foul, and cast off some part of the Occiput.
The chiefest concern and greatest trouble was the Leg; both fociles being by
the height and vehemence of the fall shattered, and dashed in pieces, and
accommodated with short rowlers for convenience of loosing to dress it, and
afterward bound up the fractured parts wounded; for there is no room for long
rowlers: in seven weeks he was so well as to go abroad with Crutches, as the
Admiral himself can testify.

CHAP. IV. A wound on the Head, etc. in a Venereal Person.
A Person (whose name I willingly conceal) in a rencounter received a large
wound on the Head, two on the Arm, and one on the Breast, who applied himself
to me for Cure; he had at the same time an Ulcer on his right Leg, a little
above the Malleolus externus of an ill Figure, to which Ulcer and Wounds,
although I made use of the most fit (to my apprehension) and methodical
Remedies, yet for many days I could procure no better from neither, than an
ugly Ichor or Sanies, or sometimes a greenish sordid matter; considering with
my self, that this could not be barely and solely the product of the parts
affected, I asked him, if he had lately, or sometimes before received a
misfortune by some one of the Virtuosa's of this Town? He told me, He had, and
that he had been in an ill case, but had been under a Surgeons Hands of good
note, and that he believed himself to have been well. I told him, it seemed to
me that his Scavenger had not taken away all his soil, but had left an Egg
still in the nest, and that he could not be perfectly cured barely by Surgery,
without referring to some internal Medicines, which might have regard to his
former mishap, whereunto he consented; so putting him upon a course of
antivenereal Pills, and diet Drink, in three days time there was laudable
digestion, and in a short time his Ulcer and Wounds were perfectly healed, yet
after they were well, I kept him to this course for three weeks longer,
believing it more safe in such cases, rather to over than underdo. I was the
more willing to express this case, because sometimes an ingenious Surgeon may
lie under an Error, to the great detriment, and utter ruin perhaps of his
Patient, if he direct his Eye no farther, than only to the superficies of the
part affected.

CHAP. V. Mania.
BEING Surgeon of the Naval Hospital, when His Majesty's Fleet was at Shotland,
there was put on board us, by advise of the Surgeon General, from one of the
Frigots, in order to his Cure (if possible) a distracted Person, most violently
raving, and the maddest I ever yet beheld, breaking what ever cords he was tied
with. I that Afternoon had him by force of Men held down, and gave him a
Glyster, which wrought well; the next Morning I bled him in the Arm, kept him
to a cooling spared yet, bled him next day in the forehead, and imposed cupping
Glasses with Scarifications to the Neck and Shoulders; but all to no purpose,
for he remained as mad still as before; wherefore I applied a Caustic on the
Crown of his Head, and made a large Eschar, that being done, and for three days
time there being no amendment, I was not willing to tarry for the casting off
the Eschar by digestion, which would have protracted time, but with my incision
Knife I cut out the whole Eschar round to the Cranium, leaving it bare, and
about midnight it was told me, the Madman had recovered his senses, and desired
to speak with me; when I came to him, I so found it; for he gave me thanks, and
expressed himself very joyfully, saying, he was perfectly well, and so remained
from that time forward. I was unwilling to send him aboard again over-soon, but
let the edges fill up, and kept it as a Fontinel with a large Pea in it for a
month, afterward took out the Pea and healed it, and sent him to his own Ship
again; who near a twelvemonth after found me out in London, and returned me a
thousand thanks for my great care of him.

CHAP. VI. Wounds of the Head with ill symptoms.
A Young Carpenter being at work upon Bow-Church, before the structure of the
Steeple, fell from the top thereof, and was taken up dead; but after a small
time perceiving life in him, I bled him, so he was carried home, and remained
speechless for seven days, having also by the same accident lost the use of his
right Arm: I applied cupping Glasses to his Neck, Scapulaes and Spine, he had
three or four wounds on his Head (for he fell amongst ragged Stones) which to
sight seemed inconsiderable, he took every other day a Glyster, and a very
sparing diet (as in such cases requisite) I dressed his wounds with a Cephalic
Balsam; he took often of an Antiepileptick Julep. But observing he often laid
his left Hand on his right Temple, for there was also a small wound, I dilated
the same largely toward the Eyebrow, observing the rectitude of Fibers (which
always is to be. heeded, where incisions are to be made, unless an
extraordinary occasion hinder) from thence I took several small pieces of the
Cranium, which were divided from the whole, and some of them pricking against
the edge of the temporal Muscle, upon the taking out of which, he recovered
both the use of his Speech and Arm. I should have told you likewise, that he
sometimes was troubled with a Spasmus Cynicus on the right side, by reason I
suppose of those pungent Ossicles; the dilated wound I dressed with a Digestive
at first, cramming in dorsils of dry lint on the bare Skull, afterward with a
Traumatick tincture, and Sir. de Ros. siccis; so in five weeks or thereabout,
he perfectly recovered.

CHAP. VII. A wound in the Liver.
A Person raging with Wine, as well as with love of his dear Mistress, of whose
enjoyment he despaired, leaving his company, went forth of the room, and with a
Knife stabbed himself in the upper part of the right Hypochondrium, wounding
also the Liver, from whence flowed a large and violent stream of Blood; to
divert which I took a good quantity of Blood from the left Arm; I gave also
some aq. Styptica Vitrioli in aq. Plantaginis; I kept him to refrigerating
Juleps, wherein was a competent quantity of Sal. prunellae, also to laxative
Glysters; and although he complained much of a very great pain in his right
Hypogastrium, which I feared might arise from extravasated Blood, falling from
the wound, and there subsiding, yet by the use of fomentations and Glysters, he
became well, and was in fourteen days recovered.

CHAP. VIII. A wound in the Belly.
A Soldier, being returned from Flanders, upon some disgust he had received
from his Mother, with a large Flemish knife stabbed himself about two inches
above, and on one side of the Navel, through the right Muscle and Peritonaeum
into the Abdomen; from out the wound hung forth a large piece of the Omentum,
which had so done for four hours, for so long after it was that I saw him: it
being Winter time, the Air having seized it, and being discolored, I made
ligature upon it, and cut off the discolored part near the the tying, and
having fomented it with warm Brandy, I put in the Omentum again, leaving the
thread hanging forth to the wound; I used a Digestive for three or four days,
afterward a Balsam, whose basis was Turpentine; so without any supervening
symptom he became well in less than a fortnight.

CHAP. IX. Two penetrating Fistulaes in ano, etc. cured.
AN Apothecary of this Town had for many months tried practice upon a Gentleman
for the cure of a Fistula, not at all knowing what he was about, having used,
as the Patient afterward informed me, at least forty different sorts of
Medicines, as Waters, Ointments, etc. a sufficient argument of his unsteady
ignorance. Once or twice, by Mercurial means (against his will as he professed)
raised a Salivation on him, had sometimes with his Knife made incisions, and
sufficiently teased him, at length told him, he had done with him, for he was
cured and well; but the Gentleman being alarmed by some pain he felt there, was
advised by a friend of his to show it to me; upon sight whereof I put my Probe
into the Orifice, being about two Inches from the Anus, and past it in length
five Inches, viz. two from the Orifice to the Anus, and three Inches from the
edge of the Sphincter up into the Sinus, it had made in the intestinum rectum;
so having satisfied the Gentleman of the ill condition he was in, and bestowed
on this Amphibious Apothecary his malediction, he became my Patient from that
time, till he recovered. But by the way, it is a common thing for Apothecaries
to practice Surgery, but with what success, let them and their Patients boast,
as in the case above, and these two following may appear. A Neighbor of mine
in the Old Bailey, consulting with a learned Apothecary, he advised her to an
Issue, which he would make, and accordingly did; and having made it upon the
Gasterocnemius, it caused such a Phagedaenic Ulcer, as eat away above half the
calf of her Leg, whom I afterward cured, not without much trouble. The ill
Medicines he had applied, having left a stain upon the part, not suddenly to
be washed off, according to that of the Poet, Quo semel est imbuta recens
servabit odorem,
Testa diu --


The other case is, a Phlebotomist Apothecary much exercised in bleeding, (not
for want of ignorance in them who permit him, any more than in himself) let
Blood one of his Neighbors Daughters, and in the carreer of his Lancet, made a
large wound in the Tendon of the Biceps; being called to take care of it, I saw
the Arm very much tumefyed, full of pain, and a large quantity of Gleet from
the wounded Tendon; the tumor of the Arm I appeased, with Anodyne Cataplasmes,
and dressed the Tendon with a There bin thinate Medicine, which after some time
became well. I could add many more of these, and other like cases, wherein
Apothecaries, by enterfering in our Profession, have gotten to themselves no
great reputation; for if a young Apothecary (for the old ones have more
prudence) get acquainted with some Surgeons Apprentice, who is but an Embrio in
his Profession, he shall from him be furnished with such pretty knacks in that
Practice, that he need not doubt to proclaim himself a Chiron, as in Physic he
does an Aesculapius; but I hope these brief Memoires will dehort them from it
in the future. But to return to my Patient, whose Postern calls out for help;
for upon a second inspection, I found two Sinus's from within the outward
Orifice, which ran one to the right, the other to the left hand; these having
laid open, I yet found another small outlet, within an inch of the anus, that
in three or four days, being made wider, by the use of Sponge tents, I incided:
in the mean time I confined him to a diet of Sarsa and China, with some
vulnerary Herbs, sometimes gently purging him with an Infusion of Senna and
Salt of Tartar, with Sir. Ros. Soiut. or Manna, and twice a Week fifteen or
twenty grains of Calomel. with res Gialap. or as much of another Mercurial
preparation of my own, excellent in Ulcers or Fistulaes, by which means this
almost incredible quantity of Gleet was exhausted and dried up: it being most
true, that Siccum est sano proximum. the dressings for the Fistulous parts
incised, was a Balsam of Sulphur, joined sometimes with a Traumatick tincture:
what incisions soever I made, I always let them bleed freely, to discharge the
great hardness round the Anus; to discuss which, did not a little help a
fomentation applied Night and Morning before dressing. The Incisions intra anum
I made with my Cannula Scissor upon the Scoop. Thus in the space of ten Weeks
he became absolutely well, and so remains.

CHAP. X. A Fistula in Ano.
ANother being a very fat Man, having ridden some hundreds of miles, from a
tumor of an external Hemorroid Apostemating, incurred into a Fistula, which
searching with my Probe I felt it come through its upper Orifice into the
intestinum rectum, about two inches above the Anus. Having an ill habit of Body
I durst not presently attempt the Chirurgical part of his cure, till I had
given him a preparatory Apozeme, and with an Hydrotick Medicine purged four or
five times, the better to empty and carry off that load of humors, I might
otherwise expect to fall upon the part; then with my leaden Probe Idrew a waxen
silk through, daily tying it straighter, till at length it cut its way through;
which being done, and the part so incised, by use of a drying Balsam, in a
short time was perfectly cured; a drying dyet-drink, which he at that time
took, helping very much to effect it.

CHAP. XI. An Abscess on the Os Sacrum.
ANother Gentleman having lain ill of a Fever for a long time, the Disease at
length terminated into an Abscess near the lower part of the Os Sacrum; being
sent for, which was two or three months after the breaking thereof, I perceived
a small Orifice, out of which issued a thin matter daily in a large quantity,
and extremely fetid; after three or four days time I past my Probe in at the
Orifice (which at first I could not by reason of its smalness) down toward the
Anus, above four inches in depth, and after some time, with my large Probe
Scissors, I dilated as far as their length would permit, and so filling it with
Dorsils of dry lint (for it bled not much) I so left it till next dressing,
which was with a digestive, being for some weeks time continued. From the part
affected a great quantity of matter daily flowed, with an excessive stercorary
odor, which gave me occasion for a while to fear, there might be some small
perforation into the Intestinum rectum, which might be the reason of this ill
smell: However by the use of Fomentations and Injections, in which were some
Vulneraries in a Decoction of Aqua calcis, adding some Traumatick tincture and
honey of Roses, the stench daily diminished. I continued still to dress twice a
day; the Medicine with which I dressed the part, was a Balsam of Sulphur with
Traumatick tincture, by the use of which Medicine and Injection, and using now
and then a little lift with a Mercurial Bolus, the parts were corroborated, the
matter lost its ill smell, became well digested, and in quantity daily
decreased, till at length having shortened my Dressings, the Party became well.
Note. He still continued his Diet-drink, which reduced his Cachochymick Body to
a better habit, I advised him to make use of little pieces of Sponge dipped in an
Emplastick matter, which I prepared for him, for purpose to keep it open as a
Fontanel, which he did for many Months; but not long after his Cure, by some
disorder, he fell into a most violent Fever, from whence he was recovered by a
large torrent of humors, finding vent at the Orifice so kept open; which
extremely running, in about a Fortnights time made a total discharge of the
Morbifick matter, and he became well, and about half a year after, unwilling
for the troubles sake to wear it open as a Fontanel, closed it up, and has
remained well for above a year.

CHAP. XII. A penetrating Wound in the Thorax.
AVintner bringing in a Reckoning, and giving some unpleasing Language to his
Guests, one of them with his Rapier ran him into the right side, about an Inch
below the Axilla or Arm-pit; he bled not much at the Wound; wherefore I took
away about fourteen Ounces of Blood; two days after the Wound received, the
Party wounding sent three eminent Surgeons to take a view of him, believing him
not so wounded as reported; I desired one of them that he would please to take
the Candle in his hand, and hold it near the Wound, which he did: Whereupon I
advised the Patient to shut his Mouth, and hold his Breath, and immediately the
included Air being forcibly expelled, blew the Candle out. I made use of short
Tents dipped in Balsamum Lucatelli; kept him to a thin Diet, refrigerating Juleps
and Glysters every day, or at least every other day; and if he slept not well,
in his composing draught, I gave him sometimes fifteen or more drops of Liquid
Laudanum; so his Fever going off, and finding no occasion to keep it longer
open, I took out my Tent, and in ten days he recovered, not leaving behind me
that ill accident, which I remember a Surgeon once did, who by keeping open a
penetrating Wound of the breast too long with Tents, procured a Callosity round
the edges of the Wound, leaving behind him a Fistula uncured.

CHAP. XIII. A Wound in the Breast.
ACountry Gentleman being in London, and going in the dusk of the Evening home
to his Lodging, was met by a Bully of the Town; who because he immediately gave
him not the Wall, drew upon him, and ran him through the Pectoral Muscle into
the Thorax; there was a considerable flux of Blood at the Wound, as also out of
the Mouth, as often as he spit or cough'd; from whence we may believe the Lungs
to have received prejudice; I nevertheless took away ten or twelve Ounces of
Blood, used to the Wound for four or five days after the first dressing, Tents
armed with a digestive, keeping him to a Pectoral and Traumatick Decoction, and
a very low Diet; but finding that little matter proceeded from the Wound, and
that his Cough (which at first was troublefome) went off, I left out my Tent,
and only applied a Pledget on the part spread with Lucatellus's Balsam; so in
three days more it was healed, and he went down to his Affairs into the Country.

CHAP. XIV. A Mortification on the Arm.
AYoung Woman upon a disorder in Diet, fell into a most desperate Fever, she
having an Issue in her Arm, was over hard bound, the slackning and dressing of
which, being for three or four days neglected, there happened a large tumor of
the Arm and Hand; when I came I found the Arm discolored, and a large
Mortification upon it, from the Shoulder to the Elbow quite round, part of the
Mortification reaching to the Clavicle and Breast: with my head Razor I made
many and deep Incisions, which she felt not, unless upon the edges of the sound
parts, which I spared not to cut to cause the sooner separation. I dressed her
twice a day with Stupps wrung out of a strong Lixivium, and applied scalding
hot. The application to the incised parts, was Egyptiacum and Spirit of Wine,
as hot as with Dorsils, and pledgets dipped, could be applied, and over all a
Cataplasme of Mithridate, or sometimes Venice Treacle round the Arm. In the
mean while there was no neglect of fit Alexipharmacaes, and cordial Juleps; so
a stop being put to the progress of the Mortification, and the Fever abated, I
began to make use of Digestives, by which means, and by cutting off daily large
quantities of the mortified cadaverous and stinking sloughs, the subjacent
parts daily appeared more florid: after gently mundifying, for a long time I
made use of the best Incarnatives, by which means there was a gradual
reparation almost of that vast loss of substance she sustained. In the mean
time I laid open by incision several Fistulous Sinus's, the virulent and
corrosive matter had made upon the Breast, Shoulder and Scapula, which I
afterward cured, and she in the space of ten weeks recovered, and has the use
of her Arm almost as well as ever.

CHAP. XV. A Leg Amputated.
A Neighbors Son about nine years of age, by reason of a wrench, had a painful
tumor of the Ancle, and afterward of the whole Foot, without alteration of
color. For remedy of which, use had been made for many Months of several
Surgeons one after another, and some pretending Bone-setters, in hopes to have
a Cure; but all in vain, the tumor and pain daily increasing, and becoming
almost insufferable: at length his Parents desired me to visit him, which I
did; they asked my opinion concerning his Cure. When I had considered the
violence of his pain, the tumor of the lower part of his Leg and Foot, his
lost appetite, want of rest, and his being emaciated, I informed them that I
did believe, that his Cure was impossible, and that there was but one way left
to save his life, which was, to take off his Leg without much further delay;
for that it had been kept on too long already, which news was unwelcome to
them, they telling me, that such eminent Surgeons as they had applied
themselves to, and had had the management of it all along, could not be so
ignorant or deceitful, as thus to abuse them, and leave them in the lurch, and
they hoped I was much mistaken in my Prognostics. But I still persisting, in
what I had asserted, left them to their future consideration, and further
advice; whereupon they applied themselves to the Surgeons of the Hospital, the
result of whose advice was, that my opinion was to be agreed with; whereupon
two days after by their consent and desire, I amputated him below the Knee, Mr.
Pierce and Mr. Johnson being Wardens, then present. So soon as I had dressed his
stump, rouled him up, and placed him in Bed, I took the Leg, and made incision
according to the length of the Tibia, laying it bare, where I showed them a
hole quite through both sides of it, as if made by an Augre, and through which
I could put my little Finger; so powerfully penetrating and corrosive are acid
humors, that they can with their pungent Particles thus terebrate the Bony
parts. There being a very great Atrophy of the Thigh and Knee (which yet
remains, though nine years since taken off) the adjacent parts having received
an ill taint from the subjacent putrid humors, it was a long time, before I
could raise flesh enough to cover the ends of the Bones; but what is most
remarkable, such was the industry of Nature, who is never idle, but always
endeavoring to progender, though impeded by imperfect and defective
principles, that some time after there grew out of the end of the stump from
the remaining part of the Tibia (as it were) another little Tibia, near an Inch
in length, and about the bigness of a Tobacco-pipe, hollow, and covered round
about with a Cartilaginous substance, which I cut off with a pair of cutting
Nippers close to the stump end, and which several times since has flown out
the breadth of a Twopence, for as I said above, the Leg was kept on too long.
The Excoriation was easily Cicatrized with aq. calcis. This caution therefore
may be of use to Surgeons, that although it is not good to be overhasty to
dismember, without sound and urgent reasons; yet on the other hand, it is as
dangerous to be dilatory, in keeping on a defective Member, until it has made
a vicious communication to the other parts, to the depraving their Natural tone
and temper.

For the advice is good,
-- immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
So I shall conclude this, beginning with another not much unlike.

CHAP. XVI. A Thigh Amputated.
A Lawyers Son in Fetter-lane, about the age of the preceding, and much about
the same time, having eleven Fistulaes in his Leg, and Thigh; for about a
Twelvemonth, had been under the hands of several Surgeons; who at length
despairing of his cure, left him off. The Boy calling to mind, that some four
years before, I had cured him of two Ulcers in his Leg (for this accident was
since, and happened by a Contusion from a Cart-wheel, hurting his Thigh and Leg,
from whence afterward Apostemations, and Fistulaes were produced) desired his
Father to send to me, telling him withal, he was confident I could cure him.
At his request to go along with him to see his Son, I accordingly went; but
found him so discarned, that he was almost a Skeleton, having for twelve weeks
been detained by a Diarrhaea. From his Ulcers, and Fistulaes flowed a silthy
matter, stinking beyond all comparison, his Heel stuck to his Buttock, and his
Knee disjoynted; for the head of the Tibia met not with the Os Femoris (which
overhung it) by above an Inch, the Ligaments being all eaten asunder, by the
matter there contained. I told his Father, I had considered, the circumstances
he lay under, were so severe, that I thought, there was no likelihood of his
recovery, nor possibility of Cure; to which the Boy very heartily replied, he
knew he should be well, if I would cut off his Thigh; and that if I would lend
him a Knife, he would cut it off himself; whereat his Father weeping, he bid
him not be troubled, telling him, that if he died, there would be an end of his
charges, but if he outlived it, he would make him amends. I proposed to his
Father, to bring the Wardens with me next day, to take a view of him; who when
they came, and saw the miserable condition he was in, knew not what to think of
it: But taking notice of the Boys undaunted confidence in me, by their
persuasions, I was encouraged to dismember him, leaving the success to God,
thinking it better rather to try a doubtful remedy, than to leave him (as
others had done before) to perish without any. It being concluded, on the next
day after his Mother should be brought to bed (for she was almost ready to lie
down, and feared to have it done, till that was over) it should be attempted;
so on the Morning after she was delivered, I came, and Amputated him near the
upper part of his Thigh, above his uppermost Fistula; he not so much at the use
of Knife or Saw, as once crying, or making any complaint, until the application
of hot Cauteries, which I was forced to make use of, by reason of the largeness
of the Vessels, from whence otherwise I might have expected in a few minutes
his whole Mass of Blood, and Life to have been exhausted. It was on a Monday
morning I took it off; and on the Thursday following, when I came to dress him,
I found him very lively, his stump very fair, being indifferently well
digested, and in six Weeks time perfectly healed; afterward he grew very plump
and carnous, and so remains. Next I will set down another case of an Arm ill
handled, and too long kept on, which is as follows.

CHAP. XVII. An Arm Amputated.
AN Hostler belonging to an Inn in Holbourn, received a blow on his Elbow from
a Horses head, which for several Months gave him some pain, though not so much,
but that he could follow his occasions; at length the tumor and pain
increasing, he applied himself to a Surgeon of his acquaintance, one G.R. who
kept him so long in hand, that for want of timely laying it open, the matter
discharged its self, through several perforations it had made; into which
perforations he daily injected such large quantities of Vitriolate, and
sometimes Mercurial Waters, that fouled both the Ancon or Olecranon, and lower
head of the Adjutory, there being a large tumor of the lower part of the Arm,
the upper part being quite extenuated. Having sent for me (for he had
discharged his other Surgeon) and taking notice of the extreme tumor, fetid
smell, and color of the Arm (for it was Livid) I told him I did believe the
Bones were so foul, and the Arm so putrid, that he must of necessity lose his
Arm, to save his life; and that if he would permit me, to make Incision, which
should not hurt him, he should find my words to be true; so with my head
Razour, I laid it open about four Inches in length (the parts being insensible)
and with my Finger pulled out a great piece of the Adjutory, being loose and
carious, like a rotten Cork. When he perceived the danger he was in, he told me
he was very willing to submit to the loss of his Arm, rather than of his Life.
I applied a Stupe wrung out of hot Brandy round about the Arm, and so left him
till the next day. In the mean while I informed the Wardens of his condition,
and of the necessity of taking off his Arm; on the next Morning they there met
me, where having all things in readiness, I Amputated him; and afterward
laying the Arm open, I found the lower part of the Adjutory, for about three
Inches in length foul quite through, so were also the upper parts of the Ulna,
and Radius carious about the same length. About three days after his Surgeon
hearing, that he had been dismembered, came to see him; I understanding that it
was he, bid the Nurse let him in, whilst I stepped behind the Bed (unseen) so
coming to the Patient, he told him, he had done villainously by him, and that
he desired not to see him; The Other replied, he wondered any one should be so
base and foolish to take off his Arm, when he would take his Oath, he could
have cured it, in a week or ten days at farthest. Whereupon I came from behind
the Bed, and told him he was as impudent as ignorant, to affirm such
impossibilities, and that I had the Wardens to justify me in what I had done;
asking him withal, what Medicines he had made use of, to occasion this
mischief? he replied, he knew what he did, as well as any Man in England, and
needed not be taught by any one; for he had used Injections with Vitriol and
Plantane Water, and sometimes Sublimate and Plantane Water, as good as ever was
used. I told him, those good Medicines were the cause of the loss of this poor
Man's Arm, whereupon he went down Stairs railing at me, and very much
displeased. He being so emaciated, it was somewhat long e're I could procure
flesh enough, to cover the end of the stump. the keeping the Arm on so long had
rendered him Hectic; for not long after the stump was Cicatrized, he took leave
of this World.

CHAP. XVIII. A Woman's Throat cut.
A Young Woman who had been at a Meeting House, where the Bonerges had shut
Heaven Gates, and threatened Hell to all, who were not on his side of the way;
in a great discontent went home, and fell into such despair, that being
melancholy by her self in her Chamber, with a Knife cut her Throat; the Wound
was near six Inches in length and uneven. When the thing was done, being sent
for, I was not in the way, but came about an hour or more after, where I found
another Surgeon had been before me; I was very unwilling to meddle with it, but
the Party her self making signs to me, that she would have me look on it, her
friends and neighbors persuading me to it; I went about it, and perceived a
large quantity of Tow sprinkled with some Astringent Powder crammed into the
Wound, which I took out. The Wound looked very dreadful, having cleansed it, I
saw the Larynx was notcht in two or three places; for as she afterward told
me, she had made two or three cuts at it: Having brought the Lips of the Wound
together with five stitches, and dressed it with an Agglutinative Balsam; she
spoke not for three days, but on the fourth, asked me if I thought she could
live; I told her there was no fear of her death, if she would be but governed,
for she was in a Fever; wherefore I at first bled her, and kept her low,
taking care she had every other day a Glyster; the Wound healed as well as one
could wish, and in less than three Weeks she recovered.

CHAP. XIX. A Wound in the Belly.
A Shoomakers Wife, her Husband not presently granting her unreasonable demand,
took one of his sharpest Knives wherewith he used to work, and stabbed her self
obliquely into the Epigastrium: the Wound was small, (and so was the Knife,
which I saw was Bloody about two Inches or more) and it bled but little;
wherefore I took Blood from her to prevent inward bleeding which I feared; I
dressed the Wound with a short Tent with a Digestive. There happened after 2. days
a large tumor round about the wounded place, of which she complained very
much, and proved to be only from wind; for upon the use of warm Fomentations,
it was wholly discussed, and she in seven or eight days became well.

CHAP. XX. A mortification of both Feet.
A Master of a Ship (bound for the West Indies, whereof a young Man belonging
to me was Surgeon) had a Servant, who by extremity of cold Weather, got a
Mortification of both his Feet; being desired I went down to Limehouse to see
him, and feeling on his Feet, several of his Toes came off in my hand. I made
diverse deep Incisions on both Feet, till I came to the parts sensible; then
with a broad Carpenters Chissel and Mallet, I cut off both Feet near the upper
part of the Metatarsus; the ends of the Bones I covered with dry Lint, and to
the Mouths of the Vessels I applied Chalcanthum; over all Bole, Whites of Eggs
and Oxycrate, and so rould him up; I came every other day to see him for three
Weeks, in which time the Bones were covered with flesh; so the Ship being bound
to Sea, and he to go in her, I left him to the care of my Man, who gave me
account by Letter, that before the Ship went out of the Downs, both his Feet
were Cicatrized and well. I have often aboard made use of the Carpenters broad
Chissel in Mortifications of the Hands and Feet, occasioned by Gunshot Wounds,
and therefore borrow room for it in the Armamentarium Chirurgicum.

CHAP. XXI. A Dislocation of the Inner Ancle, with a Lacerated Wound.
ONe belonging to an Inn on Snow-Hill, Aged about threescore and ten, being
very corpulent and weighty, by a fall suffered a Dislocation of the Foot, the
inner and lower head of the Tibia (the Ligaments being by the violence of the
fall broken asunder) coming through at the Wound, which was above four Inches
in length: I bled him largely, and kept him to an extraordinary spare Diet, to
take off his too great Plenitude, (having also an ill habit of Body) and much
ado I had to keep off a Mortification, which twice or thrice had like to have
hapened, but that he was rescued from it by Scarifications, a strong Lixivium
and Theriacal Applications. The Medicine with which I dressed the wounded part
was, of Ol. Therebinth. Tinctura Traumat. and Sir. de Ros. Sicc. and in two
Months time I healed up the wound; but because the dislocation remained (which
could not be remedied, the Ligaments which should have kept the head of the
Bone in its place, being torn asunder) I made use of an Instrument of Steel,
riveted to the Shoe below, and coming up the outside of the Leg, with a Leather
Brace at the gartering place, and another below, to Lace on the outside of the
outer Ancle, by which means the head of the Bone was firmly kept in his place,
and he went indifferently well, till some years after growing still fat and
unweldy, and wanting exercise, he fell into a Dropsy, whereof he died; this
being the only cure I ever heard of this nature, I thought good here to insert
it.

CHAP. XXII. A large Wound on the Head.
ONe going down a pair of stone steps, it being Winter time, and very slippery,
had the ill fortune to fall down with his Head upon the edge of one of the
steps, whereby he received a Wound from a little above the Eye-brow, fetching a
circumference round the side of the Head, to the hindmost part thereof,
insomuch that the Scalp hung down upon the Neck, the Wound in length being
eight Inches. Having taken off the Hair, and cleansed the Wound, I joined the
Lips by six Equi-distant stitches, and left both ends of the Wound open with
two short Tents, the better to make discharge of the great quantity of Sanies,
and matter which continually slid down. The application after the two first
days being Pledgets dipped in Balsam Lucatell. with Tinctur. Traumat. making use
always of a warm Fomentation before dressing, by which means in five Weeks time
he was made well.

CHAP. XXIII. Two Wounds of the Head.
ANother being a little Boy, lately received such a Wound by a Cart-wheel going
over the side of his Head, tearing away the Scalp, and leaving the Cranium bare
in some places; the Wound was about six Inches long, there being another Wound
likewise on the other side of the Head about three Inches in length; the Head
was very much tumefied, and from the greater Wound came such an excessive
quantity of Sanies, that I was compelled to dress it twice a day. This Wound
was handled much after the same manner, as that above mentioned, and in near
the same space of time was perfectly cured.

CHAP. XXIV. A Compound Fracture of the Leg.
ONe by a fall from a Scaffold, being about eighteen Foot high, received a
Compound Fracture of the Leg with 2 Wounds, at the Wound above, came forth a
part of the Tibia, at the lower Wound on the outside a part of the Fibula. I
bled him, kept him low, and wrapped the whole Leg in a Sear-cloth, cutting out
two pieces, one above, and the other below: for convenience in dressing, I also
contrived a Case of Tin to contain the Leg, in which were two little doors to
open and shut, for the opportunity of making applications to the wounded parts.
The Medicine to the ends of the Bones was of Tinctur. Traumatica, Mel Rosar.
and Pulv. Irid. Florentiae; for they had received prejudice from the dirt he
fell into. Wherefore it was somewhat long before they cast off; however within
the space of three Months he became well.

CHAP. XXV. Diverse Wounds by small Shot Cured.
BEing in a Merchant-man, we were attact by two Turks-Men of War of good force,
and by them at length taken; they did so gaul us with their small Shot, that a
Man could scarce appear upon the Deck, where several of our Company received
very untoward Wounds, viz. one of our Men halling at a Tackle to run out a Gun,
was shot with a Musket Bullet through both Arms, near the middle and hinder
parts of the Brachia, about the beginning of the Brachiaeus externus; I at
first drew Flammulaes of Tow through, armed with a digestive, and afterward I
used a short Tent to each of the four Orifices, suffering the Wounds to Incarne
in the middle: The flesh being pretty well filled up, I at length took out my
Tents, using only Pledgets spread with the same Medicine; and lastly with dry
Lint Cicatrized them.

CHAP. XXVI. A Wound by a Musket Ball.
A Seaman received a Wound by a Musquet-ball, entering in about the upper Angle
of the Scapula, which passing through the Trapezius, and under the Levator
humeri lodged upon the Cartilago Thyroeides. Running to me almost strangled,
and not able to speak, he made sign of being choakt with his Finger, whereupon
feeling the Bullet, I made incision, and taking it out gave it him, scarce
willing to stay to be dressed, only I clapped into the Wound above the Scapula, a
short thick Tent of dry Tow; he went to his quarters again, and behaved himself
with a great deal of courage, till the fight was over; the wound made by
Incision proved but little troublesome, for that easily healed; and that on the
Shoulder after it came to be well digested (the quantity of matter daily
decreasing) short Tents being still applied, in about three Weeks was perfectly
Cured.

CHAP. XXVII. A Wound in the Thigh by small Shot.
ANother of our Men at the same time received a small shot in the Thigh,
between the Rectus and the Vastus Externus; I could by no means (although I
made diligent enquiry) trace or find out the Bullet, wherefore leaving it
behind me, in eighteen days time I cured the wound, and never heard he had the
least trouble or inconvenience from it afterward.

CHAP. XXVIII. Several Wounds by small shot.
ANother time a great many of our Men were wounded by an Ambuscado of the Turks
ashore, who unawares surprised them. One received a Wound on the side of the
Thorax, the Bullet coming out near the Spine; I could not find it had
penetrated the cavity of the Breast, either before or behind; wherefore bending
my Probe, I found the shot had glanced upon the Rib, and had gone round it. I
kept both wounds open by two short Tents dipped in Digestive, and with good
Bandage (being a great cause of Unition) in a short time healed him.

CHAP. XXIX. A Wound by a Musket shot.
A Second was wounded in the Face with two slugs; one came in at his lower Jaw,
beating in three of his Teeth, and a piece of the Mandible: the other having
fractured the Os Jugale, came through the Orbit of the Eye, not wounding it,
but with the violence of the contusion leaving behind an incurable Amaurosis,
or Gutta Serena.

CHAP. XXX. A fracture of the Leg by a Musquet-ball.
A Mariner at the same time was shot through the Leg with several shot,
fracturing both Fociles with great laceration of the Muscles and Tendons;
diverse pieces of Bones also being driven through some that were loose, I took
out; the tumor of the Leg increasing, he fell into a Mortification, which
proved of difficult cure; however at length by Incisions, the use of hot
Lixivial Stupes, and Medicines formerly expressed, he got off from it; but it was
long e're he recovered, the Unition of some, and exfoliation of other Bones,
also the Confirmation of the parts debilitated, requiring much time.

CHAP. XXXI. Remarks on some Errors in Surgery.
BEing in the Hospital Ship in the year 65. after that great Engagement with
the Dutch on the third of June (where his Royal Highness was so signally
Victorious) from each Man of War were put aboard us their wounded Men; where I
observed very great errors committed by some Surgeons, whose fame was greater
than their merit; many of the wounded persons being brought in so ill a dress,
that it is almost a shame to mention, viz. from aboard where J. F. was a
Surgeon, among others one having a Compound Fracture of the Arm by a great
shot, and shattered all in pieces from the Elbow to the Wrist, there was only a
sheet of brown Paper (without any other application) wrapped round it, which I
showed the Surgeon General, who looked upon it with admiration: This Person was
a Scotchman, and so timorous that I could by no means persuade him to the
taking off his Arm, nor yet to be dressed; at length it sending forth such a
cadaverous smell, as was noisome to himself as well as his Neighbors (we
having at that time above five hundred wounded Men aboard, near two hundred of
them with amputations, the rest with Compound Fractures, and other Wounds by
Gunshot) I at length overcame him by persuasive arguments to save his Life,
which by no other means could be effected, but by taking off his Arm, to which
he consented; accordingly I did it, and he recovered.

CHAP. XXXII. A Leg Amputated.
ANother from aboard a Third Rate Frigate (where T. M. was Surgeon) upon the
Recoil of a Gun the Truck ran over his Foot, breaking in pieces all the Bones
of the Metatarsus; perceiving his Foot very much tumefied and discolored above
the Anckle, I made deep Incisions on the Tarsus, and Metatarsus, which he felt
not; I told him there was a necessity to take off his Leg, to which he readily
agreed; so he hopp'd on one Leg to a Chest, where sitting I took it off, (he
not expressing the least sign of pain or sorrow,) and afterward when well, was
by his Majesty's favor made Cook of a Second Rate Ship.

CHAP. XXXIII. Remarks on some Errors in Surgery.
Before mast-man on a Second Rate, (where O. R. was Surgeon, and a Male
Practicer) had by a great Shot his Leg dashed in pieces; the Surgeon aforesaid
made no other Amputation, than by cutting off the Leg with his Knife, and
dividing it from the parts it hung by. I wondered much at the strange sight,
when I came to Unrowl him; for there I found the shattered parts of the Tibia
lying loose, and split up to the Juncture, the Gasterocnemii turned back like
the flap of a Shoulder of Mutton, and with a Rowler bound back above the Hamm;
so that I was forced to make a new Amputation above the Knee.

CHAP. XXXIV.
I Could insert a great deal more Surgery of this kind (for I had too much
occasion for such observation) but I will forbear. However before I take leave
of this, let me give you a taste of that Famed Surgeon Y. F. from whom after
several Fights I received aboard diverse Amputated Persons, who needed no other
Certificate for their Passport into the other World, than his: His custom
being after Amputation to apply to the Stumps Mercur. Sublim. by which means
was always procured a Mortification, Malignant Fever and death; which might
have been avoided, had he made the happy exchange for Calcined Vitriol; but I
will leave him among his dead Patients. And here I protest, I have not made
these remarks upon any one out of ill will, but out of mere love to Surgeons,
that notice being given them by the Sandy and Rocky errors of others, they may
the better, and with more safety steer their course, 'till they arrive to the
Haven of fair and reputable Practice, it being the safest Harbor for their
Patients, and most reputable to themselves.

FINIS.

