A VINDICATION OF An ESSAY concerning Critical and Curious Learning: In which
are contained Some Short Reflections on the Controversy betwixt Sir WILLIAM
TEMPLE AND Mr. WOTTON; And that betwixt Dr. BENTLEY AND Mr. BOIL.

In Answer to an Oxford Pamphlet.

By the Author of that Essay.

-- Pudet haec opprobria Vobis, Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
LONDON, Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall. School.

A VINDICATION OF An ESSAY concerning Critical and Curious Learning, etc. IN
Answer to an Oxford Pamphlet.
SIR,
I Little thought there would have been any Need of Defending the short Essay
concerning Critical and Curious Learning, etc. which I ^ately Writ and Printed,
you know, ^urely in Compliance to your Desires. But I did not consider how
tenderly some People are affected with any thing that looks like a Reproof. It
was no sooner published, but out comes an acute Answer from Oxon, and
pronounces it a downright Ignorant and impudent Libel, and the Author of it an
Atheistical TownWit. Whether this dreadful Charge is made out or not, shall be
my present Inquiry; and because I am not much in love with the La^pooner's
method of Railing in general, and talking at random, I will beg your Patience
while I take every particular Paragraph into a distinct, but short,
Examination. Not that I think there is any thing in this Trivial Paper worth
the trouble; for on the other Hand, Pudet recitare, and nugis addere pond^s.
But the Author seems to be so full of himself, and writes with such a
Magisterial Air, that some People (especially those that are biased) may be
apt to fancy he has Justice on his side, and that my Silence is a tacit
acknowledgment of it. Besides, I may possibly do him himself no disservice, in
showing him how unfit a Champion he is to undertake the Defense of a Public
Cause. There is a vast difference betwixt the Qualifications, which may make a
Man appear advantagiously enough in an University, and those which will render
him acceptable and Eminent in the World. But I do not, Sir, pretend to
undervalue an University* Education; for I know, the most considerable
Personages of our Nation have always been those, who had their first
Institutions there. I would only urge, that a Man must have a more diffused and
mixed Conver^ation than is to be met with in a College, before his Learning
will sit agreeably upon him, or he can hope to become a finished Scholar; such
a one I mean as this Gentleman takes himself to be.

I can Observe no Method in what I am about. You must take it as it comes, in
the Confusion he has delivered it. And therefore without any more Preliminary,
I will begin to Transcribe. Viz.

Sir, I thank you ^or the Pamphlet you sent me the other day; and because you
was pleased to make it the Condition of your Gi^t, that I should return my
Thoughts upon it: I have here sent them by the first Post, and I believe much
sooner than you expected. You have them in the very Order they at first
occurred to me, without any manner of Correction; for truly I did not think it
worth my while to make any.

This Introduction you see affords nothing Remarkable, but that our Friend is
very good at Writing Letters; and may be depended upon by his Correspondents
for a speedy Answer, let the Business they employ him about be never so
Disobliging to him, or Insignificant in it self; unless perhaps we are to
understand by the particular Character of the Words Condition and Gift, that
there is some pretty double Entendre couched in them. I suppose his Meaning (if
he has any) must be to inform us (by way of Lawyer) that some Gifts are upon
Condition, and some not; and that where there is a Condition, that Condition
must be performed before the Title to the Gift can be good. But let the
Distinction lie where it will, I wish for my part he had not thought this small
Gift worth his Acceptance, upon the Barbarous Condition of persecuting his
Unknown, Humble Servant, as you shall hear he now and then does.

First then, It is obvious to remark, that the Author, whoever he is, has given
his Essay a wrong ^itle. If he had had a Mind to deal honestly with his Reader,
it should have run thus: An Essay, etc. ^n which are Contained several False
and Scandalous Reflections on Christ Church in Oxon. But to turn over the Title
Page. In his Preamble (where I assure you he pretends abundance of Modesty) he
cannot forhear making open Proclamation, that he and his Friend, to whom he
addresses this piece, have resolved to censure and damn all Books, that shall
be hereafter Published: To which purpose they have established a Critical
Correspondence between them. Woe be to all poor Writers for the future! But he
has given the World no reason to hope well of this Grand Design. For in the
present case (which it seems is the first he has meddled in) he is far from
b^ing so fair and equitable a Moderator as he ought, or indeed as he himself
would pretend to be. For he has every where showed that Dogmatical Humor and
Arrogance he blames in others; and has taken a most intolerable Freedom, where
he ought not to have done it. I have but two Reasons to think that Dr. Bentley
himself did not write this Treatise: One is, that the Matter is infinitely too
Polite, and the Style too Smooth and Flowing for him. The other, that I hardly
believe his Self-love and Pride, would have suffered him to have dealt so
freely and justly with his own and his Friend's Characters; though it was the
most likely way to do him a real Service at the bottom. For these Reasons I
must acquit the Doctor, and tell you, that I rather believe the Author to be an
Esquir^, (as he calls himself) and one of those mighty Wits amongst you in
Town, that set u^ for the Overthrow of Religion; who the better to gain their
En^s, lay hold on all Occasions, of traducing the Universities, and undermining
the Dignity and Character of the Clergy. And though I have said this of him, yet
it is no Wonder that he is Dr. Bentley's Friend and Acquaintance.

Here I have several things to account for. The first is a Misnosmer. But I
cannot agree with him in it, since I am by no means guilty of the False and
Scandalous Reflections he talks of. For what I have said of Christ Church in
Oxon, is so far from being the false or scandalous Insinuation of an Enemy,
that their best Friends have frequently and publicly owned the Truth of it;
and (to quote Horace once more) Dicere verum quid vetat? I appeal to you, or
any impartial Person, whether I have not left many things unmentioned, that
might easily have been brought in, if I had had a Mind to show my Malice. But I
thought my self Obliged to touch upon nothing, but what lay immediately within
the Argument. I did not so much urge my own single Opinion, as deliver the
Sense of every Body that knew them, which I could easily make appear, was it
not too invidious a Task. But if I could not, this Gentleman has effectually
done it for me. He has given the World a fresh and unquestionable Evidence,
that there is as much Vanity at least, as Learning in that College, as I shall
prove by and by from his own Words. If instead of making Amendments in my Title
Page, he had given me some Useful Monitions and Grave Advice, and told me, that
it was a Rule in Satyr, Parcere personis dicere de vitijs, that Truth was not
to be spoken at all times, etc. I might very probably have stood Corrected, and
never have troubled you nor him with this Defense. But he is pleased to be
scurrilous, and I must go on with him to the next Accusation; which is for
erecting a Critical Tribunal, and making you and my self the Arbitrary Judges
of it. Could this be made out, I must confess, he would have great Reason to
complain of me, for removing that Court of extreme Justice from his Residence,
and for wresting the Authority out of their Hands, who have more leisure and
assurance to put it in Execution. But I cannot imagine what brought the Whim
into his Head. There is not the least Ground for it, in that Sentence he seems
to point at in the Essay; where, after professing my own Inability and
Unwillingness to venture upon so Nice a Topic, I say, In order to begin that
Correspondence betwixt us, which your Letter so kindly proposes, and which is
so much for my own Benefit, I will here give my imperfect Thoughts upon, etc.
He might as well have found out the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in these
Words, as any such Meaning; but when a Man is resolved to say what comes next,
who can help it? Hitherto the Essay and the Essayer (as he calls me) are only
concerned. But now you have Dr. Bentley forced in by Neck and Heels, to bear me
Company, and take his share of the Satyr. It seems, he is never to escape the
Gaul of their acute Pens; for otherwise I cannot conceive, why he is named
here, only to tell the Courteous Reader, that he had nothing to do with this
Treatise. The same Argument would have brought in the Czar of Muscovy, and many
other great Men, that never dreamt of turning Authors; unless he will insist
upon it, that he has but two Reasons to believe the Dr. did not write it, and
perhaps there may be two and twenty, to think the Czar did not: But then he
must consider again, that one of the Reasons he has given is as good as one
thousand, and in such a Gase a little Logic, with the Help of as much
Philosophy, would have taught him to conceal his private Resentments. If Dr.
Bentley had not been a Man of Self-love and Pride, common Sense sure would have
hindered him from dealing so very freely with Mr. Wotton and himself. For I
cannot see what Real Service it could do him at the bottom, to wound his Enemy
through his own sides. The other Reason indeed I doubt was thrown in unawares,
or with a Design merely to mortify the Doctor. For he no sooner says, that I
write a better Style than the Doctor, but you may perceive he immediately
recollects himself, and least I should grow proud upon it, calls me in the same
Breath a Traducer of the University, a Reviler of the Clergy, an Underminer of
the Church, and an Overthrower of Religion: And which is still more notorious
(for I was to expect no better Language from him) he bestows the same
Compliments upon the Doctor too, without any regard at all to his Character.
One would have thought Dr. Bentley's Sermons against Atheism (for I must
suppose our Student has read them) would have secured him in partic^lar from
such insufferable Calumnies. I hope after this, he will not complain of any
Man's incivility. There are no such Aspersions to be found in my late Piece.
The Liberty there taken with Dr. Aldrich, is of another Nature, of a much lower
form. For any thing I have said to the contrary, he may still be an Honest Man,
and a good Christian. I meddled not with his Morals or way of Life, because it
would have been an impertinent and unjustifiable way of Det^action, which I
thought b^low me: And yet this Censor Mo^, this Correcter of my Intol^rable
Freedoms, has not boggled at it himself. Whatever he may think of my
Squireship, I have a greater Respect for any Dignified Divine, than to call him
an Atheist: I am not so like Almanzor (as he would elsewhere have me) to do all
this because I dare. Every Man's Reputation (especially a Clergy* man's) ought
to be Sacred: The Law makes it so, and has provided Penalties against the
Authors o^ Libels and De^amatory Books. But, if ^here was no Satisfaction to be
had in these cases, it is a mean and ungenerous thing, to expose and p^t lish
any one's Faults, especially such as may really wound his Character, and good
Name in the World. No body that had had any Notion of Honor or Good Manners,
would have been guilty of it, when it had no relation at all to his Subject. So
much for my Morals. In the next place you have an Account of my Learning.

But I would gladly know what there is in this piece, that should make it gain
so mighty a Reputation, as you say it has; and particularly how it comes to
deserve your Esteem, notwithstanding the aversion you are pleased to say you
have to the Satirical Stuff in it. It is indeed called (I should say miscalled)
An Essay concerning Critical and Curious Learning: Which, I must own, is a very
promising Title, and one might reasonably expect som^thing new and delicate
upon so nice an Argument. It came to my Hands with an extraordinary Advantage,
in that it had your Recommendation. I durst not pass any Censure upon it. I
suspended my Judgment, and read it again and again; but I liked it worse every
time I did so. I cannot indeed but acknowledge, I had some little reason to be
biased, when I found the Worthy and Reverend Dean of Christ Church so
undecently treated; and the Reputation of ^is whole Society arraigned in a most
imperious and insolent Manner.

This Paragraph is civil enough in Conscience from a professed Adversary; and
if I manage it to the best advantage, I shall be able to pick up a Compliment
or two at least out of it, which may make some little amends for his former
Rudenesses. First then, he tells me, the Essay has gained a good Reputation in
General; that his Friend in particular, was pleased to pass a Favorable
Censure upon it; and that truly for his own part, he is biased upon the Dean
of Christ-Church's account. After this frank Confession of his Partiality, I
can easily forgive his calling what is said upon his College Satirical Stuff. I
am not concerned neither at any other Unkind Expressions; because I know they
are extorted from his good Nature. I do not much care too, if I resign him my
Title page, since he will needs insist again upon it, viz. It is called, (I
should say miscalled). There is no withstanding such an unaffected flower and
turn of Speech: ^ully himself could not have said so much in so short a
Parenthesis: And therefore (as I said before) my Title Page is at his Service.
Thus far Matters are well enough reconciled: He has either meant me no harm, or
done me none: And if I can acquit my self as well from what follows, we shall
part very good Friends.

The seri^s part of this Piece is nothing but a Farrago of common Notions, put
indeed into tolerable good Language: But the Author talks so very abruptly, and
has so cramped himself upon every Head, that what he says of his Performance in
jest, may very well be applied to it in good earnest; viz. That by endeavoring
to say a great deal in so narro^ a Compass and short a Time, he has scarce said
any thing. But why did not our Essayer take a wider Compass, and a longer Time
for this mighty Undertaking of his? What provocation had he to speak to any
Subject, unless he would have done it to purpose? Was it a Task imposed upon
him, which he was willing to get off his Hands as soon as he could, and was he
at the same time obliged to print it? When he delivers his own Opinion, and
gives the finishing turn to any Argument, he does it in as positive decisive a
manner, as if Dr. Bentley himself had done it. He bears all down before him,
and when he is going to prove some ordinary known thing, puts himself into as
great a Sweat and Tumult, as if he was about some of the knottyest Points in
all Mathematics, and was doing no less than squaring the Circle. To make a
show of much Learning (a Qualification not very common amongst such Wits) he
runs through all the Sciences, but after a very odd manner: For when the Reader
expects some handsome Account of them, he baulks him with lame and imperfect
Definitions. He pretends to have pressed his matter very close, but it is still
so sp^ngy, that it may be squeezed much closer, and fairly reduced into
nothing. I have often heard honest Will. Pate, talk as roundly over a Glass of
Wine, of all kinds of Learning and Languages, as our Author, without ever
suspecting him to have any clear or full Notions of what he was about. There is
a sort of Commonplace, which any Man that keeps good Company may easily be
furnished with; and yet at the same time, be no more a Scholar, than the Pope's
Parrot, that could repeat the Creed, by keeping much Company with his Holiness,
was a Christian.

The first Sentence here, is a flat Contradiction to what went before. Before
he affirmed in Cool Blood, that my Matter was polite, and my Style smooth, and
flowing: Now his Passion gets the better of him, and it is nothing but a
Farrago of common Notions; which is as much as to say, that the same thing is
white, and is not white at the same time: For a Farrago of common Notion, and
polite Matter, are no more akin than Light and Darkness. However, since he
still owns, that these Common Notions are put into Good Language, I have no
reason to contend with him about a small Contradiction. For by this Concession,
he gives me no less a Character, than that which the Critics have made the
Propriety of the Divine Horace, viz. the ^xpressing Common Things in Excellent
Words; (which by the way is the reason that Poet can never be well translated;
for no other Language is sufficiently expressive of the Delicacy and Fullness of
the Latin Phrase.) But in the following part of this Paragraph he seems at
first sight to offer several weighty Objections, but they are put in such loose
and general Terms, that I can make nothing of them. Instead of giving a Reason
for what he says, he asks two or three impertinent Questions, of no more
Consequence than if he should have said, What is your Name, Sir? What does T.
R. stand for? Nay, they are hardly so much to his Point. For if he could but
once have learned who I was, he mig^t possibly have made an odd use of it, and
troubled the Wo^ld with a History of my Life. But that which looks most like a
real Objection is this; He runs through all the Sciences, but after a very odd
manner. For when the Reader expects some h^ndsome account of them, he baulks
him w^h lame and imperfect Definitions. If ^e means, that what I have said upon
the Sciences, is not suffi^ient to gve the Reader a distinct View, and ^ll Idea
of them, I shall readily a^quiesce in his Criticism, and only u^ge in my
Vindication, that it was i^possible sor me to do it in the co^pass I had
allotted my self. But if h^ meaning is, that what I have said is in it self
lame and imperfect, he would have done well to have giv^n me some particular
instance of ^t; for '^ill he is pleased to do so, I can make no Defense without
ac^using my self. I writ the Essay with the same awe (if I may be allo^ed the
Comparison on my part) that Tully did his Epistles to Atticus. (...) knew I was
talking to one that understood every Topic better than my self; and was
therefore much more sparing of my words than I should have been, had I
pretended instruction. But, if I had designed that, I know not what like lier
Method I could have taken* than first to give the general defintion of every
Science in as pleas^g unscholastick Terms as I could, and then to deliver my
own partic^lar Notions of it. But I never preended to answer the full end of
your Proposals; or to give my Opnion, how far a Man might pro^eed in every
Science, without carr^ing ^is Search further, than was usefu^. This, Sir, I
told you was an A^gument infinitely too bulky and e^tensive, for the form and
length of (...) Essay; and as I conceived, was t^ be managed in the same
Metho^, ^he Famous Verulam had done hi^ Excellent Book of the Advancement ^f
Learning, and would require a V^lume little less than his. I was so farfrom
thinking my self equal to so ^ast an Undertaking, that I was slocked at it; and
I then said what I still think, that it was a Work hardly to be performed in
the Compass of one Man's Life; and was therefore a more fit Employment for a
Body of Learned Men, than a single Person. They must be Men too, hardly
unacquainted with any thing. For how else could they determine critically of
all kinds of Knowledge? How could they assign suitable Methods and
proportionable Degrees, for the ^rocess of Humane Understanding, i^ all her
Enquiries? How could they pretend to fix the Boundaries of L^arning? How could
they be capable of forming a regular Scheme and Plan of the whole Circle of
Ar^s and Sciences for the Benefit of others, if they were not perfect Masters
of 'em themselves? I question whether there is, or ever was, any one Man in the
World thus qualified. Our late Lord Bacon has in the Book I just now mentioned,
given large Proofs of the Universality of his Genius; but he himself was of my
Opinion. Aristotle was certainly the most generally knowing of all Antiquity;
yet he is suspected to have copied some of the Books ascribed to him, and to
have burnt the Originals from whence he had them. To be thoroughly versed in
any Art, is the Effect of much Time and Industry; and we are apt to think our
selves accomplished Persons too, when once distinguished by the single Name of
good Astronomets, or Poets, or Orators, etc. without ever hoping to be thought
all of them. Those who now adays set up for universal Scholars* are commonly
Men but of rambling Pedantical Learning. They are nicely skilled in the
Mechanical Part and Jargon of the Sciences; have pr^bably read and got by heart
all the General Systems: They are such p^rfect Masters of the Terms in Logic,
that they can immediately form an argument in any* Mode and Figure, detect a
Sophism at the first Glance, and, which is still more, compile a Compendium of
the whole Art, if Occasion be, for the Use of their Friends and Pupils. They
understand so much of Mathematics, as to solve most of the Problems in Euclid;
Nay, perhaps as to draw up a small unintelligible Scheme of the Grounds and
Principles of Geometry. They may be so well versed in Astronomy too, as to know
the Common Revolutions of the Stars, to calculate the Eclipses of the Sun and
Moon, and to furnish out an Almanac every year, (set off and adorned with
Curious Italian Sculptures, whereby it becomes not only useful, to find out the
Day of the Month, but at the same time serves instead of a Picture in a Clos^t,
and by Consequence is never out of Date.) But whether such Men have any Notion
of the profound Researches in these and other Sciences, whether they have made
any useful and sound Reflections upon them or not, remains a doubt, 'till they
shall give the World greater Proofs and Evidences than these I have named.

But I had almost forgot his Extraordinary Waggery, in comparing Will. Pate and
me to Pope somebody's Parrot. It is plain from hence, that he is deeply read in
Church History. He could no doubt have told what the Pope's Name was, what
Language he and the Parrot used to converse in, etc. and I wonder he did not;
since these and such like Circumstances would have been as New and Entertaining
to the Reader, as that of the Birds repeating the Creed, and as applicable
withal to me. But why poor ^ill. Pate is here abused, is a Mystery of
impertinence. He has not I hope taken Dr. Bentley's side, and spoken Trea^on
against Phalaris. If he has, let him lie at a Tyrant's Mercy. If he has not, I
will in his Name and my own, present our Athenian with one Bird for another,
and tell him plainly, that he is as like an Owl, as either Will. Pate or Ia
Parrot; for as the Proverb expressly has it, There are Owls at Athens, as well
as Parrots at Rome.

In short, he is sometimes a proud, supercilious Critic, sometimes a dry and
starched Common-placer, and always impertinent to his Reader, and inconsistent
with himself. If it was worth while, I would undertake to refute every thing
out of the Essay it self. One Sentence contradicts another. He is not of the
same Opinion two Leaves together. Here you have him crying up Experimental
Philo^ophy, but with abundance of Limitations, as the most pleasant Study in
the World, and which a Man ought to spend all his time in. Presently he forgets
this, and talks as loudly for all the other Sciences one after another; only
Mathematics and Metaphysics have the hard hap not to be of the number of his
Favorites. When he comes to talk of his beloved Argument, of Critical Learning
in the Modern Acception, as it is taken for a thorough Understanding of
Classick Authors, and an exact Knowledge of all those Rules, by which Men judge
and determine nicely of all the finer Parts and Branches of Humane Literature;
he displays all his force, and is most wonderfully instructive. He informs his
Reader, that Aristotle was the first that drew up these Rules into a Compass,
and made Criticism an Art; that Horace, Longinus, and all the Critics both
Ancient and Modern, drained most of their Knowledge from him. This is just as
much and no more, than has been said an hundred times in Dedications and
Prefaces to Plays. Not only Mr. Congreve, Dennis, etc. but even Settle and
Durfey have often said it before him; and most of them in their present
Controversy with Mr. Collier, make nothing of talking of Aristotle as
familiarly as this Gentleman, without ever having read one word of him. But he
goes on victoriously, and says, Criticism is without all douht a very good
thing, notwithstanding what some People say of it; and has a pretty similitude
about Alexander and Caesar, nothing to the purpose; from whence however he
infers as fast as Hops, the great Advantage of Critical Knowledge. Such
Deductions are of the same stamp with his Friend^ Dr. Bentley's: But I am sure
I argue more Logically, when I say, that because Dr. Bentley writes false Latin
and false English, that therefore by way of contrary he is in the right of it;
for a good Argument may be, and often is ill defended. After having mustered up
all this, he leaves his Argument for a while, and makes a digression upon the
use of frequent Compositions. Here he crowds his fine Notions very thick upon
us, and to single out one from amongst many, he tells us, that all the
Faculties of the Mind, whether Active or Passive, are mightily heightened and
improved by Exercise. This proposition is certainly true; and so it will hold,
if I should affirm it of the Faculties of the Body, and illustrate my Position
with the Famous Story of Milo, who first tried his Strength in carrying a Calf,
and by constant Application, was at last able to do as much for an Ox. But who
could I hope to inform by it? Is any Body that had common Sense or Learning
before, made ev^r a whit the wiser for this? If I say, Critically speaking,
that Virgil is a better Poet than Martial, and Heroic Poetry nobler than
Anagram, I talk upon safe Grounds, and no Body can contradict me, without
palpably contradicting the Truth: But what then? When a Man will needs be an
A^thor, especially of Essays; it is expected he should produce Ardens aliquid,
something New and Entertaining: Montaign and Sir Evremont are remarkable for
it. There is yet another notable piece of Criticism, and it is that Tully was a
better Poet than an Orator. This is true too, and I have nothing to say in
Answer to it. But to return with him from this digression. The next thing he
presents us with, is a terrible description of the Modern Critics, That they
are biased by partiality, and in spite of all their specious Pretenses, a
strong Tincture of ill Nature unhappily appears in every Line. They tell us
indeed in their Prefaces, that they have dealt very handsomely and heartily with
the Authors they Comment upon: But when we come to the Remarks themselves, we
are entertained with nothing but continual Snarling and Insolence. This will
prove as true as the rest of his Axioms and wise Sayings, if rightly applied,
that is to himself.

One would imagine by the Concise in short at the Head of this Article, that he
had before put himself quite out of Breath with Reasoning, and was now come to
make his Use and Application from the whole. But it is at last only to say over
again, what he has said several times already, that he could if he would, prove
my Essay to be inconsistent and contradictory. If I thought this forbearance of
his was pure good Nature, I should be mightily Obliged to him. But I am of
their ill contrived Temper, who suspect every Kindness from an Enemy to be the
effect of Necessity more than Choice; and think he does not do me Harm, only
because he cannot. But, when a Man is at a Non plus, it is a pretty Superficial
Turn, to pretend he will not trouble himself and the Reader, with heaping up
all that might be said upon the Occasion. The true Reason of Silence in such
Cases is, that what is left behind is not worth speaking. The Argument in it
self may not be exhausted indeed; but it is not the Talent of every Pamphletee^
to say just as much as a Subject will handsomely bear, and no more: There is
required a solid Judgment to do this, even on the most trifling Questions. As
to the Crying up Experimental Philosophy, and then talking as loudly for all
the other Sciences, it is unfairly alleged against me, and I may say without
any breach of Modesty, that I have not Confounded my Opinions: I have been at
least consistent with my self. For if I affirm, That Experimental Philosophy is
the most Noble, Beneficial, and Satisfactory, of all those Sciences, that an
inquirer into Nature can apply himself to, and in the same Discourse call
History (in relation to Civil Life) one of the most useful and pleasant Studies
in the Worl^, I shall be thought to Contradict my self by no body, that is
possessed of a tolerable Understanding, though the Superlative Degree is used in
both Cases. And yet this is all I can find (upon an (...) Examination) that
makes him assert so positively, that one Sentence contradicts another; that I
am not of the same Opinion two Leaves together. But the Mischief of it is, he
suspects at the bottom I know nothing of the Topics I am upon, and therefore
takes it for granted, that I betray my ignorance every now and then, especially
of Mathematics and Metaphysics. If I may be permitted to use the same
freedom, and guess at his Skill in these Matters by his manner of Refuting an
Essay, I fancy they are a little too Crabbed for his Head too, as well as mine.
He ^eems to be no Friend to the Mathematics neither, and I doubt is so far
from being likely to Square the Circle, that it would perplex him grievously to
demonstrate, that the Three Angles in a Triangle are neither bigger nor less
than Two Right Angles; or any such known Proposition. But all this is gratis
dictum. He may overflow with Learning, and yet scorn to bestow any of it upon
me and my idle Treatise. It is enough to say I write Nonsense, without being
at the Pains to prove it; For some Men's bare Authority is more Convincing than
other Men's best Arguments. In the next place he examines my Knowledge in
Classick Learning, and here to my Eternal Shame he finds me no better a
Proficient than in the Severer Studies. He finds nothing but common and trivial
things, but what has been said in Dedications and Prefaces an hundred times. I
own I say Aristotle was the Father of Criticism, which for any thing I know may
have been said not only an hundred, but a thousand times before me. But what
then? I do not advance it as a New Discovery. I only make use of it as a
necessary Introduction to a Discourse upon that Subject. If I had talked of
Criticism, and not named Aristotle, I suppose I should have been as much to
blame on the other hand. And there would have been a great deal more reason for
suspecting me not to have read any part of his Works than at present there can
be. It Is true, I have quoted no Greek out of him, which I ought by all means to
have done, had I foreseen my acquaintance with that Language had been likely to
come in question* But whether I understand it or not, the four Poets (who are
here as awkardly brought in and traduced as Will. Pate was) may, for any thing
this Academick or I know to the contrary. None of them, I dare say, have ever
made honorable mention of Aristotle in their Prefaces, without a Greek
Citation or two at the same time. And in their present Controversy with Mr.
Collier, some of them have plentifully quoted Latin and Greek Authors in their
own Tongue; the Fathers themselves have hardly escaped. But I have enough to do
to defend my self. It seems I have not only dealt too familiarly with
Aristotle, but with his great Pupil Alexander, and Caesar likewise; and I must
give an account of it. As to this; I will beg leave to tell my Friend, he has
ignorantly, or (which is as bad) wilfully mistaken the plain Sense of a whole
Pa^agraph, as you will immediately see, if you please to cast your Eye upon the
29th. Page of the Essay* He says I infer from Alexander and Caesar the great
advantage of Critical Knowledge. Whereas on the contrary I ^ay, some People
have argued the inconvenience of adhereing to Critical Rules, from a Comparison
of those two great Examples in Heroic Virtue. But for all this Mistake is so
gross and apparent, he runs away with it, and in a most Academical Sophism (put
indeed as a Parallel to my Reasoning, but truly a Specimen of his own) he
ridicules me and Dr. Bentley at once for two poor silly Fellows, that know
nothing of Logic. If this was not below an Answer, it would be very easy to
prove from it, that he had never read one word of Aristotle, nor any other
Logician neither, any more than my Worship. One would think it impossible for a
Man of common Sense, to write such incoherent irrational Trash. But sometimes
Peoples Malice perverts their Understanding, and transports them to a strange
degree of Folly and Impertinence. But I may think, and say, and prove what I
will; he is so well satisfied with the justness of his Reflections, that he
pursues me with equal Vigor through the Digression upon the use of frequent
Compositions; and to my great Comfort he does it just with equal success too.
Here he is again disgusted at my Trumping common Notions upon him for fine
Things; which (says he) are by no means proper for an Essay, where all should
be New and Entertaining, (which he makes two Synonimous Terms). But with his
good leave, (since he will ^orce me to justify my Common Notions) the
commonest Notions are always the most proper Mediums, the best and surest Basis
to reason upon, and are in themselves the strongest Arguments, for that they
arise most naturally and easily out of any Subject. And therefore, whoever
writes ( Essay or Pamphlet) with a design to convince, must not neglect the use
of them. The Sentence here produced as an Instance of my ordinary Common Stuff,
[All the faculties of the Mind, whether active or passive, are mightily
heightened and improved by Exercise] I am not at all ashamed of I still think
it a good arg^ment, to evince the advantage of frequent application to
Composition. If a Man would always resolve to write something that was never
said or thought of before, his Productions might be* New indeed, but not
therefore Entertaining; nay they must of Necessity be Whimsical and Ridiculous.
We find very few Books upon the same Topics, (though ^enned by Authors of never
such different Genius's) that do not for the most part use the (...) Ge neral
Arguments, and often interfere with one another: But that which commonly
distinguishes them, is the particular Manner, the Style and Method of each
Author. Not that I would affirm, that Men do not sometimes differ very
materially in their Sentiments of the same things. What else has occasioned so
many opposite Hypotheses, so many Disputes and Controversies, which have always
employed the Pens of the Learned, and to which indeed are owing the greatest
Progresses and Advances that have been made in Knowledge, both in past and
present Ages? But I forget my Text. Another piece of Criticism is, that Tully
was a better Poet than an Orator, etc. I will take no advantage of the words
Poet and Orator being here transposed, because I believe it was through the
Printer's Negligence; but I am not sure he would not have made himself merry
with any such slip in my Book. He is guilty of as idle things. In this very
place he quotes half a Sentence, puts his own Construction up* on it, and then
makes me talk as like a Squire as he pleases. It Is true, (in the 39th. page of
the Essay, which I suppose he refers to) I name Cicero; but it is only as an
Instance to prove, that Invention i^ any kind, will turn to some advantage or
other, and that his application to Poetry was of great use to him in his
Rhetorical Composures. But whether he was a better Poet or an Orator, was a
Controversy that did not lie much in my way, and I only hinted at it. To
pronounce fully and clearly upon so doubtful a Question, to unriddle a Secret
that had ^ain hid so many Centuries, was reserved for some extraordinary
Genius; such an Aedipus could arise only in Thebes or Athens. What follows, is
transcribed from the Essay, and tartly applied to m^. But I think the Cap is
put on at a Venture, without knowing or considering, whether it would fit or
not. For he cannot make any Body else (if he can himself) believe, that I have
betrayed the least Partiality, because Dr. Bentley is as freely handled as
Christ-Church. Whatever either side may think of the Matter, I have honestly
given them the real sense of the impartial part of the Town, about their
Quarrel and way of Managing it. But if plain dealing can have no Effect upon
them, let them even go on, and make sport for others by exposing themselves.

The next Paragraph is to inform all those whom it may concern, that I play
boo^y* with Dr. B^ntley, and that upon second Thoughts I am more like Almanzor,
than a Squire: Which (however important) I shall pass over in silence, as
things that sufficiently answer themselves. But I cannon, I fear, make su^
quick Work of that Paragraph which follows it. I have there a (...) Scroll of
Offenses to answer to* and (...) you may the better judge how ^ar I am guilty,
you must have the Patience to hear both sides.

In his first Attack upon the College, he takes Dr. Bentley's Method, and says
peremptorily, Mr. Boyle's Name is falsely set to the late Answer to the
Dissertation against Phalaris's Epistles, etc. and that he is sure he had no
hand at all in it. This he does out of pure Complaisance to Mr. Boil as a
Gentleman, that there may be no Quarrel between them two; for he is resolved to
cut and slash the Book to Pieces, and without any more to do, says it is full
of nothing but little Witti^isms and Schoolboys Jests. He begs leave of his
Reader (being a very Civil Person) to suggest his own Opinion. And truly his
Opinion is, that it was made ( as most Compositions in that College are) by a
Select Club: Every Man seems to have thrown in a Repartee, or so, in his Turn;
and the most ingenious Dr. Aldrich, no doubt, was at the Head of them, and
smoaked, and p^nned plentifully on this Occasion. A pretty Conceit this! What
a Dutch Image of Wit and Composition is here! I here is just as much Wit and
Sense, as Probability and Good Manners in it. For when a Gentleman has affixed
his Name to a Book, and owned it, shall any one that dares do neither, give him
the Lie, and pretend Civility at the same time? It was a Clownish bold Piece of
Freedom at first in Dr. Bentley, and now the same in this Ambuscado Writer.
Such rude Treatment would have been abominable to any of Mr. Boyle's Quality,
had he been a Man of no Note, had he never given any Proofs of his
extraordinary Genius and great Learning to the World; and as the Case is quite
otherwise, you and the Author must pardon, if I say it is downright impudent.
But this is only a Sample of some more Behavior of the same kind. He has
plenty of such Civilities in store for the Dean and Students of Christ Church,
who he takes to be the true Authors of the Book. But he does not trouble
himself to answer them in any thing material; but without the least
Provocation, takes their Manners most severely to Task, puts a mark upon them,
and assures his Friend, that they distinguish themselves from the rest of the
University, not by their extraordinary Learning, but their abominable
Arrogance. He wonders how they can have the Confidence to condemn Pride in
another, when they have so great a share of it themselves. He would very fain
know, why it is not as excusable in Dr. Bentley, who is a Scholar, as in some
young Men, who cannot reasonably be supposed to be so. He is very angry with
the Dean, and admonishes him for encouraging this haughty proud Temper of
theirs by his own Example; and as a strong Conviction that he does so, he calls
a small Compendium of Logic to witness, in which the Dean was so unfortunate
as to censure the Author of the Art of Thinking. I kno^ not what Civilities T.
R. Esquire thinks are due to Foreigners; he is not very Courtly, I am sure, to his
own Country men* But ^arther; he ventures to affi^m, that the Compendium of
Logic is one of the worst he ever read. The reason is, because it is written in
good Latin. A most unpardonable Fault ind^ed! Well, but this is not all: He has
something more to quarrel with them about, and that is for calling Dr. Bentley
Pedant, when he can prove them to be as rank Pedants themselves. For (says he)
I take it to be as errant a Sign of Pedantry, to publish bad Edi^ions of old
Authors, and to be highly solicitous about the various Readings of them, which
former Editions have only neglected, because they were insignificant, as to
lard English Writings with Greek and Latin. He is very much in the Right of it;
but what is this to Christ-Chu^ch? Yes; it is directly levelled at it. For (he
continues) Dr. Aldrich is pretty notorious at present for employing his young
unexperienced Students this way. I know not what he means by employing his
young unexperienced Students: But I know, and under his Favor, it may be said
without any Partiality at all, that those Books which have been put forth b^
this College, both in the late Learned Dr. Fell's time, and the present Dean's
too, have a very good Reputation, not only (...) at home, but are likewise much
approved by Foreigners abroad; which, I hope, will recommend them to Dr.
Ben^ley's Esteem, whatever it may do to this Gentleman's. As for the late
Edition of Aesop's Fables, it will be time enough to defend it when it is
accused. Here the Preface is only concerned, for calling Dr. Bentley plain
quidam. He would, I suppose, have had his Name ushered in with half a dozen
Epithets of Respect; not considering how scurvily he is using Dr. Bentley's
Betters all this while. But the next Charge bears hard upon them: For it is
about no less than two Epigrams and one Verse, in a Poem, entitled, Articuli
Pacis, which he has found in a Book late^y published, called, Examen Poericum
duplex, etc. He is (...) ^olicitous (it being a Matter of va^t ^onsequence) to
discover the Author of them; and at last ventures to affirm, that either the
Dean himself, or somebody els^ made them. The Conjecture is not much unlike
that of the D^ch C^mmentators about Horace's Mother, who, after all their
Enquiry, could not b^ ^sitive who she was, but they una^imously agreed that he
certainly had one. This being sag^ly premised; he proceeds to give D^. Bentley
some Comfort, and to infuse a B^lm into the Wound, the Sting and Venom in the
Tale of these wi^ked Epigrams might p^ssibly have made in his Mind, assuring
him e^ Critique. that these are by no means the best Copies in that Collection.
As to this; if th^re was any need of an Apology (which I do not apprehend there
is) it might be alleged as a good one, that that Collection was made privately
by some Gentlemen, that did not think fit to own themselves, and the Poems
spoken of were inserted without the Author's Leave or Knowledge; and therefore
they are not strictly obliged to account for them. But this is not very much to
the Point in hand, and I shall wave it.

I am here at the same* loss I have been at all along, to find out any thing
that will bear the least Examination; or indeed that looks like an Honest
Defense. For to recite an Abuse (I give him his own Word) with a Pretense to
answer it, and leave it unanswered, is certainly more injurious than the Abuse
it self; which is the case before you. But because I believe he designed well,
and meant his Friends and himself a real Service at the bottom, I will put his
Objections in the clearest Light I can, and make the most of them. I am then
chiefly accused of three things:

1. Of Impudence, in robbing the Honorable Mr. Boil of his Title to a Book,
which he has put his Name to. 2. Of Insolence, in dealing scurvily with the
Reverend and Worthy Dr. Aldrich. 3. Of ^gnorance, in undervaluing not only the
Ingenious Answer to Dr. Bentley, but the Christ-Church accurate Editions of Old
Authors.
To all these Charges I plead not guilty. And first, I deny that I have either
impudently or modestly robbed Mr. Boil of any Honor du^ to him. For to argue
^ith this A^ademick in his own way ( i. e.) by way of Syllogism; because I
wo^ld not be too serious in Asserting an ill-natured Truth.

If any Man puts his Name to a Book, which he is not the Author of, there is no
impudence or injury in denying him a Title to it.

But Mr. Boil has put his Name to a Book, which he is not the Autho^ of.

Ergo.

If you are not yet convinced, I prove my Minor thus.

If Mr. Boil has put his Name to a Book, which contains things he does not
understand* then he has put his Name to a Book which he is not the Author of.

But Mr. Boil has put his Name to a Book, which contains things h^ does not
understand.

Ergo again.

Another Hypothetick or two would clear the Point. But I trifle. Ther^ is no
need of showing my Skill in Logic, or of endeavoring to make out that, which
(like a first Principle) every Body takes for granted* Besides, to tell you the
Truth, I am a little unwilling to push this Matter too far. I would be tender
of a Hopeful young Gentleman's Reputation, if He and his Friends would be
content with that Character, and not talk of his being a Man of Note, of his
having given proofs of his extraordinary Genius and great Learning to the
World, etc. All this indeed might be justly enough said of the late Mr. Boil,
who has written many Learned Treatises in Experimental Philosophy, and was the
Ornament of the Royal Society; but not therefore of that Mr. Boil, who has
only published a faulty Edition of Phalaris'^ Epistles; (for I do not pretend,
but he might have a Hand in that Book, though not much in this last.) There seems
to be a great stress laid upon his Quality; too as if it was a sort of Treason
to appear against him. For my part, I am ready to pay all Respect* that is due
to an Irish E^rl's young^ Son, but then (waving the Cer^mony of giving him
place) I think a Doctor of Divinity or an ind^pendent English Gentlem^n not
much his inferior. And I allege it (in Kindness to him) as another Reason,
that he did not write the Piece against Dr. Bentley, because it puts the Dr.
more frequently in Mind of his Distance, than became any Man of never such high
Birth to have done in the Contentions of Wit and Argument, where all must be
allowed to be equal.

Secondly. I deny that I have insolently abused the Reverend and Worthy Dr.
Aldrich. It Is true, I have taken Notice of his Smoking and P^nning; but they
are two very ^ociable Qualites, and he has no Reason to be angry at me for it.
He is not the only Clergyman that takes Tobacco, nor the only Academick that
puns. I must confess, he is a Punner of the first Rate; For the Town has been
often obliged to him for good Catches, which are the highest flights of that
kind of Wit. But this is not all, I have called him a Proud Man, and abused his
Logic. As to his Pride, I will say no more than what I have already done; for
my Design is not to brand his Reputation in so Tender a part. And as to his
Compendium of Logic, I am sorry I men tioned it; for to decide whether there
be any thing new in it, but the Language; and whether that Language is better
for being labored and full of Elegant Phrases or not, is a Question, that
concerns only the Fresh Men in the Universities; and I will now assign it over
to them, and heartily ask their Pardon for invading their Province before.

Thirdly and Lastly. I deny, that I have ignorantly undervalued the ingenious
Answer to Dr. Bentley, and the Christ-Church accurate Editions of Old Authors.
But I will not here so much as recite any of those particular Witticisms and
Passages, which displeased me when I perused this ingenious Celebrated Book;
because I hear Dr. Bentley's Vindication is in the Press, and I am resolved not
to interfere with him. It is sufficient for my present purpose, that it appears
at first View to any Reader, to be done by several Hands. The Style and Matter
is almost in every other Page of a different Complexion. One while you have
something that looks a little Modest and Grave, and the Quotations managed to
the best advantage. Pre^ently the Humor changes, and there is nothing to be
met with, but Buffoonery and Unmannerly Jests with nothing in them. But it is
Dr. Bentley's business (not mine) to detect and apply all their Errors. I have
already exceeded the Limits of a Letter, and must hasten to the next thing; I
must account for my speaking ill of their Editions of Old Authors, which (says
my Friend) are Famous not only here at home, but are much approved by
Foreigners abroad. If ^his was true, what is the Meaning of the present
Dispute with Dr. Bentley? But they are so far from being Books of any standing
Value amongst other People, that they themselves are not long pleased with
them. For many Authors, that were Published in Dr. Fell's Time, have been again
Revised, Collated, Printed, Index'd, etc. in Dr. Aldrich's, and for any thing I
know may undergo the same Fate in the next Dean's too. As for the late Edition
of Aesop's F^bles, I am told Dr. Bentley has Examined it very particularly, and
proved it to be of the number of those, that neither deserve a good Reputation
at home nor abroad. So that the same Reason, which made me conceal my
Observations on their English Book, will oblige me to be silent here too;
unless I would make my self a Party in the Quarrel; which I do not design to
do, for all I am Dr. Bentley's dear Friend and Acquaintance. Here, Sir, I
thought to have released you; for I was in hopes all had been pretty well over.
But his Wit is inexhaustible: There is nothing so barren, which he cannot be
fruitful and copious upon. Who else could have applied the Tale of the Dutch
Commentators and Horace's Mother to two Epigrams? Any other Man would have told
me bluntly, that if I had not been certain of what I said, I should have
forborne my idle Conjectures. But to return him one ill Jest for another, I
assure him, the Father of the Two Epigrams is not altogether so much unknown to
me, as it seems Horace's Mother was to the Dutch-Commentators; and I did not
only guess, when I laid them at a Doctor's Door. The Pretense of the Author's
not being accountable for the abuses in them, because they were Printed without
his Knowledge, is ridiculous, and of a Piece with the rest of his Arguments.
They were not I hope Composed, Transcribed, and Dispersed without his
Knowledge, which (had they not been harmless, inoffensive things) would have
made them as much Libels as the Printing of them. Indeed it is an unfair
Practice to betray a Man into Print. The Collectors* of the Examen, etc. should
not have inserted them without leave, had they been never so Excellent, much
l^ss when they hardly deserved a place in their Book. But one may guess by it
(with Submission to the conjecturing Dutch Commentators) that they were no
great Friends to Dr. Bentley neither, any more than the Author; and I some
times (...), that we are secretly obliged to Christ-Church it self for that
Miscellany, notwithstanding this Gentleman for some private Reasons publicly
disclaims it. But, whencesoever it came, if it has given you any Divertisement
in your Solitude, I have had my Desire, and there is an End of it.

There is yet another Paragraph behind, and so it is like to remain. For,
besides that it has nothing in it but Your humble Servant Sir, I begin to blush
almost as much for Examining, as the Author ought to do for writing this
Pragmatical Rhapsody. Give me leave, Sir, to call it what I think I have fairly
proved it to be; though (if I am not wrong informed) it was the Production of one
that never doubted his own Sufficience and Abilities in all kinds of Poli^e
Learning.

SIR, I am Yours, etc. T. R.
London, Aug. 23. School.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Richard Cumberland at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard.
HOrological Disquisitions concerning the Nature of Time, and the Reasons why
all Days, from Noon to Noon, are not alike twenty four Hours long. In which
appears the impossibility of a Clock's being always kept exactly true to the
Sun; with Tables of Equation, and newer and better Rules than any yet extant,
how thereby precisely to adjust Royal Pendulums, and keep them afterward, as
near as possible to the apparent Time. With a Table of Pendulums, showing the
Beats that any Length makes in an hour. A Work very necessary for all that
would understand the true way of rightly managing Clocks and Watches. By John
Smith, C. M.

The Mystery of the Christian Faith and of The Blesse^l Trinity vindicated, and
The Divinity of Christ proved. In Three Sermons. Preached at Westminster-Abbey
upon Trinity-Suaday, June the 7th. and September 21. 1696. With a Letter in
Vindication of them. By the late Reverend William Pain, D. D.

A Scriptural Catechism: Or, The Whole Duty of Man, laid down in Express Words
of Scripture, chiefly intended for the Benefit of the younger Sort. Divided
into two Parts: The first containing the chief Principles of our Christian
Belief. The Second instructing us in our Duty to God and Man, according to the
Method observed in the Excellent Book, Entitled, The Whole Duty of Man. To
which is added, Some Private Devotions in express Words of Scripture: With
devout Collects for several Occasions. Recommended by the Right Reverend Father
in God, Edward Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

Reflections upon the Devotions of the Roman Church: With the Prayers, Hymns
and Lessons themselves, taken out of their Authentic Books. The Third Edition.
With an Appendix concerning the Miracles and Relics of the Church of Rome. By
^ohn Patrick, D. D. Late Preacher of the Charter House, London.

Two Books of Elegies: In Imitation of the Two First Books of Ovid de
Tristibus; with part of the Third. To which is added, Verses upon several
Occasions, with some Translations out of the Latin and Greek Poets. By Thomas
Ball, M. A. of St. ^ohn's College in Cambrdge.

Monitio Logica: Or, An Abstract and Translation of Burgersdicius his Logic.
By a Gentleman.

A Treatise of Prayer and Thanksgiving: With Devotions for the Morning and
Evening, the Sacrament, Sickness, and oOccasions. By ^. C. To which is added a
Sermon on Psalm 73. 28. By the late Reverend B. Whitchcott, D. D. And also his
Character of the Best Christians.

A Practical Essay concerning Friendly Reproof. By Daniel Sturmy, late Student
of CatharineHall, Cambridge.

An Essay, concerning Critical and Curious Learning: In which ^e contained some
short Reflections on the Controversy betwixt Sir William Temple and Mr.
Wotton; and that betwixt Dr. Bentley and Mr. Boil. By T. R. Esquire


