A Rational Method OF Daily RELIGION: Consisting of Four New Offices of
Ordinary Devotion; AND A Practical Directory Concerning the Reasonableness and
Use of them.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for Percivall Gilbourne, at the George in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street. 1697.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN READER,
THE DIRECTORY discharging the part both of Preface and Commentary; the only
favor I have now to desire of thee is to peruse the whole, or none at all;
since both parts of the Book have a necessary dependence one upon the other.

I have ventured to publish this small part of the whole Work (if I do not
flatter my self) for swaying Reasons; by it self, for a Trial of the World's
receptio^ of the Design; and sooner than ^ once intended, in obedience to ^
particular Motion of Divine Providence.

Whilst I was composing it my great Master's Honor was al^ along in my Eye,
and it has been, and still is my own earnest Request to God, that his Spirit
might breath kindly on my Attempt; and I hope too it has been the Request of
many others, who if their visible Demeanor be the Transcript of their Hearts,
cannot but reasonably be supposed to have Interest at the Court of Heaven.

Nevertheless I am no stranger to the Bias of the Age, or the Magic of old
plausible popular Titles, and admired Names, or the Moral Necessity of the
cooperation of free Agents, with even the immediate good Motions of God's
Spirit, before they can attain their End; much more, with external succors
that are tendered by sinful Creatures, in order to make God's Blessing on a work
of this Nature truly complete, by its proving thoroughly effectual with those
who use it. And therefore, though the honest measures I have taken in this
Undertaking encourages me to hope for success, with Souls; yet, at the same
time I have took care to be prepared aforehand for a defeat. My best (though
weak) endeavor is my part; Success and Disappointment, Honor and Dishonor
are of God's disposal, and either of them in this World, should be cheerfully
submitted to by a Christian.

The truth of it is, some Assaults must be expected from the Grand Adversary of
Mankind, whatever be the Event of this Assay. But that God, whom I serve and
trust in, is both mighty and good, and will not suffer a poor Christian that
flies to him for Succor to be the Caitiff, either of Vanity, or Despondence;
or his good intention to miss of its Aim, with respect to himself, if he does
not neglect other Branches of Duty, and Perseveres in a Course of entire
Fidelity to Christ unto the End, remembering that the proper Rewards of a
Christian are not those of this State, but such as will abundantly recompense
the cheerful patience of a short Life.

If in some places the stubbornness of the Subject, or haste in the Composure
of the expressive parts of the Directory (for to deal justly by the matter;
that has been well studied) has occasioned me to be tedious, and rough in my
Sentences: I now desire thee to take first a rough View of the whole Chapter
you are reading, and always not to read the Parentheses, if they be so noted by
these Marks () till you have read to a full Period.

By this means upon a second reading over the Chapter, the most illiterate
Reader may understand it, and so digest it the better: so also if a hard word
occur, that is taken out of another, Language, because more expressive than any
in ours; the Connection, if a Man be attent will explain it.

The parts unfinished are,

I. Large penitential Offices of solemn Repentance framed according to St.
Paul's Apostolical Model of the several Gradations of Repentance.

II. Large Prose, Eucharistical Offices in Honor to the several Attributes of
God, and for the most signal Works and Providence of God with others suited to
the most remarkable Feasts of the Church.

III. Variety of occasional Offices for Sabbaths,
New-Tears-Birth-Baptism-Ordination-Wedding, and Anniversary Fast-Days, and Days
of Mourning for the Dead, with Prayers proper to be used at Visitations of the
Sick, and the like, with an ejaculatory Office.

IV. A large gratulatory Office with Triumphs of Faith, Hope and Charity by way
of Anticipation of the Beatifick Vision, and Everlasting Jubilee, as also large
intercessive Offices adapted to most possible Relations and Stations of a
Christian in this Life.

V. A large Deetical Office of Vigilance, Deprecations and Petitions for Graces.

VI. A large Office of Abstraction adapted to the different and inmost
Self-Consciousnesses of Men in this State with Glances on Death, the separate
State, the future Judgment, and the two Eternal States.

VII. An Office of Sacramental Devotions, os which there has been great
Numbers, and such as under the Titles of Weekly and Monthly, and such like
stinted formal Preparations have betrayed many to a profanation of it, and
filled the Age with unworthy confused Notions of the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper.

VIII. Large Offices of socia^ Devotion fitted for occasion of two or more
Persons conjoyn^ Exercise of social Repentance for sins committed together, as
also for the Exercise of social Gratitude for the same Mercy, as also for
Families, Religious Societies, or Fraternities, and the like.

To each of which are to be added suitable Directories by way of Appendix, with
suitable Discourses as shall be found most proper, prefixed before each,
concerning solemn Repentance, [solitary or social] Birth, Regeneration,
Solitude, Divine Gratitude, Gratulation, Fraternal Confession, Heaven, the
separate State, Vows, Scope, Contingencies, God, Angels, Heaven, Devils,
Eternity, Hell, Self-Penetration, Charity, Poverty of Spirit, Family-Religion,
Hope, Religious Societies, Heavenly Aspiration, and the like.

Which will be done if God permit; the furtherance of thy Prayers is humbly
desired.

Reader, Farewell.
THE Morning Office OF GRATITUDE.
CLASS. I. Expressions of Holy Dread and Filial Confidence, intermixed.
GReat and Glorious Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, with the Gratitude of a
Creature, and the Shame of a Sinner, I own thy Works to be full of Wonder and
Love, though my ways have been full of Vanity and Perverseness.

2.
But though I cannot offer the Tribute of a Cherub, nor pay the Gratitude of
Paradise to my great Creator; yet since so vast is thy Mercy, that thou sen^est
thy Son to take hol^ of fallen Man; and in his Name Creatures uncreatur'd by
Apostasy, may find access to the Throne of Grace and tremendous Brightness^ and
fo5 seeking be recreatur'd by his Grace and Spirit. Be not, O Lord* I beseech
thee incensed, if sinful Dust and Ashes dare in the Name of the Mighty Jesus to
bow before (...) most High God.

3.
(...)nd Judge of An(...)d, I blush to present the Homage of a Worm; much more
the Praise of a Rebel: But though I blush to present it, yet I dare not withhold
it: I am drawn to thee by the irresistible violence of that Love and that Blood
which has paved a new and living way to God for all who withstand not thy
tender of that Peace which is a Pearl of such great Price. Verily, Verily, my
Lord and my God, now I may, and ought, and will laud and address thee, though it
be with Trembling and Confusion: For as Dread belongs unto Creatures and
Sinners; so does Confidence belong unto the Immaculate, the Eternal, and only
Begotten Son of God.

CLASS II. Expressions of Praise both by way of Recital and Address.
1.
GLory therefore be to God, Condescension to his Creatures, Grace and Mercy,
Peace and Purgation, Redemption and Forgiveness to me a Sinner: May the Good
God, who pardons Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, accept the Incense of a
lowly Heart.

2.
Great is the Lord and mavelous, worthy to be praised; there there are no
bounds of his Greatness.

3.
He is Wonderful in Counsel, Mighty in Working, Glorious in Holiness, Fearful
in Praises: He dwells in inaccessible Light: The Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain him: His Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom: His Dominion lasts longer
than Ages: Ten thousand times ten thousand, and Thousands of thousands of
Glorious Spirits are the awful Retinue of the Lord God.

4.
The Heavens declare the Glory of God; the Firmament shows his Handiwork: One
Day tells another, and one Night certi^^es another.

5.
Thou, Lord, in the beginning did lay the Cornerstone of the Earth, when the
Morning-Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy: All the
Beasts of the Forest are thine, and so are the Cattle on a thousand Hills.

6.
Fearfully and Wonderfully have thou made Man; and O that my Soul did ponder it
well! Thine Eyes did see my Substance when I was yet imperfect; and in thy
Everlasting Book were all my Members written; Day after Day were they a
fashioning: To this Day are they preserved by thy hand.

7.
Every Morning thy Loving Kindness is renewed: I laid me down and slept, and
rose again, for the Lord sustained me: O how dear are thy Counsels unto me, O
God, O how great is the sum of them? Here particular Mercies may be inserted.


8.
How should I count them? They are more in number than I can conceive: Whenever
I awake they are present with me. Have I not for this reason remembered thee on
my Bed, and thought upon thee when I was waking? Now do I sing and always will
sing of thy Mercies betimes in the Morning, even unto thee, O my strength; for
thou art my Refuge, and my mercifu^ God.

CLASS IV. The Dedicatory.
THis Day I dedicate my self, Spirit, Soul and Body to thy Spirit, Honor and
Service; and do resign all my Care and Concerns to the Direction and Influence
of thy Providence; and am disposed cheerfully to embrace all the Dispensations
of thy Fatherly Goodness. Thus will I by thy Grace and Assistance, throughout
my whole Life, wait upon thee in Holiness, that I may at last behold thy Power
and Glory everlasting.

2.
I hate and abhor all my past evil ways, and from the depth of my Soul do
renounce mine own Wickedness. Here you may confess your Constitution Sin, or
other Sins.


O that I may obtain Victory over my whole Body of Sin, and live! Then shall
Jesus be my Jesus indeed, and say, Soul, Be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee; and, at the Great Day, declare before Angels and Saints, and
Devils, and the Desperate, Thy monstrous iniquities are blotted out; They shall
not be thy ruin. Thou shall live; for I died for the penitent.

3.
Hence it is, O Lord, that my Soul hangs upon thee: To this purpose with extreme
Thirst of Soul I seek thy Strength, and thy Face* O therefore do thou, who
delight'st not in the Desolation, but divine Resurrection of Humane Spirits,
cheer and replenish me with the Light of thy Countenance; for without thee we
must needs be desolate.

CLASS. V. Acts of Daily Petition for God's Protection and Blessing.
LORD, I have dedicated my Judgment to thee, O show me the way that I should
walk in. I lift up my Soul unto thee, Lord, sanctify it; I have devoted my
Spirit, Lord separate the Light from the Darkness thereof, and refine it with
the fiery Baptism of the Holy Ghost, that thy Will may be the Magnet of mine.
Lord, I beseech thee, set a Watch over my Heart and Lips, that my Words and
Meditations may please thee.

2.
O that all my Actions, and Intentions, and Discourses, may be begun, and
governed, and ended in thy Fear! so shall the Lord prosper my Handiwork; so
shall my Studies thrive under his Blessing, and all my Resolutions be
established: O that the Disposals of my Heavenly Father (be they grateful or
ungrateful to Flesh and Blood) may find their Ends answered by my Demeanor
under and use of them!

3.
Arm me, I beseech thee, with the Armor of God, that no presumptuous Sin may
ever again get the Dominion over me; Array my Soul with a competent Conformity
of Mind to the Image of thy Son, that I may grow in Grace and heavenly
Experience; that so this, and every remaining Day of my short stay here, may be
reflected on with less Sorrow, and more spiritual Joy in the Lord, than the
foregoing* O may thy Loving Spirit lead me in the ways of Evangelical
Righteousness! so shall the Land of Righteousness be mine Inheritance; and the
God of Righteousness my Portion for ever.

CLASS VI. A Catholic Conclusion.
LOrd, I beseech thee, of thine infinite Compassion, overlook my numerous
Infirmities, accept of this imperfect Sacrifice, and of the following
Expression of my Delight in the Joys of the Church Triumphant, and of my
Commiseration of all the Perils, Straits, and Necessities of thy Israel
Militant here on Earth, in the powerful Name and Words of thine only Son, and
Man's only Savior JESUS CHRIST:

Our Father, etc.
Noon-Office OF VIGILANCE AND CHARITY.
CLASS I. Vigilance excited, by Expressions of a sense of Man's and the World's
Vanity.
1.
VAnity of Vanities, all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

2.
God made Man upright; little lower than the Angels, and placed all sublunary
Things under him: But Man has sought out many foolish Inventions, and lets
some Creature or other lord it over his Heart, though they were all put under his
feet.

3.
For the Lord looked down from Heaven on the Children of Men, to see if there
were any seeking after God: But oh, how are they gone out of the way!
Destruction and Unhappiness is in their ways: The way to Reconciliation and
Glory they neither see, nor seek

4.
Nay, the humble Soul and his Care for Eternity is had in derision by them;
numerous are those Wretches which combine with the disorderly Tendencies of
Birth, and the Princes of Darkness to pluck him from his God.

CLASS II. Expressions of Trust in God and Holy Resolution.
1.
BUt my Soul shall not run any more after Idols, neither shall their Scoffs
make me draw back; for I will seek the Kingdom of God, and Christ, and the
Righteousness thereof.

2.
Seek, seek, I say, O my Soul, the Lord and his Strength; seek his Face
evermore: All other things when weighed in the Balance, are found wanting: God
alone can be the Marrow and real Plenitude of a Spirit; whose are infinite
Worlds, and all the Fulnesses of the same; He, and He alone, can be an
Enjoyment adaequate to a Will.

3.
O theresore Love the Lord, who is the Heaven of Angels: He is my stony Rock,
and my Defense, my Savior, my God, and my Might, in whom I will trust; my
Buckler, the Horn also of my Salvation: I will call upon the Lord, who is
worthy to be praised; so wall I be safe from mine Enemies: For whosoever dwells
under his Defense, does abide under the Shadow of the Almighty.

CLASS III. An Address to God for Spiritual Strength, and Christian Violence in
general.
GReat Creator of the Universe, Benefactor of Angels, Humbler of Devils, and
Restorer of Man: Mavelous for Strength, mavelous for Wisdom, and mavelous
for Goodness: Thou have promised to hear them that call upon thee faithfully in
time of Trouble; O do thou now say unto my Soul, in this state of Difficulty, I
am thy Salvation. Pity, O Lord, my darkened Mind; cleanse a Heart stained with
Sin. Terrible Hosts thou see, O Lord, do encompass my poor Soul; Thousands
fall beside me, and thousands behind me, and ten thousands round about me:
Thrones and Principalities plot against us, and those whom we are too apt (
because of Sense) to reckon our Best Friends, do ensnare and betray us. But
alas! though we are beleper'd with Guilt, though we are near the Portals of Death,
and the Talons of Hell, how apt are we to put the evil Day far from us?
Wherefore, I beseech thee, do thou, by a Divine Power, make me constantly
sensible of Death and Judgment, and the Tortures of the Damned; invest my Soul
with that Noble Violence wherewith the Kingdom of Heaven must be taken. O my
God, I know thy Grace, and that only is sufficient for me; work in me
therefore, I beseech thee, effectually in the inner Man by thy Spirit, that I
may habitually will and do according to thy goo^ Pleasure; so shall I be strong
indeed, even in the Lord, and the Power of his Might, and be more than
Conqueror through Christ, an^ hold out to the end; so shall I no^ be dismayed for
any Terror by Night, nor for the Pestilence tha^ invisibly wounds at Noon; so
shall I triumph the Triumphs of thy Saints, and trample upon Dangers, Death,
and Devils, and keep a perpetual Jubilee with my God and his Christ.

CLASS IV. Prayers for particular Graces, collected out of our Blessed Lord's
Sermon on the Mount, and St. Paul.
AND to the end, O Lord, I may be found in the Blessed Number of those who are
Christ's Disciples indeed, make me, I beseech thee, poor in Spirit, a godly
Mourner, meek, hungry, and thirsty after Righteousness, merciful, pure in
Heart, disposed to promote Peace and Unity, ready to be persecuted for
Righteousness sake, and to rejoice when I am reviled, instead of reviling
again. O suffer no worldly Emulation to sway in my Heart, and to taint my
Fastings and Prayers. Give me a Heavenly Prudence, that my Light may shine
before Men, and I may nevertheless do many Good Works secretly, looking for my
Praise and Reward from thee: Give me courage to pluck out my scandalous Eye,
and to cut off the scandalous Hand of my corrupt Nature, and all Superfluity of
Tongue and Thought for the mean Concerns of this Life. O may thy Name never be
uttered without Reverence by me* Suffer me not so to be angry with my Brother,
as to sin, or to be a Judge, but rather a Doer of thy Law. Make me so mindful
of my own Ingratitude, and of that great Goodness which has nevertheless been
continued by thee to me, that in imitation of this thy great Perfection, I may
forgive, bless, and pray for mine Enemies. Drive earthly Solicitude out of my
Mind, that (my Distributions to the Necessities of the Saints laying up for me
a Treasure in Heaven) my Heart may be there also* O illuminate my Mind, that
that Faculty which thou have planted in me to be my Light, may not by being
dark it self, overwhelm me all over with horrible Darkness. I earnestly entreat
thee to lay a deep Foundation of Faith within me, that like a wise Builder I
may build upon the Rock, and be proof against Storms, and Waves, and Tempests;
always striving more and more earnestly to enter in at the strait Gate, that I
may bring forth the excellent Fruits of a Mind thoroughly changed, and with
diligence and trembling do those things which my Lord commands: O that when my
Lord comes, when Death seizes me, I may be found so doing! O subject my Body to
my Soul, and my Soul entirely unto thee, and erect and enlarge the Kingdom of
God in it, that it may be filled with an equitable Disposition of behaving it
self so toward God and God Man* Angels and Devils, its Fellow Creatures and
the whole subordinat^ Creation, as becomes a Christian and so be filled with
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Finally, O Lord since thou have promised it to
those who ask it of thee with Faith and Purity, Importunateness and Humility;
give me, I beseech thee, all Celestial Favors, and truly valuable Bounties in
that inestimable Gift of Gifts, thy Holy Spirit. Lord* how shall our Souls be
nursed for Heaven, without the support of this Manna of the Seraphim? Give me
therefore thy Spirit, I do again and again beseech thee, else I perish to all
Eternity: Lord, I trust in thee, O let me not be confounded.

2.
O my God, thy Mercies toward me are ineffable; wherefore I present my Body
(which is daily fed and preserved by thy Bounty) before thee: O do thou so
renew my Mind, that it may be transformed from the World to thy Likeness, and
make my Body and all my Actions in their Station (wherein I am, or hereafter
may be placed by thy Providence) a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
thee; and I may experimentally prove what is that good and acceptable Will of
God.

3.
Awe me, I beseech thee, with a sense of thy Greatness and my own Meanness,
that I may not think of my self more highly than I ought to think; supply me
with Grace to have my Conversation in Heaven, an^ with all Men, in all godly
simplicity* to love without dissimulation, to abhor that which is evil, and to
stand fast in the Lord; to prefer others in Honor before my self; not to be
slothful in Business; to be fervent in Spirit; to rejoice in the Hope; to be
patient in Tribulation, and instant in Prayer; to rejoice with them that
rejoice; to weep with them that weep* in indifferent things, to be of the same
mind with others; not to min^ high things, but to condescend; not to be wise in
my own Conceit; not be overcome of evil, but to overcome evi^ with good.

For Christ his sake, O my Father and his Father, grant these Petitions.
4.
Give me Grace, O Father of Lights, to add to my Faith, Fortitude; and to
Fortitude, Temperance; and to Temperance, Piety; and to Piety, Lowliness; and
to Lowliness, Charity: To be subject to the higher Powers; to render to all
their Dues; to esteem the Laborers in thy Vineyard for their Works sake; to
live up to my Light, and to walk honestly as in the day; to please my Neighbor
to Edification; to bear the Infirmities of the Weak, and the Reproaches of the
Wicked; to resist the Devil, mortify the Body, and be one Spirit with the Lord.

This I beg for the sake of Christ Jesus; hear me therefore, O my God.
5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and all thy Soul, and all
thy Mind, and all thy Strength.

This is the First and Great Commandment; and I cannot but own, my God, that it
is most Holy, and Just, and Good.

Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

This is the next, and like unto it.

6.
But, Lord, who is sufficient for these things? Where is the Man that lives
and transgresses not these Laws? O therefore, Lord, enter not into Judgment
with me; but for Christ's sake pardon my manifold Violations of thy Laws; and
for the future, I beseech thee fortify me with a plentiful Portion of thy
Grace and Spirit: Henceforward I will not receive the former in vain, nor
quench the latter; but will love my God with a Supreme Love entirely and
constantly, and my Neighbor as my self, and my self according as my Love of
God shall recommend me* So help my God.

CLASS V. Office of Charity,
PART I. The Gratulatory of the Church Triumphant.
HAppy are those Spirits that wait on God's Throne, and do continually minister
with Halelujahs to the Holy, Holy, Holy God, and the Lamb for ever and ever.

Happy and Blessed are those Saints, who live in the Regions of inaccessible
Light, where neither Moral nor Natural Death has any place.

Happy indeed are they that are made eternal Priests and Kings to God, and are
above the need of Care and Watching; gratulated be their Joy May it be mine,
and mine theirs, in the eternal Salvation of my Soul.

2.
A Heavenly Aspiration.
My Soul is a thirst for the Living God: This is the Communion which my Soul is
inflamed with Longings after: O that I had Wings like a Dove! then should I
flee away and be at rest: When shall I gratulate, and be gratulated there! O
that I may be united to my God! When shall my Exile be at an end! When shall I
see and know him, as I am seen and known! O that I were certify'd that I am a
true Son and Servant of God, that I might long to be dissolved, and say, How
long, Lord, how long holy and true?

The Submission.
But be this as the Lord will, whose it is to appoint the number of the Days of
his Servant, if so be that while Days do not commence Eternity, I may number
them and be wise, and fit my self for my great Change.

This is my Desire, Lord, regard it; this shall be my Endeavor, Lord, further
it.
PART II. Intercession for the Church Militant.
1.
MAy the Creator of all Universes, both visible and invisible, visit the dark
parts of the Earth with the glorious Beams of the Sun of Righteousness, that
the Knowledge of Christ crucified may fill the Earth, as the Waters cover the
Sea: Let the People praise thee, O God, yea, let all Peoples, Nations and
Languages praise thee.

2.
And oh that those Countries which enjoy the Gospel, may not slander it so
shamefully by the black and blasphemous Lives of its Professors! Lord, grant
that the Power of thy Gospel may display the Luster of its native Brightness,
Simplicity, and Purity, in our Lives.

3.
Restore, I beseech thee, Beauty and Discipline, Soundness of Faith, genuine
Ordinances, and Decency and Perfection of Worship to all Ecclesiastical Bodies
professing Christianity: And to this end, give to them such true Christian
Ingenuity, as that they may all severally and unanimously own, lament, and
reform their different Excesses and Defects, that as there is but one true
Christ, and but one true Christianity, which can secure a Soul of Happiness; so
we may all glorify thee the same God and Father of us all, with one Mind, and
with one Mouth.

4.
Look down, O Lord, I beseech thee, from the Habitation of thy Glory, with a
special Eye of Favor on this Church and Kingdom, which thou have so long
blessed with many signal Mercies, and preserved in such amazing and endearing
Methods of Providence: Pardon our great and crying Abuses of the same; and
wherein soever all Orders of Men amongst us, in our own and the days of our
Forefathers, have fallen short of the Glory of God; let it not any longer, I
pray thee, be laid to our charge: Put a stop to that Latitude of Life and
Opinion which divides and corrupts us: O Lord, reform us if we are still
reformable, that we may not be delivered over into the Will of our Enemies,
whose Mercies are cruel.

5.
Guard with the Guardianship of thy Holy Angels, the Sacred Person of William
our King; grant that all his Designs and Undertakings may be so truly Christian
and Honorable, that they may prove in the end successful: Let no Weapon formed
against him prosper; and whenever the number of his Days on Earth shall be
fulfilled, grant that he may be found such a Conqueror of all his spiritual
and temporal Enemies, as may make Death to him a kind Translation of his Soul
into a World of glorious Spirits: Bless him in his Royal Relatives, and
especially Catherine the Queen-Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess Ann of
Denmark: Counsel, O Lord, our Counselors, and teach our Senators true Wisdom.
Plant a true Affection for the Welfare of true Piety and these Kingdoms in all
the Nobility, Judges, and Inferior Magistrates, that Righteousness may run down
like a mighty Stream, and there may be no Complaints of Oppression in our
Streets.

6.
Shower down a very liberal Portion of thy Spirit on all that are separated to
wait at thine Altar; give them all a commanding Sense of their own
Insufficiency of themselves (and Sufficiency in and by Christ) to turn many to
Righteousness; of the great Dignity of their Office; of the infinite Value of
Souls, and that Blood which was shed for them; and of the Greatness of their
Trust; and of that Account which at the last Day will be exacted from them.
Inflame them with a genuine Zeal from above for thy Glory, that their Loins may
be always girt for every good Enterprise which may promote the Plantation of
New Colonies of Souls in Heaven. Adorn them with Meekness and Prudence,
Circumspection and Humility, that they may be burning and shining Lights in
this perverse Generation; that so they may recover the drooping Credit of their
Sacred Function, and manifest it to be no less Honorable in the sight of God
and Angels, than it is slighted by Men of scornful and licentious Minds and
Manners. Sublimate their Minds with a noble Degree of Sincerity, that they may
divide the Word without deceit, and without reserve. Set their Faces like a
Flint against the reigning Impudence of the Age, and against the unjust
Reproaches of unreasonable and disorderly Men; and in what respect soever they
may sometimes happen to be partly too Just, may they thereby be provoked to an
Holy Jealousy over themselves. O fortify them with the Courage of a Baptist,
that they may denounce the Terrors of the Lord against all Impiety, without
partiality or respect of Persons, rebuking Vice boldly, both in season and out
of season, with that spiritual Majesty and Authority, and that degree of Faith
and Faithfulness, which becomes the Ambassadors of Christ, and the Stewards of
the Mysteries of the Gospel. O send skilful and laborious Husbandmen into thy
Vineyard, in the midst of our great distress. Furnish all Bishops with a wise
and discerning Spirit, that they may lay hands suddenly on no Man; but stock
the Church with such Holy and Judicious, such Active and Orthodox Priests, as
may honorably and manfully employ the Power of the Keys; put to shame and
silene all Gainsayers, and win many Strangers, nay, even professed Enemies, over
to Christ, that so having cultivated the Seeds of Heaven in themselves and
others, they may stand with great Joy before Christ's Tribunal, and save both
their own and the Souls of them who are committed to their Care. Lord, of thy
abundant and unbounded Goodness, do thou hasten this Enlargement of thy true
Invisible Church: O how long, how long, O our God, shall it be before the great
Affairs of Eternity prosper in their hands!

7.
Do thou so prosper the Education of our Youth in our Universities, and other
Seminaries of Learning, that the Public Spiritedness, Profound Learning, and
Generous Piety of our Posterity, may shame the Selfishness, conceited
Ignorance, and Degeneracy of this present Generation.

8.
Give to Children, Servants, and all Inferiors, Docility and Submission; and to
all Parents, Masters, and Benefactors, the Gift of wise Inspection and Conduct,
that their Management of those that are under them, may not fail of thy
Blessing, and the making them prove Blessings to themselves and the whole
Community in their several Stations, Vocations, and Relations.

9.
Reward all that have done me good, with the Rewards of the better sort: Pardon
and pacify all that have wronged or slandered me: Blast all malicious
Intrigues, and breathe kindly on all laudable Endeavors.

10.
Sanctify all Afflictions to all afflicted Persons; and as soon as the ends of
thy Fatherly Goodness have been answered, do thou speedily deliver them.

11.
Finally, I laud and magnify thy Holy Name, in the behalf of my Country, for
all thy Mercies conferred on me in my National Capacity.

12.
Lord, pardon my manifold Infirmities, and accept of this poor Tribute of
Worship, in the Mighty Name of Christ, and concluded with that complete Form of
Prayer which he himself has taught us:

Our Father, etc.
Evening Offices OF Daily Repentance.
CLASS I. A PRAYER, Proper to be used before the Evening Office of
Self-Reflection.
1.
INcomprehensible Sovereign of the World, thou art encircled with Light; with
thee there can be no Darkness; for the Dahkness and Light to thee are both
alike: The highest Heights and the deepest Depths; even Angels and Devils;
Heaven and Hell are naked before thee; How much more then the Hearts of the
Children of Men.?

2.
The Great and Good God print a firm and lively Sense of this All-searchingness
of his Nature on my Mind, that by being always mindful of the piercing
Consciousness of him with whom I have to do, I may always act and speak and
intend, as in the Presence of the Highest, and by a profound Reverence of thy
unspotted Purity and unlimitted Presence, I may be excited to make it the great
Business of my Life, to cleanse my self daily more and more from all Filthiness
of Flesh and Spirit.

3.
Particularly I entreat God at this time to enlarge my Conscience with the
Presence of that Spirit which searches the very Depths of God, that I may
dexterously apply the Maxims of my Blessed Lord to the state of my Soul, and
pass an impartial Sentence upon my Behavior this day: O place me in a clear
Light to my self; O enable me to re-call to my Memory all the Actions, Words,
and Thoughts, that not the least Rebellion may be overlooked: I know, O Lord,
to what a gracious and wonderful Being I offer this Request; all Natures lie
dissected in thy infinite Mind; how therefore should any Crevise of my Soul be
hid from thee? Universal Knowledge is the Lord's, and to Him alone it does
belong: Such Knowledge is too wonderful for Man, What Creature is there that
can attain unto it? The Knowledge of my self, Lord, is the subject o^ my
Petition; a Knowledge which is most necessary for, and which (with thy
Blessing) is attainable by me: O Witness of all my Ways, thy Wisdom can impart
to me this Gift; thy Goodness will not suffer thee to let such an useful
Pursuit go without a Blessing: O therefore, I beseech thee, make the Method of
my Pursuit acceptable in thy sight, and so prosper it; whatever things thou
think fit to keep secret, suffer not any wilful sin to lie hidden from me;
and if my present Recollection discovers any wilful Sin, or Sins, that has been
hitherto undiscerned by me; do thou direct and enable me so to bewail and
lament it ( or them) and whatsoever new Guilt of this Day may be charged upon
me by my Conscience as never to sink under the everlasting Terror of the
Flame, or the Horror of the Dark, where there is endless Weeping and gnashing
of Teeth: O bow down thine Ear to this humble Desire, even for Jesus Christ his
sake; to whom with thee, Father, and the Holy Ghost, all Honor, Praise, and
Glory, as by Mights and Thrones, Principalities and Dominions, Angels and
Archangels, and all the Triumphant Host above; so by me be ascribed for ever
and ever.

Amen.
CLASS II.
After the careful Application of that daily Method of Self-Examination,
prescribed in the Directory; if your Conscience accuses you of any wilful Sin,
or Sins committed the Day past; or brings to memory any Sin, or Sins, of a
longer Date, which you never solemnly unsinn'd by Repentance, use this
following Form.

THE First Evening Office OF Daily Repentance for Deliberate Sin.
1.
GReat and Terrible God! the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of Equity; for
thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity with delight: Thy Wrath is
insupportable, and tames the most Haughty of Apostate Spirits. Who can
withstand the Judgment, who can grapple with the extreme Justice of the Most
High?

2.
And yet, sottish and ungrateful Wretch that I am! I have departed from my God,
and lived as though I could escape his eyes; In spite of the Supreme Mercy of
the Supreme Majesty, manifested in the Death and Resurrection of his Son, I
have deliberately in many Instances committed Impiety against my God and
Savior; [Iniquity against his Creation, and Impurity against my own Soul and
Body] Here you may confess particular Sins; as, I have at such a time, and
under such and such circumstances.
: Yea, this very day have I provoked the Lord to Jealousy by the addition of a
new Sin ( or Sins) to my former crying Offenses; so like a Brute so like a
Devil; nay worse than either Brute or Devi^ have I been before thee: For n^
Brute ever spurned at Conscience, nor did ever any Devil trample upon
Redemption: Sinful Man alone is that Monster of Ingratitude, that fights both
against Light and a Jesus at once.

3.
Wrath and Vengeance, Shame and Confusion; ineffable Anguish and Bitterness of
Soul; Blackness and Darkness for ever; Communion with Devils and all the
Damned; unquenchable Flames and disregarded Cries; even the ever-gnawing and
never consuming Envy of a Judas and lapsed Angels, is, O Lord, I must
acknowledge the true Portion of my corrupted Nature, and the just Reward of
this ( or these) and all my other sinful Deeds: All this I must own, O Lord,
and all the known and unknown terrible Ingredients of Hell belongs to all who
have forgot God, and Crucified the Son of God afresh; and therefore also unto
me, O God, who have thus again sinned with so high a hand against thee; and
after all thy long-suffering and condescension, have still presumed, by new
Sins, to make my self a Derision to Devils, a Burden to my self, a Traitor to
Christ, and a noisome Spectacle to God and Holy Angels; nay, for ought that I
know, the Dregs of thy Fury ought to be drunk by so vile and villainous a Soul,
if thou were extreme to mark what has been done amiss.

4.
But though to me belongs Damnation; yet, to the Lord belongs Compassion; for
the Lord is God, and not Man; and as is his Majesty, such is his Mercy: For
doubtless were thy Ways as our Ways, or thy Thoughts like our Thoughts;
doubtless, were not the Bowels of God larger in extent than the wide and deep
Sea; doubtless, were it it impossible for fallen Man to find a favorable
access to the Throne of Grace, and to be reconciled to his offended Maker, thou
would never have sent thy eternal Begotten Son into this disorderly Portion
of thy World: For, wherefore, O Lord, did he shed his infinitely precious
Blood, if Blood, and Vapor, and Smoke, if showers of fierce and flaming
Brimstone, if eternal exile of Spirit, Soul, and Body from thee, be the
irreversible Fate of poor Man, and he be not capable of a repentance, which is
more acceptable than the Repentance of Devil, and those Souls who are departed
this Life; even a Repentance unto everlasting Life, which is never to be
repented of.

5.
Wherefore, Heavenly Father, since I make use of the Name of no less a Person
than the Christ of God and the Jesus of Men; since he is as mighty to soften
and save, as thou art to destroy* since his Merits are as charming to thy
Goodness, as thy Rage is formidable to us; let not the Dread Majesty of the
Heavens and Earth, and all that are therein, take up the Weapons of his Anger
against me, though a vain Man, which has not showed himself a Man, venture to
expostulate with his Maker and his Judge, and to take unto himself Words, and
say, Will thou enter into Controversy with a Worm? Is there no difference
betwixt the Strength of a Devil and a Man? Is not Christ a potent Savior?
Shall not thy Mercy have its Triumphs as well as thy Justice? O Lord, hearken;
O Lord, be gracious; O Lord, forgive; Lord, hide not thy face from me, but from
my Sins; O Lord most Holy, O God most Mighty, most Merciful God and Savior,
suffer me not to fall into the bitter Pains of eternal Death: O Preserver of
Men, do thou draw nigh unto me; for as I have sinned, so I return and draw nigh
unto God: I know now that it is not in vain still to repent, and therefore I
humble my self, and supplicate thee for thy Pardon; I level my self with the
Worms of the Earth, under the Scepter of thy Grace; I confess and grieve, and
hide my self in the Rock Christ Jesus, for fear of the Lord, and the Glory of
his Majesty: I come not, Lord, of mine own head, or in mine own Name, but by
the Direction, and in the Name of the great High Priest, I beseech thee forgive
me; O speak peace to my Soul; say to the Mempest within me, Be still. O do thou
so wonderfully bless and be merciful unto me, as to show me the light of thy
Countenance: O that my Soul could hear thee saying, I am reconciled; thy
Prayers, and thy Tears are regarded my n^e. Could I but believe in the Lord
Jesus, and repent effectually, there would be no room for doubt; for surely
those Words are the Motto of that Cross on which Jesus Christ gave up the Ghost.

6.
O therefore, I beseech thee, do thou spare me a while, till my Soul has through
Christ recovered that Strength, which by my Sin I have lost: It Is not for the
sake of living here that I desire a continuance of Life; but that I may have an
opportunity once more of enrobing my self with Divine Graces, that I may be a
Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, to look on the Lamb of God
that was slain for returning Sinners; hear the Sighs of a broken Heart; supply
me with a practical Faith; work in my Mind an effectual Change from all
Unrighteousness, to a steady, flourishing, fruitful Habit of universal
Holiness; make me truly lowly in Heart, a zealous Imitator of Christ; fight my
Battles against the Hosts of Hell, and bring me at last, I entreat thee, to thy
everlasting Kingdom.

7.
With this Hope, I will labor to purify my self, and do commit my self, with
all my Fellow Creatures, especially my particular Friends and Enemies, to the
kind Influences of thy Grace, and thy protection this Night. Grant that my
Sleep may be wholesome and temperate, that I may rise early the next Morning to
renew my Thanks to thee for thy continued forbearance, and to offer my Vows of
Gratitude in all sincerity. Let not my being now inspired with this soft Temper
of Soul puff me up, or make me less aware of the deceitfulness of Sin: But may
the Grace, Mercy, and Peace which I enjoy now from God the Father through Christ,
by being husbanded with Vigilance and Humility, usher me into the Regions of
Glory. Amen, Amen; so be it for Christ his sake:

In his Name and Words I conclude my Address, together with my Thanks to thee
for all thy Mercies; Our Father, etc.
CLASS III. THE Wary Christian's EVENING OFFICE OF Daily Repentance for Sins of
Infirmity.
1.
MY Lord, and my God, Glory be to thy Grace that I have not to my Knowledge
boldly provoked thee in any respect this day; for to thy Grace alone is this
Honor due. I know nothing of my self; yet am I not hereby justified: It Is thy
Sentence must make or undo me for ever. O God, thou art greater than our
Hearts, and know all things; if therefore my State is still dangerous; if
any pestilential Habit still cleaves to my Soul; if any Mortal Act, or Word, or
Thought, has escaped my Memory in my Examination; enlighten me, I beseech
thee, and suggest it to my remembrance, that I may mingle my Tears with thy
Mercy and Christ his Blood, before I dare to slumber: O suffer me not to lean
on a delusive Peace: But if it be otherwise, praised be thy Goodness, as for
all thy Mercies, so especially for this Gift of Innocence: Keep me from being
high-minded on this or any other account, and give me true Sobriety of Mind,
that I may not through Giddiness and future Neglects fall after all from Favor.

3.
Glory be to thy Grace and the Merits of Christ, that those many latent
Deficiencies from thy Law, which cleave even to the sanctified in this state
will not shut me out of thy Kingdom; may by degrees be lessened more and more
here, and will be wholly removed hereafter: O cleanse me from all my secret
Faults; be they blotted out by the Blood of thy Son; and grant that by great
Advances in Grace, an entrance may be vouchsafed me into the glorious Kingdom
of God.

4.
With this comfortable Faith, I rely this Night on thy Providence, for
convenient Repose and Defense both of Mind and Body. In the Name of Christ, I
beseech thee do thou accept this imperfect Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise; in
his comprehensive Form, I also crave pardon for the Wanderings and Imperfections
thereof, and do testify my Charity to thy Creation.

Our Father, etc.
THE Midnight Office OF ABSTRACTION.
1.
O My Soul, now thou art secret unto Men, but thou art not so unto God, nor for
all that thou know, unto many good and bad Angels, who often behold thee as
well as thy Creator, when thou neither see nor think of them: Now
therefore that thy Eyes are bound by the Darkness of the Night, let thy Mind
also be turned inwards by the profound silence of thy internal Powers, that the
Darkness of external Sense may increase the Vigor of my intellectual Sight.

2.
Commune now with thine own Spirit; O search and see whether it be fit for
Communion with God; which may be easily known, if thou know whether Light or
Darkness be the predominant Principle therein. Call to remembrance thy Sins;
call to remembrance the Mercies of God; dive deep into thy self; and then say,
if thou can, that there is not something in the center of thy Frame, which is
not perishable like the Efforts of thy Blood. Do not be like the captive
Multitude of Sense, who through neglect of Abstraction, are a secret to
themselves: Turn thy Nature over and over in thy Thoughts, and especially view
the better part thereof, and observe wherein thou have defaced or improved it.

3.
Think 'till thou art thoroughly convinced; and when thou art so, do thou
frequently consider that thou carry'st Immortality in Embrio always within
thee: It Is true the Soul rather believes than sees, whilst it is thus imprisoned
in the Womb. But when its Mortal Part is ripe for the Grave (which may be long
before even the Autumn of Man's life) 'twill make its entrance upon the
immortal Stage.

4.
Think therefore of thy great Change in time, before thou art forced to launch
into the Ocean of Eternity, lest the unexpected and unprepar'd-for sight of the
invisible World surprise thee with another-guess Dread than that which the
Faithful do find then. Remember that the State of Man here on Earth is like the
old Probationary State of Fallen Angels, before they degenerated into Devils,
and like the State which all the Impenitent who are gone before thee once
enjoyed, a State of Time and Opportunity, a State of Work and Preparation for
that State which is unalterable. But the State of Saints and Fiends, the State
of Loyal and Apostate Angels, the State of Angels and Men, who have been
acquitted and condemned before the last Tribunal, is a State of exact Judgment,
Reward, and Eternity.

5.
Then be thy Recompense Glory or Vengeance, it will never expire, there will be
no escape from the one or loss of the other; it will indeed have a beginning,
but its end will never be found: Since therefore Eternity will find and keep
thee such as Time leaves thee, and Eternity is inestimable, how can thou
value Time at too high a Rate? Let the Time past suffice thee to have served
Pride, Envy, and Concupiscence: Now be thou entirely a Servant of Christ, and a
Subject of Divine Zeal and Charity, that an ample Prospect of Heaven may
ennoble and enlarge thee.

6.
Make the Agonies of the Tormented in Hell, and the Joys of the Blessed above
familiar to the Mind by Meditation, that it may supplant the enchanting
intimacy, which sense will otherwise find in thy Soul, as it does mostly in the
Souls of the MANY* Fancy thy Spirit to be taking leave of this Cottage of
Flesh; for this Custom tends greatly to the purgation of the Heart, and the
weaning of thy Affections from all its darling Idols: It makes bare the Vanity
of the World, stabs the Love of an Earthly Life to the Heart, and cherishes
divine Love in the Soul: Awake therefore, O my Soul, strive to be clothed with
new Strength, and to regain Paradise: Meditate, and abstract thy self, whilst
Sense is tame and quiet, and does not hinder the orderly Peace of the Mind;
check every wanton Sally of Imagination, be-aw'd with a sense of the Divine
Omnipresence; prostrate thy Thoughts of thy self, and consider, and say,

Great was the Rebellion and the Overthrow of the Apostate Inhabitants of
Heaven.

Great was, and is their Envy against us, and the Fall of all Mankind in Adam.

Great is the Mercy of our affronted God, and the Redemption that is tendered
by the Lord Jesus.

Great is our Blindness and Obstinacy, deep and strong are our ill Habits,
mighty indeed are our Ghostly Enemies.

Mightier and more are the Angels that are for us; wonderful is the Courtesy,
powerful are the strivings of the supreme Spirit with Man.

Sharp is the Edge of Conscience, even sharper than a Two edged Sword, and so
great is the Peace of a good Man, that it alone might satisfy, and every one
but himself is a stranger to his Joy.

Amazingly great is the change of Death; so terrible also is the Day of the
Lord, and the Universal Judgment of Angels and Men.

Who can dwell in Everlasting Burnings? Are we stronger than God? Who can
conceive the Pleasures of Heaven? What Mortal has ever feasted upon God?

7.
And cannot all this provoke that aspiring Principle within me, which was made
for the Enjoyment of a God, to discipline its Thoughts? To be choice in the
Motions of my Will? To make the Body know its original distance from the Soul?
To resist the Faction of Hell? To be always on its Guard, when it converses
with its frail and treacherous Fellow Creatures? To be a wise Steward of Time?
To have a mean Opinion of my self and this flowing State? To keep close and
constant correspondence with Heaven, by frequent Prayer and Praise, and holy
Hungrings and Thirstings after the Beatifick Vision? And, in a word, to use its
utmost skill, and all possible care, to file, and burnish, and enrobe my Soul
with all those beauteous Fruits of the Spirit, which are the groundwork of the
Happiness of a Man? That so it may be conquered throughout endless Ages by the
Brightness and Love of God, and obtain a Place among the innumerable, the
eternal, and inconceivably glorious Conquerors, and Kings, and Priests of God.

With this Hope return to thy Rest, O my Soul: The Lord guide, the Lord
strengthen thee, and bring thee to the Haven where thou would be. Amen, for
Christ his Sake.

A Practical Directory.
CHAP. I. Modestly defending, clearly explaining, and affectionately pressing
the regular use of this New Method of Daily Devotion.
IT being very fitting that the Reasonableness of a Daily Method of Devotion,
which professes to be entirely new after so many Volumes of this Nature, should
be demonstrated: It being likewise as fitting that those who mean well, though
they know little, should not only be furnished with suitable helps to Devotion,
but also with a clear Explanation of pious helps by any person who offers them
such Assistance, that they may not pray only with Cheerfulness and Affection,
but also with that clear Understanding, which is a valuable Gift of the Spirit,
and recommendation of our Addresses to God, as well as the other two: And
lastly, it being very fitting that the faint hands and hearts should be
animated and lifted up, which the best disposed persons may sometimes stand in
need of, I have thought fit by the Adviee of some good Christians, and my own
Commiseration of the Ignorance of some illiterate, and mine own and others
Sluggishness (now I have by God's Blessing finished this small part of a large
Body of Devotions) to add a practical Directory, wherein, by God's help, I
shall,

I. Give a short and clear Account concerning daily growth in Grace.

II. I shall consider how Closet-Devotion contributes to it.

III. What Method of daily Closet-Devotion contributes most liberally to it,
therein showing the Reasonableness of this new Method of Devotion in general.

IV. I shall lay open the Structure of each particular Office, and the
Reasonableness of it.

V. I shall add two or three necessary Cautions.

VI. I shall conlude with some suitable Practical Exhortations.

CHAP. II. Of Daily Growth in Grace.
SInce the Real Christian's daily Religion of the end, is to grow in Grace,
it is necessary, in the first place, to speak something concerning Growth in
Grace: I will therefore, first, show what Growth in Grace is; and, secondly,
how a Man may know whether he grows in Grace.

Grace is any Degree of Beauty and Strength of Soul which is more than natural.
There are Degrees of Knowledge, and Liberty of Will, which we enjoy by Nature;
and are essential to the bare existence of a Nature which is partly spiritual.
These Degrees are the Gift of God and such as our Souls cannot lose, unless
they cease to be. In short, they are such Degrees of Light and Liberty, which
are consistent with a spiritual Nature's being in a state of Vncreatur'dness,
though not of Vncreatedness. Now the Death of Adam and Devils, not consisting in
a cessation from being, but a deprivation of so much Light and vigorous
Rectitude of Will, as is necessary to make a spiritual Creature happy; Man may
be and is born with certain Portions of Light and Vigor of Will, which we call
natural, and are the issue of God's bare willing our Existence, and yet
nevertheless be in a state of Damnation. Consequently this being consistent
with the Enmity of God (who willed by an eternal Decree, whether we will or no
our Existence, and the Existence of all spiritual Natures, to be eternal, but
not to be eternally happy, by an unconditional Decree of the same extent) that
which is eminently called the Grace of God, is his Tender to us, by and through
Christ, of that more than natural Degree of Light, and Rectitude of Will,
whereby a Man is placed in a state of Evangelical Fitness for the eternal
Complacency of God, in the said Nature improved.

This Complacency of God, in the said Nature improved, arising from the said
Degrees of Knowledge and Rectitude of Will, is that real Immortality which
Lucifer lost in Heaven, and Adam forfeited in Paradise. Hence it is that both
the General Capableness of human Nature's receiving this degree of Light and
Liberty by Christ; and also the more wise and industrious individual Partakers
of the said redeemable Nature their Acquisition thereof, are both called Grace;
because, it is extraordinary Compassion and Gift, a greater than the Gift of a
Creator only; the Gift of such a degree of Light is called Illumination,
because the former degree of Light is Darkness in comparison with this; and the
latter degree of Scope of Will, is called the Liberty of the Sons of God;
because the narrow degree of its natural Scope is a Prison, when compared with
supernatural Scope: For a Devil and a mere natural Man, have both of them some
degrees of Knowledge and Scope, and consequently of Light and Liberty;
otherwise they would cease to be susceptible of a Hell, for it is Heaven
discerned in themselves, according to their primitive Capacity, that causes
that Anguish and Envy, which arises from their Reflection on their foolish and
ungrateful abuse of Opportunity. So then a state of Grace, as it is used in the
New Testament, is a state of supernatural Light in the Soul of Man, together
with at least as much Rectitude of Will, as is necessary to recover the Favor
of God. Now growth in this Grace is as essential to the flourishing Condition
of the Divine supernatural Life of a Christian Soul, (during its continuance
here (it being an Human Soul's state of Adolescence, as growth in height and
bulk of Body is essential to the thriving Condition of the Animal Life till the
Body has commenced Manhood. And this growth in Grace, is the Soul's increasing
in Faith, Magnanimity, Heavenly-mindedness, Humility, Purity, Charity, and all
suchlike Divine Principles, and internal Habits, that are proper to regenerate
Souls, and are exerted in the external Exercises of forgiving Injuries, prudent
Provision for our Bodies and Dependents, oral Prayer and Praise, and the like
external Subjects of the Gospel-Precepts.

From this account of Growth in Grace, we may easily know, secondly, when we
grow in Grace: For since Grace is a state of universal Rectitude of Soul, and
is divided into several Parts of Purity, Charity, and the like, according to
the different Relations wherein we stand placed, with respect to the Creator
and his Creation, and which do severally display themselves in our Lives, at
those Seasons which Divine Providence allows for each; It Is not a Christian's
business to be solicitous, as to his particular external Exercises (provided
they be lawful and laudable in the Judgment of the Gospel, and those be
preferred, if two or more such stand in competition, which Providence and the
Gospel prefer) but his solicitude must be vigorously to exercise and improve
within himself, during every exercise of Virtue, the particular part of
universal Grace (which is the Blood and Life of a renewed Soul) that is
peculiar to, and mostly ornamental of every present external Exercise.

Hence it is, that a poor, honest Mechanic Christian may thrive as much in
Grace in his Shop, as a Priest by the daily use of the Altar, provided he
prefers his honest Work before the Sacrament; because Providence has so
preferred it in him. Tho receiving the Sacrament, as to the external Solemnity
of it, and the intrinsic Worth of the Exercise it self, is more preferrible to
him and all pious Souls in it self, when it does not stand in competition with
that degree of secular Industry, which Justice and moderate Care for a Family
requires.

Hence also it comes to pass, that as the thriving Mechanic Christian is
better every Sunday, or Sacrament-Day, than he was the Day before; because that
intentness of Spirit (which is the peculiar, ornamental, internal Exercise of
the conjoined Worship both of Soul and Body, especially when offered with the
Memorials of the Mediator's Passion) exceeds the degree of his contented
submission and heavenly-mindedness (which is the greatest internal Ornament of
a Christian then) during his last external Exercise of his secular Calling: So
also the next Day after the said Sunday, or last Sacrament-Day, if he thrives,
he is better than he was then, because his Heavenly-mindedness, during the
Exercise of his secular Calling, exceeds the intent Fervor of his Spirit,
during his last Exercise of the most solemn Worship on the last Lord's Day, if
Allowances in the Examination be made for the different Natures of both the
external Exercises. For though one external Exercise has more Religious
Splendor in it self than another, yet the Religious internal Splendor of the
Spirit of a Christian, may be diffusing it self with a daily increase, both of
extent and power, under both alike, in case they are all used in their Seasons;
and those that are the more immediately Charitable and Religious, are heartily
preferred all Opportunities.

Wherefore a Christian that would daily know, whether or no he grows in Grace
either, first, considers daily the Chain of his lawful external Exercises the
day past; and then considers what particular Concomitant Divine Tempers of Mind
are the peculiar ornamental Tempers of a Christian during each Exercise; and
after that, takes the height of its advance in each Divine Temper during each
Exercise; and so by deep abstraction of Thought, sees whether the progress of
the Soul, in the different Divine Temper, which is ornamental of each
subsequent Exercise, exceeded its progress in the particular internal Divine
Temper of each foregoing different Exercise. In which procedure of practical
Abstraction, it always also compares the proportionable or disproportionable
Advantages and Disadvantages of Divine Assistance, Temptations, Place, Time,
State of Body, and the different Natures of the external Exercises, and the
like. Or, secondly, the Soul takes an account of its Carriage at different
times, during similar Exercises, and compares the different Improvements of the
similar Tempers of each similar or like Exercises at different times, with the
Circumstances of Assistance and Temptation, and the like, during each time of
Exercise.

This, in short, seems to me to be what St. Peter exhorts us to, when he
exhorts the Christians to grow in Grace, and to give all diligence to add to
our Faith Virtue, etc. for if these things be in you, and abound, they make you
that ye shall neither be barnen, nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But he that lacks these things, is blind. From which latter
Words, it is evident the Apostle does not suppose any Man in a State of Grace,
who has not all these Virtues always ready within him, to be elicited and
vigorously exerted at different Times. A Man must have the Seeds of Grace
within him, to be in an infant-state of Grace, and must be growing in all, if
he is a real, thriving, adult Christian. But the Contents of this Chapter may
he clearly discussed, if God grant me Life, in a particular Discourse
concerning Birth. May this suffice for the present purpose.

CHAP. III. Of Closet-Devotion's furtherance of daily Growth in Grace; and the
Reasonableness of the Method of this New daily Method of Devotion in general.
WHatever external Exercises of Religion may be only Providentially, or though
constantly, yet but at some set Times necessary, I presume it is agreed by all,
That the Exercises of the United Devotion of our Hearts and Tongues, with
reverent Postures of Body in our Closets, if Health and opportunity of
Retirement will allow it, is constantly the daily Duty of a Christian, be he in
the state of Infancy or Perfection. He that wholly omits the Duty of Prayer and
Piety, lives without God. He that omits it in secret, is a Pharisee (perhaps
worse) in a Congregation. He that performs, but always performs it only in his
Mind, is to be commended so far for doing that, which in a lower or higher
Degree, is the perpetual Duty and Employ of a wakeful Christian, whose
continual sense of God's Presence and Goodness, joined with God's Grace and
Spirit, is the very Soul of a supernatural Life. But nevertheless; he cannot be
commended for forgetting that he is a compounded Creature; and I cannot but
think it my Duty Friendly to inform him, That as humble Gestures of Body,
without a sprightly Awe of God in the Mind, are the Skeleton of (not real)
Worship; since it is not only imperfect, but lifeless: So the bare elation of
the Soul to God, if it be never accompanied, with Reverence of Body is not the
complete Worship of a Man. Why should we part the Body and Spirit which God has
joined together; Do thou not believe the Resurrection of the Body? If God
designs to glorify thy Body to all eternity, ( i. e) in case thou hallow it by
the Purity of thy Soul, why should thou deny it the Honor of joining
sometimes with thy Soul, to do all the Honor it can to thy God? Or do thou
think that thy solitary mental Homage, is equal to the Homage of a simple
Spirit, who dare to refuse solemnly sometimes, according to St. Paul's
Exhortation, to present and bow thy Body before God, whilst thou can present
it a living Sacrifice on Earth?

By this united Devotion of Spirit, Soul, and Body, in our Closets, we make our
Senses do Obeisance to Faith, and give an irresistible Evidence of our sense of
God's Omnipresence to our own Consciences: By this we keep our Souls intent on
the other World; and we see how far the things of the World do, and how far
they do not, make deep Impression on our Affections. But because the happy
Trial of the constant Observance of this Religious Practice, recommends it more
than the Tongue even of an Angel can; I resign those who neglect it, to the
Discipline of that Mighty Spirit of God, whose methods of bringing Souls to
God, surpass our comprehension; and will proceed to show what method makes this
Religious Exercise contribute most to a Soul's growth in Grace.

And since I have given a Specimen of the most advantageous daily Method of
Ordinary Devotion that I know of, this may be done as well as I can do it, by a
clear and brief Representation of the Reasonableness of this Method in general.

As for the Seasons of the Day, the Three first of them were the set Seasons of
those two great Masters of Address to God, DAVID and DANIEL; and the Fourth
Season sometimes is mentioned by the former of them, and was famous in the
Infancy of the Christian Religion.

The different Natures of the several Parts of Addresses to God, and those
particular holy Tempers of Soul that are peculiarly ornamental of each Part,
and the Propriety of each Part, to the Season herein allotted for it, together
with the Reasons of the different Structures of each Office, shall, God
willing, be laid open in the next Chapter.

Wherefore the only thing which remains to be accounted for, in the defense of
the General Structure of the whole Daily Office, is our allotment of a distinct
Season, for each principal different Part of Address to God.

It is agreed by all devout Persons, be the Nature of our Address to God what
it will, That Humility, an awful Sense of God, and Faith, are necessary
Recommendations of it; because these are general Essential Ingredients of all
acceptable Address to God, and therefore peculiar to none: accordingly I took
particular care to contrive* that a Vein of these run through every one of the
Offices.

It Is, I presume, also agreed, that Petitionary, Penitential, Eucharistical,
and Intercessive Addresses to God, have each of them, besides those
already-mention'd Qualifications that are common to them all, their certain,
peculiar, ornamental, holy Tempers of Spirit, which differ very much, with
respect to the natural Modifications of Sense which attend them; though as they
are sanctified, they all conspire to the same end; as, Grief for our Sins, a
sense of our Wants, and a joyful sweet sense of God's Mercies, and the like.

Consequently these different postures or Spirit, with respect to the different
Modifications of Soul, wherewith they are necessarily attended in this state
(though they are very reconcilable at different times, or at the same time in
very low degrees, since as they are sanctified, they carry on the same end, and
are but the same universal holy Frame of Spirit, differently modifying the Soul
at different Seasons upon different Occasions) cannot be all together at the
same time, each in their Zenith, or immediately in succession so. The
consequence of which is, that those different parts of pious Addresses to God,
which require the said different holy Tempers of Mind cannot be all so solemnly
perform'^ together, as at different Seasons o^ the Day; though every part may b^
implicitly in each, and yet each Office require the vigorous exertion of but
one holy Modification of Soul.

Wherefore, whereas the usual Method of using every sort of Devotion thrice a
day, distinctly and explicitly, either makes the solemn use of each part of
Address wholly impracticable, which betrays into Lukewarmness; or else makes it
impracticable, without a great deal of time and trouble to change so many
different Postures of Soul immediately, one after another; which inconvenience
induce Tediousness, and often betrays in to frequent omission of Closet
Devotion to God: On the contrary, the Method of Distinction i^ this Book, makes
Devotion be more pleasantly and intently performed in all its parts, and with
less expense of Time, and hinderance of our social Duties: For the Soul by this
means, agit quod agit, does what it does to the purpose; because it has but one
posture of Soul at a time to provide; and yet by the use of the Lord's Prayer
(which of it self is a complete Office of mixed Devotion) it uses all together
every Season, with due Reverence, though not with the utmost height of every
Passion. Thus in all the inspired Psalms, be they Penitential or Eucharistical,
or of any other kind, it is easy to observe, that though here and there a
sprinkling of some other part of Devotion, be incidently inserted, yet the
solemn use of it, require but one reigning Cardinal Posture of Soul.

CHAP. IV. A View of the particular Structure of every Office.
OUr Sprightliness after the Refreshment of sound and temperate Sleep, being a
lively Image of the future Resurrection of our Bodies, and naturally disposing
our Minds to be brisk and cheerful, I could not but think the Morning the
properest time for the pleasant Exercise of Religious Gratitude.

This Office is divided into Five Classes.

The First is preparatory to the due Exercise of Gratitude. The two First
Sections may be used before any Address to God, it being only an Acknowledgment
of the Apostasy of our Nature, and our unworthiness to approach to God, in
order to engage us to Reverence and Humility in our Addresses, and also a
Remembrance of our Savior's purchasing the Favor of Access, and a Capableness
of Regeneration, in order to maintain within us a modest Faith and Confidence.
But the Third Section must be appropriated to this Office, it being an express
Resolution to praise God, from the Consideration of our Liberty under the
Gospel, and Obligation thereto, and especially upon the account of Christ's
shedding his Blood for us; which being here mentioned by the way of Eminence,
it is not mentioned in the next Class.

This Second Class begins with Glory therefore, putting in execution what was
resolved upon before. By Recital is meant, speaking of God in the Third Person
HE; and by address in the Second as THOU. The former is almost as frequent in
the Psalter, as the latter. The Second Section Commemorates God's Infinite and
Incomprehensibleness in general; the Third, His Attributes and splendid
Attendance; the Fourth, the Beauty and Order of the Inanimate Worlds; the Fifth
and Sixth the Works of Creation and Providence, and particularly the
Preservation of Human Nature by Birth, which is a very Instructive Subject to
the Thoughtful, and excites wonderful Thoughts of God, for our last Night's
particular Preservation. At last, the Soul perceiving God's Mercies too many to
be numbered, concludes in an holy Amaze.

Therefore the Soul, after oral Gratitude, prostrates the Body to the Ground,
and uses the Dedicatory of the Third Class, and dedicates it self without the
least reserve to God's Spirit, whose Temples St. Paul has told us good
Christians are. This Custom obliges us daily to remember our Baptismal Vow; and
'till we have renounced this, I do not see why this may not be an ordinary
practice: For our Baptismal Vow is not made the less Obligatory by our neglect
of the laudable practice of the daily recognition of it. Therefore I desire the
Reader to say daily, This Day I again dedicate, etc. This being done, it
immediately resigns it self to Providence, which is another essential part of
Gratitude to God. And now it says, I am thine, O save me, it is but fitting that
the Soul being wholly God's, it should quite abandon the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil; as it does in the Second Section of this Class, and long for the
Victory over its predominant Constitution-Corruptions, which is the main
Victory of a Christian. And because he is supposed the Night before to have
made his Peace with God, a prudent Glance upon this need not hinder, but rather
enhance its Gratitude, by the consideration of his Compassion and
Long-suffering with such noisome Creatures. The third and last Section is a
modest Dependence upon God for his Grace: And indeed if we can rely on God for
our Bodies, much more should we for our Souls.

In the Fourth Class, the Soul having discharged its part of Gratitude to God,
assumes the Boldness of Petition for spiritual Favors, and vents its holy
trembling and solicitude to perform its Vows. The Fifth Class minds us that the
Lord's Prayer is a sufficient joining of the Will with the Choir of Heaven, in
their Praises of the Divine Majesty, and an expression of our sympathy with all
who are yet left in a state of Trial; and therefore it is called a Catholic, (
i. e.) an universal Conclusion; we do thereby extend our Benevolence to all
Creatures that are actually happy, or still capable of Happiness, and make them
Partners of our Petitionary Addresses.

II. Of the Noon-Office.
IN the midst of the Day, the Soul is surrounded with Temptations, and most in
danger of being plunged in the mean Solicitudes and Thoughts of this Life; and
therefore I cannot but think that at this time Exercises of Vigilance are a
very necessary Antidote against the Infections of Darkness. This first Part may
be used before Dinner: And lest the pleasing of Sense should abate our
Expectation of the noble Enjoyment of Heaven, we have allotted a Gratulatory
Office to raise our Affections upwards; and because the use of Food does
naturally suggest to serious and wise Men, the close social Dependence of all
God's Works one upon the other; which Consideration is a great Friend to
Charity: We have also allotted for after-Dinner, an Office of Intercession for
the Church Militant.

In the Office of Vigilance, the Soul first complains of the unsatisfactoriness
of all earthly Things; and in the second Section, strives to enlarge it self,
and reach after God Himself, who is a real, and really Noble Enjoyment, and
more than commensurate to the Capacity of a spiritual Nature; after this in the
other Class ( Sect. 1.) to bring it self to a firm habit of Seriousness,
through the consideration of the difficulty of being saved, and the greatness
of natural Weakness, and the vastness of the Strength, and Number of its
Enemies, it earnestly prays for the Power of being acceptably obedient unto
death. And because our Savior has assured us, that if we seek the Kingdom of
God, and the Righteousness thereof, all things shall be added to us and that
God best knows whether Plenty or Poverty, Honor or Dishonor in this World be
best; one for this, another for that Person; and one at one time, and another
at another time, for the same Christian; and therefore that we should equally
be prepared for both, the Soul does not trouble it self to make particular
Prayers in the Dark for temporal Uncertainties; but goes the next Class to
acquaint God particularly with what it unfeignedly desires, by turning the
great Sermon on the Mount into a Prayer, because it knows that Poverty of
Spirit, and Purity of Heart, and the other Dispositions therein inculcated, are
absolutely necessary for a Man that would be eternally happy. Different
Circumstances of Life here may be of a very different Nature to different
Persons; but these are certain and necessary for every wise Petitioner; he that
gets these, and he only, is a true Favorite of Heaven.

Though it is unlawful to Worship Angels, yet it is a great part of Charity (which
teaches to Rejoice with them that Rejoice;) to gratulate them and their happy
state; and helps very much toward the sublimating the Affections.

In the Intercessive Part of Charity, I have offered a very long Prayer for the
Clergy; being very well satisfied, that if the Laity were moved, by our great
Defects, to pray as affectionately and constantly for us, as they slight and
rail against us (not considering that our Office is still as Venerable as ever)
God would restore Christian Discipline some way or other, and raise up many
Faithful Pastors amongst us, though it were at the expense of a second miraculous
effusion of his Spirit. Good Lord, increase our Faith in the use of this Prayer.

Of the Structure of the Evening Office.
The End of the Day being ordinarily the time of the greatest leisure, the good
Christian takes an opportunity to converse with himself, and to see whether he
has kept himself unspotted from the World, in the pursuit of his Business.
Perhaps it may be thought improper to use Prayer of such a length daily before
this Exercise; but if we consider, that the Falsehood or Soundness of Internal
Peace, depends upon the right management of this Exercise, and what a Mystery
of Treachery our Hearts are, a Man can never too solemnly set about it, or
think himself above the need of a peculiar Assistance from God in it, It Is an
easy thing to know, whether we are externally innocent; but not so easy to
know, according to the true Rules of daily Growth in Grace already laid down,
whether or no we are in a growing or improving state of Grace, which is an
internal Habit. The observance of the said Two Rules, after we have compared
our Carriage, and examined from Hour to Hour, with the Sermon on the Mount, is
the usefullest way of examining our selves that I can prescribe. This Method
will be tedious to those who are not used to abstract themselves; but by use it
will grow as familiar and compendious, as it is certain and safe.

The abuse of the same General or Particular Confession of Sins, howsoever the
Day has been spent, is very obvious to Men of but very little Judgment, it
making Confession it self to be slightly used; nay, sometimes sinful, when Men
are taught to live always in a tepid state, by making the same Confession to
our Lives end (which can be only proper in case of a Man's sinning and
repenting in a circle, but never repenting so, as not to repent of his
deceitful Repentance) and perhaps sometimes to charge our selves with the
Faults we never committed; as if those Faults which the best Men stand actually
guilty of, were not sufficient, with the help of Thought, to make them humble
enough. Therefore I suppose the reason of this Division of the Evening Offices
will be obvious to the meanest Capacities at first sight. For a right Judgment
to be made between Mortal Sins, and Sins of Infirmity, I refer the Reader to
the Reverend Doctor Lucas's incomparable Treatise concerning Religious
Perfection. The Office of Abstraction, so called from its abstracting or taking
the Mind off from Objects of external Sensation, explains and exhorts for it
self; and therefore I will be frugal of my room, and desist from making Remarks.

CHAP. IV. Necessary Cautions.
BUt notwithstanding all that I have said concerning the Composure of these New
Offices, the Ignorance of some, and the Censoriousness of others, will still
oblige me to declare that the Design of this Tract is not to give a New
Account, either of the Nature of Devotion in general, or to propose any new
sorts of Devotion, but to offer a more Convenient Method of Ordinary
Closet-Piety of the Means: A Contrivance of this Nature is not the Result of
deep Learning, or an acute Philosophical Genius, but of the honest Principles
of Simplicity of Heart and Christian Prudence, which consists in a regular
Appointment of the modal Process and Seasons of external Duties. Since
therefore it is a Discovery that cannot make the Author more valuable in the
World, I do not see how any charitable Christian can impute the Author's
Publication of this Treatise to a Principle of Desire of Fame, or Self-conceit,
or any other secular Emulation, whatever Weakness he may be conscious of to
himself.

Neither am I so bigoted to my own Method, as to detract from the Labors of
others. I own my Soul and my Book to be a Debtor to many Books of Common
Methods in a great measure. This Method is not asserted here to be Matter of
Duty when known: If the Reasons already given for the Convenience of it, cannot
prevail with the Reader to make a Trial, (which a wary Christian in a Matter of
this Moment should not methinks deny) I have done my part, and can be content
with the secret Approbation of my own, and my Friends Experience, after an
Intimacy with both Methods.

As for the Forms themselves, they were not composed to confine my self, or any
others to the use of them; but however 'twas convenient to compose some for a
more lively Explication of the Method; which may be observed, without adhering
to them wholly, or in part, as to the Expression. This I think may resolve all
Cavils at any Expressions of Address; if I use them improperly to thee, I don't
use them so to God! Thou may add, or contract, as Conscience directs, and
yet gain benefit by the Book too: Our Method of Closet-Devotion should
ordinarily be exact, for the Solemnity of the Employment requires it; but our
Expressions need not be so in this Exercise, in case our Affections be but
clean and polite; and therefore constant Forms of Expression are no less
needless in private upon the account of God's consciousness to our meaning,
than they are needful in public, where the Invisibleness of our Hearts may
make those hasty Expressions improper for their Obscurity or Abuse; and
therefore culpable to Men be the Thoughts, which they are intended to
represent, never so grateful to the Searcher of Hearts.

And farther, though we must not habitually neglect the Worship of our Tongue in
private, yet sometimes when (as it is often with devout Persons) the Workings of
our Mind soar above Expression: Mental Prayer alone is no omission, but rather
the more laudable. But when it is otherwise, and we are dry of sprightly Ideas
at Seasons of Address, an affecting Form of Scripture-Expressions may do well
to be at hand, since they may in part assist the drowsy Soul, though they may
not wholly satisfy the Person whose Mind is awakened and enlarged by them.

CHAP. V. Suitable Advice and Exhortations.
LEt me now, Dear Christian, in the Behalf of thy Soul, entreat thee to use thy
diligence in turning thy Heart to God; if it be possible, never venture to omit
the solemn Duty of thy Closet, but be a constant Attendant on the King of
Heaven; and be sure before you venture to speak, consider and compose thy Mind
to an awful Frame, and bend thy Body thrice down to the ground in Honor to the
Blessed Trinity.

2.
In a Morning meditate on God, and let his Excellency and Mercies force thee to
say, It is a good thing to tell of God's Loving Kindness in the Morning, and of
his Veracity in the night Season. Let this be thy Employment, which is the
Employment of Angels and Stars innumerable. Shall every thing but Devils and
damned Men praise God; and Man, who is a redeemable Sinner, neglect to give
Thanks for his unspeakable Gift, his own, his eternal, his begotten, his only
Son? The dull and dumb Ass knows how to reproach silence on such a Theme; for
he knows his Owner as well at his Crib: Certainly were thy Soul clad with that
Gratitude, which is the Purple of Angels; certainly did thou feel God
enlarging thy Soul; certainly were thy Powers within 'girt ready for Eternity,
the bent of thy Soul this way would be so irresistible, that thou could
never refrain not only from venting thy Praise, but also dedicating thy whole
Man daily to God: Withstand the Violence of all Charms but those of Gratitude,
which the glorious Inhabitants above cannot resist: The splendid Prospect of a
Christian, and his vigorous sense of the Love of Christ constrains him to
praise God, and God-man: Incessant Hallelujahs for Ghostly Victories, and
incessant Dedication and Resignation of himself to the Supreme Monarch of all
the Glorified Universes, will be the Everlasting Royalty and Priesthood of a
Christian, and is the End of his being made at first, and of his being ransomed
and sanctified after he had been uncreatur'd. Let all Souls therefore laud the
Lord: Let those praise the Lord whom he has redeemed.

3.
Remember, I beseech thee, the great Worth of eternal Happiness and if it be
possible never fail o^ securing thy self some retiremen^ in the heat of the
Day, lest the heat of worldly Business burn and lay waste that Heart which was
intended to glow, and to be solac'd with the Love of God. Now it is tha^ the
World is too apt to sway the best, unless they habit themselves to the exercise
of Vigilance. Now we had need fly to our Closets for sanctuary, that we may be
convinced that Man, [the mere Natural Man] disquiets himself in vain* and
searches after Fullness and Satisfaction in those Honors and Possessions, which
prove in the end but Wombs of Vexation of Spirit to all their deluded
Courtiers. Many and mean Enjoyments may cloy, but the true, the supreme
Enjoyment only can fill an intellectual and voluntary Creature. Let this
Consideration constantly find room in thy Thoughts, and let this make thee wise
in the choice of the Subject matter of thy Application to ^he Throne of Grace.
Let the ^arnal Soul pray for Long Life ^ere, for Wealth and Dignity ^n this
Stage of a World, and the Philosopher for Natural Knowledge; but let a
Christian pray for an Eternal Kingdom, and all those Qualifications which will
secure thy Investiture in it. In the use of these Petitions, thou can not be
too earnest, or too particular; and that thou may pray with the greater
largeness of Soul, frequently meditate on the Scriptures, especially on our
Savior's Sermon on the Mount, and the Parables of our Lord, with the 12th and
13th Chapters of St. Paul to the Romans, and some parts of St. Peter's and St.
James's, and the other Epistles of St. Paul, which are more useful for the
Generality, tha^ reading the Historical Scriptures i^ order; though it is very
useful in Ecclesiastical Assemblies; for every thing which becomes an Assembly*
is not so convenient for private Persons of all Circumstances in their Closets.
Many Persons have little Leisure, and perhaps less Judgment, and therefore may
be the worse for too inquisitive an use of some parts of Scripture* and
therefore their precious Time should be spent in Thoughtfulness on the plainest
and most moving Scriptures, that their Souls may thrive in Grace and Divine
Love. Do thou therefore daily use some of the Portions appointed by our Church
for Epistles and Gospels; and before thou read, and after thou have read,
both ponder and pray that that which was intended for a Savor of Life, may not
prove a Savor of Death by Irreverence or Negligence. God's Spirit will be an
Interpreter to those who consult him with Simplicity, and an ingenuous
readiness of Mind to receive the Truth, be it kind to their Temporal Interest
or not; and when we read the Scriptures thus, we should trust firmly and boldly
in God, that if we are patient and humble in the use of this Method, he will
inform us clearly of all those Truths, which his infinite Wisdom knows to be
convenient to be known by us, in our present Circumstances. It Is Men's
Deficience more or less, in these Tempers and Methods of handling the
Scriptures, together with their daring Neglect of not endeavoring to keep pace
in their Lives with their Light, that causes the different Irregularities of
their different Creeds. Wherefore, Fellow Christian, when thou usest the Prayer
taken out of the Sermon on the Mount, take care to fix thy Mind so, that i^ may
be the Prayer of thy Spirit and the Epitome of thy Conversation: The Favors we
request in it are the greatest we can ask, and are the Fruits of a large Thirst
and an assiduous Vigilance; do not therefore only ask, but seek and knock too,
that thy Soul may be sealed with that (no counterfeit) Arrhabon, which will be
a Key to the Kingdom of Heaven. Open therefore thy Soul; and if thou can not
yet perceive what it is to be poor in Spirit, and pure in Heart, the Bounty of
God shall give thee this Knowledge with the Gifts themselves.

If the Clause concerning Distributions does not suit thy Circumstances, thou
may understand it of Spiritual Charity; or alter it thus: Lift up my
Thoughts from the Earth, and fix my Heart upon Heavenly Things.

4.
And now having endeavored to conduct thee safe through the Temptations of the
Day, let me entreat thee in the Evening to look into thy self, and to consider
what Company thou have been in; what Time has been allotted for external
Religious Duties: what Time for Industry in thy Human Calling, and to exact a
strict Account of the Use of the Whole Day's Time. And do not pass thy Sentence
according to some external Wariness, or Unwariness, but according to the Biass
of thy Mind. Outward Wariness, without the Renovation of the Mind, signifies
nothing: Let this be truly rectified, and it is morally impossible that a Man
should be guilty of any imputable Degrees of Incircumspection. Be not over rash
in judging of thy self, lest thou be found at last among that Generation, who
are pure in their own eyes, though they are not cleans'd from their Filthiness.
There are Three sorts of unclean Men in the World: Some that are so unclean and
wicked, that, though the Consideration of the state of their Souls has no
dwelling in their Thoughts, yet cannot but know their own Uncleanness; these
know it, but lay it not so truly to heart, as is necessary for their
Purification. Others there are, who labor under Degrees of voluntary
Uncleanness, which cannot be consistent with a state of Salvation, even
according to the gracious Covenant of the Gospel. But this is a Secret to them,
because they have not examined themselves so carefully as they ought. Others
again there are, who notwithstanding strict Catechizings of Conscience, are
unclean in certain Degrees in the Eyes of God, but not of God-Man, of the
Conscience under the Law, but not of Faith under the Gospel; which they know in
general, and therefore ascribe Righteousness to their Maker, and Him only; but
that cannot explain Particulars; so mysteriously deep is the Corruption of our
Human Nature! This Uncleanness would exclude from Heaven, were it not for
Christ's Death. But now it shall not exclude those that are truly humble and
industrious to be at peace with God; for such are unclean in the Creator's
sight, but not in the Mediator's. All of these always were and are still
unclean, but the last alone daily become less so: They are all unclean, but not
in the same degree, nor alike sensible of, nor affected to it: One neither
repents of known nor secret Impurity; the other repents of known Impurity, but
knows not as much as he might, were he very diligent in search; and therefore
is guilty of his secret Sins: But the other is not guilty of known or secret
Uncleanness; for the known is savingly repented of, and the Secret is secret
only because it cannot be yet known by the Soul, although it searches daily and
diligently. Whatever degree of Uncleanness is not owing to obstinate
Self-negligence, is washed away by the Blood of Jesus, if there be but a
general Repentance for them. Here then is encouragement for a Soul to labor to
be as clean as i^ can; for then all secret Degrees o^ Uncleanness will be
remitted for humble Deprecation, and wholly removed in another World. If we are
of the first sort, we have the great Work of Repentance to begin; and yet it is
much more difficult, after it has been begun, to be completed: No Devotions
are assigned for them; for they, whils^ such, will use none. If we are o^ the
second, we must probe our Hearts with severe Cancinations of Conscience, that
we may know more of our selves, and loath and despise our selves more, as we
deserve. The First Evening Office of Repentance for deliberate Sins may clasp
with their case. If we are of the Third, we are wary Christians; only let us be
thankful, and be kept humble and watchful by our secret Faults, and it shall be
well with us indeed.

5.
But though in the Embryo of Repentance, the Penitent may close the Day with the
First Evening Office, yet something more solemnly, if Life last, must be
performed with speed; for which purpose, there is a large distinct Penitential
Office designed. 'Till that is published, I shall content my self with this
Address to the Impenitent: Why will ye trample on Opportunity, and fight with
wonderful Mercy? Are ye stronger than God? Is his Hand shortened that he cannot
punish, because his Compassion has hitherto been prolonged to you? Wherefore do
ye spend your Money, for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that
which satisfies not? Incline your Ears and bow your necks to Christ, and your
Souls shall live. Then there will be no need, as now, to skip from Attempt to
Attempt; for the Grace of God completed in the Soul will give satisfaction
that wants no change, nor new uncertain Trials. O seek the Lord while he may be
found; call upon him while he is near; forsake all your wicked Ways and
unrighteous Thoughts; return unto the Lord, and he shall return unto you, for
such he will abundantly pardon; for his Thoughts are not as the Thoughts of
Men, nor his Ways as our Ways; for as the Rain comes down and the Snow from the
Clouds, and returns not thither, but waters the Earth, and wakes it bud and
bring forth, so that it gives Seed to the Sower, and that Bread to the Eater;
so shall his Word that goes forth concerning a tender, contrite, lowly, hungry,
relenting Soul; not return unto him void, but shall accomplish that Paradise of
Graces, which was intended: Instead of a Curse, and that flaming Sword of a
terrible Cherub within, [an horrible Expectation of Vengeance] there shall
arise a prospect of an eternal Kingdom: Instead of the Thorns shall the
Firr-tree come forth, and instead of Briars the Myrtle: Where Skepticism and
Infidelity, where Doubts and Darkness had tyrannized before; Light and
Alacrity, Faith and Hope, Charity and Purity, shall banquet the Soul with
Divine Refreshments. Be wise therefore, ye thoughtless; be changed, ye
impenitent; let the time past suffice every one of you to have spoke, and
thought, and understood, and acted as a Child: Why will ye die, O Children of
Men, and not try to become the Children of God? How is it that ye can thus
sottishly be contented to hug Ruin, and to sprawl in your Blood? Or can you
conceive nothing beyond this state? Nay, my Brethren, if God and a future
Judgment be quite out of your Thoughts, or Damnation, though in your Thoughts,
cannot wake you, it is not for me to pretend to raise the Dead; you are past the
help of the hands of Man, and therefore I surrender you into the hands of God,
whose ways are unsearchable, and like the great Deep. He is the Lord of
Possibility, and spans Eternity with a Glance. He of old said, Hosts of Angels
exist; and behold they were; Let there be Light, and there was Light; and who
will say, Come forth ye Dead, at the signal Catastrophe of Time and
Opportunity, and they shall arise. This same God of Might, let him but say to a
hardened Soul, Receive the original Sensations of a Soul, be alive once more, as
holy Angels and Saints are alive; and instead of a Temple in heaps, the Divine
Spirit of the Man in less than three moments shall be rebuilt, and become a
Palace fit for the Spirit to reside in, and Angels to gaze on with wonder and
delight. All this may be done, and at the last Gasp too; and perhaps has been
done for a Confessor of Christ, after he was forsook by Disciples, when
ridiculed by Multitudes on a Cross, and before the supposed Imposture rose from
the dead; all this, I say, may be done for the first (strictly speaking)
Disciple of the Crucified Jesus, and may perhaps still be done for some Persons
in peculiar Circumstances, foreseen only by God. But is this thy case? Is it
likely to be such? Have thou not the general Rule, This do, and live, before
thee? and will thou presume to deferr thy Repentance presumptuously, relying on
a Miracle of Grace, which is not certain to thee, though possible to God? What
God may do for any daring Sinner who may read this, I know not; but this I know
and dare affirm, That, setting aside miraculous Changes of Soul; Abuse of
Opportunity, continued to a dying Hour, is sowing the Wind, and will reap the
Whirlwind of the everlasting Vengeance of the Almighty.

6.
And now, true and faithful Disciples of Christ, those little ones whom Angels
honor, Devils envy, and a perverse Generation opposes and derides, I cannot
conclude till I have said, I gratulate your Souls, those Edens of God; yea,
from my Heart I gratulate their Conversion, their Passage from Darkness and
Bondage, to the mavelous Light and Liberty of the Sons of God: And do ye
gratulate and emulate each others Virtues: Be courteous to all Men; excel your
selves, and consort much together; unite your Love and Force, against united
Malice, Dangers, and Temptations: Be patient and watchful, if it be possible,
allowing the Polity of Darkness no advantage by thoughtlessness, or immoderate
thoughts of your selves, or contempt of others: Let no Terror, no Flattery,
cause you to do that which will disturb your Peace, and grieve that great
Spirit, whose select Vessels ye ^re. Remember the Promises of God are ^ot Yea
and Nay. Quit your selves Man^ully in the Day of Battle; die Conque^ors, and
enter into your Great Masters's ^oy, when he shall come in his Fathers, and ^he
Glory of his Holy Angels.

And since he is the Author of all Re^onciliation, Affiance, Perseverance, and
Plerophory in Man; since by no other Name lost Man is become capable of
Salvation; since without him no Design can prosper, I commit you, with my self,
to his Conduct, and my poor Endeavor to promote Souls to his Acceptance and
Blessing.

In him let us trust; to him with holy Triumph of Soul ascribe we: O let us be
glad and rejoice, and give Honor unto him, and say, Thou art worthy, O Lord,
to receive Glory, and Honor and Power; for thou have created a^^ things; and
for thy pleasure they ar^ and were created: Worthy is the Lamb that was slain
to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength* and Honor, and Glory,
and Blessing* For thou wast slain, and have redeeme^ us unto God, by thy Blood,
out of ever^ Kindred, and Tongue, and People, an^ Nation.

Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power be unto him that sits on the Throne and
to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to t^^ Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in
the beginning, is no^ and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.
FINIS.

