INSTRUCTIONS FOR History: WITH A Character of the most Considerable
Historians, Ancient and Modern.

Out of the French, By J. DAVIES of Kidwelly.

LONDON, Printed by A. G. and J. P. dwelling near the Grate in Little Britain.
M.DC.LXXX.

TO THE Worthily Honored, Sir GEORGE WHARTON, Baronet.
IT is the unavoidable Destiny of some to be highly obliged by those, to whom
their good Fortune has made them any thing particularly known. Not that those
Favors are to be attributed to ought of more than ordinary Merit on their
side, by whom they were received; but purely to that Munificence and
Transcendency of Generosity, which is so predominant in certain persons, that
they cannot forbear endeavoring to render the Conditions of those, whom they
once take notice of, more comfortable then they found them.

That these have been my very Circumstances, I have had occasion heretofore to
acknowledge to others; and I am now to make the same Acknowledgment to your
self, from whom, in my most pressing Exigencies, I have received such
seasonable Reliefs, as give me just cause to celebrate the Liberalities of so
great a Benefactor.

As to the small Piece which this humble Address ushers to your hands, I find
it without any Author's Name prefixed thereto. Of which Concealment of himself,
as also of his Design in the ensuing INSTRUCTIONS, since he has given an
Account in a particular Preface, I thought fit to give the English Reader the
satisfaction of that too, that they who shall henceforth concern themselves in
the publishing of any thing by way of History, may take their Measures from
this little Treatise, and before they go any further, compute the Sacredness
and Extent of their Undertaking.

I have only to add the retributory Devotions of such as are highly sensible
how highly they are obliged, and to pray for the Continuation of a Life and
Health, which has been so beneficial to several Persons, and particularly to,

Honored Sir, Your most Humble, and much obliged Servant, J. DAVIES.

THE Original Author TO THE READER.
I Am not so well conceited of my self, or my Work, as to set my Name before
it. For, besides that it is not a throughly-shap'd Project of the manner how
History should be written, and that the very Project it self is the result of
such a reading of Historians, as may be thought superficial enough, the natural
distrust I have of my self, puts me into a fear, that either Impatience or
Precipitation has wrested out of my hands what could not have continued there
much longer.

But not to create a disgust in the Public, for the present I here make it, by
undervaluing it so far, I shall think it no trouble to acknowledge, That this
Work is a kind of Abridgment of what has been written upon this subject, by the
greatest men of the first and last Ages; That it is an Extract of what passed
(that was most rational) in the Apprehensions of Dionysius Halicarnassaeus* in
his Answer to Pompey, requiring his Sentiment upon the Greek Historians, and
his criticizing Judgment upon their different Characters; That it is a Copy of
Lucian's most judicious Reflections, in that admirable Treatise which he writ,
of the manner how History ought to be written; and that in short, the
Sentiments which I advance in this Discourse, are not so much my own, as those
of Francesco Patrici, in his Dialogues, those of Girolamo Marucci, Agostino
Mascardi, Paolo Beni, Luis Cabrera, and the other modern Spanish and Italian
Authors, who have treated of this matter.

But as it is possible that I may have injured their Conceptions, by
intermixing my own therewith, I am to declare, That I do not think my
Reputation concerned to persuade my Readers that it may be otherwise. They are
not Laws which I impose, as having not either Authority or Jurisdiction to do
any such thing; but they are at most but simple Advertisements, which every one
may take as he pleases; so far would I be thought from giving Instructions to
any one, by a title which will argue somewhat of Vanity to those who are Lovers
of Modesty, that I would have the World assured of my readiness to receive
Directions from all others. For if I have not wit enough to be as exact as so
important a Design requires I should be, I have judgment enough to be timorous
and distrustful of my self.

I am further to avoid the Imputation of assuming to my self the honor of a
counterfeit Modesty in suppressing my Name, to acknowledge that my concealing
my self proceeds somewhat from Vanity; for I am too coy to make a discovery of
my self, knowing as I do, that in an Age so apprehensive and critical as ours
is, a man must think it matter of Humiliation to declare himself an Author. Nay
the rigor is so great, that there is not any Merit, however so well it may be
established, that will exempt any one from it; and it now seems to be a kind of
presumption, for a man to commit himself openly to the Judgment of the
Public, which grows daily more and more delicate and humorous, and that in a
Juncture of time when Censure favors no man.

It is certain also, that there is so much wisdom, for a man not to pretend to
any great talent of Capacity, and that there is so much judicious caution in
being modest, that I should in those passages wherein I advance any thing of my
own, have mollified my Expression with Aristotle's (Peradventure) or Cicero's
(It seems) so to be the less positive, and to give my Sentiment with more
reservedness; if that had been suitable to the Simplicity in which I use to
express my self. For as soon as a man has acquired a mean degree of Wisdom, he
is very cautious of being peremptory and decisive, in an Age so obstinate and
opiniatrous as ours is. And therefore ill luck betide him who decides.

Be it noted further, that this Discourse which I make upon History, is not at
all of the Character of that of Lucian, who commends those that write well for
no other reason, than that he may blame and censure those who write ill; and
under the Approbation he gives good Authors, conceals a smart Satyr against the
bad ones. That is not my humor, as having no pique against any one. I pretend
only to open their eyes, who have their Senses attentive, to make them
comprehend how that a man ought to tremble, when he concerns himself in the
writing of History, wherein it is so hard a matter to come off well; and that
the particular Judgment which Dionysius Halicarnassaeus passes upon Thucydides,
should startle all wise Historians.

In fine, to close up all with a word of the Character of the Work, after I had
spoken of the Workman: I declare, that Sencefulness, with an exact observance
of Simplicity, is more conspicuous in these Instructions, than any political
Subtilty; which is the thing that the more inquisitive sort of people do most
look for in History, in regard that Politics is the vainest of all the
Sciences; and that senceful Reflections are the most universal and most solid
Groundwork of the other. I do not pretend to offer all that might be said upon
this matter; and possibly I may some time or other say more of it, if the
Public give a kind Entertainment to the present Labor.

The Heads.
THe Design of the Work 1 I. How History ought to be written 3 II. What it is
to write Nobly 4 III. What it is to write with a constant Contexture of sound
Sense 7 IV. What it is to write Purely 11 V. Of the Simplicity of Writing 14
VI. The Matter of History 19 VII. The Form of History 24 VIII. The Design and
End of History 28 IX. That Truth is the only means whereby History advances
toward its end, and how it is found 31 X. The Style proper to History 36 XI.
Whether the Noble Style, or the Florid, be more proper for History 40 XII.
Narration 44 XIII. Transitions 50 XIV. The Circumstances of Narration 53 XV.
Motives 58 XVI. Figures 64 XVII. Passions 67 XVIII. Descriptions 70 XIX.
Harangues 73 XX. The Characters of Persons 78 XXI. Reflections and Sentences 83
XXII. Digressions 88 XXIII. The Eloquence proper to History 94 XXIV. Other
Imbellishments that may be employed in History 98 XXV. The Sentiments which
ought to be conspicuous and pr^dominant in History 102 XXVI. What Genius the
Historian ought to be of 106 XXVII. The Morality of the Historian 113 XXVIII. A
Judgment of Historians 123
Instructions FOR HISTORY.
The Design of the Work.
THE Gust of the present Age seems at length to make some progress toward its
Perfection: And it seems also, that in all things we proceed in some measure
according to the Dictates of sound Sense, that we esteem what is real and
solid, and that we are not able any longer to endure what is either false or
frivolous. This is the Sentiment of all rational persons, which is the more
substantial part of those who are concerned in Judging, though possibly it be
the least. But there is not any thing makes a greater discovery of this
Discernment, than the Disgust men have for Romances, and whatever has any
tendency thereto. Insomuch that as this Love of Truth and sound Sense is a
disposition to the Love of History; so let us accordingly make our advantage of
so favorable a Conjuncture to serve the public, answerably to its own
inclination; let us exercise our selves in what can make us accomplished in
that Art; let us apprehend the Excellency of it, and let us instruct our selves
in what is requisite for our making a succesful advancement therein. Pulchrum
imprimis videtur, non pati occidere, quibus aeternitas debeatur. Plin. l. 5.
epist.
For what Genius is there not requisite for that purpose? And what can be
imagined more excellent than History, which knows how to do justice to Virtue,
by the Eternization of Virtuous Actions? And this in my Judgment is that which
may contribute, to the perfection whereof that kind of Writing is capable,
which now seems to assume a Supremacy over all the others, if this Love of
sound Sense, which aims at its own Establishment, may endure, in opposition to
the different Gusts, which a Fantastic Humor or Vanity endeavors to introduce
from time to time, by counterfeit Idea's of Ingenuity.

I.
How History ought to be written.
THere is not any thing more difficult, than for a man precisely to Affirm,
which is the best way of writing History. Every one ought to follow that which
he finds most in use in the Age wherein he writes, and most conformable to the
Gust and Inclinations of the People to whom he writes. But is that enough to
please Posterity? That is an humorous, severe, and incorruptible Judge, who
gives its approbation only to true Merit. Let us therefore endeavor to find
out the ways, whereby we may deserve its Suffrage. When a men writes nobly,
with a constant Current of sound Sense, Purity, and Simplicity of expression,
he always pleases, what Language soever he writes in. These are universal
Principles, which are suitable to the Humors of all Nations: for there are no
other general Rules in the world, than those of Reason and sound Sense. It Is by
these that Thucydides, Xenophon, Salust, Caesar, Titus Livius, Buchanan,
Mariana, and such others have always pleased, though they writ in Times, and
amongst Nations of so different a Genius; insomuch that a man may be assured of
pleasing when he writes as they have done. For what Grandeur, what Judgment,
what Politeness, but above all what a sincere Simplicity is there not
observable in the works of those great men!

II.
What it is to write Nobly.
A Man must therefore beset himself to write nobly, when he makes it his
business to write History. For when a man fancies himself speaking to all the
World, and to all Ages, he assumes a Character which gives him Authority to
lift up his Voice, -- genus hoc scribendi incitatum atque elatum esse debere,
quis ignorant? Cic. ad fam. epist. 7. l. 6.

Addidit Historiae majorem sonum* vocis Antipater, caeteri non ^xornatores
rerum, sed tantummodo narratores fuerunt. Cic. de Orat. l. 2.


because he speaks to Kings, Princes, and the Grandees of all Countries and all
Ages, and is become in some manner the Master and Instructor of all Mankind.
There is not any thing therefore more essential to History, than for a man to
give his Discourse a noble and lofty strain, to speak as he ought to do. So
that the Historian quits the mean and familiar Language, that by the Excellency
of Expression he may answer the Excellency of the things which he has to say.
He accustoms himself to make noble Reflections on whatever comes into his mind,
that by the choice of Words he may make it his design to give weight to his
Thoughts, and vigor to his Discourse, by a careful quest after whatever may
heighten and ennoble it, in order to the bestowing a Character of Grandeur on
all he says. The Models in this kind of writing are Thucydides amongst the
Greeks, and Livy amongst the Latins. They are the only Authors, who have been
able to keep up that lofty Style, with the same spirit and the same tone,
without falling into the mean and vulgar way of Expression; upon which account
they have had but few Imitators. Herodotus, out of an humor to keep too close
to Homer, would needs sometimes dwindle in those passages which required
Elevation* as Longinus has observed. Tacitus, who many times is great only
upon the score of his being concise, is not a very good Model to be proposed to
any; for the Grandeur of his Style has not any thing that is natural. And in the
general it is requisite, that we distinguish between the counterfeit Grandeur
and the real. It is not in the affectation of farfetch'd Terms, nor in lofty
Expressions; it is not in an overflux of big words, nor yet in the sumptuousness
of discourse, that we are to make that Excellency of Style to consist, which
History requires: wherein Ammianus Marcellinus, Lampridius, and most of the
Historians of the lower Class, were deceived. It consists in a lofty
Expression, Magna, non nimia; sublimis, non abrupta; fortis, non temeraria;
severa, non tristis; gravis, non tarda; laet^, non luxuriosa; plena, non
tumida. Fab. l. 12. c. 10.
but modest, and in a Discourse capable of keeping up the highest matters, and
raising up the weakest. It consists, in fine, in that temperament of Grandeur,
which Quintilian gives true Eloquence. It is not sufficient for a man to be
ingenious, but he must have a particular Genius, to write after that manner,
and to give a cer^ain Elevation to what he says, by the Choice of the Terms,
and by the Grandeur of the Sentiments. That Talent is so rare, that if we dash
out of the number of Historians those who have not written thus, the List of
the true ones will be very small.

III.
What it is to write with a constant Contexture of sound Sense.
TO write with that Contexture of sound Sense, is to go directly to the main
end, in what matter soever a man writes, without wandering or amusing himself
by the way. It consists further in an Exposal of things with a kind of Prudence
and Reservedness, without abandoning himself either to the heat of his
Imagination, or the vivacity of his Wit. It consists in the suppressing of what
may be superfluous in the Expression, such as are those Adverbs and Epithetes,
which extenuate things in aggravating them; in not leaving any thing that is
insignificant, languishing, or fruitless; in a generous Retrenchment of what
ought not to be said, how plausible soever it may be; in attributing always
less to what is splendid than to what is solid; in not discovering any thing of
fire or heat, where he needs express only what is to be done seriously and in
cold blood; in examining all his Conceptions, and measuring all his Words with
that aequilibrium of Sense, Delectus verborum habendus, and pondera singulorum
examinanda. Fab. l. 10. c. 3.
and that exquisiteness of Judgment, which lets nothing slip but what is exact
and judicious. It consists, in fine, in having the strength to resist the
temptation, which a man naturally has to make ostentation of his Wit; as that
impertinent Historian does, who in the Defeat of the Parthians by the Emperor
Severus, Lucian. de conscrib. Hist.
makes Osroes escape, by getting into a Cave planted about with Laurels and
Myrtles, wherein he makes himself ridiculous, while he thinks to be divertive;
which is one of the most slippery places that an Author could fall upon. And
that senceful Spirit, that Character of Wisdom, which History requires, is a
kind of Attention over ones self, which does not allow it self any
Exaggeration, and which takes continual Precautions against those daring
Imaginations whereto he is subject, whose Mind is too quick and volatile, or
over fertile; that he may set down great things in few words, as Salust does,
who holds great Councils, gives Battles, takes Cities, conquers Kingdoms, with
a shortness of Discourse, and a swiftness of Expression, which is understood at
half a word. Tacitus has all the Sense that is requisite, answerably to his
close way of writing; but he has not enough of it to be intelligible. A man is
sometimes put into an impatience at the Precipitations of that Author, who
loses much of his Gracefulness, and falls into Obscurity, merely upon this
score, that he will needs confine in too few words what ought to have a greater
Extent. The humor he has to be too concise puts me out of all humor, by
reason of the little Instruction he gives me, in things which he does not
sufficiently unravel. Polybius and Appianus are sometimes too liberal of their
Discourse: and there is a kind of Judicious Taciturnity, which raises a better
comprehension of the Grandeut of the things which are spoken of, than all the
words that are too weak to do it. It Is a Master-talent to suppress what cannot
well be said; and it is the principal part of an Historian, to distinguish
between that which admits of Extension and Restriction, and so to give every
thing its just measure, that there may be a strict observance of decorum. For
Livy, as diffused as he is, does not tire out the Reader's patience, because he
is judicious where he seems to be most tedeous. But Thucydides, keeping too
closely to sound Sense, does sometimes fall into a kind of harshness and
drought, which a man would hardly pardon in him, were it not for the Purity and
Excellency of his Style. So hard a matter is it to write with a strict
observance of Sense, without losing somewhat of those Beauties, which might be
employed if a man were not so prudent. But however let an Author be still of
this persuasion, that the greatest Beauty of any Production is always the sound
Sense of it: men are wearied with all else, but sound Sense never tires them.
It is by this constant current of sound Sense that Philip Comines,
notwithstanding the impure and unrefin'd Language of his Age, has merited the
esteem and approbation of ours. But of all the modern Historians there is not
any one has writ with a greater observance of the senceful Character, than
Mariana in his History of Spain. It is a Masterpiece of the last Ages, only
upon the score of that Quality. There is observable through that whole Work a
wise Precaution, which never allows him to expatiate too much in the most
plausible passages, nor yet to betray any negligence in those that are not
such: and that so judicious an Evenness of Hand, which is always the same in
the inequality of the matters, treated of by that Author, is but little known
to the Historians of these last times. But the Talent of a senceful Reflection
on things is not sufficient, without that of purely expressing them.

IV.
What it is to write Purely.
AN Historian, Historico sermoni decus conciliet perspicuitas proprietasque
verborum. Ben. de Hist. l. 1.
who makes it his design to be read by Posterity, ought to study the purity of
writing. Without that insinuating and inveigling quality, a History is likely
to be but of a short continuance. It Is through this very want of Purity of
Style, that so many Greek and Latin Historians mentioned by Photius and other
Collectors of Libraries, Quid tam necessarium quam rect* locutio? Fab. l. 1.
have been lost in the general Wreck of so many other Works, and that of an
almost infinite number, whereof Vossius gives us an account, there are
remaining only such as have written rationally enough to deserve reading.
Curae magna sentiendi and loquendi, sed dissimulatio curae praecipua. L. 9. c.
4.
A man therefore ought not to concern himself in the writing of History, if he
be not a perfect Master of his own Language, and critical in the Purity of it.
For when a man has once proposed to himself the Instruction of others, his
business is to express himself clearly, that he may be understood; and when he
once speaks well, he forces the Audience of all people; besides that, it is to
be imagined he says nothing as he should do, when he speaks not well; and this
Clearness of Expression, Nihil est in Historia pura and illustri brevitate
dulcius. Cic. ad Brut.
which is the greatest divertisement of History, cannot be found but in a pure
Style. This Purity consists principally in the Propriety of the Words, in the
natural disposition and distribution of the Phrases, and in the prudent and
moderate use of Figures. In sententia nihil absurdum aut alienum, aut
subinsulsum; in verbis nihil inquinaetum, abjectum, non aptum, durum, long
petitum. Cic. de opt. genesis Orat.
The Style ought not to admit of any thing that is improper, far-fetched,
harsh, mean, over-daring, or obscure. Herodotus had this Purity of Style, and
excells therein above all the Greek Authors, as Caesar does above all the
Latins. Men's minds grew rustly in the subsequent Ages, wherein there was not
any remarkable track of the Purity of the Ancients. But Q. Curtius, out of a
desire to be too polite, has lost somewhat of that grand and majestic Air,
which is so becoming in Salust and Livy. Certain it is, that he flourishes too
much in certain passages; as for instance, in that of the description of the
River Marsyas, at the entrance of the third Book; in that of the Adventure of
Abdolominus, who of a Gardener became a King, in the fourth; in that of the
Siege of Tire, and several others; wherein there is observable an Affectation
of Elegance not consistent with the Gravity of History, which cannot admit of
any thing that is affected. Moreover, that Purity of Elocution, which is so
necessary to History, ought to be kept up with an observance of great Sense.
Non debet quisquam, ubi maxima rerum momentae versantur, solicitus esse de
verbis. Fab. l. 8. c. 3.
For there is nothing so flat or insipid, as Elegance void of things, and such
as says nothing. Nay, it sometimes happens, that an over-studied Purity of
Discourse in great Subjects, abates somewhat of their Grandeur, as it appears
in the History of the Indies by Maffaeus, and in the Wars of Flanders by
Cardinal Bentivoglio. Both those Authors made it too much their business to
please by the Politeness of their Discourse; not reflecting, that the most
adorned Beauties are not always those that are most taking, Vt monilibus and
margaritis, quae sunt ornaementa foeminarum, deformantur viri; nec habitus
triumphalis, quo nihil augustius, foeminas decet. Fab. l. 11. c. 1.

Ornatus omnis, non tam sua, quans rei cui adhibetur, condition^ constat. Ibid.


and that the most sumptuous Ornaments disguize the Wearers, as soon as they
are excessive and disproportionate.

V.
Of the Simplicity of Writing.
THere is also a further Obligation incumbent upon an Historian, to observe a
Simplicity of Elocution, to avoid the Air that is pompous and affected, both
which are contrary to the grand Character which History is to look after; in
regard that whatever is great ceases to be so, as soon as it is divested of
that Simplicity which it ought to have; and what is jointly simple and great
doubles the Grandeur of it, and becomes sublime. Nor is there any thing that
instructs better, Si oration perderet gratiam simplicis and inaffectati coloris,
perderet and fidem. Fab. l. 9. c. 4.
or more cajoles the public Belief, than that Simplicity of Style, which was
so much cultivated by the Ancients, and is so little known to the Moderns:
whatever exaggerates has a counterfeit Air; and Nature, which ought to be
imitated in all things, expresses her self with as much simplicity as may be.
But to make a full discovery of that Simplicity, which is so necessary to, and
consistent with, a Grandeur of Style, it is to be observed that there are three
sorts of it, to wit, a Simplicity in the words, such as that of Caesar; a
Simplicity in the Sentiments, such as that of Salust; and a Simplicity in the
Design, and in the Distribution of the Design, such as that of Thucydides, In
judicio de Thucyd.
so much celebrated by Dionysius Halicarnassaeus. Those Authors of the Moderns,
who have come nearest that Character, are amongst the French, Philip de
Comines; Guicciardine amongst the Italians, Buchanan amongst the Scots, and
Mariana amongst the Spaniards: most of the others endeavor not to keep
themselves up by the Purity, Politeness, and the other Ornaments of Discourse,
but only when their Abilities will not reach to the observance of that
Simplicity; and they paraphrase the truth, when they have not the strength to
deliver it naked. Happy is that man who can arrive thereto when he is concerned
to write; ignorant persons may understand him, while the intelligent are
charmed with him. But there is not any thing of greater difficulty to attain,
than that even and natural Air, which contributes so much to the Simplicity of
Style. There is an extraordinary Genius requisite in him who would speak things
simply, without falling into the mean and frigid Style. For when he studies
Simplicity, there is not any thing he ought more to fear than Meanness of
Expression. But wherein does this admirable Simplicity consist, which is the
sovereign Perfection of a great Work, and what is meant by writing simply? In
this, that a man should make use of the most proper and most ordinary words,
but yet such as are full of great sense, as that Prince does, Homerus brevem
quidem, cum animi jucunditate propriam, carentem superfluis, eloquentiam
Menelao dedit, quae sunt virtutes generis primi. Fab. l. 12. c. 10.
on whom Homer bestows a concise, pleasant, and significant Eloquence, without
any superfluity. It is for a man to think and speak pertinently what he has to
think and say, without giving too great a Vivacity to his Expression, as Strada
does; and without giving too much Luster to his Conceptions, as Grotius does.
It consists in a man's having ordinary and natural Sentiments, without making so
many Ratioecinations and Reflections, as Davila does, in his History of the
Troubles of France, for when a man is so much taken up with Ratiocination, it
is not Nature, but Art and Study that speak; and those so much studied
Discourses smell of the School and the Declamation. Exponere simpliciter and
sine ulla exorn^atione. Cic. de Invent. l. 2 Nor. dicere ornatius quam simplex
ratio veritatis ferat. Cic. de Orat. l. 1.

Xenophon^is illam jucunditatem inaffectatam, quam nullae affectat^^ consequi
possit, ut ipsae sermonem Gratia finicisse videantur. Fa^. l. 10. c. 1.


It consists in not intermixing more Ornament in the Discourse than the Modesty
of Truth can well bear withal. It consists in expressing that natural and
simple Air of Xenophon's, which all imaginable Affectation cannot come near. It
consists, in fine, in being Master of that miraculous gift of Retrenching what
is superfluous out of the Discourse; which Phocion was so excellently possessed
withal, and of whom Demosthenes, as great a Student as he was of that
Simplicity, was wont to say, when he saw him ascending the Theater to refute
him, Plutarch.
See the Iron Instrument which is to cut off all the superfluity of my words.
The better to establish this Character, which besides a great stock of Wisdom
and sound Sense, require^ great Exercise and much Meditation, a man ought to
avoid being conversant with those Authors, whose Imaginations are over fertile,
and so to shun that profusion of frivolous Conceptions and forced Expressions,
and that Fustian way of writing into which men are apt to fall, when they are
not exact Pursuers of sound Sense, and have not their Minds well poised. For
Models in this way of writing a man is to propose to himself only the
Ancients, and amongst them he is to make choice only of the most Eminent for
the Simplicity of their Style. Herm. de Idaeis l. 2.
Hermogenes proposes Theocritus and Anacreon for great Models of that
simplicity, of which their Writings are a sufficient Testimony. Herodotus seems
to Longinus to be over-daring. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus charges Thucydides, as
simply as he writes, with inserting too many matters of fact in some of his
Narrations. Xenophon and Polybius are too full of Moralizations, and many times
break off the Thread of the History by their Reflections. Diodorus Siculus
intermixes too much Learning in his Discourse. Plutarch may pass for a great
Original of that simplicity which we look after, for he has observed it in all
he has written. Titus Livius does not appear to me more admirable upon the
score of all his other great Qualities, than he does upon this. The current of
his History is like the course of a great River, which glides away
majestically; whereas the History of Tacitus may be compared to a rich and
plentiful River, but subject to Inundations: he is not sufficiently well poised
in what he thinks, and he is many times forced and harsh in what he says,
merely because he is not simple. Mariana is one of the most accomplished
amongst the modern Historians, because he is the most studious to express
himself simply. For there is not any thing of this simplicity of Style to be
found in great Subjects, but what is always attended with Grandeur and
Excellency. Those are the Qualities from which proceeds that primitive
Ground^work of Perfection which History requires, and which may be called (as I
may so say) the first Elements of that Beauty which it ought to have, and which
ought also to be more predominant in the Fancy, and in the whole Character of
the Historian, than in his Style and Discourse. Take now the other Lines which
are to be added thereto for the completing of it, and which I briefly hint at,
observing no other order than that wherein they present themselves to my mind.
I begin with the matter and form, that is to say, with what is most essential
to History.

VI.
The Matter of History.
THE Matter fit to exercise the Art of an Historian is of a vast extent, since
it is to comprehend all the Actions of Men, relating to Peace, War, Counsels,
Negotiations, Embassies, Intrigues, and all the different Adventures which are
occurrent in Humane Life. Cicero requires two Qualities in the matter of
History, In rebus magnis memoriaque dignis historiam versari. Cic. de Orat. l.
2.

Historiam assuetam discurrere per negotiorum celsitudines, non humilium
minutias indagare causarum. -- Ammian. Marcell. l. 26.


that the things should be great, and that they should be worthy to be
communicated to the public. No man has better explicated the Choice which an
Historian ought to make of his Subject than Dionysius Halicarnassaeus has done,
in the Preface of his History, and in his Judgment upon Thucydides, where he
prefers the Choice which Herodotus had made of his Subject before that of
Thucydides, for the Reasons he alleges for it. But as it happens many times,
that what is false has the Air of what is true, so there is a great
perspicacity and discernment requisite to separate the true Motives of
important Actions, from those which are only colorable and pretentional, and
prudently to make choice of the matter, which wholly derives its Beauty and
Curiosity from the disciplination and distribution of the Circumstances, and
from the Order whereto what is too indeterminate ought to be reduced, by
restraining it within the natural extent of the Limits which it ought to have.
When it shall have been so reduced, let the Historian become Master of it,
Equidem non affirmare sustineo, de quibus dubito, nec subducere quae accepi.
Curt. l. 9
by a profound Meditation of his Subject, whereof he ought to have a perfect
information and knowledge: and withal let him be sufficiently exact and
religious, never to abuse the Credulity of the public, by entertaining it with
his own Conjectures instead of Truths, or giving it certain things for doubtful
ones. Let him read as much as possibly lies in him, to the Source of the
Instructions which he has been supplied withal, in order to his making a just
discernment thereof. Let him not advance any thing upon common Reports, whose
Authors are always uncertain. Let him not affirm things but upon very sure
Memorials, and very faithful Relations. Let him not be too slightly confident
of the sincerity of those Historians who were his Predecessors, lest he be led
out of the way by following ill Guides. Let him make a great distinction
between Relations which are partial, or suspected of Prepossession, and those
that are not such. Let him always stand upon his guard against the Partialities
of those who furnish him with Memorials, in regard that Preoccupation never
makes any but false Histories. Apud Herodotum sunt innumerabiles fabulae. De
Leg. l. 1.
Herodotus, whose History is so fabulous, according to the sentiment of Cicero,
had only wretched Memorials to work upon, as Josephus pretends. Thucydides,
desirous to make his advantage of the others miscarriage, confined himself to
the History of his own time, Marcellin. in vita Thucyd.
not trusting any other person, and writing only what he had seen himself, or
learned from creditable persons, and out of Memorials which he got together
with great cost, not only on the Athenians side, but also on that of the
Lacedaemonians, that he might have the Informations of both Parties.
Xenonophon, Polybius, and Procopius, took in a manner the same course. Dion
Cassius acknowledges in his History, that he spent ten years in preparing the
Materials of it. Salustius maria transgressus dicitur, ut oculis suis crederet
de conditionibus locorum. Petrar.
Petrarch affirms, that Salust went into Africa, to observe himself the
Situation of the places, whereof he was to give an account in his History of
the War of Jugurth, as being unwilling to trust any but his own Eyes. For the
most important matter of all is, for a man to be assured of the groundwork on
which he writes. Lucian makes him a frivolous Historian of his time, who writ
the War of Armenia upon common reports, having not seen any person who had been
in Syria, where the Battle was fought. In Praefat. Hist.
And Vopiscus could not be induced to write the History of the Emperor
Aurelianus, but upon the Assurance he received from Junius Tiberianus, Minister
of State, that he should be furnished with good Memorials. Nor is it sufficient
for a man to be himself concerned in Affairs, but he must also have a Character
of Spirit fit to communicate them to others. Hist. l. 12.
Polybius affirms, that Calisthenes was a Witness of the Engagement between
Alexander and Darius, in the narrow place of Cilicia; yet he does commit very
great Absurdities in the description of that important Battle, merely out of
his ignorance of Military Affairs, and the order which was observed in the
Engagements of that time. A man ought therefore above all things to be very
well assured of his matter, which he never fails of if he have a good
Apprehension; but he may be defective in point of Assurance, if he have not the
discernment requisite as to the matters of fact, which are advanced. How many
false Memorials are there produced, because the Sources thereof are spoiled by
interessed persons? And if there be not any thing more common than the
Materials designed for History, for all may be good in order thereto: it may
also be said, that there is not any thing more rare than that Certainty or
Assurance whereby they ought to be attended, in order to their being proper for
it, and which is hardly found, because there is a Preoccupation of all sides.
Upon which account we ought to esteem that sentiment of Boccalini, Raggua di
Parnas.
as to this point, when he advises a man not to write any more than what he has
seen, and not to suffer any thing to be published till after his death: by
which means he is assured of what he says, and Prepossession has no part
therein. But let a man be careful above all things to pitch upon great
Subjects, such are as capable of keeping themselves up by their own stock and
strength; a lofty matter gives luster and weight to the words; and in low
Subjects Art must play its part, and supply their weakness.

VII.
The Form of History.
THe Form which ought to be given to History is that which is most essential
thereto: it is this only makes it great or little, and it is by this we
discover the measure and extent of his genius who is the Author of it. The
person therefore who would write well must have a mind susceptible of great
Idea's, and capable of Elevation; to the end that making himself Master of his
Subject, he may invest his matter into what Form he pleases. It Is by this
draught that Livy gives his History a Character of Grandeur, which has not any
thing like it in all the other Historians, by imprinting upon all the Subjects
whereof he treats, the Colors whereof they are capable, according to their own
worth. It Is thus that he gives the last Kings of Rome all the Arrogance which
their absolute Independence inspired them withal; that he diversifies the
Spirit of the Republic by the uncivilliz'd Virtue of the first Consuls, by the
popular Insurrections of the Tribunes, by the Austerity of the Government of
the Decemvirs, by the Luxury and Deliciousness of the last Consuls; that he
distinguishes every Age and Period of Time, by the genius which had been most
predominant therein, without confounding the different motions of that genius
in the different Circumstances of Times, which have not any thing of
resemblance; and that he always keeps himself up at the same height, by the
great representations he makes of the things whereof he treats. On the
contrary, Tacitus gives all his matters in a manner the same Form; all is done
in him by Political Considerations; the persons he speaks of have always their
Apprehensions disconsonant to those of other people. It is not their own
Character that makes them act, but that of the Historian, who by the limits of
a Mind too much restrained within it self gives always one and the same Figure
to his Expressions, and the same Circumference to his Conceptions; there is a
general resemblance and conformity in all. The Political Reflection is the
motive and general decypherer and disentangler of all things. If Augustus makes
choice of a Successor at his death, it is only that he might be the more
regretted that he gives them a Governor of the State more wicked than himself.
Tiberium ascitum, quod ejus arrogantiam introspexerit, and comparatione
deterrima sibi gloriam quaesivisse. Tac. Ann. l. 1.
If Tiberius makes Piso Governor of Syria, it is done only to set a Spy over
Germanicus, who governed Egypt, whose glory gave him some umbrage. If the
flatteries of Dolabella displease him, the reason is, because they are not
smart and ingenious enough. Of his sending Sylla into Exile the reason is, that
he looked upon his Taciturnity as proceeding from Dissimulation and
Reservedness. Dolabella in absurdam adulationem progressus. Tac. Ann. l. 3.
The Modesty of that Emperor is only a smothered Ambition, his Favors are
only so many Snares, his Moderation is only a scornful Fierceness, and his
Religion is only a supercilious Personation of it. It Is an argument of the
Indignation of the Gods, Suspectabat Sullam, socors ejus ingenium callidumque
simulatorem interpretando. Ann. l. 13.
that Sejanus becomes the Emperor's Favorite, and is advanced to the Ministry
of State. Arruntius poisons himself upon a political account, to avoid falling
into the hands of a Master more brutish than Tiberius. He finds Wit even in the
Stupidity of the Emperor Claudius, and Delicacy even in the Debauches and
Brutalities of Nero; and he represents as a refined piece of Prudence,
Temporibus Neronis sapientia pro inertia fuit. Id.
the bestial humor which was observed in some people under the Reign of that
Emperor. In fine, all the Characters resemble one the other, Nature has no
part in any thing; her Sentiments are always forced therein, and the same
genius reigns all over, by the impression of the genius of the Historian, who
is in a manner always the same person. Mariana takes a larger Career; the
Romans, the Carthaginians, the Christians, the Arabians, the Moors, the
Mahumetans, make all different Figures in his work. The Spirit of the Author is
not diffused into the other Spirits, otherwise than to distinguish them
according to their Character, making his way always by paths, as different as
the different Subjects whereof he treats, do require it. It may be also said,
That amongst the Moderns there is not any History greater upon the score of its
Form, than that of Mariana.

VIII.
The Design and End of History.
THe main Design of Romance is only to divert, Alias in Historia leges
observandas, alias in Poemate; illa ad veritatem quaeque, in hoc ad
delectationem referri pleraque. Cic. de Leg. 1.
and that of History to instruct. And this is properly their essential
difference, the later having not any thing which it proposes to it self, but
the Instruction of the Public. For as it does not labor only for the
present, so its prospect ought not to be confined to the present time, which is
transient, but to be directed to Posterity, which continues always. What
Extravagance were it then, for a man to think of diverting only the Age he
lives in, when he may benefit all Ages? These are the Reasons which Lucian
uses, to oblige the Historian, to mind only what is beneficial, and to
regulate the Hearts and Dispositions of men, by the Instructions he gives them.
It is a great mistake (says he) to pretend that History may be divided into two
parts, the Beneficial and the Divertive; for the Historian ought to mind only
the Benefit which may be gained from a sincere and true Account of Affairs; and
if he inserts any thing that is Divertive, it must not be out of any design to
corrupt the Truth, but to embellish it, and to render it the more acceptable.
And to justify his sentiment, he alleges the Extravagancies of the Historians
of his time, who made themselves ridiculous by following other Principles.
Herodotus made it his business to please the Age wherein he writ; Graecis
historiis plerunque poeticae similis est licentia. Fab. l. 2. c. 4.
but his Sincerity was so cried down in subsequent times, that he occasioned
the Fidelity of the Greeks to be suspected in point of History, in the time of
Quintilian. Photius mentions an Historian named Damascius, who could think of
no other way to please, -- and quicquid Graecia mendax Peccat in historia --
Juv. Sat. 10.
than by relating things incredible. And Seneca complains, that in his time
there were some Historians, who had no other Expedient to signalize themselves
than by fabulous Narrations: that was always the gust and humor of the meaner
sort of people, who are pleased with Fictions; not that of Persons of worth and
abilities, who love only the Truth. Quidam incredibilium relatu commendationem
parant, and lectorem aliud acturum, si per quotidiana duceretur, miraculo
excitant, and op^^ suum fieri popul are non putant, nisi mendacio asperserint.
Senec. Qu. Nature. l. 7.
In the subsequent Ages the Arabians intermixed so many Fables into their
Writings, that they spoiled most of the Historians of their times, by the
humor then predominant, of intermixing surprising Adventures in all their
fabulous Productions. It was their Persuasion, that in order to Divertisement
there was a necessity of telling incredible things. That Fancy infected some of
the modern Greeks; whence it comes, that the knowledge we have of those Ages by
the Byzantine History, is not of the surest, because the Authors thereof seem
to be of a Character not very exact. And when a man writes according to their
Memorials, he ought to be very well precaution'd against so false an Idea, to
merit belief; inasmuch as the falsehood spoils all, and makes only a Fable of
the Truth. Nay the truest things ought not to be related, when they once appear
incredible or extraordinary, if a man gives them not an Air of truth, or at
least a Color of probability. This is done by Thucydides; and though he found
Herodotus in so great esteem, as that some gave his Books the names of the
Muses, Lucian. de Hist. conscrib.
he made it his business to speak only the truth, without minding how he
pleased. Vtilitatem juvandi praetulerunt gratiae placendi. Plin. praef. hist.
not. de Thucyd. and aliis hist.
I had rather (says he) displease by speaking the truth, than divert by
relating fables; in regard that by displeasing I may possibly benefit, and I
may happily prejudice by endeavoring to divert. Let therefore this be granted,
that there is not any thing so excellent in History, as what is real; and that
Truth being the greatest divertisement of it, that very Historian who would
endeavor to divert, ought to advance only what is true.

IX.
That Truth is the only means, whereby History advances toward its end; and
how it is found.
TRuth being the only means, whereby History may securely instruct, ought also
to be the principal rule of it, that it may be the groundwork of the public
belief, as it ought to be. But where is it to be found? Is there any thing in
the world that lies more concealed than Truth? For besides the Clouds and Mists
whereby it is naturally surrounded, and sometimes rendered inaccessible, it is
also begirt with all the Disguizes, which man's Heart is capable of. And if the
ordinary Ignorance of those who write, and are so short sighted as to the
prospect they should have before them, be an obstacle to the knowledge of
Truth, their want of Sincerity, or voluntary Insincerity, is a much greater.
For how many false Judgments do men make by the false prospects which Passion
or Interest gives them, and by the preoccupations which Error or Opinion are
wont to inspire prepossessed Minds withal? In fine, Truth being of a nature so
unknown to men, either by reason of its own obscurity, or by the weakness of
their abilities, or want of attention, there is not any thing more difficult,
than to communicate it to the public in its purity, and without any
adulteration. And as it is continually corrupted and profaned by the baseness
of Flatterers, most Historians being ordinarily Court-Pensioners; so a man
ought to bid defiance to hope or fear, as soon as he has once concerned himself
in writing, that he may have the courage to be a constant deliverer of the
truth. But if it suffices not that a man be willing to speak it, he must also
be able to do it, by searching after it in the purity of its source, by seeking
it in the most curious Closets, and by consulting the Instructions of those who
have been concerned in the Affairs, so to unravel what is most mysterious in
the most secret Intrigues. The Historian above all things must well study Man
in general, make a discovery of his disposition by the most fantastic and most
unexpected passages, find out the greatest weaknesses of his heart, dive into
his true Sentiments, that he may not impose false ones upon him; and judge of
him by those natural and unforeseen motions which he is guilty of, when he
least thinks of them. It Is by this means that he descries the real Sentiments
of the Soul, the Heart having not the time to recollect in order to its
disguizing of it self: for it forces it self as soon as it comes to reflect, as
Tacitus offers it to our observation in Agrippina, Agrippina pavor and
consternatio mentis emicu^t, quamvis vultu premeretur. Octavia, quamvis rudibus
annis, dolorem, charitatem, affectus omnes abscondere didicerat. Ita post breve
silentium repetita convivi^ (...). Tac. ann. l. 13.
and Octavia the Sister of Britannicus. For as soon as he was smitten with the
Poison which Nero had ordered to be given him at the Banquet, wherein he
procured his death, Octavia was troubled as well as Agrippina; there was a
visible Consternation in their Countenances; but whereas Octavia was in hopes
of being married to Nero, and that Agrippina his Mother, a Woman naturally
ambitious, was desirous to reign, their political Reflection reassur'd them;
and not to give any disgust to the Emperor, who rid out of the way his Rival
to the Empire, they smother their Sentiments, silence their grief, and continue
the Repast with the same Gayety of Humor, as if nothing had happened, while
the Prince gave up his last gasp in the Antichamber. Now this must be looked on
as a great piece of Contrivance in an Author, who would give us an exact
account of those whose History he relates. But this is a Consideration not much
heeded, and is the reason that we have so few Histories. There is a Character
of Spirit proper for the delivering of things as they are, which is not common;
it is one of the Talents of Thucydides, Rerum gestarum pronunciator sincerus
Thucydidides. Cic. de clar. orat.
the most faithful and most sincere of all the Historians: he has a gusto and
liking for the Truth, and a discernment to distinguish between that which is
true and false, together with an Accuracy of Spirit, which has gained him the
approbation and esteem of all Nations. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus commends him
above all things for his keeping close to the Truth, In judicio de Thucyd.
alleging that he never spoke any thing against his Conscience: wherein he has
surpassed Herodotus, whose design it was only to please. Scribe secur^^, dicas
quod velis, babiturus mendaciorum comites quos Historicae eloquenti^e miramur
autores. Vopisc. praef. hist.
For Strabo affirms, that he intermixed Fables into his History, out of a pure
frolic to render it divertive. The Historians of the lower Class became so
great Flatterers, that their defect in point of Fidelity diverted Vopiscus from
writing the History of his own time; but the Governor of the City, a Favorite
of the Emperor's, in a Discourse he had with him as they walked abroad, took
off that scruple by representing to him, that the most considerable Historians
had been deceived in many things. Apud Flori^. S^.
P^llio affirms, that the same thing has happened to Caesar in his
Commentaries, because he took not the leisure to examine what he said. Now if
the greatest men are subject to these miscarriages, what will be the case of
the ordinary sort of Writers? Neminem scriptorum, quantum ad historiam
pertinet, non aliquid esse mentitum. Vopisc. ib.
And if Truth does not always make a discovery of it self in its purity to
extraordinary Genius's, how shall it expose it self to me^ner persons, who upon
the very score of their Quality cannot deliver any thing without changing the
Circumstances thereof, either by diminishing or augmenting the Objects? For
there is not any thing of greater rarity than an exact Character, and such as
is fit to communicate things as they are: they are not said otherwise than as
they are conceived; they are not conceived, but answerably to the frame of the
Imagination: and of several persons who may have seen the same thing, there are
not many times two that deliver it after the same manner, every one relating
what he had seen according to the Idea he has taken thereof, and suitably to
the frame of his own Apprehension. The Talent therefore most requisite in an
Historian, is that exact and faithful Inclination of declaring the truth, in
all Circumstances conducive to its making an Impression in, and meriting the
belief of the public. But it is not yet sufficient to History, that it
communicate what is true; there is further requisite a certain manner of
Expression to speak it well, and that is called the Style. Let us now see which
is the most convenient to History.

X.
The Style proper to History.
THe Style is the Form of the Discourse, and the Manner after which a man
writes: the most proper to every one is that which is most conformable to his
Genius, and he ought to follow it without any violence. So that a Style having
an intermixture of several Styles is always vicious. This is a defect of Strada
in his History of Flanders, who by the excellency of his Imagination, and by
his great Reading, had fraught his mind with different Characters. Verum ipsum
in scribent is sincerita^e candoreque elucet. Melch. Can. in loc. Theol. l. 11.
c. 6.
And that intermixture which is observable in his manner of writing, how
pleasant soever it may be, abates somewhat of its perfection. Mariana, a person
of the same Society, has more substance, and is more even in his Style. But the
most proper Style for an Historian is that which has most the Character of
Truth, and wherein that natural Luster of Sincerity, which ordinarily attends
Truth, is more conspicuous: for what has that Air is easily credited. De
conscrib. hist.
The Style of History (says Lucian) ought to be clear and natural; in as much
as clearness is the rule of what it ought to speak, as truth is the rule of
what it ought to think. The Discourse of it ought to be free, Quanquam vincta
sit, soluta videri debet oration. Fab. l. 9. c. 4.
though it seem to be restrained; and it does not so much require Numerousness,
as a rotundity of Style, that it may have that unconcernment which renders it
natural. But in regard the Historian ought to read the ancient Authors, in
order to the framing of a Style according to his Genius, we shall give him here
what he shall find observable in that Study, Historia non tam finitos numeros,
quam orbem contextumque desiderat. Ibid.
for his framing to himself a Method proper to his Design. The Style of
Herodotus is gentle, evenly flowing and pleasant. That of Thucydides is more
noble, and implies more Grandeur, but it is not so natural: nay, he has some
harshnesses which render him obscure; and he is less remarkable for
Numerousness and Rotundity than Herodotus. Xenophon writes with an insinuating
and mild Air; In Herodoto omnia leniter fluunt; tum ipsa dialectus habet
jucunditatem. Ibid.

Thucydides praefractior, ita nec rotundus, in eo orbem orationis desidero.
Cic. in Bruto.

Obscurus est, quia pressus. Ibid.


his Discourse, which may be likened to a pure and clear Water, has nothing
comparable to it in Antiquity, Tribus libris de bello civili Caesari falso
asscriptis nihil durius, nec candori Caesariano minus conveniens. Florus Sabin.
in calum. Ling. Lat.
unless it be the Style of Caesar; for there has not been any thing writ in the
Latin Tongue of greater purity. The Observation of a modern Critic, who takes
notice of a difference of Style in the Books of the Civil Wars, which he
pretends are not written so purely as the War of the Gauls, is a delicacy
beyond my apprehension: I am not so subtly observant as to find it so; and I
appeal to the Sentiment of Suetonius, who makes no distinction between them. I
must acknowledge, that I am extremely taken with the Elegance and Simplicity of
that Author; no person ever had the Talent of writing more clearly. Genus
orationis fusum, and cum lenitate quadam aequabili pros^uens, sine judiciali
asperit^^e, and sententiarum forinsium deu^eis prosequendum. Cic. de orat. l. 2.
But the Transcendency of Livy's Discourse puts me into an Ecstacy; it is near
two thousand years that that Historian has been heard with respect by all
people, upon the score of that Majestical Tone wherewith he speaks, which has
been the admiration of all Ages. Nor is my mind taken up with any thing so much
as that admirable choice of words, always proportionate to his Sentiments, and
that Expression of Sentiment always conformable to the things whereof he
speaks. In fine, he of all the Authors has best pitched upon the Style which
Cicero advises of History; and he is that great Model which Buchanan, Mariana,
Paulus Aemilius, Paulus Jovius, and all those who have outlasted their own
Ages, have proposed to themselves, as to the manner wherein History ought to be
written. Tacitus is not so proper for that purpose; for he, by reason of his
startling and surprising Sallies, may be compared to Lightning, which does not
so much lighten as dazzle. Paterculus and Florus have made a kind of
intermixture of the florid, delicate, and divertive Air, with the meaner sort
of writing. The Authors of the History of Augustus, Salustius rerum Romanarum
^lorentissimus author. Tac. hist. l. 3.
as Ammianus Marcellinus, Lampridius, Spartianus, Julius Capitolinus, Vopiscus,
and the rest, have degenerated into the frigid and impure Style, which has not
any thing of that noble Simplicity of the precedent Ages. Salust has somewhat
of Grandeur and Sublimity in his way of writing; Salustio vigente amputatae
sententiae, and obscura brevitas, fu^re pro cultu. Sen. l. 11. (...). 114.
in which respect Quintilian compares him to Thucydides. Quintus Curtius is
conspicuous and florid. And upon these two ways, which are in a manner the two
only rational ones, that a man can make use of, he may examine which of the
two is the most proper for History: and that question is the most important of
any that can be made upon this subject.

XI.
Whether the Noble Style, or the Florid, be more proper for History.
IN a question of such consequence as this, which is not yet well decided, it
will be sufficient to allege the Reasons which may serve for the decision of
it, when a man has not the Authority to decide it himself. Verba excerpsit
Salustius ex originibus Catonis. Suet. in Aug.
Salust has a certain Grandeur in his Style; but he has some harsh Expressions,
which render him dry in some places, because he had derived that unpolishedness
from the original Expressions of Cato; which gives a Seriousness to his
Discourse, and that has the Air of Severity. Salustius scriptor seriae and
severae orationis. A. Gel. l. 17. c. 18.
On the contrary, there is not any thing more polite than Quintus Curtius; it
is a flower of admirable Expression, which extremely pleases the Virtuosi. But
the business now in hand is to examine, whether the harsh Style of Salust, how
harsh soever it may be, is not more sound and more proper for History, it
giving (as indeed it does) Weight, Vigor, and Grandeur to the Discourse. Has
it not even its Beauties and Excellencies? Is it not in that harshness of
Style, that we sometimes find those fierce and daring Graces, which Demetrius
Phalereus says that Homer has so well expressed, in the Adventure of Polyphemus
in the Odissey, Ib. l. 9.
whereof he is the first Author, as Demetrius pretends in his Treatise of
Elocution: that is to say, those Graces which have nothing of softness or
effeminacy, and which please without any affected and superfluous dress. The
same Author cites several Examples of them taken out of Xenophon, who has the
art of making those things pleasant, which have not ought intrinsecally ^o
recommend them. In this does properly consist that austere Style, which
Hermogenes prefers before the soft Style, De Id^is* l. 1. c. 5. and l. 2. de
Invent.
when he says, that an absolutely simple Narration has many times more force
and vigor, than that which is adorned and florid; inasmuch as the severe Style
may have Grandeur, and the mild Style cannot ascend above Mediocrity: and for
this reason does he place sound Sense, how much soever it may admit of
negligence, amongst the qualities of the noble and elevated Style. This (says
he) was the Character of Pericles, whom Demosthenes proposed to himself, in the
Acquest of that vigorous and vehement Eloquence, wherein he has excelled.
Hyperides (says he elsewhere) is chargeable with Negligence, but yet he has
Grandeur: his Style is rough, dry, and Sceleton-like; but it is noble and
sublime. Austerus Graeca consuetudine. Cornel. Front. de different. vocum.
For that Austerity of Style, which was the true Character of the Greeks, is
only an exactness of sound Sense, and an adjusted and correct Reason, which
(without minding what glitters) aims only at what is solid; it has nothing
that is counterfeit in its Sentiments; all its Attention is wholly bent upon a
Sobriety of Discourse, which has not any thing but what is senceful and simple.
Artis severae si quis amat effectus, mentemque magnis applicat, prius more
f^^gali^^tis lege polleat exacta. Petr.
And this is also the Style which Plutarch attributes to Demosthenes, and which
Dionysius Halicarn^ssaeus does not distinguish from the grand and sublime. It Is
in fine that Vigor of Expression, which gives the Discourse an Air of
Excellency and Majesty, whereby it becomes great and solid. It Is thus that
Caesar has somewhat that is more noble in the simplicity of his Discourse, than
Tacitus has in all the pomp of his words; and there are some Negligences in the
ancient Authors, Si juvenes verba atroci stylo effoderent, jam illa grandis
oration haberet majestatis su^ pondus. Ibid.

Histori ca locutio, ubi munditiem retinuerit, majora ornamenta non requirat;
simplex, pura, naturalis ^it, nec Atticam sic^itatem refer possit. Beni,
(...) hist. l. 1.


which are equivalent to all the exactness and regularity of the Moderns. Not
but that the florid Style may be of use in those small Histories, which cannot
keep themselves up by their own intrinsecal worth. The Princess of Montpensier
ought to be writ with all the Elegance that Art is capable of; but the History
of the War of Paris and of our last Troubles in France, ought to have a greater
Air of writing. In small Subjects there is a Delicacy requisite; in great ones,
Vigor and Dignity are required. Let Paterculus be polite and ornamental in the
Character he has taken; but let Livy be transcendent and serious; in as much as
ordinary Beauties stand in need of Ornament e're they can show themselves, and
the great ones, who have their Attractions within themselves, need it not. Not
to urge that Truth, which is the Soul of History, is apt to fall under
suspicion, when she is once too sumptuously adorned; nor that Negligence has
more of the Air of Sincerity. And this is what is particularly to be observed
upon the account of Style, after the general Notions I have given thereof: but
whereas it cannot be put in use otherwise than by Narration, let us examine how
that ought to be.

XII.
Narration.
HIstory (properly speaking) being only a recital of things past, Historia
narratio rei gestae, per quam ea quae facta sunt dignoscuntur. Isidor. l. 1.
Orig.
and in the order they came to pass, ought to be a continued Narration. So that
there is not any thing more essential to it, than that a man know well how to
relate; but there is not also any thing more difficult. For what Art is there
not requisite to prevent the distraction of the Reader, and to keep him in a
continual posture of Attention? Expositio praeteritorum temporum. Fab. l. 4. c.
^.
What Prudence is there not requisite to mingle and scatter up and down those
Colors, which are fit to put things into a state of Verisimilitude, and to
intermix ever and anon those Insinuations, Custodia fidelis rerum gestarum.
Tit. Live. l. 6.
those Explications, those Graces, that Fire, that Vivacity, which keep the
Narration from languishing? What Dexterity is there not requisit^ ^or a man to
display his Art and Wit in what he says, and ye still to conceal it; and by a
great variety of Expressions, Figures, Conceptions, to scatter Ornaments up and
down upon the Passages that are capable thereof, Dare orationi varios vultus;
gaudent enim res varietate. Fab. l. 9. c. 2.
yet without ever discovering them? What Discernment and Recollection is there
not requisite to know what ought to be said and what ought not to be said; to
speak, and to be silent; not to stick any longer than is fit upon the places he
is to pass through; to expose things at large or minutely, according as
necessity or decorum require; to dilate, and abbreviate them; to heighten by a
happy Expression the Passages which are not happy of themselves; and never to
tire out the Reader by an excessive Uniformity? In fine, what Judgment is there
not requisite accurately to distinguish between what suits well, and what does
not? For it is upon this that the whole Beauty of Narration, and all the Grace
of History depends. But Narration is complete, when it has not any thing that is
superfluous. Thus you have in a word that whereto the Perfection, which it is
capable of, may be reduced. The Precepts of Cicero and Quintilian say no more;
Circumcisa expositio rei quae supervacuis caret. Fab. l. 4. c. 1.
after whom I have not any thing to say. For when the Superfluities are once
retrenched, when those needless Circumlocutions and those Epithets, which are
introduced merely for ostentation, and all those frivolous Ornaments of
Discourse are suppressed, every thing hastens to its period. Vigor, Smartness,
Dignity, all is kept up in it, and nothing languishes. As to this point
Thucydides surpasses Herodotus, Densus, brevis, semper instans sibi concitatis
affectibus Thucydides. Fab. l. 10. c. 1.
who is too diffusive in certain Passages, wherein he gives too much scope to
the Excellency of his Imagination. Salust is an Author of an exact and concise
Character; he is principally recommendable upon the score of the swiftness and
rapidity of his Discourse; it is that which animate^ it, and makes it so lively.
The Narration of Caesar is admirable for its Purity and Eloquence, Thucydides
verbis aptus and pressus. Cic. de Orat. l. 2.
but it is not lively enough; and it is defective as to that force and vigor
which he quarreled at in Terence. As for Titus Livius, he has an Air of
relating things which is very insinuating, by reason of the intermixture he
makes of small things with great ones in his Narration: Immortalem illam
Salustii velocitatem consecutus Livius. Fab. l. 10. c. 1.
in as much as an overlong Continuation of great things spends the Spirits, by
reason of the Attention they require, and small things give them some
relaxation. It Is according to the same Method that he diversifies his
Adventures, that he makes a vicissitude of mournful and pleasant things, that
he disposes what is splendid and what is heavy, ^lla Salustiana bre^itas, qua
nihil apud aures eruditas per^ectius esse potest, captanda. Ibid.

Livius in narrando mirae ^uc^nditatis* clarissiimique candoris, ita ducuntur
omnia, tum rebus (...) personis accommodat^. Ibid.


according to a wise and judicious Temperament, to keep the Reader in breath by
that variety. For a Narration grows flat, when it has not a diversity of
Accidents, Adventures, Figures, and Expressions. Nay, a man must give certain
Intervals to things, that so the Reader may have time to breath, and not
smother his matter, by an over-intermixture of Occurrences one with another.
This is a defect which Dionysius Halicarnassaeus reproaches Thucydides withal,
Thucydides creber rerum frequentia. Cic. de Orat. l. 2. Tract. de Judic. Thucyd.
in a Narration of the third Book of his History, wherein he so intermingles
the different Interests of the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and the other Nations
of Greece, that he somewhat confounds the several species, by a Narration
overcharged with matter. And this is a defect ordinary enough in fertile Wits.
Rerum ratio ordinem temporum desiderat. Cic. de Orat. l. 2.
Though the order of the times be the most natural to Narration, in regard it
discloses things in the series wherein they happen; yet is there however an
order of reason in the distribution of Occurrences, which ought to be the
particular Study of the Historian. In rebus magnis memoriaque dignis, consilia
primum, deinde acta, postea eventus expectantur* Ibid.
It is only by this concealed Order that he ingratiates himself with the
Reader, makes him take the same prospect of things as he had done himself; that
he instills into him his own Sentiments, when he makes him see men acting
naturally as they ought to act, and that he shows him their Manners, their
Conceptions, their Designs, their Motives, their Actions as they are in a kind
of dependence one upon another, and in that natural Order, wherein there is an
exact Correspondence. The Historian, who knows how to manage this without
confusion, is a great man. This is the way that is pleasing, and not those
extraordinary Emergencies, after which a man runs when he has no Judgment. For
there is not any thing more taking, than to see men act in that order: that
alone well delivered keeps the Mind attentive. As to which particular Livy has
been the most succesful, because he has best followed that Order, by pursuing
the course of his History with an intertexture of Discourse, and an always
equal and even Concatenation of Actions. Cap. 18.
Longinus has not forborne to observe, that Thucydides does sometimes discompose
things that were well concerted, merely that he might surprise by his disorder,
and so diversifie his Narration: nay, he often relates things past in the
present time, in showing them as if they then actually passed; which raises a
greater Expectancy and Attention in the Reader. Tacitus has his frequent
Sallies, and does not make a consequential delivery of things. That great Sense
pent up in few words has not the extent it should have, to be proportionate to
the Apprehension of his Readers, which is many times o'repressed therewith: and
as he is not natural in what he relates, nor ever hardly humanizes himself, so
he does not instruct as he ought to do. For instance; when upon occasion of the
Papian Law he explicates the Origin of Laws; or when he elsewhere describes
the Privilege of Places of Refuge, he does not go to the Source of the things;
he does not clear up any thing to the bottom, or he does it amiss; as when he
would explicate the Religion of the Jews, in the fifth Book of his History.
Nay, his very Style is no way fit for it, which is a great defect in an
Historian, whose principal Function is to instru^^. But after all a Narration
is good, however it be made, when it pleases.

XIII.
Transitions.
THe great Art of Narration, and one of its principal Beauties, consists in
Transitions. And indeed those delicate and natural Windings, those happy
Devolutions from one subject to another, which make the Prosecution of the
Discourse engaging; those insinuating Attractions, which conduct the Reader's
Mind from object to object, and give him a spacious, yet divertive, Prospect:
in fine, all that admirable economy of Transition, is that which is most
delicate and most sprightly in Narration, which looks always as it were forced,
never easy and natural, without that Art. It is not enough for a man to
understand speaking well, in order to the attaining of this; but he must be
eloquent, absolute Master of his Subject, and perfectly know the Connexions and
Dependencies of it; for the most proper Transitions ought to be rather in the
things themselves, than in the words. So that those Excursions out of Kingdoms
into Kingdoms, out of Nations into Nations, out of Ages into Ages, without any
method or management, are great Deviations and Sallies, in a History any thing
well regulated, wherein every thing ought to be disposed and adjusted, as we
find in the Structure of a great Palace, the Proportion and Correspondency of
whose parts make one of its greatest Beauties. For History is as 'twere a Body,
consisting of its several Members by a natural Connection. As to which
particular the History of the Schism of England, by Sand^r^s, is very defective
amongst the Moderns, as that of Florus and Paterculus amongst the Ancients.
Xenophontis fluens, and sine salebris oration. Cic.
There is not any thing more connected, or more gently flowing, than the the
Discourse of Xenoph^n. Livy has those qualifications in a greater measure; his
Narration is an admirable Concatenation, in regard his Transitions are not so
much in the words as the things. Salust is not of so even a thread. Tacitus is
less even; if he has any Connexions, they are forced, and the thread of his
Discourse is much interrupted; which startles the Reader, who cannot follow
that Author but with loss of breath. The most difficult Transitions are those
which are in the most common things; for a man must keep up himself with an
Expression that has not any thing mean in it, notwithstanding the meanness of
the Matter; nay find out an Expedient to connect things that have not any
mutual dependence. It Is also in those places that a man ought to use his
greatest art and wit. The Reader's Mind is so delicate, that it is not always
turned as an Author pleases. And therefore those Windings, which it is to be
conducted from Adventures to Adventures, ought to be prepared by secret
Co^catenations. For in short, it is many times subject to a ridiculous Coyness,
and is in so fantastic an humor as renders it intractable. But what artifice
is there not requisite to diversifie those Transitions, between which there
should never be any resemblance, that so he may always supply the Reader with
new Idea's, by not placing the same objects before his eyes? Herein ought the
industry of the Historian to be much exercised; for in this consists that
Gracefulness of Narration, which alone can make it pleasant and attractive.

XIV.
The Circumstances of Narration.
IF a Narration becomes pleasant upon the score of its Transitions, it becomes
probable upon that of its Circumstances. For nothing renders a man more
concerned than a matter of Fact well circumstanced, which being over-clouded
and obscure, as it is in it self, is cleared up by particulars, and by that
means becomes sensible, palpable, evident; and there is no way to make one
apprehend the progress of great Enterprises and important Affairs, but that of
unveiling them by the different degrees of their Circumstances. So that the art
of exposing the Truth in all its dependences, by decyphering what is particular
therein, making one of the greatest Beauties of History, the Historian ought to
study it with all the care imaginable. Take then what there may be to be
observed therein. The grand Secret is, to know how to make a prudent and
judicious choice of the Circumstances, fit to give a greater Idea of the thing,
to imprint in them that color which engages Credulity, and by that minute
dissection to render them capable of fastening on the Mind. A Collection of
great and small Circumstances methodically intermixed one with another, is of
that nature when they are well chosen. For the great Circumstances raise
admiration, and the small ones create diversion, provided they be well chosen,
without being aggravated. But, though a Matter of Fact, which is not exactly
particularized, does not make any impression; yet is it requisite, that a man
should avoid all those mean, frivolous, and minute Particularities, which
debase a Subject; for he becomes childish, and indeed ridiculous, who insists
too much on small things. Such was that impertinent Historian mentioned by
Lucian, In cons^r. hist.
who makes a very particular description of the Parthian King's Vest, and of
the Roman Emperor's Buckler, whilst he is describing the Engagement. Others
(says he) not minding essential things, spend their thoughts on what makes
nothing to their purpose; as he, who having said a word or two of the Battle,
which he was to give an account of, falls into a description of the most
extravagant Adventures of a Moorish Knight, that could be imagined. Thus does
Procopius in his Secret History, forget to circumstance what is important, and
is very careful in circumstancing what is not so. A man ought therefore, in the
relation of a Matter of Fact of consequence, to know how to set off to the best
advantage the Circumstances which are most proper to clear it up, and to
heighten it, by distinguishing that which is essential from that which is not.
The most complete Model we have in History of a great Action related in all the
Circumstances capable of giving it weight and grandeur, is Hannibal's March
into Italy, described in the 21. Book of Livy's Annals. It is in my Judgment
the most accomplished passage of his History; and there are few things of that
force in Antiquity. Never did greater Design enter into a Soul more
extraordinary, and never was any thing executed with more confidence or more
resolution. His business was to come out of Africa, to pass through all Spain,
to climb over the Pyrenaean Mountains, to cross the River Rhone, which is so
large and so rapid near its falling into the Sea, and whereof the Shores on
each side were planted with so many Enemies; to open a way through the Alps,
where none had ever passed before; to march all along upon Precipices, to
dispute every foot of Ground he was to go, with People posted every where in
continual Ambuscado's, amidst Snow, Ice, Rain, Torrents; to defy Tempests and
Thunder, to engage against the Heavens, the Earth, and all the Elements; to
have at his heels an Army of an hundred thousand men of different Nations, but
all dissatisfied with a Captain, whose Courage they could not imitate. There is
a Consternation in the hearts of the Soldiery; Hannibal is the only person
undisturbed; the danger which surrounds him on all sides, raises a trouble in
the hearts of the whole Army, but he is not moved thereat. All is set down in a
minute Particularization of dreadful Circumstances; the image of the danger is
expressed in every word of the Historian; and never was there any
Representation more complete in History, nor any touched with stronger colors,
or more lively. Nor is there any thing better circumstanc'd in Tacitus, Annal.
l. 11.
than the Entertainment which the Empress Messalina made for Silius, her
Gallant and Favorite. 'Twas a kind of Vintage in all the Ceremonies, the
season of Autumn being favorable thereto; Joy, Pleasure, Effeminacy,
Lasciviousness, Impudence, Debauchery, all is described with an exquisite
delicacy and elegance, and all is particularized succinctly, sencefully, and
related in a smart and lively manner: and there is not any thing more
judiciously placed, to render by so frolicksom a Pourtraiture the Death of
Messalina, which follows soon after, more tragical and more full of horror. In
fine, there are some happy Circumstances which give a Grace to whatever they
are applied to; they must be known ere they can be employed. Sometimes things
become greater by their Circumstances than they are in themselves. Let us seek
out those Circumstances which are jointly capable of pleasing and instructing,
and so prevent the Reader's being wearied out. Let us imitate D'avila, who so
excites Attention by the art he has of Circumstancing what he says. And yet
excessive Particularizations tire the Mind: let us therefore make a distinction
between important and necessary Circumstances, and those that are not such. Let
us consult Lucian, and his Discourse upon History; he is a great Master in it.
But to make a Narration complete, we are to join to the Circumstances of the
things which it says, the Motives of the Actions which it relates; for the
Motives well couched down render a Narration as curious, as the Circumstances
render it probable.

XV.
Motives.
TO relate the Actions of Men without speaking of their Motives, is not to be
accounted writing of History. Who does so, demeans himself as a Gazetteer, who
thinks it enough to deliver the Events of things, without advancing to their
Source. As Caesar, who simply gives an account of his Marches and his
Encampings, without acquainting us with the Motives thereof: all in his
Narration is too simple and too superficial; and true it is, that he writes
only Memoirs. It is therefore by this Particularization of the Motives which
put men upon Action, that History becomes it self curious, and that it keeps it
self up, especially in important Affairs. He therefore minds only the
Superficiality of things, who relates how they passed without going to their
principle. Rerum ratio vult, ut quoniam in rebus magnis consilia primum, deinde
acta, postea eventus expectantur, in rebus gestis declarari, non solum quid
actum aut dictum si^, sed quomodo; and cum de eventu dicatur, ut causae
explicentur omnes, etc. De Orat. l. 2.
Reason requires (says Cicero) that as in great affairs the designs should
precede the execution, so the Historian should give an account not only of the
events, but also of the motives; and that reporting what has been done, he
should explicate how and by what means it was done. Tacitus says somewhat much
to the same purpose; that the Historian is concerned not only to relate the
Events of things, but also to discover the Groundwork and Principles thereof,
and to give some account of the Motives. It Is by this that an Historian
distinguishes himself, and becomes considerable; and nothing is more divertive
in a Narration, than the decyphering of what is secret and of importance, in
the designs and intentions of those whose Actions it divulges: and as History
has not any thing curious comparably to that, so are there not any Historians
of any fame, who have not endeavored to signalize themselves upon that score.
For nothing does more excite the Curiosity of men, than when they have
discovered to them what is most concealed in the Heart of man, that is to say,
the secret Springs and Resorts, which make him act in the Enterprises, which
are ordinary to him. It is therefore by this Reascension to the Cause that we
discover the genius of those persons who are spoken of, that we find out the
predominant humor which puts them into action, what things they are capable
of, and that we light on the truth by diving into their intentions. But with
how many Falsehoods are Histories fraught upon this plausible pretense? And into
how many errors have fallen, and do daily fall, unjust, unfaithful, and
interessed Historians, who carried on with the Career of their own Conjectures,
communicate their own Visions to the public, in explicating the Designs of
those whom they discourse of. As for example, that Pericles occasioned the
Peloponnesian War, upon the score of his Amors to the Curtezan Aspasia. That
Xerxes carried into Greece that dreadful Army, of which Historians give us an
account, only out of a design to eat Figs there. That Anthony lost the Empire,
only to avoid losing Cleopatra. That Francis the First of France had no motive
to bring an Army into Italy, but the fair Eyes of a Milanese Lady named
Claricia. There is not any thing more dangerous than this sort of people, who
make it their business to search into men's hearts, to guess at their thoughts;
who say all they know, and all that comes into their Minds, out of a fear of
being defective in telling the truth. This is one of the great Miscarriages of
D'avila, whose Reasonings are pertinent enough, but whose Conjectures in the
Motives of the matters of fact which he alleges, have but little truth in them,
if we refer our selves to the Sentiments of ancient Courtiers, who had a true
account of things from their Fathers. It Is therefore when all is done, only an
Action well disclosed as to the Motives, and a Secret well dived into, that
gives a great Idea of the Ability of the Historian; that creates a Judgment
that he speaks as a person well informed, and is a great beauty in a History.
Haud facile animus verum provides, ubi officiunt odium, amicitia, ira, atque
misericordia. Caesar. apud Salust. in Catil.
But let an Author, who is subject to guess at things, be always on his guard
against his own Prepossession; let him not hearken to his Affection, nor to his
Aversion, that so he may avoid Artifice, and those Colors which he is apt to
give things, to turn them to that side for which he is prepossessed; let him
not introduce supposititious Falsities, to justify his Conjectures, and to
bring things to the posture he would have them in; let him not alleviate or
aggravate any thing, as Tacitus does, who spits his venom every where; or as
Paterculus, who scatters Flowers on all sides; let him not make men have worse
intentions than they have, as Herodotus does, when he says that the Persians
were called into Greece by the Spartans, because they could not any longer
resist the Lacedaemonians* nor yet endure them, In Herod.
as Plutarch reproaches him with it; nor let him excuse unjust actions by good
intentions, as that Callias of Syracuse did, who justifies all the Actions of
Agathocles, because he was kind to him, Excerpt. constable. ex Diodoro.
as Diodorus observes; nor as Paulus J^vius has done in respect of Cosmo de
Medicis in these last Ages. There are in all Historians some Miscarriages of
this kind, because there are few among them who have their heads steady enough
to oppose their Prepossession. But though the Motives in great persons ought
regularly to be more excellent, and indeed greater than the Actions; for the
Motives depend on them, whereas the Events do not; yet is there no great
mistake (the Condition of Grandees considered) in putting into the Scales of
their Counsels and Deliberations, some Grains of the Vanity and Weakness
whereof they are capable. For it happens many times, that most men determine
what they intend to do upon impertinent and ridiculous Motives. There are
infinite Examples of it which I omit, to avoid being my self infinite upon this
Subject. It is principally requisite, that there be a discovery of the Vanity,
the Malice, the Ignorance, the Extravagance of Man's Spirit, which are as it
were the Principles thereof, in order to a full discovery of his intentions,
and e're we can ^ive into the weakness of them, which is the grand principle of
his Malice; and a man must not be ignorant above all things, that the
Slothfulness of most Grandees, in examining what is of greatest concern in
Affairs, and the impatience they are in to see the issue of them, is the Wheel
upon which is carried about what is most essential in their conduct. These are
they who ought principally to be known, in regard that being (as they are) the
grand Actors upon the Theater of the World, all things are regulated according
to the fantastic humor they are in; but it is not to be affirmed, that a
man's Reason always hits upon the right, when happily he may have done it once by
pure chance. There are some Historians in this Age who have lost their Repute
by the excessive itch they had to intermingle their own Conjectures in all
occurrences, and to communicate themselves to the public, together with their
Histories. As Herrera does, who says that the Duke of Parma did not what he
could against the Dutch, that he might according to policy keep them the longer
upon the stage. There is not any thing more opposite to the Spirit of the
Historian, who ought to be faithful and sincere, than those Conjectures which
are made at random without any ground; and all those Deductions grounded upon
simple Conjectures are either uncertain or frivolous. And this I conceived
observable upon the points of Transitions, Circumstances, and Motives, wherein
the principal artifice of Narration consists. Take now what is to be thought of
its parts, which are the Figures, the Passions, the Descriptions, the Orations,
the Reflections or Sentences, the Characters of persons, the Digressions, and
whatever may enter into the economy of the Discourse, whereof History ought to
be composed.

XVI.
Figures.
HIstory does not make use of Figures, but only to animate and enliven it
self. The Orator who designs to impose, does speak for the most part
figuratively, the better to set the Ressorts of his Art on work: but the
Historian ought to demean himself otherwise. That very Simplicity of Expression
which Truth requires in History, is not compatible with those Figurative Airs,
which would offend its candor and ingenuity. Lucian, who is admirable upon all
other accounts, is not so much upon any, as against those vain Ornaments of
Eloquence, which do not become History. Luc. de cons^ri^. ^ist.
If you bring in too many of them, says he, you make it like Hercules dressed
up in the ornaments of his mistress: which is the greatest Extravagance
imaginab^e. It is yet much less capable (adds he) of those glittering
Flourishes which some use in Poesy, to cause those Emotions which it excites in
the Heart, which stir the Soul, and raise a disturbance in the Mind by the
agitation of the Passions. History, which is simple and natural, and would not
have me believe any such thing, ought to leave me the freedom of my Heart, that
I may pass a more solid judgment on what it tells me. Floquence, which by its
proper Character is a delusive art, may attempt upon my Liberty, by
endeavoring to persuade me whether I will or no: But History, which confines
it self within the limits of pure instruction, cannot with any decorum make use
of Figures upon any other score, than that of devesting the Discourse of its
natural frigidit^, and making it less wearisom. It Is only thus that Herodotus,
Thucydides, and Xenophon keep the Readers Mind vigilant; nor is it ever to
impose upon the public, that Salust, Livy, and Mariana speak figuratively.
Tacitus is not so scrupulous; he has the Air of a man, who designs only to
dazzle: the boldness of his Metaphors, and of his other Figures, renders his
Expression as if 'twere serew'd up, and of difficult comprehension. Caesar is
in the other extreme; Caesar scripsit Commentarios qui nudi sunt, absque omni
ornatu orationis. Cic. in Brut.
it is a naked Discourse, without Figure, destitute of all ornament. Not but
that a figurative Expression seasonably made, does sometimes please more than
the proper words, in regard it creates Images that are more lively and pleasant
to the Mind, and gives a vigor and generosity to the Discourse; and there is a
wise and judicious confidence of Style, which is allowable in those places,
where there should be an excitation of the Spirits. But it is requisite, that
the Figures to be well employed should affect Shamefacedness and Modesty, not
assuming to themselves the liberty of those Sallies of Poesy, or the nobler
sort of Eloquence. Let them not (says Lucian) be too splendid nor too far
fetched, unless it be in the description of a Battle, or in an Harangue,
wherein the Historian (says he) may unfurle the Sails of his Eloquence, yet
without spreading them too far.

XVII.
Passions.
THe Passions are also one of the great Beauties of Narration, when they are
seasonably intermingled, and judiciously treated therein. Nor do they indeed
require that heat which ought to attend them upon the Theater: they ought to
appear in another Air, for they are not represented by way of action, but only
related. An Historian may give his Discourse a dress of Passion, but he ought
not to be in any himself. Thus does he study Man with all possible
disquisition, to discover in his heart the most secret Motions which Passion is
capable of exciting therein, to the end he may express the trouble and
discomposure of it. This partly and pathetically done, is a great divertisement
in a Narration. Thucydides has treated that part better than Herodotus, for he
is more eloquent and more pathetical, according to the Sentiment of Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus; Epist. ad Pomp. and de virt. Sermon.
though Herodotus does sometimes betray a greater vivacity. Hermogenes proposes
an admirable Model of a tender, affectionate Narration, in the death of
Penthea, Queen of Susiana, which is related in the seventh Book of Xenophon's
Cyrus. It Is one of the most excellent passages of that Author; all is related
therein with a great tenderness and insinuation. Affectus eos praecipue qui
dulciores sunt, nemo historicorum Livio m^gis commendavit. Fab. l. 10. c. 1.
Quintilian pretends, that of all the Historians Livy has most signallized
himself, by those tender and delicate ways of Expression, wherein he has
treated of the gentlest Motions of the Soul; the violent carrying away of the
Sabine Virgins, those Tendernesses which they made appear to disarm the Romans
their Husbands, and the Sabines who were their Fathers; the death of Lucretia,
and her body exposed to the public, to stir up the people to a Revolt from the
Tarquins; Vetturia at the feet of her Son Cariolanus, who was come to besiege
Rome, to appease him; Virginia stabbed with a Dagger by her own Father; the
Consternation of Rome after the Battle at Cannae; and a thousand other passages
of that kind, set down in his History with the most delicate Airs, and the most
pathetical Expressions that can be imagined, are excellent Examples of it. And
it is in this Historian that a man ought to study the Air of treating the
Passions, as they ought to be treated in History; for he animates himself only
in those places, where there is a necessity of heat and fervor. Tacitus minds
not the husbanding of his fire; he is always animated; nay the Colors he makes
use of are always too strong: and in regard he is many times too expressive in
certain things, and does not make a natural Representation, he moves not the
Reader. I say nothing of the other Historians, most of whom understood not the
Passions, nor the manner they ought to be treated. It Is a singular kind of
Rhetoric, which requires a great Sencefulness, and a very exact knowledge of
Moral Philosophy. But if we would please, let us be sure to avoid those dry
Narrations, which do not excite any tenderness by those passionate Airs which
Nature requires.

XVIII.
Descriptions.
THe Affectation which most Historians seem to have for Descriptions, has
somewhat decry'd the use of them amongst the Judicious: nor is there any thing
so childish as an over-gawdy Description in a serious History. An Author cannot
be too circumspect in the use which ought to be made of them. The Principle
which ought to be therein observed is, that there is no more requisite than what
is necessary, to create a clearer apprehension of the things, the knowledge
whereof is essential to that which a man writes. Such is the Description of the
Island of Capreae in the fourth Book of Tacitus his Annals; for it specifies
the Reasons which Tiberius had to retire thither, toward the end of his days,
which makes it necessary: and being short, elegant, polite, as it is, having
nothing superfluous, it may be said, that it is as it should be. The
description of the place where Jugurtha was defeated by Metellus in Salust,
Sal. in bell. Jugurth.
contributes to the better comprehension of the Fight. We find there an account
of the Gallantry of the Romans, as also of the Experience of the King of
Numidia, by the advantage he had taken in posting himself in the upper Grounds;
and the whole Relation of the Battle is better understood by that
Representation of the place, which the Historian sets before our eyes: as he
does also the Description of the place where Hannibal attacqued Minutius, in
the 22. Book of Livy's Annals, which is a passage very well couched.
Descriptions may also be allowed in a great History to render the Narration
more divertive, provided they be to the purpose, and without that superfluity
wherewith they are ordinarily attended in young Historians: the affectation
they have to make an Ostentation of their Abilities that way, occasioning
sometimes their falling into Childishness, which are to be pitied. Nay, Lucian
quarrels at the over-tedeous Description which Thu^ydides makes of the Plague
of Athens, De hist. conscrib.
in the second Book of his History; and it is possible he may have some Reason
for it; for that Author (as wise as he is) gives too minute a Particularization
of that Distemper. But it is with much more ground that the same Critic
exclaims against the impertinent Historian of his time, who took so great a
pleasure in making great Descriptions of Mountains, Cities, Battles, which
(...) all the Snow and (...) North. Nor indeed is there any thing so frigid, as
a Description too farsetch'd. The Military Machines of Caesar are described in
his Commentaries with too great a particularity of Circumstances, in a subject
so mechanic as that is. It would seem that great Commander, whose Reputation
in the management of Military Affairs is well established, had a desire also of
acquiring that of an excellent Engineer; wherein there appears too great an Air
of Affectation, in a person so judicious as he was. The Description of Africa
in Salust's Jugurth^ne War, is over-circumstanced; there needed not so much to
have been said, to set out the Limits of the Kingdoms of Adherbal, and
Jugurtha, which was the business then in hand. What occasion was there of
describing that whole Country, and distinguishing the Manners of the
Inhabitants, with so much particularity? It is requisite therefore that
Descriptions should be necessary, exact, suc^inct, elegant, not sought for, and
that they have not any thing that clashes, nor that there be discovered a vain
desire in the Author of making a greater show of his Wit than of his Subject;
that so they may be such as they ought to be, and such as those of Livy, who is
to be the Model, which they are to propose to themselves, who would make them
well.

XIX.
Harangues.
I Find the Sentiments of our Masters much differing as to this point.
Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Salust, have principally signallized
themselves by their Harangues. Thucydides has therein excelled the rest: the
Discourses which he makes the principal Actors of his History deliver, as
Pericles, Nicias, Alcibiades, Archidamus, and whole Nations, whom he introduces
speaking by their Deputies, are admirable Lectures for the Orators of all Ages;
and it is principally in that School that Demosthenes had his Institution.
Polybius is more reserved; he does not make Scipio speak so much, though he
might justly have done it, In sermonibus effingendis Herodotus, Thucydides,
Xenophon, Salustius, (...) vadentur: ea causa est cur Caesar Commentarios
scripsit, ut id omitteret, in quo alii laborarunt. Bisciol. l. 7. hor. subcaes.
as having always accompanied him in his Wars. Caesar is yet more reserved, for
he does not in a manner make any of those Harangues, pretending they derogate
from the truth of History; and making it his business only to write plain
Memoirs, that so he might be the more simple in his Discourse. Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus brings in Brutus making a great Exhortation upon the death of
Lucretia, to animate the people to revenge: and the Harangue he introduces
Valerius making upon the Form of Government, which was most convenient for the
State, in the seventh Book of his History, is of a great length. Josephus,
Appianus, Dion Cassius, Procopius, are great Discoursers, as were also
Thucydides and Xenophon, who had taken that Idea of Haranguing from Homer. And
indeed if we examine the ground of those Discourses, especially of those which
are made by chief Commanders, to encourage their Soldiers to fight, we shall
find but little likelihood in them. Trogus with much reason reproaches Salust
and Livy, Trogas repre^endit in Livio and Salustio, quod conciones and
orationes operi suo inserendo, historiae modum excesserint. Justin. l. 38.

Livius, Thucydides, interserunt conciones, quae nunquam ab iis, quibus sunt
attributae, cogni^e fuerunt. Scal. Poet. l. 1.


with the immoderate excess of Harangues in their Histories. Accordingly all
those Discourses made by Grandees have an Air of Fiction: for upon what Memoirs
could they have been taken? Besides that, it is not likely a Warrior should
speak as an accomplished Orator. So when Pericles in Thucydides commends those
Soldiers who had been defeated and killed by the Boeotians, his Harangue is
supposititious; as is also that which Salust makes Catiline speak to the
Conspirators, which in all probability was secret, and not much thought of
before hand. And this is some part of Beny's Argument in his disapproval of
that Abuse. Ben. l. 2. de hist.
Thucydides, who was a judicious Author, grew sensible of it in his last Books,
wherein he Harangues much less than in the precedent. But it is a Lesson of
Nature; for there is no account made thereof, if they who are concerned therein
are not introduced to speak them; for there is not any thing else does so much
animate the Narration, which is apt to become frigid by too even a thread of
Discourse. There is therefore a mean or temperament to be observed: A short
Discourse pertinently made in an History, by an Author fit to make such a one,
and such as may be conveniently applicable to the person and the subject then
concerned, may have its peculiar beauty, being set in its proper place. But
those formal Harangues at the head of an Army, when they are just ready to
engage, and those tiresom and prolix Deliberations, which are made upon the
Affairs whereof they speak, are now in a manner obsolete and out of use in
well-digested Histories; and the wisest Authors choose rather to introduce the
persons concerned speaking indirectly, and saying the things in general,
without engaging themselves to speak the very wo^^^, as Livy has done at the
beginning of his History, by the Ambassadors whom Romulus sends to his
Neighbors. Most of the Harangues in Salust are always admirable, and never
pertinent nor to the purpose. For nothing can be more excellent than the
Discourse of Marius; it is a most solid piece of Morality upon the subject of
Gallantry: all is rational in it, and Antiquity has but few Discourses of that
vigor in order to the persuasion of Virtue; but that is not in its proper
place. And the Air wherewith he makes Cato and Caesar give their Votes in the
Senate, is not (as great as it is) proportionate to the rest of the History.
For the same reason the great Discourse which Dion Cassius makes in the 56.
Book of his History, upon the Commendation of Marriage and Celebacy, is not
very pertinent. There is not any thing comparable to the Harangue which Tacitus
brings in Tiberius making in the Senate, upon the Reformation of Luxury and
Riot, in the third Book of his Annals: never did Historian make a Prince speak
with more Dignity. The Harangues of Agrippa and Mecaenas to Augustus, the one
advising him (...) quit the Empire, and the other to keep it, are admirable in
Dion Cassius; but they are so long, that they take up the whole 52. Book. In a
word, to put a period to this Article, I am of Cicero's Opinion, who speaking
of the Discourses of Thucydides, De Thucydide orationes, quas interposuit,
laudare soleo; sed imitari neque possim si ve^im, neque velim ss possim. Cic.
de clar. Orat.
wisely says, I find them very excellent; but I could not do as much my self if
I would, nor would I do it if I could. And this is the best that can be said as
to that point: for in fine, Harangues are always subject to be tedeous. And
it is a pleasant humor of Boccalini, who makes an ancient man to be condemned,
by way of Penance, to read one of Guicciardine's Harangues, because he had read
a Madrigal in the Parnassus with his Spectacles on.

XX.
The Characters of Persons.
POurtraitures do very much imbellish an History, when they are well done: but
the Romances have spoiled us upon that score; for we make too many of them, and
such as are not like any thing. We amuse our selves in representing at random
the external Accomplishments of the person, which is not the business to be
done. Explicentur hominum ipsorum non solum res gest^^, sed vita ac natura.
Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
Of what concern is it to me, to know whether Hannibal had a fair Set of
Teeth, provided his Historian discover to me the Grandeur of his Genius,
provided he give me the Representation of a bold restless Spirit, of a Person
of vast Projects, of an undaunted Courage, and all that animated by an
uncontrollable Ambition, but kept up by a robust Constitution, Lib. 21.
as Livy has described him? Thus does Salust create in me a great Opinion of
Catiline, by the Pourtraiture he makes of him at the entrance of his History.
And when I see that resolute Soldier raising Armies in his Closet, going to
the Senate in a silence, which denotes Resolution, to affront the Consul,
slighting and scorning his Invectives, putting Rome into an Alarm, making Italy
tremble; in fine, daring that which no private person ever durst; I am not
surpised, after the Description which the Historian has given me of him. I see
a man of capacity and conduct, who stirs all without showing himself, because
he had laid his design well. Pompey is at a great distance with the best Forces
of the Commonwealth, engaged in an important but obstinate War; Rome is full
of disaffected persons; the neighboring Provinces are full of Malcontents;
there is an universal disorder in the Commonwealth, by reason of the overflux
of all vices predominant therein; and all things seem favorable to Catiline's
design, in the conjuncture he takes for the execution of it. Thus may a man
guess at what will happen upon the War between Adherbal and Jugurth, after the
description which Salust gives of both their Genius's: thus have I a perfect
knowledge of Scylla and Marius, according to the Idea he has given me of them;
and take a pleasure to see flowing down from a source, which that Historian has
discovered to me, the result of the great Actions of Jugurth, who gave so much
trouble to the Romans, after the Representation he has made me of that
Chieftain's courage and conduct. 'Twas thus the Ancients intermingled in their
Histories such Pourtraitures of persons, whom they would give a particular
Character of, to distinguish them from others; which is a thing of great
Ornament in a Work, when it is pertinently done. For when the Historian has well
established a Character by those essential and distinctive lines, all goes the
better; every thing is more easily apprehended in the Narration. But it is a
Masterpiece for a man to attain that resemblance, which consists only in
those singular and imperceptible Touches, by which alone Nature is expressed,
and which are hardly found, otherwise than by a particular search into men's
hearts, and a discovery of all the Recesses thereof, to get a perfect knowledge
of what lies concealed. But what vivacity of Spirit, and what perspicacity is
there not requisite to do that? Take here then what is to be observed therein:
The Pourtraiture or Character ought to be real; and so Xenophon is defective in
the Pourtraiture he has made of Cyrus, wherein he has given us a Hero in Idea.
It ought to resemble the person represented; in which case Tacitus is not
exact, who makes it his business rather to follow his own genius, than to
imitate Nature; endeavoring rather to make beautiful pieces, than good
draughts; provided his representations please, as that of Sejanus, in the
fourth of his Annals, he minds not how little they resemble, for he makes him
more wicked than he was, if we may believe Paterculus, who much commends him.
There ought not to be any Pourtraitures made but of the most important persons;
as to which particular Salust is mistaken in the Pourtraiture of Sempronia, who
comes but indirectly into Catiline's Conspiracy. But though a man ought not to
amuse himself too much in describing the external qualifications of the person,
yet may it be done upon certain occasions, when it is conducive to a better
discovery of the genius of those who are spoken of. And indeed there are many
ways of representing persons. Livy speaking of Lucretia, who was so beautiful
in the eye of her Husband, giving no description of her Countenances gives an
account only of her Virtue, and in two words sets down the greatest Idea which
could be given a virtuous Woman. Taictus describes Tiberius only by his
Actions; and it is by those that he makes a discovery of him. Lucretiam no^te
sera non in convivio luxuque, sed dedi^am lanae inter ancillas sedentem
inveniunt. Annal. l. 1.

Oppress^^ in ^^lclin^is par^sitos suos violis and floribus, sic ut animam
^l^qui effaveri^t. Lampr. in Heliog.


Lampridius gives us a description of the fantastic humor of the Emperor He
(...), when he tells us, that, after he had glutted his Parasites with good
cheer, he caused them to be smothered in great heaps of Flowers. Procopius
describes the Empress Theodor^ by her Venereal Debauches. The Historian of
Wences^^us thinks it enough to pitch upon one debauched act to give a
Pourtraitive of that Emperor: He ordered (says he) his Cook to be spitted and
rousted, because he had not roasted a Pig, which he intended to eat of, to his
mind. But the hest way of describing is that of discovering the secret motions
and inclinations of the Heart, from which we may derive a better knowledge of
the person; it is thence alone we ought to assume that Air which distinguishes;
to give a man a Character* built upon the ground work whence it is taken. All
the rest ought to be but of little account in a serious History, which cannot
admit of any thing but what is judicious. Nor do I like those copied
Pourtraitures; made up of an intermixture of several pieces, such as (...) has,
which he has taken out of Tacitus; nor such as that of Walste^n in (...), which
is composed of most of the excellent Pourtrat^^ of Antiquity. A man ought not
to amuse himself in taking of Copies when he draws by the Life, and thinks to
make an Original. In fine, History is the most faithful representation of the
persons of whom it speaks; for nothing makes a greater discovery of their
Character, than the Consequences of their Actions.

XXI.
Reflections and Sentences.
THis Article will much exercise our Discussive Faculty, as being that which
makes the whole Delicacy of History, when it is treated with that tenderness
which that Subject requires. But what deviations and mistakes are there not to
be avoided, in a track wherein a man cannot walk too simply? Xenoph^n,
Polybius, and Tacitus are very liberal in point of Reflections. Thucydides,
Salust, and Caesar are more reserved. What side should we take (...) so great
Examples, upon so different a ^onduct, and in a matter so important? Certain it
is, that what beauty soever History may expect from these sorts of Ornaments,
there is not any thing relating thereto, that ought to be better or more
cautiously managed. For in a word, to morali^e upon all things, and without
(...) to put the Adventures which present themselves, great and little into
curious and political Reflections, implies a quitting of the Character of an
Historian, who ought simply to relate what he has to say, without shuffling
into the Relation what comes into his own Head. Nor is there any thing more
capable of altering the Truth, or at least of entangling it, than those subtle
Conceptions which an Author thrusts in of his own, and which the Reader has not
the ingenuity to unravel, from that part which is purely historical. It is
therefore wisdom in an Author, not to be ridiculously over-conceited of his own
sense, that so he may act the part of a Philosopher indifferently, upon
whatever presents it self to him, as* Ammianus. Marcellinus, who plays the
Philosopher too much, out of a mis-understood Affectation to appear Learned.
Livy keeps on his way, without stopping at any thing; he says what he knows
upon the things he speaks of, and he leaves the Reader to make Reflections
himself, Deos esse non negligere humana; superbi^ and crudelitati, (...).
Annal. l. 3.
and does not prepossess him with his own; and when he does so, it is in few
words, but noble and great ones: as for instance, what he says of the Crime and
Punishment of Appius, who had forcibly carried away Virginia. It is a great
talent in an Author, to know how to find work for those who read him, by giving
them matter, that they may deduce Consequences from it, and take those
Prospects to the things he relates, which they shall think fit. For every
Reader would have the freedom of think what he pleases upon what is presented
to him, and not be prepossessed; and the use of that freedom is one of the
greatest divertisements he takes in his reading. Let us therefore retrench
those profound and abstracted Reflections, if our design be to please; let us
not subtilize so much in what we write, but let us endeavor to be simple and
natural. Let us speak the truth without commenting upon it, if we have the
steddiness and strength of ingenuity to do it. Let us above all things avoid
those usual Moralizations upon Fortune and her inconstancy, whereof some Books
are so full. Let us not involve our selves in those over-sententious Sayings,
which aim only at splendor and decoration. Let us renounce those Clinchings,
and all those delusive Sentiments, which some Authors of mean parts exercise
upon words. Curandum ne sententiae emineant extra corpus oration^^ express.
Petr.
But if we make an intermixture of Reflections in our Discourse; let them be
naturally deducible from the ground of the Subject* let them not be too subtle
or over-studied; let them have less Splendor than Solidity; let them come
nearer the ratiocination of a wise Politician, than the affectation of a
Declamator; let them not be either too frequent, and without an apparent
connection, but enchac'd, or inter woven in some manner in the body of the
Work. In fine, let them not have that forced Air of Reflections, which creates
an ill Opinion of him who makes them. As to this particular Tacitus, Machi^vel,
P^^lus J^vi^^, D'avila, and most of the Italians and Sp^^iards, are excessive.
Besides, let not any one amuse himself in making those curious Reflections,
whether upon a political or morel account, unless he have a perfect knowledge
of the person he speaks of, as also of the Illusions of his mind, and the
Weaknesses of his heart; for it is by that knowledge that good Historians are
distinguished from mean ones, as Plutarch in his Lives. Salust, as great a^
Endeavourer of Simplicity as he is, amuses himself too much in declaring
against the corruptions and immorality of his time; he is always incensed
against his Country, and always disgusted with the Government; he creates too
bad an Opinion of the Commonwealth, by his Invectives and Reflections upon the
Luxury of Rome. And indeed, though ^^ere be not any thing of falsehood in what
he says, yet he devi^ces from the spirit which first ^nimated him. Nor would
D'avila be so much a Declamator, if he did not sometimes forget that he is
only an Historian. It is also requisite that a man should be deeply skilled in
Morality, e're he can make pertinent and seasonable Reflections; for true
Morality is the Groundwork of good Policy. And so it may be said, that Tacitus
his Politics are many times false, because his Morality is not true; wherein
he attributes too great a Corruption to men, or he has not sufficiently that
talent of implicity he ought to have: there is not ordinarily any thing natural
in his Reflections, because there is not any thing innocent; he envenoms all,
and gives all things the worst Gloss that may be. By those ways has he
corrupted the Minds of many persons, who imitate him in this particular, not
being able to do it in others. And this is what I conceive observable as to the
use of Reflections upon the score of History. A sententious Saving may be
seasonably put into the mouth of a person, whose Character qualifies him for
the speaking of Sentences. In my judgment Mariana and Strada have not been
sufficiently careful in this particular. Nor is there any kindness to be had
for that over-serious sort of Writers, who will not be put out of their track;
and who to give an Air of greater importance to what they say, multiply
Sentences upon Sentences, Reflections upon Reflections, and by a ridiculous
Gravity play the Cato's upon trifles. An excessive humor of subtilizing in
these over-sought Conjectures, is apt to degenerate into a delusive delicacy of
writing; and Reflections are not good but when they have least the Air of
Reflection.

XXII.
Digressions.
DIgressions have also their peculiar grace, when they are made where they
ought to be, and not chargable with any indetermination or want of connection,
inasmuch as they give the Narration that variety which is requisite to render
it divertive; but there ought to be a prudent distribution and inter-mixture of
them. A man is apt to be misled when he leaves his Subject; for wanting the
requisite recollection, he is apt to take the wrong course; and for a man to
quit the matter he had proposed to himself, without any Precaution, and so to
go and seek out Adventures, only to give his Reader a more spacious prospect,
does not so well stand with the Character of an Historian, as it does with that
of an Adventurer, who minds every thing, purposely to thrust into his Narrative
whatever comes in his way; he takes Cities, gives Battles, and makes Adventures
every where; as Herodotus does, who is continually starting out of his matter
by over-frequent Digressions, and those many times forced, though he had taken
Homer for his Pattern, who is a great Master in it; for though he often takes a
high soaring flight, yet he pursues his course directly enough to his mark,
without deviating by introducing things that are incongruous. Thucydides is
more regular than Herodotus; he keeps close to his Subject, without starting
out of it. The Conspiracy of Harmodius and Aristogiton, in the sixth Book, is
one of those Digressions wherein he has most excelled. Xenophon endeavors to
imitate him; if he sometimes miscarries, as he does in the fifth Book of the
History of Cyrus, in the Adventure of Panthea, yet that Adventure has a natural
connection with the body of his History; Panthea having been taken by Cyrus in
the Defeat of the Assyrians, and King Abradaras her Husband having engaged
himself in the Party of Cyrus, and been made one of the Generals of his Army.
True it is, that I would not be answerable for the other Digressions of that
Author, which have not that absolute connection to the Subject they ought to
have in his other Works. Polybius and Salustius ita peccarunt, ut nullam unquam
veniam impetrarint, dum digrediuntur, etc. Ex Sebast. Mac.
Polybius has frequent Digressions upon the point of Politics, the Science of
Military Affairs, and the Laws of History, which seem not very necessary.
Salust is sometimes chargeable with the same fault; upon which score a modern
Critic blames them both. Photius does very much commend the Digression which
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus makes in his seventh Book, in describing the
Consequences of Aristomedus his Tyranny. The Question about the Phoenix handled
in the sixth Book of Tacitus his Annals, upon occasion of the News which was
brought to Rome of a Phoenix that appeared in Egypt, in the Reign of Tiberius,
is within the rules of a just Digression. The Question is searched into by the
different Opinions of Naturalists upon the Bird; its Qualities, its Figure, all
is there described in few words. A Flourish of that nature well placed is of
great Ornament in a Narration, and it excites the Curiosity of the Reader, and
keeps his Mind vigilant and attentive. Nor is there any thing gives the History
of Mariana that Air of Grandeur which it has, so much as the Art which that
Author has of introducing into it, by the means of Digression, whatever passes
in the world that is considerable, whatever is admirable in fabulous times, and
whatever is remarkable in Greece, Sicily, and the Roman Empire. There you have
a very particular account of the Republic of Carthage, which it will be hard
to find better couched any where else: as also of the Sieges of Saguntus and
Numantia, of Hannibal's Passage into Italy, the series of the Emperors, the
first setting up of Christianity, the Preaching of the Gospel, the Conquests of
the Arabians, and several other Imbellishments which are of the sublime
Character. It Is a genius ever minding transcendent matters, which yet have a
constant dependence by something to the History of Spain. No Historian ever
honored his Country by any Work so much as he has done, for he makes whatever
was transacted of any great account in the world contributory to the Honor of
his own Country. But as there are few Authors who have that vigor of genius,
as to follow the thread of a History with the same breath, and to keep
themselves close to the same Subject, without starting from it; so are there
but few Historians, who do not sometimes forget themselves by being overseen in
their Digressions. I shall not trouble myself to observe them, they are
obvious: for nothing is more rare than that exactness of senceful Connection,
which knows how to keep close to its Subject. This I shall only affirm, Nihil
minus quasitum a principio huj^^ operis, quam ut plus justo ab rerum ordine
decli^arem, varietatibusque distinguer^o opera, legentibus veluti diverticula
qua^rerem. Lib. 9. Annal.
that Livy has not more carefully avoided any thing, than those Deviations
which diverted him from his matter in hand, as he declares himself; in regard
that nothing does so much betray a want of Judgment. But we might find even at
this day in some of our Historians, that ridiculous humor which L^cian
censured ^n those, who in his time writing the Wars of the Parthians, shuffled
into their Narrations the fondest and the most extravagant Imaginations in the
world, only to make them the more divertive, making their Excursions out of
Country into Country, out of Ages into Ages, out of Adventures into Adventures,
without any discernment. It ought therefore to be laid down as a certain Rule,
and such as is not to be dispensed withal; That Digressions ought always to
have a Connection by something to the principal Subject that is treated of;
Luc. de conscrib. hist.
as it has always been observed by that Judicious Historian we mentioned
before: and it must be strictly examined, whether there be not at the bottom
some natural incompatibility between them and it; otherwise they are no way
proper thereto, for nothing is more essential to Digression, than the Rapport
which it ought to have to the Subject, and the great mystery is, that a man
precisely know how far it ought to be extended, for it has its natural
Boundaries, which must not be exceeded. And what makes this measure the more
difficult is this, that the extent which must be given it ought not to be
always the same; for it ought to be great or little, proportionably to the
greater or lesser Connection it has to the principal part of the History; and
this very Discernment is the Rock upon which most Historians are ^ast. For
there are not any, who in the Digressions wherein they engage themselves, do
not exceed the Limits they should have observed, by reason of the difficulty
there is in the exact and regulated Observance thereof. And in this particular
we may be somewhat censorious upon Mariana, who in the beginning of his History
has taken great compasses and windings, in order to the carrying on of his main
design: as to this he stands in some need of Apology, and I cannot undertake
his Vindication. The only Model to be proposed as to this point is Livy, Vt
qua^rere libea^ qui eventus Romany rebus, si cum Alexandro fore^ bellatum,
futurus fuerit. Annal. l. 9.
who makes no deviation out of the Roman History, so much as to deliver his
Sentiment upon the Success of Alexander's Arms, in case he should have come
into Italy, without taking great Precautions, and without preengaging men's
minds by very elaborate Excuses. The discourse he makes upon that consideration
is very curious, and very pertinently applied.

XXIII.
The Eloquence proper to History.
HIstory ought to be eloquent, that so i^ may not be wearisom, and in this
ought its Art principally to consist; and this is its or inary effect. But
there is also an extraordinary one known to very few persons, to wit, that of
not speaking ought that is true, but what has withal the Air of truth, that it
may merit Credibility, in the things that are more difficultly credible. The
Eloquence which knows how to give things the right prospect they ought to have,
is particularly applicable in this case; and the accurate distribution of
matters in that admirable order and compagination, which gives them
ve^^similitude, is its principal work. The Historian has his matter given him
by the Memoirs wherewith he is supplied, but the distribution of it is his
peculiar province; and to manage that as it ought to be, he should not so much
reflect on what he says, as on the manner how he says it; for in this as well
as in the other parts of Eloquence, the manner is all in all. And this is
properly the use which the Historian ought to make of Eloquence, which alone
disposes every thing into its proper place, that it may there have its effect.
Thucydides omnes dicendi ar^ificio vincit. Cic. de Orat. l. 2.
This is the great artifice of Thucydides, who (as Cicero affirms) surpassed
all the other Historians by his Eloquence. Quintilian does not speak of that of
Livy, but with admiration. And it is indeed by that admirable quality that
those two great men have so highly distinguished themselves from the common
rank of other Historians: Tito Livio mirae facundiae viro. Fab. l. 8. c. 1.
for it is Eloquence that gives a man the talent of expressing himself. He who
most clearly expresses himself is most persuasive, and it is only persuasion
that imprints on things that tincture of Truth, Livium supra quam dici potest
eloquentem. Fab. l. 10. c. 1.
which they have not but by deriving it from the Air that is given them, and
from the position and prospect wherein they are placed. Accordingly there
cannot be any thing more eloquent than the Description which Salust makes of
the State Rome was in, Livius eloquentiae and fidei praeclarus imprimis. Tacit.
Annal. l. 4.
when Catiline designed to become the Master of it. And when that admirable
Author represents the Commonwealth corrupted by Luxury and Avarice, weakened by
the weight of its own Grandeur, you have the expressions of the most exquisite
Eloquence that is to be found in History. It is in those draughts and
representations that Art ought to show it self, when a man is Master of it: and
the Historians of the first rank are full of them. It Is this sort of Eloquence
that ought to be interwoven with History, that it may be animated by its fire
and spirit; for without that every thing languishes. And those different
Dresses which ought to be given to the Narration, to render it delightful; all
that artifice of Transitions, those so delicate and so passionate Sallies,
which smite the Reader's tenderest part; that intertexture and compagination of
the most memorable Matters of Fact, that regular distribution of Circumstances,
and all those conspicuous passages which excite Admiration, are only the
effects of that singular sort of Eloquence which is proper to History, and
ought sometimes to take a soaring flight when occasion requires. But it must be
the discerning Perspicacity of the Historian, that shall distinguish those
passages. There reigned amongst the Greeks, and indeed amongst the Romans, a
kind of Eloquence in the Harangues of the persons whom they introduced
speaking, which proceeded from pure Ostentation, and made a greater show of the
Historians Ingenuity than of the Truth of the History, and wherein they made it
not so much their business to instruct, as to dazzle and amuse the Reader. That
Eloquence is grown obsolete amongst those of the Moderns, who are of soundest
Judgment, because it had a certain Air of Affectation, and that such as are
able to discern do fancy only what is natural. Salustius in bello Jugurthino
and Catilinario, nihil ad historiam pertinentibus principiis usus est. Fab. l.
10. c. 8.
The Prefaces of Salust, which are large Discourses well-couch'd, instructive,
and very eloquent, seem to me to be of that kind, as being a sort of
Common-places that have no Rapport to the History. Possibly that Author had
some Pieces in store, which he made use of as occasion required; as Cicero did,
according to his own acknowledgment; I have (says he) a Volum of Prefaces
always ready for the occasions I may have of them. Habeo volumen Prooemiorum;
ex eo eligere soleo, cum aliquod (...) institu^. Ad Attic. l. 16. ep. 6.
I should never have suspected Cicero guilty of that foresight, had he not
bragged of it himself. It might do well in an Orator, who many times speaks in
public, and has not always the leisure to prepare himself: but it is not to be
allowed in a History, where a man is Master of himself and his time. For in
short, all those Discourses how plausible soever they may be of themselves, are
no longer such when they are out of their proper place, and as soon as they
make any discovery of Affectation. And thus much as to the Eloquence of History.

XXIV.
Other Imbellishments which may be employed in History.
THere may be yet other Beauties and Embellishments fit to be used in the
Structure of History, in order to the making of it more cheerful and sprightly,
either when it is apt to languish, or when it is carried on with too even a
thread, by long-winded Relations, which are not sufficiently diversified. But
of such Embellishments, those which make the greatest show do not always
produce the greatest effect. There is always somewhat that is counterfeit in
what is most glittering. A mind which is limited takes no pleasure in too much
luster; and that consideration ought to oblige an accomplished man so to
husband those Embellishments, as not to be prodigal of them, and to proportion
himself to the capacity of man, whom excessive Light dazles; besides that, when
these Beauties are too frequent, they rather astonish than delight. There are
some, which being not so obvious, give a greater satisfaction to the more
delicate sort of Readers, by whom they are observed, though they are not so by
the ordinary. Men still discover new Graces in them, which keep them up, and
are of longer continuance than what makes a sudden impression, by its being too
much exposed to Apprehension. These sorts of Beauties do sometimes consist in
certain sudden turns of Eloquence or Wit, which have somewhat that is surprising
in them, and produce an unexpected effect in the passages wherein they are
placed. Of which take these Examples.

Porsenna King of Clusium besieges Rome; Caius M^tius being much troubled at
the danger his Country was in, by reason of so pressing a Siege, goes over
into Porsenna's Camp, and kills his Secretary who stood by him, thinking he had
killed the King himself. The Murderer is seized, and a Fire is prepared to
make him discover his Accomplices. Upon which the undaunted young man held his
hand in cold blood over the live Coals, till it was quite burnt off, Sen^^^s
quam vile corpus s^^ ^is qui magn^m gloriam v^dent. (...). Live. Ann. l. ^.
without any shrinking, and said to the King, See now how de^picable Life is to
those, who lo^k at great fame. This Sentence spoken with an undaunted Spirit,
changes the face of things: the Murderer, who was before odious and
detestable, raises amazement in the minds of the Spectators. They look on him
with a kind of respect, and he is sent back with an Elogy, whom they were but
just before ready to take off by exquisite torments. It Is but a word that makes
that change; and that word thus placed is of great Ornament in a Narration, and
has a mavelous effect. Upon the taking of Tarentum by Fabius, Hannibal,
though wholly defeated, had this excellent Saying, which still argued a
victorious mind, when in commending the Enemy, he took occasion to commend
himself also, (...) Romani suum habent Anni^alem. Annal. l. 27.
The Romans (says he) have also their Hannibal. A bold demeanor in a person
discomfited. And these Touches are frequent in that Historian. Nor is there any
thing that raises a greater Idea of those who are made to speak thus, when they
speak well, nor yet of him who does make them speak, when he does it
pertinently.

Take yet another Instauce of it out of Tacitus, in that famous Treat which
Messalina made for her Gallant, in the very height of the Enjoyment, and the
Debauches of that Entertainment, they sent up to the top of a Tree a simple
person named Valens, and one asked him what he saw, A Tempest (said he) rising
in the air, and seeming to come from Ostia. That very word spoken by an
inconsiderate person, begat such a pensiveness and perplexity in their minds,
as occasioned a general disturbance, though it had been said without any
design. For it proved a Prognostic of the Emperor's return, who arrived
shortly after, and wearied out with the infamous Deportments of the Empress,
ordered her to be stabbed. These Touches having somewhat in them tending to
prodigy, are ornamental in History, as being by their smartness and pi^quancy
apt to keep the mind in a continual posture of Vigilance. There are a thousand
others, which the Historian may make use of, in order to the giving of his Work
the greater sprightliness, which I do not pretend to give a particular account
of. It Is enough that I have hinted at what may give another face to Affairs,
raise other Conjectures, and occasion other Idea's and Sentiments. In short,
all those delicate Touches, and such as are capable of making a kind of
Revolution in the mind of the Reader, and so to put it into motion and
exercise, being always real Embellishments, are always apposite and to the
purpose. What is of greatest importance is, that they be placed after such a
manner, as that they seem to be enchac'd in the Narration, there to have their
designed effect; that is to say, that they be conducive to give the subject
matter a certain Alacrity, when of it self it becomes dry and unpleasant.

XXV.
The Sentiments which ought to be conspicuous and predominant in History.
THere are some Sentiments which are fit for the Theater, and are not so for
History; in regard that Poesy speaks things as they ought to be, and History as
they are. Accordingly those Historians who give their Hero's such exquisite
Sentiments, are not always the most judicious; and whatever is not grounded
upon sound Sense, how plausible soever it may otherwise be, is not always the
best. So that Quintus Curtius is not altogether in the right, when he
represents Alexander as a person so admirable. He never makes him take the most
prudent course that might be taken, but the most heroic and the most
hazardous. He looks upon danger as what has something of Charm in it; and he
does not so much love Conquests, as the Glory of Conquering. He may surprise
Darius by attacquing him in the nightime, and by that means conceal his own
weakness, the Enemy's Army being twice the number of his. But that great man,
whose thoughts are less bent upon conquering, than upon having his Valor
admired, engages the King of Persia in the daytime, resolved rather to perish
gloriously, than to overcome by surprises. Darius after his Defeat proffers to
divide Asia with him, and proposes to him an Intermarriage with his Daughter;
but Alexander would rather make his way to Fame through danger, than to gain
pre-eminence with tranquillity. He hearkens not to those Proposals, and would
not have any thing but what is extraordinary. It Is true, his Historian does him
much honor, but in that great acquest of Glory is there not some defect in
point of Verisimilitude? Does he not make his Hero more daring than prudent,
and represent him rather as an hazardous Adventurer, than a person of great
Ambition? No doubt he thought that the more plausible way, but he has thereby
given us occasion to doubt whether it be (...) Romance or a History he has
left us; so far has he overshot himself as to that point. Of so great concern
is it, that an Author keep* close in all things to Reason, which ought to
regulate his Sentiments, and follow rather the nature of the things, than the
charming Idea's of his own imagination. Let not History therefore by any means
countenance those ridiculous projects for the acquest of an imaginary same,
which occasion unsettled minds to commit so many miscarriages, inasmuch as most
of them go but blindly in the pursuit of true honor, because they know not
what it is. Let it not inspire a solid man with the Sentiments of a Palladin or
Knight Errant, nor attribute the Virtues of a Romantic Hero to a true Courter
of Honor. Great persons are apt to frame to themselves Idea's of Reputation
according to their own Fancies, and answerably to the bent of their own Vanity.
But the Public Interest ought to be more dear to him who governs, than his own
Fame; and the true Honor of a great Prince is, that he be loved rather than
feared. These are the Sentiments which ought to be most predominant in History,
that so it may be a Lecture of Clemency to Princes, and a Rule of Reason and
sound Instruction to all people. Let not the Historian therefore be mistaken,
let him in the first place be able to distinguish between true and counterfeit
Honor in the Maxims of Life, that so he may not commend any thing but what is
commendable. Let him undeceive people of their Errors, without becoming himself
a Slave to popular Sentiments. Let him not suffer them to judge of things by
their events, without reascending to the sources, that he may acquaint them
with the Principles thereof. Let him be careful to do justice to true and false
merit, that so he may not impose any thing upon Posterity, which is apt to
credit what is said without examining it, and to keep to the literal sense of
what it meets withal. Let him never make a discovery of great Emergencies,
without some advertisement of their Causes, and without laying open the secret
Contrivances and Ressorts by which they were compassed. That many times is
something very inconsiderable; but men take a pleasure to see great effects
arising from small principles, as Dionysius Halicarnass^u^ informs us in the
fifth Book of his History, upon occasion of the Revolution of the Regal
Government at Rome, caused by the insolence of young Tarquin, and the haughty
deportment of his Father. And this is the Spirit which ought to be predominant
in History, and these the Maxims which the Historian ought to observe. We come
now to see what kind of genius he ought to have.

XXVI.
What Genius the Historian ought to be of.
IT is not to be imagined, that any thing considerable can be written in
History without a Genius* this is that which does all in all in this Art, as
well as in the others: and it is only by this that some Historians may be
distinguished from others. A mean Genius shall make but a small matter of a
great Subject; and he who has a great Genius shall make great things of a small
subject. He therefore who would write History well, ought to have an universal
and comprehensive Spirit, and such as is capable of great Idea's, that he frame
to himself a great Draught and Design of what he intends to do. Arduum videtur
res g^stas scribere, quod facta dictis exaequenda sunt. Salust. Prooem. Bell.
Ca^i^in.

Magnum quid Historiam recte scribere, and summi Oratoris proprium. De Orat. l.
2.


History (says Cicero) is a work of great importance, and not to be attempted
but by a person above the common rate of men. And when Lucian, who was one of
the greatest Wits of his Age, which produced so many celebrated men,
acknowledges that his Genius was too weak for History, and not able to reach
that Perfection which it requires, he puts me into some astonishment, and
raises in me a very great Idea of the difficulty there is for a man to acquit
himself well of that charge. For if that Author, who has not written any thing
but what is admirable, and who gives Rules for the writing of History, so
senceful and instructive, ingeniously confesses, that he is not himself capable
of supporting the weight of so great an undertaking, what are we to think of
those persons who become Historians on a sudden, without ever having any
knowledge of what is essential to History? As it happened (says he) in that War
of Armenia, mentioned by him, which begat so many Authors, who out of a pure
it^h of writing would needs be dabbling upon that subject. That will not do the
work, says he; for there is nothing more difficult than for a man to labor for
Eternity, as Thucydides has done. For what vigor of Mind is there not
requisite to deliver the truth, without paraphrasing upon it, as they do, who
have not their Souls great enough to observe the Rules of a candid simplicity,
and to relate things as they are? What unbiased Constancy is there not
requisite to unmask the Vice, which is naturally concealed in the artifices of
Dissimulation? What Penetration and Perspicacity is there not necessary to
discover the recesses of their Genius, of whom a man is to speak without
amusing himself about the external consideration of their persons, which does
hardly ever signify any thing? But when his work is to make a distinction
between whole Nations and Ages, by what is essential in their Character, what
steddiness of Apprehension is there not requisite? As for instance, in a
relation of the Civil Wars of Rome, not to confound the Spirit and Humor of
the Commonwealth, with that of Monarchy, the Independence of the one with the
Dependence of the other; not to attribute in a History of France the Manners of
the Age of Lewis XIV, which is no way superstitious, to the Age of Lewis XI,
whose Character was Superstition it self; not to make Charlemaign such a one as
Henry III, and to denote the times and persons by what is particularly
remarkable in their difference. What Principles of Equity should not a man have
for the exact Administration of Justice to Vice and Virtue, for the
distinguishing of true and apparent Merit, and for a man's accustoming himself
not to look on the Actions, without reflecting on the Persons? What Judgment is
there not needful for a man to pitch upon the right side in all things, to
display things in their best sense, to be always tending to what is most solid;
so to interpose his own Sentiment upon the matters of which he discourses, as
not to force the Reader by Prejudgments; not to descant upon the passages that
seem delicate, but with that delicacy of Reflection, which cannot be the effect
of any thing but an exquisite sense; not to charge his Discourse with too much
matter, such as many smother the smartness of it, without allowing therein some
place for what Reflection he might make himself, or giving his Reader a
convenience to make any; to be able to find out the real Knot there may be in
every Affair, without any danger of mistaking, and so to clear the difficulty;
not to make a recital of great Events upon frivolous motives; not to conceal
false Conceptions of things under a pompous Expression; to avoid what seems to
have too strong a Scent of Study, and whatever has a forced Air; and to follow
in all things that Beam of Light and Intelligence, which gives an Idea of the
discernment of the Historian, by raising a good opinion of his Capacity and
Endowments? So that the part most necessary to History is Judgment^ The Orator
may break forth into Sallies of Eloquence, such as are lively and slorid, and
^un the hazard of taking those boldnesses, which may prove succesful in a great
Concourse of people, who are not taken with any thing so much as Confidence.
The Poet may expatiate out of his subject, and not have his Wits always about
him: But the Historian, who speaks in cold blood, ought ever to be Master of
himself, have the command of his thoughts, and not speak any thing but what is
judicious. In short, there is not any thing requires so great a stock of
Sencefulness, so much Reason, so great Wit, so much Judgment, and so many other
qualities, as History, if written as it ought to be; and yet when all is done,
a fortunate Disposition enriched with all these Accomplishments, must have one
additional Perfection, to wit, that of a particular Conversation of the
greatest persons. 'Twas by the familiar acquaintance which Polybius had with
Scipio and Laelius, that he became so excellent an Historian. We have in
Thucydides and Livy the accomplished Models which History requries; Antiquity
has not any thing of greater perfection in that kind; and there is hardly any
thing to be wished for in either of them, unless it be that Thucydides is yet
more sincere than Livy, and Livy more natural than Thucydides^Tacitus is
admirable in his way; Lapsuis prefers him before all the rest, but all are not
of his Sentiment. It may be said in the general, that he is an Historian of a
particular Method by himself, who has great beauties, together with great
defects; but his defects are somewhat shadowed under a Grandeur of Genius,
which is conspicuous in whatever he says; as also under somewhat of the sublime
Character, which exalts him above many Authors, who are more exact and more
natural than he is. He has his Adherents and his Admirers. It Is true, he
pleases those who are talented with the imaginative part; but as to those who
are more for Judgment, and such as affec^ Sencefulness rather than
Embellishment or Eloquence, they are not so well satisfied with him.

Amongst the Moderns I find Mariana, D'avila, and Fra. Paolo, of an admirable
genius for History. Mariana has the talent of reflecting and expressing
excellently well what he thinks and has to say, and of giving a Character of
Grandeur to what is transacted in his mind. D'avila does circumstance things
well, reasons appositely enough upon the Subjects he treats of, and gives his
Discourse that evenness of thread and intertexture, from which it derives that
insinuating Air, which is observable in him above the rest. Fra. Paolo, in his
History of the Council of Trent, gives what color and prospect he pleases to
what he says; never had any man that Art in a more eminent degree than he has.
He also makes a discovery of a vast Capacity, in the talent he has of making
profound Researches into the points of Doctrine whereof he treats, in order to
give his Reader an exact account of them. Never did Author write with more
artifice, or greater smartness of wit, nor yet with less reason and truth. He
is a passionate Author, who imploys his Art in concealing his Passion. He would
be pleasant and drollish upon all occasions, that he might not be thought angry
and out of humor; but he falls by that means into another default. He is too
much given to Raillery in a Subject so serious as that which he treats of; for
Passion spreads it self through all he says. And so that Historian, with all
his great genius, is the most vicious Character that may be seen in the way of
writing History, wherein there is not any thing less pardonable than Animosity.
When an Historian has once the repute of being prepossessed with some Passion,
he is no longer believed. And this Reflection gives us occasion to examine the
Morality which is requisite in him who makes it his business to write.

XXVII.
The Morality of the Historian.
WHereas every one frames to himself a Morality according to his Genius, there
is a discovery made of the Spirit and Humor of an Historian by his Principles.
This must in the first place be laid down as granted, that there are few of
them so generously minded, as to be free from all Hope or Fear, and
unconcernedly prefer Truth before their Interest, which later is the most
universal Source of all the false Judgments which men make of the things
whereof they take upon them to speak. This therefore ought to be the first
thing that is taken into consideration, when a man makes it his profession to
instruct the public; and it is the first Maxim that an Historian ought to
propose to himself. This being well established, his thoughts must be bent upon
the gaining of Credibility in men's minds, and to give an Air of Truth to
whatever he says. And to this principally ought all his Morality to be
levelled, and that the Historian will never do but by a solid Establishment of
his Reputation: and it is not by Protestations of being sincere that he shall
give proofs of his sincerity; but it is done by making a discovery in all his
words of the steddiness of his Heart, and the unbyassable Integrity of his
Sentiments. Accordingly nothing ought to fall from him, but what bears the
Character of Reason and Equity. The love he ought to have for Truth should be
the rule and standard of all his Expressions, and all his Idea's. Let him
always speak as a just and virtuous man, and never let any thing slip from him
which may be injurious to Modesty and Integrity. Let him be severe and
inflexible in the Sentiments which the most exact consideration of Honor can
inspire him withal; and let there never appear any thing in his words which
may occasion any distrust of his Candor and Ingenuous Deportment. Nequa
suspicio grat^^ sit, ^equa simultat^. Cic. de Orat.
Let it be believed that he speaks what is true as soon as he speaks it; that
persuasion being grounded on the assurance men have that he is incapable of
imposing. He can never do amiss who has laid such good Principles as these.

It Is by such an unblemished Morality that Thucydides established the
Reputation of his Sincerity in all subsequent Ages, and that he has gained the
belief of all people. It Is by a love to Religion, and a respect for the Gods,
which is conspi^uous in the Works of Xenophon, that whatever he says is
credited; men being easily persuasible, that a man who has the love of Piety so
deeply engraven in his heart, cannot utter a Falsehood. Polybius is more a
Libertine; he treats as fabulous things the Sentiments which the people had of
the Gods and of Hell, pretending quite to discredit them. And it is also by an
unblameable Morality that Lavy is more persuasive, than by his great
Accomplishments; nay through all the Intrigues, Interests, Passions, and other
irregular proceedings of the men whom he decyphers, he lets you see a certain
thread of Probity, which discovers him to be yet a more honest man than a good
Historian. In the darkest recesses of their Hearts whom he describes, you may
behold the clearness of his own; and amidst the false Lights which he discovers
in their Conduct, he always takes a true prospect of things himself: he makes
sound Judgments of every thing, for his Soul is as steady as his Mind is well
balanced.

Tacitus is a man of a quite different Character: he is a great Wrester of
things to what sense he pleases himself, and one that shrouds a malicious Heart
under a very excellent Wit. He is always mistaken upon the point of true Merit,
because he is not acquainted with any but what proceeds from subtilty; and it
is rather some political Reflection than the pure truth that makes him speak.
Besides the ill thoughts he has of his Neighbor, whenever he has any occasion
to speak of the Gods, he makes not any discovery of Piety or Religion, as may
be seen in the Discourses he has upon Destiny against. Providence, in the sixth
of his Annals; and he imputes all things to the Stars and to Chance, upon the
occasion of Thrasullus, who being Astrologer to Tiberius, was become his
Confident at Capreae. So difficult a matter it is for a man who is not virtuous
to make a good Historian; for the Principles of the one are not compatible with
those of the other.

When therefore an Author takes Pen in hand, he immediately puts on the
Character of a public person; and he again degrades himself from that Honor,
as soon as he assumes the Sentiments of a private man, to mind himself, and to
revenge his own quarrels. This was the case of Procopius, who being exasperated
against the Emperor Justinian and the Empress Theodora, hearkens to his
passion, and corrupts the Truth. Or else he is apt to follow his own
Preoccupation, as Eusebius and Theodoret did, who made use of their Histories
to establish their own Errors, or to flatter those whom they would please, as
Buchanan did, who in his History of Scotland took occasion to blast the
Reputation of Queen Mary Stuart, purposely to gratify Queen Elizabeth of
England. And as Fra. Paolo did, who makes his History of the Council of Trent a
Satyr against the Roman Church and Religion, in whose conduct he makes a great
discovery of little Cheats and Frauds, only to revenge himself upon the Pope,
who did not advance him to the Dignity of a Cardinal, after he had put him in
some hopes of it.

Paulus Jovius was a man who did things pursuantly to his Interest, a Pensioner
of Charles the Fifth, unjust, malicious, and a great Flatterer. The
Pourtraitures he has made of the most considerable persons of his History, are
so many pieces detached from it, which he dressed up into Lives of Illustrious
Men, out of the pure design of getting Money; and they are writ answerably to
the Rewards he received for them. Guicciardine betrays the Passion he has
against all France. Sandoval makes Charles the Fifth pass for a most Catholic
Prince, while in the mean time he foments Heresy in Germany, only because
Pope Paul the Third had disgusted him. Cabrera celebrates Philip the Second of
Spain for his Piety, though he favored Queen Elizabeth against the Pretensions
of Mary Stuart, whom he hindered from being Queen, because she had a kindness
for the French, and by that means obstructed the Settlement of the Catholic
Religion in England. Herrera is a superficial Writer, and partial in the
Concerns of his own Nation. In short, there are hardly any Historians, who have
not their Inclinations and Aversions; they think it a bard task to divest
themselves of their Sentiments, and they make Elogies or Satyrs according to
the dispositions of their own Hearts.

But there are few Authors of such a Character as Thucydides was of, Marcellin.
(...).
who out of an unbiased sincerity commends Pericles in whatever he did that
was commendable, though he had been ill-treated by him; and always does justice
to the Athenians, who had banished him into Thrace, where he died. He was a man
without any passion, who proposed to himself only what judgment Posterity
should make of his Work, and was resolutely bent to stick to the truth; wherein
he has shown him a better-principled man than any of the others, for his
Fidelity and Probity is remarkable through all his Work.

Titus Livius is more favorable to Pompey than to Caesar, Dion more favorable
to Caesar than to Pompey. An^^i (...) Marcellinus is a perpetual Adorer of
Julian the Apostate, and a great Declamator against Valentinian his Successor,
because he was a Christian. Eusebius never shows Constantine but with the best
side outward; Zosimus shows him only with the worst. P^ocopius ^^oliz'd
Belizarius; Eginart had the same Veneration for Charlemaigne, Sandoval for
Charles the Fifth, Strada for Alexander Earnese. In s^^e, every Historian makes
himself a^ (...) according to his own fancy, whom he looks on (...) his
Creature; and to make him the more beautiful he endeavors to make him the more
admirable. And this is it that raises a suspicion of most Histories, because
all Historians have their passions; and there are few of them sincere, because
there are few but follow the bent of some Interest. On the other side, they who
are not swayed by interest, are apt to be blinded with the desire of pleasing,
and the care they have of their Reputation, inclines them to other Extremities.
Josephus in the History of the Jews, Josephus non tam stud^bat vera scribere,
quam credibi^i^: (...) c^usa fuit, cur praeterierit miracula, quod apud
infideles (...) ^rant habitura; and narravit fabul^s, quas pu^^vit iis magis
probabiles futuras. Leo Cast. disp. de transl. sacr. leg. c. 36.
suppresses true Miracles to humor the Pagans, who would not have believed
them; and supposes things less true, because he thought them such as were
suitable to their gust and capacity. This is the way to destroy, and not to
establish; things ought to be related as they are, since it is so much the
worse for the incredulous; for nothing more misbecomes a man, who makes it his
profession to give the public an account of Truth, than thus to profane it. In
short, let there not any thing of Servility or Meanness appear in the
Sentiments or Inclinations of the Historian; for nothing creates a worse
Opinion of his Fidelity. But though I do not approve the Flatterers of great
men, such as Eusebius was, who will not have us see any thing but what is
commendable in Constantine, who in the mean time had great defects; yet is it
my judgment, that they ought to be indulged in certain things. For though a man
ought to say nothing but what is true, yet all truths are not to be spoken.
Quintus Curtius might have forborne the Infamies he spoke of Alexander; there
are some Heads so privileged that they require respect; let us therefore treat
them honorably, and not be chargeable with any insolence toward them. We may
relate the Vices of their persons, but let us not say any thing that may
scandalize their Dignity, or abate ought that is due to their Grandeur. Tacitus
says so many dirty things of Tiberius, that Boccalini cannot endure him for it.
What Lampridius relates of the Emperors Heliogabalus and Caracalla, has made
his History despicable; and Platina discovers but little judgment in his way of
treating the Popes. All will not be of my Opinion, but the wise will; and it is
my persuasion, that how meritorious soever it may be for a man to be sincere,
he would be ridiculous if he were so in all things. But it is to be considered
withal, that praises are never well made, because they are not made with the
delicacy that is requisite; that Commendations are made upon indifferent
passages, and not upon those of which men were more likely to be sensible and
moved thereat; that the public is always in an ill humor against
Commendations, which it hardly ever applauds. The securest way of Commendation
is, only to make a sincere recital of commendable Actions. Lucian. de
conscrib. hist.
All know the Adventure of Aristobulus one of Alexander's Commanders, who read
to him the History of the Battle which that Prince had gained over Porus.
Alexander, who was sailing on the River Hydaspes, highly disgusted at the
^latteries of that Historian, snatched the History from him and flung it into
the River, adding that he should be served so too, for being so impudent as to
commend so ill, attributing to him imaginary Exploits, as if there had not been
real ones enough. This is a rough draught of the Morality which I should wish
in an Historian; or at least these should be my Principles, if I had any design
to concern my self in the composing of a History, and thought my self of a
Genius vigorous enough for it. In short, I would be modest after such a manner,
as that there should always be an appearance of Candor and Moderation, never
any vanity in my Sentiments. Upon which consideration I can hardly bear with
the Extravagance of that Historian mentioned by Photius, who preparing himself
to write the History of Alexander promises, that his style shall not be
inferior to the transcendent actions of his Hero. But after all, a man's edge
to writing is soon taken off, when he has seen the judgment which Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus passes upon Thucydides, if he be any way stocked with a
senceful Apprehension of things: for there is no Author, though ever so
judicious, but may dread the Censures of that Critic. And these are the
Sentiments which I have gathered by the reading of Historians. I am not so vain
as to pretend, that I lay them down for Maxims; they are only Conceptions,
possibly not well digested, which may become good by the good use which may be
made of them. In the next place you have the Sentiments which may be had upon
the most considerable Historians.

XXVIII.
A Judgment of Historians.
HErodotus is the first that gave a rational Form to History, and it is his
Elogy that he chalked out the way to others. His Style Dul^^^, candid^^. ^usus
Herodotus. Fab. l. 10. c. 1.
is pure and elegant. Lib. 3.
Athenaeus celebrates him for the Charms of his Discourse. His subject is of a
vast extent, for it comprehends Nations, Kingdoms, Empires, the Affairs of
Europe and Asia. He is not very exact in what he says, because he grasps at too
much matter; but I find him of a more than ordinary sincerity, inasmuch as he
treats the Greeks and the Barbarians, those of his own Country and Foreiners,
without any discovery of Partiality. In Herodoto.
I find also that Plutarch treats him with too much rigor, when he would have
him accounted a person of an evil intention in most of his Conjectures; but
that he is not favorable to him proceeds from pure Animosity, and merely
because he had ill treated his Country Boe^tia in his History.

Thucydides is exact in his manner of writing, Laudatur ab omnibus act rerum
explicator sinceras and gravis -- Hujus nemo neque verborum neque sententiarum
gravitatem imitatur. Cic. de opt. orat.
faithful in the things he relates, sincere, unsway'd by Interest. He has
Grandeur, Excellency, and Majesty in his Style. He is always austere, but of an
austerity which has nothing but what is great; and his subject is indeed not so
large, and more limited than that of Herodotus. It Is merely out of a spirit of
Partiality, that Dionysius Haelicarnassaeus prefers Herodotus before
Thucydides, because the former was of Halicarnassus: but for my part, I find
him the most accomplished of all the Gre^k Historians.

Xenophon is pure in his Language, natural and pleasant in his Composition. He
has a freedom and facility of Spirit, a Mind fertile and full of many learned
Discoveries; his Imagination is clear, and his Periods are of a just
Intertexture. The decorum of Morality is not always exactly observed in his
History, wherein he makes ignorant persons and Barbarians speak like
Philosophers. Cicero tells us, that Scipio could not give over reading him,
when he had once got him into his hands. Longinus gives him a Character of
Spirit, by which he makes him a fortunate Reflecter on things. He is, all
considered, a very accomplished Historian; and 'twas by the reading of his
History that Scipio and Lucullus became such great Chieftains.

Polybius is an excellent Discourser; he has a fair stock of good and noble
things, but that stock is not so well husbanded as that of the others before
mentioned. He is however esteemable by the Idea which Brutus had of him, who in
the greatest perplexity of his Affairs passed away whole nights in the reading
and study of him. His design was not so much to write a History, as an
Instruction for the good Government of a State, as he declares himself at the
end of his first Book: and so he recedes somewhat from the Character of an
Historian; which obliges him at the beginning of the ninth Book to make a kind
of Apology for his way of writing History. His Style is chargeable with
somewhat of negligence.

Dionysius Halicarnassaus in his Book of Roman Antiquities, discovers a great
Sense fullness of Expression, much Science and Ratiocination, which is not
common. He is exact, diligent, judicious, of greater Veracity than Livy, and
very ponderous.

Diodorus Siculus is a great Character, but one that comprehends too much
matter, being considered as a Compilator out of Philistus, Timaeus,
Calisthenes, Theopompus, and others.

Philo and Josephus have some Touches of a very extraordinary Eloquence. They
are two Jews, who were over-desirous to please and humor the Pagans, by
servilely accommodating themselves to their gust and sentiments.

Arrian is but a Copyer of Xenophon, and an affected Imitator of his ways. He
has made seven Books of the Conquests of Alexander, as Xenophon had done of the
Conquests of Cyrus.

Appian sponges upon all the Greeks; and out of that intermixture he has framed
to himself a Style which does not resemble any of the others. Alienorum laborum
fucus. Animad. ad Eusebius.
Scaliger calls him, The thievish Drone of other Historians. He has taken out
of Plutarch what was excellent in him; but after all, he is a great Magazine or
Stock of Matters.

Dion Cassius has lost credit with many, by the extraordinary things which he
relates, without any discerning Precaution; for he is so far from keeping close
to the truth, that he is at a distance from the likelihood of it, as in that
passage of the sixty sixth Book of his History, where he affirms, that Vespas^^
healed a blind man by spitting upon his eyes.

Procopius is exact in what he advances, because he accompanied B^lizarius in
his Wars, and was a Witness of his noble Actions; but he is somewhat too dry in
his History of Persia, which has the Air rather of a Journal than of a History.
He satisfied his passion in the writing of his Secret History, but he hearkened
to his Moderation in suppressing it; for after his death some took occasion to
publish what he had carefully concealed during his life, wherein he is not
wholly in excusable.

Most of those who have written the Byzantine History, have either copied one
out of another, as Agathias, Cedrenus, Joannes Cu^opalates, or are not very
exact; and they have nothing that approaches the Dignity, the Excellency, the
Discernment, and the Fidelity of the ancient Greek^.

Amongst the Latins Salust is conspicuous for the Grandeur of his Air,
Subtilissimus brevitatis artifex Salustius, proprietatum in verbis
re^inentissimus. Gellius.
the Steddiness of his Thoughts, and his admirable Sense. No man has better
expressed the senceful, accurate, and austere Style of Thucydides. He is
sometimes harsh in his Expressions, but yet he is not faint or flat. Salustius
homo nequam, sed gravissimus alienae luxuri^e objurgator. Lact. de falsa relig.
l. 2.
His Conciseness takes off somewhat of his Perspicuity. He has nothing that is
counterfeit in his Procedure, and he gives weight to whatever he says. His
Sentiments are always excellent, though his Morality was not good; for he
perpetually rails against Vice, and always speaks well of Virtue. I find him
ever dissatisfied with his Country, and one that is apt to think ill of his
Neighbor: All else considered he is a very great person.

Julius Caesar had the noblest talent of expressing himself of any man. The
Pedants have reason to admire him, for the inimitable purity of his Style; but
I admire him much more for the exact comprehensiveness of his Sense, for no man
ever writ more prudently. He is the only Author amongst them all who does not
speak any Impertinencies. He speaks of himself but as of an indifferent person,
and there is nothing but what is suitable to the wise he has taken upon
himself. It Is true, he is not absolutely an Historian; but it is true withal,
that he is a great Model for the writing of History. It Is a great repute to
that admirable Author, that Henry IV, and Lewis XIV of (...) implove^
themselves in the ^ranslation of his History of the Gaulish War.

Livy is the most accomplished of all, for he has a^l the great parts and
perfe^^ions of an Historian; the Imagination excellent, the Expression noble,
the Sense exact, the Eloquence admirable. His Mind will not admit of any but
great Idea's, he fills the Imagination of his Reader by what he says: it is by
that he makes his way to the Heart, and moves the very Soul. And he is the
greatest Genius for History, and one of the greatest Masters of Eloquence that
ever was. In T^o Livio putat inesse Pollio quandam Patavi^ita^em. F^b. l. 8. c.
1.
I do not comprehend what Asinius Pollio means, when he attributes to him a
Provincial Air, and such as has a little smack of Lombardy. His great talent
lies in making what he says to be felt, by making those who ^ead him to
participate of his own Sentiments, by inspiring them with his Fears and Hopes,
and by communicating to them all his Passions, by the Art he has to put all the
most secret re^^or^^ of men's hearts into motion.

Tacitus describes things after a way different from all others, but he
confines himself too much to great Affairs, that he may avoid condefcending to
small ones, which yet ought not to be neglected. He thinks well, but he is not
always happy in expressing himself clearly. He plays too much the Philosopher.
His Decisions of things are high and daring; had he the Destinies of men in his
hands, he would not speak otherwise; and he always moralizes on the
Extravagances of others, sparing none, and speaking ill of all Mankind. How
many Minds has he spoiled by the fancy of studying Politics, which he inspires
into so many people, and which is the vainest Study of all? It Is upon this rock
that so many Spaniards, as Antonio Perez; and so many Italians, as Ma^hiavel
and Ammirato have split themselves. It Is only by the Luster of his Style that
this last so much pleases the higher sort of Wits, and so little those that
affect what is Natural; for by the subtilty of his Ratiocinations and
Reflections he tires them. He is so obscure in his Expressions, that a man must
be well exercised in his Style, ere he shall be able to unravel his thoughts.
His way of Criticizing is delicate of it self, but it becomes Rustical by the
desire he has to criticize upon every thing. Evenit nonnunquam ut aliquid
grande ^uvenlat, qui semper quari^ quod nimium est. Fab. ^. ^. c. 13.
His perpetual assuming of great Sentiments must introduce somewhat that is
sublime; it is by this only that he imposes, and it is not so much to please and
to instruct that he writes, as to raise Admiration. There is in him some. what
that is great and extraordinary, which excuses most of his De^ects. But there
are so many things to be said upon this Author, as well to his advantage as
disadvantage, that there would be no end of them. It Is a kind of humor that is
of no use but only for Ostentation; and it contributes but little to the
ordinary Conversation of men.

Quintus Curtius is commendable for his sincerity; he tells the good and ill of
Alexander, without suffering himself to be preoccupated by the Merit of his
Hero. If there be any exception to be made against his History, it is only that
of its being too polite; but yet he has excelled in this particular, that he
describes men's manners with a delightful and natural Air.

This Character of Perfection, which is remarkable in these great men, was not
to be found in the subsequent Ages. Justin, who becomes a Compiler, out of a
desire to raise himself to an Historian, gives but a transient account of
matters. He knows much; he delivers things sencefully enough, and he has
amassed many Occurrences, which without him might have been lost.

Most of the Authors of the History of Augustus have confined themselves to the
writing of Lives, as Plutarc^ an^ Herodian did amongst the Gre^ks, and
Suetonius and Cor^elius Nepos amongst the La^^^e, and by that means have
degenerated from the Character of Historians. Who came after them were but
simple Chronicle^s, Copiers, Abbreviators, and Compilers, who had no Reputation
but what they derived from the gross knowledge they gave of their Age, wherein
the Star of History was not ^orunate, as having nothing that is delicate or
in^eed rational.

Nor was there much Sincerity found amongst the modern Greeks, who must needs
introduce Visions and extraordinary Adventures to satisfy their Genius. The
love of Learning, which has reflourish'd in the last Ages, has raised up,
together with the revival of senceful writing, a flight of Historians, who by
the Study of the Ancients, whom they took for their Models, made a greater
noise than their Predecessors.

Amongst those who have most signalized themselves may come in Com^es, and what
is singular in him is, that he writes sencefully and is sincere. Paulus Amilius
speaks purely, but he is superficial. Paulus Jovius follows only his own
Passion and his Interest.

Machiavel is exact enough in his History of Florence; in the rest his Wit has
the predominancy over his Judgment. He does not absolutely do justice to
Cas^ruccio Castrucci, whom he treats as an Enemy to his Country.

Mariana in his History of Spain has not been surpassed by any modern Author,
either as to the Grandeur of his Design, or the Excellency of the Style.

Buchanan is too servile an Imitator of Livy; whatere is good in him he has
filch'd from the Ancients. He writes sencefully, but has no great Elevation in
his Sentiments. His long Citations of the third Book do not generally please,
no more than do the Particularities he brings in, in the second Book of the
notion of the Country whereof he speaks.

The Germans have vast Projects upon their History; but nothing reduced within
the natural order, which an exact Design would require.

We find is most of the Spaniards a Spirit of Partiality for their Country,
which renders them very suspicious.

The Italians are well furnished with particular Histories of the different
States whereof Italy consists; but they have no complete Body of History. There
begin now to appear amongst us some rays of hope, that some accomplished
Historian will rise up, by the Approbation which the Public gives those who
write at this time.

FINIS.

