MERCURIUS RUSTICUS THE COUNTRIES COMPLAINT Recovnting the sad Events of the
late unparalleld REBELLION
Christ Church Coll: Ox:

Canterbury Minster

Trinn: College Comb:

Countess of Rivers plundered page: 11

Sr John Lucas house plundered page: ^.

(...) (...) house plundered page: 31.

A Bonfire for the voting down Episcopacy page ^6:

(...) page: 81.

Warder Castle defended by a Lady. page: 41.



Mercurius Rusticus: OR, The COUNTRIES Complaint of the barbarous Outrages
committed by the SECTARIES of this late flourishing KINGDOM. Together with A
brief CHRONOLOGY of the Battles, Sieges, Conflicts, and other most remarkable
Passages, from the beginning of this unnatural War, to the 25th of March, 1646.
Together with A brief CHRONOLOGY of the Battles, Sieges, Conflicts, and other
most remarkable Passages, from the beginning of this unnatural War, to the 25th
of March, 1646.

Jer. 15.13. Thy substance and thy treasure will I give to the spoil without
price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.

LONDON: Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's Most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold by R. Green, Bookseller in Cambridge. 1685.

THE PREFACE.
When the sins of this Kingdom were ripe for punishment, the Divine Justice
permitted a great part of it to be besotted with Discontents either wholly
causeless, or such as His Majesty was pleased to remedy with Grants so
unmeasurably gracious, as could not otherwise be justified than by their
importunity that demanded them, and His Majesty's Royal tenderness of his
Subjects peace and safety.

These Grants were so far from satisfying those, whose broken fortunes and
boundless desires would not permit them to live without a Civil War, that they
make of them no other use than thereby to strengthen themselves to demand more:
till at last they broke out into a most unnatural Rebellion.

The people always apt to cherish murmurs and invectives against their
Princes, and now grown wanton with the fruits of a long peace, incline to
Abners mind, and think the war (which yet they knew not) but a sport. Therefore
with a great facility they embrace the design: and the baits to cover the Hooks
with, are the preservation of Religion, and the vindication of Liberty. And
howsoever they cannot reconcile their practice with Gods command, which under
pain of damnation forbids all Subjects to resist their King: yet they are so
wedded to that interest which they challenge in Religion, and Liberty, that for
Gods command, if they cannot untie the Knot, they resolve to cut it. Do but
assure them that the forbidden fruit will make them as Gods, and they will eat
it though it be forbidden: do but persuade them that to take up arms against
their Sovereign is the way to secure their Religion and Liberty, and they make
bold with God for once to choose their own way for so good an end.

From so desperate Resolution, had they had but Moral justice, they might have
been kept back by the improbability of those calumnies whereby His Majesty was
traduced, as intending to alter Religion and infringe their Liberties.

Or had Religion (to which they do so Zealously pretend) had that potent
influence upon them, it might have taught them, that Religion cannot be
defended by transgressing Gods commands, which are the Rule of it.

But if nothing else, yet even regard to their own pretensions, the defense of
Religion and Liberty, should have wrought in them a detestation of Rebellion,
which is so contrary to both.

For as an eye had to Gods dominion over us should exact obedience to his
commands, though never so much to our prejudice: So the meditation of his
infinite goodness ought to win it from us, because his commands enjoin us only
what is for our good, if we could see it.

He would not have forbidden Subjects to defend Religion against their King by
force of Arms, but that he knew as Rebels can be no friends to Religion, so it
gains love and admiration by the innocent patience of those that profess it;
whereas Bloodshed, Force, and Rapine, (the fruits of Rebellion) procure Hatred
or Hypocrisy.

And for Liberty, it is for the good of mankind, to forbid the assertion of it
by Subjects Arms taken up against their Prince: both because that pretense
would otherwise be used by those that have a design to make the abused people
their own slaves, and because Rebellion does more violate the Subjects liberty,
than is morally possible for the worst Prince in times of peace to do.

This truth was known before by speculation to a few, whose endeavors to
infuse it into the distempered peoples minds, had the fate of Cassandraes
predictions, to hit the truth and want belief, till these sad times have at
last verified it by a costly experience.

That this may be more universally beneficial; you have too plentiful a
harvest of Instances collected in the ensuing Relations: wherein may evidently
be seen, that this War which the multitude was so fond of, as the only means to
preserve Religion and Liberty, has been almost the utter ruin of them both.

Here you shall find these great pretenders to Religion, suppressing that which
themselves confess to be Divine Truth, Debarring poor prisoners the comfort of
joining their prayers together, enforcing men to take Oaths of blind Obedience
to whatsoever they should afterward command them; turning out Clergymen above
all exception, and placing most scandalous and insufficient wretches in their
rooms, darting from their invenomed mouths most horrid Blasphemies against our
blessed Lord and Savior, abusing the service of God, and profaning not only
the Form of it, the Book of Common Prayer, (against which they have a professed
quarrel) but even Gods own Word, the holy Bible, which they pretend to
reverence.

Here shall you behold them not only (like those Canes Sepulchrales) violating
the bones and ashes of the dead, to make the world know that they believe what
some of their fellows openly profess, that of those sometime living Temples of
the holy Ghost, there shall be no resurrection, but exercising their fury on
the Churches of God; which they have defaced with Barbarous rudeness, defiled
with more than beastly nastiness, and (as if contrary to their wont they had
studied the Book of Maccabees to find out and outdo the most Heathenish
wickednesses therein related, they have polluted the very Altar with their
whoredoms.

The Independents (at whose door the most part of these profanations of the
Houses of God must lie) will hardly make the world believe they are in earnest
when they plead for Liberty of Conscience in Religion, while they thus deface
the places where it should be taught and practiced.

And as ill can the Presbyterians make good their pretended zeal to Religion,
and the Nurse of it, Learning, having almost extirpated one of the most
flourishing Universities of Christendom.

Then for the other point, the Subjects Liberty, the following Narrations will
plainly show that it has not been spared by those that would be accounted the
Champions of it, when the violation of it might satisfy either their Lust,
their Covetousness, or their Cruelty.

Their Lust has prompted them not only to threaten Rape, but with violence to
attempt it, and to wound and murder those upon whom they could not effect
their beastly purpose.

To satisfy their Covetousness, they have unmercifully robbed of their
fortunes, and exposed to the extremest want, not only those that were their
opposites and able to hurt them, but those whose sex, age and condition might
have melted stones into pity, women, children, the sick, the aged, women in
labor, and even those of their own party.

Their Cruelty has not contented it self with the murder of those they hated,
but as if they had been the professed Scholars of that inhumane monster, whose
Maxim was, Perimat Tyrannus lenis, in regno meo mors impetratur, they have
insulted over the persons and lives of their fellow Subjects with most
exquisite Tortures, whipped some to Death, and starved others: they have made it
a Crime in some that they were neighbors to those whom they persecuted for
their Loyalty, and punished others for showing them mercy: nay to show that
their ambition was to choose out the sharpest executioners of their Tyranny
(though with the hazard of rendering the names of Christians odious for their
sakes to the professed enemies of Christendom) they had once designed diverse of
prime worth and quality both of the Clergy and the Gentry to be sold for slaves
to their brethren the Turks at Argiers. And so full of contagious venom is
their malice, that it has made Parents unnatural to their own children,
suffering them to perish by Famine because they refused to Rebel against their
Sovereign.

To conclude, their malice has so far transcended all bounds, that they have
done mischief where they were not invited by any benefit to themselves or any
other, only for the delight they took in doing it, burning houses, spoiling
goods, destroying Books, Evidences, and Public Records, to the prejudice of
Posterity, the disturbance of Possessions, the obstruction of Justice, and the
impairing of Learning, only to make themselves Sport: they have by breaking
Articles of surrender, by offering savage force to the persons of messengers
for Treaty, and to the goods and houses of foreign Ambassadors, broken the
Sacred Laws and disturbed the Commerce of Nations: and that nothing might be
wanting to the height of their villainies, by the rude defacing of the Pictures
and resemblances of His Majesty their Sovereign, they have declared their
wicked intentions against his Sacred Person.

Now if any shall endeavor to acquit the Grandees of the Faction by laying all
the fault on private men or inferior Officers; and shall averr that if
complaint had been made to the Parliament, redress would have been given: let
them know that by reading this Book it will appear that the bad success which
wronged persons found, is a sufficient evidence that others should have lost
their labor in complaining. For even their Justice was so obstructed by that
Faction that the best remedy of the foulest injuries was but Eli his correction
of his sons, a cold admonition: and sometimes a direct denial of Justice, yea
and the goods of the sufferers, given as a reward to those that did the wrong.

Wherefore since our imagined Sickness has led us into a needless course of
Physic, wherein we have almost purged and bled to death; if we love our own
safety better than the gain of those that live upon our ruins, let us at last
be wise, and give over the Physician.

In a word, we shall promise in the sight of God, and remembering that Liars are
in the number of those against whom the gates of the new Jerusalem shall be
shut, to deal in the ensuing stories with all candor and ingenuity, not out of
a desire to render the actors of these impieties odious, or abuse the Reader
either with falsehoods or uncertainties, but to report nothing but what has
been examined and attested by men of known truth and integrity: And that the
world may see what violent affections these Sectaries brought to these hostile
Acts, we shall begin with the times of peace, when the King had no formidable
Army to inflame their Jealousies, nor these men provoked to cruelty by any
foregoing injuries; The Scene is Essex, and the first man that shall be
tendered to your view is Sir John Lucas.

MERCURIUS RUSTICUS: OR, THE Countries Complaint, etc.
I.
Sir John Lucas and Mr. Newcomin a Minister, barbarously used by the Brownists
and Anabaptists of Colchester: Sir John 's House plundered, his Mother, Lady,
and Sister abused, and committed to the common Goal. The unhumane usage of Sir
William Boteler in Kent, his House plundered, and his Servants tortured, etc.

ON Monday, Aug. 22. 1642. Sir John Lucas intended with some Horse and Arms, to
begin his Journey toward the North, to wait upon the King; which purpose of
his being on Saturday by a treacherous Servant discovered to John Langley of
Colchester, Grocer, and Captain of the Trained Bands; He, with Henry
Barrington, Brewer, and Alderman of the Town, spent the next day, being Sunday,
in riding to Coggeshall, Bocking, Bayntree, Halsteed, and other Towns of their
own Faction, to communicate to them the knowledge of it, and invite them with
strong guards of Muskets, to beset the ways and intercept him in his Journey,
and did also (by the assistance of the Mayor) set a guard of Colchester
Trainband, on Sunday night about his house. Sir John Lucas intended to begin
his journey early by one or two a clock on Monday morning, supposing he might
so pass mith most privacy and no opposition, but the back gate at which he
thought to issue out was no sooner opened, but a strong guard from under a
hedge present themselves, and one of them discharged his Musket as a
Warning-piece to the Town, where the Alarm is presently taken, the Drum struck
up, and the whole Town raised, the Volunteers (of which there were 400 or 500
then in Town gathered to serve under the Earl of Essex and Lord Say) brought up
the Beacon, by direction of Dan. Cole Alderman, fired, and Horsemen into all
parts sent forth to call in the Country against the Cavaliers in Sir John
Lucas's house.

The house is presently beset with at least 2000 people, and two pieces of
Ordnance are brought to make a Battery; at last they rushed into the house, and
the first man they seize upon is Mr. Newcomin, Parson of S. Trinity Parish in
Colchester; they tear his clothes off his back, beat him with their Cudgels and
Halberts, and with infinite exclamations, carry him in triumph through the
chief streets of the Town; by the way entering into a wild but very serious
consideration, not whether he should dye (for that they had resolved at first)
but to what death to put him; one votes drowning, another stoning, another bids
beat out his brains. At length having consulted with Alderman Cole, they carry
him to the common Goal, commanding the Jailer to put him in the strong hold, (a
place provided for the most desperate Malefactors) affirming they would soon
return to take further order with him. There he remained till one a clock,
being then removed to another Chamber. They now return to their fellows who
were searching Sir John Lucas's house, some twenty of them rushed into the
Ladies Chamber, laid hands upon her, set a sword to her breast, requiring her
to tell where the Arms and Cavaliers were. The Horse and Arms are soon found
and seized on by the Mayor, who sends the Arms to the Town Hall, the Horse to
an Inn to be there kept on Sir John Lucas's cost, till they could be sent to
the Parliament. The People lay hands on Sir John Lucas his Lady and Sister, and
carry them attended with swords, guns, and halberts to the common Goal. Last of
all they bring forth his Mother with the like or greater insolency, who being
faint and breathless, hardly obtained leave to rest herself in a Shop by the
way; yet this leave was no sooner obtained, but the rest of that rude rabble
threatened to pull down the house, unless they thrust her out, being by this
means forced to depart from thence. A Countryman (whom the Alarm had summoned
to this work) espies her, and pressing with his Horse through the crowd, struck
at her head with his sword so heartily, that if an Halbert had not crossed the
blow, both her sorrows and her journey had there found an end. Two Gentlewomen
(one of which had long been sick) by flight escaped their fury, but their most
well-wishing neighbors dared not to be known to receive them into their house,
the people threatening to burn that house that gave them entertainment. Having
secured the Master, they now begin to plunder the house, all is prize that
comes to hand, money, plate, jewels, linen, woollen, brass, pewter, etc. A few
hours disrobe the house of that rich furniture that had adorned it many years.
The Mayor and Aldermen standing by all this while, but either not able, or not
willing to conjure down the Devil which themselves had raised up. All the
servants they could meet with they bring to prison, they lay hands on John
Brown, (one who had been a servant to the family from the time of Sir John
Lucas's Grandfather) they bind him to a tree, set a Musket to his breast, and
a sword to his throat, and tie lighted matches between his fingers, and John
Furley (a young pragmatical boy) examines him concerning his Masters
intentions, Horses, Money, etc. but especially concerning Mr. Newcomin, whether
he had not given an Oath of secrecy? Whether he were not to ride a great Horse?
whether he were not habited in a Buff Jerkin and Velvet Coat, etc. Fear easily
prompts the old man to answer what he thought would give content. Out of his
Examination the Mayor frames an Information against Sir John and Mr. Newcomin,
not forgetting to relate the good service he had done, the Horse and Arms he
had taken, but withal implying how miserably the house was plundered by the
zealous people, adding in his Letters (and that very truly) that he could do no
more than a Child among them, with these Letters he presently dispatcheth a
Post to the House of Commons.

About one a clock a new Alarm is raised, that 200 armed Horsemen are
discovered in a Vault at Sir John Lucas's; That they had killed nine men
already, and were issuing forth to destroy the Town. The shops are shut up in
an instant, and the multitUde throng down thither to take or kill these
Cavaliers. And because they find none there, they now spend their rage upon the
house, they batter down the doors and walls, beat down the windows, tear his
Evidences, deface his Walks, and Gardens, do any thing that may do mischief.
From thence they go to his Park, pull down his Pales, kill his Deer, drive away
his Cattle. And to show that their rage will know no bounds, and that nothing
is so sacred or venerable which they dare not to violate, they break into S.
Giles his Church, open the Vault where his Ancestors were buried, and with
Pistols, Swords, and Halberts, transfix the Coffins of the dead.

And now the Mayors care begins to show it self, he sets a guard upon the house
that no hurt should be done unto it, yet that Guard suffered 100 l. worth of
corn (which at first was neglected as contemptible luggage) to be carried out,
and the most of it to their own houses. Another Guard he sets upon the Prison,
lest the Prisoners should be assaulted by the people who were so much incensed
against them, though it had been fit to set some honest men to guard them from
those Guardians, who were as forward as the people to drink their blood.

On Thursday comes down Sir Thomas Barrington and Mr. Grimston as a Committee
from the House, who coming into the market place before the prison-door (the
Town Hall not able to receive the least part of the multitude) there published
two Orders from the House, one wherein Sir John Lucas and his adherents were
praclaimed guilty of high Treason for intending to assist the King. Another
wherein thanks were given the People for the good service they had done, yet
they were told withal, that their Act of Plundering was against the sense of
the House. Some of the agents in that work, produced a printed Order of
Parliament (not heard of before among honest men) by which they justified what
they had done; Sir Thomas Barrington replied that it was a false and feigned
Order, contrived by the malignant party to render the House odious, and very
lovingly besought the people to do so no more. And indeed the next weeks
Diurnal tells us, that upon occasion of the outrageous plundering in Essex, It
was Ordered that thenceforward none should Plunder but those that were
authorized by the House to do it.

Friday was designed for the carrying up of the Traitors (Sir John Lucas and
Newcomin) for whom there was one Messenger come from the Black Rod, and another
from the Sergeant at Arms, (for the Ladieswere declared no Prisoners after they
had layn in the common Goal four days.) When the time of their departure was
come, many thousands of people were gathered together (both of Town and
Country) a Drum being struck up to give them warning. The Coaches are come, and
the Prisoners called forth; only Mr. Newcomin they dared not carry forth as
yet, because the people threatened to tear him in pieces; as assuredly they had
done, had not Mr. Grimston's care been very great, who placeing a Court of
Guard on each side of Sir Thomas Barrington's Coach from the Prison door,
brought him forth unexpectedly, and put him into the Coach, the people then not
daring to strike or stone him, lest the mischief intended on him should light
on Sir Thomas Barrington.

The Coach being guarded thus a mile out of Town, they passed on, suffering no
other strokes but those of the tongue (bitter Curses and Revilings) and those
they met withal abundantly, at Chelmsford, Romford, and in all the Towns
whither the news of their Treason had gone before them, Sir John Lucas's
captive Horses being carried in triumph with the Coach all the way; at London
Sir Thomas Barrington sent the Horses to the Red Lion, the Prisoners to the
Sergeant at Arms, where they remained all Sunday, not permitted to go to Church
with their Keeper: on Monday they were sent for to the house, and committed Sir
John Lucas to the Gate House, Mr. Newcomin to the Fleet. Immediately issued out
a Declaration of both Houses to the whole Kingdom, but especially to the County
of Essex, ordered to be read in all Churches and Chapels; wherein for the
better encouragement of good people (so run the words) it is told them that Sir
John Lucas's Horse and Arms are employed for the service of his Excellency,
that Sir John, and Mr. Newcomin are committed to several Prisons, and shall
speedily be brought to their Trial, to receive condign punishment according to
their demerits.

Sir John Lucas was afterward enlarged, giving 40000 l. bail to appear upon
summons, and not to depart London and the Suburbs without leave. Mr. Newcomin
remained in the Fleet from Aug. 29. to Sept. 24. being never called for, and at
length discharged.

Sir William Boteler of Kent, returning about the beginning of April 1642. from
his attendance, (being then Gentleman Pentioner) on the King at York, then
celebrating Saint Georges feast, was by the earnest solicitation of the Gentry
of Kent, engaged to join with them in presenting the most honest and famous
Petition of theirs to the House of Commons, delivered by Captain Richard
Lovelace, for which service, the Captain was committed Prisoner to the
Gate House, and Sir William Boteler to the Fleet, from whence after seven Weeks
close Imprisonment, no Impeachment in all that time brought in against him,
many Petitions being delivered and read in the House for his enlargement, he
was at last upon bail of 20000 l. remitted to his house in London, to attend de
Die in Diem, the pleasure of the House. And having thus danced attendance Six
weeks more, at last he obtained leave for his health sake to go to his own
house in Kent, called Barrhams Place in Teston, and from thence, for recovery
of his health much impaired by long Imprisonment, he visited the Wells near
Tunbridg^, leaving with his Servants both in London and in the Country a strict
charge as of his house, so to give him speedy information, if Sergeant Hunt
should summon him to make his appearance: while Sir William Boteler remained
thus a Prisoner to the House, resolving to yield obedience according to the
condition of his Bond, 500 Horse and Dragoons under the command of Colonel
Edwine Sands, Sir John Seaton, and Douglas, accompanied by several Gentlemen
his Neighbors, as Sir William Brooks, Sir Michael Lucy, Mr. Richard Lea
Burgess for Rochester, Mr. Blunt, and others, on the 24. of August, between
Eight and Nine of the clock at night, beset his house: The Servants were within
and the doors shut, only William Nelson, Sir William's Groom coming from the
Stables, pressed through the midst of them to the Hall door, where Sands and
Seaton stood: They demand of him whether he belonged to Sir William, who
answering that he did, Thou Rogue, says Sands, open the door; the poor Groom
tried, but could not, but assured them that there should be no resistance made:
and withal told them that his Master was at the Wells, but had left order to
give them the best welcome the house could afford, and upon notice given would
be ready (if they had such Order) to render himself up to the House of Commons,
whose Prisoner he acknowledged himself to be: and withal offered that if they
would have patience but while he went to the back door, the house should open
unto them. This so reasonable an answer could not satisfy unreasonable men,
who it seems were resolved to force the door, rather than have it opened, to
give a peaceable admittance: Therefore they revile the Groom, call him Rogue,
and threaten to kill him, not because he would not, but because he could not
give them entrance. And to make good their threats, Sands and Seaton commanded
some of their Rout to hold him up against his Masters Hall door, and bad some
twelve or more Dragooners to give fire on him, which was done accordingly: on
the word given, they that held him withdrew, not trusting to the
undistinguishing bullet, and presently the Groom fell down, by which means he
escaped the fury of the shot, which took effect only on the door, and beat it
down. The entrance that was offered, thus forced, the house is instantly filled
by the Commanders, the Gentlemen their abettors and the Soldiers. The first man
they meet with is Benj. Wiand, Sir William's Steward, who being demanded by
Sands where his Master was, returned answer, the same in effect which before
they received from the Groom: Sands was as courteous to the Steward as to the
Groom, calls him Rogue, and tells him that he would have his Master alive or
dead, commands him to bring him to the Chamber where Sir William did lodge,
their drawn Swords and Muskets bent upon him extort obedience. Being brought
into the Bedchamber, Sands demands whether there were no private Outlet or
Closet? to lay all naked before him, the Steward folds back the Hangings, by
which means the Colonel discovers a Close-stool, which at worst could not be so
loathsome, as he was before he died: This sight enraged him, not only to revile
the Steward, calling him Rogue, but cruelly to beat him with his Pole-ax; and
having thus prepared him, he commands him upon no less pain than the loss of
his life, to reveal his Masters Plate and Money; and to enforce the discovery
from him, with drawn Swords they prick him, and force him from one Room to
another. At last being come to the Dining Chamber, Colonel Sands causes a
dozen of Candles to be lighted, and so to be held to and under the Stewards
hands, and lighted Match to be applied between his fingers, for the space of a
quarter of an hour, Sands himself all the while looking on, commanded both
Candles and Match to be renewed, as often as either went out, or burnt dull. In
this Torment they continued the poor soul, until both his hands were shamefully
burnt, not being able to relieve himself by that discovery for which they
tortured him. Nor was that barbarous cruelty thus practiced on the Steward
only, from him they descend to the rest of the Servants, whom they prick with
their Swords, beat with their Pole-axes to the indangering their lives, and all
this to extort a Confession where their Masters Money and Plate were: but when
this inhumanity produced not the effect they looked for, they broke up every
door, plundered every Trunk and Chest, and examined every dark place, from the
Closet and Cabinet, to the Powdering-Tub and Oven. Nay the Cellar escaped not
their fury; What they could not drink, either Wine or Beer, they let out and
poured upon the ground. In this search they found and carried away five hundred
pounds in money, and some store of Arms. And because the great adventures of
Valiant Knights must not be forgotten, To the Eternal fame of Sir William
Brooks we are to tell you, that when the Ladies Closet was broken open,
besides the Charitable Provisions of Medicinal Syrupes and Salves for the poor
and the needy Neighbors, all which were trampled under foot and spoiled, There
were some hospitable Provisions for entertainments, as diverse sorts of
Preserves and other Sweetmeats, and in these this doughty Knight had his
finger as deep as any, except a common Soldier, who seeing him feed greedily on
a Gally-pot, and presuming his judgment to be good in the choice, (for the
Proverb is true which end soever you put foremost, A liquorish tail has a
liquorish tooth,) rudely thrust his whole fist all begrimed and besmeared in
blood and powder, into the pot with him: which as it turned his worships
stomach for the time, so it may serve as a sure Prognostic, That if these
Distractions go on, where the Gentleman has his finger, the Clown will be sure
to have his fist. But to leave him to his Sweetmeats, which perchance may have
sour sauce, and return to the Colonel and his plundering Regiment. Being
Masters of the House, they plundered and pillaged not only Sir William Boteler,
but all his Servants, men and maids, not only their Chests, but their very
pockets. News of this being brought to Sir William Boteler the next morning
early by three of the Clock, and finding by their threats, that his life was in
danger, he resolved to fly for protection to the King at Nottingham: In his way
thither at Pinkeny Mowlton in Northamptonshire, he was seized on by the Country
people, and by about 150 Horse conveyed first to Northampton, and from thence
to London. About the beginning of September he was brought before the House of
Commons, and there in a full House was examined twice; to whom he gave a full
and clear satisfaction in every particular. And being unimpeached, the whole
House being utterly unable to accuse him of any the least kind of offense or
Delinquency, Sir William Boteler did then and there in the public House make
his Complaint of this intolerable oppression and injustice, charging by name
before the House, Colonel Edwine Sands, Sir John Seaton, Sir Michael Livesey,
Mr. Richard Lea, who then was present sitting in the House, and Sir William
Brooks with Felony and Burglary, for breaking up his house in the night, and
stealing and carrying away his Money and Goods: and implored the Justice of the
House against them. And now behold their great zeal of Justice, their care of
the Subjects Property, and the freedom of their persons from illegal
Imprisonment, instead of harkening to his just complaint, and relieving him in
his losses, to keep Magna Charta inviolable, they Remand Sir William Boteler
again Prisoner to the Gate House, where he remained for six months longer: at
last being certainly informed, that it was really intended if not ordered by
the House to send him to Ipswitch, he endeavored and effected an escape from
the Gate House, and got safe to Oxford, where he attested all these particulars.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
II.
Sir Hen. Audley' s house Plundered: Variety of Insolences committed by the
Rabble of Essex, upon M. Laud, M. Honifold, M. Stevens, and M. Symmons,
Ministers. The Countess of Rivers Plundered to the value of 100000. Pounds, etc.

THe last weeks Mercurius told you of the Plundring of Sir John Lucas his House
in Essex and the barbarous Insolences practiced on him and his. The Tumult was
raised and made confident by Success, they go on in Triumph, and like a violent
Torrent swelling above its Channel, carry all before them, and fearing no
opposition, they divided themselves into several Companies, every place where
they come tastes of their Fury and Madness: Some go to Sir Henry Audly's at
Beerechurch, whose house they plundered of its Furniture, and his Grounds and
Pastures of his Cattle.

Others go to M. Erasmus Laud, a poor Minister of Little Try, whose very name
with these men was a Crime and reason enough to expose him to their Rage:
Guilty he was of nothing but a good and honest Name, yet they spoil him of his
Goods, drive away his Cattle, rob of 20 l. in Moneys, his own and his Wives
Clothes, all except those upon their backs: M. Laud knowing diverse of them, and
knowing them to be Colchester Men, repaired thither to the Mayor for Justice,
and by chance found him well circumstanced for an action an action of that
nature, both in respect of Place and Company, for he found him at the
Moote-Hall, and the Aldermen his Brethren with him: Being come thither, he was
so far from finding what he sought for, Justice, that he was not permitted to
make his complaint, M. Cole, one of the Aldermen telling him openly, that they
knew him and his Cause, he was the Minister of Try that was Plundered the day
before, but they had other Business in hand and he must be gone, for they could
not hear him.

Others of them went to M. Honifold, a Bachelor in Divinity, and near 70 years
of age, dwelling in Colchester, there they rifle his House of all its
Furniture, take away his Bonds, Bills, and Evidences, leave not a Shelf behind
them, nor a Pin to hang a Hat on. The good old Man, thinking that Spoil and
Robbery had been as punishable now as when he was a young Man, and not knowing
that the pretending defenders of the Law had banished all Law out of the
Kingdom, went to crave the Mayors assistance, to restore his Goods and punish
the Offenders. Alderman Cole, the Fulk of Colchester being present, told him,
that he wondered he would offer to come abroad being a Man so much hated, and so
rated him away. In his return, a multitude of Boys and rude People throng about
him, and prosecute him through the streets with Exclamations and Outcries: Nor
do they stay here, their hands second their tongues, throwing stones and dirt
at him. So little did either the hoary Head and venerable old Age, or the
privilege of his sacred Function afford him protection from the enraged
multitude: Many see him, some pity him, but none dare own him or take him into
protection, lest they should divert this swelling tide of popular fury from the
good old Man, and draw it on themselves; at last bowels of compassion yearn on
him, a Kinsman of his emboldened, what by the urgency of Nature, and the
constraint of Charity, opens his doors to afford him shelter from this storm,
but all in vain; like so many Bears robbed of their Whelps they double their
rage, the multitude threaten to pull down the house unless the prey be
delivered up unto them: The good old Man seeing the inexorableness of his
persecutors, to make a full return of the kindness which he found, resolves
rather to expose his own Person as the subject of their fury, than his Kinsmans
house: and so he did, for out he goes unto them, and now having retrieved the
Game, they pursue him with a high advanced din and confused clamor: At last
when all other means to escape their fury failed, he made a voluntary captivity
his safety, and took the Common Gaol for his Sanctuary.

Having thus thrown Master Honifold into Prison, not so much the Ignominy of
the place where they had lodged him, or saciety of contempt of Gods Minister
which they had cast upon him, as the want of more daylight, sets an end to
this days Frenzy. They part for the present, but resolve to meet next morning;
and so they do, a day or two are too scanty to act their boundless malice.
Being met, their next plundering expedition is to the Countess of Rivers house
at S. Osyth, a rich prize: There they enter the House, and being entered, they
pull down, cut in pieces, and carry away her costly Hangings, Beds, Couches,
Chairs, and the whole Furniture of her House, rob her of her Plate and Moneys:
They tear down her Wainscot, Leads, and Windows, they leave not a Door, nor so
much as a Bar of a Window behind them. The Countess with her Family, forewarned
of their intentions to come thither, made an escape, and retired to her House
at Melford in Suffolk: Thither within a day or two they pursue her, Essex is
too narrow to bound the madness of the Essex Schismatics; in Suffolk they meet
with some that are as mad as themselves: Few Counties (the more is the pity)
but can yield Companions in such Outrages. From thence she hardly escapes with
her life: she abandons her House, and leaves it to the mercy of these new
ministers of new Justice, who not only rifle the House, but make strict search
for her Person. And that you may guess what spiritual men they were, and
likewise in what danger this Honorable Person was in, they express themselves
in this rude unchristian language, That if they found her, they would try what
flesh she had. From whence she fled to St. Edmunds-Bury, where the Gates were
shut against her an hour at least; at length she was suffered to lodge there
that night, and next day with a strong Guard she was conveyed out of Town, and
so keeping her self as private as she could, made an escape to London. Her
losses at both her Houses, were valued at an Hundred thousand pounds at least,
though some that knew the rich Furniture that adorned both, affirm it to be no
less than an Hundred and fifty thousand pounds, besides her Parks in both
places were utterly spoiled. One of these Plunderers, whose name was Bowyer,
was apprehended in London selling some of these Goods in the very act, and for
this committed to Newgate as a Felon, two of the Countes's Servants entering
into Recognizance to give in Evidence against him for the King, but upon his
Petition to the House of Commons, it was ordered he should be discharged
without paying any Fees, which was done accordingly. And 'twas but an oversight
that his prosecutors had not been laid in his place, and public thanks decreed
him for his zeal to the Cause.

Mr. Stevens, Parson of South-Hamfield in Essex, hearing that the Plunderers of
that County were coming on him, took Horse and fled, and so saved both himself
and his Horse, for he knew that both were sought after. The Father being fled,
the Children left to their own providence, bethink how to secure those little
pieces of Plate which each had received from the bounty of their Godfathers and
Godmothers; neither time nor acquaintance could give them latitude of much
choice where to hide it, and thinking any place safer than their own House,
they run to a poor Woman their Neighbor, and there with her they deposite
their whole Treasure. When the Plunderers came and found that the Birds were
flown, having intelligence, or as some say, but suspecting that the poor Woman's
house might hide Mr. Stevens his Goods, they go to her House and demand them:
The Woman denies that she has any of Mr. Stevens his Goods: hereupon one of
the Plunderers strikes her on the head with a Club with such violence, that her
Brains came out at her Nostrils. The poor Woman being thus murdered, the
bloody Murderers insult over her, and say, that the just hand of God was upon
her, for lying against her knowledge, and denying those parcels of Mr. Stevens
his Goods that were in her possession: so usual a thing it is with these men to
blaspheme God, and entitle him to all those wickednesses which they commit on
others.

Mr. Edward Symmons, Parson of Rain in Essex, in the Months of June and July,
1642, Preached against the sin of Rebellion and Disobedience, and against
traducing the King, slandering the footsteps of Gods Anointed, and refused to
promote the Civil-War (then begun) by stirring up the People to contribute
Money, Plate, and Horses to the maintenance of so unnatural, so destructive a
Division, as most of the Ministers of those parts did. This as it was more
remarkable in him, so it was more heinously taken from him, in regard of his
former intimate acquaintance with Mr. Stephen Marshal, Parson of Finchingfield
in Essex, the great Incendiary of this unhappy War, and had given him the right
hand of Fellowship: Hereupon he was sent for to the House of Commons by a
Pursevant, and was told, That he being an Honest Man (but of a different
judgment from the Sense and Vote of the House) did more prejudice to the good
Cause in hand, than a hundred Knaves, and therefore would suffer accordingly:
Which saying since that time, has been plentifully made good, and verified in
many particular Oppressions and Sufferings, unjustly inflicted on him and his
whole Family.

First, He was Imprisoned and most illegally deprived of his Liberty, for no
other cause, but because he would not, contrary to the dictate of Religion, and
his own Conscience, countenance and promote an accursed Rebellion against his
gracious Sovereign.

Secondly, He was referred after to the Committee for Scandalous Ministers,
thereby to blast his Credit and Reputation in his Ministry: a most diabolical
and divelish Course, and a work of him who is the accuser of the Brethren, to
defame honest Orthodox Ministers with the odious name of Scandalous and
Malignants, though made so neither by error in Doctrine, Wickedness of life, or
Debauchness of conversation, but by the malignity of a Vote, knowing, that by
this means, such Ministers doctrines and Testimonies will be of little or no
credit afterward with the vulgar: for had it been Scandal in a true and proper
sense, which they endeavored to take away out of the Church, they would never
have brought over his head, so scandalous, so infamous a man to be Lecturer in
his Cure as they did: for to the wounding of Mr. Simmons his Soul, and the
indangering the Souls of his Parishoners, one Lemuel Tuke is appointed Lecturer
in Master Simmons his Church, a man by education a Weaver, and that had not so
much as saluted either University, yet while men slept he intruded into a Cure
of Souls in Nottinghamshire, from which ever since (...) the Parliament began
he has been a Nonresident: for not long after the sitting of this Parliament,
his Parishoners framed a Bill against him to the Lower House, Articling against
him, not only as negligent, but insufficient in his calling: Nay they accuse
him of no less than Barretry and Battery, Drunkenness and Whordom, and some
such other sins, which in the judgment of all honest men, make a man truly and
properly scandalous: yet this man thus Articled against to the House of Commons
as Scandalous, is thought worthy to be substituted as a Coadjutor in Mr.
Simmons his Cure, who only was voted Scandalous, because not Rebellious: so
that all the World may judge what it is to be scandalous in this new sense, To
honor the King, and to live in obedience to the established orders of the
Church.

Thirdly, having preached that it was unlawful to take up Arms against the
King, and contrary to the Doctrine of the Scriptures to contribute to a War
against him, in opposition to Lemuel Tuke, who labored to poison his People
with Sedition and Rebellion, affirming openly, that in some Cases it was lawful
not only to Resist, but (which I tremble to relate) to kill the King;
instancing in the example of Athaliah, 2 King. 11. yet the said Tuke is
countenanced and encouraged, whereas Master Simmons for asserting the Truth,
was summoned before the Committee, there to answer as a Delinquent: who was so
far from a Retractation, that he justified the Doctrine: which he did so fully,
that one of the Committee was convicted of it, yet as he himself did, so he
would have Master Simmons to withold that Truth in unrighteousness: for Sir
Thomas Barrington (who was the man) confessed that it was a Truth and a Divine
Truth, yet not fit to be preached at all times, no not by those that were
entrusted with it by God himself, no though it might be in some danger of
Impeachment. At last being charged to preach no more such Doctrine, and putting
in bail, by the Committee he is permitted to return to his charge. But behold
what it is to be voted a Delinquent, or a scandalous Minister by the Committee;
it is to be put out of the protection of the Law, and exposed to the fury of
the people: for on his return Oath is made before a Justice of Peace, that at
Halstead in Essex it was concluded that an hundred men from Cogshall and
Colchester side (some of that Crew that plundered Sir John Lucas his house)
should suddenly surprise Mr. Simmons in his house, Plunder his goods, and cut
off his person as one not fit to live, because he was (as they said) against
the Parliament: But by the good providence of God this Conspiracy was
discovered and prevented.

Fourthly, they oppressed him in his State, for after his return home, seeing
the necessity of opposing that inundation of wickedness which was overflowing
his Charge, and pressed earnestly in conscience according to his duty and
place, to labor to undermine that throne of Satan which by the Luxation of the
nerves and sinews of Government was like to be set up both there and in all
parts of the Kingdom, he bent himself in his Sermon chiefly against the
prevailing sins of the time, as Lying and Slandering, Rebellion and Treason,
Pride and Oppression, Malice and Cruelty: yet these Sermons by his malicious
enemies were interpreted little better than Libells against the Parliament: and
upon Information given he was sent for up, three or four times, to the Lower
House, to his very great charge and trouble, tho when he came to London he was
never called to answer to the Accusation. And because he refused to contribute
voluntarily to the maintenance of the Rebellion, his malicious Neighbors
resolved to extort it from him in a seeming legal way: for in the rates made
for the Royal Subsidy, they raised him far beyond his just proportion, and
therefore in the first rate, they seized him twice as much, and in the second
almost thrice as much as themselves; and contrived their business so cunningly,
that they caused him to be sent for up to the Parliament while these things
were in doing, and returned rates in to the Exchequer in his absence, that so
he might not have the opportunity, by complaint of a just grievance, to relieve
himself.

Lastly, having by most unjust vexations exhausted his Estate, and drained his
purse: without hearing his defense indeed without further summoning him to
appear, they sequester his Parsonage and Glebe, and Tyth, and put one Robert
Atkins a stranger into Cure; and as they put his Livelihood into a strangers
hands, so they put his life into the power of his Enemies, who are authorized
to apprehend him, and carry him Prisoner to Cambridg: but upon Intimation
given, he withdrew himself, and leaving all to the mercy of his Enemies, was
forced by flight to secure his Person.

And here by the way give me leave to observe one thing to the Courteous
Reader, and it is the Reason which was alleged in the sequestration of Mr.
Simmons his Parsonage, and indeed is generally used in all these
sequestrations, and it is, For the better supply of an able and godly man in
the said Church: I would they could tell us where we should find these two
Epithites Able and Godly to meet in any one of those which they have
substituted in the Revenues and employments of those Orthodox Divines, which
they have banished from their Cures and families: do but survey the new
Plantations which they have made, and you will think that Jereboams Priests
were risen again from the dead, the lowest and basest of the People: for while
honest, learned, and conscientious men could not suffer themselves to be made
the base instruments to corrupt and seduce the Ignorant multitudes to comply
with the reasonable practices of the heads of this Rebellion, it was necessary
to seek out and invite such of the Clergy into their Party, whom either want of
Merit, or want of Honesty, had left destitute of Means; and when Orthodox Men
are displaced or driven away, and such Trencher Chaplains put in their places,
we may easily guess what work is in hand, even the alteration of the
Government: For while they are so earnest both to Preach and Print that other
Forms of Government are God's Ordinance as well as Monarchy, they will in time
go on to undervalue Monarchy in comparison of the rest: But to leave my
Diversion, and to return to Mr. Simmons.

His Living Sequestrated, and his Person exposed to the license of his veriest
Enemies, but he withdrawing himself from this Storm, and being out of their
reach, they reek their malice on his poor Wife and Children, and his aged
Father: They threaten to beat down the House about their Ears, unless they
would yield possession to Mr. Atkins, His Father, for cutting down three Trees
on the Glebe for necessary uses, and an honest Parishoner for loving Mr.
Simmons, and plowing his Land, were most maliciously handled, and sent for up
before the Committee in the Exchequer Chamber: And when after all these Threats
and Oppressions they still keep possession of the Parsonage House, having no
place else wherein to put their Heads, at last, May the 15, Watt Tyler, I mean
Watt Long, whom some call Colonel Long, came with some Troops of Horse, and
cast his whole Family out of Doors, his aged Father, his Wife and three
Children, the eldest but seven years old, and his Servants; and so gave
possession of the House to Mr. Atkins.

He that desires to be better satisfied concerning this faithful Minister of
God, and what raised this Persecution against him, let him have recourse to
that Learned and Orthodox Book of his lately Published, called, A Loyal
Subjects Belief, worthy every Man's reading, wherein he shall see a solid and
satisfactory Answer to all those Arguments divulged by way of a Letter by
Stephen Marshal, the great Patriarch of Rebellion, whereby he endeavors to
maintain the Lawfulness of this present War against the King: In which Letter
you may see the true Character of a Cauterized Schismatic, for as if he were
afraid the World should not think him sealed up to a Reprobate sense, and past
all grace of Repentance; he tells us that as soon as he has recovered his
Health (much impaired by a hot eager prosecution of this Rebellion) he intends
to return (with the Dog to his Vomit) to sacrifice his strength to the service
of the Cause and his Excellency, in all which, while he labors to free himself
from the imputation of Madness, and apologizeth against a prevailing Report,
that the horror of his guilt had distracted him, he proves himself to be madder
than ever the World took him.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
III.
The great increase of Brownists and Anabaptists at Chelmsford of late years.
Their abuse of the Church, and Doctor Michelson Parson there. Their Tenets in
matters of Religion. Master Cornelius a Minister Plundered, etc.

ESSEX is a deep Country, and though we have Traveled almost two Weeks in it,
yet we cannot get out: We are now at Chelmsford, which is the Shire-twon, and
has in it two thousand Communicants; all these are Parishioners of one and the
same Church, for there is but one Church in this great Town, whereof at this
time Doctor Michelson is Parson, an able and godly Man. Before this Parliament
was called, of this numerous Congregation there was not one to be named, Man or
Woman, that boggled at the Common Prayers, or refused to receive the Sacramant
kneeling, the posture which the Church of England (walking in the footsteps of
venerable Antiquity) has by Act of Parliament enjoined all those which account
it their happiness to be called her Children. But since this magnified
Reformation was set on foot, this Town (as indeed most Corporations, as we find
by experience, are Nur^eries of Faction and Rebellion) is so filled with
Sectaries, especially Brownists and Anabaptists, that a third part of the
People refuse to communicate in the Church-Lyturgie, and half refuse to receive
the blessed Sacrament, unless they may receive it in what posture they please
to take it. They have amongst them two sorts of Anabaptists; the one they call
the Old Men, or Aspersi, because they were but Sprinkled: The other they call
the New Men, or the Immersi, because they were overwhelmed in their
Rebaptization.

In August, 1641. there was an Order published by the House of Commons, (indeed
by some leaders in a Committee) for the taking away all Scandalous Pictures out
of Churches, in which there was more intended by the Authors than at first
their Instruments understood, until instructed by private information how far
the People were to enlarge the meaning. When this Order came forth, there was
standing in the Chancel a goodly fair Window at the East end, untouched from
the first foundation of the Church, in which was painted the History of Christ,
from his Conception to his Ascension: And to perpetuate the memory of the
Benefactors, in the vacant places there were the Eschochions and Arms of the
ancient Nobility and Gentry, who had contributed to the building and
beautifying that fair structure. In obedience to the Order, the Churchwardens
took down the Pictures of the blessed Virgin, and of Christ on the Cross, and
supplied the places with white Glass. But the Sectaries who understood the
sense of that Order better than the Churchwardens, did rest very ill satisfied
with this partial imperfect Reformation: That therefore they might, according
to the phrase of the Times, make a through Reformation, on the Fifth of
November in the Evening, all the Sectaries assemble together, and in a Riotous
manner with long Poles and Stones, beat down and deface the whole Window.

This exercise of an usurped power in the People without the lawful Magistrate,
like that which Andreas Corolostadius put in practice in the Reformation under
Luther, and was sharply condemned by him; and indeed gave the unhappy occasion
to that Schism, which is hardly made up at this day; stirred the spirit of the
Doctor to inveigh, the next Lords Day, against popular tumultuous Reformations,
though to the better: As being vitiated, First, By the defect of lawful
Authority, which cannot reside in the People. Secondly, In the intemperancy of
the prosecution, who commonly cast out one Devil by another; abolishing
Superstition with Sedition. This so incensed the Sectaries thus to be opposed
in their furious Zeal, that they threatened the Doctor to ruin him, if he
preached any more on that subject: And to let him see how welcome such Doctrine
was unto them, there was a Carbine discharged at a Window of that room where
the Doctors usual abode was, the Bullet passed through the place, and in all
probability had slain him, had not the good Providence of God (without which a
Sparrow falls not to the ground) diverted him unexspectedly from a business
before known to be appointed for that place and hour. This design frustrated,
about a fornight after, one of these new Proselytes, a young Clothier, with
others possessed with the same frenzy, came into the Church immediately after
Divine Service was ended, laid violent hands upon the Doctor, took him by the
Throat, and would have torn his Surpl^^^ off his Back, and were so so enraged,
that had not some of his honest peaceable Parishoners come to his rescue, they
had in all probability endangered his Life: But whom they could not wound with
their hands, they cut with their tongues, as with a sharp Razor: They revile
him and call him Baals Priest, and Popish Priest, for wearing the Rags of Rome;
nay, they cry out against him as a perjured Person, that had violated his faith
engaged in the Protestation, to abolish Popery, of which (in their opinion)
wearing the Surpless was a part. Many attempts they made upon the Doctor and
his Curate, affronting them, both in officiating Divine Service, and
administration of the Sacraments; but they being countenanced by a considerable
part in the Town, the Sectaries could not effect what they desired, until at
last in the Months of June, July, and August, 1642. they were animated by the
coming of the Forces raised in Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk: For as they raised
each Company it was sent to Chelmsford, the common Rendezvous, and there stayed
until they were made up three hundred, or four hundred, and so sent to London.
In all the time of their stay there, the Doctor lay at the mercy of the
Soldiers, who egged on by the Brownists and Anabaptists of the Town, used his
House as their Quarter, consumed his provisions for his Family, and commanded
there as Lords. Amongst many Outrages committed by the Soldiers, Three are most
remarkable.

First, Upon a Fast Day, they send a Command to the Doctor, that he should not
pray for the Bishops, nor so much as make mention of them in his Lips, nor use
the Book of Common Prayer; if he did, they threaten to pull him out of the
Pulpit, and tear him in pieces: The Doctor not intimidated by their Threat,
gives order to his Curate to read the Prayers appointed; which accordingly he
did. The Soldiers right bred, being Volunteers of Colchester and Ipswich, and
rightly designed too, for my Lord Sayes's own Regiment, fit Soldiers for such a
Leader, irreverently fit with their Hats on, make a noise to drown the Curates
voice, nay, they call to him to come out of his Calves Coope, meaning the
Reading-Desk, and make an end of his Pottage: The Curate remembering that advice
of our Savior, Not to cast Pearls before Swine, nor holy things to Dogs, gives
over reading, unwilling to expose the holy Worship of God to so foul Contempt
and Scorn. Having thus silenced the Curate, their Commanders looking on, they
violently take the Sacred Bible to tear it, but being reproved for it by
Sergeant Major Bamfeild then present, they exchange the Bible for the Book of
Common Prayer: Having it in their power, in solemn Triumph they carry it into
the Streets, and that which holy Martyrs inspired by the Holy Ghost composed,
and sealed the truth and sanctity of it with their dearest Blood, these Savage
Miscreants rent in pieces: Some of the leaves they tread under feet, some they
cast into the Kennel, some they pissed upon, and some they fixed on the end of
their Clubs and Cudgels, and in a Triumphant manner marched with them up and
down the Town.

Secondly, About a Week after when the Doctor was in the Chancel, there to
Interr the Corpse of a Gentleman lately deceased, these Soldiers rushed into the
place with an intent to bury the quick with the dead, to put the Doctor into
the same Grave, which they had done (for no other reason but because he used
the Form prescribed by the Church at burial of the Dead) had he not been
powerfully rescued by his Parishoners.

Lastly, When the glad Tidings were brought to Chelmsford, that Episcopacy was
voted down by the House of Commons, all usual expressions of an exulting joy
were used; amongst the rest, Bonfires were kindled in every street, but most of
the Fuel was violently taken from the Doctor's Wood-yard. And now the pile
raised and the fire kindled, they want nothing but a Sacrifice, this they
resolve shall be the Doctor himself: To this purpose, the Separatists of the
Town, assisted by two Companies of Soldiers, in the Evening assault him in his
House, seize upon his Person, and are ready to carry him to the Fire, there to
throw him headlong into the midst of it: But some of his Friends having
information of the design, go and acquaint the Commanders with the bloody
intentions of their Soldiers, who presently take a Guard and rescue the Doctor
out of their power, as soon as ever they had seized on him.

Since that oppressed and worried every day by these ravenous Wolves, he was
forced to forsake his Charge (as many other godly Ministers are) and to fly for
his Life; leaving his Wife and eight Children to the mercy of the Rebels, who
have deprived his Family of all their Livelihood, and exposed them to extreme
want: Nay, they have several times broken violently into his House under
pretense to search for him, and have held Pistols cocked, and Swords drawn, at
the Breasts of his Children and Servants, charging them upon their Lives, to
reveal where the Doctor was.

It was lately certified from thence, by a chief Member of that Town, and no
friend of the Doctors, that he finds the case there to be far worse than he
expected; for while they hoped that the power being (Traitorously) wrested out
of the King's hand, they should have shared it amongst themselves, they find
that either the power is fallen into their hands that are far beneath them, or
else has raised these men up far above them, for as he writes, The Town is
governed by a Tinker, two Cobblers, two Tailors, two Pedlers, etc.

And that the World may see what a Systeme of Divinity these Cobblers and
Tailors are like in time to stitch together, and what Principles they intend to
Rule by, I shall here set down certain preparatory prelusory Propositions which
they usually Preach (for Preach they do) to their infatuated Disciples, and by
them are received as the Divine Oracles of God: And you shall have them in
their own Terms, viz.

First, That Kings are the Burdens and Plagues of those People or Nations over
which they Govern.

Secondly, That the relation of Master and Servant has no ground or warrant in
the New Testament, but rather the contrary: For there we read, In Christ Jesus
there is neither bond nor free, and, we are all one in Christ.

Thirdly, That the Honors and Titles of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts,
Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, are but Ethnical and Heathenish distinctions
amongst Christians.

Fourthly, That one man should have a Thousand Pounds a Year, and another not
one Pound, perhaps not so much, but must live by the sweat of his Brows, and
must Labor before he eat, has no ground, neither in Nature or in Scripture.

Fifthly, That the Common People heretofore kept under Blindness and Ignorance,
have a long time yielded themselves Sorvants, nay, Slaves to the Nobility and
Gentry: But God has now opened their Eyes, and discovered unto them their
Christian Liberty: And that therefore it is now fit that the Nobility and
Gentry should serve their Servants, or at least Work for their own Maintenance;
and if they will not Work, they ought not to Eat.

Sixthly, That Learning has always been an enemy to the Gospel, and that it
were a happy thing if there were no Universities, and all Books burnt, except
the Bible.

Seventhly, That any man whom God has (as they call it) Gifted, may be chosen
by the Congregation for their Pastor: And that Imposition of Hands by the
Bishop and Presbytery, are mere Popish Innovations.

What more additions to these monstrous Opinions, the wildness of such men's
Brains, assisted by the cunning of the Devil, and encouraged by the usurped
power of these Times may produce, we must leave to the discovery of Time. In
the interim (good Reader) stand amazed, and wonder at this excellent pattern of
the intended blessed Reformation. Had not God, to prepare us for destruction,
deprived us of Knowledge, had he not closed our Eyes that we should not see, and
hardened our Hearts that we should not understand, were we not a people as the
Prophet speaks, forsaken and meted out for destruction, it could not be, but
that Mankind would rise up against this Generation of Vipers, and their
Protectors, and sweep them away, to use the Metaphor of the Holy Ghost, with
the beesom of destruction, who if a while connived at, will prove Moths
fretting to the destruction both of Church and State: For in this Model, you
may see the Babel which is now in building, and the budding forth of those
Brambles, out of which (if not timely quenched) will come forth a Fire (as it
is in Jothams Parable) which will devour the Cedars of Lebanon.

The same godly Reformers, which plundered Master Laud, before mentioned, came
afterward to Master Cornelius, Parson of Peldon, in the same County of Essex,
whom they rob of all his goods, within doors and without: They spared not his
Library, nor his Wives Childbed Linen, though she was great with Child, and
in danger by the fright she took at their coming, to have occasion to make use
of them before her due time, they plunder him to the value of Four hundred
pounds, a very great sum in a poor Clergy-mans purse, especially as these Times
go. For relief of his Loss, he sends his Servant to the Mayor of Colchester (a
famous Justiciary, as you may remember the last Week, in the relation of Mr.
Laud, and Mr. Honifields Cases) having made his Complaint, and accused the
plunderers by name, the Mayor knew that some body deserved Commitment, but had
the ill luck to be mistaken in the person, and therefore instead of the
plunderers, he Commits Master Cornelius his man to the Gaol, where he is lodged
for a Malignant, until his Master (plundered of his Man too) came and put in
Bail, that his Servant should be forthcoming, to answer to all Objections the
next Sessions. Master Cornelius knowing that he should in vain expect Justice
where he found Oppression, from the Mayor goes to Mr. Gardner, a Justice of
Peace not far off, who grants his Warrant for apprehension of the parties: Who
being apprehended (though for Felony) put in Bail to answer the next Sessions.
When the time came, Mr. Cornelius indicts these plunderers, the Bill was found
by the Grand Jury upon the evidence of three or four Witnesses, who were
Spectators, and saw them carry away the Goods: Nay, the prisoners at the Bar
not only confessed the Fact in their Examination before the Justice, when they
were first apprehended, but in the face of the Court, and presence of the
Jurors: Yet the Petty-Jury, contrary to Reason and their own Consciences, found
the Indictment against the King. The Court wondering at so wilful blindness,
cause the Statute to be read, lay open the Evidence, and remand them back, not
doubting but comparing the Fact with the Law, the Result would be a Verdict for
the King: They persist in their Obstinacy, and return Ignoramus. Being asked by
the Bench, how they could go against so clear Evidence? They answered in
general, Because they did not think PLUNDERING (a new name for an old Theft) to
be Felony by the Law: But being beaten out of this starting hole, though ten
are Convicted, yet two stand out, and give this reason, that they were a
Malignants Goods, and the Parliament had given power to plunder such: But when
it was replied, That no such Order was produced, nor was it pleaded by the
Prisoners at the Bar; they then professed openly, that these men arraigned at
the Bar were honest men, that they had an Intent to do them favor, and they
would do it. Hereupon the Bench justly incensed against so wilful perjury,
binds over the Jurors to answer it the next Assizes: And withal, order Mr.
Cornelius to Indict these plunderers again upon another Felony; he obeys their
command, and the Grand Jury find it to be Billa vera: But when the
Undersheriff went out to Impanel a Jury to try the prisoners, he could find
none but Separatists, who attended there that day purposely to be of the Jury,
and professed openly, that they stayed there to save the prisoners. Happy men
these, that may commit Murders, Robberies, and Thefts, and yet fear no
Condemnation, neither at the Tribunal of God or Man. It is an usual doctrine of
this Sect, That God sees no sin in his Children, (for that name they will
ingross to themselves, though no men less deserve it) and it seems they are
resolved to see no sin one in another. It was a wild saying of a great
Patriarch of theirs, That the Children of God were Heteroclites, because God
did often save them, even contrary to his own Rules. I know not how true they
will find this assertion at the Great Day, when Murder shall be Murder, and
Theft Theft, and God that Righteous Judge, who without respect of persons, shall
render to every man according to his deeds, yet here on Earth, if these men may
judge one another, they may commit what wickedness they list, and let the Rains
loose to all kinds of Villainy, and yet be saved contrary to all the Rules of
Law and Justice.

Mr. Archer, Lecturer at the same place, in his Sermon encouraged the people to
take up Arms against the King, but it may be objected, says he, that the Gentry
gainsay this Doctrine, and the Learned utterly disclaim it as Erroneous and
Damnable; but what though the Gentry and Learned (as you call them) dissent,
yet let it not Stagger your belief of this undoubted Truth: For I tell you that
in my Conscience you may do it, and in doing it you are so far from sinning,
that you will do that which is acceptable to God. Be liberal therefore in
contributing to this holy War, and sending forth men to fight this Battle of
the Lord. This man in his Prayers and Sermons, constantly calls the Parliament,
The Lords Anointed, but with what Oil it is not yet determinated: I am sure by
experience, we find that it is not Oil of Gladness.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
IV.
Sir Rich. Minshul 's House in Buckinghamshire, plundered by the Lord Brooks
command. The Kings Picture abused. A House burnt near Hounslow by the Lord
Wharton 's Soldiers. Mr. Wiborow, and Mr. Thorn, the one a Minister in Essex,
the other in Bedfordshire, the first ill-intreated on the Lords Day by the Lord
S. John 's Troopers, the other unjustly committed to Prison for a private
revenge.

ON Monday, the 15 of August, 1642. Sir Richard Mynshul of Bourton, in the
County of Buckingham Knight, furnished with ten Horse and Arms, began his
journey into the North to wait upon the King, as in the duty of a Servant and
Subject he was bound. This being discovered (for they have spies in every
corner) to the Lord Brook, Sir Peter Temple, Sir Rich. Ingoldsby, Master
Goodwine, and others then at Aylesbury, leaders of an Army raised against his
Majesty. It fell under consideration to make Sir Richard Mynshul a precedent to
deter others from serving the King, since it was not to be done but by exposing
their persons to Imprisonment, and their Estates to Plundering, for the Result
of that deliberation was, that since they could not secure his person, they
would seize on his Estate. Nor do they stay long before they put the sentence
in execution: For on Thursday the 18 of Aug. the Lord Brook commanding a great
part of the Army, came to Sir Richard's House, and in case he should find
Resistance, they bring diverse pieces of Ordnance to batter the House: but being
come they find no opposition. The first company that enters the House were
under the command of one Captain Jones, who either detesting the Oppression, or
yet not fleshed in the sin, which but then found footing in this Kingdom, (for
this was the first of this kind committed in Buckinghamshire, and the second in
England) moderated the eagerness of the Soldiers sharp set on the prey, so that
they gleaned but a little here and there; this moderation renders Captain Jones
suspected for a Papist, both to the Lord Brook, and the rest of the Commanders:
Nay, he is not only voiced for a Papist, but a Rumor is raised that he was
Bribed into this Moderation, and had taken a reward to spare Sir Richard's
Goods: The Captain blasted with these reports, the jealousy of him grew so
high that they threaten to kill him: To avoid the fury of the Soldiers he is
fain to withdraw himself, nor durst he appear before a Servant of Sir Richards
had made Oath, that he was Innocent of any such Contract. And now the Lord
Brook and his Company being masters of the House, the first thing on which they
express their rage is the Kings Picture, which with their Swords they most
traitorously pierce through in diverse places: And not content to wound him in
that representation, (whose person God miraculously has, and we hope will
preserve from them) they whet their Tongues against their Sovereign, using
Traitorous and scornful Language against him: By all which it is more than
manifest to all the World, what they would do to the Substance, if they had him
in their power, that express such malice on his shadow: Having at first
entrance violated their Loyalty to their King (according to his Majesty's
frequent predictions) their fellow Subjects cannot expect Justice at their
hands: Now all is lawful prize that comes to hand, Money, Plate, Jewels, many
suits of rich Hangings, Linen, Bedding, they plunder from the Cabinet to the
Larder, and make clean work as they go, leaving no Booty for a second plunder.
And though that House were but one, yet in that one they plundered three, Sir
Richard having disrobed two Houses, one in Essex, the other in London, thinking
to secure all in this third: While these things were in doing, the Lord Brook
with other Commanders, commands the Wine-Seller to be broke up: But in a saucy
imitation of greatness, they will not drink without a Taster, yet not being
confident enough professedly to own Regal observances for prevention of danger,
a pretense was made that the Wine was poisoned, and one of Sir Richard's
Servants is compelled (a Pistol set to his Breast) to begin and lead the way,
that if there were any danger, the experiment might be made in him; he having
gained a cup of Wine by their dissembled State, they follow freely, and drink
very liberally to the good success of their designs: without ever scrupling
whether drinking so, did not come within the nature of a a Health. And indeed
'twas an oversight that Casuist Prin was not consulted in the Case, the Cup
often gone round, at last some inspired with the Spirit of Wine, prophesied
that Sir Richard's Treasure was buried in the Cellar, presently they fall to
digging, and instead of Treasure, find a Mine of Bottles; they drink up the
Wine, and in indignation break the Bottles: From hence to cool the Wine, they
go to the Beer-Seller, and in both what they could not drink, they break the
Vessels, and let run on the ground: After this they break open the Library, and
the place where he kept his Evidences: They seize on all the Bills, Bonds,
Deeds, Evidences, Writings, and Books, which they find whether Sir Richard's,
or his Friends; some of these they take away with them, some they tear in
pieces, some they bind in bundles, and make them serve instead of Fuel, both to
heat Ovens, and to roast Meat for their Supper; and would by no means suffer
any of them to be redeemed, though large sums of Money were offered for them:
The House it self escapes not their fury, wanting Ladders to come at the Lead,
they supply this defect with the Racks broken down from the Stables; they rip
up the Lead and carry it away, they tear down the walls of the Houses with
Spades and Mattocks, they dig up the lower Rooms, hoping there to find more
Treasure: They break the Windows, Doors, Wainscot, Seelings, Glass, they take
away all Iron Bars, Casements, Locks, Keys and Hinges: They break open his
Wool-house and Barns, and empty all: They enter the Dove-house, and like
Vermin destroy the Pigeons; only one of these Vermin falling from the
Holes, brake his Back and died thereof: and because they could not carry away
his House covertly they endeavor to fire it, to this purpose they leave
Matches burning in the Mats, but were discovered. From his House they issue out
into his Grounds; there they lay all common, they break up his Rales and
Fences: Of his Sheep what they did not eat, they sold, Sheep worth 20 s. for 12
d. Lambs worth 10 s. for 6 d. and the reasons why the rates of their market
were so low, were, first, they were a Malignant and a Traitors Goods (so they
styled Sir Richard.) Secondly, They were sold to their Brethren, and therefore
must afford good Penniworths. The rest of the Stock they run their Swords or
Pikes into most of them and spoiled them. Nor was Plunder the only thing they
looked after, Blood is in their thoughts. First, They send a Troop of Horse to
pursue Sir Richard, and threaten to cut him as small as Herbs to the Pot: They
clap a strong Guard on Sir Richard's Lady, deny her a Bed to lie on, though the
Neighbors earnestly entreated to kill them if they can find them: Who (poor
Souls) affrighted with these barbarous Insolences, fled into the Field, and
hid themselves in growing Hemp, and there lay on the Ground almost 20 Hours,
without Meat or any sustenance, so that what with fright and dampness of the
Earth, some of them contracted dangerous Sicknesses, and hardly escaped with
Life. The Terror which fell upon the Country thereabout was so great, that the
neighboring Justice of Peace durst not grant his Warrant to search after any
of Sir Richard's Goods, though earnestly entreated to it: And the Neighbors
were so ill used and threatened, to extort confession from them where Sir
Richard was, or where any of his Goods were conveyed, that some swooned for
fear, some fell mad, and some died. Certain it is their carriage was so
barbarous, that it enforced Mr. Jo. Crew, one of the Company, to profess his
dislike, and to tell the Lord Brooks and the rest, That they being Lawmakers
should not be Law-breakers, nor make such precedents as would discover their
intentions, and render them odious unto the Country: Since that, knowing Sir
Richard to have put himself for preservation of his Life under his Majesty's
Protection, they have caused his Pond-heads to be dug down, and have
destroyed all his Fish, they have cut down his Woods, and seized on all his
Lands, or made them utterly unprofitable unto him, for they will not suffer any
Bailiff or Servant of his to take any care of his Estate, but have often sent
parties of Horse to seize on them, or kill them.

At a place called Kings-harbour near Hounslow-heath, three Soldiers, under the
Command of the Lord Wharton, came into a House to drink, going away, they of
the House demand Money for their Drink: So unexpected an affront did so incense
the Soldiers, that one of them told his Companions he would show them how they
set Houses on fire in Ireland, and so put his Carbine into the Thatch and
discharged it, set the House on fire and departed. The General ESSEX returning
from London, came by as the House was on fire, complaint is made unto him, that
the owner of the House was undone, but all in vain, his Excellency was not at
leisure to do Justice.

The Countess of Rivers (who as you heard in the second Weeks Relation, was
Plundered to the value of an Hundred thousand, or an Hundred and fifty thousand
pounds) finding her abode here unsafe, having lost her Goods, and her Person in
danger; to secure her self, resolved for a time to abandon her Country, and
rather expose her self to the hazard of Travel, than commit her self to that
protection which the contemned Laws now afford. To this purpose she obtained a
Pass to go beyond Seas: While she was in preparing for her Voyage, Mr. Martin,
Plunder-master General, he that so familiarly speaks Treason, and steals the
King's Horses, or does any thing, plunders the Countess of her Coach Horses,
notwithstanding a Warrant from the Lords House to secure them: And when this
Warrant was produced to stave off this Parliament Horse-taker, he replied, That
if the Warrant had been from both Houses he would obey it, as coming from the
highest authority in England, (sure this man was born with Treason in his
Mouth) but since it came But from the Lords he did not value it. When this
Warrant could not prevail, the Countess obtains a Warrant from the Earl of
Essex, to have the Horses restored unto her again, but Mr. Martin to overbear
all, procures an Order from the House of Commons to keep them. This Honorable
Ladies Goods were seized on, though Licensed to pass by the Lords, and searched
and allowed by the Custom House.

At Pebmarsh, in the same County of Essex, on the Lords Day, diverse of the
Parliament Volunteers came into the Church, while the Parson, Mr. Wiborow was
in his Prayer before Sermon, and placed themselves near the Pulpit, and when he
was in his Prayer, one of them struck diverse times with his Staff against the
Pulpit to interrupt him, and while he was in his Sermon, in contempt of the
place where they were, and the sacred action in doing, they were almost as loud
as the Preacher, to the great disturbance of the Congregation. No sooner was
the Sermon ended, and the Parson come out of the Pulpit as far as the
Reading-desk, but they lay violent hands upon him, rent his Clothes, threaten
to pull him in pieces in the Church. With much entreaty they spare him there,
and permit him to go into the Churchyard; he is no sooner come thither, but
they assault him more violently than before: Mr. Wiborow seeing the Constable
(who all this while stood a spectator of his hard usage) calls unto him, and
charges him in the King's Name to keep the Kings Peace: At his request they did
a little forbear him: But before he could get half ways Home, they assault him
again, and demand the Book of Common Prayer which he used in the Church, (That
which was found by the Parish, being torn in pieces before) which he refusing
to deliver up unto them, they reek their fury on him: They tug and hale him,
and vow to kill him, unless he deliver up the Book of Common Prayer to their
pleasure; he stoutly refuses: Hereupon they fall upon him, strike up his
Heels, and take it from him by force, and so carry it away in triumph.

Mr. Blakerby (a silenced Minister heretofore) preaching at Halstead in the
same County, told them, That to bow at the Name of Jesus, was to thrust a Spear
into Christ's side; and such Ministers as signed Children with the sign of the
Cross, did as much as in them lay to send such Children unto the Devil.

When the Earl of Essex and the rest went from Reading to London, after the
unhappy (to say no more) surrender of that town, they left there a Committee,
consisting of none but City Captains and Tradesmen, these according to the
authority committed unto them, summon all the able men of the Parishes
thereabout, to appear before them at Reading, and Assessed them at their
pleasure. In Marlow they Assessed one Mr. Drue at 1000 l. they fell to 500 l.
he refusing to pay was Imprisoned; but the Prison being most nasty and
loathsome, denied the accommodation of Bedding, was forced to pay 300 l. Mr.
Horcepoole, they assessed at 200 l. Mr. Chase (a man plundered before) at 40 l.
20 pound was offered, but nothing will be abated of 30. Eliot a Butcher, at an
100 l. and Imprisoned. Cock a Baker, at 20 l. Mr. Furnace, the Vicar (not
suffered to speak for himself because a Malignant) at 10 l. and paid seven.
John Langley 10 l. Thomas Langley 20 l. William Langley 5 l. and Wilmot his
Servant 5 l. John More 80 l. Hoskins a Shoemaker 5 l. Cane an Innkeeper 7 l.
Rates so Illegal, or had they been Legal, so unequally proportioned to these
men's Estates, that had Ship Money been still on foot, it would not have drawn
so much Money out of their Purses in forty or fifty years, as this Blew-Apron
Committee at Reading, removed some seven or eight Degrees from the Close
Committee at Westminster, extorted from them at one clap. O that we were but so
wise as to compare our Conditions! certainly then we could not but acknowledge
the just wrath of God upon us for our Ingratitude, murmuring so much when we
had so little cause, and bless God for the return of our former Peace, though
with all its Grievances, and those maliciously aggravated.

Mr. Giles Thorn, Batchellor in Divinity, and Parson of S. Cutberts in
Bedford, was upon Sunday in the beginning of August last, 1642. apprehended in
his Parish Church immediately after he came out of the Pulpit (having preached
three Sermons in the Town that day) by the Lord Saint-Johns Troops, who lay
then in Bedford, and in a very boisterous manner carried away to an Inn in the
Town, not permitted to go home to his House to visit his Family, nor any of his
Friends suffered to come to him: The next day he was carried away to London,
where when he had lain more than three Weeks under the Messengers hands, he was
brought to his Trial at the Bar in the Lords House: Accusations are framed
against him out of Sermons preached nine years before. Witnesses are produced
to prove the Articles, who so well remembered what they were to say, that they
were fain to read their Depositions out of Papers which they brought in their
hands. Mr. Thorn gives so full an Answer to all the Objections, that the Lords
pronounce themselves satisfied, and him Innocent, only the Lord Say disputes
with him, and the Earl of Bullingbrooke grumbles at him. At length it is
pretended that there is another Witness in the Country that can say somewhat,
(especially if it be written down in a Paper, as it was to his fellow
Deponents): Hereupon he is committed to the Fleet, there to remain till that
Witness can be prevailed with to find leisure to come up. About three Weeks
after the Witness appears, and is Sworn, and contrary to the Rules of that
Court, is sent to be examined by a Clerk. Mr. Thorn, with much ado obtains a
Copy of his Depositions; which upon view contain no new Matter, but what he had
before answered unto and cleared: Hereupon he Petitions again for a Sentence;
he is ordered to attend the House: After a chargeable attendance of many days
with his Keeper, he is called, the Cause reviewed, upon the review, the Earls
of Pembroke, Holland, Clare, and diverse others, affirm, that in their
consciences they had Acquitted him at the first hearing, and now upon the
review, found nothing to alter their opinion, and therefore thought it fit he
should be Discharged. But well fare a good Neighbor at a dead life: The Earl
of Bullingbrook objects, That he is a man of a Malignant spirit, that he has
great Interest in the Affections of the People amongst whom he lives, and
therefore if Enlarged and remitted Home, may do much prejudice to the good
Cause in hand; upon these just and weighty Considerations, Mr. Thorn is
remanded to the Fleet: Since that time he has used the assistance of many
Friends, drawn many Petitions, humbly desiring that he might be heard: Or if
the great Affairs of State would not afford their Lordships so much leisure,
that he might have leave upon Bail to go down to attend his Cure, until their
Lordships should please to call for him: But was so far from obtaining his
desire, that he could never get so far toward it, as to have his Petition
read. His Parishoners sensible of his Oppression and their own Injury, being
bereaved of the comfort and labors of their own Pastor, sent up a Petition
subscribed with three hundred hands to the same effect, that Justice might have
a free uninterrupted course, either to Condemn or Absolve him, but all in vain:
So that for ought we yet understand he is still a Prisoner, and for any thing
we are informed to the contrary, he is without hopes for Enlargement, though
his Judges have pronounced him Innocent. And now would you know the true cause
of all this Oppression? Know then that it is possible for the High Court of
England ^o be made the Instrument of private Revenge: For Sir Sam. Luke diverse
years since suing Mr. Thorn in the Star Chamber, it was Mr. Thorns
unhappiness to get the day of him, an injury which Sir Samuel could never
forget, and did now revenge it by the help of the Earl of Bullingbrook, the
Lord Saint John's Son, and his own interest in the House. This story has been
attested by some that were both Ear and Eyewitnesses of these particulars, and
let me be substituted Prisoner in Mr. Thorns place if he (for ought I know)
know any thing that I know this, or intended to make it known to the World.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
V.
Warder Castle gallantly defended by the Lady Arundel, against Sir Edward
Hungerford and his power: His persidiousness in breaking the Articles of
Surrender: His barbarous usage of the Lady, her Children, and Goods. Mr. John
Bykar, a Vicars Son, murdered at Coventry. Mr. Abraham Haynes Robbed, Abused,
and unjustly Committed, etc.

ON Tuesday the second of May, 1643. Sir Edward Hungerford, a chief Commander
of the Rebel in Wiltshire, came with his Forces before Warder Castle in the
same County, being the Mansion House of the Lord Arundel of Warder: But finding
the Castle strong, and those that were in it resolute, not to yield it up
unless by force, called Colonel Strode to his help: Both these joined in one,
made a Body of 1300. or thereabout. Being come before it, by a Trumpeter they
summon the Castle to surrender: The reason pretended was, because the Castle
being a Receptacle of Cavaliers and Malignants, both Houses of Parliament had
ordered it to be searched for Men and Arms, and withal by the same Trumpeter
declared, that if they found either Money or Plate, they would seize on it for
the use of the Parliament. The Lady Arundel (her Husband being then at Oxford,
and since that dead there) refused to deliver up the Castle, and bravely
replied, That she had a command from her Lord to keep it, and she would obey
his command. Being denied entrance, the next day being Wednesday, the third of
May, they bring up the Cannon within Musket shot and begin the Battery, and
continue it from the Wednesday to the Monday following, never giving any
intermission to the besieged, who were but 25 fighting men, to make good the
place against an Army of 1300. In this time they spring two Mines; the first in
a Vault, through which Beer and Wood, and other necessaries, were brought into
the Castle: This did not much hurt, it being without the foundation of the
Castle. The second was conveyed into the small Vaults, which by reason of the
intercourse between the several Passages to every Office, and almost every Room
in the Castle, did much shake and endanger the whole Fabric. The Rebels had
often tendered some unreasonable conditions to the Besieged to surrender, as to
give the Ladies, both the Mother and the Daughter in Law, and the Women and
Children Quarter, but not the Men; the Ladies both infinitely scorning to
Sacrifice the Lives of their Friends and Servants, to redeem their own from the
cruelty of the Rebels, who had no other crime of which they could count them
guilty, but their fidelity and earnest endeavors to preserve them from
Violence and Robbery, chose bravely (according to the Nobleness of those
Honorable Families from which they are both extracted) rather to die together,
than Live on so dishonorable terms. But now the Castle brought to this
distress, the Defendants few, oppressed with number, tired out with continual
watching and labor from Tuesday to Monday, so distracted between Hunger and
want of rest, that when the hand endeavored to administer Food, surprised with
sleep, it forgot its employment, the morsels falling from their hands while
they were about to eat, deluding their Appetites now when it might have been a
doubt which they would first have laded their Muskets withal, either Powder
before Bullet, or Bullet before Powder, had not the Maidservants (valiant
beyond their Sex) assisted them, and done that service for them. Lastly, Now
when the Rebels had brought Petarrs, and applied them to the Garden Door (which
if forced, opened a free passage into the Castle) and Balls of wildfire to
throw in at their Windows, and all hope of keeping the Castle was taken away,
now, and not till now, did the Besieged found a Parley. And though in their
Diurnals at London, they have told the World that they offered Threescore
thousand pounds to redeem themselves and the Castle, and that it was refused,
yet few men take themselves to be bound any thing the more to believe it,
because they report it. I would Mr. Case would leave preaching treason, and
instruct his Disciples to put away Lying, and speak every man truth with his
Neighbor: Certainly the World would not be so abused with untruths, as now
they are: Amongst which number this report was one, for if they in the Castle
offered so liberally, how came the Rebels to agree upon Articles of Surrender,
so far beneath that Overture? For the Articles of Surrender were these:

First, That the Ladies and all others in the Castle, should have Quarter.

Secondly, That the Ladies and Servants should carry away all their Wearing
Apparel, and that six of the Serving Men, whom the Ladies should nominate,
stould attend upon their Persons, wheresoever the Rebels should dispose of them.

Thirdly, That all the Furniture and Goods in the House should be safe from
Plunder, and to this purpose, one of the six, nominated to attend the Ladies,
was to stay in the Castle, and take an Inventory of all in the House, of which
the Commanders were to have one Copy, and the Ladies another.

But being on these terms Masters of the Castle, and all within it, it is true,
they observe the first Article, and spare the lives of all the Besieged, though
they had slain in the defense at least 60 of the Rebels: But for the other two,
they observe them not in any part: As soon as they enter the Castle, they first
seize upon the several Trunks and Packs, which they of the Castle (...) making
up, and left neither the Ladies or Servants any other wearing clothes but what
was on their backs. There was in the Castle amongst many rich ones, one
extraordinary Chimney-piece, valued at two thousand pounds, this they utterly
def^ce, and beat down all the carved works thereof with their Pole-Axes. There
were likewise rare Pictures, the work of the most curious Pencils that were
known to these latter times of the World, and such that if Apelles himself
(had he been now alive) needed not to blush to own for his. These in a wild
fury they break and tear in pieces, a loss that neither cost nor Art can
repair. Having thus given them a taste what performance of Articles they were
to expect from them, they barbarously lead the Ladies, and the young Ladies
children, two Sons and a Daughter, Prisoners to Shaftsbury, some four or five
miles from Warder. While they are there Prisoners, to mitigate their Sorrows,
in triumph they bring five Cart-loads of their richest Hangings and other
Furniture through Shaftsbury toward Dorchester, and since that, contrary to
their promise and faith given, both by Sir Edward Hungerford and Strode, they
have Plundered the whole Castle: So little use was there of the Inventory we
told you of, unless to let the World know, what my Lord Arundel lost, and what
these Rebels gained. This havoc they made within the Castle. Without they burn
all the Outhouses, they pull up the Pales of two Parks, one of Red Deer, the
other of Fallow: what they did not kill, they let loose to the world for the
next taker. In the Parks they burn three Tenements and two Lodges, they cut
down all the Trees about the House and Grounds, Oaks and Elms, such as few
places could boast of the like, whose goodly bushy advanced heads drew the eyes
of Travelers on the Plains to gaze on them, these they sold for Four-pence,
Sixpence, or Twelve-pence a piece, that were worth three, four, or five Pound
a Tree: The Fruit Trees they pluck up by the Roots, extending their malice to
commit spoil on that that God by a special Law protected from destruction, even
in the Land of his Curse, the Land of Canaan: For so we read, When thou shall
besiege a City, thou shall not destroy the Trees thereof, by forcing an Ax
against them, for thou may eat of them, and thou shall not cut them down to
employ them in the Siege: only the Trees which thou know that they be not
Trees for Meat, thou shall destroy, Deuteronomy. 20.19, 20. Nay, that which escaped
destruction in the Deluge, cannot escape the hands of these children of the
Apollyon the destroyer. They dig up the heads of twelve great Ponds, some of
five or six Acres apiece, and destroy all the Fish: They sell Carps of two foot
long for twopence and threepence apiece: They send out the Fish by Cart
loads, so that the Country could not spend them: Nay, as if the present
Generation were too narrow an Object for their rage, they plunder Posterity,
and destroy the Nurseries to the greater Ponds: They drive away and sell their
Horses, Kine, and other Cattle: And having left nothing either in the Air or
Water, they dig under the Earth, the Castle was served with Water brought two
Miles, by a Conduit of Lead: And intending rather mischief to the Kings Friends
than profit to themselves, they cut up the Pipe and fold it (as these men's
Wives in North-Wiltshire do Bone-lace) at Sixpence a Yard; making that waste
for a poor inconsiderable Sum, which two thousand pounds will not make good.
They that have the unhappy occasion to sum up these losses, value them at no
less than an hundred thousand pounds. And though this loss were very great, not
to be paralleled by any, except that of the Countess of Rivers, yet there was
something in these Sufferings, which did aggravate them beyond all example of
Barbarity, which this unnatural War now did produce, and that was Rachels
Tears: Lamentation and Weeping, and great Mourning, a Mother weeping for her
Children, and would not be comforted because they were taken from her; for the
Rebels as you hear, having carried the two Ladies Prisoners to Shaftsbury,
thinking them not safe enough there, intend to remove them to Bath, a place
then much infected both with the Plague and the Small Pox: The old Lady was
sick, under a double confinement, that of the Rebels and her own Indisposition,
all were unwilling to be exposed to the danger of the Infection, especially the
young Lady, having three Children with her, they were too dear, too rich a
treasure to be snatched away to such probable loss without reluctance:
Therefore they resolve not to yield themselves Prisoners for that place, unless
they will take the old Lady out of her Bed, and the rest by violence, and so
carry them away. But the Rebels fearing lest so great Inhumanity might incense
the People against them, and render them odious to the Country, decline this,
and since they dare not carry all to Bath, they resolve to carry some to
Dorchester, a place no less dangerous for the Infection of Schism and
Rebellion, than Bath for the Plague and the Pox. To this purpose they take the
young Ladies two Sons (the eldest but nine, the younger but seven years of age)
and carry them Captives to Dorchester.

In vain does the Mother, with tears entreat that these pretty pledges of her
Lords affections, may not be snatched from her: In vain do the Children embrace
and hang about the Neck of their Mother, and implore help from her that neither
knows how to keep them, nor yet how to part with them; but the Rebels having
lost all bowels of Compassion, remain inexorable. The complaints of the Mother,
pitiful cry of the Children prevail not with them, like ravenous Wolves they
seize on the Prey: And though they do not crop, yet they transplant those Olive
Branches that stood about their Parent's Table: A barbarous fact, and such as
must look out of Christendom for a precedent, and hardly find it though among
the Heathen, except among the unwashed Turks, who take Christian Children from
their Mothers Breasts either to make a Seminary for their Guards of Janissaries,
or by desolation to make them Eunuchs unsuspected Guardians of their
Concubines, or if in Christendom amongst none but the Jesuits their Brethren, a
Generation whom they would be thought most to hate, yet are known most to
imitate, Exodus 21. To steal a Man was death by the Law of Moses, nay, the
Romans that saw by no other Light, but that dim Spark of Nature discerned the
equity of this Law, as is apparent in their Lex Fabia de Flagiariis: And though
these men blanch the Inhumanity, pretending that they rob the Mother to enrich
the Church, to bring them up in the true Religion, it were worth the while to
ask (if they would vouchsafe an answer) what they mean by the true Religion, if
they mean the Protestant, or to speak more properly, the Religion of the Church
of England, it is apparent they persecute that, but suppose (which we do not
grant) that they did bereave Parents of their Children to that purpose to bring
them up in the true Religion, yet cannot a good Intention warrant an unlawful
Act, nor ought they to do evil that good may come of it: Nor do we find either
that the Church was ever pleased with such Accessions, or that God did give a
blessing to such unwarrantable Zeal. When Sesibutus, King of Aragon, in the
Year 600. prevailed against the Saracens, and in a better Zeal than this, but
not according to knowledge, compelled his Captives to be Baptized, he quickly
found his error by the want of Gods blessing upon his endeavors, nay, Gods
dislike was so visible in the success, that the Church of God observing it,
determined, That the Children of Infidels not having the use and exercise of
right Reason, should not be Baptized Invitis Parentibus, contrary to the
consent of the Parents. And the fourth Council of Toledo, Cap. 56. disallowing
the inconsiderate zeal of Sesibutus, forbad to compel any man to the Faith
under the censure of Anathema, and determined withal, that to baptize Children
without the consent of the Parents, is all one as to compel men of full age to
be Baptized. The same determination is cited and approved by the Canonist,
Did. 45. Cap. De Judaeis, and were it but consistent with the nature of this
work, it were easy to decry this Jesuitical Turkish practice by most
impregnable Arguments, both in the Schoolmen and Casuists: But I must leave
this to Men of the sacred Function, and only beg leave to infer, that if it be
no^^^^ful to baptize the Children of Jews, Infidels, or Heretics, without
consent of their Parents: Though without Baptism when it may be had, there is
no entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, certainly it must be far more unlawful
being baptized to take them from their Parents, to season their tender years
with dangerous principles leading to Profaneness, Brownism, Anabaptism, and
Rebellion. A just indignation against so barbarous practice has transported me
in this argument farther than I intended, though not so far as the heinousness
of the fact deserves, therefore if any man desires to be more fully satisfied
of the power and interest which Parents have over and in their Children, being
an Inheritance given them of the Lord, as the Prophet David, and the possession
of their Parents, as Aristotle in his Politics, and the great violation of
Justice in relation of the Laws of God, Nature and Men, in despoiling their
Parents of them, let him have recourse to that Learned and Elegant discourse of
Petrus Aerodius, Chief Justice or President of Aniou, in his Book de Patria
Potestate, who being robbed of his Son, stolen from him by the Jesuits, to plant
him as a hopeful Imp in their Society, and not able to rescue him out of their
power, though he implored, and had the King of Spain's assistance (for thither
he was carried) pursues his Son with Arguments and Labors to recall him to his
Obedience, by laying before him his duty artificially Collected, and strongly
applied from the Laws, Divine, Natural, and Moral, and therefore to him I remit
him, and turn my discourse into its proper channel.

On Friday, the 12 of May, 1643. Mr. John Bykar (Son to the Vicar of Dunchurch)
was with his Father in Law, one of the High-Constables of Warwickshire, at the
Market at Coventry. Being in a House in the City, he received some rude
affronts from a Soldier of that Garrison: He being a very civil man, of good
Moderation, and it seems well instructed not to answer a Fool in his Folly, or
being reviled to answer again, withdrew himself from the place to decline the
insolent madness of the Soldiers, and free himself from his provocations: Being
come into the streets, secure, as he thought, from all violence, he was
suddenly run through the Body, and falling down, died instantly. His offense
was (for as yet we can hear of no others) that he was a Parsons Son; so
inveterate malice to that Function and all depending on it, do these Rebels
bear. And therefore if in this Relation you meet with frequent mention of
Affronts, Oppressions, Plundering, and Murders of the Ministers of the Gospel,
do not attribute it to any partiality, as if the Relator were more querulous
for them than others, but to a serious desire to proportion his Labors in a
just measure to the merit of each man's case.

Master Abraham Haynes of London, in September last, traveling into
Shropshire, to visit his Daughter and some other Friends, being benighted, was
forced to take up his Lodging in a little Village some eight miles short of his
Daughters House: After Supper, his Host in a seeming way of Courtesy comes to
visit his Guest, and brings with him two or three of his Neighbors, whereof
the Constable was one, to bear him company. After a little discourse, they will
needs persuade him that he is a Malignant, a hard word in those parts before
this Parliament began, but however it served the Constables turn well enough to
lay hold on him: Having seized on him, they search him, under pretense that he
carried Letters of dangerous consequence, but searching, they find what they
sought for, his Money, 14 l. he had about him* this as good Booty they take
from him, and for fear he should run away from his Money, that night they set a
strong Watch upon him. Next morning very early they carry him before a
Parliament Man, residing about two miles distant from that place, who most
Committee-man like out of the abundance of his Justice, though no crime were
objected, nor any thing found about him to render him liable to restraint, but
only the sin of having 14 l. or because he was guilty of the Constables
affirming him to be a Malignant, he commits him to his former guardians, by
them to be conveyed to London. Mr. Haynes unwilling to come so near his
Journeys end, and yet not arrive there, tenders Bail, Gentlemen of the best
rank and quality in the Country; but it will not be accepted: He desires to
have leave to send a Messenger to his Daughter where he was that day expected,
but it will not be granted: Away they carry him, they mount him and his man
upon two poor Jades, while my Host and Mr. Constable ride on their Geldings.
The first night they will allow him no Supper, unless he will pay for it,
though they knew he had no Money, having themselves seized on all he had.
Afterward, upon much opportunity and earnest entreaty, they are pleased out of
his own Moneys, to allow him a poor thin allowance of Food by the way. Being
arrived at London, they bring their Prisoner before the Committee, who upon an
implicit faith send him unheard, unaccused, unexamined Prisoner to the Fleet,
where after he had lain six Weeks, having made use of many Friends, and
presented many humble Petitions, and ('it is thought, some Moneys too) he is
restored to his Liberty upon this ground, that there were no Articles, nor any
Accusation found in the Committee against him: But for his Money that (in the
great Justice and Equity of the Committee) was bestowed upon his Accusers, as a
just reward of their zeal to the Parliament.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
VI.
Willingborow in Northamptonshire, miserably Plundered. Mr. Flint a Curate,
Murdered by a Rebel there. The Rebels breach of Faith at the surrender of
Sudely Castle, and their abuse of the Church and Monuments there. Colonel
Purefoy 's defacing S. Marys Church, and the Chapel, with other Monuments in
Warwick, etc.

THat the Kingdom might not be undone but at their own charges, sundry Ways and
Arts, both by force and entreaty, have been used to extort Moneys from the
Kings good Subjects, to maintain the present Rebellion. Amongst others, Mr.
Graey of Wellingborow, Clark of the Peace for the County of Northampton, was
assaulted by persuasion, and very earnestly solicited by Sir Rowland S. John,
to contribute liberally to this unnatural War: But his refusal to partake in so
crying a sin, did produce a double effect, indignation in the Rebels, that hate
all men that run not into the same excess of Treason and Rebellion with them,
because others backwardness does upbraid their forwardness that rush into
Rebellion like the Horse into the Battle: But brought forth imitation in
others, not only in Wellingborow, but in some Villages bordering on that Town:
Who seeing so good a president of Loyalty, refuse with him to hearken to so
Traitorous proposals: And now thinking themselves endangered by their refusal,
and exposed to the mercy of Rebel Plunderers, they enter into a consultation
how to secure themselves from violence, and resolve to come to each others
assistance, if the Dragooners from Northampton or any else should assault them,
upon notice given by jangling their Bells: And that the World might not think
their fears to be groundless, on the 26 of December, 1642. at 12 of the Clock
at Night, Captain Francis Sawyer (and as is supposed a Brother of Sir Gilber
Pickerings) attended by a 100 Dragoons, beset Mr. Grayes House; and the signal
of jangling the Bells being discovered by some of the Town that were of their
faction, to prevent the Alarm to the Country, they tie up the Bell-ropes, and
place a Guard of twelve Musketeers in the Churchyard, to secure the passage
to the Belfrey: Having thus beset the House, and as they thought frustrated the
device of calling the Confederate Villages to their help, Captain Sawyer
demands entrance, Mr. Gray out of his Window, tells him that he and his Family
were in Bed, and withal desired to know what their intentions were, thus in the
dead of the night to disturb their rest, and what Warrant they had to command
entrance? They return him answer that they had a Warrant to apprehend his
Person, and seize on his Plate and Arms for the use of the Parliament: Half an
hour was spent in this Parley, Mr. Gray protracting the time, that perhaps his
Neighbors hearing of his danger, might come to his rescue: Which accordingly
fell out, for some of the Town hearing that the Rebels had beset Mr. Grayes
House, hasten toward the Church that by the sound of the Bells (the Signal
agreed on) they might summon the Country: When they come thither, they find the
way intercepted, a Guard of Musketeers denying them entrance: but enraged to
find opposition where they did not expect it, they fell foul on the Guard, beat
them off, took five of their Muskets, forced their entrance, and so rang the
Bells. Hereupon the Rebels, fearing that their entrance was delayed, thereby to
gain time till the Town and Country might come in to his Rescue, brake open a
Window, and put in one or two of their company, who presently open the Doors to
them and give them free entrance: Having thus possessed themselves of the
House, their first work is to seize upon Mr. Graey's Person, to this purpose
they make directly to his Chamber, whom they found in his Shirt, and would
hardly give him leave to put on his Clothes; and that their seizing of his
Person might not be without all show of Authority, they produce a Warrant
signed by the Earl of Essex, in which Mr. Gray's name was, this they show only,
but will not permit them to read it. All the Moneys and Plate which they found
in the House they take away, and as for Mr. Gray himself having taken him
Prisoner, they compel him to go on foot from Wellingborow to Welby: While they
are on their way toward Welby, some 40 or 50 men from Wellingborow, armed only
with Swords and Staves, come to Rescue Mr. Gray from the Rebels: After a short
Skirmish (wherein one or two of the Pursuers were hurt only, not slain) finding
that they were unequal for the Rebels both in Number and Arms, leaving the Prey
in the hands of the Oppressors, they retreat to Wellingborow: Being returned
thither, they find Five hundred of the Country come in to their assistance: The
common People (who seldom love or hate moderately) enraged that Mr. Gray should
thus be taken from them, especially some of his poor Neighbors, who in him
were robbed of the relief which they received from his Charity, resolve to make
some of the Rebels Faction in that Town sensible of their displeasure; and
therefore since they cannot reek their anger on the Rebels that did the fact,
they fall foul on those that did approve it, if they were not Abettors and
underhand Contrivers of it: They break their Windows, break into some of their
Houses, and spoil their Goods. Amongst the number of those that suffered under
the fury of the People, a Chandler and a Cooper underwent the greatest Loss,
yet it could not be much, since upon a strict survey, the whole spoil done in
the Town did not amount to 30 l.

Many of this assembly, utterly disliking such disorders, did not only reprove
the chief Actors in this Outrage, but to discountenance their proceeding
withdrew themselves: They of the Town to their Houses, they of the Country to
their several Habitations; so that by the break of day the Tumult was appeased,
and the Town cleared. While these things were in doing, the Cooper and one or
two with him post away to Mr. Perne, the Parson of Welby, a Turbulent and
Seditious man, and make their complaint to him, and to inflame him that was too
apt to kindle without their help, they do not only aggravate their own losses
at Wellingborow, but tell him that they threatened to come and do the like at
Welby: Mr. Perne (changing his black Coat for a gray) instantly goes to
Northampton, and there represents the injury done to their Faction at
Wellingborow, and the pretended danger of Welby so effectually, that by Noon
that Tuesday, Colonel Norwich commanding in chief, Sergeant-Major Mole, Captain
John Sawyer, Captain Francis Sawyer, Captain Pertlow, Captain Redman, Captain
Farmar, Captain Harrold, with 500, but others say 1000 Horses and Dragooners,
came to Wellingborow: Being come thither, they divide themselves into several
Troops, to make good several passages into the Town, thereby to keep out the
Country that were coming to their aid, Captain John Sawyer, with 80 or a 100
Dragooners enters the Town at that side which leads to Welby; and riding in the
Front of his men marched directly toward Mr. Neile of Woollaston, and some few
with him who stood to oppose him: Sawyer discharges at Mr. Neile, and whom he
missed with his Bullet he would be sure to hit with his Tongue, shooting out
Arrows, even bitter words, calling him Popish Rascal: But what reward shall be
given unto thee, O thou false Tongue? He stayed not long without it, for the
words were no sooner spoken, and (to second his words) a charge given to his
Soldiers to give fire, but he received what he would have given, his deaths
wound by a shot in the Head and Neck by Goose-shot, which made him fall on his
Horse-neck, which shot was seconded by a Countryman, who with a Club beat him
off his Horse into the Dirt; being thus beaten down, the Women to revenge their
Husbands Quarrel fasten on him, but Mr. Oliver Gray (Nephew to Mr. Gray before
mentioned) and Mr. Woolaston rescued out of their hands, who otherwise had
immediately died the death of Sisera, by the hands of Women: Reprieved thus for
some few hours, they carry him to one Gray's House an Alehouse-keeper, whose
Wife was Captain Sawyers Aunt, where they administered what they could, but in
vain, for after two and twenty hours Languishment he died: As soon as Captain
Sawyer was fallen, his Soldiers instantly ran away, only his Son, unwilling to
leave his Father, followed him to the hazard of his life, by many Wounds which
he received. In other P^rts of the Town, the Townsmen quit themselves like
valiant Soldiers and loyal Subjects, and with very little help of the Country,
kept the Rebels out: Mr. Gray's man and another, with each man his Musket,
kept out above a 100 at the lower end of the Town, and repelled them twice or
thrice; and had not Captain Sawyer coming to himself a little before his death,
persuaded them that it was in vain to stand out, there being three Pieces on
the way from Northampton, to Batter the Town (which proved true) and withal
persuading them to write a Letter to the Commanders, promising that upon their
submission the Town should be secured, they had held it out to the last man:
But the dying Captain prevailed with them, they write a Letter according to his
advice, which as they say was signed by his own hand, the apprehension of his
desperate condition having put new thoughts in him. But this Resolution not
being so fully made known to the Town, as a business of that concernment ought
to have been, some of the Town, being ignorant of any Treaty, made some shot,
and the Rebels willing to take advantage, rush into the Town, put both those of
the Town and Country to flight. Captain Francis Sawyer much enraged for his
Brother, and coming near the place where his Brother was Wounded, seeing Mr.
Flint the Curate of Harrowden stand there, not any way engaged in the
Resistance, having not given any provocation, he barbarously struck him with
his Pole-Ax, and cleft his Head down to the Eyes, of which Wound he died
instantly: The Earth drinking up that innocent Blood, shed by the hand of an
accursed Doeg, which like the Blood of Abel, calls loud in the Ears of God for
Vengeance upon them, who authorize and countenance such horrid Murders; Cursed
be his anger for it was fierce, and his wrath for it was cruel.

Being masters of the Town, at three of the Clock in the Afternoon they begin
to Plunder, and continue the Spoil until the next Daylight failed them, until
Wednesday night. In this time they carry away the Wealth of the Town to
Northampton and other places, sparing none but those whose Tongues are framed
to Shiboleth, men of their own Faction, whether they were active against them,
or stood Neuters: By which Essay, those Lukewarm men (who stand Pendulous
equally poised between Rebellion and Loyalty, and know not which side to lean
unto) may guess what measure they are like to receive from the Rebels hands, if
ever they come to have them in their power.

In the Town, two men especially suffer under these Free-booters, Mr. Gray and
Mr. Fisher; from the first being Clerk of the Peace, they take away the
Commissions of Peace, the Sessions Rolls, together with his own Evidences and
Leases, all his Household Stuff, even to his very Bed-cords, leaving but one
Sheet for his Wife and five Children: His Wheat and other Corn they give to
their Horses; what they did not eat, they threw into the Streets, and trampled
it in the dirt. From the other they took Goods, and other things, amounting to
a very great Sum: And to complete their wickedness, to their Oppression they
add Scorn; for having taken away all that they could, in derision they affix
Protections in writing under Colonel Norwich his hand, at his and some others
doors, forbidding any man to Plunder. Generally what they could not carry away,
they spoil, so that the Loss sustained by the Town, is valued at Six thousand
pounds.

They took Mr. Neile Prisoner, and some Forty more, amongst them they took the
Vicar, Master Jones, a grave and learned man, but lame and very sickly, and
having Plundered him of all he had, they mount him on a poor Jade, with a
Halter instead of a Bridle; the rest they tie two and two together, and drive
them before them to Northampton. Mr. Gray, as I told you, was the day before
led Prisoner to Welby, from thence to Northampton, where his Prison cannot
afford him protection from the fury and rage of the Soldiers; to make way to
his death, they threaten to pull down the House where he was confined: And the
Commissioners finding that he could not remain there with any safety, were
constrained to send him away Prisoner to London. Being come thither, Articles
are framed and exhibited against him, which being examined at a Committee, and
no proof at all made, he was Voted to be discharged his Imprisonment: yet to
delude Justice, and the Petition of Right, the Chairman could never find a
time to make his Report to the House, so that he remained a Prisoner for a long
time.

On the 28. of January, 1642. the Castle of Sudely, upon Composition, was
delivered up to the Rebels; there were Articles agreed on and sworn to, but as
he spoke truly, Children were deceived with Apples, and Men with Oaths; the
Rebels as they swear to Articles for their advantage, so they break them as
easily for their advantage, and make Perjury an easy uninterrupted passage to
Theft and Robbery, for these Rebels brake as many Articles as they swore unto:
they plunder not only the Castle, the Seat and House of the Lord Chandois, and
Winchcombe a neighboring Village, to the utter undoing the poor Inhabitants,
but in defense of the Protestant Religion, and vindication of the Honor of God,
they profane his House. There is in the Castle a goodly fair Church, here they
dig up the Graves, and disturb the ashes of the dead: they break down the
ancient Monuments of the Chandoses, and instead thereof, leave a prodigious
Monument of their Sacrilegious profaneness: for each part of the Church they
find a peculiar way to profane it: the lower part of it they make their Stable,
the Chancel their Slaughterhouse. Unto the Pulpit (which of all other places
in probability might have escaped their Impiety) they fasten pegs to hang the
Carcasses of the slaughtered Sheep: the Communion Table, according to their own
Language, they make their Dresser or Chopping-board to cut out their meat; into
the Vault, wherein lay the Bodies of the Chandoses, an ancient and honorable
Family, they cast the guts and garbage: mingling the loathsome Intrals of
Beasts, with those Bones and Ashes which did there rest in hope of a joyful
Resurrection. The Nave or Body of the Church was all covered with the dung and
blood of Beasts: and which was (if it be possible) a degree beyond these
Profanations, in contempt of God and his holy Temple, they defile each part and
corner both of Church and Chancel with their own Excrements; and going away,
left nothing behind them in the Church (besides Walls and Seats) but a stinking
Memory, that part of the Parliament Army raised for the defense of Religion,
had been there. Let that railing Rabshekah, or jeering Sanballet, I mean the
Author of the ridiculous Pamphlet, entitled, One Argument more against the
Cavaliers, read this Story, and then tell me which are most guilty of
profanation of Churches, the Cavaliers or the Roundheads; which were most
profaned, either St. Mary Maudlins in Oxford, or the Church at Sudly Castle:
and yet this Dog sticks not with Shimei to bark at his Sovereign and blaspheme
his Piety, as if the Rebels brought from Cyrencester had been Quartered in this
Church by his approbation, who to expiate that guilt, gave an hundred an fifty
pounds to adorn and beautify that Church. The truth is, there was a fault in
the Commanders for lodging them in Churches, who if they had had their due, had
been hanged for Rebellion, their carcasses exposed to the Fowls of the air, and
the Beasts of the field, that the Ravens of the valleys might have had their
due portion, and never suffered them to come so near the Church, as to have the
privilege of Christian Burial in the Churchyard. So, even so, let all the
Kings enemies perish, O Lord, and let all the people say. Amen.

In Saint Mary's Church in Warwick, and the Chapel (commonly called the Earls
Chapel) adjoining to the Choire of that Church, are diverse fair Monuments of
the Beauchamps, anciently Earls of that place; which Family long flourishing
there, had been great Benefactors and Beautifiers of that Church, whereof
Thomas Beauchamp (Earl of Warwick, and Earl Marshal of England, and one of the
Founders of the most noble Order of the Garter, in the Reign of King Edward the
Third) built the Choire now standing, in the midst whereof is his Monument, and
adorned the Windows, with the Pictures of Himself, his Wife, and Children which
were many; upon the Surcoats of the Men were their Arms skilfully depicted, the
Women having the like, and Mantles, over which were the Arms of their Matches,
their Husbands being the prime Nobility of those times: The like Portraitures
in Glass, but much more rich and costly, were in that stately Chapel
beforementioned: In this stood the Monument of Earl Richard, being Brass gilt;
and in the Opinion of judicious observant Travelers, esteemed the rarest Piece
erected for any Subject in the Christian World: but such is the barbarousness
of the pretenders to Reformation, that upon Wednesday the 14. of this instant
June, the Soldiers, by the appointment and encouragement of one whom (in these
degenerous Times wherein the dregs of the People are made Commanders for the
advancement of Rebellion) men call Colonel Purefey (a man of a mean desperate
Fortune, but by the means of the late Lord Brook, chosen Burgess of Parliament
for Warwick, and who had the greatest Influence in seducing that unhappy Lord
to this desperate Rebellion, in which he miserably perished:) did beat down and
deface those Monuments of Antiquity; and not content with this, by the same
Command they break down the Cross in the Marketplace, not leaving one stone
upon another, Purefey all the while standing by, animating and encouraging
them, until they had finished their so barbarous Work. In which the World may
observe, that these men are the sworn Enemies, not only of pretended
Superstition, but of the Ensigns of Nobility and Gentry, that if their Diana, I
mean their Parity, may take effect, Posterity may forget, and not read the
distinction of Noble from ignoble, in these venerable Monuments of ancient
Nobility: there being in these Windows something indeed to instruct a Herald,
nothing to offend the weakest Christian.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
VII.
Doctor Cox barbarously used by the Earl of Stamford at Exeter, contrary to the
Law of Arms. The unheard of Cruelties committed by the Lord Gray of Groby and
his Soldiers, on the person, house, goods and servants of Master Nowell in
Rutlandshire. Dr. Bargrave ill entreated by Col. Sands in Kent, etc.

AFter the great and happy Defeat given by the Victorious Sir Ralph Hopton to
the Devonshire Forces at Starton, it pleased the Commanders of His Majesty's
Forces to entertain thoughts of Clemency toward the remainder of the Rebels.
To testify to the World therefore, that there was nothing more in their
desires than a Thrift of Christian Blood, and withal, to heap coals of fire
upon their heads, to conquer them by kindness whom they had often conquered by
the sword: by their Letters they signify their readiness to close up those
wide rents between them, by a Treaty. And that a Message of Peace might be well
suited with a Messenger, they sent the Letters by Dr. Cox, Doctor of Divinity,
who, attended by a Trumpeter, came to Exeter that Sunday in the Afternoon. The
Trumpeter, as the manner is, gave the Town warning, as soon as he came within
sight of the Guard, and presently an Officer came to receive him, who
blind-folding him with a Handkerchief pinned over his Eyes, conducted him
through the City unto the Earl of Stamfords House: having admittance there, the
Doctor takes off his Handkerchief, but accidentally did not dispose of the pin
that fastened it, but still kept it in his Hand: the Earl had no sooner set his
eyes upon the Doctor, but presently he reviles him, and calls him all the
reproachful Names he could imagine, and swore that he would hang him instantly:
but first, to extort a confession from him, he offers a Knife or Dagger to his
Breast, demanding an answer to some Interrogatories: the Doctor not affrighted
with such rough usage, replies very discreetly, That he had received commands
to deliver certain Letters from the Commanders of the Cornish, to those of the
Devonshire Army, but that he had no Commission to satisfy any different and
by-demands; this denial to answer, together with after dinner, inflamed the
Earl, and put him into a new fit of Railing: and for variety sake he did
intermix the opprobrious names, with many menaces and offers of stabbing him:
In the end, seeing that this harsh welcome could effect nothing, nor awe the
Doctor to make any discovery, he demands the Letters: the Doctor, that he might
clear his hands, and so dive into his Pockets suddenly, put the Pin which he
held in his hands between his lips: hereupon one Baxter, a Serjeant-Major of
the City, observing the motion of his hand, but not perceiving what it conveyed
to his mouth, cried out, What does the rogue eat there? he swallows Papers of
Intelligence: With this the Earl, forgetting the Gravity and serious Deportment
of a Peer of the Kingdom of England, began in an antic manner to leap, and
skip, and frisk, crying out, Treason, Treason, he comes to betray the City,
Courage my brave blades: and so turning to the Doctor, he set his Dagger again
to his Breast, and demanded what it was that he had put into his mouth? The
Doctor mildly and softly putting his hands to his lips, took the Pin thence,
and showing it to his Lordship, said, It is a Pin, my Lord. The Serjeant-Major
thinking to intercept the supposed Intelligence going down the Doctors throat,
instantly flies to him, took him by the throat, and griped him so hard, that he
had almost strangled him. The Earl himself (most unworthily) crying out, Cut
the Villains throat, cut it: nor did he command another, what he would not do
himself, for with his own hands he offered his Knife thrice at the Doctors
throat to cut it, but the Doctor still put it by, God, who is a present help in
trouble, restrained the Earl, and delivered the Doctor out of his hands. Nor
was it his hap to suffer from Honorable hands only, the standers by are not
idle, but follow so leading an example: as if he had been sent for from
Cornwall to Exeter on no other errand than to be made the City scorn, and the
subject whereon their wanton insolency should vent it self: every one in the
Room had a fling at him: some with their fists beat him about the head; others
scratch his face; one with his fingers boars his ears, to his extreme torment
another with his fingers rakes in his mouth, hoping there to find some Papers
of Intelligence: one tears his hair, another forces his hand down his throat,
and the thing for which they make this strict search, is Intelligence, some
scrole of Intelligence: Sure there is much want of Intelligence in their own
heads, that made such strict inquisition for it in another man's. Well, this
pursuit of Intelligence so long they continue, and so eagerly, that the Doctor
fainting under so barbarous usage, was ready to give up the Ghost, and for fear
he should dye under their hands, they leave him a sad emblem of that
entertainment which the Messengers of Peace find from the men of this
Generation. Let that rebellious City remember and tremble at that condolement
of our Savior over the like sin: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee. I am unwilling to go on and
read her destiny, and therefore shall return to the story.

Having in this unchristian manner insulted long enough upon the Doctor, they
divert their rage, and spend the rest of their Fury on the Trumpeter; and
having either before, in part breathed out their madness, or not thinking the
poor Trumpeter so Malignant as the Doctor, though they used him bad enough, yet
they express not so keen a malice against him as against the Doctor. Having
satiated themselves by cumulating Injury upon Injury upon them, they are both
commanded to an outward Room; here they are assaulted by fresh Furies, for they
had not staid long there, but two Aldermen renew the same Insolences, and act
the Injuries all over again, and the very dregs of the People animated by their
example, bear them Company. After this, the Earl commits them to Prison, and
being brought into the Room where they were to lodge, they were stripped naked,
and their Clothes narrowly searched: and though after all this scrutiny nothing
could be found, yet Intelligence is the thing the Earl looks after, and
Intelligence he will have if it be to be had. And though the World never took
his Lordship for a Physician, yet he prescribes two Vomits, where his Honor
had his Simples, I know not, but the Composition was of a green color, divided
into two Draughts, put into two Bowls, these the Earl commands to be
administered to the Doctor and the Trumpeter, that so they may vomit up those
supposed Papers of Intelligence, which Serjeant-Major Baxter thought they had
swallowed: the Doctor, the chief Patient, begins first, whom instantly they ply
with Posset Drink, having likewise some infusion in it to provoke and help on
the Potion taken: all night long did they keep the Doctor at this Exercise,
though they saw that what came from him, came with great difficulty and
torment, yet they gave not off, till at last it drew Blood from him: all the
return that was made into the Basin, was very exactly strained, to see if there
were any rag of Intelligence: but there was none: but in case it should work
both ways (though his Lordship had many about him wondrous fit for such
Employment) yet whom he placed Sentinel for the Postern, if any Intelligence
should chance to escape that way, my intelligence fails me. This Inhumane usage
brought the Doctor so low, that in three days he was not able to receive any
Sustenance. In this his extremity and weakness, he had many visits from the
people of the Town, who like Jobs comforters, revile him instead of pitying
him: and the third night, as he lay very sick and weak in his Bed, there came
into his Chamber a man very likely to prove the Messenger of death unto him;
his name was Down, Lieutenant to Captain White, who presently asking for the
Jesuit, and calling him Rogue, and as many base names as himself deserved,
offered to lay violent hands upon him: but one of the Soldiers abhorring so
barbarous Cruelty, in mere mercy to a dying Man, as he had reason to judge him,
interposing, restrained him from acting those Murderous thoughts which he
brought with him. After the Doctor had remained Prisoner five or six days, and
having recovered so much strength as to hold out another worrying, he was (with
an ill intention in some) brought before the Council of War, where, upon the
Doctors complaint of the hard usage he had undergon, some of the prime Gentry
being ashamed of the Cruelties acted on him, being a Messenger, and in that
regard by the Law of Arms ought to be privileged from all Affronts, much more
from such violent Outrages, Sir John Northcoote endeavored to palliate the
business, and to take off from the odiousness of it, by alleging the Contents
of the Letters, which indeed being for some Preparatories and Overtures of
Peace, might inrage these men that were Enemies unto it: To which the Doctor
replied, that under favor that could be no ground, nor yet excuse for their
savage usage of him; because they had beaten him, and almost murdered him in
the Earl of Stamfords presence, before they knew the Contents of the Letters,
or read so much as one syllable of them, or indeed received them, the violent
Serjeant-Major seizing on him before he could deliver them: This so
unanswerable a return, put the Knight to his Italian shrug, and rejoyned no
more, but I know not That. After a Week (and more) Imprisonment, the Earl
commands the Doctor to be carried aboard the Hope of Toptham, where the stench
and noysom smell of the Ship had almost poisoned him. The Doctors Wife hearing
of her Husbands Imprisonment, came to Exeter to see him; but before she came
her Husband being Shipped for London, on much entreaty she obtained leave to go
on Shipboard to see him; but on her return, she was Imprisoned till her
Husband being under Sail, she had liberty to go away. After ten days being at
Sea, the Doctor arrived at London, where he was long detained Prisoner at the
Lord Peter's his House in Aldersgate Street.

The Lord Gray, with some other Rebels under his Conduct, came to Mr. Nowels
House, Brother to the Lord Nowel that now is, demanding his Person prisoner,
and his Arms for the use of the Parliament. Master Nowell modestly replied,
That he knew not wherein he had offended, that he should forfeit his Liberty or
Goods to the Justice of the Parliament: his House was his Castle, his Arms were
his Defense, and his Liberty was precious unto him; so that he could not
satisfy their demands in any thing. Hereupon they plant a Cannon very near the
House, so near, that the Fire of it took hold of an Out-house that was
thatched; this House, though burnt down, was not of any great consequence.
Therefore they discharge again, and beat down a beam of his Dwelling House, but
hurt no man within it: and making a third shot, they beat down a Chimney, and
the fall of it bruised the foot of one of his Servants. At last, finding that
Mr. Nowel was resolved to make good his house against them, notwithstanding
their Cannon Battery, and would not deliver up his Person to Captivity, nor his
House to their Plunder, they fire six of his Neighbors Houses; in one of which
there was a Woman in Labor, by which means the Neighbors were compelled to
expose her to a probable, by snatching her from a certain destruction; for in
the midst of her Throws and Pangs of Childbirth, they were fain to carry her
in a Chair out into the Streets: having a while sported and warmed themselves
at those Flames, at which the poor Inhabitants wept and wrung their Hands, they
threaten, that unless Mr. Nowel will yield himself Prisoner, and deliver up his
House to their pleasure, they will not only fire his House, but will not leave
a House unburnt in the whole Parish. This so affrighted the poor Inhabitants
his Neighbors, that Men, Women and Children, come with tears, and earnestly
beseech him to surrender himself, rather than suffer them to be ruined, and
utterly spoiled before his face. Overcome at last, not by the Rebels Ordnance,
but by that which spoke louder in his Ears, the pitiful complaints and
outcries of his Neighbors, he founds a Parley, the result of which was:

First, That the Rebels should see the Fire quenched.

Secondly, That all in his house should have liberty to depart whither they
pleased.

Thirdly, That none should enter the House but Commanders.

But this generation of Truce Breakers (that keep Faith neither with God nor
man, and break Oaths faster then ever Sampson did his Cords, whom nothing can
tie fast but a Halter, the strongest Obligation for a Traitor) were no sooner
entered the House, but presently they seize on Master Nowell and Master Skipwith
as their Prisoners: and whereas by the Article of agreement, none were to enter
the House but Commanders; and since, if the Article had been kept unviolated,
there were like to be as many Thieves within as without doors; Therefore
Commanders and Common Soldiers, Common Soldiers and Commanders, all Thieves,
enter the House and rifle it. They take away his Goods, cut the Ticks of his
Beds, burn the Feathers, tear in pieces his Accounts, Writings, and Evidences,
and That which we have not read in the black Catalogue of the outrages of the
Rebellious Irish, was attempted by these; for in the Examinations upon Oath of
those that report the miserable Sufferings of the poor Protestants in Ireland,
and the barbarousness of the Irish, published by Order of Parliament, we do not
find that God gave them up to so roprobate a sense, as to commit or attempt any
Rapes; give the Devil his due, this sin we find not laid to their charge: But
these blessed Reformers, whom they have not blushed blasphemously to call, The
Host of God, and Christ's Armies, and Champions of Religion, added this to the
rest of their innumerable Wickednesses, That they attempted to ravish two of
his Maidservants; one was dumb, but fourteen years of age; another had her
knee put out of joint, striving to resist a Villain in so Beastly an attempt.
In a word, their practices were generally so Wicked, so Impious, that one that
stood Spectator of all passages, and observed strictly what was done, affirms,
That Mr. Griffith (whom some call Prince Griffith) was the only civilized Man
amongst them. Having committed these Inhumane Acts among the Living, they go
into the Church among the Dead, and there deface a goodly Monument, which this
noble Gentleman, Mr. Nowell, had erected for his deceased Wife: deeply wounding
the living Husband, by spoiling that Memorial which he had consecrated to the
dear memory of his dead Wife. Having ransacked all from the living to the dead,
they carry away Mr. Nowell and Mr. Skipwith Prisoners to London, and commit
them to safe Custody in the Lord Peter's his House (before mentioned) in
Aldersgate street, where they remained Prisoners for a long time.

Colonel Sandyes, in his perambulation of Kent, bestowed a Visit upon Dr.
Bargraves House, then Dean of Canterbury, the Dean himself then being from
home. Sandyes came late in the Night, and the whole Family were in Bed: they
soon raise the House, and where they did not find they make an entrance,
forcing Mistress Bargrave, a virtuous good Gentlewoman (whom their hasty Summons
had permitted to cast only her Nightgown about her) to wait upon them from
room to room, not suffering her to turn aside (though she for Modesty sake
requested that favor at their hands) to draw on her Stockings, unless they
might stand by and see it done. They rudely rush into Mistress Boys her Chamber,
the Widow of Dr. Boys Dean of Canterbury, a Gentlewoman about fourscore years
old, there they seize upon a Cabinet of hers, and break it open, (though the
good Old woman would very fain have had it spared, and offered them the Key to
open it) they find in it forty five pounds in Old Gold, which she had laid by
to bestow as Legacies upon her Friends: this they hug and call their own. She
entreats them to forbear it, and directs them to her Will which was laid up
with the Gold, and in that they might see how she had bequeathed it. Upon
perusal of the Will, they find that she had made Dean Bargrave, her own
Brother, her Executor; this they pronounce a Crime of so high a nature, that
nothing could expiate the guilt, but the forfeiture of the Gold, and the
Cancelling of the Will; but by the earnest mediation of Mr. King, one of their
Company, at length they are persuaded to restore the Gold, and spare the Will.
From hence they go to the Chamber where young Mr. Bargrave the Deans son did
lodge; Sandys valiantly breaks his Sword (which hung at his Beds-head) before
his face, and calling him out of his Bed, sends him Prisoner to Dover-Castle.
Soon after, the Dean hastening home to comfort his distressed Family, Sandys
hears where he was lodged at an Inn at Graves-end, and as he was undressed and
ready to go into Bed, Sandys, and thirteen of his Soldiers, press into his
Chamber with their Swords drawn, and command him to yield himself a Prisoner;
which the Dean (having neither power nor will to resist) did accordingly;
having (without any reason given) brought him a Captive to London, they commit
him Prisoner to the Fleet where after he had lain three weeks, he was at last
released, without ever being examined, or so much as called to the House. After
this Sandys writes (I blush to mention so degenerous a Pamphlet) a Book, and
was not ashamed to call it, His Travels into Kent, unworthy his Predecessors,
to strain the name of Sandyes with such Travels: In this worthless Commentary,
the Register of his perpetual Infamy; amongst other things he fastens the Note
of a debauched drunken young Fellow, upon young Mr. Bargrave, a Gentleman of so
ingenuous a Countenance, so modest and sweet a Temper, that he deserves a far
better Character. The old Dean, a Grave and learned Gentleman, heart-broken
with these Injuries, soon after dies; the World in the mean time Condemning
Sandyes, not so much for his Barbarity, as Ingratitude in dealing thus with
him, who had not many years before, been a special means to save him from the
Gallows, when he was Indicted for a Rape at the General Affizes at Maydstone.
But you know the old Proverb, Save a Thief from the Gallows, and he will cut
your Throat.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
VIII.
Master Swift, Parson of Goodwich in Herefordshire, his Wife and ten Children
most inhumanly dealt with by Captain Kirle, a stony-hearted Rebel. The Duke of
Vendosme plundered at Uxbridge, with other frauds and abuses committed by the
Rebels, etc.

WHen the Earl of Stamford was in Herefordshire, in October 1642. and pillaged
all that kept Faith and Allegiance to the King, information was given to
Mistress Swift, Wife of Mr. Thomas Swift Parson of Goodwich, that her House was
designed to be plundered: To prevent so great a danger, she instantly repaired
to Hereford where the Earl then was, some ten miles from her own home, to
Petition him, that no violence might be offered by his Soldiers to her House or
Goods: He most nobly, and according to the goodness of his Disposition, threw
the Petition away, and swore no small Oaths, That she should be plundered to
morrow. The good Gentlewoman, being out of hope to prevail, and seeing there
was no good to be done by Petitioning him, speeds home as fast as she could,
and that Night removed as much of her Goods, as the shortness of the time would
permit: next Morning, to make good the Earl of Stamfords word, Captain Kirle's
Troop, consisting of seventy Horse, and thirty Foot which were hangers on,
(Birds of prey) came to Mr. Swifts house; there they took away all his
provision of Victuals, Corn, Household Stuff, which was not conveyed away: they
empty his Beds, and fill the Ticks with Malt; they rob him of his Cart and six
Horses, and make this part of their Theft the means to convey away the rest:
Mistress Swift much affrighted to see such a sight as this, thought it best to
save her self though she lost her Goods; therefore taking up a young Child in
her arms, began to secure her self by flight; which one of the Troopers
perceiving, he commanded her to stay, or (holding his Pistol at her Breast)
threatened to shoot her dead: she (good woman) fearing death whether she went on
or returned; at last, shunning that death which was next unto her, she retires
back to her House, where she saw her self undone, and yet durst not oppose or
ask why they did so? having thus rifled the House, and gone, next morning early
she goes again to Hereford, and there again Petitions the Earl to show some
compassion on her and her ten Children, and that he would be pleased to cause
her Horses and some part of her Goods to be restored unto her: the good Earl
was so far from granting her Petition, that he would not vouch-safe so much as
to read it: when she could not prevail her self, she makes use of the mediation
of Friends: these have the repulse too, his Lordship remaining inexorable
without any inclination to mercy: at last, hoping that all men's hearts were not
Adamant, relentless, she leaves the Earl, and makes her Address to Captain
Kirle, who, upon her earnest entreaty, grants her a Protection for what was
left, but for restitution, there was no hope of that; this Protection cost her
no less than thirty shillings: It seems Paper and Ink are dear in those parts.
And now thinking her self secured by this Protection, she returns home, in hope
that what was left she might enjoy in peace and quietness: She had not been
long at home, but Captain Kirle sends her word, that if it pleased her, she
might buy four of her own six horses again, assuring her by his Fathers Servant
and Tenant, that she should not fear being Plundered of them any more by the
Earl of Stamfords Forces while they were in those parts. Encouraged by these
promises, she was content to buy her own, and deposited eight pound ten
shillings for four of her Horses. And now conceiving the Storm to be blown
over, and all danger past, and placing much confidence in her purchased
protection, she causes all her Goods, secured in her Neighbors Houses, to be
brought home; and since it could not be better, rejoiced that she had not lost
all. She had not enjoyed these thoughts long, but Captain Kirle sent unto her
for some Vessels of Cider, whereof having tasted, but not liking it, since he
could not have Drink for himself, he would have Provender for his Horse; and
therefore instead of Cider, he demands ten Bushels of Oats. Mistress Swift
fearing that the denial might give some ground of a Quarrel, sent him word,
that her Husband had not two Bushels of Oats in a year for Tithe, nor did they
sow any on their Gleab: both which were most true: yet to show how willing she
was (to her power) to comply with him, that the Messenger might not return
empty, she sent him forty shillings to buy Oats. Suddenly after, the Captain of
Goodrige Castle, sends to Mr. Swifts house for Victual and Corn; Mistress Swift
instantly repairs to him, and shows him her Protection: He, to answer show with
show, shows her his Warrant, and so without any regard to her Protection,
seizes upon that Provision which was in the House, together with the Cider
which Captain Kirle refused. Hereupon Mistress Swift writes to Captain Kirle,
complaining of this Injury, and the Affront done to him in slighting his
Protection: But before the Messenger could return with an Answer to her Letter,
some from the Castle come a second time to plunder the House, and they did what
they came for: Presently after comes a Letter from Captain Kirle in Answer to
Mistress Swifts, telling her, That the Earl of Stamford did by no means approve
of the Injuries done unto her; and withal, by word of mouth, sends to her for
more Oats: She perceiving, that as long as she gave, they would never leave
asking, resolved to be drilled no more: the Return not answering Expectation;
on the third of December, two hours before day, Captain Kirles Lieutenant,
attended by a considerable number of Horse and Dragoons, comes to M. Swifts
House and demands entrance; but the doors being kept shut against them, and not
able to force them, they broke down two Iron Bars in a Stone Window, and so
with Swords drawn and Pistols cocked, they enter the House. Being entered, they
take all Master Swift and his Wives Apparel, his Books and his Childrens
clothes, they being in Bed; and those poor Children that hung by their Clothes,
unwilling to part with them, they swung them about, until (their hold-fast
failing) they dashed them against the Walls. They took away all his Servants
clothes, and made so clean work with one, that they left him not a Shirt to
cover his Nakedness. There was one of the Children, an Infant lying in the
Cradle, they robbed that, and left not the little poor Soul a rag to defend it
from the cold. They took away all the Iron, Pewter and Brass, and a very fair
Cup-board of Glasses, which they could not carry away, they broke to pieces:
and the four Horses lately redeemed, are with them lawful prize again, and left
nothing of all the Goods but a few stools for his Wife, Children and Servants,
to fit down and bemoan their distressed Condition. Having taken away all, and
being gone, Mistress Swift, in compassion to her poor Infant in the Cradle, took
it up almost starved with cold, and wrapped it in a Petty-coat which she took
off from her self: and now hoped, that having nothing to lose would be a better
protection for their Persons, than that which she purchased of Captain Kirle
for thirty shillings. But as if Jobs Messenger would never make an end, her
three Maidservants, whom they of the Castle had compelled to carry the Poultry
to the Castle, return and tell their Mistress, that they in the Castle said,
That they had a Warrant to seize upon Mistress Swift, and bring her into the
Castle; and that they would make her three Maidservants wait on her there,
threatening to plunder all under the Petty-coat; and other uncivil immodest
words, not fit for them to speak, or me to write. Hereupon Mistress Swift fled
to the place where her Husband, for fear of the Rebels, had withdrawn himself:
She had not been gone two hours, but they come from the Castle, and bring with
them three Teems, to carry away what was before designed for Plunder, but
wanted means of conveyance. When they came, amongst other things, there was a
Batch of Bread hot in the Oven, this they seize on, Ten Children on their knees
entreat but for one Loaf, and at last with much importunity obtained it: but
before the children had eaten it, they took even that one Loaf away, and left
them destitute of a morsel of Bread amongst ten Children. Ransacking every
corner of the house, that nothing might be left behind, they find a small
Pewter dish, in which the dry Nurse had put Pap to feed the poor Infant, the
Mother which gave it suck being fled to save her Life, this they seize on too.
The Nurse entreats, for Gods sake, that they would spare that, pleading, that
in the Mothers absence it was all the sustenance which was or could be provided
to sustain the life of the Child, and on her knees entreated to show mercy unto
the Child, that knew not the right hand from the left, a motive which prevailed
with God himself, though justly incensed against Nineveh. But to show what
Bowels of Compassion and Mercy are to be expected in Sectaries, and how far
they are from being Disciples to him who says, Be ye merciful, as your Father
which is in heaven is merciful. They transgress that precept of our Savior in
the Letter, and take away the Childrens meat and give it unto dogs; for
throwing the Pap to the dogs, they put up the dish as lawful prize.

Master Swifts eldest son, a youth, seeing this barbarous cruelty, demanded of
them a reason of this so hard usage: they replied, That his Father was a
Traitor to the King and Parliament, and added, that they would keep them so
short, that they should eat the very Flesh from their Arms; and to make good
their word, they threaten the Miller, that if he ground any Corn for these
Children, they would grind him in his own Mill; and not contented with this,
they go to Mr. Swifts next Neighbor (whose daughter was his Servant) and take
him Prisoner, they examine him upon oath what goods of Mr. Swifts he had in his
custody, he professing that he had none, they charge him to take his daughter
away from Mr. Swifts service, or else they threaten to Plunder him, and to make
sure work they make him give them security to obey all their commands:
terrified with this, the Neighbors stand afar off, and pity the distressed
Condition of these persecuted Children, but dare not come or send to their
relief: by this means the Children and Servants had no sustenance, hardly any
thing to cover them, from Friday six a clock at night, until Saturday twelve at
night, until at last the Neighbors moved with the lamentable cries and
complaints of the Children and Servants, one of the Neighbors over-looking all
difficulties, and showing that he durst be charitable in despite of these
Monsters, ventured in and brought them some provision. And if the World would
know what it was that so exasperated these Rebels against this Gentleman, the
Earl of Stamford, a man that is not bound to give an account of all his
actions, gave two reasons for it, First, because he had bought arms and
conveyed them into Monmouth-shire, which under his Lordships good favor was
not so; and secondly, because not before, he preached a Sermon in Rosse upon
that Text, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, in which his Lordship
said, he had spoken Treason in endeavoring to give Caesar more than his due:
these two Crimes cost Mr. Swift no less than 300 l.

About Feb. 1642. the Duke of Vendosme being to return home into France, but
resolving first to take his leave of the King at Oxford, obtained a Pass from
the close Committee, that he might be free from any let or molestation in his
journey, but notwithstanding this Pass, in his return from Oxford he was
searched and plundered at Uxbridge, by that worthy Knight Sir Samuel Luke, who
was sent by his Excellency from Windsor, with a Troop of Horse for that
purpose, That France by experience might know that Thieves rob as confidently
in the Towns of England, as in the woods of Ardenna, or any Forest in France.

About December 1642. the Colonels Waller, Brown, and others marching from
Ailesbury to Windsor, and thence by Newbury to Winchester, their Soldiers in
the March Plundered every Minister within five miles of the Road, without
distinction whether of their own party, or of the other, whether they
subscribed for Episcopacy, Presbytery, or Independency, whether they wore a
Surpless, or refused it; only if they did not, they afforded them the less
booty. Those that were Confiders, whose Irregularity, and Nonconformity, armed
them with confidence to appear, Petitioned the House of Commons for Relief and
satisfaction: it being taken into Consideration that this was not according to
their new Phrase to weaken the wicked, but the Righteous and such who stood
well affected to the Parliament: hereupon slandering the Cavaliers, with the
fact which their own Soldiers had done, and to make the foolish Citizens bleed
free, there was an Order drawn up and published, That in regard the Petitioners
were well-affected men, and Plundered by the Cavaliers, that there should be a
general Collection made for them the next Fast Day, and that the Preachers
should exhort the People, and pray to God to enlarge the Peoples hearts,
bountifully to relieve the Petitioners.

But Winchester being surprised, and the Lord Grandison taken Prisoner,
Colonel Brown in a Letter to famous Isaac Pennington, magnifies the Victory,
and enlarged the glory of it very much by that Circumstance of taking that
Noble Lord Prisoner; but which did much eclipse the honor obtained that day, in
the Letter he adds, that by the Treachery of Colonel Urrey, he was escaped:
little Isaac had hardly so much patience, as to read out the Letter, but he
summons his Mirmidons, and gives an Alarm to his Red-coats, the Messengers of
his Fury, and sends them instantly to plunder Mistress Urries Lodging: it was no
sooner said than done, they being as swift to act mischief as Isaac was ready
to command it; what they had in charge they perform faithfully, and Plunder her
of no more but all. Mistress Urrey presently gives notice to her Husband what
measure she found in the City, while he was in their Service in the Country:
the Colonel, upon the Information hastens to London, to expostulate for this
Injury, and for redress, complains to the House against the Ringleader Brown,
and Rout-master little Isaac: upon hearing both Parties, the House quits
Colonel Urrey from any conspiracy with my Lord Grandison, or connivance at his
escape: and for reparation of his Losses, they order him 400 l. to be paid him
out of the Moneys collected the last Fast Day for the Plundered Ministers, who
by this means were Plundered twice: and so one Order begetting another, they
Order, That a new Collection shall be made for the Petitioners the next
Fast Day: nor was this the first Debt by many that have been paid by the abused
Charity of London, the great Tax-bearing Mule, as one justly calls it.

There is one Beale dwelling at Hasely (as I take it) in Oxfordshire: a Man
much devoted to the Proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament, yet it was his
chance to fall into their hands who weaken the wicked: some of the Rebels under
the command of the Earl of Essex, Plundered him of two Horses: upon complaint
made unto the Earl, he gives Beale command to attend him at Tame, and there he
should have them again: according to the directions given him by the Earl
(accompanied by his Brother) he comes to Tame, hoping to have his Horses
restored; being come thither, Beale is apprehended and committed to Prison; and
his Horse, together with that which his Brother rode on, are both seized for
the Earls use; nor can either Man or Horse be released, unless he will pay down
twenty pound in ready money: Having continued in Prison four days, at last his
Mother (for fear if she had rode she might have been Prisoner for her Horses
sake, as her Son was) comes to Tame on foot, and brings twenty pound with her
to redeem her Son out of Prison; upon receipt of the Money, being a Debt so
justly due and so truly paid, his Excellency released him out of his
Imprisonment, and restored him the two worst Horses of the four, and wisely
kept the two best for himself, which with a very little help, may serve to
explain the mystery of his Motto, CAVE ADSUM, i.e. where I come, look well to
your Money and Horses.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
IX.
Master Jones Vicar of Wellingborow, starved to death in Prison at Northampton.
A Barber and a Maidservant Murdered by the Rebels at Wellingborow. Captain Ven
his abuse of Windsor-Castle, and his barbarous usage of Prisoners there, etc.

WHen I first entered on this Work, it was a promise solemnly made, not to abuse
the World with Falsehoods or Uncertainties, but to use all Candor and
Ingenuity: and if any thing should chance to pass, which upon better
information should appear false, I should not blush to make a free and an
ingenuous acknowledgment. In these several Relations what to retract or recall
of the Rebels Cruelties, I yet know nothing, but what to add unto them I do.

The sixth Weeks Mercury told you of the Plundering of Wellingborow in
Northamptonshire by the Rebels, and the taking of Mr. Jones Vicar of that
Town, Prisoner; and in that account which I there gave of him, I left him in
Captivity at Northampton: since that Mercury went abroad, some good Body
finding that Relation to come far short of that barbarous usage which Mr. Jones
found from the Rebels, moved either with detestation of such inhumane Cruelty,
not to be buried in Oblivion, or out of affection to his Person murdered by
these savage Monsters, has supplied the former defect, and enabled me to bring
this Story to its sad conclusion-

Master Jones was a man very aged, being arrived at that Term which Moses made
the usual boundary of man's life in his time, Threescore and ten; and had not
these blood-thirsty men shortened his days by an untimely death, he might have
been so strong as to come to fourscore years: And though age it self be a
disease (which yet few men that have it are willing to be cured of) it pleased
God to add a casual infirmity to his natural; for some two years since by a
fall he unhappily broke his leg, of which he continued lame to his death. When
the Rebels, those Locusts that devour all the good things of the Land, came to
Wellingborow, having ransacked the Town, they took many Prisoners, and amongst
the rest Master Jones: all that knew him must bear him record, that he was a
man of a most unblamable life and conversation, an able Scholar, and
extraordinarily gifted for Preaching, of which he gave ample proof by his
Labors diligently bestowed among his Parishoners by the space of Forty years:
having him in their power whom they knew to be a great means by his Orthodox
Preaching to keep that Town, and some parts thereabouts in obedience, when the
rest of the Country were in Rebellion against their Sovereign, they neither
reverence his calling, nor honor his age, nor pity his infirmity, but abuse
him by scoffs and jeers, and compel him to go on foot a great part of the way
(lame and weak as he was) between Wellingborow and Northampton: and that he
might keep pace with the rest, they compel him to make more speed than his
infirmity could brook. At Wellingborow the Rebels murdered a Barber and stole
away his Bear; and when they could not force this reverend old man to mend his
pace, Lieutenant Grimes (a desperate Brownist, the Master of this misrule, and
the chief agent in inflicting all this scorn and tyranny on Master Jones, but
since a Prisoner in Banbury Castle) to see if fear would add to his strength,
forces the Bear upon him, which running between his legs, took him upon her
back, and laying aside the untractableness of its Nature, grew patient of her
burden; and to the astonishment of the beholders carried him quietly, so that
what was intended as a violence, became his ease. The Rebels overcome by so
unusual an example of kindness, the savage Bear reproving the madness of their
fury, they remove Master Jones from off the Bear to a Horse, but such a Horse
as did but vary, not better the condition of his Transportation. One of the
rout observed to be extremely active in all these insolences, and to have a
hand in murdering the Barber, seeing the tameness of the Bear, as quiet under
Master Jones, as if she had been accustomed to the Saddle, presumes that it was
no more but up and ride, and presently bestrides the Bear, who as if she had
been of that race that did revenge the Prophet Elisha's quarrel, dismounts the
bold Rider, and as if she had been robbed of her Whelps, did so mangle, rend,
and tear him with her teeth and paws, that the presumptuous Wretch died of
these hurts suddenly after.

Stay, Reader, suspend thy opinion, be not too hasty, I profess ingenuously the
relation seems at first blush to partake something of the Romanse, or at best
to be but an imitation of some Popish Legend, as if we meant to implore the
help of feigned miracles to gain credit to a party: but against all this
prejudice I must oppose, first, the integrity and quality of the Relator, being
beyond all exception, and affirms it on his credit. Secondly, why may not God
stop and open the mouth of the Bear now as well as the Lions heretofore? or
revenge the indignities offered to a Minister under the Gospel, by the same
creature, as those offered to a Prophet under the Law? Or lastly, why may not
the blood of him that owned this Beast, be required by this Beast of him that
had his hand in shedding it? This was not the first time that God gave
commission to the Brute to execute his vengeance. But I forget my self; my
business is to relate things done, not to encounter Objections against their
probability of doing. To go on therefore.

Having brought Mr. Jones to Northampton, his entertainment there was as bad as
his usage in the way thither; though it were in the depth of Winter, when old
age needed good fortifications of Lodging and Diet against the incursions of
cold and wet, yet they afforded him nothing but a hard mat, with a little straw
under him, and to cover him and to keep him warm nothing but one blanket, and
his own wearing clothes: As for his food, they give him the Bread of
Affliction, denying his own friends leave to supply him with competent diet, to
sustein nature, and his growing infirmities: yet to show that Man lives not by
bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, it
pleased his good providence to preserve him like the young Children in Daniel,
fed only with Pulse, so that he was in good plight, and seemed to want nothing,
though he continued in this distressed condition from Christmas to almost
Easter: about which time, not remorse of conscience for so much cruelty
practiced on a decrepid old man, (but an Orthodox Reverend Divine) but
importunity of friends, prevailed with the Rebels to release him of his
imprisonment in Northampton, and to remit him to a neighbor Minister of his,
one Mr. Walters, Bachelor in Divinity, Vicar of Doddington near Wellingborow, a
very learned and industrious Preacher, and permitted him to Officiate in his
own Cure at Easter, there being but one Parish Church in the Town, but no less
than two thousand Communicants. Having license to visit his Charge, not awed by
that tyrannous usage which he had undergone, Conscience of his duty does press
him to a punctual observance of the Orders and Canons of the Church: he
celebrates Divine Service according to the Book of Common Prayer; preaches
Obedience as boldly as if there had been no Rebels in Northamptonshire,
administreth the Sacraments with the same Reverence, Decency and Devotion, as
if there had been no Puritans in Wellingborow. Nor does the undaunted old man
remit any thing enjoined by Canon or Rubric. This constancy of his so incensed
the Schismatical Puritanical Party of the Town, that complaint is made at
Northampton, that Mr. Jones is the same man he was, as much a true Son and
Minister of the Church of England as ever. Upon this information, he is
apprehended in Easter week, and carried Prisoner to Northampton a second time,
where they use him with more inhumanity (if it be possible) than before; they
will not permit his Wife to visit him and kept him so short in his diet, not
suffering his Wife or friends to relieve him, that most barbarously they
starved him to death, for about Whitsontide his spirits exhausted, and his body
pined by famine, the good old Martyr resigned his Soul to God.

There is in Northampton one John Gifford, for his extraction the Hog-herds Son
of Little-Hougton, for his education, a Knitter, afterward a Hose-buyer, now
Mayor of Northampton, and Colonel of the Town Regiment. This man to his power
Civil and Martial assumes an Ecclesiastical Superintendency too, and orders
what forms shall be used in Baptism, the Lords Supper, Burial of the Dead, and
the like: When therefore they came to interr the skin and bones of this starved
Martyr, for flesh he had none, the form enjoined by this Gifford was the same
which one Brooks, a London Lecturer, used at the burial of John Gough of S.
James Dukes Place within Aldgate in London, viz.

Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust;
Here Is the Pit, and in thou must.
The World may in this see what devout Liturgies we are like to have, when a
Mayor of a Town shall suppress the Ancient pious forms, and introduce rhyme
Doggerels, fitter for a painted Cloth in an Alehouse, than the Church of Christ.

Before I leave this particular Relation, I must not forget to tell you one act
of these Religious Reformers: being at Willingborow at the Sign of the Swan,
two maid Servants making a bed, some of these Rebels did solicit them to
incontinency, but the Maids refusing to hearken to their beastly
solicitations, they began to offer violence, and to enforce what they could
not persuade, they still making resistance, they shot one of them dead in the
place, and shot the other through the wrist: such Monuments of Religion and
Purity do these blessed Reformers leave at all places where they come.

Mr. Frederick Gibb Parson of Hartist in Suffolk, in Morning Prayer before his
Sermon, desired his Parishoners to give attention to one of His Majesty's
Declarations newly set forth, with an express Command to have it published in
all Parish Churches, thereby to rectify the People, and to wipe off those
false Impressions which the Incendiaries of the Kingdom had made in them
concerning the Kings Actions and Intentions: whereupon one Mr. Coleman a
Parishioner being present, impudently replied unto him, openly in the Church,
that he might be ashamed to abuse the People by Reading his Majesty's
Declarations unto them, and therefore he would fetch him some Parliament
Declarations which were a great deal better to be published unto them; while
this railing Rabshekeh reviled his Sovereign, Mr. Gibb as if he had received
the Command in that case given, answer him not, made no reply at all, but as
not heeding this snarler, calls on the Congregation a second time to give
attention, Coleman interrupts him again, and in a scoffing manner says, Well
then Sir, you mean to be an obedient Servant to his Majesty, Mr. Gibb then
thinking it not only seasonable but necessary to profess his Loyalty, replied,
Yes, Sir, I am and hope to continue a faithful Servant unto Him as long as I
live: and so proceeds to read the Declaration; the People notwithstanding all
this Encouragement from Coleman to contradict with them, standing very
attentive to hear it: The main drift of the Kings Declaration was to assure all
His loving Subjects, That as He expected that they should make the Laws the
rule of their obedience, so He would make the Laws the guide of His Government:
Mr. Gibb having published the Declaration, Coleman stands up and most
Traitorously replied to his Parson, Well, Sir, the King neither is nor shall be
Judge of the Law, whatever such prating fellows as you would have him: after
this being enraged (as the rest of that Faction are) that the Peoples eyes
should be opened, or that they should, being truly informed, conceive of the
King as he is, a most just and pious Prince, but still to look on him and all
his actions through those false Perspectives of slander and falsehood which
they hold before their eyes; Coleman speeds to London, and complains (to that
Conventicle which call themselves a Parliament) against Mr. Gibb for so foul an
Affront put upon them by Publishing the Kings Declaration: presently (being
servilely Observant to every base informer) they dispatch several Pursevants to
apprehend Mr. Gibb, he seeing the Storm coming (as wise men do) hides himself,
after some time of retirement (advised unto it by his friend) he goes to
London, where by the great mediation of friends, and paying fees to the sum of
30 l. he was dismissed, upon engagement to be forthcoming, whenever they
should call for him.

There is none so insolent and intolerable as a base mean man started up into
command or authority, we cannot give you a greater instance, than in that
beggarly Captain Ven, Citizen of London made Colonel and Commander in chief of
Windsor-Castle, who does not only assume to himself the propriety of his
Sovereigns house, dating his Letters to Jezabel his Wife, From our Castle at
Windsor, and building some additions to the Deans lodgings, as if he meant to
set up his rest there, and make that his habitation: when no place in that
Royal Castle is fit for such a Couple but the Cole-house, and even that too
good for them; but as if there would never come a time to call him to an
account, he does use the Gentlemen and Soldiers taken by the Rebels, and sent
Prisoners thither, with that cruelty and inhumanity, as if they were Turks, not
Christians, for the Gentlemen that are Prisoners there are not only kept from
Church, nor permitted to receive the Sacrament neither from their own
Preachers, nor from any friend whom they could procure to do that office for
them, nay they were not permitted to join together in devotions in their
private lodgings, but each man a part, and if this petty Tyrant could have
hindered that intercourse which every particular devout Soul injoys with his
God, this Atheist would have hindered that too. And because the sedentary
Solitary Lives which they led there were prejudicial to their healths, they
earnestly entreated Ven that they might recreate themselves in the Tennis-Court
near the Keep, and offered to be at the charges of a Guard, if those high
walls, and the many guards about them were not thought sufficient to secure
them, but yet were denied. Nay, when the Sheriff of Sussex was brought Prisoner
from London to Windsor very lame, though his Surgeon offered Colonel Ven to
be deposed, that on the least neglect his Leg was like to gangreen, yet after
he came to Windsor, he was forced to lie with the rest of the Knights and
Gentlemen on the ground many nights; at last showing his leg to Ven, he
confessed that he never saw a more dangerous lameness, and promised to acquaint
the Earl of Essex with it: and the Sheriff himself being acquainted with the
Earl, presuming on some interest in him, wrote unto him to acquaint him with
his condition, and earnestly entreating him that he might be sent to London,
and disposed of, though in a Dungeon, for a week, that he might have the
assistance of his own Physician, and Surgeon, offering to give any security,
and be at any charges to assure him of his safe return, to render himself true
Prisoner; but neither the sense of his misery, nor his earnest solicitations
could prevail with his Excellency. And if the Knights and Gentlemen who had
money to bribe that compassion which they could not entreat, found no better
measure at their hands, what then, think you, were those heavy pressures under
which the poor common Soldiers groaned? there were in the Castle eight poor
Soldiers to whom the Sheriff of Sussex allowed eight shillings a week: yet
notwithstanding because they refused to take the wages of Iniquity, and serve
under the Rebels Colors, and fight against their Sovereign, they starved them,
insomuch that being released, (that they might not die in the Castle) coming
into the air, three of them fell down dead in the streets: three more recovered
as far as Eaton, where a good Woman for five shillings a week given for their
relief by the Sheriff of Sussex, gave them entertainment, and when the Sheriff
made his happy escape, he left them alive.

There was a poor man living near Moore Park, whom (when Prince Rupert was in
those parts) commanded to show him where the Pipes lay which conveyed water to
the Castle, for this crime they apprehend him, and commit him Prisoner to the
Castle, where they fed him with so slender diet, that they even starved him:
and when upon his Wives tears and lamentable cries that she and her Children
were like to starve at home, while her Husband starved at Windsor, they having
no subsistence but what he got by the sweat of his brows, he was released, he
was not able to stand on his legs, and whether dead since we have no
information.

There was at the same time in the Castle, one Lieutenant Atkinson Prisoner,
who suffering under the same want of necessary food, sent to his Father, humbly
petitioning for relief; his Father though a man of good estate, returned
answer, that unless he would take proffered Entertainment from the Parliament,
he should lie there, rot, and starve, and be damned for him: He finding no pity
from his Father, where Nature and Religion bade him expect it, petitioned the
Gentlemen in the Keep for bread, as many others daily did, and on his Petition
had moneys sent him, but died starved two days after, and left this just
ground to the World to make this Observation, That where Puritanism prevails,
it cancels all Obligations both of Religion and Nature, and never fails to make
men guilty of that sin which is in the number of those, which the Scripture
tells us shall heap wrath on the end of the World, the want of natural
affection.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
X.
Master Chaldwel and his Wife barbarously used by the Rebels at Lincoln, and
his Servant Murdered. Mr. Loss, Parson of Wedon Pinkney in Northamptonshire,
himself and the Church infinitely abused on the Lords day by some
Rebel-Troopers of Northampton, etc.

WIlliam Chaldwell of Thorgonby in the County of Lincoln Esquire, and Justice
of Peace, being an aged Gentleman, yet his Loyalty and desire to serve the King
in his just Wars, made him overlook his infirmities, so that he resolved in
person to come to his assistance: To this purpose he provided four horses
completely furnished, of which the Rebels having intelligence, they surprise
him and seize on his horses. In February 1643. some Rebel-Troopers came to Mr.
Chaldwells House and demanded entrance, which he denying unless they could show
some Commission from the King, they presently broke up his Hall windows, and
forcing his entrance, apprehend his Person: yet his Person is not all they come
for, they begin to plunder his Goods, and the first thing which they lay hold
on, was some Linen lying on the Hall Table. A Servant of Mr. Chaldwells
standing by, unwilling to lose any thing, if it might be saved, takes hold on
the Linen too, and entreats the Troopers to spare it: Presently some cry out
Shoot him, which was no sooner said than done, for one dscharging a Pistol at
him, shot a Bullet into his heart, and the top of his scouring-stick into his
Body near it. The poor man instantly fell down dead, hardly by any motion
expressing the farewell of life: While most stood amazed at so barbarous an
act, some make toward him, thinking to help him, but were forbid by these
bloody Villains to come near him, who were so far from remorse for what they
had done, that tomurther they added Theft, diving into the Pockets of him whom
they had thus murdered, and robbing him of his moneys: Nay his Wife whom they
had murdered, hearing of this sad accident, being great with child, came to
see her dead Husband, but was not permitted to come near him, being threatened
by these Troopers, that if she came near him, they would do unto her as they
had done unto her Husband, shoot her dead.

Having done their pleasure in Mr. Chaldwell's House, they carry him away
Prisoner to Lincoln; Being come thither, they commit him to the Town Goal, and
lodged him there in the common Keep amongst Murderers and Felons: The day
after the Lincolnshire Rebels received the defeat before Newarke, by a verbal
command from the Earl of Lincoln he was removed from the Town Prison to the
Castle, in Lincoln, where he was put into a nasty stinking place called the
Witch-hole, and without any regard to his Quality, being a Gentleman of prime
note in his Country, or to his age being an old man, they permit him to stay
there all night, having no other bed but the Ground, and no other pillow but
the hard stones. The next day they vouchsafe him the favor to let him purchase
a little and but a very little better accommodation by buying out some poor
Prisoners out of their lodging: remaining there in this disconsolate condition,
his Wife an aged Gentlewoman came to visit him, being very willing to share
with him in his Misery, as before she had done in his Prosperity.

Having spent some time in mutual consolation, and exhorting one another
patiently to bear this unjust oppression, hoping that they might enjoy one
another society, in so mean a condition, without the envy of their oppressors:
but even this contented misery did not last long, for the next day after the
Rebels lost Grantham by the Kings recovering that Town, out of their
possession, the Governor of Lincoln ( Welden by name) enraged, and not knowing
where to reek his malice safer than on this poor old Gentleman, comes up to the
Castle, and most imperiously commands that Chaldwell should come before him:
the Messenger that was sent to command his appearance, returned with this
answer, That Mr. Chaldwell labored under some indisposition, that he was in
bed, and his Wife with him: the Governor not satisfied with so reasonable an
answer, snatched a cudgel out of a Soldiers hand, and swears that he would make
the old rascal rise: in this fury away he goes to Mr. Chaldwell's Chamber, and
rushing in, in a menacing way shakes his cudgel at him, and holding it upon his
head, threatened to bastinado him if he did not rise presently; the good old
Gentlewoman his Wife, prognosticating by the rough message sent her Husband,
that there was a storm coming, forsook her bed, and stood by it in her
Nightgown, but bare-legged, there to interpose and plead for her Husband if
occasion served: and now finding more inhumanity than her fear at first
suggested, in an humble manner she beseeched the Governor to use her Husband
like a Gentleman, not like a dog, to be awed by a cudgel. The Goververnour
impatient of any mediation, though from a Wife, and though backed with never so
much reason, commands his Soldiers to take her away, which they did in so rude
and boisterous a manner, that they dragged her down the Stairs, pulled her
dressing off her head, and at last thrust her out of the Castle. Being thus
violently snatched from her dear Husband, and fearing he might suffer as much
violence within, as she did in being thrust out of the Castle, she sits down on
a stone at the Castlegate, where the winter blasts fanned her gray hair, a sad
spectacle to all that passed by, and knew who she was. Many there were that
pitied her distress, and would willingly have received her into their houses,
but durst not; it is a Crime to show mercy where the Rebels intend cruelty. At
last having sat there long, full of tears and sorrow, baffled with cold winds
and weather, a sister of Mr. Stutts the Apothecary (and the God of mercy
restore it an hundred fold into her bosom) sends her a Petticoat (for they
thrust her out with no clothes on but her Nightgown) to fence her against the
extremity of the cold. But to let this charitable Gentlewoman know that the
rewards of mercy are to be expected in another World, and that here to do good,
and for that to suffer evil, is the recompense of this World, that very
afternoon her Brothers house was plundered, and all their Goods seized on, so
that they needed a return of that compassion in the evening which they showed
to others in the morning. Welden the Governor having compelled the good old
Gentleman to rise out of his bed, notwithstanding his present infirmity, sends
him from his poor lodging which he had lately purchased, to the common Dungeon,
where he had neither light nor air but what the Grate afforded. The place was
of such condition, that there being three Prisoners with him in the same room,
but one of four must lie down at once, the rest must stand: and yet in this
little ease (as was testified by a Letter under his own hand) he remained
eleven or twelve nights without Bed, Chair, or Stool: and in that time, for
four or five nights, he was not permitted to go forth to do the Offices of
nature, a command being given, that if he offered to stir forth they should
beat out his brains. Thus much and diverse other particulars were signified to
the Commissioners at Newarke, when the Ammunition came from thence: At which
time Information was given, that Mr. Chaldwell was then in a condition not much
better than what you have heard here related: and whether their barbarous
cruelties and inhumanity have not set an end to his sufferings by Death, is
uncertain.

On Sunday the second of July 1643. in the afternoon, ten or twelve Troopers
under the command of Captain Samuel came from Northampton to Wedon Pinkney in
the same County, and coming thither in Prayer-time, they came into the Church,
one of them being Horse-keeper (as it was reported) to Sir Richard Samuel,
Father to the Captain, came up to the reading Pew, where Mr. Loss Parson of
that Parish was officiating Divine Service, and commanded him to leave off his
Pottage and to follow him: Mr. Loss entreating him in that sacred work, but to
have patience until he had finished what he had began: Patience me no patience
(replied the Groom) my business is of greater importance than to admit of any
delay, come away therefore, or I will pull you out by the ears: thereupon not
knowing whose Soldiers they were, nor of what consequence their business might
be, or if he had known both, yet not able to make resistance, he obeys his
command, and followed him into the Churchyard. Being come thither, Mr. Loss
demands what he would have with him? the Groom tells him, that he must go along
with them to Northampton, Mr. Loss demands again, by what authority, and by
virtue of what Commission? The Groom replies, that he should know that when he
came to Northampton. Mr. Loss entreats that he may be excused, alleging that
he had lost Twelve or Thirteen Horses, taken from him by the Parliament
Soldiers, and that he had never a Horse able to carry him two miles out of the
Town: one of the Troopers swears Wounds and Blood, that he would carry him
behind him, and if that did not like him, he would drag him along with a halter
at his horse tail. Mr. Loss abominating so great insolency from Grooms, boldly
told them, That he would never be a Slave to slaves; and so rushing from them,
took Sanctuary in the Church, and shut the door upon him, and perceiving the
door on the other side of the Church open, the People having unbarred it for
their speedier passage out, he hastens thither, and tho he made what speed he
could, he was like to be prevented by one of the Troopers who was come about
and was ready to enter the Church on horseback: which Mr. Loss observing, took
up the bar of the door, and resolutely ran at the Trooper to unhorse him: This
unexpected resistance so valiantly made, put the Trooper to a retreat, whereby
Mr. Loss gained time to bar the door fast against him. Having shut both the
Church doors upon himself, and the remainder of the Congregation, some being
fled for fear; the Clerk at a hole gave him the Key of the Belfrey: Mr. Loss
not thinking himself secure enough in the Church, gets up into the Belfrey, and
locks the doors fast after him; being come to the place where the Bells hang,
he discovers over head a little hole, only big enough for a man to creep
through, and a ladder standing there which led up unto it, Mr. Loss goes up
the ladder, and through the hole gets upon the Leads, and with great difficulty
draws the Ladder after him, being massy and very heavy; by which means he did
not only deprive his pursuers of the means to come at him, but with the Ladder
laid over the hole, baracadoed the passage against them: and now being here,
had he had any weapon to defend himself, he had been impregnable. While Mr.
Loss was up in the Belfrey securing of himself, the Troopers are at the Church
windows, endeavoring to wrench out the Iron bars, but without any success: at
last with their Pole-axes and great Tombstones impiously taken from the Graves
of the dead, they break open the Church doors; having thus forced their
entrance they ride into the Church (not remembering they were in Gods House)
from one end of it to another, spurring and switching their Horses purposely to
endanger the People. These barbarous outrages did much affright the People, but
especially Mrs. Loss and her poor Children, whom it most concerned, Mr. Loss
being the only man aimed at; Mrs. Loss fell into a swoon in the Church, and
had no show of life in her for a long time; at which the People moved with
compassion, interceded with the Troopers, and desired them to desist, putting
them in mind of the place where they were, a place where God met with his
People, and they with their God. It seems this Congregation had been better
taught, than to subscribe to Doctor Twist the Proloquutor of the absurd
Heterogenious Synod, his Interpretation of that Text of Scripture, Ye shall
keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary* in his Preface to Mr. Meads Book
of the Apostasy of the latter times: as if this Text enjoined no reverence to
be used toward the places of Gods public worship; they were much scandalized
at this profane Irreverence, and made it an argument to awe them to civil
demeanor at least, because of the place: and withal they objected, that they
did much abuse themselves, and dishonor their cause by such outrageous
carriages: all this would reflect on the cause they pretended to maintain. And
lastly, they alleged, that if they had any shame in them, they might be
ashamed, in the Lords House on the Lords day to abuse a Minister in his own
Congregation, who besides the honor and reverence due to his calling, might
challenge some respect from them being a Gentleman of good Birth and Descent.
In reply to so good reason, (being indeed but Pearl cast before Swine) one
breaks out with a great oath, swearing Wounds and Blood (so that all the
Blasphemy is not on the Cavaliers side) and saying, What do you tell me of
Birth and Descent, a Plague take him and his Gentility, I hope within this year
to see never a Gentleman in England: you remember the Proverb, Children and
Fools tell truth, having thus despised all wholesome admonition, they go to the
Belfrey, they break open the door, and come to the place where the Bells did
hang, and from the top of the Frames of the Bells endeavored through the hole
(but now mentioned) to get upon the Leads, where Mr. Loss was, but he having
stopped that passage with the Ladder, and making the best use he could of his
hands and feet (being all the weapons either offensive or defensive which he
had) made good the place against them: yet notwithstanding in the Resistance he
was in very great danger to lose his life, for they discharged their Pistols at
him at least eight or nine times, but by the good providence of God they missed
their mark, with their Swords they wounded him in three several parts of his
body: yet God be blessed the wounds were not mortal; at last having received a
hurt in his hand, having a vein pricked with one of their Swords, his blood
flowed so fast upon the Troopers underneath him, that as they bragged there,
and in other places after they were gone thence, they thought they had
dispatched him, and therefore thinking him to be a dead man, they left him, yet
to imbalm him to his funeral, they pour out a flood of reproachful names upon
him, calling him Rogue, Rascal, Slave, Villain, Dog, Devil, making no stop till
their Master the Devil, and their own memories could suggest no more names of
the same stamp: At last, to seal up all, for fear they had not murdered him,
they protest with many Execrations upon themselves, that if they had not now
sped him (which yet they hoped they had) they would return another time, and
have him either dead or alive.

At Bristow in Devonshire there dwells a Husbandman (and though I cannot tell
his name, yet let it not weaken the credit of the Relation) who not satisfied
with the Parliaments proceedings in taking up Arms against their lawful
undoubted Sovereign, stood in a seeming Neutrality: at last conceiving it time
to declare himself, he openly adhered to the Kings Party: hereupon he was very
diligently sought after, and the Earl of Stamford sent a Troop of Horse to his
House to apprehend him: when they came thither, they found not the good man at
home, but a Son of his, about Ten or Eleven years old, they ask him where his
Father was, the Child replied, that he was not at home, they threaten him, and
use all arts to make him discover where his Father had hid himself; the Child
being ignorant it seems where his Father was, still persisted in the same
answer, that he knew not where he was: hereupon they threaten to hang him;
neither does that prevail: at last they take the poor innocent Child and hang
him up, either because he would not betray his Father, had he been able to
satisfy their doubt, or for not having the Spirit of Prophecy, not being able
to receive what by an ordinary way of knowledge he did not know: having let him
hang a while, they cut him down, not intending to hang him unto death, but
being cut down they could perceive nothing discovering life in him, hereupon in
a barbarous way of experiment, they prick him with their Swords in the back and
thighs, using the means leading to death, to find out life: at last after some
long stay, some small symptoms of life did appear: yet so weak that there they
left him nearer the confines of death than life: and whether the Child did ever
recover, is more than my Informer can assure me. Only, Courteous Reader,
observe from this short Narration, that these Bloody Rebels spare neither the
venerableness of the Sacred Function, the infirmities of old Age, or the
tenderness of Youth.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
XI.
The particulars of the first Siege of Corfe-Castle, gallantly defended by the
Lady Banks, and Captain Laurence, against the Powers, Plots, and Policies of
Walter Earl and his Adherents, etc.

THere is in the Isle of Purbeck a strong Castle called Corffe Castle, seated
on a very steep Hill, in the fracture of a Hill in the very midst of it, being
eight miles in length, running from the East end of the Peninsula to the West:
and though it stand between the two ends of this fracture, so that it may seem
to lose much advantage of its natural and artificial strength as commanded from
thence, being in height equal to, if not over-looking the tops of the highest
Towers of the Castle, yet the structure of the Castle is so strong, the ascent
so steep, the Walls so massy and thick, that it is one of the impregnablest
Forts of the Kingdom, and of very great concernment, in respect of its command
over the Island, and the places about it. This Castle is now the Possession and
Inheritance of the Right Honorable Sir John Banks, Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, who receiving
Commands from the King to attend Him at York, in Easter Term, 1642. had leave
from the two Houses to obey those Commands: After the unhappy Differences
between the King and the two Houses, or rather between the King and the Faction
in both Houses, grew high, it being generally feared that the Sword would
decide the controversy; the Lady Banks, a virtuous and prudent Lady, resolved
with her Children and Family to retire to this Castle, there to shelter
themselves from the storm which she saw coming, which accordingly she did;
there she and her Family remained in peace all the Winter, and a great part of
the Spring, until May, 1643. about which time the Rebels, under the command of
Sir Walter Earl, Sir Thomas Trenchard, and others, had possessed themselves of
Dorchaster, Lyme, Melcome, Weymouth, Wareham, and Pool, ( Portland Castle being
treacherously delivered to the Rebels) only Corfe Castle remaining in Obedience
to the King: but the Rebels knowing how much it concerned them to add this
Castle to their other Garrisons, to make all the Seacoast wholly for them; and
thinking it more feisible to gain it by Treachery than open Hostility, resolved
to lay hold on an Opportunity coming on, to see if they could become Masters of
it.

There is an ancient usage that the Major and Barons (as they call them) of
Corfe Castle, accompanied by the Gentry of the Island, have permission from the
Lord of the Castle, on May Day, to course a Stag, which every year is performed
with much Solemnity and great concourse of People: On this day some Troops of
Horse from Dorchester, and other places, came into this Island, intending to
find other Game then to hunt the Stag, their business being suddenly to
surprise the Gentlemen in the Hunting, and to take the Castle; the News of
their coming dispersed the Hunters, and spoiled the sport for that day, and made
the Lady Banks to give order for the safe Custody of the Castle-gates, and to
keep them shut against all comers. The Troopers having mist their Prey on the
Hills, (the Gentlemen having withdrawn themselves) some of them came to the
Castle under a pretense to see it, but entrance being denied them, the common
Soldiers used threatening Language, casting out words implying some intentions
to take the Castle; but the Commanders (who better knew how to conceal their
Resolutions) utterly disavowed any such thought, denying that they had any such
Commission; however the Lady Banks very wisely, and like her self, hence took
occasion to call in a Guard to assist her, not knowing how soon she might have
occasion to make use of them, it being now more than probable, that the Rebels
had a design upon the Castle. The taking in this Guard, as it secured her at
home, so it rendered her suspected abroad; from thence-forward there was a
watchful and vigilant eye to survey all her Actions, whatsoever she sends out,
or sends for in, is suspected; her ordinary Provisions for her Family are by
fame multiplied, and reported to be more than double what indeed they were, as
if she had now an intention to Victual and Man the Castle against the Forces of
the two Houses of Parliament; presently Letters are sent from the Committees of
Poole, to demand the four small Pieces in the Castle, and the pretense was,
because the Islanders conceived strange Jealousies, that the Pieces were
mounted and put on their Carriages: Hereupon the Lady Banks dispatched
Messengers to Dorchester and Poole, to entreat the Commissioners that the small
Piece might remain in the Castle for her own defense; and to take away the
ground of the Islanders Jealousies, she caused the Pieces to be taken off their
Carriages again; hereupon a promise was made, that they should be left to her
possession. But there passed not many days, before forty Seamen (they in the
Castle not suspecting any such thing) came very early in the Morning to demand
the Pieces; the Lady in Person (early as it was) goes to the Gates, and desires
to see their Warrant; they produced one, under the hands of some of the
Commissioners; but instead of delivering them, though at that time there were
but five Men in the Castle, yet these five, assisted by the Maidservants at
their Ladies Command, mount these Pieces on their Carriages again, and lading
one of them, they gave fire; which small Thunder so affrighted the Seamen,
that they all quitted the place and ran away. They being gone, by beat of Drum
she summons help into the Castle, and upon the Alarm given, a very considerable
Guard of Tenants and Friends came in to her assistance, there being withal some
fifty Arms brought into the Castle, from several parts of the Island: this
Guard was kept in the Castle about a Week, during this time, many threatening
Letters were sent unto the Lady, telling her, what great Forces should be sent
to fetch them, if she would not by fair means be persuaded to deliver them, and
to deprive her of her Auxiliaries, all or most of them being Neighbors
thereabouts, they threaten, that if they oppose the delivery of them, they
would fire their Houses: presently their Wives come to the Castle, there they
weep and wring their hands, and with clamorous Oratory persuade their Husbands
to come home, and not by saving others, to expose their own Houses to spoil and
ruin, nay to reduce the Castle into a distressed condition, they did not only
intercept two hundred weight of Powder provided against a Siege, but they
interdict them the liberty of Common-Markets: Proclamation is made at Warham (a
Market Town hard by) that no Beer, Beef, or other provision should be sold to
the Lady Banks, or for her use; strict Watches are kept, that no Messenger or
Intelligence shall pass into or out of the Castle. Being thus distressed, all
means of Victualling the Castle, being taken away, and being but slenderly
furnished for a Siege, either with Ammunition or with Victual, at last they
came to a Treaty of Composition, of which the result was, That the Lady Banks
should deliver up those four small Pieces, the biggest carrying not above a
three pound Bullet, and that the Rebels should permit her to enjoy the Castle,
and Arms in it, in peace and quietness.

And though this wise Lady knew too well to rest satisfied or secured in these
promises (their often breach of Faith having sufficiently instructed her what
she might expect from them) yet she was glad of this opportunity to strengthen
her self even by that means, by which many in the World thought she had done
her self much prejudice; for the Rebels being now possessed of their Guns,
presumed the Castle to be theirs, as sure as if they had actually possessed it.
Now it was no more but ask and have: hereupon they grow remiss in their
Watches, negligent in their Observations, not heeding what was brought in, nor
taking care, as before, to intercept Supplies, which might enable them to hold
out against a Siege: and the Lady, making good use of this remisness, laid hold
on the present opportunity, and as much as the time would permit, furnished the
Castle with Provisions of all sorts. In this Interval, there was brought in an
hundred and half of Powder, and a quantity of Match proportionable. And
understanding that the Kings Forces, under the Conduct of Prince Maurice, and
the Marquess Hertford were advancing toward Blanford, she by her Messenger
made her address to them, to signify unto them the present Condition in which
they were, the great Consequence of the place, desiring their assistance, and
in particular, that they would be pleased to take into their serious
consideration, to send some Commanders thither to take the Charge of the
Castle; hereupon they send Captain Laurence, son of Sir Edward Laurence, a
Gentleman of that Island, to Command in Chief; but he coming without a
Commission, could not command moneys or provisions to be brought in until it
was too late. There was likewise in the Castle one Captain Bond, an old
Soldier, whom I should deprive of his due honor, not to mention him, having a
share in the honor of this Resistance. The first time the Rebels faced the
Castle, they brought a Body of between two and three hundred Horse and Foot,
and two Pieces of Ordnance, and from the Hills played on the Castle, fired four
houses in the Town, and then summoned the Castle; but receiving a denial for
that time, they left it. But on the three and twentieth of June, the Sagacious
Knight, Sir Walter Earl (that has the gift of discerning Treasons, and might
have made up his nine and thirty Treasons, forty, by reckoning in his own)
accompanied by Captain Sidenham, Captain Henry Jarvis, Captain Skuts, son of
that Arch-Traytor Skut of Pool, with a Body of between five and six hundred,
came and possessed themselves of the Town, taking the opportunity of a Misty
morning, that they might find no resistance from the Castle. They brought with
them to the Siege a Demy-Canon, a Culverin and two Sacres, with these and their
small Shot, they played on the Castle on all Quarters of it, with good
observation of Advantages, making their Battery strongest where they thought
the Castle weakest. And to bind the Soldiers by tie of Conscience to an eager
prosecution of the Siege, they administer them an Oath, and mutually bind
themselves to most unchristian Resolutions, That if they found the Defendants
obstinate not to yield, they would maintain the Siege to Victory, and then deny
Quarter unto all, killing without mercy, Men, Women and Children. As to bring
on their own Soldiers, they abused them with falsehoods, telling them, That the
Castle stood in a Level, yet with good advantages of approach; that there were
but forty Men in the Castle, whereof twenty were for them; that there was rich
Booty, and the like: So, during the Siege, they used all base unworthy means,
to corrupt the Defendants, to betray the Castle into their hands; the better
sort they endeavor to corrupt with Bribes; to the rest they offer double Pay,
and the whole Plunder of the Castle; when all these Arts took no effect, then
they fall to Stratagems and Engines. To make their approaches to the Wall with
more safety, they make two Engines; one they call the Sow, the other the Boar,
being made with boards lined with Wool to dead the shot. The first that moved
forward was the Sow, but not being Musket proof, she cast nine of eleven of her
Farrow; for the Musketeers from the Castle were so good marks-men at their
Legs, the only part of all their Bodies left without defense, that nine ran
away, as well as their broken and battered Legs would give them leave; and of
the two which knew neither how to run away, nor well to stay, for fear, one was
slain. The Boar, of the two (a man would think) the valianter Creature, seeing
the ill success of the Sow, to cast her Litter before her time, durst not
advance. The most advantageous part for their Batteries, was the Church, which
they without fear of profanation used, not only as their Rampart, but their
Rendezvous: of the Surpless they made two Shirts for two Soldiers, they broke
down the Organs, and made the Pipes serve for Cases to hold their Powder and
Shot; and not being furnished with Musket-Bullets, they cut off the Lead of the
Church, and rolled it up, and shoot it without ever casting it in a mould. Sir
Walter and the Commanders were earnest to press forward the Soldiers, but as
prodigal as they were of the blood of their common Soldiers, they were sparing
enough of their own: It was a general Observation, that valiant Sir Walter
never willingly exposed himself to any hazard, for being by chance endangered
with a Bullet, shot through his Coat, afterward he put on a Bears skin, and to
the eternal honor of this Knights valor be it recorded, for fear of
Musket Shot, (for other they had none) he was seen to creep on all four, on the
sides of the Hill, to keep himself out of danger. This base Cowardice in the
Assailants, added Courage and Resolution to the Defendants: therefore not
compelled by want, but rather to brave the Rebels, they sallyed out, and
brought in eight Cows and a Bull into the Castle, without the loss of a Man, or
a Man wounded. At another time, five Boys fetched in four Cows. They that stood
on the Hills, called to one in a House in the Valley, crying, Shoot Anthony;
but Anthony thought it good to sleep in a whole skin, and durst not look out,
so that afterward it grew into a Proverbial Jeer, from the Defendants to the
Assailants, Shoot Anthony. The Rebels having spent much time and Ammunition,
and some men, and yet being as far from hopes of taking the Castle, as the
first day they came thither. At last, the Earl of Warwick sends them a supply
of an hundred and fifty Mariners, with several Cart-loads of Petarrs,
Grenades, and other Warlike Provision, with Scaling-ladders to assault the
Castle by Scaladoe: They make large offers to him that should first scale the
Wall; 20 l. to the first, and so by descending sums a reward to the twentieth;
but all this could not prevail with these silly Wretches, who were brought
thither, as themselves confessed, like Sheep to the slaughter, some of them
having but exchanged the manner of their death, the Halter for the Bullet,
having taken them out of Goals; one of them being taken Prisoner, had Letters
Testimonial in his hands whence he came, the Letters I mean when he was burnt
for a Felon, being very visible to the beholders, but when they found that
persuasion could not prevail with such abject low spirited men, the Commanders
resolve on another course, which was, to make them Drunk, knowing that
Drunkenness makes some men fight like Lions, that being sober would run away
like Hares. To this purpose they fill them with strong Waters, even to Madness,
and ready they are now for any Design; and for fear Sir Walter should be
valiant against his will, like Caesar, he was the only man almost that came
sober to the assault: an imitation of the Turkish practice (for certainly there
can be nothing of Christianity in it, to send poor Souls to Gods Judgment Seat,
in the very act of two grievous Sins, Rebellion and Drunkenness) who to
stupifie their Soldiers, and make them insensible of their dangers, give them
Opium: being now armed with drink, they resolve to storm the Castle on all
sides, and apply their Scaling-ladders, it being ordered by the Leaders (if I
may without a Solecism call them so, that stood behind and did not so much as
follow) that when 20 were entered, they should give a watchword to the rest,
and that was Old Wat: a word ill chosen by Sir Watt. Earl, and considering the
business in hand little better than ominous, for if I be not deceived, the
Hunters that beat Bushes for the fearful timorous Hare, call him Old Watt.

Being now Pot-valiant, and possessed with a borrowed Courage, which was to
evaporate in sleep, they divide their Forces into two Parties, whereof one
assaults the middle Ward, defended by valiant Captain Lawrence, and the greater
part of the Soldiers; the other assault the upper Ward, which the Lady Banks,
(to her Eternal Honor be it spoken) with her Daughters, Women, and five
Soldiers, undertook to make good against the Rebels, and did bravely perform
what she undertook; for by heaving over Stones, and hot Embers, they repelled
the Rebels, and kept them from climing their Ladders, thence to throw in that
Wildfire, which every Rebel had ready in his hand. Being repelled, and having
in this Siege and this Assault lost and hurt an hundred men, Old Sir Watt,
hearing that the Kings Forces were advanced, cried, and ran away crying,
leaving Sydenham to Command in Chief, to bring off the Ordnance, Ammunition,
and the remainder of the Army, who afraid to appear abroad, kept Sanctuary in
the Church till night, meaning to Sup, and run away by Starlight; but Supper
being ready, and set on the Table, an Alarm was given that the Kings Forces
were coming: this News took away Sydenhams Stomach; all this Provision was but
messes of Meat set before the Sepulchers of the dead; he leaves his Artillery,
Ammunition, and (which with these men is something) a good Supper, and ran away
to take Boat for Poole, leaving likewise at the shore about an hundred Horse to
the next Takers, which next day proved good prize to the Soldiers of the
Castle. Thus after six Weeks strict Siege, this Castle, the desire of the
Rebels, the Tears of Old Sir Watt, and the Key of those parts, by the Loyalty,
and brave Resolution of this Honorable Lady, the valor of Captain Lawrence and
some eighty Soldiers, (by the loss only of two men) was delivered from the
Bloody Intentions of these Merciless Rebels, on the fourth of August, 1643.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
XII.
Mr. Thomas Jones, Bachelour in Divinity, ill entreated by the Rebels in Devon.
A Soldier hanged at Them on the Sign-post of the Kings Head. Mr. Wright a
Minister in Cheshire plundered, and two of his Maidservants murdered. Doctor
Beale, Doctor Martin, and Doctor Stern, brought Prisoners from Cambridg by
Cromwell, and their barbarous usage, etc.

MAster Thomas Jones Bachelor in Divinity, and Rector of Offwel in the County
of Devon, having discovered that the right of Patronage of one of the cures of
Tuifordton was in the Crown, and worth three hundred Pounds per annum, did in
the pursuance of his Right, spend a Thousand Pounds to recover it from those,
who account all lawful gain whatsoever they can purloin either from God or the
King. The pretended Patrons who had invaded this Right, were much offended with
Mr. Jones for being at so great expense to redeem the prey out of their hands,
and did but watch an opportunity to make him know how sensible they were of
this their loss. This Parliament being called, and these men made Members of
the Lower House, they quickly perceived that this wished-for opportunity was
now come, wherein they might pervert public Justice to private revenge,
quickly learning to exercise that Arbitrary unlimited power over their fellow
Subjects, which the prevalence of a dangerous Faction had put in their hands.
According to the general practice since this Parliament, they accuse Mr. Jones
of some Anti-parliamentary passages in his Sermons, which his Judges understood
as little as his Accusers: Nay perhaps it was with him (as with many of his
Orthodox Brethren) the same men were both his Accusers and Judges. However any
or no accusation we know have served these men's turns, to bring Godly and
Learned Ministers to the Bear-baiting of a Committee, and to put them into the
expensive custody of a Sergeant at Arms: so it was with Mr. Jones, they first
pretended some Crimes, and on these pretenses they commit him Prisoner to a
Sergeant at Arms. Having deprived him of his Liberty, and put him into a
consumption of his Estate by the unreasonable unlimited exactions of Parliament
Goalers, they then think him reduced to such a condition as to be willing to
hearken to a Composition, on any terms. At last vexed to an agreement, he is to
enjoy his Liberty and Peace on this mutual stipulation: They are to pardon him
the error of his Doctrine, to deliver up his bail, being with two Sureties
Parliament men bound in a Bond of two thousand pounds, and to give two hundred
pounds toward his charges. Mr. Jones must resign his lately recovered Cure of
Tuifordton to make way for a Clerk of their own: which to avoid farther
molestation, to his very great prejudice, he was enforced to condescend unto.
After, in September, 1642. Mr. Jones riding to Taunton in Somersetshire,
accompanied by one of the Prince's Servants, who wore his Masters Colors, was
for that reason, together with that Gentleman, immediately after his departure
from thence, apprehended, and like a Felon brought back to the Castle, where he
remained Prisoner three weeks, and could not be released without the earnest
solicitation of his friends, and his Wives humble and often petitioning the
Earl of Bedford. In November last suffering under continual molestations, and
out of all hope to live peaceably at home, he resolved to put himself under the
protection of Sir Ralph Hoptons Army then in Cornwall. To this purpose he
furnished three Horses and Arms proportionable, and set forward to deliver them
up to his Majesty's service: but unhappily in the way thither he was
intercepted by the Earl of Stamfords Forces, under the command of Captain
Gould, taken Prisoner, robbed to the value of 80 l. the Plunderers leaving him
not so much as a boot to ride in. By these he is led Captive to Liskard in
Cornwall, where they kept him three days, in which time he and another Minister
with him, with his servant, had but one pint of Beer for their sustinence,
being kept without either fire or light, and for one night had their hands
bound behind them, and had been still kept in the like bondage, had not God in
mercy rescued them by Sir Ralph Hopton, after the famous Battle of Liskard:
During the time of their imprisonment, they offer them Conditions on which they
may purchase their liberty; viz. to pay three hundred pound; to take an Oath
never any more to assist the King with Horse, Arms, or Money: But being
delivered on far better terms, he was not long after imprisoned for giving God
public thanks for his deliverance. Afterward, seeing that Religion it self
was but abused, being made the Cloak of these men's Hypocrisy and Treasons, and
that they did fast but to strife and debate, he did not observe the Fast every
last Wednesday in the Month, with that strict observation as was expected from
him by that Faction; hereupon, some of them put him in mind of it: Good Friday
coming on presently, upon the last Wednesday in April he desired his Neighbors
and Parishoners to keep that ancient Fast enjoined by the Church in
Commemoration of the bitter Death and Passion of Christ; and the better to
invite them to that days solemn Humiliation, he preached to them twice that
day. Though Sermons be all their Religion, yet two Sermons on Good Friday
(received and practiced by all Churches in all Ages, till of late a Jewish
observation of one day has shouldred out the religious observation of all
other days) he was convented before the Sessions, where Edmund Prideaux a
Parliament man, and a pretender to this Law, pressed this his Obedience to the
Church most violently against him; maliciously affirming that he did it to
affront the Parliament, and to advance Popish Superstition, and Innovation, and
that therefore He (see what it is to be a Parliament man) would make him an
Example to the World, and as the times then were (God, as he threatened Israel,
provoking us by foolish people) was like enough to have done it, had not Mr.
Jones prevented him by withdrawing himself, and so declined the evil intended
against him. Yet we may not omit one thing: though it were so heinous a Crime
in Mr. Jones not to observe one of their Wednesdays Fasts, yet Mr. Dark
Minister of Musbury in the same County, and a man of that Faction could command
his men to follow the Plough that day, and yet was never thought fit of a
Reprehension, nor so much as a Brotherly Admonition: and no wonder, for tho
heretofore Actions did Qualify persons, and denominate them, by the Sectaries
new Divinity they make Persons to Qualify Actions, those things which are sins
in others lose their Nature and their Name in a Child of God, and they will
take it very ill from you not to be so reputed, though living in the most
notorious scandalous sins that defile the Soul, and lay wast the Conscience of
man. But to return to our story.

From the beginning of this Parliament (till God, by the glorious and no less
than miraculous Victories of Sir Ralph Hopton, restored some Peace to that
miserably distracted Country) Mr. Jones was not permitted to live quietly at
his own dwelling, they threaten to hang him, and burn his house, which they
plundered no less than seven times: and not content with this, they threaten to
carry away his aged Father Prisoner, being no less than 86 years of age; and
had been as good as their word, (for in mischief they seldom fail of their
promises) had not the Women of the Parish (in detestation of so great
barbarism,) rescued him out of their hands: And after that memorable defeat of
the Rebels at Stratton in the edge of Cornwall by the brave Sir Ralph Hopton,
Mr. Jones returned to his own house, fearing no danger from the fitters of that
broken Army: but four Troopers of the Rebels Horse came to his house, searched
it very narrowly for him, insomuch that he heard them swear how cruelly they
would use that Cavaliering Priest, if they could meet with him, when they were
nearer him than they were aware of (had they known it) there being but an Inch
board between him and them: at which time missing of the intended Prey, they
wreck their malice on his household stuff, what they could not carry away, they
spoil; Beds, Bed-steads, Hangings, all are torn and spoiled: They plunder the
Maidservants, and that of their Smocks, and exchange in their very presence
their lousie Shirts for their clean Linen: Hereupon Mr. Jones finding by
experience, that there was no safety out of one of the Kings Armies (the only
Protection which the King is able for the present to afford his good Subjects)
he put himself under the Protection of Sir Ralph Hoptons Army, where he now
remains.

While the Rebels Army lay at Tame sending out parties, by chance they lighted
on some of the Kings Soldiers, and amongst them there was one, who touched in
Conscience for so grievous a Sin, as lifting up his hand against his lawful
Sovereign, the Lords anointed, forsook the Rebels Army, and was entertained in
his Majesty's pay: and being in their power, they resolve instantly to hang
him: but with such Circumstances as in the murder of the Subject they
evidently manifest their malicious rebellious hearts toward their Sovereign.
Nothing will serve to hang him on, but the sign-post of the Kings Head in Tame;
the ppor man being ready to be thrown from the Ladder, prayed very fervently,
and cried out Lord Jesus receive my Soul. The Rebels standing about him,
instead of joining with him in his Devotions, made a confused noise, and
laughed at him. They that had so little mercy for his Soul, were not likely to
draw out any bowels of Compassion toward his body. No, they will not only
murder him, but murder him by a lingering Torment; they will not afford him
the favor of a running knot quickly to obstruct the Throat, and totally
deprive him of breath, but the halter is tied so fast, that he hanged gasping
for breath, not drawing so much as to maintain life, nor so little as suddenly
to lose it: having in this torment hanged a while, a barbarous inhuman Villain
stepped to him, and fearing he should give up his vexed Ghost too soon, he puts
his hands under his feet and lifted him up to give him some scope of
Respiration, but even in this unchristian usage of a poor wretch, he did not
forget to Blaspheme his Lord and King: for having lifted him up, he turned the
dying man's face toward the sign it self of the Kings Head: and jeeringly said,
Nay, Sir you must speak one word with the King before you go, you are
blindfold, and he cannot see, and by and by you shall both come down together!
Let the World if it can now give us a parallel of so undutiful, so high a
contempt of Regal Authority, or tell us whether any of the several Spawns of
Hell but only an Atheistical Puritan could possibly commit such devilish
Cruelties against his fellow Subject, or belch out such venom against his
Sovereign. Amongst those many Sins which call for our public humiliation and
our earnest zeal to purge the land from the guilt which has polluted it,
certainly Contempt and Scorn of so good, so gracious a King is none of the
least.

On Monday the 29. of May 1643. a Boy of five or six years of age, attended by
a youth, was coming to Oxford to his Father, an Officer in the Kings Army,
passing through Buckinghamshire he fell into the hands of some Troopers of
Colonel Goodwins Regiment, who not only pillaged him of the Clothes which he
brought with him, but took his doublet off his back, and would have taken away
his hat and boots, if the Youth that attended on him had not very earnestly
intercede for them to save them. For one of the Company more tenderhearted
than the rest, moved with the Child's cries and affrightment, and with the
Youths earnest entreaty, prevailed with the rest not to rob the Child of these
necessary fences from the injury of wind and weather. Yet tho they spare him
these things, they rob him of his Horse, and leave the poor Child to a tedious
long Journey on foot: This barbarism to a poor Child far from his friends,
almost distracted with fear, so prevailed with some, that they made Colonel
Goodwin and Sir Robert Pie acquainted with it, hoping to find them sensible of
so cruel practices on a poor Child: but these great Professors and Champions of
Religion, only laughed at the relation, without giving any redress to the
Child's injuries. This want of Justice in the Commanders, animated the Soldiers
to prosecute their Villainies to a greater height: for that night they came to
the place where the Child lay, and the poor Soul being in bed fast asleep, his
innocent rest not disturbed with the injuries of the day: they dived into his,
and his attendants pockets, robbed them of all their moneys, and left them
either to borrow more, or beg for sustenance in their Journey to Oxford.

Captain Duckenfield a Commander of the Rebels in Cheshire, came to Mr.
Wright's House, Parson of Wemslow in that County, a man of four score years of
age, of a very honest Life and Conversation, and eminent for his Hospitality
amongst his Neighbors. The Captain and his followers enter the House by
violence, killed two of his Maidservants, wounded others, and in all
probability had murdered Mr. Wright himself, had not his Neighbors that loved
him well rescued him out of their hands. The Crime objected against him was
Loyalty, and that amongst Rebels is Crime enough: for this he is forced to live
an exile from his own habitation, and has absented himself from his house now
twelve months. The same Rebels came to one Mr. John Leech his house, in the
same County, as I take it, they enter his house by violence, they kill one of
his Maidservants, for endeavoring to keep the door shut against them, and
took away Mr. Leech Prisoner. There was a Gentlewoman in the house come thither
but two days before, who seeing so barbarous Cruelty practiced upon Innocents
for no other fault but living in Peace and Obedience, was so affrighted, that
for some time she remained almost distracted.

When the rebellious City of London first delivered up it self the servile
instrument to execute the illegal Commands of the heads of the Faction in
Parliament; a Troop of factious Citizens under the command of Colonel Cromwell
came to the University of Cambridge, and there seized on the Persons of Doctor
Beal, Doctor Martin, and Doctor Stern men of known Integrity, Exemplary lives,
profound learning, and heads of several Colleges in that famous University:
having them in their Custody, they use them with all possible scorn and
contempt, especially Cromwell behaving himself most insolently toward them,
and when one of the Doctors made it a request to Cromwell, that he might stay a
little to put up some linen, Cromwell denied him the favor, and whether in a
jeer, or simple malice told him, That it was not in his Commission: having now
prepared a show to entertain the People, in Triumph they lead them Captives
toward London, where the People were beforehand informed, what Captives
Colonel Cromwell was bringing. In the Villages as they passed from Cambridg to
London, the People were called by some of their Agents to come and abuse, and
revile them. When they came to London, being to bring their Prisoners to the
Tower, no other way would serve their turn, but from Shoreditch through
Bartholomew-Fair, when the Concourse was as thick as the Negotiation of Buyers
and Sellers, and the warning of the Beadles of the Faction (that use to give
notice to their Party) could make it; they lead these Captives leisurely
through the midst of the Fair: as they pass along they are entertained with
Exclamations, Reproaches, Scorns, and Curses, and considering the prejudice
raised in the City of them, it was Gods great mercy that they found no worse
usage from them: having brought them to the Tower, the People there use them
with no less Incivility within the Walls, than the People did without, calling
them Papists, Arminians, and I know not what. After some time Imprisonment
there, they were removed to the Lord Peter's House in Aldersgate Street; and
though they often Petitioned to be heard and brought to judgment, yet they
could obtain neither a Trial, nor enlargement, unless to free their Bodies,
they should ensnare their Souls by loans of Moneys to be employed against the
King, or taking impious Oaths or Covenants: at last after almost a years
imprisonment, on Friday the 11. of August 1643. by order from the Faction, that
call themselves a Parliament, they were removed from thence, and all put on
Shipboard in a Ship called the Prosperous Sail, or the Prosperous Sailer,
lying before Wapping. They went by Coach from Aldersgate Street to
Billingsgate, in the way to the Common Stairs, there to take water; one was
overheard to say These look like honest men, and he was not a jot mistaken:
however for bearing testimomy of the truth, he incurred the censure of a
Malignant, and was in danger to be committed: but another looking these grave
learned Divines in the face, reviled them, saying, That they did not look like
Christians: and Prayed that they might break their Necks as they went down the
Stairs to take water. This harsh usage they found by land, but yet they found
far worse by water: being come on shipboard they were instantly put under
Hatches, where the Decks were so low, that they could not stand upright, and
yet were denied stools to sit on, or so much as a burden of straw to lie on.
Into this Little Ease in a small Ship they crowd no less than four score
Prisoners of Quality, and that they might stifle one another, having no more
breath than what they sucked from one another mouths, most maliciously, and
(certainly) to a murtherous intent, they stop up all the small Auger holes, and
all other inlets which might relieve them with fresh air: an act of such horrid
barbarism, that nor age, nor story, nor Rebellion can parallel; But, O Lord God
to whom Vengeance belongs, thou God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy
self, O let the vengeance of thy Servants blood, that has been shed in this
land, be openly showed upon these worse than Heathen Salvages in our sight, O
let the sorrowful sighing of thy Prisoners come before thee, according to the
greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
XIII.
Mr. Anthony Tyringham a Minister, wounded, and most inhumanely used by the
Rebels in Buckinghamshire. Mrs. Wiborow ( the Parsons Wife of Pebmarsh in
Essex) and her Children exposed to great extremity by the Sectaries of that
County. A lively pattern of ingratitude acted by a schismatical Smith at Dalham
in Suffolk, etc.

MAster Anthony Tyringham, Parson of Tyringham in Buckinghamshire, having
business at Maidsmorton, at his return came to Buckingham, where he met with
two of his Nephews. The Uncle and his Nephews glad of so happy a meeting, after
some stay to congratulate the good chance, and to refresh themselves, set
forward in their journey, and passed in peace without danger until they came
near Stony-Stratford, where a party of Dragooners coming from Alesbury
surprised them: and instantly (scarce asking them from whence they came)
searched and disarmed them, which was no difficult atchievment, there being but
one sword amongst all three. The Rebels take from them their Horses, their
Coats and Money: superfluous things as they conceived for men designed to
captivity: for having spoiled them of their Horses, Money, and Garments, they
send them with a strong guard Prisoners to Ailesbury: while the rest of the
Party lurking about Stony-Stratford, stayed there to expect some fresh Booty:
And that in this we do not slander these great Champions of the Subjects
Liberties and Properties, the issue will acquaint us, for presently after (to
show that all was Fish which came to net) they seized upon a poor Bone-lace
man, and a Shoemaker, robbed them of what they had, and in the same manner sent
them away Prisoners to Ailesbury. The Guard of Dragooners having brought their
three Prisoners about a mile and a half on the way toward Ailesbury, commanded
them again to alight: The first Plunder was for the Captain or Commanders, or
else a share was set apart Anathema for the support of the public Cause, these
men to whose trust they were committed, now intend to plunder for themselves:
And first, they command Mr. Tyringham to put off his Cassock: who being not
sudden in obeying the command, nor overhasty to untye his Girdle to disrobe
himself of the distinctive Garment of his Profession: (though now a Cassock
contracted into the Compendium of a Gippo, is become the Garb of the Reformers)
one of the Dragoons to quicken him, cut him through the hat into the Head with
the Sword taken from one of his Nephews, and with another blow cut him over the
fingers: Mr. Tyringham wondering at so barbarous usage without any provocation,
came toward him that had thus wounded him, and desired him to hold his hands,
pleading that he was a Clergie-man, a Prisoner, and disarmed: the cowardly
Villain either fearing the approach of a disarmed man, or willing to lay hold
on any advantage to expose the Prisoners to the fury of his fellows, cried out,
Shoot the Rogues, for they intend to resist: the word was no sooner given, but
a Muskets was instantly discharged at one of Mr. Tyringhams Nephews; but the
Musqueteer missing his mark, another of the Rebels with his Sword aimed
righter, and ran him into the shoulder: a Musket was presented to the other
Nephew, but Gods providence restrained the murtherous intention of the Rebel,
that he did not give fire. Thus exercising their pleasure upon disarmed wounded
men, they rob Mr. Tyringham of his Cassock, rifle all their pockets, and take
from them what they please; and to palliate their cruelty, they send two
Dragooners back, to tell their Captains and their Companies, that the Prisoners
committed to their Custody and Conduct made resistance: Upon this false Alarm
given, presently the Captains and their Companies make up to them, to assist a
strong Guard against three disarmed, and of them two wounded men; being come
where they were, they encompass them about, and without any examination of the
business, presuming the suggestion to be undoubted truth, one of the Rebels,
Capt. Pollard by name, with a full blow strikes at Mr. Tyringham, and with his
Sword cuts his Arm, and Cubit-bones cross the elbow almost asunder: Mr.
Tyringham (almost threescore years of age within two) bore this barbarous usage
with undaunted Courage, and hearing this bloody Villain called Captain Pollard,
in a pleasant indignation expressed the sense of the injury but thus, That now
he had made him a Pollard indeed: A Metophor easily understood by Wood-men, who
usually call a Tree, whose limbs or branches are lopped off, a Pollard: Mr.
Tyringhams Arm thus miserably wounded, and hanging dangling from his shoulder,
without any government from the nerves or sinews, one of his Nephews having a
mourning Ribband, tendered it to his Uncle to bind up his Arm, but the Rebels
will not permit it: tho Mr. Tyringham entreat the favor to have his wounds
bound up, and the very spectacle before their eyes, was argument enough to
extort this mercy from them, yet they remain inexorable, nor would they be
persuaded until a long time after: having now made sure work with their
Prisoners, and rendered them so far unable to resist, that some were hardly able
to sit the jades on which they were mounted, they again set forward for
Ailesbury: The Dragooners horses on which they were set, being tired, made the
way very tedious, especially to Mr. Tyringham, who lost much blood all the way
as they went.

While these Gentlemen were in this miserable condition, Captain Pollard, not
troubled at all for so bloody a fact, barbarously committed by himself on an
aged Gentleman, and a Minister of that Gospel which they falsely pretend to
maintain, but indeed deny and blaspheme in all their actions, turned aside to
Whaddon Chase, and sported himself in killing some of His Majesty's Deer, which
he carried along with him to Ailesbury: after almost four hours riding, tired
out with tired Jades, and fainting with loss of blood, the Prisoners were again
commanded to alight at a Town called Whitchurch within two miles of Ailesbury.
Here they fall on Mr. Tyringham afresh, and plunder him as eagerly as if he had
been new come into their hands, and not touched by them before. They pluck off
his Boots, and take from him his Jerkin, his Hat and Cap, all the fences
provided for cold and weather, and the usual Fortifications against the
injuries of wind and rain: and so made a pattern of the man wounded between
Jerusalem and Jericho, they mount him on his Spittle again and drive on, and
after an hours riding in cold and darkness, at last they arrived at Ailesbury,
that night the Chirurgions (as soon as they could be found) viewed and dressed
the wound, but concluded unanimously that they must cut off his Arm the next
day, or else it would Gangreen and infallaby kill him, which next day was done
accordingly: Mr. Tyringham bore the loss of his Arm with incredible resolution
and courage, as knowing the Justice of that Cause for which he suffered, and as
willing to lay down his Life in testimony of his Loyalty, as his Brother Mr.
Edward Tyringham, one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber had done
before him, who the last Winter being employed in his Majesty's service, and
set on by a Party of Rebels fought valiantly, but oppressed with multitudes,
received so many wounds, that he died of them. But it has pleased God so to
bless the means used for this Gentleman's recovery, that there are great hopes
he will survive these maimes, and (as himself undauntedly told the Rebels to
their faces) Live to see them hanged. Amen.

In the fourth Week of this Mercury, you heard of the cruel usage of Mr.
Wiborow, Parson of Pebmarsh in the County of Essex, by the Rebels in those
parts; how they abused him in the Church, beat him in the fields, and took from
him the Book of Common Prayer, having before torn another of his in pieces.
After this the Brownists and Anabaptists of that place (with which that Country
swarms) threaten to kill him; Mr. Wiborow, not daring to trust himself amongst
these cruel blood-thirsty men, to preserve his life, was compelled to leave his
Cure, his Wife and Children, some seven Months since, and to put himself under
the Kings protection: hoping that his absence might be a means to secure his
Wife and Children, and prevail with these Monsters to permit them to enjoy that
which he left behind him for their sustenance: but his absence was so far from
working this good effect in them, that they made use of it, to eject him out of
the possession of the Profits of his Parsonage, and his Wife and Children out
of their house, exposing them harbourless to the wide World: for taking
advantage of his absence, they accuse him to the pretended Parliament, and
frame a Bill of Falsehood and Lies against him, thereby to gain a Sequestration
of his Living: A business not of any great difficulty, they being more ready to
grant such illegal oppressive ejections, than the People to ask them: for upon
the Accusation, John White that fornicating Brownist sitting in the Chair, Mr.
Wiborows Living was sequestered, and the Profits of it given to one Burrows,
though the Cure was never neglected, but supplied by Mr. Wiborows friends, to
the content and satisfaction of all moderate peaceable men: yet though they had
robbed him of his livelihood, and given his Wives and Childrens bread to
strangers, by most unjust practices, yet his hopes were that his poor Wife and
Children should enjoy the accommodation of their dwelling in the Parsonage
house: but such is the implacable cruelty and malice of these Sectaries, that
on the tenth of June 1643. a Troop of the Rebels came to the Parsonage house,
and demanded entrance: Mrs. Wiborow and her Children being alone in the house,
she barred up the doors against them, and for her better safety retired to an
upper room, to which the passage was through a Trap-door, which likewise she
made as fast as she could: all this fortification could not keep these Rebels
out, they break open the doors, and make way to the room, where Mrs. Wiborow
and her Children thought to secure themselves: when they came thither, three of
these Rebels set their Pistols at her breast, threatening to shoot her, if she
and her Children would not suddenly depart the house, and leave it to a new
Master. Mrs. Wiborow replied, That she would rather be killed within doors,
than perish without, but withal earnestly entreated that she might enjoy so
much of her Husbands right, as his house to shelter her and her Children, who
poor Souls stood about their Mother crying, and in their natural oratory
craving compassion toward their Mother, whom at every word the Rebels threaten
to Pistol; but neither the earnest entreaty of the Mother, nor the pitiful
outcries of the Children, could prevail with them, they remain as deaf men,
void of all pity or bowels of Compassion: nay they violently seize on her,
drag her down the stairs, and out of the house into the yard: the poor Children
being almost distracted and at their wits end for fear what would become of
their Mother, being thus violently drawn out of the house into the yard, there
she found Meriton Simpson and Cook the Sequestrators, with other attending
there to see this joyful spectacle, a poor oppressed Gentlewoman and her small
Children cruelly cast out of their own habitation by Rebels and Traitors. As
soon as Mrs. Wiborow saw them, she presented them with the Kings Proclamation
against the Oppression of the Clergy, by the intrusion of factious and
schismatical persons into the Cures and Revenues of Learned, Orthodox Divines,
by Order of one, or both pretended Houses of Parliament, contrary to all Law
and Justice: which she hoped would have found so much obedience and respect, as
to restore her to her house: This was so far from mollifying these Rebels and
Schismatiques, that it provoked them to great insolences: at last when Mrs.
Wiborow perceived that all her entreaties, and her Childrens tears prevailed
nothing, to restore her to her house, she entreated the Sequestrators, that in
case she could not be permitted to dwell in her own house, that yet she might
have some other place of accommodation provided, to receive her and her
Children: Meriton insolently replied, That he would provide his Tumbril, that
is, his Dung-Cart, to carry her and her Children from Constable to Constable,
till she came to her Husband: after many bitter scoffs and scorns in this her
affliction, she desired that if she might not obtain so much favor to dwell in
her house, yet they would not deny her access to her house, but that she might
go in to fetch out provision for her Childrens supper that night: But these
Monsters of men would not give her leave: and to complete this unheardof
Tyranny and Oppression, the Authorized Thieves, I mean the Commissioners
appointed by the pretended House of Parliament to seize upon the Estates of all
Delinquents, and to point out who shall be plundered next, Order, that
whatsoever Mr. Wiborow had left, should be seized on for the use of that Thing
which they call a Parliament: thereby to support Rebellion with Robbery and
Theft. Instantly they seize on his Corn, and those few Cattle, the remainder of
former Plunderings, though they knew it was the life of the Mother and her
Children, and that in taking away these, they deprived them of all means of
subsistence, and exposed them to extreme want, having reduced them to this
miserable condition, to beg or starve: Now for the comfortless trouble sake of
the needy, and because of the deep sighing of the poor, I will up says the
Lord, and will help every one from him that swells against him, and will set
him at rest: The good God perform his promise, Let God arise and let these
Enemies of God and Man be scattered.

Mr. Thomas Dalton Bachelour of Divinity, and Parson of Dalham in the County of
Suffolk, being plundered of his Horse by Colonel Russels Troop Deputy
Lieutenant of the County of Cambridge, on more than probable grounds, fearing
that they would seize upon his Person, and commit him to Prison, was compelled
to leave his family and retire privately to some friends, where he continued
some months. In the interim one Barnard a poor Smith, and one that formerly had
lived on the Parish Alms, informed the Committee at Cambridge of Mr. Daltons
absence, and making it his Crime, Petitioned for a Sequestration of his living,
intending to make a gain of it himself; for whereas the living is worth 140 l.
per annum, and had been so let for many years before, Vulcan, I mean Barnard
the Smith, having got a Chaplain of his own, one Randall by name, intends with
him to serve the Cure for 50 or 60 Pounds a year, intending to put up the
Overplus into his own Purse: nor did he fail of his pious project, so
apparently tending to the public good, and reformation of the Church: For on
the Smiths bare instance, though earnestly opposed by the Lord of the Town, and
about forty of the chiefest of the Parish, who all labored earnestly to
withstand it, the committee for the advancement of the Reformation, hearken to
Barnard and substitute Randall Vulcan, Priest in Mr. Daltons place, and
revenue; This grant of the Committee was ratified by the Committee at
Westminster, for it is not impossible but Barnard might have sharers with him in
both Committees: For the Tyth of the Tyth was enough for an Alms-man: nay this
Committee did not only ratify the Order of the other Committee, but added to
the injustice by ordering Mrs. Dalton instantly to resign possession of the
Parsonage house to Randall: of which Ordinance when the Patron of the living
had intelligence, he instantly posted to London, and knowing how unjust and
trivial the accusation against Mr. Dalton were, absence being his main Crime,
(being put to this hard Option either to stay and be committed Prisoner, or to
fly and be robbed of the profits of his Living, for this is the Dilemma to
which all Orthodox Conformable Ministers are now put) resolved to intercede for
him, hoping either quite to take him off, or at least to procure a mitigation
of the Order; but contrary to his expectation he found the Smith Courted,
applauded, and to enjoy freedom of access to the Committee, and himself (a
Gentleman of very good rank and esteem in his Country) to be slighted;
neglected, and made dance attendance, and after long waiting not regarded what
he spoke for his Minister: At last this good Gentleman having by experience
observed, that the practices of the Faction in Parliament did engage them to
slight and suppress the Gentry, and all that made Honor, or Conscience the
rule of their Actions, and to court and observe the dregs and scum of the
People, (as the fittest instruments for their designs) returned home, and
sending for Mrs. Dalton, entreats her to make use of his house as her own,
until God should enable the King to restore her, and all his loyal Subjects to
their own: Mrs. Dalton accepts of his courteous offer, but leaves her man to
keep possession of the Parsonage house: She had not stayed long here before her
Host is threatened to be plundered for his hospitality: Barnard the Smith (as
bad as Alexander the Coppersmith) being now so rich as to be able to travel to
London, and trouble his Neighbors; that his Levite might have the Parsonage
House to better his bargain, speeds to the Committee, and prefers a Complaint
against Mrs. Dalton for giving up possession of her house according to their
Order: upon complaint made, it is further ordered by the same Committee, that
because she had presently quitted the House, she should be brought up to London
before the Committee, there to answer the contempt: to avoid further vexation
she obeyed the Order, and gave up possession, hoping that this resigning of her
right, would set an end to her trouble: but according to the Rebels Method from
the beginning of this Parliament, first invade the Clergy, and then the Laity,
So here they vary not from the first Pattern, for having robbed Mr. Dalton of
his Ecclesiastical Revenues, presently they seize upon his Temporal, his Rents
and other Debts due unto him, they leave him nothing. But if you please to see
the lively Character of a Malicious, Ungrateful, Cheating Schismatic, whose
Religion is to return evil for good, and hatred for good will, look once more
on this Barnard the Smith, and you will conclude it doubtful which is hardest,
his Anvil or his heart. For this Wretch owing to Mr. Dalton twenty seven
Pounds, when the time of payment was come, Barnard come to the Church Porch,
the place appointed for payment of the Debt, attended with four Rebel Troopers,
as witness of the tender of the moneys. Mrs. Dalton being there to receive it,
he pours it out, she having told it, was putting it up into her Purse; But
Barnard interrupted her, Saying, Stay this is for better use than so, it is for
the service of the Parliament: and presently (as the Plot was laid) the
Troopers bent their Pistols at her breast, and force the moneys from her: nay,
before it was lawful by Order and Ordinances to violate all the Obligations of
Religion and Gratitude, this Barnard acknowledged himself much bound to Mr.
Dalton for many favors having many ways endeared him, thought all things safe
which were committed to Barnards trust; in this confidence Mr. Dalton laid up
diverse Cooms of Wheat in Barnards house, to be a help in time of need: when Mr.
Dalton was gone, his Wife sent to Barnards house to demand some Wheat, this
unthankful wretch denied it, affirming that Mr. Dalton being a Malignant had no
rite or property in those Goods; and therefore forbad her man to come on his
ground, threatening that he would run his Pitch-fork in him, if he came thither
to make any such Demand: Ab uno disce omnes.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
XIV.
The Rebels barbarous usage of Sir Ralph Canterills Man in Chancery Lane,
London: Of the Ministry of London. A Character of Mr. Ephraim Udall, Parson of
Saint Austins, with the Cruelty used toward him and his Wife. Sir Thomas Hides
covetousness and neutrality here rewarded by the Rebels. Mr. Bowlstrodes Prayer
by the Spirit, etc.

IF in the Relation of these sad stories thou find (courteous Reader) some
Complaints of London, mingled with those of the Country, know that the earnest
request of Mercurius Civicus must plead my Apology. The heads of this Rebellion
deal with that miserable City as unjust Stepmothers do with their poor
Children, Whip them till they cry, and then whip them again for crying: for
they have not so much losers Privilege left them as to have Liberty to
Complain: and then let the World judge to what a narrow Scantling the Liberty of
the Subject is reduced, by these pretended Assertors of the Liberty, when it is
lawful for them to Murder, and Plunder the Kings good Subjects, and yet it is
not lawful for the oppressed to bemoan their own Condition. Being therefore
denied the common natural mitigation of great pressures, to bewail their own
Miseries, and breath out the sense of them in free expressions, for fear they
further provoke their Oppressors while they implore the compassion of their
friends, Mercurius Civicus in his Letter, dated Aug. 5. 1643. and directed to
me, earnestly entreated (their own Presses not daring to publish the truth of
their miserable condition) that their sufferings under the Insolency,
Injustice, Tyranny and Rapine of this horrid Rebellion, might be made known to
the World by a borrowed pen, and interwoven with those of the Country: that
therefore we may not be wanting to so just requests, nor leave posterity
ignorant what transcendent cruelties are practiced as well within the Walls of
that wretched City as without, as often as they shall privately (by such secret
ways of intelligence as the present condition of the times permit) impart their
Calamities, I shall according to Mercurius Civicus desire, insert them with
those of the Country, and so impart them to the World; and though the barbarous
Murders committed on Mr. Tompkins, and Mr. Chaloner, that second pair of State
Martyrs, together with the butchery of a peaceable Citizen slain by Captain
Harvey: and the Women slaughtered by Sir Willam Wallers Troopers (that ran away
at Roundway Down, to kill Women and Virgins in London, for the unpardonable
crime of petitioning for Peace) might justly challenge precedence, yet because
the memories of those two worthies are reserved for a peculiar Martyrologue,
and these are already imbalmed by the Piety of our Brother Aulicus, I shall set
before you the misery, into which that Rebellious City has Plunged it self and
us, in some other instances.

On Tuesday the 15 of Aug. 1643. a Party of Colonel Harvies Regiment came to
one Walkers house in Chancery Lane, to Seize on Sir Ralph Canteril, whom they
supposed then to have lodged there: on their coming, finding that the Knight
was either gone out of Town, or had shifted his lodging, but on diligent
inquiry discovering that there was a man in the house that now was, or lately
had been Sir Ralphs Servant, they apprehend him, and demand where his Master
was, and where he had hid his Money, Plate, and Jewels? The man replied that he
had left his Masters service, and did know nothing, either where his Master
was, or how he had disposed of his Goods: presently they lay violent hands on
him, and carry him out into the backside into the house of Office, there to
examine him by Torment: there they rip up the Tiles, and one of the Rebels
taking a Cord out of his pocket, fastened one end of it about the poor man's
neck, and threw the other end over the rafters of the untiled house: Having him
at this posture, they interrogate him again where this (Imaginary) Treasure was
hid; he returns the same answer, that he could give no account what Sir Ralph
had done with it: for being to leave his service, he was a stranger to his
Masters Actions: Not satisfied with so reasonable an Answer, they hoise him up
by the Neck, and let him hang a good distance from the ground, where having
hanged a while, they let him down, and examine him again where Sir Ralph had
bestowed his Money, Plate, and Jewels? The poor man not able to give any other
answer to their Query, protests his ignorance, and that if the discovery might
save his life, yet he could not redeem it so, for he knew nothing concerning
what they asked him: enraged that the man could not Prophecy, (for without that
gift he could not resolve them) they suddenly hoise him up to the top of the
house, and letting go their hold, they let him as suddenly fall to the ground:
Being fallen, there he lay for dead without any expression of life: but these
barbarous Rebels hoping that there may yet remain some life in him whereon to
practice further cruelty, stand by the man, and watch him, and at last
perceiving that he was not dead, but that he began to stir and breath,
presently they put burning matches between his fingers: hoping by this way of
Torment to extort a discovery from him: but in vain, the extremity of this
Torment indeed (though half dead as he was) made him cry out and roar in a very
lamentable manner, which a Maidservant of the house hearing, and affrighted at
the noise, ran to her Master, and told him, that certainly the Rebels were
murdering the man in the house of Office, hereupon Mr. Walker hastened out,
and when he came to the place, found the conjecture of his Servant true, and
amazed at so horrid, so inhumane a spectacle, interceded for the poor man, and
earnestly desired them, not to defile his ground and habitation with innocent
blood: instead of desisting they return the Egyptians answer to Moses, Who
made thee a Ruler and a Judge? bad him be silent, and withdraw, or else they
threatened to use him in like manner: Mr. Walker fearing that those perjured
persidious Villains, which keep their words in nothing else, might yet be
punctual in performance of mischief, not daring to commit himself to their
mercy, left them, and went imto his house, where the Quartermaster to the
Rebels lay sleeping while the Troopers were acting this cruelty, him he raises
from sleep, and tells him what the Troopers were doing without, who something
moved at the Relation, went out unto them, and took them off from farther
prosecuting their barbarous intentions. But whether or no the man on whom all
this cruelty was acted, survived this barbarous usage, is uncertain.

As amongst the many blessings wherewith it pleased God to advance the City of
London far above all other Cities either of this, or other Nations of the
Christian World, one was their Clergy: for a more pious, learned, and laborious
Ministry, no people ever enjoyed, even their Enemies themselves being Judges:
So amongst the many crying sins whereby that proud rebellious City has
provoked God to give them up to a Reprobate sense and hardness of heart to
their own destruction, certainly, the contempt and oppression of their Clergy
are none of the least: as before the lest Parliament began, a main part of
their Religion was to strive with their Priests, and to rob them of their
maintenance, by all possible arts of deceit, and fraud, so as soon as the
Parliament was sat, and the basest of the People were set loose to worrey
their Ministers (though never so blameless, never so Orthodox, if they did not
conspire with them to innovate both Church and State:) the Citizens of London,
showed themselves most forward in Petitioning against their Ministers: yet at
first pretended to molest such only, who had expressed greatest zeal to the
Order, and decency of Gods worship, professing that for the rest there was no
thought to trouble them: but at last having put to flight, or imprisoned those,
they go and discover plainly, that whatsoever is a Friend to the Protestant
Religion, as it is established in the Church of England, is their Enemy: how
many have they silenced, imprisoned, or banished from their Cures whom
heretofore they did magnify for the undaunted Champions of the Protestant
Religion? and stout opposers of those supposed pretended innovations, which
they vainly imagined were the eager endeavors of some men to impose upon the
Church: he that knows London, and has frequented the most thronged
Congregations there, cannot be ignorant, that Mr. Ephraim Udall Parson of S.
Austins in the Old Change near S. Austines Gate, is a man of eminent Piety,
exemplary Conversation, profound Learning, indefatigable Industry, Preaching
constantly every Lords Day twice, and for the Winter half year, if not the
whole year, preaching a Lecture at his own Parish every Tuesday in the
Afternoon: and if I am not mistaken every Saturday before the first Sunday in
the month a Preparatory Sermon to the blessed Sacrament of the Sords Supper:
and besides all this, he is a man of an affable, courteous, peaceable
Conversation amongst his Neighbors: in a word, he was a man of their own vote:
and is (without profanation be it spoken) a shining and burning light: and his
people for a while much pleased themselves in their choice, and were content to
walk by his light; but when he found himself mistaken in the ends and
intentions of the heads of this Rebellion, when he saw that the zeal of some
did degenerate into madness and frenzy, and that the endeavors of others
(under the pretense of Reformation) was to bring in Anarchy and Sacriledg, to
devour Gods Portion, and the poor remainder of the Patrimony of the Church, he
did strongly and powerfully bend both his tongue and pen against them: against
Sacriledg he published that learned Tract, called A Coal from the Altar:
against Anarchy he declared himself for Episcopacy, and the established
Lyturgy: and published another Book called Communion Comeliness, in which by
many impregnable Arguments he proves a high Convenience, if not a necessity,
for that most laudable custom of having Rails about the Lords Table: These were
in the Schismatiques opinion Crimes enough to unsaint a man, nay, had S. Paul
himself been now in the flesh, and preached against Sacriledg and Anarchy,
there is no doubt, but there would have been some found to petition against
him, and John White sitting in the Chair, as undoubtedly he had been voted a
scandalous Minister at a Committee: but because when these Books were
published, Injustice and oppression did not march so furiously, nor were grown
so frontless and impudent to seize on innocence it self, not slurr'd with
slanders and calumnies, Mr. Udall sat something quiet, some murmurings there
were, but his former Reputation in the City bore him up against the Obloquy of
private discontent: the Faction found it no easy matter to brand Mr. Udall
with Popery, or Popishly affected, or these slanders to make any impression in
that estimation which the people had of him: but at last when they came openly
to defy their Sovereign, the Lords Anointed, and it was almost Treason but to
name the 13. Chapter to the Romans, it was a fit time to silence and remove Mr.
Udall, for neither Doctor Gouge his Church at Black Friars, or Mr. Goodwins in
Coleman-street, were half so full before this Parliament began, as Mr. Udalls
has been since. First, therefore, they Plunder his house, they take away his
Library and Household Stuff: Then they remove him from the Execution of his
Ministry, and sequester the profit for a Levite of their own: Thirdly, they
sought for him to commit him close Prisoner, being aged, of very weak and
infirm body, his strength exhausted with continual labors in Preaching the
word of God, visiting the sick, and in execution of their ministerial
Functions, in performance of which in his own person few of his Brethren were
more conscientious: And lastly, they cast him out of his dwelling house: But
when they came to seize on his house, they found one impediment, which unless
they could find some art to remove, they could not take full possession of it:
Mrs. Udall (besides the infirmities of age) was lame, and it had been monstrous
inhumanity to take her by violence and carry her out of her house, not knowing
where to dispose of her, but in the open street: Therefore to gain her consent,
and prevent clamor until the feat was done, they tell the good old Gentlewoman
that the Parliament had a tender respect unto her years, and to her present
infirmities: and therefore though they had ordered to dispossess her of that
house, yet they did not mean to leave her harbourless, but had out of the
abundance of their goodness provided another house to receive her: She good old
Woman neither awed by fear, nor won by their persuasions and promises, was
taken up by two men brought in by him that had broken open three locks, and
entered the house by force, and carried out of her house into the street, there
they set her down in a Chair, and so leave this weak infirm Matron, of a long
time not accustomed to the open air, nor being able to go out of doors in three
or four years before, unless unto the Church, exposed her (a sad spectacle of
the Rebels cruelty) to the mercy of Wind and Weather.

The Rebels in their march toward Gloucester, seized on Sr. Tho. Hide a
Bedfordshire Man, whose sordid Covetousness had made him so far forget all Duty
and Loyalty to his Sovereign, as that he refused to assist him either in his
Person or his purse: but because either his Estate lay nearer to the Power of
the Rebels, than to the Kings Protection: a Consideration which in these
Atheistical rebellious times is admitted as a just Apology, either for
Neutrality, or ready Compliance with the Rebels, so far as to submit to all
Taxes and Impositions laid on them, a most traitorous and irreligious liberty
and dispensation of Conscience, which if all men had made use of, the Kings
Crown might long before this have been thrown down to the ground: Or else
conceiving it a very unlikely, if not an impossible thing for the King to
withstand their power, who had not only by Lies and Slanders stolen away the
hearts of the People, but had seized on all his Castles, Towns, Forts,
Magazines: did contribute to the Rebels aid, and wholly complied with them, not
so much out of judgment, as fear: thinking that this compliance would be the
security of his Estate, and turn to his great advantage: but his Wealth was so
well known, that bare Compliance, and small Contributions must not serve his
turn, he must bleed more freely: They seize him the Twentieth part, and that
highly set: This demand struck his heart like pangs of death; and he that was
so forward in petty assistances, now discovered the love of himself to be more
than that of the holy Cause, and refused to part with more moneys: wherefore in
recompense of his former good deeds, they seize on his Person, and carry him
captive in their Army, and suffered his Servant to walk along by him, leading a
horse in his hand, while his Master the Knight was chained arm to arm with
another Prisoner, and was compelled to beat it on the hoof: Thus did he march
for three days on foot, coupled with another Prisoner, and that Prisoner, as we
are informed, is Doctor Stubbing, Doctor in Divinity, whom likewise the Rebels
gathered up in their march, and taking him from his Cure, added him to the
number of their Captives: So soon can these Rebels forget former aids, if men
do not comply with them, and answer their expectation in every thing, and
indeed what measure their dearest friends are to expect from them, if they fail
them in any particular, not running into the same excess of Madness and Treason
as they do, and shall not show themselves ready at a call (to their perpetual
infamy, contrary to the Religion which they profess, the Oaths which they have
taken, and the solemn Protestations which they have made) rush into the
damnable sin of Rebellion, and give the right hand of fellowship to the Rebels
here, to assist them in so unnatural a War against their own gracious native
Sovereign, we may fully learn by a Prayer (for now they have turned their very
Prayers into sin, being no better than very Libels and Pasquils) lately made by
Mr. Bowlstrode, Son to Colonel Bowlstrode, a factious Rebel of Buckinghamshire,
before his Sermon at Horton near Colebrooke, which that you may see what Spirit
of Prayer and Supplication it is, of which they boast, and that the Nation whom
it concerns may see what opinion the factious Preachers here have of them,
unless they will serve their vile purposes and engage themselves as deeply
(which God forbid) in the present Rebellion as themselves, we have here
inserted.

Thou have, O Lord, of late, written bitter things against thy Children, and
forsaken thine own Inheritance, and now Lord in our misery and distress we
expected aid from our Brethren of the neighboring Nation, (the Scots I mean)
but good Lord, thou know that they are a false and perfidious Nation; and do
all they do for their own ends, and not for our good: if therefore, good Lord,
their coming into the Land at this time be for our good, bring them in
speedily, if otherwise, keep them out, for they are a false and perfidious
Nation.

There was present at Church at that time, one Mr. Kenada a Scotch man, who
being drowsy was wakened by a friend that sat by him, to hear the devotion of
the Preacher; who hearing his whole Nation thus publicly blasphemed by this
contemptible Zelot, spoke out in the Congregation saying, I think the man is
mad: and certainly Mr. Kenada was not a jot mistaken, to think him mad that
should thus rashly in the face of a solemn Congregation traduce a Nation, and
if there be amongst the heads of the Rebellion (in whose power he is) any care
of the honor of that Nation, we doubt not but we shall shorly hear of some
exemplary Punishment inflicted on this incendiary between the two Nations: and
heightened according to the nature of the Crime. If any man doubt of the truth
of this Relation, whether it be a fiction or a thing really done, he may
consult Mr. Kenada or any of Horton Parish, who are ready to bear Testimony to
this truth.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
XV.
Master Squire of Little Saint Bartholomews, London, plundered of four thousand
pounds. Nath. Fiennes his Warrant for a Citizen of Bristol. A touch of Colonel
Morley 's tyranny in Sussex, with the hard usage of Mr. Hinson a Minister
there. A Woman most unchristianly tortured to death by the Rebels at
Chippingnorton, etc.

UPon Friday the 18. of Aug. 1643. Mr. Squire of Little S. Bartholomews,
London, having this present Rebellion upon several Rates, Taxes and Loans,
disbursed near a Thousand pounds, was sent unto for a new Sum toward the
maintenance of the Holy Cause; but he foreseeing, that as long as their Purses
were open to foment this unnatural War, there would be no end of it till their
Estates were exhausted, and the wealthiest amongst them reduced to beggary, and
a morsel of bread, returned a denial, yet withal professed his readiness to
have supplied them if he had been provided: and his Wife to indear themselves,
and to show how well affected they were to the Cause, wished that all the
Malignants in London were plundered, and then there would be less cause to call
so often on the Well-affected for so great Supplies, not imagining (good Woman)
that her Husband might be numbered shortly amongst the Malignants: or, that to
be wealthy and not pour out all, as often as the heads of this Rebellion should
call for it, was in their opinion, high Malignity: for next day,
notwithstanding their former compliance with the Rebels in so great a measure,
six men with Pistols were sent to Master Squires House, under pretense to
search for Arms, but indeed to find out a hoard of moneys, which either their
own Jealousy, grounded on the general received opinion of his Wealth, or the
treachery of some that knew the House had suggested unto them. After some small
search (though Mr. Squire thought that his Treasure had been close enough hid)
instead of Arms they find four thousand pounds, a rich booty, and very greedily
seized upon. At last, Mistress Squire finding her self so unexpectedly in the
number and condition of Malignants, robbed of so great a Sum, fell into a
swoon, and for fear she should be recalled to pursue the Injury with just
Clamors and Expostulations, when Strong Water were brought to relieve and
comfort her surprised Spirits, the Rebels would not permit it to be administered
unto her: but left Nature to the work of its own recovery, without the
assistance of any borrowed help. Of this Four thousand pounds, Eight hundred
was due to a Son in Law of Mr. Squires, a Creature of the Parliaments, and a
great Friend to the Cause; and therefore to redeem the rest, Mr. Squire freely
offered to give the Parliament (as those tame People call the Faction of both
Houses) the Sum of Three hundred pounds, so the rest might be restored unto
him: but all in vain, it was judged a very high Symptom of Malignity to hide
Four thousand pounds, and suffer the Holy League to be endangered for want of
Supplies, and therefore as a just punishment for his Coldness, and want of Zeal
to the good Cause in hand, it was wholly taken from him without restitution
(for ought we yet know) of a farthing: and indeed what measure the Rich either
of London, or any other place, cursed with the Tyranny and Oppression of this
Rebellion, are to expect from their Hands (when the Necessities of Supplies
shall press upon them) the World may read in this Warrant, directed from
Nathanael Fiennes, in the time of his reign in Bristol, to Mr. Gunning the
younger of that City: which for the plain English that it speaks, and because
it contains a perfect discovery of their Resolutions when occasion shall serve,
we have here inserted.

BRISTOLL,
WHereas this City is at this time environed, and in great and imminent danger
to be swallowed up by many cruel and barbarous Enemies of Papists, Irish
Rebels, and others: and most of the Inhabitants of this City have, and all
ought to take an Oath and Protestation for Defense thereof with their Lives and
Fortunes. These are to require you forthwith, to pay to my Servant Ralph
Hooker, to be employed for the Defense of the City, the Sum of Two hundred
pounds; which Sum, in respect of your Estate, is below the proportion required
of other Persons of your Quality by an Ordinance of Parliament. And if you
shall refuse in this time of so great necessity, you may expect whatsoever the
desperate Resolution of Soldiers, reduced unto extreme necessity, may put them
to act against your Persons and Estates, unless by a speedy Contribution
toward their supply you shall prevent the same.

NATH. FIENNES.
Given under my hand, July 25. 1643. To Mr. Gunning the younger.

On Sunday morning, being the ninth of July, 1643. in time of Divine Service,
Colonel Morley, the Crooked Rebel of Sussex, came toward Hasting, one of the
Cinque Ports; but in his March being discovered, presently notice was given to
Mr. Hinson, Curate of All Saints, who knowing that one end of the Colonel's
Sabbath Days Journey, was to apprehend him, was compelled to break off Divine
Service in the midst, and fly into a Wood near at hand, there to hide himself:
The Colonel being entered the Town, scattered the Body of his Horse into
several parts, to intercept all passages out of the Town: and having secured
the Ports, he summons the Mayor and Jurats, and demands the Arms of the Town:
to which he found ready obedience; for presently the Mayor and Jurats sent
their Servants to command all the Inhabitants to deliver up their Arms, which
was done accordingly; and one of the Jurats, Fray by name, furnished the
Colonel with a Wagon, he sent them away to Battle, being a Town in Sussex,
some five Miles from Hasting: that night some Soldiers lay in the Church, where
Mr. Hinson officiated, where one Wicker, a common Soldier, getting up into the
Pulpit, preached unto his Fellows: and to show the Fruits of so good Doctrine,
going out of the Church, either the Preacher, or one of his Auditory, stole
away the Surpless; Ralph Mills, the honest Parish Clark, to recover it,
complained to their Captain Richard Cockeram of Rye, but received no other
answer, but this, Do not you think he loves a Smock as well as you? Morley
being now Master of the Town, began to exercise his power given him for the
good of the Kingdom, and the preservation of the Subjects property, and
demanded a Sum of Moneys from some of the Jurats, which they paid him, and
because they came off so readily, he demanded more, which they refusing, he
took them with him Prisoners to Battle: where having stayed but a night, they
return with a Warrant next day signed by Morley, which they undertook to
execute upon such Persons as themselves had designed for Plunder and
Imprisonment: whereof Mr. Car, the Parson of St. Clements in Hasting, and Mr.
Hinson, were the chiefest. Mr. Car that Sunday was not at home, being fled to
prevent surprizal: but hearing that Colonel Morley was gone to Battle, and
thinking the Storm to be now blown over, he resolved to return to Hasting, and
being on the way thither, he met Fray the Jurat, who was one of the Combination
to execute Morley's Warrant, and apprehend him: as Fray was drilling Mr. Car
along, by chance one Mr. Breame met them, and seeing Mr. Car so familiarly
conversing with a Judas that was resolved to betray him, called Mr. Car aside
to speak with him; what he said is uncertain, but in all probability he
discovered to Master Car the danger in which he was, for immediately he left
Fray's company, and rode back again. Fray thus unexpectedly robbed of his prey,
instantly informed Colonel Morley, that Master Breame had frayed away the Bird,
that was so near going into the snare: Morley presently sends some Troopers to
apprehend Master Breame, and at what sum he did redeem this Crime, is
uncertain. On the Tuesday after Morleys coming to Hasting, Mr. Hinson returned
home: and that day, the Jurats, that Morley took with him, being come back,
summoned the rest of their Brethren unto the Town Hall, where they acquainted
them with the Contents of their new Warrant: who with joint consent, promise
their best endeavors to put it in execution: to this purpose, having picked out
of the Town a sufficient number to assist them, and execute their Commands; and
having put their names in the Warrant with their own, they bind them by the
Religion, and strict bond of an Oath, to do what they would have them, without
ever specifying any Particulars, wherein they intended to exercise their
Obedience, until they should give them in charge what they were to do: Nay, not
only so, but having received their commands, they swear them not to reveal what
commands were laid on them, to any body, no not to their own Wives, until they
had executed the commands; and when some of these assistants startled at this
Jesuitical implicit Obedience, to know to what in particular their Oath should
bind them: Wenham, a Factious Jurat, replied, That they must swear in general,
and afterward they should know the particulars. Thomas Staple, one of the
Assistants, being pressed to take this Oath, rejoined, Then you may make us
swear, and the business we swear to, may be to knock our Fathers in the head,
or betray them: Wenham (most convincingly) replied, That if they would not
swear, they had authority for their refusal, to Imprison them for a year: The
rest adding, That they need not be so scrupulous, though they did not know what
they swore unto, it was no harm, for they had taken the same Oath themselves to
do that which they were to assist them in: And so, partly by fear, and partly
by the inducement of the Jurats example, they took an Oath upon the Holy
Evangelists, to assist the Jurats in what they were to do, not knowing what,
and to be secret, until it was done. Sure the Oath of Canonical Obedience, and
the so much decryed and caetera, must now for ever rest in Peace, and never
more be maliciously and ignorantly traduced after this most Papistical,
Jesuitical, Puritanical practice.

Having thus engaged these men by an Oath, to do any thing which they shall
command them, they then think them sufficiently prepared to receive the
Mysteries of the Warrant which now they reveal unto them, and tell them, that
they must apprehend Master Hinson, and some others nominated in the Warrant: in
obedience therefore to the Command, they presently go to Mr. Hinson, and seize
on him in his Lodging: and being brought before the Mayor and his Brethren the
Jurats, he never questioned by what Authority he was apprehended, but only told
them, That he had not done any thing that deserved this usage; Presently Wenham
replied, That he had highly deserved it, because he read the Kings
Declarations. After this, all the Jurats went out, one by one, and left Mr.
Hinson locked up with one Mr. Parker, whom they had a little before committed,
because he would not pay for the carriage of some Ordnance to Rye, a most
Factious Town, not far off: Mr. Parker was that night removed from the
Town Hall, but Master Hinson was left there all night, strongly guarded by
eight Bill-men, having no other Bed but a Bench: next day Master Parker (who
had the favor to be lodged that Night in a Sergeants House) desirous to see his
Fellow-Prisoner, prevailed with his Landlord to go along with him to visit
Master Hinson: of which when Wenham had notice, he told Biddenham (for so was
the Sergeants name) that he deserved for this to be laid by the heels himself:
which check so awed many of Mr. Hinson's Friends, that they durst not visit him
for fear of Imprisonment: the Mayor and Wenham command the Maidservant that
attended him, not to carry any Letters from him, and being examined by them
whether she had conveyed any from him already; upon her denial, Barlow a
factious Schismatic (who because heretofore his Neighbors of Hasting refused
to concur with him in petitioning against Episcopacy, joined and subscribed
with those of Rye) told her, that she deserved to be put into the Ducking-house
(a Prison for Women) for denying it: That night Biddenham the Sergeant was
commanded to carry Mr. Hinson out of the Town Hall, and put him into the Common
Goal; which the Sergeant refusing, that busy Fellow Wenham told him, That he
deserved to be committed himself, for refusing to perform his office: hereupon,
by virtue of this Oath, they command four of the Men whom they had sworn to
apprehend Mr. Hinson, to tell him, That he must exchange his Prison, the
Town Hall, for the common Goal, whither they presently led him; there they lock
him fast up in a loathsome place, where there was but one short bench, and no
company but a Tinker, and he none of the Jovialists neither, for the stubborn
sullen Tinker pleading seniority in the place, took possession of the Bench,
and most unsociably kept it all night, not interchanging with Mr. Hinson his
repose for a walk for variety sake, but left him one while to walk, and another
while to sleep on that floor, in which he was forced to do the necessary acts
of Nature: while he lay in this loathsome condition, four of the Jurats; Jurats,
I mean four that had taken the Oath, to do whatever was commanded them, came to
the Goal, and professed to Mr. Hinson their hearty sorrow that they ever had a
hand in his Attachment, entreated him, that he would not think evil of them,
for they were compelled to do that for which they were now sorry: And Thomas
Staple that (as before you heard) expostulated so freely, and pleaded against
the taking the Oath before he was awed to take it, showing the monstrous evil
in which it might engage them, openly exclaimed against the Mayor and his
Brethren, wishing that the Plague from God might light upon them, for insnaring
their Consciences with such an Oath; when not only Religion, but right Reason
might have told him, and the rest, That their Sin was to take an unlawful Oath,
it had been no sin to break it: while Master Hinton lay thus in the Goal, one
Master Besanno, a Counselor at Law interceded for him, and earnestly
entreated, that he might be removed from the Common Goal, and committed to safe
Custody in some Chamber in the Town, but could not prevail: at last, after
three Weeks Imprisonment, upon Mr. Besanno's request, seconded by Mr. Brian
(heretofore a Jurate of Hasting, but now removed to Battle, as too honest for
such a Fraternity as he left behind him) Mr. Hinson was sent with a strong
Guard to Colonel Morley: by whom he was transmitted to London to Learned Miles
Corbet, who committed him to the Custody of a Messenger; and having no
particular accusation, but a general charge, and finding no hopes to be brought
to a hearing, but perceiving himself designed (as others before him had been)
to long attendance and vexatious delays, he withdrew himself from his Tyranny
and Oppression, and escaping to Oxford, put himself under the Kings Protection.

As the Rebels in their march toward Gloucester passed through Chipping-Norton,
in the County of Oxford: a Woman of that Town (whose zeal to the King, and the
justice of his Cause, could not contain it self, though in the midst of his
Mortal Enemies) said, in the hearing of some of the Rebels, God bless the
Cavaliers: (so are all good and faithful Subjects called by the Rebels) this
expression of the poor Woman's affection to the King and his Loyal Subjects in
so innocent a Prayer, so highly incensed the Rebels, that to punish so heinous
a Crime, presently they tied her to the tail of one of their Carts, and
stripping her to the Middle, for two miles march whipped her in so cruel a
manner with their Cart-whips, that her Body in many places was cut so deep, as
if she had been lanced with Knives, the torment being so great (as much as her
straight bounds would give leave) she cast her self on the ground, so to
shelter her self from their stripes, but in a most barbarous manner they
dragged her along, insomuch that her Legs and Feet were so torn by the Stony
rough ways, that her Flesh was worn off in many places to the very Bones: at
last, having far exceeded the number of stripes limited by God himself in the
Law of Moses (though given by the hand of Justice) Forty stripes he may give
him and not exceed, Deuteronomy. 25.3. they left her a lamentable spectacle of their
Cruelty: in this miserable condition lay this poor Soul for some few days, and
since died of those wounds which she received from them: The blood of this
Innocent, mingled with the rest shed by their hands, crying loud with them
under the Altar, Revel. 6.10. How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou nou
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on earth.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
XVI.
Burton, Prinne, and Bastwick, three Arch-Schismaticks, unjustly freed from a
just Censure. The commiting and removing of Mr. Chestlen from S. Matthews
Fridaystreet, to make way for Burton, contrary to all Law and Equity, etc.

AFter that bold affront offered (and that without Check or Control) to
public Justice, and the known Laws of the Land, in those Triumphant Reductions
of that Triumvirat of seditious Schismatics, Burton, Bastwick, and Prinne from
their several confinements: It was no hard matter for the World to guess what
measure the obedient Sons of the Church of England might expect, when that
spurious, degenerous Brood, (which most undutifully cast dirt in their Mothers
face, and in their Scurrilous, Libellous Pamphlets proclaimed her a Harlot)
became the Darlings both of the heads of the Faction in Parliament and the
People: And though it seemed good to the heads of the Faction, by restoring
these turbulent men, to brave that Authority by which they were justly
censured, yet, being restored, all were not thought to be of equal concernment:
As for Bastwick, if any man laboring under any Indisposition (besides that to
the present established Government) had a mind to be a Patient, and put himself
into the hands of a Madman, he might do as he pleased at his own peril: every
man was left to the liberty of his own choice: So for Prinne, if any man
desired to retain him of his Counsel, it was lawful for the Client to give, and
him to receive his Fee, but all this was but voluntary: no man was constrained
to be a Patient to the one, nor a Client to the other: for the intended
Rebellion might well go forward, though Bastwick never wrote an Apothecaries
Bill, or Prinne pleaded at the Bar: But for Burton, (a main Engine to promote
the design in hand) it concerned them to restore him, not only to a Liberty of
the exercise of his calling at large, but likewise to invest him in his former
Cure in particular; from which, by the just sentence of Law he was ejected: To
this purpose no arts were left unattempted, by the under Agents, for the heads
of this Rebellion, to restore Burton to his Parsonage of S. Matthews in
Friday-street, London: by unjust molestations they endeavor to weary out Mr.
Chestlen that succeeded him (but not immediately) in it, to relinquish his
Cure, and make way for this Trumpet of Sedition; that so, what was not feizable
in Law, might yet be effected by horrible injustice and oppression: First
therefore some of Mr. Chestlens Parishoners, (but Burtons old Disciples,
levened with his Schismatical Doctrine) deny to pay him his Tiths, or any other
accustomed Duties: nor are they content with their own denial, but by earnest
persuasions, and other means they labor to draw other men into the like
obstinacy and perverseness: nor did they stick openly to profess that they did
this, that by unjust vexations they might weary out Mr. Chestlen, and make way
for Burton: hereupon (the Ecclesiastical Court being suppressed, which
otherwise have cognizance of the Causes of Tiths of London, nor can there any
prohibition be justly granted as Coram non Judice, the Statute only enabling
the Lord Mayor to be Judge, if the person grieved think fit to appeal unto him,
but no way disabling the Ordinary, or abolishing his power) Mr. Chestlen
petitioned (as the Statute in that case provides) the Lord Major that then was
Sir Edmund Wright: To the hearing before the Lord Mayor came little Isaac
Pennington, no ways interested in the cause, but only to give countenance to
Mr. Chestlen's Parishoners: being there, he openly reviled Mr. Chestlen,
calling him Saucy Jack, Brazen-faced Fellow, and the like; nay he threatened the
Judge, thinking by this to stave him off from doing Justice, who bravely
scorning the threats of so contemptible a Mushrome, in a just indignation
replied, What, shall I be afraid to do Justice? and indeed the event showed
that he was not afraid, for upon a full hearing of the Cause, the Lord Mayor
gave sentence for Mr. Chestlen, and ordered the Parishoners to pay their Tiths:
Tillat a Linen Draper, one of the Citizens that was sued, refused to obey the
Lord Mayor's Decree: and therefore the time limited in the Decree being
expired, the Lord Mayor according to the power given him by the Statute of the
37 of Hen. 8. committed Tillat to Prison without Bail, or mainprize, until he
did submit to the sentence as the Statute gives him power: But see the Justice
of the great pretenders to the maintenance of the Laws of the Land, Tillat had
not stood committed many days, before two of the House of Commons (as the
Keeper of Newgate says) in the name of the House of Commons, command him to be
set at liberty, which accordingly was done, though he were in upon Execution,
and the Debt not satisfied: every man wondering at, but no man daring to
question so illegal an action. When this way took no effect, they joined their
Purses to vex him with an Action of Ejectment, threatening to spend five hundred
pounds but they would out him of his Living: but presently deserted those
intentions as not seizable. After this, they slander him for Preaching Popery
and Arminianism: which unjust scandal so prevailed in the City, that he could
not pass the streets without affronts and jeers put upon him: they dissuade his
Parishoners from hearing him, telling them, that they would be damned if they
lived under his Ministry, they branded them with the name of Malignants, if
they frequented their own Church, and procured them to be deeply Taxed in all
Sessments. In a word, that nothing might be wanting to their own malice, and
Mr. Chestlen's vexation, they threw menacing Libels into his House, laid wait
in the Pewes of his Church, while others provoked him to express himself in the
great differences of the times, hoping to entangle him in his words: and
examined his Conversation in the very places where he lived, even from his
Childhood, to that time, hoping to find something whence to frame an Accusation
against him: When all these malicious Courses would not effect the thing they
aimed at, they go from house to house for hands to a Petition against him, to
the House of Commons, pretending that he had Preached false Doctrine, and made
it the subject matter of their Petition: and if any man refused to subscribe
(as many did, because they could not testify the truth of the Petition) in
their Spirit of meekness, they called them Malignants, Papists, and Enemies to
Religion: however it is too well known, that two or three men (though the very
dregs of the People) petitioning against Orthodox Ministers, have in the
judgment and acceptance of the Faction of the House of Commons, out-poised the
rest of the Parish, though infinitely beyond them as in Number so in Quality:
their Testimony being rejected with much acrimony and sharpness, when the other
Libels have gained credit and reputation with them: Therefore about March,
1641. The Schismatics of Mr. Chestlens Parish presented a Petition against him
to the House of Commons, in the name of the whole Parish, though three parts of
four protested against it under their own hands: When it was presented,
Pennington and Venne earnestly urged that it might be read, pleading in their
drivelling, railing Oratory, that he was a very dangerous man, fit to be looked
after: To satisfy their Importunity, the Witnesses (who as their manner is,
were never sworn, and yet were both Witnesses and Accusers) were produced and
examined at the Bar, and upon examination the Petition was thrown out as
frivolous, but like eager bloud-hounds not giving off the pursuit, for being at
one loss, upon Easter Eve, to show the World that malice is part of a Puritans
preparation to the Sacrament, when the House was very thin, the Protestants of
the House being in their Closets, close at their devotions to prepare
themselves for the great Feast at hand, and when all private businesses by
order of both Houses were laid aside (for as yet all opinion of the sanctity of
the ancient Festivals of the Primitive Church, those venerable anniversary
memorials of Gods great blessings to mankind, was not lost amongst them)
Pennington and Venne prevailed to have this foiled ejected Petition to be
revived and read again in the House, and the Patrons of Justice and Integrity
being then absent, the Petition was referred to the Committee for scandalous
Ministers: so they are pleased to call all Orthodox, conscientious Ministers,
who abhor their Rebellion, and refuse to comply with them in their seditious
practices: and that no time might be lost, in Easter-week, the Committee sat
purposely for this business: to which there was a full confluence of seditious
Schismatical People from all quarters of the City; that so nothing might be
wanting to this Triumph: while Mr. Chestlen was thus tied to a tedious
chargeable attendance; God to whom appertain the Issues of death, smote Tillat
the main promoter of Mr. Chestlens troubles with the Plague: of which he died:
with whom also for the present died Mr. Chestlens trouble and vexation: and
though some (that think that all acts of providence are aimed point blank at
them) having such an opportunity as this, would interpret this to their own
Interest, as a sign of personal favor to them, yet not daring to press into
the hidden will of God, nor making our selves of familiar acquaintance with his
Counsels; I shall not make any inference from hence, but leave every man to
abound in his own sense, only thus much we say, Tillat being dead, the hot
prosecution of Mr. Chestlen, for a while lay dead too: when all these
endeavors could not re-estate Burton in the Parsonage, some of the Factious of
the Parish combine to make him their Lecturer, and perhaps better approved of
him as their Lecturer, than their Parson: to this purpose cunningly, and on
feigned pretenses they get some subscriptions of the Parishoners, and annexing
them to a Petition, for which they were never intended, preferred it in their
own names, and the names of the rest, to the House of Commons, that Burton
might be their Lecturer: which was no sooner proposed than granted, and an
Order presently drawn up to give Burton power to Preach in Mr. Chestlen's
Pulpit, which Mr. Chestlen resolutely opposing, kindled such Coals against him
as afterward fired him out of the City: for since Mr. Chestlen will not give
way to Burton to be partner with him in his Pulpit, they resolve to give him
possession of the whole, by removing Mr. Chestlen totally from his Cure: To
this purpose Mr. Case sends to the Faction in Mr. Chestlen's Parish to frame
some accusation against him; in obedience to so ghostly Counsel, Mr. Chestlen
is presently accused to the House of Commons for Preaching a seditious Sermon
on Sunday the 23. of October, that very day whereon the Battle was fought at
Edgehill: The subject of the Sermon in truth, being nothing else, but an
earnest exhortation to his Parishoners to persuade them to constancy in the
Protestant Religion, perseverance in the fear of God and the King: presently a
Warrant is granted for the apprehension of Mr. Chestlen; on the Thursday
following, they rioutously assault him in his house, with great Tumults, armed
with drawn Swords and Pistols: and seizing on him, in great triumph they carry
him to the Court of Aldermen, who now (it seems) are succeeded in the place of
the High Commission, and are to be Judges of true or false Doctrine: being
brought before this Lay Sanadrim whereof Pennington the pretended Lord Mayor
was President, and a Rabble of Schismatics crowding in, to give countenance to
the business, Captain Ven their Leader, stands forth and accuses Mr. Chestlen
for a most dangerous seditious Preacher (tho he confessed that he never heard
him) and that he stood a Delinquent in Parliament: others objected against him
that he Preached to discourage the Citizens from going to Windsor, though this
Sermon were preached before that treasonable design was known, that the Kings
Royal Castle should become Captain Ven's Royal Castle, or his Country house for
the recreation of his Mopsa: and that the People might have full content, Mr.
Chestlen was there baited on every hand, every Alderman had his fling at him:
At last having made him a public scorn of the multitude, Pennington commits
him into the hands of his accusers to expose him to more abuse, and to commit
him to the Compter: the Rabble being now made Sergeants, they threaten to carry
him in a Cart through the open streets to the Prison: to deliver him from the
fury, and rage of the People, his Father (a known able Citizen) tendered Bail
of ten Thousand Pounds, but it was not accepted: away they carry him to the
Compter, and the next day being Friday, he is brought to the Bar at the House
of Commons; where the Speaker (who had been happy in the deceived worlds
opinion both of his wisdom and honesty had he never known other Bar, but that
of the Exchequer) interrogated him touching his Preaching against Brownists,
and Anabaptists: and presently though no witness appeared, though no crime were
objected, though no accuser appeared against him: he was voted by the House of
Commons, to be sent Prisoner to Colchester Goal in Essex, there to remain
during the pleasure of the House, and to pay the Charges of his conveyance
thither: And that Posterity may read, and reading stand amazed to see how
Tyrannical, how unlimited an Empire these Subjects have exercised upon their
fellow Subjects, without any legal process, or any cause shown, to doom them to
Banishment and Captivity during their High and mighty pleasure, we have here
inserted a true and perfect Copy of the Warrant and Subwarrant by which Mr.
Chestlen was sent from hand to hand, till he came to his Goal, at Colchester.

By virtue of an Order this day made by the Commons House of Parliament, these
are to will and require you to take into your Custody, the body of Mr. Robert
Chestlen Clerk, and him by your self, your Deputy or Deputies, according to the
said Order to carry in safe custody to the Prison of Colchester Castle in
Essex, there to be delivered to the Jailer or Keeper of the said Prison, to be
kept in safe custody as his Prisoner, until the pleasure of the House be made
known to him to the contrary: It is also ordered, that the said Mr. Chestlen
shall defray the Charges of his carriage to Colchester Castle aforesaid: And
for so doing, this shall be a sufficient Warrant.

Dated this 28. of October. 1643. Henry Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D.C.
To John Hunt the Sergeant at Arms attending on the House of Commons, his
Deputy or Deputies. I do appoint the Party or Parties whose name or names are
subscribed to be my lawful Deputy or Deputies, for the Execution of this
Warrant. Witness my hand this 26. day of October. 1643.

John Hunt Sergeant at Arms.
Mr. Dodson Walter Story John Hind
Gentlemen.




Next Morning being Saturday was this (righteous) sentence put in execution:
Thus to make way to reduce Burton, a Stigmatized infamous Scismatick to his
former place, was Mr. Chestlen doomed to banishment and captivity: in a remote
place from his Father, his Wife and Family, into a noisome Goal, where he was
made a Companion to Theives and Felons; in a Town, where 'twas little less than
death to be Loyal: or as themselves phrase it, to be Caesar's Friend: A Town in
which they that sent him thither, could not but know that they exposed his life
to the fury of an enraged Fanatic People, and not long before had not only
murdered Sir John Lucas, his Mother, and Sister, together with Mr. Newcomin,
one of their own Ministers, and for this had received public thanks from the
House of Commons for their forwardness and zeal to the service of the
Parliament; Lastly, in a Town arrived at that high degree of madness, that the
Independent Church is openly practiced in it, and the Mayor banished one of the
Town for a Malignant and a Cavalier whose name was Parsons, and gave this
learned reason for this exemplary piece of Justice, Because it was an ominous
name: While Mr. Chestlen remained in this durance, if any man durst visit him,
it was at his peril, he was in danger to be Plundered and branded with the
dangerous name of a Malignant. They raised reports of great resort of Cavaliers
to him, and of Arms brought unto him, insomuch that Alderman Barrington told
the Committee, that their Town was not in safety because of Mr. Chestlen, who
poor man, had no other endeavor than how to free himself from the loathsome
nastiness of his Prison: To this end many Petitions were delivered to the House
of Commons, that he might be delivered from the Goal to some private house,
which boon after much and earnest prosecution by Mrs. Chestlen, and his
friends, was obtained: Having an Order to exchange his Goal for a private
house, Mr. Hammon an honest Gentleman dwelling in the Town, entertained Mr.
Chestlen: but for his Charity incurred the hatred of the Common People, for
whereas before he lived beloved, and in good estimation amongst his Neighbors,
now for harboring Mr. Chestlen, and for this and other actions being under the
Jealousy of the Crime of Loyalty, they call him Cavalier, they threaten to
call him up to the Parliament, and at last were as good as their word, for upon
their Complaint, he was sent for up to the Parliament, and committed for
receiving Mr. Chestlen into his house: though in reason he might safely
conclude, that, that Order of the House which gave Mr. Chestlen liberty to
remove to another house, did withal give that house liberty to entertain him:
Thus continued Mr. Chestlen in this exile and Imprisonment from October 1642.
until the February following, when the Kings express Warrant being sent for his
release, having the opportunity now and then to go abroad and take the air, he
left the Warrant for the Jailer to make use of for his best advantage, while he
came away to Oxford and put himself under the Kings Protection: Since that, in
London they have broken up his house, and Plundered his Goods: a common evil
incident to all the Kings faithful Subjects, which are within the Verge of the
Rebels usurped power.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
XVII.
Mr. Fowler Parson of Minchin-Hampton in Gloucestershire, his Wife, and
Children barbarously used, and his House plundered by the Rebels. Mr. Bartlets
house at Castle-morton in Worcestershire, five times Plundered, but especially
by Captain Scriven an impudent Rebel, etc.

ON New Years day, 1643. seventeen Soldiers sent by Captain Jeremy Buck, came
to Mr. Henry Fowlers house, Parson of Minchin-Hampton, in the County of
Gloucester; being entered the house, they find Mr. Fowler sitting (as the season
of the year required) by the fire side, presently they seize on him, and tell
him, that he is their Prisoner: and though he instantly submitted unto them
without any the least resistance, yet to wreck their own malice, and the malice
of him that sent them, upon him, one of the Rebels takes him by the throat, and
holds the point of his Sword at his breast, two more (on each side one) present
their Pistols at him, another shakes his Pole-axe over his head, others strike
him with their Pole-axes; threatened he is on every side with varieties of
death. All Smite him with the tongue, they rail at him, objecting against him
as heinous crimes, First, that he read the Common Prayers at length, and that
he had published the Kings Proclamations with a loud voice; and then with
renewed fury they assault him again: they beat him with their Pole-axes, and
call him Mass-Priest, Rogue, Rascal, and tell him, Sirrah, you can furnish the
King with a Musket, a Corslet, and a Light Horse, but thou old Knave, thou
can not find any thing at all for the Parliament: And then to work they fall
again with their Pole-axes, and beat and bruise him in most parts of his body;
so that being aged, (no less than Threescore and two years old) and being not
yet perfectly recovered of a former lameness in one of his hips, though he were
in a probable way toward it, by this barbarous usage, being so cruelly beaten,
and tugged, and haled by them, he is made a very Cripple, irrecoverably lame,
without all possibility of recovering of his Limbs: All this inhumanity was
practiced on Mr. Fowler in the presence of his Wife and Children, the Wife in
the behalf of her Husband, the Children in the behalf of their Father, humbly
entreating on their knees, that they would have compassion on him, and not
murder a peaceable man in his own house. While some of these Rebels were
executing this cruelty on his Person, others go up into his Study, and
Chambers, and take away all that was of good value, and portable. And having
crippled the Master of the Family, and rifled his house, like the true Servants
of that Master whom they serve, the Devil, they leave him, but it was but for a
season.

Now though the present sense of these sufferings, could not be but very great
to an aged man, and one laboring under former infirmities, especially to have
his sufferings imbittered by the reproachful railings of the Rebels, and the
mocks and mowes of Captain Bucks friends and Kindred, who stood by jeering, and
clapped their hands for joy, applauding the exact execution of Bucks commands,
given his Soldiers concerning Mr. Fowler, yet the sad effects which followed
were evidence enough how cruel his usage was: First, Mr. Fowler presently upon
the Rebels departure, fell into an extreme bleeding, which continued, and could
not be stanched in six hours and more, by which great outlet of Spirits, his
strength was so much exhausted, that the was not able to stand. Secondly, the
next day after his bleeding, what with the loss of so much blood, and what with
violence offered to his whole body, the Retentive Faculty, was so weakened,
that his urine came from him insensibly, and in this wretched condition he
continued very near a month. Lastly, by the many confusions and knocks which he
received on his head with their Pole-axes he lost his hearing, which he has
not perfectly recovered unto this day. And now after all this barbarous usage,
remains there yet any thing else to be added to his sufferings? was not their
malice satisfied, and these outrages (designed to be committed on him)
completed yet? No, Captain Bucke knew that it would not be lawful always to
commit murder, and rob those that are quiet in the Land, and therefore
resolved to make use of the present opportunity: he was not ignorant that the
wages of a faithful Servant to the Rebellion was full license to do any thing
that can satisfy Lust, private Revenge, or Avarice: And therefore in July
last, Bucke himself, not like a Captain of Soldiers, but a Ringleader to a
Rout of Rogues, came to Mr. Fowlers house at Minching-Hampton, and most
thievishly broke open the Window of his Sons Study, and so entered the house:
In the Study they found Rich Treasure which they did not know, being indeed
without a Metaphor Pearl before Swine, for young Mr. Fowler, a Practitioner it
seems in Physic, had in his Study Extract of Pearl, Aurum Potabile,
Confections of Amber, a great quantity of Compound Waters, a good proportion of
Pearl in Boxes, a Box full of Bezoar Stone, with many other things of admirable
use, for the preservation of the Life of Man, and of very great value, all
which they took and brake in pieces, and trampling them under foot, made them
utterly unuseful either for themselves or others. One of Mr. Fowlers Daughters
in a just indignation at so great wast of things so precious, told Bucke that
he might be ashamed to spoil things of that use and value; Bucke (a rude
untutored man as he is) called her Whore, and with his Pole-ax gave her a blow
on the Neck, and struck her down, and being risen again, again he strikes her
down with his Pole-ax, nay, to pursue the glorious victory, he strikes her down
a third time, and had she been able to rise from the floor, questionless, had
struck her down a fourth time. The compassionate Mother Mrs. Fowler standing
by, and seeing her Daughter thus barbarously used, to redeem her from this
cruelty, resolved to expose her own person to the fury of this mad Beast, and
therefore interposing, asked Bucke, whether he thought she could endure to see
her Child murdered before her face: but as soon as Mrs. Fowler came within his
reach, without regard either to her Age, or Sex, he caught her by the Throat,
knocked her down, and being down, kicked her, and trampled on her with his
feet. At last having acted what cruelty he pleased (according to the Latitude
of that Tacit Commission given every Captain of the Rebellion) on Mrs. Fowler
and her Daughter, he and his Rabble Plundered the House, and so departed.

If the monstrousness of these barbarous and inhuman cruelties committed on
this Reverend Divine, his Wife and Daughter, and reported in this Relation,
shall weaken the credit of the Relation, and render the truth of it suspected,
let the World know, that here is nothing set down in this account given unto
the World, but what was testified upon Oath before the Right Honorable Sir
Robert Heath Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench,
on the 18. day of August 1643.

On the 21 of September. 1643. being Saint Matthew the Apostle and Evangelists
day, a hundred and fifty Soldiers, some from Gloucester sent from Captain Beard
being of his Company, and some others from Teuxbury, (all conspiring together,
and taking advantage of the Peoples absence from their homes, and being at a
Fair that day at Ledbury two miles distant from Malverne Hills) under the
conduct of Captain Scriven, son to Scriven the rich Ironmonger, and late Mayor
of Gloucester, came to Castle-Morton in the County of Worcester, to Plunder Mr.
Rowland Bartlets house: a man so well beloved in his Country, for his
Hospitality, so dear to all sorts of People, especially to the poor, for his
Charity, and those helps which he freely bestowed on them, for the recovery of
the sick, the lame, and infirm, that had not these Rebels taken the opportunity
of his Neighbors being at the Fair, this force had been too weak, to have made
him the first instance of the Rebels insolency (in that County) by way of
Plunder: when they came to Castle-Morton, for fear of surprizal, their Horse
secure the streets, and Highways, while the Pikes and Musketeers beset the
house: having made good all passages, that none could go in, or come out,
without their leave, Scriven advanced toward the house: Mr. Bartlet perceiving
himself to be enclosed with armed men, their Muskets being bent upon his
house, and his Pales serving them instead of Rests; coming out of his doors,
met Scriven in the Porch, and after a friendly salute, demanded of him the
reason of this Warlike approach to his house? Scriven answered, that he came in
the name of the Parliament, and by their command to search for Arms: Alas!
replied Mr. Bartlet, you are like to lose your labor, for Justice Salloway
(meaning that traitorous beggarly Fellow, who in the time of the late universal
madness, was made Knight of the Shire for the County of Worcester) has
prevented you: yet Mr. Bartlet bad him use his discretion, to see if he could
find any gleaning, after the others full Vintage: and so brought him through
his Hall into his Parlour; being there Mr. Bartlet according to the freeness of
his disposition, and after the good old English way of bidding welcome, called
for some Beer. While Scriven sat there, and with a curious eye surveyed the
furniture of the Room, he espied Mr. Bartlet's Sword, hanging on the Wainscot,
Scriven presently taking it down, said, is not this Arms? Yes, replied Mr.
Bartlet, but no more than is necessary for every honest man, to prevent or
repel injury on the Highway; young Mr. Bartlet's Sword hanging by his Fathers,
Scriven takes down that too: and utterly to disarm them, that so they might rob
them without resistance, the Rebels in the outward Rooms possess themselves of
Mr. Bartlets man's Sword: young Mr. Bartlet coming into the Parlour, hoping to
recover his Sword, Scriven perceiving a Ring (in which was set a Rubey) hanging
in his bandstrings, rudely seized upon it, and after some struggling, some
seconds with Pistols, and Carbines, coming to his assistance, Scriven either
broke, or cut it off: having robbed the young man of his Ring, animated by the
presence of his fellow Thieves, he dives into his Fathers Pockets, and takes
thence his moneys, between three and four pounds: Mr. Bartlet perceiving his
hand in the return, to be full of money, put his own hand into his pocket, to
see what was left, and finding but one poor three pence, to have escaped his
thievish fingers, tendered him that too, desiring him that all might go
together, which was no sooner offered, than taken by this poor conditioned
unworthy Fellow, yet Heir to a Thousand pounds a year, unless the Hangman cut
off the entail; Mr. Bartlet being clad in a fair scarlet Gippo (a shrewd
temptation to a man not accustomed to wear good Clothes, especially at his own
charge) so dazzled Scrivens eyes, that he offered to pull it from the others
back: Mr. Bartlet entreated him not to strip him of his Clothes since he had
taken away his moneys, with which he should buy more: O Sir, replied this
doughty Captain, you have money enough to buy more, and so the hopes of a
greater prize making him forget the Gippo, he drew his Sword, and threatened to
kill Mr. Bartlet, unless he would confess where he had hid his money and Plate:
but finding him resolute not to betray his own Treasure, Scriven seizes upon a
Woman that was Mr. Bartlets Housekeeper, an old faithful Servant, in whom Mr.
Bartlet and his Wife reposed much trust, and thinking to work upon the weakness
of her Sex, and affright her into a confession, he causes some to present
Pistols at her breast, and others the points of their Swords, threatening her
with present death, if she would not discover where her Masters Treasure was:
but finding this Woman not to be terrified with their threats, and fearing
surprizal by some Forces which might come from Worcester, or the return of the
Country people from the Fair at Ledbury, he resolved to make trial if he could
find out that which he saw would not be disclosed unto him: Therefore without
further delay to work they go, resolving to search the house from the top to
the bottom. In Mr. Bartlets Chamber, Scriven seizes upon Mrs. Bartlets Watch,
he breaks open a Trunk, and took thence (by his own confession) six hundred
Pounds in money, he takes away all Mrs. Bartlets wearing Linen, to the value of
threescore Pounds, he breaks open her Cabinets, Trunks and Boxes, and in them
seized or (to speak more properly) stole more Money, Plate, Jewels and
Bracelets, amounting to a great Sum: amongst other things valuable both for
rarity and use, he took a Cock Eagles Stone, for which Thirty Pieces had been
offered by a Physician, but were refused: having thus scim'd the house, and
rifled it of the principal things in it, a warning-piece is shot off, to
signify to the Rascality, that now they might have free leave to enter: upon
the signal given, leaving (instant) their guards, and stations, in a confused
Tumult they rush into the house, and as eager hounds at a loss offer here and
there, and know not well where to fasten, so, these hunt from the Parlour to
the Kitchen, from thence, by the Chambers, to the Garrets: every Room is full,
every one fearing that his fellow Thief would prevent him, and seize upon the
prey before himself: Besides Mr. Bartlets, his Wives, and Childrens wearing
apparel, they rob their servants of their Clothes: with the butt ends of their
Muskets they break open their hanging Presses, Cupboards, and Chests; no place
was free from this ragged Regiment: and if so barbarous an outrage, could
possibly have admitted any time, but for a serious detestation of so foul
injustice, it may have drawn a smile from the most concerned beholders, to see
their thrusting and tumbling one another, the rude arts used to supplant one
another, and how one Thief snatched and stole from another: After this storm
was seen coming on, and to threaten this house in particular, the Servants
fearing that tho the main brunt might light on their Master, yet some
sprinkling might chance to fall on them, used all the art of cunning they could
devise, to preserve those small sums of money, of which their honest labor and
frugality had made them Masters. But 'twas in vain to hide, where desperate
beggary, and resolved Rapine were to be seekers: in one place the Rebels find
Twenty Shillings, in another Forty, three Pounds here, more or less there: but
were it more or less, all was fish that came to Net, they spare none: in this
strict search, they meet with Mr. Bartlets Sweetmeats, these they scatter on
the ground, not daring to taste of them for fear of Poison; a wary
consideration, and such as staved not off the hardy Knight Sir William Brook
of Kent, to meet fists with a greazy Common Soldier in a Gally-pot, when the
Rebels of that County did the like outrage on the truly honored Lady Butlers
Closet, as you heard in the first weeks Relation of this Mercury: and as for
Syrupes, and Salves those charitable provisions for the sick, and maimed, these
they trample under foot, not providently foreseing that some of their Brethren
in this Rebellion, might stand in need of them, the Friday next following at
the Battle of Wickfield near Worcester, where God by the hand of the Kings
Forces under the conduct of Prince Rupert, gave the Rebels their first
overthrow. The happy Omen of Edgehill, and those many other succeeding
Victories with which (no less to the wonder than confusion of the Rebels) it
has pleased God since to bless his Sacred Majesty: In a word, except Bedding,
Pewter, and Lumber, they left nothing behind them, for besides two Horses laden
with the best things ( Scrivens own Plunder) there being one hundred and fifty
Rebels, each Rebel returned with a Pack at his back. As for his Beer, and
Perry, what they could not devour they spoil, the earth drinking what the
Rebels could not, and then triumphing in their wickedness, and glorying in
their Villainy, they vaunted, That they had made Bartlet a Beggar, and left him
not worth a Groat: Yet all the Rebels were not of the same belief, for
presently after, when the Earl of Essex, possessed himself of Worcester, some
under his Command came from Worcester to Mr. Bartlets house, where what was
undervalued and left by Scriven, and his Rout, was good booty to these: They
take away good store of Bacon from his Roof, and Beef out of the Powdering
Tubs; they steal his Pots, Panns, and Kettels, together with his Pewter to a
great value, they seize on all his Provisions for hospitality and
housekeeping, and then break his Spits, as unnecessary utensils, they expose
his bedding to sale, and press Carts to carry away his Chairs, Stools, Couches,
and Trunks, though emptied before by Scriven; and sharply threaten all such as
should be known to harbor any of Mr. Bartlets Goods. And though these two
Plunders, one upon the neck of the other, left Mr. Bartlet a desolate, naked
house; yet when the Earl of Essex came lately down toward Gloucester, and hid
himself and his Army in hedges, ditches, and the enclosures about Teuxbury, on
three several days, three several Companies came to visit Mr. Bartlets house,
presuming that in almost a Twelve months time, the house might be new
furnished, nor were they altogether deceived in their expectation; without,
they plunder him of eight Horses, and within, what ever they found, they made
clean work, the fifth Plunder not sparing his Kitchin-stuff, which being
reserved in a small Barrel, a Soldier putting it on his shoulder, carried it
away; coming this last time to Mr. Bartlets house, and understanding that he,
and his Sons were in the Kings Army, they abused his Wife in beastly, immodest
scurrilous language, which I shall omit to relate, as offensive to Christian
ears: I shall conclude this five-fold Plunder, with the relation of one of
their Captains Hypocrisy, and a Common Soldiers impiety, glorying in his
wickedness: The Captain being invited to eat of a Stubble-Goose, which a
Soldier had Plundered and brought into his Quarters, refused to taste of it,
and gave this reason for his refusal, because it was stolen, which bred in Mrs.
Bartlet a great opinion that he was a conscientious man, but being to march
away, he that would eat no stolen Goose, made no scruple to ride away upon a
stolen Mare, for plundering Mrs. Bartlet of her own Mare, this Hypocritical
Captain (and pity it is I cannot tell you his name) gave sufficient Testimony
to the World, that the old Pharisee and the new Puritan, have Consciences of
the self-same temper, To strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel, measuring all
Actions, not by lawful, and unlawful, but as they are more, or less gainful.
But while the Captain chose rather to be a Villain, than openly to appear so,
the Common Soldiers would not only be so indeed, but desire so to be accounted;
and therefore when his Companions were carrying out Mr. Bartlet's Goods,
amongst other things, one seized on some live Partridges, and being entreated
to forbear, and to spare them, because they were provided for a Great-bellied
Gentlewoman, and now ready to lay down her burden, the Common Soldiers hearing
him plead thus, barbarously replied, if we had made Venison of her great Belly,
she would not have longed for Partridges, for I have killed young and old, Men,
Women, and Children: and boasting himself in his sin, and glorying in his
shame, without regard had to the dangerous longing of a pregnant Woman, if not
satisfied, took them away. So truly is that of the Prophet verified in these
Miscreants, They declare their Sin as Sodom, they hide it not, Woe unto their
Soul, for they have rewarded evil to themselves, Esaias 3.9.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
XVIII.
The Rebels persecution of Dr. Featly, a known Champion of the Protestant
Religion: part of his Sermon against the Secretaries: his death: Together with
their murdering of two of the Inhabitants of Lambeth on the Lord's Day, etc.

IN November. 1642. some of the Rebels Foot Soldiers being Billetted at Acton in
the County of Middlesex, they presently enquire of their Hosts what their
Doctor was, (meaning Doctor Featly, their then Rector) and what Divine Service
they had; they answered according to the truth, that he was a man who precisely
observed the Canons of the Church, and swerved not a title from the Rubric of
the Common Prayer, wearing the Surplice, and using all the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church established by Law. Some of the Red-coats replied, Does he so? We
will teach him another Lesson, and make him leave those Popish Superstitions,
or he shall rue it. Soon after, they repair to the Church at Acton, break open
the Doors by force, in the Chancel they find this Subscription on the Wall,
This Chancel was repaired and beautified, such a year, by Daniel Featly D.D.
Rector, which they utterly defaced: Then laying hands on the Rails, they dealt
with them (as Ducks do with a Frog) tear them limbless, and afterward burnt
them in the Street, saying, That if they had the Parson there, they would burn
him with his Popish Trinkets.

Soon after, Colonel Urrey took up his Quarters at the Parsonage-house, some of
whose Soldiers, (whether willingly or by carelessness, being in Drink, is not
certified) lying in the Doctors Barn, set it on Fire, which burned the whole
Barn full of Corn, and two Stables, down to the ground, the loss being
estimated by the Inhabitants at Two hundred and eleven pounds.

But to leave Acton, and come to Lambeth, where the Secretaries wrecked their
spleen, not upon Pales, or Rails, or the Fruits of the Earth, as at Acton, but
upon the Bodies of Christ's Servants, on his own Day, and in his own House and
Court. For February 19. 1642. even in the midst of Divine Service, at the
reading of the Te Deum laudamus, four or five Soldiers rushed into the Church
with Pistols, and drawn Swords, affrighted the whole Congregation out, wounded
one of the Inhabitants (whereof he soon after died) shot another dead, as he
hung by the hands on the Churchyard wall, looking over to the Palace Court,
who might truly have said in the words of the Poet, though in another sense, Ut
vidi, ut perii.

It was gathered by many Circumstances, especially by Depositions taken before
the Coroner, and by some Speeches that fell from their own mouths, that their
principal aim at that time, was to have murdered the Doctor, which it is
probable they had effected, had not some honest Inhabitants premonished the
Doctor, who was at the same time on his way toward the Church, intending to
have Preached.

About the same time, many of these Murderers were heard expressing their
rancour against the Doctor, thus: Some said they would chop the Rogue as small
as Herbs to the Pot, for suffering Pottage, (for by that name they usually
style the Book of Common Prayer) to be read in his Church: Others said, They
would squeeze the Pope out of his Belly, with such like scurrilous and
malicious Language.

The Sunday sennight after this Outrage, being the fifth of March, the Doctor
perceiving some Separatists at Sermon at Lambeth, took occasion to speak as
follows:

IF ever Schismatics and foul mouthed Separatists were set forth in their
native colors, the Schismatics of this age are, Psalm. 50.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate instruction (whatsoever thou pratest
of Reformation) and castest my words behind thee, ( namely, Prove. 14.21.
Eccles. 10.20. Romans 12.1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 13.8, 9, 17. 1 Pet. 2.13.) When thou
saw a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with
Adulterers. Thou give thy mouth to lying, and thy Tongue frames deceit. Thou
sit and speak against thy Brother, and slanderest thine own Mothers son.
For is not this their canting Language? The Prelates of England are all
Antichristian; The Ministers Baals Priests; The public Service, Idolatrous;
The Ceremonies, Superstitious; and the Sacraments corrupted with man's
Inventions. I take them at their word; If this be true, then is the Church of
England no true Church of Christ; then they which have received all the
Religion they have from her, are no better then Miscreants, Pagans, and
Infidels, in apparent peril of drowning in everlasting perdition, because out
of the Ark, without God in this World, because without his Church. For as the
Blessed Martyr Saint Cyprian soundly argues against their Forefathers the
Catharists, Deum non potest habere Patrem, qui Ecclesiam not habet Matrem: And
Church they have none for their Mother, for they disclaim the true Protestant
Church of England, and the Popish disclaims them; so they are mere A per se
A's, Independents, like the horti pensiles in Lactantius, and Mausolus his
Sepulcher in Martial, hanging and hovering in the Air.

The Scripture sets forth the true visible Church of Christ upon Earth, under
the Emblem of a great Field, a great Floor, a great House, a great Sheet, a
great Draw-net, a great and large Foundation, etc. The Church shadowed. out
under these Similitudes, cannot be their Congregation, or rather Conventicles:
For as they brag and commend themselves, wanting good Neighbors; In their Field
there are no Tares, in their Floor there is no Chaff, in their House no Vessels
of Dishonor, in their Sheet no Unclean Beasts, in their Net no trash, on their
Foundation nothing built, but Gold, Silver, and precious Stones. They have not
sat with vain Persons, nor kept company with Dissemblers; they have hated the
assembly of Malignants, and have not accompanied with the Ungodly; they have
not, nor will not Christen in the same Font, nor sit at the Holy Table, (for to
kneel at the Sacrament is Idolatry) nor drink Spiritually the Blood of our
Redeemer in the same Chalice with the wicked. Get ye packing then out of our
Churches with your bags and baggages, hoyse up Sail for New England, or the
Isle of Providence, or rather Sir Thomas More's Eutopia, where Pluto's
Commoner, and Osorius his Nobleman, and Castillio his Courtier, and Vigetius
his Soldier, and Tully his Orator, and Aristocles Felix, and the Jews Bencohab,
and the Manichees Paraclet, and the Gnostics Illuminate ones, and the
Montanists Spiritual ones, and the Pelagians perfect ones, and the Catharists
pure ones, and their precise and holy ones are all met at Prince Arthurs round
Table, where every Guest (like the Table) is totus teres atque rotundus.

There are three Heads of Catechism and Grounds of Christianity, The Apostles
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments; these may be more truly than
Gorran his Postills, termed aurea fundamenta, which they go about to overthrow
and cast down; and when they have done it, no place remains for them to build
their Synagogues, or Maria Rotunda's, but the Sand in the Saw-pit, where their
Apostle Brown first taught most profoundly. The Lords Prayer they have
excluded out of their Liturgy, the Apostles Creed out of their Confession, and
the Ten Commandments, by the Antinomians their Disciples, out of their rule of
life. They are too good to say the Lords Prayer, better taught than to rehearse
the Apostles Creed, better lived than to hear the Decalogue read at their
Service, for God can see no Sin in them, nor Man Honesty.

Tell me, ye Bastard brood of Martius, is it not sufficient for the conviction
of your cauterized Consciences, that ye wreck your spleen upon the material
Temples of God, by breaking down Organs, burning Rails, and defacing the
Monuments of the Dead, but will ye go about to destroy the Spiritual Temple of
the Holy Ghost? not fearing that dreadful Sentence of the Apostle, He that
destroys the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. Could they not be content
to tear the Book of Common Prayer in pieces, and scatter the leaves all about
the Church, but will they also rend and dilacerate the living Members of
Christ's mystical Body? Will they charge the Cannon with murdering Shot to
destroy and dissipate whole Assemblies of Gods Servants met together upon his
own Day to Worship him in his own House? Do they think that their bare
opposition to Popery will save them? If that alone would give a Man a good
Title to Heaven, not only the Socinians, Libertines, Familists, Antinomians,
and other damnable Heretics, but even the Jews and Turks would snatch Heaven
from them, and take it by force, for these are as vehement Opposers of Popery
as they are: And howsoever the violent Opposition to Popish Superstition is all
the Religion some of them have, yet are they not at so deadly fewd with
Papists, as they would bear the World in hand, for they shake hands with them
in many of their Tenets and Practices, both of them condemn our English
Liturgy, and profess Recusancy: both of them Idolize their Teachers, etc. Who
has bewitched them, that they should believe Bedlam shall be so far enlarged,
and the Spirit of Frenzy possess Old England, that they should have the like
success here, as their cousin-germans the Anabaptists had at Munster? though we
envy them not their high preferment in the end. After these fits of Convulsion
are over, and Peace settled in the Body of the Kingdom, do they think the wisdom
of the State will ever change our Holy Churches into their profane Barns and
Stables? our Pulpits into their Tubs? our linen Ephods into their Aprons? our
Liturgy into their extemporary Enthusiasms? our Learned Pastors into their
ignorant Hirelings? and our Apostolical Hierarchy into their Apostolical
Anarchy? But I will restrain my self, and confine my Discourse.

Soon after this Sermon, seven Articles were preferred against the Doctor to
the Committee for Plundered Ministers, by three Mechanics, who had formerly
been Indicted for Brownists, at the Sessions for the County of Surrey; but
after long attendance, the Doctor was acquitted of them. Yet at length these
Sectaries wrought so powerfully, that the Doctor must be committed to Prison,
how unjustly soever; 'twas enough that he was a Doctor, and maintained the
Religion established in the Church of England: And accordingly, on the 30 th.
of September, 1643. he is committed to Peter-house; his own House, Library and
Goods being first seized on, and his Estate sequestered. The Sunday after his
commitment, and for diverse other Lords-days, he Preached to his
Fellow Prisoners, but after a while he was prohibited by Isaac-Pennington the
pretended Mayor of London. And though Sir George Sands, Sir John Butler, Master
Nevile, and other Prisoners of Quality, Petitioned that he might continue his
so doing, yet it would not be granted.

See how this unjust Imprisonment is relished by a Foreign Divine, in these very
words:

I Am sorry to hear of the close Imprisonment of that worthy Dr. Featly: What?
He who is, and ever has been so stout a Champion for Religion, to be so used
by the Reformers thereof? But let not the Disciple think it strange, when his
Master suffered so much cruelty from the great Rabbis of Israel.

Yours from my heart, J. S.


After the Doctor had been many Months stifled up in Prison, and having a
Certificate from his Physician that he could not live long, if he had not some
fresh Air, he Petitioned these Soul-enthralling Tyrants, and at last obtained
leave to go to Chelsey-Colledge for six Weeks, upon good Bail, to recover his
Health: but it pleased God to take him out of this World, upon the 17. day of
April, 1645. being the very last day of the six Weeks limited for his return.

During his Sickness, he gave himself wholly to Divine Meditations, often
bewailing with Tears, the present state of the Church of England: he made a
Confession of his Faith to Doctor Leo, and the Dutch Ambassadors Chaplain,
saying, That the Doctrine which he had always Preached, and the Books which he
had always Printed against Anabaptists and other Sectaries, were agreeable to
Gods Word; and that he would Seal the Protestant Religion (as it was
established and confirmed by the Acts of three Pious Princes) with his Blood.
And being asked by some that came to visit him, What he thought of the
Covenant? he said, It was a damnable and execrable Oath, made purposely to
ensnare poor Souls, and full of Malice and Treason against our Gracious
Sovereign. And, said he, For Church Government (a thing now much controverted)
I dare boldly affirm, That the Hierarchy of Bishops is most agreeable to the
Word of God, as being of Apostolical Institution, the taking away whereof is
damnable; and that by consequence, both the Presbyterian and Independent
Governments are absurd and erroneous, neither of them being ever heard of in
the Church of God, till of late at Geneva; nor is there so much as any color
for them in Holy Writ. It is evident (said he) that as the Priests in the Old
Testament were above the Levites, so in the New the Apostles were above the
Disciples, and that the seven Angels of the seven Churches in the Apocalypse
were seven Bishops, and that Polycarpus was Bishop of Smyrna, and Timotheus of
Ephesus. And for the Laity, no pregnant proof can be produced, That they ever
meddled with the Priests Function, or had any Power to ordain Ministers. And
these things (said he) I intended to have published to the World, if God had
spared me longer life, which I might (through his goodness), have enjoyed, had
I not been unjustly Imprisoned: which he several times reiterated to his
Friends.

Anon after he Prayed thus: Lord, strike through the reins of them that rise
against the Church and King, and let them be as chaff before the Wind, and as
stubble before the Fire; let them be scattered as Patridges upon the Mountains,
and let the breath of the Lord consume them; but upon our Gracious Sovereign
and his Posterity, let the Crown flourish: This (said he) is the hearty and
earnest Prayer of a poor sick Creature. With which, and other such spiritual
Ejaculations, he expired.

FINIS.
MERCURIUS RUSTICUS: OR, The Countries Complaint of the Sacrileges,
Prophanations, and Plunderings, Committed by the SCHISMATIQUES, ON THE
Cathedral Churches of this Kingdom.

MATTHEW. xxi. 13. My House shall be called the House of Prayer, but ye have made
it a Den of Thieves.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1685.

The Preface.
THE Author of the French History relating that horrid Rebellion of the Holy
League in France, the Prototype of the present Rebellion in England, gives this
definition or Character of one of those Zealots: Essential form (says he) of a
Zealous Catholic in the Holy League, was to Rob and Profane Churches, to
Ravish Wives, and Virgins to murder Men against the Altars, to spoil the
Clergy, not to be the Kings Servants, which that Age held for a Crime, but to
vomit out against him, all the indignities, and all the wickednesses which
Irreligion, and Injustice could invent in mad Soldiers: do change Zealous
Catholic into Zealous Puritan, and no Pencil ever limm'd a Rebel of this
present Rebellion so exactly to the life as this: and though they have outdone
all examples, presidents of wickedness, cruelty, disloyalty, sacrilege, and
profanation, as if in them the Devil meant to show his Masterpiece, raging in
them horribly, because he knows that he has but a short time, yet to their
dishonouring of God, their vilifying his holy worship, profaning his Temples,
blaspheming the footsteps of his Anointed, affronting and contemning his
Priests and Ministers, to their rending, rearing, and trampling underfoot, all
Hallowed Ornaments, and Vtensils provided for the reverend, and decent worship
of God, I know nothing that they have left undone, which remains yet to be
added to their accursed impieties. So that what the old Eustathians,
Meslalians, Fratricelli, and the rest of those wild Heretics (who placed their
Religion in Contempt of Consecrated Churches, Temples, and Oratories, places
Consecrated, and set apart for the public worship of God) durst not do, these
Schismatical Rebels, (having wilfully smothered not only their Consciences, but
the dictate of common reason) putting no difference between Holy, and Profane,
have acted with greediness: whatsoever things they are, whereon the name of God
is called, whether Persons, times or places, in the Judgment of venerable
Antiquity, whether Councils, Fathers, or Historians, those things were ever
held Sacred and Inviolable, always habenda cum Discrimine and that extra Usum
Sacrum, to be regarded with a reverential, and discriminative usance, that is,
with a select and different respect from other things of the same kind, but not
employed to Holy uses: nay the honoring Gods House, was ever held an
Ingredient of that Petition of the Lords Prayer, Sanctificetur Nomen tuum,
Hallowed be thy Name: what opinion the Ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin,
had of such places, may be collected from those Magnificent, and honorable
Names, whereby they commended them to the due esteem of several Ages in which
they lived: Some in regard of their use and employment called them the Lords
House, some the Patrimony of Christ, some the Dowry of the Spouse of Christ,
some a Consecrated Possession of God, and a Holy Soil: others in respect of
their Magnificence of Structure, and Costliness of Ornaments, called them
Palaces, Royal or Kingly Houses: Nay would we but sharpen our Goads at a
Philistines Forge, or weave the Woollen Yarn of the Gentiles, with Linen webb
of the Christians, I mean, call in the Testimony and practice of the Heathen,
in what vener ation and esteem they had their Idol Temples (which was in them
the dictate of Nature, mistaken only in the Object) and they would stand up, as
so many witnesses, and certainly in the day of Judgment, shall condemn-this
profane Generation, who under an Hypocritical pretense of worshipping God in
Spirit, in a true Anabaptistical fury, have laid wast the Sanctuaries of God,
polluted his Temples, and broken down all their carved work with Axes and
Hammers: And though these Rebellious Schismatics have in all places (which
have been plagued with their presence) Roared in the midst of our
Congregations, set up their Banners for tokens, and left some infamous memorial
of their frenzy, and hatred of the beauty and magnificence of Gods Houses; and
therefore in every place made it their first business (as an introduction to
the rest) to rob, and deface Churches, and violate the Sepulchers and Monuments
of the dead, so they have expressed their greatest hatred against the Mother
Churches, and Cathedrals of this Kingdom, because in them, the primitive Order,
and decency, prescribed in the Rubric of the Book of Common Prayer, and
ratified by Act of Parliament, have been best preserved from those Omissions,
Neglects, and Contempts, which had almost banished them out of private
Parochial Congregations, and rendered them obnoxious to sinister
interpretations, and suspected of no less than Popery, Superstition, and
Innovation, in those places wherein they were retained, and practiced: when
therefore our Posterity shall see this Abomination of desolation, which the
Rebels have brought into these Temples of God, and by Tradition hear of those
costly Vtensils, and Ornaments, which most Sacrilegiously they have carried
out, and shall with wonder, and astonishment inquire, what Lunacy? what Frenzy?
what accursed madness possessed the hearts of the men of this present Age, to
lay wast the places where Gods honor dwells? where God vouchsafes to meet with
his People, and the People, with united devotion, to propitiate their God, and
impiously (as much as in them is) to turn these Beauties of Holiness into
desolate places, for Ziim, and Ochim, (as the Prophet speaks) and the Satyrs to
dance in, Esaias 13.12. Let them know, that the Puritans, Brownists, and
Anabaptists, Rebels, marching under the Banners of a faction in the two
pretended Houses of Parliament (which yet some have the impudence to call the
Great and Highest Court, the Supreme Judicature, and the most zealous
Protectors, and Assertors of the Established Protestant Religion) have brought
this desolation upon us. And because this Tempest raged first the East, and so
spread it self into all parts of the Kingdom, West, North, and South, I shall
in the Relation keep the same Method (if so great confusion can be ranged into
a method) whereby we shall give (as is due) Precedence to the famous
Metropolitan Church of Canterbury, which as it is (in respect of her lesser
Sisters) first in Order and Dignity, so was it then and now shall be, the first
instance of the Rebels Sacrilege.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
I.
The Cathedral Church of Canterbury horribly abused and defaced by the Rebels
under the Conduct of Col. Sandys and Sir Michael Livesey: Together with the
miserable end of the said Col. at Worcester, etc.

THe City of Canterbury, the Ancient seat of the Kings of Kent, while the Saxon
Heptarchy flourished in this Island, was by King Ethelbert given, together
which the Royalty thereof to Augustine the first consecrated Archbishop of the
English Nation, who there fixed his seat for himself and his Successors: for
whose sake Gregory the great, then Bishop of Rome, translated the Motropolitan
dignity, together with the Honor of the Pall, from London to Canterbury: this
City (as the rest) had 'its share in that spoil and devastation, which War and
the sword, in the Innovations of Foreign Nations and domestic broyls, brought
upon it: the greatest impressions of desolation made on it, were in the Danish
Wars, but the Normans succeeding, through the Piety of Godly Religious men,
residing there, and the bounty and liberality of the Bishops, it did suddenly
start up, not only into its primitive beauty, and Luster, but out-stripped all
other places, as in the number and sumptuousness of Private Houses, so
especially in the magnificence and splendour of Religious houses: amongst which,
two were most famous, far exceeding all the rest, viz. Christ-Church, and bujus
pertinacissimus aemulus (as learned Cambden speaks) the eager rival of
Christ-Church, St. Augustines. This Church by the injury of Sacrilege, and
time, (two greedy devourers) lies almost buried in its own Ruins, presenting
nothing else to the eye of the beholders, but a sad spectacle, how spacious,
and ample a structure it once was, when now, a piece of it has the honor to
be styled (though seldom employed as) the Kings House. But Christ-Church,
placed as it were in the Navel of the City, raises it self to so great a
Majesty, and Stateliness, that Erasmus, a man not too much taken with
magnificence in this kind, I am sure not doting on it, says, that this does
present it self with so Majestic state, ut procul etiam Intuentibus
religionem incutiat, that it occasions that devotion, which should be used
there, and strikes a sensible impression of Religion, in their hearts that
behold it, though a far off, and at a distance. This Church built in old time
(as Beda says) by the faithful and believing Romans, and by King Ethelbert
given to Augustine, in process of time needed the like Piety to support it, as
at first built it, and works of that Nature in those days, did not long lie
neglected, for want of benefactors: Lanfranke therefore, the thirty third
Archbishop of this Sea (whether more famous for repairing of decayed Churches,
as this of Canterbury, Rochester, and S. Albans, or his indefatigable pains in
correcting the corrupt translations of the Holy Bible, scattered every where
through the Kingdom in his days, is uncertain.) William Corbet, or (as others
will have it) Corbois, the thirty sixth Archbishop of the same Sea, reedified
the Quire, and the upper part of this Church, and the Piety of succeeding
Bishops built and joined the Nave or body to the Quire, and brought, it to this
Magnificence, and splendour in whih we now see it. But what our Forefathers
thought Religion to build up, we, their degenerous posterity, think Piety to
pull down, so that while some leading Atheists (enemies to God and his
Religion, and reprobate to every good work) are busy to Vote and cry down
Episcopacy, with the Sacred Hierarchy, Root and Branch: their Emissaries
encouraged and set on by them, first deface these Churches, and in the next
place, will utterly ruin them, that so, the places where God is worshipped,
being demolished, the revenue that maintains the worship, may become a prey to
these Sacrilegious Cormorants: But my God shall make them like a wheel. Now,
how the Rebels behaved themselves in their first attempt, in this kind, on the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, under the conduct of Colonel Sandys, I cannot
better express than in the passionate elegancy of Reverend Doctor Paske, one of
the Prebends, and at that time Subdean of that Church, to the Earl of Holland,
the most ungrateful, and most unthankful of men.

My ever Honored Lord,
DId it not conduce unto the Public, I should not presume to interrupt your
Lordships weighty affairs; but the long experience of your Lordships zeal for
Religion, and vigilance for your University of Cambridge, has assured me of
your Lordships Patronage of our whole Church in general, and (as the case now
stands) of this Mother Church in particular, we expected peace, but have found
much trouble from the Troops sent amongst us; with what barbarousness they
have behaved themselves at Rochester, and in other parts of this County, I
leave to the Relation of others, and beg your Lordships patience, only to be
informed what has happened here with us: and wherein I am more nearly
concerned, by my Office in the absence of the Dean.

Colonel Sandys arriving here with his Troops, on Friday night, presently
caused a strict watch and Sentinels to be set both upon the Church, and upon
our several houses, to the great affright of all the Inhabitants: this done,
Sergeant Major Cockaine came to me, and in the name of the Parliament, demanded
to see the Arms of the Church, and the Store-powder of the County, which I
presently showed him; when he possessed himself of the Keys, and keep them in
his own custody: the next morning we were excluded the Church, and might not be
permitted to enter, for the preformance of our divine Exercises, but about
eight of the Clock, Sir Michael Livesey attended with many Soldiers, came unto
our Officers, and commaded them, to deliver up the keys of the Church, to one
of their Company, which they did, and thereupon he departed, when the Soldiers
entering the Church, and Quire, Giant-like, began a fight with God himself,
overthrew the Communion Table, tore the Velvet cloth from before it, defaced
the goodly Screen, or Tabernacle-work, violated the Monuments of the Dead,
spoiled the Organs, brake down the ancient Rails, and Seats, with the brazen
Eagle which did support the Bible, forced open the Cupboords of the
Singing-men, rent some of their Surplices, Gowns and Bibles, and carried away
others, mangled all our Service-books, and Books of Common Prayer; bestrwing
the whole Pavement with the leaves thereof: a miserable spectacle to all good
eyes: but as if all this had been too little, to satisfy the fury of some
indiscreet zealots among them (for many did abhor what was done already) they
further exercised their malice upon the Arras hanging in the Quire,
representing the whole story of our Savior, wherein observing diverse figures
of Christ, (I tremble to express their blasphemies) one said that here is
Christ, and swore that he would stab him: another said here is Christ, and
swore that he would rip up his Bowels: which they did accordingly, so far as
the figures were capable thereof, besides many other Villainies: and not content
therewith, finding another statue of Christ in the Frontispiece of the
South-gate, they discharged against it forty shot at the least, triumphing
much, when they did hit it in the head, or face, as if they were resolved to
crucify him again in his figure, whom they could not hurt in truth: nor had
their fury been thus stopped, threatening the ruin of the whole Fabric, had
not the Colonel, with some others, come to the relief and rescue: the Tumults
appeased, they presently departed for Dover, from whence we expect them this
day; and are much afraid, that as they have already vilified our Persons, and
offered extreme indignity to one of our Brethren, so they will Plunder our
Houses at their Return, unless the care of the Major, the Colonel, and some
Members of the House of Commons (Sir Edward Masters, and Captain Nut, now with
us, who have promised to present their knowledge to that honorable House) do
prevent the same.

Your Lordship will be pleased to pardon my hasty expressions, which proceed
from a grieved heart, and I am confident the honorable Houses of Parliament,
being rightly informed herein, will provide against the like abuses, and
impieties in other places, in the mean time we submit with patience to the
providence of him, who can, and will bring good out of evil, which is the
earnest Prayer of

Christ-Church, Cant. Aug. 30, 1642. Your Lordships most Obliged Servant,
Thomas Paske.


WHat effect this just complaint wrought, how it prevailed either with that
Lord to whom it was addressed, or with the pretended Houses of Parliament,
whose authority, and assistance was implored to prevent further outrages,
either here or elsewhere, we have too clear testimony, not only in the like
sacrileges, and prophanations every day acted, without any the least check, or
restraint from the heads of this Rebellion, but more especially from their
Votes and Ordinances, for the abolishing all remainders of Popery and
Superstition, as they call it: in all which, Intelligi malunt quam Audiri, they
would have their creatures understand, more than they speak, being certain
politic Litotes, in which, minus dicitur, plus intelligitur, signifying more
than the Grammatical construction will permit, an carry in them a hidden,
secret sense, and meaning, which their own Emissaries know how to interpret,
and enlarge, according to the full intention of the Authors. But before we pass
from the relation of this horried Sacrilege, committed on the Church of
Canterbury, I could not free my self from being guilty of that great sin of
obscuring the great manifestation of Gods Justice, if I should in silence pass
over that most examplary vengeance, which persued to death, that unfortunate
Gentleman Col. Sandys, the ringleader to that Rebellious rout, which were
Actors in that more than Barbarous outrage.

Whether the cunning persuasions of others, or his own ambitiom first embarked
him in this fatal undertaking, is uncertain, but as himself confessed on his
deathbed, to a friend and Kinsman of his, who asked him, what he meant being a
Gentleman of so fair an Estate, to engage himself in this Treason? he answered,
That he was so far drawn in before he was aware, that he knew not how to come
off, without the danger of his head: So usual it is for one sin to engage the
sinner for a second: having therefore once lifted up his hand against his
Sovereign, the Lords Anointed, he thought the way to be secure from the
punishment of Rebellion, was to presevere in his crime, and go on in Rebellion:
in pursuance therefore of so black designs, being Colonel of a Regiment of
Horse, in Sept. 1642. with the rest of the Rebels Army under the Conduct of the
Earl of Essex, he advanced toward Worcester, and making some excursions with
ten Troops of Horse from the body of their Army, at Wickefeild, near Worcester,
accidentally were met by Prince Rupert, accompanied by Prince Maurice, and some
others, Lords and Gentlemen of His Majesty's Cavallry: being thus by chance
met, The Prince glad of any opportunity, to express the braveness of his
resolution, charged the Rebels with incomparable valor: In this short, but
fierce conflict, Colonel Sandys was wounded, and being dismounted his Horse,
became Prisoner to the Kings party. Being thus wounded and as then was
conceived, mortally, he began to reflect upon himself, and finding so little
warrant in his now unbiased conscience for his undertaking, which had brought
him into this condition, his perplexed Soul brake out into many sad expressions
of remorse: crying out, Woe, Woe, to evil Counsel, and happy are they that do
not take it. And being put in mind by a Reverend Doctor in Divinity, and
Chaplain to Prince Rupert, of the heinousness of the sin of Rebellion, he
acknowledged himself to have fallen into that sin, and that God was just in his
Judgments for finding him out in his iniquity, professing withal his hearty
sorrow, and repentance for it: whereupon the Doctor replied, that if he
recovered, perhaps the same persuasions from others, or inconsiderateness in
himself, might again engage him in his Rebellion, at which words a little
lifting up his hand, he professed, He would rather have it cut off, then ever
again lift it up against the King: He freely acknowledged the Justice of the
Kings cause, and that he had observe the blessings of God to accompany it, and
when the Doctor desired leave to testify his Repentance to the world, he freely
gave him leave, asking God and the King forgiveness, praying for a blessing upon
him, and his proceedings. In this mind he continued while Prince Rupert, and
the Kings forces with him staid in Worcester: and whether after the Earls
possessing himself of Worcester, by the impetuous solicitations of those
Murderers of Souls, those Factors for Hell, their Schismatical Lecturers, (who
make men twofold more the Children of the Devil than themselves) he fell off,
and turned Apostate from his newly resolved Loyalty, as repenting of his
Repentance, is uncertain; Those that were about him and saw his weakness, ever
declining from the first hour he received his wounds, must testify to the World
that he had neither strength of hand to write, nor so much composedness of
spirit, to be the Author of that Spurious, Supposititious Vindication,
Published in his name Oct. 11. 1642. He being (whatsoever that forgery
pretends) as unable to vindicate himself with his Pen, as his sword: but if he
had his heart, as well as hand subscribing to that Atheistical resolution,
where they thus bring him in foaming out his own shame, The Apprehension of
death never hitherto so nearly touched me, but if God shall once restore me to
my former strength, I shall by his help, with as much alacrity and I hope
courage, endeavor, to defend, and maintain with my dearest blood, this so good
a cause (meaning this present Rebellion) as ever I was at first engaged in it.
If I say they had his heart, as well as his hand to that Resolution, I am
afraid it was too evident a Symptom of a wretched man, given up to a Reprobate
sense, which of all spiritual judgments questionless is the greatest; and might
justly call for those Torments of body, which afterward, as a Gangreen devoured
and eat up his flesh, and those pangs of Conscience, which I am afraid were but
the earnest of a worse condition to ensue: for as the Psalmist says, As for
such as turn back unto their own wickedness, the Lord shall lead them forth,
with the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.5. but I Remember that of S. Paul, Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come: 1. Cor. 4.5. And therefore while
on Supposition I writ my fears, positively I determine nothing, not knowing,
whether God might not give him the grace of Repentance at the last, which if he
did, he only (I dare say) that gave the Grace, knew of it: concerning his
eternal condition therefore, I shall leave him to the Judgment of that
Righteous God, that judges Righteous Judgment, and gives to every man
according to his works: and only inform the World in what condition the Colonel
lay, until the time of his dissolution, and putting off his earthly, but
loathsome Tabernacle.

As the Col. was amongst the Rebels a very considerable man, both for his
extraction, and quality, and likewise for his Estate (to say nothing of his
valor, and resolution, had they been Loyally employed) so it was among their
chiefest cares to recover him of those wounds which he received in their
unchristan quarrel: while therefore the Rebels Army lay in Worcester (which was
about three weeks) though then upon more strict searching his wounds, in the
opinion of the best Chirurgions, they were not mortal, yet, whatsoever the Art,
and invention either of the Physician or Surgeon, could contribute to his
recovery, was not omitted: when the Rebels Army drew out, to meet the King, in
their March from Shrewsbury, which they did to their cost at Edgehill, the
Colonel was committed to the care of his own Surgeon, then in pay under him,
John Anthony of London: to whom, as a witness and an assistant in the crew, was
joined a Surgeon of the City of Worcester, Edward Marshall: who, though they
both used all the Art, and Industry that possibly they could, to effect the
cure, yet the difficulties every day multiplied against the means, and in
despite of their Balsoms, his wounds did putrify and the flesh rot, to the
wonder of the Artists, and the Scorn of their Art: In so much that the
Chirurgions, after much variety of means used, and much struggling with these
growing evils (the cure still going backward, as if their skill had been
employed to widen those wounds which they pretended to close up) were heard by
many of the City of Worcester to confess, what Hippocrates says every
Physician should first look after, in every cure, that there was, (...), the
hand of God in it, that it was a peculiar judgment upon him, and that the cause
of this putrefaction was more than Natural: nor were they without good grounds
for this conjecture, for besides the conclusions of their own Art, directly
thwarted, experience on the several parts of the body of their Patient, was a
clear demonstration: Those wounds in the upper parts of his body, near the
Vitals, and therefore more dangerous, were cured long before his death, but
those in his thigh, which were flesh wounds, as they call them, these were the
Oppropria Chyrurgorum, here the flesh did daily rot, and putrify, and was cut
away by degrees, even to the leaving of the bones naked, and stunk in so
loathsome a manner, that as he was a burden to himself, so to his friends too,
and those that were about him, being hardly able, for the noysomness of the
smell, either to come near him to do the office of necessary attendance, or so
much as to endure the room where he lay, so intolerable was the stench, and so
offensive.

Nor were the wounds of his Body more insufferable to his friends, than the
wounds of his Conscience to himself, the guilt of Rebellion wrought in him
strong convulsions of Soul, high distempers of mind, yet that he might not sink
under the burden of his wounded Spirit, a weight that requires more than man to
support it, he sent for Master Cotterell, an Orthodox godly Minister, and
Parson of S. Andrews in Worcester, to Administer a word of comfort unto him in
this his afflicted condition.

When Master Cotterell came unto him, he found Obadiah Sedgwick that scandalous
seditious Minister of Essex, in private conference with the Colonel: and Bread
and Wine, ready prepared for the Lords Supper: Sedgwick having ended his
discourse, went to Prayers, whereupon Master Cotterell offering to withdraw, he
was entreated by one of the Colonels Servants to stay, which accordingly he
did: Sedgwick having concluded his extemporary Prayer, took his leave and
departed, refusing to stay either to administer the Sacrament to the Colonel,
or to Communicate with him: of which refusal, when Master Cotterell afterward
desired to know the Reason, all the satisfaction that was given him, was, that
Sedgwick was not fully assured of the fitness, and due preparation of those
that were to receive the Sacrament with him. Desperate Hypocrisy,! whatsoever
he was persuaded of the preparation of the other Communicants, it is most
certain, he could not be ignorant of the unfitness of the Colonel himself: whom
he himself in all probability persuaded to return with the dog to his vomit,
and to justify himself in that sin of which but very lately he seemed to
repent: it is more probable, that, that poor remainder of Conscience in
Sedgwick, not quite yet put away, though it suffered him to betray, in private,
a dying man to impenitency, under feigned pretenses of what he in his own Soul
must needs confess to be a crying sin, and enrolled by S. Paul himself amongst
those works of the flesh which do exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven: yet his
heart might smite him, and his conscience withstand him as it were to the face,
that he durst not seal that destructive Counsel, by delivery of the Sacrament:
Sedgwick being gone, the Colonel willingly entertained conference with Master
Cotterell; to whom he made a general confession of his sins, and the
grievousness of them, professing his hearty repentance, and sorrow for them.
But as the two pretended Houses of Parliament, in their Catalogue of sins,
reckoned up in their Homily (if without offense I may so call it) and offered
to this Nation as the subject matter of their solemn humiliation, quite forgot
Lying and Rebellion, for some reasons best known to themselves: so this
Champion of theirs in his general Confession, made no mention of the sin of
Rebellion, which most nearly concerned him, and for which in all probability he
was very suddenly to render an account to God: a Confession most necessary both
for him to make, and the Minister to require, before he could be thought a fit
receiver of those dreadful mysteries: but after this general Confession, having
received the Sacrament, Master Cotterell commending him to the grace of God,
for that time left him; and having by one or two visits, after that, as he
thought gained some interest in the Colonel, coming again to him and finding
him in a calm Temper, and judging it a fit opportunity to inquire into his
Conscience, and to sound him what persuasion he now had of his taking up Arms
against his Sovereign, he desired the Colonel to command his servants out of
the room, that he might speak with him in private, which being done, and all
witnesses removed, but God, and their own Consciences, Master Cotterell,
prefacing his discourse, with a solemn Protestation, that in what he did, he
proposed no other end, but the salvation of his Soul, demanded of him, whether
he were not sorry for drawing his sword against the King? and whether he were
not persuaded in his Conscience of the unlawfulness of it? To which the Colonel
replied, that he was persuaded, that it was lawful, having taken up Arms not
against the King, but for the King, for his good, to bring him back to his
Parliament, to make him more glorious than any of his Predecessors, and to
redeem him from his evil Counselors, and those Popish Malignants that were
about him. To which old, thredbare pretenses (invented to palliate Treason, and
blanch their most gross Rebellion) when Master Cotterell opposed the Laws of
God, the Laws of the Kingdom, and seconded both, by the Kings most clear and
satisfactory Declarations, able to undeceive the abused World, and dispel that
mist of error and prejudice, which the heads of this Rebellion had cast before
the eyes of the People of this deluded Nation: the Colonel not able to return
any reasonable answer, or pre-instructed by Sedgwick, who foresaw what
encounter he was like to meet withal, suddenly called aloud to his servants to
come in, whose presence set an end to the Conference: after this, Master
Cotterell (some say by Doctor Bruce his Physicians advice, though I do not
absolutely affirm it) was wholly neglected, and Master Halsetor was sent for,
Parson indeed of S. Nicolas in Worcester, but more acceptable to those that
gave this Counsel, under another capacity, as he was the City Lecturer.

But before we acquaint you with what success Halsetor undertook, and
discharged this employment, it will not be amiss to let the World know, what
reward this dying Colonel intended to bestow on Master Cotterell, for all his
pains taken with him, when the Colonels Wife came to Worcester to visit her
Husband, what pains he had taken in administering the Sacrament, and his great
care in Praying and conferring with him: she very nobly pressed her Husband to
gratify Master Cotterell by some honorary gift, as an acknowledgment of his
thankfulness, that he might reap some of his Temporalls, to whom he had so
plentifully sowed Spiritual things: to so reasonable a motion made by the Wife
of his bosom, the Colonel most unworthily, and most uncharitably replied,
Sweetheart be content, we shall, find him a Delinquent: but he that shall
reward a Cup of cold water, shall not forget so great a work of Charity: he
that endeavors to turn a sinner to righteousness (though the success answer
neither his labor, nor expectation) yet he shall shine as the Stars for ever
and ever, nor shall his work be in vain in the Lord.

Master Cotterell being thus most unthankfully rejected, the Colonel is now
committed wholly to the care of his new ghostly Fathers, Master Halsetor, a man
of a Schysmatical Turbulent Spirit, fitter to make a Rebel than reclaim a
relapsed Traitor: and since has followed that counsel which he gave by
deserting his Cure and joining himself to the Rebels: the men of this Faction
have an Art to torment perplexed consciences, instead of comforting them,
dispensing not so much the promises of the Gospel, as the terrors of the Law,
as if the way to spiritual Consolation were through despair, and no way led to
Heaven so sure, as what coasted by the confines of Hell; whether Master
Halsetor dealt thus with the Colonel, I cannot say, perhaps he might go about
as some others of his Faction have done to sow Pillows under their seduced
Champions arm-holes, and to justify the sinner in the sin, comparing
circumstances, questionless this was his way, but the sad effects of his
Rebellion which the Col. felt in his body, and those flashes of horror
affrighting his guilty Soul, would not permit this dying man to be lulled
asleep in so vain presumption: though at first therefore when Master Cotterell
was with him to assist him in that great work to prepare him to stand before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, and the preparatories were confessions and sorrow
for sins (though but in the general) deprecations of Judgment, and the wrath of
God, and the like, some spiritual comfort, began to dawn in his benighted Soul,
and that he might seal that obscure glimmering of hope opened unto him in this
valley of Achor, and obtain more, he desired to Communicate in the Body and
Blood of Christ, yet after Master Halsetor came unto him, ( woe, woe to evil
Counsel, to use his own exclamation) it was observed that the Col. fell into
strong distempers of mind, which suddenly grew to so great a height that he was
utterly distracted, even to raving, and madness: which amongst them that think
of Gospel ineffectual, unless the spiritual man be mad, is taken for the
undoubted evidence of a Powerful Ministry: certainly it was a sad spectacle,
to see him lie in this condition, and a horrid thing to hear, that his last
breath, which should have been breathed out in Prayers, and deprecations, and
humble Confessions of sin; should be spent in venting the wild fancies of his
distracted brain: sometimes crying out, that his Surgeon and servants had
broken up his Trunks, and robbed him of of his Gold: and by and by starting up,
and crying out, that the Enemy was at the Walls of the City, and calling for
the keys to lock up the Gates: Thus he lay diverse weeks: and in these
distractions dyed; dreadful things are these, but it is written, The Lord shall
smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart. His Wife and
Son coming to visit him in this wretched condition (poisoned with the stench of
his body) both fell sick of the small Pox, of which she dyed, and both of them
lie Buried in the South I Will of the body of the Cathedral, in that Cathedral of
Worcester where his Grandfather Doctor Edwin Sandys, afterward Archbishop of
York, made his first step to the Arch-Episcopal honor, being first Consecated
Bishop of that Diocese: and there laid the foundation of those fortunes, which
descending to this man, made him forget his own extraction; and certainly it
was no small aggravation of his sin, that being descended from an Archbishop,
and that Estate which made him considerable in the World, being raised out of
the Revenues of the Church, and a Cathedral Church (a blessing which but few
Churchmen have attained unto, though advanced to the same, or the like dignity
to raise a family) He should yet so far degenerate, so far forget himself, and
the Rock from whence he was hewn, to be a Ringleader to so Barbarous a Rout,
which beginning at Canterbury went on to ruin and deface all Cathedral
Churches where they came, ending with that of Worchester, were he had the
undeserved Privilege to be interred.

Thus as briefly as I could, I have given an account of the unhappy end of this
miserable Gentleman. In which I call God to witness there is nothing feigned,
nothing suborned, there being nothing here recorded, but was is attested, by
men beyond all exception. And I must appeal again to the same God, that this
account is not given to that end to make his name, or memory odious, either
with the men of this present age, or with posterity; I must confess I would
disgrace the Sin, but my intent is, by this example to teach those that seduced
as this Man was, to know and foresee in him, what end attends those, who
forgetting all Religion, and Loyalty, shall lift up their hands against their
God in Sacrilege, and against their Sovereign in Rebellion.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
II.
The Cathedral Church of Rochester violated: the Sacrilege and profaneness of
the Rebels under Command of Sir William Waller and Sir Arthur Haslerig, acted
on the Cathedral Church of Chichester, etc.

AS when the Spirit brought the Prophet Ezekiel into the holy Temple, he led
him from place to place, and each place entertained him with greater
Abominations than the former, so that the farewell to the last Vision, and the
invitation to the next is, Turn thee yet again and thou shall see greater
Abominations than these: so having brought you in the Cathedrals of this
Kingdom, Temples (in despite of Atheists, Rebels and Anabaptists) of God too:
and having showed you the Abomination of desolation in one of them, viz. in
Canterbury, the first instance of their accursed rage, and having viewed that,
I must now lead you on as the Spirit did the Prophet, from place to place, and
the incitement may be the same, for though you have seen great prophanations in
the former relation, yet you shall see greater Abominations than these.

The next instance of the Rebels profaneness, which I shall offer unto you, is
in the Cathedral of Rochester, recompensed for the smalness of 'its revenue,
with the honor of 'its antiquity, as boasting of Ethelbert King of Kent, a
common Founder to this Church, with those of Canterbury and London. The unhappy
loss of Earnulphus History, the thirty second Bishop of this See, deprives us
of that light which discovered the various condition of this Church how long in
the beginning it struggled with 'its own poverty, and in after ages with the
injuries of time and War, remaining some Years in a kind of widowhood, without
the government and superintendency of a Bishop; till at last Gundulfus the
thirtieth Bishop of this See, reedified this Church from the ground, and
brought it into that magnificence, in which we now see it: to which pious work,
he brought so good, so vigorous affections, that as Maelmesbury records of him
Praevenerat vivacitas Gundulfi omnium successorum diligentiam, Gundulphus
alacrity in that work did so prevent the piety of his successors, that he
hardly left them any place in this kind, wherein to exercise their bounty.
Little did the overflowing zeal of our Ancestors to the house of God, like
that of the old Israelites, pouring out their wealth and precious things to
adorn the Tabernacle, in so great measure, that Moses was fain to publish a
Proclamation, to restrain their liberality, for the stuff they had was
sufficient for the work to make it, and too much, Exodus 36.6, 7. little (I say)
did they thnik, when they did this, that what they thus bountifully gave unto
God, should ever, while this Kingdom remained Christian, become a prey to
those, which as Tertullian speaks, Gentes agunt Christi nomine, have not so
much as a form, but the bare usurped name of Christianity, which they fully and
pollute with those worse than heathenish crimes of Sacrilege and Profaneness:
had the Sacrilege lately committed at Canterbury been applauded by the People,
(to gain whom, no arts though never so repugnant either to Religion or common
honesty were left unattempted) certainly, this Church which next stood in their
way, and immediately after Canterbury tasted of their fury, had been utterly
demolished, and offered up a sacrifice to Popularity. But Plundering being then
but a stranger in England, newly arrived here from desolate Germany, especially
Plundering of Churches, which heretofore were held inviolable Sanctuaries for
offenders, but much more for their own innocent ornaments; this made a general
outcry, every man detested so foul impiety; nay, their own party (some of them)
not yet so deeply leavened with their Anabaptistical Doctrines, nor given up to
so reprobate a sense to believe monstrous lies for truth, did not only not
approve, but sparingly condemn the Fact: and the general vote of the People,
awakened by Doctor Paske his Letter, declared it barbarous and wicked; nay, the
dislike of such proceedings grew to so great a height, that some wise men were
deceived into an opinion, that the Houses would punish the offenders for the
present, and publish an Order to restrain the like outrages for the future; and
indeed, though some good men. Members of both Houses, did earnestly desire it,
yet by experience they quickly found how unequal they were to effect any thing,
in which they had not the concurrence of the heads of the Faction which ruled
in both Houses, but much less when they rowed against the stream, and had them
for their adversaries. The Rebels therefore coming to Rochester brought the
same affections along with them which they expressed at Canterbury, but in
wisdom thought it not safe, to give them the same scope, here as there; for the
multitude though mad enough, yet were not so mad, nor stood yet so prepared to
approve such heathenish practices: by this means the Monuments of the Dead;
which elsewhere they brake up and violated, stood untouched; Escutcheons and
Arms of the Nobility and Gentry (upbraiding eye-fores to broken, mean Citizens,
and vulgar Rebels) remained undefaced, the Seats and Stalls of the Quire
escaped breaking down, only those things which were wont to stuff up
Parliament Petitions, and were branded by the Leaders of the Faction, for
Popery and Innovation, in these they took liberty to let loose their wild zeal:
they brake down the rail about the Lords Table, or Altar, (call it which you
please;) and not only so, but most basely reviled a now Reverend Prelate, who
being lately Dean of that Church, had for the more uniform, and reverend
receiving of the blessed Sacrament set it up, with the odious name of Rogue,
often repeated: they seized upon the Velvet Covering of the holy Table, and in
contempt of those holy Mysteries which were Celebrated on the Table, removed
the Table it self into a lower place of the Church, in this, perfect Disciples
of that profane Author of the Book called,, Altar Damascenum, who in the 718.
p. devoutly resolves thus. De loco ubi consistat cur solliciti, cum quovis loco
vel Angulo extra Tempus Administrationis collocari possit; Concerning the place
where the Lords Table shall stand what need we to be sollicitous, when out of
the time of administration of the Sacrament, it may be set aside, in any place,
or obscure corner. And to show what Members they are of the Church of England,
they strewed the Pavement with the torn mangled leaves of the Book of
Common Prayer, which, with the Book of Homilies, and the 39 Articles, makes up
the third Book, wherein the Doctrine of the Church of England is fully
containad: understanding that the Dean that then was, was to Preach on Sunday
morning, Colonel Sandys and Sir John Seaton, that false Traitorous Scot, sent
unto him to command him to forbear the wearing of the Surpless, and Hood: to
which Message the Dean stoutly, and like himself, returned this answer, that if
they would expect any Sermon from him, they must permit him to appear in such
Ornaments, as the Church, and his degree required: and accordingly did so:
afterward Sandys and Seaton, coming toward the Church and hearing the Organs,
Seaton started back, and in the usual blessing of some of his Country, cried, A
Devil on those Bag-pipes: perhaps he never read so far in David's Psalms, where
it is written, Praise God upon the Srrings and Pipe, Psalm 150.4. or if he had,
it is more than probable, that it had been all one to him: however, this served
them both, as a pretense to cloak their Irreligion, and refusal to join with
that true Protestant Congregation. While the Rebels were pulling down the Rails
about the Communion Table, one of the Prebends of the Church, Master Larken,
interposed, and attempted to stay their madness by reason, and persuasion; but
he quickly found, that he did not only profane Reason, by urging it to S.
Paul's, Absurd, unreasonable, wicked men, men made up of Incongruities, but that
he did it to the hazard of his life; for one of the Rebels, instead of
returning a reasonable answer, discharged a Pistol, or Carbine at him, to have
murdered him at the very Altar, but by the good providence of God he missed his
mark. Thus having done some spoil, that they might render themselves not
altogether unprofitable to their party, and not daring for the present, to do
any more, for fear of losing that party which they hoped to gain, for that
reason, they left the Church: but into what further outrageous Impieties, their
Schismatical fury has since transported them, or what else they have practiced
on this Church, to complete their Monstrous Reformation, is not yet made known
unto us.

The third instance, which I shall give of the Rebels Sacrilege and
Profaneness, is in the Cathedral Church of Chichester; Successor in the honor
of being the seat of the Bishops Residence to Sealesey: for Wilfrid Archbishop
of York, being driven into Exile by Egfrid King of Northumberland, retiring
himself into Sussex, and finding the South Saxons wholly given up to Idolatry,
his Spirit, like S. Paul's at Athens, was stirred within him, and knowing the
unprofitable servants doom, that Buried his Talent, he Preached unto them the
Gospel of Christ: and Edilwalch King of those parts (not long before converted
to the faith, by the persuasion of Wolfhere King of the Mercians) willing that
the same saving knowledge, which he himself had embraced, should be imparted to
his People, seconded the pious endeavors of Wilfrid, and therefore amongst
other acts of bounty, he gave the Archbishop, Sealesey for the palce of his
residence. Not long after Cedwalla, Conquering Edilwalch, built here a
Monastery to the honor (as Malmsbury says) of S. Peter, and erected the
Episcopal Chair: where it stood fixed the succession of 22. Bishops, or as
others say (reckoning Wilfrid Archbishop of York for the first) the succession
of 23 Bishops; from the year 711. the Reign of William the Conqueror 1070. at
which time Stiganeus translated his Chair from Sealesey to Chichester, and so
became the last Bishop of Sealesey, and the first of Chichester, where the
Episcopal power did flourish ever since, until now; in these last, and worst
days, wherein while the heads of a Rebellious, Schismatical Faction, Vote down
the sacred Function and Order of Bishops, their Emissaries are mad to deface,
if not utterly to demolish their Churches. To this purpose, the Rebels under
the Conduct of Sir William Waller, entering the City of Chichester on Innocents
day, 1642. the next day, their first business was to Plunder the Cathedral
Church; the Marshal therefore and some other Officers having entered the Church
went unto the Vestery, there they seize upon the Vestments and ornaments of the
Church, together with the Consecrated Plate, serving for the Altar, and
administration of the Lords Supper: they left not so much as a Cushion for the
Pulpit, nor a Chalice for the Blessed Sacrament: the Commanders having in
person executed the covetous part of Sacrilege, they leave the destructive and
spoiling part to be finished by the Common Soldiers: brake down the Organs, and
dashing the Pipes with their Pole-axes, scoffingly said, hark how the Organs
go. They break the Rail about the Communion Table, which was done with that
fury, that the Table it self escaped not their madness, but tasted of the same
fare with the Rail, and was broken in pieces by them. At the East end of the
Quire, did hang a very fair Table, wherein were written the Ten Commendments,
with the Pictures of Moses and Aaron on each side of the Table; possessed with
a zeal, but not like that of Moses, they pull down the Table, and break it into
small Shivers. 'Twas no wonder that they should break the Commandments in their
representation, that had before broken them all over in their Substance, and
Sanction: they force open all the locks, either of doors or desks wherein the
singing men laid up their Common-Prayer-Books, their singing Books, their Gowns
and Surplesses: they rent the Books in pieces, and scatter the torn leaves all
over the Church, even to the covering of the Pavement, but against the Gowns
and Surplesses their anger was not so hot, these were not amongst the
Anathemata, but might be reserved to secular uses: in the South cross I Will on
the one side, the History of the Churches Foundation was very artificially
pourtrayed, with the Pictures of the Kings of England; on the other side over
against them are the Pictures of the Bishops as well of Sealsey as Chichester,
began by Robert Sherborn, the 37 Bishop of that See, and the Series brought
down by him to his own times at his own Charges, who as he made that of the
Psalmist, Dilexi decorum domus tui domine, Lord I have loved the beauty of thy
house, his imprease and Motto, so he made it his work, and endeavor. These
Monuments they deface and mangle with their hands and swords, as high as they
could reach: and to show their love, and Zeal to the Protestant Religion
established in the Church of England, one of those Miscreants picked out the
eyes of King Edward the sixth's Picture, saying, That all this mischief came
from him, when he established the Book of Common Prayer. On the Tuesday
following, they had a solemn Thanksgiving, for their success in gaining that
City. Men of Cauterized Consciences, and given up to a Reprobate sense, thus,
not only to take the name of God in vain, but damnably to Blaspheme it, as if
he were the Patron of Rapine, Blood and Sacrilege. After the Sermon was ended,
as men not inspired by the holy Spirit, of which they so much boast, but
possessed and transported by a Bachanalian fury, they ran up and down the
Church, with their swords drawn, defacing the Monuments of the dead, hacking
and hewing the Seats, and Stalls, scratching and scraping the painted Walls:
Sir William Waller, and the rest of the Commanders standing by as spectators,
and approvers of these Barbarous Impieties: yet for fear lest in the
Schismatical frenzy, the sword in mad men's hands might mistake, Sir William
Waller, a wary man as he is, and well known not to be too apt to expose himself
to danger, stood all the while with his sword drawn, and being asked by one of
his Troopers what he meant to stand in that Posture? He answered, that it was
to secure himself, you know, it is written, the wicked are afraid where no fear
is, for though the People made him an Idol in London, yet being no Popish, but
a Puritanical Idol, (for they have their Idols, and their Idolatry, as much as
the Church of Rome) there was no danger to his person, to be mistaken for an
object of their Reformation, at Chichester. The same Trooper added also, That
if his Colonel in the Low Countries were there, and Commanded in chief, he
would hang up half a dozen of the Soldiers for examples sake: it not being the
custom of the Low Countries, (though long time has made their enmity
inviterate, and added much to the animosity of the parties) to Plunder
Churches, it being a mutual stipulation between the Spaniard and the Hollander,
that what Town soever should by Conquest pass from the possession of one Nation
to the other, though the Conqueror had the free Plunder of the Town, yet
Churches with their ornaments, and what ever was conveyed into them, should be
Inviolable, the Church being Sanctuary to whatsoever was under its Roof, and,
if they would have any thing thence, it was to be purchased at a valuable
Price. These good intimations of moderation from a man of less Command, but
more Religion than Sir William, prevailed nothing with him to restrain the
outrageous madness of his fellow Rebels. Having therefore made what spoil they
could in the Cathedral, they rush out thence and break upen a Parish Church,
standing on the North side of the Cathedral, called the Subdeanery: there they
tear the Common Prayer Books, both those belonging to the Church, and likewise
those which were left there by devout persons which did usually frequent divine
service; and because many things in the Holy Bible make strongly against them,
one did contradict, and condemn their impious practices, they marked it in
diverse places with a black cole; it is more than probable that the 13. Chapter
to the Romans did not escape their Index Expurgatorious, for certainly if that
be the word of God (as undoubtedly it is) they cannot so far withhold the truth
in unrighteousness as not to read their doom in that word, they shall judge them
at the last day: here they stole the Ministers Surpless, and Hood, and all the
linen serving for the Communion: and finding no more Plate but the Chalice,
they steal that too, which they brake in pieces, to make a just and equal
divident amongst themselves; for an Engineer of theirs, Robert Prince a French
man with a wooden leg, afterward showed the foot thereof broken off; and when
complaint was made of these barbarous outrages, Capt. Keely replied, that he
knew not whether all this were not done by Order, or no. About 5. or 6. days
after, Sir Arthur Haslerig, demanded the Keys of the Chapterhouse: being
entered the place, and having Intelligence by a treacherous Officer of the
Church where the remainder of the Church Plate was, he commanded his servants
to break down the Wainscot, round about the room, which was quickly done, they
having brought Crows of Iron for that purpose along with them; while they were
knocking down the Wainscot, Sir Arthurs Tongue was not enough to express his
joy, it was operative at his very heels, for dancing and skipping, (pray mark
what Music that is, to which, it is lawful for a Puritan to dance) he cried
out, there Boys, there Boys, hark, hark, it Rattles, it Rattles: and being
much importuned by some members of that Church, to leave the Church but a Cup
for administration of the blessed Sacrament, answer was returned by a Scotch
man standing by, that they should take a wooden-dish: and now tell me which was
farthest from a Christian, either this impure Scot, or that blasphemous
Atheist, who seeing the massy Plate, and rich ornaments wherewith the Christian
Altars were adorned in the Primitive Church, in indignation and scorn of Christ
belched out En quam preciosis vasis Mariae ministratur; Behold with what costly
vessels the Son of Mary is served: what further spoil and Indignity they have
since done to that House of God, and the habitation where his honor dwelt, is
yet uncertain.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
III.
The Rebels defying God in his own House: their Sacrilege, in stealing Church
Plate and goods: their irreverence toward the King, by abusing his Statue:
their heathenish barbarity in violating the bones and ashes of dead Monarchs,
Bishops, Saints and Confessors in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, etc.

THE next instance which I shall give of the Rebels Sacrilege, and Profaneness,
is in the Cathedral Church of Winchester: which City as it was the Royal Seat
of the King of the West Saxons, in the time of the Heptarchy, so was it the
Seat of the Bishops of that People, after Kenwalchus King of the West Saxons
(not brooking the Barbarous, broken expressions of Agilbertus his Bishop)
divided this large Diocese, between Agilbertus, and Wina, and leaving
Agilbertus to reside at Dorchester, caused Wina to be consecrated Bishop of
Winchester. Before we tell you by whom, and in what manner, this Church was
robbed and spoiled of its ornaments and beauty, it will not be impertient
(while it may serve as an aggravation of their impiety) briefly to set down, by
whom this Church was built, and so richly adorned, as lately we saw it. This
magnificent Structure which now stands, was began by Walkelinus the thirty
fifth Bishop of this Sea: which work left imperfect and but begun by him, was
but coldly prosecuted by the succeeding Bishops, until William Wickham (the
magnificent Sole founder of two S. Mary Colleges, the one in Oxford commonly
called New College, the other a Nurcery to this, near Winchester) came to
possess this See: He amongst many other works of Piety, built the whole Nave,
or body of this Church, from the Quire, to the West End, the Chapels on the
East End, beyond the Quire, had their several Founders: The hallowed Ornaments,
and utensils of this Church, being many, rich, and costly, were the gifts of
several benefactors, who tho their Names perhaps are not recorded in earth,
have found their reward in Heaven. This Church was first differenced by the
Name of S. Amphibalus; who received a Crown of Martyrdom under the Persecution
of Dioclesian: Next it exchanged this name for that of S. Peter; and again,
this, for that of S. Swithin, the eighteenth Bishop of this See: Last of all,
it was dedicated to the Holy Trinity, whose blessed name is now called upon it:
which Holy name though it could not but put the Rebels in mind whose possession
and House it was, did not at all afford it patronage, and protection from their
accursed rage, and madness.

The Rebels under the Conduct of Sir William Waller, sat down before the City
of Winchester, on Tuesday the 12. of December, 1642. about twelve of the Clock,
and entered the City that afternoon between two and three: being Masters of the
City, they instantly fall upon the Close, under a pretense to search for
Cavaliers. They seize upon the Prebends Horses, and demand their Persons with
many threatening words: That night, they break into some of the Prebends Houses,
such Houses as they were directed unto, by their Brethren the Seditious
Schismatics of the City; and Plundered their goods. But the Castle not yet
surrendered into the Rebels hands something awed their insolency: which being
the next day delivered up to their power, did not only take away the Restraint
which was upon them, but encouraged them, without check, or control to rob,
and defi^e, both God and all good men. Wednesday therefore and Wednesday night
being spent in Plundering the City, and Close, on Thursday Morning between
nine, and ten of the Clock, (hours set apart for better employments, and
therefore purposely in probability, chosen by them, being resolved to profane
every thing that was Canonical) they violently break open the Cathedral Church,
and being entered, to let in the Tide, they presently open the great West doors,
where the Barbarous Soldiers stood ready, nay greedy to rob God, and pollute
his Temple. The doors being open, as if they meant to invade God himself, as
well as his possession, they enter the Church with Colors flying, their Drums
beating, their Matches fired, and that all might have their part in so horrid
an attempt, some of their Troops of Horse also accompanied them in their march,
and rode up through the body of the Church, and Quire, until they came to the
Altar, there they begin their work, they rudely pluck down the Table and break
the Rail: and afterward carrying it to an Alehouse, they set it on fire, and
in that fire burnt the Books of Common Prayer, and all the Singing Books
belonging to the Quire: they throw down the Organ, and break the Stories of the
Old and New Testament, curiously cut out in carved work, beautified with
Colors, and set round about the top of the Stalls of the Quire: from hence
they turn to the Monument of the Dead, some they utterly demolish, others they
deface. They begin with Bishop Fox, his Chapel, which they utterly deface, the
break all the glass windows of this Chapel, not because they had any Pictures
in them, either of Patriarch, Prophet, Apostle or Saint, but because they were
of painted, Colored Glass: they demolish, and overturn the Monuments of
Cardinal Beaufort, Son to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by Katharine
Swinfort founder of the Hospital of S. Cross near Winchester, who sat Bishop
of this See forty three years. They deface the Monument of William of Wainflet,
Bishop likewise of Winchester, Lord Chancellor of England, and the Magnificent
Founder of Magdalen College in Oxford, which Monument in a grateful Piety,
being lately beautified, by some that have, or lately had Relation to that
Foundation, made these Rebels more eager upon it, to deface it: but while that
College; the unparralleld example of his bounty, stands, in despite of the
malice of these inhuman Rebels, William of Wainflet cannot want a more lasting
Monument, to transmit his memory to Posterity: from hence they go into Queen
Mary's Chapel, so called because in it she was Married to King Philip of
Spain: here they brake the Communion Table in pieces, and the Velvet Chair
whereon she sat when she was Married. They attempted to deface the Monument of
the late Lord Treasurer the Earl of Portland, but being in Brass, their
violence made small impression on it, therefore they leave that, and turn to
his Fathers Monument, which being of Stone was more obnoxious to their fury:
here mistaking a Judge for a Bishop, led into the error by the resemblance or
counterfeit of a Square cap on the head of the Statue, they strike off not only
the Cap, but the head too of the Statue, and so leave it. Amongst other acts of
Bounty, and Piety, done by Richard Fox the fifty seventh Bishop of this See, he
covered the Quire, the Presbytery, and the Isles adjoining, with a goodly vault,
and new glased all the Windows of that part of the Church, and caused the bones
of such Kings, Princes, and Prelates, as had been Buried in this Church, and
lay dispersed and scattered in several parts of the Cathedral, to be collected
and put into several Chests of lead, with inscriptions on each Chest, whose
bones lodged in them: These Chests (to preserve them from rude, and profane
hands) he caused to be placed on the top of a Wall, of exquisite workmanship,
built by him, to enclose the Presbytery: there, never to be removed (as a man
might think) but by the last Trump, did rest the bones of many Kings and
Queens, as of Alfredus, Edwardus Senior, Eadredus the Brother of Athelstane,
Edwinus, Canutus, Hardecanutus, Emma the Mother, and Edward the Confessor her
Son, Kiniglissus the first founder of the Cathedral of Winchester, Egbert who
abolishing the Heptarchy of the Saxons, was the first English Monarch, William
Rufus and diverse others: with these, in the Chests, were deposited the bones of
many Godly Bishops, and Confessors, as, of Birinus, Hedda, Swithinus,
Frithestanus, S. Elphegus the Confessor, Stigandus, Wina, and others. Had not
the barbarous, Inhuman impiety, of these Schismatics, and Rebels, showed the
contrary, we could not have imagined, that any thing but the like Piety that
here inshrined them, or a Resurrection should ever have disturbed the repose of
these venerable, yet not Popish Relics. But these monsters of men, to whom
nothing is holy, nothing is Sacred, did not stick to profane, and violate
these Cabinets of the dead, and to scatter their bones all over the pavement of
the Church: for on the North side of the Quire, they threw down the Chests,
wherein were deposited the bones of the Bishops, the like they did to the bones
of William Rufus, of Queen Emma, of Hardecanutus, and Edward the Confessor, and
were going on, to practice the like impiety on the bones of all the rest of the
West Saxon Kings. But the Outcry of the People, detesting so great inhumanity,
caused some of their Commanders (more Compassionate to these Ancient Monuments
of the dead then the Rest) to come in amongst them, and to restrain their
madness. But that devilish malice which was not permitted to rage and overflow
to the spurning and trampling on the bones of all, did satiate it self, even to
a prodigious kind of wantonness, on those, which were already in their power:
And therefore as if they meant (if it had been possible) to make these bones
contract a Posthume guilt, by being now made passive Instruments, of more than
heathenish Sacrilege, and profaneness, those Windows which they could not
reach with their Swords, Muskets, or Rests, they brake to pieces, by throwing
at them, the bones of Kings, Queens, Bishops, Confessors and Saints: So that
the spoil done on the Windows, will not be repaired for a Thousand Pounds: nor
did the Living find better measure from them than the dead: for whereas our
Dread Sovereign that now is (the best of King) was graciously pleased, as a
pledge of his princely favor to this Church, to honor it with the gift of his
own Statue, together with the Statue of his dear Father King James of ever
blessed memory; both of massy brass: both which Statues were erected at the
front, of the entrance into the Quire: These Atheistical Rebels, as if they
would not have so much of the Militia, to remain with the King, as the bare
Image, and representation of of a Sword by his side; They break off the Swords
from the sides of both the Statues: they break the Cross from off the Globe, in
the hand of the Statue of our gracious Sovereign now living, and with their
Swords hacked and hewed the Crown on the headof it, swearing they would bring
him back to his Parliament. A most flagitious crime, and such, as that for the
like, S. Chrysostom, Hom 2. ad populum Antioch. With many tears complains, he
much feared, the City of Antioch, the Metropolis, and head (as he calls it) of
the East, would have been destroyed, from the face of the earth: for when in a
Tumult, the seditious Citizens of Antioch had done the like affront to
Theodosius the Emperor, in overturning his Statutes How does that holy Bishop
bemoan? how does he bewail that City? which, fearing the severe effects of the
abused Emperors just Indignation, of a Populous City, a Mother boasting of a
Numerous Issue, was on the sudden become a Widow, left desolate, and forsaken
of her Inhabitants: some, out of the sense and horror of the guilt abandoning
the City, and flying into the desolate Wilderness, others lurking in holes, and
confining themselves to the dark corners of their own houses, thereby hoping to
escape the vengeance due to so disloyal, so Traitorous a fact; because of this
foul injury offered the Emperors Statue, He (as that Father speaks) was
wronged, that was the sepreme head of all men, and had no equal on Earth. But
what wonder is it, that these miscreants should offer such scornful indignities
to the Representation of his Royal Person, and the Emblems of his Sacred power,
when the heads of this damnable Rebellion (who set these their Agents on work)
offer worse affronts to his Sacred person himself, and by their Rebellions
Votes, and Illegal Ordinances daily strike at the Substance of that power, of
which the Crown, the Sword, and Scepter are but Emblems and shadows, which yet
notwithstanding, ought to have been venerable and aweful to these men, in
respect of their Relation. After all this, as if what they had already done,
were all too little, they goonin their horrible wickedness, they seize upon all
the Communion Plate, the Bibles, and Service-books, rich Hangings, large
Cushions of velvet, all the Pulpit-Clothes, some whereof were of Cloth of
Silver, some of Cloth of Gold: They break up the Muniment House, and take away
the common Seal of the Church, supposing it to be Silver, and a fair piece of
gilt Plate, given by Bishop Cotton: they tear the Evidences of their Lands, and
cancel their Charter; in a word, what ever they found in the Church of any
value, and portable, they take it with them, what was neither, they either
deface, or destroy it. And now having Ransacked the Church, having defied God
in his own house, and the King in his own Statue, having violated the Urns of
the dead, having abused the bones, and scattered the Ashes of deceased
Monarchs, Bishops, Saints, and Confessors, they return in Triumph, bearing
their spoils with them. The Troopers (because they were most: conspicuous) ride
through the streets in Surplesses, with such Hoods, and Tippets as they found:
and that they might boast to the World how glorious a victory they had
achieved, they hold out their Trophies to all spectators: for the Troopers
thus clad in the Priests Vestments, rode carrying Common Prayer-Books in one
hand, and some broken Organ pipes, together with the mangled pieces of Carved
work but now mentioned, containing some Histories of both Testaments, in the
other. In all this, giving too just occasion, to all good Christians to
complain with the Psalmist, O God the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance.
Thy holy Temples have they defiled, The dead Bodies of thy Servants have they
abused, and scattered their bones as one heweth wood upon the Earth: Help us, O
God of our Salvation, for the glory of thy Name, Psalm. 79.

Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
IV.
The Rebels profanation and horrible abuse of the Abbey Church of Westminster:
Together with their several outrages and abominations committed on the
Cathedral Church of Exeter, etc.

IF in the Catalogue of Plundered Cathedrals, we inroul the now Collegiat
Church of Westminster, I hope I shall not be thought to make my discourse, no
more of kin to my Title, than Mountain does some of his Essaies: for if we look
back on the various condition of this Church (no place set apart for Religious
Persons, having so often shifted its owners) we shall find that amongst many
changes, it had the honor of a Bishops Sec. On the dissolution of the Abbeys,
amongst the rest, Henry the Eighth suppressed this Monastery, and in the place
thereof founded a Deanery, Anno, 1536. And two years after, added a Bishopric
to the Deanery. The Bishop sat here but nine Years, and again resigned his
dilapidated Revenue, into the hands of a Dean; Middlesex, which was the Diocese
of the Bishopric, being devolved to London: yet though this Bishopric of
Westminster, as it relates to the Saxons, was but of modern Erection, yet in
the time of the Ancient Britains, it was no less than the Sea of the
Archbishop of London: and therefore it is more than probable, that, that
record which tells us, that the Archbishop of Londons See, was planted in S.
Peter's in Cornhil, was either corrupted, or mistaken, for S: Peter's in Thorney:
for Sic olim a spinis, as learned Cambden, and other Antiquaries, affirm, from
the great crop of thorns which heretofore grew there, that which we now call
Westminster, was then called Thorney. This Church so famous for its Antiquity,
so admired, for its Elegancy of Structure, especially by the addition of Henry
the Seventh's Chapel, a Pile of that polished magnificence, ut omnem
Elegantiam in illo acervatam dicas, as if art, and bounty, had conspired to
raise it to a wonder of the World. Lastly, a Church so venerable, as being once
the seat of an Archbishop, and a Bishop, and now a long time the place where
the Kings of England receive their sacred Unction, and Crowns at their
Coronation, and where their bodies rest in honorable Sepulture, when they have
exchanged their Temporal, for Eternal Crowns. This Church, under the eye, and
immediate protection of the pretended Houses of Parliament, had its share in
spoil, and profanation, as much as those Cathedrals, which were more remote
from them: for in July last, 1643. some Soldiers of Weshborne, and Catwoods
Companies (perhaps because there were no Houses in Westminster) were quartered
in the Abbey Church, where (as the rest of our Modern Reformers) they brake down
the Rail abut the Altar, and burnt it in the place where it stood: they brake
down the Organ, and pawned the Pipes at several Alehouses for Pots of Ale:
They put on some of the singing men's Surplesses, and in contempt of that
Canonical Habit, ran up and down the Church, he that wore the Surpless, was the
Hare, the rest were the Hounds. To show their Christian Liberty, in the use of
things, and that all Consecration, or Hallowing of things, under de Gospel, is
but a Jewish or Popish Superstition, and that they are no longer to be
accounted holy, than that holy use, to which they serve, shall by the actual
use only, impart a transient holiness to them, they set Forms about the
Communion Table, there they eat, and there they drink Ale, and Tobacco: some of
their own Levites (if my Intelligence deceive me not) bearing them company, and
countenancing so beastly Profanation. Nor was this done once, to vindicate
their Christian Liberty, as they call Profanation it self, but the whole time
of their abode there, they made it their common Table on which they usually
dined, and supped, though S. Paul calls it despising the Church of Christ, and
asks his Corinthians if they had not houses to eat, and to drink in. 1 Cor. 11.
They did the easements of nature, and laid their Excrements about the Altar,
and in most places of the Church. An abomination which God did provide against
by a peculiar prohibition in the Law of Moses; and that, in places not rendered
so dreadful, by so peculiar a manner of the presence of God, as in the hallowed
Temples of his public worship: God would not permit the Jews to do these
offices of nature in the Camp; they must have a place without the Camp, and a
Paddle to dig and cover it; you have the Law, and the reason of the Law, both
together, they must not do so; For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of the
Camp, therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee,
and turn away from thee. Deuteronomy. 23.12. If God, for these reasons would not
endure it in the Camp, how much more does his Soul abhor such beastly
uncleanness in his House, and holy Temple? Nay, which is the height of all
Impiety, they familiarly kept their whores in the Church, and which I tremble
to write (Prodigious Monsters as they are) lay with them on the very Altar it
self, and did in that place commit such things, as are unfit to be done by
Christians.

These remain yet two Prophanations more of this Church, not to be passed over
insilence. The first was committed by Sir Robert Harlow, who breaking into
Henry the Seventh's Chapel, brake down the Altar-stone which stood before that
goodly Monument of Henry the 7. the stone was Touchstone all of one piece, a
Rarity not to be matched that we know off, in any part of the World: there it
stood for many years, not for use, but only for Ornament: yet it did not escape
the frenzy of this man's ignorant (...), for he break it into shivers. The
second was committed on the 13. of December, 1643. When the Carcass of John Pym
(as much as the lice left of it) was brought into this Church, and after a
Sermon Preached by Stephen Marshall Arch-Flamen of the Rebels, and the Church
Service Officiated by Lambart Orbaston, one of the Prebends of that Church, is
was interred under the Monumental stone of one Windsor, Buried about 200 years
since in the void space, or passage as you go to Henry the Seventh's Chapel,
between the Earl of Dovers place of Burial, and the Monument of Henry the
Third, Founder of that Church: usurped Ensigns of honor displayed over him.
'Twas pity, that he, that in his life had been the Author of so much
bloodshed, and those many calamities, under which this Kingdom yet groans, and
therefore deserved, not only to have his death with the transgressors, and
wicked, but afterward to be Buried with the Burial of an Ass, drawn, and cast
forth beyond the Gates of the City, Jer. 22.19. should after his death, make
his Sepulcher amongst the Honorable, and mingle his Vulgar, Lowzy ashes, with
those of Kings, Princes, and Nobles.

The sixth Instance, of the Rebels Sacrilege, and Profaneness, which I shall
present unto the World* is in the Cathedral Church of Exeter: which was once a
Monastery, founded by Athelstane the Eighth King of England of the Saxon Race,
and by him Consecrated to S. Peter. Edward the Confessor removing all the Monks
from hence, and planting them at Westminster, which he had newly founded, and
endowed, made it the Bishops See, for Devon and Cornwall: That Pile which we now
see, owes its being to many founders. William Warlwast, the third Bishop of
this See, after it was translated from Cridington, or as it is now usually
called Kir^on, to Exeter, built the Quire which now is, but was intended, by
the Founder for the Nave or Body of the Church: but Peter Quivil, the 13 th.
Bishop of this See, laid the Foundation of that which is now the body of the
Church: but he prevented by death, left the work imperfect: John Grandesson
therefore, the seventeenth Bishop of this See, thinking the Foundation laid by
his Predecessor Quivil, to be faulty in Geometrical proportions, the length not
being answerable to the height, added two Pillars more, to the length of the
Nave of the Church; of a distance, proportionable to those laid before he
closed up the end with a Wall of most Exquisite work, in which, he built a
little Chapel, and in that Chapel, a Monument, wherein himself was intombed.
He built likewise, the two side Isles, and covered the whole Fabric with an
Arch of Exquisite work, and brought it to such perfection, that in splendor,
and magnificence, it gives precedence to few Cathedrals of the Kingdom: and
which is very remarkable; though this Church was first began by King
Athelstane, and made many steps before it came to arrive at its perfection, so
that there are numbered almost five hundred years from the laying the first
stone, to the covering of the Roof; yet the wisdom, and care of the several
Benefactors was so great, that the most curious Surveyor, must confess, that
the Symmetry of the parts, and the proportions of the whole, are so exact, as
from the Foundation to the Roof, had been the work not of one age only, but of
one, and the same hand: and that the Ornaments of the Church might be
answerable to the beauty of the Structure itself, Bishop of Grandesson,
bestowed upon it vessels of God, and vessels of Silver, Books, and all other
kinds of rich furniture, Copia Immensa, Immensi pretij: in exceeding great
measure, of exceeding great price. All which, with many other things of
necessary use, and public Ornament, became a prey to the Schismatical Rebels;
whose sin was so much the greater, because being neither enraged by Opposition,
nor made insolent by conquest, (Apologies that may possibly be taken up for
other Rebels, in other places, as Chichester and Winchester) but which was a
main aggravation of their crime, Citizens within their own Wall, in cool
Blood, not provoked, spoil, and lay wast their Mother Church: for after this
City (now most unworthy of those Privileges, and honorary rewards, once
purchased by their Loyalty, now forfeited by ingratitude, and Rebellion,) had
once shut up their Gates against their King: it was not long before they shut
up the Gates likewise of Gods house, denying all access to devout Persons,
there to make their Prayers and Supplications: so near bordering upon Rebellion
against the King, is Atheism, and Contempt of God: for having demanded the Keys
of the Cathedral, and taken them into their own Custody they presently,
interdict divine service to be celebrated: so that for the space of three
quarters of a year, the Holy Liturgy, lay totally silenced. Nor was the
restraint upon the Reading Desk only, the Pulpit was made Inaccessible to all
Orthodox, Loyal Ministers, and was open only to Factious, Schismatical
Preachers, whose Doctrine was Rebellion, and their Exhortation Treason, that so
the People might hear nothing but what might soment their disloyalty, and
confirm them in their unnatural revolt, from their duty and Obedience. Having
the Church in their possession in a most Puritanical, beastly manner, they make
it a common Jakes for the Exonerations of Nature, sparing no place, neither the
Altar, nor the Pulpit, though this last, finds a better place in their
estimation, than the former: yet profaned it was, nay so profaned, that it
remains a doubt yet undetermined, which profaned it most in their Kinds,
either the Common-Soldiers, or their Lecturers. Over the Communion Table, in
fair letters of Cold, was written the Holy and blessed name of Jesus: this they
expunge as Superstitious, and Execrable. On each side of the Commandmants, the
Pictures of Moses and Aaron, were drawn in full proportion: these they deface,
they tear the Books of Common Prayers to pieces, and as if this had been too
small a contempt, and despite done to that form of Gods holy worship, they use
them, as if they had been a second sacrifice of Curious Arts, and burn them at
the Altar, with exceeding great Exultation, and expressions of joy. They made
the Church their Storehouse, where they kept their Ammunition, and powder, and
planted a Court of Guard to attend it; who used the Church, with the same
reverence, that they would an Alehouse, and defiled it with tippling and taking
Tobacco: they brake and deface all the Glass windows of the Church which cannot
be repaired for many hundred pounds: and left all those ancient Monuments,
being painted glass and containing matter of story only, a miserable spectacle
of Commiseration, to all well-affected hearts that behold them. They struck off
the heads of all the Statues, on all Monuments in the Church, especially they
deface the Bishops Tombs, leaving one without a Head, another without a Nose,
one without a Hand, and another without an Arm. A sad Emblem of that Trunk of
Episcopacy, which the accursed Atheists of these times have fancied to
themselves, and endeavored: a poor deformed, mangled, mutilated thing, having
neither head of Prelation, nor face of Honor, nor arm, nor hand, nor finger of
power and jurisdiction: they pluck down, and deface the Statue of an Ancient
Queen, the Wife of Edward the Confessor, the first Founder of this Church,
mistaking it for the Statue of the blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of God. So
she was styled by the holy Catholic Church many years before it was in danger
to be voted Blasphemy in that Committee where learned Miles Corbet sat in the
Chair. They brake down the Organs, and taking two or three hundred Pipes with
them, in a most scornful, contemptuous manner, went up and down the street,
Piping with them: and meeting with some of the Choristers of the Church, whose
surplesses they had stolen before, and employed them to base, servile Offices,
scoffingly told them, Boys we have spoild your trade, you must go and sing hot
Pudding Pyes. By the absoluteness of their power, they send forth their
warrants to take away the Lead off a Conduit and a great Cistern that stood in
the midst of the Close, giving plentiful supplies of water to many hundreds
of Inhabitants; and by virtue of the same warrant they give their agents power
to take a great quantity of Timber, which was laid up and designed for the
repairing of the Church; such Timber as that it will be a very hard matter to
procure the like, all Timber not being fit for that use: and with these a great
stock of Lead out of the Common Storehouse, reserved there for the same
purpose; which warrants were accordingly put in execution to the full. They did
enter into a Consultation about taking down the Bells, and all the Lead that
covered the Church, to convert them into Warlike Ammunition, the Bells might be
cast into Cannon, the Lead into Bullets, both would serve toward the effecting
their Traitorous designs. They took down the Gates of the Close, which the
Dean, and Chapter, had set up, and kept locked every night for their security:
which Gates they employed, to help forward, and strengthen their
Fortifications: They lay intolerabe taxes on most of the Members of the Church,
and whosoever refused to submit to those most unjust, Illegal Impositions, were
threatened to have their Houses Plundered, and their Persons sent on shipboard;
where they must expect usage, as bad as at Argier, or the Galleys. Doctor
Burnell, a grave learned man, and Canon of that Church, refusing to submit to
their Taxations, they gave Command (though he were at that time sick and
confined, not only to his Chamber but to his bed) to take him in the night, and
bring him away to Prison though they brought him in his bed: but upon much
importunity, some of the best rank of the Citizens being tendered his security,
to render himself a true Prisoner, for that time they left him. For the like
refusal, they took Doctor Hutchenson another Canon of the Church, a man of a
weak infirm Body, but of a vigorous knowing Soul; and violently carried him
toward the Ship, there to imprison him; by the way as they carried him along,
he was (not only by the permission but by the encouragement of those that led
him Captive) blasted, and abused, and howted at by the Boys, and exposed to the
affronts, and revilings of the base Insolent Multitude: at twelve of the clock
at night they seized on Mr. Hilliar in his bed, and another Canon of that
Church, being almost Fourscore and Ten years of Age, and for the like refusal,
because he would not disburse such sums as they demanded, for the maintenance
of this horrid Rebellion, they carry him first to the Prison, and from thence
to the Ship: in the way to the Prison, they throw dirt in his face, and beat
the good old man so cruelly, that his roaring, and outcries were heard, and
pityied by all his neighbors: and at last not able to endure (by reason of his
extreme old Age) the barbarous usage of the Rebels, he was forced to redeem his
liberty at eight hundred Pounds: and now having dispossessed the owners, the
Rebels find new employments for the Canons houses: some of them they convert
into Prisons, and in an Apish imitation, call them by the names of Newgate,
King's Bench, Marshalsey; others they employ as Hospitals, for sick or maimed
Soldiers: some they use as Slaughter-houses, and Shambles: and for the Bishops
Palace, they might have called it their Smithfield, for in, and about it, they
kept their fat Oxen, and Sheep, and all their Plundered Provision. These houses
though foully abused, yet do still stand, as to upbraid the Rebels injustice,
and oppression; so to give entertainment to their own Master, or their
successors, unless some men, possessed with worse devils than ruled in these
children of disobedience, shall to their just damnation alienate them from
their Original use: but other houses belonging to the Church, they set on fire,
and burn down to the ground: for they burnt down the Guild Hall in S. Sidwels,
belonging to the Dean, and Chapter, and as many houses more of their Ancient
Inheritance and revenues as were worth 100 l. per Annum, making likewise great
havoc and spoil of their woods, and Timber, maliciously intending to disable
them, from reedifying what they had most barbarously burnt down.

Reader,
ENgland lately gloried in being Mistress of 28. famous Cathedral Churches,
beautified with such magnificent structure, that no Nation in Europe could
equalize them; and of these, the impiety and irreligion of the Schismatical
Reformers of these times, has hardly left any one undefaced, though for the
present the exact relation of the particulars are not come to our hands. God in
his good time will, we doubt not, pour down his Judgments upon the Actors of
these horrid Prophanations.

A Catalogue of the CATHEDRALS in England and Wales.
1 Canterbury. 2 Rochester. 3 London. 4 Lincoln. 5 Chichester. 6 Winchester. 7
Salisbury. 8 Exeter. 9 Bath. 10 Wells. 11 Gloucester. 12 Worcester. 13
Lichfield. 14 Coventry. 15 Hereford. 16 Ely. 17 Norwich. 18 Oxford, 19
Peterborough. 20 Bristol. 21 Landaffe. 22 S. David's. 23 Bangor. 24 S. Asaph.
York Province.
25 York. 26 Chester. 27 Carlisle. 28 Durham.
Besides
1 Rippon. 2 Southwel. And 3 Westminst. Abbey.
FINIS
Mercurius Rusticus, etc.
V.
The Cathedral Church of Peterborough Robbed, defaced and spoiled by Cromwell
and his Schismatical adherents, etc.

COuld we sooner have produced a certain, and full relation of the observable
circumstances about the ruins and desolations of the sometimes flourishing,
though now demolished Cathedral of Peterborough, the same might justly have
challenged to have been inserted before this time and place, both in respect of
the dignity of the Ancient, Religious and Royal Founders, the same of the
irreligious and unworthy defacers, the admirable vicissitude of its own
condition, and reasons of its Fatal doom, having suffered not so much by the
fury of the Danes, because a rich Monastery, as by the zeal of Cromwell, because
an Episcopal See: and (if his knowledge reached so high) for that it had been so
much and often honored by the Princes of this Nation in several ages.

When Peada the first Christian King of the Mercians to propagate the faith of
Christ, laid the foundation, but had a sudden period put to his life and pious
intentions by his unnatural and wicked Mother, Wolpher his Brother, albeit at
first averse, yet afterward a convert to Christianity, (to expire the Murder
of his two Sons whom he had cruelly put to death for embracing the Gospel
before him) by the help of his Brother Ethelred, and his Sisters Kimburga, and
Kinswith, having finished that work in the year of our Lord 633. Consecrated it
to the memory of S. Peter (whence the place ever since has been styled
Peterborough, which before was called Medeswel-hamsted, or Medeshamsted) and it
continued for the space of two hundred and fourteen years, in such glory, that
in the Judgment of our Learned Antiquary, Monasterium fuit long
Celebratissimum, till the Danes massacred the Monks and destroyed that place of
Devotion, which was after an 108. years restored to its former state, by
Ethelwould Bishop of Winchester, asisted by King Edger and Adulph his
Chancellor, about the years of our Lord 960. in which it remained, until
covetous Sacrilege began to get the upper hand of wel-meaning charity in his
Reign, who was as fitly, as truly said to have had Ingentes virtutes, nee
minora vitia, though at the undoing of its Kindred, this had least reason to
complain, being then advanced to a Bishops See; But this third woe has so much
disfigured that Majesty which till then this building retained in its
forefront, this Cromwell has so far out-vied in acts of Piety his Precedent,
that Cromwell in Henry the 8. time, this place has now suffered in so great a
manner for its Loyalty, as that we know not where to enter upon the narration
of the same, except at the great West-window (where his Soldiers made their
first breach and entrance) which was adorned with such variety of
Ecclesiastical History, as will evidence them to be deformers of that
through-Reformation in our blessed Queens time of happy memory, whom
notwithstanding they so highly cried up. From thence they presently hurried to
the Choire, where as soon as they had broken open the doors, they, according to
their trade and custom in other places, fell on tearing in pieces the Books of
Divine service, and sacred Anthems, yea (which may seem more strange) they were
so hot against Preaching or hearing Sermons, that all the seats of the
Auditors were plucked up and the Pulpit, the place of the Divine Oracle, and
the Book seat pulled down with that black-mouthed cry, Down with that Throne of
Antichrist, down with it even to the ground. And when their zeal had driven
them, to that height of impiety, that some standers by could not behold it
without great reluctance, which moved one of them to request Cromwell that he
would please to stay his Soldiers from further defacing and ruining that place,
all the satisfaction he could get, was but a provocation to further mischief,
replying, that his Gods were a pulling down, and when the other answered that
the God he served was beyond the reach of Soldiers, Cromwell told him that they
did God good service in that action, as if even in these days were fulfilled
that prophecy of our Savior, John 16.2. The time is coming whosoever does the
greatest Mischief will think he serves God. But observe the wages that divine
Justice repayed one of them for their work, which may testify how he accepted
of the same; When they had demolished the Choire, the East End was the next
they aimed at, where one espying in the roof right over the Communion Table,
our Savior pourtraied, coming in glory with his holy Angels, and at the 4.
corners, 4. Evangelists (none of which they will endure, as knowing how
opposite they are unto them) he charged his Musket to shatter them down, but
by the rebound of his own shot, was struck blind; If he did his God good
thereby, he did himself an ill turn, his wickedness falling on his own pate; He
laid a long while in a woeful condition, and never recovered his former sight:
His life by Gods mercy was repreived, that he might repent, but he was surely
scourged, that he might take notice, there is punishment for Sacrilege, and
bear witness of that truth unto his fellows, although he found more savor than
Calisthenes, who attempting to burn the temples by setting fire on the Gates,
was for that act himself burned: or Alcimus, who whilst he was pulling the
house of God down, was struck with a Palsy, and dyed in torment. Some would
have thought, that that remarkable judgment overtaking him so on the sudden,
sufflaminated their running on, and that striking of him blind, should have
opened their eyes. But let favor be showed to the wicked, yet they will not
learn righteousness, in the land of uprightness will they deal unjustly, and
will not behold the Majesty of the Lord; But Lord, when thy hand is lifted up,
they will not see, as thou foretoldest by thy Prophet Esaias 26.10.11.13. it
should come to pass, When other Lords besides thee have dominion over us; They
were not at all deterred, neither left any ways unattempted to get down that
roof, which ladders failed, they cut the Bell-ropes ( which if rightly applied,
might have curred their itch) to eke out their tackling, till they reached it
with their Poleaxes, and brake down the carved works. Psalm. 7.4. Afterward
espying the rare structure of Stoneworks over the Altar, admired by all
travelers for the excellent artifices, which was no ways guilty of
superstitious workmanship, they made all of it rubbish, breaking up also the
rails of which they compiled bone-fires, tumbling the Communion Table over and
over, they were also so offended with all memorials of the dead (knowing
themselves in the number of those whose memories at the best shall perish as if
they had never been) that not one Monument in the Church escaped undefaced, no
not of the pious benefactors, (whose accusation was sufficient, they had done
good to the Church) not those two fair Tombs of Katharine Queen Dowager of
Spain, the Repudiate of King Henry the 8 th. and Mary albeit Queen of Scots. It
was so great a crime to have been Queens, the marble walls, and guards of irons
wherewith they were surrounded and incircled could not preserve them in repose
from all their miseries, but they would add this one unto the rest, to lay the
Emblems of their honors in the dust, pulling away the hearse of black velvet,
and carrying away whatsoever was vendible: When their unhallowed toylings had
made them out of wind, they took breath afresh on two pair of Organs, piping
with the very same about the Market place, lascivious Jiggs, whilst their
Comrades danced after them, some in the Coaps, others with the Surplices, and
down they brake the Bellows to blow the coals of their further mischief, and
left any should ring auke for the fire they had make, they left the Bells
speechless, taking out their clappers, which they sold with the Brass they
flaied from the graven stones, and the Tin and Iron from other parts of the
Church and Chapels belonging thereto, which were many and richly adorned, but
the Daughters faired no better than their Mother; there was not suffered any
window to remain unshattered, or remarkable place in them unruined, their
intent being to leave those consecrated walls as a room fitted for vermin to
nestle in, or which was worse for Cap. Ashwell to exercise his Soldiers in,
where while he was in town, he made his Rendezvous, and when they went away,
set fire on some part of the wood-work, to have burnt the remainder down, if it
had not timely been discovered; Neither did the Cloisters attending, escape
better than those they were made to wait upon, though these both in their roof
and glazing might be compared with the chiefest Cathedrals, the first square
being beautified with the History of the Old Testament, the second of the New,
the third showed the whole relation of those by whom the Church was builded,
the fourth presented us with all the Effigies of our Kings since William the
Conqueror: But it seems; those unreasonable and wicked men, care for
scripture, and Princes, and Pious Monuments all alike, their wide throats were
as open Sepuclhres, their Sacrilegious appetites (being yet unsatisfied with
devouring) must needs swallow up the Lands appertaining to that Church, to
whith that they might pretend the juster title, they broke open the
Charter House, Plundered away the great Charter, all the Evidences, leases, and
other writings belonging thereunto, manifesting their parties desires to have
all Estates of others, to come, and be at their arbitrary disposals, and they
unto whom in right they are due, to lie as these places and Persons at this
day, Mourning in Sackcloth and Ashes.

Querela Cantabrigiensis: OR, A REMONSTRANCE By way of APOLOGY, For the
banished Members of the late flourishing UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

By some of the said Sufferers.

S. MATTHEW. 10.17, 18. Beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the
Councils, and they will scourge you in their Synagogues. And ye shall be
brought before Governors, etc.

Basil. Magn. Epist. 79. Eustach. Episc. Sebastiae. (...).

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1685.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To every indifferent Reader.
Christian Brethren, and Fellow Subjects,
IT is a memorable saying of an ancient Heathen Moralist, Curae leves
loquuntur, ingentes stupent: And the like may be said concerning sorrows; when
they come once to overcharge the heart, they stupifie it, and obstruct those
passages, by which it should ease it self of them. This has been our
particular case: Our being deprived of our livelyhoods (for how small a trifle
this ensuing Remonstrance will manifest) has filled our hearts with sorrow:
But when we considered, not only the hand foom whence this oppression comes,
(even that which pretends to the infallible weild of the sword of Justice)
but withal that through our sides such a fatal stroke is given to one of the
most famous Universities of Christendom: this sad prospect did so far surcharge
us with grief, that it cast us for a long time into a fit of Musing, till at
last (the fire being kindled) we spkae with our Tongue.

The Preface.
And now that the string of our tongue is untyed, our earnest desire is, that
none of these its sorrowful expressions may be mis-interpreted by any. And to
that end we have perfixed this advertisement, to prevent three mistakes, which
are all we can possibly imagine the malice of our greatest Enemies can any way
fancy against this our Remonstrance.

I. The first is, That perhaps it may be groundless, because we have not
therein set down the express words, either of those Protections by which we
might securely have expected an Indemnity, or of those Orders by which we
suffered.

To which we answer, that the reason hereof was partly to avoid tediousness,
and therefore we gave only some short hints in the margent. And partly because
(being despersed) we could not possibly have the true Copies of all of them by
us. And to publish any thing that was but supposititious, could not consist
with our constant endeavor still to maintain the truth, notwithstanding
whatsoever difficulties to the contrary. But yet (to prevent all mistakes as
near as we can) we have here inserted the true Copies of such as we had by us:
whereby the indifferent Reader will not only guess at the rest, but also
easily imagine what rigor and malice there was used in the execution of them,
which we assure him are as much (or more) than he can possibly fancy. For they
being to deal with an University, which then had a reverend esteem over the
whole Kingdom, must counterfeit Jacobs voice as much as possibly he could in
their Orders, though their hands were far rougher than Esau's in the execution
of them. And accordingly (though now it is too apparent it was but only in
mockery) we had sent us these two following Protections.

Die Sabbati 4. Mar. 1642.
THE Earl of Holland, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, having this
day represented in the House the present condition of the said University; the
Lords in Parliament apprehending that through the public distractions, and by
reason of great multitudes of Soldiers resorting from several places to the
Town of Cambridge, some disturbance might happen to the quiet and studies of
the Scholar: For preventing therefore of any such mischief, have thought fit to
declare the esteem and care they have of that ancient and noble Seminary of
Learning; and have accordingly Ordered, that no Person or Persons whatsoever,
shall presume to offer any outrage or violence either by themselves or others
unto any the Colleges, Chapels, Libraries, Schools, or other buildings
belonging to the said University, or to any the Scholars or public Ministers
thereof: Nor plunder, purloin, deface, spoil, or take away any the Books,
goods, chattels, or household stuff of or belonging to the said University, or
any Col. there, or to any Scholar or public Minister thereof, under any color
or pretense whatsoever, as they will answer the contrary to this House at their
utmost perils. And that Divine Service may be quietly performed and executed
throughout all the said University according to the settlement of the Church of
England, without any trouble, let, or disturbance, until the pleasure of the
Parliament be further signified. Provided nevertheless that this Protection
shall not extend to stop any due course of Law, or proceeding of Parliament,
that may or might have had its course if this Protection had not been granted.
And herein ready obedience is to be given by all such whom this does or may
concern, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.


THese are to will, require, and command you, and every of you, to forbear
(under any pretense whatsoever) to prejudice or offer any damage to the
University of Cambridge or to any the Schools, Colleges, Halls, Libraries,
Chapels, or other places belonging to the said Universities, by plundering the
same or any part thereof in any kind whatsoever. Hereof fail not as you will
answer the contrary at your perils.

Given under my hand and seal the 7. day of March, 1642. Essex.
To all Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Captains, and all other Officers and
Soldiers of the Army under my command.

These indeed were our Protections, but they were blasted in the bud by this
following Warrant.

THese are to authorize you to enter into the houses of all Papists,
Malignants, and other Persons whatsoever, that have or shall refuse to appear
at Musters, or to contribute according to the Propositions of both Houses of
Parliament, or refuse to enter into the Association: and to seize upon all such
Horses, Arms, and Ammunition, as shall be found in their custodies, and to
apprehend their said Persons, and them to be brought before me, or any one of
the Deputy Lieutenants of the County; and in case of Resistance, to force the
same. Commanding all Mayors, Sheriffs, Captains, Trained-Bands, and other
inferior Officers whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting to Colonel Coke
herein. Dated Feb. 23. 1642.

Gray of Wark.
To Col. Coke, Lieutenant-Col. Bryldon, or any other of his Officers.

This Warrant was issued out the more suddenly, and prosecuted the more
violently, in regard that our Protections were then in procuring: But the
rigorous prosecution of this, made those to be of little or no use, more than
the name, unless it was to shut the Stable door after the Steed was stolen. For
under pretense of Papists, Malignants, etc. there was scarce a Scholar in all
the University which escaped examination: And lest our College Chapels,
Libraries, or Treasuries, or even the privatest Cabinet therein, or in any of
our Chambers or Studies, should (perchance) have been converted into Stables
for Horses, or Magazines for Arms and Ammunition, they searched them all so
strictly, and plundered them all so thoroughly, that nothing which they liked
escaped their fingers, our ancient Coins not excepted.

When we had seen their unparalled rigor herein, and how we were slighted
when we made our just complaints against it, we did not much regard whether
they had any Commission or not for whatsoever they did to us afterward. But
like Christian sufferers, when they took our Cloaks, we forbad them not to take
our Coats also: and when they took our goods, we asked them not again. For we
did plainly see that we were destinated to ruin, and that all these were but
previous dispositions, to take us down and fit us for the great stroke, when
they should please to lay it upon us. And therefore (omitting all the rest,
though we could insert some) we shall here only add two other Warrants,
mentioned hereafter: The one their general Summons, the other their first form
of their Writs of Ejection.

THese are to will and require you upon sight hereof, to give speedy
advertisement, viis mediis and modis, to Master, Fellows, Scholars, and
Officers of your College, to be resident in your said College the 10. day of
March next ensuing, to give an account wherein they shall be required, and to
answer such things as may be demanded by me, or such Commissioners as I shall
appoint. Given under my hand and seal the 26. of Feb. 1643.

E. Manchester.
To the President or Locum tenens of (...) College.

BY virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament, entitled, An Ordinance for
regulating the University of Cambridge, and the removing of Scandalous
Ministers in the seven Associated Counties, giving me likewise power to eject
such Masters of Colleges as are scandalous in their lives or doctrines, or do
oppose the proceedings of Parliament: I do eject (...) from being Master of
(...) College in Cambridge, for opposing the proceedings of Parliament, and
Mark. It was not for scandalous acts, but for opposing.
other scandalous acts in the University of Cambridge. And I require you to
sequester the Profits of his Mastership for one that I shall appoint in his
place: and to cut his name out of the Butteries, and to certify me of this
your act within one day. Given under my hand and Seal the 13. of March, 1643.

E. Manchester.
To the President and Fellows of (...) College in Cambridge.

This, we hope, will satisfy the indifferent Reader concerning the truth and
ground of our Sufferings.

II. But lest a second mistake should arise, that (supposing them to be true,
yet) they are not (perhaps) so great as we pretend, because that for the most
part we have given but a slight glance at them; we held it very requisite to
give this further Advertisement.

1. That in matters of this nature, a man ought not to macerate his Soul too
much by reflecting on his own misery, lest the Devil thereby get an advantage
upon him, to tempt him to a melancholy despair. 2. Though we desire hereby to
move every compassionate Christian to a fellow-feeling of our miseries; yet
have we endeavored (as much as we could) to forbear the long insisting upon
particulars, lest we should offend his ears, instead of moving his compassion.
For as in Music, the harshness of a discord may be admitted if it be not too
long produced; so have we studied to temper those harsh notes to the tender ear
of the Christian Auditor, by making a speedy transition from one to another. 3.
We had so many matters of complaint, (and might have many more, if we had been
all together to confer our Sufferings) that this small Remonstrance would have
swelled to (an Iliada malorum) a just Volum; if we had not purposely
endeavored to comprise an Ilias in a Nutshel, by instancing only in some, and
reducing those to as small a model as possibly we could. And to this end also
we have used as much plainness of speech in our expressions, as ingeniousness
of the truth of the thing it self. And indeed if we should but a little have
indulged our Pen the liberty of a Rhetorical flourish, we should thereby have
made our sufferings (which in themselves are almost beyond belief) to have
seemed altogether incredible.

III. But our greatest and last fear is lest the intolerable weight of those
heavy pressures under which we have so long groaned, have (perhaps) extorted
from us some expressions which may not seem altogether to become persecuted
Christians. And in this we submit our selves wholly to the candor of the
charitable Reader, desiring him to interpret all things in the best sense. For
tho we have used our endeavors to avoid all manner of expressions which might
seem to savor of malice, yet carrying about us those passions which accompany
flesh and blood, it is impossible but we should sometimes slip. We know very
well, and acknowledge, that Prayers and tears are the only defensive weapons of
a Christian against persecutions: And if anything, which is not fully consonant
hereunto, has passed from our pen, we desire it may be imputed to our many
infirmities; seeing we are still ready to pray for our Persecutors, that God
would open their eyes, that they may yet see and repent of those many and great
wrongs which they have done to him, his true Religion and Service, to his
Anointed our gracious Sovereign, as also to us in particular, and other their
fellow subjects. Which if it would please him to grant unto them, we might
quickly recover the temporal peace of this distracted Kingdom, and they the
possibility of enjoying everlasting peace in the Kingdom of Heaven.

1 PET. 4.16. If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let
him glorify God on this behalf.
ACT. 5.41. They departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they
were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.
JOHN 16.33. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world.
Aug. in Psalm. 93. Bonilaborant quia flagellantur ut filii: maliexultant quia
damnantur ut alieni.
Idem in Psalm. 125. Sicut qui seminat per hyemem non deterretur ab opere
propter hyemem: Sic and nos pressura mundi non debemus a bono opere deterreri,
quia qui seminant in lachrymis, in gaudio metent.
Querela Cantabrigiensis: OR, The Universities Complaint.
THough an Apology for our long silence might better become us than any other
form of Prefacing, yet were there some that thought it better to sit down in
the shade of cool patience, and sweeten the sad prospect of our own miseries,
by reflecting on the great public woes of this Kingdom, than incur the
suspicion of querulous natures, such as are apt to cry out only at the
imagination of being hurt. But seeing our miseries are real, and our sufferings
not so much intended against us, as against that famous University, whereof by
right, we are still actual Members; and that the adverse party, has hitherto
made so much advantage of our tameness, as to steal away our livelihood from
us, and conceal the Theft: though our own Mothers mouth be stopped, by
violently seizing her press, and thereby not suffered to speak, but (like
Apollos Statue of old) just as the evil spirit speaks in her, which at this
time utters little else but disloyalty and Rebellion: yet seeing it has
pleased the hand of providence to give us this happy opportunity freely to
bewail our own miseries; We are at length resolved to do Justice to these Men's
iniquity and our own innocence, that our fellow subjects may know, (and if they
leave so much learning as to speak in another language, the whole World may
hereafter understand) how and by what Arts the Knipperdullings of this Age (who
think shortly to make themselves Kings of this Sion) have reduced a glorious
and renowned University, almost to a mere Munster, and have done more, in less
then three years, then the Apostate Julian could effect in all his Reign, viz.
broken the heart strings of Learning and learned men, and thereby luxated all
the joints of Christianity in the Kingdon.

The particulars whereof, and the barbarous courses taken to bring these
designs to effect, as we shall truly and impartially set them down, so we fear
not to appeal to any impartial Judge, whether if the Goths and Vandalls, or even
the Turks themselves had overrun this Nation, they would more inhumanly have
abused a flourishing University, than these pretended advancers of Religion and
Learning have done; it being a constant custom (if not also the Law of Nations)
in the fiercest encounters of the most enraged parties, to exempt and
privilege Scholars from, if not protect them by their Martial proceedings.

To begin therefore with the first occasiion (as we conceive) from whence they
pretended any cause of this rage and persecution against us, (though the mere
conscience of so senseless a Rebellion cried up only by the illiterate herd,
might afford reason enough for them to look asquint upon all Scholars qua
tales) The contribution of a small pittance of Money to our Sovereigns extreme
necessity before any War was thought on by us, is made to be our unpardonable
crime, (though not then prohibited by any Order or Ordinance) which (added to
the tenderness of our consciences in refusing their wicked confederacy,
commonly called the Covenant) by the help of their Legislative Engine, has
bereaved us of all, and cast us from our livelyhoods, maintenance and Colleges.

For when His Sacred Majesty (whom they made to be the first Grand Delinquent,
and whose Crown-Revenues and Estate, together with his Towns, Ships, and
Magazines, they sequestered and seized on) deigned (by His Royal Letters) to
acquaint His poor University with His strange wants, even of sustenance for his
very household: Our hearts burned within us, to hear our living Founder, whom we
expected to be made (by that time) a great and glorious King, (as was promised
him) should almost starve while we had bread on our Table. Whereupon out of our
poverty, a small and inconsiderable sum of Money was collected and tendered, as
a Testimony not only of our Loyalty to him as King, or of our gratitude as our
most gracious and bountiful Protector and Benefactor; but also of our Charity
to him as a Christian, then in extreme want and necessity. We hope our
Persecutors will Pardon us this expression, seeing our Metaphysics may with
less danger of Treason abstract Charles from King than their bullets; and this
was the first flower out of which they sucked all their venom which shortly
after they disgorged upon us.

Hereupon his Sacred Majesty (knowing well how eager that party was in
revenging the least seeming provocation, and being informed of that Cloud which
was then hanging over us and ours, for that action of Humanity, Loyalty, and
Christian^ty) out of his care and tenderness, proffered to secure our College
Plate (if we were content to deposite it in his hands) which their intended
Revenge, had already swallowed without any Grace, so much as of the public
faith: and therefore wrote his most gracious Letters to us to take an exact
survey of it, not only for the weight, but also of the form of every piece,
together with the Names, Arms, and Mottoes of the respective Donors, that if
(perhaps) his Majesty could not preserve it entire as it was, he might restore
it hereafter in the same weight and form, and with the same marks: All which he
graciously insured upon his Royal word.

It behoved not us to refuse protection from that hand to which God (for that
end) had entrusted a Scepter, especially considering the concurrence of Actions
about that time. It is not unknown to most part of this Kingdom, that not long
before this, the zealous Brethren of Essex and Suffolk had packt themselves
together in a Religious Rout, to give the first Essay of a Popular Reformation:
How happily this work did thrive in their hands, has been already published to
the Kingdom, and the ruins of the two magnificent houses of the Countess
Rivers (with many other Gentlemen's houses of quality) are still dismal
witnesses. Vid Mercur. Rustic. 2.
So that (having found the sweet of their labors) the Reformers would in all
likelihood have prosecuted the great work as far as Cambridge, for a less prize
than our University, (thanks be to God and our good Benefactors.) And we had
good reason to fear the increase of their Army, if they had come near us,
seeing the inferior part of the Town, had provided Arms, and yet had no
Commanders; and some that durst discharge a Musket, made it their practice to
terrify us, and disturb our Studies by shooting in at our windows. And
therefore lest our Plate should become a bait to have our Liberties rifled,
This particular appears by a Paper delivered into the Registers Office, under
the hands (if not also upon the Oaths) of Master Christopher Terne, and Master
Anthony Walker, both of S. John's College, who had Muskets several times
discharged in at their windows, as also diverse others.
our College; pulled down, and perhaps our Throats cut, we thought it our
wisest course to secure all, by securing that in His Majesty's gracious hands.

Upon these reasons (which no judicious man will esteem otherwise than weighty)
we endeavored to convey away some part of our Plate about the beginning of
August, 1642. (which by the way was before either His Majesty Standard was
erected, or his Proclamation issued out to that end: However many of us, and
others have suffered for it, as fomenters of this War) But within a few days
after, (see how the just grounds of our fears concentred) one Master Cromwell,
Burgess for the Town of Cambridge, and then newly turned a man of War, was sent
down by his Masters above, at the invitation of his Masters below, (as himself
confessed) to gather what strength he could to stop all passages that no Plate
might be sent: But his designs being frustrated, and his opinion as of an
active subtle man, thereby somewhat shaken and endangered, he has ever since
bent himself to work what revenge and mischief he could against us. In pursuit
whereof, before that month was expired, down he comes again in a terrible
manner with what Forces he could draw together, and surrounds diverse Colleges,
while we were at our devotion in our several Chapels, taking away Prisoners,
several Doctors of Divinity, Heads of Colleges, viz. D. Beale, Master of S.
John's College, D. Martin, Master of Queens College, and D. Stern, Master of
Jesus College, men of such eminent worth and abilities, as render them above
the reach of our commendation, and these he carries with him to London in
triumph: And though there was an express Order from the Lords House for their
imprisonment in the Tower, which met them at Tottenham-high-crosse, (wherein
notwithstanding there was no Crime expressed) yet were they led captive through
Bartholmew-fair, and so as far as Temple Bar, and back through the City to
Prison in the Tower, on purpose that they might be houted at, or stoned by the
Rable-rout.

Since which time, now about three years together they have been hurryed up and
down from one Prison to another at excessive and unreasonable charges, and fees
exacted from them, far beyond their abilities to defray, having all their goods
Plundered, and their Masterships and Livings taken from them, which should
preserve them from famishing. And though in all this time there was never any
Accusation brought, much less proved against any of them; yet have they
suffered intolerable imprisonment ever since, both by Land and Water,
especially that in the Ship, where for ten days togethe^, they (with many other
Gentlemen of great rank) were kept under deck, without liberty to come to
breath in the common Air, or to ease Nature, except at the courtesy of the
rude Sailors, which oftentimes was denied them. In which condition, they were
more like Gally-slaves, than freeborn Subjects, and men of such quality and
condition; and had been so indeed, might some have had their wills, who were
bargaining with the Merchants to sell them to Argiers, Alex. Rigby the Lawyer.
Vide Declar. of the Parl. at Oxf. Mar. 19. 1643.
or as bad a place, as has been since notoriously known upon no false or
fraudulent information.

And now that we are mentioning our Reverend and worthy Heads of Houses, we may
not omit, what our long exile from the said University will not suffer us
otherwise than by certain Report to be apprehensive of: Namely, that a very
great number of them are since in the same condition with us, that is, deprived
of all, and banished: Particularly, the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of Exeter, against whom their malice could invent no more than that he
was a Bishop, nor pretend any thing, but that, being Vice Chancellor, he did
according, to his Office Preach a learned and pious Sermon in S. Mary's, Mar.
27. 1645. being the day of His Majesty's most happy inauguration. To whom we
may add that most Reverend and learned man, Doctor Collins, His Majesty's
Professor of Divinity, whose extraordinary worth and pains had continued him in
that place almost thirty years, and made his name famous, and his person
desirable in every Protestant University in Christendom: and yet his Loyalty
and conscience caused our new pretended Reformers to think him unworthy so much
as of a Country Cure, (for they sequestered likewise both his Livings) though
since, as we hear, they have restored him to his Professors place, which none
of them are able to discharge, and he living in their Quarters, durst not deny.
Thus likewise have Doctor Comber, D. Pask, D. Cosins, and D. Lany been deprived
of their several Masterships and Livings, and some of them also Plundered of
their goods, though all of them be very eminent for their Learning, Prudence,
Judgment and Piety, among all that knew them, and have no prejudice of them.
And for conclusion (as the Epitome of all) we add D. Holdsworth, whose
universal approbation put him upon the troublesome office of Vice-chancellorship
for three years together in the beginning of these troubles; yet before his
Triennial Office was expired, his person was seized upon and imprisoned, first
in Ely-house, then (because they thought that was not expensive enough, though
they had Plundered him of all) they thrust him into the Tower, only for his
Loyalty in seeing His Majesty's Commands executed for the Printing of such
Declarations at Cambridge, as were formerly Printed at York; which though the
Committees before which he appeared have always objected against him as
Licensing the Kings Books, yet has he ever denied it, (for the manner, though
not for the matter) professing himself before them, not to be so saucy as to
offer to License any thing which His Majesty Commanded to be Printed: but yet
still enjoining the Printer (as he would answer the contrary at his peril) that
the thing might be performed according to His Majesty's Command.

And that the whole Body of the University might fare no better than the Heads;
not long after the carrying up of the first three, they gave us an Argument of
a sad presage. What was like to become of that Ancient and famous Seminary of
Learning and Religion, when those Root-and-Branch-men chose that place for the
prime Garrison and Rendezvous of their Association: whereby the subtle
Enginiers of the great pretended work of Reformation hoped not so much to gain
security to their disloyal actions by any fortifications of that Town, (which
it never was capable of, as now plainly appears) as some countenance and
authority rather (which they had more want of) from the sacred name of an
University to be listed Theirs. By this means instead of carrying us all to
London Goals, (thanks be to our multitude, not their mercy) they found a device
to convey a Prison to us, and under color of Fortification confined us only in
a larger enclosure, not suffering any Scholars to pass out of the Town, unless
some Townsmen of their Tribe promise for him that he was a Confider, as they
call it.

And after this intrenchment for almost two years together, (we are forced with
unspeakable grief of mind to think) what prophanations, violences, outrages and
wrongs our Chapels, Colleges and Persons have suffered by the uncontrolled
fury of rude Soldiers, notwithstanding two several Protections to the contrary,
one from the House of Peers, the other from the Generalissimo the Earl of
Essex. It is grievous to our memories to recount, how our Vice Chancellor and
Heads of Colleges solemnly assembled in Consistory, being many of them
threescore years old in an exceeding cold night till midnight, without any
accommodations for food, On Good Fiday, Mar. 30. 1643.
firing or lodging; and for no other reason, but only because they could not in
conscience comply or contribute any thing to this detestable War against His
Majesty: Yet they, notwithstanding all terrors and ill usage the day following
this their imprisonment, did constantly unanimously avouch and declare before
the then General of the Association, That it was against true Religion and good
Conscience for any to contribute to the Parliament in this War. Whereupon our
Learned and Reverend Professors, two of Divinity, and one of the Law, the very
Junior whereof (as well as the other two) had faithfully discharged his place
almost so long as that by the Imperial Laws (his own profession) ever since
Valens the Emperor, he might have challenged to have been Imperator Valens
Grammaticos, Sophistas, Legum Professores, qui per vigliti annos probe munere
docendi: suncti sunt, annumerari and honorari cum iis, qui ex vicaria sint
principis dignitate jubet, and inter Comites. Greg. Tho. losan. Syntag. lib.
19. c. 1., 8. ubi citat l. uni de Professor. qui in urbe Constantinop. lib. 12.
C. tit. 1. juncta rub. and gl.
Comes Imperii; yet all the encouragement any of them could get from these was
perpetually to be harrowed by Plundering and tedious imprisonment to betray
their Loyalty, Learning, and Consciences to the advancement of this present
Rebellion, till at last that Reverend man (whom Posterity will honor
henceforth as much for his Loyalty as his Learning) Doctor Samuel Ward (a man
of known integrity and universal approbation even amongst those who were his
adversaries in this Cause) took the wings of a Dove to fly away and be at
rest: whose dying words (as if the cause of his Martyrdom had been written in
golden Letters upon his heart) where breathed up to Heaven with his parting
Soul, GOD BLESS THE KING.

And though the grave resolution of all the Reverend Professors of Divinity and
Law in so famous an university ought to be more sacred and powerful with them
than the noise of their new Teachers and obstreperous American Lay-lecturers,
yet they are not ashamed, after all these (upon mature deliberation and
consultation with the rest of the Learned men of that famous University) have
publicly and unanimously declared their proceedings to be flatly contrary to
Christian Religion and Loyalty, (and have stood therein even to imprisonment
and death) to persuade the silly abused multitude, that all is for the Defense
of His Majesty, and the Protestant Religion.

Neither is their wild fury confinable within those banks, it swells yet
higher: for as the Tyrant wished that Rome had but one neck, that he might cut
it off at one stroke; so these having got the opportunity, imprisoned the whole
University, March 23. 1643. which day the whole Senate, (the Representative
Body of it) being solemnly assembled in the Regent house, were there violently
environed with great Bands of Armed Soldiers, who wanted nothing but the Word
to dispatch us, because we would not vote in a matter as they would have us,
though that matter did not any whit concern them or their Cause, more than the
conferring of a Degree upon such a man as the whole University in their
consciences judged unworthy of it: And one Master Danes, (General of that
famous Expedition, but formerly a Member of that house which he then so abused)
adding Perjury to his former sins, came in a terrible manner, (contrary to his
Oath formerly taken to his Mother the University) and flatly denied the
Vice Chancellor leave to dissolve the Congregation, unless he would first
promise that the matter should be voted, as they required: whereupon sundry
Members of that Senate, being observed to make use of that Statute-liberty and
freedom, which was essential to that assembly, were forthwith seized on, and
imprisoned by the Committee, in no better Lodgings than the common Court of
Guard: which strange and violent perverting of our Universities proceedings, we
wonder at the less, for that this Captain had not done more to us, than Captain
Ven with his Raggamuffins had done formerly to the sacred Senate of the whole
Kingdom.

And that all Academical Exercises might expire and so the face of an
University be quite taken away, a grave Divine (the Lady Margarets public
Preacher) going to Preach Ad Clerum, M. Power.
(according to his Office) pridie Termini, was furiously pursued over the
market place by a confused number of Soldiers, who in a barbarous uncivil
manner cried out A Pope, A Pope, and vowed high revenge if he offered to go
into the Pulpit; whereupon the Church was straightways filled with great
multitudes, and when some who accompanied the Preacher, told them, it was an
University Exercise, and to be by Statute performed in Latin, they replied,
They knew no reason why all Sermons should not be performed in English, that
all might be edified, threatening withal totear the Hoods and Habits which
Graduats then wore, according to the University Statute. Yet all this may
perhaps be extenuated as a sudden uproar of undisciplined Soldiers, but (which
is the aggravation of all, and makes us believe that these petty Reformers were
but the senseless instruments of higher Agents) when all this was related to
their then General of the Association, Lord Gray of Warke.
no course was taken at all to prevent these growing mischiefs, but the Divine
appointed by Statute to Preach Ad Clerum, was enforced to return Re infecta,
and glad he could escape so: And this is the great protection which Learning is
like to find from these grand pretenders to advance it.

And that Religion might fare no better than Learning in the University Church,
(for perhaps it may be Idolatry now to call it S. Mary's) in the presence of
the then General our Common-Prayerbook was torn before our faces,
notwithstanding our Protection from the House of Peers for the free use of it,
See the Preface.
some (now great one) encouraging them in it, M. Cromwell.
and openly rebuking the University Clerk, who complained of it before his
Soldiers. Thus those Reverend Fathers, the Compilers of it, who sealed the
truth thereof with their dearest Blood, being content to burn at a stake for
the light of the Gospel, are now this second time Martyred and torn in pieces
in their Liturgy, yet all this under pretense of Religion.

It will not be strange now to hear how our Persons have been abused, seeing
Religion and Learning have suffered so deeply amongst us: how diverse of us have
been imprisoned without so much as pretending any cause, but snatched up in the
streets, and thrown into Prison at the pleasure of a small sneaking Captain,
where we have lain three or four months together, Jordan.
not so much as accused, much less heard, but quite and clean forgotten, as if
their had been no such thing in nature. How some of us (and many others with
us) have been thrust out of bed in the night, that our Chambers might forthwith
be converted into Prison Lodgings: how our young Scholars with terror have
been commanded to accuse and cut out the names of their own Tutors, So at S.
John's College.
and some of them thrown into Prison for not being old enough to take their
Covenant So was Jo. Bullock of S. John's.
: But (to pass higher) how often have our Colleges been beset, and broken open,
and Guards thrust into them sometimes at midnight, while we were asleep in our
beds? How often our Libraries and Treasuries ransackt and rifled, not sparing
so much as our Ancient So at S. John's College, whence they took in Ancient
Coyn's to the value of 22. l. according to weight.
Coyns? which those that know any thing, know to be a great light to the
understanding of History. How often has that small pittance of Commons which
our Founders and Benefactors allotted for our sustenance, been taken from off
our Tables by the wanton Soldier? How often have our Rents been extorted from
our Tenants, or if received, re-manded of our Bursars and Stewards, and by
force taken from them? And all this under the old odious title of Plundering,
which word though they cannot endure to hear of, since that new term of
Sequestration was invented; yet the thing is the same, and more practiced than
ever, they having for above two years together set themselves upon little else
than to seize and take away our goods and furniture belonging to our Chambers,
prizing and selling away our Books at a tenth part of their value, which are
our only tools and instruments whereby the trade and profession of Learning
should be holden up. And to this end they have constituted a decayed Hatter,
Plunder-master General, who (together with a Conventicling Barber and a
Confiding Tailor) has full Commission, Fortune. Parrell. Curd.
for our propriety sake, to Lord over us, and dispose of our goods as they
please: So despicable a thing to them is an University, or any that belong unto
it.

But their malice is unsatiable, and cannot be contained within the Line of
their Fortifications, and therefore to propagate their own wickedness, and make
us odious and abominable to the whole Country, as we were already (though most
undeservedly) to some of themselves; they have invented a pretty device to
reserve out of their Plunder all sorts of pictures, were they but Paper Prints
of the twelve Apostles, and every market day to burn ihem openly in the market
place, proclaiming them the Popish Idols of the University, until we became so
hated by the weaker sort of the deceived People, that a Scholar could have
small security from being stoned or affronted as he walked the streets.

But why do we insist so long upon particular men's Plundering, when whole
Colleges (wherein not only the present, but also the future propagation of
Religion and Learning is concerned) have drunk so deeply the dregs of their
malice? For besides the cutting down of our Walks and Orchards, (contrary to
their own Generalissimo's Orders of War) they have cut down the Woods and
Groves belonging to our Colleges, So at Jesus College-
and sold them before our eyes to a great value, when by an Ordinance they were
declared not Sequestrable: And (which was likewise contrary to an Order) they
have seized and taken away the Materials of our intended buildings, to the
worth of three or four hundred Pounds in Timber, which our pious and charitable
Benefactors had out of their devotion conferred toward the re-edifying of an
ancient College which Time had impaired: And, Clare-Hall.
to show what violent passions they are transported withal, they have pulled
down, demolished and defaced five or six fair Bridges of Stone and Timber
belonging to several Colleges, S. John's, Trin. Kings, Garret Hostle, and 2. at
Queens.
and have spoiled a good Walk with a new Gate pertaining to one of our Kings
College.
Colleges, upon pretense of keeping out Cavaliers, and yet for forty shillings
they would fain have been hired to spare it, and cast up a Work beyond. And let
the World judge whether this was not done to get the countenance of a
Contribution from a College to their Fortifications, and consequently to this
War against the King.

But (as if Bridges and materials for Building were nothing) they have yet
proceeded further, even to the very Structure it self of one of the fairest
Colleges in our University, S. John's Coll.
which they Plundered the true owners of, for above sixteen months together, as
an especial argument of their love to Learning, and have converted all the old
Court thereof into a Prison for His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, (which before the
other was built, has contained above three hundred Students at a time) not
suffering any whom it concerned to remove any Bedding or other goods, whereof
the Jailer could make any use or benefit, but renting them all out together
with the Chambers at above five hundred Pounds per Ann.

And as if spoiling of one College were not enough, their malice has since
extended it self to all the rest, in Quartering multitudes of Common Soldiers,
in those glorious and ancient Structures, which our devout and Royal Founders
designed for Sanctuaries of Learning and Piety, but were made by them mere
Spittles and Bawdy-houses for sick and debauched Soldiers, being filled with
Queans, Drabs, Fiddlers, and Revels night and day. Which black deeds of
darkness being diverse times complaned of by us to their Officers, and the
particular men showed them, who had thus lewdly abused our Colleges, none of
these new Reformers were ever punished, Pembr. Hall.
nor the holy Sisters removed, nor so much as called before any that then bore
rule among us. By which means, (see what Religion they fight for, and what a
glorious Reformation we may expect) they have dishonored Cod, countenanced
leudness, scandalized modest and civil men, and driven from us, or poisoned
among us those young Students which were left.

To this we may add, how they have torn and defaced those Reverend buildings,
pulled down and burned the Wainscot of our Chamb. Bed-steeds, Chairs Stools,
Tables, and Shelves for our Books, so as they may now have some plea for
multiplying of Goals, if the Liberty of the Subject shall so require. And when
their ragged Regiments which had lain lowzing before Crowland nigh a fortnight,
were commanded to Cambridge, forthwith the Colleges are appointed for their
Kennels, and fourscore were turned loose into one of the least Halls in the
University, Pembr. Hall.
and charged by their Officers to shift for themselves; who without any more
ado broke open the Fellows and Scholars Chambers, and took their Beds from
under them. But when the Kings Prisoners taken at Hilsden-house were brought
famished and naked in triumph by Cambridge to London, some of our Scholars were
knocked down in the streets, only for offering them a cup of small Beer to
sustain nature, and the drink thrown in the kennel, rather then the famished
and parched throats of the wicked, as they esteemed them, should usurp one drop
of the creature. And it is much to be feared, they would have starved them in
prison there, Mistress Cumbers maid.
if a valiant Chambermaid had not relieved them by force, trampling under her
feet in the kennel their great persecuter, Homes.
a Lubberly Scotch Mayor.

What should we mention moreover, how we have been overwhelmed with
insupportable Taxes extorted from us by Plundering, seized not by any of our
own Body, but (which is directly contrary to our established privileges) by the
Arbitration of a few confiding Aldermen, our professed Enemies, who instead of
that gratitude which very nature requires at their hands, now repay us with
unsatiable malice and Envy: which properties of their shave since commended and
qualified them to be appointed Commissioners and Judges to strip us of our
estates and livelyhoods. And when neither our consciences nor Estates could
extend any further to defray their imposts for our very Chambers (which their
Soldiers then possessed and burnt) besides all excises, weekly payments, Taxes,
fifth and twentieth part, upon all our Revenues, and other such new terms of
property and liberty, all the favor we can expect from them, is, quietly to be
thrust into Prison without further abusings.

And although all these are but sad theams to be thus far enlarged and dilated
upon, yet they think they can stop the noise of all these just complaints with
their usual grinning objection, that several of our Students are in the Kings
Army: making that to be their crime, to which if their own innate Loyalty did
not draw them, yet their haughty and heathenish usage would of necessity drive
them: for who had not rather fall upon the bed of honor, and assert with his
dearest blood, his Religion, Loyalty, and Liberty, than live a slave under
them, to set his surviving footsteps upon the graves and ashes of expired
Loyalty, Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Civility it self?

And now to tell how they have profaned and abused our several Chapels;
though our Pens flowed as fast with vinegar and gall, as our eyes do with
tears, yet were it impossible sufficiently to be expressed: when as multitudes
of enraged Soldiers (let loose to reform) have torn down all carved work, not
respecting the very Monuments of the dead: And have ruined a beautiful carved
structure in the University Church (though indeed that was not done without
direction from a great one, M. Cromwell.
as appeared after upon complaint, made to him) which stood us in a great sum
of Money, and had not one jot of Imagery or Statue-work about it. And when that
Reverend man the then Vice Chancellor told them mildly, D. Ward.
That they might be better employed, they returned him such Language, as we are
ashamed here to express.

Nor was it any whit strange to find whole Bands of Soldiers t^^ning and
exercising in the Royal Chapel of King Henry the sixth: Nay even the
Commanders themselves (being commanded to show their new Major General Master
Pawson of Sidney College, though since he has proved himself an arrant honest
man, and is rewarded for it with a fellowship in S. John's.
how well they understood their trade) chose that place to train in, Kings Coll.
(whether in policy to conceal their Mystery, Crawford.
or out of fear to betray their ignorance, or on purpose to show their Soldiers
how little Gods house was to be regarded, let the World conjecture.) And one
who calls himself John Dowsing, and by virtue of a pretended Commission goes
about the Country like a Bedlam breaking glass windows, having battered and
beaten down all our painted glass, not only in our Chapels, but (contrary to
Order) in our public Schools, College-Halls, Libraries, and Chambers, See the
Pref.
mistaking perhaps the Liberal Arts for Saints (which they intend in time to
pull down too) and having (against an Order) defaced and dug up the floors
of our Chapels, many of which had lain so for two or three hundred years
together, not regarding the dust of our founders and predecessors, who likely
were Buried there; compelled us by armed Soldiers to pay forty shillings a
College for not mending what he had spoiled and defaced, or forthwith to go to
Prison: We shall need to use no more instances than these two, to show that
neither place, person nor thing, has any reverence, or respect amongst them,
Master Pawson of Sidney College, though since he has proved himself an arrant
honest man, and is rewarded for it with a fellowship in S. John's.
A Fellow of one of our Colleges was violently plucked from the Communion as he
was ready to receive that holy Sacrament before the solemn Election of a Master
of that College, and thrown into Goal, to the great disturbance of the
Election: And at another * College the Communion Plate was sacrilegiously
seized upon and taken away from the very Communion Table, S. John's
notwithstanding it was (upon a former Plunder) restored to the said College by
an Order from the Close Committee of the 18. of September. 1643. under the hands
of the Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Denbigh, Lord Say, Lord Howard, Sir Will.
Waller, and Mr. Pym.

And yet all these actions of theirs, were but preparatory Pills to dispose our
whole Body for its final Purge of Reformation, when ever they should please to
think it sick of us: And that is this last act, which is none of the least
arguments, of this our sad complaint. For although we were seldom in any
freedom for any time near these three years from some Protestation, Oath,
Association, Vow and Covenant, etc. menaced upon us, yet this last only brought
with it the fatal doom of our final extirpation: though we must have leave to
wonder that all Liberty of Conscience should be denied us by them, who latety
pleaded nothing else against the established Ecclesiastical Laws, and now
pretended partly to fight for the same: But indeed the Covenant was not the
true cause but the pretense only for our Ejection, (for that is the word of
Art, for this newly invented Mystery) as appears by several writs issued out
under hand and seal without mention of refusing the Covenant. The thing was
absolutely determined by a peremptory decree, to plant a new University for
propagating at least, if not inventing a new Religion: And to that end the old
one must be removed, at least so much of it, for the present, as might hinder
this great design; Only some means and plausible pretenses were yet wanting.

The first that was attempted was to summon all those that were absent to
return within ten days. But then they were so far to seek for reasons of
Ejection, as that after almost half ten days more study all they could insert
in their writ was, For opposing the proceedings of Parliament, and other
Scandalous Actions in the University; See Pref.
Their tongues thereby testifying their minds, though perhaps out of
incogitancy, which are so furiously set upon their great work of Reformation as
to punish the opposing Scandalous Actions, with the loss of all a man's
livelihood. Whether they were ashamed of the phrase or not we know not; but
they had very good reason to be ashamed of the Act, being so different from all
show of Justice, as to enjoin impossibilities in commanding men to return
within twelve days, after issuing the summons, which at that time were above
two hundred miles distant, and had two Armies to pass through all the ways: or
enjoining them to be resident at Cambridge, whom themselves at the same time
kept fast Prisoners at London: And yet for nonappearance, for no man knows any
other cause, these must be Ejected.

But though this be not so plausible, yet they have a sure reserve, their
Solemn League and Covenant, which coming from their dear Brethren of Scotland,
they think no penalty too great for refusal of it: And this, because it carries
in its frontispiece a pretense of Rrformation, comes not alone, but (though
without any visible Order) accompanied with a new Legislative fangle called an
Oath of discovery, but indeed was an Oath of Treachery, a wild unlimited device
to call whom they would before them, and make them accuse their nearest and
dearest Friends, Benefactors, Tutors, and Masters, and betray the Members and
Acts of their several Societies, manifestly contrary to our Peaceable Statutes
formerly sworn unto by us, which provide against all faction and sedition,
which these men only hunt after, [ viz. Non revelabis aliquod secretum
Collegii; Non malum aut damnum inferes Collegio aut cuilibet Sociorum:] And
apparently reviving the Oath Ex Offishio, (as their Commissioners spell it)
abolished this present Parliament, to accuse our selves: For what is it else to
accuse our own Societies and Corporations, whereof our selves are parts and
members?

And though we would not any whit derogate from the Oath Ex Officio as it is
used this day in most Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths, nay even in
Scotland and Geneva, and may be of excellent use, if not stretched beyond the
due limits of Law: yet this Oath of Discovery, all, we think, except one or
two, refused, perceiving that thereby the design of a second Century was to be
promoted; for they finding no accusation or crime objected against any of us,
where with to color their ugly purposes which they had already plotted in
private against us, and yet their Covenant must be for Reformation, they
resolved to shrive us with an Auricular Confession sanctified to the Cause,
that so we might help them out with their malice, which was otherwise like to
be born blind, though hitherto it has been Eagle-eyed over our most venial
slips; And forthwith upon refusal of this Oath was their Solemn League and
Covenant urged upon us.

We cannot but signify by the way, that seeing it must be tendered to the
University, as their Printed instructions told us, we hoped it should have been
to the whole body Statuteably assembled, either to admit of, or otherwise
humbly to show reasons of denial; but they were wise enough to foresee what
entertainment such stuff was like to find from all the Learned men of so famous
an Unversity, and were not willing it should be blasted with their Universal
refusal. And therefore contrary to our hopes, a selected number of particular
men are culled out, partly as the lot sell, for it much resembled a lottery,
but chiefly of such whom they most redoubted, and of whom by some petty
information, they had received a black Character of Loyalty termed Malignancy,
and to these, yet severally, was tendered the Oath of discovery, and after that
the Covenant.

And though indeed we should, by Gods help, as often have refused it, as it
should have been offered, yet after one single denial, without a second tender,
contrary to the Eleventh Article of the Instructions, a warrant was straightway
issued forth under the Earl of Manchester's hand and seal for our Ejection and
Banishment from the University of Cambridge for refusing to take the Solemn
League and Covenant, and other Misdemeanors in the said University, which were
surely no other than the denial of the Oath of discovery, for not one of us who
were there present, had any one accusation brought, much less proved against
him, when we appeared upon their Summons. And without any delay our names are
cut out of the College Tables, and we strictly commanded in three days space to
quit the University and Town under pain of Imprisonment and Plunder, if any
thing was left.

And it is here not to be passed by, that whereas by the Laws of the Land we
were ever reputed to have as good an interest in our several fellowships during
life, as any of our fellow Subjects in his fee Simple, provided we carried our
selves according to those Statutes by which our several Colleges were
respectively to be governed, yet now we are utterly deprived of them by the
mear Arbitrary power of one of our fellow Subjects without transgressing of any
one Statute, or being called to answer for any pretended offense whatsoever.
Nay, so little was Propriety valued, that a pair of M. Ash, and M. Good.
Camp-Chaplains, or one of them, might expunge, eject, and banish whom they
pleased, especially, such as would not sacrifice their Loyalty and consciences
to the nerves and cement of this Rebellion, called the Covenant. For instance,
when a Warrant for Ejection of certain Fellows of S. John's College was issued
out under hand and seal, and their names expressly mentioned in it, yet Mr. Ash
knows very well who it was that expunged Mr. Henmans name, and put in M.
Botelers, without so much as writing the Warrant over again.

And now (seeing what courses were taken) it will not seem strange to the
Reader, to hear that no less than 32. Fellows, (together with the Master) have
been thrust out of the said College, the emoluments of whose places have been
ever since swallowed up by not half the number, and not content with that
neither. And in an other they have made a through Reformation, Queens Coll.
Root and Branch, leaving neither Fellow nor Scholar. In others indeed they
have left perhaps one or two, (or more as they see good) like Gibeonites, to
hew wood and draw water, till such time as they have discovered unto them all
the mysteries concerning their College Revenues, and by that time they will
find enough godly men of their own Tribe, Learned enough to pocket the profits of
two Fellowships apiece, which is the end of all this blessed Reformation. Thus
is their old pretense of Regulation vanished, in place whereof their true
intention of a total Extirpation of the whole ancient Body of the University
does now so plainly appear, that they which run may read it; which though a
great many would not believe, till by woeful experience they found it, yet was
it conspicuous enough from the very beginning to any that was but tolerably
provident in matters of this nature.

For it was hardly possibly that Cambridge should be free from these two crying
sins of Sacrilege and Rebellion, which the devil has long endeavored to make
this whole Kingdom guilty of: and to that end (mis-calling them by the names of
Religion and Liberty) had masked under the counterfeit vizard of a Covenant for
Reformation: by which means though the simplicity of the vulgar was much
abused, to the extreme hazard of this once flourishing Church and State; yet
seeing it could not be able to endure the strict search, which in such an
University of all sorts of Learned and conscientious Men it was not like to
escape; it could not be otherwise expected, but that those who were his
instruments herein, would lay a sure foundation, and (how moderate soever their
pretenses were) reform Root and Branch, as they called it, that seeing they
could not make the University of Cambridge to Rebel by taking their Covenant,
they might at least make a Rebellious University at Cambridge which should take
it.

And to this end those new intruders which falsely call themselves Masters and
Fellows of our several Colleges, instead of those solemn Oaths which our pious
and prudent Founders and Legislators enjoined to be taken, (and without taking
of which, no man can pretend any right to any of their foundations) only take
their Covenant again, and make a Protestation to reform all our wholesome Laws
and Statutes according to that Covenant.

A Covenant with Hell, begot between Munster and Mecha, by the help of a
Jesuit, sthe most impious and unchristian confederacy that their grand Master
the devil could contrive: the chief end whereof is to dethrone the Lords
anointed, and throw down the Church and Apostolical Government thereof, and to
force not only their Fellow Subjects to contradict their Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, but even their most gracious Sovereign to perjury, in violating
this his sacred Oath which he solemnly made at his Coronation. And to complete
that their most horrid and heinous sin, to join in Arms with a foreign Nation,
to lay desolate their own native Country, to stain this Earth with the Blood of
their own Countrymen and Fellow Subjects, and to expose the treasures of
England, the Cream of these fruitful Valleys, to the empty and hungry maw of a
Rebellious Scot: and then vow never to have peace, but what shall be written in
the Blood of their Enemies (His Majesty and His Loyal Subjects,) and lastly,
most cruelly and wickedly to exhort and solicit all Protestants in the
Christian World to undertake the like course with them by rising in Rebellious
Arms; thereby exposing the Throats and Lives of all our Brethren the
Protestants in France and else where to the just jealousy of their several
Princes. And yet (for sooth) this Covenant is made the foundation of the great
work of their glorious Reformation, and under pretense of refusing this we must
be banished, and thrust out of all we have.

It will not be more than what upon trial will be found true, if we here
mention a mystery which many (we conceive) will not a little wonder at, viz.
That this Covenant, for which all this persecution has been, consists of 6.
Articles, and those Articles of 666. words. This is not the first time that a
persecution has arisen in England upon 6. Articles, (witness those in the
Reign of King Henry the 8 th. See Mr. Fox, Act. and Mon. Vol. 2. p. 443. Edit.
London. 1631.
) But as for the number of the Beast, to answer directly to the words of those
six Articles, it is a thing, which (considering Gods blessed providence in
every particular thing) has made many of us and others seriously and often to
reflect upon it; though we were never so superstitiously Caballistical as to
ascribe much to numbers. This discovery (we confess) was not made by any of us,
but by a very judicious and worthy Divine, formerly of our University, Mr.
Geast.
and then a Prisoner (for his Conscience) within the precincts of it, and not
yet restored to his liberty, but removed to London. And therefore we shall
forbear to insist any farther, either upon it, or the occasion of it.

For our own particulars we shall only add thus much, that seeing some of our
own Reasons with which we had Armed our selves against that Misery of iniquity
have since that time been published to the World (in such humility of phrase as
well became Christian sufferers, though in such distraction as may sufficiently
testify who were the Authors and what their Condition) we appeal to any who
with Judgment and moderation has or shall read the same; whether we have
causlesly and foolishly trifled away those fair advantages wherewith God by the
means of our renowned Benefactors had endowed us, for the advancement of his
Glory, and further propagation of Learning and true Religion; or whether we had
not rather suffered an unjust deprival of all our livelyhoods under the
merciless hands of cruel Tyrants who neither fear God nor respect the just
scruples of tender Consciences.

For when a Member of our University was brought upon this occasion before the
Earl of Manchester, Mr. Baldero.
and being not satisfied in Conscience, desired his Lordship that his Chaplain
(then present) might resolve him in some Scruples about it; to this motion
(being then thought not unreasonable by his Lordship, and much pressed by some
that were there present) his Reverend Chaplain Learnedly replied before the
whole Company, that he came not thither to resolve Men's Consciences, but to
Preach to his Lordship. Whereupon the Gentleman was not long after sent up
Prisoner to London by the said Earl for tendering the Reasons of his refusing
the Covenant, though invited and required thereunto by his Lordship: And there
without farther hearing committed to Prison, where he continued a long time at
excessive charges, which is all the satisfaction he could find (or any other
can expect) from them, for the scruples of a tender Conscience.

Thus are we imprisoned or banished for our consciences, being not so much as
accused of any thing else, only suspected of Loyalty to our King, and Fidelity
to our Mother the Church of England; and not only so, but quite stripped of all
our livelihood, and exposed to beggary, having nothing left us to sustain the
necessities of nature, and many of us no friends to go to, but distitute and
forlorn, not knowing whither to bend one step when we set footing out of
Cambridge, having one only companion, which will make us rejoice in our utmost
afflictions, viz. A clear Conscience in a righteous cause: humbly submitting
our selves to the chastisement of the Almighty, who after he has tried us,
will at last cast his rods into the fire.

As for us, God forbid that we should take up any railing or cursing, who are
commanded only to bless: we are so far from that, that we have rather chosen to
let the names of our greatest persecuters rot in our ruins, than so much as
mention them with our Pen, save only where necessity compelled us unto it.

But though we spare their names, we hope we may without offense to any
describe their qualities: And therefore if Posterity shall ask, Who thrust out
one of the eyes of this Kingdom? Who made Eloquence dumb, Philosophy sottish,
widowed the Arts, and drove the Muses from their Ancient habitation? Who
plucked the Reverend and Orthodox Professors out of their Chairs, and silenced
them in Prison or their graves? Who turned Religion into Rebellion, and changed
the Apostolical Chair into a Desk for Blasphemy, and tore the garland from off
the head of Learning, to place it on the dull brows of Disloyal Ignorance? If
they shall ask, who made those Ancient and beautiful Chapels, the sweet
remembrancers and Monuments of our forefathers Charity, and kind fomenters of
their Childrens devotion, to become ruinous heaps of dust and stones? or who
unhived those numerous swarms of laboring Bees, which used to drop honey-dews
over all this Kingdom, to place in their rooms swarms of senseless Drones? It Is
quickly answered, those that were, who endeavoring to share three Crowns, and
put them in their own pockets, have transformed this free Kingdom into a large
Goal, to keep the liberty of the Subject: They who maintain 100000. Robbers and
Murderers by Sea and Land, to protect our lives, and the propriety of our
goods: That have gone a King-catching these three years, hunting their most
gracious Sovereign like a Partridge on the mountains in his own defense; They
who have possessed themselves of His Majesty's Towns, Navy, and Magazines, and
Robbed him of all his Revenues, to make him a glorious King: Who have
multiplied Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Leagues and Covenants for the ease of
tender consciences: Filling all Pulpits with Jugglers for the Cause, canting
Sedition, Atheism, and Rebellion, to root out Popery and Babylon, and settle
the Kingdom of Christ: who from a trembling guilt of a legal trial have engaged
three flourishing Kingdoms, and left them weltring in their own Blood; They
(lastly) which when they had glutted themselves with spoil and rapine, hissed
for a foreign Viper to come and eat up the bowels of their dear Mother: The
very same have stopped the mouth of all Learning, (following here in the example
of their elder Brother the Turk) lest any should be wiser than themselves, or
Posterity know what a World of wickedness they have committed.

And now seeing they are not content to deprive us of our Estates, but (which
is much more grievous unto us) have also Robbed us of our good names, branding
all of us in our several writs of Ejectment with a black Character of
Misdemeanors in general (and yet not any one particular was alleged against
any one of us, which were then there, much less offered to be proved by any one
single witness, although especial care was taken by an Ordinance for appointing
a Committee to sit at Cambridge for that purpose) we challenge and conjure them
as they will one day answer for this slander and oppression, that they declare
and prove what those Misdemeanors are; which if they do, the shame and guilt
will be ours: if not (as we are confident they cannot) we must appeal herein
from these unjust Judges to the impartial Tribunal of the righteous Judge of
Heaven and Earth, who knows our integrity, and to whom we submit our selves and
cause, Humbly beseeching him not to lay this Sin to their charge. For though
for our many sins against him we may justly receive at his hands, heavier
Judgments than these: yet our Innocence will plead Not Guilty, to the face of
any Man who shall object against us any Civil Misdemeanors, whereby we can more
justly be deprived of our Fellowships than any free Subject in England of his
fee Simple, if they please to say he is guilty of Misdemeanors.

And as it has pleased our gracious Master (whose Ministers we are) to make us
examples (though but of suffering) to the rest of our Brethren: So we hope he
will continue unto us his grace of humilation under his mighty hand, as an
earnest of his exalting us in due time: And in the interim, that he will lay no
more upon us, than he shall be pleased to strengthen our infirmities to bear:
And that he will still preserve unto us a good conscience, that whereas our
persecutors speak evil of us as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely
accuse our good conversation in Christ.

FINIS
Mercurius Belgicus: OR, A brief Chronology of the Battles, Sieges, Conflicts,
and other most remakable passages from the beginning of this Rebellion, to the
25 th. of March, 1646. Together with A Catalogue of the Persons of Quality
slain on both sides:

CICERO. Incerti sunt exitus pugnarum, Marsque esi communis, qui saepe
spoliantem, jam and exultantem evertit, and perculit ab abjecto.

Printed in the Year, 1685.

The Preface.
Readers,
YOU have here a canded and impartial Epitomy of an unnatural War, Subjects
banding against their lawful Prince, Brother against Brother, and Father
against Son. Read but the said ensuing Story, and therein consider the number
and quality of Persons slain, the destruction of Houses and Families, the
desolation of Cities and Towns, the increase of Widows and Orphans, the Tyranny
and inhumanity of our new Legislators over their own Fellow Subjects, and you
will easily conclude of these, as Cicero did of Sylla's time,

-- Nemo illo invito, nec bona, nec patriam, nec vitam retinere potueirt.

In earnest, it may well be wondered whence these men have their minds, God, nor
man, nor Nature ever made them thus. To be short, the Reader may here see the
flux and reflux of Fortune de la Guerre, now this party flourishes, and that
goes down, anon that flourishes, and this goes down, as if the guilt of our
sins were drawing a heavy Judgment from Heaven upon this Land, and these Rebels
were ordained for the instruments of it. But let us hope for better. And
particularly, that God in the richness of his mercy, will look down upon these
macerated Kingdoms, and periodize these distractions, That Religion may again
flourish in its purity, maugre the Plots and impieties of all Seditiaries and
Schismatics, That His Sacred Majesty may be re-established in His just Rights
and Prerogatives, that Parliaments may move in their own and known Center, the
Ancient Laws of the Land reinforced and freed from fellow subjects Tyranny and
Arbitration, and the Subject re-estated in his Ancient Liberties* freed from
Murder, Rapine and Plunder: which that we may quickly see, let it be the
Subject of ever good Christian Prayer.

Memorable OCCURRENCES since the beginning of this REBELLION.
Anno Dom. 1641.
IN December 1641. The House of Commons published a Remonstrance of the State
of the Kingdom, therein setting forth all the errors of his Majesty's
Government, a mere design to alienate the affection of his Subjects from him.

The tenth of January following, his Majesty with the Queen, Prince, and Duke
of York, left White Hall, and went to Hampton Court to avoid the danger of
those frequent tumults then hazarding the safety of his Royal Person.

February the 23 d. the Queens Majesty took shipping at Dover, having been
driven before from White Hall by the frequent tumults of the Rebels, And soon
after His Majesty went to New Market and from thence to York, where (after the
Rebels had Guards for three Months before) the Gentry of the Country raised a
Guard for his Majesty's Person.

Anno Dom. 1642.
MAY the 20 th. it was voted by both Houses, That the King intended to levy
War against the Parliament: which they did on purpose to excuse themselves for
raising a Rebellion against His Majesty, as appeared within few days after.

July the second the Kings ship called the Providence, Landed in the Creek of
Kenningham near Hull, till which time His Majesty had not a Barrel of Powder,
nor any Arms, or Ammunition whatsoever.

July the 12 th. the pretended two Houses Voted, that the Earl of Essex should
be General of their Army, and that they would live and die with him.

August the first, the Earl of Essex caused all the men then raised (being in
number about 10000) to be committed to Officers, and divided into Regiments,
which men had been raising ever since the 12 th. of July 1642. at which time he
was made General of the Rebels.

August the sixth the Earl of Bedford having fruitlessely besieged the Lord
Marquess of Hertford in Sherburn Castle for four days before, retreated to
Yevell; the Noble Marquess sallied after him, and with a small number fell on
that great body of the Rebels, Killed above 140 whereof 9 Commanders, took
diverse Prisoners and routed the rest; so as he marched away, and after divided
his small Forces, going himself into Wales, and Sir Ralph (now Lord) Hopton
into Cornwall, of both which there followed so good an effect.

August the 22 d. His Majesty set up his Standard Royal at Nottingham, for
raising of Forces to suppress the Rebels then marching against him.

September the 23 d. Prince RUPERT with about 11 Troops of Horse gave a great
overthrow to the Rebels in Wikefield near Worcester, where Colonel Sands that
commanded in chief, received his mortal wound, Major Douglas (a Scot) and
diverse other Captains and Officers slain and drowned, Captain Wingate a Member
of the House of Commons, with four Coronets taken, and two more torn in pieces.
This body of the Rebels was observed to be the flower of their Cavalry.

October the 23 d. was that signal great battle fought between Keynton and
Edg-hill by his Majesty's Army, and that of the Rebels led by the Earl of
Essex: wherein the Rebels lost above 70 Colors of Coronets and Ensigns, and
His Majesty but only 16 Ensigns and not one Coronet. The exact number that were
slain on both sides in this Battle is not known: But it is certain that the
Rebels lost above three for one. Men of eminence of his Majesty's Forces, who
were slain in the Battle were, the two Noble and valiant Lords, Robert Earl of
Lindsey Lord High Chamberlain of England, and George Lord D. Aubigney Brother
to the Duke of Richmond, and Lenox, Sir Edmund Verney, Knight Marshal to His
Majesty, with some other worthy Centlemen, and Soldiers, but besides these
three named there was not one Noble Man or Knight killed, which was an
extraordinary mercy of Almighty God, considering what a glorious sight of
Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Knights and Gentlemen of
all Orders, were not only present but engaged themselves against the Rebels as
much or more than Common Soldiers, which they most cheerfully did by example of
His sacred MAJESTY, whose Royal undaunted Courage put life into every man,
exposing His Sacred Person to so much danger as all good men do tremble to
remember; His Royal Sons (the two young Princes) CHARLES Prince, of Wales, and
JAMES Duke of York, being also in the field in very much danger, if God whose
cause it was) had not covered their heads in the day of Battle. The Rebels as
they had few men of quality to lose, so those they had, were sensible of their
guilt, which then they expressed by their flight, some sculking into holes and
Saw-pits, and others running out before they were well in the field. They lost
of note the Lord St. John, eldest Son to the Earl of Bullingbrooke, Sir Charles
Essex, with many inferior Officers.

October the 27 th. His Majesty to complete his Victory in Keynton field, drew
his whole Army before Banbury; but after the firing of one piece of Ordnance,
the Rebels submitted to His Majesty's mercy (which were in number about 800
Foot (of the Earl of Peterboroughs, and Lord Says Regiments) with 10 Colors,
and a Troop of Horse) and yielded the Town and Castle to the King: at which
time the Earl of Essex with his shattered Force, were crept over the River Aven
into Warwick (full eight Miles backward from the place where they were beaten)
there to secure those few he had left under the protection of the strong
fituate Town and Castle, leaving behind him above 20 Wagons loaded with Powder
and other Ammunition.

November the 12 th. His Majesty after four hours fight forced the Town of
Brainford, where Lieutenant Colonel Quarles that commanded in chief was slain,
and at least 400 more of the Rebels killed and drowned, as many taken
Prisoners, with little loss to His Majesty's part, these thus taken and killed,
were observed to be the best foot Soldiers the Rebels had.

November the 13 th. (being Sunday) certain of the Rebels had come down the
Thames from Kingston, with 13 pieces of Ordnance, which (so soon as they could
see) they fired against Sion house, and His Majesty's Train of Artillery; but
did little or no harm. Whereupon Order was presently given for drawing down
some Pieces into the Meadow and to the River side against them; which was
accordingly done: and likewise a Demy-Cannon planted near the South-end of the
Town. All which were so judiciously plied, that they shot through their Boats
and Barges, and at last fired the Powder in one of them, which blew up diverse
of the Rebels: Those Rebels which escaped took them to their heels, leaving
behind them their mangled Boats and Barges, with all their Ordnance, and the
remainder of their Ammunition, on which His Majesty presently seized, and
afterward made an honorable and safe retreat to the City of Oxford.

December the 5 th. His Majesty's Forces under the command of Lieutenant
General Wilmot, having his own Regiment of Horse, with the Lord Grandisons, and
Lord Digbies, and Sir William Pennimans, and Colonel Blagues Regiments of Foot,
and Colonel Ushers, and Colonel Grayes of Dragoons, took the Town of
Marlborough, defended by Robert Ramsey (a Scot) and about 500 Foot; Ramsey and
diverse of the chief Rebels brought Prisoners to Oxford; all their Arms taken,
and four Colors.

On the same 5 th. day, the Earl of Newcastle laid siege to Tadcaster, where at
that time was all the strength of the Rebels in Yorkshire (excepting Hull) and
by several assaults on the Town (from Ten of the Clock in the morning, till
Seven at night) killed Cap. Lyster, and about 60 more of the Rebels, who found
such hot service that they stole away in the night to Cawood and Selby, leaving
Tadcaster fortified for His Majesty's service.

January the 19 th. a great Victory was obtained by the Lord Hopton, near
Bodmin, in the County of Cornwall, where was slain in the pursuit 200 of the
Rebels, and 700 taken Prisoners (amongst whom was Sir Shilston Colmadee) and
eight Colors; good store of Ammunition, an five excellent brass Guns, and one
of Iron.

January the 22 d. the Lord Hopton assulted Saltash, forced the Town, where he
took Ten pieces of Ordnance, 700 more Prisoners, 4000 Arms, and a Ship with
sixteen pieces of Ordnance.

January the 27 th. certain of the Rebels under the command of Master John
Hampden, to the number of 1800 Foot, and seven or eight: Troops of Horse, with
two pieces of Ordnance, came before Brill, and made an assault upon it: But
were so bravely repulsed by His Majesty's forces there, under the command of
Sir Gilbert Gerard (the then Governor thereof) that they made all possible
have away; His Majesty's Horse having the pursuit of them, for above 4 miles,
about 80 of them being sound dead, and betwixt 40 or 50 men wounded, which they
had left together in a private House.

February the 1 st. Lieutenant General King, and Lieutenant Ge^eral Goring
coming from Newcastle with a great Convoy, of much Arms and Ammunition: and
being faced at Yarum, with 400 Foot, three Troops of Horse, and two pieces of
Ordnance of the Rebels, fell upon them, slew many, took the rest of the Foot,
and most of the Horse Prisoners, with their Ordnance and Baggage.

February the 2 d. Cyrencester, (or Cicester) in Gloucester-shire was taken by
his Highness Prince Rupert, with the loss of less than 20 men of his Army,
there being above 300 of the Rebels slain, and near 1200 taken Prisoners. Of
Colors taken, one Coronet, two of Dragoons, and fourteen Foot Ensigns,
together with all their Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

February the 13 th. the QUEENS Majesty left the Hague, and went to Sciveling.
And on the 16 day Her Majesty embarked again in the Princess Royal of Great
Britain. And on the Sunday after came within sight of Flamborough-head.

February the 20 th She cast Anchor in the Harbor of Burlington-bay. And the
22 d. day following (upon fight of 1000 of his excellency the Earl of
Newcastle's Horse) landed at Burlington Key.

Fibruary the 24 th. in the morning four Ships and a Pinnace, in the Rebels
service, (which came over night into the Road) made above 100 great shot at the
houses in the Key, for two hours, shooting Cross-bar-shot, and Bullets of
twelve pound weight, all of them aiming so near as they could, at the house
were the Queen lay. Insomuch that her sacred Majesty was forced to make what
have she could out of Her Bed, and to get under an hill to save Her life from
the fury of those Bloody Rebels, who endeavored to Murder Her. But God
Almighty preserved Her Majesty both by Sea and Land.

March the 18 th. and 19 th. was a great Battle on Hopton-heath in
Staffordshire, wherein Gell and Brereton (two cowardly Rebels) were routed by
His Majesty's Forces under the command of the Right Honorable Spencer then
Earl of Northampton, in which fight, above 300 of the Rebels were taken and
killed; at the least 200 more wounded; abve 300 of their Horse taken, four
pieces of Cannon, and a case of Drakes, with some Ammunition, here was the most
Noble and valiant Earl of Northampton unfortunately slain, with C. Middleton
and some few others on His Majesty's side.

March the 23 d. Grantham was taken in, by some of His Majesty's Forces under
the Command of Colonel Charles Cavendish: wherein were taken 360 Prisoners,
with all the Captains and Officers, three foot Ensigns, two Cornets, together
with three loads of Arms and Ammunition. And afterward the works demolished.

Anno Dom. 1643.
APRIL the third Prince Rupert entered, and possessed that seditious Town of
Burmingham, wherein was 300 Foot, and two Troops of Horse, who being gallantly
charged by the Welch-men, in less than half an hour forsook their Breast-works,
and retired to their Barricadoes within the Town, wherein they found such
slender defense, that they took them to their heels, and that so fast, that
though they were pursued as soon as the Prince had possessed the Town, yet few
of their Horse were overtaken, only about 80 of the Rebels were killed, and as
many Prisoners taken; together with about 150 Muskets, and betwixt 4 and 500
Swords, and three Colors; In this service the Noble Farl of Denbigh received a
wound, whereof he afterward died.

April the 11 th. there was a fight near unto Ancaster in the County of
Lincoln, betwixt the Kings Forces under the command of Colonel Cavendish, and
the Rebels of that County, under young Hotham (their then General) in which
fight the most part of the Rebels were slain, and taken Prisoners, their
General put to flight, and their whole Body totally routed.

On the 21 st. day (being Friday) the Close at Lichfield (after three weeks
siege, and the loss of some men) was yielded up to Prince Rupert, together with
the Ordnance, and Ammunition, all sorss of Arms (except the Horse-mens Arms,
and a certain number of Muskets) and all such Treasure which had been formerly
conveyed in thither and did not properly belong to the Soldiers there. These
Soldiers were part of those Forces under the command of the late Lord Brook (a
great Leader in this Bebellion, and a maliciious enemy to the Church) who was
killed in his assaulting this Church by a shot into the eye, on S. Chads day
who was the first Bishop of this See, in memory of whom this Cathedral was
built, and called S. Chads Church.

The last day of April his Excellency the Earl of Newcastles Forces,
encountered with, and totally routed a whole Body of the Rebels (consisting of
above 3000 men) which were going to relieve the Town of Leeds, killed 150 of
them in the place, took 240 Prisoners, three pieces of Ordnance, together with
all their Victual and Ammunition.

May the 6 th. James Earl of Northampton (the true Heir of his Fathers Loyalty
and valor) encountered with a Body of the Rebels in Middleton Cheny
Town-field, near Banbury (consisting of about 700 Foot, and five Troops of
Horse) where he wholly routed their Foot, killed 217 upon the plain, took above
300 Prisoners, all their Ordnance and Ammunition, 416 Muskets, 150 Pikes, and
above 500 Swords, pursued the fugitive Horse, and killed, and took many of
them: the rest made what have they could to Northampton. In this fight his
Lordship lost but three men, and those not of any note: Nor had above one
Officer so much as hurt.

Upon the 16 th. of May the Lord Hopton assaulted the great Rebellious Body
then entrenched near Stratton on the Borders of Devonshire, fought with them
full ten hours, and having spent his Ammunition, insomuch that he had not
powder left to serve one hour longer, fell upon the Rebels with Swords, Pikes,
and Muskets stocks: And (with unexpressible valor) wholly routed the Rebels
Army, killed many hundreds of them in the place; wounded many more; took 1700
Prisoners, whereof above 30 Commanders, all their Cannon, being 11 pieces of
Brass Ordnance, and 4 of Iron; 2 Mortar pieces; 75 Barrels of Powder, with Shot
and Match proportionable, betwixt 2 and 3000 Arms; and 3000l in money; there
being not above 46 of the Kings Forces killed and hurt, and amongst those not
any one Commander or Gentleman of Quality.

May the 23 d. The Queen was most traitorously voted a Traitor, for her love
so exemplarily expressed to the King Her Husband.

May the 30 th. Master Robert Yeomans and Master George Boucher, two Citizens
of Bristoll, were there publicly Murdered by Colonel Nathanial Fines for
their Loyalty to His Majesty.

June the 18 th. 1643. His Highness Prince Rupert beat up the Quarters of the
Rebels at Postcombe and Chinner in Oxfordshire, killed some 50 of the Rebels
there Quartered, took about 120 Prisoners, almost all their Horses and Arms,
and three of Sir Samuel Lukes Dragoon-Cornets: obtained a great victory in
Chalgrove field, and utterly defeated the Rebels Horsemen and Dragooners, slew
diverse of their Commanders, especially Colonel John Hampden (one of the five
Members accused of high Treason) who in this fight received his mortal wound,
in this very Chalgrove field, where he first Mustered, and drew up men in Arms
to put in execution the Rebellious Ordinance for the Militia.

On Friday the last of June: His Excellency the Earl of Newcastle obtained a
great victory against the Northern Rebels under the Lord Fairfax upon
Aderton-heath, within the County of York. In which fight my Lord soon put the
Rebels into such confusion, that they could not be reduced again into any
Order; until he had gained all their five pieces of Cannon; which he presently
turned against them; the sight whereof did so terrify them, that they made
what have they could toward Leedes. But finding that his Excellencies horse
had intercepted that passage; their last shift was to recover Bradford, which
was done in such a disorderly manner, that his Excellency in the pursuit of
them killed and took above 2000, whereof above 1500 Prisoners. As for their
General Fairfax, he with much ado made shift with one poor Troop of Horse to
get (at night) into Leeds, leaving the rest to the mercy of the Victor.

July the 1 st. The Earl of Essex being with his Army at Tame in Oxfordshire,
sent Colonel Middleton with 500 horse and Dragoons to Padbury to waylay Prince
Rupert and his Forces from returning from Buckingham to Oxford, while Essex
with his Army fell on the Prince, but Sir Charles Lucas by his Scouts
discovered the Rebels design, and accordingly met them with three Troops of his
own Regiment, wherewith he routed all Middletons 400 horse and Dragoons,
pursued them to their pass at Werthillbrook, followed them through the foard
(in despite of all their Musquettiers there) slew above 100. took 40
Prisoners, and prevented the Rebels hopeful design.

The same day the Marquess of Newcastle besieged Bradford, bestowed upon it
above 40 shot from his great Artillery; and the morrow after made himself
Master of the Town. In which he took 2000 Prisoners, with all the Horse Arms,
and Ammunition, which either the Rebels found in the Town, or brought thither
with them.

Hereupon the Rebels deserted the Town of Hallifax, and presently after Sir
Hugh Cholmely fell upon Beverly, and took it for his Majesty.

July the 5 th. Master Tomkins and Master Challoner were most barbarously
Murdered by the Rebels in London for their Fidelity to his Majesty; And the
same fifth day, there was a fight on Landsdownhill, betwixt His Majesty's
Forces under the command of the Marquess of Hartford, and the Rebels under Sir
William Waller; who (after 11 hours fight) stuck their lighted matches in the
hedges, and ran quite away, leaving behind them above 500 Muskets, 14 barrels
of Powder, a whole Stand of Pikes, with good store of all sorts of Arms. Their
Foot were absolutely routed, and all dispersed: his loss of Officers and horse
was great, many hundreds of his men were killed; His Majesty's forces having
the pillage of the field. And here was that most valiant Knight Sir Bevill
Greenvill unfortunately slain in the Front of his men, with some others of less
Quality.

The 13 th. of July about four a Clock in the Afternoon the King and Queens
Majesty met at Edgehill, where the Rebels had received their main overthrow:
and the same day and hour His Majesty's Forces under the Command of the Lord
Wilmot Lieutenant General of the Horse, the Earl of Carnarvon, the Earl of
Crawford, and the Lord Biron obtained another great and strange victory upon
Round-way-down, with 1500 horse, and two small pieces of Cannon only: wherewith
they totally routed the Rebels Army under the Command of the old-beaten Soldier
Sir William Waller, consisting of above 2500 Foot, and 2000 Horse, besides 500
Dragoons, with 8 pieces of Brass Ordnance: slew 600 of them in the place, took
above 900 Prisoners, all their Cannon, Arms, Ammunition, Wagons, Baggage, and
Victual, 28 Foot-Ensigns, 9 Cornets, and left not one Rebel, but what was
either killed, taken Prisoner, or narrowly, escaped.

Upon the 24 th. of July his Highness Prince Rupert having joined his Forces to
his Brothers, and the whole body of their strength being brought together, they
sat down before Bristol, and began their Batteries. And the 26 day (with
unexpressible valor) they gained the Outworks, and the 27 day following the
City and Castle was delivered up to His sacred Majesty, with all the Ordnance,
Arms and Ammunition. At this siege were slain on His Majesty's part Sir Nicolas
Slanning, one of the Lunsfords, with some few others, and that valiant Lord,
the Lord Grandison, did here receive a wound.

August the 3 d. Corf-castle in the Isle of Purbecke (which had been so often,
before besieged by Sir Walter Earl) but had always beaten off the Rebels, and
killed their Cannoniers, was once more fallen upon by the Rebels, who were so
bravely received by Captain Laurence, that 60 of them were killed in the place:
the rest hearing of the most valiant Earl of Carnarvons approach, ran away.

Soon after, the Earl of Carnarvon, Summoned Dorchester, which was thereupon
delivered up to his Lordship, with all the Arms, Ammunition, and Cannon: which
were disposed of for His Majesty's use.

About the 9 th. of August, the Castle and Isle of Portland were reduced again
under His Majesty's command; And the Town and Haven of Weymouth and Melcombe
submitted to His Majesty.

August the 20 th. Colonel Jo. Digby defeated the Rebels of Biddeford and
Barnstable, killed 100 of their Foot, took 211 Officers and common Soldiers
Prisoners, (most of which were miserably wounded) two pieces of Ordnance, six
barrels of Powder, 400 weight of Bullet, 200 and a half of Match, and above 300
Arms; besides all the Foot-Officers horses: Pursued their horse to the very
works of Biddeford, and returned victoriously, without the loss of more than
one man, not one of the rest of his Soldiers being so much as hurt all that day.

Upon the 2 d. and 3 d, of September, the Towns of Biddeford, Appleford, and
Barnstable, delivered up their several Garrisons to His Majesty.

Upon the same 3 d. of September, Prince Maurice gave a very hot assault upon
the City of Exeter, and battered the Walls, whereupon the Rebels desired
Parley; but refusing the conditions, the assault was afterward eagerly
pursued, and the next day after won the great Sconce, turned the Ordnance there
against the Town. Whereupon the Rebels craved to be admitted unto those
conditions which before they rejected, and obtained the same, delivered up the
Town and Castle to the Prince his Highness, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and
Ammunition, after it had been blockt up and besieged about six weeks.

September the 17 th. the Rebels Army (stealing out of Gloucestershire toward
London) surprised part of a new raised Regiment of His Majesty's horse at
Cirencester, but were overtaken by Prince Rupert with His Majesty's horse, near
Auburne in Wiltshire, where he gave them two charges, the one by a commanded
Party under Colonel Urrey, the other by the Queens Regiment, commanded by the
Lord Iermin, who performed it so well on the Rebels whole Army, that many great
bodies of Foot were routed, and many of them slain in the place, without any
loss to His Majesty's Forces, save two common Soldiers killed, and the Marquess
de la Vienville taken Prisoner, (who was afterward Murdered by the Rebels in
cold Blood) and the Lord Digby and Lord Iermyn lightly wounded: by which two
charges the Rebels Army was so retarded, that His Majesty had time to overtake
them with his Foot, and on Wednesday after (the 20 th. of this month) upon an
Hill (near Newberry and Enborne-heath) His Majesty fought with the Rebels, who
were seated in the most advantageous place imaginable: yet in despite of all
their Cannon, Foot, and Horse, His Majesty beat them from their ground; gained
the Hill, and one piece of their brass Ordnance, and quickly routed all their
horse upon the Heath. The most that were killed in this fight of His Majesty's
Forces, exceeded not the number of 300, though above 600 of the Rebels were
slain, and a very great number wounded. In this fight were slain the most Noble
and valiant Earl of Carnarvon, the Earl of Sunderland, the Lord Viscount
Faulkland, Col. Morgan, Captain William Symcots, with some other Gentlemen and
Commanders. After this fight the Rebels were further pursued, and routed again,
so as they fled into Reading, where they durst not stay, but left the Town for
His Majesty.

September the 25 th. That pernicious confederacy, called the National
covenant, was taken by the Members of the House of Commons at Westminster, in
S. Margarets Church.

October the 18 th. the Pince of Harcourt Lord Ambassador Extraordinary from
the French King and Queen Regent, (after he had been most barbarously used in
his passage by the Rebels) came safe into Oxford, where he had entertainment
more suitable to the worth of so great a Personage.

In this month of October, His Majesty's Forces under the command of the Lord
Widdrington, and Colonel Henderson a Scot received a defeat near Horn-castle in
Lincolnshire, by the Rebels under the command of Manchester, Cromwell, and
Fairfax; there were taken Prisoners near 600 of His Majesty's forces, Sir
Ingram Hopton and some few others slain, not without some considerable loss to
the Rebels, it cannot be said that in any other Battle since this Rebellion,
but this, that His Majesty's forces made a dishonorable retreat, where the
fault was I, cannot say.

November the 11 th. an Ordinance for authorizing the counterfeit great Seal.

November the 21 st. Sir William Armine, and others (sent by the Houses at
Westminster) arrived at Edenborough with Articles of accord, and advance Money,
to hasten the Scots Invasion.

November the 27 th. the Kings Messenger Hanged at London for discharging his
duty in serving His Majesty's Writ.

December the 4 th. Hawarden-castle surrendered to His Majesty's Forces.

December the 8 th. John Pym died (de morbo pediculoso) at Derby house in
Westminster, in which place the medley Scots, and others sit, and hatch their
contrivances for support of the present Rebellion.

December the 12 th. Becston Castle assaulted, and taken for His Majesty.

December the 21 st. Lapley house taken by Captain Heavenningham for His
Majesty.

December the 28 th. Colonel Nathaniel Fines, one of the first that appeared in
this Rebellion, was in a Court of War at S. Albans by his fellow Rebels
sentenced to be Hanged for a Coward.

December the 29 th. The stately Screen of copper richly gilt, set up by King
Henry the seventh in his Chapel at Westminster, was by order of the House
reformed, That is, broken down, and sold to Tinkers.

Anno Dom. 1644.
JAnuary the 16 th. The perfidious Scots (contrary to the solemn Pacification)
invaded this Kingdom.

January the 22 d. The Members of Parliament assembled at Oxford according to
His Majesty's Proclamation.

March the 2 d. The Scots came over the River of Tyne, General King pursuing
their rear, forced them into Sunderland, whereupon the Marquess of Newcastle
sent for Sir Charles Lucas out of Yorkshire, who had been Ordered to stay
there to fortify Doncaster.

March the 13 th. Hopton Castle in Shropshire taken by Col. Woodhouse for His
Majesty.

March the 18 th. Wardour Castle in Wiltshire after long siege was taken by Sir
Francis Dodington for His Majesty.

March the 22 d. Newarke, after three weeks siege was happily relieved by his
Highness Prince Rupert; in which action the Rebels forces there were totally
defeated, all their Arms and Ammunition consisting of 4000 Muskets, 11 pieces
of brass Ordnance, 2 Mortar pieces, and about 50 barrels of Powder, etc. were
taken. And soon after, Lincoln, Sleeford, and Gainsborough were quitted by the
Rebels, and many pieces of Ordnance, with good store of Arms left behind them.

March the 23 d. Sturton Castle in Staffordshire rendered to Sir Gilbert Gerard,
Governor of Worcester for His Majesty.

March the 24 th. The Scots being much provoked to come out of Sunderland, came
to Bowdon-hill, whence with great loss they were forced back into their
Trenches, but next morning they came with many of their horse and foot on the
Marquess of Newcastles Rear, and had so disordered it, that the whole Army was
endangered, but Sir Charles Lucas, who was then in the right Wing, hasted to
the Rear, and with his own Regiment fell upon the Rebels Lanciers and routed
them, which made the rest fly from pursuing their advantage.

March the 24 th. Apley house in Shropshire, Garrisoned by the Rebels, was
taken by His Majesty's Forces, commanded by Col. Ellis.

April the 3 d. Longford house in Shropshire rendered to his Highness Prince
Rupert, wherein was taken 100 Muskets, etc. and about the same time,
Tongue-castle in the same County was likewise surrendered to his Highness.

April the 13 th. The Rebels from Gloucester assaulted Newent (then a Garrison
commanded by Colonel Mynne) but were gallantly repulsed and pursued, leaving
behind them two pieces of their Cannon, and many dead bodies before the Works.

April the 17 th. The Queens Majesty began her Journey from Oxford into the
West.

April the 17 th. Brampton Bryan in Herefordshire (a Castle of Sir Robert
Harleys) after three weeks siege, and the loss of 7 or 8 men, summoned and
rendered (at mercy only) to Sir Michael Woodhouse, wherein was taken 67 men, 100
Arms, two Barrels of Powder, some Plate, and a whole years provision.

April the 17 th. Dunfreize in Scotland taken in by the Marquess of Montross,
etc. for His Majesty, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

April the 22 d. Stutcombe in Dorsetshire assaulted and entered by the force of
his Highness Prince Maurice, wherein was taken 5 Captains, and 16 other
Officers, 114 Soldiers, with all their Arms, 6 Colors, one piece of Cannon,
and two Murderers, good store of Ammunition, and one Seditious Lecturer.

May the 6 th. His Majesty's Forces in Latham house in Lancashire made, amongst
diverse others, a most remarkable sally; wherein they killed many of the
besiegers in their trenches, and continued the execution to the park side, and
slew near 300 Rebels, took 3 great pieces of Ordnance, having since the 10. of
April then last taken 7 of their Cannon, besides one Mortar-piece, many
Colors, and killed above 600 of them.

May the 12 th. The Rebels from Plymouth assaulting Mount-Edgcombe house in
Cornwall (which was only defended by thirty Musquettiers) were bravely repulsed
and eighty of them killed in the place.

May the 24 th. The Rebels having formed 2. Armies, (consisting for the most
part of the London Trained-bands and Auxiliaries under the command of the Earl
of Essex and Sir William Waller) this day joined about Blewbury in Berkeshire,
and bent their course toward Abingdon.

May the 25 th. Prince Rupert assaulted and took Stopford, a strong Garrison of
the Rebels in Cheshire, together with all their Cannon, most of their Arms and
Ammunition, and about 800 of them Prisoners. Hereupon Latham house after at
least 18 weeks siege, was timely relieved by his Highness Prince Ruperts
approach into those parts.

May the 28 th. His Highness Prince Rupert summoned Bolton, (the Geneva of
Lancashire as the Brethren call it, the first Town in that County and
consequently in England, that put in execution the Militia, as the readiest
means to ruin the Kingdom. But they out of a zealous confidince Hanged one of
the Princes Captains which they had not long before taken Prisoner, whereupon
the Prince stormed the Town, and in the two attempt took it, wherein were
killed at least 800 Rebels, 600 Prisoners taken, with all their Colors,
Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition. The justice of which act was foreseen by Mr.
Booker, who about this time had noted it in his Almanac thus, Authors
dissentionum and sanguinis profusionum, absque dubio mercede sua mulctabuntur.

May the 29 th. The Rebels Armies severed, The Earl of Essex marching from
Abingdon to Islip, with purpose to distress Ozford on the North part, as Waller
at Abingdon on the South part.

May the 30 th. The Rebels attempted to cross the River Charwell at
Gosworth-bridge, but were gallantly repulsed by a small party of His Majesty's
Forces that had the guard of that pass.

May the 31 st. Waller attemping to pass Isis at Newbridg, and being then
repulsed, retired to Abingdon, where he, to revenge himself, demolished
Abingdon Cross, defaced the Church, burnt all the Tables and Chess-boards in
Abingdon, and Plundered most of the People of their goods.

June the 1 st. The Rebels did attempt in several places at once, to cross the
river Charwell, but could speed at none, being still beaten off with great
loss, and particularly at Gosworth-bridg, where they lost above 100 men.

June the 3 d. His Majesty perceiving the Rebels intention to besiege Oxford,
left a sufficient strength for defense thereof, and (to disburthen the City of
unnecessary force,) marched with the rest of his Army this evening toward
Worcester.

June the 4 th. the Earl of Essex perceiving the Kings Forces drawn away,
passed Charwell with his Army, and hearing of His Majesty's departure from
Oxford, hastened after, but upon Campsfield near Woodstock there fell upon his
Army such a prodigious and violent storm of hail and rain, accompanied with
such terrible thunder and lightening for the space of two hours, that some of
them took occasion to say, that the Conjurers at Oxford had engaged all their
Familiars to work them a despite, there being some hail as big as Nutmegs.
Others more nearly touched with an apprehension of the wickedness of their
actions, confessed, that they suffered the violence of Heaven. No such storm
being seen at Oxford, nor in any the adjacent Villages. But the besotted Rebels
contemning this presage from Heaven, went on to their own ruin.

June the 5 th. The Earl of Essex went this day as far as Chipping-Norton after
the King.

June the 6 th. But unwilling to lose his labor any longer, returned to
Burford, where he deputed Sir William Waller to proceed in the adventure of
King-catching, that himself might have the sole honor of taking in Lestithiell.

June the 11 th. Dudley Castle (which had been gallantly defended by Lieutenant
Col. Beaumont for three weeks before) was relieved, and the siege raised by His
Majesty's Forces sent from Worcester, who took two Colors of the Rebels horse,
two Majors of Foot, two Captains, three Lieutenants, killed about 100 in the
fight, and took above 50 common Soldiers Prisoners, without any considerable
loss on His Majesty's part.

June the 12 th. Col. Gage with some forces from Oxford took in Borstall house,
a Garrison of the Rebels in Buckinghamshire.

June the 18 th. His Majesty in Worcestershire having intelligence that the
Rebels Armies were now severed, (whilst Sir William Waller to get before the
King ran into Staffordshire) resolved to reinforce himself with the Regiments
left at Oxford, and encounter Sir William, to which end he returned and came
this day to Witney.

June the 20 th. His Highness Prince Rupert being then in Lancashire clearing
the County, Colonel Shuttleworth with 400 Rebels came to beat up some of his
quarters, and fell in at Blackburne. Where that vigilant Commander Sir Charles
Lucas was so ready for him, that he killed and took above 100 of the Rebels,
making the rest run for their lives.

June the 22 d. Sir William Waller having run himself out of breath, gave over
the pursuit of the King, (the rather for that His Majesty was provided for
him.) Whereupon His Majesty directed his march toward the Rebels associated
Counties, and came this night to Buckingham, where he received the joyful news
of His Queens safe delivery of the Princess Henrietta, who was born at Exeter
the 16 th. of this month.

June the 25 th. Sir Charles Lucas hearing Colonel Shuttleworth had gathered
300 horse and 100 Dragoons at Colne on the Borders of Yoreshire, marched to
him, and fell on with such skill and courage that he totally routed all the
Rebels both horse and Dragoons, had execution for three miles, wounded
Shuttleworth himself, who with very few others escaped; all the rest Sir
Charles killed and took, and brought their Colors with the Prisoners to Prince
Rupert.

June the 26 th. Waller to recruit his weary Army from the Garrisons of
Gloucester, Warwick, Coventry, Northampton, and Kenelmworth-castle, had this
day a rendezvous in Keinton field, whereof the King having notice turned his
march toward him, and quartered this night at Brackley.

June the 28 th. This day the King coming before Banbury, found Waller drawn up
in Battalia Westward from the Town, on the side of Crouch hill, taking
advantage of the hills, bogs, and ditches.

June the 29 th. His Majesty discerning that Waller would not come into the
plain, nor could be assaulted as he lay but with much disadvantage, removed
somewhat Northwards, to see if thereby he could draw him from his station,
which succeeded accordingly, for Waller likewise advanced on the other side the
River, whereupon the King at Cropready marched further off the River, leaving
the Bridge in hope to draw them over, which Waller greedily apprehending as an
advantage, put over 2000 horse and a great body of foot, with 14 pieces of
Cannon. The Rebels being thus divided were immediately charged by the Kings
Rear, the brave Earl of Clevelands horse, and Sir Bernard Astleys foot, routing
all that had past the Bridge whilst the Earl of Northampton charged the rest of
the Rebels horse that were fording over: In this fight were slain at least 300
Rebels, and many of them taken Prisoners with their 14 pieces; there were slain
on His Majesty's part two gallant Knights, Sir William Butler and Sir William
Clarke, and not above 14 common Soldiers besides, and so much for Wallers Army
this Summer.

July the 3 d. The King having thus defeated one of the Rebels Armies bent
Westwards after the other, and came this day to Evesham to refresh his Soldiers
after their hard duty, from whence he sent to Westminster his message for Peace
of the 4 th. of July.

In the beginning of this month his Highness Prince Rupert marched out of
Lancashire with a considerable Army for the relief of York, which had been two
months besieged by an aggregate body of Rebels, consisting of the Earl of
Manchesters Army, the Lord Fairfax, and the Rebellious Scots under command of
Lesley. The Prince had no sooner relieved York, but drew forth after the
Rebels, and in Marstone Moore there began a terrible fight, wherein his
Highness had at first much the better, took the Rebels Ordnance, and many of
them Prisoners insomuch that Lesley and the Lord Fairfax thinking all had been
lost, fled many miles from the place where the Battle was fought, and never
came to the remainder of their Armies till two days after the fight, but in
conclusion (whether by fate which attends the event of War, or by neglect I
know not) the fortune of the day turned, and the Rebels recovered their lost
Ordnance and took some of the Princes baggage, and with it Sir Charles Lucas,
Col. Porter, and Col. Tillier Prisoners. In this Battle were slain on His
Majesty's part, the Lord Carry, Sir Thomas Metham, Col. Ewer, Col. Townley, with
some others of note, and about 1500 common Soldiers. On the Rebels part were
slain Sir Charles Fairfax (younger son to the Lord Fairfax) with many other of
their Commanders, and at least 3000 common Soldiers.

This done, the Rebels rally, and sit down again before York, which was
valiantly defended for three weeks after by Sir Tho. Glenham, and then
delivered upon honorable conditions, to march away with Arms, Bag and Baggage,
which conditions were most persidiously broken by the Rebels.

July the 6 th. The Lord Hopton routed 350 of the Rebels near Warmister, which
were pursued above 20 miles by Sir Francis Dodington.

July the 15 th. The King came to Bath with his Army, which day the Queens
Majesty arrived safe at Breast in Britanny, notwithstanding 50 great shot made
at her by Batty, the Rebels Vice Admiral.

July the 23 d. The King made His speech to the Summersetshire men on
Kings-moore, who came in to His Majesty's assistance very cheerfully.

July the 31 st. Middleton the Scot furiously assaulted Denington Castle, and
received a most shameful repulse, leaving dead behind him one Col. eight
Captains, one Sergeant Major, with many inferior Officers, and Soldiers.

August the 1 st. His Majesty with his Army passed into Cornwall over Tamar at
Polton bridge in pursuit of the Earl of Essex whom he had now chased through
Devonshire.

August the 25 th. The King gained from the Rebels the Castle of Lestithiel,
(where their Army lay strongly encamped) and in it took Col. Butler, and some
others Prisoners.

August the 30 th. The Rebels horse in the night passed between His Majesty's
Quarters and fled toward Plymouth.

August the 31 st. The Rebels Foot making toward Foy were beaten from five
pieces of their Ordnance.

September the 2 d. The Rebels being deserted by their General the Earl of
Essex, (who with the Lord Roberts fled to Plymouth in a Cock-boat the night
past,) this day yielded up to His Majesty all their Train of Artillery, viz. 49
pieces of fair brass Ordnance, 200 and odd barrels of Gunpowder, with match,
ball, etc. proportionable, above 700 Carriages, and betwixt eight and 9000
Arms. His Majesty out of his wonted Clemency granting them their lives.

September the 5 th. His Majesty having obtained so complete a victory over the
Rebels, did (as formerly after the defeat of Waller) from Tavestock send his
second message of Peace to Wistminster.

In the beginning of this month His Majesty's forces in Scotland under the
command of his Excellency James Lord Marquess of Montrosse, and General Major
Mackdonald (who not long before landed in that Kingdom with 1000 Irish)
obtained a great victory over the Rebels there upon Newbigging Moore, near S.
John's Town, where were killed above 1200 Rebels, among which was the Lord of
Rires and some others of note, and seven brass Pieces taken; this done, His
Majesty's forces pursued them to S. John's Town and took it, and therein and in
the battle took 2000 of the Rebels Prisoners, with two pieces of Ordnance more,
all their Arms, Ammunition, and Baggage, and this done with the loss of not
above 60 men on His Majesty's part. The Rebels in this battle were commanded by
the Earl of Tullibairne, the Lord Drummond, the Lord Elcho, and Sir James Scot
of Rossy, their word was Jesus, no Quarter.

And within a fortnight after this success, his Excellency the Marquess of
Montrosse and Major Genesis Mackdonald obtained a second victory over another body
of Rebels in that Kingdom commanded by the Lord Forbes, Burly and others near
Aberdeen, wherein the Marquess killed and took Prisoners at least 1000 with
three pieces of Cannon, and all their baggage, without any considerable loss on
His Majesty's part; among the Prisoners taken by the Marquess, there was Sir
William Forbes of Craigyvar, and John Forbes of Boynly with others of note: And
soon after the Marquess took the Town of Aberdeen, with all the Ordnance,
Ammunition and Arms, and many of the fugitive Rebels therein.

September the 11 th. The Garrison of Basing (after 18 weeks siege wherein the
Rebels lost many hundreds of their men,) was relieved from Oxford by Sir Henry
Gage.

September. the 12 th. Ilfercombe in Devonshire rendered to General Goring for
His Majesty.

September the 17 th. Barnstaple in Devonshire (that had revolted upon the Earl
of Essex this approach) submitted to His Majesty, and obtained from him their
second pardon.

September the 23 d. Col. John Fines (having besieged the Castle of Banbury
above a month before) hired his men to storm it in five places, in all which
they were shamefully beaten off with great loss.

October the 7 th. in the night Sir Richard Greenvile took the Town of Saltash
by storming, wherein 400 Rebels were killed, and at least 300 taken Prisoners
with their Arms, this Town had been quitted by His Majesty's forces not long
before without any considerable loss.

October the 25 th. The Earl of Northampton and Sir Henry Gage raised the siege
of Banbury Castle, fell upon Col. John Fines his flying Troops, slew about 60
of them, took above 100 Prisoners, with about 200 horses, one piece of
Ordnance, all their Ammunition, and many Arms.

October the 27 th. The Rebels having thus lost two of their Armies, called the
third (under the Earl of Manchesters command) out of the Associated Counties,
and forced other Regiments out of London to withstand the King, who was now
advanced to Newberry with part of his Army, where the Rebels apprehending a
great advantage in regard that the rest of His Majesty's forces were not come
up, fell upon His Majesty's quarters, but were beaten off, with the slaughter
of above 1000 of their men, whereof Major Urrey with some other of their prime
Commanders were part, with the loss of Sir Anthony St. Leager, and less than
100 others on His Majesty's side, who had the pillage of the field; here the
valiant Earl of Cleveland was casually taken Prisoner, having his horse first
killed under him.

November the 6 th. His Majesty had his rendezvous on Bullington-green, betwixt
Wallingford and Oxford.

November the 9 th. His Army came to Dennington Castle, which since His
Majesty's marching thence, had been again besieged by the Rebels, and raised
the siege, the Rebels not daring to withstand his Army.

November the 17 th. The King having some days expected the Rebels, who it
seems were loath to hazard the last stake, advanced toward them to Hungerford,
upon whose approach, the Rebels left the field. Whereupon His Majesty sent Sir
Henry Gage with a party to supply the wants of Basing, that had been besieged
all this Summer by five Colonels and their Regiments, but the Rebels had raised
the siege before his approach.

November the 19 th. Monmouth that had lately been betrayed by Kirle, was
bravely regained by the Lord Herbert and Ragland, wherein was taken the Rebels
whole Committee, 14 pieces of Ordnance, with store of Arms and Ammunition, 30
Officers and common Soldiers proportionable, whereby South Wales is much
secured.

November the 23 d. The King having thus victoriously, defeated two of their
Armies and driven away the third, came to Oxford to entertain an overture of
Peace, (certain Propositions being the same day come thither from London)
having disposed of his Army to their Winter Quarters.

November the 26 th. A Vote passed by the members of the House of Commons at
Westminster for the utter abolishing and taking away of the Book of
Common Prayer, with intention to set up a new device to be called a Directory
in its room.

December the 13 th. His Majesty (out of his wonted desire of Peace) sent the
Duke of Richmond and Earl of Southampton to the Houses of Parliament at
Westminster for a Treaty, as the best expedient for Peace.

About the middle of this month Helmsley Castle in Yorkshire, (which had been
gallantly defended during 16 weeks siege by Capt. Jordan Crosland, and some
others) was delivered up to the Rebels under command of the Lord Fairfax, upon
honorable conditions to march away, the Governor and Officers with their
horses and Arms, the rest without Arms. In this siege the Defendants (amongst
others) made one remarkable salley wherein they took Sergeant Major General
Forbs a Scot Prisoner with diverse others, here did Sir T. Fairfax also receive
a shot in the Shoulder from the Castle.

December the 22 d. Colonel Air with some horse from Newarke, took two Troops
of horse at Upton belonging to the Rebels of Nottingham, brought the Men,
Colors, Horses, and Arms, all safe to Newarke.

December the 23 d. Sir Alexander Carew was beheaded on Tower Hill by Martial
Law, for intending to deliver up the Island at Plymouth to His Majesty; he was
observed to be most violent against His Majesty in the beginning of this
Rebellion, but it should seem he had of late some disposition to be a convert,
which made his fellow Members think fit to dispatch him to another World.

December the 24. Sir William Vaughan Governor of Shrawarden Castle for His
Majesty, fell on a party of Rebels at Welsh Poole cammanded by Sir John Price,
killed some, wounded others, took 47 Prisoners, 64 horse and many Arms.

December the 28 th. A party of the Lord Gorings Forces took Master Blakes
house at Pinnel near Calne in Wiltshire, and in it 59 Rebels, but more Arms.

December the 31 st. The Members at Westminster Voted Sir Thomas Fairfax to be
their new General, cashiering the Earl of Essex, with whom they had formerly
sworn to live and die.

January the 1 st. Young Hotham was beheaded on Tower Hill, and Sir John Hotham
his Father the morrow after, both by Martial Law. Here the Reader may take
notice of a special mark of Gods judgment, for (the 23 April 1642.) when old
Hotham denied His Majesty admittance into Hull, he held up his hands and prayed
God never to prosper him or hiis posterity if he were not His Majesty's Loyal
Subject: And now see both Father and Son adjudged by their fellow Members, and
condemned by their own beloved Marshal Law, for intending to deliver up Hull to
His Majesty.

The same first of January, the Lord Astley took Lypyate House in
Gloucestershire, and in it 45 Prisoners with all their Arms, Victuals and
Ammunition.

Soon after this, Sir Marmaduke Langdale totally routed Col. Ludlowes Regiment
of horse at Salisbury, took five Rebel-Captains Prisoners, besides
Underofficers, and 80 common Soldiers, 150 Horse and Arms, with there Colors,
Ludlow himself hardly escaping.

January the 10 th. The Lord Archbishop of Canterbury was beheaded on
Tower Hill. It would be too long here (where we aim at brevity) to set down the
particulars of his imprisonments, the preposterous proceedings against him in
his Trial, and his pious magnanimity at the time of his death, his Sermon on
the Scaffold (whereof here follows a true copy) will satisfy the World that he
died innocently, and (which is more) that His Majesty has been unjustly
accused of an inclination to Popery.

Good People,
THis is an uncomfortable time to Preach, yet I shall begin with a Text of
Scripture, Heb. 12.2. Let us run with patience that race which is set before
us, Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and it set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to Jesus the author and
finisher of my Faith, He best knows: I am now come to the end of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a death of shame; but the shame must be despised, or no
coming to the right hand of God; Jesus despised the shame for me, and God
forbid but I should despise the shame for Him; I am going apace (as you see)
toward the Red Sea, and my feet are now upon the very brink of it; an
Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me into the Land of promise, for that
was the way through which he led his People: But before they came to it, He
instituted a Passover for them, a Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with sour
Herbs, I shall obey, and labor to digest the sour Herbs, as well as the Lamb.
And I shall remember it is the Lords Passover; I shall not think of the Herbs,
nor be angry with the hand which gathers them; but look up only to him who
instituted that, and governs these; For men can have no more power over me than
what is given them from above. I am not in love with this passage, through the
Red Sea, for I have the weakness and infirmities of flesh and blood plentifully
in me; And I have prayed with my Savior, ut transiret Calix iste, that this
Cup of red Wine might pass from me: But if not, Gods will (not mine) be done;
and I shall most willingly drink of this Cup as deep as he pleases, and enter
this Sea, yea and pass through it, in the way that he shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (Good People) that when Gods Servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them
(and did in a manner drive them into that Sea) were drowned in the same Waters,
while they were in pursuit of them; I know my God whom I serve, is as able to
deliver me from this Sea of Blood, as he was to deliver the three Children from
the Furnace, and (I most humbly thank my Savior for it) my Resolution is now,
as theirs was then; They would not worship the Image the King had set up, nor
will I the imaginations which the People are setting up; nor will I forsake the
Temple and the truth of God, to follow the bleating of Jereboams Calf in Dan
and in Bethel. And as for this People, they are at this day miserably misled,
(God of his mercy open their Eyes that they may see the right way) for at this
day the Blind lead the Blind, and if they go on, both will certainly fall into
the ditch. For my self, I am (and acknowledge it in all humility) a most
grievous sinner many ways, by thought, word, and deed, and I cannot doubt, but
that God has mercy in store for me (a poor penitent) as well as for other
sinners, I have now upon this sad occasion, ransacked every corner of my Heart,
and yet (I thank God) I have not found (among the many) any onesin which
deserves death by any known Law of this Kingdom; And yet hereby I charge
nothing upon my Judges; for if they proceed upon proof (by valuable witnesses)
I or any other innocent, may by justly condemned; And (I thank God) though the
weight of the sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet within, as ever I was
in my life. And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man
that ever died by an Ordinance of Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have
gone this way, though not by this means; For Elphegus was hurried away and lost
his head by the Danes; and Simon Sudbury in the fury of Wat Tyler and his
fellows; Before these, S. John Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd Woman;
and S. Cyprian Archbishop of Carthage, submitted his head to a persecuting
Sword. Many examples (great and good) and they teach me patience; for I hope my
Cause in Heaven will look of another dye, than the color that is put upon it
here. And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great
men in their several Generations, but also that my Charge (as foul as it is
made) looks like that of the Jews against S. Paul, ( Acts 25.3.) For he was
accused for the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion; And like that of S. Stephen
( Acts 6.14.) for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law and
Religion, the holy place and the Temple ( verse. 13.) But you will say, do I
then compare my self with the integrity of S. Paul and Stephen? No, far be that
from me; I only raise a comfort to my self, that these great Saints and
Servants of God were laid at in their times, as I am now. And it is memorable,
that S. Paul who helped on this Accusation against S. Stephen, did after fall
under the very same himself. Yea, but here is a great clamor that I would have
brought in Popery; I shall answer that more fully by and by; In the mean time
you know what the Pharisees said against Christ himself, If we let him alone,
all men will believe in him, Et venient Romani, and the Romans will come, and
take away both our Place and Nation. Here was a causeless Cry against Christ
that the Romans will come; And see how just the judgment of God was; they
crucified Christ for fear lest the Romans should come, and his death was it
which brought in the Romans upon them, God punishing them with that which they
most feared: and I pray God this clamor of Venient Romani (of which I have
given no cause) help not to bring them in; for the Pope never had such a
Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now upon the Sects and
Divisions that are amongst us. In the mean time, by Honor and dishonor, by
good report, and evil report, as a deceiver and yet true, am I passing through
this World, 2 Cor. 6.8. (...) Some particulars also I think it not amiss to
speak of.

And first, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our gracious Sovereign;
He has been much traduced also for bringing in of Popery; but on my Conscience
(of which I shall give God a very present account) I know Him to be as free
from this charge, as any man living; and I hold Him to be as found a Protestant
(according to the Religion by Law established) as any man in this Kingdom; And
that he will venture His life as far, and as freely for it; and I think I do,
or should know, both His affection to Religion, and his grounds for it, as
fully as any man in England.

The second particular is concerning this great and Populous City, (which God
bless) Here has been of late, a fashion taken up, to gather hands, and then go
to the, Great Court of this Kingdom, (the Parliament) and clamor for Justice,
as if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which are
unknown to the many) could not, or would not do Justice, but at their
appointment. A way, which may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his
blood upon their own heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also: And this has
been lately practiced against my self; The Magistrates standing still, and
suffering them openly to proceed from Parish to Parish without check; God
forgive the setters of this (with all my heart I beg it) but many well meaning
People are caught by it. In S. Stephens case, when nothing else would serve,
they stirred up the People against him; and Herod went the same way, when he
had killed S. James, yet he would not venture upon S. Peter, till he found how
the other pleased the People. But take heed of having your hands full of blood,
for there is a time (best known to himself) when God (above other sins) makes
Inquisition for blood, and when that Inquisition is on foot, the Psalmist tells
us, That God remembers (but that is not all) He remembers and forgets not the
complaint of the poor, that is, whose blood is shed by oppression, verse 9.
take heed of this, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for blood; And (with my
Prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to remember the Prophecy
that is expressed, Jer. 26.14.15. As for me, behold I am in your hand: do with
me as seems good and meet unto you. But know ye for certain, that if ye put
me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon your selves, and upon
this City, and upon the Inhabitants thereof, etc.

The third particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven upon
them. But, alas, now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether, or
how it shall get out; and (which is worse than a storm from without) it is
become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and
at every cleft profaneness and Irreligion is entering in* while as Prosper
spakes (in his second Book De vitae contemptu cap. 4.) Men that introduce
profaneness are cloaked over with the name Religionis Imaginariae, of Imaginary
Religion; for we have lost the Substance and dwell too much in Opinion, and
that Church which all the Jesuits machinations could not ruin, is fallen into
danger by her own.

The last particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self; I was
born and baptized in the bosom of the Church of England established by Law; in
that profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to dye; This is
no time to dissemble with God, least of all in matter of Religion; and
therefore I desire it may be remembered, I have always lived in the Protestant
Religion, established in England, and in that I now come to dye. What clamours
and slanders I have endured for laboring to keep an Uniformity in the external
service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church, all men
know, and I have abundantly felt.

Now at last I am accused of High Treason in Parliament: a crime which my Soul
ever abhorred; this Treason was charged to consist of these two parts, An
endeavor to subvert the Laws of the Land, and a like Endeavor to overthrow
the true Protestant Religion estab^^shed by Law. Besides my Answers to the
several Charges, I protested my innocence in both Houses. It was said,
Prisoners protestations at the Bar must not be taken. I can bring no witness of
my heart and the intentions thereof; therefore I must come to my Protestation,
not at the Bar, but my Protestation at this hour and instant of my death; in
which I hope all men will be such charitable Christians, as not to think I
would dye and dissemble, being instantly to give God an account for the truth
of it: I do therefore here in the presence of God, and his holy Angels, take it
upon my death, That I never endeavored the subversion either of Law or
Religion; and I desire you all to remember this Protest of mine concerning mine
innocence, in these, and from all Treasons whatsoever. I have been accused
likewise as an Enemy to Parliaments: No, I understand them and the benefit that
comes by them too well to be so; But I did mislike the misgovernments of some
Parliaments many ways, and I had good reason for it; for Corruption optimi est
pessima, there is no corruption in the World so bad, as that which is of the
best thing in it self: for the better the thing is in nature, the worse it is,
corupted. And that being the highest Court, over which no other has
jurisdiction, when it is misinformed or misgoverned, the Subject is left without
all remedy. But I have done, I forgive all the World, all and every of those
bitter Enemies which have persecuted me, and humbly desire to be forgiven of
God first, and then of every man, whether I have offended him or not, if he do
but conceive that I have. Lord do thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of
him, And so I heartily desire you to join in Prayer with me.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fullness of all thy mercies look upon me; but not till thou have nailed my
sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the blood of
Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ: that so the
punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased to try
me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee give me now in this great instant,
full patience, proportionable comfort, and a heart ready to dye for thy honor,
the Kings happiness, and this Churches preservation. And my zeal to these (far
from Arrogance be it spoken) is all the sin (human frailties excepted, and all
incidents thereto) which is yet known to me in this particular for which I now
come to suffer; I say in this particular of Treason; but otherwise my sins are
many and great: Lord pardon them all, and those especially (what ever they are)
which have drawn down this present judgment upon me: and when thou have given
me strength to bear it, do with me as seems best in thine own eyes: and carry
me through death that I may look upon it in what visage soever it shall appear
to me, Amen. And that there may be a stop of this issue of blood, in this more
than miserable Kingdom, (I shall desire that I may pray for the People too, as
well as for my self) O Lord, I beseech thee, give grace of repentance to all
Blood-thirsty People; but if they will not repent, O Lord confound all their
devices, defeat and frustrate all their designs and endeavors upon them, which
are or shall be contrary to the Glory of thy great Name, the truth and
sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King and his posterity after
him in their just rights and Privileges, the honor and conservation of
Parliaments in their just power, the preservation of this poor Church in her
truth, peace, and patrimony, and the settlement of this distracted and
distressed People under their ancient Laws, and in their native Liberties. And
when thou have done-all this in mere mercy for them, O Lord, fill their hearts
with thankfulness, and with Religious dutiful obedience to thee and thy
Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord Jesus Amen, and receive my Soul into
thy Bosom Amen. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

January the 11 th. Sir Henry Gage Governor of Oxford marched thence with a
party of horse and foot toward Abingdon with intention to raise a Fort at
Cullom bridge, but Brown (having treacherous notice of the design) was prepared
accordingly, which begat a hot skirmish, wherein the Rebels lost Major
Bradbury, and at least 30 others slain, and on His Majesty's part not above 7
common Soldiers; but by great misfortune Sir Henry Gage himself marching in the
front of his men did here receive a fatalshot, whereof within few hours after
he dyed. His Body was afterward interred at Oxford with funebrious exequies
and solemnities answerable to his merits; who having done His Majesty special
service, was (whilst living) generally beloved, and dead is still universally
lamented. His daily refreshed memory makes me trespass on the Readers patience
with this

ELEGY Upon the never-enough lamented Death of Sir HENRY GAGE, the most desired
Governor of OXFORD.
SO Titus called was, The Worlds delight,
And straightway died; The envious Sisters spite
Still the great favorite: The darling head
Unto the Fates is always forfeited.
Our Life's a Chase, where (tho the whole Herd fly)
The goodlyest Deer is singled out to dye.
And as in Beasts, the fattest ever bleeds:
So amongst men, he that does bravest deeds.
He might have lived, had but a Coward fear
Kept him securely sculking in the rear:
Or like some sucking Colonel, whose edg
Durst not advance a foot from a thick hedge:
Or like the wary Skippon, had so sure
A suit of Arms, he might (besieged) endure:
Or like the politic Lords, of different skill,
Who thought a Saw-pit safer, or a Hill;
Whose valor in two Organs too did lie
Distinct; the ones in's ear, the others in his eye.
Puppets of War! Thy name shall be divine,
And happily augment the number Nine,
But that the Heroes, and the Muses strive
To own thee dead, who were them all, alive.
Such an exact composure was in thee,
Neither exceeding Mars, nor Mercury.
It Was just, tho hard, thou should dye Governor
Of the Kings chief Fort of Learning, and of War.
Thy death was truly for thy Garrison,
Thou dy'dst projecting her Redemption.
What unto Basing twice (successeful spirit)
Was done, thou have effected here in merit.
The Bridge was broken down: The Fort alone
GAGE was himself, the first and the last stone.
Go burn thy Faggots Brown; and grieve thy Rage
Lets thee outlive the gentle grasp of GAGE.
And when thou read'st in thy Britanicus
The boasted story of his death, say thus:
The Valor I have shown in this, was Crime,
And GAGES Death will brand me to all Time.
In this month a fair new Ship called the John of London belonging to the
East India Merchants, was brought to Bristol (by the Loyalty of Capt. Mucknell
and the rest of the Officers and Mariners of the Ship) for His Majesty's
service, wherein were 26 pieces of Ordnance mounted, 17000. l. in Money, besides
some other good Commodities. For which good service the said Captain Mucknell
had the honor to be the first Knight that ever the Prince of Wales made.

And within a few days after another Ship called the Fame of London, (of
burden 450 Tuns, with 28 pieces of Ordnance mounted) was by Tempest forced
into Dartmouth, where she was seized on for His Majesty's service, as lawful
prize, being bound for Dover or London. The Ship had been abroad 4 years, and
was now returning homewards from the West Indies, laden with Bullion, Oil,
Couchaneille, and other rich Commodities, to the value of 40000 l. at least.

January the 30 th. The Treaty began at Uxbridg, wherein the candor of His
Majesty's real intentions and desires of Peace was very perspicuous: For His
Majesty did not only Arm his Commissioners or any ten of them with a very large
and powerful Commission to treat of, conclude and settle a firm Peace in all
His Dominions, but did also by Proclamation appoint a solemn Fast on the 5 th.
day of February then next for a blessing on that Treaty, with a Form of
Common Prayer set forth by His Majesty's special Command to be used in all
Churhes and Chapels within this Kingdom. One of which Prayers drawn by His,
Majesty's special direction and dictate, I here afford the Reader.

The Prayer
O Most merciful Father, Lord God of Peace and Truth, we a People sorely
afflicted by the scourge of an unnatural War, do here earnestly beseech Thee,
to command a Blessing from Heaven upon this present Treaty, begun for the
establishment of an happy Peace. Soften the most obduarte hearts with a true
Christian desire of saving those men's blood, for whom Christ himself has shed
His. Or if the guilt our great sins cause this Treaty to break off in vain,
Lord let the Truth clearly appear, who those men are, which under pretense of
the Public good do pursue their own private ends; that this People may be no
longer so blindly miserable, as not to see, at least in this their Day, the
things that belong unto their Peace. Grant this gracious God, for his sake who
is our Peace it self, even Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

February the 9 th. Sir Walter Hastings Governor of Portland Castle for His
Majesty, took the great Fort at Weymouth, and within two day after Sir Lewis
Dives took the middle Fort and Town of Weymouth, and in a skirmish there slew
Major Sydenham (a forward Rebel) with some others. This Town and Forts were not
many days held by His Majesty's Forces, but were as unfortunatey lost, as
happily gained.

Febru^ry the 15 th. Rowdon house near Chippenham in Wiltshire (after 9 days
siege) was taken by His Majesty's Forces, and in it 120 good Horse, above 200
Foot, with their Arms and provisions, Col. Stevens the Mock-sheriff of
Gloucestershire, six Captains, and above 20 inferior Officers, all at mercy.

February the 20 th. The Lord Macguire, an Irish Baron, was executed by the
common hangman at Tyburn by command of the Members at Westminster. In the
History of which execution recorded in many of their own Pamphlets written then
and upon that subject, the Reader may observe two Questions asked by Mr. Gibbs,
one of the Sheriffs of London, and answered by that Lord the very instant
before his death; The first was, Whether he knew of any Commission the King had
granted to the Irish Rebels, for the commotion they had raised in their
Country? he answered, That he never knew nor heard of any. The second was,
Whether there was not some agreement made by the Irish Commissioners, before
the Rebellion first brake out with the Recusants of England? He answered, That
to his knowledge, there was never an one in England, either Catholic or
Protestant, that knew of it, but one, and he was an Irish man, and a
Protestant, and he came to the knowledge of it but by chance, not at he was an
actor in it.

Out of which, and out of that delivered by the Archbishop of Canterbury on
the Scaffold immediately before his death, the World may evidently see His
Majestly irrefragably cleared, by two acts of the Rebels own cruelty, from two
of the most scandalous aspersions, by which the malice of these forging Rebels
has from time to time endeavcured to make His sacred Majesty odious to His
People. Salutem ex inimicis nostris, may the King well say, seeing his Enemies
actions turned to his justification, quite contrary to their intendments. The
first was an imagined inclination in His Majesty to Popery; The second, a
pretended commissionating of the Irish Rebellion. In the first, the Archbishop
of Canterbury. In this, the Lord Macguire, both at their very dying hours, have
rendered His Majesty as innocent, as the Rebels intended him odious. I say
innocent, because we know the worst of Rebels cannot but credit those Persons
especially testifying at such time when they were immediately after to give an
account of all their actions to the knower of all hearts. Nor can any one
believe, but the Archbishop of Canterbury (who was daily conversant with His
Majesty in matters of Religion) must needs know the very depth of his heart
therein; And the Lord Macguire (who was privy to the first motion of the Irish
Rebellion) must likewise of necessity have known of the Kings Commission, if
any such thing had been.

February the 22 d. The Treaty at Uxbridg, was broken up, though His Majesty
sent a particular message, and his Commissioners did earnestly desire that the
same might be continued. In this Treaty His Majesty's Commissioners
condescended much, but those of Westminster would abate nothing of the rigor
of their first unheard of Propositions, which was the cause the Treaty took no
better effect.

February the 22 d. The Town of Shrewsbury was (by treachery in the night)
delivered to Col. Mitton the Rebellious Governor of Wem. Here you may see the
Rebels Masterpiece, in hatching this treacherous Plot in the time of Treaty,
wherein they used the name of Peace, only as a masque for their designs, but
intended nothing less. In this Town the Rebels did most barbarously execute 13
of His Majesty's Soldiers, which his Highness Prince Rupert did soon after
justly requite, (lege talionis) by hanging up a like number of theirs, which he
had taken without Quarter given.

February the 25 th. Sir Marmaduke Langdale routed a great Body of Rebels
consisting of at least 1200 Horse and Dragoons, commanded by Col. Rossiter, a
Scot, near Melton Mowbray, in Leicestershire, killed above 30 of them, too 46
Prisoners, with four Colors of horse, with the loss of Sir John Girlington a
gallant Knight, Capt. Gascoigne, and not above 6 or 7 common Soldiers on His
Majesty's part.

February the 25 th. Col. Roger Molineux with a party of Horse from Newarke
took the Rebels Committee at Wirksworth in Darbyshire, where they were
gathering contribution, viz. Mr. Wigfall, (Sir John Gells Son in Law) Mr.
Edward Charleton, Mr. Buxton, Major Molins, Capt. Harstaffe, Lieutenant
Boteler, about 70 Troopers and Dragooners, with all their Horse and Arms, and
400 l. in Money. In this action some of the Rebels were killed, whereof of Mr.
Sellors, a busy Sequestrator, was one, and on His Majesty's part only one man
lost.

February the 26 th. Sir William and Sir Charles Compton (Brothers to the Noble
Earl of Northampton) with 300 horse routed 400 of the Rebels horse of
Northampton near Daventry in that County, killed 13, wounded many, took 36
Prisoners, with 50 Horse, and good store of Arms.

In the latter end of this month, a party of His Majesty's Forces from Hereford
took Castle-ditch, (a Garrison of the Rebels on the borders of that County) and
in it Col. Hopton the Governor, (Son to Sir Richard Hopton) his
Underofficers, above 60 Foot Soldiers, with their Arms and Provisions, and
some Horse.

March the 1 st. Pontfract Castle (that had been long besieged, not without
much loss to the Rebels, by frequent sallies made by the Defendants and
otherwise) was relieved by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, who there utterly defeated
the Lord Fairfax whole Army, killed 300 on the place, besides many drowned,
took above 700 Prisoners, whereof 44. Officers, 22 Colors of Foot, being all
the Rebels had, and 26 Standards of Horse, with 34 double Barrels of Powder,
and a proportionable quantity of Match and Bullet, and 2500 Foot Arms, besides
Horse Arms, and other spoil. In this action were slain many of the Rebels chief
Officers, as Col. Armyn, Col. Thornton, Col. Malevery, with others; On His
Majesty's part no Officer slain, and but very few common Soldiers.

March the 6 th. Sir Charles Compton with his Regiment of horse took 72
Pack-horses at Hawford on the borders of Warwickshire, being richly laden with
the Rebels wealth of Gloucester, and intended for London; with these Sir
Charles also took their Convoy of at least 100 Horse, and near 70 Prisoners,
with a Lieutenant, one Cornet and his Colors, having first killed 12 Rebels on
the place, without loss of any one man, and but one hurt.

March the 7 th. Major Abercromy a Rebellious Scot was slain near Stratton
Audley in Buckinghamshire, and 17 of his men taken by a party from His
Majesty's Garrison of Borstal house.

March the 14 th. Col. Long the high Sheriff of Wiltshire with his own Regiment
of horse only, gallantly charged a great body of Wallers horse near the
Devizes, and did good execution on them; but being much overpowered by the
Rebels numbers, was at length taken Prisoner with some part of his Regiment;
which was within few days after sufficiently requited by the Lord Goring, who
took above 700 of Wallers horse in those parts.

March the 15 th. A Party of His Majesty's horse from Pontfract Castle fell on
Colonel Brandlings Quarters at Badsworth, four miles from Doncaster, took 67
Rebels Prisoners, whereof 13 Officers, 130 horse, and 1000 l. in Money.

March the 18 th. The Earl of Northampton with his three young Brothers, (in
all whom Gallantry is hereditary) routed a great Body of the Rebels horse of
Northampton near Abthorp, killed near 30 Rebels, whereof Captain Lidcote was
one, and hurt many more, took 26 Prisoners, and this with the loss of 5
Troopers only on His Majesty's part.

The same 18 th. of March, Beeston Castle in Cheshire (that had been bravely
defended for 17 weeks before by Capt. Valet, and as vainly besieged by Prince
RUPERTS approach into those parts.

March the 24 th. The Lower Member at Westminster Vote the clause for
preservation of His Majesty's Person, to be left out in Thomas Fairfax his
Commission. Thus do the Rebels

1. Swear to live and die with their own General Essex, yet upon second
thoughts they disoblige themselves from that Oath, and cashier him of his
command.

2. Covenant to preserve His-Majesties Person and Authority, and yet afterward
Authorize Sir Thomas Fairfax to kill him if he can.

3. They vow to maintain the Protestant Religion, yet condemn and
discountenance the essential parts thereof, and introduce Irreligion and
Profaneness.

Now tell me, Reader, what Tropological sense can save this juggling from flat
and literal Perjury? not all the addition of their Abrogative to their
Legislative power, For this is indeed to abrogate Christianity as well as
Loyalty out of the World: To give leave to kill the Kings Person in the field,
and yet to cheat men into a conceit of preserving His Majesty in William
Lenthal's Chair: To make the World believe they are Protestants, when they
permit and authorize an illiterate Assembly of Non-Divines to discountenance
the 39 Articles, dispute about expunging the fifth Article of the Apostles
Creed: To antiquate the Lords Prayer out of the Church Service, and turn out
the long-setled Service of Common Prayer out of the Church, to give way to a
long winded extemporary nonsense in the room thereof.

O tempora! O mores! Are not these fine Lawmakers;, who violate the Laws of God
and holy Church, as well as those themselves were born unto, to make way for
their own Chimeraes? Would not any true Zelot pawn his Soul upon these men's
Consciences, who make no Conscience of breaking their own Oaths? Would not any
wise man melt his Fortunes to maintain these men's Cause, who have no cause for
what they do? Yes, he that could be made to believe Perjury were Fidelity;
Treason, Loyalty; Blasphemy, Sanctity; Atheism, Religion; the Speakers Cushion,
the Kings Majesty; may likewise possibly believe that these Rebels intend the
Churches, Kings, and Commonwealths good.

Post-monita.
THe Reader may take notice of two omissions; The first in February 1642. about
which time His Majesty's Forces from Hereford, commanded by Sir Richard Lawdy,
encountered the Rebels of Gloucester at Cover on the borders of that County,
routed their whole Body, killed and took most of the Rebels Commanders, and
many common Soldiers, with four Drakes; yet this Victory came not off without
some loss, for Sir Richard Lawdy himself was here slain by a shot out of a
window in Cover Town, with 5 common Soldiers only on His Majesty's part.

The other in the beginning of July, 1643. about which time Col. (now Lord)
Jermyn with those Forces that guarded Her Majesty out of the North, assisted by
Col. Hastings, now Lord Lowghborough, took Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire
by assault, wherein there was taken Col. Houghton the Governor, with all the
inferior Officers, above 400 common Soldiers, 8 pieces of Ordnance, and good
store of Ammunition, and this done without any considerable loss.

The End.
Mercurius Belgicus: OR, Memorable Occurrences, in Anno 1645.
MARCH the 25 th. 1645. The Lord Goring routed a party of the Rebels horse at
Pitmaster near Taunton in Summersetshire, slew Major Roy that commanded them,
took 100 horse and Arms, and about 50 Prisoners.

April the 1 st. Major General Sir John Digby with a brigade of horse and
Dragoons beat up the Rebels Quarters at and about Wincaunton, took 100
Prisoners, 2 Colors, 300 horse and as many Arms, without any considerable loss
on His Majesty's part.

April the 5 th. A party of the Lord Gorings horse routed Colonel Pophams
Regiment in Wiltshire, killed 40 of them, took Major Car that commanded them,
with at least 120 Prisoners with their horses and Arms.

April the 14 th. the siege of High-archall in Shropshire, which had been
continued by the Rebels for the space of 17 days, was raised by themselves:
during this siege, the defendants commanded by Sir Vincent Corbet and Capt.
Armorer, in several sallies killed and took at least 500 Rebels and 4 pieces of
Ordnance.

April the 19 th. A party of His Majesty's Forces from Newark took the Fort at
Nottingham Bridge by Scalado, took some 50 Rebels in it (besides an Ensign and
10 others killed and drowned) 30 horse, 200 Arms, and 5 pieces of Ordnance*
Th^^ Fort His Majesty's Forces held about 11 days, and then quitted it without
any loss.

April the 22 d. Col. Masseyes Forces were totally routed by Prince Rupert at
Ledbury in Hereford-shire, where above 100 of them were slain, Major Backhouse,
and near 400 Prisoners taken, whereof 27 Officers, besides many hundred of Arms
with all their Baggage, and this done with the loss of but 5 common Soldiers
only on His Majesty's part.

April the 23 d. Major General Laughorne lying at the siege of Newcastle Emblin
in Carmarden-shire, was totally defeated by His Majesty's Forces commanded by
Col. (now Lord) Gerard, who killed 200 of his men on the place, took near 500
Prisoners, with all their Arms, Ordnance and Baggage, with the loss only of
about 26 men on His Majesty's part, and some hurt.

April the 24 th. Col. Cromwell the Independent General routed a party of 200
of His Majesty's horse near Oxford, and no sooner summoned Blechington house,
but 'twas delivered up to him by Col. Windebank the Governor, who was soon
after Condemned therefore by a Counsel of War, and executed at Oxford
accordingly.

April the 30 th. Cromwell assaulted His Majesty's Garrison of Farrington,
commanded as then by Lieutenant Colonel Burges, who defended the place with
such gallantry, that Cromwell was repulsed with the loss of near 200 men,
besides what were wounded, a Captain and some others also taken Prisoners.

May the 7 th. The Lord Goring routed a strong party of Cromwells horse near
New-bridge betwixt Oxfordshire and Barkshire, killed and wounded at least 80,
took Major Bethell that commanded in chief, Prisoner, with diverse common
Soldiers and 2 Colors.

In the beginning of this month that unheard of cruelty was put in practice in
and about London by certain persons, men and women appointed and authorized to
inveigle and entice Children from their Parents, and without their knowledge,
and so convey them on Shipboard to be sold and transported to new Plantations,
the Lord knows where. This so much discontented the People, that the houses at
Westminster were glad to disavow the thing, and forthwith make an order against
it.

May the 11 th. His Majesty's Forces made a gallant sally from Scarborougb
Castle, wounded Sir John Meldrum, that commanded the siege, whereof he not long
after dyed, slew Colonel Cockeram, Lieutenant Colonel Stanley, Major Dent,
Captain Piercy, and 50 others, whereof most Commanders, and took diverse
Prisoners: On His Majesty's part were only slain Capt. Gower and some 4 common
Soldiers.

Soon after Capt. Zachary that commanded one of the Ships in the harbor of the
Rebels, Received a shot from the Castle, whereof he dyed.

May the 15 th. Hawkesley house a Garrison of the Rebels in Worcestershire was
surrendered to His Majesty, the Governor Captain Gouge, and 80 Soldiers
submitting to mercy, and the house afterward slighted.

This done His Majesty with his Army marched toward Chester, which had been
long besieged by Sir William Bruerton, but before His Majesty came within 20
miles of it, the Rebels raised their siege.

May the 26 th. Massey took Evesholme in Worcestershire a Garrison of His
Majesty's by storm, and in it Col. Leg the Governor, and some 300 common
Soldiers, with the loss only of about 20 men killed, but more wounded.

May the 30 th. His Majesty's Army sat down before Leicester and the morrow
morning early took it by storm, and in it the whole Committee. Sir Robert Pie
and many hundred Prisoners, many horses, much Powder, Arms and Ordnance, and
great store of wealth. In the assault on His Majesty's part were slain Col. St.
George and about 80 others, but of the Rebels about 120.

The same day the Rebels quitted their several Garrisons of Bagworth,
Colehorton, Kirby-bellows and Burleigh. Whilst His Majesty's Army was thus
busied at Leicest. Sir Thomas Fairfax (the Rebels new General) lay some 15 days
blocking up of Oxford, though fruitlessly, for by several Sallies thence, he
lost many of his men, some killed, others taken Prisoners, and not a small
number running away, so that he raised his siege thence the beginning of June;
And June 4. he assaulted Borstall house commanded by Sir William Campion for
His Majesty, but was beaten off with the loss of 300 of his men, the brave
Garrison losing but one man, and 4 hurt.

June the 6 th. there fell a strange hail storm in that part of Licestershire
which is in and about Loughborough, some of the Hailstones were as big as small
hens eggs, and the least as big as musket bullets: it destroyed the Corn and
did much hurt in that part of the Country were it fell.

June the 9 th. His Majesty's Forces encountered a body of Rebels near Stokesey
in Shorp-shire, but being over-powred, were forced to retreat with the loss of
Sir William Croft, a gallant Gentleman, and some others.

June the 14 th. Was that fatal Battle at Naesby-Down in Northamptonshire,
where His Majesty's Army (till then victorious) was now by the incertainty of
War much worsted, his foot, Ordnance and Baggage most lost. In this battle, Sir
Peter Brown, Sir Thomas Dallison, Gol. Bawd, Major Wilson, and Capt. Thorold on
His Majesty's part were slain, the whole number on both sides slain was
conceived not to exceed 400. but more wounded. Above all the Rebels cruelty was
remarkable in killing upon cold Blood at least 100 Women, whereof some of
quality, being Commanders Wives, and this done under pretense that they were
Irish Women.

June the 18 th. Leicester was re-taken by the Rebels upon Articles that His
Majesty's Soldiers within should march away, the Officers with horses and Arms,
and the common Soldiers without, which Agreement was most persidiously broken
by the Rebels.

The same 18 th. of June a party from Newark commanded by Capt. Wright routed
200 of the Rebels horse at Riby in Lincolnshire, slew their Commander in chief,
Lieutenant Col. Harrington, with some others, and took 50 Prisoners, with their
horse and Arms.

June the 28 th. The City of Carlisle was delivered to the Scots (after it had
been gallantly defended 42 weeks by Sir Thomas Glenham and Sir Henry Stradling,
the Governor of the City and Citadel) upon very honorable conditions, to
march away with Arms, Bag and Baggage, Colors flying, drums beating, etc.

July the 4 th. Sir William Vaughan with a party of horse beat up the Rebels
Quarters near Bramcroft Castle in Shropshire, took 50 Prisoners and 80 horse.
And next morning July 5. (having received some more supplies from His Majesty's
Garrisons in those parts) marched to Higharchall, then a second time besieged
by the Rebels, and behaved himself so gallantly that he totally routed the
besiegers, killed 100 on the place, and took 400 Prisoners, with all their
Baggage and Carriages, without any considerable loss.

July the 10 th. A brigade of the Lord Gorings Army being put to guard a pass
at Langport in Somersetshire were overpowered by the Rebels and so forced to a
disorderly retreat with the loss of 300 men killed and taken, but above all,
here that gallant and resolute Genleman Sir John Digby received a hurt, whereof
he not long after dyed.

July the 16 th. Chippenham a new erected Garrison of the Rebels in Wiltshire
was taken by Col. James Long, and in it 100 Prisoners, 300 Arms, and about 20
Rebels slain.

The same day a Party from Newark surprised Welbeck house, took 200 Prisoners
in it, 3 pieces of Cannon, and above 300 Arms.

July the 21 st. Pontefract Castle, after above three months siege, and many
notable fallies, was delivered to the Rebels by Col. Louder the Governor, upon
honorable conditions.

July the 22 d. Bridgwater was taken by Sir Thomas Fairfax by assault, not
without much loss of blood to the assailants, and of goods to there poor
Towns-People.

July the 25 th. The strong Castle of Scarborough after long siege was
delivered to the Rebels by Sir Hugh Cholmley upon condition to march away, etc.

August the 1 st. A party of His Majesty's Forces from Newark took Torkesey
house in Lincolnshire by Scalado, and in it 140 Prisoners, and about 8 of the
Garrison slain, and but two men on His Majesty's part.

Aug. the 8 th. Capt. Allen a forward Rebel and his whole Troop were taken on
the borders of Lincolnshire by a party from Belvoire Castle.

Aug. the 15 th. Sherburne Castle in Somersetshire after much battery was won
by assault, and Sir Lewis Dives the Governor taken Prisoner. In this action
the Rebels lost Major Dove, 5 Captains, and many common Soldiers.

Aug. the 17 th. The most noble and gallant Marquess of Montrosse utterly
defeated an Army consisting of at least 12000. Rebels in Kilseith field near
Glascow in Scotland, slew 3500 on the place, took their bag, and baggage and
Ordnance, with 2000 Prisoners, and the next day the Marquess received the
submission of 9 Lords in behalf of His Majesty, and in a manner became Master
of all Scotland.

Aug. the 24 th. His Majesty's Forces took Huntington, (after a small skirmish,
wherein Capt. Bennet and some other Rebels were slain.) In this Town were taken
400 Horse, 200 Prisoners, and good store of Arms.

Aug. the 31 st. A party from Newarke marched as far as Barton upon Humber, and
there took Sir Alexander Hope a Scot, with his two Brothers, and some other
considerable Prisoners, with a good booty in money and jewels, and brought all
safe to Newarke.

Sept. the 2 d. The Scots (that had lain 5 weeks before Hereford) suddenly
raised their siege, by reason of His Majesty's approach with his Army into
those parts. During the time of this Siege were slain of the Scots, Major
General Crawford, and Lieutenant Col. Gurdon, with at least 600 common
Soldiers. At this siege was also slain Doctor Scudamore, but on His Majesty's
part no considerable number, nor any considerable person lost.

Sept. 6 th. His Majesty's Forces From Oxford beat up the Rebels Quarters at
Tame, killed diverse, took Prisoners Adjutant General Pride, with diverse other
Officers and common Soldiers. They also took 3 Colors and above 200 Horse, and
this done with the loss only of Captain Gardener a gallant young Gentleman, and
some few more on His Majesty's part.

Sept. the 9 th. Master Stroud, one of the five Members, and one of the
principal promoters of these troubles, dyed of a pestilential Fever, to say no
worse of it.

Sept. the 11 th. Bristol was delivered upon Conditions by Prince Rupert after
about three weeks siege, part of the City was won by assault; which as the
Rebels gained not without some loss, so was their loss, no ways equivalent to
the importance of the place. During this Siege, in Sallies, and in defending
the Assault, His Majesty lost four eminent persons, ( viz.) Sir Bernard Ashley,
Sir Richard Crane, Colonel Tailor, and Major Garneer a Frenchman.

Sept. the 13 th. A Brigade of the Marquess of Montross his Forces received a
defeat at Philip-haugh in Tividale in Scotland, wherein the Lord Ogleby and
some others of note were taken Prisoners, and some slain. This was the first
clear defeat that ever that noble Marquess, or any considerable part of his
Army received since the beginning of this War.

September 22 d. The Castle of the Devizes in Wiltshire was surrendered to the
Rebels upon Conditions, etc.

Sept. the 24 th. 5000 of His Majesty's horse encountered a greater Body of the
Rebels at Routon-heath near Westchester, then besieged. In this Battle His
Majesty's Army was worsted, having lost that gallant Gentleman, the Lord
Bernard Steward, Earl of Lichfield, and some others. The Rebels here (as in
most other places) lost no men of Quality, having very few or none in their
Army to lose.

September the 26 th. Barckley Castle in Gloucestershire was surrendered to the
Rebels upon Conditions, etc.

October the 1 st. Sandall Castle in Yorkshire was likewise delivered to the
Rebels, after a long siege, upon Conditions, etc.

October the 6 th. Winchester Castle was likewise delivered upon composition,
etc.

October the 14 th. Basing house was taken by storm, the defendants not having
a sufficient number within to man their works, the noble Marquess of Winchester
(that had so long and gallantly defended this his own house) was here taken
Prisoner with about 200 others, and at least 100 of the defendants slain, many
whereof in cold blood, not without some loss to the Assailants.

October the 15 th. A Brigade of His Majesty's horse marchimg Northward under
command of the Lord Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale surprised 800 of the
Rebels foot at Sherborne in Yorke-shire, but before they had disposed of the
Prisoners and their Arms, a fresh party encountered them, rescued the Prisoners,
disordered His Majesty's Forces, slew Sir Richard Hutton, and some others.

October the 16 th. Tiverton Castle in Devonshire taken by assault by Sir
Thomas Fairfax's Forces, the Governor and the rest within all at mercy, etc.

October the 27 th. Shelford house in Nottinghamshire was taken by the Rebels
by storm, the valiant Governor Col. Stanhop defended it, even to the last man,
himself and near 200 others were slain by the Merciless Rebels after they were
entered the house, having first lost about 60 of their men in the assault.

November the 5 th. Boulton Castle in Yorke-shire hat had been long and
gallantly defended by Colonel Scroop the Governor and owner of it, was
surrendered to the Rebels upon Conditions, etc.

November. the 16 th. Beeston Castle in Cheshire (after long siege) was likewise
surrendered to the Rebels upon Conditions.

November. the 22 d. The stables and outworks of Belvoir Castle were gained by
storm, in which action the Rebels lost 100 of their men and more wounded, the
defendants retreating all into the Castle with the loss of 2 men only slain and
some few hurt.

December the 1 st. The house of Commons at Westminster Vote the King to confer
several honors upon several Members of each house, and ( inter alios) a
Dukedom on the Earl of Essex and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten,
etc.

The same 1 st. of December a party of His Majesty's Forces from Ashby de la
zouch took a Troop of horse and some foot Soldiers conveying certain Rebels
goods from Darby to Leicester.

December ihe 4 th. Latham house (that had so long and gallantly defended it
self, and so often offended the Rebeis) was surrendered to them upon conditions,
etc.

December the 5 th. His Majesty sent to the Parliament at Westminster to desire
that the D. of Richmond, E. of Southampton, Mr. Ashburnham, and Mr. Palmer,
might have a safe Conduct to bring Propositions of Peace.

December the 18 th. His Majesty sent a second Letter, with the most powerful
persuasions imaginable, that a safe Conduct might be granted according to his
desire in his former Letter, but both had one denial in a Letter of the 25 th.
of Dec.

December the 18 th. The Loyal City of Hereford was by the persidiousness of
some within, and the bribery of others without, delivered up to the Rebels
without any siege, or almost any bloodshed, whereby the persons and goods of
many Gentlemen of quality and other loyal Subjects fell into the hands of the
merciless Victors.

December the 22 d. The Lords at Westminster (to the eternal dishonor of that
House) put it to the Vote, Whether Christmas day should be kept or no? For
truly to blot out that, and the memory of Christ's Passion, is the nearest way
to introduce Judaism.

December. the 26 th. His Majesty sent a third message, wherein he offered to
repair personally to London for concluding a Peace, but this found no better
acceptance than the two former.

December. the 29 th. His Majesty sent answer to the Parliaments Letter of the
25. of this month, and did then again use the best persuasions he could to
beget in them admittance of a Personal Treaty; both which last received a
denial from the Parliament by a Letter dated Jan. 13. 1645.

January the 1 st. The Newarkers (to welcome in the New year) made a gallant
sally upon General Pointz his Quarters at Stoke, killed and took above 220.
with good store of Arms and other Booty, without any valuable loss.

Jan. the 14 th. His Majesty sent a fifth Message, inviting to Peace.

January the 17 th. His Majesty sent Answer to the Parliaments Letter of the 13
th. of January, with many gracious expressions of his desire of Peace.

Jan. the 18 th Dartmouth was taken by Sir Thomas Fairfax, part of it by storm,
and other part by Composition.

Jan. the 20 th. Sir John Cansfield with a party of horse from Oxford beat up
the Rebels Quarters at Marlborough, took Col. Airs, the Rebels Governor of
the Devizes, Mr. Goddard a Committee-man, Cap. White their Commissary General,
3 Troops of Horse, 100 Foot Soldiers, with good store of Arms and Ammunition,
with the loss of but 3 or 4 men slain, and not many hurt.

The same day a party from Ashby-de-la Zouche took Astley Castle in
Warwickshire, by Scalado, and in it the Governor, with some 30 others, with
good store of Arms.

Jan. the 24 th. His Majesty sent a seventh Letter in fuller Answer of the
Parliaments Letter of the 13 th. of this month, with earnest desire of a
satisfactory Answer to his former Letters, the aim of all which still levelled
at the peace and welfare of this bleeding Kingdom.

Jan. the 29 th. His Majesty sent an eighth Letter to the Parliament, with many
gracious condescendings for Peace, but their ears were still deaf to such pious
motions.

Jan. the 30 th. A party from Ragland Castle commanded by the Lord Charles
Sommerset, took the Town of Carlion in Monmouth-shire, wherein were 200 of the
Rebels Foot Soldiers, and a Troop of Horse, some of which were slain, others
drowned, and the rest taken Prisoners.

Feb. the 1 st. The same party also took the Town of Newport in that County,
after a sharp fight, wherein 200 Rebels fell, agd as many were taken Prisoners
in the Town, His Majesty's Forces in this action not losing one man, but had
about 30 wounded.

Feb. the 3 d. Belvoir Castle that had been defended for near three months by
Sir Gervas Lucas was now surrendered to the Rebels upon Honorable Conditions to
march away, with Bag and Baggage, etc.

The same 3 d. of Feb. Westchester that had been gallantly defended by the Lord
Byron above five months was likewise surrendered upon Conditions to march away,
etc.

Feb. the 6 th. Dunster Castle in Sommersetshire, that had been long besieged
by the Rebels, was relieved by that tried Soldier Major General Webb.

Feb. the 7 th. A party of His Majesty's Forces entered the Town of Warham in
Dorsetshire, took Col. Butler the Governor, two Committee men, and some others,
and thence marched to Corf Castle then besieged, which they relieved, took a
Mortar-Peice of the Rebels, and made a safe Retreat without any Loss.

Feb. the 15 th. A little but sharp encounter happened between a party of His
Majesty's Forces from Titbury Castle, and a like party of Rebels from Barton
house in Darbyshire, wherein after above half an hours dispute, some slain and
many hurt on each side, the Rebels were Routed and many of them taken Prisoners.

Feb. the 18 th. A party of Rebels near Uttoxeter in Staffordshire, were routed
by His Majesty's Forces, who slew Captain Watson their Commander in chief, with
Captain Hard-staffe and diverse others, and took 60 Prisoners, but more Horses
and good store of Arms. In this action His Majesty lost Captain Sares only of
Note and three Troopers.

Feb. 26 th. His Majesty sent a ninth Letter to Westminster to desire an Answer
of his former Letters, still pressing for Peace.

Feb. 16 th. The strong Castle of Corf which had been lately relieved, was
delivered into the hands of the Rebels by the Treachery and perfidiousness of
one Lieutenant Colonel Pitman.

March the 2 d. A party of His Majesty's Forces from Oxford entered the Town of
Abbington, seized upon the Ordnance and Magazin, yet for want of a sufficient
supply were forced to retreat with some Prisoners, and few slain on either side.

March the 12 th. The Lord Hopton being, much overpowered by the Rebels in the
West was necessitated to accept of Conditions for the disbanding his Army, etc.

March the 21 st. the Lord Ashley commanding a Brigade of horse and foot from
Worcestershire which were intended for Oxford, were set upon by an aggregate
body of the Rebels on the edg of Gloucestershire and defeated, the foot most
taken with my Lord himself and some of the horse, the remainder escaped and got
to Oxford. Thus had His Majesty two Armies defeated in less than a fortnight,
yet we are confident when Almighty God has sufficiently punished the sins of
this Nation, he will in his good time restore a pious King to his just rights,
and his bleeding Kingdoms to peace and union in despite of all Sectaries and
Opponents.

March the 23 d. His Majesty (never weary in acting any thing tending to Peace)
sent his tenth Message to this effect, That in case he might have the faith of
his two houses of Parliament for the preservation of his Honor, person, and
estate, and that liberty might be given to all those that do and have adhered
to His Majesty, to enjoy their Estates, without any sequestration, or being
compelled to take any Oaths, not enjoined by Law, he would then disband his
forces, dismantle his Garrisons, return to and reside with his two Houses of
Parliament, etc. And could more be offered by, or expected from a Gracious
King? If the Ears of the Parliament continue deaf to so reasonable a motion,
the World will easily perceive their intentions are not conform to their often
professions: And His Majesty will be abundantly cleared before God and man for
any ensuing miseries that shall (by want of an Accommodation) befall these
Kingdoms, whereunto God of his goodness afford Peace and Truth.

Reader,
THere remains now nothing to complete this short sad story, but a Catalogue of
the Persons of Note slain in these last four years, (not to speak of those many
thousands of inferior Rank) which may well challenge even from an adamantine
heart the tribute of a bleeding eye, the rather, since there is hardly any story
can parallel these calamities, which if truly resented, will exact from all
good Christians an earnest and continual supplication, that Almighty God would
please to avert his anger from us, and set a period to these distractions.

A Catalogue of the Names of all, or the most part of the Lords, Knights, and
men of Quality slain or Executed by Law-Martial on both sides, since the
beginning of this Unnatural War, to the 25 th. of March, 1646.

On His Majesty's part slain,
EArl of Lindsey. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Carnarvon. Earl of Sunderland.
Farl of Litchsield. Earl of Kingstone. Marquess de Vieuville, a French man.
Lord Viscount Faulkland Lord d' Aubigny. Lord John Steward. Lord Grandison.
Lord Carry, eldest Son to the E. of Monmouth. An Outlandish Lord slain at
Nottingham, who was a near kinsman to the Prince of Orange. Sir Edmon. Verney.
Sir Bevill Grenvile. Sir Nicholas Slannyng. Sir Richard Lawdy. Sir Ingram
Hopton. Sir William Butler. Sir William Clark. Sir Thomas Metham. Sir Anthony
Maunsell. Sir Anthony St. Ledger. Sir Henry Gage. Sir John Girlington. Sir
William Mainwaring. Sir John Digby. Sir William Crofts. Sir John Smith. Sir
Thomas Gardener and his Brother. Sir Peter Brown. Sir Thomas Dallison. Sir
Bernard Ashley. Sir Richard Crane. Sir Richard Hutton. Sir Gilbert Gerard. Sir
William Wentworth. Sir Cha. Blunt by Mutiny. Sir Jo. Scudamore in a Duel,
Colonel Blague. Col. Windebank. Sir Job. Cademan.
Executed, by Martial Law: The first for Treachery, the second for Cowardice,
and the third Beheaded at Bristol for killing an Officer there Col. Howard.
Col. Lunsford. Col. Trevanian. Col. Morgan. Col. Eure. Col. Cavendish. Col.
Townley. Col. Herne. Col. Ferdinando Stanhop and Col. Stanhop, Sons to the Earl
of Chesterfield. Col. Marrow. Col. Prideaux. Col. Mynne. Col. Mannyng. Col.
Slaughter. Col. Bernard. Col. S. George. Col. Tailor. Col. Bawd. Col. Carnaby.
Col. Bentall. Lieut. Col. Markham. Master Sackvile, Son to the Earl of Dorset.
Persons of Note slain on the Parliaments part: where the Reader may observe,
that as His Majesty had on his side ten Gentlemen at least for every one on
their side; it must by consequence follow, that he must lose many more of Note
than they.
THe Lord S. John, eldest Son to the E. of Bullingbrook. Lord Brook. Sir
Charles Essex. Sir William Fairfax. Sir Charles Fairfax. Sir John Meldrum.
Major Genesis Crawford. Col. John Hampden, one of the 5. Members. Col. Sands. Col.
Armyne. Col. Thornton. Col. Lister. Col. Meldrum. Col. Malevory. Col. Cockeram.
Lieutenant Col. Stanley. Lieut. Col. Quarles. Lieut. Col. Harrington. Lieut.
Col. Gurdon. Major Douglas. Doctor Scudamore.
Executed on the Parliaments side by Law-Martial, (not to speak of the E. of
Strafford and the Archbishop of Cant.)
Sir Alexander Carew. At LONDON. Sir John Hotham and his Son. At LONDON. Master
Tomkins. At LONDON. Master Chaloner. At LONDON. Master Bourchier. At BRISTOLL.
Master Yomans. At BRISTOLL.
FINIS.
THE TABLE OF Mercurius Rusticus.
ARcher Preaches Rebellion up, and Gentry and Learning down. page 35 Articles
of Surrender broken. 49, 51, 65, 76 Sir Henry Audley Plundered. 13, 14
B.
Doctor Bargrave Plundered. 79. etc. dies of grief, 81 Barnard an ungrateful
Schismatic. 145 Sir. Tho. Barrington for bids the Preaching of Divine Truth.
20, 21 Master Bartlets house five times Plundered. 186, etc. Doctor Beale,
Doctor Martin, Doctor Stern imprisoned and barbarously used on Shipboard. 132
Beale a Rebel Plundered by the Rebels. 91 A Bear more merciful than the Rebels.
94 Bible abused. 213. Blasphemy. 43, 123, 124 Sir Wllliam Boteler Plundered. 7.
His Steward tortured. 10 Bowlstrodes Prayer. 157 Sir Will. Brook storms a
Gally-pot. 9 John Brown tortured. 3 Burton intruded into Mr. Chestlins Living.
177 Master Bykar Murdered because he was a Parsons Son. 57
C
Sir Ralph Canterills man Tortured. 149 Cathedral Churches Profaned and abused
at Canterbury, 119. Rochester, 136. Chichester, 139. Winchester, 146, etc.
Westminster, 154. Exeter. 158, 159 Mr. Chaldwel and his Wife barbarously used,
and his Servant Murdered. 104 Chelmsford well governed, 25. and taught. 26 Mr.
Chestlen unjustly ejected and Imprisoned. 170 Child hanged for not betraying
his Father. 112 Children taken from their Parents. 54 Church Profaned. 67,
110, 193. Colchester, 1. their justice. 14 Mr. Cornelius Plundered. 33 Dr. Cox
most inhumanely used against the Law of Arms. 71
D
Mr. Dalton Plundered and his Wife hardly used 144 Dark a Rebel makes his
Servants plough on the Fast day without reproof. 127 The Dead violated. 67, 69,
105, 147 Divine Service disturbed. 29, 42, 108, 192.
E
Sir Walter Earls creeping valor. 12C Evidences and Books destroyed. 39
Ambassador Robbed. 90
F
Father starves his Son, because he will not be a Rebel 101 Fear of Cruelty
makes some run mad, others die. 41 Dr. Featley Persecuted to Death. 193 Nath.
Fiennes his Warrant. 160 Mr. Flint murdered. 65 Mr. Flower Lamed and
Imprisoned, his house Plundered, his Wife and Children barbarously used. 181,
182
G
Gentry to be rooted out. 111 Giffords form of Burial. 97 Mr. Gibb persecuted
for Loyalty. 98, 99 A Goose strained at, a Mare swallowed. 191 Mr. Gray
plundered and imprisoned. 59
H
Sir Arthur Haslerigs dance. 143 Mr. Haynes robbed and imprisoned. 57, 58 Sir.
Tho. Hides compliance with the Rebels rewarded. 155 Mr. Hinson imprisoned, and
inhumanly used. 165 Mr. Honifold plundered, imprisoned, and rudely hanled. 14
House Burnt to pay a reckoning. 41 Mr. Hutchinson and Mr Hiliard imprisoned on
Shipboard. 161
I
Infant robbed. 131 Mr. Jones imprisoned. 92. famished. 97 Mr. Jones (another)
persecuted. 125, 126 Jury perjured. 34 The Justice of the Earl of Essex. 42
K
The Kings Picture abused, 38, 129. and his Statue. 149 Kirles Cruelty. 84
L
Mr. Laud plundered for his name sake. 13 Mr. Loss barbarously used. 108 Sir
John Lucas plundered and imprisoned, his Mother, Wife and Family abused. 1
M
Dr. Martin imprisoned, and inhumanly used on Shipboard. 132 Mercy forbidden to
be showed. 88 Dr. Michelson persecuted, and most inhumanly handled for Loyalty,
and his Wife and Children undone. 27 Sir Richard Minshull plundered 36, 17
N
Mr. Newcomin rudely handled and imprisoned. 2 Mr. Nowel plundered and
imprisoned. 78
O
Oath of implicit Obedience. 48
P
Parliaments Justice. 12, 46, 47, 58, 67, 171 Parliament, the Lords Anointed,
how. 36 Prisoner's forbidden their Devotions. 100 Pyms lowzie ashes. 156
R
Rape threatened, 16. attempted, 78. with Murder. 98 Reading taxed. 44 Rebels
lay their own Robberies on the Cavalliers, and cozen the Londoners. 90 Countess
of Rivers plundered. 15, 41 Robber released by the Commons. 16
S
Col. Sands a cruel plunderer. 7. his Travels. 79. indicted of Rape. ib. his
Repentance, Relapse, and miserable Death. 131 A Scot defends the stealing of a
Chalice, and holds a wooden dish good enough for the Sacrament. 143 Servent
Treacherous. 1 A Soldier hanged for Loyalty. 129 Soldiers made drunk to bring
them on. 122 Soldier brags of cruelty. 191 Spoil of goods. 38, 51 Mr. Squire
plundered of 4000 l. 159 Mr. Swift plundered, his Wife and Children barbarously
used. 83, 84 Mr. Stevens his neighbor murdered for concealing his goods. 17
Mr. Simons sequestered and persecuted for Loyalty, and a scandalous man put in
his place. 18
T
Thanks given for Sedition. 5 Mr. Thorn unjustly imprisoned. 45 Treason
preached and encouraged. 17 Mr. Tyringham wounded and inhumanly used. 136
V
Mr. Udal and his Wife cruelly used. 153, 154 Vens traitenous sauciness and
cruelty. 100
W
Wellingborow plundered. 59 Whoredom on the Altar. 154 Mr. Wiborow abused. 42.
and his Wife and Children. 139, 140 Women in labor cruelly used. 77 Woman
whipped to death. 167 Mr. Wright plundered and his servants murdered. 132
THE TABLE OF Querela Cantabrigiensis.
A
ANcient Coins plundered. 191 Ash and Good, two Camp-Chaplains, eject and
banish, whom they please. 202
B
Mr. Baldero imprisoned to satisfy his Conscience. 246 Banishment. 201 Bishop
of Exeter deprived and banished. 184 Book of Common Prayer torn in St. Mary's
Church. 190 Bridges broken down. 193
C
Cambridge made a Rendezvous to ruin the University. 185 Chapels abused. 196,
197 Colleges defaced 193, 194. made a Prison. 193 Dr. Collins deprived of his
places. 184 Dr. Comber and Dr. Cousin deprived. 185 Covenant with Hell 204. a
cause of Persecution, like the six Articles 205. The number of the Beast. ibid.
Cromwels malice to the University. 182 Curd a confiding Tailor. 192
D
Doctors of Divinity carried Prisoners to London in triumph. 182. designed to
be sold for slaves to Argiers. 183
E
Ejection of those for absence who had not time given to return, or were kept
Prisoners at London 198
F
Fellow of a College plucked from the Communion to hinder an Election. 197
Fortune, a decayed Hatter, Plunder-master General. 192
G
Goods and Books taken from Scholars. 192
H
Dr. Holdsworth deprived and imprisoned. 185 Homes a lubberly Scottish Major
trampled in the kennel by a Chambermaid. 195 St. John's College, Fellows there
ejected. 202 Jordan a small sneaking Captain, his Tyranny. 190
L
Dr. Lany deprived. 185
M
Earl of Manchesters Chaplain will not resolve men's Consciences. 246. his
Warrants. 201 Materials for College building taken away. 193 Meat taken from
College Tables. 191 Muskets shot against Scholars windows. 182
G
Oath of discovery, Treacherous perjury. 199, 200
P
Dr. Pask deprived. 185. Pictures burnt. 192 Mr. Power not suffered to preach
Ad Clerum. 189
Q
Queens College extirpated Root and Branch. 202 Regent house besieged to force
the Congregation to confer a Degree upon an unworthy man. 188 Rents taken from
Colleges. 191
S
Scholars thrust out of their Beds, 191. knocked down for relieving Prisoners.
195 Soldiers Quartered in Colleges. 194, 195
T
Taxes imposed on the University by the Town. 165 Training in Kings College
Chapel. 196, 197
V
Vice-chancelor and Heads kept Prisoners in the Consistory. 186 University,
their Contribution to the King justified. 179
W
Walks, Woods, and Orchards of Colleges cut down. 192 Dr. Wards Loyalty to
death. 187 Whores kept in Colleges by the Rebels. 194

