MICRO-CHRONICON: OR, A brief Chronology of the Time and Place of the Battles,
Sieges, Conflicts, and other most remarkable Passages which have happened
betwixt His Majesty and the Parliament, from the beginning of these unhappy
dissentions to the 25th of March. 1647.

Together, With a Catalogue of the LORDS, Knights, Commanders, and persons of
quality slain on either side therein.

Cicer. Incerti sunt exitus pugnarum, Marsque est communis, qui saepe
spoliantem, jam and exultantem evertit and perculit ab abjecto. Printed in the
Year, 1647.

The Preface.
Reader,
YOu have found in the preceding parts of this Ruina, under the Title of
Rusticus, some few relations of those many plundring outrages committed on the
good subjects lives, consciences, and Estates, by the giddyheaded Sectaries. In
the second place, you have met with their fanaticke fury in destroying those
once much to be admired Edifices, the Cathedrals of this Kingdom. In the
third, you have seen what tyranny they have exercised over the learned and
pious Divines in and about London, And in the fourth place, you have heard the
querulous outcry of that once famous University of Cambridge. In this last and
remaining part, it rests only to give you a Synopsis, or short view of the
Martial Actions which did concomitantly occur in the time of the other, and
with it a List of suck Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen and Commanders as perished
on both sides, in the fury of less th^n five years War where the men* cry
of such as fell in defense of Religion, King and Laws, will deservedly live
for ever, whilst the others will dye in their own putrefaction: In this (as
in the former parts) the Reader will easily perceive a great deal of candor
and impartialitie to go along even to the end where these persecuting subjects
met with strange successes, not given by God, as a blessing upon their bad
cause, but as a scourge for our sins, which when his infinite goodness shall
deem to be sufficiently chastised, we doubt not but that he will burn those
Rods, by destroying the Hydra-headed multitude of Sects and Heresies, by
re-establishing our gracious Sovera^gne in his ancient Rights and freedom, by
reducing the Laws to their old Channel, all loyal subjects to their
Liberties and Estates, and out of the dissentions and impieties of these
all-commanding subjects make new Rods for their deserved chastisement, which we
shall patiently expect in Gods good time.

March 25. 1647.
Micro-Chronicon Annorum sex Mirabilium, etc.
Anno 1640.
NOvember 3. (after the unhappy breaches of some former Parliaments) began that
(yet sitting) at Westminster, called by His Sacred majesty, to advise with him
for the redress of our grievances: But instead thereof, (by the prevalencie of
a factions party) the Kingdom was voted into unheardof disobedience against
His majesty, whereby our grievances were multiplied; Religion and Laws
defaced, by encouragement given to Anabaptists, Brownists, Independants, and
all manner of Sectaries, Churches profaned, the Monuments of the dead
violated, the Common prayer Book thrown away every man being left to the
dictate of his private Spirit, and the whole Kingdom engaged in a most
unnatural and bloody War.

Anno 1641.
May 12. The Earl of Strafford, Lord Deputy of Ireland, after a long and
tedious trial, was beheaded on Tower Hill. It were hard to tell you by what
Law, other then some rusty volumes of constructive and arbitrary Treason.
Howbeit, his life was sacrificed to appease the thirst of the multitude. And
although His Majesty (unwillingly) signed the Bill; It was no small happiness
for him and his Posterity, that His majesty conceived him not meriting so
severe and heavy a punishment, as the utmost execution of that sentence.

Dec. 15. The House of Commons published a Remonstrance of the state of the
Kingdom, therein setting forth all the Errors of His Majesty's Government (a
mere design to alienate the affection of His Subjects from Him) Wherein they
also declared, that the party of Bishops and Popish Lords in the House of
Peers, had hindered the proceedings of diverse good Bills passed in the Commons
House, concerning the Reformation of sundry great abuses and corruptions both
in Church and State. And thereupon the tumultuous and factious people in and
about London, resorted to Westminster with clubs and swords, crying through the
streets, Westminster Hall, and between the two Houses, No Bishops, No Bishops,
No Popish Lords, and abusing the several Members of either House, who, they
were informed, favored not their ends: and using seditious and traitorous
speeches against His Majesty himself.

January
3. His Majesty exhibited Articles of High Treason against the Lord Kimbolton,
and the five Members, as for other matters, so, for endeavoring to subvert the
fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and to deprive. His
Majesty of his Regal power, and to place an Arbitrary, and Tyrannical power
in subjects; and for raising and countenancing Tumults, thereby to compel the
Parliament to Order, limit, and dispose their proceedings as might concur with
their designs.

4. Upon an Order published by the House of Com- against the Arresting of their
Members, His Maj. went in person to demand them.

5. The Houses thereupon adjourned themselves into London, and the City took
the Members into protection, under pretense of maintaing the privilege of
Parliament.

11. The accused five Members were guarded to Westminster both by water and
land.

20. His Majesty (to compose these differences) sent a most gracious Message to
both Houses, advising them to take into confideration all such particulars as
they held necessary for upholding his just Regal power, and settling his
Revenue; as also for establishing Religion, (with due regard to tender
consciences in point of Ceremonies) and for securing their Privileges, and the
liberty of the Subject.

27. The House of Commons petitioned His Majesty, that the Militia, and the
Forts and Castles might be put in the hands of such men, as they did conside in.

31. Because the major part of Lords would not concur with the house of
Commons in the business of the Militia, the factious and poor sort of people
in and about London, petitioned the House of Commons (by their own direction)
against those Lords, as Malignants, and disturbers of their Peace, and
threatened to remove them, so they withdrew themselves; and the Militia was
carried by the remaining party of the Lords.

February
2. The Lords and Commons petitioned His Majesty, that he would forthwith put
the Tower of London, and all other Forts, and the whole Militia of the
Kingdom, into the hands of such persons* as they should recommend unto him, to
which His Majesty returned this most Gracious Answer, that when he should know,
the extent of Power which was intended to be established in those Persons, whom
they desired to be the Commanders of the Militia, in the several Counties; and
likewise to what time it should be limited, that no Power should be executed by
His Majesty alone without the advice of Parliament; then he would be content to
put in all the places both of Forts and Militia, such persons as both Houses of
Parliament, should either approve, or recommend unto him, so that they declared
before unto His Majesty the names of such persons: unless such persons should
be named, against whom he should have just and unquestionable exceptions. In
the interim,

11. His Majesty (to show his real intention to satisfy the (needles^e)
fears of his people) was content to accept of S. John Conyers, in the place of
S. John Byron to be Lieutenant of the Tower.

23. The Queens Majesty took shipping at Dover having been driven before
from White Hall by the frequent tumults of the factious and rude people; and
soon after His Majsty went to New Market, and from thence to York.

24. The Houses of Parliament sent a message unto His Majesty, wherein they
desired that the Prince might not be removed from Hampton Court, least it might
be a cause to promote jealousies and fears, etc. To which His Majesty
returned, that he knew not what answer to give, not being able to imagine from
what grounds they proceeded. But if any information had been given to that
purpose; His Majesty much desired that the same might be examined to the
bottom, and then he hoped, that their fears and jealousies would be
afterward continued only with reference to His Majesty's Rights and Honor.

24. The Lords and Commons voted 2500000. Acres of Land in Ireland to be
assigned, allotted, and divided amongst such as should disburse any sums of
money, for reduceing of Ireland.

The same day His Majesty (being glad to receive any Proposition that might
repair the calamity of his distressed Kingdom of Ireland;) not only assented
unto their Propositions; but also offered to venture his own Royal Person for
the recovery of that Kingdom, and to contribute any other Assistance he could
to that service, by parting with any profit, or advantage of his own there --
And yet they were not ashamed afterward to suspect, nay, accuse His Majesty
of Granting Commissions for raising the Rebellion there.

25. The Houses presented an Ordnance to His Majesty for settleing of the
Militia according as they had thought fit; to which they desired His Majesty's
assent.

28. His Majesty (for many weighty reasons) returned his Negative answer;
wherein (amongst other rational expressions) this was one: That he could not
consent to divest himself of the just power which God and the Laws of this
Kingdom had placed in him, for the defense of his people, and to put it into
the hands of others for any indefinite time, etc.

March
1. The Houses Petitioned His Majesty (then at Theobalds) concerning the
Militia, wherein they threatened him; that if His Majesty should persist in his
denial, and not assure them by their Messengers of his Royal assent to their
former desires, they should be enforced to dispose of the Militia, by their
own Authority, in such manner as had been formerly propounded to him; and
that they had resolved to do it accordingly, with many other undutifull
expressions.

The same day His Majesty retuned them answer; That for the Militia he had
thought so much of his former answer before he sent it, and was so much assured
that the same was agreeable to what in Justice, or reason they could ask, or
he in honor grant, that he should not alter it in any point, etc.

2. The Houses voted that the Kingdom should be put into a posture of defense
by their own Authority, in such a way as they had already agreed upon.

15. His Majesty (upon his removeall from Huntington to York) sent a most
gracious Message to both Houses, wherein he earnestly desired that they would
use all possible industry in expediting the business of Ireland, intimating
withal, that no inconvenience should happen to that service by his absence,
and that if the misfortunes and Calamities of his poor Protestant Subjects
there should grow upon them (though His Majesty should be deeply concerned in,
and sensible of their sufferings) he should wash his hands before all the
world, from the least imputation of slacknesse in that necessary and pious
work; with many other most gracious expressions for the begetting of a good
understanding between him and the Parliament, and the due observation of the
Laws of the Kingdom concerning the Militia, etc.

16. His Majesty set forth a most gracious Proclamation for putting the Laws
against Popish Recusants in due execution.

Anno 1642.
28. A Paper was sent from the two Houses, unto His maj. concerning the Earl
of Warwick to be made Admiral of the Seas, notwithstanding that His Majesty
had already appointed Sir John Pennington upon the Recommendation of the
Admiral, against whom no fault was or could be alleged.

31. His Majesty signified his resolution upon that point, which was that he
would not alter him, whom he had already appointed to command this years
fleet.

April
8. His Majesty sent a most gracious Message to the Parliament, concerning his
firm resolution of going in Person to Ireland, for suppressing the Rebels
there, and thereby so to settle the peace of that Kingdom, and the security of
this, that the very name of fears and Jealousies might have been no more
heard of.

9. The Lords and Commons declared that they intended a due and necessary
reo^mation of the Government and Lyturgie of the Church, and to take away
nothing in one, or the other, but what was evil, and justly offensive, or at
least unnecessary and burdensome.

The same day they Petitioned His Majesty to give leave to remove the Magazine
from Hull, to the Tower of London, and for executing of six condemned Priests,
which His Majesty (in his wonted mercy) had Reprieved, because he had been
certainly informed that they were (by some restraint) disabled to take the
benefit of His Majesty's Proclamation.

18. The Houses Petitioned His Majesty to desist from his intended passage to
Ireland, and from all preparation of men and arms tending thereunto, and to
leave the managing of that War to themselves. Whereunto the King returned a
most gracious answer, and was contented to stay sometime to see the event of
things, and not pursue his resolution, etc.

22. The Gentry of Yorkshire Petitioned His Majesty that the Magazine at Hull
might not be removed thence.

23. Hereupon His Majesty went in Person to view his Arms, and Munition there,
where being come, he sound the Gates all shut upon him, and the Bridges drawn
up by the command of that Arch-Traitor Sir John Hotham, who then commanded a
Garrison there, and from the Walls flatly denied His Majesty entrance; nor
would he suffer the Duke of York, and his Nephew the Prince Elector, (who had
gone thither the day before) to be let out to His majesty, till after some
Consultation.

28. It was voted that Sir John Hotham had herein done nothing but in obedience
to the command of both Houses of Parliament.

May
12. The Militia being taken from His Majesty (against the Law, and His
Majesty's consent) and put in execution; And his Magazine at Hull (being his
own proper goods) taken from (and employed against) him; and Sir John Hothams
Treason countenanced, and defended by the two Houses; His Majesty resolved to
have a Guard (the Parliament having had one for three months before, upon
imaginary jealousies) only to secure his Person; to be maintained at His
Majesty's own Charge: In which he (this day) desired the concurrence and
assistance of the Gentry of Yorkshire, who willingly thereunto agreed, as
conceiving themselves bound to do the same by their Allegiance.

20. It was voted by both Houses, that the King intended to ^eavy War against
the Parliament: which they did on purpose to excuse themselves for raising a
Rebellion against His majesty, as appeared within few days after.

27. His majesty by his Proclamation forbad all his subjects belonging to the
Traind-bands, or militia of the Kingdom, to rise, martch, muster, or exercise,
without his consent, or warrant, upon pain of punishment according to the
Laws.

The same day His majesty commanded the Gentry and others of the County of
York, to meet upon Heyworth moore.

June
18. His majesty by his Proclamation, forbad all leavies of forces, without his
consent.

20. His majesty by another Proclamation, declared the lawfullnesse and use of
the Commissions of Array, and commanded obedience to be given to the
Commissioners therein named, in the Execution thereof.

30. His majesty sent out his Warrant, for summoning of all Gentlemen, and
others, being Protestants, who were charged with horses for His majesty's
service, or had listed themselves to attend personally for his security to make
their appearance at York, July 7. following.

2. They offered to His majesty 19. Propositions, which struck at Regal power
it self; and would transfer it to, and settle it in the Houses of Parliament
for ever: And so of Monarchy would have made this an Aristocracy and Democracy
(suitable to the Government they intended in the Church, the Presbytery:) and
upon the Kings refusal of them,

10. They published Propositions for bringing in of money, etc. to raise an
Army.

11. The Lords Ordered, that all Arms, Ammunition, Powder, Light-horses, etc.
that were, or should be convayed toward the North, should be stayed.

12. Letters, feigned here at home, yet, given out to be sent from Amsterdame,
intimating preparation of Ordnance, Pistols, and Ammunition there, to be
transported to His majesty of purpose to deter the simple people, and to
possess them with a belief that His majesty intended to make War with the
Parliament;) were read in the House of Commons, and Ordered to be Printed and
Published.

16. His majesty disavow^d any preparations, or intentions in him to leavie
War against his Houses of Parliament. And the Lords and others of his Privy
Council there testified in Justification of His majesty.

July
2. His majesty's Ship called the providence landed in the Cre^k of Kenningham
near Hull; till which time His m^i^sty had not a Barrel of Powder, nor any
Arms, or Ammunition ^hatsoever.

12. The pretended two Houses (Rebelliously) voted, that the Earl of Essex
should be General of their Army, and that they would live and dye with him.

30. They Ordered 100000. l. of the monyes which was come in upon the
subscriptions for Ireland, to be employed to the disturbance of the peace of
this Kingdom, in bloody War against His Sacred majesty, the mischievous,
illegal, and unjust diversion of which moneys (contrary to the express words
of the Act of Parliament concerning the same) was the only cause of the Rebels
success, and of the wasting of His majesty's Armies there, for want of timely
supplies and payment.

August
1. The Earl of Essex caused all the men then raised (being in number about
10000) to be committed to officers, and divided into regiments, which men had
been raising ever since the 12. of July 1642. at which time he was made
General of the Rebels.

6. The Earl of Bedford having fruitlessely besieged the Lord marquess of
Hertford in Sherburne Castle for four day* before, retreated to Yevell;
whereof 9. Commanders, took diverse Prisoners, and routed the rest; so as he
marched away, and after divided his small forces, going himself into Wales and
Sir Ralph (now deservedly Lord) Hopton into Cornwall.

8. The Lords and Commons by their Declaration gave full power and Authority to
the Earl of Essex, and all the rest of their Commanders to ^ight with, kill,
and slay, all, or any that should oppose the militia.

9. The Earl of Essex, and all his adherents were Proclaimed Traitors: And His
majesty made his gracious offer of pardon to him and such of his adherents, as
should within six days lay down their Arms.

10. His majesty declared (by his Proclamation) that no Popish Recusant should
serve him in his Army.

18. The Rebels at Westminster declared all men Traitors that should assist
His majesty with Horse, Arms, and money, etc.

22. His majesty (then at Notingham) sent unto them a most gracious message,
for a Treaty: But they refused it.

25. His majesty set up his Standard Royal at Nottingham, for raising of
Forces to suppress the Rebels then marching against him.

September
19. His majesty made his speech and protestation in the head of his Army
between Stafford and Wellington.

23. Prince Rupert with about 11. Troops of horse gave a great overthrow to
the Rebels in Wikefield near Worcester.

The same day they Ordered, that all the Regiments of foot, and Troops of
horse in London, and all parts of England, should within 48. hours march to
the Earl of Essex, to be employed against His majesty.

October.
4. His majesty by his Proclamation adiourned part of Michaelmas Term; but the
Houses would take no notice thereof.

23. Was that signal great Battle fought between Keinton and Edgehill by
His majesty's Army, and that of the Parl. led by the Earl of Essex, wherein
the Parl. lost above 70. Colors of Cornets and Ensigns, and His majesty but
only 16. Ensigns, and not one Cornet. The exact number that were slain on
both sides in this Battle is not known: But it is most certain that the
Parl. lost above three for one. His majesty himself was in the Bataile, whose
undaunted Courage put life in every man, his sacred Person being exposed to so
much danger as all good men do tremble to remember. His Royal Sons (the two
young Princes) Charles Prince of Wales, and James Duke of York, being also in
the field in very much danger, if God (whose cause it was) had not covered
their heads in the day of Battle.

24. His majesty offered a general pardon to all such as should lay down
Arms, and return to their obedience.

27. His majesty to complete his victory in Keinton field, drew his whole Army
before Banbury; but after the fireing of one small Drake, the Parl. forces
there submitted to His may. mercy (which were in number about 800. foot (of the
Earl of Pete boroughs, and Lord Says Regiments) with ten Colors, and a troop
of horse) and yielded the Town and Castle to the King: at which time the Earl
of Essex with his shattered forces, were crept over the river Avon into
Warwick (full 8. miles backward from the place where they were beaten) there
to secure those few he had left under the protection of the strong situate
Town and Castle, leaving behind him above 20. Wagons laden with Powder and
other Ammunition.

His majesty offered a pardon to the Citizens of London and Westminster.

November
12. His majesty, after four hours fight, forced the Town of Brainceford,
where Lieutenant Col. Quarles that commanded in chief was slain, and at least
400. more of the Parliaments killed and drowned, and many taken Prisoners,
amongst whom was that Firebrand of sedition, John Lilburne, Defendour of the
Independents faith.

13. The next morning (being Sunday) certain of the Parl. forces had come down
the Thames from Kingston with 18. pieces of Ordnance, which (so soon as they
could discern (for it was a very misty morning) they fired against Sion house,
and His majesty's Train of Artillery, but did little or no harm: Whereupon
His majesty commanded some Pieces to be drawn down into the meadow, and to
the river side over against them, and likewise a Demicanon to be planted near
the South end of the Town. All which were so iudiciously plied, that they shot
through their Boats and Barges, and at last fired the powder in one of them,
which blew up many of them: The rest took them to their heels, leaving behind
them their mangled boats and barges, with all their Ordnance and the remainder
of their Ammunition; on which His majesty presently seized, and afterward (the
year being spent) made an Honorable and safe retreat to the City of Oxford.

5. His majesty's Forces (under the command of Lieutenant General Wilmot)
stormed, and took the Town of Marlborough defended by one Ramsey (a Scot) and
about 500. foot: Ramsey and diverse of the prime Resistants brought Prisoners
to Oxford, all their Arms taken and four Colors.

The same day, the Earl of Newcastle laid siege to Tadcaster, and by several
assaults on the Town (from ten of the Clock in the forenoone, till seven at
night) killed Captain Lyster, and 60. more of the Parl. who found such hot
service that they stole away in the night to Cawood and Selby, leaving
Tadcaster fortified for His majesty's service.

19. A great victory was obtained by the Lord Hopton, near Bodmin in the
County of Cornwall, 900 of the Parl. slain and taken Prisoners, etc.

22. The Lord Hopton assaulted and took the Town of Saltash.

27. The Forces (Commanded by John Hampden) assaulted Brill in Buckinghamshire
(then a Garrison for His majesty) but were shamefully repulsed by His majesty's
forces there, under the command of Sir Gilbert Gerard the then Governor
thereof.

February
1. Lieutenant General King and Lieutenant General Goring defeated 400. foot
and three Troops of the Parl. horse near unto Yarum.

2. Cirencester, or Cicester, in Glouceste^shire was taken by his highness
Prince Rupert.

13. The Queens majesty left the Hague and went to Sciveling.

16. Her majesty reimbarked in the Princess Royal of Great Britain; And,

Her majesty came within sight of Flamborough head.

20. She cast Anchor in the harbor of Burlington-Bay.

22. Her majesty landed at Burlington Key.

24. This morning, four Ships and a Pinnace in the Parl. service, which came
overnight into the road, made above 100 great shot at the houses in the Key,
for two hours shooting crosse-barre-shot, and bullets of 12. pound weight, all
of them aimed so near as they could, at the place where the Queen lay:
insomuch that Her majesty was forced to make what haste She could out of her
bed, and to get her self under the shelter of an hill to save her life from
the fury of those bloody rebels. But God preserved Her majesty both by sea and
land.

In this month, Sir Richard Lawdy, with the Forces from Hereford, routed a
great body of the Parl from Gloucester, at Cover, on the borders of that
County; where that valiant and faithful Gentleman was slain out of a window.

March
18, 19. was a great battle on Hopton-heath in Staffordshire, wherein Gell
and Brereton, two cowardly rebels, were totally routed by His majesty's forces
under the command of the right honorable Spencer, then Earl of Northampton,
who was there unfortunately slain, with Col: Middleton, and some few others on
His majesty's part.

23. Grantham taken by Col: Charles Cavendish for His majesty, and afterward
the Works demolished.

Anno 1643.
April 3. His highness Prince Rupert assaulted, entered, and possessed
himsel^e of that seditious town of Burmingham. Here he noble Earl of Denbigh
received a wound, where of he afterward dyed.

11. A body of the Pa^l forces under young Hotham their then General, totally
routed, the General put to flight, the most of his men slain and taken
prisoners. This was performed by Colonel Cavendish, near unto Ancaster in the
County of Lincoln.

21. The Close at Lichfield after three Weeks fiege, was yielded up to his
highness Prince Rupert. This place was defended by a part of those forces
under the command of the late Lord Brook, a great leader in this rebellion,
and a most m^litious enemy to the Church, who was killed in his assaulting this
Church by a shot into the eye, on Saint Chads day, who was the first Bishop of
this See, in memory of whom this Cathedral was built, and called S. Chads
Church.

30 His Excellency the Earl of Newcastles forces encountered with and totally
routed above 3000 of the Parl. forces which were going to releeve the Town of
Leeds.

6. James Earl of Northampton, the true heir of his Fathers loyalty and
v^lour encountered with a body of the Parl. forces in Midleton-Cheny
towne-field near to Banbury, consisting of about 700. foot, and five Troops of
Horse, where he totally routed their foot, killed 217. upon the plain, took
above 300. Prisoners, and all their Ordnance and Ammunition, etc.

16. The Lord Hopton assaulted a great body of the Parliament then entrenched
near Stratton on the borders of Devonshire, fought with them full 10. hours,
and having spent his Ammunition, insomuch that he had not powder left to serve
one hour longer, fell upon them with Swords, piques, and musquetstocks: and,
with unexpressible valor, wholly routed their Army, killed many hundreds of
them in the place, wounded many more, took 1700. prisoners, whereof above 30.
Commanders, all their Canon, money, (being three thousand pounds) Arms and
Ammunition, etc.

30. The Queens majesty was most Traitorously voted a Traitor, for her love so
exemplarily expressed to the King her husband.

30. M. Robert Yeomans, and M. George Bourcher. two Citizens of Bristoll, were
there publicly murdered by that Cowardly Colonel Nathaniel Fines, for their
Loyalty to His Majesty.

June
18. His Highness Prince Rupert beat up the Quarters of the Parl. forces at
Postcombe and Chinner in Oxfordshire, obtained a great victory in
Chalgrove-field, and utterly defeated the Parl. horsemen and Dragoons, slew
diverse of their Commanders, amongst whom was Colonel John Hampden (one of the
five Members accused (by His Majesty) of High Treason) who in this fight
received his mortal wound, in this very Chalgrove field, where he first
mustred, and drew up men in Arms to put in execution the ungodly Ordnance for
the Militia.

31. His Excellency (the Earl of Newcastle) obtained a great victory against
the Northern Forces under the Lord Fairfax upon Adderton Heath within the
County of York. In which fight His Excellency soon put the Parl. to flight;
their General Fairfax being forced to shift (with one poor Toupe of horse)
into Leeds, leaving the rest to the mercy of the victor.

July
1. Sir Charles Lucas with three Troops out of his own Regiment, routed 400.
of the Parl. horse and Dragoones commanded by Colonel Middleton, near Padbury
in Buckinghamshire, slew about 100. of them, took 40. prisoners, and thereby
prevented a great design of the Parliament

Col. (now Lord) Jermin, with those forces that guarded her Maj. out of the
North (assisted by Col. Hastings (now Lord Loughborough) took Burton upon Trent
in Staffordshire.

The same day the Marquess of Newcastle besieged Bradford.

2. Bradford taken, and in it 2000. prisoners, withal their Horse, Arms, and
Ammunition.

Hereupon the Parl. deserted the town of Hallifax, and presently after Sir
Hugh Cholmeley fell upon Beverley, and took it for His Majesty.

5. M. Tompkins and M. Challenor were most barbarously murdered in London, for
their fidelity to His Majesty. And the same 5. day was a fight on Landsdowne
Hall, betwixt His Majesty's Forces, under the Command of the noble Marquess of
Hartford, and the Parliaments Army under Sir William Waller, who (after 11.
hours fight) stuck their lighted matches in the hedges, and ran away. Their
Foot were absolurely routed, and all dispersed: their loss of Officers and
Horse very great, many hundreds of their men were killed; His Majesty's Forces
having the pillage of the field. And here was that valiant Knight Sir Bevill
Greenvill unfortunately slain in the front of his men.

13. About 4. aclock in the afternoon, the King and Queens Majesty met at
Edgehill, where the Parl. ( October 23. 1642.) had received so great an
overthrow: and the same day and hour His Majesty's Forces (under the Command
of the Lord Wilmot, Lieutenant General of the horse, the Earl of Carnarvon,
and the Lord Byron) obtained another great and strange victory upon Round-way
Down, with 1500. Horse, and two small pieces of Cannon only: wherewith they
totally routed the Parl. Army under the command of that old beaten Soldier Sir
William Waller, consisting of above 2500. foot, and 2000. horse, besides five
hundred Dragooners, took eight pieces of brass Ordnance, slew 600. of them in
the place, took above nine hundred prisoners, all their Cannon, Arms,
Ammunition, Wagons, Baggage, and Victual, 28. foot-Ensignes, nine Cornets,
and left not one of them, but what was either killed, taken prisoner, or
narrowly escaped.

24. His Highness Prince Rupert having joined his Forces to his brothers and
the whole body of their strentgh being brought together, they sat down before
Bristoll, and began their Batteries.

26. They gained the Out works.

27. The City and Castle were delivered to His Maj. withal the Ordnance,
Arms and Ammunition.

August
3. Corfe-Castle (in the Isle of Purbecke) was fallen upon by the Parl. forces,
who were shamefully repulsed by the Gallantry of Captain Laurence: Above 60.
were killed in the place, the rest hearing of the Earl of Carnarvons approach,
ran away.

5. Dorchester summoned, and surrendered unto the E. of Carnarvon.

9. About this, the Castle and Isle of Portland were reduced under His Maj.
Command: And the Town and Haven of Weymouth and Melcombe submitted to His
Majesty.

20. Col. John Digby defeated the Forces of Biddeford and Barnstaple.

September
2, 3. The Towns of Biddeford, Appleford and Barnstaple delivered up their
several Garrisons to His Majesty.

The same third day His Highness Prince Maurice assaulted Exeter.

4. His Highness gained the great Sconce, and immediately after the Town and
Castle, which were delivered unto His Highness, with all the Ordnance, Arms,
and Ammunition.

The Parl. Army (stealing out of Gloucestershire toward London) surprised part
of a new raised Regiment of His Majesty's Horse at Cyrencester, but being
overtaken by Prince Rupert with His Majesty's Horse near Auburne in Wiltshire,
many great bodies of their foot were routed, and many of them slain in the
place. Here was the Marquess De la Vieuville taken prisoner, who was
afterward murdered in cold blood; because they understood he was something
allied to the Queens Majesty. Hereby the Parl. Army was greatly retarded,
insomuch that His Majesty had time to overtake them with his foot, and

20. upon an hill near Newbury and Enborne heath, His Majesty fought with
them, who were seated in the most advantageous place imaginable; yet in
despite of all their Cannon, Foot and Horse, His Majesty beat them from their
ground; gained the hill and one Piece of their Ordnance, and quickly routed all
their Horse upon the heath. The most that were killed in this fight of His
Majesty's forces, exceeded not the Number of three hundred; but above six
hundred of the Parl. lost their lives there, and a great number of them were
wounded.

In this fight were slain the most Noble and valiant Earl of Carnarvon, the
Earl of Sunderland, the Lord Viscount Faulkland, Colonel Morgan Captain
William Simpcots, with some other Gentry and Commanders. After this the Parl.
forces were further pursued and routed again, so as they fled into Reading
where they durst not stay, but left the Town for His majesty.

25. Th^^ pernicious Confederacy, called the national Covenant, was taken by
the Members of the House of Commons at Westminster in Saint Margarets Church.

Anno 1644.
October. 18. The Prince of Harcourt Lord Ambassador extraordinary from the
French King and Queen Regent (after he had been most barbarously used by the
Parl.) came safe to Oxford, where he had entertainment more suitable to the
worth of so great a Personage.

His Majesty's under the Command of the Lord Widdrington, and Colonel
Henderson (a Scot) received a defeat near Horne-Castle in Lincolneshire, by
the Parl. forces under the Command of Manchester, Cromwell, and Fairfax, there
were taken prison^rs near 600. of His Majesty's forces, Sir Ingram Hopton and
some few others slain, not without some considerable loss to the Parliament.

November
11. An Ordnance for authorizing the Counterfeit Great Seal.

21. Sir William Armine, and others (sent by the Parl. at Westminster) arrived
at Edenborough with Articles of accord, and advance money, to hast^n the Scots
invasion.

27. The Kings Messenger hanged at London, for discharging his Duty, in serving
His Majesty's Writ.

December
4. Hawarden Castle surrendered to His Majesty.

8. John Pym died ( De morbo pediculoso) at Derby house in Westminster.

12. Beeston Castle assaulted and taken for His Majesty.

21. Lapley house taken by Capt. Heaveningham

28. Col. Nathaniell Fiennes, one of the first that appeared in this unnatural
War, was in a Court of War at S. Albans, by his own fellows, sentenced to be
hanged for a Coward.

29. The stately Screen of Copper richly gilt, set up by Henry the seventh in
his Chapel at Westminster, was by Order of both Houses reformed, that is,
broken down and sold to Tinkers.

Anno 1644.
Jan. 16. The perfidious Scots (contrary to the solemn Pacification) invaded
this Kingdom.

22. The members of Parl. assembled a^ Oxford according to His may.
Proclamation.

March
2. The Scots came over the river of Tyne, and General King pursueing them in
the rere, forced them into Sunderland.

13. Hopton Castle in Shropshire taken by Colonel VVoodhouse for His majesty.

18. VVardour Castle in Wilsthire (after long siege) was taken by Sir Francis
Dodington for His majesty.

22. Newarke, after three weeks siege releived by His Highness Prince Rupert,
where all the Parl. Forces were totally defeated; and soon after Lincoln,
Sleeford, and Gainsborough were quitted by the Parliament.

23. Sturton Castle in Staffordshire surrendered to S. Gilbert Gerard then
Governor of Worcester for His majesty.

24. Apeley House in Shropshire taken by Col. Ellis, for His majesty.

April
3. 6. Longford House and Tongue Castle in Shropshire surrendered to His
highness Prince Rupert.

13. Gloucester Forces assaulted Newent, but were gallantly repulsed and
pursued by Col. Minne the Governor thereof, and forced to leave two pieces of
their Cannon behind them, and many dead bodies before the works.

17. The Queens majesty began her journey from Oxford into the West.

The same day B^ampton B^yan in Herefordshi^^ (a Castle of S. Robert Harleys)
was summoned, and rendered (at mercy only) to S. Michael VVoodhouse, for His
majesty.

The same 17. day was Dunfreize in Scotland, taken in by the Marquess of
Mountrosse for his majesty.

22. Stutcombe in Dorsetshire assaulted and taken by his highness Prince
Maurice.

May
6. The Garrison of Lathom House in Lancashire, made (amongst diverse others) a
most remarkable sally, wherein they killed many of the Besiegers in their
Trenches, pursued the rest and killed near 300. of the Parl. in the pursuit,
and took three pieces of their Ordnance.

12. The forces from Plymouth assaulted Mount-Egcombe House in Cornwall, and
repulsed.

24. The Parl. having formed two Armies, (consisting for the most part of the
London Trained Bands and Auxiliaries under the Command of the Earl of Essex
and Sir William Waller) this day joined about Blewbury in Berkshire and bent
their course toward Abbingdon.

25. Prince Rupert assaulted and took Stopford in Cheshire. Hereupon Latham
House (after 18. weeks siege) was timely releived.

28. His highness Prince Rupert summoned, stormed, and took Bolton (the Geneva
of Lancashire (as the Brethren use to call it) the first town in that County,
and consequently in England, that put in execution the Militia, as the readiest
means to ruin the Kingdom.

29. The Parl. Armies severed* The Earl of Essex marching from Abbingdon to
Islip, with purpose to distress Oxford on the North part, as Waller at
Abingdon on the South part.

30. The Parl. forces attempted to pass, to cross the River Charwell at
Gosworth-bridge; but were gallantly repulsed.

31. Waller attemp^^d to pass Isis at Newbridge, but being also repulsed, ^e
retired to Abingdon, where (to revenge himself) he demolished Abingdon Cross,
defaced the Church, burnt all the Tables and Chesseboards, and plundered most of
the people of their Goods.

June
1. They again attempted in several places at once, to cross the river
Charwell, but sped as little, being still beaten off with great loss, and
particularly at Gosworth Bridge, where they lost above-100. men.

3. His Majesty perceiving the Parl. intention to besiege Oxford, left a
sufficient strength for defense thereof, and to disburthen the City of
unnecessary sorce) marched with the rest of His Army (this eveevening) toward
worcester.

4. The Earl of Essex perceiving the Kings forces drawn away, passed Charwell
with his Army, and hearing of His Majesty's departure from Oxford, hastened
after.

5. The Earl of Essex went this day as far as Chipping Norton after the King.

6. But unwilling to loose his labor any longer, returned to Burford, where he
deputed Sir Wiliima Waller to proceed in the adventure of King catching, that
himself might have the honor of taking in Lestithiell.

11. Dudly Castle releeved by His Majesty's forces from Worcester.

12. Col. Gage, with some forces from Oxford took in Borstall house.

16. The Lady Henrietta borne at Exeter.

18 His Majesty in worcestershire (having intelligence that the Parliament
Army were now severed, (whilst Sir william waller to get before the King r^n
into Staffordshire) resolved to reinforce himself with the Regiments left at
Oxford, and encount^^ Sir william, to which end His Majesty returned, and came
this day to VVitney.

20. Col. Shuttleworth with 400. Men attempted to beat up a part of Prince
Ruperts Quarters at Blackburne in Lancashire: But S. Charles Lucas was so ready
for him, that he killed and took above 100. of his men, and made himself and
the rest shift for their lives.

22. Sir Will. Waller having run himself out of breath, gave over the
pursuit of the King (the rather for that then His Maj. was provided for him)
whereupon His Majesty directed his march toward the Pari. associated Counties,
and came this night to Buckingham, where he received the joyful news of His
Queens safe delivery of the Princess Henrietta.

25. S. Charles Lucas totally routed 300 Horse and 100. Dragoons under the
command of Col. Shuttleworth, at Colne, on the borders of Yorkshire, had
execution on them for three miles, wounded Col. Shuttleworth himself, who with
some few escaped, the rest were either killed, or taken, and the Colors and
prisoners brought to Prince Rupert.

26. Waller to recruite his weary Army from the Garrisons of Gloucester,
Warwick, Coventry, Northampton, Kenelmworth Castle, had this day a Rendezvous
in Keinton field, whereof the King having no ice, turned his martch toward
him, and quartered this night at Brackley.

28. This day His Majesty coming before Banbury, sound Waller drawn up in
Battalia Westward from the Town, on the side of Crouch hill, taking advantage
of the hills, bogs, and ditches.

29. His Majesty discerning that Waller would not come into the plain, nor
could be assaulted as he lay, but with much disadvantage, removed somewhat
Northwards, to see if thereby he could draw him from his Station, which
accordingly was done, for Waller likewise advanced on the other side the river,
whereupon the Kingat Cropready marched further off the river, leaving the
bridge, in hope to draw them over, which Waller greedily apprehending as an
advantage, put over 2000. horse and a great body of foot, with 14. pieces of
Cannon. Wallers Army being thus divided were immediately charged by the Kings
rear, the Earl of Clevelands horse, and Sir Bernard Astleys foot, routing all
that had past the bridge, whilst the E. of Northampton charged the rest of
their horse, that were fording over. In this fight were slain above 300. Parl.
and many of them taken prisoners, with their 14. pieces: There were slain on
His Majesty's port two Gallant Knights, Sir William Butler, and Sir William
Cla^ke, and not above 14. common Soldiers besides. And so much for Wallers
Army this Summer.

July.
In the beginning of this month His Highness Prince Rupert marched out of
Lancashire with a considerable Army for the relief of York, which had been
two months besieged by an aggregate body of the Parl. consisting of the Earl
of Mancesters Army, the Lord Fairfax and the rebellious Scots under the Command
of Lesley. The Prince had no sooner releeved York, but drew forth after the
Parl Army, and on Marston moore there began a terrible fight, wherein His
highness at first had much the better, took their Ordnance, and many of them
Prisoners, insomuch that Lesley and the Lord Fairfax thinking all had been
lost, fled many miles from the place where the Battle was fought, and never
came to the remainder of their Armies, till two days after the fight, but in
conclusion (whether by fate that attends the event of War, or by neglect, I
know not) the fortune of the day turned, and the Parl forces recovered their
lost Ordnance, and took some of the Princes Baggage, and with it Sir Charles
Lucas, Colonel Porter, and Colonel Tiliard Prisoners. In this Battle were
slain on His Majesty's part, the Lord Carry, Sir Thomas Metham, Colonel Ewer,
Colonel Towneley, with some others of note, and about 1500. common soldiers.
On the Parl. part were slain Sir Charles Fairfax with many other of their
Commanders, and at least 3000 common Soldiers.

This done, the Parl. rally and sit down again before York, which was
surrendered within three weeks after upon honorable conditions, which were most
perfidiously broken by the Parl. forces.

6. The Lord Hopton routed 350. of the Parl. near Warmister, which were
pursued above 20. miles by Sir Francis Dodinglon.

15. His Maj came to Bath with his Army; which day the Queens Maj. arrived
safe at Breast in Brittany, notwithstanding 50 great shot made at her by Batty
the Parl. Vice Admiral.

23. The King made a speech to the Sommersetshire-men on King's-moore.

31. Middleton (a Scot) furiously assaulted Dennington Castle, and received a
most shameful repulse.

August
1. His Majesty with his Army passed into Cornwall over Tamar at Polton bridge
in pursuit of the Earl of Essex, whom he had now chased through Devonshire.

25. His Maj. gained from the Parl. the Castle of Lestithiel, where their Army
lay strongly encamped.

30. The Parl. Horse in the night passed between His Majesty's Quarters, and
fled toward Plymouth.

31. The Parl. foot making toward Foy, were beaten from five Pieces of their
Ordnance.

Semptember
2. The Parl. Army being deserted by their General the Earl of Essex (who
with the Lord Roberts fled to Plymouth in a Cock-boate the night past) this day
yielded up to His Majesty all their Train of Artillery, viz, 49. pieces of
fair brass Ordnance, above 200. Barrells of Gunpowder, with match, Bullet,
etc. proportionable, above seven hundred Carriages, and betwixt eight and nine
thousand Arms: His Majesty out of his wonted clemency granting them their
lives.

5. His Majesty having obtained so complete a victory over the Parl. Forces,
did (formerly after the defeat of Waller) from Tavestocke send his second
message of peace to Westminster.

About this time the Marquess of Montrosse, and major General Mackdonald
obtained a great victory over the Parl. Forces upon Newbigging Moore in
Scotland: and took S. John's Town.

And within 14. days after this victory they obtained a second victory over
another body of the Parl. forces in that Kingdom near unto Aberdene; and
soon after the Marquess took the Town of Aberdene and all the Ordnance, etc.
and therein many of their fugitives.

11. The Garrison of Basing (after 18. Weeks siege) was releeved from Oxford
by Sir Henry Gage.

12. Ilfercombe in Devonshire rendered to General Goring for His Majesty.

17. Barnstable in Devonshire (that had formerly revolted upon the Earl of
Essex his approach) submitted to His Majesty and obtained from him their second
pardon.

23. Colonel John Fines (having besieged the Castle of Banbury above a month
before) hired his men to storm it in five places, in all which they were
shamefully beaten often with great loss.

Anno 1644.
October 7. In the night Sir Richard Greenvil regained the Town of Saltash by
storming.

25. The E. of Northampton, and Sir Henry Gage raised the siege of
Banbury-Castle, fell upon Col. John Fines his flying Troops, slew and took
many of his men and horse, one piece of Ordnance, all their Ammunition, and
many Arms.

27. The Parliament having thus lost two of their Armies, called the third
(under the Earl of Manchesters Command, out of the associated Counties) and
forced other Regiments out of London to sight His Maj. who was now advanced to
Newbury with part of his Army, where the Parliament apprehending a great
advantage, in regard that the rest of His Mai^forces were not come up, fell
upon His Majesty's Quarters, but were beaten off, with the slaughter of above
1000. of their men.

November
6. His majesty had his Rendezvous on Bullington green, betwixt Wallingford
and Oxford.

9. Dennington Castle releeved, the Parliament not daring to withstand His
majesty's Army.

17. His maj. advanced toward the Parl. forces to Hungerford, upon whose
approach the Army left the field. Whereupon His may. sent S. Henry Gage with a
party to releeve the wants of Basing, but the Parl. had raised their siege
before his approach.

19. Monmouth that had lately been betrayed by Kirle, was bravely regained by
the Lord Herbert of Ragland.

23. His Majesty having thus victorously defeated two of their Armies, and
driven away the third, came to Oxford to entertain an Overture of Peace
(certain Propositions being the same day come thither from London) having
disposed of his Army to their Winter Quarters.

26. A Vote passed by the Members of the House of Commons at Westminster, for
the utter abolishing and taking away of the book of Common Prayer, with
intention to set up a new device, to be called a Directory instead thereof.

December
13. His Majesty (out of His wonted desire of Peace) sent the Duke of Richmond,
and the Earl of Southhampton to the Houses of Parliament at Westminster for a
Treaty, as the best expedient for Peace.

Helmseley Castle in Yorkshire (after 16. weeks siege) was delivered up to
the Parl. upon honorable Conditions.

22. Col. Air with some horse from Newarke took two Troops of horse at Upton
belonging to the Garrison of Nottingham, brought the men, Colors, Horses and
Arms all safe to Newa^ke.

23. Sir Alex. Carew was beheaded on Tower Hill by Martial Law, for intending
to deliver up the Island at Plymouth to His Majesty. This man was observed to
be most violent against His Majesty in the beginning of this War; but having
some disposition to become a Convert, his fellow members thought fit to
dispatch him to another world.

24 S. William Vaughan fell on a party of the Parl. near Welsh Poole Commanded
by S. John Price, killed some, wounded others, took diverse Prisoners, and many
Horses and Arms.

28. Master Blakes house at Pinnell near Calne in Wiltshire, taken by a party
of the Lord Gorings forces.

31. The Members at Westminster voted Sir Thomas Fairfax to be their new
General, cashiering the E. of Essex, with whom ( July 12. 1642) they had sworn
to live and die.

January
1. Young Hotham was beheaded on Tower Hill.

2. Sir John Hotham his father was likewise beheaded, by Martial Law. Here the
Reader may take notice of a special mark of Gods judgment, for ( Apr. 23.
1642.) when old Hotham denied His Maj. admittance into Hull, he held up his
hands, and prayed God never to prosper him or his posterity, if he were not His
Majesty's loyal Subject: And now see both father and son adjudged by their
fellow members, and condemned by their own beloved Martial Law, for intending
to deliver up Hull to His Majesty.

The same day the Lord Astley took Lypyate house in Gloucestershire.

Sir Marmaduke Langdale totally routed Col. Ludlowes Regiment of horse at
Salisbury.

10. The Lord Archbishop of Canturbury was beheaded on Tower Hill. It would be
too long here (where we aim at Brevitie) to set down the particulars of his
Imprisoment, the preposterous proceedings against him in his Trial, and his
pious magnanimity at the time of his Death, his Sermon on the Scaffold (whereof
here follows a true Copy) will satisfy the world, that he dyed innocently,
and (which is more) that His Majesty has been most unjustly accused of any
inclination to Popery.

Good People.
THis is an uncomfortable time to preach, yet I shall begin with a text of
Scripture. Heb. 12. 2. Let us run with patience that race which is set before
us, Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to Jesus the author and
finisher of my Faith, He best knows: I am now come to the end of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a death of shame; but the shame must be despised, or no
coming to the right hand of God; Jesus despised the shame for me, and God
forbid but I should despise the shame for Him; I am going a pace ( as you see)
toward the Red Sea, and my feet are now upon the very brinke of it; an
Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me to the Land of promise, for that was
the way through which he led his People: But before they came to it, He
instituted a Passover for them, a Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with sour
Herbs, I shall obey, and labor to digest the sow^e Herbs, as well as the
Lamb. And I shall remember it is the Lords Passover; I shall not think of the
Herbs, nor be angry with the hand which gathers them; but look up only to
him who instituted that, and gov^rnes these; For men can have no more power
over men, then what is given them from above. I am not in love with this
passage, through the Red Sea, for I have the w^aknesse and infirmities of flesh
and blood pl^ntifully in me, And I have prayed with my Savior, ut trans^^et
Cal^x iste, that this Cup of red wine might pass^ from me: But if not, Gods
will (not mine) be done; an^ I shall most willingly drink of this Cup as deep
as he pleases, and enter this Sea, yea and pass through it, in the way that he
shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (Good people) that when Gods Servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them
(and did in a manner drive them into the Sea) were drowned in the same waters,
while they were in pursuit of them; I know my God whom I serve, is as able to
deliver me from this Sea of Blood, as he was to deliver the three Children from
the Furnace, and (I most humbly thank my Savior for it) my Resolution is now,
as theirs was then; They would not worship the image the King had set up, nor
will I the imaginations which the people are setting up; nor will I forsake the
Temple and the truth of God, to follow the bleating of Jeroboams Calfe in Dan
and in Bethell. And as for this people, they are at this day miserably missed,
(God of his mercy open their Eyes that they may see the right way) for at this
day the blind lead the blind, and if they go on, both will certainly fall into
the ditch. For my self, I am (and acknowledge it in all humility) a most
grievous sinner many ways, by thought, word and deed, and I cannot doubt, but
that God has mercy in store for me (a poor penitent) as well as for other
sinners, I have now upon this sad occasion, ransacked every corner of my heart,
and yet (I thank God) I have not found (among the many) any one sin which
deserves death by any known Law of this Kingdom; And yet hereby I charge
nothing upon my Judges; for if they proceed upon proof (by valuable witnesses)
I or any other innocent, may be justly condemned; And (I thank God) though the
weight of the sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet within, as ever I wa in
my life. And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that
ever dyed by an Ordinance of Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have gone
this way, though not by this means; For Elphegus was hurried away and lost his
head by the Danes; and Simon Sudbury in the fury of Wat Tyler and his fellows;
Before these, Saint John Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd woman; and
Saint Cyprian Archbishop of Carthage, submitted his head to a persecuting
sword. Many Examples (great and good) and they teach me patience; for I hope my
Cause in Heaven will look of another dye, then the color that is put upon it
here. And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great
men in their several generations, but also that my Charge (as soul as it is
made) looks like that of the Jews against Saint Paul, (Acts 25. 3.) For he was
accused for the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion; And like that of Saint
Steven (Acts 6. 14.) for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law
and Religion, the holy place and the Temple (verse 13.) But you will say, do I
then compare my self with the integrity of Saint Paul and Steven? No, far be
that from me; I only raise a comfort* to my self, that these great Saints and
servants of God were laid at in their times, as I am now. And it is memorable,
that Saint Paul who helped on this Accusation against Saint Steven, did after
fall under the very same himself. Yea, but here is a great clamor that I
would have brought in Popery; I shall answer that more fully by and by; In the
mean time you know what the Pharisees said against Christ himself, If we let
him alone, all men will believe in him, Et venient Romani, and the Romans will
come, and take away both our place and the Nation. Here was a causeless Cry
against Christ that the Romans will come; And see how just the judgment of God
was; they crucified Christ for fear lest the Romans should come, and his death
was it which brought in the Romans upon them, God punishing them with that
which they most feared: And I pray God this clamor of Venient Romani (of which
I have given no cause) help not to bring them in; for the Pope never had such a
Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now upon the Sects and
Divisions that are amongst us. In the mean time, by Honor and dishonor, by
good report and evil report, as a deceiver and yet true, am I passing through
this world, 2 Cor. 6. 8. Some particulars also I think it not amiss to speak
of.

And first, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our gracious Sovereign;
He has been much traduced also for bringing in of Popery; but on my
Conscience (of which I shall give God a very present account) I know Him to be
as free from this charge, as any man living; and I hold Him to be as sound a
Protestant (according to the Religion by Law established as any man in this
Kingdom; And that he will venture His Life as far, and as freely for it; and
I think I do, or should know, 60th his affection to Religion, and His grounds
for it, as fully as any man in England.

The second particular is concerning this great and Populous City, (which God
bless) Here has been of late, a fashion taken up, to gather hands, and then
go to the Great Court of this Kingdom, (the Parliament) and clamor for
Justice, as if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which
are unknown to the many) could not, or would not do Justice, but at their
appointment. A way, which may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his
blood upon their own heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also: And this has
been lately practiced against my self; The Magistrates standing still, and
suffering them openly to proceed from parish to parish without check; God
forgive the setters of this (with all my heart I beg it) but many well meaning
people are caught by it. In Saint Stevens case, when nothing else could serve,
they stirred up the people against him; and Herod went the same way, when he
had killed Saint James, yet he would not venture upon Saint Peter, till he
found how the other pleased the people. But take heed of having your hands full
of blood, for there is a time (best known to himself) when God (above other
sins) makes Inquisition for blood, and when that Inquisition is on foot, the
Psalmist tells us, That God remembers (but that is not all) He remembers and
forgets not the complaint of the poor, that is, whose blood is shed by
oppression, verse 9. take heed of this. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for
blood; And (with my prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to
remember the Prophefie that is expressed, Jer. 26. 14, 15* As for me, behold I
am in your hand: do with me as seems good and meet unto you. But know ye
for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood
upon your selves, and upon this City, and the Inhabitants thereof, etc.

The third particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven upon
them. But, alas, now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether,
or how it shall get out; and, which is worse then a storm from without, it is
become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and
at every cleft profaneness and irreligion is entering in, while as Prosper
speaks (in his second Book De vitae contemptu cap. 4.) Men that introduce
profaneness are cloaked over with the name Religionis Imaginariae, of Imaginary
Religion; for we have lost the Substance and dwell too much in Opinion, and
that Church which all the Jesuits machinations could not ruin, is fallen into
danger by her own.

The last particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self: I was
borne and baptized in the bosom of the Church of England established by Law;
in that profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to dye; This
is no time to dissemble with God, least of all in matter of Religion; and
therefore I desire it may be remembered, I have always lived in the Protestant
Religion, established in England, and in that I now come to dye. What clamor
and slanders I have endured for laboring to keep an Uniformity in the
external service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of this
Church, all men know, and I have abundantly felt.

Now at last I am accused of High Treason in Parliament: a crime which my soul
ever abhorred; this Treason was charged to consist of these two parts, An
endeavor to subvert the Laws of the Land, and a like Endeavor to overthrow
the true Protestant Religion established by Law. Besides my Answers to the
several Charges, I protested my innocence in both Houses. It was said,
Prisoners protestations at the ^ar must not be taken. I can bring no witness
of my heart and the intentions thereof; therefore I must come to my
Protestation, not at the Bar, but my Protestation at this hour and instant of
my death; in which I hope all men will be such charitable Christians, as not to
think I would dye and dissemble, being instantly to give God an account for the
truth of it: I do therefore here in the presence of God, and his holy Angels,
take it upon my death, That I never endeavored the subversion either of Law or
Religion; and I desire you all to remember this Protest of mine concerning mine
innocence, in these, and from all Treasons whatsoever. I have been accused
likewise as an enemy to Parliaments: No, I understand them and the benefit that
comes by them too well to be so; But I did mislike the misgovernments of some
Parl. many ways, and I had good reason for it, for Corruption optimiest
pessi^a, there is no corruption in the world so bad, as that which is of the
best thing in it self: For the better the thing is in nature, the worse it is
corrupted. And that being the highest Court, over which no other has
jurisdiction, when it is misinformed or mis-governed, the Subject is left
without all remedy. But I have done, I forgive all the world, all and every of
those bitter Enemies which have persecuted me, and humbly desire to be forgiven
of God first, and then of every man, whether I have off^nded him or not, if he
do ^ut conceive that I have. Lord do thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness
of him, And so I heartily desire you to join in Prayer with me.

OEternall God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the
riches and fullness of all thy mercies look upon me; but not till thou have
nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the
blood of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ: that so
the punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased
to try me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee give me now in this great
instant, full patience, proportionable comfort, and a heart ready to dye for
thy honor, the King's happiness, and this Churches preservation. And my zeal
to these, far from Arrogance be it spoken, is all the sin, humane frailties
except^d, and all incidents thereto, which is yet known to me in particular,
for which I now come to suffer; I say in this particular of Treason; but
otherwise* my sins are many and great: Lord pardon them all, and those
especially, what ever they are, which have drawn down this present judgment
upon me: and when thou have given me strength to bear it, do with me as
seems best in thine own eyes: and carry me through death that I may look upon
it in what visage soever it shall appear to me, Amen. And that there may be a
stop of this issue of blood, in this more then miserable Kingdom, ( I shall
desire that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my self) O Lord, I
beseech thee, give grace of repentance to all bloodthirsty people; but if they
will not repent, O Lord confound all their devices, defeat and frustrate all
their designs and endeavors upon them, which are or shall be contrary to the
Glory of thy great Name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment
of the King and his posterity after him in their just rights and Privileges,
the honor and conservation of Parliaments in their just power, the
preservation of this poor Church in her truth, peace, and patrimony, and the
settlement of this distracted and distressed People under their ancient Laws,
and in their native Liberties. And when thou have done all this in mere mercy
for them, O Lord fill their hearts with thankfulness, and with religious
dutiful obedience to thee and thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord
Jesus Amen, and receive my Soul into thy Bosom Amen. Our Father which art in
heaven, etc.

11. Sir Henry Cage Governor of Oxford intended to have raised a fort at
Cullom-Bridge, but the design being treacherously discovered, he was
prevented, and in the attempt most unfortunately received a shot, whereof,
within two hours after, he dyed. His Body was afterward interred at Oxford
with funebrious exequies, and solemnities answerable to his merits, who having
done His Majesty special service, was, whilst living, generally beloved, and
dead is still universal lamented: He was a most valiant and expert Soldier;
and a most pious and learned Gentleman, as may appear by that learned tract of
his, written and printed at Oxford, entitled the prerogative of man, or his
Souls immortality, and high perfection defended, etc. His daily refreshed
memory makes me trespass on the Readers Patience with this

ELEGY Upon the never-enough lamented death of Sir HEN: GAGE, the most desired
Governor of Oxford.
SO Titus called was, The worlds delight,
And straightway dyed; The envious Sisters spite
Still the great favorite: The darling head
Unto the Fates is always forfeited.
Our Life's a Chase, where (though the whole Herd fly)
The goodliest Dear is singled out to dye.
And as in beasts, the fattest ever bleeds,
So amongst men, he that does bravest deeds.
He might have lived, had but a cowards fear
Kept him securely sculking in the rear:
Or like some sucking Colonel, whose edge
Durst not advance a foot from a thick hedge:
Or like the wary Skippon, had so sure
A suite of Arms, he might (besieged) endure:
Or like the Politic Lords, of a different skill,
Who thought a Saw-pit safer, or a hill;
Whose valor in two organs too did lie
Distinct; the one in's ear, the other in his eye.
Puppets of War! Thy name shall be divine,
And happily augment the number Nine,
But that the Heroes, and the Muses strive
To own thee dead, who were them all alive.
Such an exact composure was in thee,
Neither exceeded Mars, nor Mercury.
It Was just, though hard, thou should dye Governor
Osth' Kings chief Fort of Learning, and of War.
Thy death was truly for thy Garrison,
Thou dy'dst projecting her Redemption.
What unto Basing twice (successful spirit)
Was done thou have effected here in merit.
The Bridge was broken down: The Fort alone
GAGE was himself, the first and the last stone.
Go burn thy Faggots Brown; and grieve thy Rage
Lets thee outlive the gentle grasp of GAGE.
And when thou read'st in thy Britanicus
The boasted story of his death, say thus:
The Valor I have shown in this, was Crime,
And GAGES Death will brand me to all Time.
In this Month the John of London belonging to the East India Merchants, was
brought to Bristoll (by the Loyalty of Captain Mucknell and the rest of the
Officers and Mariners of the Ship) for his Majesty's Service, wherein were 26.
Pieces of Ordnance mounted, 17000. l. in money besides some other good
commodities. For which good service the said Captain Mucknell had the honor
to be the first Knight that ever the Prince of Wales made.

And within a few days after another Ship called the Fame of London, was by
tempest forced into Dartmouth, where she was seized on for His Majesty Service,
as lawful price, being bound for Dover, or London. This Ship had been abroad
4. years, and was now returned homewards from the West Indies, laden with
Bullion, Oil, Couchanielle and other rich commodities to the value of 40000.
l. at least.

The Treaty began at Uxbridge, wherein the Candor of His Majesty's most real
intentions and desires of peace was very prespicuous: For his Majesty did not
only arm Commissioners, or any Ten of them, with a very large and powerful
Commission to treat of, conclude, and settle a firm peace in his dominions,
but did also by Proclamation appoint a solemn Fast on the fifth day of February
then next for a blessing on that treaty, with a form of Common Prayer set
forth by His Majesty especial Command to be used in all Churches and Chappells
within this Kingdom.

February
9. Sir Walter Hastings Governor of Portland Castle for His Majesty, took the
great fort of Weymouth, and within two days after Sir Lewis Dives took the
middle fort and Town of Weymouth, and in a skirmish there slew Major Sydenham
(a forward enemy) with some others.

15. Rowdon house near Chippenham in Wiltshire (after nine days siege) was
taken by His Majesty's Forces.

20. The Lord Macguire, an Irish Baron, was executed by the common hangman at
Tyburne by command of the Parl. In the history of which execution recorded in
many of their own Pamphlets, the reader may observe two questions asked by
Master Gibbs, one of the Sheriffs of London, and answered by that Lord the
very instant before his death.

The first was, whether he knew of any Commision the King had granted to the
Irish Rebels, for the commotion they had raised in Ireland. He answered, that
he never knew, nor heard of any: the second was; whether there was not some
agreement made by the Irish Commissioners, before the Rebellion first brake
out, with the Recusants in England?

He answered, that to his Knowledge, there was never any one in England, either
Catholic or Protestant, that knew of it, but one, and he was an Irish man,
and a Protestant, and he came to the knowledge of it by chance, not as he was
an Actor in it.

Out of which, and out of that delivered by the Archbishop of Canterbury on
the Scaffold immediately before his death, the world may evidently see His
Majesty irrefragably cleared, by two acts of the Parliaments own cruelty, from
two of the most scandalous aspersions, by which the malice of these forgiving
enemies has from time to time endeavored to make His Sacred Majesty odious
to his People.

Salutem ex inimicis nostris, may the King well say, seeing his enemies actions
turned to his Justification, quite contrary to their intendments. The first
was, an imagined inclination in His Majesty to Popery; The second a pretended
Commissionating of the Irish Rebellion. In the first, the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury. In this the Lord Macguire, both at their very dying hours, have
rendered His Majesty as innocent, as his enemies intended him odious. I say
innocent, because we know the worst of Rebels cannot but credit those persons
especially, testifying at such time when they were immediately after to give an
account of all their Actions to the knower of all hearts. Nor can any one
believe, but the Arch Bishop of Canterbury (who was daily conversant with His
Majesty in matters of Religion) must needs know the very depth of his heart
therein. And the Lord Macguire, (who was privy to the first motion of the Irish
Rebellion) must likewise of necessity have known of the Kings Commission if any
such thing had been.

22. The Treaty at Uxbridge was broken up, though His Majesty sent a particular
Message, and his Commissioners did earnestly desire that the same might be
continued. In this treaty His Majesty's Commissioners condescended much, but
those of Westminster would abate nothing of the rigor of their unheard of
Propositions, which was the cause the treaty took no better effect.

The same day was the Town of Shrewsbury (by treachery in the night) delivered
to Colonel Mitton, the Parliaments Governor of Wem. Here you may see the
Parliaments Masterpiece, in hatching this treacherous plot in the time of
Treaty, wherein they used the name of peace, only as a Masque for their
designs, but intended nothing less.

25. Sir Marmaduke Langdale routed a great body of the Parl. forces consisting
of at least 1200. Horse and Dragoons, commanded by Colonel Rossiter, a Scot,
near Melton Mowbray in Leicester shire.

The same day Colonel Roger Molineux, with a party of horse from Mewarke took
the Parl. Committee at Wirksworth in Darby-shire, where they were gathering
Contribution.

26. Sir William and Sir Charles Compton brothers to the Noble Earl of
Northampton) with three hundred horse, routed four hundred of the Praliaments
horse of Northampton near Daventry in that County. In the latter end of this
month, a party of His Majesty's Forces from Hereford, took Castle-ditch, (a
Garrison of the Parliaments) on the borders of that County.

March
1. Pontfract Castle (that had been long besieged, not without much loss to
the Parl. by frequent sallies made by the defendants and otherwise) was
relieved by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, who there utterly defeated the Lord Fairfax
his whole Army.

7. Major Abercromy a rebellious plundring Scot, was slain near Stratton
Audley in Buckinghamshire, where his party of Horse was routed, and 17. of his
men and horse taken prisoners, by a party from Borstall house.

14. Col. Long the High Sheriff of Will shire, with his own Regiment of Horse
only, gallantly charged a great body of Wallers horse near the Devises, and
did good ex^cution on them; but being much overpowered by the Parl. numbers,
was at length taken Prisoner with some part of his Regiment, which was within
few days after sufficiently requited by the Lo: Goring, who took above 700. of
Wallers Horse in those parts.

15. A party of His Majesty's Horse from Pontfract Castle fell on Col.
Brandlings Quarters at Badsworth, 4. miles from Doncaster, took 67. prisoners,
whereof 13. Officers, 130. Horse, and 1000. l. in money.

18. The Earl of Northampton with his 3. young brothers (in all whom Gallantry
is hereditary) routed a great body of the Northampton Horse near Althrop in
that County.

The same day Beeston Castle in Cheshire was relieved by P. Ruperts approach
into those parts.

24. The Lower Members at Westminster vote the Clause for preservation of His
Majesty's Person to be left out in Sir Tho: Fairfax his Commission.

Thus do the members
1. Swear to live and dye with their own General Essex, yet upon second
thoughts, they disoblige themselves from that oath, and cashiere him of his
Command. 2. Covenant to preserve His Majesty's Person and Authority, and yet
afterward authorize Sir Tho: Fairfax to kill him if he can. 2. They vow to
maintain the Protestant Religion, yet condemn the essential parts thereof,
and introduce irreligion and profaneness.
Now tell me, Reader, what Tropologicall sense can save this juggling from flat
and literal Perjury? not all the addition of their Abrogative to their
Legislative power; For this is indeed to abrogate Christianity as well as
Loyalty out of the World: To give leave to kill the Kings Person in the field,
and yet to cheat men into a conceit of preserving His Majesty in William
Lenthalls Chair: To make the world believe they are Protestants, when they
permit and authorize an illiterate Assembly of Non-Divines to discountenance
the 39. Articles, dispute about expunging the fifth Article of the Apostles
Creed: To antiquate the Lords Prayer out of the Church Service, and turn out
the long-setled Service of Common Prayer out of the Church, to give way to a
long-winded extemporary nonsense in the room thereof.

O tempora! O mores! Are not these fine Lawmakers, who violate the Laws of
God and holy Church, as well as those themselves were borne unto, to make way
for their own Chymeraes? Would not any true Zelot pawn his soul upon these
men's consciences, who make no conscience of breaking their own oaths? Would
not any wise man melt his Fortunes to maintain these men's Cause, who have no
cause for what they do? Yes, he that could be made to believe Perjury were
Fidelity; Treason, Loyalty; Blaspemy, Sanctity; Athiesme, Religion; the
Speakers Cushion, the Kings Majesty; may likewise possibly believe that these
Members intended the Churches, Kings, and Commmon-wealths good.

Anno 1645.
25. The Lord Goring routed a Party of the Parl. horse at Pitmaster near
Taunton in Sommerset-shire.

April
1. Major General Sir Jo. Digby with a Brigade of horse and Dragoones beat up
the Parl. Quarters at and about Wincaunton.

5. A party of the Lord Gorings horse routed Col. Pophams Regiment in Wiltshire.

14. The siege of High-archall in Shrop-shire raised.

19. A party of His Majesty's from Newark took the Fort at Nottingham bridge,
by Scalado.

22. Colonel Masseys forces were totally routed by Prince Rupert at Ledbury in
Hereford-shire.

23. Major general Laughorne lying at the siege of Newcastle Emblin in
Carmarthenshire was totally defeated by His Maj. forces Commanded by Col. (now
Lord) Gerard.

24 Colonel Cromwell (the Independent General) routed a party of His
Majesty's horse near Islip, took diverse Prisoners, and about 200. horse. And
no sooner summoned Blechington house, but it was delivered up to him by Col.
Windebank the Governor, who was soon after condemned by a Council of War at
Oxford and there shot to death in the Castle Yard.

26. The Garrison of Farringdon lost some few horse and men, through the
indiscretion of a Commander.

30. Cromwell assaulted His Majesty's Garrison of Farrington, but was repulsed
with the loss of near 200. of his men, besides what were wounded and taken
prisoners.

7. His Majesty martched from Oxford, and the same day the Lord Goring routed a
strong party of Cromwells horse near unto Newbridge.

In the beginning of this Month that unheard of cruelty was put into practice
in and about London by certain persons, men and women appointed and authorized
to inveigle and entice young Children from their Parents, and without their
knowledge, and so convay them on Shipboard to be sold, or transported to new
Plantations the Lord knows where. This so much discontented the People, that
the Houses at Westminster were glad to disavow the thing, and forthwith make
an Order against it.

11. Taunton relieved by the Parl. forces.

The same day His Majesty's Forces made a gallant sally from Scarborough
Castle, wounded Sir Joh. Meldrum, that commanded the siege, whereof he dyed,
flew Col: Cockeram, Lieutenant Colonel Stanley, Major Dent, Capt. Percy, and
50. others, whereof most commanders, and took diverse prisoners: On His
Majesty's part were slain Capt. Gower and some four Common soldiers.

Soon after Captain Zachary that Commanded one of the Ships in the Harbor
for the Parliament, received a shot from the Castle whereof he dyed.

15. Hawksley house a Garrison of the Parliament in VVorcester-shire was
surrendered to His Majesty at mercy only, and the house afterward slighted.

This done His Majesty martched with His Army toward Chester, which had been
long besieged by Sir William Brereton, but before His Majesty came within
twenty miles of it, the Parliament raised their siege.

22. Sir Thomas Fairsax sat down before Oxford.

23, Godstow house quitted and slighted, and some houses fired by the owner, M.
David Waltar.

26. Massy surprised Evesholme in Worcestershire, a Garrison of His Majesty's.

30. His Majesty's Army sat down before Leicest.

31. This morning Leicester was taken by storm, and in it the whole Committee,
etc. And the same day the Parl. quitted their several Garrisons of Bagworth,
Colehorton, Kirby-bellowes, and Burleigh.

June
2. Whilst His Majesty's Army was thus busied at Leicester, Sir Thomas Fairfax
(the Parl. General) continued blocking up of Oxford, though f^uitl^^sly, for
by several sallies thence, he lost many of his men, and especially this
morning, when the Governor Col: William Leg with 1000. Horse and Foot fell
upon the Parl. Guard at Heddington Hill, where they took and killed all their
Musketeers, save one: their Horse (not daring to withstand them) ran all
shamefully away, and left their Foot to shift for themselves. These miserable
wretches had some two hours before most wickedly railed against the King and
Queens Majesty, which much incensed the Oxford Horse.

4. Sir Thomas Fairfax (weary of such hot service before Oxford) assaulted
Borstall house, (which he had closely surrounded the first of this month) but
was beaten off with the loss of above 300. of his men.

6. There fell a strange storm of hail in that part of Leicester shire, which
is in and about Loughborow: some of the haile-stones were as big as small Hens
eggs, and the least as big as Musquet-bullets: It destroyed the Corn and did
much hurt in that part of the Country where it fell.

9. His Majesty's forces encountered a body of the Parliament forces near
Stokesey in Shropshire, but being over-powred, were forced to retreat with the
loss of Sir Will. Croft, a gallant Gentleman and some others.

14. Was the fatal battle at Naesby down in Northamptonshire, where His
Majesty's Army (till then victorious) was now by the incertainty of War much
worsted, his Infantry, Ordnance and Carriages lost: Some have blamed Prince
Rupert there, for preferring his own rash violence, before the result of a
Council of War, how deserved I know not: However, I am sure, there was a
necessity of the one, not of the other: For, as Caesar held, and that truly,
Council is as necessary in war, as Pbysitians in time of sickness. The
whole number on both sides slain was conceived not to exceed 400. but more
wounded. Above all, the Parl. cruelty was remarkable, in killing upon cold
blood at least 100. women, whereof many of quality, being Commanders wives, and
far more most miserably wounded; and this done under pretense that they were
Irish women.

18. Leicester was re-taken by the Parl. upon Artlcles; which were most
persidiously broken. The same day Capt. Wright (from Newarke) routed 200. of
the Parl. Horse at Ryby in Lincolneshire.

27. Highworth yielded to the Parl. who presently made Sutling houses, Stables,
and (oh horrible to think of!) Houses of Office within and about the Church,
broke down, and watered their horses in the Font.

28. The City of Carlisle was delivered to the Scots, (after it had been
gallantly desended 42. weeks) upon very honorable conditions.

July
2. Taunton the second time relieved by the Parl:

4. Sir Will. Vaughan beat up the Par. Quarters near Bramcroft Castle in
Shropshire. And

5. Routed the Besiegers of High-Archall, killed 100 of them, and took 400.
Prisoners, with all their c^rriages and baggage.

10. A Brigade of the Lord Gorings Army worsted at Langport, being over-powred
by the Parl. and so forced to a disorderly retreat, with the loss of 300* men,
amongst whom was that gallant and resolute Gentleman Sir John Digby, who there
received a hurt, whereof he shortly after dyed.

16. Chippenham, a new erected Garrison of the Parl. in Wilsthire, was taken
by Col. Long.

The same day a party from Newarke surprised VVelbeck house.

21. Pontfract Castle, after three months siege, surrendered upon honorable
conditions.

22. Bridgewater assaulted, and taken by Sir Tho: Fairfax, not without much
loss of blood to the Assaylants, and of goods to the poor Townes-people.

25. Searborough delivered (upon conditions) to the Parl.

30. The city of Bath surrendered.

August
1. A party of Horse from Newarke took Torkesey house in Lancashire by scalado.

4. The club-men of Dorsetshire dispersed.

8. Captain Allen and his whole Troop were taken on the borders of
Lincolneshire, by a party from Belvoire Castle.

15. Sherburne Castle assaulted and taken by the Parl.

17. The Marquess of Montrosse utterly defeated an Army consisting of at least
12000 Scots in Kilseith field near Glasgow, slew 3500* took 2000. Prisoners,
etc.

20. Nunny castle in Sommerset-shire surrendered to the Parl.

24. Hunting don taken by His Maj. Forces.

September
2. The Scots (upon His Majesty's approach with His Army) raised their siege
from before Hereford, (where they had lain five weeks before) and hastened
away, plundring every body where they came.

6. His Majesty's Forces from Oxford, beat up the Parl. Quarters at Tame,
killed diverse, took prisoner Adjutant General Puide, with diverse other
Officers and common Soldiers. This Puide within three days after he was
brought to Oxford had leave to depart upon his Parol; yet wanted the civility
either to return himself, or to release the Gentleman (or any other) that he
promised in exchange for him. Such and no better is the faith and humanity of
their Soldiers. They took also three Colors, and above 250. Horse.

9. Master Strode, one of the five Members, and one of the principal promoters
of this unnatural war, died of a Pestilentiall Fever, to say no more of it.

11. Bristoll, part of it, won by assault, the rest surrendered (by P. Rupert)
upon Conditions, after 3. weeks siege.

13. A Brigade of the Marquess of Montrosse his Forces received a defeat, at
Philip -- haugh in Tividale in Scotland; being the first clear defeat that
ever that noble Marquess, or any considerable part of his Army received since
the beginning of this War.

22. The Castle of the Devizes (in Wiltshire) was surrendered to the Parl. upon
Conditions, etc.

24. Five thousand of His Majesty's Horse encountered a far greater Body of the
Parl. Forces at Routon-heath near Westchester, then besieged. In this fight
His Majesty's Army was worsted, having lost that noble and valiant Gentleman,
the Lord Bernard Steward, Earl of Lichfield, and some others. The Parl. here
(as in most other places) lost no men of quality, having very few or none in
their Army to lose.

26. Barckley Castle in Gloucester-shire was surrendered to the Parl. upon
Conditions.

October
1. Sandall Castle in York shire, after a long siege, surrendered to the Parl.
upon Conditions, etc.

6. Winchester Castle was likewise delivered upon Composition, etc.

14. Basing house was taken by Storm, the Defendants not having a sufficient
number within to Man their Works, so that they were wearyed out with continual
duty. Here was the truly loyal and noble Marquess of Winchester (that had so
long and gallantly defended his own house) taken prisoner, with about 200.
others, and at least 100. of the defendants flaine, many whereof in cold blood:
the murderers using these words, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently

15. A Brigade of His Majesty's Horse martched Northward, under the Command of
the Lord Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdall, surprised 800. of the foot at
Sherburne in Yorkshire, but before they had disposed of the Prisoners and
Arms, a fresh party encountered them, rescued the Prisoners, disordered His
Majesty's Forces, slew Sir Richa^d Hutton and diverse others.

16. Tiverton Castle in Devonshire assaulted and taken by the Parliament forces.

11. Langford house in Wiltshire surrendered.

27. Shelford house in Nottinghamshire taken by storm, the valiant Governor
(Colonel Stanhop) defended it, even, to the last man, himself and near 200.
others were slain by the mercilefle enemies, after they had entered the house,
having first lost about 60 of their men in the assault.

November
5. Bolton Castie in Yorkshire surrendered to the Parl. upon conditions.

16. Beeston Castle in Cheshire (after long siege) was likewise surrendered to
the Parliament upon conditions.

22. The stables and Outworks of Belvoire Castle were gained by storm, in
which action the Parl. lost 100. of their men, and more wounded, the defendants
retreating into the Castle.

December.
1. The House of Commons at Westminster voted the King to confer several
Honors upon several Members of each House, and ( inter alios) a Dukedom on
the E. of Essex, and the heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten.

Latham house (that had so long and gallantly defended it self, and so often
offended the enemy) was surrondred to them upon conditions.

5. His Majesty sent to the Parliament at Westminster to desire that the Duke
of Richmond, Earl of Southampton, Master Ashburnham, and Master Palmer, might
have a safe conduct to bring propositions of Peace.

15. His Majesty sent a second Letter, with the most powerful persuasions
immaginable, that a safe conduct might be granted according to his desire in
his former Letter, but both had one denial in a letter of the 25. of December.
The same day was the Loyal City of Hereford (by the perfidiousnesse of some
within, and the bribery of others without) delivered into the hands of the Par.
Forces, without any siege, or almost any bloodshed, whereby the Persons and
Goods of many Gentlemen of Quality, and other loyal Subjects, fell into the
hands of the merciless enemy.

22. The Lords at Westminster (to the eternal dishonor of that house) put it
to the Vote, Whether Christmas day should be kept or no: For truly to blor out
that, and the memory of Christ's Passion, is the nearest way to introduce
Judaisme.

26. His Majesty sent a third Message, wherein he offered to repair personally
to London, for concluding a peace, but this found no better acceptance then the
two former.

29. His Majesty sent an Answer to the Parl. Letter of the 25. of this month;
and did then again use the best persuasions he could to beget in them
admittance of a personal Treaty; both which last received a denial from the
Parliament by a Letter dated Jan. 13. 1645.

January
1. The Newarkers made a gallant Sally upon Pointz his Quarters at stoke,
killed and took above 220. of his men, etc.

14. His Majesty sent a fifth Message, inviting to Peace.

16. The siege before Plymouth raised.

17. His Majesty sent an Answer to the Parl. Letter of the 13. of Janu. with
many gracious expressions of his desire of Peace.

18. Dartmouth was taken by Sir T. Fairfax, part of it by storm, and part by
composition.

20. Sir John Cansfield beat up the Parl. Quarters at Marlborough.

The same day a party from Ashby-de-la-Zouche took Astley Castle, in
Warwickeshire, by Scalado.

24. His Majesty sent a 7. Message in fuller Answer of the Parliaments Letter
of the 13. of this month, with earnest desire of satisfactory Answers to his
former Letters; the aim of all which still levelled at the peace and welfare
of this bleeding Kingdom:

29. His Majesty sent an eight Message to the Parliament, with many gracious
condescendings for Peace, but their ears were still deaf to such pious
motions.

30. A party from Ragland Castle, took the town of Carilon in Monmouthshire.

February
1. The same party from Ragland took the town of Newport in that County.

3. Belvon Castle surrendered to the Parl. upon honorable Conditions, etc.

The same day was Westchester surrendered upon conditions, etc.

6. Dunster Castle in Summersetshire relieved by Major General Web.

7. A party of His Majesty's forces entered the town of Wa^ham in Dorsetshire,
took Colonel Butler the Governor, two Commit^ee men and some others, and
thence martched to Corse Castle there besieged, which they releeved, took a
mortar piece of the enemies, and made a safe retreat without any loss.

15. A little but sharp encounter happened between a party of His Majesty's
forces from T^tbury Castle, and a like party of the Parl. from Barton house in
Darbishire, wherein after above half an hours dispute, some slain and many
hurt on each side, the Parl. forces were routed, and many of them taken
Prisoners.

16. Torrington in Devonshire entered by the Parl. forc^s.

18. A party of the Parl. forces near uttoxeter, in Staffordshire were routed
by His Majesty's Forces.

26. His Majesty sent a ninth Letter to wesiminster to desire an Answer of his
former letter, still pressing for Peace.

The same day Corse Castle (but lately releeved) was delivered into the hands
of the Parliament by the treachery and perfidiousnesse of one Lieutenant Col.
Pitman.

March
2. A party of His Majesty's forces from Oxford entered the town of Abbingdon,
seized upon the Ordnance and Magazine, yet for want (only) of a dozen spades
were forced to retreat, with some prisoners, and few slain on either side. It Is
known who was too blame.

14. The Lord Hopton being much overpowred by the Parliaments Forces in the
West, was n^cessitated to acc^pt of conditions for the disbanding his Army, etc.

21. The Lord Astley commanded a Brigade of horse and foot from VVorceste
shire, which were intended for Oxford, were s^t upon by an aggregate body of
the Parliaments Forces on the edge of Gloucestershire and defeated, the foot
most taken, with my Lord himself, and some of the horse, the remainder escaped
and got to Oxford. Thus had His Majesty two Armies defeated in lesle then a
fortnight. Yet we are confident when Almighty God have sufficienly punished the
Sins of this Nation, he will in his good time restore a pious King to his
just Rights, and this bleeding Kingdom to Peace and Union in despite of all
Sectaries and Opponents.

23. His Majesty (never weary in acting any thing tending to Peace) sent his
tenth Message to this effect, that in case he might have the faith of his two
houses of Parliament for the preservation of his Honor, Person, and Estate,
and that liberty might be given to all those that do and have adhered to His
Majesty to enjoy their estates, without any sequestration, or being compelled
to take any Oaths, not enjoined by Law, he would then disband his forces,
dismantle his Garrisons, return to and reside with his two Houses of Parl. etc.
And could more be offered by, or expected from a gracious King?

Anno 1646.
March
25. The City of Worcester was summoned by Sir Will. Brereton.

And the same day was Dennington Castle surrendered to the Parl. upon Articles.

27. Newarke summoned by the English and Scottish Forces.

30. An Answer was agreed on by the Houses to be sent to His Majesty, being a
flat denial to his Tenth most gracious Message of the 23. of March, wherein
they told the King, That it would be unsafe for Him, or them, to return to
westminster, until He had assented to the Propositions, which they were
framing, etc.

Now can any man imagine, that these men ever intended the Honor and safety of
His Majesty's Person, the restoring of Him to His just Rights, or (their maine
pretense) the bringing of His Majesty's Person from among his evil
Counselors; or had the least thought of composing these unhappy differences,
and of settling the Kingdom in peace, when after so many gracious Messages sent
unto them, (the worst of men) by Him, (the best of Kings) and therein so many
more then fair proposals, and condescendings for the procuring of a happy and
lasting peace; that yet these men should rerurne Him a flat denial for coming
to Westminster, until He had assented to the Propositions, which they were a
framing; that is, as much as if they had said, Until He had granted them they
knew not what; for as yet neither they themselves (much less His Majesty) knew
what those Propositions were; as their own words import.

31. And in case His Majesty should resolve to throw himself into their arms,
by coming to London, without their knowledge and consent, (as what would not
His Majesty have ever done for to beg^t a good understanding betwixt Him and
His People, and to manifest the sincerity of His endeavors, for obtaining
Peace?) to prevent that, they voted, That if the King (contrary to their said
Answer) should come, or attempt to come (mark the height of their pride)
within the Lines of Communication; that then the Committee of the Militia of
London should have power, and were thereby enjoined to apprehend and secure
(that is, imprison) such as should come with him, to prevent resort unto him,
and to secure his Person, (i. e. to commit him (close prisoner) to the Tower.

And the more to manifest their inveterate hatred and malice to His Majesty,
and all such as had been loyal to Him, the same day they thundered out another
Order, commanding all men that had borne Arms against the Parliament, to
depart the City of London, and Lines of Communication, by the 6. of April
following, or otherwise to be proceeded against as Spies.

April
1. The Neworkers made a gallant and successful ^^lly upon the enemy before
that town; wherein they slew and drowned many of their best men, and took
diverse prisoners.

3. And lest such of His majesty's friends, as they had banishnd by their last
mentioned Order, should address themselves to His majesty, or the Queen, or
to any other of the Nobility, for their relief and comfort: The Parl. at
Westminster passed a bloody Ordinance, for establishing a Court martial in
London; wherein they gave power to Commissioners, or any twelve of them, (a fit
Jury) to punish with death all such as should voluntarily repair unto the
person of the King, or Queen, or Lords of the Council, etc.

7. And that nothing which was either good or holy might escape the effects of
their cruelty, they sacrilegiously Ordered, That the Brass Statue, and d^faced
Monuments in the Church of Windsor, should be sold (to Tinkers,) and the
proceed thereof paid to the Governor and Soldiers of Windsor Castle.

8. Ruthen Castle, etc. surrendered to Mitton.

13. Exeter surrendered upon Articles.

The same day Lichsield Close was summoned; whereunto a gallant and resolute
Answer was returned by Sir Thomas Tildsley, Col. Baggot, and the rest of that
Loyal Garrison.

14. Barnstaple surrendered Town and Castle.

15. S. Michaels mount yielded.

21. Barnstaple Fort surrendered.

25. Dunstar Castle and Aburstwith yielded to the Parliam.

26. Woodstock manor, a place naturally so seated, that it was scarce
capable of Fortification: Yet by the excellent skill, care, and industry of
Capt. Samuel Fawcet, a Gentleman of unquestionable worth and fidelity, so
strengthened it by Art, where Nature had been deficient, and so judiciously and
valorously defended it against the Enemy, that he killed many hundreds of them
before the Works; sallyed frequently upon them, with great success and
safety; took a Colors, and resolutely withstood them, till he had not half a
barrel of powder left him: yet nevertheless had resolved to have left his
bones there, had not His Majesty sent Commissioners to treat for him with the
Enemy, for the surrender of the Garrison, which this day was delivered upon
Articles.

27. This morning early His majesty (being prohibited to attempt coming to
London, or Westminster, and all his messages, and proposalls for peace being
denied, and an Army ready to inviron him within the Walls of Oxford) was
enforced of two inevitable evils to choose which he conceived the lesser, viz.
to fly to the Scottish. Army (then before Newarke) for protection, thinking
(by that means) to preserve his life, and more easily to compose these unhapy
differences betwixt him and his Subjects.

About the same time that perfidious Prelate, and shame of the Clergy,
williams, the Apostate-Archbishop of York, deserted His Majesty, put a
Garrison in, and fortified his House at Purin, near Conway in wales, and
protested against the Kings Party, which he had formerly sworn to maintain.

May
2. The Parliaments Army commanded by Sir Thomas Fairfax, the second time
Leagured before Oxford.

4. The Treaty began at Newarke.

The same day (the Houses not being yet certainly informed where His Majesty
was gone, and suspecting Him to be in London, concealed by the Major or some
other honest Citizen) to the end His Majesty should not find any place whereon
(quietly) to rest his head, they passed an Order, and published it by beat of
Drum throughout the City of London, and westminster; That what person soever
should harbor, and conceal, or know of the harboring or concealing of the
Kings Person, and should not reveal it immediately to the Speakers of both
Houses, should be proceeded against as a Traitor to the Commonwealth, forfeit
his whole Estate, and die without mercy.

Was it ever heard of before, (speak you Lawyers) that to harbor the Kings
Person, was, or could be Treason?

5. But (whilst they were searching of the Lord Majors House for him (an act
beyond president, wherein the Honor of the City is yet not a little
concerned) His Majesty arrived at Southwell; and from thence was he conducted
into the Scottish Army.

6. Upon notice whereof, the Commons voted that the Scottish Commissioners, and
the General of the Scottish Army should be desired, that His Majesty's person
be disposed of as both houses shall desire and direct: And that he be thence
disposed of and sent (a Prisoner) to Warwick Castle. And further Ordered, that
Master Ashburnham, and the rest that came with the King into the Scottish
Quarters, should be sent for as Delinquents, etc.

8. Banbury was surrendered upon Articles.

9. Newarke (after 6. weeks siege) delivered: upon this the Scottish Army drew
off from before Newarke and retreated about four miles and the King with them
in the head of their Army.

11. Oxford, Borstall house, Radcot and Wallingford, were summoned by the Parl.
forces.

13 His Majesty came into Newcastle.

16. Hartleborough Castle surrendered to Colonel Morgan.

18. His Majesty (after he had withdrawn himself to the Scottish Army) for to
secure His Person, sent His eleventh most Gracious Message, wherein he
recommended to the two Houses, all the ways, and means possible, for the
speedy finishing so Pious and necessary a work, as that of settling Peace
within His Kingdoms: And particularly desired that they would take the advice
of the Divines of both Kingdoms assembled at Westminster. As for the Militia,
His Majesty was pleased to have it settled, as was offered at the Treaty at
Uxbridge for seven years: And concerning the War in Ireland, His majesty
would do whatsoever was possible for him to give full satisfaction therein,
etc. His majesty being resolved to comply with the Parliament, in every thing
that should be for the happiness of His subjects, and for the removing of all
unhappy differences, which had produced so sad effects, etc. And that He would
take a speedy course for easing and quieting his afflicted people, by
satisfiing the public debts, by disbanding of all Armies, and whatsoever else
should be* judged conducible to that end, that so all hindrances being removed,
He might return to His Parliament with mutual comfort: And being desirous to
shun tho further effusion of blood, and to evidence His real intentions to
peace, His majesty further signified unto them that he was willing, that his
forces in and about Oxford should be disbanded, and the fortifications of the
City dismantled, they receiving Honorable conditions, which being granted to
the Town and forces there, His majesty would give the like Order to the rest
of the Garrisons.

The same day began the Treaty at Marston a mile from Oxford.

19. It was voted; That this Kingdom (the Parl. at Westminster) had no further
need of the Army of their Brethren (in Rebellion) the Scots in this Kingdom.
And further, that the sum of 100000. I. should be advanced, and paid to the
Scottish Army, etc. (for Invading and Plundring the Kingdom, and for running
away from Hereford, and Marston-Moore.)

26. A Remonstrance from the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common council was
presented to the Houses at Westminster which they promised to take into their
Consideration, in convenient time, but that times not come yet, March 25. 1647.

4. A great defeat given unto the Scottish and British forces, by the Irish,
near unto Benburke in the County of Tyron, wherein the Lord Viscount
Mountgomery was taken prisoner, and his Lieutenant of Horse deadly wounded: The
Lord Blancy killed, above 5000. more drowned, and taken, with all their
Ammunition and about 5000. foot Arms, and most of the Officers killed, or taken.

6. Carnarvon Town and Castle surrendered to the Parliament.

9. And still to continue their wonted practice of endeavoring to make His
majesty odious to the People; (notwithstanding that His maj. had fully and
freely declared to the Scottish Army upon his coming thither, that his repair
to them; was purposely to compose the differences betwixt him and his Subjects,
etc. and to settle a firm Peace in these two Kingdoms) the Houses at
Westminster voted (1.) That His majesty in going to the Scottish Army in this
Kingdom, thereby intended to prolong the Wars in this Kingdom. Now let any
man judge whether these men aim at any thing more then the Ruin and
destruction of His majesty? For, neither would they admit of his coming to
London, or Westminster; Nor yet relish his going to the Scots; but tell the
World it was to prolong the Wars.

(2.) That a declaration should be drawn to set forth new Jealousies and
fears, etc.

The same ninth day Ludlow was delivered upon Articles.

10. And now all the world may see and judge whether His majesty had any
intention to prolong the Wars, when he sent a warrant signed with his own
hand, and directed to the Governors of Oxford, Lichfield, Worcester, and
Wallingford, and all other Commanders of any other Towns, Castles, or Forts
within the Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales, requiring them upon
honorable Conditions to quit the Towns, Castles, and Forts, and to disband
all the Forces under their several commands. Now if disbanding of Forces, and
quitting of Garrisons be any mean or sign of prolonging the War, let those
of Bedlam determine, since those at Westminster. mistake so grosty.

20. The Articles for the surrender of Oxford were concluded, and the Treaty
ended.

24. Oxford (His Majesty's head Garrison) and the famous University thereof,
after 6. weeks siege, was surrendered upon Articles to the Army of the
Independents under the Conduct of Sir Thomas Fairfax. Which Articles were
afterward most perfidiously broken, especially by their Masters (the Wisemen)
at Westminster.

1. By arresting and imprisoning the Governor himself, and diverse others, for
many weeks together, in the Compter and other prisons, contrary to the 7.
Article. 2. By disarming (maliciously) such of the Officers and Soldiers of
that Garrison, etc. as repaired to London, contrary to the 5. Article. 3. By
banishing them 20 miles distance from the Lines of Communication, contrary to
the said 5. Article. 4. And lastly, by not suffering any belonging to the
societies of the Innes of Court, Innes of Chancery, or the Sergeants Inn, who
had assisted His Majesty, according as they were bound both by Law and
Conscience, to be admitted to live in any of the said Societies.
30. One Morgan (alias Powel) who was formerly arraigned and convicted for a
Priest of the Order of Saint Benedict, at the Kings Bench Bar, was drawn,
hanged and quartered.

July
1. The Treaty began at Worcester.

The same day His Highness the Prince of Wales, being forced out of the
Kingdom by the Parl. arrived at S. Jermans with about 200. attendants, where
his Mother (the Queens Majesty) then was; being fled thither (long before) to
save her life from the fury of those creatures that had voted her a Traitor.

2. Ordered that all Papists and Irish should be put out of the Lines of
Communication of the city of London, and all other Corporated places in this
Kingdom, etc.

3. Sir Thomas Fairfax sent the True (not counterfeit) Great Seal of England,
the Privy, Seal, the Signet Royal, the Seal of the K. Bench, the Seal of
the Exchequer, the Seal of the Court of Wards, the Seal of the Admiralty and
Navy, and the Sword to the Parl. at Westminster. And (in great haste) they
Ordered, That all the said Seals should be forthwith broken in pieces, and
that the Sword should be kept safe in the Kings Wardrobe.

6. Ordered, that all (such Godly and Learned) Ministers that had adhered to
His Majesty, and been sequestered for their Malignancie, (i. e. Loyalty) should
be dis-enabled from any Office, place or privilege of the Ministry; That is,
they, their wives and children, must first beg, and then starve:

The same day they renewed their former vote; that this Kingdom had no more
need of the Scottish Army, etc. and that a Letter should be sent to the
Commissioners of Scotland, to desire them to withdraw their Army into Scotland.

7. Sir Peter Killigrew (the State-Poste) was sent toward Newcastle with a
Letter dated July 6. to His Majesty, to desire Him to give order to the
Marquess of Ormond to surrender Dublin up to the Parl. and other Garrisons in
Ireland.

9. They Ordered that the honest and faithful Gentlemen Attendants upon the
Duke of York, should be all discharged.

The same day Monsieur Bellieure (the French Ambassador) landed, and came to
Greenwich.

And the same day Massey was sworn a Member in the House of Commons, and took
his place in the House. In the first Expedition against the Scots, he thought
himself highly advanced in being Capt. of the Pyoniers for 5. s. per diem, and
then one might have spoke to him without a cringe: I wonder how a man must
address himself unto him now?

And this day also Montrill (the French Agent) returned to His Majesty from
France, with a Letter from the Queen, wherein (as it is recorded in the London
Newes-books) she advised the King to make Peace with the three Kingdoms upon
any terms, etc.

Now is it not to be wondered at, with what impudence these malicious wretches
dare tax Her Majesty for being a means of this war; that know and acknowledge
her thus piously advising the King (her Husband) to Peace?

10. Monsieur Bellieure (the French Ambassador Extraordinary) came into London.

11. A most gracious Letter came from His Majesty in answer to the Par. Letter
of the 6. of July, wherein he granted all their desires, touching the surrender
of the Garrisons in Ireland.

The same day they committed John Lilburne close Prisoner in the Tower.

14. Commissioners were sent to His Majesty at Newcastle, with the Parl. most
unreasonable and illegal Propositions for Peace, being such as are wholly
destructive to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and which would
absolutely deprive His Majesty of His Regal Power.

16. Lichfield Close surrendered upon Articles.

17. Monsieur Bellieure was highly honored with the deaf ears of the Parl. at
Westminst.

23. Worcester surrendered upon Articles.

The same 13. day a Declaration was passed, and pasted upon every post,
prohibiting all such as had adhered to the King, to presume to repair to the
Court, or to the Kings Person, etc. and particularly that Edward Walker (the
King thought him worthy (so do all that know him rightly) to be called Sir
Edward Walker) a dangerous Malignant, etc. to be dismissed and sent away from
about His majesty. See what care they took to have none but -- about Him.

24. The Prineesse Henrietta (having been long destitute of all things, even
common necessaries, suitable to the quality of the Kings daughter, though the
Parliament, her evil Angel, had been often told of it) was happily conveyed
away from Oatlands by the Lady Dalkeith, and carried to the Queen her mother
in France.

31. Gotheridge Castle in Wales surrendered.

August
1. A Peace between the Marquess of Ormond and the Catholics of Ireland
proclaimed at Dublin.

2. The Commissioners received His Majesty's Negative Answer touching the Parl.
Propositions, and took their leave of him. I did not hear that any of them
kissed his hand --

5. Hugh Peter's (the very same man that so devoutly used the Butchers wife by
Smithfield Bars) had 200. 1. per annum Ordered him out of certain Lands of
Delinquents for public and great services: But the Earl of Essex whilst he
lived would not suffer him to enjoy it, for some reasons best known to
himself.

Shortly after their Gen: Fairfax came to town, and had slender thanks
returned him by some of the more factious Citizens: But the House of Com.
ordered him thanks, and a slender visit. And (as a reward of his good services)
instead of an Army, gave him a Brigade, and bad farewell to their General.

7. Ragland Cast^e summoned.

10. The Commissioners that carried the Propositions to His Majesty returned to
London.

18. The French Ambassadors Letters seized on, opened, and read Publicly in
the House of Commons. Will not France remember this?

The same day, were the true Great Seal of England, and the rest of His
Majesty's Scales that were taken in Oxford, save only two, viz. the Privy
Signet and another small Signet all broken and defaced by one Henry Radley (a
shirking fellow) now attendant on the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall in the
presence of all the Higher and Lower Kings at Westminster, in the upper House.

13. The Silver of the broken Seals were bestowed on the Speakers of both
Houses; which they formed into Plate: But I hardly believe they ever drank His
Majesty's health in them.

17. Sir John Stowell (a rational and resolute Gentleman) only for desirng to
know hi^ Charge, and why he might not be admitted to his Composition, was
Ordered to be sent Prisoner to Newgate and that an Indictment should be drawn
up against him at the next Assizes, for assisting His Majesty against his
enemies.

The same day Pendennis Castle was yielded.

About this time Conoway town was taken by storm. Where Mitton tied many
English and Irish back to back and threw them Overboard.

19. Ragland Castle surrendered.

28. It was Ordered that Sir Thomas Glemham the late Governor of Oxford, should
be discharged of his imprisoment; but no reparation made him. Neither was he
released upon this Order.

About this time, that grand Incendiary betwixt the two Nations, Henderson (the
Scot) died. The King confuted all his Arguments which he urged to persuade him
to take the Covenant and sign the Propositions; which forced the poor Scot
into another World to see if he could learn any better.

14. The Earl of Essex died; some say of an Apoplexy, some of a Surfer, others
say of the Plague, and many think he was Poisoned; Whether he was or not, it
is most certain that the Parl. suspected him to harbor some Honorable
thoughts of His Majesty, and that was enough to kill him, by one means, or
other. It is confessed by all men, that he dyed suddenly: And that he was the
first General of the Grand Rebellion: that will not die suddenly.

16. The Castle of S. Mary's in Silly and the Island surrendered.

20. Ordered that His Majesty's Person should be disposed of as both Houses of
the Parliament of England should think fit.

25. Ordered that the Estates of the Lord Capell, Lord cottington, the
Marquess of winchester, E. of worceste, Sir Charles Smith, and many others
should be sold. etc.

29. Sir John Geere (Alderman) Elected Lord Major by the City of London. This
Gentleman is daily derided (by the Factious Persons in and about London) with
the Title of the Queens Knight: How well he may deserve so Honorable an
Epithet, Time will manifest.

30. M. Culham and M. Edmonds (formerly elected Sheriftes for London) were
sworn at the Exchequer bar, at Westminster.

October
1. Ordered that 5000 1. should be paid to the Executors of the late Earl of
Essex, for defraying the Charge of his Funeral, etc. 500. 1. and a part of the
Communion Book would have buried him like a Christian; But 10000. 1. would*
not wipe away the stain of his Name and Honor, whose memory will live in the
Title of the first Leader of the -- Anno 1642.

Ord red also that 4500. 1. which was due to the Countess of Essex, should be
to the State. Alas (good Lady!) nothing of his, Alive, nor dead.

Ordered that an Ordnance should be forthwith prepared for Estating 5000. 1.
Per annum, upon Sir Tho: fairfax. So he gets more by his Rebellion, then ever
his Predecessors did for their Loyalty.

5. And now that the Earl of Essex is dead, M. Peter's gets an Ordnance passed
for the payment of two hundred pounds Per annum, and his heirs for ever out of
the Estates of the Earl of Worcester and other Delinquents excepted against in
the Propositions.

But let him take heed, the E. of Clamorgan be not a greater enemy to him, then
the E. of Essex was: What a Curse it is sor M. Peter's to be troubled with
Earls?

6. Ordered, That whereas all Commissions to Sea Captains ran formerly in
the name of the King and Parliament, they should be altered, and made in the
name of the Parliament only. Any thing (you see) rather then f^ile, provided it
propagate the Cause, but let them remember The vessels are His Majesty's.

12 Commissioners from Ireland came to London, to treat on the behalf of the
Marquesle of Ormond.

14. The Scots Papers concerning the Disposal of the Kings Person seized on,
and the Scots Warrant for printing of them, adjudged invallid, the Printers and
Stationers imprisoned.

17. Ordered that the Marquess of Hartford, nor any that had ever borne Arms
against the Parliament, should be suffered to go with the Earl of Essex his
Corpse to see his last Rights performed. Was not this a horrible dishonor and
grief (think you) to the Cavalier^?

22. The E. of Essex his Funeral solemnized with more Ceremony, and
superstitious foolery then ever was the Ashes of S. Cuthbert by the monks of
that Age.

23. Ordered that the Judges of the Sergeants Inns, Benchers of the Innes of
Court, and the Principalls of the Inns of Chancery, should take care that none
of those Societies that had borne Arms against the Parliament, should be
admitted to live in any of the said Societies. Which contradicts all Christian
Charity, and violates, the Articles of Oxford, as formerly we not^d.

26. Denbigh Castle surrendered.

29. Sir John Gere, formerly Elected Lord Major of the City of London, was
sworn at Westminster.

31. The Speakers of the two Houses, made keepers of the Counterfeit Great
Seal, etc.

November
3. The Parl. begun to fit at Edenborough: Sure this day is fatal to all
Parliaments.

17. This day the Ordnance for raiseing the 200000. l. for the Rebellious Army
of the Scots, to betray and deliver His majesty into the hands of the
blood-thirsty Subjects of England, was passed.

26. The E. of Essex beheaded.

December
8. The Treaty with Scottish Commissioners for the payment of the first 200000.
l and their martch out of the Kingdom was concluded.

12. An Order was made (upon the motion of the Earl of Pembrooke;) That all
Papists and such as had ^orne Arms against the Parliament, should depart the
Lines of Communication, and 20. miles further, (except such as should get
Tickets from the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall, for to stay and attend their
Compositions) and not to return again within 2. months. Which very day the
said Earl of Pemb^ookes house at wilton near Salisbury, was burnt down to the
ground, whereby it is supposed he lost above 20000. l. A just judgment of God
on so malicious a person.

16. The money for the treacherous Scots (being 36 cart loads) martched out of
London.

19. The City Petition presented; and high Resolutions were pitched upon for
obtaining a speedy and positive Answer from the Parl. but they received only
thanks for their Desires: and of a sudden the Independent Horse of Sir The:
Fairfax his Army were drawn nearer London, to keep the citizens in awe.

20. His Majesty dispatched his 12. most gracious Message to the great men at
Westminst. wherein he proposed and desired rgaine to come to London, or any of
his Houses thereabouts, upon the public faith and security of his two Houses
of Parl. and the Scottish Commissioners, that he might be there with honor,
freedom and safety, etc.

28. But instead of returning him an Answer, the Higher House voted, That there
might not be any further personal Treaty upon the Propositions; To which the
Commons assented, and added a further vote, That the King coming to Holmby
house, and the Scottish Army gone out of this Kingdom, the two Houses of
Parliament will then join with our Brethren of Scotland in all possible means
to persuade the King to pass the Propositions; and if he refuse, that then the
Houses will do nothing that may break the union and affection of the two
Kingdoms, but to preserve the same.

January
9. And now they perceive the game is done, they begin to share the stakes, for
this day it was Ordered that the Lord Say should have 10000. l. Sir Rowland
Wandesford 5000. l. Sir Benjamin Rudyard 6000. l. Master Bacon 3000 l. Just
24000. l. in one day.

13. Went those Lords and Commons from London, who were appointed by the Parl.
to receive His Majesty from the hands of the treacherous Scots, and attend Him
to Holmby. This night they lay at Dunstable; a very fit place for them, if you
mark it.

18, 19. The House of Commons passed several Votes for allowances to be given
to such of themselves as could pretend to have sustained any losses or
sufferings in the year 3 Caroli, and particularly

1.
To the Earl of Northumberland 10000 Master Vassal 10000 Master Seldom 5000
Sir John Eliots children 5000 Sir Will. Strodes poor kindred 5000 Master
Bensamin Valentine 5000 M. Peter Hamond's successors 5000 M. Walter Long 5000
Sir Miles Hubbard 5000 M. John Hampdens children 5000 Denzill Hollis Esquire. 5000
In tote 65000. l.

Besides 2000. l. to the Trustees for the sale of Bishops Lands, and many
hundreds more to petty Petitioners.

65000. and 24000. l. is 89000. l. a small pittance, and not worth the
mentioning; yet a less sum would have stopped a great deal of clamor made at
Westminster hall gates by a number of poor women and others who have lost
their husbands and friends in their service, and yet are suffered to starve in
the streets for want of bread, whilst these men share the spoil amongst
themselves, yea no less then 89000. l. in three days; and yet see what care
they afterward took for the good of the Kingdom, in desiring His majesty's
Keepers at Holmby to be sparing in their expenses: who out of their providence
for preserving the wealth of the Kingdom, reduced their Prisoner to one meal
a day.

20. The total charged upon the Excise of the Kingdom was cast up, and
reported to the House to be but 390000. l. Nevertheless it has plainly been
proved in a printed book, entitled, Londons Account, that there must needs be
above 4000000. remaining in the Accomptants hands of the Excize only of the
city of London and its Weekly Bills. -- And what proportion the Excize of the
rest of the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales may bear thereunto, let
all honest men judge.

21. Doctor Hudson (only for conducting His maj. into the Scottish Army, after
the Parliament had denied Him access to London, or any other of His Houses,
(being formerly apprehended at York, and brought up to London) was committed
Close Prisoner to the Tower for Treason, and Ordered that none should speak
with Him, but in the presence of His Keeper. Such are the Com^orts, and such
the Rewards of Obedience and Loyalty.

30. The Perfidious Scots surrendered up New castle to the Parliament; Presented
a Declaration to His Majesty; and the Commissioners sent from London received
His Majesty Prisoner, and took the Charge of him.

February
3. The last 100000. l. was paid to the Treacherous Scots: The House of Lords
published a Declaration wherein they set forth, that the Compositions made at
Goldsmiths Hall, were not by Ordinance, and so the Sequestrators in the
Countries not bound to observe them, etc.

The House (you know who we mean) Ordered, that His Majesty's Plate, which was
appropriated to an holy use, and stood usually upon the Communion Table, and in
the Vestry at White Hall Chapel, should be melted for the service of the
State: Now let all Moderate men determine, whether this was done out of
contempt to His Majesty and the Church, or for mere necessity, the
Common-Stock being so lately drained of 89000. l. But we have heard a story of
a Tailor, who had gotten such a habit of theeveing, that rather then he would
forget the main Principal of his profession, he would pilfer the very Rushes
where he came to keep his Lime-twiggs in Action.

The similie may hold, save only in this; The one stitches together, the other
rents in pieces.

The same day the Lord of Ormond sent a Letter directed to Sir Thomas Wharton,
and Major Salloway, with propositions therein enclosed, for the surrender of
Dublin to the Parliament.

7. the House of Lords were this day persuaded by the Commons, to pass a
Declaration to recall their former Declaration published against the power of
the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall, and to join with them in another of their
drawing up for the establishing of that Committee, etc.

9. Some of the London Apprentices Petitioned the Lords for a Play day once a
Month.

10. Ordered that the Library of the late Arch Bishop of canterbury should be
employed and disposed for the service of the University of Cambridge.

11. The Treacherous Army of the Scots martched over Tweed, at Kelsey and
Barwick.

12. Barwick quitted and the Garrison dismantled.

15. A great Tumult in Smithfield; The Excise house pulled down and burnt, the
books torn in pieces, and (as the Clerks say) 80. l. in money scattered, but
we hear not of a penny that was found in the ashes: This was a happy day for
the Excise men. Diverse Butchers were apprehended about it, and committed to
Prison; but we heard not of any further punishment.

16. His Maj. was led Captive to Holmby.

17. His Majesty sent a Message to both Houses, wherein he desired to be
attended by some of His Chaplains, not only for the exercise of his
Conscience, but also for the clearing of His judgment concerning the present
differences in Religion, and therein named 12. Reverend and Orthodox Divines
viz. B. London, B. Salisbury, B. Peterborough, D. Shelden, Clerk of the Closet,
D. Marsh. Deane of York, D. Sanderson, D. Baily, D. Heywood, D. Beale, D.
Fuller, D. Hammond, D. Tailor. Whereof he desired that at least two might have
free liberty to wait upon him, for the discharge of their Duty to His Majesty,
according to their function: Upon reading whereof, they Ordered Wednesday
following (being the 24. day) to return Answer thereunto.

18. The House Ordered, That a Body of 5400. Horse and 1000. Dragoones should
be continued, and maintained at the Charge of the Kingdom.

22. A Letter was sent to the Marquess of Ormond, for the Granting of his
Propositions, The Lord Lisle Lieutenant of Ireland arrived at Cork in Munster.

27. The French Ambassador had Audience: His desire was for a happy
accommodation between the King and Parliament; and presented himself as a
mediator betwixt them.

March
1. The Apprentices of London, Petition again for Play days, etc.

6. His majesty after 17. days Expectation of an Answer to His former message
of the 17 of February, renewed the same, and sent it to the Houses at
Westminster, wherein amongst many other sweet and pious expressions, He assured
them, that He could not as He ought take into consideration those Alterations
in Religion, which had and would be offered unto Him, without such help as He
desired; because He could never judge rightly of, or be altered in any thing of
His opinion, so long as any ordinary way of finding out the truth was denied
him: but when this was granted him, His Majesty promised them faithfully not to
strive for victory in Argument, but to seek and submit to truth, according to
that judgment which God had given Him, etc.

10. This day was set apart for a day of Humiliation for the growth of Heresies
and Blasphemies, etc. One would have thought they had been grown to a
sufficient number already: The Humble-men were much afraid of being interrupted
in their devotion, by the Independents, (whom they account the prime
Heretics) and therefore they set strong Guards both of Horse and Foot
throughout the City and Suburbs.

The same day the Catholic Irish had a general Rendezvous at Laughlin
bridge, not far from Dublin in Ireland.

19. Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, and Major Saloway, received
Instructions to treat with Sir Thomas Fairfax about the 8000. Foot and 2000.
Horse that had been formerly voted to be sent for Ireland.

21. This day being Sunday in the afternoon, there happened a notable
Insurrection amongst the Apprentices and others in Moorefields, (occasioned
upon the apprending of some who were found drinking in an Alehouse;) who drew
into a head, and assaulted, broke down and plundered the House of Justice
Hubbard, and forced him and his servants to shift for their lives: Three were
diverse hurt by small shot from the house before entrance, but not any killed.

Postscript.
THere remains now (Reader) nothing to complete this short-sad story, but a
Catalogue of the persons of note slain within this Kingdom since the
beginning of these bloody wars, (not to speak of those many thousands of
inferior Rank) which may well Challenge even from an Adamantine heart, the
tribute of a bleeding Eye, the rather, since there is hardly any story can
parallel these Calamities, which if truly resented, will exact from all good
Christians an earnest and continual supplication, that Almighty God would
please to avert his Judgments from us; to set a Period to these distractions;
and to preserve our most Gracious King from the fury of his Enemies; to deliver
him out of their bloody hands; and (in his own due time) to re-establish him
in his Throne.

A Catalogue of the names of all or the most part of the Lords, Knights,
Commanders, and persons of quality slain or executed by Law Martial on both
sides, from the beginning of this unnatural War to the 25. of March. 1647.
But before we proceed to give you the Names, we must in duty breathe forth
some pious Ejulations in memory of so many gallant souls, slain on His
Majesty's part.
Immortal Spirits, whose transcendent worth
Has made you such, while it has brought you forth
By a most glorious Birth, into a Light
Holds no alternate course with darksome Night.
Refulgent Stars, in Honor's Orb you shine,
Of the first Magnitude: Who did decline
No Combats, signal Enterprises, or
The wants and sufferings that attend on War;
But fought for Church, for Caesar, and your Laws,
In all things disadvantag'd, save your Cause
And valiant hearts, which made you bold to oppose
Your noble Blood against ignoble Foes.
You need no Marble Statua's, or Brass
To help transmit your Actions; which shall pass
To all succeeding Ages, by the Tongues
Of learned Bards, the subject of their Songs.
No Flux of Time shall cancel any Name,
Your swords have graven on the leaves of Fame:
Who swelled her breast with your departing breath,
To trumpet loud the Glories of your Death.
Wherein the living wish with you a room,
To draw immortal Honors from that Toombe,
Which shaded stands with noble Palms that spring
From the pure blood you shed for Charles your King;
On whose perpessions may the Heavens look down,
In vindication of his injured Crown.
EARLS and LORDS Slain on His Majesty's part.
Earl of Linsey, slain at Edgehill battle, October 23. 1643. Earl of
Northampton, slain at Hopton heath in Staff. shire, March 19. 1642. Earl of
Carnarvon, at Newbery first battle, Sep. 17. 1643. Earl of Sunderland there
also. Earl of Litchfield, slain at Routon-heath in Cheshire. Sept. 29. 1645.
Earl of Kingston, near Gainsborough. Earl of Denaigh received his deaths wound
at Burmincham. Marquess de Vieuville, a French Lord, slain at Newbery first
Battle. Lord Viscount Fawlkland, slain there also. Lord d'Aubigny, at
Edghill. Lord John Steward, near Alresford in Hampshire. Lord Grandison,
received his deaths-wound at Bristow. Lord Carry, slain at Marston-Moore, July
1644. Baron Dene, (kinsman to the Prince of Orange) slain at Nottingham. M.
Edward Sackvile, (son to the Earl of Dorset) most barbarously murdered near
Oxford, by some of Brownes soldiers from Abbington.
Baronets and Knights.
Sir Edmund Verney, his Majesty's Standard Bearer, slain at Edghill. Sir Bevill
Grenvile, at Lansdowne, July 5. 1643. Sir Nicholas Slaynning, at Bristow, July
26. 1643. Sir Rich: Lawdy, at Cover in Gloc:shire. Sir Ingram Hopton, at Winsby
fight near Horn-castle, October. 1643. Sir George Bowls, at Winsby fight near
Horn-castle, October. 1643. Sir William Butler, slain at Cropedy Bridge, June
29. 1644. Sir William Clarke, slain at Cropedy Bridge, June 29. 1644. Sir
Thom: Metham, at Marston-Moore. Sir Will: Lambton, at Marston-Moore. Sir Anth:
Maunsell, at Newbery first Battle. Sir John Smith, near Alresford in
Hampshire. Sir Anth: St Litger at Newbery second Battle, October. 27. 1644. Sir
Henry Gage, at Cullom-Bridge near Abbington, Ian. 11. 1644. Sir Michael Earnly,
slain at the surprisall of Shrewsb. Sir John Girlington, near Melton-Mowbray in
Leicest. shire. Sir William Manwaring, slain at Chester. Sir John Digby,
received his deaths-wound at Langport in Com. Summer. Sir William Crosts,
slain at Stokesey in Shropsh. June 9. 1645. Sir Tho: Gardener, in Buck:shire.
Sir Peter Brown, wounded at Naisby, dyed at Northampton. Sir Tho: Dallison,
slain at Naisby Sir Richard Cave, slain at Naisby Sir Henry Fletcher slain at
Chester. Sir Bernard Astley, son to the Lord Astley, at Bristow last siege.
Sir Richard Crane, upon a salley there. Sir Richard Hutton. at Sherburne in
Yorkshire. Sir Francis Carnaby. at Sherburne in Yorkshire. Sir Gilbert Gerard
jun. near Ludlow. Sir William Wentworth at Marston-Moore. Sir Charles Slingsby.
at Marston-Moore. Sir Francis Dacres. at Marston-Moore. Sir Richard Goodhill
wounded in Wales, and dyed at Worcester. Sir Brian Stapleton, in Yorkshire.
Sir Lodowick Wire a Dutchman, at Banbury. Sir Phillip Biron, slain at York.
Sir Nicholas Fortescue, Knight of Malta, received his deaths-wound in Furnace
in Lancashire. Sir Troilus Turbervile, Captaine-Lieutenant of the Kings
Lifeguard of Hotse, slain at His Majesty's going from Newark to Oxford.
COLONELLS.
COl. Thomas Howard, (son to the Lord William Howard) slain at Peirsbridge
in the County of York. Col. Cha. Cavendish, (brother to the Earl of
Devonshire,) near Gainsborough in Lincolne-shire. Col. Thomas Howard, (son of
Sir Francis Howard) slain at Atherton-Moore in Yorkshire; the gaining of that
Battle was principally ascribed to his valor- June 30. 1643. Col. George
Herne slain there also. Col. Ferdinando Stanhop (son to the Earl of
Chesterfield) slain in Nottingham-shire. Col. Stanhop his brother slain in
defending his Fathers house at Shelford in that County, October 27. 1645. Col.
Cuthbert Connyers of Leighton in Durham, slain at Malpasse in Cheshire, in
August 1644. Col. Henry Lundesford. slain at the taking of Bristow by his
Majesty's Forces, July 26. 1643. Col. Buck. slain at the taking of Bristow by
his Majesty's Forces, July 26. 1643. Col. Trevanian. slain at the taking of
Bristow by his Majesty's Forces, July 26. 1643. Col. Thomas Morgan of Weston,
slain at Newbery first Battle. Col. Beton slain near Gainsbor, in
Lincolne-shire. Col. Herne, son to Sir Edw. Herne slain near Gainsbor, in
Lincolne-shire. Col. John Marrow, slain in Cheshire near Sandyway. Col.
Thomas Dalton of Thurnham in Lancashire, mortally wounded at Newbery second
Battle, and died at Marlborough. Col. Bernard, Governor of Cannon-Froome in
Herefshire, slain when the Scots took that place in July 1645. Col. Francis
Hungate of Saxton in the County of York, slain at Westchester. Col. Mynne,
Governor of Heref. slain on the edge of Gloc: shire. Col. Will: Baynes, slain
at Malpasse in Cheshire. Col. Billingsley, at the loss of Bridgnorth. Col.
Whitley, slain at Conway-Castle in North Wales. Col. Pinchback of Leic: shire,
received his deaths-wound at Newbery. Col. Rich: Green, slain at Beeston-Castle
in Cheshire. Col. Prideaux, (son to the late Bishop of Worcester D. Prideaux)
slain at Marston-Moore. Col. Rich: Mannyng, near Alresford in Hampshire. Col.
Kirton, at Marston-Moore. Col. Will: Eure, (brother to the late Lord Eure)
slain at Marston-Moore. Col. John Fenwick, there also. Col. Bl^rt, slain at
the siege of Lime in Dorset-shire. Col. St George, at the storming of Leic. by
His Majesty's Forces. Col. Dalby, slain at Winkfield Manor in Darby-shire.
Col. Bentall, in Shropshire. Col. Phillips, near Winchester. Col. Tailor, at
the loss of Bristow. Col. Will: Wynn, at Wem in Shropsh. Col. Bawd, at Naisby.
Col. Guthbert Clifton, slain near Manchester. Col. Leake (son to the Lord
Deincourt, now Earl of slain at or near Newark. Col. James Chidley. slain at
the siege of Dartmouth. Col. Bowls, slain at Alton in Hampshire. Col. Hugh
Windham, slain in Dorset-shire. Col. Rich: Poor, slain in Wales. Col. Pert
received his deaths-wound in Cornwall, when Sir Tho: Fairfax was there.
Lieutenant-Colonels.
L. Col. Tho: Markham of Allerton in the County of Notingham, slain with his
Coll: Cavendish, near Gainsborough. L. Col. Monroe, slain at Edghill. L. Col.
Lancelot Holtby, slain at Branceford. L. Col. Colt, slain at Radcoat. L. Col.
George Preston, slain at Bradford in Yorkshire. L. Col. Howard, at Landsdowne.
L. Col. Ward, at Landsdowne. L. Col. Wintour, slain in Gloc: shire. L. Col.
Pavier, slain at Lincoln. L. Col. Johnson, slain upon a sally at Basing. L.
Col. Haggerston, of Haggerston-Castle in Northumb. received his deaths-wound at
Preston in Lancashire. L. Col. Lisle, slain at Marston-Moore. L. Col. Jordan
Metham, slain at the relief of Pontefract-Castle, March 1. 1644. L. Col. John
Gower, slain in the siege of Scarborough-Castle. L. Col. Stonywood, at
Marston-Moore. L. Col. Tho: Eure (eldest son to Sir Will: Eure) slain at
Newbery. L. Col. Lawson, slain at Naiseby. L. Col. Topham, at Newbery first
Battle. L. Col. Will: Hoghton, slain at Newbery second Battle. L. Col.
Phillip Howard (nephew to the first and Cousingerman to the second Col. Tho:
How:) slain at Chester Battle. L. Col. Michael Constable, of the Sepulchers
near Hull, slain chere also. L. Col. Story, slain in Gloucestershire. L.
Col. sayr of Worsarn in the County of York, received his deaths-wound at
Naiseby. L. Col. Moyle, slain at the storming of Bristow by His Majesty's
Forces. L. Col. Ballard. slain at the siege of Taunton in Somerset. shire. L.
Col. Muddyford. slain at the siege of Taunton in Somerset. shire. L. Col.
Jones slain upon a sally at the siege of Bridgwater. L. Col. Slingsby slain
at Newbery. L. Col. Bolton at Namptwich. Henry Sherhurue, Esquire, Comptroller
of the Ordnance in the Lord Hoptons Army, slain at
Serjeant-Majors.
MAjor Richard Harborne wounded at Malpasse (where his Col. Cuthbert Connyers
was slain) and dyed at Kendale. Major Beaumont, drowned at Leeds in
Yorkshire. Major George Pluckney, slain near Stamford in Lincolne-shire.
Major Kendall, slain at the storming of Bristow by His Majesty's Forces. Major
Smith, at Major Pate (brother to Sir John Pate) slain at or near
Ashby-de-la-Zouch. Major Sheldon, at Lansdowne Battle. Major Lower, at
Lansdowne Battle. Major Panton slain in the West. Major Thomas Vavasor slain
at Marston-Moore. Major Threave, at Torrington. Major Cusaud, slain at the
taking of Bazing, upon cold blood. Major Dubleday, at Major Huddleston, slain
at York. Major Gower, slain at Scarborough. Major Trevillian, slain at
Newbery. Major Turner, at Major Price (who commanded Priors Hill-Fort in
Bristow) slain there, when Sir Thomas Fairfax took that City. Major Garneer, a
Frenchman, slain then and there. Major Will: Leake, slain at Newbery second
Battle. Major Heskith, at Malpasse. Major Laurence Clifton, slain when
Shelford-house was taken. Major Pilkington, at Major Armestrong, slain at
Oxford. Major Duet, a Frenchman, slain before Lechlade. Major Pollard, at
Dartmouth. Major Clarke, slain at York. Major Metcalf, at Major Wigmore,
slain near Ilmister in Summers: shire. Major Wilsox, at Naiseby. Major
Spotswood, a Scot, slain at Wem in Shropshire. Major Tho: Whitmore, slain at
Muscam when the Newarkers beat up the Scotch quarters, he commanded the Foot in
that service. Major Deane, slain at the storming of Bristow. Major Dacres,
slain at Westhoughton in shire. M. Hugh More, Deputy Play Master General to His
Majesty's Army, slain at Bristow by a Granadoe. Doctor Weston a Physician,
slain at Doctor Tho: Westby a Physician, slain at Preston.
CAPTAINS.
Cap. Marmaduke Constable, Standard Bearer to the Lord General Linsey, slain
at Edghill. Cap. Hen. Byron, and Cap. Kingsmyll slain there also. Cap. Will:
Laborn, slain at Sheriff-Hutton in the County of York, and with him. -- Cap.
Matthew Anderton, of Cleyton in the County of Lanc. Cap. Plunkett, at Cap. John
Lampton, slain at Bradford in Yorkshire. Cap. Jose: Constable, slain at Newbery
first Battle. Cap. Will: Bows, at Cap. Will. Williamson, at Cap. Tho: Winkley
(Captain of Horse under Sir Thomas Tildesley) slain in the siege of Leverpoole.
Cap. Thurstan Anderton, wounded at Newbery, and dyed at Oxford. Cap James, at
Lansdowne. Cap Ratcliff Hoghton, slain at Preston in Amoundernes. Cap.
Cornisham, at Lansdowne. Cap. Hugh Hen, at Faringdon. Cap. Tho: Whittingham
of Claughton in Com. Lanc. slain at Newbery. Cap. Hugh Hoghton, at Reading.
Cap. Vaughan, at Cap. Goring slain at Newbery. Cap. Robert Mollineux of the
Wood in Com. Lanc. slain at Newbery first Battle. Captain Charles Osborne,
slain near Hartland in Devonshire. Captain Fry, at Torrington. Cap. Charles
Thimelby, slain at Worcester. Capt. Cottingham, at Capt. Gardener, (brother to
Sir Tho: Gardener,) slain at Tame in Oxfordshire. Capt. John Bird, at
Marston-Moore. Cap. Rich, slain at the storming of Bristow by His Majesty's
Forces. Cap. Needham, slain at the surprisall of Shrewsbury. Cap. Tho.
Mennell, of Kilvington in the County of York, slain at the relief of
Pontefract-Castle. Cap. Fitz-lames, slain at Bridgwater. Cap. Cha: Stewart, at
in Warwickshire. Cap. Bunce, at Bradford. Cap. Christ: wray, at Bradford. Cap.
John Clifton (brother to Major Laur: Clifton) slain at Shelford-house. Cap.
Redman, slain at Pontefract. Cap. Will: Fenwick, slain near Bolton in
Yorkshire. Cap. Abraham Lance (of Abraham in Com. Lanc.) and Cap. Robert Lance
his brother, slain in Cheshire. Cap. Slany, at Cap. Cony, at Whaley in
Lancashire. Cap. Chamberlain, at Cap. Rich: Wolsole of Wolfole in Com. Lanc.
slain at Newbery. Cap. Bushel, at Cap. Farrar, at Namptwich. Cap. James
Basset, at or near Lanceston in Cornwall. Cap. Edw: Row, slain at Wakefield in
Yorkshire. Cap. Anth: Hammerton, drowned in service near Manchester. Cap.
Will: Symcotts, (Cap. L. of Lord Piercies Troop) slain at Newbery first
Battle. Cap. Gerrard, at Cap. Tho: Whitley, at Harden. Cap. Sares, slain near
Uttoxeter in Staffordshire. Cap. Tho: Singleton of Stanyng in Com. Lanc.
slain at Newbery first Battle. Cap. Francis Errington of Denton near
New Castle, slain at Rotheram in Yorkshire. Cap. Nicholas Fitzackerley, slain
at Leverpoole. Cap. Butler of Kirkland in Com. Lanc. slain at Marston-Moore.
Cap. Maximilian Nelson of Fairhurst in Com. Lanc. there also. Cap. Will:
Lambton received his deaths-wound at Wakefield. Cap. Topham, slain at
Carlisle. Cap. L. Burbeck, slain at Carlisle. Cap. Baxter, slain at Baughton
near Chester. Cap. Henry Aldersey, slain at Chester. Cap. John Adlington,
slain at Chester. Cap. Gilbert Markham, (brother to L. Col. The: Markham)
slain at Naisby. Cap. Messenger, slain at Naisby. Cap. Daniel Thorold, slain
at Naisby. Cap. Greenbury, slain at Naisby. Cap. John Rookesby, wounded at
Sherburne, and died at Pontefract. Cap. Gascoigne, slain near Melton. Mowbray.
Cap. Sandford, at Namptwich in Cheshire. Cap. Gilbert Ashton, slain at Boulton
in Com. Lanc. Cap. Anthony Awd, slain in a salley at the last siege of Newark.
Cap. Tho: Cole, slain upon the like occasion at the same place. Cap.
Huddleston (brother to Sir William Huddleston of Millum-Castle in Cumberland)
slain at York. This Sir William Huddleston raised a Regiment of Horse for the
King, and had 7 or 8 brothers Officers in the same Regiment, a Loyal Family.
Cap. Dudly Smith, slain at Round-way-downe. Cap. Sam* Wenman, slain in
Devonshire. Cap. Orm^shaw, slain in going out upon a party at Oxford. Cap.
Richardson, slain upon a sally at Oxford. Cap. Joseph Davison, at New Castle.
Cap. Francis Clifton, slain at Newbery first Battle. Cap. Standish, slain at
Manchester. Cap. Roger Hoghton, at Marston-Moore. Cap. Edw: Bradley, at
Marston-Moore. Cap. Mennell, Cap. Edw: Wynn, slain at Denbeigh. Cap. Swords,
slain at Denbeigh. Cap. Parry, slain at Denbeigh. Cap. John Lance, slain at
Islip near Oxford. Cap. Anthony Girlington, (Uncle to Sir John Girlington) was
the man that did so gallantly charge the Scots at Newburne in the first
Scottish expedition, where he was almost cut to pieces in the company of the
ever to be honored Sir John Digby, and Sir John Smith, but ultra spem
recovered, and was finally slain near Lancaster.
GENTLEMENVOLVNTIERS.
CHarles Townley of Townly in Com. Lanc. Esquire, slain at Marston-Moore. M.
Charles Sherburne, a young Gentleman attending him, slain also in attempting to
gain his Masters dead corpse. M. Sands of the Vine, slain at the Battle of
Alresford. Edw: Preston Esquire, slain at Ormeschurch in Com. Lan. Sidney
Godolphin, Esquire, slain at Chafford in Devonshire. M. Price of Washingley in
Com. North* slain in cold blood, when the Ear of Manchester took Linc. M.
Bale, (son to Sir John Bale) slain near Thorpawker in Leic: shire. Ralph
Langton of Low in Com. Lanc. Esquire, slain at Preston. M. John Constable,
slain in Yorkshire. M. Steven Tempest, slain at the Devizes. M. Cuthbert
Ratcliff, slain when the Scots took New Castle. M. The: Latham of Mosborough
in Lancash. slain when Pr. Rupert came last to Newark. M. Rich: Latham his
brother in the last siege of Litchfeild-Close. M. Carry, slain at
Shelford-house. M. Iennyngs, slain at Shelford-house. M. Bourscale, slain at
Newbery last Battle. M. Courteney, slain in Lancashire. M. Lames Anderton,
slain in Wales. M. Tho: Roper (second son to Tho: Roper Esquire) slain in the
last siege of Gotheridge-Castle, in Com. Hereford. M. Steven Pudsey, slain in
Holdernesse. M. Francis Pavier, at Marston-Moore. M. Rich: Brown, slain in
the West. M. Christoph: Anderton, slain at Marston-Moore. M. Charles Mohun
(brother to my Lord Mohun) killed with a great shot at the siege of Dartmouth.
Squire Cresset, slain at the loss of Bridgnorth. Alexander Davison, Alderman,
slain at New Castle. M. Tho: Ogle, slain there also. Mounsiour S. Paul, a
Frenchman, slain at Marston-Moore. M. Mort, Mayor of the Town of Preston in
Lancashire, slain there. M. Boniface Kemp, slain by the Parl. soldiers, as
they were marching (upon the delivery of York) to Skipton. M. Ildesons Hesket,
slain by the Parl. soldiers, as they were marching (upon the delivery of York)
to Skipton.
Here must not be omitted that memorable Gentleman Voluntier, M. Gawen
Rotherford, who though he was not slain in the service, yet deserves to be had
in perpetual remembrance for his Loyalty, for having had 29 children by one
Wife, he trooped under his 27th child, who was a Commander for His Majesty at
Newark.

That dyed in or by the service on His Majesty's part, (not to speak of those
many that dyed in Prisons at London, and elsewhere.)
SIr Henry Constable, Lord Viscount Dumbar, dyed in Scarborough-Castle. Sir
Will: Pennyman Governor of Oxford, dyed there. Sir Gilbert Gerrard sen.
Governor of Worcester, dyed there. Sir Will: Savile, dyed at York. Sir John
Beaumont of Gracedieu in the County of Leic. dyed in the service. Sir John
Ramsey, dyed at Newark. Col. Fleetwood, dyed at Borstall-house. L. Col. Green,
dyed at Banbury. Cap. Robert Curson (eldest son to Sir John Curson of
Oxfordshire) dyed at Shrewsbury. Cap. Smith, dyed at Newark. M. Blount, drowned
near Manchester. M. Ralph Fitzharbert, dyed at Ashby-de-la-zouch. M. Rich:
Blount, dyed in the service.
Doctor Rawleigh Deane of Wells, who being first committed prisoner to
Banwel-house, a prison in the County of Sommerset, by the Committee of that
County, was afterward most inhumanely butchered by the Marshall attending the
said Committee, who run a knife into his belly, whereof he soon after dyed,
yet the Marshall kept his place, and went unpunished: And afterward the
Committee turned the Doctors wife and children out of doors, and his son was
forced to fly the Country, for that he would have prosecuted the Law against
the murderer of his Father.

Executed by Law-Martiall, or slain by accidents.
COl. Blague, executed for Treachery, the first at Oxford, the other at Exeter.
Major Sadler, executed for Treachery, the first at Oxford, the other at Exeter.
Col. Windebank, executed for cowardice at Oxford. Sir John Cademan, beheaded at
Bristoll for killing an Officer of that Garrison. Sir John Scudamore, slain at
Bristoll in a duel. Sir Charles Blount, Scout-Master-Generall, slain at Oxford
by one Langston an Officer under him. Sir James Einyon, slain by the hand of
Sir Nicholas Crispe in a duel. M. Hornivall of Worceshire, shot dead by
accident in his Chamber at Worcester, by one in a like Chamber on the other
side the street,
We cannot better conclude this sad story, then in affording the Reader a
deserved Elegy on that gallant Gentleman before named, Captain William
Lahorne, slain at Sherrishutton, who (being first asked by the Enemy for whom
he was?) answered, for God, his holy Church, and the King, and so was instantly
shot dead.

An Elegy upon the much lamented death of Captain William Laborne, slain at
Sheriffe-Hutton in Yorkshire.
FOr God, his holy Church, and King
He died, whose Dirge my Muse does sing:
For God, in duty; Church, in zeal:
For the King, in love to the Commonweal.
For God he died, with God he lives;
For the Church he died, which triumph gives;
For the King he died, with the King of kings
His blessed soul Alleluja sings.
Thus God, Church, King, have each a share
In Labornes death, a mirror rare,
Wherein brave minds may have a sight,
How for God, Church, and King to fight.
Persons of Note, and Commanders slain on the Parliaments part, where the
Reader may observe, that as His Majesty had on his side ten Gentlemen at least,
for every one on their side, it must by consequence follow, that His Majesty
must lose many more of note then they. Besides, their Officers being for the
most part Tradesmen, of small quality, and less fortunes, when any of them
were slain (as doubtless there are many more then are come to our knowledge)
there was little cause to bewail their loss, and less to eternize their
memories.
LOrd St John's, son to the Earl of Bulling brook, slain at Edghill battle.
Lord Brook, slain at Litchfield-Close, Sir Charles Essex, slain at Edghill. Sir
Will: Fairfax, slain at Mongomery Battle in North Wales. Sir Char: Fairfax,
Major-Generall, slain at Marston-Moore. Sir John Meldrum, a Scot,
Major-Generall, and Commander in Chief at the siege of Scarborough-Castle, did
there receive his deaths-wound by a sally from the Castle, commanded by Major
Tho: Crompton, who performed that service with much gallantry and valor. Sir
Will: Brook, dyed in the service. Sir Will: Springer, dyed in the service.
Major-Generall Crawford, a Scot, slain at the siege of Hereford.
COLONELLS.
COl. Sandys, slain at Wike field in Worc: shire, Sep. 23. 1642. Col. John
Hampden, one of the five Members, slain at Chalgrave in Buck: shire, June 18.
1643. Col. Lutterell, slain at Milverton in Com. Some: Ian. 24. 1644. Col.
Tucker, at Newbery first Battle. Col. Meldrum, a Scot, received his
deaths-wound at Alresford in Hampshire, and dyed in London. Col. Prince, slain
at Chester battle. Col. Armyne, slain at the raising of the siege of
Pontefract-Castle, by Sir Marm. Langdale. Col. Mallevory, slain at the raising
of the siege of Pontefract-Castle, by Sir Marm. Langdale. Col. Cockeram, at the
siege of Scarborough. Col. Lloyd, slain in defense of Taunton. Col. John
Gunter, slain at Col. Pickering, dyed in the service.
Lieutenant-Colonels.
L. Col. Ramsey, slain at Edghill. L. Col. Quarles, slain at Branceford. L.
Col. Stanley, slain at the siege of Scarborough. L. Col. Gurdon, a Scot, slain
at the siege of Heref. L. Col. Harrington, slain at Riby in Linc: shire. L.
Col. ^ures^y, slain at the last storming of Bristow. L. Col Richbell, slain in
defense of Taunton. L. Col. Dursey, slain at Bristow. L. Col. Ingoldsby, slain
at the siege of Pendennis-Castle. L. Col. Frances (L. Col. to Genesis Skippon)
slain at Naisby. L. Col. Cotsworth, slain at the last siege of Oxford. L. Col.
Viccarman, slain at the siege of Scarborough.
Serjeant-Majors.
MAjor Douglas, a Scot, slain at Wykefield in Worcestershire. Major Francis
Sydenham, slain at or near Weymouth. Major Gunter, slain at Chalgrave in Buck:
shire. Major Vrrey, slain at Newbery second Battle. Major Heines, slain near
Plymouth. Major Abercromy, a Scot, slain near Stratton-Audley in Buck: shire.
Major Bradbury, slain at Cullom bridge near Abingdon. Major Dent, slain at the
siege of Scarborough-Castle. Major Stawham, slain at Lansdowne. Major Iackson,
slain at Major Done, slain at Sherb: Castle. Major Cross, slain at Sherb:
Castle. Major Roy, slain at Pitmaster in Summerset-shire. Major Burton, slain
at Mountgomery. Major Cromwell, slain at Bristow. Major Fitz-Symons, slain at
Major Bethell received his deaths-wound at Bristow. Major Cook, slain at
CAPTAINS.
CAp. Lister, slain at Tadcaster in Yorkshire. Cap. Willet, slain at Newbery
second Battle. Cap. Iuxton, slain at Cap. Lidcoat, slain near Abthorp in
Northamp. shire. Cap. Nutty, slain at the siege of Redding. Cap. Zachary, slain
at the siege of Scarbor. he was Vice Admiral, and commanded 16 Ships at that
siege. Cap. Horsey, slain at the siege of Sherb: Castle. Cap. L. Flemmyng,
slain at the siege of Sherb: Castle. Cap. Cross, slain at the siege of Sherb:
Castle. Cap. Guilliams, slain at Bristow last siege. Cap. Hill, slain at
Bristow last siege. Cap. Gayle, slain at Bristow last siege. Cap. Ward, slain
at Bristow last siege. Cap. Herne, slain at Bristow last siege. Cap. Parker,
slain at Chester. Cap. Fownes, slain at Tiverton in Devon-shire. Cap. Wilkes,
slain at Taunton. Cap. Gollidge, slain at Taunton. Cap. Ienkins, slain at
Farrington. Cap. John Heynes, slain at Leigh-hall in Shropshire. Cap. Bennet,
slain at Huntington. Cap. Samon, slain at Heightley in Yorkshire. Cap. Watson,
slain near Uttoxeter in Darbyshire. Cap. Bowen, slain near Uttoxeter in
Darbyshire. Cap. Wigfall, slain at Barkley-Castle. Cap. Hunt, slain at Newbery
first Battle. Cap. Franklin, slain at Exeter. Cap. Oglesby, slain at Cap.
Allen, slain near Burleigh in Rutl: shire. Cap. Cawler, slain at Newbery. Cap.
Bowen, slain at Carlion in Monm: shire. Cap. Wilkes, slain at Bazing. Cap.
George Massey, slain at Newbery first Battle. Cap. Lacy, at Branceford. Cap.
Williams, at Oswestre in Shropshire. Cap. Paltison, slain by the Club-men at
Hambleton hill in Com. Dors. Cap. Dove, slain at Sherburne-Castle. Cap. Pue, at
Marston-Moore. Cap. Cook Commissary-Generall of Horse-provisions, slain at
Naisby. Cap. Tompkins, slain at Naisby. Cap. Selby, slain at Naisby. Cap.
Bush, slain at Naisby. Cap. Hoskins, slain at Naisby. Cap. Potter, slain at
Naisby. Cap. Tho: Cooper, slain at Higharchall in Shropshire. Cap. Tailor,
slain at Higharchall in Shropshire. Cap. Birket, slain at the siege of
Scarborough-Castle. Cap. Pearson, slain at the siege of Scarborough-Castle.
Cap. Middleton, slain at Awborne-Chase. Cap. Hacket, slain at Awborne-Chase.
M. Sellors, a Sequestrator, slain at Wirksworth in Darby shire.
Executed on the Parliaments side by Martiall-Law (not to speak of the Earl
of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury.)
SIr Alexander Carew, at London. Sir John Hotham and his son. at London. M.
Tompkins, at London. M. Chaloner. at London. M. Bourcher, at Bristow. M.
Yeomans, at Bristow.
Besides many other of inferior rank that were executed in several Garrisons
for deserting their Colors, or otherwise for supposed Treachery, or for Spies.

The End.

