Monsieur RAPIN'S Comparison OF THUCYDIDES AND LIVY.

Translated into English.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, for Anthony Peisley, Bookseller. 1694.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, Rapin's Reflections
upon History, Translated by the same Hand.

TO William Inge OF THORP, IN STAFFORDSHIRE, Esquire.
Dear SIR,
WHat I here Offer You, I choose to Pay as an Instance of my Gratitude, and as
Part of the Debt I owe to the Honor of your long-continued Friendship and
Acquaintance; Notwithstanding you might reasonably Demand it on your own
Personal Account and Merit; as being able to pass Sentence both on the Author
and Translator, and to determine whether the Criticisms are well grounded, or
the Translation just and proper. For you have not failed to Improve the Talent
Nature has given you, by the Advantages of Study and Education; having a Mind
Inquisitive and Curious, Penetrating, Solid and Retentive, averse to Sloth, and
always Busy and Industrious: So that you brought to the University, a greater
Stock of Sense, than many Gentlemen carry from it; and Built successfully upon
the Grammar-Foundation, so well laid by your Excellent Master, a Superstructure
of sound, rather than superficial Acquisitions. It was your distinguishing
Prudence, forthwith to make Choice of the best Company, as well as Books,
thereby seasoning your Mind with a true sense of Learning, and good Manners;
which thing alone, were there no other Engagements on you, had made you a
Friend to the University and the Church, and a worthy Member of both; whilst
others bringing nothing but Ignorance and their hereditary Vices hither; and
Conversing with none, but those of the like Stamp and Character, make the
Debauchery of the College the chief Topic of their Discourse when they have
left it: Those being ever most forward to Revile the Universities, when from
them, who in them were their greatest Scandal and Reproach. And now, Sir,
though a plentiful Estate calls off some part of your Thoughts and time from
your Study, yet the choiceest of both are still employed upon your own
Improvement; since you think it no less becoming a Gentleman to enlarge his
Mind, than his Fortune, and to have his Head, than his House, richly Furnished;
upon which Account I shall not pretend, by the Present I here make you, to
Inform you so much as Divert you, whenever you shall please to allow some of
your leisure-minutes, in comparing the Copy with the Original. But if this
Comparison of the Two Best Historians, and Reflections upon History, shall
either Provoke you to take Pen in Hand, or Assist you hereafter in Projecting a
Piece of that Nature, I shall Merit more of the Public, than will at first
View be discovered: However it may happen, I shall not fail of my Design, which
was my own Satisfaction, in making, though a Poor, yet Real Acknowledgement of
the frequent Favors you have Conferred on,

SIR, Your Most Obedient Humble Servant, T. TAILOR.
Magd. Coll. Oxon. Apr. 12. 1694.
THE PREFACE.
I Must beg leave to Acquaint the Reader, in Two or Three words, with the
Reason that induced me to enter on the Translation of Rapin; which probably
might seem Unnecessary, since it had been formerly done, and was in the Hands
of most People. But understanding it was Performed by several Persons, at
several Times, and some of it carelessly enough, and that which was better out
of Print; and being informed some parts of it had not hitherto been Translated,
and desired to go over with it again, to make it all of a Piece, and of more
general Use, I thought my* Pains would not be very ill Employed, if I Collected
the scattered Parts of so excellent a Book, and reduced them into a Body:
Especially since I might Advantage my self by the Failings and Mistakes of
Others, and possibly, by imitating what was Good, and avoiding what was Bad in
in them, make a tolerable Translation. I began with the Authors Treatises upon
History, in his Comparison and Reflections; upon the Booksellers Information
they had not been Attempted before: And because nothing was more seasonable
than a Comparison of Thucydides and Livy, at a time when the former was
Printing, in an excellent Edition at the Theater; nothing being more necessary
to the through understanding any Author, than the Reading, together with him,
the best Censures and Critics that have been Wrote upon him. But it was a kind
of Surprise to me, when I had finished the Reflections, to find they had been
ventured on before, by One Davis de Kidwelli, apprehending it would cost me a
fresh Trouble, where I fell in with his Expression, to Change my own: But
finding the Copy he went by to be the Original rough-cast and incomplete,
before the Author had put his last hand to it; and that we seldom agreed in
the way of expressing the same thing, I let Mine pass without any Alteration. I
have been told too, by a Gentleman, he thought he had seen the other Part done;
but not being able to get a Sight of it, I leave the Comparison to take its
Chance: If it meets with a kind Reception, the rest shall speedily be Published;
if not, I am not not so great an Enemy to the Bookseller and my self, as as to
throw my Pains, and his Money away to no Purpose. I have only this to add, That
I would not be thought, because I have Translated the whole, to Believe it all:
There are some few Reflections that smell too strong of the Jesuit; who, in
Favor of his Church, falls into Partiality, whilst he is Declaring against it;
but the Instances serve his Purpose as well as if they were True; and it is a
Fault which must be Pardoned him, since it cannot be avoided, be the Man never
fo Learned, without abandoning his Religion.

The AUTHOR'S Preface.
MY Design in Comparing these Two Authors, is only to make their Value better
known; since I take them to be the most Proper of all others, to form a Man's
Sense and Reason, in an Age, where both are better Cultivated and Improved,
than in any other. Wherein, this may be said to the Commendation of our own
Times, That we understand the Character of Ancient Authors better, and are more
intimately Acquainted with their Mind and Meaning than our Predecessors.

The Difference between them and us is this, That greater Pretensions were made
to Learning in their Age, than ours. This was formerly so much in Fashion, that
Elizabeth, Queen of England, Translated several of Sophocles's Tragedies; and
Mary Stuart the Queen Dauphine, recited at the Louvre, in the great Guard-Hall,
before the whole Court, a Latin Oration of her Own making, and the Chancellor
of the Hospital, in the Reign of Charles the Ninth, was as well skilled in
Languages as a Professor of the Colledge-Royal. 'Twas the Genius of those
Times, in which nothing was so much in Vogue, as a great Capacity and profound
Reading: The Tongues were thoroughly Studied, and Men betook themselves to reform
the Text of Ancient Authors, by far-fetcht Interpretations; to subtilize upon
an equivocal Term, and to found a Conjecture for the establishing a Correction.
In short, they scrupulously adhered to the literal Sense, because they were not
able to reach the Spirit of the Author, and his Meaning; which now adays is
done, Men being become more Rational, and less Learned; and greater account is
made of good Sense, in the greatest Simplicity, than of an awkward and perverse
Capacity of Mind.

Hereby it is we are arrived to a greater Intimacy with the Sentiments of the
Ancients, and a more through Knowledge of their Writings: Which is so true, that
all Men, never so little Impartial, must agree to it; and I may say without
Vanity, I give a better Idea of the Spirit of Livy, for instance, in this
little Piece I have drawn, than Gronovius has done in his last Edition, Printed
at Amsterdam in the Year 1665; which contains a long, and exact History of the
Manuscripts of the Historian, of the Editions put out from time to time, and of
a Catalogue of those Men who have endeavored, by their Notes or Corrections,
by their Reflections or Criticisms, to re-estalish or augment him. There is not
to be found, in all the Assistances he affords us, for the understanding this
Historian, nor in all his other Commentators, so exact a Knowledge of his
Character, as that which I give in this Volume, as little as it is. At least, I
shall not spoil the fine Relish the World begins to have of good Sense, upon
Reason's displaying its self to the Learned, in all the Extent of Solidity and
Delicacy: Which is so thoroughly settled in the Minds of Men at this day, that in
all the Works, Recommended to us by the Merit of their Antiquity, the
Preference is without Scruple given to a Man of good Sense, and little
Learning, before a Man of Learning of an injudicious Character.

I am fearful however of Discouraging those who have no Genius for Writing, by
desiring to Encourage those that have. For whatever Rules may be given for
History, none can be prescribed more severe than those Thucydides and Livy have
observed. After all, That which I shall say may be Serviceable to many Things;
being designed to destroy the Remainder of that Love of false Luster, which
still obtains, even in this Age, amongst Men whose Taste is not thoroughly purged
and purified; to enlighten those who pretend to write with a Ray of sober
Reason, which makes the Solid Character; to stop that current of Repute, some
sort of Men still attribute to Flash and Words; to show that it is from Things
rather than Words, the Nobleness of Expression should be sought; to avoid that
empty greatness of Discourse, as contrary to the real Dignity of Expression, as
a too naked Simplicity; and to write in a sensible manner, by the right use of
a correct and sober Reason, which is no where better learned, than from the
Acquaintance with these Two Authors; for I know very few that are more proper
to make a Man Rational, that reads them, if he reads them well: And though I
should only say, that all the majesty of the Roman Commonwealth still reigns
in Livy, after it has been more than 1500 Years destroyed; and all the Purity
of Reason of the Ancient Greeks appears the same still in Thucydides, as it was
2000 Years ago; yet this would be enough one would think, to excite the
Curiosity of a generous Soul to know the Bottom of them, according to their
Merits. For in short, there probably never appeared in any Work, more solid
Reasons, accompanied with all the Force and Dignity of Discourse; nor good
Sense delivered with a more exquisite Judgment, than in these Two Authors.

THE COMPARISON OF THUCYDIDES and LIVY.
CHAP. I.
The Design of the Work, and the Difficulties of the Undertaking.
BEsides that vast Difficulty there is, to establish standing Rules, whereby to
judge of the Beauty of such Works as these which I am going to compare: There
are many whose Opinion will be contrary to mine in the very Choice I have made
of these Two Historians, as the most Accomplished in both Languages; because men
are different in their Judgments, and humoursome in their Tastes of things: and
'twill be hard to convince them that a just Comparison can be made betwixt Two
Authors, whose Works have nothing of Relation or Proportion to each other. For
that of Livy is an Universal History, of a People who had the Sovereignty of
the World, that takes in a space of more than Seven Hundred Years; and that of
Thucydides is only a Fragment of a History, relating to a particular Nation,
and of a War that lasted not Thirty Years in all: Such are the Difficulties
that immediately offer themselves in the Execution of my proposed Design; and
it is troublesome to engage in it before this Point be cleared.

For the first we need only understand what is the end of History, to be able
to judge with some kind of certainty and distinction, of the excellency of a
work of that nature. And for the second difficulty which respects the choice I
have made of these two Authors, nothing can better justify it, than what I
shall say in Commendation of them both. For not to tie my self to the
testimonies of the Learned who have given their judgment of them before me,
upon which I might build my own; not to mention Dionysius Halicarnassensis, the
most judicious Critic of them all; who calls Thucydides, the most perfect of
the Greek Historians, assuring us that the ingenious of his time took him for
the true pattern of writing History: Not to call in the evidence of Quintilian
in favor of Livy whom he prefers before all the Latin Historians; nor to
allege the admiration they have both been had in, by all ages, where sound
Sense has had any sway or dominion; nothing can possibly afford us a better
view of the ascendant these two Historians have above all others, than the
Parallel which may be drawn betwixt them, to convince those that are doubtful
in the matter. For the only Greeks that can pretend to completion with
Thucydides, are in my opinion Herodotus, Xenophon and Polybius: The rest
deserve not to enter the Lists with him, as rising not to that grandeur and
dignity which History requires.

Herodotus, indeed took a greater flight: His design including all that was
nobly transacted in Europe and Asia, by the Greeks and Barbarians for the space
of two Hundred Years was more fortunate than that of Thucydides; but the
performance is no way answerable to the grandeur of the Subject. The too great
ambition that Author had to please made him so careless of Truth, that Plutarch
concludes his Falsehoods alone would make a Volume: and his Integrity has been
extremely run down, by all that have examined it. He was of a temper too
agreeable to have a Character that was solid, laborious, and fit for the
discovery of Truth. He Is of a superficial Genius that lays not stress enough on
things to carry our Mind to the bottom of them. As to Xenophon, he is
admirable for the sweetness of his Style; but is too smooth, and too much upon
the level; he hardly makes a step out of that middle way, which yet carries in
it something noble and natural. Polybius is a kind of Philosopher of a
penetrating Spirit, who lays out himself in Reasonings, and generally divests
himself of the character of Historian to put on the Politician. The rest of the
Greeks have nothing in them comparable to Thucydides.

There is still less Difficulty in respect of Livy among the Latins, the most
accomplished of whose Historians come not near him. Salust has scarce any thing
that is finished: What we have remaining of his History, is in-sufficient to
give us a just notion of his Merit. There remains indeed enough to give us a
good Opinion of him; but too little to found a Comparison on with Livy. Caesar
(that in the most familiar way of expressing himself has retained that Dignity
which became him, and writing in the lowest kind of middle Style, wants nothing
of the fineness of the most exact) is no Historian. Paterculus's Piece, howbeit
of a noble and delicate taste has too little Body, because it has too much Soul.
Tacitus has an admirable genius; but he generally out-shoots the sublime: He is
noble enough in his Thoughts; but is not Natural in what he thinks. It Is true
he has abundance of Wit, but such sort of Wit that can not speak of plain
things in a plain manner: for he is still politic and artificial in every
thing he says. His work is not so much an History as Reflections on History: he
busied himself in making Reflections, Fabius. Cluvias. Plin.
being forestalled by others, who left nothing new for him to say, which
determined him to that way he took, wherein he succeeded, and made himself
considerable. Quintus Curtius has handled a noble Theme with too florid and gay
an air, in terms too exquisite and far fetched, and too studied figures. In some
places he sports a little with his Subject, forgetting the importance was such
as required more Gravity. Livy alone has filled up all the parts of a complete
Historian The greatness of his Subject is answerable to his Style: he has
matched the Grandeur of a People, whose History he writes, with as noble a
Genius: That matter could not be treated, as became its greatness, but in that
manner he has done it; who has been Master of all the Beauties of Composition
in such height of perfection, as no Man else has ever been so happy as to
arrive to.

So then, all things well considered, Thucydides has not only stood
unparalled among those Greek Historians, which have been handed down to us,
and Livy been unrivaled amongst the Latins; but both the one and the other
have arrived to such a pitch of Excellency as has appeared in no Historian ever
since. And all succeeding Ages have as it were fallen prostrate at their Feet,
acknowledging them to be Genius's of the highest Order, destined to be Rules
and Models to all others. Which will be made out, in that which follows, so as
to be unexceptionable to all those who will have a little patience and
attention.

For the third Difficulty I own it impossible to make a just Comparison of two
Authors, and their History who have no relation to each other. But in respect
of their wit and of their temper, of their ways and manner of writing, and all
that belongs to Composition they may be compared: it is only herein they can be
made the subject of a Comparison, and it is in this only that I compare them:
But let us consider their Persons before we enter upon their Works.

CHAP. II.
A Comparison of their Persons.
THOUGH Impartiality, Fidelity, Honesty, and other moral Virtues, are not always
necessary Qualifications of an Author in general: we may say notwithstanding
they are extremely requisite to an Historian whose Sentiments should ever be
honest and wellmeaning. It Is necessary his Zeal for Truth be as Sacred to him
as his Religion; that Integrity be his indispensable Rule; that Honor, love of
Equity, and a disinterested Meaning shine in every thing he writes, and every
thing he thinks. So that although it requires a prodigious stock of Parts to
write History well; yet an Historian that is in search of Glory, and thinks to
make himself Immortal, should be more solicitous to avoid the imperfections of
Will than Understanding; the one being more Essential than the other. For it is
not so much the Parts and great Capacity, as the Faithfulness of an Author
which is regarded, when Men desire to be instructed how things have been
managed and transacted in former times; since the best wrote History, take away
the Credit of it, is no better than a Fable. But an Historian cannot himself be
Faithful, unless he is an Honest man, disengaged of Prejudice, Interest and
Passion. And these Qualifications require a niceness of Conscience, a greatness
of Soul, and a Courage above the common rate. Which probably gave occasion to
that Roman to admire how it came into the head of one of Pompey's Freed-men
named Otacilius to undertake, Primus omnium libertinorum scribere Historiam
orsus non nisi ab honestissimo quoque scribi solitam. Corn. Nep. in Fragmentis.
the first of his Rank, to write an History; because to carry on such an
Attempt successfully there is required a sort of liberty inconsistent with any
thing slavish or cringing. A dishonest Man whose Soul is not of a make capable
to distinguish false Glory from true, and who can be sensibly affected with
other Interests than those of Truth and Reason, is the unfittest in the world
to write an History. He will never be admitted into the belief of Mankind, who
first gains not their good opinion of his Probity. So that sincerity stands him
instead of all things, if he would be well received, and if Wit should
sometimes chance to fail him, yet Principles of Honor and Honesty should never
be deficient. This then is the first foundation for an Historian, as to his own
concern. And these are the Principles on which I intend to examine these two
Authors in what respects their Persons in order to compare them.

We know nothing of certainty concerning the Person of Thucydides but what he
himself has delivered in his History, The Person of Thucydides.
that he was a Citizen of Athens, and General of the Army in Thrace, where he
Married; that his Possessions were very great there, and that he purchased much
esteem by the largeness of his Expenses. For the rest Antiquity is almost
silent in the matter. There is no question to be made but that he was of an
honorable Extraction, which, Marcellinus who has left us a Fragment of the
Life of this Great Man, deduces from the Kings of Thrace pretending that his
Grandfather married a Daughter of that Family, whence his Father took the Name
Olorus, and that he reckoned amongst his Ancestors Miltiades and Cimon those
Two celebrated Generals of the Athenians. Suidas and Photius relate that
Thucydides when a Youth hearing Herodotus read his History, at the Solemnity of
the Olympic Games, fell a Crying, through a gallant Jealousy, and a sense of
Emulation. Which gave occasion to Herodotus to Complement the Father of the
young Gentleman, as giving an infallible earnest of his future Glory: In short
he was an honest Man; the severity of his Morals and his Piety are to be seen
in several places of his Works, where he ever talks like a man of excellent
Principles, never advancing of his own Head any Maxim of dangerous consequence.
And his Discourse carries always in it a Masculine air of Virtue. Take for an
Instance what he says of a famous Commander, that was put to Death by the
Syracusians after his Defeat. Thus fell Nicias, Libro 7. De Bello. Pelop.
who of all his Cotemporaries least deserved to die in such a manner as having
always been a zealous Worshiper of the Gods. And by the Character of his
Integrity, which appears in all his Writings he discovers the true bottom of
his Heart, and the Purity of his Manners, which is the Quality Aristotle
chiefly requires in a Discourse: Rhet. l. 3. c. 7.
when he says it can never be agreeable to the Subject, when it is insufficient
to give you the manners of the Speaker: and a Discourse is nothing worth where
the manners of the man are naught; for it is a Rule that one should be
conformable to the other. Which is the particular Character of this Author who
never fails to create a good Opinion of himself in the Minds of those that read
him.

Anaxagoras was his Master in Philosophy, and Antiphon in Rhetoric, by both
which his Mind was formed in that solid and sensible manner to those Studies
which lay the main Foundation of his Character. But as excellent as he was at
these Sciences, he however knew the World better than Books. The Acquaintance
he had with Socrates, Plato, Critias, Alcibiades, Pericles, and all the Great
Men of that Age, which was the Politest, and of the finest Taste that has ever
been among the Greeks, gave the finishing stroke, so as to fit his Mind with
these noble Idea's and Principles, which make an absolute Gentleman, and an
accomplished Historian: For besides that no man ever wrote in a more brave and
disinterested manner, without the least reserve to his Resentment: he has
moreover said nothing, but withal imaginable Candor. He was so utter an Enemy
to all manner of disguise that he could not away with any thing that should, I
don't say wound, but give the least Offense to Truth, never advanceing any
Maxim that looked not toward the Good of the Public, the Love of which was
engraven in his Heart. He was so tender and scrupulous of honor, that he has
not failed in his History to treat the Athenians well, even those at whose
Hands he had received the greatest Indignities: concealing nothing which might
be to the Advantage of Cleon and Brasidas the principal Authors of his
Banishment.

For it was principally through the Intriegue of Cleon his Rival, that he was
Banished his Country, for not having succored Amphipolis whither he was
commanded: and it was during his Exile that he wrote his History, finding more
leisure, and better instructions in the Enemies Affairs, amongst whom he lived,
as he declares in his Fifth Book; in which he speaks of his Banishment, and his
Retirement among the Lacedaemonians, by whose means he got acquainted with the
Mystery of Affairs, which he had no possibility of knowing any other way. His
Lady that he Married bringing him a vast Fortune, he made use of it to collect
his Memoirs; and he disburst considerable Sums to the Lacedemonian Commanders
to be instructed in the Truth of those things which his own Party for their own
Interest had disguised. The Passion he had for Study, and the Pleasure he took
in it, made his ill Fortune sit easier upon him, by giving him Resolution: It Is
not known that he ever attempted his Restoration; the Honors that were due to
him seemed odious, since he thought it a shame to ask them; and having through
Modesty never been forward, before his Exile, to make his way up to the Helm,
he thought himself now utterly incapable of doing it, being suspected by the
Citizens. He retreated to Egina a small Island of Peloponnesus, where he began
to work upon his History: His Exile lasted Twenty Years, and he Died before he
had finished it. It Is his great Glory to have said nothing against his
Conscience, as Dionysius Hallicarnassensis assures us in his own words, Dion.
Halic. in Jud. de Thucyd. Number. 9.
and that was One of his more special Qualities. Cicero gives him almost the
same Encomium: Thucydides rerum gestarum pronunciator sincerus.
and it is the Testimony the Learned of all Antiquity have given of him, who
have extolled his Sincerity above his other Virtues. He had the Fortune to
serve his Country both with his Sword and Pen; being engaged in most of the
Expeditions he Describes. And having, through the Employs the Republic had
entrusted him with, obtained an entire Knowledge of the Affairs of his own
Country, as well as the Interests of the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, for the
Particulars of which he was wholly obliged to his Exile: This gave him
opportunity of preparing himself for his Undertaking with a Diligence which
scarce had its Precedent. And it may be said, never Historian took Pen in hand
better furnished with Instructions, which he collected out of the different
Interests of the Two Nations whose History he undertook. It may be farther
added, that never Author had a greater Passion for Virtue, or a greater
Aversion to Injustice than Thucydides. He Died in Thrace in the Fiftieth Year
of his Age, before his Work was finished. Xenophon, who Completed it, adjoin'd
the War of Sicily, and the other Wars of Greece, to enlarge his History. This
is all we have been able to gather concerning the Person of Thucydides; for his
Historian Marcellinus has rather given us the History of his Mind, than of his
Life.

We are still more in the dark as to the Particulars of Livy's Life than that
of Thucydides: The Person of Livy.
For whether he had a greater Unconcernedness for Public Business, and his own
Promotion; or had more of the Philosopher than Thucydides; whether he was of a
more studious Constitution, and was destined to live retired in Silence and
Obscurity: certain it is we know very little of his Origin, his Employments,
his Adventures, or the condition of his Fortune in general. Only thus much,
that he was of Padua, contrary to Sigonius's Opinion, who would have him Born
in a Village near that Town, called Apona, producing for this the pretended
Testimony of Martial in one of his Epigrams. It Is plain too he was of an
honorable Family, since it had the Honor of sending out Consuls of the Roman
Commonwealth. That he lived under the Empire of Augustus; that he Dedicated
some Dialogues to him, upon the Questions debated in those Times relating to
Philosophy, whereby he got into that Emperors acquaintance, and good opinion;
that he after wrote a Treatise of Eloquence to his Son, which Quintilian made
great account of; that he began his History at Rome for the convenience of such
Memorials as were necessary, which were Recorded in the Annals in the Capitol;
and for the better distinguishing Truth from fabulous Traditions, wherewith the
Originals of the City of Rome abounded; that he retired some time after to
Naples, to avoid disturbance in his Study; that he recited to Augustus and
Mecenas some parts of his History, wherewith they were sensibly affected: that
Augustus upon the esteem he conceived of him, made choice of him for a Tutor to
form the Mind of his young Son Claudius who afterward was Emperor. Sucton. in
Claud. c. 42.
Pliny Junior says the reputation of this great Man began already to make such
a noise in the World, Gaditanum quendam Titi Livii nomini gloriaque Commotum ad
visendum eum ab ultitimo terrarum orb venissi statimque ut viderat abyss.
Plin. s. 2. Epist. l. 3.
that a Stranger came to Rome from the farthest part of Spain purposely to see
Livy, whose Renown had spread it self far and near in his own Country.

After the death of Augustus he returned to Padua, where the Citizens received
him with extraordinary honors. He died in the fourth Year of the Reign of
Tiberius. His abode at Rome, and the Favor of Augustus, gave him opportunity
of furnishing himself with Knowledge necessary to his Design. The Zeal for his
Undertaking, which was great and extraordinary, so fixed him to his Closet, and
gave him so little disquiet for the Concernments of his Fortune, that his Life
thereby became a little obscure: being he was Obliged to sequester himself from
a more public Conversation, and live private, that he might give himself
wholly up to that grand Work he had in hand. He must needs have had a Soul
prodigiously great, to form the project of so vast and laborious an Enterprise.
For in short what ever Genius a man has; it is only a greatness of Spirit can
produce those exalted and generous Sentiments that make the beauty and
excellency of a noble Work.

Livy also was One of the Worthiest Men of all Antiquity. We need only read
him, to think well of him, his manner of Writing ever giving us a great Idea of
his Probity. You would conclude from his air of Speaking that he knew not what
vanity was. He has not only never spoken of himself, nor any thing that belongs
to him, in his History: but likewise we had been ignorant in what times he
Wrote, had it not been for a word that by chance escaped him, concerning the
Temple of Janus, Janus post Numae Regnum Clausus semel Y. Manlio consule,
iterum quod nostrae aetati dii dederint ut videremus post bellum Actiacum ab
imperatore Caesare Augusto pace terra marique paita. etc. Hist. Romans l. 1.
which was now shut, says he, by Augustus, having been so but once before,
since the Reign of Numa. He began his History in a strain of Modesty, which
seems so Admirable to me, that I cannot believe a discreeter Author ever
appeared in the World. Facturusne operae pretium sim si a primordio urbis res
populi Romani perscripserim nec satis scio nec si sciam, dicere ausim: quippe
qui etc. Proaem Hist. Romans Tit. Livii.
See what is the Scope of that History which has been the most absolute
Masterpiece of Antiquity, and the Admiration of all Ages. I am uncertain
whether the History I write of the Actions of the Roman People, since the
Foundation of Rome, will be a Work worth any consideration, and though I were
persuaded of it, I durst not say it: for it is a matter etc. The rest of that
Exordium, which I offer not to Copy, since it is in the hands of all Men, is
answerable to the beginning, and is sufficient to show the Spirit of the
Author. Never Man promised so little in Beginning a Work that promised so much.
He comes not without trembling to the opening his Design, Diffident of his own
strength, in the sustaining so great an Enterprise. But it is only in order to
give us more that he suffers us to hope so little: he is not timorous, but
because he is wise, and ordinarily a Man is no farther Modest than he is
Judicious. And this Character of Modesty is the finest amongst all the
Qualities of an Author, that is Meditating some great thing; nothing creates a
greater notion of his Judgment than his Distrust. It is a proof of his Capacity
that he is sensible of the weightiness of his Subject, and it is the greatest
Testimony can be given of the Honesty of an Historian. For what a Fund of
Discretion and good manners must he needs have that can stifle all Pride so
natural to Mankind, and do himself Justice without Flattery. See wherein Livy
is worthy of Admiration as soon as he opens his Lips. But after he has given us
so mean an Opinion of himself by the small Regard he makes of his own
Performances, he lets us into a multitude of Lights, he discovers a
profoundness of Mind, an extent of Genius, a fruitfullness of Imagination; in
fine, a Thousand Beauties, and infinite Treasures, which we attend not to, when
we only reckon upon what he promised us.

For his Sincerity it Underwent the severest Trial, that possibly could be,
without being Corrupted. The Reputation he was in with Augustus, and that
Favor to which he had advanced him, were not Motives sufficient to hinder his
speaking Honorably, not only of Pompey, but also Cassius and Brutus, the
greatest Enemies of that Emperor; honoring the Memory of the Conquered in the
Face, as one may say, of the Conqueror: and Recommending to the World, as
Honest Men, the Murderers of Caesar, in the Presence of Augustus: because they
were Lovers of their own Country. It Is this which Cremutius Cordus thought
impossible to be sufficiently Praised in Titus Livy, Cornel. Tacit. de Cremutio
Cordo lib. 4. Annal.
as we are assured by Tacitus.

Such was Livy for his Moral Accomplishments, and what respects his Person: and
it seems that something had been wanting to the glory, or rather the good
fortune of a People that was Master of the World, had they failed of so great a
Man for their Historian. It Is that which has doubtless occasioned that Famous
Inscription found at Padua in the Year One Thousand Four Hundred and Thirteen,
in the Church of St. Justina. Ossa Titi Livii Patavini omnium mortalium judicio
digni, cujus prope invicto calamo, invicti populi Romani res gestae
conscriberentur.

Thus then we see Two truly Virtuous Historians: But to conclude this Head, the
Virtue of Thucydides seems more Admirable than that of Livy. The former has
afforded a kind Treatment even to his Enemies, who could not make him abate the
least of his Integrity: and the Virtue of the later soared not quite so high,
since it went no farther, than causing him to speak well of the Enemies of
Augustus his Protector. This is what may be Collected of the Persons and Morals
of both Historians: Let us now examine their Intellectual Virtues, which we
cannot know better than by a Comparison of their Characters.

CHAP. III.
The Comparison of their Characters.
AS the Lines of a Face are exposed to view, so it is no hard matter to discover
them; but the lineaments of a Mind from whence proceed the differences of a
Style, and Character, are so Obscure and Imperceptible, that without a very
singular insight, nothing of them can be known. Take however what Ancient
Authors have left us of Thucydides, who were best able to know his Character.

He has a mind so Solid, The Character of Thucydides.
and well Founded, that he speaks nothing but what is well thought, and
correct; nothing but what has all the Nerves and Strength, his Subject is
capable of receiving. And whereas he always arrives at the truest Sense, and
purest Reason, troubling not his Head about the Ornaments of Discourse, his way
is usually somewhat dry, yet strong and lively, because he is concise and close
in his Expression. 'Twas from that great strength of Parts that he Studied to
include so much Sense in so few words, and talking less than others, that he
often said a great deal more. Take Cicero's Opinion of him in these words.
Thucydides omnes dicendi artificio mea sententia facile vincit, qui ita creber
est rerum frequentia ut verborum prope numerum sententiarum numero consequatur.
Ita porro verbis aptus and pressus ut nescias utram res oratione an verba
sententiis illustrentur Cic. lib. 3. de Orat.
Thucydides in dignity of Style, and the art of Eloquence, in my Opinion goes
far beyond all that have Wrote: he abounds so with Matter, that his thoughts
are almost equal in number to his Words, and he is so expressive and close in
what he says, that it is hard to say whether his words set off the things, or
the things his words, the most. This is what makes him so very Sententious in
respect of other Historians; and is the cause that his Sense, straightened and
confined in so few words, becomes something Obscure, because it wants that
Liberty and Compass required to make it Natural and Easy.

His Style is Exalted, Noble and Sublime, which is the reason of his using so
frequent and so bold Metaphors, in pure Political terms, yet better managed
than those of Plato: and hence he arrived to that grandeur of Expression which
reigns so strongly in his Writings: in which he is ever great, without being
extravagant, in his Thoughts; always Natural, yet falls not into any thing
vulgar or common. This he took from Homer, whose Imitator he perfectly was. He
proposed him for a Pattern in his simple, though noble Expression, and almost
in the whole Order of his Discourse, that is lively and animated. Marcellinus
adds, that he betook himself to one Prodicus of the Island Cos, for the exact
Choice of Words, and to Gorgias of Leontium for Order and Disposition. And
besides that, this Historian formed himself upon Pindar for the Sublime Style,
and the Greatness of Expression, which was his Excellence.

He had also learnt of Socrates, by the acquaintance he had with him, the Art
of a Frank, and Ingenuous Narration, which he was so well accustomed to, and
which procured him the gift of persuasion in so high a measure: true it is that
never any Man knew how to use his Reason better, or to make it more prevalent
by those natural, but strong and pressing Turns he gave it: it is in this
likewise he so far Transcends the rest of Authors, speaking nothing but what
was Essential to his Design. This it is that gives that Weight, Force and
Dignity to his Discourse. He is indeed sometimes a little irregular in his
Narrations, but it is always an Effect of art more than disorder. It Is only to
inspirit what he says, and to paint things in a more lively manner, that he
expresses as present, what is past, and as careless as he seems in certain
places, he still preserves a justness of Expression couched in his words, so as
nothing in the World is more natural than his Eloquence, or more finely
Natural: His way of reasoning by frequent Enthymems, which Demosthenes has so
well Copied, is strong and vehement; and nothing can be more lively or more
engaging, than that Air of his which makes his distinguishing Character.
Dionysius Halicarnassensis concludes him to be the first Inventer of that way,
which has set him so far above all other Writers. We find in the end of that
Critick's Discourse, to Tubero, the places wherein Demosthenes has best expressed
the force and grandeur of Thucydides in his imitation. 'Twas upon this great
Model that noble Orator was formed, to which he applied himself with that
exceeding Industry, as to Transcribe this Authors History eight times over, to
take his Character, and Copy out his Excellence, as we are assured by his
Commentator Vlpian the Rhetorician. And it was chiefly in his Declamations
against Philip of Macedon that Demosthenes imitated that Historian; and in the
places where he speaks of the Republics of Corinth, Corcyra, and of the King
of Persia, and in such other Subjects as had reference to those Demosthenes had
to treat of.

In fine Thucydides had a nobleness of Thought, a choice of Words, a boldness
of Imagination, a vigor of Discourse, a profoundness of Reasoning, a neatness
of Conception, a fineness of Stroke, Color and Expression, which none of the
other Greek Historians have been Masters of; which gave the most Ingenious
Critics amongst the Ancients reason to acquaint us, he took the true Style,
History ought to be Wrote in: And indeed whatever he says, whatever passes
through his Mind, receives a Turn of Greatness and Beauty beyond what any
others can afford us. He is a Genius of an order above the common Standard,
that conceives every thing Nobly, and gives a sort of Elevation to the most
ordinary things. This so solid Character of mind gave him an exquisite relish
for what was excellent, an admirable sagacity in the choice of things, an
obstinate adherence to Truth, (which made him a Critical observer of every
thing any ways conducible to the discovery of it) and an incredible aversion to
any thing that was an offense to probability; ever endeavoring more to profit
than please, as he declares himself at the beginning of his Work. Hence he
became so careful and scrupulous as to throw off many of those Ornaments his
Subject might have wore; as his Historian has observed, Marcellin. in vita
Thucyd.
to the end he might avoid those famous Rocks, on which want of Discretion cast
Herodotus, as Arion and his Dolphin, with the rest of his fabulous Adventures.
Dionys. Halic. in Judicio de Thucyd. Number. 9.
And it is on this account also that all Antiquity has had so great an Opinion
of Thucydides.

But after all, this great Man seems to be in nothing worthier of Admiration,
than in his Treating of the manners of Men, as one that excellently understood
Mankind, and had all the penetration requisite to unfold the most intricate
doublings of the Heart: 'Twas from this profound Knowledge, he could so well
discover the springs and motives of the nicest Interests, and the most
imperceptible movements of the secretest Passions that set Mankind on work:
'twas through the shrewdness of his view, that he stored his mind with those
grand Maxims of the public good, and all those political Considerations
wherewith his History abounds: and upon which he built his principal Reasonings
for the establishing of States, and continuing them established. From this so
vast, and rich Fund, it is he draws out those noble sentiments, and admirable
reflections he makes upon the management of the People, and conduct of their
Governors, and from whence he deduces those excellent principles that are the
first Foundations of that Equity and Honesty which make flourishing States; and
those sound political and moral Maxims, which serve for Rules to guide Men in
their duty. Hence it is he Circumstantiates every thing with so much
Distinction, keeping close to necessary* Particularities, and cutting of what
is useless or superfluous to the Subject. Hence he takes those lively,
affectionate and pathetical descriptions, that Embellish his Discourse: from
hence it is he forms the project of his Narratives of Battles, Sieges,
Assaults, Defenses, warlike Expeditions, popular Commotions, and all those
Agitations that usually happen in Commonwealths, through the nature of their
Government, which are ever judiciously Circumstanc'd. To conclude, it is from
that rich treasury of the knowledge of Men's manners he has taken all those
Rules of decency, which teach him to represent all Conditions, Persons and
Actions as their Quality and Capacity demand; and from whence he has formed
that wonderful art of Eloquence that renders him absolute Master of those he
speaks to, in persuading them whatever he desires. It Is by this Art he engages
and fixes the mind of his Reader upon the action he describes, by so dazzling
Colors and lively Images representing to his Eyes, as it were, rather than his
Understanding the things he speaks of, moving his Passion, raising his
Attention, and filling him full of the matter he is expressing: whilst the Mind
dragged along with a pleasing kind of violence, lets go its hold, and is
willingly carried away by the Impetus of the current, for the better attending
to the Impression.

But though all Authors indifferently make use of the same Terms and the same
Expressions, The Character of Livy.
yet each has a peculiar Character, because the order and management of his
Discourse is different; as every Painter has a particular way, though all have
the same Colors. Take then the Character of Livy. He had, together with all
the Accomplishments of Thucydides, in which he equally excelled, an advantage
of Birth above him, a natural Felicity for all things fine and great, wherein
he had a Palate extraordinary delicate. He had an exquisite Faculty of
expressing his Thoughts nobly, an admirable Genius for Eloquence in general,
that is, for the purity of Discourse; for a fineness of Speech, for the dignity
of Expression, and a certain elevation of Soul, that made him most fortunate in
his Imagination. He was to complete these Qualifications, choice in his Words,
just in the order of his Discourse, great in his Sentiments, noble and
proportionate in the Disposition and universal Economy of his Design: he was
in short Master of all the Rhetoric of History: For History has a peculiar
Rhetoric of its own, and this Rhetoric has its Rules. Illa Livii lactea
ubertas satis docebit eum qui non speciem expositionis sed fidem quaerit.
Instit. l. 10. c. 1.
Quintilian says his Style is sweet and fluent, that it has a greater Tendency
to Solidity, than flash and luster; and is most pleasing to those who had
rather be Affected, than Dazzled and Amazed. His Air is great and noble in its
simplicity, and he has a softness of Expression, ever supported with much force
and Majesty. His Discourse is animated, in so lively a manner, as suffers
nothing to droop or languish. And the turn, the cadency, the graces he gives to
all he says, the justness of his Words, the clearness of his Sense, every thing
he has is admirable. Perhaps there was never Historian more Engaging by the
Talent he had of Expressing Nature to the Life, and giving her a different
Face, as became her several Conditions, painting her always in her proper
Colors, making every Passion speak its Genuine Language that it might have its
effect upon the Mind. Hence it is he is so incomparable at painting the manners,
that his Potraictures are so like, that he expresses every thing in the
features that become it, never confounding those Beauties which Nature has
distinguished.

He eminently exceeds the rest of the Historians in that perfect Knowledge he
has of all decorums, which is a Science indispensably necessary to a Man that
will write History, since nothing carries a face of Truth, but from an exact
Observation of what is agreeable to each particular. See how he distinguishes
the different Ages of the Commonwealth, by the difference of Spirit and
Manners that reigned in it. It Is by this Principle Hannibal and Scipio preserve
their Characters so well in this Author; where nothing is touched in the same
manner, or wrote in the same tenor. From hence it is that Rome could speak
otherways under Kings and Tribunes, than in the Reigns of the last Consuls and
Emperors: that every one in that History stands marked with a distinguishing
Character. The Historian often changes the Style its self. His Discourse has
authority when it Instructs, it has sweetness and condescension when it
Persuades, neatness when it Relates, is graceful and Elegant when it would
Please, is fervent, moving and pathetical when it would Affect. He is moral and
instructive where it is required, giving Lessons to the whole World, and at the
same time seeming to do nothing less.

Finally the length of his period, which many are apt to reproach him with, is
in my Judgment one of his greatest Advantages: it is this only that makes him
majestical. For a long and ample Style never wants majesty when it is, like
his, bore up with good Sense, and an exquisit Choice of Words. After all, the
World has never been able to discern his Method. He has a secret Art couched
under a seeming Plainness and simplicity, which makes him appear natural
throughout his Work. He is particularly sure to practice that Art, in that
which seems to have its dependence most on Nature; carefully shunning all
manner of affectation, and Studying always to be simple: it is by this stately
and familiar way together, which is the most usual Ornament of his Discourse,
that he strikes the Soul with those wonderful impressions, that he shakes and
Agitates it as he pleases, that his sentiments break in upon you through the
force of his words, (the strength of which he very well understood,) and that
he always moves those whom he is speaking to by the natural energy of his
Expression. This Quality renders him as vehement in his great passions, as soft
and agreeable in the less, giving the former a more active and lively Mein, and
smoothing over the latter with a gentle and tender Touch. Indeed the Genius he
had for the Nobleness of Expression, and the Art he had to manage it so
dexterously, and employ it upon occasion, accustomed him to raise himself upon
any great Event. 'Twas here he took a kind of Pride to set forth, as one may
say, and show the most rare and concealed Riches of his Soul, in their full
Capacity. What Draughts, what Paintings, does he then give you, when the
Greatness of his Theme, at once excites him, and furnishes him with those
admirable Opportunities, he knew how to make the best of! And it is in those
favorable and naturally lofty Topics, that he raises and ennobles his
Discourse, by those great Ideas with which his excellent Genius, for the
sublime and majestic Style inspires him, which is his very Character. It Is in
fine, by the natural and proper Choice of Words, the most in use, but the most
Glittering and Harmonious, which add a Luster to all the other Beauties of
Discourse, He excites in the Mind of his Readers, an admiration mingled with
Surprise, which is quite another thing than the Pleasure that accrews from mere
Persuasion.

I acknowledge Thucydides has much of this Character, I know likewise that
Longinus reckons him amongst the Models he proposes of the sublime, that he has
a natural Happiness at Expressing things nobly, that he even stamps the image
of the Object he describes upon the very Words: that the frequency of his
figures, especially the hyperbaton, which he uses in his narration, gives more
heat and action to his Discourse, by transposing things, and changing the
natural order of the time, as a means to keep the Mind close to the Subject he
represents in so lively Colors; that his sublime is ever sustained by a
greatness of Sense, and a vigor of Expression; and that he has throughout his
manner of Writing, a kind of loftiness that strikes the Mind. For none but
those who have a solid way of Thinking are able to elevate a a Discourse. But
it must be confessed that the sublime of Thucydides is less managed than that
of Livy, who knows as well to stoop in lesser things, as to mount and soar in
greater, and to give those Flourishes and Graces to his Discourse, which
Thucydides never thought of. Which made Dionysius Halicarnassensis say, Lib. de
Collec. Verb. numb 29.
That Thucydides was always beautiful indeed, but scarce ever agreeable: for he
distinguishes the gracefulness from the beauty of a Discourse. It Is the
cadence, the harmony, the elegance, the fineness, the sweetness, the luster and
order, and the proper decorum of a Subject, that he will have to make a
Discourse graceful; and it is in the grandeur, the nobleness, the majesty, and
the gravity, he makes the beauty to consist: the grace and Mein is generally
the effect of Parts and Nature, beauty is often the Product of Art; the one is
the gift of Heaven, and the other the effect of Study.

It Is herein, almost, consists the difference there is betwixt our two
Historians. Titus Livius in narrando mirae iucunditatis clarissimique candoris.
Quin. l. 10. c. 1.
Livy is fine and agreeable to a Miracle; he knew how to strew his flowers in
the places that needed them: he had likewise a happy Faculty of managing his
Ornaments, and embellishing his Discourse; which Advantage Nature had not
bestowed upon Thucydides, who is fine without caring to be agreeable; that
austerity of Temper, which is so natural to him, that severity of Way, that
exactness of Sense, that correctness of Reason, and that prodigious seriousness
he Wrote with, made him diligently avoid those charms of Language, which he
disapproved in Herodotus. The beauty of Livy is of a lovely and tender make:
The beauty of Thucydides, is stately, austere, and ancient, as Dionysius
himself calls it: Dionys. Halic. in Jud. de Thucyd.
The one is always noble, and the other taking. The one ties himself dryly to
his Matter, which he precisely pursues; the other gives an agreeable Form to
every thing that goes through his Mind. And this is it wherein the essential
Difference of their Characters consists. Let us examine the subjects, both of
them have worked upon, and compare them likewise in that particular, that
nothing may be wanting to a just Comparison.

CHAP. IV.
The Comparison of the Subjects of their History.
THucydides having so great a Genius, 'twas impossible he should conceive any
mean Design. So lofty a Mind could not admit low and grovelling Ideas. The
Peloponesian War, which he undertook to Write, The Subject of Thucydides.
was at that time, the most curious Subject of History in being; Dionysius
Halicarnassensis assures us too, that he preferred it before that of Herodotus.
And he says, That having laid before him for a Model, the Two most celebrated
Historians of his Time, Herodotus and Hellanicus, he found fault with the
subjects each of them had taken. Hellanicus's Design, who had attempted to
write the History of Athens, looked too uncompounded, too narrow, and of too
little Action. Herodotus's History, which contained the Wars the Grecians waged
against the Kings of Persia, that is to say, all the Memorable Actions that
happened in Europe and Asia, for Two Hundred Years space, seemed too vast and
unweildy. He thought so great an Object very disproportionate to the Mind of
Man, unable to comprehend in his Thought so mighty a Project: Upon which he
mistrusted his own Abilities, despairing in the thread of a Discourse, to give
that due Connection so different Matters would require, which of themselves
seemed too Extravagant and Incoherent.

So having thought upon his Design, he pitched upon a middle and a moderate way,
choosing a Subject capable of being bounded in a less compass than that of
Herodotus; and of receiving a greater extent than Hellanicus's: Engaging
Himself in the History of the Peloponesian War, which continued Seven and
Twenty Years. But to ascend to the Fountain head of that War; it Commenced upon
the occasion of the War betwixt Corinth and Corcyra. Peloponesus is a kind of
Peninsula in the Archipelago, formerly going by the name of the Country of
Argos, and now of the Morea. The Corinthians, the more potent People of the
Two, being attackt by the Corcyreans, who were the ancient Phaeacians, the
Athenians engaged in their Interest, and the Lacedaemonians took the Corinthians
into their Protection. The two Republics Athens and Lacedemon, were then in
the most flourishing Condition they were ever known in; and as their Power was
arrived to the highest pitch, and their respective Grandeur gave a mutual
Jealousy of each other, that War was a kind of Dispute betwixt them for the
Empire of Greece.

The Athenians began to be suspected by the Lacedaemonians, under the government
of Pericles, who was become the Favorite of the People, by his popular
Behavior. He had the absolute Administration of the Affairs of Peace and War
in the Republic for Forty Years together, and by that admirable Talent he had
in Oratory, becoming an incontroulable Sovereign in Athens, he made that City
formidable to the rest of the Commonwealths of Greece, by the several
Embassies he caused it to depute either upon its real, or pretended Interests:
which thing rendering that Republic so highly considerable in all the Countries
round about, caused the Lacedaemonians first to take the Allarm; and these two
States exasperated by a long Emulation, began to dispute the Sovereign Power,
by a formal War they declared, for which the War of Corcyra and Corinth was
only a Pretense. All Greece was concerned, and most of the Neighboring People
engaged in the Quarrel, which became the most Famous in the World, and they
sided according as their different Interest, or different Pretensions carried
them, to this or that Party.

Thucydides reflecting in his Exile on that famous Dispute betwixt Two of the
most polite and warlike People in the World, found nothing that could better
employ his Leisure than the Writing of their History: And being resolved upon
it, consulting his own Breast, he found he had sufficient Strength to write
what he knew himself, and what he could collect from those who had bore a part
in Affairs in a Controversy of that Importance, so as to give a good Account of
it to Posterity. It is true, the different Temper of the Spartans and
Athenians, that uniform Conduct he observed in Lacedemon, for the continuance
of the same Form of Government, without the least Alteration, which made that
Republic so powerful, as to be able to give Laws to its Neighbors; that
severity of Discipline, rigidness of Morals, frugality of Living, modesty of
Habit, all opposite to the luxary, pompousness, and politeness of Athens:
besides the consideration of that people, always giddy and wavering in their
Sentiments; which was a true Image of Lightness and Inconstancy, compared with
the Constancy and Resolution of the Lacedaemonians, promised him fair Idea's for
the completing such Pieces as were likely to please, from their Diversity and
Opposition: those great Generals Themistocles, Pericles, Theramenes,
Alcibiades, Nicias, with so many others that had the principal Commands on both
sides, and all the Grandees, who signalized themselves more eminently by their
glorious Actions in that War, whose Names have all along been magnified in so
high a manner, furnished him with noble Subjects, whereby he might recommend
himself by representing them to the Life.

Add to all this the strange Accidents that War was disturbed with, as
extraordinary Earthquakes, frequent Eclipses of the Sun, Droughts, Famines,
Plagues, and other more fatal Adventures, which gave him a Privilege of
diversifying his Work, mingling it with terrible Subjects, and most frightful
Occurrences. There might probably be other more engaging Prospects than these
forementioned, that determined this Author in the Choice of his Subject, which
seemed worthy to employ his Pen, from such a Retail of mighty Circumstances as
rendered that War, (as he himself in the beginning of his Work confesses) the
most remarkable Enterprise in all Antiquity: Especially since Athens and
Lacedemon were at their highest Point of Glory, and all Greece interess'd it
self in that Expedition. Sure it is also, that Xenophon, who was a Man of a
singular Judgment, found the Peloponesian War so fine a Subject, that he
quitted those other Works he had before him, to Accomplish that History
Thucydides had left imperfect, by reason of his Death, that took him
unexpectedly.

As great, The Subject of Livy.
notwithstanding, as this subject seemed to this Author, it must not come at
all in Competition with that which Livy went upon. There is so great a
Disproportion betwixt them, that there is no room for Deliberation concerning
the Pre-eminence. This is the entire History of many Ages, of a people almost
always Victorious, and that made it self Master of the World. It Is a vast, and
unfathomed Ocean, a Carriere of so unbounded an Extent, that it may be said,
such a grand Design never entered the Head of any Historian besides him. Others
who have undertaken as long-winded Pieces, in proper speaking, are Compilers,
not Historians. In fine, it is one of the greatest Attempts of an humane Mind;
and possibly never Author appeared in a vaster Theater, as one may say, than
He. But it is not only from the long succession of Time, and the multitude of
Years, the Subject is so great: It Is through the Grandeur* of a People that was
Sovereign of all others: it is by the glorious actions of this People, in their
warlike Expeditions, and Treaties of Peace, which they dispatched so Honorably
for the Interest of their State; it is from a Thousand almost incredible events,
wherewith Fortune exercised their Virtue; it is in that prudence they manifested
in their Councels, the Maturity of their Deliberations, diligence in executing
their Designs, their secrecy and faithfulness in the most important Affairs,
and in their resolution in unavoidable Dangers, and the greatest Extremities.
In short, every thing seems strange and wonderful in that admirable Design. The
Originals of that State, which grew so mighty from so small beginnings, its
progress, its changes, its Vicissitudes, the Revolutions of its Power and
Greatness, its exaltation, and almost inconceiveable pitch of glory it arrived
to; by its patient enduring hardships, by its perseverance in labors, by the
exact Observation of laws, by the inviolable severity of its discipline in the
duties of Peace and War, and by training up a well regulated and martial
Soldiery, encouraged, and exalted, with the only Thoughts, and prospect of
Aggrandizing the Roman Name.

Thus then this design, considered well in all its Circumstances, is the most
glorious Subject History ever had. It Is a long train of the Adventures of a
People that being scandalous, as it was, in its Origin, coming of an
Extraction in a manner infamous, Born and Nursed in plunderings and murders,
trained up to villainies; became wise, frugal, just, passionately studious of
glory, faithful to its Allies, and professing uprightness in all things. It Is
the Story of the Fate and Fortunes of a City that raised it self to Universal
Empire, and became the Metropolis of the whole World; from a Troop of vagabond
Shepherds, accidentally packt together upon the Banks of Tiber: it is the
Conduct of a Government wherein the Observation of a rigid Discipline,
concurring with a ready and faithful obedience, was had in greatest Honor and
Regard; though the Principles thereof were very Lame and Defective. For the
Senate of Rome having subdued other nations, could no longer suffer
equivocations, or Disguises in its consultations: loose, unresolved, feeble,
interessed, dishonest Councels were no more heard of. 'Twas a Nation that was
virtuous through a principle of Honor; whose valor was the product more of
the head, than heart; That courted or avoided Danger, from a result of
Prudence; and knew as well when to expose it self, as when to retreat by the
Dictates of Reason; and obtained the Sovereignty over the rest of the World,
more by the Reputation of its virtue, than the force of its Arms. This is the
true Character of the Romans, whose History Livy undertook to write. And as
nothing seems finer amongst all the works of Reason, than the Relation of a
great Enterprise, happily conducted to a glorious End, through a thousand
Obstacles and Oppositions: as nothing is so pleasant, as to see the Progress of
that Conduct, through the successive Degrees of its Augmentation and Strength
it gathers by little, and little, from Poor, Mean, and Contemptible Beginnings;
so nothing is more proper to be related, because it will appear agreeable in
all its retail of Circumstances.

The History of a people, or a Prince, that is always successful, can never it
self Succeed: it will have too much uniformity; and nothing is more insipid in
a relation than too long a Prosperity, and a perpetual Success. There must be
variety of Events, changes of Fortune, contrariety of Adventures, all sorts of
Objects that are fit to attract the Mind of the Reader, by their Diversity. And
all this abounding in Titus Livy's History, far more than in any other, it is
undoubtedly the most absolute Subject an Historian could have fallen upon.
'Twas from this view that Livy forthwith pitched upon it, as finding in it those
favorable Advantages for his Genius, which he knew how to dispose of to their
best Use, in the Execution of his Work. This Subject so Noble, so Great, so
Rich, through so many different Adventures it included, seemed a weight not too
heavy for his Shoulders. He found a means of confining himself in so Immence a
Matter without lanching into needless Digressions, and Amplifications, as the
generality of Historians do. The greatness of his Subject, which he so well
gave us to Understand, by his natural distrust, in showing only his own
Weakness, and the Disproportion of his Strength, at the entry of his Work, did
not at all discourage him; because he saw that compass it took in, as vast as
it was, reduced to the unity of a single State, whose Fortunes he described.
That darkness likewise, and uncertainty he found under the first Consuls, which
perplexed the coherence of the Subject, in the beginnings of the Republic,
prevented not his Resolutions: For he knew how in those confusions to do his
part sincerely, not vouching any thing for certain but what he found to be so;
and Doubting himself the first, of that which was Doubtful and Suspicious.

Besides that strength of Genius which he found capable of so great a Design,
in the ordering and management of its Parts, in the just proportions of an
accomplished Piece; besides that through understanding he had of his Subject,
wherewith he had stored his Mind: the Knowledge he got of the World in
Augustus's Court by his acquaintance with all the most accomplished Persons in
the Empire; Rome that magazine of Virtue, that seat of Grandeur and Majesty, as
Cicero Styles it, Roma Domus virtutis, imperii dignitatis, domicilum (...), lux
orbis terrarum etc. Cic. de Orat.
began to furnish him with lofty Ideas, which he all along displays in the
several places of his History: He began to polish himself in a Court the most
delicate that ever was: where all that had a Genius for Learning, had a most
exquisite Palate for what ever was fine and excellent. He was Instructed by the
Commanders that were about the Emperor in Military Discipline, in the Marches,
of Armies, Incampments, Sieges, and all that belongs to the art of War, which
is best understood by practice. He observed the humor that prevailed most in
that Court, and the Taste of the People, who were become very Polite: He formed
himself upon all this, discovering by degrees infinite things, of which he had
been altogether ignorant, without this Correspondence. The Familiarity he had
with the Twelve Tables, which were contained in the Fasti of the Capitol,
taught him the Ancient Romans manner of Life. The Succors he elsewhere hoped
to receive through the Emperors Favor, as of having Memorials necessary for
his History, and the hopes his Friends gave him of their Assistance, Encouraged
him to conquer the wearisomness, and surmount the Uneasiness, which are the
general Attendants of such tedious, and almost endless Undertakings.

But as soon as he had made all sufficient Preparations for his Work, and was
assured of such Succors, and Encouragements, as he thought necessary for its
Execution, he bade Farewell to all the World, that he might give himself wholly
up to his Enterprise; having nothing in his Thoughts but the Work he was about,
to which he Sacrificed his Fortune, his Pretensions, the Preferments he might
hope for from his Princes Favor, and his own Merit; his Pleasures, his Hopes,
his Ease, his All. And never Author had that Zeal and Industry, to accomplish
what he had proposed.

CHAP. V.
A Comparison of the History of THUCYDIDES, with that of LIVY.
THe Attempt of Comparing these two Historians, as to their Performances, and
of drawing a just Parallel betwixt them, is so Rash, and so much above my
Capacity, that I am so far from Imagining, I shall be able to content the
Public in this Point, as to be sensible* I can never satisfy my self in that
Particular. And I must confess, to speak sincerely, it is rather a project of a
Comparison of the two Works than a Comparison it self. But I hope this project
will suffice for my Design, which is to give the learned leave to determine of
the Preferrence of these two Authors, and their Works, by the Essay I shall
make thereof, which can pass but for a very imperfect part of this Piece. Here
is the Abridgement of Thucydides.

He begins his History with an Universal Notion he gives us of Greece in
general, An Abridgment of Thucydides's Hi^tory.
and with Pelops's Descent into Peloponnesus, (from whom it derived its name)
after the War of Minos; thence he enters on his Matter, and so passes to the
War of Troy. This is to ascend too high: and this beginning is not suitable, and
proportioned to the body of the History, which is only a particular War betwixt
Athens, and Lacedemon. However he had his Reasons wherewith to justify it; and
that exordium is a kind of platform, to represent the state of his Country, on
which it was expedient for him to insist, to make it understood; he descends
there, probably, to too many Particulars, which give us reason to believe he
more Studied to satisfy the inclination he had for his Country, than the taste
of an indifferent Reader. He gives there too much Reins to his Carriere: For he
might have reduced that long Digression into narrower Bounds, as not being
altogether so necessary for the understanding his History as he Imagined it.
But he had a Mind to engage his Readers, by giving them great Matters, and to
accustom them by little and little to embrace his Opinions, and Sense, by
filling them with his Ideas. Notwithstanding one shall be hard put to it to
forgive him that vast Excursion, where he immediately falls upon the Trojan
War, as also, the Relation of the Transactions of Greece since that time, the
different Adventures of the Country, the several Expeditions by Sea, the
Trading of the City Corinth that grew so Rich by Commerce.

Hereupon indeed he enters upon a Narrative of the Advantages of the People of
Greece, who became so Potent by Sea: whence he passes to the several ways of
building their Vessels and Galleys and gives an Account of the Use of them. And
that narration tends directly to his Point; for these are the Preparatives of
the War he is to describe. But methinks he has crowded too much Matter in his
first Book, out of a desire of prefixing a too stately portal to his History.
He has not confined himself enough in assigning the several Reasons of the
breach of Treaty, betwixt the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, to give a very exact
Account of the Causes of that War he undertook to write. He has not always so
cleverly opened the Particulars of that Affair, as his Subject demanded. But he
has shown himself Profoundly skilled in the different Interests of Greece: and
the general Notion the Historian gives of the Forces of the Country, both by
Sea and Land; the Description he adjoyns of the Ancient Greeks, and of those of
his own Age; the Abridgment he makes of the Persian War, is an happy Beginning
for his History, in as much as there is something great in those Particulars.

But the Subject of the second Book becomes still more Material, by the List of
the Allies who engaged in that War, on both sides: For he reckons up almost all
the Commonwealths of Greece one after another, which took contrary Parts, they
were disposed by their Interests, and Relations to the two Republics, Athens
and Lacedemon, of which they were either Allies or Favorers. And the Historian
bestirs himself here exceedingly, by reason of the different Embassies the
several States deputed to each other, which put the whole Country in Ferment
and Commotion by their Factions and Intrigues: and all this is still made
Greater by the Art he has of Interessing in that War, which at the bottom was
but of small Moment, all the Countries of Greece, Sicily, and part of Italy,
the Generals also of the King of Persia, who make all a grand Figure in that
Expedition; and engaging as one may say Heaven and Earth and all the Elements
in that Quarrel, to make it more Considerable, through those prodigious
Circumstances, of Eclipses, Earthquakes, Plagues, Famines, Mortalities, and
other Prodigies, of which I have already spoken: and which he introduces in his
History to give a greater Idea of his Subject. It must be acknowleged the Wit
of the Historian is very Apparent in that part: and that so inconsiderable a
War as that of two petty Nations could never have been of much importance, but
by means of that Pompous Retinue of Circumstances it came attended with. And
herein he can never be sufficiently admired, whilst we reflect upon the Art he
had of supporting a little Subject by Treating it in a Method great and noble.

He continues his Second Book with the Description of the Condition the Town of
Athens was in, when the Enemy made a Descent into the Country, by Oenoe the
first Frontier Garrison on the Coast of Boeotia, as also of the Havoc
Archidamus made about Eleusine; whence passing through Acarne, he came and
posted himself within two Leagues of Athens: The Alarm being spread abroad,
Pericles, who at that time had the Administration of Affairs, refused to
convene the People, least the Fright they were in should put them upon some
Absurdity or Extravagance, through too much weakness. He relates next the
several Enterprises of each People upon one another, without escaping any
memorable Action, the rest of the Summer; as also the Funeral Solemnities the
following Winter, paid to the Honor of those who were slain in this first
Campaign; and he Describes the Ceremonies thereof: wherein Pericles who had
advised the War, made an Elogy upon those who had lost their Lives in it.
Probably never Man succeeded more happily than he in infusing Courage into the
living, by celebrating the memory of the dead, and setting before their Eyes
the Glory of dying for their Country with their swords in hand, especially for
a Country so Glorious in all things as was then the Commonwealth of Athens.
There is nothing in that Discourse but is set off with all that Dignity, which
shines so Eminently in this Historian. The Description of the plague in all its
particulars, which comes after, stands rightly placed, for the intermixing that
Variety which is requisite to make a History taking.

The Athenians crushed almost at the same time with a War and Pestilence, which
laid their Country desolate, began to murmur against Per^cles, who hereupon
assembled them, in order to encourage them, by justifying his management. That
Harangue, howsoever Forcible, by those Masterly and Engaging Strokes he gave
it, had but little Effect upon their Minds, who were sensible of nothing but
their Misfortunes: he was discarded presently, and as suddenly restored. The
inconstancy of that People over whom he had gained all the Authority his Merit
and his Eloquence deserved, hastened his Death, which happened not long after.
The Encomium the Historian makes upon that Great Man, affords us a very fine
Idea of his Virtue: His loss was none of the least Disgraces that fell on
Athens in the second Campaign. For there being no one left behind of so Eminent
a Quality to fill up his place; his Successors as equal perhaps in Merit, and
rivals in Dignity, wanting sufficient Power to rein up a People with an
absolute hand, were Obliged for their interests to manage them remisly, and to
Sooth and Flatter them into Obedience.

After the Death of Pericles the posture of Affairs was more untoward than
formerly. Sicily began to be in Commotion, and to Arm for Lacedaemon: the Siege
of Platea was formed in Boeotia, the Assault was Vigorous, and the Defense as
Resolute. That Siege described at length in the second Book, falls into a
Blockade: thence follows the Attempt of the Athenians upon Chalcis, to give a
Diversion to the Lacedaemonians, which occasioned them to enter Acarne, to make
themselves Masters of the Isles Zacynthus and Cephalenia, as also of Naupactus,
in order to prevent the Athenians Sailing about Peloponnesus. But as perplexed
and imbroil'd as Affairs were through the heat which was diffused in the minds
of the People, and their several engagements with each other, in the end of the
second Book, they are cleared off by the Historian with that Easiness and
Perspicuity, as renders that an Admirable Piece: the Naval Battle of the
Athenians against the Corinthians at Naupactus, and that of the Lacedaemonians
against the Athenians, are described in such a retail of Circumstances as is
wonderfully taking with the Reader. The Advantages they had over each other,
being reciprocal; there was an endeavor on the Enemies side to surprise the
Pirean Haven near Athens; which proved unsuccessful for want of due Measures in
taking the Advantage of the Occasion.

This Book, and the third Campaign, conclude with the Thracian War in
Macedonia. Never History comprised so much Matter in so little Room, nor so
much Action in so few Words. If any thing can be found fault with, it is that
the Exploits are too closely wound with one another, so that the coherence
seems somewhat intricate and confused; and that multiplying of Objects tends
only to dissipate the attention of the Reader.

He begins the Third Book with the Revolt of Lesbos from the Athenians, and the
Attempt of the Athenians upon Mitylene, which sent Ambassadors to Lacedemon to
demand supplies. That Oration is so insinuating, and full of Artifice, that the
Lacedaemonians could no way resist it. Mitylene is received into the Alliance of
Peloponnesus. The Harangue of Cleon upon the Affair of the Prisoners of
Mitylene, which some were for putting to Death at Athens, of which Opinion he
himself was; and that of Diodotus who was for having them Pardoned, are very
strong and persuasive. Platea being at last surrendered up to the Athenians,
that Town sent to justify its conduct to Lacedemon. There are to be seen in the
Discourse of that Embassy fine and curious Strokes of Eloquence; nothing can be
more moving, or founded on more substantial Reasons, yet all to no purpose: The
Plateans fell a Sacrifice to the Revenge of the Thebans: which makes a notable
incident in the History. The Historian, taking the Hint from the Troubles of
Corcyra, makes a Digression upon the Factions that grow in a State, and the
disorders that spring from them which is a very good Lesson for Gover^ours.
That which follows of the Affairs of Sicily, the Warlike Exploits of the
Athenians in that Country, their Defeat in Etolia; the Lacedaemonians Attempt
upon Naupactus; the Purification of the Isle of Delos; and the Description of
that mysterious Ceremony performed by the Athenians, is expressed in a Noble,
Great and Stately manner.

The Author quits the War of Peloponnesus in the Fourth and Fifth Book, to
enter upon the Affairs of Sicily, which occasioned several Enterprises upon
Megara, Boeotia, Thrace; the Battle of Delia, the taking of Amphipolis,
Thoronus; and several Expeditions which are related in one and the same strain.
The Business of Sicily gave Birth to a Truce betwixt the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians, whereupon was formed a Treaty of Peace betwixt them, which
lasted Seven Years: the Historian is here Obliged to make a kind of an Apology
to justify the Continuation of his History, pretending that League was broken,
and renewed, done and undone several times, that the War was never interrupted,
that the Treaty was never put in Execution, by reason of manifest Trespasses;
the Lacedaemonians having never quitted Amphipolis, which their Articles obliged
them to do. To speak Truth, that Treaty was never ratified by the Allies, which
gave rise to several other Leagues amongst them, and many other Affairs. But
all that Campaign was spent in Negotiations of Peace, which were put an end to,
by the Battle of Mantinea, from which was dated the Renovation of the Alliance
betwixt Argos and Lacedemon.

The Sixth Book is a large Digression upon the Wars of Sicily, which begins
with a long Description of the Country, and the Founding of Syracuse by Archias
the Corinthian. He shows a great deal of Ancient and far-fetched Learning in
that Description, but it is not pleasant and agreeable: it is too remote from
the main Subject, and falls not rightly in, unless it be that the Sicilians
thought of coming to maintain the League of Peloponnesus. Alcibiades's
Discourse to persuade the Athenians to a War with Sicily, and that of Nicias on
the other hand to dissuade them, are Two of the chiefest Masterpieces of
Eloquence in their kind. The Description of the Athenian Fleet, and all the
Equipage of War, in their Preparations against Syracuse, is very handsome.
Alcibiades's Oration to the Lacedaemonians in his Banishment, advising them to
send a Reinforcement into Sicily, that was attackt by the Athenians, is a piece
of lofty, lively, strong and generous Eloquence.

The Defeat of the Athenians at Syracuse, and the Description of the Battle, is
the finest part of the Seventh Book; nothing is better drawn, or more absolute,
than the Picture the Historian makes of it: it is handled throughout with
abundance of Art and Mastery. The Destruction of the Power of the People of
Athens, on occasion of a Negotiation with Alcibiades, who had thrown himself
into the hands of Tisaphernes, Lieutenant General of the King of Persia,
because he had interfer'd with the Lacedaemonians, who received him in his
Banishment, is described in this Book particularly enough. He was sought to in
his Disgrace for an Accommodation, which he disdained to hearken to, but upon
Condition the people should not be consulted; only the Officers of the King of
Persia, who were honorable Gentlemen: The Reluctance he showed in exposing
himself to the inconstancy and humors of the people, occasioned the
Destruction of Democracy; which is very well opened and related.

The Digression upon the change of Government in Athens, and Samos, where it
was attempted to humble the too excessive power of the People, has very little
relation to the principal Design of the History, which is the War of
Peloponnesus: and this last Book is generally very confused, and has nothing
finished; which has given reason to some Critics to think Thucydides was not
the Author. This is the Abridgment of his History: now for that of Titus Livy,
that we may make the Parallel.

There is nothing that can give us a better notion of the difference betwixt
these two Authors, An Abridgment of Livy's History.
than the different ways of Writing they have taken: For Livy takes a course
quite contrary to that of Thucydides. The Entrance to his History is great,
suitable to the greatness of his Subject, but it is modest and humble: it may
be said too not to want simplicity, though it is Pompous and Majestic. With
what admirable Discretion does he introduce that ancient Tradition, Quae ante
conditam urbem poeticis decora Fabulis ea nec affirmare nec ref^llere in animo
est. Hist. Romans l. 1.
which makes Aeneas, the first Parent of Rome, of a Divine descent. He Treats
it as a fable that he would neither mantain, nor overthrow, intimating there is
so much deference and respect to be paid to antiquity, as to give her leave to
mingle something divine with humane Affairs, to recommend the Originals of
Cities and Empires, as more august, and venerable to Mankind by such a mixture.
He hence descends to something of a more solid Consideration; and to give us an
Idea of his Work, He begins it with an Elogy upon the Virtue and Probity of the
People whose History he is Writing, yet still preserving himself from being
blinded with self-love, and carried away with the inclination a Man naturally
has for his own Country. For he scruples not to give you their ill Qualities as
well as their good, that is, the remissness as well as severity of the Roman
manners; but without any prepossession of Interest or Passion, and with all the
Prudence in the World. That beginning of the History, where the Author fetches
the Origin of Rome quite from the Destruction of Troy, and the whole Pedigree
of the Kings of Alba, is in it self a little cumbred and confused, both in the
words and things, and has a Style that has hardly any thing Great in it. One
may see the Author avoided flashing at the first: The things he speaks are
great, but his way of speaking is low and humble; and there is much Artifice in
that entrance, which the Author debases on purpose to show that the Beginnings
of the Roman Grandeur were but small, Debebatur fatis tantae origo iuris,
maximique secundum deorum opes imperii Hist. Romans l. 1.
and the better to observe the Progress of that State. He however fails not to
relieve the destiny of that Empire, from the nobleness of its Extraction,
deducing it from the God Mars, whom he makes the Father of Romulus.

The haughty and fiery Temper of Romulus is finely drawn, but the Picture of
his Successor Numa, and his Government, makes that Founder of Rome seem more
haughty than he really is: That opposition is very Advantageous in those two
Characters. The fierceness of the first, however softened it seems by the
Religion of the second, is set off the more by that kind of contrast, which is
pleasanter in History than in painting. Those petty Battles under the first
Kings, and kinds of Apprenticeships, the Roman People served in War against
their Neighbors, are heightened by the Expression of the Historian, who can,
when he pleases, animate little things with an Air of Grandeur. The Engagement
of the Horatii and Curiatii, for the Decision of the Fate of Rome and Alba, is
an Adventure that Beautifies all that part; for it is admirably related. The
expulsion of Kings, which is the greatest Event in the two first Ages of Rome,
is rendered more remarkable by Lucretia's Exploit, who Stabbed her self before
her Husbands face, for having been dishonored by young Tarquin* and the making
that Circumstance the most material in that Revolution, recommends the Relation
more effectually to the Reader, interessing his Affection, by so surprising an
Adventure. All the Consequences of that Revolution become more considerable, by
a Foundation so Solid, and of so great a Luster.

Scaevola's attempt is Painted in the Second Book, with all the Colors, so
great, Heroic, and extraordinary a Design, is capable of. The love of his
Country, to which that Design owed its Conception, the contempt of Life upon
which it was formed; the Proposition that Gallant Gentleman offered the Senate
in ambiguous Terms, that so he might Merit their Approbation, without incurring
Disgrace; that undauntedness of Action, and Resolution of Soul, and Courage in
revenging on himself the miscarriage of his Blow; all is of that Spirit and
Elevation as is hardly to be paralleled. And it is impossible a description of a
like Enterprise should be supported with more astonishing Circumstances, with
more disdainful Language, or greater Sentiments. Porsenna King of Clusium, who
was besieging Rome, amazed at so prodigious an instance of Valor, demanded
Peace of the Romans; and that Peace was the product of so desperate an
Undertaking. But finally, that Probity he attributes to a People grown Fierce
and Untractable by the constant practice of Arms; that justice and clemency
they exercised in the very pride and height of their Victories; that love of
glory he ascribes to them; that noble Pride from whence he draws their
principal Character: that greatness of Soul, and loftiness of Thoughts, the
Dignity of the Roman Name inspired them with; the Ingenuity of the Senate in
its Suffrage, instanced in their taking Generals from the Plough: That Spirit
of Wariness, Frugality, Innocence, and Equity so much practiced, and had in
Honor in the raw and unpolisht Beginnings of the Commonwealth: The public
Spiritedness of Brutus, who Sacrificed his Childen to the Safety of his
Country: The Poverty of Curious, who after he had enriched the Republic with
the Spoils of the Enemy, had not wherewith to Bury him: Moreover those grand
Maxims, engraved in all Hearts, truly Roman never to brook Disgrace: The
Resolve of the Senate after the Defeat, by Hannibal, at Cannae, never to
hearken to a Proposal of Peace: those Idea's of Equity, intimately impressed on
their Minds: that great Sense of Honor, Fidelity, love of their Country, and
Liberty: Their incomparable Knowledge in the Art of War, the Severity of
preserving the Laws of War in their utmost Extent: that invincible Patience in
Dangers and Hardships; and all those other Virtues wherewith the Author has
stored his History, in innumerable Examples, are the most usual Strokes he
gives for the completing of their Character. This was the Spirit that reigned
in the Commonwealth in those troublesome Times, when the Power of the first
Consuls was balanced by the Institution of Tribunes, to bear up the people
against the Encroachments of the Nobles.

After the Second Carthaginian War, and the Defeat of Hannibal, the taking of
Numantia, the Conquests of Sicily, and all Greece, we may observe other sort of
Manners, and a quite different Spirit introduced in the Republic, through that
abundant Prosperity their Arms brought in. Politeness, and love of Gentile
Arts, a delicacy of Palate, and the Study of Learning began to be established in
Rome, and to give quite another Countenance, Mode, and Luster to the
Government, which the Historian has admirably laid open in all its
Circumstances. The Second Part also that remains of his History, or rather the
Two last Decades, are incomparably better than the First. For as to the Second,
which contains the Succession of Wars against the Samnites, against the People
of Etruria, and Lucania; against the Gauls, against King Pyrrhus, against the
Tarentines; the first Punick War made by Attilius Regulus, and that against the
rest of the People of Italy, we can say nothing of, since all that Decade is
entirely lost.

Finally, Scipio and Laelius, who were the perfectest Models of that Politeness
which was, through the Study of Learning, set up at Rome, and who were
themselves the Worthiest Gentlemen of the Republic, completed the Perfection
of that State, already so far advanced; causing the love of Eloquence and
Poetry, and all Arts and Sciences to flourish in it; and 'twas by their
Example, and the Converse and Familiarity with the Greeks, which the Romans had
just Conquered, that they Civilized themselves, utterly banishing out of their
Republic that rude, surly and unmannerly Carriage, their constant dealing in
Arms had introduced. 'Twas then this Victorious People began to Plume it self
upon the Notion their Prosperity and Success had inspired them with, that they
were born to be Lords and Governors of the rest of the World. And from thence
it was that the love of Liberty, and the thirst of Glory, so much possessed them:
This is the Image Livy gives us of them after the Second Punick War, and during
the Third: these are the principal Ingredients of their Character. For Plenty
had not as yet debauched the Minds of a People, Virtuous, upon so good
Principles, as the Romans were. There runs through the whole Character of
Scipio, who was at the Head of Affairs, a Spirit of Religion, which shows that
Virtue alone was in greater Reputation at Rome than ever; one need only see the
Air the Historian makes him speak in, in his African Voyage; the Discourse he
makes in the Twenty-ninth Book in his Departure from Sicily, abounds with all
the Sense of Piety, an honest Man is capable of. Cato gives his Voice in the
Senate against the Luxury, and Dress of Women in the Thirty-fourth Book, Marcus
and Attilius Roman cum verissentis and nulla re magis gloriarentur quam decepto
per inducias and spem pacis Rege Peri^o. Hist. Romans lib. 42.
with the same rigor he would have done in Plato's imaginary Republic. Every
thing savours of Virtue, both in the People, and in the Senate: Veteres and
moris antiqui memores negabant se in ea legatione Romanas agnoscere arts ut
astu magis quam vera virtute gloriarentur. Hist. Romans lib. 37.
And nothing better manifests the Spirit, wherewith the Senate governed the
Republic at that time, than the Verdict it passed upon the two Ambassadors,
Marcius and Attilius, Commissioned to the King of Persia; who gave some uneasy
Suspicions to the Romans, as being a Man of Courage and Understanding. They
said, in accounting for their Negotiation, they had amused that Prince with the
Proposals of a Treaty, and the Hopes of a Peace; that they had thereby
prevented him from making Warlike Preparations, and took off his Allies from
making their necessary Preparatives, and putting themselves in readiness. The
young Senators had nothing to object to his Proceedings, which seemed novel to
those who had grown Gray in the Government, and were highly disapproved by the
Ancient Sages; who alleged, it was not by these Methods their Ancestors
arrived to the Sovereignty of the World: but by Virtue alone, and Fidelity
toward their Enemies, no less than that they exercised toward their Friends.
Insomuch that that sort of Disguise, and Tricking, which had a tendency to
Treachery, were ever held as Means not to be practiced, and Paths their Probity
and Virtue knew not how to tread in.

Moreover nothing is more bright and dazzling, in this History, than the Idea
Livy gives us in the Fourth Decade, and in the beginning of the Fifth, of the
Dignity, and Power of the Senate, which was grown the absolute Master of the
Republic; all things stood to its Resolves, and submitted to its Orders. If
King Antiochus restores to Scipio his Son, whom he had taken Prisoner, and
petitions him for a Peace, Scipio answers in Capacity of a private Person, and
a Father, that nothing in the World could more Oblige him to it than the
Present he had made him of his Son; but in Quality of a Roman and General of
the Troops of the Republic, he could no ways grant the Peace he demanded, for
that lay only in the Breast of the Senate. And after the Defeat of Perseus, the
Senate grew so absolute, that all stooped to its Authority, Consuls, Generals,
Armies were obedient to it. The Ambassadors of Antiochus King of Syria, Ptolemy
King of Egypt, and Cleopatra his Sister, make it the Vmpire of their Quarrels.
King Massinissa sends his Two Sons to Rome, to complement the Senate from him,
upon their Defeat of King Perseus. Prusias King of Bithynia dispatches his Son
Nicomedes to Rome, to put him under the Protection of the Senate: But how must
the Historian Treat the People of that Republic, Positis jam adversus omnes
mortales certaminibus haud secus quam Deos consulere, and parcere vos generi
humano oportet Hist. Romans lib. 37.
whereof that King Styles himself a Freed-man, glorying in so magnificent a
Title; and whose Clemency, Maximo semper animo victis regibus populisque
ignov^stis, quanto majore vos animo dec^t facere in hac Victoria quae vos
dominos orbis terrarum facit
Antiochus's Ambassadors, (who came to beg Peace of Scipio) implored, as if it
had been from the Gods themselves: If, say these Ambassadors, out of a
greatness of Soul you have Pardoned those Kings and People you have Vanquished,
what ought you not to do in that Victory which makes you Masters of the World?
And this was it, that made this People, in their Victories, take upon them the
glorious Title of Deliverer of other Nations. To conclude, nothing is so Great
and Majestic as the Image the Historian gives us of the Republic in those
happy Times. There you may see King Perseus chained to the Chariot of Paulus
Emilius, to enhance the Glory of the Triumph. Next is to be seen Gentius King
of Illyricum, with his Wife and Children Vanquished by the Praetor Anicius, and
led Captive along the Streets of Rome. There are the Ambassadors of Attalus
King of Pergamus, and of his Brother Eumenes, in Posture and Quality of
Supplicants before the Senate of the people. Thus possibly never Historian had
so great a Subject, nor supported the Grandeur of it better by the Dignity of
Expression, and loftiness of Idea's. See then the end of what we have remaining
of Livy's History. For after follow the Successful and Victorious Times of
Sertorius, who subdued Spain; of Pompey who subjected to the Republic
Mitridates, Tigranes, Armenia, Cicily, and the other Provinces of Asia; and of
Caesar who Triumphed over the Belgians, the Gauls, and most part of the Northern
People, as Pompey had over those of Asia. This is then the Abridgment, or
rather the Extract of Livy's Roman History, which it was necessary to reduce
into this Form, the better to apprehend the Nature of it; and thus this History
is Preferable to that of Thucydides, because it represents a mighty Design
carried on by regular Methods to the top of its Perfection, and a Republic
grown up to be Mistress of the Universe, from so small and inconsiderable a
Foundation: but now let us observe the Imperfections and Beauties of these two
Histories: That which is still behind, for the Accomplishment of the Comparison.

CHAP. VI.
A Comparison of the Faults of the Two Historians.
It Is a very bold Undertaking to enquire into the Failures of so accomplished
Authors as Thucydides and Livy: For to find fault with those which a Man sets
up for Models and Exemplars, is to destroy what he would establish, and
Undermine the Credit of that he desires to Confirm. Besides that it seems
unmannerly to Criticize upon these Two great Men, when Antiquity recommends
them to us as the Perfectest and most Absolute of all others. But as nothing is
more Essential to Man than to Err and slip sometimes; and those who pretend to
be most Infallible, have their Faults; I Presume the Criticisms I shall make
upon these Two Historians, will make not a little for their Praise; and that
the World will be better satisfied of their Excellence, when I have examined
their Faults, which may serve to set off the greatness of their Merit. For it is
not so much by avoiding Faults, as by a direct tendency to his Point, without
any Deviation, that an Author shows himself: he that proceeds in the directest
Line, and wanders out of his Way the least, as does Thucydides, is the most
accomplished in Dionysius Halicarnassensis's Opinion. Dionys. Halicarn. ad
Aelium Tuberon. Number. 3.
Let us see what it is wherein Thucydides's History may be reprehended.

He is not so Fortunate in the management of his Subject, Thucydide' s Failings.
as in his Invention, which always bottoming upon a great Fund of Reason, never
fails him. He often confounds his Subject by anticipating or else Suspending,
or lastly Interrupting his Narrations, which break off the Course of the
History, and dissipate the Mind of the Reader, by the multitude of Objects that
present themselves. For instance, in the Third Book he begins a Matter relating
to the Mitylenians, and before he has finished it, he skips to an Expedition of
the Lacedaemonians: from that Expedition, which he leaves Imperfect, he
undertakes a Relation of the Siege of Platea, which he abandons, to return
again to the Mitylenians. And upon their Account, he touches upon something of
a Sedition happening at Corcyra, wherein the People divided themselves, some
siding with Athens, and some taking the Part of Lacedemon. Thence he passes to
the business of Sicily, and again pursues other Affairs without concluding any.
And the whole Book is stuffed with such a multitude of Matters, and so
different from one another, that a Man is quite lost, and can never be able to
discover the natural Thread of the Principal History. And this is one kind of
Fault in a Narration, which should ever have Union and Connection, and be still
endeavoring at the Scope it Proposes; that so it may fix and determine the
Mind of the Reader to the same Object, without offering any thing to disengage
him from it.

Again, it is pretended, he has not Explained, so cleverly as he might have
done, the Cause of the War he goes to Write: Dionysius Halicarnassensis is of
Opinion he has not given us the True one, at least that he has mingled together
with the True one, (which was the Lacedaemonians Jealousy, of the too great
Power of the Athenians) other Causes which are not True. Undoubtedly he is
somewhat Dark in that Place. The occasion of that War is much finer Explained
in the Life of Pericles in Plutarch; where that Author makes it appear that is
was Pericles who first Inspirited the Athenians, by the frequent Embassies he
advised them to Depute, in order to persuade all. Greece to enter into a
Confederacy against the King of Persia; which gave the Lacedaemonians Reason to
suspect them: For thereby Athens gave it self a considerable Regard, which it
never had before, and by that Distinction seemed to take a kind of Pre-eminence
above all other People.

That large Amplification upon the different Characters of the People of Greece
in the Proem, their several Expeditions, which he drives up as high as the
Trojan War; the Luxury of the Athenians, which he is too curious in Describing,
talking even of their Curling their Hair: what he says of the Modesty and
Frugality of the Spartans, and what he add^ concerning one Aminocles, a
Corinthian, who first taught the Art of Building Ships: and such other Loose
and Unconnected Matters he Treats of as a Preface to his History, are nothing
to his Purpose in Dionysius Halicarnassensis's Opinion. He thinks he might have
let all that alone, and have entered on his Subject without making so great a
Ramble from his Design: he concludes likewise that his History has for its
Subject not only the War of Peloponnesus, but all the Affairs of Greece; for he
brings in the Enterprises of the Athenians in Chalcis, the Breaking in of the
Thracians into Macedonia in the Second Book, the War of the Leontins and the
Concerns of Sicily in the Third Book: and thus he seeks out Matters that are
Foreign, because his own Subject is unable to furnish him with Variety enough
out of its self; which is the Reason there is so little Accord and Union in his
Work: There are two Wars, one of Peloponnesus, and the other of Syracuse,
without any Reference to, or Connection with one another.

That Celebrated Funeral-Oration in the Second Book, which he makes Pericles to
speak, is neither Agreeable, nor Proportioned to the Occasions and Persons that
it concerns; and the Historian himself confesses, that Affair had nothing
memorable in it, in Respect of that which he Describes in the Fourth Book under
Demosthenes near Pylus; where the Athenians were Routed both by Sea and Land:
and those who fell, Signalized themselves much more than in the former Defeat,
in which only a few of the Cavalry were slain; and all the Circumstances of the
former Battle, have nothing comparable to the other, which he slightly passes
over unregarded. But that the Historian might add greater Weight and Moment to
his Discourse, he puts it into the mouth of Pericles, who indeed was alive at
the first Expedition, but was dead at the Second; in which a little Fault may
be found with the Sincerity of the Author so Celebrated elsewhere for his
Integrity: He is Upbraided too with his so long and frequent Harangues, and for
having so little Variety. It is true, the Number of them is great; but since
the Humor of Athens and Lacedemon was to have every thing done by Haranguing,
whilst the People were in Power, he must unavoidably Harangue them, since they
would have it so. After all, the Historian knows how to abate that Heat of his
Eloquence, when he Divests himself of the Orator, and puts on the Historian.

The Athenians dejected by their Losses, and the wast the Plague had made in
their Country, having the first dispatched a famous Embassy to demand a Peace
of the Lacedaemonians, Dionysius Halicarnassensis blames the Historian for
passing so considerable a Point so superficially over; and reprehends him for
not so much as naming the Ambassadors, (which seemed very Material in that War,
through so considerable an Alteration in their Characters;) nor making mention
of one Tittle of the Embassy: He that at other times would diligently Court
every Occasion, to Introduce Towns and States, Discoursing by so frequent
Deputations. It is certain he is guilty of a little Negligence in so notable an
Opportunity, where he might have made his Country speak so fine Things, and
have added more Renown to his History, by the Talent he had of Haranguing so
excellently well.

I Omit several other Places Dionysius Halicarnassensis dislikes in this
Author; because he runs into an Excess, overstraining his Criticisms through a
Spirit of Animosity, against that Historian, whose Reputation he endeavors to
lessen, that he may with more Ease set up Herodotus against him, who was his
Countryman, wherein his Proceedure has a Tincture of Partiality; not but that
he had just Reason for it in many Particulars, but he had not in all. He is
frequently too rigidly Censorious, so that it is necessary sometimes to Correct
Spleen, at least not to be carried away with it without Examination. These
following are the other Faults the generality of the Learned find with
Thucydides. He leaves too much to his Readers Conjecture, whether for want of
Care to Explain himself clearly, or whether through an earnestness to Express
things nobly, he does it in fewer Words; by which he often falls into such
Obscurities as the whole World can never reach his Meaning, because his Sense
is as it were choked with the multitude and force of his Images, which he
crowds into his Expression. But by that affected loftiness that everywhere
abounds in him, he without Scruple over-bears all the rules and decency of
Construction; which he seems very little to Regard, provided he can express
himself with more Grandeur. It Is also through the self-same Principle, that the
figures he makes use of, are for the most part violent; that the colors he
Paints things in, are too strong; that his strokes are too deep; that he has a
theatrical air diffused through his Discourse, by means of Expressions, that
sound tragically, and of a Character not much different from that which Pindar
took by his too closely following Eschylus; that the Historians which preceeded
him, were more careful of Expressing things plainly; that he is too Figurative
in his Speech; that he affects an uncouth ancient way, in Words worn out of
use, or In-authentick; that there is nothing of sweetness in his Expression;
that he can not Paint a thing with any softness; that his Discourse is
Disagreable; that he was utterly unacquainted with those Graces and Charms his
Predecessor Herodotus so well understood; and that in fine, by the natural
Prosperity of his Genius, he runs into a dryness of Style, which renders his
Discourse harsh and impoverisht.

There are those who push their Criticisms farther still; pretending he has not
sufficient care to search into the bottom of Things; that he is too
superficial; that he simply relates Transactions, without giving us the Reasons
of them, or explaining the Motives that led to them: they add, there is no turn
in his Periods, no harmony in the Cadence, no agreeableness in the Words, no
fineness in his Discourse: that there is very little variety in his Harangues;
that there are perpetual Embassies, wherein are large Discourses, excellent
indeed, but too prolix, and too Studied: It Is thought he took that Method from
Homer, who to make his Narration the more lively, makes those, he introduces in
his Poem, talk everlastingly. The Dialogue he makes between the Athenians and
the Melians, upon their different Interests, in the Fourth Book of his History,
has something of the Nature of a Dramatick Poem, where things are Played by
several Persons that are introduced; for which there is no Precedent in any
History, which ought to be united, and continued in a Thread, without
Interruption: in short, this is not suitable to Thucydides's Character of
Simplicity. It Is supposed too, that he makes the Greeks have more Courage than
Strength: their Ability is not answerable to their Pride; and one can not
always have an opinion of their Merit great enough to support that presumptuous
Arrogance he puts into their Character. For their Warlike Exploits went no
farther often, than the Plundering a Village, or over-turning the side of a
Wall: He is a little deficient too, by giving petty Things more Stress than
they can well bear, and in not giving the greater so much Weight as they
require.

Besides that, the Distinction he makes of the Campaigns, by the Seasons, is
not always neat enough; it is moreover tedious, because he is obliged to use
the same Terms, and the same Transitions, which cause a disag^eeableness in a
Discourse: and by too Scrupulous and superstitious an Adherence to his Method,
he leaves his Matter unfinisht, and his Narrations interrupted. Others carp at
I know not what abstruseness of Style, that wants a little clearing. I pass by
that Digression in his Eighth Book, upon the Change of the Government in Athens
and Samos, when there was a necessity of curbing the Power of the People, who
abused their Authority, and carried things to an excess of dangerous
Consequence to the State. The Critics have not, without good reason, reflected
on the too great Length of that Digression, for the little Relation it has to
the principal Design. The Reconciliation of Alcibiades, with the People of
Athens, who had Banished him, without declaring the reason why; and how he broke
with the Republic, and was reconciled again; which is a Subject of the same
Book, is methinks a little defective. Something more had been due to so
considerable a Man: many other of the like Faults are to be met with in
Dionysius Halicarnassensis, whom it is but turning to, to find them.

But for my own part, if I thought the Failings that are laid to the Charge of
great Men, were to their Dishonor, I could easily vindicate Thucydides in the
greatest part of those they object against him. I could say he was possessed
with so high a Notion of the sublime Style, that he affected it in all Things;
that all besides seemed inconsiderable, even so far, as to trample on the most
common Rules of Grammar, by the change of Tenses, Numbers, Genders and Persons;
provided he could thereby exalt his Expression, and add more heat and vehemence
to his Discourse: I could mantain, that the little Connection there is in some
of his Narrations, is more the fault of his Subject, than his Understanding.
For at the bottom, the War he describes, has nothing in it of a continued and
premeditate Design: one shall not see any Enterprise regularly formed, well
contrived, and well executed: It Is all tumultuously Transacted, according to
the different Movements or Passions of the People engaged in the War; and
'twere easy to make an Apology for the Author, in his other Faults imputed to
him, if a Man would have the Patience to Reflect, that he was only Careless in
some things, to add greater Perfection to others, which he thought of more
Importance. For it was often on the account of Elevating his Style, and writing
Majestically, that he over-lookt some little Negligences he has been Reproached
with. Thus I would take care to excuse those Faults of his, by which he arrived
to so great Perfection.

As for Livy, The Faults of Livy.
he has been more Happy than Thucydides, in that he has not fallen into the
Hands of so morose a Critic, as Dionysius Halicarnassensis: and that Antiquity
has ever had so great a Deference to his Merit; upon which no one has so
impertine^^ly Criticiz'd as on other Authors, of as established a Reputation as
himself. But since nothing is so Absolute, but some Men will find fault with,
take what they Reprehend in this Historian. Livium ut verbosum in Historia and
negligentem carpebat. Suet. de Calig.
It Is said that his Style is too diffusive, and that by his continual
amplifications he wants that vigor and strength which is admirable in
Thucydides. Poet. c. 2. l. 2. de Conse. Hist.
And they are Beny and Bodin in particular who find the most to carp at; since
they judge not of Livy by the general Consideration of his Work, which demands
Grandeur. He may be censured for that extent of his Style, but that Fault is
readily pardoned, if it be a fault, upon Consideration, that it is only that
diffuseness that makes him Stately and Majestic. The dignity of his Design,
and the nobleness of his Thoughts required a copious Style, and it is in that
this Author's Majesty principally consists.

It must be owned, he is sometimes Obscure, as well as Thucydides; but there is
no necessity of absurdly troubling ones Head to understand him all; for there
are many Places in him which are, in their own Nature, Difficult: As the
Explication of Ceremonies, Customs, and Matters of Fact; of which we have
neither any Knowledge, nor Idea. He affects too, the usuage of very ancient
Latin Words, which now are Obsolete; and he has peculiar ways of speaking,
unknown to the other Authors, and only Proper to himself. Besides all this,
it is probable he has been Corrupted in many places, whether by those who were
the first Copyers, or by the ancient Editions; whether by the Moderns, or by
the false Conjectures of unskilful Critics; who pretending to correct him,
where they have not understood him, have quite spoiled what they would have
mended; so that we are far from having Livy such as he was at first. Turnebius
will have Sigonius to be the only Man amongst the Critics, who has used him
well, and set him best to rights.

There are those who disapprove some bold Expressions and Thoughts he has,
whereby he over-leaps the Bounds of Modesty, to which he is a great Pretender.
I confess he sometimes ventures such sort of Sallies, but always with the
greatest Prudence; for as much as he knows how to make good use of them in the
moving part of his Discourse, wherein nothing succeeds better than that which
is least contrived. That too great Inclination of observing nicely, whatever he
found Monstrous in his way, and attributing the Reasons of it to supernatural
Causes, as to the Anger of the Gods, smells strongly of the Heathen, somewhat
too Superstitious. St. Gregory the Great taxes him with this Fault, in
Causabon's Preface to Polybius, being persuaded he only intermixed these
prodigies in his History, to authorize his Religion; which I fancy was less in
his Thoughts than the seeking Variety, to enliven the dullness and melancholy
of his Narrations. That Rustical air, Asinius Pollio finds fault with in this
Author, which has given occasion for the Niceties and different Opinions of the
Critics, is in my Judgment only an ill Pronunciation that sounded a little
Country-like, and was Offensive to the Courtiers accustomed to all the Delicacy
of Augustus's Court: at least it is the Sentiment of Quintilian, who was too
piercing a Wit himself, In Tito Livlo mirae facundiae viro putat inesse Pollio
quandam Patavinitatem: quare si sieri potest verba omnia and vox hujus alumnum
urbis oleant ut oration Romana plane videatur non civitate donata. lib. 8. c. 1.
and too near a Neighbor of those Times to be ignorant of the Mystery, which
he wholly imputes to the Pronunciation.

Others assure us he was not exact enough in furnishing himself with
Instructions, by diving to the bottom of his Subject; that he only Wrote from
the Memoirs of the Conquerors, who had undoubtedly suppressed what made for
their Disadvantage; and that he has not justly Distinguished one from the other.
They add, that if Livy had been at the same Expense to Purchase the memorials
of Carthage, as Thucydides to obtain those of Lacedemon, he had not expatiated
so largely upon the Glory of the Roman People: he would doubtless have found
some particulars where to have done more Justice to Hannibal and his Republic
than he did. For opposing Rome and Carthage, as two Cities Rivals in Glory, it
lay upon him to display the Grandeur, Riches and Power of the Carthaginian
Government, and he had done more Honor to his Country, by extolling the Merit
of those who disputed with it the Empire of the World.

Some men blame him for taking the main Instructions of his first Decades from
the ancient Origins of Rome, which are full of Forgeries, and scarce have any
thing else but Fabulous Traditions; since the use of Annals what but of a late
Date in that Republic, as Sigonius observes. Moreover Mascardi in his Treatise
on History, lays much Negligence to the Charge of this Author, for not having
opened the greatest Events in all their Circumstances, especially such as were
principally necessary to the understanding the Importance of Affairs; which are
found elsewhere, as in Appian, and other less exact Historians. But let us see
the Faults of Livy more in particular.

He is obscure in some places of his Beginnings, as for Example, in the line of
Descent of the Kings of Alba, which he has not unravelled plain enough. The
Revelation of Romulus, after his Death, that Rome should become the Capitol
City of the World, and all the Particulars of that Apparition, seen by
Proculus, and which he related to the People, has something so Enthusiastic in
it, that one is amazed an Author, of so solid a Character, should suffer such a
Story to pass, without giving it a more plausible Turn; yet he relies upon it,
and gives it not out for a Tale or a Fable. The Adventure of Lucretia, as
wondrous as it is, is not so admirably put together, there is something wanting
to its Probability; a Man knows not upon what Grounds she Kills her self. If
she has suffered Violence, why does she punish her self since she could not
resist it? Why would she not dye before she was Ravished? Is it modesty or
vanity, is it wisdom or despair, is it love of virtue or glory that makes her
Stab her self? All things rightly considered, one knows not what it is. If she
could not open her Eyes at the Horror of her Condition, her Virtue is either
too nice or too self-interess'd: in short, that wants a little Neatness. And
St. Austin, who examines that Action, in all its Circumstances, in the
Nineteenth Chapter of his Book De Civitate Dei, has much ado to discover what
his Thoughts are of it. Is not that Audaciousness of Clelia too, a little
Extravagant? and considering the make of Tyber, was it a thing Practicable:
could a Maid, naturally Timorous, ever think of attempting so dangerous a
Passage in a River that had Brinks almost inaccessible. For though Dionysius
Halicarnassensis agrees with Livy, in the Description of that Adventure, Val.
Maximus expounds it in a manner that looks much more probable.

It Is pretended also, that the Historian shows too much Partiality in the Ninth
Book of the first Decade, in the Comparison he makes of Alexander with the
Romans in Point of Valor: He seems to divest himself too much of the Character
of an Historian in that place, impertinently to play the Declamer; giving the
Preference to his Countrymen before the Conqueror of Darius, upon uncertain
Conjectures, and without examining the Matter any farther than by extravagant
Suppositions, and a List of Consuls which the Commonwealth of Rome had set up
in Competition with him. On Pompejum tantis laudibus extulit Livius, ut
Pompejanum Augustus appellaret. Tacit. An. lib. 4.
Tacitus Reproaches Livy with the same Fault, in respect of Pompey, for whom he
was too Partial against Caesar; which Augustus objected to him without taking it
amiss: On the contrary he commends him, for that instead of flattering the
Victorious Party in the Civil-War, he could not prevail with himself to condemn
those Worthy Gentlemen, who were engaged on Pompey's side.

That Train of Affairs, of Philip King of Macedon, spun out to such a length in
the Fortieth Book, the Intrigues of his Family, the Adventures of Theoxena, a
Princess of Thessaly, and her Children; the Cruelty of the King; the Quarrels of
Demetrius and Perses his Two Sons; and all that Retinue of Circumstances
relating to that Monarch, seems of an Extent disproportioned to the principal
Subject of the History, which an exact Historian should always keep in view:
And that long Digression has, methinks, something Foreign in it to the
business of the Roman Story; for what is it to the purpose of the War the
Romans wage with that Prince, that we must necessarily know all those
Particularities? Was it not enough to have related those that concerned the
Controversy betwixt him and the Republic; and the War the Romans made upon
him. Perses's Speech to his Father Philip, to justify himself, that long
Exaggeration of his Brother Demetrius's Crimes, together with his Answer, is
too Studied an Amplification, and is a sort of Declamation that has a relish of
the Desk or Bar in it. One might to this add, that the Historian suffers his
Eyes to be dazzled with that Triumphant and Victorious Air he gives the People,
whose History he writes, toward the end of the Wars of Asia; where he
represents, in two Arrogant and Lordly a Style, Captive Kings chained to the
Chariot of the Conqueror, and dragged with their Queens along the Streets of
Rome. There is an unaccountable Pride in those Strokes of Glory he gives the
Victors; wherein he makes the People too vain, and is not himself so Modest as
he might be. It is a false Clemency, or a real Vanity, to treat Sovereign
Princes so shamefully, and to pardon their Subjects: Would it not have been
much better to have had some Veneration for Crowned Heads? Does not that
Respect which is due to Mankind, claim some consideration for the Governors
thereof? And that Greatness of Soul, which is the Character of the Romans, that
Nicety in Glory, upon which they Plumed themselves, would have been more
conspicuous, by their replacing the Crowns on the Heads of those they had
Vanquished, than by their ignominious Treatment of them, and their contemptuous
sporting on their Grandeur. To conclude Livy with that sound Sense he had so
natural and inbred, desiring to give us a good Opinion of the Romans Virtue by
their Conquests, gives us as scurvy a one as may be by their Triumphs; for as
much as he makes a People, when forgetting it self, so far forgetful of its
real Glory, as to abandon it self, to all the Pride of its Conquests, and the
Extravagance of its Vanity. It had at least been a Prudential part in him, to
have seemed to dislike that sort of Management. There are doubtless, other like
Observations to be made upon this Author, if a Man would Cavil. Let this
suffice, whereby to Judge of the rest, since it is necessary to fix Bounds to a
Subject, that will not bear too many Particulars.

CHAP. VII.
A Comparison of the Excellencies of both Authors.
AS the Faults of a thing strike more upon one, than the Perfections, so
doubtless there is required a greater insight to discover what is good, than
what is bad therein. They are oftentimes the narrowest Souls, that are the most
forward Censurers; for nothing is more easy than to find fault, witness that
impertinent Fellow mentioned by the Poet, Qui ut putentur sapere, coelum
vituperant Phaed. Fab.
who could Reproach the most Absolute thing in Nature; I mean the Structure of
the Heaven, to create an Opinion of his Sufficiency: and indeed it is the
Prerogative of the most exalted Capacities, to know what is Praiseworthy, and
to praise it as it should be. I am very sensible I am not one of that Order,
nor sufficiently Enlightened to discern, my self, the greatest Beauties in these
Two Authors, or discover them to others: But possibly by attempting these
little Essays, I may be instrumental to others to exercise themselves in
greater; and by opening the lesser Excellencies make the Understanding sort of
Men sensible of the greatest. Here then is, in my Mind, a part of that which is
remarkably fine in both One and the Other; for I pretend not to give an account
of all that is so.

It must be acknowledged in general, The Beauties of Thucydides.
that Thucydides had one of the most admirable Genius's that ever was, Relating
what he had a mind to, with all Nobleness, and Dignity imaginable. As he was
Eloquent before Aristotle had wrote his Rules of Eloquence, he was Industrious
of improving, with all manner of Application and Study, that wonderful Talent
of Speech he had received from Nature; and he made that Art of his, whereing he
excelled, consist in employing every thing that could any ways ennoble his
Discourse, and giving all those impresses, and turns to Reason, whereof it was
capable, in order to persuade; laying upon it all the weight it would sustain,
to make the deeper impression on the Mind; tending directly always to the
bottom of Affairs, without staying on the surface; and by a Profoundness of
Reasoning, peculiar to him, reducing every thing to the fountainhead from
whence it came. But though he bestows nothing upon the ornaments of Style, or
the Charms of Elocution, yet he is sure to please, because he is thoroughly
sound in his Discourse, altogether clear in his Thoughts, and solid in all his
Reflections. And there is nothing but what is Natural in his Expression, and
it is by these ways he tends directly to the Soul. It Is also the frequent use of
the Enthymeme, which Demosthenes learnt of him, that in some measure, renders
him lively, strong and powerful in his Discourse. It is by this Art he
domineers over the Resolutions of those he speaks to, that he seizes the Soul
of his Readers, and hurries it away with the same vehemence as if it were an
Heavenly inspired Motion: he carries away the Mind with the Spirit, and force
of such kind of Reasoning, as give it not leisure to be sensible of his Faults.
It Is herein he is so successful in engaging, in the Interests he is carrying
on, all that hear him. That seriousness, gravity and austerity of his
Character, makes his Style noble, masculine, vigorous and abounding in Sense;
and that vehemence of Expression, which sets him so far above other Authors,
proceeds only from the Greatness of his Genius. For it is not so much the
glittering of his Words, as the solidity of Sense, and the nobleness of his
Thoughts, and the propriety of Terms, that gives weight to his Speech. All this
is completed with the utmost height of so clear and sober Reason, so exact a
Judgment, and so noble a Style, that nothing seems more capable of giving a
true relish of what is Excellent, than an Acquaintance with this Author.

Besides, he is ever so full of his Subject, through his profound Contemplation
of it, that he leaves nothing for his Readers to desire, by the way he has of
circumstantiating things. It Is merely by this Art his Narration is so
delightful, in that he omits no one Particularity, that might be serviceable to
the understanding the Business he is about. Thus he so strongly ingages the
Mind, by the lively images of things, that he Paints the ghastlyness or beauty
of those dismal or agreeable Objects he represents, and it is by this Art of
representing to your eyes the things he speaks of, he inforces upon his Reader
the same Impressions those feel who have been Actors, Sufferers, Spectators or
Witnesses of the things related.

I say no more of those admirable Orations than I have said already, wherein
the Historian so Personates every Man as to make him speak in his proper
Character; having composed them by Pericles's Model, who could Charm the People
of Athens even in Declaiming against them, and opposing their Opinions. For
Thucydides had often heard that Oracle of Greece, upon whose Lips dwelt the
Charms of Eloquence, as Cicero says. Upon this Model he formed himself, Cujus
in labris leporem habitasse dixerunt comici. Cic. l. 3. de Orat.
and by proposing so great an Example, carried the Art of Speech to its highest
Perfection, in the Orations that he made. It is certain that Author gave a
prodigious Luster to his History by those Orations: It must likewise be
acknowleg'd those so Studied and exact Discourses, had quite another Beauty
when Extemporary, and spoken in the heat of Action and Business. To all this we
may add those most solid Principles and Virtues, Reason and sound Sense; those
most established Maxims of Morality and Politics, and that general decorum
which runs through all he says, by pursuing particular Circumstances up to
universal Idea's; and giving Energy to his Reasons, by tracing them to their
first Principles, and Sources from which they were derived, which is the thing
that gives that substantial Form and Solidity to his Discourse: These are the
main Beauties of that Author in general; let us observe now his Excellencies in
particular.

The Harangue of Pericles, who Persuaded only by obtaining a Magisterial
Authority over his Auditors, speaking ever in an imperial Strain, and as one
may say, with Thunder in his hand; which occasioned him to be styled Olympian
Jove: that admirable Discourse that Great Man makes in the First Book of his
History, in counselling the Athenians to a War, is of a noble Spirit, and
abounds with lofty Thoughts. For instance, when he says to encourage them to
take up Arms, Let us not be concerned at the loss of our Lands, or
Country-seats; but our Liberty is that which ought nearly to concern us: We are
not made for our Estates, but our Estates for us: I am more afraid of our own
Vices, than all the Advantages of our Enemy: great Glory and a mighty Name is
only to be purchased by great and dangerous Undertakings: all the rest of that
Discourse is of an equal Force and Exaltation.

But what Wisdom, what Dignity is there is that of Archidamus King of Sparta,
dissuading the Lacedaemonians from War in the same Book. Let us not suffer our
selves, says he, to be blinded by those Men's Flatteries, who only Praise that
they may Destroy us: Let us preserve our Modesty, which is the Source of our
Valor: We are the only Greeks whom Prosperity has not as yet puffed up with
Vanity.

What is there Comparable to those Beauties we find in the Funeral Panegyric
in the Second Book, upon those who lost their Lives the first Campaign of that
War; especially where he speaks of the Manners that prevailed in Athens, and of
the government? Our Government says he, is popular, because the end we propose
is the happiness of the Republic, not the making of some few particular
Persons; and Honor is the Reward of Merit, not the Privilege of Birth. We
love Politeness without being fond of Luxury; we apply our selves to the Study
of Philosophy, without giving up our selves to Effeminacy and Laziness, the
ordinary Companions of that Study: We take the estimate of Riches from their
Uses, and not from their Pomp; and we think it no shame to be Poor, but not to
do what is necessary to avoid Poverty, this is Disgrace. The Interests of each
People are examined in that Discourse, where Pericles gives his Sentence for
the War, with all the Sagacity, the most subtle and curious Politics are
capable of. That is a Place worthy of their Study who have the management of
Affairs: Nothing can be better explained.

That terrible Pestilence, described in the Third Book is so particularly
Circumstanc'd, is so elaborate and exact, that Lucretius has almost entirely
Translated it into his Poem; Lucret. lib. 6. versus finem.
and Demetrius, the Phalerian, has Commended it as one of the Chiefest Works of
Art, though Lucian finds fault with it in his Treatise of History: because that
Description falls into too great a Retail of Circumstances. The Description
Livy gives us in his Seventh Book of a Plague that happened at Rome, like that
at Athens, is more succinct, and has a Style more serious. The Discourse of the
Inhabitants of Platea, who in the same Book justify their Conduct to the
Lacedaemonians, after they had Surrendered to the Enemy, is a piece of
Excellency, that Dionysius, the declared Censurer of Thucydides, could not
choose but admire: There is a justness of Sense, and a force of Eloquence that
penetrates the Soul, and causes a kind of Admiration mingled with Surprise.
It Is in these Discourses the Models for the method of Persuasion are to be
sought, as being such masterly Strokes of Eloquence as are no where else to be
found.

The Sea Fight, in the Port of Syracuse, described in the Seventh Book, so
highly valued by Plutarch, is expressed so much to the Life, and the Motions of
the Two Fleets of Athens and Sicily are so clearly distinguished by their
different Circumstances, that Plutarch himself calls that Description, a lively
Image of the Passions of the Soul; it is all drawn in so lively and sensible a
manner: Nothing can be touched with a finer Hand, or be more absolute than that
Piece; which manifests the Excellence of the Art, and the Greatness of the
Master. There is likewise, in the Sixth Book, an Oration of Alcibiades, to
persuade the Athenians; to resolve upon a War with Sicily; which is remarkable
for those Draughts of Eloquence and Politics it is stored with: As for
instance, when he introduces that great Man, saying, That Turbulent Spirits,
such as were the Athenians, made greater advantage of Commotions than they
could of Settlement: and that it was more convenient to stick to the Ancient
Maxims, though possibly not so Good, than to change them for those that are
better; because Nature, says he, is a Principle of an higher extract than
Reason; this being but the common Operation of Man's Soul, and the other
proceeding from the Decree of God Almighty. There is a profound Wisdom, an
admirable Sense in that Reflection. It Is much the same Reasoning that he
attributes to Cleon, a Citizen of Athens, upon the Case of the Prisoners of
Mitylene; saying, That ill Laws, well observed, were better than good Laws that
were despised or neglected: and that a well-meaning and regular Ignorance, was
preferable to disorderly and inconstant Knowledge: For nothing is more
dangerous in a State, than change of Conduct.

Again, what is there more wise or rational, than the Dialogue of the Melians
with the Athenians Deputies, in the Fourth Book. The Melians talk in a
submissive way, which is however noble and ingenuous; they preserve well the
Character which became the Vanquished, without loosing that of Worthy Men, who
knew how to employ their reason well, when their sword head failed them. But the
Athenians Lord it in too insolent a manner. The Historian gives them too
contemptuous a Carriage, not very agreeable to Persons charged with a
Negotiation? It must be confessed, nevertheless, that nothing is more sensible or
solid than that Intercourse. And the Reproach, wherewith the Ambassadors of
Platea urge the Lacedaemonians, in the Third Book, of which I have already
spoken, is very noble. If you measure, say they, Justice by your Interests, you
will give us reason to believe your Interests are dearer to you than your
Glory. All the Arguments the Historian imploys in that Discourse are like the
Flashings and Dartings of Thunder and Lightning, as his most severe Censurer
Dion. Halicarnassensis acknowledges; it is all Divine, even in his Opinion. But
if a Man would set down all the Excellencies he shall find in this Authors
Orations, he must entirely Transcribe them, as did Demosthenes. What can be
imagined more pressing, than that which he makes his Hero of Eloquence,
Pericles to speak; when he endeavors to persuade the Athenians to the War in
the First Book. If it were possible (says he to them) you should be discouraged
by the labor and hazard there is in Conquering; I would advise you to bid
farewell to Glory; For it is only by Pains and Hardships, ye can become worthy of
that Honor. The Argument is there expressed in all its Force and Dignity.

Finally, those Grand Principles of Honor, Equity, Honesty and Glory, to which
he knows how to give their due inforcement, are the most usual Characters he
imprints upon his Discourse. It Is herein he makes use of the purest Reason, not
laying more weight on it than it will bear, as the Sophists endeavor to do,
nor desiring through a counterfeit Eloquence to carry it beyond its natural
bounds. It Is in these Harangues that all things shine and glitter, with the
Luster of a noble strong and vehement Eloquence, which he had formed from the
lively Sense he had of Things, and a thorough Understanding of the Subjects
that he Treated on. Let us then Pardon him those Discourses, for which we see
some Critics have Censured him, since they are fraught with so many
Excellencies. For, besides that the Greeks, as I have observed before, were
Devoted to that Haranguing Humor, and their Republican Spirit Authorized that
way: This Great Man was very sensible of his own Qualifications, for making
States and Commonwealths discourse; by which means he makes his History, of so
little and inconsiderable a Subject, to be of so important Consideration: And
here he delivers those grand Maxims of Morality and Policy, he understood so
well. And though Cicero is of Opinion, that the Rhetoric of the Bar, through
its too great Loftiness, is improper for civil Affairs; I maintain that for
Reasoning, in the great Affairs of Treaties, and the Negotiations of Peace and
War, and in all weighty and important Interests, Controverted by States,
Thucydides is the greatest Master that can be Consulted; and it is impossible to
find, elsewhere, Reason better wrought, by all the wisest Maxims of Government,
than in Thucydides. And all things well considered, there is not to be found,
in other Works, that Force of Eloquence that appears in his.

What Wit, The Beauties of Livy.
what Understanding, what Views must not a Man have, to discover the
Excellencies of a Work, conceived in the very purest Reign of the Roman
Eloquence; and to distinguish those Beauties, that so highly transcend the
common Rules as Livy's do: He had an Elevation of Soul, that gave him a noble
Conception of things; and it proceeded more from the Nobleness of his Thoughts,
than that of his Language, that he was so Happy in his Expression. He was
intimately acquainted with Nature and all her Movements; of which he gave us
such lively Draughts, that there is ever a surprising Sprightliness of Soul in
his Discourse: And as he had contrived a sublime Style, by the Greatness of his
Expression, which he diffuses through his Work* though he manages it with all
that Prudence, which was Natural to him, so he has placed all the Objects he
Represents, in the finest Light imaginable. His Discourse is clear, ever
tending to its Purpose, without making those Starts and Excursions other
Authors are so Subject to. His Logic is exact, his Diction pure, his Narration
full of variety: His Order looks so Natural, as if the most curious Images of
things, so Postur'd themselves in his Mind, as to fall each in its proper
Place, to make an absolute Picture, both in all he thinks, and all he says. He
disposes of those Images, which he unfolds in his Narration, by a great
Diversity of Ideas; and it is by the Disposal and Order of them he is so
Engaging: And as he speaks more to the Understanding, than the Eye or Ear, so
he ever tends more directly to the Soul.

The Ornaments, which he mixes with his Discourse, and those Flourishes he
bestows upon it, are so well Husbanded, as to appear only in those Places that
demand them, and can bear them well; wherein he shows himself Liberal without
Profuseness. As for the rest, it is generally the Plenty of his Matter, that
makes him so Copious in his Style; the native Richness of his Subject causes
that Luxuriance in his Speech: And his Narration becomes taking, by means of
its Diffuseness, growing thereby better Circumstantiated, and more Probable.
For nothing is more effectual, to render a thing Credible, than the Knowledge
of the Particularities how 'twas Acted: Besides, a Man gives a steadier View of
the Objects represented, by standing a little upon the Turn of a Narration,
without precipitating, or exhibiting things in a transient Glance. To all which
may be added, the admirable Discretion he has, to dissever and separate the
Sentiments of Men, and to make them speak and act according to the Decorum, of
their several Conditions, in which Nature has instated them. I am dazzled with
that Luster which reflects from his Discourse, by the Choice, the Harmony, and
Elegance of the Words he uses, and those softer Passions, that abound in his
History, of which Quintilian speaks so favorably: Affectus quidem praecipue
eos qui sunt dulciores nemo commendavit magis. Quint. l. 10. c. 1.
those moving and delicate Affections, which he treats with all the Art and
Nature imaginable, perfectly Enchant me, by those wonderful Commotions they
raise in my Soul.

Perhaps never Man came furnished with better Parts, or those more improved, to
the Writing of a History, than he: For he was formed in a City, at that time,
the Empress of the World; in which all the most important Affairs of the
Universe were Decided: and in the politest Reign that ever was, having had
scarce any other school than the Court of Augustus. There it was he learnt the
Language of the Genteelest part of Mankind, and that lively, fine, subtle and
natural Air, then in Fashion; that exquisite Taste, that purity and nobleness of
Expression, which was the Character of that Age; and of which there were so
great Models in all sorts of Writing, perfecting and polishing himself upon
them. Thence it was he took that Softness, necessary to please, and that Force
which renders him moving, wherein peculiarly consists his essential Character:
For never Man united all the Grace and Beauty, with all the Vehemence of
Discourse, so much as he; so much does the sweetness of Beauty Temper the
Masculine Force and Energy of what he says: that there falls not any thing from
his Pen too strong, but is softened with a Term more nice and delicate. He
prepares whatever is Bold, and heightens whatever is Low, with the Brightness
of his Speech: These then are part of his Beauties in general; let us now see
those he has in particular.

He immediately procures a great Attention, and much Inquisitiveness, by that
great Idea he gives his Subject, at the Entrance to his Work, when he says, the
Destiny of a City, designed for the Empire of the World, ought to have
something of Divinity in its Original; and when he gives so great an Opinion,
of the Virtue of the People, whose History he undertakes.

In the First Book, wherein Events are little, and proportioned to the strength
of a State in its Infancy, nothing is better related than the Battle of the
Horatii and Curiatii; the Adventure is Great and Extraordinary. Two little
States, which make War, and Dispute for Sovereignty, give up their Interests
and Destinies into the Hands of Two Families, to decide them. What Colors,
what Expressions does not the Historian employ in that Combat, where he Paints
with all his Art, the Fears, the Hopes, and the rest of the Passions of the
Armies, who were concerned in that Affair, where the Dispute in hand was, who
should be Masters or Subjects of each other. Is there any thing to be seen more
strongly Painted, or better Represented? Does not a Man feel what the Historian
says, and take in the very Sentiments he inspires, by the Impressions his
Narration makes upon the Soul? The Adventure of Lucretia is finely introduced
in the same Book, for as much as it renders the Revolution of the Government,
which it occasioned, more Remarkable. The Banishment of Tarquin, and his
Family; the Revolt of the People against the King, whose very Name was
abhorred; which is one of the greatest Adventures in the History, and all that
grand Enterprise, is made much more considerable and surprising, by so
illustrious and virtuous a Motive.

This dethroned Tarquin, who so Pathetically implores the Assistance of his
Neighbors to Re-establish him; that Image of the growing Liberty, of the novel
State, after the slavery it had escaped from; that Pleasure in the mighty Hopes
of a lasting Settlement, wherewith they flattered the Desires of the People;
that ease and quiet they sensibly enjoyed: Those Proceedings Brutus put them
upon, Plebs soluta Regio metu, agitari coepta Tribunitiis procellis. Hist. Romans
lib. 2.
to make them still more sensible, they had the Power in their own Hands, as
desirous of Ruling as he was himself: The several Accessions of the love of
that Liberty, that ripened daily through the Pleasure they began to take in
Dominion: and which still increased by the Disturbances of those tempestuous
Assemblies held under the Tribunes: those popular Commotions caused by the
Excess of Power they had left them, which it was necessary to repress by the
Creation of Decemviri, accustoming them insensibly to use no other Authority
but that of Laws. Those petty Wars they waged against their Neighbors; their
Successes proportioned to their Valor and their Strength; and those Essays
wherewith Fortune delighted to exercise that growing Republic, to exalt it to
the height of Glory, which it arrived to: All these, I say, Painted in those
Colors, the Historian knew how to order so admirably well, are the greatest
Beauties of the first Decade; the Events whereof are mostly contained in Rome,
and amongst the Neighboring People, without going out of Italy: And though all
is mean and little in the Beginning, according to the Nature or Fate of Things
of no long Date; yet the Historian sails not to Elevate his Subject, by the
Greatness of his Expression, and to inspire several Persons, he introduces,
with noble Thoughts, as Brutus and Manlius, who Sacrifice their Lives to the
Security and Glory of their Country. There are diverse Occurrencies, in the
Third Book, set in a fine Light: As the Transport of young Appius, who so
furiously carried off Virginius's Daughter, and that had like to have destroyed
Rome; and such Indignation the People conceived at so Brutal an Action: The
Havoc of that horrible Attempt, is described in a very passionate Air. The
Adventure of the Old Senator Quintius Cincinnatus; taken from the Plough, to be
made Dictator; and the Diligence of his Wife, to make him Neat and Cleanly, and
look something like a Gentleman, and all the Circumstances of that Adventure,
are very Naturally Painted. The Historian, who makes Camillus take up Arms
against the Commonwealth, and to do himself Justice on a People jealous of his
Power, but insensible of the Merit of Brave and Courageous Men, makes him speak
with all the Disdain a noble Roman was capable of, when fired with Glory. It Is
Rome (says he) that calls me back, not to re-instate me in my Place, but that I
may re-establish her in hers: Which he did by the Conquest of the Vientes, and
the taking Veii after Ten Years War. The Encomium, the Historian bestows upon
that Great Man, in the Seventh Book, is full of exquisite Sense; and there is
somewhat very singular and rare in the Praises he gives him. The Magnanimity of
young Curtius, who all in Armor, threw himself headlong, into a vast Chasm of
the Earth, which happened in the City, to close it up, and Appease the Gods by
such a Sacrifice, is an extraordinary Ornament in the same Book. In fine, we
see in the First Part of this History, a rising Neatness, that makes large
Advances to its Perfection, without doing any thing unlike it self. And that
One thing, well laid open, is of a singular Excellence.

The Second Decade* which is the constant Succession of that growing Glory, and
of all its Progress, is entirely lost: which contained the Wars against Pyrrhus
King of Epirus, who broke into Italy to Succor the Tarentines; and all that
happened in those Wars, concerning the Valor and Probity of the Romans:
Amongst which was that high Principle of Honor, which appeared in Fabricius,
who Heading the Roman Army, in Quality of Consul, sent back to Pyrrhus his
Physician, that made an Offer to the Romans of Poisoning his Prince, who had
engaged them in a bloody War, and was become their most terrible Enemy. Here
was the first Punick-War, wherein Attilius Regulus so highly Signalized his
Virtue, when having been made Prisoner by the Carthaginians, he was dispatched
to Rome, to treat of the Exchange of Prisoners of both Parties; and who out of
an heroic, dis-interess'd Principle, was the First that Advised them not to do
it, because that Exchange must needs be Disadvantagious to the Commonwealth,
though he himself might have enjoyed his Life and Liberty as the Fruits of it.
These are the principal Subjects of the Second Decade, as appears by
Freinshemius's Supplement, who hits his Character exactly, and succeeds much
better in making up the Loss of Livy, than he has done in the Supplement of the
History of Alexander the Great, Wrote by Quintus Curtius; as may be seen, if
any one will give himself the trouble to Compare them.

But Livy's History takes another sort of Flight, in the Third Decade, which is
come to us entire; with the Fourth, and half of the Fifth. The Scene grows more
lively and animated, and more astonishing, through those mightier Movements,
and more important Conjunctures: For now comes the second Punick-War, and that
Famous Expedition of Hannibal, Marching from his Country at the Head of an
Hundred Thousand Men; to make an Assault upon the Romans, ever* at Rome it self*

There is nothing in other Histories comparable to the Portraicture this Author
makes of the March of this General; It Is all of a Force and Expression above
the common level: It Is the noblest Scene of the whole History, and the
Consequences perfectly answer the Beginning; where the Historian, after having
Pictured Hannibal, and Represented him more Terrible, through his Virtues than
his Vices, as taken up as he is with that mighty Object, he falls upon his
Matter, that he may express the Particulars, and loose nothing at all of it;
every step he makes him take, in despite of Danger, as he passes the Alps, is
terrible: All the Circumstances are dismal and ghastly, and the Picture of
Danger is imprinted almost in every Word, and every Syllable. Thence he soars
in the Expansion that his Subject gives him, which is so spacious, so copious,
as to give him Scope for the following Books, and all the Third Decade: For
Hannibal is the Leading Subject of it all. The most notorious Adventures of
that War, are the Battle fought upon the Banks of the Trasymenian Lake in
Tuscany, wherein there were above Fifty Thousand Romans killed upon the spot,
and the rest of the Army taken or routed: The Battle of Cannae far more Bloody
than the former, in which were above Forty-five Thousand slain. Nothing in
Nature is described in so moving a Strain; the Terror and Confusion Hannibal
casts in the Face of Rome, by those bloody Victories, are expressed in such a
way, as never any other History could reach. There are such Draughts, and such
Colors, as were unknown to all Historians besides. The Consequences of those
Two Battles were still more Terrible, a general consternation run through the
Heart of Italy; the Romans were Deserted by all their Allies; the People was
Alarmed, and the whole Body of that great Republic, till that time
Victorious, was in a violent Commotion, except the Nobility and Chief Men, whom
Scipio caused to Swear with a Dagger at their Throat, that neither any of them,
nor the remaining Officers, should abandon the Republic in that present
Conjuncture: and there was that Fierceness at Rome, after that last Defeat,
that it was not lawful to make mention of a Peace with Hannibal. Nulla timoris
significatio, nulla mentio, pacis. Off. l. 3.
Their Minds were shaken, but not dejected; and 'twas the Resolution of the
Great Men which inspirited the People, and re-establisht Affairs.

The Wars of Sicily against Hieron and his Sons, that of Numidia against
Syphax, were the Consequents of the Second Punick-War. But in the Twenty-sixth
Book the Historian describes the new impressions of Fear, Hannibal caused in
Rome, when he pitched his Camp before the City, and advanced as far as the
Porta Collina near the Temple of Hercules, whence he took a Turn upon the
Walls, to take the Model of it. But the Conqueror of Rome Retreated on his own
accord, and he whom the Virtue of his Enemies could not Vanquish, was subdued
by his own Vices, and the Pleasures of Capua, where he was for some time
Posted; and he was heard to say in his Retreat, that one while he only wanted
an Inclination, and other time good Fortune, to make him Master of Rome. The
Idea the Historian gives us in that Place of a Veteran General hardened to the
Fatigues of War, Potiundae sibi urbis Romanae modo mentem non dari, modo
fortunam Hist. Romans lib. 28.
and coming to soften himself in Italy in the Embraces, as one may say, of
Pleasure, is very agreeable, and of an extraordinary Beauty. The Affairs of
Sicily having obliged Marcellus to Besiege Syracuse, Archimedes was there
killed by Two blundering Soldiers, who took the Diagram of a Geometrical
Demonstration he was drawing upon the Sand to be Conjuring; which is a singular
and surprising Incident in that place.

But after all, nothing is Comparable to the Picture the Author gives us of
young Scipio, in the End of the Twenty-sixth Book; where he Represents him,
Commissioned General of the Roman Army into Spain, to give a Diversion to the
Progress of Hannibal in Italy. That Victorious Youth, at Twenty Four Years of
Age, was of a ripe and consummate Prudence; And though he performed Exploits of
Arms, that astonished his Enemies, though in One Day he took New Carthage, in
which the Carthaginians had a numerous Garrison; He yet obtained greater
Victories by his Virtue than his Valor. For when he was presented with
Mandonius's Lady, a Prince of Spain, and Two of his Nieces, exceedingly
Beautiful, he sent them back with these Words, That though, for the sake of his
own Integrity and the public Discipline of Rome, Meae populique Romani
disciplinae causa facerem ne quid quod sanctum usquam esset, apud nos,
vialoretur: nunc ut id curem impensius, vestra quoque virtus and dignitas
facit: quae ne in malis quidem oblitae decoris matronalis estis. Lib. 26.
it lay upon him to secure from Violence whatever was Sacred: yet their own
Consideration, was still a greater Engagement to do them Justice, since in
their Misfortunes they were not forgetful of themselves, nor of their Virtue:
And having showed the same Respect to another Spanish Prince, whose Princess
was presented to him, of a more accomplished Beauty than the other, he sent her
back to her Husband with a great sum of Money offered for her Ransom. That
Prince charmed and amazed, with so great Bounty, Proclaimed in his Country,
There was arrived in Spain, Venisse diis simillimum juvenem vincentem omnia
quum armis, ^ion benignitate ac benificiis. Ibid.
a Young Roman, Qualified like the Gods, that carried on his Conquests as well
by his Virtues as his Arms. Nothing can be finer; and the image the Historian
gives us, of the Young Victor, produces an admirable Effect, through the
Opposition he makes of his Virtue against Hannibal's Vices. It Is only by his
good Nature and Clemency that Scipio Triumphs over the Carthaginians, whereas
Hannibal Triumphs over the Romans by Savageness and Violence. The one is
Plundering Provinces, and Battering Towns, whilst the other is winning the
Hearts of the People, and Captivating their Souls by his Beneficence and
Goodness.

The last Books of this Decade contain the mighty Progress of Scipio's Arms in
Africa: Hannibal is recalled to the Succor of Carthage, where he was Defeated,
Carthage taken, and Scipio Triumphantly returned from Africa to Rome. Thus the
End of this Decade, by its Opposition to the Beginning, where Hannibal drives
on his Victories uncontrolled, is one of the finest Places of the History;
especially by the new Road the Young Roman takes to Glory; contributing more to
the Conquests of the Republic, by setting in the Minds of the People the
Reputation of the Roman Virtue, than by giving Battle: For that Reputation
becoming the Admiration of the Conquered Nations, was more Victorious than
their Arms.

After the Defeat of Carthage, the Glory of the Roman Name soared to a greater
Height. The Victorious People, whose Renown was spread far and near, began to
be looked upon as the Deliverer of other Nations. Thus Gloriously it is
Represented by Livy, in the Fourth Decade. The Athenians Oppressed by Philip
(the last of the Name) King of Macedon, implored the Assistance of the Senate.
Publius Sulpitius was sent thither, who having Subdued all Greece, Proclaimed
Peace to all the People by his Lieutenant Quintius, and restored them their
Liberty; and in a Public Assembly for the Celebration of this Festival, was
heard that saying, That, Esse gentem in terris, quae sua impensa ac pericu^o
bella gerat pro liberate aliorum maria tra^iciat, ne quod toto orb terrarum
injustum imperium sit* ubique jus, f^ts, ^er potentissima sint. Lib. 33.
at last, there was a People in the World, born for the safety of all others,
that crossed Seas, made Wars at its own Cost and Peril, to revenge the
Oppressed, to establish Laws, causing them to be observed through the whole
Earth, and to maintain the public Security.

The Historian afterward opens the mystery how Hannibal became suspected by his
Countrymen, upon advice that he entertained a constant Correspondence with
King Antiochus, to oblige him to declare War against the Romans: That was it
which this Great Man Banished out of his Country, and as it were a Vagabond
abroad, voted in that Kings Council; that if he would make War as he should do,
with the Romans, he must attack them in their own Territories, and Fight them
at Rome as he himself had done: There is a greatness of Soul, and a loftiness
of Thought in what the Historian makes him speak, and suting with the Character
of Hannibal: it is in the Thirty-fourth Book. There is something Rare and
Uncommon in point of Adventure in the accidental meeting of this Commander, and
Scipio who was made Lieutenant to his Brother, as it is related in the
following Book. Undoubtedly it creates a very agreeable surprise, as it needs
must, to see two Great Generals who had disputed the Empire of the World at the
head of two potent Armies meeting by chance at Ephesus, and coldly giving their
Opinion as two private Men, in a Sedate, and unpassionate Discourse of the
pre-eminence of the Greatest Officers, who have made the most noise in the
World. In fine, Hannibal suspected by his Citizens, and hated by all the World,
is constrained to fly to Ephesus: his flight contains several Adventures, which
render that part of the History very Curious, as being of a Man of so great
Importance, that every Step he makes is Considerable.

But the Adventure of Scipio, accused before the People by Q. Petilius for
having Converted part of the Spoils of King Antiochus to his own Coffer, is
more surprising and remarkable through the giddiness of Fortune, and the
injustice of the Roman People; and it is represented by the Historian with all
the dignity so strange an Adventure does require. That Man of incomparable
Virtue as well as Valor, made his Appearance at the Day prefixed by his
Accuser. But instead of making his Defense to his Accusation, presumptuous upon
his own Innocence, he spoke to the People assembled, to Condemn him, with a
bold and undaunted Gallantry, and the Voice of a Conqueror: Celebratior is
prope dies favore hominum, and aestimatione vere magnitudinis ejus fuit, quam
quo triumphans de Syphace and Carthaginensibus urbem invectus. Lib. 38.
Such was the day wherein I took Carthage, beat Hannibal, and Vanquished the
Carthaginians; let us go to the Capitol, and thank the Gods. The People
surpised at so magnanimous a Carriage, left the Accuser, and followed Scipio:
and that Day, says the Historian, was infinitely more Glorious to him, and
advanced his Honor higher in the Opinion of the People, than that wherein he
Triumphed over King Siphax, and the Carthaginians. Dissatisfied however with
that Treatment, which manifested so much Disesteem, he Retreated to Linternum,
a Country-seat of his toward Capua, where he died, sometime after, in the
Embraces of his Family, as a private Person. The Portraicture of Cato,
delineated in the Thirty-ninth Book, on occasion of the Dignity of Censor,
which he Canvas'd with the Scipio's, Valerius Flaccus, Furius, and other
Persons of note in the Senate, is a Masterpiece. It Is pleasant to see how
Resembling it all is, upon the Notion a Man has of the Austerity of Virtue in
that Great Man: For that portraicture is so singular, in all the features that
compose it, that whether it is like nothing, or whether it resembles its
original, all is touched off with an admirable Air. That which the Historian
brings him in speaking, against the Luxury of Women, in the Thirty-fourth Book,
to put in Execution the Oppian Law, which regulated the Expense of Habits, and
retrenched the Prodigality therein; and against the Nocturnal Devotion,
described in the Thirty-ninth Book, wherewith they mixed all the Horror of the
most dissolute Practices, and abominable Debauchery in the World, has much of
the Spirit of a rigid Censour of Manners. The Speeches he makes against the
Disorders, which the Wars of Asia had brought into Rome, by infusing
Effeminacy, Licentiousness, and a Prostitution of Youth, which tended to its
utter Ruin, bear the Stamp of a sincere and Great Man, who contributed with
the Old Senators, to the Preservation of that Wisdom, Probity, Hatred of
Injustice, love of Equity, and horror of Vice, which prevailed in the Senate
at that time: And all this has its Effect in the End of that Decade; where the
Historian presents us with the Spirit and Character of the Republic, then
subsisting. The Death of Annibal, who had retired to Prusias, King of Bithynia,
after the Defeat of Antiochus (having Poisoned himself to avoid falling into
the Hands of Flaminius) is very moving at the End of the Thirty-ninth Book: One
is concerned to see so great a Man Die in such a manner; and that Particular
prepared so finely, with such remarkable Events, is of a singular Excellence.

But it must be acknowleg'd, that nothing is more pompous or magnificent than
the Entrance of the Forty-third Book, where Livy sets forth the Generality of
the People of Greece, and Asia after the subduing Macedonia, sending their
Ambassadors to Rome, to implore the Protection of the Senate, and to submit
themselves to the Republic: All that Part is described in that Triumphant
Character, which usually accompanies the happy Conquerours. The Historian
himself there strikes on such a Key, as lets us know he is Apprehensive of the
good Fortune of his Country and the Merit of his Subject. The Defeat of Perses
in the Forty-fourth Book, happening upon occasion of an Horse, that escaped the
Hands of his Servants, and was the Cause of the Battle, which the Two Armies,
encamped upon the opposite Banks of a little River, would willingly have
avoided, has something surprising in it; and indeed nothing is finer in an
History than great Events, caused by trifling Accidents, as this, which is very
Remarkable upon the Wonder it raises.

The Oration the Ambassadors of Rhodes make before the Senate, in the
Forty-fifth Book, is fine, lofty and eloquent; nothing comes nearer the
Discourses Thucydides attributes to the Deputies of States and Commonwealths,
in his History of the Peloponnesian War: Nothing can be more fitly compared
with him, in that very Kind in which his Excellence lay; nor is there any thing
more like that manner of speaking, he gives the Towns and States whose History
he Writes. Paulus Emilius's Voyage through Greece, after he had Conquered it,
his Visiting the Provinces to observe what was Remarkable for Antiquity, or for
the Rarity and Excellence of the Work, is handsomely Described in the
Forty-fifth Book. Every Town has its peculiar Character, its Order and
Distinction; and the Historian, by giving us a fine Notion of the Country,
heightens the Victories and Advantages of his own.

All this receives an additional Greatness in the remainder of that History,
after the Defeat of Perses, which was the concluding Blow of that long and
hazardous War of Macedonia; and the Roman Name was exalted to its highest Pitch
of Glory. In effect, the Senate had scarce any other Employment, than the
answering the Requests of Kings, and ordering their Destinies. It Is no longer
the Ambassadors of Kings and Crowned Heads: Here are the Kings of Syria and
Egypt, of Bithynia and Pergamus; here is Ptolomy, and his Sister Cleopatra,
who make the Senate the Arbiter of their Difference; here is King Massinissa
sending his Two Sons to Rome, to Congratulate the Republic, in his Name, for
the Defeat of Perses: Here Is Prusias King of Bithynia, accompanying his Son
Nicomedes, and presenting him to the Republic, to take him under its
Protection: Here Is Perses fastened to Emilius's Chariot, with his Two Sons, to
render the Triumph of the Conqueror, more Arrogant and Glorious, as had done
Gentius King of Illyricum, with his Wife and Children, overcome by the Praetor
Anicius. In fine, not to repeat what I have already observed, at the End of the
Abridgment I have made of the History in the Fifth Chapter, we may say, there
is nothing Comparable to the Idea Livy gives of the Grandeur and Glory of the
Republic in those Times: That never History went upon so great a Subject; nor
ever Historian supported the Dignity of the Matter with a greater Majesty and
Force of Expression. That Picture the Author draws of Prusias King of Bithynia,
who takes Pride in being a Denizen of the Roman People, which he Treats,
according to Polybius, Polybius eum regem indignum majestate neminis tanti
tradit. R^mae quoque cum veniret in cu^tam summisisse se, and osculo limen
curiae contigisse and Deos servatores nos Senatum appellasse, aliamque
orationem non tam honorificam audientibus quam sibi deformem habuisse Tit Live.
45. sub finem.
with the most prostituted Flattery, is well worthy of him and that Purity of
of Morals he so highly Professes: Herewith he concludes the Forty-fifth Book;
for the rest of it is lost.

How Glorious, would it be, should we have the Residue of the History which is
lost, and the Description of those great Transactions of the following Times, I
would say the Particulars of Scipio's Victories, the adopted Son of Paulus
Emilius, who subdued Africa to the Romans: those times wherein Thebes, Calcis,
Corinth, Numantia, were seen levelled to the Ground, and following the Destiny
of Carthage? Those Celebrated Wars against Jugurtha and Mithridates? Those
terrible Seditions, that began to make Head in the Republic through Cinna,
Marius and Sylla's abusing their Power, which the Success of their Arms
conspiring with that Degeneracy, Abundance and Luxury had infused into the
Generality, and their own Fortune had given them?

What should we say, did there but remain in this mighty Work, any Track of
those great Expeditions of Sertorius into Spain, of Marius upon the Cimbri and
Teutons, and of Pompey into Asia, Caesar amongst the Gauls, and in all the
North? The mutual Jealousy of those Two Great Generals who caused a Civil War?
The Sequels of that War, so fatal to the Romans, which went near the
Destruction of Rome, by the Revolution of the Government? Finally, should we
see in this Historian, those ghastly Representations of the Republic, ripped
open to her very Bowels, by the Hands of her own Children? Of the Senate broken
into Parties, of Italy in Distraction, and of all the Universe almost in
Disorder and Confusion? Should we see the establishment of the Empire, the
Death of Caesar, stabbed by the Senate, the Triumvirate of Octavius, the Defeat
of Antony, the Triumph of Augustus, and all the great Objects of those
unfortunate Times, which doubtless made the finest part of Livy's History, as
being the most memorable Events of the Roman Commonwealth; For why should we
not reckon up all the Beauties and excellent Works that came from his Hands,
and were only lost through the Negligence or perhaps Ignorance, and corrupt
Palate of the succeeding Ages.

But I pretend not to have Remarked all the Delicacies of this Author; I have
only mentioned those I my self was most Affected with; a Man must go quite
through with him, that would do the Historian Justice. And to speak more freely
upon the Point, he must fetch a vaster compass, than the Bounds I have
prescribed my self would admit. This may suffice for an Essay, to Judge of the
rest by, without being mistaken.

CHAP. VIII.
The Decision of the Comparison.
ANd now having examined the Advantages and Disadvantages of these Two
Historians, Their Persons, their Genius, their Subjects, their Histories, and
the Faults and Excellencies of each; it may be determined which ought to have
the Preference. But seeing they mutually Excel each other, in several
Particulars, to hold the Balance even, and do them all the Justice that is
possible, here is, in my Opinion, what we ought to think, and say of One and
the Other. They are both Equally above that exact and scrupulous Niceness,
which too Studiously affects a perfect Regularity; since they were only made
for great Things, and the Elevation of their Genius, would not permit them to
stoop to so mean Regards. They had in the same degree of Perfection, an
admirable Judgment in the Choice of their Thoughts, and in expressing them
Nobly: They had an exquisite sense for the natural Turn of Expression, which is
the effect of a mature Judgment, and they were skilled in the choice of Words,
which enlivened the Expressions most, and were most proper to declare their
Meaning; they were equally industrious to avoid flashy and glittering Words,
and to stick to the more ordinary and significant: Both of them have more of a
figurative, than a proper Style, knowing that one made greater impression than
the other; but their Discretion in this Practice was equally admirable in both,
being ever happy in the Images and Representations of their Thoughts, wherein
we may always discover the Footsteps and Tracks of Nature. Thus there has been
but very few Authors, every way so Accomplished, as these Two Historians; for
there is nothing but is judiciously and happily Imagined in them both.

They have both a Sublimity, ever maintained with, and founded on Reason; a
thing not known to other Historians. They both endeavored to copy Nature, and
this they proposed as their main End. They are just in their Comparison, Easy
in their Figures, and happy in their Metaphors. Livy is richer in his
Expression, is more Copious, and fuller of Variety, and has more of those
passionate Strokes that affect the Mind. But Thucydides has Expressions more
strong, Colors more terrible, and Strokes more lively, and seems to make more
forcible Impressions on the Thoughts: He likewise gives more Action and Motion
to his Speech; and by enclosing a great deal of Sense in a little room, he
leaves more to the Imagination and Conjecture of his Reader. But Livy is sure
to please more, because to the force and vehemence of Expression, he adds all
the sweetnesses, and graces of Art, he is as Florid and Agreeable as he
pleases, by the Art he has of Tempering his Discourse, with such fine and
delicate Airs; by giving it those enchanting Turns; and by the Method he found
out of joining to that Dignity, upon which he ever bottoms his Discourse, all
the Easiness and Simplicity requisite to make it Natural. Besides that Livy has
a greater abundance of Matter, and more order and variety in the Events he
represents, there is moreover something unaccountably sweet and insinuating in
his Transitions, which renders him so smooth and easy, that in Reading him, a
Man is conveyed from one Subject to another, without being sensible of the
Motion; so dexterously he orders his Matters, and threads his Discourse. He
marches, or makes a halt, advances, or takes breath, as his Occasion or his
Pleasure is, and no Man is aware of it. The Greek is great in his Words, and
little in his Events, which are generally inconsiderable. The Roman is great in
both, and is very singular in the Art he has of drawing out at length
extraordinary Events, in all their train of Circumstances. For he postures them
with Design, and collects them with Discretion, by avoiding all Superfluous
Particulars; and herein it is he is generally so Alluring; for nothing ingages
a Reader more, than that Choice of necessary Circumstances, singled out from
those that are less useful.

Nor are only his Idea's more noble, but also the Affairs he treats of, and
the Adventures he describes; are of more weight and moment; and the Persons he
introduces, are of a more exalted Character: For what can a Man find in
Thucydides a Match for Hannibal, and the Scipio's; for Pompey or Caesar; and all
those mighty Names the Roman History abounds with? Again, the Virtues which
Livy proposes, present themselves in all their formalities, that is in their
beginnings and their progress; than which nothing can be more Delightful in an
History; which is neither so distinct, nor sufficiently observed in Thucydides.
Livy has a more rich, a more embellisht, and a more fruitful Imagination; he
has more fire and liveliness in his Expression: His Project is greater, and the
contrivance of his Design more magnificent. That Majestic Strain of Talking,
which is Natural to him; that Elegance he shows in little Subjects; all that
admirable Art of Rhetoric, with an exquisite Choice of Words; and all those
other Qualities, which distinguish him from the Rest of the World, give him a
vast Advantage over Thucydides; who by a dry, unsavory and austere way of
Speaking, has nothing by way of Show and Ostentation: Whereas the other knows
how to manage all this to his use, and practice it according to the necessity
of his Subject, without any Appearance of Study or Affectation. And those
favorable places of Eloquence, where one may play the Passions, and all those
secret Engines, which move the Soul, are much frequenter in Livy, by reason of
those great Concerns he is engaged in, and which furnish his History.

There seems too to be in Livy, more Purity, better Construction; greater Order
and Regularity, throughout his Discourse: Which Thucydides troubled not his
Head with; nay, in some measure, he affected to be disorderly in his
Expressions: And indeed, he talks best of War, especially of the Sea, and Naval
Expeditions, having made that his Exercise and Employment. But it must be
confessed, that Livy gives us a better Opinion of the Romans, than Thucydides of
the Greeks; though at the same time they have both pursued the Truth of the
History; and the Greek Historian is not to be blamed, if the Portraictures he
copies, want that Beauty which the others have; for as much as he makes not the
Characters, but represents them only. It must be owned too that the Athenian
People were more intractable, and headstrong than the Romans; because their
Power was not poised, with such Politic Mediums, as was that of Rome: And that
which was haughtiness in the Greeks, was true virtue in the Romans, and a
Nobleness of Soul. Livy too had a great Advantage over Thucydides, from the
Nature of his Subject; which was not only more Fortunate, but more Stately also
and Magnificent: For it is the Empire of the World, it is all the Universe he
grasps into his History, whilst Thucydides is confined to a little piece of a
Continent, an inconsiderable Spot of Ground: But this may be said in his
Commendation, that he has expressed more Artifice in supporting the Meanness of
his Subject; he has shown a great deal of Dexterity, in improving so harsh and
barren a Soil, into so rich, and, in some measure, fertile a capacity; and
herein consists the Greatness of his Merit, that he has raised so
Disadvantagious a Subject; to so high a Value as it bears. It is true, Livy
takes Pleasure to open the growing Grandeur of the Republic by degrees,
striking always at his Mark, which is his Countries Glory. Thucydides had
scarce such Thoughts in's Head; he follows the beaten Road, without turning to
the Right Hand, or the Left.

Livy's Beginning bears more Proportion to the rest of his History; but however
great was his Design, there is nothing haughty in the Proposition of it.
Thucydides's Entrance on a particular History, is too universal. It would have
served for an Exordium to a general History of all Greece, and have given us a
complete Notion of it.

After all, they are Both of them mighty Artists, Admirably skilled in
expressing the Passions in their proper Characters, and natural Colors. Livy
has a softer, and a sweeter Hand; Thucydides has something strangely serious
and grave in his way of Painting. The Morals of them both are incorrupt, pure,
exact and honest; they have great Principles of Virtue, admirable Maxims of the
Public Good, a noble Taste of Things, and are very experienced in Decency and
good Breeding. To this may be added that they are Equals, and Rivals in the
Love of Truth; they are Men of an untainted Honesty, of an inviolable Fidelity
and Sincerity on all Occasions.

One might possibly, to push the Comparison as far as it will go, compare
Thucydides's Description, in the beginning of the Eighth Book, of the Event,
the News of the entire Rout of the Athenian by the Syracusian Army had, with
the Effect the News of the Battle at Canna caused at Rome. The Picture Livy
makes of the Consternation the People of Rome were in, after that Defeat, is
not so Circumstantiated as that of Thucydides, but it is more greatly
Expressed. There appears not that Resolution in the Athenians, as in the People
of Rome, supported by the Senate, and the Grandees of the Republic; and all
well considered, the Latin Historians Genius seems to have the Ascendant over
the Graecians.

After all, it is confessed, Thucydides is much exacter in his Logic, that he
is more Elevated in his Reasonings, that he has greater Principles and nobler
Thoughts, in several places, than Livy, and that he makes greater Impressions
on the Soul; but the other is always more agreeable and moving; the one gives
his Colors Strength, the other Charms and Liveliness. What Masterly Strokes,
what bold Expressions are in the former, what variety in the latter? Thucydides
chooses rather to be Solid than Polite; Livy has found the Method of being
Solid and Polite together; and of joining all the Elegance and fineness of
Words, with the Solidness of Things: The one is great on no other Bottom than
himself; the other is so, through the nature of his Subject, and his manner of
treating it. The one has nothing but Strength and Vigor; The other has the Art
of Tempering that Masculine Vigor with the softest Charms, such a Work as his
is capable of.

Finally, to draw to a Conclusion, Livy has been incomparably Happier in his
choice, in his project, in the performance and success of his Work; which leads
the Reader step by step, from contemptible Beginnings, through extraordinary,
and sometimes miraculous Events, to a Glorious end; that represents the Roman
People, risen from a base and scandalous Extraction, to such a Pinnacle of
Glory, as never People yet arrived to: This History displays all the Motions
and Progress of that Glory, through its Obstacles and Oppositions, which make
it appear the brighter; and it displays that growing Greatness, conducted to
its highest Pitch and Elevation, through all the several Degrees of its
Perfection. This is the thing wherein it is so Admirable: For nothing is so
Charming and Delightful, as to see the Representation of the Beginnings and
birth of things, gradually increasing, and a great Design methodically
accomplished, and brought to its Perfection: In which point, Thucydides's
History is nothing Comparable: The Peloponnesian War, which is the principal
Design, aims at nothing but the weakening the Two States that strove for the
Empire of Greece. The succession of that War has nothing of Connection or
Coherence; it is interrupted by a multitude of Occurrencies that have no
Analogy to the End of it; and that End is neither happy for the One nor the
other: Thus it leaves the Reader's Mind discontented, at least very little
satisfied with a Story, whereof it retains no Idea, but of Battles and Orations.

But if so, then the Comparison of these Two Authors is very unequal, and Livy
has much the better of Thucydides; which yet I cannot absolutely Agree to, if a
Man considers them by themselves, and in their Personal Merit: I add too, that
probably Thucydides had Excelled Livy, had he been equally Happy in the Choice
of a Subject: For he is not at all Inferior to him, in the natural Solidity of
good Sense; in that exactness, or rather severity of Reason that accompanies
all he says: I question too, whether Livy argues always in the Justness of
Thucydides; it is true, he has always a nobleness of Expression in his
Narration; but it is to be doubted, whether he has all that Simplicity, which
should go into the Character of a perfect Historian.

Thus then, to decide the Controversy, and precisely to Declare the Preference,
it is requisite we return to the Stating the essential Character of an
Historian, and determine whether Truth is all that is required in him; whether
it is enough merely to recommend Truth to our Understanding, and not indear it
to our Affections, by His manner of speaking and describing it; for Simplicity
is all that is required to a Discourse, to discover the Truth of it: But to make
the Reader in love with it, when presented to him, there must be a great deal
more; there must be purity of Language, nobleness of Expression, loftiness of
Thought, and much variety in his Narration: It ought to be known, whether Truth
is not charming and attractive enough, through its own native Brightness, and
naked Simplicity, without the assistance of Paint and Artifice; and whether she
is not spoiled of her natural Ornaments, and such as really become her, by that
customary Wash and Dress they bestow on her. For if so, then Thucydides, who
has the most Plainness and Simplicity, is to be preferred before Livy: And on
the contrary, if Truth ought to become Agreeable and Lovely, by the Charms and
Beauty of Discourse, Livy must be awarded the Precedence. Here is something to
exercise nice and curious Wits, to whose Sentence I refer my own, being not
Confident and bold enough, my self, to pass the Verdict.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by Anthony Peisley in Oxford.
DOctor Campion's Sermon of National Providence. Oxf. 1694.

Dr. Hody's Letter to a Friend in Defense of the Baro^cian Manuscript. Oxf.
1692.

Pliny's Panegyric upon Folly, Englished by Mr. Kennet.

Barrow in Euclidem. Land. 1678.

Walker' s Antidote on Romans 13. 1.

Pia Desideria in Engl. Land. 1690.

Tullii Enchiridion. Oxon. 1683.

Plain Discourses on the Lord's Supper. Oxford, 1684.

Boil of Cold, in Quarto.

Stierii Philosophia, Land. 1679.

Boyle's Skeptical Chemist. Oxf. 1680.

Smith and Brerewoodi Logica. 12o.

Barnesii Catholicus Romanus Pacificus. 8o.

Burgersdicii Metaphysica. 12o.

Carpenterii Decades. Octavo.

Ashwel de Socino.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of John Earl of Rochester by Mr. Parsons.

Ellis's Gentile Sinner. Twelves.

Dr. Bohun of Winds. Octavo.

Absalom and Achitophel, in Latin. 4o.

Frazer's Sermon.

Lysimachus Nicanor' s Epistles. 4.o

Pasquin's Voyage to the other World. 8o.

Gardineri Orationes. 12o.

Burgersdicii Idea Philosophia, 12o.

Des Carts Ethicae. 8o.

Cassandrus de Officio. 8o.

Holland's Globe Notes. 8o.

Winstanley's Lives of the Engl. Poets. 8o.

Bertram on the Sacrament. 8o.

Jackson' s Pueriles Confabulatiunculae. 8o.

Novum Test. Beza Lat. 12o.

Livii Orationes 12o.

Virgilius Notis Min-ellii.

Cole de Secretione. 12o.

Cosin' s Tabulae. Fol.

Willis Pharmacenticae. Cum Figuris, 8o.

Lactantii Opera, cum Notis Tho. Sparks, Oxon e Theatro, 1684.

Smith Epist. Quatuor.


