Of Religious Melancholy.

A SERMON PREACHED before the QUEEN AT White Hall, March 6. 1691/2.

PSALM xlii. 6. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou so
disquieted in me?

By the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of Norwich.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

The Fifth Edition.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside.
For the Benefit of the Poor.

PSALM xlii. 6. Why art thou cast down O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted
in me?


A Man, in no part of his Life, wherein he is sensible he has offended God, can
be exempted from the Duty of repenting presently; it being an obligation, which
constantly lies upon him, whenever he perceives his sin, to ask pardon for it,
and to forsake it.

However, considering the multitude of business, and many diversions Men meet
with in the ordinary course of Things that hinder them from repenting, as they
ought to do, of their Sins; it is of absolute necessity that they should single
out, and set apart several portions of their Time, wherein they may exactly
consider their Spiritual Condition, severely judge their Actions, and narrowly
search into the Occasions and Causes of their Errors and Failings, and
endeavor to find the best means to prevent the same Crimes for the future.

A good part of that Season is now spent, which our Church has appointed for a
Review of our Lives, and to discover our Trespasses against the Divine Laws,
that we might humble our Souls for them, and amend whatever we find amiss. And
during this Season, you have heard the Nature of Repentance often and fully
explained, and the most prevailing Reasons urged to excite your Care, and
engage your Diligence in a matter of such infinite consequence to your
Salvition; and I hope with good effect on the minds of many, who in secret have
blessed God most heartily, for these Public Occasions of Reforming themselves,
and making their peace with him.

But notwithstanding these solemn Seasons are designed for the benefit of all
Men, that the bad may be converted, tha the weak may be confirmed; and that
those, who have made a large progress in the ways of Virtue, may still proceed
to further degrees of perfection; yet it is manifest, that as hardened Sinners,
who have little four of God, and no regard of their Duty, do certainly grow
worse by their contempt and neglect of these Opportunities; so also, that
diverse good Christians, but of timorous and melancholy Constitutions, do fear
they do not become better, or recieve any improvement from them.

For they, feeling no present comfort from their long and strict Fasts, nor
from their earnest and often-repeated Prayers, do conclude. That whatever they
have been doing in the Service of God, is so mean and full of imperfections,
that it will neither please him, nor profit their own Souls.

Wherefore at this time I shall not insist upon the Arguments which are proper
to affect and awaken obdurate Offenders; but rather apply my self to the case
of those melancholy Persons, who, notwithstanding they are in a safe condition,
yet are in great need to have their minds quieted and composed. So that even
they, who indeed most deserve it, may have their share of advantage, from such
holy Seasons as these.

The scruples and fears which disturb them are manifold: I now can only have
time to consider two or three of those Cases; which as more commonly, so more
violently use to disorder and affright them; and shall give the most
satisfactory answer to them that I can.

(1.) The first Case is of those who are apt to think, that the Reformation of
their Lites has not proceeded from a sincere love of God, and an unwillingness
to displease him; but from a mere dread of those punishments which he has
threatened.

(2.) The second Case relates to them who find a flatness on their Minds, and
want of Zeal, when they apply themselves to any Religious Duty; which makes
them fear, that what they do, is so defective and unfit to be presented unto
God, that he will not accept it; insomuch that this coldness, when they are
employed in their Devotions, does lamentably deject them, and even tempt them
to lay the practice of them aside.

(3.) The third Case does concern those unhappy Persons, who have naughty, and
sometimes blasphemous thoughts start up in their minds, while they are
exercised in the Worship of God; which makes ready to charge themselves with
the Sin against the Holy Ghost; to pronounce their Condition to be without hope
of Remedy, and that God has utterly cast them off.

(1.) I begin with those Persons, who are apt to think, that the Reformation of
their Lives has not proceeded from a sincere love of God, and an unwillingness
to offend him; but from a mere dread of those Punishments, which he has
threatened to inflict on unrelenting Sinners. Their doubt is, that fear which
has had the greatest influence in reclaiming them from an ill Life, is but a
slavish and sordid Passion, which God does despise, and that he will refuse all
those Services, which do not spring from a nobler Principle: For seeing God is
Love, he will not be pleased with any Sacrifice, but what is offered by Love.

I answer, That there can be no question, but Love is a more noble Principle of
Action than Fear: And therefore, that the Religious Service which has its rise
from Love, is more Perfect, more Angelical, and more grateful to God: But for
all that, he will not turn aside his face from those weaker and less improved
Servants of his, whose Service and Obedience owe themselves chiefly to their
Fears.

They who have forsaken their evil ways, out of a horrible dread that they
would lead them to the Pit of Hell, will, it is to be hoped, find a place in
the glorious Kingdom of Heaven: For Hell was made on purpose to terrify daring
Sinners; and to reduce and confine them within the bounds of their Duty.

The thing then I affirm is this; That they who have departed from their
Iniquities, out of fear, that had they continued in them; they should have been
condemned to dwell with everlasting Burnings, will at the Judgment of the Great
Day be allowed to have been true Penitents, whom God will set on his Right
Hand, and receive into the Bright Mansions of Infinite Happiness; which may be
proved by the following Reasons.

(1.) Fear is one of the Passions God has planted in our Souls, as well as
Love; they are both the Creatures of his Wisdom and Power; and whatever he did
put in us, was for some end, and may have a good use. Wherefore, when the
Passion of Fear does serve the End for which God grafted it in our Minds, there
can be no doubt but he will approve the good Effects which it does produce.

Now the end for which God placed Fear in our Nature, was chiefly to beget in
us an awful regard of his most Glorious Majesty; to make us dread violating of
his Laws, and doing any thing contrary to his Righteous Will; and also when we
trip or go astray from his Ways, to quicken our Returns to our Duty.

So that when Fear does prevail upon a Man to amend his bad Life, he puts this
passion to the very use for which he received it from God: and having thus
applied it to the end for which it was made an Essential Ingredient of his
Nature, we have no cause to question but God will own him, and graciously allow
his Obedience.

(2.) We may observe, That God has enforced all the Laws he has given to the
Children of Men, by Threatenings, as well as by Promises; But as Promises are to
work upon our Love, so Threats are to excite our Fears; God having made the
Motives to our Obedience to answer the different Passions, with which he has
endued our Souls.

Wherefore there cannot be the least reason to conceive, that God should
threaten Punishments against the Disobedient, which naturally act upon the
fears of Men, and yet not be pleased with the Service which these fears, raised
by the Penalties annexed to his own Laws, do bring forth. No, God therefore does
set Life and Death before Men, that the fear of Death may make them choose Life;
and he threatens them with Everlasting Punishments, that the amazement and
horror, which the serious and due consideration of them will cause in their
Souls, may powerfully engage them with all speed and care to labor to fit
themselves to partake of the Divine Mercies.

(3.) Our Blessed Savior first, and his Disciples after him in their Sermons,
do address hemselves not only to the Passion of Love, but also to that of Fear:
which they never would have done, had they been conscious that the Sacrifices
of Fear would not have ascended up to Heaven with a grateful savor.

He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not
shall be damned. Mar. 16.16. Does not Christ here intend to bring Men to a
belief of his Gospel, and to yield obedience to the Laws thereof, as well by
the fears of Damnation, as the hopes of Salvation? And when he had cured the
Man who had been afflicted with an Infirmity thirty eight Years, he bids him
sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto him. The Argument our Lord used to
engage the poor impotent Man to live innocently, was directed to the passion of
his Fear, taken from the danger of a Calamity, greater than the very long
Infirmity of which he was now cured, that would befall him, if he did still
continue in his sins.

Knowing the terror of the Lord, says St. Paul, we persuade Men. The Apostle
well knew, that the greatness of these Terrors, expressed in the foregoing Verse;
That we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done whether it
be good or bad, 2. Cor. 5.10. if fully and maturely weighed, would be of
irresistible force to recover Men from a lewd and profane Conversation. They
must be brought to a state of extreme obstinacy or desperation, upon whom an
Argument of such worderful Power and Efficacy can make no impression.

(2.) I come to a second Case often complained of by some serious Christians,
which is a want of inclination to holy things, and a coldness in their
Devotions: They do not come to God's House, nor address themselves to their
Prayers, with such an appetite as they do to the Business of the World; but
want earnest and fervent Desires for the success of the Petitions they put up
to their Father in Heaven; they cannot warmly engage their Hearts in the Cause
of their Salvation, but find a listlesness to Spiritual Exercises; which they
apprehend to be a full proof of their Hypocrisy, and that God will refuse
their Prayers and Thanksgivings, as vain and insincere Oblations.

Now before I proceed in the best and clearest Method I can, to relieve Persons
in this unhappy Condition: I desire it may be first observed, that why many
have no more Zeal and Life in God's Service, is their own fault, for which they
are greatly to be blamed.

Because this dullness of Spirit that attends their Religious Exercises, does
come from their own negligence, and want of consideration. They take care to
make an appearance in the Congregation, but no care about what their Souls are
there employed. They have not considered of what infinite importance it will be
to them to serve God in the most acceptable manner, nor how they should render
their Service, acceptable; neither by what cause their Devotions have decayed,
nor by what means they may revive and increase them.

Now if they neither consider where they are, nor for what end they came, it is
no wonder that their Minds should be flat and unactive all the time they stand
before the Lord, and very little concerned for the prosperous issue of the
Prayers that are offered up by the Congregation.

As therefore it is high presumption for such careless Persons to hope for any
benefit by that part they bear in the Public Worship; so they may cure their
Malady, by retiring from their Business and their Pleasures, and by reflecting
in good earnest upon the terrible dangers whereunto they do every hour expose
their Immortal Souls.

But these are not the Men to whose Case I would speak at this time; but I
direct my Discouse to those who have frequently striven to remove this coldness
from their Souls, when they did approach the Heavenly Throne, and yet have
failed in their attempt. Now, in abatement of their trouble, give me leave to
lay the following Observations before them.

(1.) That the difference of degrees of affections, with which Men serve God,
does often depend upon the difference of their Tempers and Constitutions. Some
have such heavy Constitutions, that it must be a great matter that will work
upon their hopes or fears; and it will require some time to make them very
sensible either of their gain or loss.

But others have such a tenderness in their Natures, and such quickness of
sense, that the least things do much affect them: A little prosperity makes all
their Spirits to mount, and they are overflowed with joy; and as small a cross
sinks them down, and causes them to have sad and melancholy persuasions of
their Condition.

Now People of such various Dispositions notwithstanding they have equally
endeavored to prepare themselves, cannot serve God with equal affections: but
yet he may be alike pleased with what they both do. Because he will measure
their Obedience by the sincerity of their minds, that lies in their own power;
and not by the difference of their Constitutions, which was not made by
themselves.

The Constitutions of some Men being much warmer than those of others, they
easier take fire, whether they are paying Homage to God, or doing business
among Men. Where therefore Men have more heat in their natural Temper, it is no
wonder they should have more zeal in their Devotions. But God will not reject
any Man, because he is of a cold Complexion; or disdain his reasonable
Sacrifice, because it is offered with less vehemence of Passion.

(2.) We may say further, That they who are not carried by their Passions to
the Service of God, but render worship to him upon rational motives, because he
is the giver of all good things seem to act upon a higher and more sublime
Principle: For notwithstanding they are destitute of that pleasing warmth in
their Passions, which provokes others to pray unto God, and to be thankful unto
him; yet they do not cease to celebrate his Praise, because it is their duty to
do it, and because Reason suggests that they ought to make grateful
acknowledgments of his Infinite Mercies.

(3.) We may observe, That the most zealous are not always the best Men. For
their zeal may be without knowledge, or on the wrong side; as it was in St.
Paul, when he Persecuted the Church. And it is his own observation, That
notwithstanding a Man had such a zeal for the Cause of God, as would prompt him
to suffer Martyrdom, and yet wanted Charity, his sharpest Sufferings would
profit him nothing.

I must confess, where a Man is zealously affected in a good matter, and his
active Spirits are discreetly directed to the Service of God, such an one may
prove a glorious Instrument for the propagating and promoting the Fear and
Honor of God among Men; and also may have a more sensible pleasure in every
Religious Performance. But all cannot raise their Affections to this pitch;
however, God will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed; but
pardon the wanderings, pity the weaknesses, quicken the aflections, and make
gracious allowances for all the defects of infirm, but honest Christians.

(4.) That the most holy Servants of God cannot maintain an equal wamth in
their Devotions at all times. Experience does teach them, that, in some
Seasons, an unaccountable heaviness will seize upon their Hearts while they are
on their bended Knees, supplicating the forgiveness of their sins, who at other
times can put their Souls all in a bright and pure flame, by intense
meditations on the unspeakable love of God.

If therefore now and then you perceive your minds dull and heavy at your
Prayers, it is but what sometimes does happen to the most sincere Christians,
how great care and diligence soever they use to uphold life and vigor in their
Souls; so that this is no just-cause of disquiet and dejection of Spirit.
Moreover, Sickness Losses, and all Afflictions, do sometimes so disorder the
Passions, and oppress the Spirits even of the best Men, that it is hardly
possible they should serve God with as much cheerfulness under Calamities and
Troubles as at other times; though they may have as much integrity, and as
sincere desires to please him; and he will take what they then do, as kindly at
their hands, and bountifully reward such Services.

Hence I gather, That since Men are notable at all times to keep their
Affections at an equal height, when they address themselves to their Heavenly
Father, either in the Church, or in their Closets, that he does not expect it
from them; and they ought not to give place to melancholy Fears, when they
shall find it otherwise with themselves: God has made nothing the subject of
our obedience, which is not within the bounds of our abilities; and he will at
the Day of Judgment condemn Men for the Actions only, which proceeded from
their Wills; and not for that want of heat in their Passions, which was owing
to the natural make of their Constitutions, that they could not help; or to
outward unhappy Circumstances, which they had not at their command.

(5.) What has been hitherto said about coldness and damps in the Minds of Men
while they are engaged in Religious Duty, has been to comfort those who are
exceedingly grieved at it; and who yet have not been able to conquer it, though
they have used true pains for that purpose. Now notwithstanding it is not to be
expected, nor necessary, that these innocent Persons should meet with a
complete cure of their grief; yet I must tell them, that nothing will more
enliven their Spirits in the Service of God, than deliberate Meditations of
him, and of themselves, before they enter upon any part of Divine Worship.

If they would often engage their minds in Contemplations about the Divine
Attributes, and the Infinite Perfections of the Nature of God, it would
strangely help to deliver them from that drowsy Stupidity, of which they so
sadly complain and which has so strong an influence on their Actions. For
frequent thoughts of Almighty Power, will make the most sturdy Temper to
tremble, and the proudest Heart to submit. There is no thinking so seriously of
unsearchable Wisdom, without being wrapped up in admiration of it, and becoming
very willing to be ruled by it: And will not the meditations of Infinite Love,
diffusing it self over the World, oblige us to adore, to honor, to love, and
to praise that most Glorious Spring from whence it flows.

Do but consider, as the Providence of God watches over all the Works of the
Oreation, so with what a particular care it has preserved you, and delivered
you from many and great dangers, which you did not foresee, and against which
you could make no Provision; and certainly it will give a sensible touch to
your Soul, and cause you to break forth into Songs and Hymns of Thanksgiving.

But if you proceed still further, to contemplate the deep Mysteries, and
inconceivable love shown by Christ in the mighty work of your Redemption, to
consider the great Condescension of your Savior, when he left the Heavens to
dwell amongst us; the wonderful humiliation of himself, when he took our frail
Mortal Nature upon him; the Pains, the Agonies, the Horrors of the most
dreadful Death he suffered to save us ungrateful Sinners; this can hardly fail
to dissolve the most obdurate and stony Heart, and make you firmly conclude,
that you can sufficiently admire, love, serve or suffer too much for this most
Blessed Savior.

Can your Passions continue all puiet, when you look to this your most merciful
Redeemer, who left the Bosom of his Father to seek you, when you had lost your
selves in the ways of Sin, and the paths that lead to death! Who came to
procure reconciliation for you with God, whom as you had heinously provoked, so
you were in no respectable to make him satisfaction.

Do but with some seriousness recollect how often the Lord has spared you,
when your own hearts have told you that you did deserve Punishment; how very
often you have highly offended him, and fearfully looked when he should destroy
you; and yet you are still suffered to be in the Land of the Living, as so many
Monuments of his Compassion; and he is not yet wearied with waiting for your
return, that he may be gracious unto you: Do, I say, but meditate upon these
mercies of your God, and try whether your Hearts will not all melt into Love
and Affection.

Can we say too much, or think too long of this Savior, who did join himself
to our Flesh, that he might loose the bands of our Iniquity; who being in the
Form of God took the Form of a Servant, that he might destroy the power of
those sins, which would have enslaved both our Souls and Bodies, and made us
for ever miserable?

Surely we cannot but fall down before the Lord, with the deepest reverence,
and esteem him above every thing in Heaven and Earth, who has created us
according to his own Image; who has redeemed us with the Blood of his own Son,
and who does daily assist us with the Graces of his most holy Spirit, and who
has provided for us a House not made with Hands, in the Heavens.

Let such Subjects as these be the Arguments with which you entertain your
Thoughts, before you begin any Religious Duty, and it will strangely conduce to
the filling of your Souls with Light and Life, and make you diligently study to
obtain God's Favor, and bleed in you most passionate Desires to dwell in his
presence to all Eternity.

(3.) I come to the last Case I proposed to speak to, which does relate to
those unhappy Persons, who have naughty, and sometimes Blasphemous Thoughts
start in their Minds, while they are exercised in the Worship of God, which
makes them ready to charge themselves with the Sin against the Holy Ghost, to
pronounce their condition to be without hopes of remedy, and to fear that God
has utterly cast them off. Now to give them the best ease and relief I am
able, I will endeavor these two things.

(1) To show that their Case is not so dangerous as they take it to be. (2) To
give proper Advic for their Behavior under these tumultuous Disorders of Mind,
and for their recovery from them.
That their Case is not so dangerous as they apprehend it, I shall endeavor to
show by the following Considerations.

(1.) Because these frightful Thoughts do for the most part proceed from the
disorder and indisposition of the Body. And this I take to be evident, because
they are most rife, and troublesome, and insult most over a Man after a fit of
Sickness, or a great Disappointment, or a heavy Loss; which has deprest his
Spirits, and mada them gross and heavy: but when it pleases God that he shall
recover his health again, and his spirits grow finer, and move more briskly,
and his strength does become more confirmed, then these Perplexing thoughts use
much to abate, and by degrees quite to vanish. (2) Because they are many good
People, who are exercised with them. For bad Men. whose Heads are busied in
laying one Scene of Wickedness or other, how they may gratify their Malice, or
execute their Revenge, or overreach their Neighbors, or violate their Trusts,
or satisfy their beastly Lust, rarely know any thing of these kind of
Thoughts, or use to complain of them. But they are honest and well-meaning
Christians of unhealthy Constitutions, and melancholy Tempers, who are so
miserably harrass'd with them; who above all things earnestly desire an
interest in their God and Savior, and for that reason the least dishonorable
thought of him, which insinuates its self into their Minds, is so dreadful unto
them. (3) Because it is not in the power of those disconsolate Christians, whom
these bad Thoughts so vex and torment, with all their endeavous to stifle and
suppress them. Nay often the more they struggle with them, the more they
increase; and when they are vehemently opposed, they do more domineer and
terrify Men. And the true reason is, because by unsuccessful strivings they do
but feed this melancholy Humor, and grow more dejected, So that there is good
cause, as I observed, to judge them to be Distempers of the Body, rather than
Faults of the Mind. (4) We may observe, that they who labor under the burden
of such dismal Thoughts, are seldom betrayed into any great or deliberate Sin.
For they having a very low opinion of the Condition of their Souls, are jealous
of the least Temptations, and tremble at the appearance of any notorious Evil.
Which is the cause they commonly set a strict guard over their Words and
Actions.
Hence it is apparent that the sins which most easily captivate others, can
sarce make an entrance into them. They have little Temptation to Covetousness,
who can find no satisfaction in Riches. They cannot be hard-hearted to their
Neighbors in distress, who are so ready to beg the Prayers and Help of all
about them. They are in no danger of being swelled with Pride, who think a
great deal worse of their own state than it deserves. They being then thus
humbled into a mean apprehension of themselves, by the calamitous disorders of
their Mind, do contend the more abundantly to keep themselves blameless and
unspotted from the World, wherein they discovering no ease, no relief for their
doleful Complaints, are not allured by any of its glittering or sensual Baits
to transgress the Divine Laws.

From what has been said it plainly follows, that there is more trouble than
danger in the case of the dejected Christians, which we have been considering.
Although I own that none do more deserve our pity, so black and dismal is the
Sentence they pronounce against themselves; and yet I make no question but God
in his own season, and when he sees it most proper for them, will in some
measure settle and quiet their Minds, and also bestow a large Recompense on
them for all the Troubles and Sorrows they have sustained out of fear that he
was highly displeased with them.

I am now arrived at the last Part of my Subject, which is to give the best
Advice I can, for their Behavior under these perplexing Disorders of Mind, and
for their Recovery from them. Which I shall endeavor in the following
Particulars.

(1) Frequently oberve how your Thoughts are employed. If they are engaged in a
good Matter, encourage them to persevere, and secure them, all you can, from
outward disturbance and di versions. If they are taken up in trifling and vain
Subjects, of no real benefit to you, translate them to some more noble and
useful Argument. For as your Thoughts are, so your Actions will be: Men cannot
think foolishly and act wisely. Besides, idle Thoughts are Neigbours to bad
ones, and there is a straight and short passage from one to the other.

But if they are exercised in any evil design, it highly behooves you to
extinguish and suppress them, for if the Fountain be muddy, all the Streams
must partake of its Impurity. And this Work you ought to take the first
opportunity to do, and that with all your Might, not only because it is of
absolute necessity to the Health and Peace, and Innocence of your Soul; but
because the Victory over them will be much easier at their first apperance,
then after, by suffering them to dwell with you, you have given them some
countenance and encouragement: and so that Conquest which would have cost you
but small pains may become doubtful, where you are to contend with Thoughts,
whose long standing has confirmed, and almost rooted them in your Nature.

Thus frequent Reviews taken of your Thoughts, will produce both Power and
Skill to manage them wisely, and may in good measure prevent or cure the
Troubles complained of by these Melancholy Persons.

(2.) Endeavor to keep all your Passions within due bounds, since Storms of
Passion confound the Soul, and make way for evil Thoughts. And whatever was the
first Cause of the Passion, it is apt before it goes off to run them into those
frightful Reflections, which they so much dread, and after the weakness and
indisposition which a strong Passion leaves behind it, they will be less able
to repel them. So that it is very bad for Splenetick Persons to give way to
their Passions, which both bring their Distemper upon them, and unfit them to
grapple with it.

Nay, they cannot safely give any scope to the most pleasing Passions; for they
sometimes shall find as bad effects in the excesses of Joy, as of any of the
sour and churlish Passions, and be as greatly dejected after them.

It would be much for their advantage to bring themselves to an equal and
steady temper, so as none of the Affairs of the World may make a deep
impression upon them; to be mild and gentle in their Behavior, to avoid all
needless Contentions and Heats; to be ready to do good to every body; but never
to do things seemingly hard, except where great necessity requires it. Neither
to set their Hopes, nor their Fears too high; nor groundlessy to despair, where
God has pronounced no Threats: nor fondly to presume, where he has made no
Promises.

(3.) Do not leave your Callings, nor forsake the Post wherein Providence has
placed you. As before it was my Advice not to set your Hearts too much on the
World, nor to suffer your Passions to run vehemently after it; so now I exhort
not to quit your Employment, and utterly to forsake it, by reason of the
trouble of your Mind: For no but siness at all is as bad for you as too much;
and there is always more Melancholy to be found in a Cloister, than in the
Marketplace. As when a Man is too full of business he is ready to forget God,
so when he is idle and destitute of all Employment, his Head is apt to become a
Cage, not only of unruly, but unclean thoughts.

It will be therefore much to your detriment to hide your selves from your
Friends, and to quit the Calling wherein you were exercised; in that People of
dejected Tempers never fare worse than by themselves, and when they have
nothing to do. For when they have neither Company not Secular Affairs to take
up their time, they will be musing perpetually upon the Objections they make
against themselves, and their thoughts will all fix and center upon the
desperate Condition, wherein their disturbed Fancy has placed their Souls.
Whereas virtuous and cheerful Conversation, innocent Recreations, and moderate
Business, will give a great Diversion to the Distemper, and much conduce to
chase away these gloomy Apprehensions.

(4.) When you find these thoughts creeping upon you, be not mightily dejected,
as if they were certain Tokens of your Reprobation; For so far as they depend
upon the disposition of the Body, which for the most part they chiefly do, I
take them, no more to be marks of the Divine Displeasure than Sickness, or
Losses, or any other Calamity you may meet with in the World.

Neither violently struggle with them; since experience does teach that they
increase and swell by vehement opposition; but dissipate and waste away, and
come to nothing when they are neglected, and we do not much concern our selves
about them; for it is the Custom of the Mind of Man, much oftener to think and
reflect upon those things, which either delight or grieve him, than upon those
which he judges are to be despised.

I know this would be no good Advice, did these Thoughts lie within our Power,
and were the Products of our Choice, as all sins are: For then the sooner and
the more vigorously we resist them, so much the better it will be for us; for
at first sin is weak, and has little Interest in us, and Conscience is tender,
and is made extreme uneasy by any compliance with it; so that if we did
bravely oppose it in the beginning of the Siege, the Victory would be most
certain: But when in length of time sin has got both strength and confidence,
our very Nature must undergo a great change before it can be subdued. But now
having proved that these bad thoughts do result more from the weakness of the
Body, than from the vitiousness of the Mind, it is evidently apparent, that by
another sort of treatment they must have a cure.

It is not therefore a furious Combat with Melancholy Thoughts, which will but
weaken and sink the Body, and so make the Case worse, but a gentle Application
of such comfortable things are restore the Strength, and recruit the
languishing Spirits, that must quash and disperse these disorderly Tumults in
the Head.

Whenever therefore these troublesome thoughts begin to stir, do not fall into
any violent Passion, which will abate the Courage, and shatter the Resolutions
of your Soul; but having first commended your miserable Case to the the tender
care and compassions of your Heavenly Father, who will not let you be afflicted
above measure, endeavor with a meek and sedate temper quietly to bear them.

(5.) Do not think the worse of God for them, or accuse his Providence of want
of care of you. For he might have permitted such thoughts to have continued
perpetually, or at lest to have visited you much oftener and in a more
frightful manner, and all this without the least diminition of his Justice But
as his Mercy appears in the degrees and intervals of your Sufferings, so it
does also in the ends of them. He sending these Afflictions for wise and kind
Reason; that that they might be powerful Preservatives of your Souls against
the heinous sins of a crooked Generation in which you live, that cry loudly to
Heaven for Vengeance; they might lessen your Inclinations to the Enjoyments of
this Life; that they might de^den your Appetites to Sensual pleasure, and take
your Hearts of the perishing Goods of the World, which can afford you small
Satisfacti^n so long as your Minds are haunted with these black thought.

Nothing will dispose you more to have compassion on your Suffering Brethren
than your own Sorrows; and nothing make you less envy the towering height and
prosperity of others, which to Persons in your mournful state must be so
insipid and uncomfortable, that you will indeed be concerned for the many
dangers of their station; but never wish you could supplant them. In a word,
nothing will cause you more to feel your own Infirmities, and a want of the
Divine Assistance; nothing will oftener carry your thoughts to Heaven than your
present Disconsol^tion and Trouble, whose length and accuteness will also make
Heaven it self taste the sweeter, whenever God of his infinite Mercy, shall
bring you thy her.

(6.) Let not these afflicting Thoughts discourage you from the exercise of
your Devotions; not tempt you to omit, or negligently discharge any one
Christian Office or Duty. Go still on in the ways of Religion, and do the work
of the Lord, notwithstanding these Performances to your selves may seem flat,
and heavy, and such as will neither be grateful to him, not procure good to
your Souls. Let your Prayer; ascend up to Heaven continually, although at present
you find no Answer or Return to your Petitions. Is any among you afflicted,
says St. James, let him pray. Prayer is the natural and the only safe Refuge
for the Afflicted. It is a sure stay to the Heart, when nothing else in the
World can support it. Nay, the liftleness to Prayer, so grievous to weak
Christians, will be removed by nothing so soon and so effectually, as by Prayer
it self: For Prayer refines the Thoughts, purifies the Heart, and exalts the
Soul above its natural pitch; so that he who did enter upon his Prayers with
some coldness, shall often receive wonderful joy in his Mind, before he comes
to the end of them. Nothing will make the Soul partake so much of the Divine
Nature, and so closely unite it to God as Devout Prayer.

But further, at these disconsolate Seasons especially, let the matter of your
Prayers be such as does imply your reposing an extraordinary confidence and
trust in God, although he seems now to hide his face from you: for it will be a
thing most acceptable to him, and a strong proof of your Integrity, that you
cease not to do your Duty, even when you find little pleasure in it; and still
continue to cast your self and cause wholly upon him, when he does appear to be
afar off, and to have no regard to your Cries and your Tears.

And here it may be sit to give you a Caution against long Prayers; for your
Heads, under this disturbance, will bear nothing which requires length of
attention: Let your Prayers therefore be frequent rather than long; such as may
cause delight, and not prove tedious. There is no time or place, or employment
do so engage you, but you may have leisure now and then to send up your desires
to Heaven, and if they be sincere and servent, they will prevail with God, how
short soever they are: for it is not the multitude of your words, but the
honest disposition of your Heart, which will incline him to hear you. And this
Advice is therefore to be insisted upon, because melancholy Christians have
been observed to suffer by the length both of their Prayers and their Fasts.

Moreover, do not forsake the Table of the Lord, notwithstanding there also you
meet no comfort, and should be altogether unable to move and affect your hearts
with holy reflections upon the most cruel and shameful death of your blessed
Savior: For that Heavently Bread will refresh your Souls, and increase your
Graves, and replenish your Hoarts with joy, as soon as ever God shall find you
qualified for so great Mercies.

What evil thoughts then soever are injected into your Minds, so long as you
persist in a godly course of Life, there can be no color of doubt but God will
love you, and approve your Services. For he no where has said, that Men shall
be condemned for their ungovernable thoughts, over which they have no Dominion:
But he has promised, that all those who are not weary in well-doing, shall in
due season reap everlasting life.

Now should these perplexing thoughts last as long as you live, which is the
hardest thing you can suppose in this case; yet that (as I said before) would
be no more an Argument of God's Anger, than a Fever, or a Fire, or the loss of
a Friend, or any other Affliction; nor of the unsoundness and hypocrisy of
your mind, who in this matter are only the Sufferer; for as you did not invite
them, so they continue with you much against your consent.

Let not therefore your present Trials and Humiliations make you despair of
finding favor with a God of boundless Mercy, and most tender Compassions:
Persevere in your Duty, and confide in his infinite Goodness, and at length the
Clouds, which now darken your Minds, shall all vanish, and be succeeded by
steady and pure light; your fears shall be turned into full assurances of
unconceivable happiness; and all the Disorders. Tumults, and Confusions in your
Souls, shall be changed into Eternal Peace, and undisturbed and endless Joys.

Give me leave to conclude all in the words of the Psalmist, who had been a Man
of So^rows from his youth, and yet ever received Supplies from the Lord
answerable to his Distress. Ye that fear the Lord, praise him, for lie has nor
despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted: Neither has he hid his
face from him, but when he cried unto him he heard. Wait on the Lord, be of
good courage, and he shall strengthen thy Heart. I will be glad and rejoice in
thy Mercy, for thou have considered my trouble; Thou have known my Soul in
adversities. I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with
me; yea, I will hope continually, and yet praise him more and more. O how great
is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee: O love the
Lord all ye his Saints; for the Lord preserves the faithful. They that know
thy Name will pur their trust in thee; for thou have not forsaken them who seek
thee,

FINIS.

