AN ESSAY, Concerning Critical and Curious Learning: In which are contained
Some Short Reflections on the Controversy betwixt Sir WILLIAM TEMPLE AND Mr.
WOTTON; And that betwixt Dr. BENTLEY AND Mr. BOIL.

By T. R. Esquire

LONDON, Printed for R. Cumberland at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard. School.

AN ESSAY, Concerning CRITICAL AND Curious Learning.
SIR,
IF I am at all capable of undertaking your Commands, it is wholly owing to the
Advantage of that Converse you have for some time Honored me with: But would
you be prevailed upon, to lay aside your Authority over me, I could assign the
Province to a much more skillful Hand; I could wish you would rather have
Instructed me your-self upon those Points you have offered to my Consideration,
than to exact the little I am able to say upon them. However, in order to begin
that Correspondence betwixt us, which your Letter so kindly proposes, and which
is so much for my own Benefit; I will here give my Imperfect Thoughts upon your
first Question, viz. Whether Critical and Curious Enquiries are really
Conducive to the advancement of solid and useful Learning, or not? together
with my Opinion in general of the Controversy betwixt Sir William Temple and
Mr. Wotton, and that betwixt Dr. Bentley and Mr. Boil. This I shall only do, so
far as it will come within the Compass and Form of a Letter; for I am not at
all inclined to engage in a set Methodical Discourse.

Though the Negative side of this Question may hold very well, if applied to some
superficial Wits and pretended Virtuosi in the World; yet it can never be
supported against those learned Ancients and Moderns, that are justly
distinguished by the Name of Critics. For to them we owe what is truly Curious
and Entertaining in Philosophy; and to them we must attribute all those
admirable Refinements in the Liberal Arts and Sciences. For had not the Censors
of former Times been able, by their great Knowledge of Nature and Reason, to
refute the many crude indigested Hypotheses, which frequently were advanced in
Athens and Rome; what whimsical Inventions had Sophisters imposed upon the more
unlettered sort of People, and transmitted down to Posterity, for rare Systems
and unusual heights in Philosophy? and had not the Critics of latter Ages,
when Learning after a long and dark Interval began to dawn and revive again in
Europe, been very industrious in Publishing correct Editions of ancient Books,
and putting Modern Authors upon great Care and exactness in their Writings,
that they might at last restore Letters to the World, we had not at this day
seen Learning in so flourishing a Condition, nor so many Academies, and places
of Polite Literature, where Men are wholly set apart for the Cultivation of
Knowledge.

There are indeed some Studies, wherein a Scrutinous Curiosity is altogether
impertinent and ridiculous; as when we would busy our Thoughts about things
that can neither reform our Morals, nor enlighten our Understandings, when we
either sink them to mean and frivolous Niceties, or raise them to secret
unknowable Disquisitions. And yet these two Extremes have strangely engaged
many great Men.

Simonides (we are told) undertook to give a positive Definition of the Nature
and Essence of GOD: But he soon found his imperfect Capacity could frame no
adequate Conceptions of him, no Descriptions, but what were purely Negative.
Aristotle, and many other Philosophers, attempted the Solution of several
abstruse Phoenomena in Nature; which we have cause to believe by their bad
Success, is beyond the scanty power of Humane Reason. And our Modern
Philosophers and Divines are every day raiseing new Hypotheses, and seem
resolved to unfold all the Mysteries of Religion. But after all their subtle
reasonings and labored Disputes, they will find no better Effects of their
Studies than Uncertainty and Confusion. For though in Justice to our selves we
ought to entertain great and worthy Idea's of the excellency of Humane Reason;
yet Experience teaches us, that it is bounded and limited in many respects,
that it is short and imperfect in its Deductions, even in those things that are
more immediately within its compass. Why then should some Men be so fond of
Speculations, which the wiser part of Mankind have concluded above their
Knowledge, and which they themselves must confess to be nothing better than
Learned Amusements?

As to the other Extreme; I am so far from admiring those great Men, that have
taken wonderful Pains about little insignificant things, as in traceing the
rise and progress of Words; and have written Volumes concerning particular
Letters; that I think they miserably lost their time; and so will any one that
reads their Works upon these Subjects: Whatever can be said upon them is not
worth knowing. The Authors indeed may flatter themselves with the Thoughts of
some New Discoveries or hidden Secrets; but the World will never grow wiser for
such Labors. We shall not understand the Noble Expressions and Proprieties of
Homer, nor the Style and Genius of Thucydides at all the better, for being
nicely skilled in the Chronology of the Greek Tongue; or for knowing how many
Letters Cadmus first found out, and by what Degrees the Alphabet, as we now
have it, was completed. These are frivolous Curiosities, fit only for Pedants
and Schoolmasters to amuse their Boys withal; and are wholly Foreign to the
acquisition of solid and real Knowledge.

But there are however many kinds of Learning, wherein Curious and Critical
Observations are very commendable, and are doubtless Noble Exercises of Humane
Understanding. And of all such Studies, methinks that of Experimental
Philosophy is the most noble, beneficial, and satisfactory. For the Mind is not
there seduced with abstracted Arguments and Chymerical Notions; but is
determined by Demonstration and Matter of Fact. It is the great Instrument by
which such admirable Effects in Nature have been discovered, and from whence
the constituent Principles of all mixed Bodies are best known, and those Nice
Speculations of Philosophy so excellently grounded. But even this Science,
however desirable and entertaining in it self to an inquisitive Genius, may be
prosecuted to a great absurdity: As when Men carry on their Experiments to the
Land of the Moon; contrive AErial Engines for our passage thither; and teach
the Learned to fly as familiarly as others walk: When they are resolved to
refine so far upon all former Inventions, as to advance New Impossibilities,
and instead of improveing useful Navigation, will propose Methods for Ships
sailing under Water, and such like Contradictions to Nature. These, I must
confess, are Projections that turn upon too subtle and deep Reasons for my
comprehension. Others have discovered by the help of their Glasses, that those
Insects which are almost invisible to a Naked Eye, have however as distinct
parts as we have; and that a Louse, compared to those liveing Atoms, is a
Creature of a monstrous size. There are yet others; who not only undertake to
trace Nature in all her Operations, but will pretend to rival her Works, and
produce the same Effects from Artificial Causes. But when Chemists, setting up
for Adepti, forget their useful Experiments, and begin to hunt after the
Philosophers-Stone; when they talk of nothing but their Diana, their
Quintessence and their secret Physical Matter: When, I say, they are once so
besotted as to have these Whimsies in their Head, and to expend their Health,
Labor, and Money, in digging for an imaginary Mine in Fairy Ground; we may
reasonably Conclude them in the High Road to Poverty and Confusion. I wonder
indeed, how Men of Sense can be taken with those Improbabilities, some Chemical
Authors impose upon their Readers: I mean, those Stories about the Vast
Quantities of Gold made their Mighty Elixir or Transmuting Powder; to which
they ascribe little less than a kind of Divinity and Omnipotence. I have read
in some of their late Books, that it is Authentically recorded, that Ripley, an
English Adeptus, sent for many Years successively an Hundred Thousand Pounds of
Artificial Gold to the Knights of Rhodes, to maintain the War against the
Turks: And that Raymund Lully, another Adeptus, furnished Edward the First with
six Myriads of the same Metal, to carry on the Holy War in the Holy Land.
Besides, I have read a great many Tales of Covents, Monasteries, Hospitals, and
other Works of Charity, which have been privately founded at the Expense of the
Adepti. But a Man must be arrived at Dotage, before he believes this Cant: It
can have no better Credit sure with any thinking Person, than a fictitious
Narrative in a Romance.

To be well skilled in Chronology is looked upon as a great and necessary piece
of Learning. For this Science only gives us a distinct View of the Successive
Order of things from the first Accounts of time: It determines and divides the
Periods of the most considerable Transactions of past Ages; which History does
not oblige it self to, being chiefly employed in representing the Causes
Vicissitudes and Events of them; in letting us into the true resorts and
intrinsic Contextures of public and private Negotiations; and conveying down
such Notices and Observations from Antiquity, as may be of Service in the
Conduct of all future Occurrences in Humane Life. And therefore without
Chronology we should have but an imperfect knowledge of one of the most useful
and pleasant Studies in the World. But I could never understand the use or
pleasure of that everlasting Contention some Writers have raised amongst
themselves, about small Punctilio's and Niceties; wherein perchance they are
much concerned to discover whether Homer or Hesiod did really live first; to
know what Day and Hour such a King or Consul dyed. These little Questions have
seemed so very important, that the World has been troubled with whole Volumes
about them; and after all, the Quarrel ends as it begun. I am as much at a loss
too to know the worth of that hidden and remote Knowledge, Antiquaries so much
value themselves upon. It is at best but Uncertain and Conjectural, being drawn
out of defaced Monuments, Coins, Inscriptions, Calendars, Traditions, Archives,
Fragments, and scattered passages of lost Books. These Men however put an
higher Esteem on such Treasures, (as they call them) than on all the solid and
beneficial Studies a Man can apply himself to. To discern the Year of a rusted
Medal, or the Date of a Moth-eaten Manuscript, is in their account a greater
piece of Learning, than to be acquainted with the Life and Actions of that
Emperor whose Image the Coin bears, or to understand the Style and Matter of
the Book it self. Perhaps the one kind of Knowledge may cost as much Pains and
Labor as the other; but that only proves their Folly more ridiculous and
unpardonable.

Grammar is a Science, that is introductory and subservient to most others, and
is absolutely Necessary for a Scholar to be well versed in. Without it we could
have no acquaintance with the Dead Tongues, from whence is drawn all, or the
best part at least of the Learning now in the World. But I need not endeavor
to point out the particular Uses of it, as it is applied to Ancient or Modern
Languages, and examines the Idiotisms and Proprieties of them, and lays down
Rules, by which they may be more speedily learned, and more correctly spoken:
Every body is well enough acquainted with them, and I know who I am writing to.
But Grammar, as it handles those Grounds and Rules that belong to the
Philosophy of Letters, in order to frame a New and Universal Language, wherein
every word is a Description of the thing it signifies; is of a vaster extent,
and takes in the whole Theory of Nature. To consider the Analogy between words
and things, is no doubt a very entertaining Speculation; and it would be a
means to reconcile the two distinguishing Characters of Humane Nature, Speech
and Reason. But I believe those few learned Authors that have treated of it,
rather proposed their own private Satisfaction, than any public Advantage to
Mankind. Not to mention others, Dr. Wilkins's Essay toward a real Character,
is a Book of great Learning, and is justly admired by all that have read and
understood it. But it is like those Noble Schemes and Models, that are too fine
and exquisite to be put in practice. And I may venture to say, (but with due
Respect to this and other Learned Authors, who have placed it among their
Desiderata) That a Philosophical Grammar is at this time as Useless as a
Mechanical one is Necessary.

There is another Study, which is of admirable Use and Ornament, and that is
Astronomy. But when Men mistake the End and Design of this too, and instead of
understanding the Natural Motions and Situations of the Heavenly Bodies, with
respect to the Earth, will undertake to give an account of Planetary Influences
and Impressions, to Calculate Nativities, to grasp at and anticipate future
things, as if they had not enough to do to digest the present. It then becomes
a vain and fruitless Impertinence. The common Argument in favor of Astrology
is, that since we are assured by Experience it self that Solstices,
AEquinoctials, New Moons, Full Moons, and the like greater Revolutions of the
Stars do manifestly Operate upon Natural Bodies, it must needs follow, that the
more exact and subtle Aspect of the Planets should produce Effects more
exquisite and occult, and open a very ample Field to Humane Observation. But
this is precariously affirmed, and as weakly applied. For the greater and more
apparent Influences of the Celestial Bodies are only known to us by mere
Conjecture; and if so, what Hopes can Humane Inquiry have of discovering their
more subtle occult qualities, or collecting any certain Consequences from them?
Horace says admirably well, Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus,
Ridetque si mortalis ultra
Fas trepidat.


Which Consideration, as well as many others, ought to check the Presumption of
those, who pretend to a secret Intelligence from above, and an Immediate
Correspondence with Heaven. This is nevertheless, a Study which some Men think
worth their Care; and if at last they attain to the Reputation of an
Almanack-maker or Conjurer, they are abundantly satisfied with the Worthy
Distinction.

There are yet other Sciences, as Geometry and Metaphysics; which in some
Degrees are extremely useful and necessary. For without this great Branch of
Mathematics, many parts of Nature could never be fully comprehended, nor
clearly demonstrated, nor accommodated to use with any Skill or Certainty. And
without Metaphysics, what Notion could we have of that vast Circle of
Knowledge beyond the Sphere of Matter and Motion, which is conversant about
Spirits and Incorporeal Substances? But I should not desire to be a Profound
Critic in them. Because, the greatest Acquirements, that could be hoped for,
would hardly compensate the infinite Pains a Man must bestow upon them. Not but
that I believe Mathematics afford as substantial a pleasure to those, who are
wholly addicted to them, as any other Humane Knowledge whatever. And so do
Metaphysics too; if we believe the Story of the Famous Avicen, who is said to
have been so ravished with Aristotle's Metaphysics, that upon his first
Understanding of them, he bestowed large Sums of Money on the Poor, out of the
abundance of his Joy and Gratitude; and had the patience to read them over
forty times, and get them all by Heart. But, I say, however, I can never be
persuaded, that it is worth any Man's while to dedicate his Time and Thoughts
to those Abstracted Idea's and Theorems in these Knowledges the Learned so much
Talk of. This kind of Pleasure is too Exquisite and Refined for the Taste of
the present Age; and we now adays think it no Reflection upon our
Understandings, to profess our Neglect and Ignorance of it. The bent of these
Times is for Politer Studies.

And therefore Critical Learning, in the Modern Acception, is commonly taken
for a thorough Understanding of Classick Authors, and an Exact Knowledge of
those Rules, by which Men judge and determine nicely of all the finer Parts and
Branches of Humane Literature. Aristotle was the first that drew these Rules up
into Compass, and made Criticism an Art; and the Philosopher took such Care to
form his Precepts upon the Practice of the best Writers, and to reduce them
withal to the severest Test of Nature and Reason; that he scarcely left any
thing for succeeding Ages to do. We find little or nothing in Horace, and the
admirable Fragments of Longinus, but what he had in a great measure laid down
before. The Modern Critics drain all their Notions from this great Source and
Fountain: And though later Systems have endeavored to explode his Philosophy;
yet I find no Reflections on his Critics, but what are likely to perpetuate
that Esteem and Value the World has all along had for them. But in short, he is
esteemed a good Critic, who can distinguish the Beauties and Excellencies of
an Author; and discover likewise his Failures and Imperfections. When he makes
his Judgment of a Book; he takes it in pieces, and considers the whole
Structure and Economy of it; What Connection and Dependence there is between
one Part or Argument and another; whether all Material Circumstances are fully
touched upon; whether any thing less remarkable is too far spun out, and
dilated. Then he proceeds to a Consideration of the Style; how that is suited
and accommodated to the Nature of the things it treats of; how the Language is
worked together and digested; how the Figures and Proprieties of Speech are
used. And here we see a Critic in this sense has a vast Room and Scope for his
Observations, wherein he may show his Judgment and Learning; and be very
Instrumental in the Propagation of Arts and Sciences.

But it is sometimes urged against Criticism, that too regular an adherence to
the Forms and Measures of it, is a Restraint upon a Writers Invention, and does
more harm than good in Composition. For that the Imagination cannot so freely
diffuse and expand it self, when it is obliged to any Bounds or Limits
whatever. Which Argument is sometimes illustrated and supported by that Famous
Example of an Ungovernable Genius in Heroic Virtue, I mean that of Alexander
the Great; whose Vast Ambition never failed to hurry him beyond the due
Measures of Conduct: Upon which very Account, (say they) his Exploits had
always something in them wonderfully Surprising and Astonishing. Whereas
Caesar's Actions, that were more Cool, Deliberate and Proportioned to the Rules
of Prudence and Policy, never give us such an Exalted Sublime Idea of his
Fortitude as we must necessarily entertain of the Greek Hero's. The Friends too
of our great Dramatick Writer, Shakespeare, will not be persuaded, but that even
his Monstrous Irregularities were conducive to those Shining Beauties, which
abound in most of his Plays; and that if he had been more a Critic, he had
been less a Poet. But, I say, notwithstanding this; good Conduct in War is no
hindrance to the boldest Undertakings. For any one that knows History, knows
that if Caesar had neglected it, his Achievements had never been so glorious,
nor Alexander's neither. Those astonishing (I might call them accidental)
Victories, which the latter gained, betrayed (many of them at least) more of
Fool-hardiness than Valor. And a due Observation of Critical Rules, that is, a
strict attendance to the Rules of Nature and Reason, can never impede or clog
an Author's Fancy; but rather produce and enlarge it. They may as well urge,
that good and wholesome Laws, which enjoin nothing but what a Rational Nature
would otherwise oblige us to, take away the Liberty of Mankind; whereas they
are the very Life and Security of it.

Now I am nameing Invention and Composition, I cannot but reflect on the Use
and Advantage of a frequent application to them. Which is another Argument in
Favor of your Proposals; and you will therefore Pardon a short digression upon
this Head.

It was the Opinion (you know, Sir,) of one of the greatest Men of Antiquity,
that all Knowledge was but Reminiscence, and that it was innate in the Soul,
though obscured and darkened by our grosser part more or less, according to the
particular Disposition and Temperament of the Body. The allowance of which
Principle would doubtless teach us, that to exert these Original Seeds of
Science, we must often use and stretch our Intellectual Powers. For thus the
Mind would as it were dilate it self, and by degrees correct the Tone and
Habitude of the Organs. But whether there be any Truth in the Philosophers
Doctrine or no, this is most certain, that all the Faculties of the Mind, both
active and passive, are mightily heightened and improved by Exercise. But if
they are neglected and unimployed, they will shrink and contract themselves,
and be unable to answer their proper Functions. Which (as the Experiments of
our Modern Virtuosi have plainly demonstrated) is true also as to some
Properties of inanimate Bodies. Our Reason, which is an Active Principle,
would, if for some time stifled and suppressed, in a great measure loose that
Sagacity and Acuteness implanted in it. The Memory, which is more perceptive
and passive, could neither retain nor return those Idea's and Images
recommended to it, unless it were often proved and examined. It would have but
a very Dark and Unfaithful Conception of Things, unless we sometimes
recollected and produced our Notions. If we never Committed our Thoughts to
Writing, the Invention would become faint and sluggish for want of breathing;
and the Judgment could never determine aright of that huddled perplexed Chaos
of Knowledge, or rather Ignorance, we should have within us.

It is the Condition and Circumstance of Humane Nature, under its present
Depression, to acquire Science but by Steps and Gradations. The Conveyances to
our Understanding, are too gross to be consistent with an immediate Intuition,
which is the Happiness and Prerogative of Spiritual Intelligences only: Whereas
the Mind of Man takes Impressions from External Objects; and these Impressions
make her reflect upon the Nature of the thing, from whence she receives them,
leading us through a long Chain and Series of Thoughts before we can arrive at
any Conclusions. Now in Order to bring these Conclusions to some Clearness and
Perfection, we must often ruminate upon them, we must turn our Thoughts into
Words and Expressions; and thus we shall instruct and inform the very Mind that
produces them, by putting it still upon a more intense Application. For we
doubtless understand our selves better by expressing the Idea we have formed
within, than we possibly can by Private Thoughts and Internal Reflections,
which are always a little dark and cloudy. The Image becomes more clear and
determinate, when it is set in open Light, and is, as it were, a second time
submitted to the Censure of the Mind. We cannot so easily flatter our selves
with false Beauties and Appearances. Our Judgments will reform the Mistakes our
Vanity might before have fondly entertained, and give us a juster and more
exact View of our Abilties. Thus we shall understand the real Compass and
Circle of our Knowledge: We shall digest and settle what we have already
imbibed, and be the better able to proceed to further Improvements. We shall
discover our own Natural Infirmities or Defects, and consequently may learn to
apply proper Remedies and Reliefs to them.

It has been a Controverted Question in Philosphy, An omnes animae sint
aequales? and though I would not undertake to maintain the Affirmative in all
points; for why should not our Souls be of different Statures and Complexions
as well as our Bodies? Yet I am thus far of the Opinion, as to think, that no
Man's Soul is so unluckily formed, so sunk and immersed in his Body, that it
cannot by due care be made to exert it is Faculties, and advanced to a
considerable degree of Knowledge. Not that I would therefore conclude, that it
is positively in every Man's power, provided he uses his utmost Industry, to
reach what Perfection he pleases in any Science. All are not blessed with the
same portion of Genius: Nature has visibly framed and fashioned some Men to
particular things; wherein they proceed with a great deal of Ease and Delight;
the Native Tendency and Propension of their Souls concurring with their
Diligence and Labor. On the other hand, it is equally difficult, if not
impossible, to turn the Stream, and be successful in spite of Nature. Whereof
we have a remarkable Instance in the Famous Cicero, who, though he was very fond
of Ingenious Men and Writings, and spared no time nor pains to have made
himself as considerable a Poet, as he was an Orator; yet his Verses are so
extremely Unpoetical, that the Critics cannot allow him any Title or
Pretension at all to the Character. And yet we must not altogether condemn his
Poetical Essays, when we consider what he himself somewhere suggests in his own
Defense, that such Exercises did not only relieve and unbend his Thoughts from
severer Studies, but were of great use to him in his other Composures: They
furnished him with the knowledge of Figurative Ornaments; with that fertility
of Imagination, and that Beauty of Conception, which is the Mother of
Eloquence, and of all that is graceful in Speaking. So that Invention in any
kind will turn to some Advantage or other; There will either be Pleasure or
Profit, and still the Mind must be improved.

But to return. It too often happens, that those who now adays set up for the
Censors of Writings are biased by Partiality; and in spite of all their
specious Pretenses, a strong Tincture of ill Nature and Virulence unhappily
appears in every Line. They commonly tell us indeed in their Prefaces, that
they have dealt very handsomely and heartily with the Authors they comment upon;
and that a Critic ought to be as Cautious and Impartial in determining a Man's
Reputation, as a Judge in the Decision of his Fortune. But all this is soon
forgot: For when we come to the Remarks themselves, we are entertained with
nothing but continual Snarling and Insolence. The poor Writer is used most
inhumanely for the ill Cadence of a Verse, or the Ruggedness of a Period: And
if by chance he has offended against any of the smallest Precepts of Aristotle,
etc. then to be sure, there is no Mercy nor Quarter for him. The little Lapses
of a Pen, and sometimes the Errata of the Press, cannot be passed by without a
strange Disgust and and Severe Reprimand. And rather than not swell up his
Annotations to a just Volume, this mild, inoffensive, good natured Creature,
will acquit his Conscience, and fall foul upon the Author's Morals; will give
us an account of his Religion, Estate, and Pedigree; or if he has the least
Reason to suspect his Friend has none, he is very free in discloseing that
Secret too. I am sorry some Pieces lately written on good Subjects, and by good
Hands, (which I forbear to Name) have fallen under this Censure, and for want
of a prudent Conduct have lost a great part of that Reputation they might
otherwise have justly claimed. Thus Criticism dwindles into down right Raillery
and Aspersion, and we must take it, as we find it, a Composition of a great
deal of Dogmatical Arrogance and ill Nature mingled with a very little Wit and
Discernment; which is the Reason it has so small Effect upon those Scriblers
who every day crowd the Press with their senseless Productions. But if Critical
Writers would lay aside their private Piques; and employ themselves only in
pursuing the main Business of their Art, The Reformation and Finishment of
Letters, they would prove extraordinary Members in the Commonwealth of
Learning. But 'till Men will divest themselves of the prevailing Affections of
Humanity, this Candor and Ingenuity is rather to be wished for than expected.
Not that I would here be supposed to insinuate, that the present Age has not
actually produced Men of as Considerable Abilities and accurate Learning, as
any other Age of the World. For never did Men follow Reason with more
steddiness, nor prosecute their Studies to greater Purpose and Advantage, than
at this day; as might be proved from several instances not only in the more
abstruse Sciences, but in those of Humanity too, had not the Argument been
sufficiently controverted already by some Modern Critics both of this and our
Neighbor Nations.

But I promised to give you my Opinion of some late Books. I will begin first
with Mr. Wotton 's Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning, which he has
reprinted not long since with Amendments and Additions. I shall not enter into
the Merits of the Cause with him, or pretend to answer his Elaborate Work in an
hasty Dissertation. For his Design of giving the World an History of Learning,
is doubtless a very Useful and Commendable Undertaking; and I think he has in
General, chosen the better side of the Argument. My Intention is only to
consider cursorily his manner of handling it; and this, I doubt, will not
appear so Generous as the Design it self. He, has you know, opposed Sir William
Temple, one of the most Gentlemanly Writers of our Age and Nation; but not with
so much Respect and Decency as became either his own, or Sir William's
Character. I cannot imagine what Reason he had for it; unless he thought it
might be some Honor to him, if he could provoke (though rudely) so worthy an
Antagonist to enter the Lists with him. But he was unluckily disappointed in
that part of his Design, and has therefore in this Second Edition retracted
many of those undervaluing Criticisms, that are too frequently urged and
insisted upon in the first. But as to the Book it self. It seems Mr. Wotton was
engaged by some Friends, or Patrons, to try what could be said in Defense of
Modern Learning, against that of the Ancients. Upon which account he found
himself obliged to Consider, who had appeared on the other side. And therefore,
least he should be accused of betraying his Cause, proclaims open War against
Sir William Temple, for having written an Essay in Honor of the Ancients. In
order to subdue this popular Adversary, he nicely examines every Word that
seems disagreeable to his own Notions; and, least any thing should be wanting
to complete his Victory, quarrels with him about insignificant Trifles wholly
foreign to his Point. Any other Man would have thought it sufficient to have
refuted the Arguments in general, without citeing and referring so particularly
to almost every Line. But then Mr. Wotton had lost his End; it was his Business
to attack Sir William Temple. And therefore he begins his Book like a good
Disputant, with General Reflections on the state of the Question; then proceeds
to examine his Hypothesis, and talks much of inquiring into the particular
points, that arise from his General Propositions; of controverting his
Arguments; of using proper Mediums; of reasoning severely, etc. Who, upon
reading this, would not imagine our Reflecter had some knotty Syllogistical
Piece to deal with; and was at least supporting the Reformation and Church of
England against a Second Bellarmine? But all this mighty Bustle is how to
confute an Essay; which is so far from being penned in a Scholastic or
Polemical Way, that it is writ (as all this Author's Works are, and as all
Essays certainly ought to be) in the most easy unaffected Style imaginable.
Which is more than I can say of Mr. Wotton's Book; for (though I read it with no
manner of Prejudice, but with a desire only of being pleased and informed) it
appears to me to be done in a stiff artificial manner. There is indeed a
Flowingness of fine Language, and Rapidity of smooth Numbers and Periods; but
then the same dance and chime of Words is eternally sounding in one's Ears, and
the same fine Expressions brought in over and over again, and affected even to
an Impropriety; the most nauseous Entertainment a Reader can have. For We love
Variety; and the best Expressions, as well as Things, constantly reiterated
will certainly disgust. But this may look very odd, (especially to the Logical
Reasoning Mr. Wotton) to assert all, and prove nothing; and yet I am resolved
neither to trouble you nor my self with quoteing his Book, which would be the
only way, I know of, to prove any thing for or against his Style. I must
therefore appeal to your own Judicious Taste for the Truth of what I say; and
in the mean time I will venture to assert one thing further, viz. That whatever
becomes of Sir William Temple's Hypothesis, his Essay will always be read with
more Pleasure, than Mr. Wotton's Reflections with Profit. For, notwithstanding
all his mighty Pomp and Boast of much Reading, if we come to examine what
Discoveries he has made, what new Lights he has given the World on this
Subject, I believe we shall find nothing, that was not well known before to any
Man of the least acquaintance with Letters. And if he was as considerable, as
he thinks himself, that is, so considerable as to represent the Learning of the
present Age, these Reflections might very well be alleged against him by those
of the Opposite Party, and silence him at once. Perhaps you may fancy by this
General Dislike, that I am biased in my Opinion, but I assure you what I have
said is my real Judgment, which though it may be mistaken, is however Impartial.
I have no Design of gaining Sir W. Temple's Favor, or incurring Mr. Wotton's
Displeasure. I only take the Liberty (which all Authors must allow their
Readers) of speaking my Thoughts freely, and as such I offer them to You.

I have now done with Mr. Wotton, and am come to his Friend Dr. Bentley. Who
has for some Reasons best known to himself, not only engaged a single
Gentleman, but a whole Society, upon a much less important Argument than that
of Ancient and Modern Learning; viz. Whether those Epistles and Fables commonly
ascribed to Phalaris and AEsop, etc. be truly genuine or not? The Debate is now
depending; and, however insignificant You and I may take it to be, is
prosecuted with as much Heat and Contention on both sides, as if some Article
of Eternal Life was immediately concerned in it. I shall not presume to
interpose one word in so hot a Dispute; only as a Stander-by I may be allowed
to give my Sentiments of their Behavior that manage it. First then, The Ground
of the Quarrel is generally looked upon as highly ridiculous on the Dr's. part,
even allowing the matter of Fact to be just as he himself has stated it. For
there was no such keen Sting in the Words he resents, [viz. collatas etiam (sc.
Epistolas) cum MSo. in Bibliotheca Regia, cujus mihi copiam ulteriorem
Bibliothecarius pro singulari sua humanitate negavit] that could have provoked
any discreet or sensible Man, whose time did not lie upon his hands, to write a
Long and Labored Dissertation (on a Subject widely remote from his Profession,
and of little or no advantage at all to any other part of the Learned World,)
that he might have a proper Opportunity of retaliating upon his Adversaries.
But if he denied Mr. Boil the King's Manuscript in so rude a manner, as is
pretended on the other side; I think Mr. Boil was so far from being the
Aggressor, that he was obliged in his own Defense, to give the World some
Reason why it was not collated; and he could not say less than he did in his
Preface. This is my Opinion of the beginning of this Controversy: But the Dr.
perhaps knew better how to apply the Reflection than I do; and had therefore
Reason not to brook it. But before he could conveniently retort this bitter
unpardonable Irony, he found it necessary to complement Mr. Boil out of his
Title to the Edition of Phalaris; that he might clear his way to some other
Gentlemen he had a greater mind to be dealing with, and fix the Affront (as he
pretends) where it ought to be. All this while Mr. Boil is made a Child and a
Tool of, to serve these malicious Ends. He is a Thing of great hopes, and as
such the Dr. says he is willing to encourage him. But is so far from looking
upon him as a suitable Antagonist, that out of his great Goodness and
Condescension he offers by way of Tutor, to give him a clearer View into the
Depths and Secrets of Learning, than those Ignorant Pretenders, under whose
Care he was bred, have been able to do. The Style of this Book is as remarkable
for it is Roughness and Operoseness, as Mr. Wotton's for its Flowingness. But
instead of venturing to Criticize upon it, I have here rather chose to
Transcribe a few Lines, which may serve to give you a small taste of the Man as
well as the Book. In the Prelude to this grand Dispute he looks bigg, and says,
Phalaris has the Plea and Right of Possession, and I shall not go to dispossess
him, as those have done before me, by an Arbitrary Sentence in his own
Tyrannical way; but proceed with him upon lawful Evidence, and a fair impartial
Trial. And I am very much mistaken in the nature and force of my Proofs, if
ever any Man that reads them persist in his old Opinion of making Phalaris an
Author. After he has quite confounded the Epistles, he proceeds to his Triumph
over the Late Edition; and gives an Account of his own Extraordinary Character
and Learning, in the following Words. Pro singulari sua humanitate! I could
produce several Letters from Learned Professors abroad, whose Books our Editors
may in time be fit to read; wherein these very same words are said of me
heartily and seriously. For I endeavor to oblige even Foreigners by all
Courtesy and Humanity; much more would I encourage and assist any useful
Designs at home. And I heartily wish I could do any service to that young
Gentleman of great hopes, whose Name is set to the Edition. I can do him no
greater at present, than to remove some blemishes from the Book, which is
ascribed to him; which I desire may be taken aright, to be no Disparagement to
himself, but a Reproof only to his Teachers, etc. While I write this, I cannot
but fancy it is dictated to me by some Haughty Schoolmaster, with his Rod in
his Hand. It has such a strong Tang of that kind of Pride, that no Body else
could have said it. He professes indeed to dislike an arbitrary Tyrannical Way
of Writing; but has not Skill enough at the same time to conceal it in himself.
But why should I quarrel with the Dr. for that which is a fault in his Nature,
and which he has as little Inclination as Power to correct? I have nothing more
to add, only to assure him I am not singular in my Sentiments. The same Censure
is passed upon his Book by all I have discoursed with about it: And some of
them were such as had no great Friendship for his Adversaries.

You are by this time probably prepared to expect I should determine in favor
of Mr. Boil, (his Quarrel I mean, for I do not interfere with the Argument.)
And truly so I should, if he had not lately printed a Book in his own Defense;
which I will here give you a short touch of: But it must be in the same
superficial manner I have done of the Two Books already dismissed.

This Piece cannot be exempted from as many Faults at least, as have been
charged upon the Dr's. They are indeed Faults of a different kind: The Dr. all
along entertains his Reader with Insolence and Pedantry; and this Gentleman
with Schoolboy's Jests and little Witticisms. Two Extremes equally distant from
fine Satyr; which I the rather mention, because I believe it was more
immediately both their Aims, than any true design to Examine the Argument in
Debate. But Mr. Boil has in a great measure acknowledged, that this is not his
Performance. For he says, he employed some Friends at Christ-Church, to consult
such Authors as would be of use to him. And I believe the Wits of that place
could hardly content themselves with dry Citations only, and not be provoked
now and then to exercise the Talent they are so remarkable for; especially in
a Case that concerned them so nearly. There are many more Reasons to suspect
Mr. Boil in this than in the Edition of Phalaris. But I shall only hint at
such, as will be no Dishonor for him to acquiesce in.

Any one Person certainly would have been quite weary of jesting, before he had
swelled a Book to half this Volume. And as for the Honor of the Quotations, he
himself does not contend for it. If I may be permitted to suggest my own
Opinion; I fancy this Book was written (as most Public Compositions in that
College are) by a Select Club. There is such a profusion of Wit all along, and
such variety of Points and Raillery, that every Man seems to have thrown in a
Repartee or so in his turn, and the most Ingenious Dr. Aldrich no doubt was at
the Head of them, and smoaked and punned plentifully on this Occasion. It
brings the old Character of Christ-Church very fresh into my Mind; which you
may remember distinguished it self from the rest of the University, not by its
Extraordinary Learning, but its abominable Arrogance. Methinks a little
Consideration would have restrained their Fury against Dr. Bentley, for being
guilty of their own darling Fault; and which the World will justify him in
returning upon them. Pride and Insolence are certainly as allowable in him, who
is a Scholar, as in some young Men, who cannot reasonably be supposed to be so.
Not that I would justify such a Character in any Man of twice Dr. Bentley's
Learning; for he has made himself ridiculous by it, as I have observed before.
But I would very fain know what Prerogative some People have of sanctifying it
in themselves, when they have naturally such Scorn and Contempt for it in
others. The Dean, instead of checking this intolerable Temper, encourages and
promotes it by his own worthy Example. It is not long since he published a
small Compendium of Logic, for the Use of Mr. Boil, (upon which account I name
it,) wherein he gives a Specimen of his haughty Dogmatical Humor, and takes
all Opportunities of inveighing very warmly against the Author of L' Art de
Penser, a most ingenious and useful Writer. He makes nothing of calling him
Coxcomb, Fool, and Blockhead, for dareing to dissent from Aristotle, and for
presumeing to advance any thing New, upon a Subject that great Man had quite
exhausted so many Ages before him. One would imagine that this learned Dr. had
done his Master Stagyrite some Notable Service. But his Book is only an Epitome
of Sanderson, and one of the worst, most obscure Epitome's I ever read. He has
forsooth endeavored to turn Sanderson's plain intelligible Language into terse
polite Latin: Which Sanderson could have done as well as he, had he not
industriously avoided it, and with good reason. For he knew, if the Phrase was
too labored, the Rules would still become more obscure; and the Student
consequently perplexed with an unnecessary Pomp and Ornament of Style. But this
will be no Fault, when the present Controversy comes to be turned into Latin.

Pedantry is another thing, which they have severely branded Dr. Bentley with.
But this too might have been spared as well as his Insolence, and upon the same
Account. For it is as errant a sign of Pedantry to spend ones Time in
publishing bad Editions of Old Authors, and to be highly sollicitous about the
various Readings of them, which former Editions have only neglected, because
they were insignificant; as to affect the Use of hard words, and to lard
English Writings with Greek and Latin. I think Dr. Aldrich is pretty Notorious
at present, for employing his young unexperienced Students this way. He
betrayed Mr. Boil into the impertinent Controversy he and his Friends are now
engaged in; and is still involving others in the Quarrel. We have lately had an
Edition of some of AEsop's (or, as they are called, AEsopical) Fables, in the
Preface to which, the young Editor, with a Pertness peculiar to that College,
has made a very slighting mention of Dr. Bentley. Such a one as I think the
Dean ought to have retrenched upon the score of good Breeding; a thing they so
frequently exact from others. But instead of that, I find in another Book
published last Week, called Examen Poeticum Duplex, etc. that he has suffered
some of his College to make Sport with him in their Occasional Compositions.
Amongst other things, some Body has endeavored his Character in two Epigrams,
one of which I have here transcribed for You. I am assured they were made in
Christ-Church, and either by the Dean himself, or a Brother Doctor at least.
Intellectus agens illuminat phantasmata.
Ad R. B. Bibliothecarium philocriticum.
Quidam acer doctusque (ipsi si credere possis)
Scriptorum judex, and been notus homo,
Dum terit assidue chartas, rigidique magistri
Argutum examen vocula quaeque Jubit;
Saevit^ atrox impune hinc inde minantia vibrat
Arma, ferus calamo, nec minus ungue ferus.
Arbiter ipse unus: Quippe hic mihi perplacet Author,
Sit sacer; ille mihi displicet, intereat.
Ille idem mancis reddit sua membra Poetis,
Siqua dies rapuit longa, vel ignis edax.
Quicquid Aristotelis Gellive intercidit, illi
Tam notum, quam qui prostat ubique liber.
Praevidet ille etiam seclo scribenda futuro,
Et nondum natum mente revolvit opus.
Bacchetum aspexti? minime, nec curo; necesse est
Haec fari, haud aliter scribere, novi hominem.
O quam deliri vis est foecunda cerebri!
Quid non ingenii vivida flamma potest?
Te praebente facem pellucent, Mome, tenebrae,
Splendorem fumus, somnia pondus habent.


Another Gentleman, of the same College, has strained hard in a Poem, entitled
Articuli Pacis, to bring in a smart Verse upon him, viz.
Anglo-Graeco-Latino-crepundia Bentleiana.


But it may be some Satisfaction to the Dr. that these are by no means the best
Copies in the Collection. I have just read it over, and because I know you have
a Value for such things, will send it you (with those Books you mentioned) by
the first Opportunity. I think I cannot make a better Present of the kind.

But I had almost forgot what an Acquaintance of ours has often said upon this
Argument, in Opposition to Dr. Bentley, that if he had had either good Manners
or good Sense, he would never have hastily fallen upon a Learned Body, that was
so very able to justify it self, and to confound him, it being the most likely
way to make a Shipwreck of the little Reputation he had got. In Answer to this,
(for you see I have changed sides, and as the Case now stands, am entirely for
the Dr.) I have already confessed it my Opinion, that he was too forward in
provoking the Dispute, and that he engaged himself in a great deal of
unnecessary Trouble when he did it. But I cannot agree with our Friend in my
Reasons why I think so. For he would have the College a Match infinitely above
Dr. Bentley; whereas I think, that part of it which was at first concerned was
rather below him, and upon that Account the Dr. should have been silent. He
represents them as too formidable a Society for any single Person to encounter,
without Shipwrecking his Reputation, though he has the Truth on his side. But a
Multitude is not always terrible, because it thinks it self so. Dr. Bentley
knew well enough the World had no such Opinions of them, and that both his
Character and Argument would stand secure against all the weak Efforts they
could make; which I fancy was one great Reason of his being too warm in his
first Resentments. I hear he has now prepared an Answer to their Book, which I
much wonder at. For the Abusive Part of it is so blunt and ungenteel, that it
does not affect his Reputation at all; and the Authorities in the other are so
falsely cited and misapplied, that they answer themselves. In my little Reading,
I can perceive several Mistakes, and I doubt not but the Dr. and others, who
are more conversant in such Authors, are able to detect many more. But if I
might advise both Parties, they should employ their Time and Pains upon some
more Useful Subject. There has been too much Dust raised about this already.

Thus, Sir, you see, by striving to say a great deal in so narrow a Compass and
short a Time, I have scarce said any thing; I have but just named those
Topics, that should have been minutely considered, to have done the Subject
right, rather proposing all along than proving my Opinions, which I submit to
your better Judgment. And I hope you will put the most Favorable Construction
upon my Endeavors, if I have been more willing than able to Observe your
Commands.

I am SIR, Yours, etc. T. R.

In page 13. line 7. r. made by their


