Sultan Mahomet Han the present Emperor of the Turks aged 23: years Anno 1666


THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Ottoman Empire. Containing the MAXIMS of the TURKISH
POLITY, The most material Points of the MOHAMMEDAN RELIGION, Their SECTS and
HERESIES, their CONVENTS and RELIGIOUS Votaries. THEIR MILITARY DISCIPLINE,
With an exact Computation of their FORCES both by LAND and SEA. Illustrated
with diverse Pieces of Sculpture, representing the variety of Habits amongst the
Turks. IN THREE BOOKS.

By PAUL RYCAUT Esquire Secretary to his Excellency the Earl of Winchilsea,
Ambassador Extraordinary for his Majesty Charles the Second, etc. to Sultan
Mahomet Han the Fourth, Emperor of the Turks.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey and Henry Brom, at the Mitre between the
Middle-Temple-Gate and Temple Bar in Fleet Street, and the Star in
Little-Britain. 1668.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord ARLINGTON, His Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State.
My Lord,
AFter five years residence at Constantinople, in service of the Embassy of the
Earl of Winchilsea (my ever honored Lord) and this my second journey from
thence by land into my own Country, I judged it a point of my Duty, and of my
Religion too, to dedicate this following Treatise, as the fruits of my Travels,
Negotiations, and leisure in those remote parts, to the Noble Person of your
Lordship; as that Votiva Tabula, which many both in ancient and in the modern
times, after some signal deliverance, or happy arrival at their desired Port,
use to offer to their Gods, their Saints, or their Patrons: And truly, my Lord,
this Discourse treating chiefly of the Turkish Policy, Government, and Maxims
of State, seems naturally to appertain to the Patronage of your Lordship, whose
faculties of Wisdom and Virtue have given you the Blessing of your Princes
Favor, and the Reputation, as well abroad as at home, of an Eminent and
Dexterous Minister of State.

It were a great Presumption in me to offer any Observations of my own in the
Courts of Christian Princes to the test of your Lordships Experience and
Judgment, who not only is acquainted with the Customs and Manners, but
penetrates into the Designs, and knows the Cabinet Councels of Neighboring
Principalities, with whom our divided world may possibly be concerned; but
perhaps without disparagement to your Lordships profound Wisdom, or overvalue
of my own abilities, I may confidently draw a rude Scheme before your Lordship,
of the Turkish Government, Policies, and Customs; a Subject which Travelers
have rather represented to their Countrymen, to supply them with discourse and
admiration, than as a matter worthythe consideration, or concernment of our
Kings or our Governors.

It has been the happy fortune of the Turk to be accounted barbarous and
ignorant; for upon this persuasion Christian Princes have laid themselves open
and unguarded to their greatest danger; contending together for one Palm of
land, whilst this puissant Enemy has made himself master of whole Provinces,
and largely shared in the rich and pleasant possessions of Europe.

This contempt of the Turk on one side, caused the Emperor to be so backward
in opposing that torrent of the Ottoman Force, which in the first year of the
late War broke in upon him; and the suspicion of designs from France on the
other, altered the Resolutions and Councels of the Emperor for prosecution of
the War, which then running favorably on the Christian part, was no less than
with the astonishment of the whole world, and of the Turks themselves, on a
sudden understood to be clapped up with Articles of a disadvantageous Peace;
admiring to see the Emperor give a stop to the current of his Victories, and
relinquish the Game with a lucky hand. But this will seem no riddle to those
who penetrate Affairs with the same judgment that your Lordship does, and
consider the unfirm condition the House of Austria was in, by a daily
expectation of the death or fall of so main a Basis of it, as the King of
Spain, and the division amongst the Princes of the Empire, the League of the
Rhine, the French practices to make the Duke of Enguyen King of Poland, and the
extravagant demands of the French and Rhinish League for Winter quarters, and
places of strength, not only in Hungary, but also in Styria and the adjacent
places; and at the same time look on the Factions in Hungary, and a
considerable Army of French in the bowels of Germany, who were supposed in
those parts to have rather come with design to overawe the next Diet, and
force the German Princes to elect the French King for King of the Romans, than
with sincere and simple intentions of opposing themselves to the Enemy of the
Faith: for then it will appear, that the best use the Emperor could make of his
good success, was moderation in Victory, and reconciliation with his powerful
Enemy. And hereupon Earl Leisle being dispatched for Extraordinary Ambassador
from his Imperial Majesty, to the Grand Signior; though the Turk was elevated
with the thoughts of the necessity the Christians had of a Peace, did yet so
happily manage his Charge and Employment, as created in the Turks an
extraordinary reverence toward his Person, and obtained such Honors and
Treatments from them, as the Turkish Court never bestowed before on the
Emperors, or any other Christian Ambassador; extorting this Complement from the
great Vizier, That he was more satisfied the Emperor had sent so brave and
illustrious a person, than if he had sought to reconcile his Affections with a
hundred thousand Dollars more of Present. And to do justice to this worthy
Person, he has brought a reputation to the British Nation, above any in our
age, whose virtues and industry have acquired the highest Trusts and
Preferments in Foreign Parts; and done the same honor to his King, under whom
he was born a Subject, as to the present Emperor and his Ancestors, under whom
he is, and has always been a faithful Minister: having deserved so eminently
for saving the whole German Empire from the Treason of Wallestein, by his own
single act of bravery (a story notoriously known to all the world) as can never
in gratitude be forgot by that Nation, nor want its due Record and place in the
History of that Country.

The speculation of what is contained in this following Discourse may seem
unworthy of your Lordships precious hours, in regard of that notion of
Barbarity with which this Empire is styled; yet the knowledge hereof will be
like a Turquoise, or some other Jewel set within the Rose of those many Gems of
your Lordships Wisdom and Virtues.

This Present, which I thus humbly consecrate to your Lordship, may be termed
barbarous, as all things are, which are differenced from us by diversity of
Manners and Custom, and are not dressed in ^^e mode and fashion of our times
and Countries; for we contract prejudice from ignorance and want of
familiarity. But your Lordship, who exactly ponderates the weight of humane
Actions, acknowledges reason in all its habits, and draws not the measures of
Economy or Policy from external appearances or effects, but from the
fundamental and original Constitutions; so that your Lordship will conclude,
that a People, as the Turks are, men of the same composition with us, cannot be
so savage and rude as they are generally described; for ignorance and grossness
is the effect of Poverty, not incident to happy men, whose spirits are elevated
with Spoils and Trophies of so many Nations.

Knowing (My Lord) that this work which I have undertaken is liable to common
censure, I have chosen to shroud my name under the patronage of your Lordship,
to protect me from the ill-understanding and mis-conceptions of our Countrymen,
both at home and abroad: against which I doubt not but to be sufficiently armed
in all parts where I travel, when the countenance your Lordship affords me, is
joined to the authority of his Excellency the Earl of Winchilsea, his Majesty's
Ambassador Extraordinary, now actually resident at Constantinople, my ever
honored Lord; to whom I read, a long time before published to the World, the
greatest part of this following Treatise; and as I received his favorable
approbation, and assent to the verity of most matters herein contained; so I
must ingenuously confess to have been beholding to that quick and refined
Genius of his, who often rectified my mistakes, supplied me with matter, and
remembered me of many material points, which I might otherwise have most
unadvisedly omitted: And his Excellency knowing that in his absence this Book
might want a favorable Patron, left me to my self to seek out one, who might
concur with him in the same innocent defense. And as (My Lord) you are a
public person, and under our Gracious Sovereign, are one of those generous
spirits which have espoused the common interest of the Nation; so I presume on
this present occasion not to want your protection also in a single capacity:
for which excess of favors I shall ever pray for the exaltation of the greater
glory of your Lordship, and for ever acknowledge my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, most faithful, and most devoted Servant,
PAUL Rycaut.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Present thee here with a true Systeme or Model of theTurkish Government and
Religion; not in the same manner as certain ingenious Travelers have done, who
have set down their Observations as they have obvionsly occurred in their
Journeys; which being collected for the most part from Relations, and
Discourses of such who casually intervene in company of Passengers, are
consequently subject to many errors and mistakes: But having been an
Inhabitant my self at the Imperial City for the space of five years, and
assisted by the advantage of considerable Journeys I have made through diverse
parts of Turkey, and qualified by the Office I hold of Secretary to the Earl of
Winchilsea Lord Ambassador, I had opportunity by the constant access and
practice with the Chief Ministers of State, and variety of Negotiations which
passed through my hands in the Turkish Court, to penetrate farther into the
Mysteries of this Polity, which appear so strange and barbarous to us, than
hasty Travelers could do, who are forced to content themselves with a
superficial knowledge.

The Computations I have made of the value of their Offices, of the strength
and number of their Soldiery, according as every City and Country is rated,
are deduced from their own Registers and Records. The Observations I have made
of their Polity, are either Maxims received from the Mouth and Argument of
confiderable Ministers, or Conclusions arising from my own Experience and
Considerations. The Articles of their Faith and Constitutions of Religion, I
have set down as pronounced from the mouth of some of the most learned Doctors
and Preachers of their Law, with whom for Money or Presents I gained a
familiarity and appearance of friendship. The Relation of the Seraglio, and
Education of their Youth, with diverse other matters of Custom and Rule, were
transmitted to me by several sober Persons, trained up with the best Education
of the Turkish Learning; and particularly, by an understanding Polonian, who
had spent nineteen years in the Ottoman Court.

If (Reader) the superstition, vanity, and ill foundation of the Mohammedan
Religion seem fabulous, as a Dream, or the fancies of a distracted and wild
Brain, thank God that thou were born a Christian, and within the Pale of an
Holy and an Orthodox Church. If the Tyranny, Oppression, and Cruelty of that
State, wherein Reason stands in no competition with the pride and lust of an
unreasonable Minister, seem strange to thy Liberty and Happiness, thank God
that thou art born in a Country the most free and just in all the World; and a
Subject to the most indulgent, the most gracious of all the Princes of the
Universe; That thy Wife, thy Children, and the fruits of thy labor can be
called thine own, and protected by the valiant Arm of thy fortunate King: And
thus learn to know and prize thy own Freedom, by comparison with Foreign
Servitude, that thou may ever bless God and thy King, and make thy Happiness
breed thy Content, without degenerating into wantonness, or desire of
revolution.

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS Of the several CHAPTERS.
The First Book.
CHAP. I. THE Constitution of the Turkish Government, being different from most
others in the world, has need of peculiar Maxims and Rules whereon to
establish and confirm it self. Page 1 CHAP. II. The absoluteness of the
Emperor is a great support of the Turkish Empire. 2 CHAP. III The Lesson of
Obedience to their Emperor is taught by the Turks as a Principle of Religion,
rather than of State. 8 CHAP. IV. The History of Kiosem, or the Queen Mother.
11 CHAP. V. The Education of Young Men in the Seraglio, out of which those who
are to discharge the great Offices of the Empire are elected; it being a Maxim
of the Turkish Polity, To have the Prince served by such whom he can raise
without envy, and destroy without danger. 25 CHAP. VI. Of the Method in the
Turkish Studies and Learning in the Seraglio. 30 CHAP. VII. Of the Platonic
affection and Friendship the Pages in the Seraglio bear each to other. 33 CHAP.
VIII. Of the Mutes and Dwarfs. 34 CHAP. IX. Of the Eunuchs. 35 Of the Black
Eunuchs, and Appartments of the Women. 37 CHAP. X. Of the Agiamoglans. 40 CHAP.
XI. Of the Vizier Azem, or Prime Vizier, his Office; the other six Viziers of
the Bench; and of the Divan, or place of Judicature. 43 CHAP. XII.Of the
Offices, Dignities, and several Governments of the Empire. 51 CHAP. XIII.In
what manner the Tartar Han depends on the Turk. 57 CHAP. XIV. Of the Tributary
Princes to the Turks, viz. the Moldavians, Valachians, Transilvanians,
Raguseans, etc. 60 CHAP. XV. The desolation and ruin which the Turks make of
their own Country in Asia, and the Parts most remote from the Imperial Seat,
esteemed one cause of the conservation of the Empire. 67 CHAP. XVI. All
Hereditary Succession in Government, as also the preservation of an Ancient
Nobility, against the Maxims of Turkish Polity. 69 CHAP. XVII. The frequent
exchange of Officers, as the setting up one and degrading another; a Rule
always practiced as wholesome, and conducing to the welfare of the Turkish State.
75 CHAP. XVIII. The several Arts the Turks use for increase of their People, is
a Principal Policy, without which the greatness of their Empire cannot continue
nor be increased. 79 CHAP. XIX. The manner of Reception of Foreign
Ambassadors amongst the Turks, and the esteem is had of them. 83 CHAP. XX. How
Ambassadors and Public Ministers govern themselves in their Negotiations and
Residence amongst the Turks. 89 CHAP. XXI. How Christian and other Foreign
Princes in particular stand in the esteem and opinion of the Turk. 91 CHAP.
XXII. The regard the Turks have to their Leagues with Foreign Princes. 94


The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Turks Religion in general. CHAP. II. The Toleration that
Mahometanism in its Infancy promised to other Religions, and in what manner
that Agreement was afterward observed. 98 CHAP. III. The Arts wherewith the
Turkish Religion is propagated. 103 CHAP. IV. The Power and Office of the
Mufti, and the Turkish Government in Religious Matters. 105 CHAP. V. Of the
Mufti's Revenue, and from whence it does arise 109 CHAP. VI. Of the Emirs. 110
CHAP. VII. Of the Endowments of Royal Mosches, and in what nature Tithes are
given for maintenance of their Priests and Religion. 112 CHAP. VIII. Of the
nature of Predestination according to the Turkish Doctors. 115 CHAP. IX. Of the
difference of Sects, and disagreement in Religion amongst the Turks in general.
117 CHAP. X. Of the two prevailing Sects, viz. of Mahomet and Hali, that is,
the Turk and the Persian; the Errors of the Persian recounted, and confuted by
the Mufti of Constantinople. 119 CHAP. XI. Of the ancient Sects and Heresies
amongst the Turks. 122 CHAP. XII. Of the new and modern Sects arisen amongst
the Turks, and how dangerous some of them may prove for raising Sedition in the
Empire. 128 CHAP. XIII. Of their Religious Men; and first of their Dervises.
135 CHAP. XIV. Of the Order of Ebrbuhare. 141 CHAP. XV. Of the Order of
Nimetuhali. 142 CHAP. XVI. Of the Order of Kadri. 143 CHAP. XVII. Of the Order
of Kalenderi. 145 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Order of Edhemi. 147 CHAP. XIX. Of the
Order of Bectasse. 148 CHAP. XX. Of the Order of Hizrevi, or Herewi. 149 CHAP.
XXI. Of Marriages, Divorces, and how far Concubinage is indulged amongst the
Turks. 151 CHAP. XXII. Of other parts of the Turkish Religion, and first of
Circumcision. 157 CHAP. XXIII. Of the five necessary Points which are required
to constitute a true Mohammedan; viz. 1. Washings. 2. Prayers. 3. Observation of
the Ramazan. 4. The Zacat. 5. Pilgrimage. 158 CHAP. XXIV. Of the Feast of
Bairam, and the Ceremonies used at that time by the Chief Officers and
Ministers toward the Grand Signior. 162 CHAP. XXV. Of the Prohibition of
Swines-flesh and Wine. 165 CHAP. XXVI. Of their Morality, good Works, and some
certain account of their Laws; worthy observation. 166


The Third Book.
CHAP. I. Of the present state of the Military Discipline amongst the Turks. 1
CHAP. II. Of the Turkish Militia in general. 3 CHAP. III. A Computation of the
Forces arising from the Zaims and Timariots. 6 CHAP. IV. Of certain Customs and
Laws observed amongst the Zaims and Timariots. 13 CHAP. V. Of the state of the
Militia in Grand Cairo and Egypt, and of the Auxiliary Forces to the
forementioned Militia of the Turks. 14 CHAP. VI. Of the Spahees. 16 CHAP. VII.
Of the Janissaries. 22 CHAP. VIII. Whether the maintenance of an Army of
Janissaries according to the original institution, be now agreeable to the Rules
of Polity amongst the Turks. 28 CHAP. IX. Of the Chiauses. 31 CHAP. X. Of the
other parts of the Turkish Militia, viz. the Toptchi, Segbans, and Sarigias,
Gebegee, Muhlagi, Besli, and Delees. 32 CHAP. XI. Certain observations on the
Turkish Camp. 36 CHAP. XII. Of the Turks Armata, or Naval Forces at Sea. 45 The
Conclusion. 49


THE MAXIMS OF THE Turkish Polity.
CHAP. I. The Constitution of the Turkish Government being different from most
others in the World, has need of peculiar Maxims, and Rules, whereon to
establish and confirm it self.
I Have begun a Work which seems very full of difficulty and labor; for to
trace the footsteps of Government in the best formed and molded Commonwealths
(such as are supported with Reason and with Religion) is no less then to
unriddle and resolve a Mystery. For as a Commonwealth, by many Authors, O
navis referent in ma^e te novi fluctu^.
has not been unaptly compared to a Ship, in diverse respects, and proper
Allegories; so Hora^^ 14.
principally the small impression or sign of Ode Lib. 1.
track, the floating habitation leaves behind it on the Sea, in all the
traverses it makes, according to the different winds to attain its Port, is a
lively emblem of the various motions of good Government, which by reason of
circumstances; times, and multiplicity of chances and events, leaves little or
no path in all the Ocean of humane affairs.

But there must be yet certain Rules in every Government, which are the
foundations and pillars of it; not subject to the alteration of time, or any
other accident; and so essential to it, that they admit of no change, until
the whole model of Polity suffer a Convulsion, and be shaken into some other
form; which is either effected by the new laws of a Conqueror, or by intestine
and civil revolutions. Of such Maxims as these, (obvious to all who have had
any practice in the Ottoman Court) I have made a collection, subjoining to
every head some reflections and considerations of my own, which at my leisure
hours I have weighed and examined, bringing them (according to the proportion
of my weak judgment and ability) to the measure and test of reason and virtue;
as also to a similitude, and congruity with the Maxims of other Empires, to
which God has given the largest extent of Dominion.

But indeed when I have considered seriously the contexture of the Turkish
Government, the absoluteness of an Emperor without reason, without virtue,
whose speeches may be irrational, and yet must be laws; whose actions
irregular, and yet examples; whose sentence and judgment, if in matters of the
Imperial concernment, are most commonly corrupt, and yet decrees irresistible:
When I consider what little rewards there are for virtue, and no punishment for
profitable and thriving vice; how men are raised at once by adulation, chance,
and the sole favor of the Prince, without any title of noble blood, or the
motives of previous deserts, or former testimonies and experience of parts or
abilities, to the weightiest, the richest, and most honorable charges of the
Empire; when I consider how short their continuance is in them, how with one
frown of their Prince they are cut off; with what greediness above all people
in the world, they thirst and haste to be rich, and yet know their treasure is
but their snare; what they labor for is but as slaves for their great Patron
and Master, and what will inevitably effect their ruin and destruction, though
they have all the arguments of faithfulness, virtue, and moral honesty (which
are rare in a Turk) to be their advocates, and plead for them. When I consider
many other things of like nature, (which may more at large hereafter be
discoursed of) one might admire the long continuance of this great and vast
Empire, and attribute the stability thereof without change within its self, and
the increase of Dominions and constant progress of its arms, rather to some
supernatural cause, then to the ordinary Maxims of State, or wisdom of the
Governors, as if the Divine will of the all-knowing Creator, had chosen for
the good of his Church, and chastisement of the sins and vices of Christians,
to raise and support this potent people. Mihi quanto plura recentium seu
veterum revolvo, tanto magis ludibria rerum Tacit. l. 3. An.
mortalium cunctis in negotiis observantur.

But that which cements all breaches, and cures all those wounds in this body
politic, is the quickness and severity of their justice, which not considering
much the strict division and parts of distributive and commutative, makes
almost every crime equal, and punishes it with the last and extremest
chastisement, which is death; I mean those which have relation to the
Government, and are of common and public interest. Without this remedy, which
I lay down as a principal prevention of the greatest disorders, this mighty
body would burst with the poison of its own ill humors, and soon divide it self
into several Signories, as the ambition and power of the Governors most remote
from the Imperial Seat adminstred them hopes and security of becoming absolute.

In this Government, severity, violence, and cruelty are natural to it; and it
were as great an error to begin to loose the reins, and ease the people of
that oppression to which they and their forefathers have since their first
original been accustomed, as it would be in a nation freeborn, and used to
live under the protection of good laws, and the clemency of a virtuous and
Christian Prince, to exercise a Tyrannical power over their estates and lives,
and change their liberty into servitude and slavery. The Turks had the original
of their Civil Government founded in the time of war: for when they first came
out of Scythia, and took arms in their hands, and submitted unto one General,
it is to be supposed, that they had no Laws but what were Arbitrary and
Martial, and most agreeable to the enterprise and design they had then in hand,
when Tangrolipix overthrew the Persian Sultan; possessed himself of his
Dominions and Power, and called and opened the way for his companions out of
Armenia; when Cutlumuses revolted from him, and made a distinct kingdom in
Arabia: when other Princes of the Selcuccian family in the infancy of the
Turkish power had by wars among themselves, or by Testament made division of
their possessions; when ( Anno 1300) Ottoman, by strange fortunes, and from
small beginnings swallowed up all the other Governments into the Ogusian Tribe,
and united them under one head, until at last it arrived to that greatness and
power it now enjoys. The whole condition of Ma Experati che gli hanno, e che
cominoiano ad essere in veneratione, etc. Machi. c. 6. del Prencipe.
this people was but a continued state of war; wherefore it is not strange, if
their laws are severe, and in most things arbitrary; that the Emperor should be
absolute and above law, and that most of their customs should run in a certain
channel and course most answerable to the height and unlimited power of the
Governor, and consequently to the oppression and subjection of the people: and
that they should thrive most by servitude, be most happy, prosperous and
contented under Tyranny, is as natural to them, as to a body to be nourished
with that diet, which it had from its infancy or birth been acquainted with.
But not only is Tyranny requisite for this people, and a stiff rein to curb
them, lest by an unknown liberty they grow mutinous and unruly, but likewise
the large territories and remote parts of the Empire require speedy
preventions, without processes of law, or formal indictment: jealousy and
suspicion of mis-government being license and authority enough for the Emperor
to inflict his severest punishments: all which depends upon the absoluteness of
the Prince; which because it is that whereby the Turks are principally
supported in their greatness, and is the prime Maxim and Foundation of their
State, we shall make it the discourse and subject of the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. The absoluteness of the Emperor is a great support of the Turkish
Empire.
Sultan Mahomet Han the present Emperor of the Turks aged 23: years Anno 1666


THe Turks having (as is before declared) laid the first foundation of their
Government with the principles most agreeable to Military Discipline, their
Generals or Princes, whose will and lusts they served, became absolute Masters
of their Lives and Estates; so that what they gained and acquired by the Sword
with labors, perils, and sufferings, was appropriated to the use and benefit
of their Great Master. All the delightful fields of Asia, the pleasant plains
of Tempe and Thrace, all the plenty of Egypt and fruitfulness of the Nile, the
luxury of Corinth, The largeness of the Turkish Empire.
the substance of Peleponesus, Athens, Lemnos, Scio, and Mitylen, with other
Isles of the Aegean Sea, the Spices of Arabia, and the riches of a great part
of Persia, all Armenia, the Provinces of Pontus, Galatia, Bythinia, Phrygia,
Lycia, Pamphylia, Palestine, Caelosiria and Phaenicia, Colchis, and a great
part of Georgia, the tributary principalities of Moldavia and Valachia,
Romania, Bulgaria and Servia, and the best part of Hungary, concur all together
to satifise the appetite of one single person; all the extent of this vast
territory, the Lands and Houses, as well as the Castles and Arms, are the
proper goods of the Grand Signior, in his sole disposal and gift they remain,
whose possession and right they are; only to lands dedicated to religious uses,
the Grand Signior disclaims all right or claim; and this he so piously observes
(to the shame of our Sectaries in England, who violate the penetralia of the
Sanctuary) that when a Bashaw, though afterward convicted of Treason, bestows
any lands or rents on any certain Mosch or Temple, that grant or gift is good
and exempted from any disposal or power of the Grand Signior. The lands being
thus originally in the Grand Signior, after the Conquests were made, and the
Country secured, and in condition to be distributed, divisions were made of the
houses, manors, and farms among the Soldiery, whom they call Timars, as the
reward and recompense of their valor and labor; in consideration of which,
every one proportionably to his revenue and possession, is obliged to maintain
horse and men to be always ready when the Grand Signior shall call him forth to
serve him in the wars; by which means the whole Country being in the hand of
the Soldiery, all places are the better strengthened, and the conquered people
more easily kept from Mutiny and Rebellion; not much unlike our tenure of
Knights-service in England, and lands held of the Crown, but with this
difference, that we enjoy them by the title of a fixed and settled Law, never to
be forfeited but upon Treason and Rebellion; they enjoy them also by
inheritance derived from the Father to the Son, but yet as usufructuary during
the pleasure of the Emperor, in whom the propriety is always reserved, and who
does often as his humor and fancy leads him to please and gratify a stranger,
dispossess an ancient possessor, whose family has for many generations enjoyed
that inheritance. Sometimes I have heard with the sighs of some, and the curse
of others, how the Grand Signior heated in his hunting, and pleased with the
refreshment of a little cool and crystal water, presented him by a poor
Paisant; has in recompense thereof freed the Tenant from the rent of his
Landlord, and by his sole word confirmed to him the Cottage he lived in, the
Woods, Gardens and Fields he manured, with as sound a title, as our long deeds
and conveyances secure our purchases and inheritances in England; and this the
former Master dares not name injustice, because this Tenant is now made
proprietor by the will of the Grand Signior, which was the same title and claim
with his; preseription, tenant-right, and custom availing nothing in this case.
For if the inheritance has been anciently derived from Father to Son; the more
is the goodness and bounty of the Emperor to be acknowledged, that has
permitted so long a succession of his favors to run in one family, in whose
power it was to transfer it to others.

The absolute and unlimited power of this Prince is more evident by the titles
they give him, as God on earth, the shadow of God, Brother to the Sun and Moon,
the giver of all earthly Crowns, etc. And though they do not build and erect
Altars to him, as was done to the Roman Emperors, when that people degenerated
into a fashion of deformed adulation, wherein Italy is at present corrupted;
yet the conception they have of his power, the Ray they conceive to be in him
of divine illumination, is a kind of imagery, and idolatrous fancy they frame
of his divinity. It is an ordinary saying among the Turkish Cadees and Lawyers,
That the Grand Signior is above the Law; that is, whatsoever law is written, is
controllable, and may be contradicted by him: his mouth is the law it self, and
the power of an infallible interpretation is in him; and though the Mufti is
many times, for custom, formality and satisfaction of the people consulted
with, yet when his sentences have not been agreeable to the designs intended, I
have known him in an instant thrown from his office to make room for another
oracle better prepared for the purpose of his Master. Some maintain that the
very oaths and promises of the Grand Signior are always revocable, when the
performance of his vow is a restriction to the absolute power of the Empire.
And I remember when my Lord Ambassador has sometimes complained of the breach
of our capitulations, and pleaded that the Grand Signior had no power by simple
commands to infringe articles of peace, to which he had obliged himself by
solemn oaths and vows; the Interpreters have very gently touched that point,
and been as nice to question how far the power of the Grand Signior extended,
as we ought to be in the subtle points of the divine Omnipotence, but rather
in contemplation of the Grand Signiors justice, wisdom, faith, and clemency,
insinuated arguments of honor, convenience, and justice in maintaining the
league inviolate with the King of England. It was Justinians rule concerning
the Prerogative of Princes, Etsi legibus soluti sumus, tamen legibus vivimus.
That is, although the Majesty of Princes, and the necessity of having a supreme
head in all governments, did free and privilege them from all punishment, and
exempt them from the censure and correction of law, that no earthly power could
call them to account for their errors or disorders in this world; yet it is
necessary to the Being of an absolute Monarch, to be a severe executioner of
the Laws of his Country, and it is more his interest and security, then to act
without rule, and always to make use of the power of absolute dominion, which
is to be applied like Physic, when the ordinary force of nature cannot remove
the malignancy of some peccant humors. The Grand Signior himself is also
restrained by laws, but without impeachment to his absolute jurisdiction. For
when there is a new Emperor, it is the custom to conduct him with great pomp
and triumph to a place in the Suburbs of Constantinople called Job, where is an
ancient Monument of some certain Prophet, or Holy man, whom the Turks for want
of knowledge in Antiquity and History, style that Job, who was recorded for the
mirror of constancy and patience. For they confound all History in Chronology,
saying that Job was Solomon's judge of the Court, and Alexander the Great,
Captain of his army. At this place Solemn Prayers are made, that God would
prosper and infuse wisdom into him, who is to manage so great a charge. Then
the Mufti embracing him, bestows his benediction, and the Grand Signior swears
and promises solemnly to maintain the Musleman Faith, and laws of the Prophet
Mahomet; and then the Visiers of the Bench, and other Bashaws, with profound
reverence and humility, kissing the ground first, and then the hemme of his
vest, acknowledge him their lawful and undoubted Emperor: and after this form
of inauguration, he returns with the like solemnity and magnificence to the
Seraglio, (which is always the seat of the Ottoman Emperors.) And thus the Gr.
Sig. retains, and obliges himself to govern within the compass of Laws, but
they give him so large a latitude, that he can no more be said to be bound or
limited, than a man who has the world to rove in can be termed a prisoner,
because he cannot exceed the Enclosure of the Universe. For though he be
obliged to the execution of the Mohammedan Law, yet that Law calls the Emperor
the Mouth and Interpreter of it, and endues him with power to alter and annul
the most settled and fixed Rules, at least to wave and dispense with them when
they are an obstacle to his Government, and contradict (as we said before) any
great design of the Empire. But the lea^^ed Doctors among the Turks more
clearly restrain the Imperial power only to the observation of that which is
Religious in the Mohammedan Law, saying, That in matters which are Civil his Law
is Arbitrary, and needs no other Judge or Legislator than his own will. Hence
it is that they say, the Grand Signior can never be deposed or made accountable
to any for his crimes, whilst he destroys causelessly of his Subjects under the
number of 1000 a day; and in like manner hence it is, that though the Mohammedan
Law determines the testimony of two Witnesses of that Faith to be valid for the
determination of all cases of difference; yet by our Capitulations it is
provided, that no Turkish Witnesses of what number or quality soever can avail
against any of the English Nation, by reason that the case being Civil is
dispensable by the Imperial power; but I doubt, were any matter in question
Criminal, (as we have never, God be praised, had occasion to put it to trial)
the Capitulations would be forced to yield to the Mohammedan Law, as being
Religious and Divine, with which the Sultan has no power to dispense. Of what
consequence and benefit this absolute power has been to the Turks, is evident
by the extent of their Empire and success of their Arms. For if the Sultan
pleases the Soldiery, no matter how the people in this constitution is
contented; and this was the conclusion of Machiavel upon this Government, in
the 19. Chapter of his Book del Prencipe. And it must needs be a great
advantage to a Commander, when the Utile and Justum are reconciled and made the
same, and that he meets no contradiction or opposition at home, which may
retard or cross the great designs abroad. The Emperor of Germany had doubtless
sooner encountered the Turks, and given a stop to his free entrance the first
year of the late War into Hungary, had he been absolute of the whole Empire,
and not necessitated to expect the consent of his several Princes, and the
result of a Diet, when the Turks were even ready to enter Germany. For when
many heads or hands are required, all business moves slowly, and more time is
spent in agreement of the manner of action, in arguments and debates, (which
are most commonly carried on by faction) than in the most difficult point of
execution. It would seem a great clog to the Grand Signior to be obliged to
depend on the bounty of his Subjects when he would make a War, or on the
judgment of a Lawyer that should contradict and censure the actions of his
Prince as irregular, and exceeding the privileges of his Prerogative. It is
very difficult to understand how it is possible with these fetters for any
Country or City ever to arrive to that height, as to be termed the Mistress of
a great Empire, or a Prince be said to have a long arm, or embrace a large
compass of the Globe, who is pinioned with the bands of his own Laws. But I
confess it is a blessing and wonderful happiness of a people, to be Subjects of
a gracious Prince, who has prescribed his power within the compass of wholesome
Laws, acknowledged a right of possession and propriety of Estate as well in his
Subjects as himself, who does not punish the innocent with the guilty, nor
oppress without distinction, nor act the part of that King whom God gives in
his wrath. But then they must content themselves with their own borders, or
some neighboring conquest, and this is better, and a greater glory and
content, than the honor of being Slaves to the lust of a Monarch, whose Titles
c^mprehend the greatest part of the world.

CHAP. III. The Lesson of Obedience to their Emperor is taught by the Turks,
as a Principle of Religion rather than of State.
THE absolute power in the Prince implies an exact obedience in the Subjects;
and to instill and confirm that Principle no art or industry is wanting, in the
education of those who are placed in the Seraglio, with design of preferment to
Offices and great Charges; so that even the Oath of Obedience which Friars and
other Religious men vow to their Superiors at their first initiation into
Ecclesiastical Orders, is not more exactly or devoutly observed or professed by
them, than this Doctrine of submission to the will of their great master is
carefully taught to his young Scholars, who stand Probationers and Candidates
for all the Governments of the Empire. To die by the hand or command of the
Grand Signior, when the blow is submitted to, with entire resignation, is
taught to be the highest point of Martyrdom; and whose good fortune it is so to
suffer is immediately transported to Paradise. Kara Mustapha Passaw (a great
Vizier) after he had been so successeful in all matters of his charge, and
proved so excellent an Instrument of victories and services to his Master, that
he was applauded by all to be a most happy and fortunate Minister, was so
sensible of his own condition, and the favor of his Prince, that he confessed
he was now arrived to the greatest glory and perfection he could in this life
aspire to, and only wanted the holy Martyrdom, to die by the order and sentence
of the Grand Signior as the reward of his faithfulness, and the consummation of
all his Honors.

Such as receive any wages or pay coming from the Exchequer, or any Office
depending on the Crown, have the title of Kul, which is, the Grand Signiors
Slave: such is the great Vizier and all the Pashaws of the Empire, and it is
more honorable than the condition and name of Subject; for they have a
privilege over these, and can revile, beat and abuse them with authority; but
the Subject cannot offer the least injury to the Slave without danger of severe
punishment. Slavery among the Turks denotes a condition of entire resignation
to the will and command of the Emperor, to perform whatsoever he signifies; or
if possible, what he conceives: though he command whole Armies of them to
precipitate themselves from a Rock, or build a Bridge with piles of their
bodies for him to pass Rivers, or to kill one another to afford him pastime and
pleasure. They that have been where they have seen and known the manner of this
blind obedience, may well cry out, O homines ad servitutem paratos! And
doubtless the flattery used in the Seraglio toward the Prince by those that
are near his person, is proportionable to this condition of slavery they
profess, and cannot but fancy a strange kind of projected baseness in all the
deportment within the Walls of the Seraglio, when there appears so much
condescension abroad to all the lusts and evil inclinations of their Master; so
that a Qui libertatem publicam noollet, cum profota servintium patintiae
tedebat. Tac.
generous Prince (as some have been found among the Ottoman Emperors) though
he desired not the public liberty, would yet be weary of this slavish
compliance, and seek other counsel and means to inform himself of the true
state of his own and other Kings Dominions, then such as proceed from men
unexperienced in any other Court or Country then that they live in. This
flattery and immoderate subjection has doubtless been the cause of the decay
of the Turkish discipline in the time of Sultan Ibrahim, when Women governed,
and now in this present age of Sultan Mahomet, whose counsels are given chiefly
by his Mother, Negroes, Eunuchs, and some handsome young Mosayp or Favorite;
seldom any from without being permitted, or have their spirits emboldened to
declare a truth, or are called to give their counsel in matters of greatest
importance. So that this obedience which brave and wise Emperors have made use
of in the advancement of noble exploits, and enlargement of their Empire, is
with effeminate Princes (delighted with flattery) the snare of their own
greatness, and occasion of weak counsels and means in the management of great
designs. If a man seriously consider the whole com psition of the Turkish
Court, he will find it to be a Prison and Banniard of Slaves, differing from
that where the Galley-slaves are immured, only by the ornaments and glittering
outside and appearances: here their chains are made of Iron, and there of gold,
and the difference is only in a painted shining servitude, from that which is a
squalid, sordid, and a noisome slavery. For the youths educated in the Seraglio
(which we shall have occasion to discourse of in the next Chapter) are kept as
it were within a prison, under a strange severity of discipline, some for 20,
30, others 40. years, others the whole time of the age of man, and grow gray
under the correction of their Hogiaes or Tutors. The two Brothers of this
present Grand Signior, are also imprisoned here, restrained with a faithful and
careful guard, and perhaps are sometimes permitted out of grace and favor into
the presence of their Brother, to kiss His Vest, and to perform the offices of
duty and humility before their Prince. The Ladys also of the Seraglio have
their faithful keepers of the black guard to attend them, and can only have the
liberty of enjoying the air which passes through grates and lattices, unless
sometime they obtain license to sport and recreate themselves in the Garden,
separated from the sight of men by walls higher then those of any Nunnery.

Nay, if a man considers the contexture of the whole Turkish Government, he
will find it such a Fabric of slavery, that it is a wonder if any amongst them
should be born of a free ingenuous spirit. The Grand Signior is born of a
slave, the Mother of the present being a Circhasian, taken perhaps by the
Tartars, in their incursions into that Country. The Visiers themselves are not
always free born by Father or Mother; for the Turks get more children by their
slaves then by their wives, and the continual supply of slaves sent in by the
Tartars, taken from different Nations, by way of the black sea, (as hereafter
we shall have occasion to speak more fully) fills Constantinople with such a
strange race, mixture, and medly of different sorts of blood, that it is hard
to find many that can derive a clear line from ingenious Parents: So that it is
no wonder that amongst the Turks a disposition be found fitted and disposed for
servitude, and that is better governed with a severe and tyrannous hand, then
with sweetness and lenity, unknown to them and their forefathers: as Grotius
takes this Maxim out of Aristotle, Quosdam homines natura esse servos; i. e.
ad servitutem aptos; and ita populi quidem, eo sunt ingenio ut regi quam regere
norint rectius. But since it appears that submission and subjection are so
incident to the nature of the Turks, and obedience taught, and so carefully
instilled into them with their first Rudiments; it may be a pertinent question,
how it comes to pass, that there are so many mutinies and rebellions as are
seen and known amongst the Turks, and those commonly the most insolent,
violent, and desperate that we read of in story. To let pass the mutinies of
former times in the Ottoman Camp, and the usual, though short rebellions of
ancient days: I shall instance in the causes and beginnings of two notorious
disturbances, or rather madnesses of the Soldiery not mentioned in any
History, which being passages of our age, deserve greatly to be recorded.

This obedience then that is so diligently taught and instilled into the
Turkish Militia (as to the Spahees in their Seraglios, or Seminaries; Spahees
the Turkish horse.
the Janissaries in their chambers) sometimes is forgot when the passions and
animosities of the Court (by which inferior affections are most commonly
regulated) corrupt that Discipline, which its reason and sobriety instituted.
For the affections of Princes are endued with a general influence, when two
powerful parties aspiring both to greatness and authority, allure the Soldiers
to their respective factions, and engage them in a civil war amongst
themselves; and hence proceed seditions, destruction of Empires, the overthrow
of Commonwealths, and the violent death of great Ministers of State.

And so it happened when ill government and unprosperous successes of war, caused
disobedience in the Soldiery, which some emulous of the greatness of those
that were in power, nourished and raised to make place for themselves or their
party. For in the time of Sultan Mahomet, the present Grand Signior, when the
whole government of the Empire rested in the hands of one Mulki Kadin, a young
audacious woman, by the extraordinary favor and love of the Queen Mother (who,
as it was divulged, exercised an unnatural kind of carnality with the said
Queen) so that nothing was left to the counsel and order of the Vizier and
grave Seniors, but was first to receive approbation and authority from her; the
black Eunuchs and Negroes gave laws to all, and the cabinet councels were held
in the secret appartments of the women; and there were proscriptions made,
Officers discharged, or ordained as were most proper to advance the interest of
this Feminine Government. But at length, the soldiery (not used to the tyranny
of women) no longer supporting this kind of servitude, in a moment resolved on
a remedy, and in great tumults came to the Seraglio, where commanding the Grand
Signior himself to the Kiosch, or banqueting house, demanded without further
prologue the heads of the favorite Eunuchs; there was no argument or Rhetoric
to be opposed to this unreasonable multitude, nor time given for delays, or
consultation; but every one of the accused, as he was entered into the soldiers
roll or catalogue, and required, being first strangled, was afterward thrown
headlong from the wall of the Garden, and committed to the farther
satisfaction of their enemies revenge, by whom from thence they were dragged to
the Hyppodromo, and before the new Mosque cut into small pieces, and their
flesh roasted and eaten by them. The day following, they apprehended Mulki, and
her husband Schaban Kalfa, both whom they put to death; nor ended this tumult
here, until by means of dissension between the Spahees and Janissaries, the
principal Ministers found means and opportunity to interpose their power; and
having executed several of the Spahees, and performed other exemplary parts of
Justice, reduced matters to some kind of quietness and composure; and thus
order results often from confusion, and tumults in corrupted Commonwealths have
operated good effects to the redress of several evils. But besides this
insurrection or mutiny of the Janissaries, have succeeded diverse other; but
because there has been no disorder amongst them so notorious and memorable, as
that which occasioned the death of Kiosem, Grandmother to the present Sultan,
we have thought fit to record the certain particulars of it to all posterity.

CHAP. IV. A true relation of the designs managed by the old Queen, Wife of
Sultan Ahmet, and Mother of Sultan Morat, and Sultan Ibrahim, against her
Grandchild Sultan Mahomet who now Reigns; and of the death of the said Queen
and her Accomplices.
AFter the murder of Sultan Ibrahim, by conspiracy of the Janissaries, Sultan
Mahomet (eldest son of the late deceased Emperor, a child of nine years old)
succeeded in the throne of his father; and the tuition of him, and
administration of the Government (during his minority) was committed to the old
Queen, the Grandmother, called Kiosem; a Lady, who through her long
experience, and practice in affairs, was able, and proper for so considerable
an office; and so the young Sultan was conducted to the Mosch of Eiub, where
with the accustomed Ceremonies, his sword was girt to his side, and he
proclaimed Emperor through all the Kingdoms and Provinces of his Dominions.

For some time this old Queen governed all things according to her pleasure,
until the Mother of this young Sultan (as yet trembling with the thoughts of
the horrid death of her Lord; and fearing lest the subtle and old Politician
the Grandmother (who had compassed the death of her husband) should likewise
contrive the Murder of her Son, grew hourly more jealous of his life and
safety; which suspicion of hers was augmented by the knowledge she had of the
ambitious and haughty spirit of the Grandmother, and the private treaties, and
secret correspondence she held with the Janissaries, which compelled her to a
resolution of making a faction likewise with the Spahees, and Pashaws, and
Beyes, who had received their Education in the Seraglio, being a party always
opposite to the Janissaries. These she Courted by Letters, and Messages,
complaining of the death and Murder of the Sultan her Husband, the Pride and
Insolence of the Janissaries; and small esteem was had of her Son, their
undoubted Prince; adding, that if they provided not for their own safety, the
Old Queen would abolish both the name and order of Spahees. The Asiatick
Spahees awakened hereat, with a considerable Army marched to Scutari under the
Conduct of Gurgi Nebi, and demanded the heads of those who had been the
traitors and conspirators against the sacred Life of their late Sovereign; all
which were then under the protection of the Janissaries, and supported by the
powerful Authority of the Queen Regent. Upon this Alarm, the Grand Vizier,
(called Morat Pashaw) who had had his Education amongst the Janissaries, being
adored by them as an Oracle, and engaged with them in the late Treason against
the Sultan, speedily passed over from Constantinople to Scutari, with an Army
of Janissaries, and others of his favorites and followers, transporting
likewise Artillery and all necessaries for entrenchment; some skirmishes passed
between the Vanguard of the Spahees and the Deli (which are the Visiers Guard)
and thereby had engaged both the Armies; but that the two Chief Justices of
Anatolia and Greece interposing with their grave and religious countenances,
preached to them of the danger and impiety there was in the effusion of
Musselmins or believers blood; and that, had they any just pretenses, their
plea should be heard, and all differences decided by the Law. These, and such
like persuasions made impression on Gurgi Nebi and other Spahees; and the
posture they found their Adversaries in, to give them battle, made them
inclinable to hearken to proposals for accommodation; but especially their
courages were abated by what the Justices had declared, that in case they
repaired not to their own homes, the Vizier was resolved to burn all the Rolls,
and proclaim a general Nesiraum through the whole Empire: (which is an Edict of
the King and Mufti, commanding all the Turks of his Kingdoms from seven years
old and upward to arm and follow him to the war.)

The Spahees hereupon dispersed themselves; and from their retreat increased
the Pride of the Janissaries faction, and of their chief Commanders, viz. Bectas
Aga, highly favored by the Queen Regent; Kul Kiahia Lieutenant of the
Janissaries, and Kara Chiaus a follower of Bectas, who now esteemed themselves
absolute Masters of the Empire. These three now governed all matters,
contriving in their secret Councils the destruction of the Spahees; especially
those famed for riches and valor; and as one of the first rank, gave order to
the Pasha of Anatolia to take away the life of Gurgi Nebi, whom accordingly he
one day assaulted in his quarters, and being abandoned by his Soldiers shot
him with a Pistol, and sent his head to Constantinople.

The Spahees exasperated hereat, entered into private Councils and Conspiracies
in Anatolia against the Janissaries, drawing to their party several Beyes and
Pashaws of Asia (and particularly one Ipsir a Circasian born, but educated in
the Seraglio, a Person of a courageous spirit, and powerful in men and
treasure) assaulted many quarters of the Janissaries in Asia, and cutting off
their arms and noses, miserably slaughtered as many as fell into their hands.

On the other party Bectas Aga, secure in his condition, amassed wealth with
both hands by new impositions, rapine, and other arts; causing to be coined at
Belgrade 300 thousand Aspers, one third silver, and two of tin; these Aspers
he dispersed amongst the Tradesmen and Artisans, forcing others to exchange his
false metal for Gold, at the value of 160 Aspers for the Hungarian Ducat. The
people sensible of the cheat, begun a mutiny in the quarter of the Sadlers at
Constantinople, which increased so fast, that the whole City was immediately in
a general uproar: this tumult was violently carried to the place of the Mufti,
whom they forced with the Seigh (who is the Grand Signiors Preacher) and the
Nakib Esref, or Primate of the Mohammedan Race, to accompany them to the
Seraglio, where at the inward gate of the Royal Lodgings, with clamours and
outcries they made their complaint. In this danger the Grand Signior was
advised by the Capi Agasi, and Solomon Aga, the Kuzlir Aga or chief Eunuch of
the Women, that this happy conjuncture was to be embraced for the destruction
of Bectas and his accomplices; but fear, and too much caution hindered that
design for the present; only it was judged fit, for satisfaction of the
multitude, that Metek Ahmet Pashaw (then Prime Vizier, and yet a slave to the
lusts of the Janissaries) should be deprived his office; which was immediately
effected; and the Seal taken from him was delivered to Siaus Pashaw, a Stout
and Valiant person. This Vizier being jealous of his own honor, and jealous
for the safety of the Empire, cast about all ways to suppress the arrogance of
Bectas and his adherents; lest the like shame, and misfortune should befall
him, as did to Murad Pasha one of his late Predecessors in the Office of
Vizier, who for dissenting from Bectas in opinion, had lost his life, had he
not escaped his fury by flying into Greece. The times were also troublesome,
and full of danger; the Janissaries kept guard in the streets, not suffering so
much as two Citizens to walk together, for prevention of secret consultations;
many Artisans, or handy-crafts-men were imprisoned, as principal in the late
tumult, against the consent and order of the new Vizier; the Court was also
divided; The Sultans party contrived to surprise and kill the rebellious
Commanders of the Janissaries, and that the day following, the Lieutenant of the
Baltagees, or Hatchet-men, should encounter Kul-chiachia as he came according
to custom to the Divan, and slay him; but the Old Queen being of a contrary
faction, with threats and menaces frighted that Officer from his design. The
two Queens were exasperated highly against each other; one to maintain the
Authority of her Son, and the other her own; in the City the confusion grew
greater; the Janissaries were not pleased with the election of Siaus Passa,
knowing him to be averse to their faction; but yet considering the state of the
times, they endeavored with fair promises to allure him to their party. The
Old Queen by Letters advised Bectos of all matters that were discoursed in the
Seraglio, intimating that the Young Queen was Author of all these disturbances,
and that therefore as a remedy of all these evils, it was necessary, that
Sultan Mahomet should be deposed, and his younger Brother Solomon placed in his
stead, who having a Mother, would be absolutely subject to her tuition: she
added likewise that Solomon was a lusty youth, corpulent and Majestical,
whereas Sultan Mahomet was lean, weakly, and unable for the Crown. Bectas
having received this message from the Queen Regent, assembled a Council at
Orta-giami, (that is the Janissaries Moseh) where was great and solemn
appearance both of the Soldiery and Lawyers, (which latter are of the
spiritual function among them) some out of friendship to their party, and
others for fear of their power; only the Vizier was wanting, whom they sent to
invite, out of an opinion that he might be drawn to their side, and in case
they found him opposite, then not to suffer him to escape alive from their
Councils. It was then two hours in the night, when this message came to the
Vizier; and though it was against the state, and gravity of a Vizier to go to
any, but his Master; yet he thought it now time to dissemble, and overcome the
greatness of his mind; and so with a private retinue went to the Mosch, where
the first he encountered was a Guard of ten thousand Janissaries armed with their
Muskets and Matches lighted, which at first so dismayed him that he had some
thoughts of returning; but afterward recovering himself, and taking courage,
resolved to proceed; and coming to the Mosch, Bectas vouchsafed not to meet
him, but sent another to perform that Ceremony; at which neglect though the
greatness of his spirit could scarce contain it self; yet suppressing his
choler, addressed himself to the feet of Bectas, who scarce arising gave him a
faint wellcom; and setting him on his left hand, (which is the upper hand with
the Turkish Soldiery) began to propound to him his new designs, and first that
it was necessary, that the present King should be deposed, and Solomon Crowned
in his place; that the Canons of the Imperial Seraglio should be reformed; and
that whereas the Children of diverse Nations were yearly collected for the
service of the Grand Signior, none should for the future have admission there,
but the Sons of Janissaries: The Vizier consented to all that was proposed,
professing a sincere affection and reality to them, and their party, swearing
upon the Alchoran, with the most horrid imprecations on himself, and his
family, if he were not faithful to them and their designs; which gave Bectas
that satisfaction that he began to persuade himself, that the Vizier was really
a confiding person, and one affectionate to their interest; and so partly from
this consideration, and partly out of a confidence of his own strength, and
inability of the Vizier to hurt him, fairly took his leave of him, and so
dismissed his Kalaba Divan, or his confused Council. But the Chiachia Bei (or
Lieutenant General of the Janissaries, and Kara-Chians reproved very much Bectas
for permitting the Vizier to escape with his life, saying, he had done ill in
suffering the bird to escape out of the Cage; that he had released one, and
permitted him to carry his head on his shoulders, who would shortly take off
theirs, with many words of the like effect. But Bectas slighted their reproof,
as proceeding from want of courage, and the ignorance of their own power; and
that the time until morning was so short, that should the Vizier intend to
countermine them, he was wholly unable, being unprovided both of Power and
Council. The Vizier being got free, went apace to the Seraglio, with two men
only, thanking God as he walked, that he was freed from the hands of those
Tyrants and Villains; and coming to the Iron gate, intending to pass through
the Garden, he found it open contrary to the custom, and enquiring of the
Bostangees or Gardiners the reason, he could learn nothing farther from them,
then that it was the order of the Old Queen; who (as it appeared afterward)
expected her Confidents who might withdraw her that night into some retirement
where she might remain secure from the dangers of the ensuing day. The Vizier
being entered, went softly to the Sultans apartments, and in his way by good
chance met with the Kuzlir-Agasi Solomon Aga, the chief Eunuch of the Women,
who in the dark was making his rounds about the old Queens Lodgings; by the
Visiers voice Solomon knew who he was, but was amazed at his unseasonable
Visit, yet understanding the business, thanked him for his Vigilance; adding,
that he had also observed that the Old Queen contrary to her custom, was not
yet gone to bed, who did at other times at two hours in the night dispose her
self to rest, only this Evening she had entertained her self in company of her
Eunuchs, and Favorites, with Music, Singing and other unusual delights.
Wherefore after some short deliberation, the Vizier, Solomon Aga, and others of
the Kings Eunuchs went to the quarters of the Old Queen, and offering to enter
forcibly, were repulsed by the Queens Eunuchs; but Solomon Aga being a stout
man drew his Dagger and struck the chief Chamberlain Bash Kapa Oglar on the
face, upon which the other Eunuchs who accompanied Solomon entered furiously
with their Daggers, at which the Eunuchs of the Queen flying, she remained
alone in the Chamber, where she was committed to the Custody of the Kings
Eunuchs. The fugitive Eunuchs would immediately have escaped out of the
Seraglio, but the Gates were first shut by order of Solomon Aga, so that they
with all other favorites of the said Queen were taken and secured in safe
hands. This Victory was so secretly obtained, that they received no alarm in
the Royal Lodgings, though near adjoining; so that the Vizier and Solomon Aga
went to the Chamber where the King slept, and lifting up the Antiport, made a
sign of silence to the Ladies of the Guard, commanding by dumb motions that the
Young Queen should be awakened (for it is the custom in the Grand Signiors
Court to speak by signs, to prevent noise, and as if there were some point in
it of Majesty and decency, they have practiced this mute language so fully,
that they are able to recount stories in it) The Ladies hereupon gently rubbing
the Queens feet, raised her out of her sleep, and gave her to understand that
Solomon Aga would speak with her; whereat the Queen surprised, leapt from her
bed to speak with him, and was scarce informed of the business before she
became so affrighted, that she could not contain her self within the bounds of
moderation or silence, but with a great cry ran to take her Son as one
distracted, and catching him up in her arms, cried out, O Son, you and I are
dead; the Grand Signior likewise as a Child bewailed himself, and falling at
the feet of Solomon Aga, said, Lala, Lala Kurtar-beni; which is Tutor, Tutor
save me: He not without tears took his Lord into his arms, and with the Vizier
encouraged the Child and his Mother, protesting that they would rather die,
then live to behold so horrid a ruin; and so accompanied him (some Ladies
carrying before Torches lighted in their hands, to the Hozoda, which is the
Presence Chamber or place where the Principal Officers of the Court attend)
Upon the approach of the Torches, the Guard which watched in this Chamber was
amazed, and walking toward the light to discover what there was, perceived
that the Grand Signior was coming thither, and thereupon rerurned again with
all haste to awaken their companions, and calling them immediately to repair to
their due service. The Grand Signior being seated on a Throne, which is always
remaining in the Presence Chamber; the Officers hereof (which are in number
forty) presented themselves before him, desiring to know if His Majesty had any
thing wherein to employ their Fidelity and Service. Hereat Solomon Aga said, He
that eats the Kings Bread, should apply himself to the Kings service; we
suffered the Traitots to destroy Sultan Ibrahim, and now they would also take
this out of our hands; To you it belongs, who are His Majesty's Principal
Servitors, to afford him your utmost assistance. Eigiuse Mussapha Passa
Sword Bearer to the Grand Signior, and chief of the Presence Chamber, a man of
a Lions Heart and undaunted resolution, understood something formerly of the
bad inclinations of the old Queen to wards the King, readily replied, Great
Master be not troubled, tomorrow you shall see (God willing) the Heads of your
Enemies at your feet. The Vizier and others in the mean time after a short
Consult, fell to act, the exigencie of their Affairs admitting no delays; and
in the first place, Pen and Ink being brought, an Order was presented to the
Grand Signior to be subscribed for arresting the BossangiPasha as a Traitor,
for having against the rule of the night kept open the Gate of the Kings
Garden. This was done in an instant, he removed from his Office and another
constituted in his place, and at the same time the Oath of Allegiance was
administered to him, who calling together the Gardiners in number about 500.
caused them also all to swear faithful obedience to the Grand Signior, and to
remain all that night, keeping good Guard at the Gates and Walls of the
Gardens. In the next place the Ichoglans were called up (who are the Grand
Signiors Pages) and to proceed with the more privacy and least confusion, they
went first to the Chamber of the Capa Agasi (who by his Office is over all the
Youth of the Seraglio) and knocking gently at the Window, the Guards came at
the noise, and demanded what the matter was? they answered, Awake the Capa Aga,
and let him speak to us at the Window. But the Capa Aga would first know who
they were that would speak with him: and when it was told him that it was the
Vizier and the Kuslir Aga, he answered, I am indisposed and cannot rise, but
utter what you have to say at the Window; so they said, by His Majesty's Order
go and raise all the Ichoglans in the Seraglio, upon an important occasion; and
yet the Capa Agasi would not stir, so that some believed him confederate in the
Conspiracy; but the truth was, he was an ancient Man of 90 years, and
unhealthful in his body. Wherefore Solomon Aga cried out with a loud voice, Aga
raise the Ichoglans, Our King is ready to be taken out of our hands; but the
Capa Agasi persisted that he would not raise the Ichoglans or Pages, unless he
brought a Command in writing from the King. In the Interim the Servants of the
Capa Aga awakened, and hearing his discourse, could not contain themselves, but
without farther order run to both the greater and lesser Chamber of the Pages;
the Butler came to that which is called the greater Chamber; it was then five
hours in the night when he entered in, and running to the middle of the Chamber
which was 80 paces in length, he made a stop and clapped his hands together;
(To make such a noise in the Seraglio at night is a high misdemeanor) at which
some being awakened, raised up their heads, and startled at such an unusual
alarm, enquired the reason of it; at which he again clapping his hands, and
crying out, Arise, the Grand Signior is like to be taken out of our hands, the
whole Chamber was raised; so that you might have seen all the Ichoglans in
number above 600. to rise and run in a confused manner, some without Clothes,
some without Arms to fight, some to fly, supposing the Janissaries were already
entered the Seraglio. In this amaze came a Guard of Black and White Eunuchs to
the door, advising them to arm themselves with what weapons were next at hand,
and there to remain until they received farther Orders. All the other Chambers
of Pages and Officers were in the same confusion, and were commanded in the
like manner to arm themselves. The Grand Signior all this time fearing he
should be put to Death as his Father was, could not be pacified until Mustapha
Pasha his Sword Bearer taking him by the hand, showed him his Attendants all
armed, and ready at his command; and passing by one of the Windows of the
Lodgings, was descryed by a young man, who cried out with a loud Voice (God
grant our King ten thousand years of life) at which all the Chamber shouted, A
shout used by the Turks when they fight.
Allah, Allah; this acclamation rang through all the Seraglio, so that it
reached the more remote quarters of the Drogists, Cooks, Poleaxe-men,
Faulconers and others; who being ready and armed as the others, answered with
the like shout.

These preparations were not only in the Seraglio, but likewise without; for
the Vizier had given order to all the Pashaws and Beglerbegs and other his
Friends, that without delay they should repair to the Seraglio with all the
force they could make, bringing with them three days provisions, obliging them
under pain of Death to this Duty. In a short space so great was this concourse,
that all the Gardens of the Seraglio, the outward Courts and all the adjoining
streets were filled with armed men: from Galata and Tophana came Boats and
Barges laden with Powder and Ammunition and other necessaries; so that in the
Morning by Break of day appeared such an Army of Horse and Foot in the Streets,
and Ships and Galleys on the Sea, as administered no small terror to the
Janissaries; of which being advised and seeing the concourse of the people run
to the assistance of the King, they thought it high time to bestir themselves;
and therefore armed a great Company of Albaneses, Greeks and other Christians,
to whom they offered Money, and the Titles and Privileges of Janissaries,
promising to free them from Harach, or Impositions paid by the Christians;
which Arguments were so prevalent, that most taking Arms, you might see the
Court and City divided, and ready to enter into a most dreadful confusion of a
Civil War.

In the Seraglio all things were in good order, the Morning Devotions being
finished, the Baltagees (who are a Guard that carry Poleaxes) called to the
Pages to join with them, and accompany them to the Presence Chamber. These
Baltagees were in number about 200 strong, of large stature, and of admirable
agility; at whose beck the Pages ran with all alacrity to the door of the
Chamber, where they at first received a repulse from the Master of the Chamber
who was an Eunuch, and one faithful to the Old Queens interest, who to yield
all possible furtherance toward the protection of her Person, reproved the
insolence of the Rout in coming so boisterously to the Royal Lodgings: to which
they unanimously answered that they would speak to His Majesty, and that it was
their desire to have the Old Queen (Enemy to the King, and the Mahometane
Faith) put to Death; at which words he being enraged, and relying on his
Authority, reproved them with terms of Rebels and Traitors to their Master.
What have you to do with the Queen (said he)? Are you worthy to open your
mouths against her Serene Name? He reiterating these and the like words, one of
this Rabble said, Kill that Cuckold, for he also is an Enemy of the Faith; and
whilst one lifted up his hand to strike him, he fled by the way of the Tarras
into the Garden, whither being pursued by five or six of them, he was
overtaken, and catching him by the collar would have cut his throat, but that
at his earnest entreaty they gave him so much liberty as first to cast himself
at the feet of the Sultan: whither being dragged, he delivered to the King a
Seal and a Key of Secret Treasure, and being about to say something in his own
behalf and defense of his life, a bold youth of these Baltagees called
Jalch-Leferli struck him on the head with his axe, and cleft it into two
pieces; the others seeing this first blow given him, fell on him with their
Symitters and cut him to pieces: his blood and brains were dashed on the rich
Carpets, which moved fear in many, who were secretly of the Conspiracy with the
Old Queen. The Young King himself ignorant of the good intentions of his
Servants, at the sight of bloodshed, being yet tenderhearted, cried and
closely embraced the Selihtar who then held him in his arms; but upon the
removal of the Corpse out of his sight and some smooth words, as that it was a
sacrifice of love to him, and the like, his childish tears were soon wiped
away. In this interim the new created Mufti and Kenan Pasha one of the Visiers
of the Bench, and Balyzade Efendi, who was formerly Lord Chief Justice, and
well affected to the Spahees party, entering the Hazoda or Presence Chamber,
perceiving a tumult in His Majesty's Presence with different voices and
languages, for some cried in Georgian, others Albanian, Bosnian, Mengrelian,
Turkish and Italian, remained in great confusion how to proceed with order and
reason in this important affair; For the Mufti and others were of opinion that
the sentence against the Old Queen was not rashly to be pronounced, and so the
matter might calmly be debated, and if possible, an expedient might be found
for saving her life, and securing the Sultan: But the Rabble impatient of
delay, cried out, defer not the sentence; for otherwise we shall esteem thee as
one of her adherents. By this time news was come to the Young Queen, that there
had been a fight in the Streets; who as yet doubtful of the success, and
fearing if the Janissaries should gain the advantage, Bectas would revenge the
blood of the Old Queen by her death, came covered with a Vail into the Presence
Chamber, saying as she passed, Is this the Reverence you owe to the King your
Lord? Do you know the place where you are? What would you have of a Woman? Why
do you busy your selves in the Kings Affairs? Some presently apprehended that
this was only a Plot of the Young Queen to make the World believe she would
rather assist the Grandmother, than contrive against her, which made the Pages
the more importunately to persist with the Mufti for the Fetfa or sentence
against her. But one of the Pages suspecting that this Woman so veiled, might
be the old Queen her self, cried out, This is she you seek for; she is in your
hands, take your Revenge upon her: at which some bestirring themselves to seize
her, she ran to the feet of her Son, and laying hold on him, cried out, No, no,
I am not the GrandMother, I am the Mother of this His Majesty; and wiping the
tears from the eyes of her Son with her handkerchief, made signs to keep back,
which restrained the forwardness of some who pressed to lay violent hands upon
her. The Mufti, who observed the carriage of the Rout, and their earnest
desires which could not be resisted, feared, if he gave not his concurrence, he
himself should be killed, and the rather because he overheard the old Kenan
Pasha discourse with the Vizier, to the like effect. So that after some pause
and Consultation with the other chief Ministers, it was resolved to supplicate
His Majesty for his consent; which was done in these words; Sir, The will of
God is, that you consign your Grandmother into the hands of Justice, if you
would have these Mutinies appeased; a little mischief is better than a great
one; there is no other Remedy; God willing, the end shall be prosperous. Pen
and Ink being brought, the Mufti wrote the sentence, and the Grand Signior
subscribed it, which was that the Old Queen should be strangled, but neither
cut with sword, nor bruised with blows. The writing was delivered into the
hands of one of the Chamberlains, to whom by word of mouth it was ordered that
they should carry the Queen out by Cushana (or the Gate of the Birds) so as she
might not die in sight or hearing of the Grand Signior. The Ichoglans advancing
the Royal Command on high with their hands, went out of the Presence with a
great shout, crying, Allah, Allah, to the door of the Women's Lodgings, where
they met some Black Eunuchs keeping Guard, who upon the sight of the Imperial
Firm, and the command of Solomon Aga, gave them admittance, upon condition
that twenty persons only should enter the Chambers. Those who were best armed
went in, and passing through the Chambers of the Virgins, were met by the
Queens Buffone with a Pistol in her hand, who demanding what they would have,
they answered, the Kings Grandmother; she replied, I am she, and with that
offered to discharge her Pistol, but it took fire only in the Pan; with that
the Ichoglans laid hold on her, supposing her to be the Queen; but being better
advised by Solomon the Kuzlir-Aga, and directed to the Chamber where the Queen
was; the door being opened, they perceived the Room to be dark (for the Women's
quarters in the Seraglio for the most part are made obscure and close, and
Lights are burnt in them day and night) and the old Queen had at the approach
of these Officers extinguished her Candles and got into a great Press, and
there covered her self with Quilts and Carpets; but Torches being brought in,
they looked all about, and discryed nothing; at which they were enraged against
Solomon and would have killed him, saying, that he was the cause the Queen had
escaped. But Solomon advising them to search more narrowly, one called Deli
Dogangi, got upon the Press, and removing the Clothes, discovered the Queen,
who had thrust her self into a corner; at which she softly thus entreats him, O
brave man be not cruel unto me; and promised she would give to every Ichoglan
five purses a man (each purse consisting of 500 Dollars) if they would save her
life. It is not the time of ransom, Traitor, said he; and taking her by the
feet, drew her forth; the Queen rising up put her hand into her Pocket, and
threw out handfuls of Zaichins, hoping that whilst they were scrambling for the
Gold she might have an opportunity to escape; some of the young men gathered up
the Money, but the Dogangi, like a Dog of the Game, left her not, and at length
though she were heavy, cast her down. The others offered at her life, and
particularly an Albanese called Ali Bostangi, who seeing two great Jewels at
her ears, immediately catched at them and tore them thence. They were two
Diamonds of the bigness of Chestnuts cut angulary, and beneath each Diamond was
a Ruby to set it off. Those earings were given her by Sultan Ashmet in the time
of her most flourishing Age, and his greatest affection. It Is said that such
Jewels cannot be found in all the Great Turks Treasure, and were esteemed by
the most skilful Jewellers worth a years Revenue of Grand Cairo. This Ali
showed the Jewels to his Comrade, demanding the value of them, and his Counsel
whether to conceal or reveal them: but the Comrade prized them at that rate,
that the stout young man could not sleep day nor night, being always in fear
lest the Jewels should not be kept hid; and apprehending that they became none
but the Grand Signior to wear, went and delivered them to Solomon Aga, who in
recompense thereof, presented him with 16 Zaichins which he accepted, desiring
also to be admtited into the Chamber of the Treasury, which was granted him.
Others also plucked her, some by the hands, others by the feet, some rifled her
Clothes, for she was furnished throughout with things of great value sewed in
her Garments, and especially in her Sable Furs, which contained also certain
Magic Spells, by which she conceived she had tied the tongues of all the
Emperors living in her time. The Person who gave me this relation, informed
me, that he had seen a certain lock admirably made, and engraved with the Names
of Murad and Sultan Ibrahim; it was made by a famous Gindgi, a very ignorant
Fellow, but a Superstitious, Crafty Liar, by which Arts finding access, in
short time he became a chief Favorite of Sultan Ibrahim, and from a poor
Student called by the Turks a Softa, he grew so rich in two years that none in
Constantinople was comparable to him.

But to return to the Queen now assaulted by furious young men greedy of
riches; she was in a moment despoyled of her Garments; her Furs were torn off
into small pieces; and being stripped of her Rings, Bracelets, Garters and other
things, she was left naked without a Rag to cover her, and dragged by the feet
to the Chushana: and being at the place of her execution, the young Officers
found themselves unprovided of a Cord to strangle her, so that crying out for a
Cord, one ran to the Royal Chapel, and thence took the Cord that upheld the
great Antiport of the Mosch, which being twined about the Queens neck, the
aforesaid Dogangi getting upon her back, pitched her neck with his hands,
whilst the others drew the Cord. The Queen though she were by this time besides
her senses, and worn out with Age, being above 80 years old and without Teeth:
yet she with her Gumms only did bite the thumb of his left hand, which by
chance came into her mouth, so hard that he could not deliver himself until
with the haft of his Poniard he struck her on the forehead near her right eye.
There were four that strangled her; but being young Executioners, labored long
to dispatch her, till at length the Queen leaving to struggle, lay stretched
out and was supposed to be dead, and so crying ( Uldi, Uldi) she is dead, she
is dead, ran to carry the News thereof to His Majesty; but being scarce out of
sight, the Queen raised her self up, and turned her head about; upon which the
Executioners being again called back, the Cord was a second time applied, and
wrung so hard with the haft of a hatchet, that at length she was dispatched,
and the News carried to the Royal Chamber. The Black Eunuchs immediately took
up the Corpse, and in a reverent manner laid it stretched forth in the Royal
Mosch; which about 400 of the Queens Slaves encompassing round about with
howling and lamentations, tearing the hair from their heads after their
barbarous fashion, moved compassion in all the Court.

This work being over, the Vizier having given thanks to the Ichoglans or Pages
^^r their pains, gave order to produce the Banner of Mahomet, which is
carefully and reverently kept in the Treasury; which being produced, obliges
all of that faith from seven years and upward to arm and come under it. The
Banner being brought forth with a rich covering, was advanced with great shouts
of Allah, Allah; and carried by the Ichoglans out of the chief Gate of the
Seraglio, where it was shown to the people, who with wonderful admiration and
Devotion beheld their glorious Standard; order was also given to proclaim
through the whole City the procession of the Heavenly Banner; for they say that
the Angel Gabriel brought it to Mahomet in the time of a great War made against
the Christians, as an infallible sign and evidence of Victory. The opinion of
this superstitious flag so prevailed, as it brought not only the young and
healthful to fight under it, but sick, and old, and Women judged themselves
obliged to run to the defense of this holy Ensign. The News hereof, and the
death of the Old Queen coming to the old Chamber of the Janissaries; several of
them, and those also of the Principal heads began to murmr, that it was now
necessary to lay aside their private interests, and have a respect to their
faith and their souls; for should they oppose the Heavenly Banner, they should
run themselves into the State of Gaurs or Infidels, and become liable to the
same censure or punishment which is inflicted upon unbelievers. But in the new
Chambers Bectas endeavored to remove this apprehension from the mind of his
Soldiers, by large Presents both of Gold and Silver, persuading them to uphold
their Fame and Reputation; for that the Grand Signior and his Mother were
Enemies to their name and designs, and resolved to abase or destroy the order
of that Militia; and with assurance of Victory and encouragement against a
people unarmed and undisciplined, animated them to fight; and to make the
business more easy, advised them to fire the City in several parts, that so
the people might be diverted and divided for safety of their own goods and
dwellings. But this proposition took not with the Officers and Soldiers, who
had many of them Houses and Possessions of their own in Constantinople, but put
them into great distractions and divisions in their Councels. In this pause
came an Officer from the Grand Signior (who to venture his life, had the
promise of a good reward) with a Command in writing which he threw in amongst
them, and galloped away as fast as he could; crying out as he rode, He that
comes not under the Banner of the Prophet is a Pagan, and his Wife divorced.
The Writing was taken up and carried to the Presence of the Principal Officers,
which being opened and read, was to this purpose; Bectas Aga I have made Pasha
of Bosna, Kara-chiaus I have made Captain General of the Sea; Kul-kahya I have
made Pasha of Temiswar; and Kara Hassan Ogle I have made Ja^zar Agasi; and I
require at sight of these Presents, that every one of you upon pain of death
and ruin of his Family, repair to his duty and station. In this Instant came
News that the old Chamber of Janissaries had left their station and were run
under the Banner without Arms, and had refused Bectas's Money and deserted his
Cause, and that the Spahees in great Troops and the Jebegees (who command the
Ordnance) approached with Artillery to beat upon their Chambers. The Spahees
came thundering in upon the Janissaries in remembrance of their past injuries,
and had certainly cut them off, had not the Vizier with his Sword in his hand
by good and bad words restrained them, and appeased their animosity. The
Janissaries of the new Chamber proclaimed their new Commander, and visited him
with their usual form of Congratulation, running afterward confusedly under
the Banner. Kara-Hassan the new elected Aga of the Janissaries, went to the
Seraglio to thank the Grand Signior for the honor done him, and with ten of
his Principal Friends was admitted to the Grand Signiors Presence; who humbly
kissing the ground, received the accustomed vests, and with some admonitions
was fairly dismissed, and ordered to reduce his Janissaries to better obedience.
By this time Bectas, Kulkahya, and Kara Chiaus with some of their Favorites
remained wholly abandoned, looking one upon the other, full of complaints and
railings each at other for the miscarriage of the action.

But since it was not now time to condole but to save their lives, every one
made to his house. First Bectas fled to his home, where having ordered his
Affairs, he clothed himself in the Albanian fashion, and escaped to the house
of a poor man formerly his Friend and Confident; but the next day being
discovered by a youth, was taken, and being set on a Mule, was with the scorn
and derision of the people conducted to the Grand Signiors Seraglio and there
strangled. This person was held in so much detestation by the common people,
that after his death the Cooks and inferior sort of Servants run Spits and
Pitch-forks through his body; and plucking the hairs out of his beard, sent
them for Presents to their acquaintance through all Constantinople, saying,
These are the hairs of that Traitor, who gloryed, that before he would lose his
Head, there should be raised a Mountain of heads as high as Sta Sophia. But
Kulkahya being come to his house, filled his Portmantles with Gold and Jewels,
and accompanied with sixty horse, resolved to fly to the Mountains of Albania,
places so inaccessible, that they have never yielded to the Turkish yoke: but
finding himself hotly pursued in his journey, and that it was impossible to
escape with so great a number, freely distributed a great part of his Gold upon
his retinue, and thanking them for their affection and good intentions,
dismissed them all excepting one Servant, with whom he journyed with four laden
horses with Gold, Jewels and other riches; and perceiving that this also was
too great an encumbrance, they buried a Treasure to the value of 600. thousand
Dollars in the Country as they traveled; which was afterward found out by
certain Shepherds, who disagreeing about the division thereof, the matter came
to be known to the Judge of that Country, who seized upon it all and sent it to
the Grand Signiors Treasury. But Kulkahya traveling still farther with his
single Page, came to a Town, where wanting bread, and forced for the payment of
it to exchange Gold, fell into a suspicion of being one of those Rebels lately
escaped from Constantinople; which news being brought to a Captain of horse
that commanded the place, he came immediately with some men to take him; but
Kulkahya resolving not to fall into their hands alive, resisted them until he
was killed by a Musket Shot, and so his head being severed from his body was
sent to the Grand Signior. Kara Chiaus in this interim being with 200 men
retired into his Garden, was assaulted by an Aga of the Spahees (called
Parmaksis) with 500 men; but that this enterprise might be acquired with little
blood, a Person was sent secretly to advise that party, that if they opposed
the Royal Command, they should every one be put to death; at which the people
fled and dispersed themselves. At that instant came in this Aga and took him,
and yet comforted him with the clemency and mercy of the Grand Signior,
promising also himself to intercede for him. And so bringing him to the
Seraglio by the Garden gate, His Majesty had notice of it, and looking out of
the Window and seeing him upon his knees begging pardon, the Grand Signior gave
a sign to the Executioner to strangle him, which was accordingly performed. The
new Janizar Aga who knew all the Officers formerly affected to the Rebellious
party, for several nights caused some or other of them to be strangled, to the
number of 38 persons, which struck such a terror into the Janissaries, that for
a long time after they kept themselves within the bounds of humility and
obedience. And thus concluded this Tragedy, remarkable as well for the dispatch
as for the action it self, being but the work of fourteen hours. And in this
manner it is apparent, how the Lessons of obedience which are so carefully
taught, and instilled into the minds of all those who serve and depend upon the
Grand Signior are corrupted; and by the Pride, Discord and Faction of the
Governors seduced from their natural Principles.

By the premises we may consider more generally, that it has always been the
Misfortune of unlimited powers to be subject to dangers and violence, arising
from the discontents and unconstancy of the Soldiery: for they coming to be
sensible of their own strength, and knowing that the power of the Emperor is
but fortified with their hands and heart, like unruly beasts throw their
Riders, and show that the Principles of obedience taught them, are easily
corrupted and defaced by evil persuasions, or sedition in a Commander or common
Soldier. Thus we see in the time of the latter Roman Emperors, who usurped a
power unknown in the days of the pure and happy constitution of that
Commonwealth, and governed all by the Sword and their own lusts; few of them
ended their days fortunately, or died in their beds and peace, without
becoming a Sacrifice to the same power that first proclaimed them Emperors.
And though the Mutinies and Rebellions in the Turkish Militia can hardly
operate any durable alterations in the State (as we shall more at large
hereafter discourse) yet doubtless the Tyranny in the Ottoman Emperors, had
provoked the people long since to have proved the benefit of another Race, but
that there is a strange kind of Devotion and Religion in their minds as to the
Ottoman blood, which having been the original of their Empire and greatness,
will ever be maintained in high reverence and honor. Nor is it likely that the
fair Speeches and allurements of a Rebellious slave will ever prevail to
persuade this people from their Religion to this Prince, or that their arms can
ever be prosperous under the Ensign and Conduct of an Usurper. And may all
Christians learn this Lesson from the Turks, and add this principle to the
Fundamentals of their Religion, as well as to their Laws. None can more
experimentally preach this Doctrine to the World than England, who no sooner
threw off her Obedience and Religion to her Prince, but (as if that virtue had
been the only bar to all other Enormities and Sins) she was deprived of all
other Ecclesiastical and Civil Rights, and in all her capacities and relations
deflowred and profaned by impious and unhallowed hands.

And thus having given a Relation of the Turks Religion and first Principles in
order to their obedience to their Prince, let us proceed a little farther into
the penetralia of the Seraglio, and there see what farther care is taken of the
Youth, in all points of their Education, to fit and prepare them for the
management and performance of the highest and weightiest Offices of State;
which I judge to be one of the chiefest of the Turkish Polities, and is
certainly an extraordinary support and security of the Empire.

CHAP. V. The Education of young men in the Seraglio, out of which those who
are to discharge the great Offices of the Empire are elected. It being a Maxim
of the Turkish Policy, to have the Prince served by such whom he can raise
without Envy, and destroy without Danger.
IT is a special point of Wisdom in Princes, to provide and prefer men of
deserving Parts and Abilities to the discharge of the great and important
Offices of State, not such whom chance and fortune casually throws on them,
because they will not take the pains of a narrow and severe scrutiny to seek
men able, and fit for trust; nor such whom flattery, riches, gifts, or nobility
promote, but those whom the Prince by his own experience of their wisdom,
virtues, and diligence, or the testimony of his Counselors, and other
confidents, judges capable to improve their advancement to the honor of the
King, and the blessing of their Country: and not like vast Mountains which hide
their heads in the clouds, and yet remain without fruit, or herbage; whose
barrenness Balzac de la ^our Lcur sterilite fait maudire leur elevation.
makes their height accursed. Some wise Princes, and great Ministers of our
modern times, have kept Rolls and Registers of the most eminent Men famed for
their virtue, and knowledge in any parts, with an account of their Family
lineage, and conditian, out of which, (if in Cardinal Richelieu
their own jurisdiction) they culled and elected such, proper for their
occasions and vacant Offices.

The Turk is not less careful in the choice of his Officers, and loves to be
served by his own, such as to whom he has given breeding, and education, and
are as obliged to employ those parts in his service which he has bestowed;
whose minds he has cultivated with wisdom and virtue, as well as nourished
their bodies with food, until they arrive to a Mature age, that renders the
profit of his care, and expense; such as these he is served by, whom he can
raise without envy, and destroy without danger.

The Youths then that are designed for the great Offices of the Empire, called
by the Turks Ichoglans, must be such as are of Christian Parents, taken in War,
or presented from remote parts; as I have observed that the Algerians, always
amongst their other gifts, present some Youths whom they have taken by Pyracy;
the Policy herein is very obvious, because the Sons of Christians will hate
their Parents being educated with other Principles and Customs; or coming from
distant places have contracted no acquaintance, so that starting from their
Schools into Government, they will find no Relations, or Dependencies on their
Interests then that of their great Master, to whom they are taught, and
necessity compells them to be faithful. In the next place, these Youths must be
of admirable features, and pleasing looks, well shaped in their bodies, and
without any defects of nature; For it is conceived that a corrupt and sordid
soul can scarce inhabit in a serene and ingenious Aspect; and I have observed,
not only in the Seraglio, but also in the Courts of great men, their personal
attendants Magneqque est comitum emulatio, quibus primum apud principem suus
locus, and Principum cui plurimi and acerrimi comites. H^c dignitas, hae vires,
Magno semper elcotorum juvenum globo circundari, in pace decus, in bello
praesidium.
have been of comely lusty Youths, well habited, deporting themselves with
singular Modesty and respect in the presence of their Master: So that when a
Pascha, Aga, or Spahee travels, he is always attended with a comely equipage,
followed by flourishing Youths, well clothed and mounted in great Numbers, that
one may guess at the greatness of this Empire, by the retinue, pomp, and number
of Servants which accompany Persons of Quality in their journeys; whereas in
the parts of Christendom where I have traveled, I have not observed (no not in
attendance of Princes) such ostentation in Servants as is amongst the Turks,
which is the life and Ornament of a Court. And this was always the custom in
the Eastern Countries, as Q. Curtius reports Lib. 6. Quippe, omnibus barbar is
in corporum Majestate veneratio est, magnorumque operum Tacit. de Morib. Germo.
non alios capaces putant, quam quos eximia specie donare natura dignata est.
But these Youths before they are admitted, are presented before the Grand
Signior, whom according to his pleasure he disposes in his Seraglio at Pera, or
Adrianople, or his great Seraglio at Constantinople, which is accounted the
Imperial Seat of the Ottoman Emperors. For these are the three Schools or
Colleges of Education. Those that are preferred to the last named, are
commonly marked out by special designation, and are a nearer step to degrees of
Preferment, and are delivered to the charge of the Capa Aga, or chief of the
White Eunuchs. The Eunuchs have the care of these Scholars committed unto them,
whom they treat with an extraordinay severitry; for these, being the Censores
morum, punish every slight omission, or fault with extreme rigor. For Eunuchs
are naturally cruel, whether it be out of envy to the Masculine Sex which is
perfect and entire, or that they decline to the disposition of Women, which is
many times more cruel and revengeful then that of men; they will not let slip
the smallest Peccadillo without its due chastisement, either by blows on the
soals of the feet, or long fastings, watchings, or other penance; so that he
who has run through the several Schools, Orders, and degrees of the Seraglio,
must needs be an extraordinary mortified man, patient of all labors, services
and injunctions, which are imposed on him with a strictness beyond the
discipline that religious novices are acquainted with in Monastries, or the
severity of Capuchins, or holy Votaries. But yet methinks these men that have
been used all their lives to servitude, and subjection, should have their
spirits abased, and when licensed from the Seraglio to places of Trust and
Government, should be so acquainted how to obey, as to be ignorant how to Rule,
and be dazzled with the light of liberty, and overjoyed with the sense of their
present condition, and past sufferings, passing from one extreme to another,
that they should lose their reasons, and forget themselves and others. But in
answer hereunto, the Turks affirm, that none know so well how to govern, as
those who have learned how to obey; though at first the sense of their freedom
may distract them, yet afterward the discipline, lectures, and morality in
their younger years, will begin to operate, and recollect their scattered
senses into their due and natural places. But to return from whence we have a
little digressed; These young men Oda signifies a Chamber.
before they are disposed into their Schools, which are called Oda, their
Names, Age, Country, and Parents are Registered in a Book, with their allowance
from the Grand Signior of four or five Aspers a day; the Copy of this book is
sent to the Tefterdar, or Lord Treasurer, that so quarterly they may receive
their pension.

Being thus admitted they are entered into one of the two Schools, The 2. Odaes.
that is to say into the Bojuck Oda, or the Cuchuck Oda, which is the great
Chamber, or the less; the former commonly contains 400, and the other about 200
or 250. these two Schools may be said to be of the same form or rank; and what
is taught in one, is likewise in the other; neither of them has the
precedence; all of them equally near to preferment; their first lessons are
silence, reverence, humble and modest behavior, holding their heads downwards,
and their hands across before them; their Masters the Hogias instruct them in
all the rights, discipline, and superstition of the Mohammedan Religion, and to
say their prayers, and understand them in the Arabic language, and to speak,
read, and write Turkish perfectly. Afterward having made proficiency in the
former, they proceed in the study of the Persian and Arabic tongues, which may
be of benefit to them if their lot chance to call them to the Government of the
Eastern parts, and is a help to the improvement of their knowledge in the
Turkish, which being of it self barren, is beholding to those tongues for its
copiousness and enrichment.

Their Clothing is good English Cloth and Linen, neither fine nor Clothing
and other necessaries.
coorse; their Diet is chiefly Rice, and other wholesome Meats which become the
Table of Scholars, where there is nothing of superfluity, as there is nothing
of want: Their manners and behavior are strictly watched by the Eunuchs their
careful Guardians, so as they cannot be familiar one with another at any time
without modesty, and respect to the presence they are in; if they go to perform
the necessary offices of nature or to the Bath, they are never out of the eye
of an Eunuch, who will admit none of their nearest relations to speak with them
or see them, unless special License be obtained from the Capa Aga or chief
Their retirement.
of the Eunuchs. Their Bed-chambers are long Chambers where all Bed-chambers.
night Lamps are kept burning; their Beds are laid in ranks one by another upon
Safrawes or Bords raised from the ground; and between every five or six lies an
Eunuch, so as conveniently to see or overhear if there be any wanton or lewd
behavior or discourse amongst them.

When they are arrived to some proficiency, and almost to Man's estate and
strength of body, fit for manly exercises, they are trained up in handling the
lance, throwing the Iron Bar, drawing the Bow, and throwing the Gerit or Dart.
In all these Exercises they spend many hours, being constant in all or some of
them, and are severely corrected by their Eunuchs if they seem to be remiss or
negligent therein: many of them spend much time principally in drawing the Bow,
in which they proceed from a weaker to one more strong, and by continual
exercise and use come at last to draw Bows of an incredible strength, more by
art and custom then of pure force; and thus by constant bodily exercise they
become men of great strength, health and agility, fit for the Wars, and all
active employments; amongst their other exercises, Horsemanship is a principal
Lesson, both to sit in a handsome posture, and to manage their Horse with
dexterity; to Horsemanship.
draw the Bow on Horseback forwards, backwards, and on either side, which they
learn with that agility and pliantness of their joints in the full career or
speed of the Horse as is admirable; They learn also to throw the Gerit or Dart
out of their hands on Horseback, which because it is a sport and recreation
the present Grand Signior delights in The Dart or Gerit.
above all others, every one in hopes of preferment, and in emulation one of
the other, endeavors to be a Master in it, and most are become so dexterous,
that they will dart a stick of above three quarters of a yard long with that
force, that where it hits, it will endanger breaking a bone. The Grand Signior
every day passes his time with seeing his Pages exercised in this sport, in
which ordinarily one knocks another from his Horse, and seldom a day passes in
which some receive not bruises or desperate wounds. This Sultan does many times
appoint days of combat between the Black Eunuchs and some of his White Pages
on Horseback, in this manner with the Gerit; and then happens such a skirmish
with such emulation, each side contending for the honor of his color, race
and dignity, with that heat and courage, as if they contended for the Empire;
this pastime seldom concluding without some blood. But it is to be noted, that
none of these exercises are performed by any of those that belong to the two
Chambers, unless within the Walls of the Seraglio; the other Pages who
accompany the Grand Signior abroad, are such as are preferred to farther and
higher Chambers, as hereafter we shall discourse. To the former Lessons of
School-learning and exercise abroad, are added some other accomplishments of a
Trade, handy-craft or Mystery, in which a man may be useful to the service of
the Grand Signior, as to sow and embroider in Leather (in which the Turks
exceed all other Nations) to make arrows and embroider quivers and saddles, and
make all sorts of Furniture for Horses; some learn to fold up a Turbant, others
to fold up, clean, and brush Vests; to wash and clean in the Bath, to keep Dogs
and Hawks; others to excel in the Turkish manner of Music, and all other
services which may keep them from idleness, and wherein they may be of future
use to their great Master. And according hereunto Pashaes and great men have
been denominated and surnamed after their departure from the Seraglio, to their
places of Office and Trust.

Such as have before made good proficiency in their Studies, and attained to a
dexterity in their bodily exercises, are transplanted to the first step of
preferment, which is the washing the Grand Signiors Linen, and here they first
change their Cloth for Satin Vests and Cloth of Gold, and their Pay and Salary
is augmented from four or five Aspers a day to eight or more; thence they pass,
as places fall, to the Hazna-Oda, or Chamber of the Treasury, or to the Kilar
or Dispensatory, where the Drugs, Cordials and rich Drinks for the Grand
Signiors service are kept; out of these two Chambers they are elected in order
to the highest and supreme place of the Seraglio, which is called the Haz Oda,
which consists of forty Pages; these attend immediately on the Person of the
Grand Signior, and amongst them twelve hold the chief Offices of the Court, viz.

1. The Selictar-Aga, the Kings Sword Bearer. 2. The Chiohadar-Aga, he who
carries his cloak or vest for rainy weather. 3. The Rechinbtar-Aga, he that
holds his Stirrup. 4. The Ebrictar-Aga, he that carries his water to drink or
wash. 5. The Tulbentar-Aga, he that makes up his Turbant. 6. The Kem Husar-Aga,
he who keeps the wardrobe, and oversees the washing the linen: 7. The
Chesneghir Bashee, the chief Sewer. 8. Zagergee Bashee, the chief over the
Dogs. 9. Turnackgee Baschee, he who pares his nails. 10. Berber Bashee, chief
Barber. 11. Muhasabegee Baschee, the chief Accomptant. 12. Teskeregee Bashee,
his Secretary.
There are also two other Officers in the Court of great respect, which are the
Dogan Bashee, or chief Falconer, and the Humaungee Bashee, or chief over the
Baths; but these have their offices and lodgings apart, and not entering into
the Royal Chamber, are not capable of higher preferment.

There are nine also are called Arz Agalar, who have the privilege of
presenting petitions like Masters of the Requests; of these, 4 are of the
Hasoda, as the Shiletar Aga, Tchohadar Aga, Rikiabrar Aga, Tulbend Oglanij, and
the others are of different offices, as the Hazna Kiahaiasi, who is the second
Officer of the Treasury, Kiler Kiahaiasi, who is overseer of the provisions of
Sherbets, Sugar, sweetmeats, etc. Dogangi Bashi, or chief Falconer, the
Hazodabaschi, or principal commander of the Royal Chamber, and Kapa Agasi or
chief Commander of the Pages; all which are first and nearest to preferment,
and to be employed abroad, in the Office of Pascha, as places are void.

Those that are thus through the grace and favor of the Sultan arrived to the
dignity of being of the Royal Chamber, where they enjoy the honor and
privilege of being constantly in his eye and presence, are often presented by
him with Swords, vests, bows and the like; and are permitted to take rewards
for the intercessions and applications they make in behalf of others. Sometimes
he sends them on message to Pashaes; sometimes for the confirmation of the
Princes either in Transylvania, Moldavia, or Walachia; sometimes to carry
presents to the Vizier and great men: in all which employments they are greatly
entertained and presented both which money, jewels, and rich furniture for
horses, so that very few of these forty, but in a short time gain estates of
their own, fit to equippe and furnish them to enter into any offices of the
Empire. As offices fall in order, supplies are The degrees of successions
greatly observed.
made out of these, others rising from lower chambers successively in their
places; whether it be to the four most considerable Governments, which are
Cairo, Aleppo, Damascus and Buda, or if none of these places be void, to be
Beglerbegs of Grecia, or of Natolia, to be Aga of the Janissaries, Spaheeler
Agasee, or General of the Horse, or to some small Pashalicks or Governments
scattered in several places of the Empire. But we shall not here need to
discourse of the particular offices and dignities within the power and gift of
the Grand Signior, intending to make a distinct Chapter of the several offices,
governments, dignities and places, from whence the Grand Signiors profits
arise, that so we may the better describe the wealth of this Empire, and the
importance of those offices, for discharge of which young men are educated with
the care before mentioned.

But before the conclusion of this Chapter, it will be necessary to add, that
none unless by special grace, are advanced from the Seraglio, until the age of
about 40 years, by which time they are ripe and mature for Government, and the
wantonness and heat of youth allayed. Before their departure to their places of
trust, they are courted and honored by all with presents; the Queen Mother,
the Sultanaes, the rich Eunuchs, the Great Vizier, and Officers abroad concur
all to adorn them with gifts and riches at their advancement, as undoubted
consequents of the Grand Signiors favor. And at the farewell, with much
submission they visit the Capa Aga, or chief of the Eunuchs, and other
principal officers of the Seraglio, recommending themselves in the time of
their absence to their good grace and favor, desiring to live in their good
opinion and friendship; and this is done with as much ceremony and complement
as is exercised in the most civil parts of Christendom. For though the Turks
out of pride and scorn, comport themselves to Christians with a strange kind of
barbarous haughtiness, and neglect, they are yet among themselves as courtly
and precise in their own rules of complement and civility, as they are at Rome,
or any other parts of the civilized world.

CHAP. VI. Of the method of the Turkish Studies and Learning in the Seraglio.
WE have rather showed in the foregoing Chapter, the education of those young
Scholars, in reference to exercise of body, and dexterity in arms, then the
method of their studies and speculations, according to the manner of our
Seminaries and Colleges, which more respect the cultivation of the mind with
the principles of virtue and morality, and the notions of sublime reason, then
in the improvements of the body by assiduity of exercise, which makes them
become active, and begets an agility in the management of arms. And though the
latter is a business most attended to by sprightly and ingenious spirits, who
know preferments in the Ottoman Court have always depended and still do on the
virtue of the Sword; yet speculation and knowledge in Sciences are not wholly
estranged from their Schools, which we shall in brief touch upon to satisfy
the curiosity of our Academies, who I know would gladly be resolved what sort
of Physical or Moral Philosophy, what Tongues and Sciences fall within the
contemplation of that barbarous ignorance of the Turks. To dilucide which the
most clearly that I can, according to the best information of the learned
Turks; It is reported by the Kalfaes or Pedagogues of the Seraglio, that their
chief design is to instruct their Scholars in reading and writing, so as they
may have some inspection into the books of their Law and Religion; especially
the Alchoran, whereby may be produced in their minds a greater reverence to
them. For being once passed from the first form of their A. B. C. and joining
Syllables, they are then instructed in the Arabian Tongue, wherein all the
secrets and treasure of their Religion and Laws are contained, and is a
necessary accomplishment of a Pasha, or any great Minister in relation to the
better discharge of his office, being thereby enabled to have an inspection
into the writings and sentences of the Kadees, or other Officers of the Law
within his jurisdiction, as well as furnished with knowledge and matter of
discourse concerning religion. And to adorn these young Candidates of the Grand
Signiors favor, with more polite and ingenious endowments, the next lesson is
the Persian Tongue, which fits them with quaint words and eloquence, becoming
the Court of their Prince, and corrects the grossness, and enriches the
barrenness of the Turkish tongue, which in it self is void both of expression
and sweetness of accent. It teaches them also a handsome and gentle deportment,
instructs them in Romances, raises their thoughts to aspire to the generous and
virtuous actions they read of in the Persian Novellaries, and endues them with
a kind of Platonic love each to other, which is accompanied with a true
friendship amongst some few, and with as much gallantry as is exercised in any
part of the world. But for their Amors to Women, the restraint and strictness
of Discipline, makes them altogether strangers to that Sex; for want of
conversation with them, they burn in lust one toward another, and the amorous
disposition of youth wanting more natural objects of affection, is transported
to a most passionate admiration of beauty wheresoever it finds it, which
because it is much talked of by the Turks, we will make it a distinct discourse
by it self. The books they read commonly in the Persian language, are,
Danisten, Schahidi, Pend-attar, Giulistin, Bostan Hafiz, and the Turkish books
called Mulemma, or a mixture of the Arabian and Persian words both in prose and
verse, facetious and full of quick and lively expressions. Of these sorts of
books those most commonly read are called Kirkwizir, Humaiunname, or delile we
Kemine, El fulecale, Seidbatal, and various other Romances: these are usually
the study of the most aerie and ingenious spirits amongst them. Those others
who are of a complexion more melancholic and inclinable to contemplation,
proceed with more patience of method, and are more exact in their studies,
intending to become Masters of their Pen, and by that means to arrive to honor
and office either of Rest Efendi, or Secretary of State, Lord Treasurer, or
Secretary of the Treasury, or Dispensatory, etc. or else to be Emaums or Parish
Priests of some principal Moschs of Royal foundation, in which they pass an
easy, quiet and secure life, with a considerable competency of livelihood.
Others aim in their studies to become Hazifizi, which signifies a Conserver of
the Alchoran, who get the whole Alchoran by heart, and for that reason are held
in great esteem, and their persons as sacred as the place which is the
Repository of the Law.

Those who are observed to be more addicted to their Books then others, are
named by them Talibulilmi, or lovers of Philosophy; though very few amongst
them arrive to any learning really so called, yet they attain to the degree of
Giuzehon or Readers of the Alchoran, for benefit and relief of the souls of
those departed, who for that end has bequeathed them Legacies. At certain
houses they read Books that treat of the matters of their Faith, and render
them out of Arabic into Turkish, and these Books are Schurut, Salat, Mukad,
Multeka, Hidaie, etc. which they descant upon in an Expository manner;
instructing the more ignorant and of lower form, by way of Catechism. They have
also some Books of Poetry written both in Persian and Arabic, which run in
Rhyme and Meeter, like the Golden Verses of Pythagoras, containining excellent
sentences of Morality, being directions for a godly life, and contemplations of
the miseries and fallacies of this world, which many of them commit to memory,
and repeat occasionally as they fall into discourse. For other Sciences as
Logic, Physic, Metaphsick, Mathematics, and other out University Learning,
they are wholly ignorant; unless in the latter, as far as Music is a part of
Mathematics, whereof there is a School apart in the Seraglio. Only some that
live in Constantinople have learned some certain rules of Astrology, which they
exercise upon all occasions, and busy themselves in Prophesies of future
contingencies of the Affairs of the Empire, and the unconstant estate of great
Ministers, in which their predictions seldom divine grateful or pleasiing
stories. Neither have the wisest and most active Ministers or Soldiers amongst
them, the least inspection into Geography, whereby to be acquainted with the
situation of Countries or disposition of the Globe, though they themselves
enjoy the possession of so large a proportion of the universe. Their Seamen,
who seldom venture beyound sight of Land (unless they be those of Barbary, who
are Renegadoes and practiced in the Christian Arts of Navagation) have certain
Sea-carts ill framed, and the Capes and head-lands so ill laid down, that in
their Voyages from Constantinople to Alaxandria, the richest place of their
Trade, they trust more to their eye and experience, then the direction of their
Maps; nor could I ever see any Cart of the black Sea made either by Turk or
Greek, which could give the least light to a knowing Seaman, so as to encourage
him according to the rules of Art, to lay any confidence thereon in his
Navigation.

The Art of Printing (a matter disputable, whether it has brought more of
benefit or mischief to the world) is absolutely prohibited amongst them,
because it may give a beginning to that sublety of Learning which is
inconsistent with, as well as dangerous to the grosseness of their Government,
and a means to deprive many of their livelihood, who gain their bread only by
their Pen, and occasion the loss of that singular Art of fair Writing, wherein
they excel or equal most Nations: the effect of which is evident amongst the
Western people where Printing has taken footing. And though there be few
Historians among them who have any knowledge of past-times, or the being of
other Empires before the Ottoman, mixing all stories in confusion together (as
we have said before) without distinction of Persons, or respect of Chronology;
yet as to the successes and progress of Affairs in their own dominions, they
keep most strict Registers and Records, which serve them as presidents and
rules for the present Government of their Affairs.

And thus the Reader may sound the depth of the Turks Philosophy, who though
they reach not those contemplations of our profound Sophies, have yet so much
knowledge as neither to be overreached in their Treaties with the wits of the
World, nor for want of good Conduct of Affairs lose one inch of their Empire.

CHAP. VII. Of the Affection and Friendship the Pages in the Seraglio bear each
other.
SINCE in the foregoing Chapter we have made mention of the amorous
disposition that is to be found among these youths each to other, it will not
be from our purpose to acquaint the Reader, that the Doctrine of Platonic love
has found Disciples in the Schools of the Turks, that they call it a passion
very laudable and virtuous, and a step to that perfect love of God, whereof
mankind is only capable, proceeding by way of love and admiration of his image
and beauty enstamped on the creature. This is the color of virtue, they paint
over the deformity, of their depraved inclinations; but in reality this love of
theirs, is nothing but libidinous flames each to other, with which they burn so
violently, that banishment and death have not been examples sufficient to deter
them from making demonstrations of such like addresses; so that in their
Chambers, though watched by their Eunuchs, they learn a certain language with
the motion of their eyes, their gestures and their fingers, to express their
amors; and this passion has boiled sometimes to that heat, that jealousies
and rivalties have broken forth in their Chambers without respect to the
severity of their Guardians, and good orders have been brought into confusion,
and have not been again redressed, until some of them have been expelled the
Seraglio with the Tippets of their Vests cut off, banished into the Islands,
and beaten almost to death.

Nor is this passion only amongst the young men each to other; but Persons of
eminent degree in the Seraglio become inveigled in this sort of love, watching
occasions to have a sight of the young Pages that they fancy, either at the
Windows of their Chamber, or as they go to the Mosque, or to their washings or
baths; offer them service and presents, and so engage them as to induce them to
desire to be made of the retinue of him that uses this Courtship toward them,
which they many times obtain, and being entertained in the service of a Master
who so highly fancies and admires them, they become often sharers with him in
his riches and fortune.

The Grand Signiors themselves have also been slaves to this inordinate
passion. For Sultan Morat became so enamoured of an Armenian Boy called Musa as
betrayed him, though otherwise a discreet Prince, to a thousand follies; and at
another time preferred a youth for his beauty only from the Novitiate of
Galata, to be one of the Pages of his Haz-Oda or Chamber of his Royal Presence,
and in a short time made him Silahtar Aga or Sword Bearer, one of the greatest
Offices in the Seraglio. And this present Sultan became so enamoured of a
Canstantinopolitan youth, one of the Pages of his Musicians School, called
Kulogli, or Son of a slave, that he made him his chief Favorite, never could
content himself without his Company, Clothed him like himself, made him ride by
his side, commanded all to present and honor him, in the same manner as if he
had made him Companion of the Empire.

This passion likewise reigns in the Society of Women; they die with amorous
affections one to the other; especially the old Women court the young, present
them with rich Garments, Jewels, Money, even to their own impoverishment and
ruin, and these darts of Cupid are shot through all the Empire, especially
Constantinople, the Seraglio of the Grand Signior, and the apartments of the
Sultans.

GHAP. VIII. Of the Mutes and Dwarfs.
A mute A Dwarf


BEsides the Pages, there is a sort of Attendants to make up the Ottoman Court,
called Bizebani or Mutes; men naturally born deaf, and so consequently for want
of receiving the sound of words are dumb: These are in number about 40 who by
night are lodged amongst the Pages in the two Chambers, but in the day time
have their stations before the Mosque belonging to the Pages, where they learn
and perfect themselves in the language of the Mutes, which is made up of
several signs in which by custom they can discourse and fully express
themselves; not only to signify their sense in familiar questions, but to
recount stories, understand the Fables of their own Religion, the Laws and
Precepts of the Alchoran, the name of Mahomet, and what else may be capable of
being expressed by the Tongue. The most ancient amongst them, to the numder of
about eight or nine, are called the Favorite Mutes, and are admitted to
attendance in the Haz-Oda; who only serve in the place of Buffones for the
Grand Signior to sport with, whom he sometimes kicks, sometimes throws in the
cisterns of water, sometimes makes fight together like the combat of Clinias
and Dametas. But this language of the Mutes is so much in fashion in the
Ottoman Court, that none almost but can deliver his sense in it, and is of much
use to those who attend the Presence of the Grand Signior, before whom it is
not reverent or seemly so much as to whisper.

The Dwarfs are called Giuge; these also have their quarters amongst the Pages
of the two Chambers, until they have learned with due reverence and humility to
stand in the Presence of the Grand Signior. And if one of these have that
benefit, as by natures fortunate error to be both a Dwarf, and dumb, and
afterward by the help of Art to be castrated and made an Eunuch, he is much
more esteemed, then if nature and Art had concurred together to have made him
the perfectest creature in the world; one of this sort was presented by a
certain Pasha, to the Grand Signior, who was so acceptable to him and the Queen
Mother that he attired him immediately in Cloth of Gold, and gave him liberty
though all the Gates of the Seraglio.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Eunuchs.
THis libidinous flame of depraved nature, is so common a disease amongst the
Turks, and so ancient a Vice, that both for state and prevention of this
unnatural crime, it has not been esteemed safe or orderly in the Courts of
Eastern Princes to constitute others for the Principal Officers of their
Household then Eunuchs: the like is observed in the Seraglio of the Grand
Signior where two Eunuchs especially have the Principal Command, and are
persons of the highest and eminentest esteem, viz. the Kuzlir-Agase, who is
superintendent over the Women, and is a Black Eunuch;

Kuzlir Aga or Black Eunuch of the women


The other is Capa Agasi, or Master of the gate, who is White, and commands all
the Pages and White Eunuchs residing in the Court; Under him are all the
Officers that are Eunuchs; as first the Haz Odabaschi or Lord Chamberlain, who
commands the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber.

2. The Serai Kiahaiasi, Lord Steward of the household, who oversees the
Chambers of the Pages, and the Seferli odasi, or the Chambers of those Pages
who are designed to follow the Grand Signior upon any journey, and of these he
has care to see provided of Clothes and all other necessaries for the service
they undertake.

3. The Haznadar Bashi, or Lord Treasurer of the Seraglio, who commands those
Pages that attend the Treasury; I mean not that which is of present use, as to
pay the Soldiery, or serve the public and present occasions of the Empire,
for that is in the hand of the Tefterdar; but that riches that is laid apart
for the expenses of the Court, and that which is amassed and piled up in
several rooms of the Seraglio, of which there have been Collections and
additions in the time almost of every Emperor, distinguished and divided by
the names of the Sultans, through whose industry and frugality they had been
acquired; but this wealth is conserved as sacred, not to be used or exposed,
unless on occasions of extreme emergency.

4. The Kilargi Bashi; that is, the chief Commander over the Pages, to whose
care the charge of the dispensatory is committed, or expenses for the daily
provisions. Other Office^ there are of Eunuchs; as he that is first Master of
Scholars for their books, called Ikingi Capa oglani and his Usher; the chief
Miergidgi or Priest of the Grand Signiors Mosque; under whom are two other
assistants, for cleansing and well ordering of the Mosques.

These are the only Officers of the White Eunuchs, the others are of the
commonalty, which are in uumber about fifty, and have ordinarily twelve Aspers
a day pay, which also are augmented according to the Wakfi or Legacies of the
deceased. Those that are Curates of the Royal Mosques, and have pluralities of
benefices of that nature, have sometimes a revenue of a 100 chequins a day:
among these also due order is observed, the younger or Junior's in the
Seraglio, always giving respect and reverence to Seniority.

Of the Black Eunuchs.
THe Black Eunuchs are ordained for the service of the Women in the Seraglio;
as the White are to the attendance of the Grand Signior, it not seeming a
sufficient remedy by wholly dismembring them, to take the Women off from their
inclinations to them, as retaining some relation still to the Masculine Sex,
but to create an abhorrency in them; they are not only castrated, but Black,
chosen with the worst features that are to be found among the most
hard-favoured of that African race. The prime Officer' of them all, as we have
said before, is the Kuzlir Aga or Master of the Maids or Virgins.

2. Valide Agasi, the Eunuch of the Queen Mother.

3. Schahzadeler Agasi, or the Eunuch to whose charge is committed the Royal
Progeny, and in whose custody at present are three Sons of Sultan Ibrahim,
Brothers to the present Emperor, viz. Solomon, on whom the Turks at present
found their principal hopes and expectation; Bajazet and Orchan, the Mother of
which two last is still living, and confined to the old Seraglio in
Constantinople, which is the Monastry of the decayed Wives and Mistresses of
former Grand Signiors, from whence there is no redemption, until either their
Sons die, or by good fortune one becomes Emperor.

4. Is Fazna Agasi, or the Eunuch that is Treasurer to the Queen Mother, and
commands those Damsels that are Servants in the said Chamber.

5. Kilar Agasi, or he that keeps the Sugar, Serbets and Druggs of the Queen
Mother.

6. Bujuck Oda Agasi, commander of the greater Chamber.

7. Kiatchuk Oda Agasi, commander of the lesser Chamber.

8. Bash Capa Oglani, the chief Porter of the Women's apartment.

9. and 10. Two Mesgidgi Barchi, or the two Emaums or Priests of the Royal
Mosque belonging to the Queen Mother, ordained for the Women's prayers.

The Apartments of the Women.
The habit of a Lady in the Seraglio


ANd since I have brought my Reader into the quarters of these Eunuchs, which
are the Black guard of the sequestered Ladies of the Seraglio, he may chance to
take it unkindly, should I leave him at the door, and not introduce him into
those apartments, where the Grand Signiors Mistresses are lodged: And though I
ingenuously confess my acquaintance there (as all other my conversation with
Women in Turkey) is but strange and unfamiliar; yet not to be guilty of this
discourtesie, I shall to the best of my information write a short account of
these Captivated Ladies, how they are treated, immured, educated and prepared
for the great atchivements of the Sultans affection; and as in other stories
the Knight consumes himself with combats, watching and penance to acquire the
love of one fair Damsel; here an army of Virgins make it the only study and
business of their life to obtain the single nod of invitation to the Bed of
their great Master.

The Reader then must know that this Assembly of fair Women (for it is probable
there is no other in the Seraglio) are commonly prizes of the Sword, taken at
Sea and at Land, as far fetched as the Turk commands, or the wandering Tartar
makes his excursions, composed almost of as many Nations as there are Countries
of the world; none of which are esteemed worthy of this Preferment, unless
beautiful and undoubted Virgins.

As the Pages before mentioned are divided into two Chambers, so likewise are
these maids into two Odaes, where they are to work, sow, and embroider, and are
there lodged on Safawes, every one with her bed apart, between every five of
which is a Kadun or grave Matron laid to oversee and hear what actions or
discourse passes either immodest or undecent; Besides this School they have
their Chambers for Music and Dancing, for acquiring a handsome air in their
carriage and comportment, to which they are most diligent and intent, as that
which opens the door of the Sultans affections, and introduces them into
Preferment and Esteem.

Out of these, the Queen Mother chooses her Court, and orderly draws from the
Schools such as she marks out for the most beauteous, facetious, or most
corresponding with the harmony of her own disposition, and prefers them to a
near attendance on her Person, or to other Offices of her Court. These are
always richly attired and adorned with all sorts of precious stones, fit to
receive the adresses and amors of the Sultan: over them is placed the Kadun
Kahia or Mother of the Maids, who is careful to correct any immodest or light
behavior amongst them, and instructs them in all the Rules and Orders of the
Court.

When the Grand Signior is pleased to dally with a certain number of these
Ladies in the Garden; Helvet is cried, which rings through all the Seraglio, at
which word all people withdraw themselves at a distance, and Eunuchs are placed
at every avenue, it being at that time death to approach near those walls. Here
the Women strive with their Dances, Songs and Discourse to make themselves
Mistresses of the Grand Signiors affection, and then let themfelves loose to
all kind of lasciviousness and wanton carriage, acquitting themselves as much
of all respect to Majesty as they do to modesty.

When the Grand Signior resolves to choose himfelf a Bedfellow, he retires
into the Lodgings of his Women, where (according to the story in every place
reported, when the Turkish Seraglio falls into discourse) the Damsels being
ranged in order by the Mother of the Maids, he throws his handkerchief to her,
where his eye and fancy best directs, it being a token of her election to his
bed. The surprised Virgin snatches at this prize and good fortune with that
eagerness, that she is ravished with the joy before she is defloured by the
Sultan, and kneeling down first kisses the handkerchief, and then puts it in
her bosom, when immediately she is congratulated by all the Ladies of the
Court, for the great honor and favor she has received. And after she has
been first washed, bathed and perfumed, she is adorned with Jewels, and what
other attire can make her appear glorious and beautiful; she is conducted at
night, with Music and Songs of her Companions chanting before her to the
Bedchamber of the Sultan, at the door of which attends some Favorite Eunuch,
who upon her approaching gives advice to the Grand Signior, and permission
being given her to enter in, she comes running and kneels before him, and
sometimes enters in at the feet of the Bed, according to the ancient ceremony,
or otherwise as he chances to like her, is taken in a near way with the
Embraces of the Grand Signior.

This private entertainment being ended, she is delivered to the care of the
Kadan Kahia or Mother of the Maids, by whom she is again conducted back with
the same Music as before, and having first washed and bathed, has afterward
the lodging and attendance that belongs to Hunkiar Asa-kisi, that is, the Royal
Concubine; if it be her good fortune to conceive and bring forth a Son, she is
called Hasaki Sultana, and is honored with a solemn Coronation, and Crowned
with a small Coronet of Gold beset with precious Stones. Other Ladies who
produce like fruits from the Grand Signiors bed, have not yet the like honor,
but only the name of Bash Hasaki, Inkingi Hasaki, the first and second
Concubine, and so forward.

The Daughters that are born from the Grand Signior, are oftentimes at four or
five years of Age wedded to some great Pasha or Beglerbeg with all the Pomp and
solemnities of Marriage, who from that time has care of her Education; to
provide a Palace for her Court, and to maintain her with that state and honor
as becomes the dignity of a Daughter to Sultan. At this tenderness of Age,
Sultan Ibrahim, Father of the present Grand Signior, Married three of his
Daughters; one of which called Gheaher Han Sultan, has had already five
Husbands, and yet as is reported by the World, remains a Virgin; the last
Husband deceased was Ishmael Pasha, who was slain in the passage of the River
Raab; and is now again Married to Gurgi Mahomet Pasha of Buda a man of 90 years
of Age, but rich and able to maintain the greatness of her Court, though not to
comply with the youthfulness of her bed, to which he is a stranger, like the
rest of her preceding Husbands.

After the Death of the Grand Signior, the Mothers of Daughters have liberty to
come forth from the Seraglio and marry with any person of Quality; but those
who have brought forth Sons, are transplanted to the old Seraglio, where they
pass a retired life without redemption; unless the Son of any of those Mothers
by death of the first heir succeeding, release his Mother from that restraint,
and make her sharer with him in all his happiness and glory.

CHAP. X. Of the Agiam-Oglans.
WE have hitherto spoken of the Ichoglans or Pages, Mutes, Dwarfs, Eunuchs, and
the Feminine Court; it will be now necessary to speak of the under Officers and
Servants called Agiam-Oglans, who are designed to the meaner uses of the
Seraglio. These are also Captives taken in War, or bought of the Tartar, but
most commonly the Sons of Christians taken from their Parents at the Age of ten
or twelve years, in whom appearing more strength of body than of mind, they are
set apart for labor and menial services: These are,

1. Porters. 2. Bostangi's or Gardiners. 3. Baltagi's or Hatchetment, who cut
and carry Wood. 4. Atgees or Cooks, with all the Offices of the Kitchen. 5.
Paicks and Solacks. 6. Butchers. 7. Holvagees or Confectioners. 8. The
Attendants of the Hospital of sick Pages. And all other set apart for servile
Offices.
These are seldom the Sons of natural born Turks, but yearly collected (as I
said) from the increase of poor Christians in the Morea and Albania; by which
means those Countries are greatly dis-peopled; the yearly number of those thus
collected, amount most commonly, as I am given to understand, to about 2000.
which being brought to Constantinople, are first presented before the Vizier,
who according as his humor directs him) are placed in diverse stations, either
in the Seraglioes of Galata, Okmedon, or Adrianople; others are put forth to
learn diverse Trades in the City; others to be Seamen, and learn Navigation;
others especially are placed in the great Seraglio, where they are made to
serve in the Stables, in the Kitchen, to dig in the Gardens, to cleave Wood, to
row in the Grand Signiors Barge, and to do what other services they are
commanded by the Superiors set over them, called Odabashees, who are men of
ancienter standing then the rest, having about fifteen Aspers a day Salary, two
Vests of Cloth a year, and two pieces of Linen Cloth for shirts and
handkerchiefs, etc. and these are subject to the Bostangi Pasha, who is the
head and absolute Commander of all those who have the name of Bostangees or
Gardeners, of which there may be 10000 in and about the Seraglioes and Garden
of the Grand Signior.

Of these Bostangees, some are raised to a higher degree, and called Hasaki,
which signifies Royal, and attend only to messages sent by the Grand Signior
himself, and are men of special authority. Their Habit or Clothing nothing
differs from the Bostangees, unless in the fineness of their Cloth, their
Collar and Girdle according to this Picture.

The power of the Bostangi Pasha is very great; for though he himself arose but
from the Agiamoglans, and wore a felt Cap, yet he has the command of all the
Grand Signiors Gardens and Houses of pleasure, over-sees all his Waterworks,
and has power and jurisdiction along the Bosphorus, unto the mouth of the
Black Sea, commands also the Country at a large distance from Constantinople;
having power to punish all debaucheries and extravagancies in and about the
Country Villages, and is capable by the Grand Signiors favor to become Pasha
of Grand Cairo, Babylon, Buda, etc. and of the first degree which is Vizier
Azem.

The Agiamoglans who are designed to the Grand Signiors Seraglio, are of the
choicest amongst the whole number, the strongest bodies and most promising
Aspects, and are distributed into several Companies as they want to make up
their complement. This discipline is very severe and strict, so that they are
taught obedience and readiness to serve, with watchings, fastings and other
penances.

Their clothing is of course Cloth made at Salonica, anciently called
Thessalonica; their Caps of Felt, after the form of a Sugar Loaf, of a hair
color, according as the Picture (...) describes; some of them are taught to
Read and Write, who are esteemed the most acute and fit to receive ingenious
learning, but the most part are exercised in activity of body, in running,
leaping, wrestling, throwing the iron bar, and other agility wherein the
strength and activity of body is best practiced. Their Lodgings are under
several Pent-houses or sheds, built under the walls of the Seraglio, their Diet
is flesh and rice, sufficient though not luxurious. Out of these belonging to
the Seraglio none are drawn out for Janissaries, but are sometimes preferred to
service of Pashas for their fidelity or good deserts, and by those Masters
arise to considerable riches, and commodious manner of livelihood; others of
these in great numbers are made use of for attendance on the Grand Signiors
Tents, when he goes to the Wars, and in other journies are useful for the
management of the Grand Signiors carriages and traveling necessaries. Such
Agiamoglans (as we have said before) that are distributed into other quarters
besides the Royal Seraglio, are principally designed as they grow ripe, and of
strength of body to be made Janissaries in the place of the deceased; so that
their principal education is in order thereunto, of whom we shall speak more
largely when we treat of the Militia.

The names of the Agiamoglans are written in a book with the places where they
are distributed, their several Pays of two, three, or five Aspers a day, which
book is underwritten by the Grand Signior, and consigned to the Tefterdar or
Lord Treasurer, who pays their Salaries every three months, being obliged at
that time to enquire who is dead or removed, and so accordingly to make a true
report to the Grand Signior.

And thus I have given you a brief account of the Grand Signiors Seraglio and
the Regiment of it, which if well considered and weighed, is one of the most
Politic constitutions in the world, and none of the meanest supports of the
Ottoman Empire; which relation I had from the mouth of one who had spent
nineteen years in the Schools of the Seraglio. I must confess I have not
treated so amply thereof as the subject might require, because the rules and
economy observed among the Women, Mutes, Eunuchs and other of the retired
apartments, I conceive to be a kind of digression from my purpose, my intention
being principally to describe the Government, Maxims and Policies of the Turk.
And therefore I proceed to treat of the diversities of Offices and Places of
great Riches and Trust, which remain in the power of the Sultan to confer on
those Favorites, Minions, and Creatures, whom thus at his own charge he has
nourished like a Father from their (...) to invest in their riper years with
great honors, for security of his own Person, and flourishing estate of his
Dominions.

CHAP. XI. Of the Vizier Azem or Prime Vizier, his Office, the other six
Visiers of the Bench, and of the Divan or place of Judicature.
The Prime Vizier


THe prime Vizier called in Turkish Vizier Azem, is as much as chief
Counselor; he is sometimes termed the Grand Signiors Deputy or Representative,
or Vicarius Imperii, because to him all the power of the Sultan is immediately
devolved; there is no other solemnity, as I know of, in the creating a Vizier
then the delivery of the Grand Signiors Seal, which he always carries about
him in his bosom, on which is engraven the Emperors name, by which he becomes
invested in all the power of the Empire, and can without the formality and
process of Law remove all obstacles and impediments which hinder the free sway
of his Government. It has always been the policy of the great Princes of the
East, to erect one as Superintendent over all the rest of their Ministers; so
Daniel was constituted by Darius over the Presidents and Dan. c. 6.
Princes, because of the admirable spirit and wisdom that was in him: and
Joseph was made chief Governor and absolute Commander over all Egypt, and by
this means those Princes who gave themselves much over to softness and luxury,
could with more ease demand account of miscarriages in the rule of their
Empire, it being their Policy to constitute one on whom all the blame of
miscarriages in Government might be thrown.

The first constitution that we meet with in History of the first Vizier, was
in the time of Amurath the third King of the Turks, who passing into Europe
with his Tutor called Lala Schabin, he made him his chief Counselor and
committed to him the charge of his Army, with which he won Adrianople formerly
called Orestias, and ever since the Grand Signior has continued to maintain
that Office of Vizier, using that common appellation of Lala, which signifies
Tutor, whenever in familiar discourse he speaks to him.

There are besides the first, commonly six other Visiers who are called Visiers
of the Bench, that have no power nor authority in the Government, but only are
grave men, that have perhaps had Charges and Offices, and are knowing in the
Laws, and sit together with the first Vizier in the Divan or Court where causes
are tried, but are mute and cannot give their sentence or opinion in any matter
unless the first Vizier please to demand their Council or judgment in point of
Law; which he seldom does, not to disparage his own reason and experience.
Their pay proceeds from the Grand Signiors Treasury, and is not above 2000
Dollars a year: any of these six can write the Grand Signiors Firm or Autogra
upon all commands or decrees that are sent abroad; and because their riches are
but moderate, and the Office they are in treats not much with the dangerous
parts of State, they live long without envy or emulation, or being subject to
that inconstancy of fortune and alteration, to which greater degrees of place
are exposed. And yet when any great matter is in Consult, and of considerable
importance, these six with the first Vizier, the Mufti and Caddeelescheers or
Lords chief Justices, are admitted into the Cabinet Council, and are often
permitted freedom to deliver their opinions on the matter of question.

The state and greatness the Prime Vizier lives in is agreeable to the honor
of him whom he represents, having commonly in his Court about 2000 Officers and
Servants; when he appears in any solemnity or public show, he carries on his
Turbant before two Feathers, as the Grand Signior wears three set on with a
handle of Diamonds and other rich Stones, and before him are carried three
horse tails called the tugh upon a long staff, upon the top of which is a
gilded knob; the like distinction of honor is permitted only to the three
other principal Pashaes within their jurisdiction, viz. the Pasha of Babylon,
of Cairo, and of Buda; the other inferior Pashaes have only one horse tail
carried before them without other distinction or badge of Authority; and these
three forementioned Pashaes have a right to be Visiers of the Bench, and can
take their places in the Divan when the time of their Offices are expired, and
any of them found at the Court in entire grace and favor.

The Prime Vizier as he is the representative of the Grand Signior, so he is
the head or mouth of the Law; to him appeals may be made, and any one may
decline the ordinary course of justice, to have his case decided by his
determination; unless the Vizier through the multiplicity of his affairs, and
the small consideration of the case, thinks fit to refer it to the Law. And
that he may evidence his care of the public good, he is always present at the
Divan four times a week; that is, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, and the
other days (excepting Friday) keeps Divan in his own house, so diligent and
watchful are these men to discharge the Acts of Justice, and their own Office.

He is attended to the Divan, which is a Chamber of the Seraglio, by a great
number of Chiauses and their Commanders in chief, who are a sort of Pursevants
and other Officers who only serve to attend him to the Divan called Muta
faraca, and may be termed Sergeants or Tipstaffes; as he descends from his
horse and enters the Divan, or upon his return goes into his house, he is with
a loud voice of his Attendants prayed for, and wished all happiness and long
life, not unlike the salutations the Roman Soldiers used to their Emperors;
Cum sub auspiciis Caesaris omnia prospera and felicia precabantur. When he is
set upon the Bench, all causes are brought before the Caddeelescheer who is
Lord chief Justice, and by him all judgments pass, unless the Prime Vizier
shall think the cause proper for his cognizance, or shall disapprove at any
time the sentence of the judge; and then by virtue of his unlimited power he
can reverse the Verdict and determine as he pleases. All officers in the Divan
wear a strange sort of dress upon their heads called in Turkish Mugevezee,
which for the most lively description, is here delineated before you.

A Turbant
And this shall in short serve for what is necessary to speak of the Divan in
this place, in regard we only touch upon it for the better explanation of the
Visiers office.

The Prime Vizier has his power as ample as his Master who gives it him,
except only that he cannot (though he is the Elder Brother of all Pashaes) take
off any of their heads without the Imperial signature or immediate handwriting
of the Grand Signior, nor can he punish a Spahee or Janizary, or any other
Soldier but by means of their Commanders: the Militia having reserved
themselves that privilege, which secures them from several oppressions: in
other matters he is wholly absolute, and has so great a power with the Grand
Signior, that whomsoever he shall think fit of all the Officers in the Empire
to proscribe, he can speedily obtain the Imperial hand to put it in execution.

Whatsoever petitions and addresses are made, in what business soever, ought
first to pass through the hands of the Vizier: but yet when a party has
suffered some notorious injury, in which the Vizier is combined, or has
refused him justice, he has liberty then to appeal to the Grand Signior
himself, which is permitted by an ancient custom; the aggrieved person putting
fire on his head enters the Seraglio, runs in haste, and can be stopped by no
body until he comes to the presence of the Grand Signior, to whom he has
license to declare his wrong. The like was done by Sir Thomas Bendysh when
Ambassador at Constantinople, putting pots of fire at the Yard arms of some
English Ships then in Port, and came to Anchor near the Seraglio. The reason
thereof was, the violent seizure of the Merchants goods, as soon as arrived in
Port, for the service of the Grand Signior, without bargain or account of them,
which being taken up by those Officers and great Persons who were out of the
reach of Law, forced the worthy Ambassador at that time Resident to represent
his grievances with much resolution, signifying them to the Grand Signior by
fire on the Yards of eleven English Ships then in Port, which were drawn off
from the scale, where they usually lay, to the side of the Seraglio; which
coming to be discovered first to the Vizier, before the grand Signior had
notice thereof, he immediately extinguished those fires by a fair
accommodation, before they burst into a more dangerous flame, by the knowledge
of the Grand Signior, who might justly destroy him for suffering such notorious
injustice to run to that public and known extremity.

The Persians in like cases put on a Vest of White Paper, signifying the
aggravation of their injury is not to be described in as much Paper as can
cover their bodies.

This great Office of Charge and Trust, as it is the highest, so it is the
nearest to Joves Thunderbolt, and most exposed to envy and emulation; strange
stories are read and confirmed by eyewitnesses in our days, concerning the
unexpected rise and ascent of unworthy men on a sudden without degrees, steps
or approaches to (...) mighty power and glory, and as soon have been thrown
down and been the subject of the peoples cruelty and revenge; some have been
the Sons but of a few days growth, and the Sun has scarce set, before their
greatness and glory has declined; others have continued but a month, some a
year, others two or three, and withal, even in those who have lived longest and
happiest, fortune sports with that wantonness and inconstancy, that it may
serve to be the Mirror and Emblem of the Worlds vanity, and uncertain riches;
It is the fate of great Favorites with barbarous Princes to be but
short-lived. For either the Prince delights to exercise his power in debasing
some, and advancing others, or has bestowed so largely, that his bounty is at
a stop, and begins to be wearied with heaping of favors, as the other is
glutted and satiated with receiving them; Fato potentiae raro sempiternae, an
satias capit aut illos cum omnia tribuerunt, aut hos quod nihil reliquum est
quod capiant. Tac. Lib. 3. Emulation and flattery are likewise great, and the
factions are commonly many in the Ottoman Court, whereby the state of the first
Minister is endangered. Insita mortalibus natura recentem aliorum felicitatem
aegris oculis introspicere, modumque fortunae a nullis magis exigere, quam quos
in aequo vident. Tac. Lib. 3. Sometimes the Queen Mother rules, sometimes the
Kuslir Aga commands, perhaps a beautiful Woman is Mistress of the power, as
well as of the affections of the Sultan; every one of these have some
Favorites, some or other who watch Preferments, and are intent to observe all
miscarriages of State, which may reflect on, or question the judgment or
honesty of the first Author, by which means the unhappy Vizier, either by the
Sultans immediate command, or tumults of the Soldiery raised by the powerful
factions aforementioned, yields up his Life and Government together; whose
power and greatness being only borrowed from his Master, and depending on
another pleasure, by its short continuance and mutability, verifies that true
saying of Tacitus, Lib. 12. Nihil rerum mortalium tam instabile and fluxum est,
quam fama potentiae non sua vi nixae.

But it does not always happen that the Prime Vizier because he is deprived of
his Office, should therefore lose his life; for many times, especially if he be
a man whose disposition is not greatly suspected of Malice or Revenge to the
contrivers of his fall, or be not of a generous spirit, and great abilities and
popularity, whereby he may he venterous and capable of raising Rebellion or
Mutiny, he is permitted calmly to retire, and quietly to descend from his high
Throne of honor, to enter into the lower Region and air of a small and petty
Government of a Pasha; as not many years past the Predecessors of Kiuperli
Father of this present Vizier being degraded, had the Pashalick of Kanisia
(which is accounted one of the meanest of all the Governments which are subject
to a Pasha) conferred on him, and here I cannot tell whether such a Vizier has
not more reason to bless and congratulate his fortune then accuse it; for in
this condition he is more free from cares and dangers, and much more happy if
his ambition and greatness of spirit render not his repose and ease less
pleasing, because it is not in the highest Lodgings of Honor and Command. But
it is seldom so among the Turks; for with them it is esteemed no disgrace to be
transplanted from the Mountains to the Valleys; they know their original, and
composition partakes not much of Heavenly fire, and that the Clay they are
framed of, is but of common Earth, which is in the hand of the Grand Signior as
the Pot, to frame and mould, as is most agreeable to his pleasure and will. And
as it is no disparagement to decline and go backward in Honor amongst the
Turks, so it is no new thing, or absurdity in their Politics, to see men rise
like Mushromes in a night, and from the meanest and most abject Offices,
without degrees or convenient approaches, at once leap into the Seat and
Quality of the Prime Vizier; I shall instance in one example worthy of Record,
which was of late days, and as yet that I know of, has had no place in
History. It happened that in Constantinople, there was either great scarcity of
flesh, or the negligence of the Butchers had made it so; so that they who were
not so early abroad as to watch their usual time of making their days
provision, or came any thing late, were necessitated to pass that day with a
Lenten diet; among those who had missed one morning their common proportion of
flesh, was one Dervise a Cook of a Chamber of Janissaries; this man knew the
blows and punishment he was to suffer from the chief of the Chamber; that
through his sloth and want of care, the whole Company should that day pass
without their Dinner, which caused him in great passion with loud exclamations
as he passed the streets to accuse the ill Government, and little care was had
to rectify these common abuses: it fortuned that at that time that Dervise was
lamenting his case to all the world, and cursing the principal Officers, that
the Grand Signior in disguise passed by, and seeing a man in such a disorder of
mind, came in a courteous manner to demand the reason of his passion; to whom
the Dervise replied, It was in vain for him to be (...); or for me, said he, to
inform of what you are able to afford no remedy unto; for none but the Grand
Signior himself is of sufficient power to redress that for which I have so much
cause to be troubled. At last with much importunity he told what great abuse
there was in the Butchery, that the Shambles were ill served, that be had
missed the usual proportion of flesh that morning for his Janissaries Chamber,
and what punishment he was likely to suffer, for having come short only one
moment of his due time; he added farther that the Vister and other Officers
were negligent in rectifying these mean and low disorders, being wholly taken
up in enriching themselves, and intent to their own interest; but if I were
first Vister, I would not only cause great plenty of flesh in this City, but at
all times of the day it should be found by those who wanted it; and now what
benefit have either you, said he, by hearing this story, or what release am I
likely to have of punishment by repeating it to you? The Grand Signior
afterward returning home, and considering of the discourse the Janissaries Cook
had made him, whether to prove the abilities of the man, or because he
conceived Providence had offered this encounter, or that Princes delight to
exercise their power in creating great men from nothing; he sent immediately
for the Dervise, who being come into his presence, and sensible of the familiar
discourse he had made him, trembling cast himself down at his feet, supposing
that the free language he used of the (...) and the Government, was the cause
he was now to lose his life. But it happened quite contrary, for the Grand
Signior encouraging him to lay aside his fear, told him he was resolved to make
him first Vister, to try an Experiment whether he was able to amend those
abuses he complained of; and that herein he might not transgress the degrees
whereby he was gradually to pass, he first made him chief of his Chamber, the
next day Captain, the day following Aga or General of the Janissaries, and
thence with one step to be Great (...), who not only remedied the abuse in the
shambles according to his promise, but proved a famous and excellent Minister
of Sat; and though examples of the like nature are frequent among the Turks,
yet this may serve at present to show in part the fortune and fate by which men
are raised, and the unconstancy of greatness and glory amongst the Turks above
any other part of the world besides.

It was a hard Problem in the Turkish Policy, which as a wise Prime Vizier
proposed to certain Pashaes amongst other questions, What courses were possible
to be found out for a first Vizier to maintain and continue his office, and
acquit this so dangerous charge from the hazard and uncertainty to which it is
liable; for you see Brothers, said he, how few enjoy or grow old herein; their
virtue, their care, and their innocence are no protection; some remain a day, a
week, a month, others protract the thread to a year or two, but at length they
are (to use our own Proverb) like the Ant to whom God gives wings for their
speedier destruction. The Pashaes were for a while all silent, not knowing what
reply to make, or how to resolve so difficult and knotty a point, until Kuperli
(who was then the most ancient and perhaps the wisest Pasha, as the actions of
his following life have sufficiently testified) first replied that in his
opinion, the only and most probable means for a tottering Vizier to secure
himself, is to divert the minds of the Grand Signior and other working brains,
upon some foreign War; for Peace is that which corrupts the dispositions of
men, and sets them on work to raise themselves with intestine and civil evils;
when War busies their Spirits, and employes them to gain renown and glory by
Martial actions, by which means Plots and Treachery are droven from our own
homes; Consiliis and astu res externas moliri, arma (...) habere, Tac. lib. 6.
And it is possible that Achmet the Son of Kuperli, who began the last War with
Germany, might go upon this Maxim of his Fathers; for in all matters of his
Government, he is observed to walk by the same rules and directions, which was
bequeathed to him as well as his inheritance.

And yet for all this doubtful estate of the Prime Visiers, some have been
known to manage this office 18 or 19 years, and afterward wearied with care
and pains, to acquit it by a natural death; from whence this question may
arise, whether the favor or displeasure of the Prince depends on the destiny
or fortune we are born to, or whether humane Council can assign a way between
contumaciousness and flattery, wherein to steer free from danger and ambition?
Unde dubitare cogor, fato and sort nasoendi, ut caetera, ita Principum
inclinatio in hos, offensio in illos, an sit aliquid in nostris consiliis,
liceatque inter abruptam contumaciam, and deforme obsequium pergere iter,
ambitione and periculis vacuum. Tacit. lib. 4. But we find but few examples of
this kind. For if Visiers have been evil, their own cruelty and covetousness
have hastened their fate; if good, their merits have been their ruin; least
the great (...) their merits have procured to their Prince should seem to want
reward, or be dangerous or difficult to requite, Beneficia eousque laeta, dum
videntur exsolvi posse; ubi multum antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur, Tac.
lib. 4.

The Revenues of the first Vizier which issue immediately from the Grown, and
are certainappendages to the office, are not great, being not above 20000
Dollars yearly, which arise from certain Villages in Romelia; the rest of the
immense riches which accrues to this charge so full of cares and danger, flows
from all the quarters of the Empire. For no Bassaw or Minister of trust enters
his place without his Present and offering to the first Vizier, to obtain his
consent, and purchase a continuance of his favor. Those that have Governments
abroad, have always their Agents at Court, who with gifts continually mollify
the Visiers mind, entreating him to represent their service to the Grand
Signior in an acceptable and grateful manner. And though at the Equinoctial in
the Spring, all Pashaes and any that have Governments of note, are obliged to
make their Presents to the Grand Signior of considerable value, at which time
the first Vizier neither will not want his own acknowledgments, he is yet
farther treated by all Perfons with sums of money, as the nature of their
business is, which is not secretly, but boldly and confidently demanded, and
the bargain beaten as in matters of Merchandise, and Trade; and justice and
Favors made as Vendible and set as public to sale, as Wares and Commodites
are in the Shops and places of common Mart; so that if the first Vizier proves
covetous (as commonly they do who are raised from nothing, and used always to
thrist) and resolves to lose nothing of what he may get, his income is
incredible, and may equal that which is the Rent of the Grand Signior, and in a
few years amasse an immense riches and wealth. But of this the Prince and the
Turkish Policy is not ignorant, and accordingly provides remedies to drain the
inundations of the Visiers Coffers; at first by extorting great sums of money
from him at his entrance to the charge; then under color of Friendship and
Favor the Grand Signior makes him Visits, in requital whereof rich Presents
are made him, as Gratitude for so much Honor; next he many times sends to him
for a gift of 100000 Dollars, for Jewels, Horses and other things of a great
value; and in this manner several contrivances are used to turn these Rivulets
to pay their Tribute to the great (...); amongst which this present Grand
Signior Mahomet the fourth has found out one way amongst the rest, putting the
Vizier often to the charges of his Dinner, sending to his Kitchen for 20 dishes
of Meat, which is the usual proportion of the Grand Signiors ordinary Table,
and by inviting himself to a Banquet many times at the Visiers expenses; and
this being done so frequently, gives the world occasion to believe that he
demands it out of no other (...) then narrowness of soul to save the charges of
his own Dinner; and the rather it is so believed because this Emperor is
reputed of a covetous disposition, and of no affinity with Solomon the
Magnificent. But the ways and means by which the Grand Signior comes in the end
to be possessed of the gains and profits collected by his Vizier, and other
officers, requires a particular discourse apart, which shall in its due time
and place be treated of; and this shall for the present suffice to have spoken
concerning the Prime Vizier and his office.

CHAP. XII. The Offices, Dignities, and several Governments of the Empire.
HE that will describe the Policies of a Country, must endeavor especially in
the most exact and punctual manner possible to declare the several Offices,
Dignities and Riches of it, that so a more easy computation may be calculated
of its strength, numbers of Men, Fortifications, Forces by Sea, where best
defended, and where most easily vulnerable and exposed.

The next to the Vizier Azem or the first Vizier, are the several Beglerbegs
(which may not unaptly be compared to Archdukes in some parts of Christendom)
having under their jurisdiction many Sangiacks or Provinces, Beyes, Agaes and
others; To every one of these the Grand Signior in honor bestows three Ensigns
(called in Turkish Tugh) which are staves trimmed with the tail of a Horse with
a golden Ball upon the top, and this is to distinguish them from Bashaws who
have two Ensigns; and the Sangiak-beg, who has also the name of Pascha, and
has but one. When a Pascha is made, the Solemnity used at the conferring his
office, is a Flag or Banner carried before him, and accompanied with Music and
Songs by the Mirialem, who is an Officer for this purpose only, for investiture
of Pashaes in their office.

The Government of Beglerbegs, who have several Provinces called Sangiacks
under their Command, are of two sorts; the first is called Has i will
Beglerbeglik, which has a certain Rent assigned out of the Cities, Countries
and Signories allotted to the Principality; the second is called Saliane
Beglerbeglik, for maintenance of which is annexed a certain Salary or Rent,
collected by the Grand Signiors Officers with the Treasure of the whole
Government, out of which are paid also the Sangiack Beglers, that is, the Lords
of the several Counties, Towns or Cities, and the Militia of the Country.

It is impossible exactly to describe the Wealth and ways of Gains exercised
by these Potent Governors to enrich themselves; for a Turk is ingenious to get
Wealth, and hasty to grow rich; howsoever we will succinctly set down the
certain sums of Revenue which are granted them by Commission from the Grand
Signior, assigned them out of every particular place of their Government;
besides which they have the Profits of all Wests and Strays, Goods of Felons,
sale of Vacant Church-Offices, Salves, Horses and Cattle, which by Mortality or
other accidents have no certain Master; to which may be added the benefit of
their Avanias or false Accusations, whereby they invade the Right and Estates
of their Subjects; as also of the Robberies of their people and strangers, by
their own Slaves and Servants, whom they send abroad with that design; and
having committed the Robberies themselves, under pretense of discovery of the
Crime and doing Justice, they seize the innocent people, torture and imprison
them, and perhaps put some to death for expiation of their own offenses. To
come nearer then to this purpose. The Beglerbegs of the first sort are in
number 22, who have their Revenue allotted them in the places that they govern,
collected by their own Officers according to Commission, of which the first is
of Anatolia, anciently called Asia minor, afterward Anatolia, (...), from its
more Eastern situation in respect of Greece; the yearly Revenue of which in the
Grand Signiors books called the old Canon is a Million of Aspers, and has
under its An Asper is about the value of a halfpenny.
jurisdiction 14 Sangiack Kiotahi where the Beglerbeg resides in Phrygia
Magior, Sarahan, Aidin, Kastamoni, Hudanendighiar, Boli, Mentesche, Angora,
otherwise Ancyra, Karahysar, Teke ili, Kiangri, Hamid, Sultan Ughi, Karesi,
with the command of 22 Castles.

2. Caramania, anciently called Cilicia, and was the last Province which held
out belonging to the Caramanian Princes, when all places gave way to the
flourishing Progress of the Ottoman Arms; the Revenue hereof is 660074 Aspers,
and has under its jurisdiction 7 Sangiacks, viz. Iconium, which is the Court
of the Beglerbeg in Cappadocia, Nigkde, Kaisani, otherwise Cesanca,
Jenischehri, Kyrscheheri, Akschehri, Akserai: And in this Principality are
three Castles, at Iconium one, at Larende and Mendui, under the Pasha's
immediate command, and 17 others in several Sangiacks.

3. Diarbekir, otherwise Mesopotamia, has a Revenue of a Million two hundred
thousand and 660 Aspers, and has under its jurisdiction 19 Sangiacks, with
five other Governments called Hukinmet Which signifies a free command.
in Turkish, eleven of which Sangiacks are properly belonging to the Ottoman
Royalties, and eight are Curdian Counties, or of the people called Kurts; for
when Curdia was conquered, the Country was divided, and distinguished into the
nature of Sangiacks, but with this difference of right inheritance and
succession to the Goods and Possessions of their Parents, and succeed as Lords
of Manors, or to other petty Governments by Blood and Kindred. And as other
Lords of Sangiacks, Timariots, or Barons pay the Grand Signiors duties, and
hold their Land in Knights service, or other tenure whereby they are obliged to
attend and follow their Commanders to the Wars, whenever they are called
thereunto by the Grand Signiors summons: these that are registered for Hukiumet
have no Timariots or Lords to command them, but are free from all Duties and
Impositions, and are absolute Masters of their own Lands and Estates. Those
Sangiacks which are properly belonging to the Ottoman Royalties are C Harpu,
Ezani, Syureck, Nesbin, Chatenghif, Tchemischekrek, Seared, Mufarkin, Aktchie,
Kala, Habur, Sangiar otherwise Diarbekir, which is the place of residence of
the Beglerbek. Those Sangiacks which are entailed upon Families are Sagman,
Kulab, Mechrani, Tergil, Atak, Pertek, Tchifakichur, Tchirmek.

4. Of Scham otherwise Damascus, the certain Revenue of which is a Million of
Aspers, and has under it Sangiacks 7 with Has, where the Contributions by the
Beglerbegs Officers are collected upon the Country, and are Kadescherif alias
Jerusalem, Gaza, Sifad, Nabolos alias Naples in Syria, Aglun, Bahura, and
Damascus, the City where the Beglerbeg resides. He has farther three with
Saliane, for account of which he is paid by the Kings Officers; and those are
Kadmar, Saida, Beru, Kiurk, Schubek, where are no Timariots, but the
Inhabitants are true, and absolute Masters of their own Estates in the same
manner as the Curdi are, which we have beforementioned; the Castles here are
for the most part demolished, and scarce worthy our notice.

5. Is of Siwas a City in Armenia major, has a Revenue of 900 thousand Aspers,
and has under his Dominions six Sangiacks, viz. Amasia, Tchurum, Buradik,
Demurki, Gianick, Arebkir, the Castles of which are 19.

6. Is the Government of the Pascha of Erzrum on the confines of Georgia, has
a Revenue of a Million two hundred thousand and 660 Aspers, and has under his
Government eleven Sangiacks, viz. Karahizar, Scharki, Kieifi, Pasin, Esber,
Hanes, Tekman, Turtum, Meyenkerd, Mamervan, Kyzutchan, Melazkerd; and has 13
Castles.

7. Is the Government of the Pascha of Wan or Van a City in Media, has a
Revenue of a Million a hundred and thirty two thousand 209 Aspers, and commands
14 Sangiacks, viz. Adilgiwar, Ergisch, Musch, Barkiri, Kiarkian, Kisani,
Espaird, Agakis, Ekrad, Benikutur, Kalaibaierid, Berdea and Edegik.

8. Is the Government of the Pascha of Tchildir on the confines of Georgia,
has a Revenue of nine hundred twenty five thousand Aspers, and commands nine
Sangiacks, viz. Olti, Hartus, Ardnug, Erdehamburek, Hagrek, Pusenhaf alias
Pusenhal, Machgil, Igiare, Penbek, Pertekrek.

9. Is the Government of Scheherezul in Assyria, the Pascha of which has a
Revenue of a Million of Aspers, and commands 20 Sangiacks, viz. Surutchuk,
Erbil, Kiuschaf, Schehribazar, Chabkiule, Gebthamrin, Hezurd Merd, Dulchuran,
Merghiaue, Haninudevin, Agiur, Neitutari, Sepeuzengire, Ebruuan, Tauudan,
Badeberend, Belkas, Vicheni, Garikalo, Renghene.

10. Is the Government of Halep or Aleppo, has eight hundred and seventeen
thousand 772 Aspers Revenue, and commands 7 Sangiacks with Has and 2 with
Saliane: Of the first sort are Adana, Ekrad, Kelis, Beregek, Mearre, Gazir,
Balis: Of the other are Matik and Turkman which is Turcomania, of these at this
day the Revenue is farmed, and are not called Sangiacks but Agalik, for in them
are no Timariots, but every man is Lord and Master of his own Lands: This
Government has five Castles.

11. Is the Government of Marasch near the River Euphrates, situated between
Mesopotamia and Aleppo, otherwise called by the Turks Zulkadrie, has a Revenue
of 628 thousand 450 Aspers, and commands four Sangiacks only, viz. Malatia,
Asab, Kars, and Samsad, and has four Castles.

12. Is the Government of Kibros otherwise called Cyprus, has a Revenue five
hundred thousand 650 Aspers, and commands 7 Sangiacks, viz. 4 with Has, and are
Itchili, Tarsus, Alanie, Schis; the other 3 with Saliane, are Kenine Baf Mausa,
Lefkuscha or Larnica, which is the place of the Pascha's residence, and has 14
Castles.

13. Is the Government of Tarabolos Scham otherwise Tripoli of Syria, has a
Revenue eight hundred thousand Aspers, at this place the Pascha. resides, and
has under him 4 Sangiacks, viz. Hams, Hama, Gemele and Selemie, and has only
one Castle in the Sangiack of Hams called Faslulekrad.

14. Is the Government of Terbozan, otherwise Trabezond, encompassed with a
ridge of Mountains, according to a Poet born in that place,

Vertice Montano Trapezus inclusa recessit.

Formerly the Imperial Seat of the Comneni reigning over Cappadocia, Galatia,
and the parts of (...), founded by Alexius Comnenus, who upon the taking of
Constantinople by the Western Christians fled to this place, which flourished
until taken by Mahomet the Great; it is situate on the Euxine or black Sea, and
still a place of considerable Traffic, especially made rich for the fishing,
out of which and the customs the Pascha, though he has no Sangiacks under his
Government, has yet a Revenue allotted of 734 thousand 850 Aspers, with 14
Castles to defend the City, and the Dominions belonging thereunto.

15. The Government of the Pascha of Kars a City near Erzrum, has a Revenue of
820 thousand 650 Aspers, and commands six Sangiacks, viz. Erdehankiutchuk,
Giugewan, Zaruschan, Ghegran, Kughizman, Pasin.

16. The Government of the Pascha of Musul, otherwise called Nineve in Assyria,
has a Revenue of 681 thousand and 56 Aspers, and commands five Sangiacks, viz.
Bagiwanlu, Tekrit, Zerbit, Eski Musul or old Ninive, and Hurun.

17. The Government of the Pascha of Rika has a Revenue of 680 thousand
Aspers, and commands seven Sangiacks, viz. Ghemasche, Chabur, Dizirhebe,
Benirabue, Serug, Biregek Ane.

These are all the Governments which are in Asia with Has, let us now pass into
Europe.

18. Is the Government of the Pascha of Rumili otherwise Romania, which is the
most honorable Turkish charge in Europe, has a Revenue of a Million and a
hundred thousand Aspers, the seat of the Pascha is Sofia, and commands 24
Sangiacks, viz. Kiostendit otherwise Justiniana, Mora otherwise Morea, Skenderi
Tirhala, Silistra, Nigheboli, Uchri, Awlona, Jania, Ilbrazan, Tchirmen, Selanik
otherwise Salonica, Wize, Deluniia, Uskiup, Kirkkelisa, Dukakin, Wedin,
Alagehizar, Serzerin, Waltcharin, Bender, Akkerman, Ozi, Azak; But it is to be
observed that though Morea, according to the ancient Canon, was under the
jurisdiction of the Pascha of Romania, yet now it is divided and made part of
the Revenue of the Valede or Queen Mother, where a Farmer of her Rents and
Incomes now resides.

19. Is the charge of the Kupudan otherwise Captain Pascha, or as the Turks
call him, General of the White Seas, has a Revenue of 885 thousand Aspers; he
is Admiral of the Grand Signiors Fleet, and Commands as far as the Turkish
Power by Sea extends; and commands 13 Sangiacks; viz. Galipoli, which is the
proper place of the Pascha's residence, Egribuz otherwise Negropont, Karlieli,
Ainebahti, (...), Midillu or Metilene, Kogia Eli, Betga, Sifla, Mezestra, Sakis
or the Island of Scio, Beneksche or Malvatia; some others add Nicomedia,
Limnos and Nixia.

20. Is the Government of the Pascha of Budun otherwise Buda in Hungary, has a
Revenue and commands 20 Sangiacks; viz. Agri, Kanysia, Samandra, Petchui,
Ustunibilgrad or Stultwissenberg, Ostrogon or Strigonium, Sekdin, Chatwan,
Semutum, Sirem, (...), Filek, Sekitwar, Sektches, Setchre, Novigrad, Seksard,
Belgrade or (...) Regalis. And now lately in the year 1663 that Wiwar or
Newhausel was taken, a new Sangiack is since added.

21. The Pascha of Temeswar in Hungary, has a Revenue and has under his
command 6 Sangiacks, viz. Lipona, Tchanad, Ghiola, Mudava, Waradin, to which
also Janova is added, conquered in the year 1663.

22. Is the Government of the Pascha of Bosna in Myria, divided formerly into
Liburnia and Dalmatia, now called Sclavonia; his Revenue is a and commands 8
Sangiacks, viz. Hersek, Kelis, Ezdernik, Puzga, Feragine, Zagine, Kirka, (...).

There are other (...) of Coffa, (...) in (...) Chersone sus, which having no
Sangiacks, no Timariots nor Ziamets under them, but only a few beggarly
Villages which we shall purposely omit, as not worthy the notice. And so much
shall be said for the Paschas or Beglerbegs with (...), or with the Revenue
imposed upon Countries under their command, collected by their own officers.

Those that are with Saliane, or paid out of the Grand Signiors Treasury, are:

1. The Pascha of Gran Caira, called by the Turks (...), has a Revenue of 600
thousand Scheriffs or Zechins a year, which he may justly and honestly pretend
to; as much is the Tribute yearly paid the Grand Signior from that place; which
is most commonly brought since the War with Venice upon Camels backs by land,
with a guard of 500 men, not to expose it to the danger of being intercepted at
Sea; another sum of 600 thousand Zechins yearly goes to the payment of the
Turks Forces in Egypt; besides the vast sums of money this Pascha extorts with
insupportable Avarice and Tyranny from the Natives of the Country, during the
space of his 3 years Government; by which means he grows excessive rich, and
able to refund a good stream into the Grand Signiors Coffers at his return, as
hereafter shall be the subject of our more large discourse; he commands 16
Sangiacks as is reported, but not being registered in the Kings Book, I let them
pass without naming them. 2, Is the Government of Bagdat, otherwise Babylon,
has a Revenue of a Million and 700 thousand Aspers, and commands 22 Sangiacks,
viz. Dertenk, Gezan, Gewazir, Renk Aiadiie, Gelle, Semwat, Remaliie, Beiare,
Derne, Debare, Wasit, Gebkiule, Gedide, Kesend, Kasrschirin, Ghiilan, Karag,
Anne, Alsebah, Demurkapn, (...), Karaniie. 3. Is the Government of the Pascha
of Yemen, which is in Arabia Faelix, whose place of residence is at Adem upon
the Red Sea; which place and Country being recovered for the most part again
from the Turk by the Arabians, it is neither needful to mention the Revenue,
nor the Sangiacks it formerly commanded. 4. Is the Government of Habelch upon
the confines of the Abissines in Ethiopia, called also by the Turks (...),
which extending it self to the Dominions of Prester John, being far distant
from the succors of the Ottoman force, is now wholly lost to the Turk; so that
we can neither assign the Revenue, nor the Sangiacks. 5. In the Government also
of Bosra on the confines of Persia, a Maritine City in the Sinus Persicus near
Byblis in (...), were reckoned 26 Sangiacks, but now not held by the Turk, who
has no other power there, nor benefit thence, excepting only that prayers are
made constantly for the Sultan. 6. In the Government of Lahsa on the confines
of Ormus in Persia, are counted 6 Sangiacks, viz. Aiwen, Sakul, Negniie, Netif,
Benderazir, Giriz, but these Countries are poor, and have scarce any place in
the Grand Signiors Registers.
To these we should add the Governments of Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli in
Barbary; but that being much fallen off from the Turks obedience and become
almost independent of themselves; we shall pass by the discourse of them,
especially because of late years the mutual Treaties with Barbary, and
interchanges of War and Peace with those Countries, has made the state and
condition of that people well known and familiar in England.

The use of the particular Catalogue foregoing, is to demonstrate the
greatness and power of the Ottoman Empire, which has so many considerable
Governments and Principalities in its possession, wherewith to encourage and
excite the endeavors of Heroic spirits to an ambition of great and noble
Enterprises, whereby to merit the Rewards which remain in the power of the
Sultan to gratify them with. And also to help in the just computation of the
number of men the Turk can bring into the Field, every Pascha being obliged for
every 5000 Aspers Rent to bring a Soldier to the War: though notwithstanding,
they often appear for Ostentation and gain of the Grand Signiors favor with
more men then their due complement; as in the last War with Germany, the
Beglerbeg of Romania brought 10000 effective men into the Field.

Of these Beglerbegs five have the Title of Visiers, which signifies as much as
Councellor, viz. the Paschas of Anatolia, Babylon, Cairo, Romania, and Buda;
which are charges of the greatest riches, power, and fame; the others have
their pre-eminence, rank, or order according to the Priority of Conquest, and
Antiquity in the possession of the Turks.

These are all the great Governments of the Empire, in whose respective
jurisdictions are always three principal Officers, viz. the Mufti, the Reis
Efendi, otherwise called Reis Kitab, which is Lord Chancellor or Secretary of
State, or rather those two offices united into one; and the third is Tefterdar
Pashaw, or Lord Treasurer. These three officers are near Counselors and
attendants on their (...), and so also they are on the Prime Vizier, whose
Mufti, Reis, Efendi and Tefterdar have a superiority and dignity above the
others, and are to them, as the original to the Copy.

Of the Mufti we shall speak in due place. The Reis Efendi, which signifies
chief of the Writers or Book-men; (for the Turks call always men of the Law,
and Professors of the Pen, and Parochial Priests by the Title of Efendi) is
always present and attending on the Vizier, for passing Orders, Decrees,
Patents and Commissions into all parts of the Empire; which are daily
dispatched in those numbers into all places, as is incredible; for the Turks
governing more by their Arbitrary power, and according to the exigences of
affairs, then by a set rule, or form, every business requires its distinct
order; and the very Courts of Justice are moderated according to the commands
and directions they receive from above; by which means the Reis Efendi's hand
are filled with such a multitude of business, as employs great numbers of
Writers; and consequently brings in riches flowing to his Coffers; some in
which Office, who by their parts, industry, and courage have gained authority
and respect, have amassed wealth, which might compare with the riches and
treasure of Princes: We shall here instance in one of late years, famous in
Turkey for his knowledge and riches, called Samozade; one who had piled those
heaps of all things that were rich and curious, as wear too tedious and long to
insert in a Catalogue in this place. It may suffice, that being executed in the
time of the last Wars against the Emperor of Germany for some conspiracy
against the Great Vizier, such a Treasure was found appertaining to him (all
which was confiscated to the Grand Signior) as was sufficient to have enriched
and raised his Prince, had he been impoverished, and in a declining condition.

The other Great Officer, is the Tefterdar or Lord Treasurer, who receives the
Revenue of the Grand Signior, and pays the Soldiery, and makes other public
disbursements; this Office is different from the Treasurer of the Seraglio (of
whom we have already spoken) who attends to nothing else but the expenses of
the Court, and to gather in the accidental profits and presents paid to the
Grand Signior; which is so considerable, that every Sultan (for the most part)
amasses a particular treasure of his own, which after his death is enclosed in
a certain Chamber, and shut with an Iron gate, and the Keyhole stopped with
Lead, and over the Port is writ in Golden Letters, The Treasure of such a
Sultan. And this shall suffice to have spoken of the Offices and Dignities of
the Empire.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Tartars and Tartar Han, and in what manner they depend upon
the Turks.
THe Tartars may very well be accounted amongst the other Princes subject to
the Ottoman power; I mean not the Asiatick Tartars or the Tartar of Eusbeck
(though so much Mohammedan, as to wear green Turbants, and to deduce their Race
from the Line of Mahomet himself) for having conquered China, and possessing a
greater Empire then the Ottoman, they are far from acknowledging any subjection
or degree of inferiority to the Turk; nor are all the European Tartars subjects
to the Sultan; for the Kalmuk and Citrahan Tatars (men of strange barbarity,
and countenance different from all the other race of mankind) though Professors
of the Mohammedan Religion, are yet faithfully and piously obedient to the Duke
of Moscovie their lawful Prince.

But the Precopentian Tartar, which inhabits Taurica Cherfonesus, now called
Crim, the principal City of which is Theodosia, now Cafa, and the Nagaentian
Tartar, which inhabits by the Palus Meotis between the Rivers of Volga and
Tanais, are the people which may be accounted amongst the subjects, or at least
Confederates of this Empire: though only the City of Cafa of all those
Dominions, is immediately in Possession and Government of the Turk, which in my
opinion appears to be a cautionary Town and Pledge for their obedience; and
though the Han or Prince of that Country is elective, yet he is chosen out of
the true Line, and confirmed by the Grand Signiors, who have always taken upon
them a power to depose the Father, and in his place constitute the Son or next
of that Lineage when found remiss in affording their Auxiliary helps to the War,
or guilty of any dis-respect or want of duty to the Ottoman Port.

This present Han which now governs, called Mahomet Ghirei (for that is the
Surname of his Family) remained during the life of his Father (according to the
custom of the Eldest Son of this Prince) a hostage to the Turk in Janboli a
Town in Thrace, four days jurney distant from Adrianople, situated on the
(...) or black Sea; but from thence upon jealousy of too near a vicinity to
his own Country, was removed to Rhodes, where he passed an obscure and
melancholy life until the death of his Father, and then being recalled to
Constantinople, had there his Sword girt on, swore fealty to the Grand Signior,
with all other formalities performed according to their custom of regal
inauguration: But being settled in his Kingdom and mindful of his sufferings at
Rhodes, he had ever stomached the Pride of the Ottoman Emperor, by which, and
the disswasion of the Polonians, and the other neighboring Tartars, as a thing
dishonorable to so ancient and powerful a people, to resign the heir of their
Kingdom a hostage to their neighbors; this present Prince has refused this
part of subjection which the Vizier Kupriuli often complained of; but not being
in a condition to afford a remedy unto, thought it prudence to dissemble.

But yet these people are esteemed as Brothers, or near allies with the Turk,
to whom for want of heirs-male in the Ottoman Line, the Empire is by ancient
compact to desend; the expectation of which though afar off, and but almost
imaginary, does yet conserve the Tartar in as much observance to the Turk, as
the hopes of an Estate does a young (...), who is allured to a complaisancy and
obsequiousness with the petulant humor of a Father that adopts him, who is
resolved never to want heirs of his own Family. And thus the Tartar is as
obedient as other subjects; and though the Turk exercises not his power there
by commands, as in other places of his Dominions, but treats all his business
by way of Letters; yet these Letters serve in the place of Waraents, for the
signification of the Grand Signiors pleasure, and are as available as the The
great Character of the Emperors name (...) at the top of every Command.
Autogra, and other formalities of the Imperial Edict, are in other places (in
subjection to the Turk.)

By ancient compact between this Empire and the Kingdom of Tartary, it is
agreed, that whenever the Grand Signior goes in person to the Wars; the
Tartar Han is to accompany him in person with an Army of a hundred thousand
men, but if the Vizier or some other General be in the Field, then is he only
obliged to send forty or fifty thousand under the command of his Son, or some
principal Officer of his Kingdom, who are paid and maintained out of the booty
and pillage they acquire. In the year 1663 the Tartar called on occasion of the
War in Hungary to the assistance of the Turk, they made such incursions into
that Country, Moravia, and Silesia, sacking and burning all Cities and Towns,
that they carried away one hundred and sixty thousand captive souls in one
year; which precise number I am informed from those who had received good
information of the Pengik or Certificates that were given upon every head; for
the Tartar being an absolute free-booter, makes prize of all that comes within
his power; and lest he should prey on the subjects of the Turk, they are bound
to take out attestations from certain Registers, of the Names, Countries and
Age of their Captives, lest they should deceive the Turk with the sale of
those, who are already their own subjects and slaves.

The Tartar is to the Turk, as the Giacall to the Lion, who hunts and finds the
prey for the Lion to overcome and feed on: And so the Tartar makes incursions
into the neighboring Countries round about, and pass in great bodies some
times ten or twelve days without doing the least damage or spoil in their
journey outward; but as soon as they turn their (...) home, they rob, spoil,
burn and carry all the Inhabitants of what Age or Sex soever, like a torrent
before them; and every one of them leading three or four horses a piece, on
which they mount their Captives and load their prey, make a running march day
and night with few hours intermission for natural repose, too fast for any
orderly Army to overtake; and any other, that is not so, is not able to give
them Battle. Such of their slaves as in the journey are wounded and infirm,
and not able to accompany the Camp, they kill; those which they bring safe into
their own Country they sell to the Turks, who come thither to Trade for this
Merchandise, which is the most profitable commodity that Tartary affords. Young
Boys and Girls are rated at the highest price, the latter of which being
beautiful are like Jewels held at an unknown value; but few of them escape the
lust of the Tartars, who deflower them even in the years of their very infancy.
This sort of people were by the ancients called Sermati, and were always
famous for their exploits on Horseback, but heavy and ignorant of foot
service; which Character Tacitus gives of them, Lib. 1. Hist. Omnis Sarmatum
virtus quasi extra ipsos, nihil ad pedestrem pugnam, tam ignavum ubi per turmas
advenere, vix ulla acies obstiterit, iners videtur sudore acquirere, quod
possis sanguine purare, mira diversitate naturae cum ijdem homines sic ament
inertiam, and oderint quietem: They live very hardly, and feed especially on
horse flesh, which dying in their march, they never examine his diseases,
whether surfeited or overheated; but distributing his flesh amongst their
Companions, placed it under their Sadles, and thus baked between the heat of
the man and the horse, chafed with that days labor, is at night judged
sufficiently prepared, as a dish fit for the Table of their Prince.

And as the men are nourished with a Diet of raw flesh, herbs and roots, or
such as the Earth naturally produces without the concoction of the Fire to
prepare it for their stomachs; so also their Horses are of a hardy temperament,
patient of hunger and cold, and in the sharp Winter of those Countries, when
the ground is covered with Snow, nourish themselves with the Barks of Trees,
and such herbage as they can find at the bottom of the deep Snow. Their Towns
or Villages consist of huts rather then houses, or hurdles made of sticks and
covered with a course hair Cloth; of which Villages there are accounted two
hundred thousand, so that taking one man out of every Village (as their custom
is when they go to the War) they speedily form an Army of two hundred thousand
fighting men. But now having carried great riches out of Poland, and gained a
considerable wealth by the Market of their slaves, some of them throw off their
homely Plads to wear Sables, and some more frugal, employ their money for
building Houses; the riotous and dissolute are addicted to strong Waters, and a
drink called Boza made of a certain seed (which drank in a great quantity does
intoxicate, and is now much in use among the Turks) and give themselves up to a
gluttony, as brutish as that which is natural unto Swine, having no art of
sauces to provoke their appetite, but rest delighted with the mere contentment
of idleness and a full stomach.

But this shall be sufficient to have spoken of the relation the Tartars have
to the government of the Turk, and their subjection to this Empire, their
customs and manners being more amply and fully described in other books.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Tributary Princes to the Grand Signior, viz. Moldavians,
Valachians, Transilvanians, Raguscans, etc.
THe power and puissance of an Empire is not more judged of by the many
governors, the rich offices it can dispose of, the multitude of Provinces it
contains in obedience, and the necessity it can impose on other Princes to seek
its confederacy (which we have already treated of) then it is by the many
tributaries which to redeem the remainder of their wordly goods, willingly
sacrifice the best part to appease his fury, in whose power it is to master
all: and so these distressed Nations, long wearyed-out with tedious Wars,
oppressed between the Emperor of Germany, the Polander, and the Turk, and more
damaged by their own civil dissentions and domestic perfidiousness, then
vanquished by the force of Arms, were forced at last to surrender up their
fruitless Provinces to the devotion of the Turk, which are now harassed and
oppressed beyond all expression, and are the meerest slaves to the Turk of all
other his subjects; and may well be compared to the industrious Be and
profitable Sheep, whom he cares for and maintains alive for the sake of their
Honey, and the interest of their Wool; and as if all this were too little, when
it ^^all be so thought fit, he opens the gate to the incursions of the Tartar,
who having gained a considerable booty of goods and captives, sells to the
Turks for slaves, those which were before his subjects. These three poor
Provinces formerly called the Daci, which withstood so long the Roman Arms,
were always esteemed a Valiant and Warlike people, according to that of
Virgil, lib. 8. Aen.

Indomitique Dacae, and pontem Indignatus Araxes. and Juvenal. Sat. 5. Dacius
and scripto radiat Germanicus antro.

Which Countries have been the Graves and Cemeteries of the Turks, and in these
modern times been the stage on which so many Tragedies of War have been acted,
being defended with as much valor and variety of successes, as could humanely
be expected in so unequal a Match as was between those Provinces singly, and
the Ottoman Empire. But now at last they are forced to yield, and become not
only tributaries, but slaves and subjects to the Turk; who having deprived them
of the true line of their natural Princes succeeding in a lawful inheritance,
place over them some Christians of the Greek Church, without consideratian of
their conditions or riches, or qualifications; nay, rather choose to give the
Standart (which is the sign of the Grand Signiors confirmation of the Prince)
to some inferior Person, as Taverners, Fish-mongers, or other meaner
professions purposely to disparage the people with the baseness of their
Governors, and expose them to the oppressions of men of no worth or dexterity
in their office. It has several times been under the consideration of the
Turks, at length to reduce these three Provinces to the command of so many
Pashaws; contrary to the original Capitulations agreed on at the time that
these people first submitted to the Ottoman yoke: but as yet it has been
carried to the contrary, as more profitable and better serving the ends of the
Empire; for hereby Christians become the instruments of torment to their own
Brethern; Outrages and Spoils may be the more boldly acted; more Turkish
Officers employed on every slight occasion on gainful messages, and the people
by long oppressions living under the jurisdiction of a Prince, who can rather
spoil then protect, may be reconciled more willingly to the Turkish Government,
and learn to value the gentleness and power of a Pashaw, compared with the
remembrance of their former aggrievances. But of this government they will
rather let them imagine the ease and sweetness then enjoy it; for (...) a
Pashaw the Governor, the power of a Turk would be concerned for their
protection, he would esteem himself their Patron, and his honor engaged in
their defense, by which means these Countries would be relieved in a great
measure of extortions and violences, which is not so beneficial to the Turk, as
the present miserable estate in which they remain.

Moldavia called by the Turks Bugdan, was first made tributary to the The word
(...) (...) as much as (...) (...), or the General of an (...)
Turks by Mahomet the great, but under the small tribute of 2000 Crowns per
annum; afterward Bogdanus Vayvod thereof, anno 1485 fearing to become absolute
Vassal to the Turk, taking to his association the Kingdom of (...), took up
Arms against Selymus the second, by whom being drawn out from his Country, John
a Moldavian born, but one who had embraced the (...) superstition, was
preferred (...).
by Selymus to the Principality; but no sooner was he settled therein but he
returned to his former Religion, for which cause the Turk taking into his
assistance the Province of Valachia, made War upon Moldavia; but John the
Vayvod by treachery losing his life, this Province fell (...) into the power of
the Turk, and was united to his Empire in the year 1574. The tribute in those
days of this Province is recorded in the Turkish History to have been 40000
Zechins or 80000 Dollars; but now whatsoever may be reported, the tribute of
these Countries is, or was, the Reader may take this following account for what
is the certainly paid, being related to me from one who had for many years been
employed for (...) both in Moldavia and Valachia by the Turk, viz. the yearly
tribute of Moldavia is,

1. To the Grand Signior 120 purses of money; each purse containing Its annual
tribute.
500 Dollars, makes 60000 Dollars. 2. Ten thousand Oaks of Wax, each Oak being
two pounds and a half English weight. 3. Ten thousand Oaks of Honey. 4. Six
hundred Quintals of Tallow for the Arsenal. 5. Five hundred Ox Hides. 6. Five
hundred pieces of Canvas for Clothing, and Shirts for the slaves, and other
services for the Galleys. 7. 1330 Oaks of Wax for the service of the Arsenal.
8. To the chief Vizier ten Purses of money or 5000 Dollars, and a Sables Furre
for a Vest. 9. To the Visiers Kahija or chief Steward, one Purse or 500
Dollars. 10. To the Tefterdar or Lord Treasurer the same, as to the Kahija.
This is the ordinary and annual tribute this Country acknowledges to the
supremacy of the Sultan; and it were well and happy for this people were it
all; but there are so many accidental expenses, pretensions and artifices of
the Turks, framed and contrived messages merely to extract money and presents
from this oppressed and harassed people, as do more then equal, and sometimes
double the charge of their yearly tribute. To which you may add the price paid
for the Principality, which is every three year set to sail, and is

To the Grand Signior 150 Purses, or 75000 Dollars.

To the Valede or Queen Mother 50 Purses, or 25000 Dollars. The price of the
(...).


To the Grand Signiors Favorite, who is commonly some handsome young youth,
ten Purses, or 5000 Dollars.

And to the Kuslir Aga or chief Black Eunuch, who is Superintendent over the
Ladies of the Seraglio, ten Purses of money.

And lastly, to the Prime Vizier and other Officers, for as much as they can
beat their bargain. All which money is taken up at Interest of 40 or 50 per
cent. sometimes on condition to be doubled; and this is done by men who having
no Estates of their own, the Debt becomes to be charged on the Country, which
is pillaged and poled for it to the very bones, first to satisfy the price of
the Principality with the Interestmoney for what it was valued, then to pay the
annual tribute, then to satisfy the multitude of covetous Turks, who like so
many Vultures pursue after the Skeliton of this consumed Carcass: And lastly,
the Prince himself must take his accounts, and take his Measures to be capable
for the future, after he has laid aside the Ornament of his Office, to live in
some proportion agreeable to his past condition; and this is neither done
moderately nor modestly, but with a covetousness and greedy appetite, commonly
incident to the nature of men born of mean Parentage and educated with the
parsimony of a scanty house; who also thereunto add many grains of allowance
to the limits of their gains, in consideration of the yearly Gratuities they
must make to reconcile the Friendship of the chief Turkish Ministers, whereby
they may enjoy protection for their Persons and Estates.

The state and condition of the Province of Walachia is not better, but rather
worse, and more afflicted then that of Moldavia; for this Country being now
equally with the former in the sole and entire disposal and possession of the
Turk, to whom it became first tributary under their own Princes in the time of
Sultan Bajazet: Afterward in the year 1462 Mahomet the Great undertook the
entire Conquest of it, then governed by its Vayvod Wladus, whose younger
Brother supported by the Turk, and a factious party in that Country, possessed
himfelf of the Principality, contenting himself to be Vassal to the Turkish
Empire; afterward in the year 1595 Michael the Vayvod thereof joining himself
with Sigismond of Transylvania, and with the Vayvod of Moldavia waged a long
and terriblc War against the Turks, until revolutions, unquietness, and
factions have so spent them as that they are at length become another addition
to the Empire of the Turks, who now impose on them a heavy yoke and a strait
curb, not to be imputed to any thing more then to Divine Justice, which takes
occasion to exercise a hand of severity against the unseasonable negligence,
sedition and variance of Christians amongst themselves, at a time when the
common enemy to their profession attended only the opportunity of their own
dissentions, to enter and devour them.

The tribute of Walachia to the Grand Signior, was formerly 120 Purses of
money, or 60000 Dollars yearly, according to that of Moldavia, and had so still
continued had not lately Matthew the Vayvod about the year 1655 grown rich, and
therefore forgetful of his condition (having by friends and large presents at
the Port, procured a continuation of his Office for the space of nineteen or
twenty years) rebelled against the Turk, taking false measures of his wealth
and power as able to encounter the puissance of the Ottoman Empire; but being
soon put to the worst and forced to yield, his life was spared, and the safty
of his Country redeemed upon the augmentation of their tribute; so that now,
that which was yearly paid being 120 Purses of money,

1. Is become to the Grand Signior 260 Purses, or one hundred and thirty
thousand Dollars. Every Oak is two pounds (...).
2. There is paid 15000 Oaks of Honey. 3. 9000 Oaks of Wax. 4. To the Prime
Vizier ten Purses of money, or 5000 Dollars, and a Vest of Sables. 5. To the
Tefterdar or Lord Treasurer one Purse of money, or 500 Dollars, and a Vest of
Sables. 6. To the Kuslir Aga, or chief Eunuch of the Women 12000 Aspers. 7. To
the Visiers Kahija or Steward five hundred Dollars, and a Vest os Sables.
The other charges and value set on this Province when triennially sold, is not
less then that of Moldavia; the method and arts used for extorting money from
thence are the same, the oppression in every point equal, unless the
remembrance of the extravagent disorder of Matthew the Vayvod still kept in
mind, emboldens the Turk with more confident pretenses to work more desolation
and impoverishment in this Province. Now lately a Prince was settled there by
order of the Grand Signior, in the year 1664 called Stridia Bei by the Greeks,
which signifies a Lord that had gained some fortune from selling Oysters and
Fish; this person succeeded Gregorasco the late Prince, who fearing the anger
of the Prime Vizier for returning home with his Army without license, defeated
by General Susa near Lewa, fled for safety of his life into the Dominions of
the Emperor: The Turks who always avenge the crimes of the Governors on the
people, or of the subjects on the Governors, raised the price of the
Principality to a higher value, causing Stridia Bei (as I am confidently
informed, who was contented to accept it at any rate) to pay for it 800 Purses
of money, or four hundred thousand Dollars; to which being added the interest
before mentioned, the sum may easily be computed that this new Vayvod engulfed
himself in; and I leave the Reader to imagine with what glad hearts and
blessings the people of that Country went forth to receive their Bankrupt
Prince.

Nor is Transylvania wholly exempted from the oppression of the Turk; for after
several revolutions from the time of Huniades made Vayvod by Uladislaus the
fourth King of Hungary, anno 1450, a great defender of his Country against the
Infidels, until the time of Stephen the seventh, surnamed Ragotzki Patronized
by the Turks, anno 1630. This Principality remained sometimes at the devotion
and disposal of the King of Hungary, of Poland, of the Emperor, and sometime
of the Turk; until by the growing greatness of the Ottomans, the Turks became
Masters of the best part of this Country. But yet Transylvania is more tenderly
and more honorably treated then the other two Provinces, their tribute being
much less, and their Princes chosen for the most part more regularly from the
ancient Line, or at least from the honorable houses of the Boyars or Nobility,
who have an affinity or alliance with the true blood of the former Vayvods.
Their ancient tribute was only 6000 Zechins yearly, but afterward were added
9000 more annually, for acknowledgement of certain Castles which Rogotzki had
taken from Poland, which the Turk demanding to have resigned into his
possession, were for that sum redeemed, and still detained in the hands of the
Transilvanians; over and above which they only pay 300 Dollars and two Silver
bowls to the seven Visiers of the Bench: And this is all the acknowledgment
they make to the Turk, who demonstrates more respect always to this Prince and
his Messages, then those of the neighbor Provinces, by reason that that
Country is not totally in his power (certain strong fortresses being in the
hand of the Emperor of Germany) for whose sake this people is more gently
dealt with, lest too much (...) should occasion them to revolt; And this
consideration induced the Turks to treat modestly with Michael Apafi the Prince
of this Country in the late Wars in Hungary, by trusting much to his conduct,
by using him like an honorable Confederate, by permitting him freely to
possess Zekelhyd after its voluntary surrender in a Mutiny, without the
controulment or superintendency of a Turk as his Superior; and for his farther
encouragement gave out, that when the Sultan had totally subdued Hungary, those
parts which were not subject to Pashaws, should be annexed to his Dominions,
and he honourad with the Title of King of Hungary.

These Princes of the three foregoing Provinces are farther obliged to serve
the Grand Signior in his Wars, whenever summoned thereunto; but with what
number, and in what manner, we reserve for its due place in the Treatise of the
Turks Militia and Auxiliaries.

The City and small Dominion of Ragusi is also another tributary to the Turk;
which is a petty Commonwealth, not vouchsafed the Title of a Republic;
neither by the Venetians nor the Pope, and only styled la (...) di Ragusi,
which is a Town in Dalmatia, commanding over a narrow and barren Territory of a
few Villages, which for the space of above 150 miles extends it self along the
Seacoast, and some little Islands of no great consideration: It was anciently
called (...) (of which name there were two other Cities in Peloponesus) but
that being rased by the Goths, the Inhabitants after their departure rebuilt
again this City of Ragusi, giving it a new name as well as a new foundation.
The government of it in the nature of a Commonwealth is more ancient then that
of Venice, having preserved it sels more by art and submission to some powerful
Protector, then to its own force; which caused them to court the friendship of
the Turk, before he was Master of any part of Europe; and as their Records
report, it was upon the advice of a Holy Nun, esteemed a great Saint amongst
them; who prophesying of the future greatness of the Turkish Empire, assured
them that the only means to preserve for many Ages their Commonwealth free and
happy, was to submit themselves to one of the most prosperous of Princes, to
whose (...) the best part of the world should be subdued: Whereupon two
Ambassadors were dispeeded to the City of Prusa (then the Regal Seat, before
the utter ruin of the Grecian Empire) with presents to the Sultan Orchanes,
desiring to become his tributaries, and in consideration thereof to strengthen
their weak Commonwealth with assistance, under the shadow of his prevalent
protection. There is no doubt, but the Sultan (...) received them the more
courteously, and promised the maintenance of a former League, by how much the
distance they were at as yet, gave them the less cause to fear his arms; (...)
the tribute being agreed on of twelve thousand and five hundred Zechins yearly,
they were returned home with all demonstrations of courtesy, and assurances of
defense: Orchanes entered into Articles with them, bestowed on them a grant of
all the immunities and privileges they desired, the which he signed with the
form of his whole hand wetted in Ink and clapped on the Paper, which was all
the Firm and Seal in those days, and is now reverenced amongst the Turks with
the same esteem, as the Jews do the Tables of Moses, or we the most sacred and
holy relics; ever since that time this tribute has yearly continued, and
been brought always in the Month of July by two Ambassadors, who reside at the
Turkish Court for the space of a year, the former returning home; these are
relieved at the same season of the following year, by the accession of two
others with the like tribute; which with the presents they also bring to the
Prime Vizier, the chief Eunuch of the Women, the Queen Mother and other
Sultans, with the charges and expense of the Embassy, is computed to amount
yearly to the sum of twenty thousand Zechins.

They were in times past, before the War between the Republic of Venice and
the Turk, very poor, and put to hard shifts and arts to raise the Turkish
tribute; but this War has opened their scale, and made it the Port for
transmitting the Manufactures of Venice and all Italy into Turkey, which yields
them such considerable customs, as thereby their tribute is supplied with
advance, and their other necessities provided for: So that now the old
Ornaments of the Ambassadors, as their black Velvet Bonnets, and Gowns of
Crimson Satin, lined heretofore with Martins Fur, but now with Sables; are not
laid up in the common Wardrobe for the Ambassadors of the succeeding year, but
a new Equipage and Accoutrements are yearly supplied at the common charge: and
thus they pass honestly and in good esteem at the Ottoman Court, being called
the Dowbrai Venedick by the Turks, or the good Venetian.

This petty Republic has always supported it self by submission, and
addresses for favor and defense to diverse powerful Princes, courting the
favor of every one, never offering injuries, and when they receive them
patiently support them; which is the cause the Italians call them le set
bandiere, or the seven Banners, signifying that for their being and maintenance
of the name of a free Republic, they are contented to become slaves to all
parts of the world. And it is observable on what a strange form of jealous
policy their Government is founded; for their chief officer who is in
imitation of the Doge at Venice, is changed every month, others weekly; and
the Governor of the principal Castle of the City, is but of twenty four hours
continuance; every night one is nominated by the Senate for Governor, who is
without any preparation or ceremony taken up as he walks the streets, having a
handkerchif thrown over his face, is led away blindfold to the Castle, so as
none can discover who it is that commands that night; and by that means all
possibility of conspiracy or combination of betraying the Town prevented. These
people in former times were great Traders into the Western parts of the world;
and it is said, that those vast Carracks called Argosies, which are so much
famed for the vastness of their burden and bulk, were corruptly so denominated
from Ragosies, and from the name of this City, whose Port is (...) rather by
Art and industry, then framed by nature.

Some of the Provinces also of Georgia, formerly Iberia, but now supposed The
tributaries of Georgia and Mengrelia.
to be called from St. George the Cappadocian Martyr, and the poor Country of
Mengrelia, are also tributaries to the Turk, who every three years send
messengers with their sacrifice to the Grand Signior of seven young Boys, and
as many Virgins apiece, besides other slaves for Presents to great men: this
people choose rather this sort of (...) then any other, because custom (...)
introduced a forwardness in the Parents without remorse to sell their Children,
and to account slavery a preferment, and the miseries of servitude a better
condition then Poverty with freedom; of the whole retinue which these beggarly
Ambassadors bring with them (for so the Turks called them) being about seventy
or eighty persons, a (...) of miserable people are all set to sale, to the very
Secretary and Steward, to defray the charge of the Embassy, and bring some
Revenue to the public Stock; so that the Ambassadors return back without their
Pomp, reserving only the Interpreter as a necessary attendant to their voyage
home.

The Emperor of Germany may also not improperly be termed one of the
tributaries to the Ottoman Empire (whom for honor sake we mention in the last
place in so ungrateful an office) being obliged according to the Articles made
with Solomon the Magnificent to pay a yearly tribute (...) 3000 Hungars, but it
was only paid the first two years after the conclusion of the Peace; afterward
it was excused by the Germans, and dissembled by the Turks; until taking a
resolution to make a War on Hungary, made that one ground and occasion of the
breach: for upon the truce made for eight years between Sultan Solomon and the
Emperor Ferdinand, as Augerius Busbeck reports in (...) Capitulations, that the
tribute is made the foundation of the accord. Cujus concordiae, pacis, ac
confoederationis hae conditiones sunto primo, nt tua dilectio quotannis ad
aulam nostram pro arra induciarum 30000 Hungaricos Ducatos mittere teneatur,
una cum residuo, quod nobis per proxime praeterlapsum biennium reservetur.

CHAP. XV. The Desolation and Ruin which the Turks make of their own Countries
in Asia, and the parts most remote from the Imperial Seat, esteemed one cause
of the conservation of their Empire.
THis position will appear a Paradox at first sight to most men who have read
and considerd the Roman Conquest, whose jurisdiction and Dominions were far
larger then this present Empire; and yet we do not find that they so
studiously endeavored to dispeople, and lay waste the Nations they subdued;
but rather encouraged industry in plantations, gave privileges to Cities
meanly stored, invited people to inhabit them, endeavored to improve Countries
rude and uncultivate with good Husbandry, and Maritine Towns with Traffic and
Commerce; made Citizens of their confederates, and conferred on their conquered
subjects oftentimes greater benefits then they could expect or hope for under
their true and natural Princes; and certainly the Romans (...) and were richer
and more powerful by their policy; and therefore why the Turk might not proceed
in the same manner, and yet with the same advantage, is worth our consideration.

For the solution of which difficulty, it will be necessary to consider that
these two Empires being compared, there will be found a vast difference (...)
the original, foundation, progress and maxims each of other. For the Romans
built their City in peace, made Laws by which the arbitrary will of the Prince
was corrected; and afterward as their Arms succeeded, and their Dominions were
extended, they accommodated themselves often to present necessities and
humors, and constitutions of the people they had conquered, and accordingly
made provision, and used proper Arts to keep them in obedience; and next, by
their generosity and wisdom won those Nations to admire and imitate their
virtues, and to be contented in their subjection. But the Turks have but one
sole means to maintain their Countries, which is the same by which they were
gained, and that is the cruelty of the sword in the most (...) way of
execution, by killing, consuming and laying desolate the Countries, and
transplanting the people unto parts where they are nearest under the command
and age of a Governor; being wholly destitute and ignorant of other refined
Arts, which more civilized. Nations have in part made serve in the place of
violence. And yet the Turks have made this course alone answer to all the
intents and ends of their Government.

For the subjects of this Empire being governed better by Tyranny then
Gentleness, it is necessary, that courses should be taken whereby these people
may remain more within compass and reach of Authority; which they would hardly
be, were every part of this Empire so well inhabited as to afford entertainment
within the Fortifications of its vast Mountains and Woods, to the many unquiet
and discontented spirits that live in it. And this may be one cause, that so
rarely Rebellions arise amongst the Turks, though in the remotest parts of
Asia; and when they do, are easily suppressed: This also is one cause, why
Great men so easily resign themselves up to the will of the Grand Signior to
punishment and death, whether the sentence be according to Law, or only
Arbitrary: this is the reason that fugitives and homicides cannot escape; for
having no place for flight, neither the inhabited Cities which are immediately
under the eye of a vigilant Commander will afford them refuge, nor can the
desolate Countries entertain them; and Christendom is so abhorred by them, that
they will never take it for their Sanctuary. And thus deprived of all means of
safety, they wholly attend to please and serve their Great Master, in whose
favor and hands alone is the reward and punishment.

Another advantage, and that not inconsiderable, that this manner of
dispeopling the Country brings to this Empire, is the difficulty an enemy would
find in their March, should they with a Land-Army attempt to penetrate far
into the Country; for without great quantities of Provision they could not
possibly be sustained; from the Country none can be expected; what little it
affords, the Inhabitants will conceal or carry away, and leave all places as
naked and barren of Food for man, as the Sea it self.

And though it is known often, that in Asia the Troops of some discontented Bei
or Aga, to the number of three or four hundred men, in the summertime having
their retirements in the Woods and Mountains, assault Caravans, and rob all
Passengers from whom there is any hope of booty; yet in the Winter they are
dispersed, because they have no quarters against the weather, nor Provisions
for humane sustenance, every one shifting for himself in some place where his
condition is the least known or suspected.

And it may not be here from our purpose to admonish the Reader, that as the
Turks account it one good part of their policy, to lay a considerable part of
their Empire desolate; so on the contrary, they observe in their new Conquests
to fortify, strengthen and confirm what they have gained, by numbers of
people, and (...) (...) of their own; and when they have reduced any (...)
(...) to their subjection, they commonly are inclined to make peace with (...)
Prince from whom they have won it, so as to have time to settle and secure
their new Conquests; for Countries overrun in haste, are almost as speedily
again recovered, and are like tempests and sudden storms, which are the sooner
dispersed for being violent. Augustus Caesar, who was a wise and judicious
Prince, considering the extent of the Roman Empire, wrote a Book, says
Tacitus, which was published after his death, wherein he described the public
Revenue,. the number of Citizens and Confederates listed for the War, the
Fleets, Kingdoms, Provinces, Tributes, Customs, etc. Addideratque insuper
Consilium coercendi intra Tac. Lib. 1. (...).
terminos imperii, incertum, says that Author, Metu, an per invidiam; which
doubtless this wise Emperor meant of a moderate, and not a precipitate
progress of their Arms, as well as of prescribing fixed limits to the ultimate
confines of the Empire, beyond which a Statute should be made of Non plus
ultra, notwithstanding the most promising designs and incitements that could
offer.

CHAP. XVI. All Hereditary succession in Government, as also the preservation
of an ancient Nobility, against the Maxims of the Turkish Policy.
HAving formerly entered into discourse of the several great Officers of State,
it will be necessary to declare what care the Turks take to preserve the body
of their Empire free of Faction and Rebellion; for there being many Provinces
in the Sultans gift, which are remote, rich and powerful, and so administer
temptation to the Governors to throw off the yoke of their dependence, and
make themselves and their Posterity absolute; great care is taken to prevent
this mischief by several Arts, none of which has been more effectual amongst
the Turks, nor more sedulously practiced, then the destruction of an ancient
Nobility; and admitting no succession to Offices or Riches, but only in the
direct Ottoman Line, as my Lord Verulam says, Essay 14. A Monarchy where there
is no Nobility at all, is ever pure and absolute Tyranny, as that of the Turks;
for Nobility attempers Sovereignty, and draws the people somewhat aside from
the Line Royal. By which means it comes to pass, that (...) education in the
Seraglio (in the manner as we have said before) without knowledge of their
blood or family, and without the support of powerful relations or dependances,
being sent abroad to foreign Governments, where they continue but for a short
season, have no opportunity or possibility of advancing any interest of their
own above that of the Sultan. And though some have out of an aspiring and
ambitious spirit, assumed a blind confidence of renting away part of the
Empire; as Asan Aga Pashaw of Aleppo of (...) years, with a strong and (...)
Army marched as far as Scutari, threatening the Imperial City; and the Turkish
History tells us of the revolt of several Pashaws; yet all these Rebellions
have been but of short durance; the Grand Signior never designing by open force
and dint of Sword, to try his Title to the Empire with his own Slaves, but only
by some secret plot and stratagem, getting the head of the Rebel, he is assured
of the Victory without other hazard or dispute of War: for immediately
thereupon the whole Army disperses, and every one shifts by flight to save
himself from the Sultans anger; nor is it imaginable it can be otherwise; for
these men are but strangers and forraigners in the Countries they ruled, have
no relations there or kindred to second or revenge their quarrel, have no
ancient blood or possessions which might entitle their heirs to the succession,
or out of affection or pity move their subjects to interest themselves in their
behalf; but being cut off themselves, all falls with them, which affords the
strangest spectacle, and example of fortunes unconstancy in the world; for a
Turk is never reverenced but for his office, that is made the sole measure and
rule of his greatness and honor, without other considerations of Virtue or
Nobility. And this is the reason the Turk value not their great men when taken
by the Enemy; for not otherwise looking on them then on ordinary Soldiers,
they exchange them not with Commanders and persons of Quality on the Christians
party; for the favor of the Sultan makes the Pashaw, and not noble blood or
virtues; so that the Pashaw imprisoned losing the influence of his Sovereigns
protection and greatness, loses that also which rendered him noble and
considerable above other persons.

There are notwithstanding some Pashaws of petty Governments, who have obtained
to themselves, through some ancient grace and privilege from the (...), an
hereditary succession in their Government, and as I can (...), those are only
the Pashaws of Gaza, Cordistan, and three (...) formerly mentioned under the
Pashaw of Damascus and Matick, and Tureman under the Pashaw of Aleppo. And
since I have mentioned the Pashaw of Gaza, it will be but requisite to recall to
mind the memory of one lately of that place with much honor and reverence,
being one whose actions and devotion to the Christian worship, might conclude
him not far from the Kingdom of God: for besides his favorable inclination in
general, to all who professed the Christian Faith; he was much devoted to the
Religious of Jerusalem, to whom he often made (...), as provisions of Rice and
other supplies for their Monastery; and when once the Father Guardian of the
holy Sepulcher came to make him a Visit, with great respect and reverence, he
met him at a good distance from his house, giving him a reception much
different from what the Turks usually bestow on any, who profess other then the
Mahometane faith: and might deserve the Character that Tacitus gives of L.
Volusius, that he was Egregia fama, cui Septaginta cinque anni spatium vivendi,
praecipuaeque opes bonis artibus, in offense tot Imperatorum malitia fuit. And
yet this good man having for seventy five years lived innocently in that
Government, and received the inheritance from his Father, was by promise of
fair treatment allured to the Port, where without farther process or any
accusation, his hoary head was severed from his body, for no other reason, then
lest the permission and indulgence to this long continuance and succession in
office, should prove too ample a deviation from the rules of the Turkish
Policy.

And that all means of attaining ancient riches, which is the next degree to
Nobility, may be cut off; the Turk observes this Maxim of Machiavel, a
reprimere la insolensa di uno, non vie piu sicuro, emeno scandoloso modo che
preoccupargli quelle vie, per le quale viene quella potenza: and so the Grand
Signior suffers no possibility of arriving to ancient wealth; for as Eldest
Brother to great men he makes seizure of the Estates of all Pashaws that die,
who having Children, such part is bestowed on them for their maintenance as the
Grand Signior shall think fit and requisite: If a Pashaw dies that is married
to a Soltana, which is the Grand Signiors Sister, Daughter, or other near
relation, her Kabin or Dowry is first deducted from the Estate (which is
commonly 100000 Dollars) and the remainder accrues to the Sultan, as heir to
the rest; and by this means all ancient Nobility is suppressed, and you shall
find the Daughters of ancient Greek-houses espoused to Shepherds and Carters,
and the ancient Relics of the noble Families of (...) and Paleologi, living
more contemptuously at Constantinople, then ever Dionysius did at Corinth.

But not only in Pashaws and great men is care taken to clip their wings,
which may hinder them from soaring too high, but also in the Ottoman Family it
self greater severity and strictness is exercised then in others, to keep them
from growing great in offices or wealth, whereby to have possibility of
aspiring to the Supreme power; and therefore by the original and Fundamental
Laws of Turks, the Children of a Soltana married to a Pashaw are not capable of
any office in the Empire, and at most cannot rise higher, then to be in the
quality of a (...), which is one of the Porters of the Grand Signiors Gate.
They (...) are of this race never dare Vaunt of their Pedigree, it is a
contumaciousness and almost Treason to name it; nor have I learned that there
is any Family amongst the Turks of this Line, of any account or esteem, but one
alone, who is called Ibrahim Han Ogleri, or the offspring of Sultan Ibrahim,
their Father being a Son of the Grand Signiors Sister, and married to a Soltana
(and are said to be of the race of the Tartars) so that proceeding by the
Woman's side only, the less notice is taken of their blood: their Rent or
Revenue yearly is about 70000 Dollars, Quibus magnae opes, innocenter partae,
and modeste habitae, which they manage with prudence and discretion, live
honorably without ostentation, seek no office, or intermeddle in the affairs
of State; by which means they hitherto have preserved themselves from envy and
suspicion, in the revolutions of the Turkish Government.

The Grand Signior many times when he fears the greatness of any Pashaw, under
color and pretense of honor, prefers him to the Marriage of his Sister, or
some other of his Feminine kindred; by which means, instead of increase of
power and glory, he becomes the miserablest slave in the world, to the Tyranny
and Pride of an insulting Woman: For first he cannot refuse the honor, lest he
should seem to neglect and contemn the Sultans favor; then before the
Espousals, he must resolve The Marriage of a Pashaw with a Soltana.
to continue constant to her alone, and not suffer his Affections to wander on
other Wives, Slaves or distractions of his love: If he has a Wife whom he
loves, whose long conversation and Children she has brought him, have endeared
his affections too far to be forgotten; he must yet banish her and all other
relations from his home, to entertain the embraces of his unknown Sultana:
Before the Espousals, what Money, Jewels or rich Furs she sends for, he must
with complement and cheerfulness present, which is called Aghirlick; besides
this, he makes her a Dowry called Kabin, of as much as friends that make the
match can agree; when the Kabin is concluded and passed before the Justice in
form or nature of a recognisance; the Bridegroom is conducted to the Chamber of
his Bride by a Black Eunuch, at whose entrance the custom is, for the Soltana
to draw her Dagger, and imperiously to demand the reason of his bold access,
which he with much submission reply's to, and shows the Emmeri Podeshaw, or the
Imperial Firm for his Marriage; the Soltana then arises, and with more
kindness admits him to a nearer familiarity. The Eunuch takes up his Slippers
and lays them over the Door (which is a sign of his good reception) then he
bows with all reverence before her to the ground, and retires a few paces back,
making some brief Oration to her full of Complement and Admiration of her Worth
and Honor; and remaining afterward a while silent, in an humble posture,
bowing forward with his hands before him, until the Soltana commands him to
bring her water, which he readily obeys, taking a Pot of water provided for
that purpose, and kneeling before her, delivers it to her hand; then she takes
off her red veil from before her face, embroidered with Gold and Silver
Flowers, and so drinks; in the mean time her Serving-maids bring in a low
Table, on which are set a pair of Pigeons roasted, and a plate of Sugarcandy;
the Bridegroom then invites his coy Spouse to the Collation, which she refuses
until other Presents are brought her, which lie prepared in the outward room;
with which her modesty being overcome and her stomach brought down, she is
persuaded to the Table, and sitting down, receives a Leg of a Pigeon from the
hand of her Bridegroom; tastes a little, and then puts a piece of the
Sugar Candy into his mouth; and so rising up returns to her place; all the
Attendants then retire and leave the Bridegroom alone with his Soltana for the
space of an hour to court her singly; that time being past, the Music
sounding, he is invited forth by his Friends to an outward room, where having
passed most of the night with songs and sports, at the approach of the morning,
the Soltana weary of her pastime retires to her bed, which is rich adorned and
perfumed, fit to entertain Nuptial Joys: The Bridegroom advised hereof by the
nod of the Eunuch, creeps silently into the Bride-chamber, where stripping
himself of his upper Garments, he kneels a while at the feet of the Bed, and
then by little and little turning up the Clothes, gently rubs her feet with his
hand, and kissing of them, ascends higher to the embraces of his Spouse, which
she willingly admits him to, and wishes her self and him a happy Bedding: in
the morning betimes the Bridegroom is called by his Friends to the Bath; at
whose call a rising, he is presented by the Bride with all sorts of Linen to
be used in Bathing; after these Ceremonies are past, they are better
acquainted, yet in public she keeps him at a distance, wears her Haniarre or
Dagger by her side in token of her Superiority; and so frequently commands
gifts and riches from him, until she has exhausted him to the bottom of all
his wealth. Nor is this esteemed sufficient to mortify these poor slaves by a
Woman's Tyranny, but they are always put forward upon desperate attempts, as
lately Ishmael Pashaw, who was killed passing the River Raab, in the overthrow
given the Turks by the Emperors Forces under Montecuculi; and others I could
name in the like manner; lest the honor of their Marriage in the Royal Family
without the crosses and mortifications which attend it, should puff them up
with the ambition and proud thoughts, which is not lawful for them to imagine.

But it may well be objected how it came to pass, that the present Prime Vizier
called Ahmet, should succeed his Father Kuperlee in the The reasons why Ahmet
Pashaw present Vizier, succeeded his Father Kuperlee in Government.
Government of the Empire. It Is true, it was a strange deviation from the
general rule of their Policy, and perhaps such a President as may never
hereafter be brought into example; but accidents concur ofttimes to the fortune
of some men without order or reason; and yet Kuperlee the Father had so well
deserved of the Sultan, and his whole Dominions, for having by his own wisdom
and resolution saved the Empire from being rent in pieces by the faction and
ambition of some aspiring persons, and by the blood of thousands of mutinous
and rebellious heads, had cemented and made firm the throne of his Master, that
no honor could be thought sufficient to be paid to his Ghost, unless it were
the succession of his Son in his place; which the more unusual and irregular it
was esteemed, the greater glory it was to that family; and herein also this
subtle fox played his Masterpiece, by representing the state of affairs to
remain in that posture, as was necessary to be carried on with the same method
as begun; which he had entrusted to the knowledge of his Son; and this was the
reason why this young Vizier then scarce arrived to thirty years, and but an
ordinary Kadee or Justice of the law, was both as to his age and relation thus
irregularly preferred to the office of Vizier.

Nor has hereditary succession and long continuance in authority been only
avoided amongst the Turks; but we find that the Romans often changed their
Governors, and never suffered them to continue long in one Province; and so
the King of Spain does at present in the Government of Flanders, the Indies,
the Kingdom of Naples and other parts, the space of three years being commonly
allotted them for their residence. But amongst the Turks there is no fixed term
of time appointed to their Pashaws, but only they remain as Tenants at Will of
the Grand Signior; who according to his pleasure, and as he sees reason cuts
them off, recals them, or transplants them to another Province; only the Pashaw
of Grand Cairo in Egypt, has a certain space of three years appointed, to
which his Government is confined; and there may be very good reason for it; for
it being a place of great trust, riches and power, in which Pashaws grow in a
short time vastly wealthy, it cannot be wisdom to continue them long there; the
revenue of which we have had occasion already to discourse of. And therefore
the Grand Signior does often, not only abereviate their time, but also at their
return shares in the best part of the (...) they have made. The Romans had that
opinion of the wealth and power of Egypt, that Augustus made a Decree, and held
it inter alia dominationis arcana, that it should not be lawful for any without
particular license to enter Egypt, and expressly forbids Senators and Gentlemen
of Rome, without order from the Prince, or for affairs of State, to visit those
parts. And Tacitus Lib. 1.
gives this reason for it, Ne fame urgeret Italiam quisquis eam Provinciam,
claustraque terrae ac maris, quamvis levi praesidio adver sum ingentes
exercitus insedisset.

Another danger to the Empire, which the Turks sedulously avoid, besides
hereditary succession in office, is rivalry among Princes of the Blood, during
the time of their Fathers life; for afterward the successor takes care to
secure his Brethren beyond possibility of competition. The story of Selymus and
Bajazet, the Sons of Solomon the Magnificent, is a perfect experiment of the
feud and dissension which is bred in the desires of barbarous Princes; so that
when they arrive to any maturity of age, they are always transplanted to
different Seraglios abroad, where they keep their Courts distinct, and cannot
enter within the Walls of Constantinople, during the life of their Father, lest
by interview with each other, their minds should be moved with emulation, or
inhabiting in the imperial City, should be provided with means before their
time to attempt the Throne of their Father. And for this very reason the Grand
Signior has scarce performed the ceremonies of his inauguration before he has
seasoned his entrance to his Throne with the blood of his Brothers; which
barbarous custom began in the time of Sultan Bajazet. But if the Brothers are
but few, and the Grand Signior of a disposition more naturally inclined to
clemency then cruelty, he secures them in the Seraglio, under the tuition of
Masters, and care of a faithful guard; differing nothing from imprisonment, but
in the name, prohibiting them the society and conversation of all: and thus the
two Brothers of this present Sultan Mahomet, live in as much obscurity and
forgetfulness, as if they had never been born, or having past a private life,
were departed to the place where all things are forgotten.

It is no great digression from our purpose here to take notice of two sorts of
Government purely popular; the one has already had his period, and the other
is of late beginning, and at present flourishes; and those are the
Commonwealths in Egypt under the Mamalukes, and the other in our days in the
Dominions of Algier: The first not only deposed the whole Family of their
Prince from having power in the Government, and from all succession, but also
made it an immutable law, that the Sons of the Mamalukes might succeed their
Fathers in the inheritance of their estates, as lands and goods, but could not
assume the title or Government of a Mamaluke; nor not only so, but that all
that were born in the Mohammedan or Jewish Faith, were incapable ipso facto of
the Order of a Mamaluke; and only such preferred thereunto, who had been Sons
of Christians and become Slaves, instructed and educated in the Mohammedan
superstition; or else men of maturer age, who having abjured God and their
Country, were come thither to seek preferment in that Kingdom of darkness. And
this slavish and strange constitution of Government flourished for the space of
267. years, until overthrown in the year of (...) Lord 1517. by the arms of
Selymus that victorious Emperor of the Turks. The present Government of Algier
is but of a few years; the first original of which was by one Barbarose a
famous Pyrate, and afterward by the accession of great quantities of Turks out
of the Levant, the protection of the Grand Signior was craved, and a Pashaw
received from the Port; but now the Pashaw remains without any power; the whole
Government being transferred to the scum of the people; who fearing lest the
power should at last become subject to the Natives, have made it a law, that no
Sons of a Turk born in that Country, whom they call Cololies, can be capable of
an office in their Commonwealth; but only such, who having been born
Christians, are perverted to the Turkish sect, or else such who come from parts
of the Turkish Dominions, to be members of their Republique. And thus much
shall serve to have declared how much the Turks are jealous of all successions
in office and authority, which may prejudice the absolute Monarchy of their
great Sultan.

CHAP. XVII. The frequent exchange of Officers, viz. the setting up of one, and
degrading another, a rule always practiced as wholesome, and conducing to the
welfare of the Turkish State.
HE that is an eyewitness and strict observer of the various changes and
chances in greatness, honors and riches of the Turks, has a lively Emblem of
contemplation before him, of the unconstancy and mutability of humane affairs;
fortune so strangely sports with this people, that a Comedy or Tragedy on the
Stage with all its Scenes, is scarce sooner opened and ended, then the fate of
diverse great men, who in the daytime being exhaled to high sublimity, by the
powerful rays of the Sultans favor, in the night fall, or vanish like a
Meteor. The reason hereof, if duly considered, may be of great use as things
stand here, that is, to the power of the Grand Signior; for in this
constitution the health and benefit of the Emperor is consulted before the
welfare of the people: And the power of the Emperor is in no action more
exercised and evidenced, then by withdrawing and conferring his favors; for by
these means, having many whom he has educated and prepared for offices, and
stand candidates to receive them, his power would seem to be at a Nonplus, and
appear like an inconsiderate Father, who had spent more money in the breeding of
his Sons, then the Patrimony amounted to he had to bestow upon them: and
therefore the Grand Signior to imitate the Sun, benights some parts of the
world to enlighten others, that so by a general influence and communication of
his Beams, he may be acknowledged the common Parent of them all.

And this course does not only evidence the power of the Grand Signior, but
likewise increases it; for none are advanced in these times to office, but pay
the Grand Signior vast sums of money for it, according to the riches and
expectations of profit from the charge; some pay, as the Pashaws of Grand Cairo
and Babylon, 3 or 4 hundred thousand Dollars upon passing the Commission;
others one, others two hundred thousand, some fifty thousand, as their places
are more or less considerable: and this money is most commonly taken up at
Interest, at 40 (...) 50 per cent. for the year, and sometimes at double, when
they are constrained to become debtors to the covetous Eunuchs of the (...); so
that every one upon his first entrance into office looks on himself (as indeed
he is) greatly indebted and obliged by justice or injustice, right or wrong,
speedily to disburthen himself of the debts, and improve his own principal in
the world; and this design must not be long in performance, lest the hasty
edict overtake him before his work is done, and call him to account for the
improvement of his Talent. Think then (taking all circumstances together of the
covetous disposition of a Turk, the cruelty and narrowness of soul in those men
commonly that are born and educated in want) what oppression, what rapine and
violence must be exercised to satisfy the appetite of these men, who come
famished with immense desires, and strange considerations to satisfy! Diu
sordidus repent dives mutationem fortunae male regit, accensis egestate longa
cupidinibus immoderatus, Tac. lib. 1. Hist. So that Justice in its common
course is set to sale, and it is very rare when any Lawsuit is in hand, but
bargains are made for the sentence, and he has most right who has most money
to make him rectus in Curia, and advance his cause. And it is the common course
for both parties at difference, before they appear together in presence of the
Judge, to apply themselves singly to him, and try whose donative and present
has the most in it of temptation; and it is no wonder if corrupt men exercise
this kind of Trade in Traffiquing with Justice; for having before bought the
Office, of consequence they must sell the Fruit.

Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.

Add hereunto a strange kind of facility in the Truks, for a trifle or small
hire to give false witness in any case, especially, and that with a word, when
the controversy happens between a Christian and a Turk; and then the pretense
is for the Mussulmanleek as they call it, the cause is religious, hallows all
falseness and forgery in the testimony; so that I believe in no part of the
world can Justice run more out of the current and stream then in Turkey, where
such Maxims and considerations corrupt both the Judge and Witnesses. Turcae
magnae pietatis loco ducunt Busbeque Ep. 4. de Leg Tur.
dicere falsum testimonium adversus hominem Christianum; non expectant ut
rogentur; injussi adsunt seque ultro ingerunt.

This consideration and practice made an English Ambassador upon renewing the
Capitulations, to insert an Article of caution against the testimony of Turks,
as never to be admitted nor pleaded in any Court of Turkish Justice, against
the English interest; and nothing to be admitted as evidence in that case, but
only a Hoget, which is in the nature of a Recognisance made before a Judge, or
a Bill or Writing under the hand of him on whom the demand is made; which
Article as it was very advisedly, and with great Prudence and Wisdom obtained,
so it has proved of admirable consequence and security to the Traffic and
Merchants Estates, which before being liable to the Forgeries and false
pretenses of every dissolute Turk, have now this point as a defense and
fortification, by which false pretenses and suits for considerable sums of
money, and matters of great value have been blown away, and decided with great
facility and little expense.

In the time of Bajazet, the fourth King of the Turks, the Courts of Turkish
History in the reign of Bajazet the fourth King of the Turks.
Justice were in like manner corrupted, as at present; for reformation of which
the Prince resolved to execute a great number of the Lawyers, until it was
pleasantly represented by his Jester (to whom between jest and earnest he had
given liberty to speak the truth, which soberer men durst not) that all the
cause of bribery and corruption in the Judges, proceeded for want of stipends
and necessary maintenance; whereupon Bajazet growing cooler, sensible of the
cause of that evil, applied a remedy, by granting their pardon, and allowing
them salaries and stipends, with additional Fees of twenty Aspers, in all
causes exceeding a thousand; and twelve Aspers for every writing and instrument
out of Court. And in times of the best Emperors, when virtue and deserts were
considered, and the Empire flourished and increased, men had offices conferred
for their merits, and good services were rewarded freely and with bounty,
without sums of money and payments to be a foyl to the luster of their better
parts: But now it is quite contrary, and all matters run out of course; a
manifest token in my opinion of the declension and decay of the Ottoman Empire,
as Livy says; Omnia prospera sequentibus Deos, adversa autem spernentibus.
Howsoever in part this serves the great end of the Empire; for Pashaws and
great men having a kind of a necessity upon them to oppress their subjects, the
people thereby lose their courages; and by continual Taxes and seisures on what
they gain, poverty subdues their spirits, and makes them more patiently suffer
all kind of injustice and violence that can be offered them, without thoughts
or motion to Rebellion; and so the Lord Verulam says in his Essays, that it is
impossible for a people Essay 29.
overladen with Taxes, ever to become Martial or Valiant; for no Nation can be
the Lions Whelp, and the Ass between burdens: by which means the Turk
preserves so many different sort of people as lie has conquered in due
obedience, using no other help then a severe hand joined to all kind of
oppression; but such as are Turks, and bear any name of office or degree in the
service of the Empire, feel but part of this oppression, and live with all
freedom, having their spirits raised by a license they attain to insult over
others that dare not resist them.

But the issue and conclusion of the spoils these great men make on subjects is
very remarkable; for as if God were pleased to evidence his just punishment
more evidently and plainly here, then in other sins; scarce any of all those
Pashaws who have made haste to be rich, have escaped the Grand Signiors hands,
but he either wholly devests them of all, or will share the best part of the
prey with them. Amongst which I have observed none passes so hardly as the
Pashaws of Grand Cairo, because it is the richest and most powerful of all the
Governments of this Empire; and so either in his journey home, or after his
return, he loses his life by public command, or at least is rifled of his
goods as ill-got, which are condemned to the Grand Signiors treasury: And it is
strange to see yet with what heat these men labor to amass riches, which they
know by often experiences have proved but collections for their Master; and
only the Odium and Curses which the oppressed wretches have vented against
their Rapine, remain to themselves; rebus secundis avidi, adversis autem
incauti, Tac. And this is like the policy that Caesar Borgia used, otherwise
called il Duca Valentine, who the better to reduce Romagna, lately subdued to
obedience, made one Messer Romiro d'Orco his Deputy, a man of a cruel and
tyrannical disposition, who by rigor and force reduced affairs to the will and
order of his Prince: and the work now done, and the people remaining
extraordinary discontented, the Duke thought it time to purge the minds of his
people of the ill apprehension they had of his Government, by demonstrating
that the former hard usage proceeded from the bad inclination of his Minister;
commanded the same Romiro d'Orco at Cesenna, to be cut in pieces, and exposed
to the public view of the people, with a piece of wood, and a bloody knife by
his side. This says Machiavel, lib. del Principe, cap. 7. fece aquelli popoli
in un tempo remanere stupidi and sodisfatti; and the Turk understands well how
profitable in the same manner it is for the constitution of his Estate, to use
evil instruments, who may oppress and poll his people, intending afterward for
himself the whole harvest of their labors; they remaining with the hatred,
whilst the Prince under color of performing justice, procures both riches and
fame together.

If it be suspected that any great man intends to make combustion or mutiny in
his Government, or that his wealth or natural abilities render him formidable;
without farther inquisition or scrutiny, all discontent of the Grand Signior is
dissembled, and perhaps a Horse, or Sword, or Sables-vest is reported to be
presented, and all fair treatment is counterfeited, until the Executioner gets
the bow-string about his neck, and then they care not how rudely they deal with
him: just like the Birds in Plutarch, who beat the Cuckoo for fear that in Lib.
6. Apoth.
time he should become a Hawk.

And to make more room for the multitude of officers who crowd for Preferments,
and to act the cruel Edicts of the Empire with the least noise; oftentimes when
a great Personage is removed from his place of Trust, and sent with a new
Commission to the charge perhaps of a greater Government; and though he depart
from the Regal Seat with all fair demonstrations of favor, before he has
advanced three days in his journey, triumphing in the multitude of his
Servants, and his late hopes, the fatal command overtakes him; and without any
accusation or cause other then the will of the Sultan, he is barbarously put to
death, and his body thrown into the dirt of a Foreign and unknown Country,
without solemnity of Funeral or Monument; that he is no sooner in the Grave,
then his Memory is forgotten. And this methinks is somewhat agreeable to the
crafty policy of Tiberius, who sometimes would Commissionate men for Government
of Provinces, to whom beforehand he had designed not to permit license to
depart the City; Postremo eo provect us est, ut mandaverit quibusdam provincias
quos egredi urbe non erat passurus.

Hence are apparent the causes of the decay of Arts amongst the Turks, of the
neglect, want of care in manuring and cultivating their Lands; why their Houses
and private Buildings are made slight, not durable for more then ten or twenty
years; why you find no delightful Orchards and pleasant Gardens and
Plantations; and why in those Countries where Nature has contributed so much
on her part, there are no additional labors of Art to complete all, and turn
it to a Paradise; for men knowing no certain heir, nor who shall succeed them
in their labors, contrive only for a few years enjoyment. And moreover, men
are fearful of showing too much ostentation or magnificence in their Palaces,
or ingenuity in the pleasures of their Gardens, lest they should bring on them
the same fate, that Nabals Vineyard occasioned to his Master: and therefore men
neglect all application to the Studies of Arts and Sciences, but only such as
are necessary and conducing to the mere course of living; for the very fear and
crime of being known to be rich, makes them appear outwardly poor, and become
naturally Stoics and Philosophers in all the points of a reserved and cautious
life. And here I am at a stand, and cannot conclude this Chapter without
contemplating a while, and pleasing my self with the thoughts of the
blessedness, the happiness, the liberty of my own Country; where men under the
protection and safe influence of a gracious and the best of Princes in the
world, enjoy and eat of the fruit of their own labor, and purchase to
themselves with security Fields and Manors, and dare acknowledge and glory in
their Wealth and Pomp, and yet leave the inheritance to their Postery.

CHAP. XVIII. The several Arts the Turks use to increase their People, is a
principal Policy, without which the greatness of their Empire cannot continue
nor be increased.
THere was never any people that laid Foundations and Designs of a great
Empire, but first thought how to make it populous, and by which means they
might best supply them with people; not only sufficient for the sacrifice and
slaughter of the War, but for the Plantation of Colonies, Possession and
security of what the Sword has conquered. We never understood how one people
alone that was Martial, and by successes in War had framed a large Empire, was
able from the mere original of its own Stock, to abound with issue of natural
subjects, to bear proportion with the stronger Nations; nor how a handful of
people with the greatest policy and courage in the world was able to embrace a
large extent of Dominion and Empire: It is true, that Alexander did with an
Army, for the most part, composed of Macedonians, as it were in a rank make a
Conquest of the best part of the Eastern world; but this Empire, like a Ship
that had much Sail and no Ballast, or a fair Tree overcharged with boughs too
heavy for its stem, became a windsal on a sndden.

The Turks therefore, during the continuance of their Empire, have not been
ignorant of this Truth; for no people in the world have ever been more open to
receive all sorts of Nations to them, then they, nor have used more arts to
increase the number of those that are called Turks; and it is strange to
consider, that from all parts of the world, some of the most dissolute and
desperate in wickedness, should flock to these Dominions, to become members and
professors of the Mohammedan superstition; in that manner that at present, the
blood of the Turks is so mixed with that of all sorts of Languages and Nations,
that none of them can derive his lineage from the ancient blood of the Saracens.

The Romans who well knew the benefit of receiving strangers into their bosom,
called this freedom they gave Jus civitatis, whereby foreigners became as
lawful possessors of Estates and Inheritance, and had as much right to the
common privileges, as any that was born in the Walls of Rome; and this Jus
civitatis was given to whole Families; so that as Sir F. B. says well, that the
Romans did not overspread (...).
the World, but the World it self. The English call it Naturalization, the
French Enfranchisment; and the Turks call it becoming a Believer; for they
joining with it a point of Religion, not only the proffers of the goods of this
world, but also of delights in the world to come, make the allurements and
arguments the more prevalent; and it being an opinion amongst them, as over all
the world, that it is a meritorious work to create Proselytes, scarce any who
has money to purchase a slave, but will procure one young and fit for any
impression, whom he may name his Convert, and gain reputation amongst his
neighbors of having added to the number of the faithful: Of all this number,
which yearly are added to the Professors of Mahomet, none can retreat on lower
terms then Death and Martyrdom for Christ; which causes many whose consciences,
though touched with a sense of the denial of their Savior, yet having not the
grace or courage to assert their faith on so hard a Lesson, grow desperate or
careless, and dye in their sin. This sort of people become really Turks, and
some through custom and their own lusts, are really persuaded of the truth of
this profession, and have proved more inveterate and fatal enemies to
Christianity, then the natural Turks; which will appear, if we consider that
all the successes they have had, and exploits they have done at Sea, have been
performed by such who have denied the Christian Faith, as namely Chigal, Ogli,
and others.

It was the custom formerly amongst the Turks, every five years to take away
the Christians Children, and Educate them in the Mohammedan superstition; by
which means they increased their own people, and diminished and enfeebled the
force of the Christians; but now that custom in a great part is grown out of
use, through the abundance of Greeks, Armenians, Jews, and all Nations where
the Iron Rod of the Turks Tyranny extends, who flock in to enjoy the imaginary
honor and privilege of a Turk. And indeed it is no wonder to humane reason,
that considers the oppression and contempt that poor Christians are exposed to,
and the ignorance in their Churches, occasioned through poverty in the Clergy,
that many should be found who retreat from the Faith; but it is rather a
Miracle, and a true verification of those words of Christ, That the Gates of
Hell shall not be able to prevail against his Church, that there is conserved
still amidst so much opposition, and in despite of all Tyranny and Arts
contrived against it, an open and public Profession of the Christian Faith;
which next to Gods Providence, considering the stupid ignorance in the Greek
and Armenian Churches, the conservation of their Faith is not to be attributed
to any instance more, then to the strict observation of the Feasts and Fasts of
their Churches; for having rarely the helps of Catechism or Sermons, they learn
yet from these outward Ceremonies some confused Notions and Precepts of
Religion, and exercise with severity and rigor this sort of Devotion, when
through custom, confusion and scarcity of knowing guides, all other service is
become obsolete and forgotten amongst them.

The Turks have another extraordinary supply of people from the Black Sea, sent
them in by the Tartars, who with their light bodies of Horse make incursions
into the Territories of the neighboring Christians, and carry with them a
booty of whole Cities and Countries of people, most of which they send to
Constantinople to be sold, and is the chief Trade and Commodity of their
Country (as we have already discoursed.) It is sad to see what numbers of
Saykes, or Turkish vessels, come sailing through the Bosphorus, fraighted with
poor Christian Captives of both Sexes, and all Ages, carrying on the Main-top a
Flag, either as a Note of Triumph, or else as a Mark of the Ware and
Merchandise they carry. The number of the Slaves brought yearly to
Constantinople is uncertain; for sometimes it is more, and sometimes less,
according to the Wars and success of the Tartars; but as it is apparent in the
Registers of the customs at Constantinople only, one year with another at the
least 20000 are yearly imported; amongst which the greatest part being Women
and Children, with easy persuasions, and fair promises become Turks; the men
being ignorant, and generally of the Russian or Moscovite Nation (who are
reported not to be over-devout, or of famed constancy and perseverance in
Religion) partly by menaces and fear, partly by good words and allurements of
reward, despairing of liberty, and return to their own Country, renounce all
interest in the Christian Faith. Of this sort of Mettle most of the Turks are
in these days composed, and by the fecundity of this generation, the Dominions
of this Empire flow; for the Turks of themselves, though they have the liberty
of Polygame, and freer use of diverse Women allowed them by their Law, then the
severity of Christian Religion does permit, are yet observed to be less
fruitful in Children, then those who confine themselves to the chaste embraces
of one Wife. It is true, we have heard how in former times there have been
particular men amongst the Turks, that have severally been Fathers to a hundred
Sons; but now through that abominable vice of Sodomie, which the Turks pretend
to have learned from the Italians, and is now the common and profesled shame of
that people, few fecundious Families are found amongst them; especially amongst
the Persons of the greater Quality, who have means and time to act and contrive
their filthiness with the most deformity. And in this manner, the natural use
of the Women being neglected amongst them, and as St. Paul says, Men burning
in Romans cap. I. V.
lust one toward another; so little is mankind propagated, that many think,
were it not for the abundant supplies of Slaves, which daily come from the
Black Sea (as before we have declared) considering the Summer-slaughters of the
Plague, and destructions of War, the Turk would have little cause to boast of
the vast numbers of his people: and that a principal means to begin the ruin
of this Empire, were to prevent the taking of so many Captives, or intercept
those numbers of Slaves which are daily transported to nourish and feed the
body of this great Babylon; by which means in time they would not only find a
want of Servants, but a decay and scarcity of Masters; since as it is before
mentioned, these Slaves becoming Turks, are capable of all privileges, and
being commonly Manumised by their Patrons, through the help of Fortune, arrive
equally to Preferments with those who are of the ancient Mahometane Race: this
is the true reason, the Turk can spend so many people in his Wars, and values
not the lives of ten thousand men to win him but a span of ground, and yet
almost without any sensible diminution of his people; and on the contrary, the
invention of an Inquisition, and the distinction between Christianos vieios,
and Nuevos in Spain and Portugal, have caused that decay and scarcity of people
in those Countries, as has laid the best part of those fruitful Soyls
desolate, and forced them both to a necessity of entertaining a mercenary
Soldiery.

It is no small inducement to the vulgar people, who is most commonly won with
outward allurements, to become Turks; that when they are so, by a white
Turbant, or such a particular Note of honor, they shall be distinguished from
other like Sects (all people amongst the Turks, being known by their heads, of
what Religion or Quality they are) and so may the better be directed where they
may have a privilege to Domineer and injure with the most impunity. If we
consider how delightful the Mode is in England and France, especially to those
that are of a vain and gay humor, and that nothing seems handsome or comely,
but what is dressed in the fashion and air of the times; we shall not wonder,
if the ignorant and vain amongst Christians, born and Educated in those
Countries, should be catched and entrapt with the fancy and enticement of the
Turkish Mode, and be contented to despoil themselves of the garment of
Christian virtues, to assume a dress more Courtly and pleasing to the eyes of
the world; for so the Britains, and other Nations, after Conquered by the
Romans, began to delight themselves in their Language and Habit, their Bankets
and Buildings, which they accounted to be humanity and refinement of their
manners; but Tacitus says, Pars servitutis er at, a signal symptom (...) Agric.
of their subjection.

And it is worth a Wisemans observation, how gladly the Greeks and Armenian
Christians imitate the Turkish Habit, and come as near to it as they dare; and
how proud they are, when they are privileged upon some extraordinary occasion
to appear without their Christian distinction. And thus the Turk makes his very
Habit a bait to draw some to his Superstition; Riches, to allure the covetous;
rewards and hopes, to rule the ambitious; fears and terrors of death, the
cowardly and timorous; and by all means works on the dispositions and humors
of men, to make additions to his Kingdom: Such as adhere to the Christian
Faith, the Turk makes no account of, and values no otherwise in the place of
subjects, then a man does of his Ox or Ass, merely to carry the burdens, and
to be useful in servile and slavish Offices: they are oppressed, and are
subject to all advantages and pretenses; and their Goods and Estates gained
with labor, and the sweat of their brows, liable to the Rapine of every great
man; they are disarmed, and never exercised in War, by which means they become
Effeminate, and less dangerous in Rebellion: only the people of Transylvania,
Moldavia and Valachia, under the conduct of their respective Princes that the
Grand Signior sets over them, serve him in their persons in the War, and are
the first thrust forward in all desperate enterprises; so that the oppression
of the poor Christians under the Turk, is worthy our compassion, how poor they
are become, how their former wealth is exhausted, how the fatness of their rich
soil is drained, and made barren by poisonous suckers; so that it is evident
that the Turks design is no other, then by impoverishment and enfeebling the
interest of Christianity, to draw Proselytes and strength to his own Kingdom.

Wherefore some sort of poor Christians, either actually subjects to the
Turkish Tyranny, or borderers on them, who often feel the misery of their
incursions, being fearsul of their own constancy in the faith, have contrived
ways to preserve themselves from any other profession: wherefore in Mengrelia,
the Christians at the Baptism of (...) Children make a cross on their hands;
and in Servia their custom is to make it on their foreheads, with the juice of
a certain Herb, the stain of which never wears out; so that some of these
Nations, who become Renegadoes to the Christian Faith, bear always a badge and
note of designation about them to a holy profession, which may serve to upbraid
their perfidious desertion of the faith; the cross on their forehead appearing
for a shame and discountenance to the white Turbant on their heads. By which
pious art, many of these distressed Christians have notwithstanding fear and
despair of liberty, and promises of reward, through the apprehension of this
incongruity between the Cross and the banner of Mahomet, preserved themselves
firm to their first colors.

CHAP. XIX. The manner of Reception of Foreign Ambassadors amongst the Turks,
and the esteem they have of them.
THere was no Nation in the World ever so barbarous, that did not acknowledge
the Office of an Ambassador sacred and necessary.

Sanctum populis per saecula nomen;

And Cicero says, Sic enim sentio jus legatorum cum hominum praesidio De
Harusp. responsis.
munitum, tum (...) divino jure esse vallaium; the Alchoran it self calls this
Office inviolable; and it is a Turkish Canon, Elchi zaval yoketer, Do no hurt
to an Ambassador; so that the Turks do confess themselves obliged by their own
law to rules of civilities, courteous treatment, and protection of
Ambassadors. The greatest honor they show to any foreign Minister, is to him
who comes from the Emperor, because his confines are contiguous with theirs,
and have had occasion more frequently, then with other Christian Princes, to
try the power of the imperial Sword. An Ambassador coming from the Emperor,
as soon as he enters within the Ottoman Dominions, has his charges defrayed by
the Sultan, according to the importance of the business and negotiation he is
designed to, until the time of his return; and a Resident continuing in
ordinary, has in like manner his constant allowance. As it has always been a
custom amongst the Eastern Princes to send presents each to other, as tokens of
friendship and amity; so the Emperor is by an ancient custom and agreement
obliged to accompany his Ambassador to this Court with presents and gifts, as
offerings of peace: and on the contrary, that the Emperor may not remain with
the disadvantage, the Grand Signior is bound to recompense the Embassy with
another from himself, and adorn it with presents of equal value, with those
that were sent him. But Ambassadors and Representatives from other Princes,
who have their Dominions more remote, and whose principal design is esteemed
for the promotion of Trade and Commerce, as the English, French and Dutch, are
always admitted with their presents, which the Turk by custom calls his right,
and judges not himself obliged to return the like, esteeming his Capitulations
and Articles he makes with those Princes, privileges and immunities granted
their subjects.

The ceremonies they use at the audience of every Ambassador are acted (as in
all parts of the world) most to set off the glory of the Empire; and
represented with such advantages, as may best afford a Theme for an
Embasiadours pen to describe the riches, magnificence and terror of the
Ottoman power. The Audience with the Grand Signior (having first passed a
complement with the Prime Vizier) is commonly contrived on days appointed for
payment of the Janissaries, which is every three months; and with that
occasion, the Order and Discipline of the Militia, the Money and Stipends that
are issued forth, are there exposed to the observation of the public Minister.
The money is brought into the Divan, and there piled in heaps, where the
Ambassador is first introduced, and seated on a Stool covered with
Crimson-velvet, placed near the first Vizier, and other Visiers of the Bench:
as soon as the money is paid out of the chief of (...) Oda or Chamber, who
afterward distribute it amongst their Soldiers, a plentiful dinner is (...)
for the Ambassador, who together with the first Vizier, and other Visiers of
the Bench, and Teftardar or Lord Treasurer, are seated at the same Table, which
is not raised as high as the Tables we use, but something lower, covered over
with a capacious Voyder of Silver, in which the dishes are set, without
ceremony of Table-cloth or Knives. In the same room are two other Tables for
the principal attendants of the Ambassador, and other personages amongst the
Turks of chief note and quality; the dishes are served in by one at a time,
which as soon as touched or tasted, are taken off to make room for another; and
thus there is a succession of threescore or fourscore Services, all the dishes
being of China, worth about 150 Dollars a piece; which are reported to have a
virtue contrary to poison, and to break with the least infusion thereof, and
for that reason esteemed more useful for the service of the Grand Signior.

Nam nulla aconita bibuntur Fictilibus, etc. Juvenal.

The banquet being ended, the Chaousbashee, or chief of the Pursivants conducts
the Ambassador, with some of his retinue, to a place a part, where several gay
Vests, or long Garments, made of Silk with diverse figures, are presented them
(as a sign of the Grand Signiors favor) which the Ambassador first putting
on, and then the others, to the The Audience of Ambassadors.
number of 18 or 19, attended with two Capugibashees, or chief of the Porters,
persons of good esteem in that Court, with Silver staves in their hands, he is
conducted nearer toward the Grand Signiors presence; then follow the presents
brought by the Ambassador, which are carried to the best advantage for
appearance, and are delivered to Officers appointed to receive them. The Courts
without are filled with Janissaries, amongst whom is observed so profound a
silence, that there is not the least noise or whisper understood; and the
salutations they give their principal Officers as they pass, bowing altogether
at the same time, is warlike, and yet courtly, and savours of good Discipline
and Obedience.

The Ambassador is then brought to a great gate near the Audience, the Porch
of which is filled with white Eunuchs, clothed in Silks and Cloth of Gold;
farther then this, none is suffered to proceed, besides the Secretary,
Interpreter, and some other persons of best quality: at the door of the Chamber
of Audience is a deep silence, and the murmuring of a Fountain near by, adds to
the melancholy; and no other guard is there but a white Eunuch: and here a
pause is made, and they tread softly in token of fear and reverence, so as not
to disturb with the least noise the Majesty of the Sultan: for access to the
Eastern Princes was always difficult, and not permitted with the same
familiarity as has been practiced amongst the Romans, and at present with us,
where the sight of the King is his own glory, and the satisfaction of his
Subjects: For it is with the Turks, as it was with the Parthians, when they
received Vonones their King, educated in the Roman Court, who conforming to
those manners, says Tacitus, irridebantur Lib. 2. Ann.
Graeci Comites, prompli aditus, obvia comitas, ignotae Parthis virtutes; the
affability and easiness of address to their Prince, was a scandal to that
Nation. At the entrance of the Chamber of Audience hangs a ball of Gold,
studded with precious Stones, and about it great chains of rich Pearl; the
Floor is covered with Carpets of Crimson-velvet, embroidered with Gold wyre, in
many places beset with seed Pearl. The Throne where the Grand Signior sits, is
raised a small height from the ground, supported with four Pillars plated with
Gold: the roof is richly gilded, from which hang balls, that seem to be of
gold; the Cushions he leaned upon, as also those which lay by, were richly
embroidered with Gold and Jewels: In this Chamber with this occasion remains no
other attendance besides the first Vizier, who stands at the right hand of the
Grand Signior with modesty and reverence. When the Ambassador comes to appear
(...) the Grand Signior, he is led in, and supported under the arms by the two
Capugibashees before mentioned; who bringing him to a convenient distance,
laying their hands upon his neck, make him bow until his forehead almost
touches the ground, and then raising him again, retire backwards to the farther
parts of the room; the like ceremony is used with all the others, who attend
the Ambassador; only that they make them bow somewhat lower then him; the
reason of this custom, as Busbequius says, was, because that a Croat being
admitted near to Amurath, to communicate something to him, made use of that
opportunity to kill him, in revenge of the death of his Master Marous; but the
Turkish History says, that this was done by one Miles Corbelitz, who after the
defeat given Lazarus the Despost of Servia, rising from amongst the dead, had
near access to the presence of Amurath. The Ambassador at this Audience has
no (...) set him, but standing, informs the Grand Signior by his Interpreter,
the several demands of his Master, and the business he comes upon, which is all
penned first in writing; which when read, is with the Letter of credence
consigned into the hands of the great Vizier, from whom the answer and farther
treaty is to be received.

This was the manner of the Audience given the Earl of Winchelsea, when
Ambassador there for His Majesty, and is (as is there said) the form used to
others, who come from a Prince equally honored, and respected. But though the
Turks make these outward demonstrations of all due reverence and religious care
to preserve the persons of Ambassadors sacred and free from violence; yet it
is apparent by their treatment and usage toward them, in all emergencies and
difference between the Prince they come from, and themselves, that they have no
(...) of the Law of Nations, or place any Religion in the maintenance of their
Faith. For when a War is proclaimed, the Ambassador immediately is either
committed to close imprisonment, or at least to the custody of a careful guard,
confined within the limits of his own house: in this manner, the Representative
of Venice, called there the Bailo, by name Sorenzo, in a straight Chamber of a
Castle situated on the Bosphorus, endured a severe imprisonment, having his
Interpreter strangled, for no other cause then performing his office in the
true interpretation of his Masters sense: afterward this Bailo (for so they
call there the Ambassadors from Venice) was removed to another prison at
Adrianople, where he continued some years; and in fine, by force of presents
mollifying the Turks with money (with which their nature is easily made gentle
and pliable) he obtained liberty to remain in the house appropriated to the
Representatives of Venice, but under a guard, whose office was to secure him
from escape, and observe his actions; and yet with liberality and presents,
which overcome the Turks more then any consideration in the world, he enjoyed
as he pleased, license for his health to take the fresh air, and use what
freedom was reasonable.

Nor less injurious to the Law of Nations, have been the examples of violence
and rage, acted on the persons of the French Ambassadors; first on the Sieur
Sensi, accused upon suspicion of having contrived the escape of Konispolski,
General of the Polish Army, taken captive in a Fight, and sent Prisoner to the
abovesaid Castle on the Bosphorus; the means was by a Silken cord sent in a
Pie, with Limes and Files to cut the Iron bars; and having first secured his
guard with the strength of wine, in the dead of the night, let him down by the
cord from the highest Tower, where finding Horses ready, he got safe into
Poland: the contrivance of this stratagem, and the instruments of the escape,
was laid to the charge of the French Ambassador; who was committed for that
reason to the Prison of the seven Towers, where he remained for the space of
four months, until his money, and the French King his Master mediated for him,
promising to send another speedily to succeed him; he was delivered from his
imprisonment, and returned home by the way of Poland.

The successor of this Ambassador was the Count Cesi a man too generous and
splendid to live amongst covetous and craving Turks; exhausted most of his
wealth in gifts and presents; to which adding a vanity and ambition to court
the Grand Signiors Mistresses in the Seraglio (as is said) he paid such vast
sums of money to the Eunuchs for his admittance, that in a few years he became
so indebted, and importuned with the clamours of his Creditors, as wholly
discredited, and lost the Honor and Authority of his Embassy; so that the
French King thinking it dishonorable to continue his Minister in that charge,
who was failed and undone in the reputation of the world, sent his Letter of
Revocation to recall him home; but the Turks gave a stop to his return,
pretending that their Law which was indulgent to the persons of Ambassadors,
did not yet acquit them from payment of their debts, or privilege them with
impunity to rob the Believers and other subjects of the Grand Siguior, contrary
to that rule of Grotius, who not only exempts the Persons, but the Servants and
movables of Ambassadors from attachments; and no Law can compel him to the
satisfaction of debts by force, but by friendly persuasion only, till being
returned to his own Country, and put off the quality of a public person, he
becomes liable to common process; Si quid ergo debiti contraxit, Grot. lib. de
Jure belli and pac.
and ut sit, res solieo loco nullas possideat, (...) compellandus erit amice,
and si detrectet, is qui misit, ita ut ad postremum usurpentur ea, quae (...)
debitores extra territorium positos usurpari solent.

Nor less remarkable was the barbarous usage of the Sieur la Hay, Ambassador
also for the French King to the Port, under the Government of the great Vizier
Kuperli. The Court being then at Adrianople, and the Treaty in hand between the
Grand Signior and the Republic of Venice; through the mediation of the French
Ambassador, by consent and command of his Master, certain Letters of his wrote
in Characters were intercepted by the Turks; by what means, and upon what
information, the matter was too evident then, to be apprehended other then an
Italian contrivance: the Cipher, as containing matter prejudicial to the State,
was carried to Adrianople; and being known by examination and confession of the
Messenger, to have been delivered to him by the Secretary of the French
affairs; immediately in all haste the Ambassador then at Constantinople was
cited to appear at Court; but being ancient, and indisposed in his health with
the Gout and Stone, dispatched his Son as his Procurator, with instructions and
orders how to answer what might be objected; hoping by that means to excuse the
inconvenience of a Winters journey.

The Son being there arrived, immediately was called to Audience, accompanied
with the Chancellor, or Secretary for the Merchants (for the other Secretary of
the private affairs of the Embassy, apprehending the fury and injustice of the
Turks, had timely secured himself by flight.) Discourse was first had
concerning the Contents of the Characters; the Turks insolent in their
Speeches, provoked this Sieur la Hay the younger, to utter something tending
toward a contempt of that power the Turks had over him, encouraging himself
with the thoughts of the protection of the King his Master; who was soon
sensible, and moved with the least injuries offered his Ministers. The Turks,
who can endure nothing less then menaces, and Kuperlee through natural cruelty
and choler of old age, and particular malice against the French Nation, moved
with this reply, commanded the Caousbashee, who is chief of the Pursivants, to
strike him in the mouth; which he did with that force, being a rude robustious
fellow, that with a few blows of his Fist, he struck out two of his Teeth
before, and in a most undecent and barbarous manner dragged him with the
Secretary for the Merchants, to a Dungeon so loathsome and moist, that the ill
vapors oft-times extinguished the Candle. The old Ambassador the Father, was
with like Turkish fury sent for, the Turks executing all they do with strange
haste and violence; Barbaris contatio servilis, statim exequiregium Tac. lib. 6.
videtur; and being arrived at Adrianople, was also committed to custody,
though not with that rigor and severity of Imprisonment as the Son, until the
space of two Months passing with presents and solicitations, they both
obtained their liberty, and returned again to Constantinople; where scarce were
they arrived, before news coming of a French Ship, which had laden Goods of
Turks, and run away with his Cargason, the Ambassador was again committed to
another Prison in Constantinople, called the seven Towers, where he remained,
until with Gifts and Money, the anger of the Turks was abated. And still the
malice of Kuperlee persecuted this Sieur la Hay, until after his Embassy of
25 years continuance, unfortuante only at the conclusion, he was dispatched
home obscurely and in disgrace, without Letters of revocation from his Master,
or other intimation to the Grand Signior, which might signify the desire of
this Ambassadors return.

The reason of this irreverent carriage in the Turks toward the persons of
Ambassadors, contrary to the custom of the ancient (...), and other gallant
and civilized people, is an apprehension and Maxim they have received, that an
Ambassador is endued with two qualifications; one of representing to the Grand
Signior the desires of his Prince, the breach of Articles or League, the
aggrievances and abuses of Merchants trading in his Dominions; that so
satisfaction and amendment may be made: And the other, that he remains in
nature of a Hostage, called by themselves Mahapous or pledge; by which he
becomes responsible for what is acted by his Prince contrary to the
Capitulations of Peace, and remains for a pawn for the faithful and sincere
carriage of his Nation, and as security to insure what goods belonging to Turks
are laden on their Vessels. As the Resident for Holland was in the year 1663,
imprisoned at Adrianople for miscarriages of a Ship belonging to his Nation,
taken by Maltese men of War, whereon at (...) were goods laden belonging to
the Grand Signior, and other considerable persons of State, and was not
released, until he engaged to eighty five thousand Dollars, in the space of one
hundred and twenty days, which was the full import of the Turkish interest.

Nor has this Law of Nations, to the sacred esteem of Ambassadors, found
better observation toward the Representatives of the German Emperor, who have
upon all conjunctures of Discord and Breaches of Peace between those two
powerful Princes, been subject to confinements and custody of a Guard, nothing
differing from formal imprisonment; or else, as it happened to the German
Resident in the last War, are transported from place to place, according to the
1663
motion of the Armies, as a barbarous Trophy in the time of their prosperous
successes, and as a means at hand to reconcile and mediate when evil Fortune
compels them to composition.

What ill fate soever has attended the Ministers of other Princes in this
Court, the Ambassadors from his His Majesty of great Britain, our Sacred King,
have never incurred this dishonor and violation of their Office; the
negotiations and differences since the English Trade has been opened in
Turkey, have been various and considerable, and matters as to the security of
the Ambassador and Merchants, have been often reduced to a doubtful condition,
as far as words and rude speeches full of menaces and choler, might make a
sober man suspicious of a greater ruin: And yet through the constancy,
prudence and good fortune of Ambassadors, the Turkish rashness has not drawn
upon themselves the guilt of violating their persons, but have either prevented
troubles in the beginning, or wisely compounded them before they made too far a
breach.

It is worth observation, that the Turks make no difference in the name between
an Ambassador, Resident, Agent, or any petty Messenger sent or residing upon a
public Affair; the name Elchi, serves them to express all: and though the
Turks on occasion of Ruptures and other Discontents lose their respect toward
the person of Ambassadors; yet still it is commendable in them, that they
commonly abstain from the spoil and plunder of the Merchants estates, with
whose Prince they are at enmity; for they look on Merchants as men, whose
profession is best advanced by Peace; and as their own comparison is, like to
the laborious Be which brings Honey to the Hive, and is innocent, industrious
and profitable; and therefore an object of their compassion and defense.

CHAP. XX. How Ambassadors and public Ministers govern themselves in their
Negotiations and Residence amongst the Turks.
Ambassadors in this Country have need both of courage and circumspection,
wisdom to dissemble with honor, and discreet patience, seemingly to take no
notice of Affronts and Contempts, from which this uncivilized people cannot
temperate their Tongues, even when they would seem to put on the most courteous
deportment and respect toward Christians. The French Ambassador, Mounsieur la
Hay, sent once to advise the great Vizier Kuperlee, that his Master had taken
the strong City of Arras from the Spaniard, and had obtained other Victories in
Flanders, supposing that the Turk would outwardly have evidenced some signs of
joy, and return an answer of congratulation; but the reply the Vizier gave, was
no other then this (What matters it to me whether the Dog worries the Hog, or
the Hog the Dog, so my Masters head be but safe!) intimating that he had no
other esteem of Christians, then as Salvages or Beasts; and with no other
answer then this, due to an officious Courtship toward a Turk, the Messenger
returned. There is no doubt, but of all those means, wherewith Kingdoms and
States are supported, there are two more principal and chief of all others: The
one is the substantial and real strength and force of the Prince, which
consists in his Armies and interest; and the other is the honor and reputation
he gains abroad, which has sometimes proved of that Authority and consequence,
as to make the State of the weaker Prince to appear more considerable; or at
least, equal to the greater forces of the other. This reputation is principally
maintained by a prudent manner of negotiation, and depends on the discretion of
the Representative, in which for many years the Republic of Venice had great
advantages in the Turkish Court, through the caution and policy of their
Ministers, who nourished in the Turks an opinion of their strength of Arms, and
force of Wisdom, beyond the reality thereof; (...) before the War broke forth,
no Nation in amity with the Turk, had their affairs treated with more honor
and respect then this Commonwealth.

An Ambassador in this Court ought to be circumspect and careful to avoid the
occasion of having his honor blemished, or of incurring the least violation of
his person; for afterward, as one baffled in his reputation, he becomes
scorned, loses his power and interest, and all esteem of his worth and wisdom;
for having endured one affront, their insolence soon presumes farther to
trespass on his patience: for certainly Turks of all Nations in the world, are
most apt to crush and trample on those that lie under their feet; as on the
contrary, those who have a reputation with them, may make the best and most
advantageous treats of any part of the world, according to that of Busbequius,
Ep. 1. Sunt Turci in utramque partem nimii sive indulgentia, cum pro amicis se
probare volunt, sive acerbitate cum irati sunt. To reply according to the Pride
and Ignorance of a Turk, is properly to blow up fire into a flame; to support
with submission and a pusillanimous spirit, his affronts and indignities, by
negotiating faintly or coldly, is to add fuel and wood to the burning piles;
but solid reason and discourse, accompanied with cheerful expressions, vivacity
and courage in argument, is the only manner of dealing and treating with the
Turks. That which is called good nature or flexible disposition, is of little
use to a public Minister in his treaty with Turks: a punctual adherence to
former customs and examples even to obstinacy, is the best and safest rule; for
the concession of one point serves to embolden them to demand another, and then
a third; and so their hopes increases with the success, having no modesty nor
wisdom to terminate their desires; one act or two of favor is enough
afterward to introduce a custom (which is the chiefest part of their Law) and
to make that which is merely voluntary, and of grace, to become of obligation.
But a principal matter, which a public Minister ought to look to, is to
provide himself of spirited, eloquent and intelligent Interpreters; spirited, I
say, because many times the presence is great they appear before, and the looks
big and sour of a barbarous Tyrant; and it has been known, that the
Ambassador has been forced to interpose his own Person, between the fury of
the Vizier and his Interpreter, whose offense was only a delivery of the words
of his Master; some of whom have notwithstanding been imprisoned, or executed
for this cause, as we have partly intimated in the foregoing Chapter: The
reason of which Tyranny and presumption in these prime Officers over the
Interpreters, is because they are most commonly born subjects of the Grand
Signior, and therefore ill support the least word mis-placed, or savouring of
contest from them, not distinguishing between the sense of the Ambassador, and
the explication of the Interpreter; and therefore it were very useful to breed
up a Seminary of young Englishmen, of sprightly and ingenious parts, to be
qualified for that Office; who may with less danger to themselves, honor to
their Master, and advantage to the public, express boldly without the usual
mincing and submission of other Interpreters, whatsoever is commanded and
declared by their Master.

It is certainly a good Maxim for an Ambassador in this Country, not to be
over-studious in procuring a familiar friendship with Turks; a fair comportment
toward all in a moderate way, is cheap and secure; for a Turk is not capable
of real friendship toward a Christian; and to have him called only, and
thought a friend who is in power, is an expense without profit; for in great
emergencies, and times of necessity, when their assistance is most useful, he
must be bought again, and his friendship renewed with presents, and farther
expectations: howsoever, this way of negotiation by presents and gratuities, is
so much in custom amongst the Turks, that to speak truly, scarce any thing can
be obtained without it; but it is the wisdom of the Minister, to dispose and
place them with honor, decency and advantage: For there are, and have been
always, two or three powerful persons in this Court, which in all times carry
the principal sway, and command of all; these must necessarily be treated with
respect, and often sweetened with gratuities: he that has money may doubtless
make friends when he needs them, and with that secure his capitulation and his
privilege, purchase justice, and if his stock will hold out, act any thing
that can reasonably be imagined; yet it is the most profitable and prudent way
to refer something to friendship and good correspondence, and not all to the
(...) force and strength of money.

CHAP. XXI. How Foreign Princes in particular stand in the esteem and opinion
of the Turks.
THe Turks, as we have occasionally instanced before, are naturally a proud and
insolent people, confident, and conceited of their own virtue, valor and
forces, which proceeds from their ignorance of the strength and constitution of
other Countries; so that when the danger which may arise from the Conjunction
and Union of Christian Princes to the Mohammedan Interest, is discoursed of,
they compare the Grand Signior to the Lion, and other Kings to little Dogs,
which may serve (as they say) to rouse and discompose the quiet and Majesty of
the Lion, but can never bite him, but with their utmost peril. They say
farther, as by an ingenuous confession, that they are unable to encounter the
Christians at Sea, to whom God has given that unstable element for Dominion
and Possession; but that the earth is the lot and inheritance of the Turks,
which is demonstrable by that great circuit of Empire, obedient to the
Mohammedan Arms. These are the thoughts and apprehensions of the Commonalty
concerning Christendom in general (which I have heard often discoursed amongst
them) but the opinion and esteem which knowing men and Ministers frame of
Foreign Kingdoms and States distinctly, is for the most part according to
these following particulars.

Of all the Princes so far remote as England, none amongst this people stands
in better account then His Majesty of Great Braitain, not only for the
convenience of the Trade, which provides this Empire with many necessary
commodities; but for the fame of his Shipping, and power at Sea, which makes
him, though divided from all parts of the world, yet a borderer on every
Country, where the Ocean extends: And this esteem and honor the Sultan bears
toward His Majesty, has been evidenced in several particulars, and by none
more then by the security and freedom his Merchants live in, in these
Dominions, and a readiness always in every reasonable request, to gratify His
Majesty's Ambassadors.

As for the Emperor, the Turk knows that his own proper and peculiar force in
its self, is inconsiderable, but that with the conjunction and assistance of
the German Princes, they are assured, and have proved it to their experience in
the year 1664, that his strength is equivalent to the Ottoman power; but yet
they are not ignorant, that the diversity of Religions and Sects in Germany,
abate much of that heat and coalition amongst themselves, which is requisite to
the vigorous opposition of so potent an enemy. And it is evident, that the
Emperors unseasonable severity against the Protestants in Hungary, disobliging
his whole Dominion there, by depriving them of their Churches, and exercising
other courses for suppression of the reformed Religion, ripened the Turks
design of War first laid in the year 1663; conceiving that in that conjuncture,
holding forth the specious pretense of liberty in Religion and Conscience, the
Hungarians would either wholly desert the Emperor, or very coldly and faintly
apply themselves to his succor; the effect of which was in the succeeding Wars
plainly verified, and known that the Hungarians were not only sparing in their
contribution and supplies of men in the service of the Emperor, but held
secret Juntoes and Councels, whether it were not better to (...) the Turks
sovereignty, on the conditions proposed, with liberty of their Religion, rather
then to continue in Allegiance to the Emperor; who neither afforded them
freedom of conscience, which is the destruction of their spiritual estate, nor
was able to withstand the Turk, which argued insufficiency to yield them
protection in their temporal. The Emperor sends his Ambassador to the Turk,
under notion of the King of Hungary, because at his instalment as Emperor, he
swears to make a perpetual War with the Turk; and indeed their peace is little
better then a War, considering their frequent incursions into each others
Territories; and that to skirmish or fight in bodies under the number of 5000,
not taking Forts, or bringing Cannons into the Field, is no breach of the
capitulations.

The French King, though the first Christian Prince, that having no confines
bordering on these Dominions, entered into capitulations with the Turk for a
free and open Commerce and Traffic; and obtained the Title of Podeshaw, which
signifies as much as Emperor, and is denied to all other Christian Kings, and
even to the Germane Emperor himself, being judged an honor amongst the Turks
proper and peculiar only to the Grand Signior: yet their esteem of the French
is not so great as some would persuade the world it is, having (as we have at
large declared in the foregoing Chapter) given ample testimonies in the persons
of the Ambassadors, their scorn and neglect of the Prince he represented. I
have heard the wise Lord Chancellor Samosade say, that the French gained that
Title of Podeshaw to their King by craft and subtilty, and was never fully
examined nor considered; and in that business there is a strange Romance told
of a fair French Lady, preferred to the Seraglio, whom the Turks were willing
to receive for a Princess, and thence challenging affinity with the King of
France, was the more profuse in the honor of his titles: It is true, there was
a time when the French Ambassador was called to secret Councels, and admitted
within the Walls of the Seraglio to private meetings and debates of the Turk;
but it was when the French plotted, and openly assisted in transportation of
the Turks, for the invasion of Italy; but since that time, and especially in
the year 1664, through the force given the Emperor, and the Bravado upon
Barbary, the French has always (and that not without some reason) gone
declining in the good opinion and esteem in the Ottoman Court.

The Pope is more esteemed, as a Prince able to blow the coals, and excite
other Princes to the damage of the Mohammedan State, rather then by his own
power or force to effect any thing himself; and having no confines bordering on
the Turks, his riches, power or greatness seldom falls as a subject for their
consideration.

As little account would they make of the King of Spain, but that the Granadin
Turks, of which there remains in Constantinople a considerable number since
their expulsion, through an extreme affection naturally inherent in them to
Spain, discourse of it with a passion, not altogether free os a little
Rodomontado, and vainglory, vices incident to their Country; whereby they
create in the Turks a conceit of the greatness, riches and force of Spain,
according as it flourished in the time that the Moors possessed their seat and
habitation there. But yet the Turks, though a people incurious and negligent of
the accurate state of other places, besides their own, are not altogether
ignorant of the decay of Spain, the Wars in Portugal, and the menaces from
France, which makes them aim at one of the Venetian Ports in Dalmatia, to have
the better prospect and easier passage unto Sicily, or the Kingdom of Naples.

The esteem the Venetians are in at this time amongst them, is greater then
when the War first began; for then they entertained an opinion of their force
much inferior to the real estimation thereof; as they do now the contrary
byond their true strength, making always calculates from the effect and success
of things. Yet the Turk knows, that the Venetian power is not comparable to his
by land, and that nothing but Friuli stands between him and the mastery of
Venice; which makes him ashamed and angry, that after so many years Wars, no
greater additions should be acquired to the Empire, then his footing in Candy,
the whole possession of which was imagined at the beginning of the war, would
upon a bare demand been quietly presented as the price and purchase of the
peace.

The King of Poland is none of the least amongst the Christian Princes esteemed
at the Ottoman Court, by reason of his great power, consisting chiefly in
Horse, which in opinion of the Turks is the most warlike; and look on that
people as martial, and with much difficulty brought under their subjection. But
by reason of the great combustions and intestine troubles of that Country, the
Polanders apply themselves with much dexterity and caution in their treaties
with the Turks; and especially, being borderers with them, and subject to their
incursions and robberies of Men and Cattle, they endeavor all means of fair
and reasonable compliance. And on the other side, the Turk is well inclined to
the Polander, and desires his prosperity beyond others of his
neighbour-Princes; because he looks on him, as the only curb upon all occasions
of the Moscovites, and whom they may make use of, to give some stop and arrest
unto the progress of his Arms.

The Moscovite has yet a greater fame and renown with the Turks, being
reported able to make a hundred and fifty thousand Horse; so that he treats
with the Turk on equal terms, and fills his Letters with high threats and
Hyperbolical expressions of his power, and with as swelling titles as the Turk.
The Greeks have also an inclination to the Moscovite beyond any other Christian
Prince, as being of their Rites and Religion, terming him their Emperor and
Protector; from whom, according to ancient prophesies and modern predictions,
they expect delivery and (...) to their Church. But the greatest dread the Turk
has of the Moscovite, is from the union with the Soffi or Persian, which two
uniting together, would be too unequal a match for the Ottoman Empire.

But above all the great Potentates of the world, the King of (...) was most
feared and esteemed by the Turk, not only by reason of his great force, and
that the borders of his Dominions run a long space on the confines of the
Turks; but because it is almost impossible, by reason of the vast Deserts, and
uninhabited places, to carry the War into his Country, without the cumbersome
carriages of all necessary provisions, which with how much difficulty and
incommodity were performed in the last (...) between these two great Princes,
the History sufficiently relates; but since the conquest of Babylon, and decay
of their riches, they are now the subjects of the Turkish scorn and contempt.
The neerness of their Faith, though derived from the same Founder, but
afterward receiving some difference by the interpretation of Haly, is in no
wise a reconcilement of their affections; but rather a ground and matter of
their fear and jealousy, lest at any time waging a War against the Persian,
that Heresy should begin to be set on foot amongst the people, which like a
spark that causes the conflagration of a whole City, may breed those intestine
civil distractions, which may prove of more danger and ruin then the former
War. It will not be necessary to speak much of the Hollanders, in regard, that
though they have a Resident there, are scarce taken notice of as a Nation
different, but depending on the English. And these are all the Nations
considerable, with whom the Turk has occasion to treat, or that follow under
his cognizance or business.

CHAP. XXII. The regard the Turks have to their Leagues with Foreign Princes.
AS the Christian Religion teaches humility, charity, courtesy, and faith
toward all that are within the pale of humane nature, to be (...), so the
Turkish superstition furnishes its followers with principles, not only to abhor
(...) (...), but also the persons of such whom they term not (...). The
sordidness of their blood, and ungentleness of their education, makes them
insolent and swelled in prosperity; and their Victories and Spoils upon
Christians, render (...) Arms and Force of other parts contemptible in respect
of theirs.

Upon these considerations of the vileness of Christianity, and scorn of their
power, they assume this into a Maxim, that they ought not to regard the
Leagues they have with any Prince, or the reasons and ground of a quarrel;
whilst the breach tends to the enlargement of their Empire, which consequently
infers the propagation of their Faith. Many and various are the examples and
stories in all Ages, since the beginning and increase of the Turkish power, of
the perfidiousness and treachery of this people; that it may be a question,
whether their valor and force has prevailed more in the time of War, or the
little care of their faith and maintenance of their Leagues has availed them
in the time of Peace. Thus Didymotichum in the time of Peace, under Amurath,
third King of the Turks, whilst the Walls and Fortifications were Building, was
by the Asian laborers, which were entertained in the work, and the help of
other Turks which lay near in ambush, surprised and taken; so also Rhodestum in
time of Peace by command of Amurath, was by Eurenoses assaulted and taken by
stratagem; so Adrianople Now called Rhodesto,
in the reign of the same Emperor, after Peace made again, and assurances
given of better faith, was by the art and disguise of Chasis-Ilbeg, pretending
to be a discontented Captain and a Fugitive from the Turks, by fair Speeches
and some Actions and Skirmishes abroad, gained such confidence amongst the
credulous Greeks, as enabled him afterward to set the Gates open to Amuraths
Army, which after some Conflict was taken, and never recovered again by the
power of the Greeks.

It is an old and practiced subtilty of the Turks, immediately after some
notable Misfortune to entreat of Peace, by which means they may gain time to
recollect their Forces and Provisions to prosecute the War. It is notable and
worthy of Record, the treachery of the Treaty used in the year 1604. Begun in
the time of Mahomet the third, and broken off by Achmat his Successor. The
overtures for a Treaty were first propounded by the Turks; and Commissioners
from the Emperor appointed, and met the Turks at Buda; twelve days truce were
concluded for consideration of the Articles, and Presents sent by the Turks to
the Emperor, to persuade him of the reality of their intentions. Mahomet
dying, Sultan Achmat renews his Commission to the Bassa of Buda to continue the
Treaty; whereupon the Christian and Turks Commissioners have another Meeting at
Pesth; where whilst the Christians were courteously. Feasting the (...) in
Tents near the Town, and they to create in the Christians an assurance of their
faithful dealing, were producing Letters from (...) Sultan and Prime Vizier
filled with Oaths and Protestations, as by the God of Heaven and Earth, by the
Books of Moses, by the souls of their Ancestors, and the like, that their
intentions for Peace were real, and meant nothing but what was honorable and
just: At that very time the Turks of Buda, conceiving that in the time of this
great jollity and (...), the Walls of Pesth were neglected and slightly manned,
issued (...) in great numbers to surprise it; the alarm of which ended the
Banquet, and the Turks finding matters contrary to their expectation, returned
only with the shame of their treachery.

It is no wonder the Disciples should in a point of so great liberty and
advantage follow the example and Doctrine of their Master; for the like Mahomet
did when overthrown, and repulsed at the siege of Mecha, made a firm League
with the Inhabitants of strict Peace and Amity: but the next Summer, having
again recruited his Forces, easily surprised and took the City, whilst that
people relying on the late agreement, suspected nothing less then the Prophets
treachery. And that such perfideousness as this might not be Chronicled in
future Ages, in disparagement of his Sanctity; he made it lawful for his
Believers, in cases of like nature, when the matter concerned those who were
Infidels, and of a different persuasion, neither to regard Promises, Leagues,
or other Engagements; and this is read in the Book of the institutions of the
Mohammedan Law, called Kitab Hadaia.

It is the usual form and custom, when a noble advantage is espied on any
Country, with which they have not sufficient ground of quarrel, to demand the
opinion of the Muftee, for the lawfnlness of War; who without consulting other
consideration and judgment of the reasonable occasions, then the utility of
the Empire, in conformity to the foregoing president of his Prophet, passes his
Fetfa or sentence; by which the War becomes warrantable, and the cause
justified and allowed.

It is not to be denied, but even amongst Christian Princes and other the most
gallant people of the world, advantages have been taken contrary to Leagues,
and Faith, and Wars commenced upon frivolous and slight pretenses; and States
have never wanted reasons for the breach of Leagues, though confirmed by Oaths
and all the Rites of Religious Vows: We know it is controverted in the Schools,
whether Faith is to be maintained with Infidels, with Heretics, and wicked
men; which in my opinion were more honorable to be out of question.

But we never read that perfidiousness by Act and Proclamation was allowable,
or that it was holy to be faithless, until the Doctors of the Mohammedan Law, by
the example of their Prophet recorded and commanded this Lesson, as a
beneficial and useful Axiom to their Disciples.

And here I cannot but wonder at what I have heard and read in some Books of
the Honesty and Justice of the Turks, extolling and applauding them, as men
accomplished with all the virtues of a moral life; thence seeming to infer that
Christianity it self imposes none of those engagements of goodness on men's
natures, as the Professors of it do imagine. But such men I believe, have
neither read the Histories, nor consulted the rules of their Religion, nor
practiced their conversation; and in all points being ignorant of the truth of
the Turks dealings, it is not strange, if through a charitable opinion of what
they know not, they err in the apprehension and Character they pass upon them.

OF THE Turkish Religion. BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of the Religion of the Turks in general.
THe Civil Laws appertaining to Religion amongst the Turks are so confounded
into one body, that we can scarce treat of one without the other; for they
conceive that the Civil Law came as much from God, being delivered by their
Prophet, as that which immediately respects their Religion, and came with the
same obligations and injunctions to obedience. And though this Policy was a
Fiction of some, who first founded certain Governments, as Numa Pompilius,
Solon, and the like, to put the greater engagements and ties on men, as well of
conscience, as through fear of punishment; yet in the general that proposition
is true, that all Laws which respect Right and Justice, and are tending to a
foundation of good and honest Government, are of God; For there is no power but
Romans 13.
of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God. And then if God owns the
creation and constitution of all Princes and Rulers, as well the Pagans as
Christians; the Tyrants, as the indulgent Fathers of their people and Country;
no less does he disallow the Rules and Laws fitted to the constitution and
Government of a people, giving no dispensation to their obedience, because
their Prince is (...), or their Laws not founded according to true reason, but
the (...) of their corrupted judgments or interest.

It is vulgarly known to all, that their Law was compiled by (...), with the
help of Sergius the Monk (and thence this superstition is named Mahometanism)
whose infamous life is recorded so particularly in many other Books, that it
were too obvions to be repeated here: and therefore we shall insist, and take a
view of the Rites, Doctrines and Laws of the Turkish Religion, which is founded
in three Books, which may not improperly be called the Codes and Pandects of
the (...) constitutions.

The first is the Alchoran; the second, the consent or testimony of Wisemen,
called the Assonah, or the traditions of the Prophets; and the third, the
inferences or deductions of one thing from another. Mahomet wrote the Alchoran,
and prescribed some Laws for the Civil Government: the other additions or
superstructures were composed by their Doctors that succeeded, which were
Ebbubecher, Omar, Ozman and Haly; the (...) of Babylon and Egypt, were other
Doctors and Expositors of their Law, whose sentences and positions were of
Divine Authority amongst them; but their esteem of being oraculous failing with
their temporal power, that Dignity and Authority of infallible determinations,
was by force of the Sword transferred to the Turkish Mufti. And though there is
great diversity amongst the Doctors, as touching the explication of their Law;
yet he is esteemed a true Believer, who observes these five Articles or
Fundamentals of the Law, to which every true Turk is obliged. The first is,
cleanness in the outward parts of their body and garments. Secondly, to make
Prayers five times a day. Thirdly, to observe the Ramazan or Monthly Fast.
Fourthly, to perform faithfully the Zekat, or giving of Alms according to the
proportion prescribed in a certain Book, wrote by the four Doctors of theirs,
called Asan, Embela, etc. Fifthly, to make their Pilgrimage to Mecha, if they
have means and possibility to perform it. But the Article of Faith required to
be believed is but one, viz. that there is but one God, and Mahomet his
Prophet. Other Rites, as Circumcision, observation of Friday for a day of
Devotion, abstinence from Swines flesh, and from blood, are not reckoned (as
they say) amongst the five principal points, because they are enjoined as
trials and proofs of a man's obedience to the more necessary Law.

CHAP. II. The Toleration that Mahometanism in its Infancy promised to other
Religions; and in what manner that agreement was afterward observed.
WHen Mahometanism was first weak, and therefore put on a modest Countenance
and plausible Aspect to deceive mankind, it found a great part of the World
illuminated with Christianity, endued with active Graces, (...) and Devotion,
and established within it self with purity of (...) (...), and firm profession
of the Faith, though greatly shaken by the Horesies of Arrius and Nestorius;
yet it began to be guarded not only with its patience, long-suffering and hope,
but also with the Fortifications, Arms and Protection of Emperors and Kings: so
that Mahometanism coming then on the disadvantage, and having a hard game to
play, either by the luster of graces, and good examples of a strict life to
outshine Christianity; or by a looseness and indulgence to corrupt manners, to
pervert men dedicated to Gods service; or by cruelty or menaces to gain those
who accounted Martyrdom their greatest glory, and were now also defended by the
power of their own Princes; judges it best policy to make proffers of truce and
peace between the Christian and its own profession: and therefore in all places
where its arms were prevalent and prosperous, proclaimed a free toleration to
all Religions; but especially in outward appearance, courted and favored the
Christian, drawing its Tenants and Doctrines in some conformity to that rule,
confessing Christ to be a Prophet, and greater then Moses; that he was born of
a Virgin; that Mary conceived by the smell of a Rose; that the blessed Virgin
was free from original sin, and the temptations of the Devil; that Christ was
the Word of God, and is so styled in the Alchoran, and cured diseases, raised
the dead, and worked many miracles; and by his power, his Disciples did the
like: and I have heard some speak of him with much reverence, and with heat to
deny Christ's passion; saying, it were an impiety to believe that God who loved,
and had conferred so much power, and so many graces on Christ, should so far
dishonor him, as to deliver him into the hands of the Jews, who were the worst
and most scorned of men; or to the death of the Cross, which was the most
infamous and vile of all punishments.

In this manner they seemed to make a league with Christianity, to be
charitable, modest, and well wishers to its professors; and Mahomet himself
says in his Alchoran thus: O Infidels, I do not adore what you adore, and you
do not adore what I worship; observe you your law, and I will observe mine: And
for a farther assurance of his toleration of Christianity, and evidence to the
world, that his intention was neither to persecute nor extirpate their
Religion; he made this following Compact, the original of which was found in
the Monastery of Friars on Mount Carmel, near Mount Libanus (which is within
one days journey of Mecha, and is the place where the Mohammedan Pilgrims make
their Corban or Sacrifice before they enter that City, as we shall hereafter
have occasion to speak of more at large) and, as it is said, was transported to
the Kings Library in France; which because it is ancient, and of curiosity, it
will not be impertinent to be inserted here.

Mahomet sent from God to teach mankind, and declare the Divine Commission in
truth, wrote these things. That the cause of Christian Religion determined by
God, might remain in all parts of the East, and of the West, as well amongst
the inhabitants, as strangers, near and remote, known, and unknown: to all
these people I leave this present writing, as an inviolable league, as a
decision of all farther controversies, and a law whereby justice is declared,
and strict observance enjoined. Therefore, whosoever of the Mosselmans Faith
Mosselman signifies a believer, and so the (...) call themselves.
shall neglect to perform these things, and violate this league, and after the
manner of Infidels break it, and transgress what I command herein, he breaks
the Compact of God, resists his agreement, and contemns his Testament, whether
he be a King, or any other of the faithful. By this agreement, whereby I have
obliged my self, and which the Christians have required of me, and in my Name,
and in the name of all my Disciples, to enter into a Covenant of God with them,
and League and Testament of the Prophets, Apostles elect, and faithful Saints,
and blessed of times past and to come. By this Covenant, I say, and Testament
of mine (which I will have maintained with as much Religion, as a Prophet
Missionary, or as an Angel next to the Divine Majesty, is strict in his
obedience toward God, and in observance to his Law and Covenant) I promise to
defend their Judges in my Provinces, with my Horse and Foot, Auxiliaries, and
other my faithful followers; and to preserve them from their enemies, whether
remote or near, and secure them both in peace and war: and to protect their
Churches, Temples, Oratories, Monasteries, and places of Pilgrimage,
wheresoever situated, whether in Mountain or Valley, Cavern or House, a Plain,
or upon the Sand, or in what sort of edifice soever: also to preserve their
Religion and their goods in what part soever they are, whether at Land or Sea,
East or West, even as I keep my self and my Scepter, and the faithful believers
of my own people. Likewise, to receive them into my protection from all harm,
vexation, offense and hurt. Moreover, to repel those enemies which are
offensive to them and me, and stoutly to oppose them both in my own person, by
my servants, and all others of my people and Nation. For since I am set over
them, I ought to preserve and defend them from all adversity, and that no evil
touch them before it first afflict mine, who labor in the same work. I promise
farther to free them from those burdens which confederates suffer, either by
lones of money or impositions; so that they shall be obliged to pay nothing but
what they please, and no molestation or injury shall be offered them herein. A
Bishop shall not be removed from his Diocese, or a Christian compelled to
renounce his faith, or a Monk his profession, or a Pilgrim disturbed in his
Pilgrimage, or a Religious man in his Cell: Nor shall their Churches be
destroyed, or converted into Mosques: for whosoever does so break this Covenant
of God, opposes the Messenger of God, and frustrates the Divine Testament. No
imposition shall be laid upon Friars or Bishops, nor any of them who are not
liable to Taxes, unless it be with their own consent. And the Tax which shall
be required from rich Merchants, and from Fishermen of their Pearl, from Miners
of their Precious Stones, Gold and Silver; and all other rich and opulent
Christians, shall not exceed above 12 shillings yearly; and it shall also be
from them who are constant inhabitants of the place, and not from Travelers,
and Men of an uncertain abode; for they shall not be subject to impositions or
contributions, unless they are possessors of inheritance of Land or Estate; for
he which is lawfully subject to pay money to the Emperor, shall pay as much as
another, and not more; nor more required from him, above his faculty and
strength. In like manner, he that is taxed for his Land, Houses or Revenue,
shall not be burdened immoderately, nor oppressed with greater Taxes then any
others that pay contribution: Nor shall the confederates be obliged to go to
War with the Mosselmans against their enemies, either to fight or discover
their Armies, because it is not of duty to a confederate, to be employed in
Military affairs; but rather this Compact is made with them, that they may be
the less oppressed; but rather the Mosselmans shall watch, and (...) and defend
them: And therefore, that they be not compelled to go forth to fight, or
encounter the enemy, or find Horse or Arms, unless they voluntarily furnish
them; and he who shall thus willingly contribute, shall be recompensed and
rewarded. No Mosselman shall infest the Christians, nor contend with them in
any thing but in kindness, but treat them with all courtesy, and abstain from
all oppression or violence toward them. If any Christian commit a crime or
fault, it shall be the part of the Mosselman to assist him, intercede and give
caution for him, and compound for his miscarriage; liberty shall also be given
him to redeem his life, nor shall he be forsaken, nor be destitute of help,
because of the Divine Covenant which is with them, that they should enjoy what
the Mosselmans enjoy, and suffer what they suffer: and on the other side, that
the Mosselmans enjoy what they enjoy, and suffer what they suffer. And
according to this Covenant, which is by the Christians just request, and
according to that endeavor which is so required for confirmation of its
Authority, you are obliged to protect them from all calamity, and perform all
offices of good will toward them, so that the Mosselmans may be sharers with
them in prosperity and adversity. Moreover, all care ought to be had, that no
violence be offered to them, as to matters relating to marriage, viz. That they
compel not the Parents to match their Daughters with Mosselmans: Nor shall they
be molested for refusal, either to give a Bridegroom or a Bride; for this is an
act wholly voluntary, depending on their free-well and pleasure. But if it
happen that a Christian Woman shall join with a Mosselman, he is obliged to
give her liberty of conscience in her Religion, that she may obey her Ghostly
Father, and be instructed in the Doctrines of her Faith without impediment;
therefore he shall not disquiet her, either by threatening divorce, or by
solicitations to forsake her Faith: but is he shall be contrary hereunto, and
molest her herein, he despises the Covenant of God, rebels against the Compact
of the Messenger of God, and is entered into the number of liars. Moreover, when
Christians would repair their Churches or Convents, or any thing else
appertaining unto their Worship, and have need of the liberality and assistance
of the Mosselmans hereunto, they ought to contribute, and freely to bestow
according to their ability; not with intention to receive it again, but gratis;
and as a good will toward their Faith, and to fulfill the Covenant of the
Messenger of God, considering the obligation they have to perform the Covenant
of God, and the compact of the Messenger of God. Nor shall they oppress any of
them living amongst the Mosselmans, nor hate them, nor compel them to carry
Letters, or show the way, or any other manner force them: for he which
exercises any manner of this Tyranny against them, is an oppressor, and an
adversary to the Messenger of God, and refractory to his Precepts. These are
the Covenants agreed between Mahomet the Messenger of God, and Christians. But
the conditions on which I bind these Covenants on their Consciences, are these:
That no Christian give any entertainment to a Soldier, enemy to the
Mosselmans, or receive him in his house publicly or privately; that they
receive none of the enemies of the Mosselmans, as sojourners into their (...)
Churches or religious Convents; nor underhand furnish the Camp of their
enemies with Arms, Horse, Men, or maintain any intercourse or correspendence
with them, by contracts or writing; but betaking themselves to some certain
place of abode, shall attend to the preservation of themselves, and to the
defense of their Religion. To any Mosselman and his Beasts, they shall give
three days entertainment with variety of Meat; and moreover, shall endeavor to
defend them from all misfortune and trouble; so that if any Mosselman shall be
desirous, or be compelled to conceal himself in any of their houses or
habitations, they shall friendly hide him, and deliver him from the danger he
is in, and not betray him to his enemy: and in this manner the Christians
performing Faith on their side, whosoever violates any of these conditions, and
does contrarily, shall be deprived of the benefits contained in the Covenant of
God and his Messenger; nor shall he deserve to enjoy these privileges indulged
to Bishops and Christian Monks, and to the believers of the contents of the
Alchoran. Wherefore I do conjure my people by God and his Prophet to maintain
these things faithfully, and fulfill them, in what part soever of the world they
are. And the Messenger of God shall recompense them for the same; the perpetual
observation of which he seriously recommends to them, until the day of
judgment, and dissolution of the world. Of these conditions which Mahomet the
Messenger of God has agreed with the Christians, and has enjoined, the
witnesses were Abu-Bacre Assadiqu, Omar ben-alcharab.
Ithman ben Afaw, Ati ben abi-taleb,
with a number of (...); the Secretary was Moavia ben abi So fian, a Soldier
of the Messenger of God, the last day of the Moon of the fourth Month, the
fourth year of Hegira in Medina. May God remunerate those who are witnesses to
this writing. Praise be to God the Lord of all creatures.

This Covenant or Articles with Christians (howsoever denied by the Turks to
have been the act and agreement of Mahomet) is yet by very good Authors taken
for real, and to have been at that time confirmed when his Kingdom was weak,
and in its infancy, and when he Warred with the Arabians: and fearing likewise
the enmity of the Christians (not to be assaulted by two enemies at once)
secured himself by this religious League, made in the Monastery of Friars, in
Mount Carmel, from whence that strict Order have their denomination. But mark
how well Mahomet in the sequel observed this Law: As soon as his Government
increased, and that by Arms and bad Arts he had secured his Kingdom, he writes
his Chapter of the Sword, called so perhaps because the first words of it are
often engraved on the Turks Cymeters made at Damascus, and on their Bucklers
and other sorts of Arms: And another Chapter in the Alchoran, called the
Chapter of Battle (which is always read by the Turks before they go to fight)
and therein his modests words (if you adore not what I adore, let your Religion
be to you, and mine to me) and other promises of toleration and indulgence to
the Christian Religion, were changed to a harsher note; and his Edicts were
then for blood and ruin, and enslavement of Christians: When you meet with
Infidels, says he, cut off their heads, kill them, take them prisoners, bind
them, until either you think fit to give them liberty, or pay their ransom; and
forbear not to persecute them, until they have laid down their Arms and
submitted. And this is that sort of toleration the Turks give to the Christian
Religion; they know they cannot force men's Wills, nor captivate their
Consciences, as well as their bodies; but what means may be used to render them
contemptible, to make them poor, their lives uncomfortable, and the interest of
their Religion weak and despicable, are practiced with diverse Arts and Tyranny,
that their toleration of Christianity is rather to afflict and persecute it,
then any grant of favor or dispensation.

The Mohammedan Religion tolerates Christian Churches and Houses of Devotion, in
places where they have been anciently founded, but admits not of holy Buildings
on new foundations; they may repair the old Coverings and Roofs, but cannot lay
a stone in a new place Consecrated to Divine Service; nor if Fire, or any
accident destroy the Superstructure, may a new strength be added to the
foundation, wherewith to under-prop it for another Building; so that at last
the Christian Churches in those Dominions must necessarily come to ruin, as
many already have submitted to the common fate of time. And as it happened in
the great and notable Fires of Galata first, and then of Constantinople, in the
year 1660, that many of the Christian Churches and Chapels were brought to
Ashes; and afterward by the Piety and Zeal of Christians scarce re-edified,
before by public order they were thrown down again into their former heaps,
being adjudged contrary to the Turkish Law, to permit Churches again to be
restored, of which no more remained then the mere foundation.

CHAP. III. The Arts wherewith the Turkish Religion is propagated.
THe Turks, though they offer the specious outside of the foregoing
toleration, yet by their Law are Authorized to enforce men's consciences to the
profession of their Faith; and that is done by various arts and niceties of
Religion: For if a man turn Turk, his Children under the age of fourteen years,
though Educated with other principles, must be forced to the same persuasion.
Men that speak against the Mohammedan Law, that have rashly promised at a time
of distraction or drunkenness to become Turks, or have had carnal knowledge of
a Turkish Woman, must either become Martyrs or Apostates; besides many other
subtilties they have to entrap the souls of Christians within the entanglements
of their Law.

It is another Policy wherewith the Mohammedan Sect has been increased, the
accounting it a principle of Religion, not to deliver a City or Fortress by
consent or voluntary surrender, where Mosques have been once built, and
Mahometanism professed. And therefore the Turk no sooner enters a Town by
Conquest, but immediately lays foundations for his Temples, thereby imposing an
obligation of an obstinate and constant resolution on the conscience of the
defendants, which many times has been found to have been more forcible and
prevalent on the spirits of men, then all the terrors and miseries of Famine,
Sword or other calamities.

It is well enough known upon what different interests Christianity and
Mahometanism were introduced into the world; the first had no other
enforcements, then the persuasions and Sermons of a few poor Fishermen,
verified with Miracles, Signs and inspiration of the holy Ghost; carrying
before it the promises of another life, and considerations of a glorified
spirituality in a state of separation; but the way to it was obstructed with
the opposition of Emperors and Kings, with scorn and contempt, with
persecution and death; and this was all the encouragement proposed to mankind
to embrace this Faith: But Mahometanism made its way with the Sword; what knots
of Argument he could not unty, he cut, and made his spiritual power as large as
his temporal; made his precepts easy and pleasant, and acceptable to the fancy
and appetite, as well as to the capacity of the vulgar: representing heaven to
them, not in a spiritual manner, or with delights unexpressible, and
ravishments known only in part to illuminated souls; but with gross conceptions
of the beauty of Women with great eyes, of the duration of one act of carnal
copulation for the space of sixty years, and of the beastly satisfaction of
(...) glottonous palate; things absurd and ridiculous to wise and knowing men;
but yet capable to draw multitudes of professors, and carnal defenders of its
verity. And this Doctrine being irrational to the better sort of judgments,
causes the Lawyers, who are men of the subtilest capacities amongst the Turks,
to mistrust much of the truth of the Doctrine of Mahomet; especially the
assertions relating to the condition of the other life. For the representation
of the delights of the next world, in a corporeal and sensual manner, being
inconsistent with their reason, leads them to doubt the truth of that point;
and so wavering with one scruple, proceed to a mistrust of the whole system of
the Mahometans faith. One would think that in such men a way were prepared for
the entertainment of a Religion, erected on more solid principles and
foundations; and that the Jews might gain such Proselytes to their Law, from
which a great part of the Mohammedan superstition was borrowed; or that the
Christians might take advantage in so well-disposed subjects, to produce
something of the Mystery of Godliness: But the first are a people so (...) to
scorn and contempt, esteemed by the Turks to be the scum of the world, and the
worst of men; that it is not probable their Doctrine can gain a reputation with
those, to whom their very persons and blood are vile and detestable; nor is it
likely the Christians will ever be received by them with greater Authority, and
more favorable inclination, until they acquit themselves of the scandal of
Idolatry, which the Images and Pictures in their Churches seem to accusethem of
in the eyes and judgment of the Turks, who are not versed in the subtle
distinctions of Schoolmen, in the limitations and restrictions of that worship,
and the evasions of their Doctors, matters not only sufficient to puzzle and
distract the gross heads of Turks, but to strain the wits of learned Christians
to clear them from that imputation.

But to return to our purpose. The propagation of the Mohammedan faith having
been promoted wholly by the Sword; that persuasion and principle in their
Catechism, that the souls of those who die in the Wars against the Christians,
without the help of previous acts of performance of their Law, or other works,
are immediately transported to Paradise, must necessarily whet the Swords and
raise the spirits of the Soldiers; which is the reason that such Multitudes of
them (as we read in History) run evidently to their own slaughter, esteeming
their lives and bodies at no greater price then the value of stones and rubbish
to fill Rivulets and Ditches, that they may but erect a Bridge or passage for
their fellows to assault their enemies.

The success of the Mohammedan arms produced another argument for the
confirmation of their faith, and made it a principle; That whatsoever prospers,
has God for the Author; and by how much more successeful have been their Wars,
by so much the more has God been an owner of their cause and Religion. And the
same argument (if I am not mistaken) in the times of the late Rebellion in
England, was made use of by many, to entitle God to their cause, and make him
the Author of their thriving (...), because their wickedness prospered, and
could trample on all holy and humane rights with impunity. And I have known
that the Romanists have judged the afflictions and almost subversion of the
Church of England, to be a token of Gods desertion and disclaim of her
profession, forgetting the Persecutions and Martyrdoms of the Primitive Saints,
and that the Church of God is built in sorrow and established with patience and
passive graces; but these men rather then want an argument, their malice will
use the weapons of Infidels to oppugn the truth. And on this ground, the Turks
so horribly detest and abhor the Jews, calling them the forsaken of God,
because they are Vagabonds over all the world, and have no Temporal Authority
to protect them: And though according to the best enquiry I could make, that
report is not true, That they permit not a Jew to become a Turk, but by turning
a Christian first, as a nearer step and previous disposition to the Mussulman,
says; yet it is certain they will not receive the Corpse of a Renegado Jew into
their Cymetaries or places of burial; and the Jews on the other side disowning
any share or part in him, his loathed Carcass is thrown into some Grave distant
from other Sepulchers, as unworthy the Society of all mankind.

CHAP. IV. The power and office of the Mufti's, and of their Government in
Religious Matters.
THe Mufti is the principal head of the Mohammedan Religion or Oracle of all
doubtful questions in the Law, and is a person of great esteem and reverence
amongst the Turks; his election is soly in the Grand Signior, who chooses a man
to that office always famous for his Learning in the Law, and eminent for his
virtues and strictness of life; his Authority is so great amongst them, that
when he passes judgment or determination in any point, the Grand Signior
himself will in no wise contradict or oppose it.

His power is not compulsory, but only resolving and persuasive in matters both
Civil and Criminal, and of State: his manner of resolves is by writing; the
question being first stated in Paper briefly and succinctly, he underneath
subscribes his sentence by Yes, or No, or in in some other short determination
called a (...), with addition of these words, God knows better; by which it is
apparent that the determinations of the (...) are not esteemed infallible. This
being brought to the Cadee or Judge, his judgment is certainly regulated
according thereunto, and Law Suits of the greatest moment concluded in an hour,
without Arrests of judgment, appeals, or other dilatory Arts of the Law.

In matters of State the Sultan demands his opinion, whether it be in
condemnation of any great man to death, or in making War or Peace, or other
important affairs of the Empire; (...) to appear the more just and religious,
or to (...) the people more willingly to obedience. And this practice is used
in (...) of greatest moment; scarce a Vizier is proscribed, or a Pashaw for
pretense of crime displaced, or any matter of great alteration or change
designed; but the Grand Signior arms himself with the (...) sentence; for the
nature of man reposes more security in innocence and actions of justice, then
in the absolute and uncontrouleable power of the Sword. And the Grand Signior,
though he himself is above the Law, and is the Oracle and Fountain of Justice,
yet it is seldom that he proceeds so irregularly to contemn that Authority
wherein their Religion has placed an ultimate power of decision in all their
controversies.

But sometimes perhaps Quaeries are sent from the Grand Signior to the Mufti,
which he cannot resolve with satisfaction of his own conscience, and the ends
of the Sultan; by which means affairs important to the well being of the State,
meet delays and impediment; In this case the Mufti is fairly dismissed from his
infallible office, and another Oracle introduced, who may resolve the difficult
demands with a more favorable sentence; if not, he is degraded like the
former, and so the next, until one is found apt to prophecy according to what
may best agree with the interest of his Master. This Office was in past-times
esteemed more sacred by the Ottoman Princes then at present; for no War was
undertaken, or great Enterprise set on foot, but first like the Oracle or
Augur, his determination with great reverence was required as that without
which no blessing or success could be expected; but in these days they are
more remiss in this manner of consultation; sometimes it is done for formality;
but most commonly the Prime Vizier conceited of his own judgment and Authority
assumes the power to himself, and perhaps first does the thing, and afterward
demands the approbation of it by the sense of the Law.

And herein the Mufti has a spacious Field for his Interpretations; for it is
agreed that their Law is temporary, and admits of expositions according to
times and state of things: And though they preach to the people the perfection
of their Alchoran; yet the wiser men hold, that the Mufti has an expository
power of the Law to improve and better it, according to the state of things,
times and conveniences of the Empire; for that their Law was never designed to
be a clog or confinement to the propagation of Faith, but an advancement
thereof, and therefore to be interpreted in the largest and farthest fetched
sense, when the strict words will not reach the design intended.

So it was once propounded to the Mufti, what rule should be observed in the
devotion of a Turk carried Salve into the Northern parts of the world, where in
Winter is but one hour of day, how he might possibly comply with his obligation
of making prayers five times within the twenty four hours; viz. Morning, Noon,
Afternoon, Sunset, and at an hour and half in the Night; when the whole day
being but of one hour admitted of none of these distinctions; for resolution of
which, the Mufti answered, that God commanded not things difficult as it is in
the Alchoran, and that matters ought to be ordered in conformity to time and
place, and making short prayers once before day, then twice in the hour of
light, and twice after it is dark, the duty is complied with.

Another question of the same nature was proposed to the Mufti, concerning the
Kiblah or holy place of Mecha, to which they are obliged to turn their faces in
their prayers; how at Sea where they had no mark, especially such bad
Geographers as commonly the Turks are, it is possible to comply with that
necessary formality required in their devotion; the Mufti resolved this doubt
almost like the former, prescribing a kind of circular motion in prayers, by
which means they cannot miss of having at some time their faces toward the
Holy City, which in a case of so much difficulty is a sufficient compliance
with the duty.

Many cases of this nature are proposed to the Mufti; and many particular rules
of (...) required, one of which is remarkable, that Busbequius relates, that
occurred in his time during the Wars between the Emperor of Germany, and
Sultan Solomon: whether a few Christians taken Captives by the Grand Signior,
might be exchanged with many Turks in the hand of the Emperor. It seems the
Mufti was greatly perplexed and puzzeled in the resolution; for sometimes it
seemed a disesteem to the value of a Turk to be rated under the price of a
Christian; on the other side, it appeared want of charity and care of the
interest of the Mosselmans to neglect real terms of advantage on such aerie and
subtle points of formality. In fine he consulted his Books, and declared that
he found two different Authors of great authority of contradictory opinions in
this controversy; and therefore his Judgment was to incline to that which had
most of favor and mercy in it. The Mufti whilst qualified with that title, is
rarely put to death, but first degraded, and then becomes liable to the stroke
of the Executioner; but in cases of notorious crimes or conviction of Treason,
he is put into a Mortar for that intent remaining in the Prison called the
seven Towers at (...), and therein beaten to death, and brayed to the breaking
and contusion of all his bones and flesh.

The next office to the Mufti is Kadeleschere or Judge of the Militia,
otherwise Judge Advocate, who has yet power of determination in any other Law
Suits whatsorver; for this privilege the Soldiery of this Country enjoys, to
have a power extensive over all other conditions of people, but to be only
subject themselves to the Government of their own Officers; this office a Mufti
must necessarily pass through, and discharge with approbation before he ascends
the top and height of his Preferment.

The next inferior degree is a Mollah; and these are of two sorts, (...).
one of three hundred Aspers, and the other of five hundred Aspers, so called
for distinction sake; the first sort are principal Judges in petty Provinces,
containing under them the command of Kadees of poor and inconsiderable places;
the others have their jurisdiction over the whole dominion of a Beglerbeg, and
have the Kadees of several rich and renowned places under their Government:
these rise often to the (...) office, but proceed by several (...) and steps,
and must first gradually command where the Imperial Seats have been, as first
to be Mollah in Prusa, then in (...), and lastly in Constantinople, at which
time he is next to the office of Kadeleschere, and thence to that of the Mufti.

These and Kadees which are the lower and ordinary sort of Judges are as much
to be reckoned in the number of religious men as the (...) himself; for as I
have said before, the Civil Law of the Turk is conceived by them to be derived
from their Prophet, and the other Expositors of their Law with as much
engagement and obligation as these which immediately concern the Divine
Worship; and therefore are to be treated and handled together.

The Emoums or Parochial Priests, must be able to read in the Alchoran, and be
counted men of good fame and moral lives amongst their neighbors, before they
can be promoted to this Function, and must be one of those who have learned at
the appointed times of prayer to call the people together on the top of the
Steeple, by repeating those words, Allah ekber, Allah ekber, Eschedu (...)
Ilahe ilaliah we eschedu (...) Muhammed (...): cuan Fleie ala Selah heie ala
Felah Allah ekber, allah ekber, la Ilahe ilallah; that is, God is great, God is
great, I profess that there is no Diety but God, and confess that Mahomet is
the Prophet of God; in this manner the people of a Parish recommending any one
to the Prime Vizier, declaring that the former Emaum is dead, and the office
Vacant, and that this person is qualified in all points to the Function, or
better and more knowing then the present Incumbent; he receives immediate
induction and establishment in the place; but for better proof or trial of the
truth of the testimony that accompanies him, he is enjoined to read in presence
of the Vizier some part of the Alchoran, which being done, he is dismissed and
approved, and takes the Visiers (...) or Mandamus for the place.

This is all the Ceremony required in making an Emaum; (...) there is no new
Character or state of Priesthood (as they hold) conferred upon them, nor are
they a different sort distinguished from the people by holy Orders or Rites,
but merely by the present office they manage; when being displaced, they are
again numbered with the layetie: their habit is nothing different from others,
but only that they wear a larger Turbant like the Lawyers, with some little
varity in folding it up, and put on a grave and serious countenance. Their
office is to call the people to prayers, and at due hours to be their leader
into the Mosque, and to read and repeat upon Fridayes certain Sentences or
Verses out of the Alchoran; few of them adventure to Preach, unless he be well
conceited or really well gifted, but leave that office to the (...), or him
that makes Preaching his Profession, who is (...) commonly that passes his time
in the Convents, that we shall hereafter treat.

The (...) has no jurisdiction over the Emaums, as to the good order or
Government of the Parishes, nor is there any Superiority or Hierarchy as to
rule amongst them; every one being Independent and without control in his own
Parish, excepting his subjection in Civil and Criminal Causes to the chief
Magistrates, and considering the manner of their designation to the Religious
office, the little difference between the Clergy and the Layetie, and the
manner of their single Government in Parochial Congregations, may not unaptly
seem to square with the Independency in England, from which original pattern
and example our Sectaries and Phanatick Reformers appear to have drawn their
Copy.

The Churchmen and Lawyers are greatly in esteem amongst them, as is apparent
by the Title they use toward them in their writings and commands, directed to
them in this manner; You that are the glory of the Judges and Sage men, the
profound Mines of Eloquence and Excellence, may your Wisdom and Ability be
augumented.

CHAP. V. Of the Mufti's Revenue, and from whence it does arise.
AFter the (...) is Elected, there is no Ceremony used in his Investiture then
this: he presents himself before the Grand Signior, who Clothes him with a Vest
of rich Sables of a thousand Dollars price, and a thousand more (...) presents
him with in Gold made up in a Handkercheif, which he delivers with his own
hand, putting it in the fold of his under Garment doubled over his breast, and
bestows on him a Salary of two thousand Aspers a day, which is about five pound
Sterling money; besides which he has no certain Revenue, unless it be the power
of Preferment to some Prebendaries or Benefices of certain Royal Mosques, which
he sells and disposes of as is best to his advantage without the scruple of
corruption or Simony.

By the sentences he gives which they call Fetfas, he receives not one Asper
benefit; though every Fetfa costs eight Aspers, yet the Fee thereof goes to his
Officers; that is, to his (...), or he who states the question, is paid five
Aspers; to his Mumeiz, or he who Copies or transcribes the question fair, two
Aspers; to him that keeps the Seal, one Asper.

Other benefits the Mufti has little, excepting only that at his first
entrance to his office, he is saluted by all Ambassadors and Residents for
foraign Princes; as also the Agents of several Pashaws residing at the Port,
none of which come empty handed, but offer their accustomed presents, by which
he collects at least fifty thousand Dollars.

When any Mufti is deprived of his Office without any other motive then the
pleasure of the Grand Signior, he is gratified with an Arpalik, which is the
disposal of some judical Preferments in certain Provinces and the
superintendency of them, from which he gathers a competent Revenue for his
maintenance.

And because he is a Person whose advice and Council is of great Authority with
the Grand Signior and Vizier, and that his word and candid report of matters is
considerable, and his favor in sentences very estimable; he is therefore
courted by all the Grandees of the Empire, who know no other way of reconciling
and purchasing the affection of a Turk, then by force of presents, which have
more of power in them, then all other obligations or merits in the world.

CHAP. VI. Of the Emirs.
Emir Bashee or Head of Mahomets Kindrad


WE may here bring in the Emirs, otherwise called Eulad Resul, into the number
of the Religious men, because they are of the race of Mahomet, who for
distinction sake, wear about their heads Turbants of a deep Seagreen which is
the Colors of their Prophet; out of reverence to his esteemed holy blood, many
privileges are indulged by the secular Authority, that they cannot be
vilified, affronted or struck by a Turk upon forfeiture of his right hand; but
least they should be licentious by his impunity, they have a chief Head or
Superior amongst them called Nakib Eschref, who has his Sergeants or Officers
under him, and is endued with so absolute a power over them, that as he pleases
it extends both to Life and Death; but he never will give the scandal to this
holy seed to execute or punish them publicly. And though few of them can
derive his Genealogy clearly from (...); yet those who can but only pretend to
it, are often helped out in their Pedigree; as often as the Nakib desires to
favor any Person, or can have any color to acquire a new subject; and then to
clear all scruple from the world, he gives him a Tree of his lineage and
descent. The (...) being well acquainted with this abuse, carry the less
respect to the whole Generation; so that as often as they find any of them
drunk or disordered, they make no scruple to take off their Green Turbants
first, Kissing them and laying them aside with all Reverence, and afterward
beat them without respect or Mercy.

Their second Officer is called Alemdar, who carries the Green Flag of Mahomet,
when the Grand Signior appears with any solemnity in public, they are capable
of any offices; few of them exercise any Trade, unless that which is (...), or
one who deals in Slaves, to which sort of Traffic this Sainted offspring is
greatly addicted, as being a holy profession to captivate and enslave
Christians. These are the most abominable Sodomites and abusers of Masculine
youth in the world, in which sin against nature they exceed the foulness and
detestable lust of a (...).

CHAP. VII. Of the endowments of Royal Mosches, and in what manner Tithes are
given for Maintenance of their Priests and Religion.
An Emaum or Parish Priest of one of the Royal Mosehs


THe Turks are very Magnificent in their Mosches, and Edifices erected to the
honor and service of God, and not only in the Buildings, but in the endowments
of them, with a Revenue which Records the Memory of the Donor to all Posterity,
and relieves many poor who daily repeat prayers for the souls of such who dyed
with a persuasion that they have need of them after their decease; for those I
say who dye of that belief, for the condition of the soul, until the day of
judgment is controverted amongst the Turks, and the question not decided as a
matter of faith, or as revealed or determined by the Alchoran. For so large
benevolence is given to places destined to Gods service, that as some compute,
one third of the Lands of the whole Empire are alloted and set out to a holy
use; much to the shame of those who pretend to the name of Christians, and yet
judge the smallest proportion to be too large a competence for those who serve
at the (...).

The principal Muschs and those of richest endowment (as in all reason ought)
are those of Royal Foundations, called in Turkish, Selatin Giameleri; over
which the Prime Superintendent is the Kuzlir Aga, or the chief Black Eunuck of
the Sultans Woman; and in his power it is to distribute all considerable
offices of Ecclesiastical Preferment relating to the Royal Moschs, which office
makes a considerable addition to his other power and Revenue: for there are
many of those Moschs in diverse places of the Empire; but especially where the
Sultans do or have resided as Prusa, Adrianople and Constantinople.

The Royal Moschs of Constantinople are Santa Sophia, Sultan Mahomet, who
Conquered this City. Sultan Bajazet, Sultan Selin, Sultan Soylman, Schezade or
the Son of Sultan Soylman, Sultan Ahmet, and three other Moschs built by the
Queen Mothers, one of which was lately erected and richly endowed by the Mother
of this present Sultan.

I shall scarce adventure to acquaint my Reader with the particular Revenue
belonging to all these Royal Edifices; but certain it is they have Rents as
noble and splendid as their Founders; for example of which, I shall instance
only in that of Santa Sophia, built by Justinian the Emperor, and rebuilt by
Theodosius, and was the Metropolis of old Bizantium, and the Mother Church
belonging to the Patriarchal See of Greece, is still conserved sacred and
separated for use of Divine Service; of the Revenue of which Mohammedan
Barbarism and Superstition has made no Sacrilegious Robbery, but maintained
and improved and added to it, in that manner that the in-come may equal any
Religious foundation of Christendom; for when I had the curosity of procuring
from the Registers of that Church, distinctly all the particular Gifts,
Benefices, Lands, Moneys at interest, and other endowments belonging thereunto,
and offered according to my ability some thing considerable, to have a true
Copy of the riches and annual Rent of the place; the Keepers of those Lists
would persuade me (whether out of ostentation, or scruple of sin to make one of
my faith acquainted with the particulars of their Religious offerings) that the
Wealth, rent and account of all those Royal endowments are so many, that as
they are distinctly set down, fill a Volume, and the knowledge of them is the
study alone of those who are designed to this service: but in general I am
given to understand, by those who magnify not matters beyond their due
computation: That the Revenue amounts to about one hundred thousand Zechins a
year; which proceeds not from any Lands or Duties raised without the Walls of
the City, but all from within; the Sultan himself being a Tenant to that place,
paying or acknowledging a Rent of one thousand and one Aspers a day for the
ground on which the Seraglio stands on, being in times of the Christian
Emperors some part of the Sanctuary or Gardens dedicated to the use of that
stately Temple, which the Turks esteemed Sacrilegious to separate entirely from
the holy Service to which it was assigned; though the admirable situation
thereof rendered it unfit for other habitation, then the enjoyment of the
Sultan; did therefore think fit to oblige the Land to a Rent, adding the odd
Asper as a signification, that the thousand Aspers were not a sufficient
consideration for the use of the Church Lands; and might therefore be augmented
as the piety and devotion of succeeding Emperors should move them.

It is reported by the Turks, that Constantinople was taken upon a Wednesday;
and that on the Friday following (which is their Sunday or Sabbath as we may
call it) the victorious Sultan then first entitled Emperor, went with all
Magnificent Pomp and Solemnity to pay his Thansgiving and Devotions at the
Church of Sancta Sophia; the Magnificence of which so pleased him, that he
immediately added a yearly Rent of 10000 Zechins to the former endowments; for
the maintenance of Imams or Priests, Doctors of their Law, Talismans and
others, who continually attend there for the Education of youth, teaching them
to read and write, instructing them also in the principles of their Law and
Religion.

Other Emperors have since that time, errected near unto it their Turbe or
Chapels of burial, in one of which lies Sultan Selim, Surnamed Sarhose, or the
drunken, with his hundred Children; and therewith have conferred a maintenance
of Oil for Lamps and Candles which burn day and night, and a provision for
those who attend there in prayer for their souls departed; to which opinion the
Turks (as I have said already) are generally inclinable, though not preached or
enforced on any man's belief as an Article of Faith. Over and above this
expense, there is daily provision made for relief of a multitude of poor, who
at certain hours appear at the Gates of this Temple, and receive their daily
sustenance; whatsoever advances as yearly great sums are laid up in the
Treasury, is numbered with the riches of the Mosch, and remains for the service
of that place, as for the reparation, or building thereof, in case of fire or
other accidents.

Besides the sumptuous Edifices of the body of the Royal Moschs, there are
annexed unto them certain Colleges for Students in the Law called Tehmele,
outhouses for Kitchins, where the poors Meat is dressed, Hospitals called
Timarhanelar, Hans, or Houses of Lodging for Strangers or Travelers, public
Fountains, shops for Artizans, and whole Streets of low Cottages for habitation
of the poor, whose stock reaches not to a higher Rent.

All these appendages bring some Revenue to the Mosch, which is constantly paid
in to the Rector or President thereof, called Mutevelli; but because this is
not a sufficient maintenance, there are diverse Lands, Villages, Mountains,
Woods and whole Countries assigned to this use called Wakfi, which are hired
out at certain Rents for the behoof and benefit of the Moschs; some rents being
paid in Corn, others in Oil, and all sorts of Provisions; and out of every new
Conquered Country, some part thereof is assigned to the use of Moschs of modern
Fabric; as now from the Country gained lately about Newhausell (which as I am
informed from those who gave in the account to the Grand Signior, there are two
thousand Villages which pay Contribution to the Turk) are assigned certain
Lands for increase of the rent of the Moschs built at Constantinople by this
present Queen Mother: which rents are sometimes raised by the way of Tenths or
Tithes, not that the Turks make Tithes a duty or rule for the maintenance of
persons, places and things consecrated to Divine Service, but as they find it a
convenient and equal expedient in some Countries for leviation of their rents.
Such Countries and Villages as these which are called Wakfi, are greatly
blessed and happy above others, in regard that the Inhabitants enjoy not only
particular privileges and immunities from thence, but freedom likewise from
oppression of Pashaws and the (...) Soldiery in their March, or of great
persons in their journey or passage from one Country to another, who out of
reverence to that lot to which they are separated, abstain from all kind of
disturbance and abuse toward that people.

Other Moschs of inferior quality, founded by private persons and the consents
of Dervises and other Orders, which cannot have their Revenues in Land like the
Moschs of Royal Foundation, have their Estates in money bequeathed by Testament
or by Gift of the Living, which being lent out at eighteen in the hundred per
annum, produces a constant (...); and though interest for the most part is
forbidden by the Mohammedan Law, yet for the uses of (...) and support of
Orphans it is allowed; in all other cases it is Haram and abominable. And
because the taking up of money upon Loan is in some manner necessary and
conducing to the better subsistence and being of Trade, and that men will not
lend without a consideration or benefit; the usual manner is to borrow money
for a certain time, and in the writing or obligation to acknowledge the receipt
of as much as the principal and interest may amount unto, and oftentimes double
of the Capital sum, which being delivered before witness in a bag or in
gross, the Creditor declaring the sum to be so much therein contained, and
the Debtor acknowledging it, the testimony is valid when the Debt comes to be
demanded. And thus much shall serve in brief to have declared concerning the
endowments and manner of enriching the Turkish Moschs, from whence the
constitution of others of the like nature may easily be collected.

CHAP. VIII. The Nature of Predestination according to the Turkish Doctors.
THe Doctrine of the Turks in this point seems to run exactly according to the
assertion of the severest Calvinists; and in proof hereof their Learned men
(...) places of Scripture, which seem to incline to the same opinion. As shall
the Vessel say to the Potter, Why have thou made (...)? I will harden the heart
of Pharaoh; Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, and the like. For the
Turks attribute no small Reverence and Authority to the old Testament, as wrote
by Divine Inspiration, but that the Alchoran being of later date, and
containing the Will of God more expressly and perfectly, the former is now
abrogated and gives place unto this.

Some are so positive in this assertion, that they are not afraid to say that
God is the Author of evil, without distinction or evasions to acquit the Divine
purity of (...) foulness of sin according to the Doctrine of the Manichees. And
all in general concur in this conclusion, That whatsoever prospers has God for
the Author; which was the reason they destroyed not Bajazets Children, during
the time of his War against his Brother (...), expecting to receive an
undoubted argument of the Will of God therein, from the good or bad fortune of
the Father. And from the same rule they conclude much of the Divine approbation
and truth of their Religion, from their Conquests and present Prosperity.

They are of opinion that every man's destiny is wrote in his forehead, which
they call Narsip or Tactir, which is the Book wrote in Heaven of every man's
fortune, and is (...) no contrary endeavors, councels or wisdom to be avoided;
which (...) is so firmly radicated in the minds of the vulgar, that it causes
the (...) (...) to throw away their lives in the most desperate attempts, and
to esteem no more of their bodies, then as (...) or rubbish to fill up the
trenches of the Enemy; And to speak the truth, this received asertion has
turned the (...) as much to account, as any other of their best and subtilest
Maxims.

According to this Doctrine, none ought to avoid or fear the Infection of the
Plague; Mahomets precepts being not to abandon the Cityhouse where Infection
rages, because God has numbered their days and predestined their fate; And
upon this belief, they as familiarly attend the Beds and frequent the company
of Pestilential persons, as we do those that are affected with the Gout, Stone
or Ague. And though they evidently see that Christians, who fly into better
Airs, and from infected habitations, survive the fury of the years Pestilence,
when whole Cities of them perish and are depopulated with the Disease; yet so
far is this opinion rooted amongst them, that they scruple not to strip the
contagious shirt from the dead body, and to put it on their own, nor can they
remove their abode from the Chambers of the sick; it being the custom in the
Families of great men to lodge many Servants on different Palets in the same
room, where the diseased and healthful lie promiscuously together, from whence
it has happened ofter, that three parts of a Pashaws Family, which perhaps
has consisted of two hundred men, most youthful and lusty, have perished in
the heat of July and Augusts Pestilence. And in the same manner many whole
Families every Summer have perished, and not one surviver left to claim the
inheritance of the house; for want of which the Grand Signior has become the
proprietor.

Though the Mohammedan Law obliges them not to abandon the City, nor their
houses, nor avoid the conversation of men infected with the Pestilence where
their business or calling employs them; yet they are counseled not to frequent
a contagious habitation, where they have no lawful affair to invite them. But
yet I have observed, in the time of an extraordinary Plague, that the Turks
have not confided so much to the precept of their Prophet, as to have courage
enough to withstand the dread and terror of that slaughter the sickness has
made; but have under other excuses fled to (...) and private Villages,
especially the Cadees and men of the Law, who being commonly of more refined
wits and judgments then the generality, both by reason and experience have
found that a wholesome Air is a preserver of life, and that they have lived to
return again to their own house in health and strength, when perhaps their next
Neighbors have through their brutish ignorance been laid in their Graves. And
this is the opinion most general and current with the Turks, who are called
Jebare; There is another sort amongst them called Ka^ere.

CHAP. IX. The difference of Sects and disagreement in Religion amongst the
Turks in General.
THere is no consideration more abstruse and full of distraction, then the
contemplation of the strange variety of Religions in the world: how it is
possible that from the rational soul of man, which in all mankind is of little
difference in it self, and from that one principle, which is the adoration of a
Diety, should proceed such diversities of Faiths, such figments and Ideas of
God, that all Ages and all Countries have abounded with superstitions of
different natures; And it is strange to consider, that Nations who have been
admirably wise, judicious and profound in the Maxims of their Government,
should yet in matters of Religion give themselves over to believe the Tales of
an old Woman, a Pythoness, or the dreams and imaginations of a melancholy
Hermit. And it is as strange that men who embrace the same principles in
Religion, and have the same true and infallible Foundation, should yet raise
such different and disproportionate Fabrics, that most should make their
superstructure of Straw and Stubble, and but few of a substantial and durable
Building, without uniformity, harmony or agreement each to other. For
resolution of which difficulties, nothing can be said more then that the god of
this world has blinded the hearts of them that believe not, Lest the light of
the glorious Gospel 2 Cor. 4. v. 4.
of Christ who is the image of God, should shine unto them.

The Mohammedan Religion is also one of the prodigious products of Reasons
superfaetations, which has brought forth nothing good, nor rational in this
production, more then the confession of one God. And yet even herein also are
diversities of Sects, Opinions and Orders, which are maintained in opposition
each to other, with emulation and zeal by the professors, with heats, disputes
and separations, terming the contrary parties profane and unholy; the
particulars of which Sects and diversity in their Tenants, I shall as far as I
have seen or could learn, set down and describe, having with the more curiosity
and diligence made the stricter enquiry, because I have not read any Author
which has giving a satisfactory account of such Sects as are sprung up amongst
them in these latter and modern times.

It is a common opinion, that there are seventy two Sects amongst the Turks,
but it is probable there are many more, if the matter were exactly known and
scanned. The Turkish Doctors fancy that the seventy two Nations which they call
( ^e^mish ekee Melet) into which the world was divided upon the confusion of
the Languages at Babel, was a Type and a Figure of the divisions which in
after-ages should succeed in the three most general Reilgions of the World. In
this manner they account seventy different Sects amongst the Jews, seventy one
amongst the Christians, and to the Mohammedan they assign one more, as being the
last and ultimate Religion, in which, as all fullness of true Doctrine is
completed, so the Mystery of iniquity, and the deviation of man's judgment, by
many paths from the right rule, is here terminated and confined.

The Turks have amongst themselves as well as in other Religions, Sects and
Heresies of dangerous consequence, which daily increase mixing together with
them many of the Christian Doctrines (which shall in their due place be
described) and in former times also a sort of phanatick Mahometans which at
first met only in Congregations under pretense of Sermons and Religion,
appeared afterward in Troops armed against the Government of the Empire.

So one Scheiches Bedredin Chief Justice to Musa, Brother of Mahomet the fifth
King of the Turks; after the death of his Master was banished to Nice in Asia,
where consulting with his Servant Burgluzes Mustapha, by what means they might
raise Sedition and a second War; they agreed, the readiest course was by
broaching a new Sect and Religion, and by persuading the people to some thing
contrary to the ancient Mohammedan superstition. Whereupon Burgluzes masking his
Villainy under a grave and serious countenance, took his journey into (...),
otherwise Caria, where he vented Doctrines properly agreeing to the humor of
the people, preaching to them freedom and liberty of conscience and the Mystery
of Revelations, and you may believe he used all arts in his persuasions, with
which subjects used to be allured to a Rebellion against their Prince, so that
in a short time he contracted a great number of Disciples. beyond his
expectation. Bedredin perceiving his servant thrive so well with his preaching,
fled from his place of Exile at Nice into Valachia, where withdrawing himself
into a Forest like a devout religious man, gathered a number of Proselytes
composed of Thieves, Robbers and Outlawed people; these he having instructed
in the principles of his Religion, sent abroad like Apostles to preach and
teach the people that (...) was appointed by God to be the King of Justice, and
Commander of the whole world; and that his Doctrine was already embraced in
Asia: The people taken with these Novelties, repaired in great numbers to
Bedredin, who conceiving himself strong enough to take the field, issued from
his desert with Colors displayed, and an Army well appointed; and fighting
with his deluded Multitude a bloody Battle, against those Forces which Mahomet
sent to suppress him under his Son Amurath; the deluded Rebels were overthrown,
Bedredin taken Prisoner, and his pretenses of Sanctity and Revelation were not
available to save him from the Gallows.

And thus we see, that the name of Gods cause, revelations, liberty and the
like, have been old and common pretenses and delusions of the world, and not
only Christians, but Infidels and Mahometans have wrote the name of God on
their Banners, and brought the pretense of Religion in the Field to justify
their cause.

CHAP. X. Of the two prevailing Sects, viz. of Mahomet and Hali; that is, the
Turk and the Persian; the Errors of the Persian recounted and confuted by the
Mufti of Constantinople.
THe two great Sects amongst the followers of Mahomet, which are most violent
each against other, the mutual hatred of which diversity of Education and
Interest of the Princes have augmented, are the Turks and Persians: The first
hold Mahomet to have been the chief and ultimate Prophet; the latter prefers
Hali before him; and though he was his Disciple and succeeded him, yet his
inspirations they esteem greater and more frequent, and his interpretations of
the law most perfect and Divine.

The Turk also accuses the Persian of corrupting the Alchoran, that they have
altered words, misplaced the Comma's and Stops, that many places admit of a
doubtful and ambiguous sense, so that those (...) which were upon the Conquest
of Babylon brought thence to Constantinople, are feparated and compiled in the
great Seraglio, in a place apart, and forbidden with a Curse on any that shall
read them. The Turks call the Persian forsaken of God, abominable and
blasphemers of the Holy Prophet; so that when Selymus the first made War in
Persia, he named his cause the cause of God, and proclaimed the occasion and
ground of his War to be the Vindication of the cause of the Prophet, and
revenge of the blasphemies the Persians had vented against him; and so far is
this hatred radicated, that the youth of what Nation soever is capable of
admittance into the Schools of the Seraglio, excepting only the Persian, who
are looked upon by the Turk as a people so far Apostatized from the true
belief, and fallen in (...) desperate an Estate by a total corruption of the
true Religion, (...) they judge them altogether beyond hopes or possibility of
recovery, and therefore neither give them quarter in the Wars, nor account them
worthy of life or slavery.

Nor are the Persians on the other side endued with better nature of good will
to the Turks, estranging themselves in the farthest manner from their Customs
and Doctrines, rejecting the three great Doctors of the (...) Law, viz.
Ebbubecher, Osman and Omar, as Apochryphal and of no Authority; and have a
custom at their Marriages to erect the Images of those three Doctors of Paste
or Sugar at the entrance of the Bridal Chamber, on which the Guests first
casting their looks, leave the impression of any secret Magic which may issue
from their eyes, to the prejudice or misfortune of the married couple; for in
the Eastern parts of the world they hold that there is a strange fascination
innate to the eyes of some people, which looking attentively on any, as
commonly they do on the Bridegroom and the Bride in Marriages, produce
macerations and imbecility in the body, and have an especial quality contrary
to procreation: and therefore when the Guests are entered, having the Malignity
of their eyes Arrested on these Statues, they afterward cut them down and
dissolve them.

And that it may the more plainly appear what points of Religion are most
controverted amongst them, and what Anathema's and Curses are by both sides
vented each against the other; this following sentence past by the Mufti Esad
Efendi, upon Schah Abbas Tutor to the King of Persia called Sari Halife; and
all the Persians will be a sufficient testimony and evidence of the enmity and
hatred that is between these two Nations, an extract of which is here drawn
from the Book it self licenced and approved at Constantinople.

If you had (says he) no other Heresy then the rejection of those elevated
familiars of Mahomet, viz. Omar, Osman and Ebbubecher, your crime would
notwithstanding be so great as were not expiable by a thousand years of prayer
or pilgrimage in the sight of God; but you would be condemned to the bottomless
Abisse of Hell, and deprived for ever of Celestial Bliss; and this sentence of
mine is confirmed by the same opinion of the four Imams, viz. Imam Azem, Imam
Schafi, Imam Malick, and Imam Hambeli; and therefore I friendly admonish you to
correct this error in your selves; and likewise in your Scholar King Abbas.

Nor are you contented to pass with this single error, whereby you have gained
the name of Kyzilbaschi, that is, Persian Heretics, but you are become as
abominable as the Durzi (a people that lives about Mount Libanus) of bad esteem
and reputation, corrupted in all points of Doctrine and manners; so that I
cannot but pass this black sentence upon you, that it is lawful in a Godly
zeal to kill and destroy you for the Service of God; your Tenants being refuted
by Giafer Efendi, who has branded the Persians for Pagans, and in seventy
several places of the Alchoran, and the very words of Mahomet demonstrated the
clearness of their error.

If the Christian only for saying there is a Trinity in God is condemned for
Life and Estate, why should the Persian expect better quarter, who is
stigmatized for (...) in seventy places of the Alchoran. And one of your
detestable (...) of the first rank is,

That you esteem your selves obliged to assemble at the Moschs, but not to
prayers: for what signifies your meeting, if not to prayers? Mahomet himself
says, that he who repaires to the Congregation without a design of prayer, is
a Hypocrite and a Dissembler, is accursed of God, nor shall be blessed in his
House or Estate, the good Angels shall abandon him, the Devils shall attend
him, nor shall he ever prosper in this world, or in the world to come.

In answer hereunto you say, that the ancient Order of Priests is extinct, that
you have none whose pious lives enable to preach and instruct you, or to be
your leader to holy prayer in the Public Assembly. Do there want pious and
holy persons of the race of Mahomet? if there do not, why do not you imitate
and follow them? but you are enemies, and in open Hostility to the Mohammedan
Family, and excuse your selves from the use of Priests or Imams, because their
innocence cannot equal that of Infants. In this point (it is true) you have
something of reason; for your Imams are not only Insidels in Doctrine, but
defiled in their conversation; and your king who is your HighPriest, frequents
Stews and the Styes of deformed Lust, ravishing fair and chaste Wives from the
embraces of their Husbands; and that publicly in the face of the world,
maintaining concubinage with them. And where the example of a Prince makes such
things lawful, his Subjects, whether Soldiers or Lawyers, will make no (...)
to imitate his actions.

You deny the Verse called the Covering in the Alchoran to be authentic;
Chapter so called.
you reject the eighteen Verses, which are revealed to us for the sake of the
holy Aische. The (...) of (...) so called.


At the Abdest or washing, you hold it not lawful to wash the bare feet, but
only lightly stroke them over.

Your Mustachioes or hair on the upper lip you never cut, but the Beard on the
Chin, which is the honest Otnament of a man's countenance, you cut and clip into
what form you please.

That holy Color of Green appropriated to the Banner of Mahomet, which ought
only to adorn the nobler parts, you in despite to the honor of the Prophet,
with an irreverent negligence, place it on your Shoes and Breeches.

Wine which is an abomination to the true observers of the Law, you drink
freely of, without scruple of conscience; as also in Meats you make no
distinction between clean and unclean, but use all with a like (...). In short,
should I mention all those seventy points wherein you err, and are without all
comparison corrupt and erroneous, I should swell my writing to a Volume, and
not attain my end, which is brevity.

Another sinful custom you permit amongst you, which is, for many men to be
joined to one Woman; for to whom of them can be appropriated the offspring
that is born; what Book have you, or Law, or example of any Nation to produce
in (...) of this vile and unnatural custom? How vile must those Children be who
are the issue of such Parents? that it is no wonder, there be none found
amongst you worthy the holy Character of a Priest or a Judge.

But you cannot be so irrational, as to deny that the Assembling in (...) to
prayer, is necessary to Divine Service; Mahomet himself prayed together with
the people, and sometimes preferred Ebbecher to celebrate the Divine Service,
following him as others of the people did.

Why do not you ask your Pilgrims who come from Mecha, what mean these four
Altars in the Mosch, which are the places of prayer designed to the four
several Orthodox Sects? why take you not example from these? but you are still
perverse and obstinate, haters of God and his Prophet; What will you answer at
the day of judgment before Mahomet and his four Friends? who long since being
dead, you revive their Ashes with ignominy, erecting their Statues at your
Marriages in Sugar, and afterward in contempt hew them down to yield pastime
and occasion of laughter to the Spouses and their Guests.

Was not the first converted to the Faith, Ebubecher?

Was not (...) the bravest Champion of the Mahomet an Religion against the
Christians?

Was not he who disposed and distinguished the Chapters of the Alchoran the
chaste Osman?

Was not the bravest and most Learned bearer of the (...), or the Sword with
two points, was it not Hali? And were not Imam (...), and Imam Husein, Martyrs
of the Faith in the (...) of Kerbela?

Did not Mohomet say with his own mouth, O Hali, for thy sake there are two
sorts of people predestined to Hell? one that loves thee, and one that loves
thee not. Are not you then that wear red Turbants much to be condemned, being
of evil life and conversation, and not well inclined to the house of the
Prophet, nor the family of the faithful, as it is written in the Book called
Aadick? The Christians conserve the hoofs of that Ass on which Christ road,
and set them in cases of Gold and Silver; and esteem it an extreme honor to
have their Faces, Hands or Heads touched with so holy a (...). But you who
profess your selves Disciples of the Prophet of God, and derived from That is,
when the people are called to prayers from the Steeple.
the blood and family of his Friends, despise so glorious a Title, commanding
after the repetition of your prayers, that is, after the Ezan, that Curses and
Blasphemies be proclaimed against these holy Friends and (...) of the Prophet.

Besides this, your Books maintain and avouch it lawful to pillage, burn and
destroy the Countries of the Musselmins, to carry their Wives and Families into
slavery; and from a principle of Malice and Reproach to carry them naked
through your Markets, and expose them to sale to any Chapman; Pagans themselves
esteem not this honest nor decent, by which it is apparent that you are the
most mortal and irreconcilable enemies to us of all the Nations in the world,
you are certainly more cruel to us then the Sezidi, the Kiafirs, the Zindiks,
then the Durzians; and in brief you are the Kennel of all uncleanness and sin;
a Christian or a Jew may hope to become true Believers, but you can never.

Wherefore by virtue of that Authority I have received from Mahomet himself, in
consideration of your misdeeds and incredulity, I pronounce it lawful for any
one of what Nation soever, that is of the Believers, to kill, destroy and
extirpate you; so that as he who slayes a rebellious Christian, performs a
meritorious action in the sight of God; much rather he who kills a Persian,
shall obtain a reward seventy fold from the fountain of Justice. And I hope
that the Majesty of God in the day of Judgment will condemn you to be the Asses
of the Jews, to be road and hacknyed in Hell by that despised people; and that
in a short time you will be exterminated both by us, the Tartars, the Indians
and Arabians our Brothers and Associates in the same Faith.

CHAP. XI. Of the Ancient Sects and Heresies amongst the Turks.
THere are four Sects into which the Mahometans of the esteemed Orthodox belief
are divided; and those are these.

The first is called (...), which is professed in Turkey, Tartary, Eusbec, and
on the other side of Jehun, Bactorus and Oxus. The second is Shaffee, whose
Customs and Rules the Arabians follow. The third is Malechee, to which Tripoli,
Tunis, Algier, and other parts of Africa devote themselves. The fourth is
Hambelle, of which are but few, and is known only in some parts of Arabia.
These four are all accounted Orthodox, and are followers of certain Doctors
(as we may say amongst (...), Scholars of St. (...), Thomas Aquinas,
Dominicus, or the like) and have only differences as to Ceremonies, postures in
their prayers, washings, diversities in some points of their Civil Laws; and
each maintains a charitable opinion of the other, as true Believers, and
capable of entering into Paradise, if their life and conversation be regulated
according to their (...) and Tenants.

All Mahometans according to the Countries wherein they live, come under the
notion of one of these four preceding Professions; but yet are nominated with
other names and differences of Sects according as they follow the opinions
which some Superstitious and Schismatical Preachers amongst them have vented;
and those commonly known and marked with the names of ancient Heresies by the
respective Opponents, which may properly be called so, because they are
conversant in their Doctrines concerning the Attributes and Unity of God, his
decrees and judgments, his promises and threatenings, and concerning prophesies
and gifts of Faith; are especially these which stand in opposition each to
other, viz.

Moatazali To Sephatii

Kadari To Giabari

Morgii To Waidi

Shii To Chawarigi.

From each of these Sects, as from so many roots arise several Branches of
(...) Doctrines, as according to the Tenants of the Turkish Doctors complete
the number of seventy two.

Moatazali signifies as much as Separatists; the reason of which denomination,
(...).
was from Alhasan the Scholar of Wasel Ebw Atw, the Author and Master of this
Sect, to whom the question being proposed Whether those who had committed a
gross sin, were to be adjudged condemnned and fallen from the Faith? the
Scholar (...) instead of expecting the resolution of his Master, withdrew
himself and began to interpret his sense thereof to his other Fellow-Disciples;
from which withdrawing of himself they were afterward denominated Moatazali
which is (...). But the name they give themselves is the Defenders of the
Equity and Unity of God, in declaration of the manner of which they so differ
among themselves, that they are divided into two and twenty Sects, which are
maintained with that passion on all sides, that every party accuses his
opposites of Insidelity. But the principle in which their wrangling Sophisters
accord in common, is this; That God is eternal, and that eternity is an
attribute most properly agreeable to his essence; but yet they reject the
attribute it self, saying, that God is eternal, wise, powerful and the like, by
his own entire and single essence; but yet they say, he is not eternal by his
eternity, nor wise by his wisdom, nor powerful by his power, for fear of
admitting any (...) in the Diety, or incurring the like error as they say of
the Christians, who divide and dishonor the Unity of God, by the conceptions
they frame of the three Persons in the Trinity. And if the Christians are to be
blamed for introducing three Eternals, how much more are those who frame as
many Eternals, as there are Attributes to the Diety?

Another sort derived from this Sect called Haietti, hold that Christ (...).
assumed a true and natural body, and was the Eternal and Incarnate, as the
Christians profess; and in their Credo or Belief have inserted this Article,
that Christ shall come to judge the world at the last day, and for proof hereof
allege an Authority out of the Alchoran in these words. Thou Mahomet shall see
thy Lord return in the Clouds: which though they fear expressly in plain terms
to interpret of Christ, yet they confidently affirm it to be prophesied of the
Messiah, and in discourse confess that that Messiah can be no other then
Christ; who shall return with the same humane flesh again into the world, Reign
forty years on Earth, confound Antichrist, and afterward shall be the end of
the world.

Another sort of Professors of the Sect of Moatazali, are Isi, whose Isi.
first Author was Isa Merdad; these maintain that the Alchoran was created
contrary to the express word of Mahomet, who anathematizes all who are of this
persuasion, saying, let him be reputed an Infidel, who believes the Alchoran
created; for solution of which difficulty and to concur with the words of
their Prophet, they say, that the (...) delivered by Mahomet, was but a Copy
transcribed out of that wrote by God and laid in the Library of Heaven, and
that when their Prophet denies the Creation of the Alchoran, he has no
reference to the Original, but to his own handwriting which he had Copied, and
extracted from that first, and infallible exemplar.

These also farther proceed to deny against the common Tenent of the
Mahometans, the incomparable and Matchless Eloquence of the Alchoran; asserting
that were it not prohibited, other Arabians might be found, who could far
transcend every line of it in Wisdom and Rhetoric; which in my opinion is a
strange kind of Impudence in the very face of their Prophet, who seems to be
too proud of the exact disposition, and full signification of every word, that
he judges it not less charming for the sweet sound of its Eloquence, then it is
convincing for the purity and truth of its Doctrine.

The great Antagonists to the Moatazali, are the Sephati, who Assign (...).
in God Eternal Attributes of Knowledge, Power, Life, etc. And some of them
proceed so far, and grosely herein, that they frame conceptions of corporeal
Organs of Sense, as of Hearing, Seeing, and Speech to be in God, affirming that
those expressions of Gods sitting in his Throne, Creation of the World by the
work of his Hands, his Anger against Sin, Repentance for man's Conversion, which
we call (...) are to be taken in the literal and plain sense, and have no need
of farther fetched interpretations to clear the true notion of them: But yet
herein their Doctors seem not to agree, some defining a body, to be the same
as, per se subsistens, denying it to be an assential propriety of a body to be
circumscribed and finite; others conclude that it is enough to say that God is
great, without argument of his circumscription, or determination to any
particular place, with many other strange conceits, whereby are made apparent
the roving Fancies of Ignorant Men, without the Rules or Grounds of Philosophy,
or Metaphysics. But the soberer sort amongst them, who would appear more
Moderate and Wiser than the rest, forbid their Scholars to make Comparison of
the Senses in God, with those of the Creature, who being more subtly urged by
their severe opponents. The Moatazali; they were forced to declare themselves
more plainly, in this manner, that the God which they Worshipped was a Figure,
Visible, and an Object of the Sight, consisting of (...) Spiritual and
Corporeal, to whom local Motion might be agreeable, but that his Flesh and
Blood, his Eyes and Ears, his Tongue and Hands were not of any similitude with
created substances, but were of another Crasis and Mixture which subjected them
to no Distemper or Corruption; in proof whereof, they allege the words of
Mahomet, that God created Man after his own Likeness: And all other of those
Examples drawn from the Holy Scriptures with which the Alchoran is filled, and
where in familiar expressions, the Divinity is pleased to condescend to the
infirmity of Humane Capacity.

The next Sect is that of the Kadari, who deny wholly the Divine (...)
Decree or Predestination, asfirming that every man is a free Agent, from whose
will as from the first principle all good and bad actions flow and are derived,
so that as with just reason God Crowns man's good works with the Rewards of
(...) and Felicity; so on the other side justly punishes his evil actions in
this world, and in the next to come; and this they style the Doctrine of
Equity, and define it to be a measure of man's actions, according to the
rectitude and disposition of that right line, which the prime Intellect has
drawn out by wisdoms proportion. This opinion is absolutely rejected as
heterodox in the Mohammedan Religion; and yet it is not fully determined how
Mahomet moderated in the dispute between Adam and Moses, whom (...) Arabian
Doctor (...) (...) Mr. Pococh Notae de (...) Arabum.
comically introduced, pleading and justifying themselves before God. Moses
beginning first, reproached Adam, that he was one immediately created by the
proper hand of God, in whom the Divine Nature (...) the breath of Life, whom
Angels were made to adore, placed and seated in Paradise, and fortifyed with
actual graces against the enormities and crooked irregularities of inferior
affections; from which happy state that he should fall and precipitate mankind,
together with himself his crime was aggravated with all the degrees of his
former perfection. Adam to excuse himself, replied in this manner. Thou Moses
whom God has called to a familiar parley, revealed his Will and Pleasure unto
in those engraven Tables, where all Morality and Virtue is contained, resolve
me this one Quaere and difficult Problem, how many years before I was created,
do thou find that the Law was wrote? Moses answered forty. And did you find,
replied Adam, that Adam rebelled against his Lord and sinned? to which Moses
answering in the (...), do you blame me then said he for executing that which
God forty years before predestined and designed me unto? and not only forty
years, but many Myriads of Ages before either the Heavens or Earth were framed.
Mahomet confounded, as the Kaduri report with this Argument, left the question
undetermined, though his followers, as men are most prone to error generally,
entertain the (...) Tenent.

The great enemies diametrically opposed to these are the (...) or (...).
Giahari; who maintain that a man has no power over his Will or Actions, but
is wholly moved by a Superior Agent, and that God has a power over his
creatures, to design them to Happiness or to Misery, as seems best to his
divine pleasure; but in the explication of this opinion they proceed in the
most rigorous manner, and say that man is wholly necessitated and compelled in
all his actions; that neither his will nor power, nor election is in himself;
and that God creates in him his actions, as he does in Inanimate and Vegetable
creatures the first principle of their Life and Essence; and as the Tree may be
said to produce Fruit, the Water to run, the Stone to move downwards, so are
the actions in man, for which yet there is a reward and a punishment properly
and necessarily allotted. This point is very subtly controverted by the Arabian
Doctors, to which how the Turks are addicted, we shall farther discourse in the
Chapter of Predestination.

The Sect of Morgi, are the great Favorers and Patrons of the Mohammedan (...).
Religion, maintaining that a Musselman or Believer though guilty of the
grossest sins, is not punished for them in this world, nor receives his
absolution or condemnation after death, until the day of Resurrection and
Judgment: and farther, that as impiety with the true belief shall never be
punished; so piety and good works proceeding from a false and erroneous faith,
is of no validity or power conducing to the fruition of the joys of Paradise.
And to these may not improperly be compared some Sectaries in England, who have
vented in their Pulpits that God sees no sin in his Children; and that the
infidelity of Sarah, being of the house of the faithful, is more acceptable to
God, then the Alms, Prayers and Repentance of an erroneous Believer without the
pale and Covenant of grace.

The opposite Sect to these are the Waidi, who esteem that a man (...).
fallen into any great or mortal sin, is put into the condition of a desertor
of his faith; and though he be a professor of the true Belief, shall yet
without recovery for ever be punished in Hell; but yet that his torments shall
be in a more remiss degree then that of Infidels: But that opinion which in
this point is esteemed Orthodox amongst the Turks, is this, That a sinner in a
high nature going out of this world without repentance, is wholly to be
committed to the pleasure of God, either to pardon him for his mercy, or for
the intercession of the Prophet (...), according to what he says in the
Alchoran, My intercession shall be (...).
for those of my own people who have greatly sinned; that being first punished
according to the measure of their iniquity, they may afterward in compassion
be received into Paradise; for it is impossible they should for ever remain in
the eternal flames with the Infidels; because it is revealed to us, that
whosoever has but the weight of an Atom remaning in his heart of faith, shall
in due time be released from fiery torments; for which cause some Sects amongst
the Turks use prayers for the dead, and place their Cemiteries always by the
side of high ways, that Passengers may be remembered of their own Mortality, and
pray for the souls of those departed; of which we shall have occasion to
discourse hereafter. The fictions the (...) frame of hell, are as ridiculous as
those they fancy of Paradise; For they imagine when they shall be called by
Mahomet from this Purgatory at the day of judgment, the way to him is over Iron
Bars red hot with Fire, over which they must pass with naked Feet; only the
Paper which they in their lifetime have taken from the ground and conserved
from being trampled on by the Feet of Men or Beasts, shall at that day be
strowed on the Bars of this hot passage, that they may pass that fire Ordeal
with less torment; which is the reason the Turks see no small piece of Paper on
the ground, but they immediately stoop for it, and place it in some secret
corner of a Wall, to redeem that (as they say) from the dishonor of men's feet,
on which the name of God is or may be wrote, and with expectation to enjoy the
benefit promised, when the soals of their feet shall try the intense heat of
this burning Iron. The same respect also they show to Rose-leaves, in
consideration (as they believe) that a Rose was produced from the sweat of
Mahomet.

The Shii are the Sect spoken of before, opposed by the Subjects of the whole
(...) Empire, as the most heretical of any of the rest, in regard they prefer
Ali before Mahomet in the prophetical Office, and restrain the prophetic gift
to the natural line derived from Ali, and that none is worthy of the Title of a
Prophet, who is guilty of sin, though of the lower nature; some of which
Professors called Alnosairi, (...).
affirm that God appeared in the form of Ali, and with his tongue proclaimed
the most hidden Mysteries of Religion; and some have proceeded yet farther, to
attribute to their Prophets divine honors, asserting them to be elevated above
degree and stare of the creatures: these expect the return of their Prophet Ali
in the Clouds, and have placed that belief as an Article of their Faith, from
whence may seem to be grounded that mistake amongst our vulgar, that the Turks
believe Mahomet shall again return into the world.

To the foregoing are opposed the Chawarigi, who deny that there (...).
is or has been such Function as that of a Prophet, allowed by God in any
particular person; nor any ever sent into the world endued with that power of
Infallibility, to resolve doubts, and teach and impose a new Law on Mankind;
but if at any time such an Office shouid be necessary, it can never be
restrained to one lineage; for the person being faithful and just, no matter
whether he be a Servant or free, a One of the vulgar or rude sort amongst the
(...).
Nabathean or a One of a noble family amongst the Arabians.
Koraschite.

These are ancient Sects amongst the professors of the Mohammedan Religion, out
of which are arose so many others as by the confession of the (...) Doctors
complete the number of seventy three. But because the accurate search into so
many is of little delight or profit to the Reader, I shall content my self with
having given him a taste of these foregoing, learning him to guess at the rest
in what manner the fancy of a man can frame deductions from the foregoing
premises. And shall now gives an account how busy these Modern times have been
at Constantinople in hammering out strange forms and chimera's of Religion, the
better to acquit England from the accusation of being the most subject to
religious innovations, the world attributing much thereof to the Air and
constitution of its Climate.

CHAP. XII. Concerning the New and Modern Sects amongst the Turks.
ALL Ages and times have produced their Sects and Heresies in every Religion;
and therefore we shall proceed in declaring some few that are of fresher date
then those in the foregoing Chapter, and so shall continue to descend to others
which this present Age has begot, That called Zeidi, is one of the latter
edition.
Zeidi maintains that God will send a Prophet of the Persians with a Law by
which shall be annulled the Law of Mahomet.

A second to this is derived from the Moatezeli, that denies any man can be
styled a Saint in this world, excepting the Prophets, who were Derived from the
Moatezeli.
without sin; and that the true Believers shall in the next world see God as
clearly as we see the Moon at full; against the Doctrine of Mahomet, who says
God is invisible either to us in this world, or the next.

There are also those called Malumigee, who maintain God is perfectly (...).
to be known in this world; and that by the Doctrine of Cognosce teipsum, the
creature proceeds to the perfect knowledge of his Creator.

The Opponents to these are Mezzachulia, who hold, that they Mezzachulia.
which know God only in this world by some glimmerings and rays of his glory
and essence, is sufficient to lead them into Paradise, and rank them in the
number of the faithful.

Another sort there are called Jabaiah, which denies Gods Omniscience, Jabaiah.
affirming, That God governs the world by chance and accidents, not
comprehending from Eternity or at the Creation of the world, a perfect
certainty of the particular affairs that were to be transacted in it, and that
God improves in knowledge by time, as men do by constant practice and
experience.

We shall not insist here to multiply many of these Sects, who have almost as
many diversitiesamongst the Turks, as there are Schools and Masters; every
Hogia that is but a form above a mere Pedagogue, and reads a few Books of the
Arabian Fables, esteems himself of mean account, if by some singular opinion
which he instills into his Disciples, he distinguishes not his Gymnasion from
the common and inferior Schools. But these men in framing their particular
fancies, and venting their follies have a special care that none of their
principies oppugn those five points of practice, and one of faith, mentioned
in the first Chapter of this Book, which are the essential points that
constitute a Mohammedan; or derogate from the Authority of their Governors, or
produce factions or disturbances in the State.

But these Modern times have produced other Sects amongst the Turks, some of
which seem in part dangerous, and apt to make a considerable rupture in their
long continued union; when time changes and revolutions of State shall animate
some turbulent spirits, to gather Soldiers and followers under these Doctrines
and other specious pretenses.

One of which is called Kadezadeli, a Sect sprung up in the time of (...).
Sultan Morat, whose chief propagator was one Birgali (...), who invented many
Ceremonies in praying for the souls departed, at the burial of the dead. Those
that are of this Sect cause their Imaum to cry loud in the ears of the
inanimate body, to remember that God is one, and his Prophet one. Those who are
principally devoted to this Sect, are the Russians and other sort of Renegado
Christians, who amongst their confused, and almost forgotten notions of the
Christian Religion, retain a certain Memory of the particulars of Purgatory,
and prayers for the dead.

But the opinion esteemed Orthodox, and most generally allowed amongst the
(...), is, That no Mohammedan goes eternally to Hell, but after a certain space
of years is delivered thence, and passes into Paradise; After death they
assign two sorts of punishments; the first is called Azabe-Kaberi, or the
punishment of the Grave, which being the bed of wicked men, binds with its
Earth so fast as crushes their bones, and shuts the pores and crevises through
which they should see into heaven; but the bodies of good men enjoy the comfort
of having a window from their dark enclosures, to behold the Vision of Gods
glory. The other is the pain of Hell, where the souls remain until their
torments are accomplished, and Divine Justice satisfied.

There is an opinion of late years principally maintained amongst the Gallants
of the Seraglio, and common in Constantinople, the professors of which are
called Chupmessahi, or the good followers of the (...).
Messiah; these maintain that Christ is God and Redeemer of the world; the
young Scholars in the Grand Signiors Court are generally devoted to this
Tenent, especially those which are the most courteous, (...) and best disposed,
that it is grown into a Proverb amongst them, when they would commend and
praise gentleness and courtesy of each others nature, they do it with the
expression of Chupmessahisen, as if they would say, You are gentle,
accomplished and excessive in your favors as becomes one who professes the
Messiah. Of this sort of people there are great numbers in Constantinople, some
of which have so boldly asserted this Doctrine, that they have suffered
Martyrdom under this denomination, which is still maintained, and secretly
professed by such multitudes as wear white Turbants, that upon some notable
opportunity were this cause and Religion made the ground of some Toleration and
Insurrection amongst its Disciples and professors, it might take an unexpected
footing, and prepare a ready way for the Plantation of the Gospel: but of this
we shall speak more hereafter in its due place.

And because it is our intent here to declare the several Religions amongst the
Turks, it will not be from our purpose to mention how far Atheism has spread
it self in these Countries; And as Logicians illucidate one contrary with
another, and Painters set off the Whiteness of their Colors with a foil of
Jet, or other Blackness; so the privation of all Religion is not unaptly placed
in the same Chapter with the various and different professors of it.

These then give themselves the Title of Muserin, which signifies, The (...)
true secret is with us; which secret, is no other then the absolute denial of
a Diety, that nature or the intrinsecal principal in every individual thing
directs the orderly course which we see and admire; and that the Heavens, Sun,
Moon and Stars have thence their Original and motion, and that man himself
rises and fades like the grass or flower; It is strange to consider, what
quantities there are of men that maintain this principle in Constantinople,
most of which are Kaddees and learned men in the Arabian Legends, and others
are Renegadoes from the Christian faith, who conscious of the sin of their
Apostasy, and therefore desirous that all things may conclude with this world,
are the more apt to entertain those opinions which come nearest to their
wishes. One of this Sect called Mahomet Effendi, a rich man, Educated in the
knowledge of the Eastern Learning, I remember, was in my time executed for
impudently proclaiming his blasphemies against the being of a Diety; making it
in his ordinary discourse, an argument against the being of a God, for that
either there was none at all, or else not so wise as the Doctors preached he
was, in suffering him to live who was the greatest enemy and scorner of a
Divine essence that ever came into the world. And it is observable, that this
man might notwithstanding his accusation have saved his life, would he but have
confessed his error, and promised for the future an assent to the principles
of a better: but he persisted still in his blasphemies, saying, That though
there were no reward, yet the love of truth obliged him to dye a Martyr. I must
confess until now, I never could believe that their was a formal Atheism in
the world, concluding that the principle (of the being of a God) was
demonstrable by the light of nature; but it is evident now how far some men
have extinguished this light and lamp in their souls.

This poisonous Doctrine is so Infectious, that it is crept into the Chambers
of the Seraglio, into the apartments of the Ladies and Eunuchs, and found
entertainment with the Pasha's and their whole Court; this sort of people are
great favorers and lovers of their own Sect, courteous and hospitable to each
other, and if any by chance receives a Guest within his Gates of their own
judgment, besides his Diet and Fare with much freedom, he is accommodated with
a handsome Bedfellow of which Sex he most delights: they are very frank and
liberal and excessive in their readiness to do each other service; It is said,
that Sultan Morat was a great favourer of this opinion in his Court and
Militia, desirous withal to propagate that of Kadizadeli amongst the vulgar,
that they being a severe, morose and covetous people, might grow rich, and
spare for the benefit of his Exchequer; for the Sect of Kadizadeli before
mentioned, is of a melancholy and Stoical temper, admitting of no Music,
cheerful or light discourses, but confine themselves to a set Gravity; in
public as well as private they make a continual mention of God, by a never
wearied repetition of these words, Ilahe ila Ellah; that is, I profess there is
one God: there are some of these that will sit whole nights bending their
bodies toward the Earth, reciting those words with a most doleful and
lamentable Note: they are exact and most punctual in the observation of the
rules of Religion, and generally addict themselves to the study of their Civil
Law, in which they use constant exercises in arguing, opposing and answering,
whereby to leave no point undiscovered or not discussed. In short, they are
highly Pharisaical in all their comportment, great admirers of themselves, and
scorners of others that conform not to their Tenets, scarce affording them a
salutation or common communication; they refuse to marry their Sons with those
of a different rite, but amongst themselves they observe a certain policy; they
admonish and correct the disorderly; and such who are not bettered by their
persuasions they reject and excommunicate from their Society. These are for the
most part Tradesmen, whose sedentary life affords opportunity and nutriment to
a Melancholy, and distempred fancy.

But those of this Sect who strangely mix Christianity and Mahometanism
together, are many of the Soldiers that live on the confines of Hungary and
Bosna; reading the Gospel in the Sclavonian tongue with which they are supplied
out of Moravia, and the neighboring City of Ragusa; besides which, they are
curious to learn the Mysteries of the Alchoran, and the Law of Arabic tongue;
and not to be accounted rude and illiterate they affect the Courtly Persian.
They drink wine in the month of Fast called the Ramazan, but to take of the
scandal they refuse Cinnamon or other Spices in it, and then call it Hardali,
and passes current for lawful liquor. They have a Charity and Affection for
Christians, and are ready to protect them from Injuries and Violences of the
Turks: They believe yet that Mahomet was the Holy Ghost promised by Christ; and
that the descending of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost was a Figure and
Type of Mahomet, interpreting in all places the word (...), to signify their
Prophet, in whose ear so often the White Dove revealed the Infallible
directions to happiness. The Potures of Bosna are all of this Sect, but pay
Taxes as Christians Potures a people of Bosna.
do; they abhor Images and the sign of the Cross; they circumcise, bringing the
Authority of Christ's example for it, which also the Copticks a Sect of the
Greek Church in Egypt imitated; but have now, as I am informed, lately disused
that custom.

Another subtle point about the Divine Attributes has begot a Sect amongst the
Jenizaries, called Bektaschi from one Becktash, which seems an improper subject
so deep in the Metaphysical speculation to trouble such gross heads as theirs;
they began (as it is said) in the time of Solomon the Magnificent, and are
called by some Zerari; that is, those who have Copulation with their own
kindred, and by the vulgar, Mumsconduren, or extinguishers of the Candle. This
Sect observe the Law of Mahomet in Divine Worship, with a strictness and
superstition above any of the Precisions of that Religion: but hold it unlawful
to adjoyn any attributes to God by saying, that God is great or God is
merciful, by reason that the nature of God being infinite and incomprehensible,
cannot fall under the weak and imperfect conceptions of man's understanding,
which can imagine nothing applicable to his nature. Of this Sect there was a
famous Poet amongst the Turks called Nemisi, that was flead alive, for saying,
when the Emaum called the people to prayers at the ordinary hours from the
Steeple with the usual word, Allah Ekber, God is one, that he lied upon the
supposition that no Epithet can be predicated of the Divine Essence. Amongst
the Jenizarites are at present many principal Commanders of this Sect; but
formerly were more in the time of Becktash Aga, Kul Kahya, Mahomet Aga, and
others, who for their Rebellion in Constantinople, (as we related before) were
put to death under the Historical Pillar in the time of this present Emperors
Minority. These people against the instinct of nature use Carnal Copulation
promiscuously with their own Kindred, the Fathers mixing with their Sons and
Daughters, without respect to proximity of blood or nearness in the degrees of
relation, suffering themselves to be transported contrary to the abhorrency of
Nature, by a weak and illogical comparison of the lawfulness and reason, that
he who engrafted the Tree, and planted the Vine should rather taste of the
Fruit, then resign the benefit of his labors to the enjoyment of others; and
in this Argument act against the inclination of innate modesty, according to
that of Seneca.

Ferae quoque ipsae Veneris evitant nesas, Generisque leges inscius servat
pudor.

These people are easily induced to give false witness or testimony in the
favor of their Sect, without consideration of Equity or reasonableness of
their cause; by which means invading the right of others they became rich and
powerful, until they were debased by the deprivation of Becktashes Authority
and Power of other potent favorers of their Sect: and though afterward upheld
by Sudgi Beker, a Standard Bearer of the Janissaries, a rich and learned man,
they received a second blow by his death, be executed by a Vizier Kupriuli
Mahomet, for his diversity in Religion and Wealth together; but farther
animosity against this Sect was dissembled at that time, by reason of the
multitude of those professors in Constantinople, and because reason of State
saw it at that time necessary to draw blood in many parts of the Empire for
other causes, then for Errors in Religion.

The Sect called Sabin, though Mahometans in profession seem yet to run
contrary to the stream and general consent of all its professors who give
themselves commonly the Title of Enemies and Confounders of Idolatry, and yet
these notwithstanding seem from the influence, the Sun and Moon have on
sublunary bodies, of all living sensative creatures do conclude a certain
Divinity in those common lights of the world. In Constantinople there are some
few Astrologers and Physicians of this Sect, but in Parthia and Media they are
numerous, the men commonly worshipping the Sun, and the women the Moon, and
others the Artick Pole; they are not strict in a severity of life, or in the
conformity to the prescriptions of their Law, but govern themselves with
mortality and prudence. They are not apt to believe the immortality of the
soul, nor the reward of Virtue, or punishment of Vice in the next world; nor
prone to vindicate themselves from injuries, reproachful language, or other
evil actions of men, but regarding them as the natural effects of the Celestial
influences, are no more provoked by them than we are with a shower of Rain for
wetting us, or the intense heat of the Sun in the Summer Solstice.

Munasihi is a Sect purely Pythagorical, which believes the Metampsychosis or
Transmigration of souls, of which there are some in Constantinople, one
Albertus Bobovius a (...) by Nation, but Educated in the the Seraglio, and
instructed in all the Learning of the Turkish Literature (from whom I freely
confess to have received many of my observations) related to me a pleasant
discourse that passed between him and a Dorgist at Constaneinople, touching
this subject. This Dorgist being Learned, was the occasion that Albertus
frequented his Shop the oftener; and once being after some familiar acquaintance
at a collation together, it chanced that a Black Dog giving them interruption
at their Banquet, that Albertus kicked him to drive him to a farther distance;
at which (...) Dorgist growing pale and disordered, Albertus guessed by his
countenance that he was displeased at his unkindness toward the Dog; and
therefore desired his pardon if thereby he had given him any subject os
offense: the Dorgist being thus pacifyed with the courtesy of his Guest,
advised him to ask pardon of God, for that it was no small crime and sin that
he thereby committed. This happening at the same time that the Funerals of a
Mufti called Behai Efend, were then solemnizing, afforded an occasion of
Discourse concerning the soul of the Mufti and Dog together; the Dorgist
demanding the opinion of his Guest, whether he conceived the soul of that Mufti
was predestined to remain within the confines of the Grave, until the day of
Resurrection? in the knowledge of which question Albertus seeming wholly
ignorant, and desirous to understand the solution from him; the Dorgist began
freely to declare that the souls of men deceased enter into the bodies of
Beasts, which are in temperament most agreeable to the dispositions of those
whom before they animated; as the soul of the glutton enters into the Swine,
the soul of the lascivious into the Goat, of the generous into the Horse, of
the vigilant into a Dog, and so the like; in proof of which he produced a Book
treating of all the distinctions of nature, and the proper assignments for
their habitation after death: adding moreover, that of this opinion it was
pity there was so few in Constantinople, some there were, and those all of his
own Trade and Profession, but that at Gran Cairo were great numbers, strict
adherers to this Doctrine; that for his part he prayed to God with the rest of
his Brothers of the same Trade, that their souls may hereafter be so honored
as to inform the body of the Camel; because they are Beasts that are laborious,
abstemious, patient and meek, and bring their Dorges from the remotest parts of
the East: and that he did not doubt but after the Circle of 3365. years, that
his soul had traveled for several Ages through the world, and wandered from the
body of one Camel to animate another; it should with the vicissitude of time
return again to a humane body, more purifyed and refined than in its first
principles. And this was the Credo of the Dorgist, to which opinion it is said
all China is greatly devoted.

Escbraki, which signifies illuminated, is a Sect purely Platonical,
contemplative of the Divine Idea, and the number in God; for though they hold
the Unity, yet they deny not the Trinity, as a number proceeding from the
Unity; which conception of their they usually illustrate by three folds in a
Handkerchief, which may have the denomination of three; but being extended, is
but one entire piece of Linen. These men are no great admirers of the
composition of the Alchoran; what they meet therein agreeable to their
principles, they embrace and produce as occasion serves in confirmation of
their Doctrine; other parts which with difficulty are reconciled they reject,
and style abrogated: and because they apprehend that the true beatitude In
Turkish (...).
and bless of Paradise consists in the contemplation of the Divine Majesty,
they contemn all the fancies and gross conceptions of Heaven, which (...) has
framed to allure and draw the minds of rude and gross men. Of this Sect are all
the Scheghs or able Preachers that belong to the Royals Moschs or Churches; who
are men constant in their devotions, abstemious in their Diet, of a cheerful
countenance, and taking behavior, great lovers of harmony and Music, and of
an indifferent strain in Poetry, whereby they compose certain Songs in Meeter,
for entertainment of their Auditory. They are likewise generous Called in Tur
kish Hahi and (...).
and compassionate of (...) frailty; and are not covetous, Stoical, or
conceited of themselves, by which means their behavior is rendered extremely
taking through all Constantinople; they are greatly delighted with an ingenious
Aspect in youth, and from thence gather matter of contemplation on the
comeliness of the increated beauty: they are addicted to entertain a charitable
(...) for their neighbor, because (as they say) he is the creature of God,
from whom our love is (...) to the Creator. Their Disciples they procure as
much as possible, to be men of comely and pleasing countenances and Majestic
presence, who they instruct in all the rules of abstinence, gravety, and other
virtues most appropriated to their (...). And these of all sorts of Turks seem
worthy of the best Character, whom I compassionate, for not being born within
the pale of a Christian Church, nor duly instructed in the Mystery of
Christianity, to which they seem by their morality and virtues already to have
prepared many previous dispositions.

A Sect much different to that immediately foregoing is the Haireti, signifying
amazed, and doubtful in determination of all controversies, who can endure any
thing rather than to controvert opinions, and dispute on question in chase of
truth: they will neither undertake to persuade or dissuade; but like the
Academicks asfirm that falsity may by the wit and contrivance of man be dressed
in a habit as not to be distinguished from truth it self; and on the contrary,
truth may be so disguised with Sophistry and delusions as to be rendered as
deformed and ugly, as falsehood, and therefore they conclude all questions to be
merely probable, and no ways admitting of certain demonstration; so that in
points of dubious controversies their common sayings are, Allah bilur, God
knows, bize karanuk, it is unknown to us, and such like expressions savouring
of negligence and a brutish want of (...) to search into the studies of Art and
Science. Of this Sect some notwithstanding are Preachers, and from that degree
are promoted to the office of Mufti, in which they behave themselves according
to their affected carelessness, with a readiness and facility to subscribe all
sentences to the satisfaction, and in favor of the demandant; adding for the
most part of these words. Well (...) ealem bissenab, God knows that which is
best. As to the manner of their life and practice, they are punctual observers
of the rites of the Mohammedan Religion and constitutions of their civil Law,
but much incline to yield to the course of their own (...), and the force of
passion; they drink Wine not to appear Cynical or unsociable, but more
generally addict themselves to Electuaries composed of (...), which (...) to
augment their natural stupefaction; and when they are overcome with the
obscurity of this vapor, whatsoever you affirm though never so contradictory,
they readily (...) to, not so much (as they confess) from a persuasion to one
proposition more then another, but of a pleasing compliance to their
companions, which humor the nature of their Sect allows of. And though they
style the Eschraki Dogmatical and obstinate opiniators; yet by experience it is
observed that the Mufties Educated in the Eschrakian Schools have been much
more fortunate then those of the Hairetian Sect; because the former having a
certain foundation of principles, have been cautious in signing (...), or
delivering their Sentence in the resolution of weighty Matters of State,
choosing rather to renounce their Office, then their reason. But the others
being negligent and incurious in their determinations, as if fortune did direct
them more to the true part then solidity of judgment; have been always free
and open in their Sentences; by which means events of State falling out
unhappily, and the miscarriage attributed to the council of the (...), they
have been oftener subject to the punishment of banishment or death, then (...)
other Opponents.

We shall not proceed to swell this Work with a longer Catalogue of these
Sects, least we should seem over (...) to the Reader, and instead of pleasing
his Palate, should over-charge his Stomach; otherwise we might proceed to
recite as many Sects as there are Towns or Schools in the Empire, in every one
of which some pragmatical Preacher or other have always started a new opinion,
which can never want Disciples. And certainly the diversity of opinions in
Turkey is almost infinite, and more numerous then in England, or other parts of
Christendom, though commonly not proceeding from the same malice, nor laid with
the same design to the prejudice of the State: the reason of this variety
amongst the Turks I attribute to the many Religions which voluntarily, and for
interest or by force have entered into the Mohammedan superstition, many of
which being Grecians, and instructed in the Arts and Sciences with which that
Empire once flourished, which was the Mine and Treasury of Philosophy and
Learning, did afterward mix with their new Religions (not being wholly
satisfied with the Alchoran) certain Traditions and Opinions of the ancient
Philosophers: And several other Nations, as Russians, Muscovites, Chircassians,
and the like, retaining some few remembrances of their first Notions and
Principles, make a farther addition to this ill compounded medley, which also
receiving some difference and variety as they increased and were propagated,
have multiplied to a number both unprofitable and tedious to search farther
into.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Dervises.
IT is commonly known and received, that the Turkish Religion is an absurd
composition of the Christian and Jewish Rites; in imitation of the former of
which doubtless their Monasteries and Orders of religious men were introduced;
most of which incline to a pretended mortification and strictness of life; to
poverty, and renuntiation of the worlds enjoyments, according to the devotion
of Christians a thousand years past, whose piety and exemplary lives drew
Infidels to extract a rough Copy of their elevated virtues.

I have been the more curious in making an exact enquiry into the Customs,
Institutions and Doctrines of the Mohammedan Convents, because I find relations
hereof sparingly scattered in other Books, and that obscurely without
punctuality or certainty: But I shall promise my Reader to deliver nothing
herein, but what I have good Authority for, and taken from the mouth of the
most Learned of their Seighs or Preachers which are the Heads or Superiors of
these Societies.

The Doctors of the Mohammedan Law inform me, that their Religious houses and
Institutions, are as ancient as Mahomet, from whom general orders and
instructions were derived for their economy, first to his Disciple Hali; but
our Turkish History and other Records make no mention of these Monasteries,
till within these three hundred and fifty years, in the time of Orchanes second
King of the Turks, who is famed to have been the first founder of Houses of
these Orders.

Those of the Mohammedan Faith, who first framed rules and (...) for these
Religions, were two, viz. Chalvettee and (...), which after Mahomet are
esteemed the two Fountains from whence other Orders are proceeded, which are
these following; from Chalvettee are derived

The first Founders and Masters of these Orders.
Nimetulahi from Nimetula Kadri from Kadri Kalenderi from Calendar Edhemi from
Edhem Hizrevi from Hizr Bektassee from Bektass.
From Nacksbendee proceed only two, viz.

Their Original Founders.
Ebrbuharee from Ebrbuhar Mevelevee from Mevelava.
These several Orders we shall distinctly touch upon, beginning with the
Mevelevee, which though set down here last, yet because for fame amongst the
Turks, they are the first, we (...) most largely and particularly treat of them.

The Mevelevee, otherwise and most commonly named Dervise, which word signifies
Poor and renouncers of the world, have their chief and Superior foundation in
Iconium, which consists of at the least Their Superior.
four hundred Dervises, and governs all the other Convents of that Order within
the Turkish Empire, by virtue of a Charter given them by Ottoman first of the
Mohammedan Kings, who out of devotion to their Religion once placed their Prior
or Superior in his Royal Throne, because having been his Tutor, and he who
girted on his Sword (which is the principal Ceremony of Coronation) he granted
him and his successors ample Authority and Rule over all others of the same
Profession.

They pretend to great Patience, Humility, Modesty, Charity and Their Postures.
Silence in presence of their Superior or others; their eyes are always fixed
downwards, their heads hanging toward their breast, and their bodies bending
forwards.

Their shirts are of the coursest Linen can be made, with a White Their
Clothing.
Plad or Mantle about their shoulders: but most wear a loose kind of Garment
made of Wool at (...) or in Anatolia, of a dark color; their Caps or what they
wear on their heads, is like the Crown of a Hat of the largest size, made of
course Camels hair of a whitish color; their Legs are always bare, and their
Breasts open, which some of them burn or sear in token of greater devotion:
they wear also a Leathern girdle with some shining stone upon the Buckle
before, either of Marble or Alablaster, Porphyry, Ivory, or some thing that
makes a great show or luster.

The Prior over a Convent of Dervises


The Habit of Dervises


Besides their Fast of Ramazan, they keep a weekly Fast on every Their Fasts.
Thursday, on which day, none unless for some indisposition of health or other
lawful cause, has license to eat, until after Sunsetting.

Every Tuesday and Friday the Superior of the Convent makes a Sermon or
exposition of some Verses in the Alchoran, or out of the Books wrote by their
Founder, or some other prime Doctor of the Mohammedan Law; after which is done,
the Dervises with mavelous modesty Their turning round.
and reverence bowing to their Superior, begin to turn round, some of them
with that swift motion, that their faces can scarce be seen; a certain Pipe
made of a Cane, sounding all the time of this motion; and on a sudden when the
Music ceases, they all stop with that exactness and firmness, showing no
symptoms of a disordered or swimmimg brain; to which having accustomed
themselves from their infancy or youth, in some years that motion becomes as
natural, with as little disturbance to their Head or Stomach, as to walk
forward, or to use any other exercise which nature is delighted with. This
custom (they say) they observe with great devotion in imitation of their first
Founder Mevelana, who for fourteen days together, and without taking any
nourishment, used this Vertiginous motion by a miraculous assistance (his
Friend Hamze, or Companion, all that time sounding by him with his Flute or
Pipe) until at last falling into an ecstasy, he received strange (...), and
divine commands for the institution of this his Order: the Pipe they play on,
they esteem for an ancient and sanctified sort of Music, and to be that with
which (...) and the other holy Shepherds in the Old Testament praised God.

It has a doleful melancholy sound; but their constant exercise and
application thereunto makes it as Musical as can be imagined in such an
Instrument: the best of those Canes are esteemed to come from (...), and are of
twenty five (...) price. But this sort of devotion with instrumental Music, is
by Turks themselves disputed against, denying that their Founder, who was so
spiritual a man, did ever institute, or himself use Music in his turning
round; because the Alchoran expressly forbids all devotion and service of God
with Music, but only with the natural and living voice; And that is the
reason, why in calling their people to prayers they use no Bells, but only the
voice of a man; and for this cause I remember, that in my time prohibitions
have been made by public Authority against this practice of the Dervises. But
they on the contrary, alleging David's example, and his Dancing before the Ark
as Arguments for their Music and Giration, have by the help of several persons
in power, many of them being greatly affected with their devotion, maintained
from time to time this custom and institution of the first Founder of this
Order, notwithstanding that one Vanni (...) a great (...) or Preacher, esteemed
as a knowing Person by the Grand Signior and all the Court, has by his
Authority endeavored to Reform this Corruption (as he calls it) amongst them.

They profess Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, like Capuchin Friars Their
(...).
or other Orders of St. Francis; but if any have not the gift of continence; he
may obtain License to leave his Convent and marry; but of these, they observe
that none ever thrived or lived happily with contentment, that renounced this
Dedication to Gods Service.

The (...) serve in the most servile Offices, and in time others supply Their
Employment.
their places; they lie as companions two together in a Cell, some of which
employ their time in Learning to Read and Write in Turkish, Arabic and
Persian; but most yield to their slothful temperament to which they are
naturally addicted: but because the nature of man is restless, and must employ
it self either in good or bad actions; most of these associates exercise some
kind of Legerdemain, or tricks to amuse the minds of the common people; and
some really apply themselves to (...) and Conjurations by help of familiar
spirits. Busbequius tells strange Stories of one with whom he was acquainted,
that he would strike a stone of great weight and bigness against his bare
Breast with that force and violence as were sufficient to (...) down an Ox, or
break the bones of the (...) Giant; and that the same man he has seen take an
Iron Bar red hot from the fire and hole it in his mouth, and though the spittle
and moisture of his mouth (...) with the heat, yet he seemed to take it thence
again without the least (...) or burning imaginable.

This sort of people of all other (...), addict themselves to drink Wine,
Strong Water, and other intoxicating Liquors; and eat Opium in that quantity,
by degrees using their bodies thereunto, that no (...) or Mithridates himself
who was nourished with poison, are capable to digest half that proportion that
these men will do; the effect of which is at first, like men drunk or mad, to
raise their spirits to a sort of distracted Mirth, and afterward when the
subtle vapors are consumed and spent, and a dull stupefaction overcomes them,
they name it an ecstasy, which they account very holy and divine in imitation
of their first Founder, who was often observed to put himself into this
condition; and therefore what helps may be found to excite Mirth or
distraction, is lawful and allowable in this Order.

There is a famous Monastery of these in Egypt, invocating for their Saint one
Kederlee, which by the Stories they tell of him should be St. George, in
conformity with whom all other Dervises maintain a Reverend (...) of this
Saint, affirming that in his life he was a valiant Horseman, killed Dragons and
all sorts of venomous Beasts; and now being departed this life, God for
preservation of good men has given him power to deliver such as being in
distress, invoaks his assistance; especially those who are at Sea, and at the
point of shipwreck; and that he with an extraordinary swiftness of motion flies
from one part of the world to another in the twinkling of an eye, and
seasonably comes in to their succor. These by virtue of that blessing Kederlee
confers upon them, pretend to charm Serpents and Adders, and (...) them as
familiarly as we do the most innocent and domestic creatures; which art, as I
have heard from good Authority, is not peculiar in Egypt only to Dervises, but
to other men who are said to be naturally endued with a virtue against the
poisonous bites of Vipers and other venomous Beasts; who putting great numbers
of them into a bag together, do (...) and sort them out with their hands, as
one would do Worms or Muscles; and others with a word charm Serpents from
moving as they crawl along the Banks of (...), which gifts these men pretend to
inherit from their Parents, and others to (...) in reward of their virtues and
sanctity. This sort of Egyptian Dervises have Sainted the Horse of St. George,
and have seated him in Paradise with (...) other three beasts in high respect
and esteem amongst the Turks, viz. the Ass on which Christ road, the Camel of
Mahomet, and the Dog of the seven Sleepers.

A Sort of Dervise that Travailes the World


These Dervises have Monasteries in the most famous places of the Turkish
Empire, which serve the traveling Pilgrims of this Order for Inns and places
of entertainment: for they above all other Religious Turks, journey and travel
from one place to another, where the (...) Religion is professed, under
pretense of preaching and propagating their Faith; and thus they travel upon
Charity of their Monasteries and Alms of others into Persia, China, and the
Dominions of the Mogul, by which means they become the best spies and
intelligencers of any that are found in the Eastern parts of the world.

I remember at Adrianople to have seen the Ruin of one of these Monasteries
situated on a pleasant hill, and in good Air, that oversees the whole City and
Plains round about; which upon enquiry I understand was demolished by the
famous Vizier Kuperli; because it was discovered to be a Rendezvous of the lewd
Women of the Town, and a Stew where the young Gallants debauched the Wives of
the richest Turks, to whom their Husbands had given liberty in honor to the
Sanctity of the place, to be often present at the devotion of the Dervises; but
their way of practice being too public and scandalous, the Foundation of their
house by the order of the Vizier was razed to the ground.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Order of Religious Turks called Ebrbuharee.
THis Order of Ebrbuharee was first instituted by their founder and institutor
Ebrbuhar from whom they have their denomination, who herein followed the
Precepts and Rules of his Master Nacsbende, from whom in like manner the Order
of Meveleve or (...) are derived: for the better understanding this sort of
people, the Reader may take this following, as an authentic discourse relating
to their manners and original, which I shall deliver Verbatim as given me in
writing by one esteemed Learned amongst the Turks, and was a Hadgi or Pilgrim,
and made it his business to inform me of this Sect. Sultan Bajazet, said he, in
the year of Mahomet nine hundred and eleven, erected a Mosch and Convent in
Constantinople, dedicated to this Holy Emir Ebrbuhar (that is of the race of
Mahomet) upon whom rest the mercy of the Creator. This man both extrinsecally
as to appearance in the world, and intrinsecally as to his devout soul, was
famous and renowned for the Miracles he worked; on which Fabric Sultan Selim
afterward bestowed a fountain of water.

This Ebrbuhar Scholar of Nacsbende, taking into his Company the assistance of
Abdullah and Ilahi and (...), Preachers and Heads of other Ilahi.
Convents, came out of Asia to propagate their Doctrine in Europe.

Their actions were governed with Meekness, Gravity and Silence, and laying
aside all Superstitious Worships, they exercise themselves in pious actions;
their discourses amongst themselves were nothing in relation to the things of
the world, but of Matters relating to a future life.

These (...) religious fast for the most part on (...) and Thursdays; And both
they and those devoted to their order abstain from all Meats that carry with
them any fetulent or ungrateful smells, and in this manner these devout people
exercised in abstinence and a moral life, and swallowed up or transported with
the illumination of God, and attending to their daily prayers Commemoration of
Gods mercy, and other offices of devotion acquire a holy disposition and
preparation for Celestial glory.

As to the Holy Emir Ebrbuhar, whose Mysterious life may God sanctify to us;
was nourished with Bread made of Barley, Oil of Olives, Honey and Grapes, and
abstained from all things of a strong scent or savor, he eat but three times a
year, giving himself continually to Fasting and Prayer; he was a man of great
Sanctity, full of Divine Revelation, his attractive virtue was grateful to all,
to his Feet from diverse Countries were many diseased persons brought, which
afterward returned sound and healthful to their own homes; all which is the
relation of my Doctor and great admirer of the Mohammedan Religion.

In commendation of the religious of this Order, are these Verses in the
Persian tongue.

Gher hakiki iahi der gehan bulendi Nakschibendi Kiun Nakschibendi; That is,

If thou would find in the world one accomplished as a true Hero, make thy
self a Nakschibendi, who is the true pattern of a Servant of God.

And notwithstanding this great pretended purity and sanctity of these men,
they are yet by the generality esteemed Heretics in the Mohammedan
superstition, because they judge themselves not obliged to the Pilgrimage of
(...), by reason of their pretended purity of soul and (...) Raptures, which
elevate them above the world, and enable them in their very Cells to be
present, or have a clear Prospect into their Holy Mecha.

CHAP. XV. Of the Nimetulahi.
ONe sort of those who are accounted in the number of Chalvetti is the
Nimetalahi; they had their beginning in the Hegira or year of (...) 777, and
their denomination from one of that name, famous for his Doctrine and severity
of life in the time of Sultan Mahomet, Son of Bajazet, called by the (...)
Ilderim, or the Son of Thunder; He was an excellent Physician, and renowned for
his virtues amongst the vulgar; for better knowledge of his Life and Doctrine,
the Reader may take notice what one of this Order related to me in admiration
of his Master.

He was one, said he, who preached and published the truth, mortifyed his body,
followed not the affections of the carnal Appetite, knew the intrinsic nature
and Quiddity of all creatures, rendered continual Prayers and Praises to his
Creator; and so long resigned himself entirely to speculation, until he
arrived to the Ravishment of Ecstasies and Raptures, in which he oftentimes
obtained the happiness to discourse with God.

He (...) of all those things which God made lawful for humane nourishment,
without observation of Fasts or strictness in Diet, but day and night continued
in his prayers and devotions: whilst he slept he extended not his feet like the
beasts of sense, who eat Corn and Hay in the Stables; sometimes the fear of God
made him tremble, and his countenance became melancholy and affrighted with the
apprehension of his Majesty. And to this perfection none ever arrived, nor to
that intimate knowledge of the divine Secrets.

The professors of this Order assemble every Monday night to praise the Unity
of the Divine Nature, and Celebrate the name of God with Hymns and Songs.

Those that would initiate themselves into this Order, are obliged to make a
Quarentene first, or (...) sequestered in a Chamber for the space of forty
days, with twenty four drams of Meat a day, during which time they see the
face of God, the sublime Paradise, and praise the Creator and Framer of the
universe; at the expiration of their term, they are taken forth by the rest of
the Fraternity, who taking hands Dance in a Morris; in which Vagary, if any
Vision appear to the Novices from God, they throw their Clothes behind them,
and fall flat with their (...) on the ground, like men astonished or struck
with an Apoplexy, until such time as the Prior or chief of their Order coming
and making prayers for them, they return by degrees to their sense again, and
taking them up with their eyes red and distorted, they remain a while like men
drunk, distracted or stupid; but afterward their (...) spirits being better
collected, the Prior demands in secret their Visions and Revelations, which
they communicate to him, or some other serious and grave person well instructed
in the Mysteries of their profession.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Kadri
THis is another of those six Religions which are derived from (...), which had
one Abdul Kadri Ghilani for its first Founder, a man greatly admired for his
wisdom and abstinence, whose Sepulcher is found without Babylon, to which place
many of those who enter into the Regular Orders of these Convents make their
Pilgrimages.

Those who enter into this Religion, must perform their Novitiate with degrees
of abstinence and fasting; wherefore when first they take the (...) upon them,
there is bestowed upon them a small Cudgel made of the Wood of a Willow,
weighing when fresh and green four hundred drams, which they are always to
carry about them hung at their Girdle; by the weight of this they take their
daily allowance of bread, until such time as the Wood becoming exceeding dry,
is also much the lighter, and so according as the weight thereof lightens,
their proportion of Bread diminishes.

Besides their prayers of five times a day, to which all Mahometans are bound,
they are obliged to spend the whole or best part of the night with turning
round at the sound of a little Pipe, and to utter this word, Hai, Hai, which
signifies Alive, being one of the Attributes of God: and this they do in
imitation of the Custom used by their Founder, who is said to have pronounced
this word Hai, so often, and with that vehemence, that the vein of his breast
bursting, the blood gushed out upon the Wall, and made the word Hai. Wherefore
all his Disciples to follow the example of their Master, taking hands together
in a ring, repeat this word, Hai, Hai, with so much violence, and so often,
until they fall on the ground without breath or life; those who last out
longest (...) (...) the dead from the Chamber, and lay them to recover their
spirits after their strained exercise; and this they do every Friday night.
Every one of these are obliged once in the year to a retirement of forty days,
in a little Cell free from all company or conversation, during which time they
are wholly to give themselves to meditations, and to observe (...) dreams, and
so recount them to their Superior, who studies the interpretation of them, and
from them Divines of future things.

They have many times license from their Superior, to be drunk or intoxicate
themselves with Aqua vitae, Opium, or any stupisying Drugs, to be better able
to perform with more spirit and vehemence their mad Dance.

These fellows are of a refined wit, notable Sophisters and Hypocrites; their
secrets they reveal to none but those of their own profession, by which means
they are subtle to cheat those of other Religions.

They are not debarred from the liberty of Marriage, but if they do marry they
are excluded from the Convent, and may wear any sort of habit, yet for
distinction sake they wear Black Buttons; those that live in the Convent, carry
a certain white Plad of a course Cloth, their Heads with hair unshaven, without
Caps or other covering, and (...) feet bare. These are called Kadri, and have a
convent at (...) in Constantinople.

The Founder of this Order, called, as we have said before, Abdul Kadir Ghilan,
was born in the Hegira or year of (...) five hundred sixty one, and dyed in the
year six hundred fifty seven; he was esteemed both a Lawyer and a Philosopher;
his Master or Instructor was Abdul Mumin (...), who composed two Books, one
called Mugrib or the Arabian Grammar, and another called Andalus. At that time
that Helakin Son of Genghiz Han came to Babylon, he caused him to kill one
Alkami then Vice-King of that City, for being of the Persian Sect, called by
the Turks Rafizi or Heretics, because they reject Abubecher, Omar and Osman,
as Apochryphal Writers, and attribute not to them that honor of Holy men,
which is given by the Turks.

The Prior or chief of the Convent of this Order, teach their Disciples a
certain prayer, which they whisper in their ears that it may not be overheard
or known by others; this they are obliged to repeat every moment with little
intermission, unless at times set apart for the offices of nature; and boast
that it has so much of efficacy in it, that by the virtue thereof, they obtain
the enjoyment of divine visions and revelations.

Their posture is, like other religious Mahometans, to sit with their heads
hanging down, and their Noses in their Breasts, which they call (...); the
better to keep them from distraction or wandering thoughts, during their
contemplations of heaven, and the vanity of satisfying the carnal appetite.

Amongst the many Miracles that the followers of this Order recount of their
Master, one is this, That coming once to Babylon to inhabit amongst the other
superstitious persons and Santones of that City, they hearing of his approach
went forth to meet him, one of them carrying in his hand a dish filled with
water; from whence they would infer, that as that dish was full to the brim so
as to be capable of containing no more, so their City was so replenished with
Learned and Religious persons, that there was no place to receive him:
Whereupon this subtle Sophister studying to confute this Hieroglyphick, whereby
they would excuse the courtesy of due Hospitality, stretching his arms first
toward Heaven, and then bowed down and gathered a Rose leaf which he laid on
the water, which before had filled the dish: by which piece of ingenuity, he
not only confuted the parable of the Churlish Babylonians, but also so took
with them, that they registered it as a Miracle of wisdom, and bringing him into
their City with triumph, made him the Superior of all their Orders.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Order of Kalenderi.
a Santone or Holy man


THis Order may rather be termed the Sect of Epicureans, then men retired to
mortify their appetites, and deny the world, as all other of the religious and
regulated Turks pretend; but yet this sort of Fanatics pretend to Religion by
a different way of Libertinism and looseness in their conversation; which they
act so publicly, that they are not ashamed to profess their institution and
customs to be after this manner

In the time that (...) (...) Son of Melkaziz Ohoma the Son of (...), being
ready to resign up his last breath, bequeathed to his Son Mahomet Melik Kiamel,
the Government of Cairo, and all the other parts of the Kingdom of Egypt: (...)
and Jerusalem to his Son Isa (...) Muazin and Diarbekir, to his third Son
Eschrefmusa; There lived a certain Santone, who always mentioned the name of
God with the sound of his Pipe, and with that Music recreated himself day and
night, not after a cheerful and merry humor, but with sad and melancholy
Tunes, accompanied his Pipe with Tears and Sighs. He was an excellent Musician,
and a deep Philosopher, endued with those supernatural virtues as enabled him
to work Miracles clear, and notorious to all the world; he was a Hermit,
called in Arabic Abdal; went with his head bare, and his body full of wounds,
without Shirt or other Clothing, besides a Skin of some wild Beast thrown about
his Shoulders, at his Girdle he wore some finely polished stone; his wrists,
instead of Diamonds or Stones of value, he wore counterfeit Jewels, which
carried a luster and fair appearance with them; this man was called (...)
(...), who was continually singing Arabic Sonnets, and according to them
Musical Airs, making also harmonious compositions so artificially, that he
seemed another David. But how strict and sober soever this Santone was, his
Disciples or Proselytes are of another temper, being wholly given up to Jollity
and delights, they banish all kind of melancholy and sadness, and live free of
cares, passions or torments of the mind, and have this saying amongst them,
This day is ours, to morrow is his, who shall live to enjoy it; and therefore
studiously attend to lose no moment or least part of their pleasure, but
consume their time in eating and drinking; and to maintain this gluttony they
will sell the Stones of their Girdles, their Earrings and Bracelets. When they
come to the house of any rich man or person of Quality, they accomodate
themselves to their humor, giving all the Family pleasant words and cheerful
expressions to persuade them to a liberal and free entertainment. The Tavern by
them is accounted holy as the Mosch, and believe they serve God as much with
debauchery or liberal use of his creatures (as they call it) as others with
severity and mortification. And the Turks say, That in the Hegira 615, the
Christians become Masters of Jerusalem, by reason that the Institutor of this
Order of the Kalenderi, who had a chief hand in the Government of the City, was
found drunk when it was assaulted.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Edhemi.
A Religious man of the order of Edhemi


THe original Founder of this Order was one Ibrahim Edhem, concerning whom the
Disciples themselves, or Followers recount things very obscurely, and tell us
Stories that his Father was a Slave and (...) by Nation, and went one day under
the Fort Horanan to discourse with Ibnimelik King of Cairo, that he was a man
very comely, facetious and sober in his carriage, always desiring to please
God, continued in the Moschs reading the Alchoran, and in prayer day and night
with his face prostrate on the ground, and often repeating these words;

O God, thou have given me so much wisdom, as that I know clearly that I am in
thy direction; and therefore scorning all power and dominion, I resign my self
to the speculation of Philosophy and a holy life.

His Servants seeing this his devout way of living, applied themselves to the
imitation of his Austerity, and abandoning all greatness and vanities of the
world, applied themselves to solitude and mortification; their superfluous
garments they bestowed on the Poor, giving to those whose necessities required
them.

Their food is Bread made of (...), and Pray frequently with Fasting, and their
Priors apply themselves much to a faculty in Preaching.

Their principal Covents are in Cities of Persia, especially Chorasan.

Their Clothing is of a course thick Cloth, upon their heads they wear a Cap
of Wool, with a Turbant round it, and about their necks a white Linen Cloth
striped with red. In the Deserts they converse with Lions and Tigers, salute
them and make them tame, and by the miraculous power of divine assistance
entertain discourse with (...) in the Wilderness; This and many other wild
discourses they make of this Edhem, but because their are but few of this Order
in Constantinople, being most appropriated to Persia; I could not receive so
particular an occount of their Rule and Institutions, as I have done of others.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Order of Bectasse.
THe original Founder of this Religion, is of no ancient Memory or standing,
nor had his Birth or Education amongst the Santones of Arabia, from whence most
of these superstitious pretenders have had their beginning; but one of those
that was an Army-Preacher, that could fight as well as pray, of whom my learned
Hogia gives me this account.

In the time ( says he) that the Warlike and Victorious Sultan Amurath passed
with his Army into Servia, and overcame Lazarus, the Despot of that Country,
and slew him in Battle, Becktash was then preacher to Amurath; who amongst
other of his admonitions forewarned him of trusting the Servians; but Amurath
out of his courageous spirit replying on his own wisdom Vid. Chap. 20. (...). 1.
and force admitted a certain Nobleman called Vilvo, upon pretense of doing him
homage to approach near him and kiss his hand, who having his (...) ready and
concealed, stabbed Amurath to the heart, and with that blow made him a Martyr.
Bectash knowing that this treacherous death of his Prince, must needs also be
the cause of (...), for being so near his Person, and prophesying of this fatal
stroke, sought not to prevent it, but made preparations for his own death. And
in order thereunto provided himself with a (...) Robe with long Sleeves, which
he proffered to all those which were his admirers, and Proselytes, to be kissed
as a mark of their obedience to him and to his institutions; from this action
the custom has been introduced of kissing the sleeve of the Grand Signior.

The Religious of this Order wear on their heads white Caps of several pieces
with Turbants of Wool, twisted in the fashion of a Rope, they observe
constantly the hours of prayer, which they perform in their own Assemblies;
they go Clothed in White, and praise the Unity of God, crying, Hu (which is,
may be live) and by these means obtain the Grace of God.

This Santone has many millions of Disciples and Followers; now all the
Janissaries of the Ottoman Port are professors of the same Religion. This
Bactash at his death cut off one of his sleeves, and put it upon the head of
one of his religious men, part of which hung down on his shoulders, saying,
after this, you shall be Janizares, which signisies a new Militia; and from
that time began their original institution, so this is the reason why the
Janissaries wear Caps falling behind after the manner of sleeves called Ketche.
This Hagi Bectash was a person exceedingly attractive in his conversation, holy
to admiration, a man of great worth, and Majestic in his comportment, he was
(...) in the City Kyr, where they have many Convents and Religious followers,
who always praise (...) adore God, and thus far my Hogia informs me.

But whatsoever he says, this Order is the most abhorred in the world by the
Kadizadeli, because that Bectash left it to the free will of his Disciples,
either to observe the constant hours of prayer or not; by which great liberty
and licentiousness is entered amongst the Janizartes, who are Souldier-like,
not over zealous or devoute in their prayers, little attendance to the offices
of devotion. In some Songs which this Bectash is said to have composed; it is
often repeated, that none has known God, because none has seen him: And for
this reason the most zealous Mahometans call the Janissaries Keferesis, which
signifies without faith; and a certain Mufti called Ebusuud delivered his
sentence or Fetfa, to the question demanded him; if a Mussulman or believer
should say to a (...), thou art a Pagan, what punishment he should merit by the
Law? he replied, that a man is an Infidel, who holds a (...) for a true
believer.

Some Friars of this Order of Bectash do in all public shows and solemnities
march near the person of the Janizar Aga, crying continually. Hu, Hu, with
their Daggers drawn. They are a most licentious sort of people, much given to
Sodomy, for which the ignorant and loose sort of Janissaries are willingly their
Disciples; and are now grown into that vast multitude, as is almost impossible
to exterpate them or their vices; though corrosives are laid to eat away this
Gangreen in the Militia, which goes creeping on with an unsensible pace; as we
shall discourse more largely in the next Book of the Turkish Militia.

CHAP. XX. Of the Order of Herewi or Hizrevi.
IN the time of Orchanes the second King of the Turks, who Governed thirty five
years and Reigned eighty three, and dyed in the Hegira of Mahomet seven hundred
and sixteen, there lived in Prusa, then the Regal Seat, a famous Santone called
Herewi, who used to walk up and down, and as an act of charity to buy the
Livers and Lights of Beasts to feed Cats and Dogs; he professed poverty and
severe mortification with Tears and Sighs, which he acted with that fervency
that the Angels leaving heaven, came to be witness of his holy penance. The
fame of which moved Sultan Orchanes to discourse with him, and to know the
story of his past life; which he smiling began to recount, and told him, that
he formerly was a King derived from the Line of Mahomet, had compassed with his
arms the Rivers of Nilus, Euphrates and Tigris, had governed Provinces with his
Sword and Scepter, had been gloriously and triumphantly adorned with precious
Stones and glittering Arms, and had made the world tremble at the very mention
of his name. But at last considering the vanity of this world, he resolved on a
solitary life, and to renounce all the follies and small satisfactions of
riches and empty honors. At which saying, Sultan Orchanas was amazed, and
said, We ought not to despise those who under the guise and appearance of mad
and distracted persons wander through the world; for their virtues are rare;
and in this man particularly I discover so much of sanctity that I judge my
self unworthy the name of one of his Servants. And this is the reason, why
Fools and Frantic people have ever since been had in Honor and Reverence
amongst the Turks, as those whom Revelations and Enthusiasms transported out of
the ordinary temperament of humanity.

This Herewi was very Learned and Experienced in Chemistry; and to those who
professed his Order and entered into the regular life of his Religion, instead
of Aspers he bestowed Gold; he wore a Green Vest; and lived very abstemiously;
he mended his own Clothes, and dressed the Diet for his Convent. He endowed
many Moschs and several Hospitals of Charity at Grand Cairo and Babylon. His
Sepulcher is at Prusa, which is greatly visited by Pilgrims, and adorned by the
Bounty and Munificence of those who reverence the Memory of this holy Santone.

This is the best relation I could procure from one of the Sheighs or
Preachers, and one that was Prior of this Order, whose example, as the original
Copy, others of this Order imitate. They have a Monastery in Constantinople, as
all the others before mentioned, besides which in this Capital City, nor in any
parts of the Turkish Dominions in Europe, have I observed any Teke or
Monastery, where Turks profess to lead a Religious life, but is one of the
Orders before mentioned; some others there may be about Babylon and Egypt, and
remotest parts of Asia, whose names and constitutions I have not repeated here,
who have (as I am informed) somewhat more of ridiculous and superstitious
Worship amongst them then I have declared in the account I have given of those
I have been acquainted with in the parts I have traveled; yet it is observable
they all of them pretend to poverty, as the nearest way to arrive the happiness
of Paradise; but with their poverty (as I have seen in some of their Tekes
where I have been, especially those removed from Cities) they mix so much
negligence in their living, not caring for neatness in their Houses, but leave
all things in a disorderly and confused manner, as testifies their laziness as
well as poverty; And are not like the Cells of Capuchins, who having nothing to
attend to besides their Prayers and Gardens, improve all things with that
advantage, as graces Poverty, and convinces the World that in a moderate
enjoyment of it there is more satisfaction, then in those vexations which
attend the disposal and government of heaps of riches, and the satiety of
opulency and plenty. It is worth nothing also; that on the Monuments of
Santones and in the Gardens, or before the Gates of these Religious, there is
always some ridiculous adornment such as agrees with the fancy of Bedlams; as
Crowning the Hearse of the dead with Beads, and Horns, and Ribbonds, and pieces
of Tinsel, etc. and their doors with the like; accounting it a chief
disposition to Divine Service to have a mind endued with an humor inclining to
the fancy of Hypocondriacal or distracted heads, so that I shall not enlarge
farther in this Discourse, nor to glut my Reader with so Insipid and Fulsome a
subject.

CHAP. XXI. Of Marriages and Divorces, and how far Concubinage is indulged
amongst the Turks.
The Habit of the Women in Constantinopler


THe state of Marriage is accounted both honorable and holy amongst the Turks,
by which the race of Mankind is best increased and maintained; yet the Priest
as I may call him, or their Churchman, has the least hand in the Solemnity;
the matter as an action wholly civil, is performed before the Caddee or Judge;
not unlike the manner practiced in England for some few years, according to
that absurd act of Marriages by a Justice of Peace; and is in the nature of a
Recognisance, whereby the Husband does personally oblige himself before the
Judge to take such a Wife, and in case of his Death or Divorce, to endow her
with a certain Estate to remain to her own disposal. The Woman is not there
present, but appears by her Father or some of her nearest Relations, and is
afterward by a great attendance of Women brought covered, sitting a stride on
Horseback under a Canopy to the Habitation of her Bridegroom, who remains at
the Gate with open arms to receive her; there is great Rejoicing and Feasting
hereat, the night before she is brought to the Company of her Husband; but when
the precedent Ceremonies to the Marriage are performed and completed, the
House is all silent, and she is brought into the Bride-chamber by an Eunuch (if
she be of Quality) if not, by some Women of near Relation, and delivered to her
Husband, who is himself to untie her Drawers, and undress her for his bed, not
unlike the custom amongst the Romans of Zonam solvere.

Polygamie is freely indulged to them by their Religion as far as the number of
four Wives, (...) to the common report, that a Turk may have as many Wives as
he can maintain; Though Mahomet had nine Wives, and Hali had fourteen, as being
men more spiritual and of a more elevated degree, had greater privileges and
indulgences for carnal enjoyments.

This restraint of the number of their Wives is certainly no Precept of their
Religion, but a rule superinduced upon some politic considerations, as too
great a charge and weakening to men's Estates, every one that takes a Wife being
obliged to make her a Kabin or Dowry, as we have said before; or else for
better Regulation of the oeconomies, and to prevent and abate somewhat of the
Jealousies, Strifes and Embroilments in a Family, which must necessarily arise
between so many Rivals in the affection of one Husband who is obliged by Law
and Covenants, to deal and bestow his benevolence and conjugal kindness in an
exact proportion of equality. And least this consinement to a certain number of
Wives, should seem a restriction and impeachment of that liberty and free use
of Women which they say, God has frankly bestowed on man; every one may freely
serve himself of his Women Slaves, with as much variety as he is able to buy or
maintain; and this kind of Concubinage is no ways envyed or condemned by the
Wives, so long as they can enjoy their due maintenance, and have some
reasonable share in the Husbands bed, which once a week is their due by the
Law; for if any of them has been neglected the whole week before, she
challenges Thursday night as her due, and has remedy in that case against her
Husband by the Law; and if she be so modest as not to sue him for one weeks
default, she is yet so ingenious to contrive a supply of her wants: And whereas
these Women are Educated with much retiredness from the conversation of men;
and consequently with greater inclinations toward them, and with no principles
of virtue of moral honesty or Religion, as to a future state relating to the
rewards or punishments of their good or bad actions; they are accounted the
most lascivious and immodest of all Women, and excel in the most refined and
ingenious subtilties to steal their pleasures; And as in Christendom the
Husband bears the disgrace and scandal of his Wives incontinency; here the
Horns are by the vulgar adjudged to the Father, Brothers, and Kindred; the
Blood of her Family is tainted and dishonored, and the Husband obtaining a
Divorce, quits himself of his Wife and dishonor together.

No question but the first Institutor of this easy Religion, next to the
satisfaction of his own carnal and effeminate inclination, and this taking
freedom amongst his Disciples; his main consideration was the increase of his
people by Polygamie, knowing that the greatness of Empires and Princes consists
more in the numbers and multitudes of their people, than the compass or large
extent of their dominions. This freedom (if it may be called so) was granted at
the beginning of the world for the propagation and increase of mankind; and the
Jews had that permission and indulgence to their loose and wandering affections,
and we read that the Eastern parts of the world have abounded with Children of
diverse Mothers, and but one Father; and that ordinarily a Great Personage in
Egypt has been attended with a hundred lusty Sons in the field, proceeding
from his own Loins, well Armed, and daring in all attempts of War. But yet this
course thrives not so well amongst the (...) as formerly; whether it be thought
their accursed Vice of Sodomie, or that God blesses not so much this state of
life, as when the paucity of Mankind induced a sort of a necessity and plea for
it.

But chiefly through the irreconcilable Emulation and Rivalry which is amongst
many Wives, those Witchcrafts and Sorceries (which in this Country are very
frequent) are prepared against the envyed fruitfulness each of other, that
either they make an Abortive Birth, or otherwise their Children pine and
macerate away with secret and hidden charms, by which means they are now
observed not to be so fruitful and numerous, as is the Marriage Bed of a single
Wife; nor is the Family so well regulated, and orderly as under the Conduct and
good Huswifery of one Woman, but contrarily, filled with noise, brawls and
dissentions, as passes the wisdom of the Husband to become an equal Umpire and
Arbitrator of their differences, which consideration restrains many, though
otherwise inclineable enough to gratify their Appetites, from incumbring
themselves with so great an inconvenience; and I have known some though
childless, have adhered to a single Wife, and preferred Quiet and Repose,
before the contentment of their Offspring.

The Children they have by their Slaves, are equally esteemed with those they
have by their Wives; Neque vero Turcae minus honoris deferunt natis ex
concubinis aut pellicibus quam ex uxoribus, neque illi minus in bona paterna
juris habent, Busbeq. Ep. 1.

But yet with this difference in esteem of the Law, that unless the Father
Manumisses them by his Testament, and confers a livelihood upon them by Legacy,
they remain to the Charity of their Elder Brother that is born from the Wife,
and are his Slaves, and he their Lord and Master; and it is with them, as in
the Civil Law, Partus ventrem sequitur; So that from the Loins of the same
Father, may proceed Sons of a servile and ingenious condition.

There is also another sort of half Marriage amongst them, which is called
Kabin, when a man takes a Wife for a Month, or for a certain limited time: and
an agreement is made for the price before the (...) or Judge: and this
Strangers oftentimes use, who have not the gift of Continency, and are desirous
to find a Wife in all places where they travel, and is the same which they
term in Spain to be Emancibado, or Casado de Media Carta, only the act there is
not made allowable by the Laws as in Turkey.

There is another sort of Marriages commonly used amongst the Turks (if we may
give it that honorable Title) which is the conjunction of an Eunuch with a
Woman; such I mean as are wholly disarmed of all parts of virility, do
notwithstanding take many Wives, and exercise Lusts of an unknown and
prodigious nature.

There is also one point or restriction of Matrimony in the Turkish Religion
which is observable; that is, a (...) may Marry himself with what Woman
soever, though esteemed an Infidel, as a Christian, Jew, or any other different
profession, so it be of those who are of a Learned Religion, of which Books are
wrote to defend and maintain it; but such Women as are of a Religion which
has nothing in it of Learning or of written Law, as the Sect of Meiuzee, who
adore the fire, conserving it always burning in their Temples, and are to be
found in the parts of Persia, but principally in some Countries of Mogul; and
also the Gypsy Women are prohibited (of which great numbers are amongst the
Turks:) a Vagabond people without Law or Religion, but what is fabulous and
ridiculous; and having no litterature or knowledge amongst them, are reputed as
abominable amongst the Turks.

And here the Turks upon occasional discourses of the severity and strictness
of the Christian Discipline in matters of Concupiscence, telling them that no
Copulation is allowable but in the Marriage Bed, and that restrained and
confined to one Wife, without the additions of Slaves to satisfy with variety
the corrupted fancy; that the very thoughts of Lust and Concupisence pollute
the purity of the soul; And that whosoever looks on a Woman to Lust after her,
commits adultery in his heart; They presently deride these our Preceps and our
Laws, which Christians not only by their actions and corrupted lives contemn
and invalid, but Authority it self not by a simple connivance only, but by
indulgence and privileges, foments and encourages persons walking contrary to
that which is confessed to be an indispensable Law. For proof whereof, they
mention the Stews of Italy, (...) made an allowable Trade and Profession in
Venice, Naples, and the City of Rome, and the Cantoneras in Spain, and framed
into a Politic body (as is related and apprehended by the Turks) from whence
Taxes and Impositions are raised: The Turks comprehend not the Politic grounds
hereof, with which in Italy this Maxim is defended, nor is it fitting to
produce the reasons or argue it with them; since the benefit which accrews to
the Roman Church, and the Profits that arise thence, being employed in
maintenance of Galleys and Forces against Infidels, is the best can be said to
hallow this permission; but it is an improper argument with a Turk to excuse
this Liceuse and Authority to sin, upon considerations of being better able to
War against the Professors of his Religion. And therefore the Turk will hardly
be convinced but that (...) manner of Concubinage has much more of Sanctity,
Order and Policy in it, as being freer from Diseases and Foulness, than the
wandering Lusts of Stews or impudence of Cortesans, made bold and
hard-foreheaded by concession of Authority.

Pudet haec opprohria Nobis Et dici potuisse, etc.

Amongst all the privileges that the (...) enjoys above his subjects, this one
he has less than they, that he cannot Marry; but yet has as many Women as
serves his use, though never so libidinous, or are requisite for the
Ostentation and greater Magnificence of his Court, according to the custom of
the Eastern Princes, who placed a great part of their Pomp in the multitude of
their Women. This disuse of Marriage in the Sultan, has been a Maxim of
State, and reckoned amongst the (...), Inter Arcana Imperii, from the time of
Bajazet, until this very Age: the reasons hereof are diversely related.
Busbequius says, That Bajazet after the great Victory obtained against him by
Tamerlane, to his other great Misfortues and Disgraces, had this one added, of
having his Wife Despina whom he dearly loved, to fall into the hands of the
Conqueror, whose ignominious and undecent treatment be fore the eyes of her
Husband, was a matter of more dishonor and sorrow, than all the rest of his
afflictions: so that ever since that time, the Sultans to free themselves from
being capable of that disgrace, on occasion of like fortune, take no feminine
companion of their Empire in whom they may be more concerned than as in Slaves,
or the loss of Goods, Riches or Estate. But in my opinion, this policy is of a
deeper reach and design, than the consideration of matters so merely possible;
for as I have heard, the only sign and ceremony of a Sulans making a Wife, is
the endowing her with Riches agreeable to her condition and quality, not called
Kabin, which is Dowry, but Pashmaluck or money for her Shoes; which besides
Presents, Jewels and Rich Garments for her self, and great attendance, her
Revenue ought to be equal to that of a Valede or Mother of the Grand Signior,
which is four or five hundred thousand Dollars yearly Rent; so that were this
custom in use, and meeting with the disposition of some Prince that are Amorous
and Prodigal, the chief Revenue of the Empire would be expended in the Chambers
of Women, and diverted from the true Channels in which the Treasure ought to
run for nourishment of the Politic body of the Commonwealth. Besides were it
the custom for Sultans to take wives, it would contract that main principle of
Policy amongst them, of avoiding Alliances and far Relations of the Grand
Signior abroad. And this was the principle reason of the murder of Sultan
Osman, tenth Emperor of the Turks, contrived by the Rebellion and Toleration
of the Soldiery; it being objected that he had Married a Soltana, whereby he
had contracted Alliances, contrary to the Fundamental Constitutions of the
Empire.

The tie and solemnity of Marriage, and the nature thereof amongst the Turks,
is as before related: from which the Woman has no ways to unloose her self,
whilst the Husband maintains her with Bread, Butter, Rice, Wood, and Flax to
spin for her Clothing; the Law subposes her so industrious a Huswife as with
her own labor to supply her self: there are some other points pleadable in Law
for Divorce in behalf of the Woman, as impotency or frigidity in the Husband,
and the like; but the man has diverse means to acquit himself, and can do it by
several allegations; and may upon as easy terms, and on as slight grounds iue
out his Divorce, as was permitted to the Jews in cases of dislike, or that she
found no favor in his eyes.

There are amongst the Turks three degrees of Divorce, every one of which is
made before the (...) or Justice, and by him drawn out and registered. The first
separates the Man and Wife only from the same House and Bed, the maintenance of
a Wife being still continued; The second not only divides them in that manner,
but the husband is compelled to make her good her Kabin, which is a Jointure or
Dowry promised at her Marriage, so as to have no interest either in him or his
Estate, and to remain in a free condition to Marry another. The third sort of
Divorce which is called ( Ouch (...)) is made in a solemn and more serious
manner, with more rigorous terms of separation, and in this case, the Husband
repenting of his Divorce, and desirous to re-take his Wife, cannot by the Law
be admitted to her without first consenting, and contenting himself to see
another man enjoy her (...) his face, which condition the Law (...) as a
punishment of the Husbands lightness and inconstancy, and as an evidence to
show that though the Turkish Law is very indulgent and open in the free choice
and enjoyment of Women, yet that it punishes such as unadvisedly frustrate the
solomn points thereof, with remarkable notes of infamy and disgrace.
Notwithstanding some afterward repenting of their Divorce, have been contented
with the condition, and have chosen some handsome youth to enter into the Bed
of their Wife. It is a Merry Story that is told of one, who in this (...) being
put to a great strait, resolved to call the first man he conveniently met to
this (...), that so as one unknown his reputation might be the less concerned;
the man he first lighted on happened to be a Kaickgee or Boat-man, who it seems
so well satisfied and pleased the Wife, that she afterward renounced all
interest in her Husband, and resolved to adhere to her new Lover, of whom she
supposed she had sufficient proof and acquaintance with already to esteem a
better Husband than her former. There are but few amongst the Turks, though
some are found, who so heartily repent of their Divorce, and so fond of their
separated Wives, as to be contented to take them with the foregoing condition:
for it is reputed a kind of an abomination; and when they would signify any
matter far alienated, or estranged, they all call it ( Ouch Talac) some thing
so divided and separated as to be a Sin and profanation so much as to (...) or
desire it.

CHAP. XXII. Of the other parts of the Turkish Religion. Of Circumcision.
CIrcumcision is not reckoned amongst one of the five points which constitute a
true Mohammedan believer, but is only (as we have said before) proposed as a
trial and proof of man's obedience to the more necessary parts of the Law. This
rite of Circumcision is not received by them as an Article of Precept delivered
expressly from the Alchoran, but by tradition and ancient practice and use
amongst the Arabians, before the time of (...), derived originally from Ishmael
or Esau, whose progeny they are, and from thence give themselves the name of
Ishmaelites. The Arabian Doctors affirm that Mahomet himself was born without a
Navel, and naturally Circumcised; perhaps to equal the same story which the
Jews report of Moses, and some others of the (...); and it seems in those
Countries where Circumcision is in practice, that it (...) not unusual for
Children to be so born; who are therefore called Sons of the Moon, on whom the
virtue of the Moon has more than an ordinary manner of influence. Credebant
siquidem Arabes, quod ille qui (...), Notae de Arabum moribus.
sub lunae radi is nasceretur, contrahi perinde ac circumcisum praeputium.

The Turks never Circumcise their Children until the age of seven years and
upwards; and then they do it my a Barber or Surgeon, it not being esteemed a
matter appropriated to the office of the Emaum or Priest; for (as we have said
before) they make no such distinction as Clergy and Laity; I mean, as to any
spiritual Carracter of Priesthood; for a man may cry upon the (...) to day, and
like their Pastor be the first to lead his Congergation to their prayers, and
expound the Alchoran in the Pulpit; and next day be expelled his Parish, and
become free to any other secular employment or profession: they observe some
ceremonies amongst them on this occasion, often differing according to the
Country and place; but (...) the Child is set on horseback in his best
Clothes, attended with his School-fellows and companions, who Ceremouies at the
Circum. cision.
with loud shouts repeat some words in the Alchoran; and being brought home,
and the act of Circumcision performed, he is carefully attended for his cure,
and in the mean time there is a Feast or Banquet prepared for the Guests; those
who of (...) years become Mahometans, in some places are carried about the Town
on horseback, with a Dart in their left hand (...) toward their heart,
signifying that they will rather suffer themselves to be passed through with
that instrument, than renounce that faith they then profess. And this
Circumcision is an admission and introduction of them into the number of the
faithful, as it is amongst the Jews, and Baptism with the Christians.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the five necessary points which are required to constitute a
true Mohammedan.
Of their Washings.
THough Mahomet (...) in the Alchoran, that his Religion is founded in
cleanness, and that it is half of his Law; yet much before Mahomets time
washings were observed according to the same prescriptions by the Arabians, who
descending from Ishmael, maintained by tradition the practice of washings: and
he had no other share in this invention, than that it was enforced by his
Authority on the professors of his Sect. The Turks are certainly a very cleanly
people in their exterior manner of living; as in their shawings relating to
their holy exercises and duties, they are very precise and superstitious; some
of them believing that the very water purifies them from the foulness of their
sins, as well as from the uncleanness of their bodies: There being three sorts
of washings observed by them.

The first is called Abdest, which is a preparation for their prayers, entering
the (...), or reading the Alchoran; they first wash their hands and arms, then
their neck, their forehead, the crown of their head, their ears, their teeth,
the face, under the nose, and last of all their feet; but if the weather be
cold, and not convenient to uncover them, it is sufficient, if they make some
evidence thereof by any other outward signification.

The second his called Gusul, which is the clensing of the Bath after
Copulation or nocturnal pollutions; until which time a man is called Giunub,
that is, his prayers are accounted abominable before God, and his Society to be
avoided by men.

The third is Taharet, which is a washing after the ease or evacuation of
nature; to this homely office they design the three last fingers of the left
hand; and upon this account they call Christians (...), which is as much as one
defiled and impure for want of this manner of elensing. And washing is so usual
and frequent amongst them both before and after meat, as has caused a common
Proverb amongst them, that God has created meat that men may have occasion
often to wash their hands.

Secondly of their prayers. After their washing follow their prayers, which
(...) to recommend to his Disciples the force and virtue of prayer, calls it in
his Alchoran the Pillar of Religion, and the key of Paradise, and enjoined the
performance five times in the space of twenty four hours, viz. between the
day-breaking and Sunrising, called Sabanamasee; Secondly, at noon, called
Ulenamasee; Thirdly, at the middle hour, between the noon and the setting of
the Sun, called Kindinamasee; Fourthly, at Sunsetting, called (...); Fifthly,
at an hour and half in the night, called Yachinamasee; this action they perform
with very much reverence and devotion, and hold that they ought to be so intent
and fixed in their thoughts on this religious act toward God, that no business
of the world, though the execution of the Sultans decree should in the same
moment be commanded, or fire should burst forth in the very Chamber where they
remain, or an armed enemy within their Gates or Camp, they ought not yet to be
diverted, or break abruptly (...) their prayers, to extinguish or oppose
themselves against their inevitable destruction: It is much, in my opinion,
that Infidels should be possessed with that awe and sense of the Divine Majesty
in the time of their audience with him; And yet that Friars and others of the
Roman Church obliged to their office, as the (...) to his Namas, should perform
it so perfunctorily, as to mix the discourse of business with the repetition of
their breviary and join with their responsals answers and resolutions of
questions are made them; and so satisfy themselves in the Opus operatum, as if
it were more important to comply with his command who imposed the office, than
with his who primarily enjoined the sacrifice of prayer.

The form of their prayers is not extracted out of the Alchoran, only the
collections of sentences, as in the Name of God, God is great and merciful, and
the like, are (...) from thence (as Christians do from the fountain of the holy
Scriptures (...) the rest is compiled by the four Doctors we have before
mentioned, viz. Ebbubecher, Omar, Ozman and (...); whose names are wrote in
golden Characters on the walls of most (...): herein they observe diverse
postures and gestures of their body, as placing their hands one on the other
before them, bending the body, kneeling, touching the ground with their
forehead, moving the head to each side, and the like; in which it is difficult
to make distinction of those merely invented and ordained by (...) from those
which were primarily in use amongst the ancient Arabians: But that the orderly
Ceremonies in their prayers may be better described, it will be to our purpose
to hear what (...) uius relates of the whole Turkish Army, whom he had seen
drawn up orderly in the field at their devotion. I saw (said Epist. 3.
he) (...) (...) (...), a gre it multitude of heads folded up in Turbants, who
with (...) silence attended to the words of a Priest their Conductor; all of
them being drawn up in ranks and file, and covering with their (...) orders the
whole plain, seemed to have framed a wall or bulwark by the regular disposition
of their bodies: their cloathings were of light colors, and their Turbants
comparable to the (...) of the snow, and the variety of the different colors
of their garments, fed the eyes with a strange pleasure: in this manner so
immovable, they stood as if they had grown in the place where their feet were
fixed; no coughing, hemming, nor voice was heard, nor so much as any motion was
perceived of their heads; every one at the name of Mahomet pronounced by the
Priest, bowed his head to his knees; and at the name of God reverently (...)
(...), and kissed the Earth: and thus the Turks with devout ceremony and
profound attention perform their holy duties; supposing that prayer to become
fruitless, which is interrupted by scratching of the head, (...) the hands, or
any other gesture not essential to their prayer. But of all Nations and
Religions that I have known, they are the most hypocritical; they are those who
love to pray in the Marketplace, and in the Corners of the Streets to have
praise of men; for it is observable with the Turks, that where they find the
most spectators, especially of Christians, to choose that place how inconvenient
soever, to spread first their handkerchief, and then begin their prayers. The
substance of their prayers consists for the most part in praises of the divine
power and attributes; mixing therewith Petitions for the safety of their Prince
and his dominions, and for dissension and wars amongst Christians, which part
they conceive God has greatly gratified them in, and rejoicing upon the rumors
of wars and disturbances in Christendom, as an effect of the divine facility
and concession to their prayers: they know well by experience, what Tacit
reports of the Roman Policy; That, Lib. 12. Hist.
Omne scelus externum cum laetitia habendum, semina etiam odiorum incende; and
as the Romans destined Armenia to be a prize held up, and the Stage also, on
which the Tragedy of the ruin of the Eastern Nations were to be acted, Eandem
Armeniam specie largitionis turbandis barbarorum animis praebuerint; so the
Turks forebore for several years the total Conquest of the Provinces of
Transylvania, Moldavia, and Valachia, reserving them for the Cadmean fields,
wherein the Hungarians, Germans, Polonians, and the people of those Countries
themselves might destroy one the other, and make his entrance to the possession
of them the more facile, and less bloody.

Thirdly, Of their Ramazan.
The third necessary point of their Religion, is the observation of the Month
of Ramazan, or a Fast in that whole Month, in which time they can neither eat,
drink, or take any thing in their mouths, whilst the Sun is above the Horizon;
afterward, upon shutting in of the Evening, that the Emaum lights the Lamps,
which in that Month are exposed round the Steeple of every Mosch, they have
liberty to eat: Most part of the night they spend in Feasting, reserving
commonly their greatest Delicacies and best Provisions for the consolation of
that Fast; their business and employments they attend most to in the night,
passing the day as over tedious in sleeping, so that their Fast is nothing but
a changing of the day into night. This Month they call (...) and holy, and the
time when the Gates of Paradise are opened, and of Hell are shut: and so strict
is the Imposition of this Fast, that it is no less than Death for a Turk to be
accused of the breath thereof. In this Month to drink Wine is esteemed an
inexpiable Crime; and such who give themselves that liberty at other times, do
yet, not to give scandal, abstain from it fourteen days before the beginning of
this Month; and Women and other of the more superstitious sort, begin fifteen
days their Fast before it is enjoined by the Precept of their Prophet. Put such
as are sick, or have any infirmity, or are travelers in their journey, have a
permission to eat; but with that condition, as to remain obliged at other times
of their health and convenience to make good those days of the Ramazan, of
which they remain indebted to the performance of their Law.

The institution of this Month of Ramazan, proceeded from Mahomet himself, in
the second year of his Prophetic office, which he did not assume until he had
fully completed forty years, having before in imitation of the Jews Fast of
Ashura Levit. 16. ver. 29. in Memory of Mr. Pocock, Notae de Arabum (...).
the overthrow of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea, enjoined to the Arabians
the same time of abstinence: but afterward apprehending it dishonorable to be
beholding to the Jews for the invention of a Fast, instituted the Ramazan, the
time of which is governed by the course of the Moon, and falls out commonly ten
days sooner then in the preceding year, so that this Fast with time comes to
run through all the months; and is more easy to the (...) when it happens in
the (...) days of the Winter, rather then in the Summer, when the days are
long and hot, which become tedious to the ordinary sort of people, who for
necessity are forced to labor, and yet for the quenching thirst dare not
refresh their mouths with a drop of water.

Fourthly, Of their Zacat
Which is another necessary point to the constitution of a (...), which is the
bestowing alms according to certain rules prescribed by four principal Doctors
of their Law: the word Zacat signifies as much as increase, because that alms
procure the blessing of God, and multiply the store of the merciful. According
to this command every man is obliged to give one in the hundred of all their
Estate to relief of the poor; and though this Precept is enjoined as an
essential ingredient to constitute a true Mohammedan, yet Covetousness and
Policy so much prevail with the Turks, that the Rich are both unwilling to part
with so much of their Estate, and fearful to evidence their Wealth by a true
calculate according to the Zacat; so that the Poor are the best observers of
this injunction, the Rich conceiving it superfluous, and never intended by God
to make the performance of Religion a snare to their Estates.

Fifthly, Of their Pilgrimage to Mecha
Which is enjoined to every one who has riches and freedom from great offices
and charges of Government, to perform it; being a Type or signification of
their passage out of this world into the next. The number of those who yearly
undertake this Pilgrimage is uncertain, though most commonly are registered from
diverse parts where the Mohammedan Religion is professed, above fifty thousand
souls; these Pilgrims depart about the latter end of May from Constantinople,
and meet with those from Anatolia, Caramania, and others of that quarter of the
world at Damascus; those from Persia assemble at Babylon, those of the parts of
Egypt at Grand Cario, and all unite upon the Mount Ararat, where they observe
diverse Ceremonies, as making Corban or Sacrifice, which they do by killing
Sheep, and sending part thereof as Presents to their Friends, and distribution
thereof amongst the Poor, in remembrance that upon the same Mount Abraham
designed to sacrifice his Son Isaac; they also here strip themselves of their
Garments, and being covered only with a Blanket, go in procession through the
Mountain in signification that they must now leave all their sins and
affections of the world behind them.

The chief Commander over these Pilgrims (for amongst so considerable a number
of people, there must be rule and government) is appointed by the Grand
Signior, and is called Sur-Emini by whom he sends 500 Zechins, an (...)
Embossed with Gold carried on a Camel, and as much black Cloth as serves for
hangings for the Moschs at Mecha; and this is yearly presented from the Sultan
to that place; when the new hanging is set up, that of the former year is
pulled down, and is by the Pilgrims torn in pieces; some getting more and some
less, carry any rag of it home, as a relic and token of their Pilgrimage,
which serves them in place of the Caabe to which they turn their faces at the
time of their prayers. The Camel which carried the Alchoran, at his return home
is decked with flowers and other ornaments, and having performed this holy
journey, is ever after exempted from all labor and service.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Bairam and Ceremonies used at that time by the Chief
Officers to the Grand Signior.
THe Bairam is the Feast of the Turks, of which there are two in the year; one
immediately following the Fast of Ramazan, as our Easter does the Lent, which
is called the great Bairam; the other is the little Bairam, which happens about
seventy days after the former; at which time the people for three days cease
from their labor, present one the other, rejoice and take a greater liberty
then at other times; which no question but was invented by Mahomet, for
relaxation of the bodies and minds of his followers, as well as in imitation of
the Christian Feasts.

The Bairam is then conceived to begin at the first appearance of the new Moon
after the Ramazan; which is sometime deferred a days time, if the weather prove
Cloudy, that the Moon is not visible; if longer the Sky be obscured, according
to the course of nature, it is presumed that the Moon is begun, and so their
Feast begins also; which is published at Constantinople by the discharge of
great Guns at the point of the Seraglio upon the Sea-shoare, at which time the
Lights or Lamps on the Steeples of the Moschs are extinguished or omitted to be
lighted, and Drums and Trumpets are sounded in all public places of the City
and Courts of great Persons: so that every one betakes himself to Mirth and
Pastime, as his own inclination or convenience leads him.

But that which will be most curious to the observation of the judicious
Reader, is, the relation of the Ceremonies used in the Seraglio at this Feast
by the several officers of State to the Grand Signior, and to one and other;
which are so formal, precise and constant to the least motion of every Member
of the body, as will clear the (...) from that opinion which passes of them in
the world of being rude, uncivil and void of all Ceremony or Courtship in their
comportment and behavior, which according to the best information I could
procure, is for the most part in this manner.

The Antiport leading to the Lodgings of the Kapa Agasi (or Chief Eunuch who
commands the Pages) being adorned with rich Carpets, Cushions and other
Furniture after their fashion, on the Vigil or Eve before the Bairam, all the
Prime Officers of State belonging to the Empire then at Constantinople,
assemble themselves at the Grand Signiors Seraglio three or four hours before
day, where as soon as day breaks, the Grand Signior mounted on horse back,
passes through the midst of them, and goes to the (...) of Santa Sophia, where
having said his Morning prayer, he returns again to the Seraglio.

(...) returned he enters the (...) or Royal Chamber, and setting himself in
his Seat of State, having the chief Eunuch of the Pages on his left hand, the
Sons of the (...) Han (which remain for hostages in the Turkish Court) upon
signs made to them, are the first who present themselves before him to wish him
a happy Festival; whom (as I have heard reported) he walks three paces to meet,
and they prostrating themselves, say, Eiamischerif, which is, may these days
be happy, and arising kiss his hand and so retire. The next who makes his
address, is the Prime Vizier, who standing on the right hand of the Grand
Signior, in the front of all the (...), Pashaws, and other great Officers,
Complements the Grand Signior upon one knee, and nearer approaching kisses his
hand, and then arising takes the station of the Kapa Agasi or Eunuch of the
Pages. The next who follows in this Ceremony is the (...), who on the left hand
fronts the Officers and principal heads of the Law, as the Kadelescheres or
Lords chief Justices of Anatolia and (...), the Nakib Eschref, principal head
or Primate of the Kindred of Mahomet, the Mollahs, Preachers called Seighs and
others. Then the (...) bowing his head to the ground, holding his hands on his
Girdle, kisses him on the left shoulder, and the Grand Signior steps one pace
forward to meet him, and so retires to his place; then all the others in their
several orders take their turns to pass this Ceremony, who are treated
according to what the Prime Vizier informs the Grand Signior; for some kiss his
hand, others the hem of his vest, some his sleeve, others his breast,
thereafter as their Quality and Authority is, which is so full of variety and
formal (...), that there is a Book wrote expressly treating of all the
particularities of this Ceremony. The last of all who is called to perform his
Complement, is the Janizar Agasi, or the General of the Janissaries.

This part being thus far passed, the Grand Signior enters into a more retired
Chamber of the Seraglio, where the Arz (...) or the four principal Pages are
the first of the Court to do their obeisance as before: then follow the Eunuchs
and other Pages; In the mean time a Dinner is provided in the Chamber of the
Divan, where the Officers of State having complied with their obligation, take
a plentiful repast at the Grand Signiors charge, after which the Grand Signior
makes a present to each of the sixteen principal Officers of Sable Vests, with
which the Ceremony concludes.

Then is way made for the Coaches of the Soltanaes, who having been Cloystered
in the old Seraglio the whole year before, are glad at the Feast of Bairam to
have occasion to make their Visits to the Grand Signior in the first place, as
being of his Kindred and Relations, and then to the Queen or Queen Mother, and
to the other Soltanaes and Ladies, with whom they use variety of Ceremony
according to their Condition and Quality; and there have liberty to remain for
the space of three days in Banqueting and other divertisements of Music and
discourse.

I may well be observed from the premises, how generally the world is mistaken
in the opinion is conceived of the Courtship used amongst the Turks, commonly
reputed by Travelers to be rude, coming much short of that quaintness,
bowings, cringings and (...) postures used in Christendom. It is true the Turks
deportment even in the most vile and mechanic vulgar, though never so mean, is
carried with a strange kind of barbarity and rudeness toward the best of
Christians in those parts; which proceeds rather from a sort of pride and
detestation taught them by their Religion, then from any want of being
instructed in their duty of due reverence to their Superiors; For in their
carriage one toward the other, they observe the rules and niceties of
Complement with as much variety and exactness, as is exercised in Rome, or the
most civilized Courts of Christendom; and amongst the chief Ministers there is
much preciseness and caution used not to exceed the limits of that Ceremony
which (...) owe the Superiors, least they should disparage their own quality,
or give occasion to the world to believe their disorderly submission to be a
part of adulation. And therefore it is worthy the study of Christian Ministers
employed in Embassies in the Ottoman Court, to be well informed in the rules
and manner of their carriage in presence of the chief Ministers of State; for
uncovering the head, as in Christendom is amongst them esteemed ridiculous and
affrontive, and the manner of little bowings, and often inclinations of the
body, taken as acknowledgments of the great distance there is between the
Masters they represent; and therefore a little Ceremony at the entrance, and
the like at departure, with a steady and constant behavior at the time of the
treaty or discourse, is the best rule for a Christian Minister; which is
interpreted amongst Turks as the effect of gravity and estimation of
themselves; It being certain, that the contrary has caused many Christian
Ministers to fall lower in the reputation of the Turks, then they had deserved
for their wisdom and dexterity in the management of the more substantial points
of affairs.

CHAP. XXV. Of the prohibition of Swines flesh and Wine.
THe five foregoing principles already treated of are (as we have said before)
the essential points required toward the constitution of a true Mohammedan;
other matters are proofs and trials of their obedience; amongst which none is
more enjoined then the prohibition of Swines flesh and Wine: which are called
Haram, things abominable and forbidden. The first is in reality abhorred by
them, and as displeasing as the flesh of a man to civilized people, or a Dogs
thigh to such as have been used to delicacies and wholesome viands. But Wine of
late years, though forbidden by the Law, has gained a better reputation, and
though accursed by them, is yet accounted of so strong a temptation, that the
sin is the more excusable. And though the Alchoran positively inhibits the use
thereof, and the expositors of the Law have so far removed it from all
possibility of becoming lawful, that they have determined that if Wine be spilt
on the ground, and in that place grass grows, and with that Pasture a Sheep or
an Ox is nourished, those Cattle become Haram, and are as abominable as the
flesh of Swine.

But notwithstanding the severe prohibitions hereof by their Religion, Wine is
so commonly used, that it is publicly drank without cautions or fear of giving
scandal; the great men, because in office, are more careful how the world
discovers the delight they take in that Liquor, least the miscarriages of their
office should be attributed to the excess of Wine; or the knowledge of their
use of that which deprives them of their reason, render them incapable of their
trust and dignity. For the Turks account it impossible to drink Wine with
moderation, and are ignorant of the benefit of it for correction of crude
humors and indisgestions of the stomach; and wonder to see it by English,
French or Italians tempered with water; for unless they may drink it with
full-bowls, and have sufficient thereof, to give them their Kaif (as they call
it) that is to transport them into a dissolute Mirth, or the ridiculous actions
of drunkenness, or to a surfeit or a vomit, they esteem it not worth the
drinking, and a provocation to the appetite and palate to remain with a desire
of demanding more.

But such as would appear Religious amongst them, and are superstitious, morose
and haters of Christians, abstain wholly from Wine, and are of a Stoical pride,
melancholy temper, and censorious of the whole world. These men who drink only
Water and Coffee, enter into discourses of State Matters, censure the actions
and pass Characters on the Grandees and great Officers; Assumta Stoicorum
arrogatia, (...); quae turbidos, and negotiorum appetentes faciat. Tac. lib.
14. And this was the reason why the great (...) Kupruli, put down the
Coffee-houses in (...), and yet privileged the Taverns; because the first were
melancholy places where Seditions were vented, where reflections were made on
all occurrences of State, and discontents published and aggravated; but Wine
raised the spirits of men to a gay humor, and would never operate those
effects to endanger his condition, as the Councels which were contrived in the
Assemblies of those who addicted themselves to a more melancholy Liquor.

The drinking Wine in young men is esteemed amongst the extravagancies of
youth, but in old men is a crime more undecent and scandalous in a higher
degree. But why Mahomet should so severely forbid the use of Wine to his
Disciples is recounted in a fable on this occasion; That their Prophet being
once invited by a friend to an entertainment at his house, chanced in his way
thither to be detained a while at a Nuptial Feast, where the Guests raised with
the cheerful spirits of the Wine, were Merry, embracing, and in a kind temper
each toward other; which pleasing humor Mahomet attributing to the effect of
the Wine, blessed it as a sacred thing, and so departed. But it happening that
in the Evening returning again, and expecting to see the love and (...) he had
before blessed to be augmented, he found the house to the contrary, full of
brawls, and noise, fightings, and all confusion; which he also having
understood to be another effect of the Wine, changed his former blessing into a
curse, and for ever after made it Haram, or an abomination to his Disciples.

CHAP. XXVI. Of their Morality, Good Works, and some certain of their Laws
worthy of observation.
THough according to the preceding discourse, the Character that may thence
result from the nature and temperament of the Turks, does not promise any long
Treatise concerning their deep morality, virtues, and elevated graces: yet in
the minds of all mankind though never so barbarous, God having wrote the Law of
nature, and made that impression of doing right to our neighbor, which tends
toward the conservation of the world; we may well expect to find the same
principles in the Turks; especially their Victories and Spoils abroad, having
procured them conversation with other Nations, and their Wars and Treaties with
Christians, having refined their minds in a good part of that rude temper they
brought with them out of Scythia, it will not be strange for us to find amongst
them men, whom Education has made civil, polished in all points of virtuous
deportment, and made Heroes of their Age; though I must confess I cannot
applaud the generality of this people with so high Encomiums, as I have read in
the Books of some ingenious travelers, and do believe without partiality that
they come short of the good nature and virtues are to be found in most parts of
Christendom. Howsoever, wherein they conceive a great part of charity is
placed, and meritorious works, it will not be unworthy nor unpleasant to
consider.

And in the first place, they esteem it a good work to build houses, though
from thence they obtain a Rent, because it is a habitation for those who have
no Lands or Estates, to have them of their own. But especially such as are
Princes and great men, who build Chans or Inns, which are receptacles for
travelers at night, are ranked in the first order of sacred Benefactors, and
are blessed and prayed for by the weary Guests, who have found repose and
refreshment through their munificence: And in these buildings the Turks are
extraordinary Magnificent in most parts of the Empire, having united to many of
them a stately Moschs, Baths and Shops for Artisants and Tradesmen to supply
all the necessities of the travelers; and some of them are so endowed, that
every night the Guests are entertained at free cost with a convenient Supper,
be their number more or less according as the Chan is capable to receive. The
form of these buildings is for the most part according to the model of the
highest and stateliest of our Halls, covered with lead, though not altogether
so high-roofed; yet some I have observed for their breadth and length very
Magnificent; yet by reason that they have been somewhat lower, have only in
that come short of the pride of the stateliest Fabrics: though in few of them
are apartments for different companies, yet every one is sufficiently retired,
having at a convenient distance different Chimnies for all parties of Guests to
dress their meat, and in the winter for their fire; the greatest inconvenience
to men of watchful spirits, and used to quiet retirements is the want of sleep,
which until I have been over-tired with labor, and accustomed thereto by
diverse days journeyes, has been always a stranger to my eyes, by reason of
the molestation of various companies, some of which are always awake, some
mending their Carts, others dressing meat, others upon their departure, that in
those public places never want noise to disturb those who sleep but of one
ear: These stately Chans or Inns, which with the Moschs are the only durable
and magnificent buildings of the Empire, are the Edifices of certain great men,
who fearing to be deprived of their riches by a hasty death, should they
endeavor to continue them to their family, choose to perpetuate their names and
secure their conditions by these public works.

Those who would appear of a compassionate and tender nature, hold it a pious
work to buy a Bird from a cage to give him his liberty; and hold it a merciful
action to buy bread and feed the Dogs, of (...) there is a great number of
diseased Curs in all streets appropriate to no Master, but are mangy and foul,
and no small causes of breeding the Plague, so frequent in all the Cities of
the Turks. And this care of Dogs is accounted so charitable, that there are
certain Laws made for the protection and maintenance of them: and it is a
lighter offense to deny bread to a poor Christian who is famished in his
chains, then to the Dogs of their street, which are fit for nothing but to
breed Infection; and some bind themselves by a vow to give such a quantity of
bread a day to the Dogs of such a street, others bequeath it by Testament; for
they maintain their quarters from other wandering Curs, and join together in a
strange manner to preserve certain limits free from others that are not whelped
and bred amongst them.

The Camel is another sort of Beast to which the Turks bear not only a love,
but a Religious reverence, accounting it a greater sin to over-burthen and tire
them with too much labor then the Horse, because it is the Beast most common
to the Holy parts of Arabia, and carries the Alchoran in Pilgrimage; so that I
have observed those who have the government of the Camels, when they have given
water to them in a Basin, to take of the foam or froth that comes from the
mouth of the Beast, and with that, as if it were some rare Balsome, with a
singular devotion to anoint their Beards, and thereat with a Religious sigh
groan out, Hadgi Baba, Hadgi Baba, which is as much as, Oh Father Pilgrim, Oh
Father Pilgrim. And thus having run through the most observable points of the
Turkish Religion, it will be now time to take a view of their Host and Militia,
being that by which their Empire is more supported, then either by their Policy
in Civil Government, or Profession in Religions.

THE THIRD BOOK, Wherein is Treated of the Turkish Militia.
CHAP. I. Of the present state of the Military Discipline in General amongst
the Turks.
WHoever is acquainted with the state of the Turkish Empire, and has duly
considered the premises of this foregoing Treatise, will easily judge that the
main sinews of the (...) Kingdom consists in the force of the Spahees,
Janissaries, and the other Auxiliaries; and that this Government being wholly
founded upon Martial Discipline, and the Law of Arms, is most obliged to the
Constitutions, and supported on the Props related in this following Discourse:
for this people having neither entered into the Possession of this Empire, as
into an unhabited and desert Land, as Colonies of other Nations have done into
Countries new found or discovered; nor got admittance precariously from the
Grecian Princes for the benefit of their Neighborhood and Commerce; but have
opened their (...) to Possession and government by mere force and power of the
Sword; whereby their Constitutions, Laws, Customs, and Manners of living are
wholly agreeable to the warlike discipline of a Camp, and to the quickness and
ready execution of Martial Law: And if it be true in Morality, as it is in
Nature, that things are conserved by the same cause by which they are produced;
it will necessarily follow, that this Ottoman Empire, which was begot by Arms,
and had Mars its only Father, will never be nourished by softness, and the Arts
and blandishments of Peace.

But he that takes a view of the Ottoman Armies, as described in various
Histories, renowned for their Chivalry and Discipline in the times of Sultan,
Selim, or Solomon the magnificent, and designs thence to extract a draught, or
Copy for his present speculation, will find himself much at a loss in framing
true conjectures of the puissance of the Turks, or the Rules of their
Government, by comparison of former times with this present age. For that
ancient sublimity and comely Majesty in the Emperor is much abated; the forces
by Land decayed, and the Maritime power by ill success and unskilful and
slothful Seamen, reduced to an inconsiderable condition; the Countries are
dispeopled, and the Royal Revenue abated; nothing remains of those plenteous
stores and provisions of War, nor that Regiment and Discipline continued in
Peace, none of that ancient observation of their Laws and Religion, nor that
love and respect to the Militia, which is now become degenerate, soft, and
effeminate; nor is the Ottoman Court so prone to remunerate the services, and
exalt the interest of the (...), or maintain the reputation of the Janissaries.
In brief there are no relics of ancient justice, or generosity, of discreet
Government, or Obedience to it, of Courtesy or Concord, of Valor or Counsel,
(...) yet of Confidence, Friendship, or generous Fidelity.

But though this Empire has many of these (...), and begins to grow factious,
and yet slothful, and desirous to avoid the occasions of War, as all
Governments have been which in their youth and first beginnings were eager,
active, and provoked through poverty, in their riper years grown rich, and
luxurious with plenty, (...) declined afterward as from the meridian of their
greatness and power; yet the Turks maintain still the extent of their
Dominions, and if they have lost ground in one place, like the Sea, they have
recovered it in another; if in Asia the Persians have taken from them Rivan,
Schirvan, Tebris, Lyris, and Ghenge, it is but a recovery of their own
Dominions; if they are dispossessed in Ethiopia, of Aden, and other parts of
(...) Faelix, they have recompensed themselves in Europe, by their footing in
Candy, and in Hungary, by the late conquests of Newhausel, and Novigrade, and
in Transylvania, by the additions of (...) and Waradin.

But this Empire as vast and large as it is, is yet dispeopled, the Villages
abandoned, and whole Provinces as pleasant and fruitful as Tempe or Thessaly,
uncultivate and turned into a desert, or wilderness: all which desolation and
ruin proceeds from the Tyranny and Rapine of the Beglerbegs, and Pashaws; who
either in their journeys to the possession of their Governments, or return from
thence, expose the poor inhabitants to the violence and injury of their
Attendants, as if they had entered the Confines of an Enemy, or the Dominions
(...) a conquered people.

In like manner the insolence of the Horse and Foot is unsupportable, for in
their marches from one Country to another, Parties of 20 or 30 are permittted
to make excursions into diverse parts of their own Dominions, where they not
only live upon free quarter, but extort money and clothes from the poor
Vassals, taking their Children to sell for slaves, especially the Bulgarians,
and Servians, and the people of Bosna and Albania, which being ignorant of the
Turkish tongue, are sold for Russians, Hungarians, or Moscovites, so that
rather than be exposed to so much misery, and license of the Soldiery, the
poor people choose to abandon their dwellings and wander into other Cities, or
seek for refuge in the Mountains, or woods of the Country. In fine, though
generally the Military Offices are in the same form, and the Soldiery disposed
according to the ancient Rule, and Canon, yet licentiousness and negligence
have so prevailed in the Officers, as to introduce that corruption which
renders them wholly altered, and estranged from their first Discipline: For the
Commanders upon every light occasion are contented to make Otoracks or
Stipendiaries, such as enjoy the pay and privileges of a Soldier, and yet are
excused from the Wars; which they easily purchase with a small sum of money,
for a scratch, or a flesh-wound gained in the Wars; wholly against the Original
Institution, which designed that benefit only for maimed and disabled
Soldiers; so that now there is so great a number of that Soldiery lusty and
healthful, under the title of dead-mens pay, as disfurnishes the Grand
Signior's Treasury, and weakens his Forces.

The Janissaries also marrying freely, and yet dispensed with as to the absence
from their duty and Chambers, apply themselves to Trades and other Studies
besides the War, by which means having Children and dependencies, they are
forced by other Arts than their few Aspers of daily pay, to seek the provision
and maintenance of a Family; and their minds growing estranged from the War,
are sollicitous with the care and anxiety for a Wife and Children; and in my
time, have so abhorred the thoughts of the War both in Candy and Hungary, that
many have offered great Presents to be excused; and so general has been the
dislike of all kind of Martial action for the reasons before mentioned, that at
first the very rumors and discourse of War, and afterward the reality
thereof, caused so general a discontent, as had, if not prudently prevented and
timely suppressed, burst into a Mutiny of the Militia; whose mere enquiry but
into the reasons and grounds of the War, is little different from a Sedition.

Another Corruption has the covetousness of the Officers produced for small
presents and donatives, in owning many under the title and name of Spahees, and
Janissaries, which have no name or place in the Rolls, or Registers of the
Soldiery; by which means many Offenders, and Outlawed persons are defended by
the military privileges; and the ancient honor due to Arms is prostituted for
the maintenance and protection of the rascalities and scum of the world.

And this shall serve to have spoken in general of the present state of the
Turkish Soldiery; we shall now proceed to the particularities of the force and
numbers of the Turkish Militia, and from whence, and how they are ra^^ed.

CHAP. II. Of the Turkish Militia.
IN the twelfth Chapter of the first Book we made an estimate of the Revenue
and the Riches of all the Beglerbegs and Pashaws of the Empire, by which might
be collected the number of Soldiers which these great men are able out of
their own Families to furnish unto the Wars; it will be now time to make a just
computation, in its due place, of the Forces in particular, the numbers, the
Countries from whence they are raised, the several military orders, and the
true puissance of the Ottoman Empire; which is indeed so incredibly great and
numerous, that with good reason they have formed it into Proverb, That no grass
grows there where the Turkish Horse has once set his foot. This speculation is
absolutely necessary to a true description of the Regiment of a Country; for
the Martial Constitutions are the best part of the Political Science, and Civil
Laws have no vigor unless they receive their Authority by the enforcement of
the Sword: This Consideration is also so necessary to the Art of a Statesman,
that he ill studies the Geography of his Enemies Provinces, who knows not the
utmost (...) it contains by Land and Sea; and is ill prepared to gain a perfect
knowledge of the prudent Arts wherewith a Nation or People is conserved in
Peace, who is ignorant of their Force, and Constitutions appropriated to the
time of War. Wherefore we shall discourse as succinctly of this Subject as the
matter will permit, and with the same certainty that one of the principal
Muster-masters of the Turkish Rolls, long practiced and accurate in his Office,
has decyphered, from whose Report it self I profess to derive my Authority in
this following Relation.

The whole Turkish Militia then is of two sorts; one that receives maintenance
from certain Lands or Farms bestowed on them by the Grand Signior; others that
receive their constant pay in ready money. The (...) nerve or sinew of the
Turkish Empire is that of the Called in Turkish (...).
first rank, which are of two sorts, viz. Zaims, which are like Barons in some
Countries; and Timariots, who may be compared to the Decumani amongst the
Romans. Those of the second sort, paid out of the Grand Signiors Treasury, are
(...), Janissaries, (...).
Armourers, Topzi.
Gunners, and Sea-Souldiers called Levends, who have no pay for life, or are
enrolled amongst the military Orders; but only make an Agreement for five or
six thousand Aspers for their Voyage, which being ended, they are disbanded.

Of the Zaims and Timariots
The nature of these two, and their Institution is the same; the only
difference is in their Commissions or Patents, or rather we may call them the
Conveyances or Evidences for their Lands, which they have from the Grand
Signior: For the Rent of a (...) is from 20m of Aspers to 99999, and no
further; for adding one Asper more, it becomes the Estate of a (...), called a
Pashaw, which is from 100000 Aspers to 199m999; for adding one Asper more, it
becomes the Revenue of a Beglerbeg.

The Timariots are of two sorts; one called Tezkerelw, who have the Evidences
for their Land from the Grand Signiors Court, whose Rent is from 5 or 6000
Aspers, to 19m999; for then with the addition of one Asper they enter the
number of Zaims: The other sort is called Tezkeretis, who has his Patent or
Writing from the Beglerbeg of the Country, whose Rent is from 3000 to 6000
Aspers.

The Zaims in all Expeditions of War are obliged to serve with their (...),
which are to be furnished with Kitchens, Stables, and other necessary
Appartments, agreeable to their state and Quality; and for every 5000 Aspers of
Rent received from the Grand Signior, they are to bring a Horseman into the
Field, which is called (...); as for example, one of thirty thousand Aspers is
to come attended with six, one of ninety thousand with 18 Horsemen, and so
proportionably: every Zaim is entitled Kiilig or Sword, so that when the Turks
calculate the strength or numbers that a Beglerbeg is able to bring into the
field for the service of his Prince, they make a computation upon so many Zaims
and Timariots themselves, which they call so many swords, not numbering the
people with which they come accompanied.

The Timariots are obliged to serve with lesser Tents, and to be provided with
3 or 4 Baskets for every man that attends them, for their Office is, besides
fighting, as also of the Zaims, and Spahees, to carry earth, and stones for
making Batteries and Trenches, whilst the Janissaries are in skirmish with the
Enemy. And for every three thousand Aspers rent the Timariots are sessed at a
man and horse, as the Zaim is for every five thousand: And both one and the
other of these Soldiers little differ from those in England which hold their
lands in Capite, or the ancient (...) of Knights-service.

Both Zaims and Timariots are disposed into Regiments under command of
Colonels, called Alai-Begler, who march with Colors, and the In Turkish Tabl.
Alem.
Kettle Drum: these Colonels are again under the command of the Pashaw, or
Sangiack-beg, and he under the Beglerbeg; which Forces being united into one
body, repair to the Rendezvous appointed by the In Turkish Serasker.
general, who is either the Grand Signior in person, or the Vizier Azem, or
some other eminent person qualified with the title of Vizier.

These two Orders of Soldiery are not only appropriated to Landservice, but
some also are destined to the Sea, who are called Deria Kaleminde, and are
under the command of the Captain Pashaw or Admiral: but the Zaims are most
commonly dispensed with as to the Sea-service in their own persons, upon the
payment of so much money as they are esteemed at in the Signiors Books, out of
which Levends are raised, and enrolled in the Registers of the Arsenal; but the
Timariots can never be excused from their personal duty and service with their
attendance of Soldiery, according to the value of their Lands.

Neither the one nor the other of these can be dispensed with from their
personal service at Land; no excuse in time of the Grand Signiors Wars is
lawful or pleadable: if sick, they are carried in HorseLitters or Beds; if
Infants, in Hampers, or Baskets, and in their very Cradles accustomed to the
hardship, hazard, and discipline of War. And thus much shall serve in brief to
have spoken in explication of the Nature of the Zaims and Timariots, which come
under the general denomination of Spahees, and (...) the best part of the
Turkish Armies; we shall now proceed to declare, as far as can probably be
computed, the number of these Horse which fill up the vast Host that has
overspred so large a proportion of the world.

CHAP. III. A Computation of the numbers of the Forces arising from the Zaims
and Timariots.
IT were a work of too great labor, considering the little satisfaction and
delight it would afford the Reader, to proceed accurately in describing the
just numbers of those which follow these Zaims and Timariots; it will be
sufficient to denote, that the smallest number of a Zaim is four men, and is
the greatest of a Timariot, whose lowest condition is obliged to maintain a
single man, and the highest of a Zaim to serve with nineteen; so that whosoever
will survey this Turkish Host, must make his Calculate a little more or less by
conjecture and judgment.

And this difficulty is the more augmented, when I consider the fraud is used
by the Accomptants, Registers, and Muster-Masters of the Grand Signiors
Enrolments, who are as well acquainted with the arts and sweetness of making
false Musters, as they are in the most ingenious places of Christendom; and
perhaps Policy may afford a connivance to this fraud, for the sake of a
superlative face of their Armies; which they love to express by this usual
similitude, Asker reml deria misal, As innumerable as the sands of the Sea
shore: but in effect the noise is greater than the reality, and he that will
sum up their number, may find Arithmetic to make the account, which by the
vast extent of Tents, confusion of Baggage, train of Servants, and attendants
of the Camp, appears infinite in the popular estimation. Besides the Turkish
Army admits of great increase and decrease by the many Interlopers, as we may
call them, which the Zaims for their own honor introduce to fill up their
numbers on a day of muster, or appearance; so that one would admire to see, in
so short a time so apparent a decay in the Turkish Camp: which abuse, the great
and famous Vizier Mahomet Kiupruli with cruelty and extraordinary severity
endeavored to remedy upon his expedition for recovery of Tenedos and Lemnos,
and conquest of Janoua in Transylvania; but it is impossible for one man to
know, and see, and remedy all disorders, and is amongst the Turks called Aain
oin a secret fraud, as difficult to be totally remedied, as it is to be
thoroughly discovered.

But that which makes the principal difference and various change herein, is
the death of Zaims and Timariots; some of which holding an estate only for
life, and others dying without heirs of their bodies, their Lands (...) to the
Crown: Which Estates being improved by the industry of the Possessors, above
the primary valuation in the Records, and afterward falling into the hands of
the Prince, are bestowed again on others according to their true estimate,
which is oftentimes double of the former. By which means, the number of the
Grand Signiors Soldiery is increased; and it is a point very observable, Note.
that as other Princes lose by the fall, and death of their Subjects; the Grand
Signior is the only gainer, for of the most that are slain in a day of Battle,
the Estates accrue to him, in disposal again of which, he observes this Rule,
to gratify many with that which was before the proportion of a single person.

But to come now to the express and distinct account of the Ziamets and
Timariots in every part and Government of the Empire, this Computation is
extracted out of the Imperial Rolls, and Registers of the Grand Signior.

In the Government of Anatolia are reckoned as follows; in the

Of Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Kiotahia 39 948 Saruhan 41 674 Aidin 19 572
Kastamoni 24 570 Hudawendighiar 42 1005 B^li 14 551 Mentesche 52 381 Angura 10
257 Karahisar 10 615 Teke ili 7 257 Kiangri 7 381 Hamid 9 585 Sultan Ughi 7 392
Karesi 7 240 Jenige hisar 7 12

Total of Ziamets are 295 and 7440 Timariots

So that computing at the lowest (...) 4 Zaims is the person, and Ziamet the
Land for maintenance of the Zaim.
Gebelues to every Zaim with them and their followers, must make 1180

Doubling the number of Timariots at the lowest rate makes 14880

In all 16060

For maintenance of which Army, 80 Aspers makes a Doller or a piece of 8.
the Rents in the Ottaman (...) are, Aspers 37310700

There were farther in past times allotted to the attendance of this Army about
6900 men for mending the ways, bringing provisions, and service of the
Artillary; there was also an allowance for 1280 Sutlers, or Victualers of the
Camp, and for (...) Trumpeters, and Drummers, which were Gypsies; but this was
when Anatolia was a Frontier Country to the Christians, and was therefore
better fortified and accommodated; but since it is become one of the innermost
parts of the Empire, that Rent is converted into the possessions of Zaims and
Timariots, so that there is a farther addition of 330 Ziamets, and 1136
Timariots.

In the Government of Caramania are reckoned

Sangiacks 7. Ziamets Timariots (...) 18 512 Nighde 11 355 (...) 12 144
Jenischeher 13 244 Akscheher 6 122 Kyrscheher 4 430 Akserai 9 358 Which make 73
2165

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the lowest rate are 292

Of Timariots at the same account 4600

Which makes in all 4892

The Rent according to the Ottoman Statutes is, Aspers 10500175

In the Government of Diarbekir are reckoned 12 Sangiacks besides those of
Kiurdistaw and (...), which are computed to make 1800 men; but I find only 9
denoted for the Ziamets and Timariots, viz.

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Amed 9 167 Charpurt 70 163 Ezani 10 122 Sipurek 0
1 Nesbin 1 5 Chasenghif 5 30 Tchemescherek 2 7 Kuleb 3 24 Sangiar 6 21 Which
make 106 540

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the lowest rate will make 424

Timariots Gebelues at the same rate will make 1080

1504

The Rent is not described of this Conntry in the Ottoman Statutes.

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Damascus, called in Turkish Scham, are 7
Sangiacks,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Damaseus 87 337 Jerusalem 9 161 Aglun 4 61 Bahura
9 39 Sifad 5 123 Gaza 7 108 Nabolos 7 44 Which make 128 873

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate 512

The Gebelues of Timariots 1746

In all 2258

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Liwas,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Liwas 48 928 Amasia 19 249 Tchurum 16 310 Buzadick
15 731 Dermurki 1 310 Cianik 7 348 Arebkir 2 153 Which make 108 3029

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate 432

The Timariots 6058

In all 6490

The Rent for maintenance hereof 13087327

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Erzrum are,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Erzrum 56 2214 Karahizarscharki 32 904 Kieifi 8
229 Pasin 9 654 Hanes Esber 2 435 Tortum 10 491 Mamervan 4 96 Melazkerd 0 272
Tekman 1 253 122 5548

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate 488

The Timariots 11096

In all 11584

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Wan are,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Wan 48 147 Adilgewar 29 101 Ergisch 0 14
Senureghiul 32 203 Tchoba^lu 2 36 Ghiokiche 36 160 Derekgher 27 79 Chiorluk 7
61 Faniiazi 4 25 185 826

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate make 740

The Timariots. 1652

In all 2392

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Marasch are,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Marusch 10 118 Malatia 8 276 Asab 9 118 27 512

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate make 108

The Timariots 1024

1132

The Rent for maintenance, Aspers 9420317

In the Government of Cyprus are,

Zangiacks. Ziamets. Timariots. Itchili 16 60 Alaine 0 119 Cyprus 9 308 Sch^ 2
156 Tarsus 13 428 40 1067

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate make 160

The Timariots 2134

2294

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Tripoli in Syria are,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Tripoli 12 87 Hams 15 169 Gebele 9 91 Selemie 4 52
Hamaz 23 171 63 570

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate make 250

Timariots 1140

1392

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Rika are,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Rika 30 143 Serug 9 291 Biregek 15 109 Ane 6 123
60 666

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate make 240

Of the Timariots 1332

1572

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Trabezond are no Sangiacks as is
declared in the First Book; yet within the Jurisdiction of the City it self are
56 Ziamets, and 398 Timariots; So as the computation of that place is of 920
men.

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Aleppo are,

Sangiacks. Ziamets. Timariots. Aleppo 73 295 Adana 11 191 Kelis 17 295 Azir 2
91 Balis 7 86 Mearre 7 86 117 1044

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate make 468

Of the Timariots. 2088

2556

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Tchilder are,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Olti 3 123 Erdehamburek 9 86 Hagrek 2 23 Hartus 13
39 Ardnug 4 149 Pusenhaf 11 18 Penbek 8 54 Tarchir 2 4 Luri 9 10 Ustucha 1 7
Achankiulk 11 37 Achtala 6 6 Asin 4 14 Penbeck 14 89 Pertekrek 9 0 106 659

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former rate make 424

Of Timariots 1318

1742

In the Government of the Captain Pashaw, or Lord Admiral, are,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Negropont. 12 188 Mytilene. 4 83 Kogia i will. 25 187
Sifla. 32 235 Karliili. 11 119 Galipoli. 14 32 Rhodes. 5 71 Betgai. 5 146
Mezestra. 16 91 124 1152

The Gebelues of the Zaims at the former proportion make 500

Of Timariots 2304

2804

For maintenance of which the Rent set down in the Ottoman Statutes is, Aspers
10800000

In the Government of the Beglerbeg of Rumeli, otherwise Romania, are,

Sangiacks Ziamets Timariots Sophia 337 1788 Kiostendil 48 1017 Morea 100 242
Alexandria of Epyrus 19 205 Tirhala 26 525 Silistra 75 432 Nigheboli 60 344
Uchri 60 342 Aulona 68 489 Jania 62 345 Ilbasan 18 138 Tchirmen 20 130 Salonica
36 262 Wize 20 79 Delunia 24 165 Uskiup 20 344 Kerklesa 1 18 Dukakin 10 53
Widin 17 225 Alagehizar 27 509 Serzerin 17 225 Waltcarin 10 317 1075 8194

The Zaims with their Gebelues at the former proportion make 4300

The Timariots 16388

This the lowest rate 20688

But the ordinary computation of the Zaims and Timariots in this place with
their Gebelues, is of about 30200 fighting men, or thereabouts; to which is
added the Soldiers of the Beglerbeg, Sangiackbegs, and other Officers, which
commonly amount to 2500. The Militia maintained with the Lands of the Country
may be computed at 32700, or 33000 men.

Besides this Militia in Romania, there is another sort called Jureghian or
Jurukler, who have their Estates in Fee from Father to Son, of which there are
accounted about 1294 Families: There is also another sort in the Province of
Dobridge, called Signifies a Chimney.
Ogiacks, of which there are about 4000 Houses: Of the same kind in the
Province of Kizilge are 200 Houses, in Tchirmen 351 of Cingani, which are the
same as amongst us the Race of the Gypsies; in Wize 170: So that the whole sum
of Ogiacks may arrive (...) the number of 4721, or at most to 5000. These are
obliged every year to draw out of every thirty persons five, called Eschkingi
or Volunteers, who are to join themselves with the Tartars for making
Excursions into Russia, Poland, or other parts; and so yearly they
interchangeably take their course. The other 25 remaining are called Jamak, and
are not obliged personally to serve when the Grand Signiors Wars call them to
employment; but then for every 5000 Aspers Rent they possess of the Grand
Signiors Lands, they are fessed at one man; who are assigned to serve out of
those whose turn it was that year to have accompanied the Tartars in their
Robberies. The principal Office of these is to attend the Artillery, Baggage,
and Provisions, to mend the Ways and Bridges for passage of the Army. To the
like Service are obliged certain Families of Bulgarians, for carriage of Hay,
and cutting Grass, according to the Season of the Year.

The number of the Zaims and Timariots in the Governments of the Beglerbegs of
Buda, Temswar, and Bosna, I find not particularly described in the Ottoman
Books; but however according to the best information, that Militia on the
Confines of the Empire (...) Serhadli, amount to the number of about 70000
fighting men, paid out of the Rents of the Sangiacks of that Country. But
though the Militia of Buda be not set down in the Registers of more ancient
date at Gonstantinople, because it is as it were a Principality independent
both for its eminency, Revenue, and large extent of Dominions; yet in that City
it self is strict order observed, and the Rolls of their Force most exactly
known and computed; to which the Turks have a strict eye, it being a Frontier
Garrison of much importance, and the Key of Hungary; the Militia of which, as I
learned from Officers of note, during my residence in that place, was according
to this precise account: Of

Janissaries 12000 Spahees 1500 Zaims and Timariots 2200 Azaps, which are the
meanest sort of Soldiery, 1800 Belonging to the Castle of Buda 1200 Jebegees,
or Armourers 1900 The Guard at the Gate called Cuchuc Cappe 500 Topgees, or
Gunners 500 Martoloes, a sort of FootSouldiers 300 Soldiers belonging to the
Powder-house 280 The Soldiery who are Servants to the Pashaw 3000

In all 22180; to which adding the Militia of Bosna, and other parts of
Sclavonia, and all along the Frontier Countries, which extends for above 800
English miles, the number may amount to no less than 70000 fighting men. But we
here discourse only of the number of the Zaims and Timariots, which whole sum
amounts to, of Zaims 10948, and of Timariots 72436; which makes in all 83380;
but this is calculated at the lowest rate, they may very well be reckoned to be
one third more, besides other Militia's of Cairo, or other Orders of Souldery
to be treated of in the following Chapters.

These Partitions or Divisions were first made by Solomon the Magnificent, as
the best Rule and Method for an orderly disposition of his Militia, and as the
strongest nerve of the Ottoman Force: but as with Time in the most exact
compositions of Discipline, corruptions through covetousness and ambition of
officers are introduced; so also in the just disposal of these Rents according
to the ancient Institutions: for the Beglerbegs, Pashaws, Treasurers, and other
Officers, instead of bestowing this maintenance to the Soldiers, according to
their merits of Valor, or long Service, reserve it to prefer and gratify
their Servants and Pages, obliging them in recompense thereof under various
Services; some that live at Constantinople, or near the Sea, to defray the
charges of all Boats and Vessels which carry their household Provisions; others
that live in the inland Countries agreeing with the Treasurer of the Soldiery,
without regard to the true Heirs, or any other consideration, set to sale these
Rents to them who proffer most; so that in time of Harvest the Pashaw sends
abroad his Officers to gather his Profits from the poor Timariots, with that
oppression and violence as causes disturbances, differences, and Lawsuits
amongst them, which being to be decided by Judges partly interess'd in the
Quarrel, the Sentence is certainly determined on their side who have most power
and most money.

The aforegoing account of Zaims and Timariots is the most reasonable one can
be given: And because we have reckoned them at the lowest rate, making some
allowance to the 83380, (...) Militia may amount to an hundred thousand men,
which, as I have heard, is the utmost number of this sort of Soldiery.

CHAP. IV. Of certain Customs and Laws observed amongst the Ziamets and
Timariots.
AMongst these Forces of Ziamets and Timariots are in time of War and Action
mixed certain Volunteers or Adventurers, called by the Turks Gionullu, who
maintain themselves upon their own expense in hopes by some signal Actions of
Valor to obtain the succession into a Zaims or Timariots Lands, as places are
made void by the slaughter of the War. These men are often very hardy, and
ready to attempt the most desperate Exploits, moved by a desire of the reward,
and by the persuasion, that at worst dying in a War against Christians, they
become Martyrs for the Mohammedan Faith. It is reported, that in one day, upon
the assaults given Serinswar, or the new Fort of Count Serini, one Timariots
Farm was bestowed eight times; one being slain it was conferred on another, and
so on a third, and so on the rest; all which had the misfortune to fall, until
it rested on the eighth, the others dying with the title only of Timariots.

The Zaims or (...) being aged, or impotent, have in their life time power to
resign up the right of their Estates to their Sons, or other Relations.

It is not lawful for a Peasant or Clown to mount his Horse, or girt his Sword
like a Spahee, until first he has had part of his Education in the Service or
Family of some Pashaw, or person of Quality; unless it be on the Confines of
the Empire, where having given evident Testimonies of his Courage, he may then
become Competitor for the vacant Farms of a Zaim, or Timariot.

It is the Custom of Romania, that a Zaim, or Timariot dying in the Wars, his
Ziamet Rents are divided into as many Timariot Farms as he has Sons; but if a
Timariot has no more then 3000 Aspers Rent, it descends entirely to his eldest
Son; but if it be more, it is proportionably divided amongst the rest of his
Children.

But if they dye of a natural death at their own homes, the lands fall to the
disposal of the Beglerbeg of the Country, either to confer them on the Heirs of
the deceased, on any of his Servants, or sell them at the best advantage.

But in Anatolia there are many Zaims and Timariots whose Estates are
hereditary to them and their Heirs; and are not obliged to serve in person in
the War but only to send their Gebelues, or number of Servants according to the
value of their Estates; of which duty if they fail in the time of War, that
years Rent is confiscated to the Exchequer; and this Estate descends to the
next of Kin, whether derived from the Male or Female line.

CHAP. V. The State of the Militia in Gran Cairo, and Egypt.
THE Guard and protection of the Kingdom of Egypt is committed to the charge of
twelve Begs, some of which are of the ancient Race of the Mamalukes, confirmed
by Sultan Selin upon the taking of Cairo; these have the command of the whole
Militia in their hands, whereby they are grown proud, powerful, and ready upon
every discontent to rise in Rebellion; every one of these maintains 500
fighting men, well appointed for War, and exercised in Arms, which serve but as
their Guard, and for Servants of their Court; with which they go attended in
journeys, in their huntings, and public appearances; under the command of
these twelve Captains are twenty thousand Horse, paid at the charge of the
Country, whose Office is by turns to convey yearly the Pilgrims to Mecha, and
the annual Tribute of 600000 Zechins to the Ottoman Court, whether it be judged
requisite to send it either by Land or Sea; these are the standing Militia of
the Country, out of which, unless upon the foregoing occasions, they are not
obliged to other service; their principal duty being, to prevent the invasion
of the African Montaneers, who often make incursions from their barren Rocks,
into the fat and fruitful Soyls of Egypt. Besides this Militia, are computed
eighty thousand Timariots, out of which they yearly transport about 2500, or
3000 men to the Wars of Candy; but to more remote Countries, or the late Wars
of Hungary, I did not hear that this Soldiery has usually been called.

These twelve Beghs of Egypt are noble by blood, enjoying an hereditary Estate
descending from the Father to the Son; which richness joined with the command
of a powerful Army, has rendered them so formidable and insolent, that
oftentimes they take upon them an authority to imprison and depose the Pashaw
from his Office, and spoil him of all the riches he has collected in his three
years Government: by which means, are always great jealousies, and enmities
between the Pashaw and these Beghs; dissentions and rebellions to that high
degree, that many times it has been little different from an absolute Revolt.
Ibrahim Pashaw was in the year 1664 imprisoned by them, and obtained his
liberty for About 100000 Dollars at Cairo.
600 Purses of money; after whose departure the brother of the said Ibrahim,
upon some certain pretenses on the Pashaw's score, falling into their hands,
was imprisoned also, but shortly after obtained his releasement by the Grand
Called Embra (...).
Signiors Master of Horse, who was sent expressly to compose the disorders of
Egypt; which were now proceeded to that degree, as without some satisfactory
atonement could not be termed otherwise than a total defection; and therefore
they resigned up one called Sulficar Bei to justice, who In the month of Feb.
1604.
being brought to Adrianople, was immediately in presence of the Grand Signior
put to death. But the Turk has always on occasions of these disturbances and
insolences, dissembled and connived at the disorders, perceiving the distemper
of that Kingdom to be such, as can with much difficulty be redressed, fearing
that were forcible remedies applied, they would cause so violent a commotion of
humors, as would absolutely rent it from the body of the Empire.

The Auxliary Forces to the forementioned (...) of the Turks,

Are the Tartars, Valachians, Moldavians, and Tranfilvanians, under the command
of their respective Princes, who are obliged to serve in person whenever
called by the Sultans command. The Tartars, I mean of Crim, are to furnish a
hundred thousand men with the Tartarhan, or Prince in person to lead them, when
the Grand Signior himself appears in the field; but if the Army is commanded by
the Vizier only, then the Son of the Tartarhan is to serve; or having no issue,
the Army to the number of 40 or 50 thousand fighting men, is to be conducted
under the chief Minister. But the Princes of Valachia, Moldavia, and
Transylvania are (...) excused from personal attendance in the Camp, each of
which respectively are to be attended with six or seven thousand men a piece.
And though the Prince of Transylvania called Apafi, was in the last War against
the Emperor not called out of the Confines of his own Country; it was with
design that he should keep that Station free from the irruption of the Enemy
not that he was disobliged from his personal attendance on the Visiers Camp.

CHAP. VI. Of the Spahees.
A Spakee.


HItherto we have treated of the Turkish Horse that are maintained by Farms,
and Rents of Lands: now it will be necessary to discourse of those that receive
their constant pay from the Grand Signiors Treasury; and these are called
Spahees, who may not improperly be termed the Gentry of the Ottoman Empire,
because they are commonly better educated, courteous and refined, than the
other sort of Turks, and are in number 12000. Of these there are two Orders,
one called Silahtart, who carry yellow Colors, and the other Spahaoglari or
the Servants of the Spahees, and have their Colors red; these Servants have
now obtained the precedence above their Masters; for though the Silahtari are
very ancient, and dednce their institution from Ali their first Founder, who
was one of the four Companions of Mahomet; yet Sultan Mahomet the third, on a
day of Battle in Hungary, seeing the Silahteri routed and put to flight, with
violent passion and earnestness endeavored to stop their course; and
perceiving the Servants of these Spahees to remain still in a body, incited
them to revenge the shameful cowardice of their Masters, who immediately
encouraged with the words of the Sultan, clapping up a red Flag, gave so bold
an onset on the Enemy, and with that success as wholly recovered the glory of
the day: in remembrance of which service and notable exploit, the Sultan as
disposer of all Honors and Orders, gave ever after the pre-eminence to these
Servants before their Masters; since which time this new institution of
Spahaoglari has always been continued.

These Light Horse men are armed with their Scimitar and Lance, called by them
Mizrak, and some carry in their hands a Gerit, which Their Arms.
is a weapon about two foot long, headed with Iron, which I conceive to be the
same with the Pila amongst the Romans, which by long exercise and custom they
throw with a strange dexterity and violence, and sometimes darting it before
them in the full career of their Horse, without any stop recover it again from
the ground: they also wear a straight Sword named Caddare, with a broad blade
fixed to the side of their Saddle, which, or the Scimitar, they make use of
when they arrive to handy-blows with the Enemy; many of them are armed with
Bows and Arrows, and with Pistols, and Carbines; but esteem not much of
firearms, having an opinion, that in the field they make more noise than
execution: some of them wear jacks of Mail, and Head-pieces painted with the
color of their Squadron; in fight they begin their onset with Allah, Allah,
and make three attempts to break within the Ranks of (...) Enemy, in which if
they fail, they then make their retreat.

The Asian Spahees are better mounted than commonly those of Europe, Comparison
of the Spahees of Asia and Europe
though these being Borderers on the Confines of the Christians, having learned
much of their Discipline by constant skirmishes and combats, are trained in the
art of War, and become the more valiant and experienced Soldiers. But the
Asiatick Spahees were formerly the more rich, many particular men of them
bringing into the field thirty or forty men apiece, besides their Led-Horses,
Tents and other accommodations proportionable to their retinue; but these
Cavaliers seemed too great and proud to the Vizier Kupriuli, for the condition
of common Troopers, and infected with the Epidemical Spirit of Faction and
Mutiny, which raged at that time amongst all the Grandees of the Empire; which
caused him to strike off their heads with as little remorse, as one would do
the tops of Poppies, until he had absolutely made a total destruction of them.
Those now which remain are poor and inconsiderable, contented to comrade 10 or
12. in a Company for maintenance of a poor Tent, and 2 or 3 Horses and a Mule
for Baggage and Provisions; these are more tame, and subject to the Cudgel, and
can take a beating patiently on the soles of the feet, which is their
punishment, as the Janissaries is to receive the blows on the Buttocks; (that so
this chastisement may neither incommode the seat of the Horsemen, nor the
marches of the Foot) but if the Crime be great and capital, they are sent for
by Chiauses, or Pursuivants to appear before the Vizier, by whom being
condemned, and strangled near the Walls of the Grand Signiors (...), their
bodies are afterward about two or three hours in the night thrown into the
Sea, without other solemnity than the firing of one of those great Guns next
the Sea, which are planted under the Walls of the Seraglio, which serve for so
many warning pieces for others Example.

Their Pay is diverse, but in general, it is from twelve to a hundred Their Pay.
Aspers a day: those who proceed from the Seraglioes of Pera Ibrahim, Pashaw,
and Adrianople, which are so many Nurseries and Schools as well of the
principles of War, as literature; or have been Cooks Mates (for the Cook of
these Societies is a principal Officer of respect) or Baltagees, that is,
Hatchet men, who cut wood for the Grand Signiors Seraglio, and are licensed to
live abroad with the title of Spahee, have the lowest pay of twelve Aspers a
day; but those who are extracted from the less, or greater Chamber of the Grand
Signiors own Seraglio, called Seni serai, have 19 Aspers pay, and if they are
favored with the title of an Office, they receive two or three Aspers (...).
But such as are elected to the War out of more eminent Chambers, as the
Landery, the Turbant office, the Dispensatory, the Killer Odasi.
Treasury, the Hazna Odasi.
Falconers Lodge and others, (which we have mentioned in the Description of the
Seraglio) have (...) (...).
at first thirty Aspers daily pay: an Called Taraki
increase of which is obtained sometimes by the Viziers, or Registers favor
unto two Aspers more; sometimes by services in the War, by receiving two Aspers
augmentation for the head of every Enemy he brings in; two Aspers more for This
is done that the Grand Signior may not be cheated by having the pay continued
to those who are dead.
intelligence of the death of any Spahee, out of the pay of the deceased; as
also at the Incoronation, or (...) of every Grand (...), five Aspers increase
is given as a (...) in general to the whole Army of Spahees: and thus many of
them by art, industry, and good success go augmenting until they arrive to a
hundred Aspers, and here is their non plus ultra, they can rise no higher. They
are paid quarterly from three months to three months; which they may omit to
receive for 9 months, but if twelve pass, they can only demand the nine, the
other quarter, or more is confiscated to the public Exchequer: Their place of
payment is now in the Hall of the Vizier, which formerly was in the houses of
the Pay-Masters, and Treasurer, but changed by the Vizier Kupriuli, on occasion
of the disorders and abuses of the Officers which caused mutinies, and
disturbances amongst the Soldiery. For the rich Spahees living far distant, to
excuse themselves from a long journey to the City, agreed with the Pay-Masters
that they for some certain part of their income, should without farther trouble
to themselves, take up their dues, and make it over quarterly to their
Countries of abode; these men thus tasting the benefit of this trade, agreed
with others for some little gains to dispatch them before the rest; by which
means, and the payment only on Wednesdays, and Saturdays, those (...) that came
from remote parts, making so long attendance, had with their excesses in
Constantinople, spent as much as the principal sum they expected; of which
growing sensible, at first they began to murmur, then to threaten the
Pay-masters, and at last it proceeded to open mutiny, by forcing (...) doors,
breaking the windows of the Officers, with many other insolences and
disorders, until 'Kupriuli, to remedy these abuses, ordered the money to be
given out in his presence, and the payment to be continued every day until the
pay was ended.

The Sons of Spahees, presenting themselves before the Vizier, may Sons of
Spahees
claim the privilege of being enrolled in the Grand Signiors Books; but their
pay, which is the lowest rate twelve Aspers a day, is to issue forth from their
Fathers proportion, but then they are in the road of preferment, and are
capable by their services and merits to make additions upon foundation of their
own industry. Besides the foregoing ways by which the Spahees gain their
increase of pay, I am given to understand that formerly they had another
benefit, called Gulamiie or safe Conduct money; which was one per cent. of all
moneys Accidental gains to the Spahees.
to those whom the Collectors of the Grand Signiors Revenue summoned to convey
the Treasure for more security to the Capital City, besides the maintenance of
themselves and Horses in the journey; but this as too (...) a deduction from
the Imperial Revenue, was with time taken off, to the great discontent of the
Spahees in general.

The Grand Signior going in person to the Wars, according to the ancient
Custom of other Sultans, bestows a largess on the Spahees, of five thousand
Aspers a man, which they call (...) Akchiasi, or a donative for buying Bows and
Arrows; as also to the Janissaries, as we shall hereafter mention.

This Army of Spahees is in the War a mere confused multitude, Their Discipline.
without any government, or distribution into Troops or Regiments, but march in
heaps, fight without order, little account kept of their presence or absence
from the Camp; only at the pay in the month of Called in Turkish Kassem Ulefefi.
November whosoever appears not, unless favored by the Officers, has his name
raced from the (...) Signiors Register.

Their duty in the War is to stand Sentinel with a Janizary at the end of every
cord of the Grand Signiors Pavilion, as also at the Viziers, armed with his
Cemytar, Bows, Arrows, and Lance, mounted on Horseback; as the Janizary on foot
with his Sword and Musket; and also the charge of the Treasure for payment of
the Militia, is committed in the field to their custody.

This Order of Soldiers was in ancient times in great esteem and honor in all
parts of the Empire, by reason of their accomplishment How they have lost their
honor.
in Learning, refined Education in the Imperial Court, their nearness to
preferments, and acquaintance and interest with the Grandees of the Empire: The
place of the (...) in their marches to the War, was to flank the Grand
Signior on the left hand, and the Spahi Oglani on the right, and were always
the ultimate reserve of the Battle, as the Lifeguard to the Sultan: But like
men not knowing how to comport themselves in prosperity, growing mutinous and
ambitious to have a hand in the Government, became Confederates with the
Janissaries in conspiracy against the life of their true Sovereign Sultan Osman;
to which Treason adding other Insolences, they justly were deprived of the
favor of Sultan Morat, and Sultan Ibrahim; the terrors also of their late
sedition remaining freshly still impressed in the memory of this present
Emperor Sultan (...), when they complotted against his own and his Mothers
life, is the cause they have still gone declining from the degree of their
pristine honor and esteem; for the Prince as he is the Fountain of Honor, so
is his countenance and favor the spirit and life which gives a luster and
sparkling to those Titles and Riches he has conferred; other Seditions hastened
the ruin of their reputation, and in the year 1657, when the Vizier Mahomet
Kiupruli, on occasion of his Expedition against Janova, summoned the Asian
Spahees to the Rendezvous in Hungary; who instead of yielding obedience to the
command of their General, elected a new Captain a Spahee of their own rank,
called Hassan Aga, preferred to be Pashaw of Aleppo: whose name at that time, I
remember upon the hopes of the dissentions he might create amongst the Turks,
was greatly famed and celebrated over all Christendom. These Combustions in
Asia headed by the chief Enemy to the Vizier, caused (...) to leave many of his
designs against Transylvania uneffected, and to clap up a Peace on reasonable
and moderate terms of honor, that so he might hinder the progress of a
dangerous evil which now threatened and approached the Capital City; for by this
time Hassan Pashaw being arrived near the Walls of Scutary, began to treat by
way of Petition to the Grand Signior, and represent that out of his zeal to the
good of his Majesty and his Empire, he had undertaken a long march to inform
him of the corruption of his Ministers and the miscarriages of Government; his
tender years as yet not having ripened his judgment to penetrate these evils,
which with time his understanding would discover to be too inveterate and
incurable. All the oppressions and aggrievances of the Soldiery he seemed to
object to the cruelty and oppression of Kupriuli, and in appearance had nothing
but thoughts of the honor and safety of the Grand Signiors person; and
doubtless this man was unfit to manage such a design, for he entertained
scruples of Conscience, and a remorse and tenderness in spilling Mohammedan
blood, considerations which are incompatible with the condition of a Rebel; for
who has the impiety to draw his Sword against his Prince, must stop at no bars
either of divine or humane right to maintain it. This gave advantage to
Kupriuli to effect his design upon his Enemy; for in the interim of this
Treaty, Mortaza (...) of Babylon, was commanded to possess the City of Aleppo,
and Hassan after many fair messages and promises from the Grand Signior and the
Vizier, was persuaded to return again to Aleppo, to capitulate with Mortaza
concerning those points and aggrievances he sought to have redressed; it being
alleged to him, that (...) had received instructions to treat, and a
plenipotentiary power to grant and firm as far as should be reasonable and
honorable for the Grand Signior to condescend. Hassan with this easy answer
returned toward Aleppo; near which place he credulously committed himself into
the hands of Mortaza, who no sooner had him within his Tents, but he concluded
all Controversies and Capitulations by the decision of his head from his body:
The whole Army of Spahees immediately, with the fall of their General, was
scattered, and divided themselves; but about three hundred of them being
apprehended by Mortaza, were sent to Constantinople, where in the presence of
the Grand Signior within the walls of the (...) at Scutari they were all
executed; since which their pride has ever gone declining, and their name
become so odious amongst the people, that upon the very nominating a Spahee,
the vulgar were ready to run upon them with stones, or other weapons that came
next to hand; so that now the Spahees are much eclipsed in their ancient fame
and honor.

There are besides these two foregoing sorts of Spahees, other four, the first
calltd Sag Ulefigi, that is appointed to march on the right hand of the
Spahaoglani, and carry white and red Colors: The second is Sol Ulefigi, whose
place is on the left hand of the Silahtari; which carry white and yellow
Colors. The third Sagureba, that is Soldiers of Fortune that are to march on
the right hand of the Sag ulefigi, and carry green Colors. The fourth is Sol
Gureba, whose place is to march on the left hand of the Ulefigi, and carry
white Banners: but these four sorts of Spahees are raised and listed according
to necessity and occasions of War, and are obliged to all services and duties;
their pay is from 12 Aspers to 20 a day, and are capable according to their
merits, of being promoted to one of the superior Orders. There is also another
sort of more elevated Spahees, called Mutafaraca, who issue out from the
Seraglio with more favor than the ordinary sort of Spahees, and are 400 or 500
in number, their pay is 40 Aspers a day, and have always the obligation or
duty on them to serve and attend the Grand Signior when he goes in progress for
pleasure from one Village to another.

And thus much shall serve to have declared in brief concerning the institution
and discipline of the Spahees, as also of all the Militia of the Turkish Horse;
we shall now proceed to declare something of their Infantry.

CHAP. VII. Of the Janissaries.
A Janizary.


THE next main sinew of the Ottoman Power is the order of Janissaries, which is
as much as to say, the new Militia; and yet their Antiquity may be deduced from
Ottoman the first King of the Turks; but because they received honors and
privileges from Amurath their third King, our Turkish History accounts that to
be the Their beginning.
time of the first original: it is certain that in his time they were
modelized, and certain Laws prescribed both for their education and
maintenance; when by the counsel of Catradin, otherwise called Kara (...),
Amurath's prime Vizier, it was ordained that for the augmentation of this
Militia, every fifth Captive taken from the Christians, above the age of 15
years, should be the dues of the Sultan who at first were to be distributed
amongst the Turkish Husbandmen in Asia, to learn and be instructed in the
Turkish Language and Religion.

Their number at first was not accounted above 6 or 7000, now with Their number.
time they are increased to the number of twenty thousand effective men; but
were there a list taken of all those who assume this title of Janizary, and
enjoy their privileges though not their pay, there would be found above a
hundred thousand; six or seven go under the name of one Janizary, for gaining
by this means a privilege of being free from all Duties and Taxes, they bestow
a certain sum of money or annual presents on the Officers, in consideration
of which they are owned and countenanced as Janissaries. Their Habit is as the
Picture Their Habit.
represents, wearing always the beard of their Chin and underlip shaven, which
some say they learned from the Italians; but certain it is, that this Custom is
more ancient, than since the time of their Neighborhood unto Italy: this
manner of their shaving being generally used as a token of their subjection,
and so all the Pages and Officers in the Seraglio of great men, orders of
Gardeners, Baltagees or Hatchetmen and others, are distinguished by this mark
to be in service and obliged to the attendance of a Master: But when they are
either licensed from the War, or promoted to Office, or freed to their own
disposal, they immediately suffer their Beards to grow as a sign of (...)
liberty and gravity.

In former times this Militia consisted only of the Sons of Christians, The
Janissaries of whom composed.
educated in the Mohammedan Rights; but of late that politic Custom has been
disused, the reason of which some attribute to the abundance of people the
Turks having of their own to supply all their occasions: but I am rather
induced to another opinion, having not observed the multitude which Histories
and Travelers tell us, that the Turks swarm with; and rather assign the
neglect of this practice, so prejudicial to Christian Interest in these parts,
to the corruption of the Officers, and carelessness in their Discipline.

And though this election of Janissaries out of the eldest and lustiest The
Novices.
Sons of Christians that inhabit Europe (for Asia was exempted) is now (...);
yet such as enter into this Order, whosoever they are (unless the necessity of
the present state of the War be over-urgent) are obliged to (...) their
Novitiate like Tyrones Romani, before they can be enrolled in the Register of
Janissaries, and are called Agiamoglans. The chief Officers of these is called
Stambol Agasi, in whose care and charge it is to enure these men to all
labors, pains, and mortifications, as to cut wood, carry burdens, endure
heats, colds, and other sufferings which may render them obedient, temperate,
vigilant, and patient of all the inconveniences and miseries of War.

The quarters many of these have in the Garden-Lodges of the Their Quarters
Grand Signiors Seraglio's (whereof they are many in and about Constantinople)
to manure and dig the Ground, learn the Art of Plantations, and Husbandry, and
practice (as occasion requires) meaner Offices of labor and servitude: others
of them are placed in the three Seraglio's (we have before mentioned in the
Chapter of Spahees) viz. of Pera, Ibrahim, Pashaw, and Adrianople, where their
principal art is the mystery of Plantation and delitious disposal of Gardens
into the variety of Knots, VValks, Groves, and Fountains; and though there are
many of this profession who have no other thoughts to employ their minds, few
of them are acquainted with any part of polite Husbandry, or know more than the
season to plant their Hartichoaks or Colworts; as to the rules and symmetry of
setting Trees, ordering the Labyrinths of Knots, making pleasing VValks,
Fountains and Groves; it is strange a people that delight so much in Flowers,
in Fields, and Arbours, and have themselves or Ancestors ruined many of the
delightful Paradises of Christians, should be so wholly ignorant and dull in
the contrivance of what they love, as not to be able to borrow one example or
model, which amongst all the Grand Signiors Gardens in Constantinople may
deserve a better name than of a Wilderness.

Others of these (...) are made Baltagees or Hatchet-men to cut wood for the
Seraglio; others are made Cooks and Officers in the Kitchen, such, I mean, as
can already speak the Turkish Language, for those that are ignorant in that
speech or in the Mahometane Religion, are disposed into remoter parts of
Anatolia, where the Janissaries have Possessions and Authority; as to Kiotahia,
where the Called (...).
Lieutenant General of the Janissaries has Revenue; to Karahisar and Angura,
where the Stambol Agasi has principal power; to Mentesche, Sultan Ughi, and
Karosi, where the Turnagibatch and Jaiabatchi, who are chief Officers of the
(...), have Rents and Profits belonging to their Offices, and here they are
employed in plowing and (...) the Ground, or other (...) exercises, until such
time as supplies for the Wars give them occasion to draw out these men from
their several Stations: and then being called to the Chambers of Janissaries,
The manner in making Janissaries.
they orderly march one after the other according to their seniority, one
holding the end of his fellows Garment, appear before the Muster-Master, who
having enrolled their names in the Grand Signiors Register, they run as fast as
they can by their Oda baschi or Master of their Chamber, who gives every one as
he passes a blow under the Ear, to signify their subjection to him: and this
is the Ceremony observed in creating Janissaries.

At their first Enrolment some have but one Asper a day, others 4 Their Pay.
and 5 unto 7 and a half; and so with time and favor of their Officers,
increase to 12 (...) a day, which is the highest pay of any Janizary, and can
have no other advance, unless good Fortune promote them to the degree of
Kiahaia Begh, which is as much as Lieutenant General of the Janissaries, or any
other eminent Office.

Besides this pay, they have their daily provision and diet from the Their Diet
and Clothing.
bounty of the Grand Seignior, and their Table ordered at constant hours, where
they find their Rice, fifty drams of Flesh, and one hundred of Bread their
ordinary Commons, and eat in their respective Refectories like Monks in
Convents, or Scholars in their Colleges; they receive also one Soldiers Coat
yearly, of Cloth made at Salonica of a coarse thread, but warm and convenient,
which in every Month of Ramazan is distributed to each Chamber; so that their
Bellies are full and Backs are warm, and in all points are better provided than
the tattered Infantry which are to be seen in most parts of Christendom. And
thus this people being pampered without cares of seeking their Bread, grow
often querulous and apt to take the fire of Sedition with every spark of
discontent in their Officers, the beginnings of which they commonly make known
at their Assemblies of the Public Divan, whither 4 or 500 of them are obliged
4 times a week, that is Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday, to accompany the
Janizar Agar or their General; at that place they have their Commons from the
Grand Signiors Kitchen: which when they have any subject of discontent they
evidence by slighting, by kicking down their Plates of Rice, and showing better
stomachs to be revenged, than to their Entertainment; which Mutinies the Grand
Signior and Principal Ministers having Mutinies.
found oftentimes fatal, endeavor by fair promises and satisfactory compliance
with their desires to pacify in their first motion.

Janiszar Agasi or General of the Janissaries


The General of this Militia is called Janizar Agasi, and is always elected
from the Hazoda
Royal Chamber of the Seraglio; because it being an Office of great Charge, it
is thought necessary to be entrusted to one The Janizar Aga.
whose Education and Preferment has made a Creature of the Court; which Policy
has been the suppression of diverse mutinies amongst the Janissaries, the
discovery of their Combinations, and an engagement to a stronger dependency on
the favor of the Seraglio. When this General either dies by a natural death,
or the Sword of the Grand Signiors Justice or Authority, his Riches, like that
of other Pashaws, is not confiscated to the Sultans Exchequer; but the
Inheritance accrues to the public Treasury of the Janissaries; which how
dangerous it is to a The public Treasure of the Janissaries.
State to have a Militia endowed with Revenues appropriated to their Officers
(as already we have declared they possess in some parts of Anatolia) and a Bank
of Wealth united to the maintenance of a licentious Sword, the Ottoman Princes
have by sad effects rather felt, than been able by virtue of their absolute
Power to remedy.

The second Chief Officer is the Kiahaia Begh, or Lieutenant General. Officers.


The third is Segban baschi, the Overseer of the Carriage of the Soldiers
Baggage.

The fourth is the Turnagi Bashee, or Guardian of the Grand Signiors Cranes.

The fifth is the Samsongi Bashee, chief Master of the Grand Signiors Mastives.

The sixth is the Zagargi Bashee, Master of the Spaniels.

The seventh is the Solack Bashee, Captain of the Archers, or of such
Janissaries who go armed with Bow and Arrows.

The eighth is Subashi and Assasbashi, who are chief of the Sergeants and
Bailiffs, and attend always at the Grand Signiors Stirrup when at any time on
solemn occasions he shows himself to the people.

A Solack or one of the Grand Signors Footmen


A Paick or another sort of Footmen


The ninth is the Peikbashi, or Commander of that sort of Pages which are
called Peiks, who wear caps of beaten gold, of which there are 60 in number,
who march at Solemnities together with the Solacks near the Person of the Grand
Signior.

The tenth is Mezuraga, or the head Baily of the Janissaries.

These eight last arise from the order of Janissaries, and have their several
Commands in the Army, though the Grand Signior to augment their Power and
Honor the more, bestows on them Titles and Wealth in other Offices.

The Janissaries Chambers (of which there are no others but in Constantinople)
The Janissaries Chambers.
are in number (...), of which 80 are of ancient Foundation, and are called
Eskai Odalar; and 82 called Jeni Odalar, or the new Chambers; over most of
which is a Tchorbagi or Captain: In these Chambers those that are not married
enjoy their Lodgings and Habitation, and twice a day find their Repast, as we
have before mentioned: And thus instead of Monasteries of Friars, the Turk
maintains Convents and Societies of Soldiers, who are trained up with all
modesty and Severity of Discipline.

The Principal Officers of these Chambers are,

First, the Odabashee, or Master of the Chamber, who in the Wars Officers of
the Chambers.
serves as Lieutenant of the Company. Second is Wekilharg, or expenditor for
maintenance of the Chamber. Third is Bairacktar, or Ensign-bearer. Fourth is
Ashgee, or the Cook of the Chamber. Fifth is Karakullukgee, or the under-Cook.
Sixth is the Saka, or the Water-carrier.
The Cook is not only an Officer to dress the Diet and Provision of the
Janissaries, but is also a Monitor or Observer of their good behavior; so that
when any one of them commits a Crime, the Cook is the Officer that executes the
punishment. The under-Cook also serves for an Apparitor, and is he who summons
the married Janissaries at their several Dwellings in Constantinople, when their
Officers command their attendance.

The greatest part of the Janissaries consists of Batchelours or single
Janissaries married.
men; for though Marriage cannot be denied to any of them, yet it is that which
terminates their Preferments, and renders their Seniority incapable of claiming
a right to Offices, or Military Advancement; for being encumbered with a Wife,
and other dependencies, they are judged in a condition not capable to attend
the Discipline of the War, (...) Service of the Grand Signior, and therefore as
to other duty in the times of Peace, besides their appearance every Friday in
their Chambers, and presence of their Officers, they wholly are dispensed with.

In the Wars this Militia is considered as the most valient and best
disciplined Soldiery of the Turkish Camp, and therefore are either kept as a
Reserve, or march in the main Body of the Army. In times of Peace their
Quarters are many times changed, to keep them in employment, from one Castle or
Garrison to another, as to Buda, Kanisia, Temeswar, to Rhodes, Canea, and other
parts: Some of them are appointed to keep Courts of Guard at all Gates and
Avenues of Constantinople, to prevent the Insolences and Injuries their
Companions are apt to offer to Christians, Jews, and others in the streets, who
at some times, being heated with Wine, have in the open market forced Women,
whilst their Comerades have with their Called Haniarres.
Daggers drawn stood over them to defend them from the people; to prevent which
disorders, the Janizar Agasi accustoms to ride the Streets attended with about
40 Mumgies, or Bailiffs of the Janissaries, where meeting any guilty of such
like Crimes, or other Enormities, he seizes them, and carries them to his
Court, where after examination of their fault, he orders them to be beaten, or
if their Crime be great, to be strangled, or sowed in a Sack and thrown into
the Sea; but always their punishment is inflicted privately, perhaps because
they are jealous of a mutiny.

In every Province the Janissaries have their Serdars, who are Colonels Serdars.
or chief of all the Janissaries within that Jurisdiction, who greatly abuse
their Office by taking into their protection any that present or pay them for
this privilege; by which means they have grown so powerful and rich, that some
time past the Command of the whole Ottoman Empire has reposed in the hands of
this Militia.

Their Arms are Muskets and Swords; they fight confusedly in the Field, and
with no more order than the Spahees; only sometimes they draw themselves up
into Cunei, observed amongst the Romans.

And thus much shall serve to have spoken of the Institution and Discipline of
the Janissaries: We shall now proceed to declare how this Militia is decayed,
and upon what grounds it is not maintained in its ancient honor and
flourishing estate.

CHAP. VIII. Whether the Maintenance of an Army of Janissaries according to the
Original Institution, be now agreeable to the Rules of Polity amongst the
Turks.
THis Problem I find first moved by (...), once the Germane Epist. 3. de (...)
Turcica.
Emperors Ambassador to Constantinople, who pretends to speak the Grand
Signiors sense in this particular, on occasions of difference which the
insolent rudeness of the Janissaries had caused between themselves and his
Family: For Rusan Pashaw then Prime Vizier, admonished him friendly to
condescend to any terms of Composition, for that Law could not avail where
Soldiers ruled; and the powerful (...) himself, who then reigned, trembled at
nothing more than the apprehension of some secret Ulcer of perfidiousness.
which might lie concealed within the retirement of the Janissaries.

But as there is no question but a standing Army of veterane and
well-disciplin'd Soldiers must be always useful and advantageous to the
Interest of a Prince; so, on the contrary, negligence in the Officers, and
remisness of Government, produces that licentiousness and wrestiness in the
Soldiery, as betrays them to all the disorders which are dangerous, and of
evil consequence to the welfare of a State.

And so it has fared with the Ottoman Empire, which rising only by the power
of Arms, and established on the blood of many valiant and daring Captains, gave
Privileges, Honors, and Riches to the Militia, and at all times encouraged
their Prowess and forwardness by Rewards, and connivance at their Crimes; by
which indulgence and impunity, these men ill-principled (...) rules of Virtue,
and unequally bearing Prosperity and the favor of the Prince, have for a long
time been gathering a (...) of ill humors ready to receive any contagion of
seditious design, and to maintain it with an impudence constant to the
Janissaries for some Ages, which may equal the levity of the Roman Soldiery,
until they shamelesly set their Empire to sale, and forgot both their old
obedience to the Senate, and reverence to their new Emperors.

The death and ruin of many Grandees, and of the Sultan himself, by such like
Seditions, has at length by dear experience taught the Principal Ministers how
unsafe it is to permit an Army lodged in the bowels of the capital City, of a
disposition favorable to it self, envious, and impatient of any other,
jealous, and always at enmity with the Court, rich and powerful with
Possessions and Rents appertaining to its Commanders in Anatolia, and a
Treasury of unknown sums which have descended to the Common Bank by the decease
of their Generals or Janizar Agas; and therefore have by degrees, and as
prudently as might be, begun to diminish the strength of this (...) by the
destruction of the veterane Soldiers, and ruin of their reputation, by
various arts, in the estimation of the World.

The particular means whereby the Janissaries have been studiously destroyed,
are by many ways evident; for first they are exposed upon every obscure
Service, and drawn forth to encounter every Assault of the Empire; as the Wars
of Candy have exhausted the flower of this Militia, the Battles at Sea buried
vast numbers, who (...) formerly reserved for times of eminent exploits and
glory.

Secondly, Which destruction of the veterane Soldiers has created other
mischiefs to this order, in point of discipline, as prejudicial as the former;
for as the Agiamoglans were obliged to perform six or seven years Novitiate,
now, by reason of the constant necessities to supply the Wars, they overskip
the orderly formalities of the first Institution, and create them Janissaries
after a year or half a years service: And others I have known educated in
Mechanic Professions, and from framing Timber and carrying Burdens in the
Arsenal, have at once for the Service in Candie been created Janissaries, who
neither know how to manage a (...), nor are otherwise disciplined to any
exercise of Arms.

Thirdly, that Europe may not be dispeopled by the triennial seizure of
Christian Children for the Grand Signiors Service, which in Turkish is called
Deuschirme, that politic Custom and principal conservation of the discipline
of Janissaries is, as we have said before, wholly forgotten, and instead thereof
election is made of Vagabonds, that proffer themselves out of Asia, or other
parts, who having passed five or six months like Novices, are afterward made
Janissaries, and being ignorant in the use of Arms, and unaccustomed to labors
and sufferings, run from their Colors, and renounce their Order, which has
been in times past one of the most honorable in the whole Empire.

4. The old veterane Officers, which had by degrees and steps proceeded to
Honor methodically from inferior Soldiers, have either by their own
seditious spirits, or jealousy of the Prince, been dispeeded from this world,
and in their places the Sons of Constantinopolitan Janissaries succeeded, who
have been bred up with softness and effeminacy; and their Tchorbagees or
Captains have not obtained their Commands by time or valor, but buy their
places with money and presents to the prime Officers.

Fifthly, And to forward the decay of this Militia, and to take off their
warlike and haughty courages, the confinement to their Chambers is not severe,
but liberty given upon color of poverty and impossibility of livelihood on
their mean pay, to attend other Trades and services, whereby the exercise of
Arms and thoughts of the War is converted to mechanic Arts, and an intention
to ways of maintenance of themselves and Families.

Sixthly, Hope of reward and fear of punishment, which are the incitements to
worthy actions, and restrictions from the vilest crimes, are rarely held up to
the Janissaries in these times for their encouragement or terror; for without
money to the superior Officers none of them obtains preferment; nor can any
worn out with age and wounds procure dismission from the War with the enjoyment
of the usual stipend, who are called by the Turks Oturak, and by the Latins
Exauctorati; and on the contrary the children of Officers born in
Constantinople are often made Oturaks in their Cradles, and lusty youths are
with favor and money exempted in the flower of their age from the labors of
War, and yet enjoy the benefits due to a toilsome Militia.

And yet, as if all the connivance at these various disorders and subversion of
the good institutions of this Soldiery were not sufficient to impoverish their
Spirits, to mould them into a more effeminate temper, and cause them to lose
their interest and reputation; it is the common opinion that the Vizier
Kupriuli laid the designs for the late War with Germany before his death, and
enjoined it to his Son to prosecute, with an intention, amongst other
expectations of benefit to the Empire, to complete the final destruction of the
ancient Spahees and Janissaries, so as to be able to lay a foundation of new
Discipline, which may more easily for the future restrain the Turkish Militia
within the compass of better modesty and obedience: which design has taken so
severe effect in the War of Hungary, in the year 1664. that the bloudiest part
of slaughter in the Battles fell on the Janissaries and Spahees, and by how much
more any were more bold and forward in their attempts, by so much more fatal
and hasty was their ruin; so that it is reported that the valiantest Soldiers
of the Confines, the veterane and best disciplined of the Spahees and
Janissaries, and the best number of their skilful Commanders and expert Captains
perished promiscuously together, to the great damage and weakening of the
Ottoman power; so that now it is not probable that a new Militia succeeding,
capable of receiving other Customs and Laws, and neither remembering nor
concerned in former Mutinies, will adventure to follow the seditious practices
of their Predecessors; for men are commonly modest at their first entrance into
any condition, and unless debauched by corruption in government, are easily
contained within the bounds of reasonable moderation. And yet notwithstanding
that the pride of the Turkish Militia is reduced to so low an abatement of
their power, and to a condition easily for the future with good management to
be ruled; yet this present Sultan Mahomet still retaining the memory and
impression of the amazement he suffered in his infancy on occasion of a
dangerous combination and couspiracy of the Janissaries, will never confide
himself to their guard, nor be reconciled to Constantinople, in consideration
of the many Chambers it contains of that loathed Militia, which have been so
many Nurseries and Seminaries of Treasons complotted against himself, his
Father and his other Progenitors.

CHAP. IX. Of the Chiauses.
The Chaousbashee or Chief the Pursuivants


THese having both offensive and defensive Arms assigned them, may be reckoned
in the number of the Militia, though their Office being chiefly in relation to
Civil Processes and Laws, they may rather deserve the name of Pursuivants or
(...). They are in number about 5 or 600, their pay is from 12 to 40 Aspers a
day; and their chief Officer is called Chiaus Baschee, to whose custody
Prisoners of quality are committed: their place of attendance is in the Palace
of the Prime Vizier, to be ready on all occasions to carry Letters and Commands
to any part of the Empire; such Christian Renegadoes as become Turks, they most
commonly for their encouragement and subsistence in the Mahometane Superstition
admit into this Rank; because having commonly an endowment of other Languages
besides the Turkish, are most serviceable on messages into Foreign Countries;
and sometimes are sent with title of Ambassadors, as one was once into England,
France, and Holland. Their Arms are a Scimitar, a Bow, and Arrows, and a
Trunchion with a knob at the end, called in Turkish Topous; those of these
Officers that are servants to the Vizier or Beglerbegs, carry this Trunchion
covered with Silver, called in Turkish (...); but the Chiauses of simple
Pashaws only of Wood: their Harvest they make upon the occasions of Lawsuits
and differences between one party and another, being Apparitors or Sergeants to
call the guilty person to justice, or if the business comes to composition,
they commonly are in the midst to persuade both sides to reason, in which
action they want not their Fees or acknowledgment of labor from both parties.

CHAP. X. Of the other parts of the Turkish Militia, the Toptchi.
THese are Gunners, called so from the word Tope, which in Turkish signifies a
Cannon; and are in number about one thousand two hundred, distributed into 52
Chambers, their quarters are at Tophana or the place of Guns in the Suburbs of
Constantinople; few of these are expert in their art, and are ill practiced in
the proportions and Mathematical part of the Gunners mystery; for were they as
skilful as many Engineers in the world, they might doubtless with that train of
vast Artillery they either march with in their Camp or found in their Trenches,
give much more annoyance to the Christian forces: And therefore knowing their
own imperfections in this Exercise; when Christian Gunners are taken in the
War, they entertain them with better usage than other Captives, quartering them
in the Chambers appropriated to that profession, allotting them with the others
a pay of 8 to 12. Aspers a day; but because this is too considerable a
maintenance to allure men who are otherwise principled, most of them, as
occasion offers, desert the service of the Turk, and fly to their own Conntry.

Their Officers are,

1. The Topgibaschi, or General of the Ordinance. 2. The (...) or the chief of
them that found the great Guns. 3. The Odabaschi, the chief of all the Chambers
of the Gunners in the Suburbs of Constantinople. 4. Is the Kiatib or their
Muster-Master, who is always a Spahee.
Their Guns are the biggest and as well cast and molded as any in the world;
for the last Expedition in Hungary there were 40 pieces of new Cannon cast and
transported by way of the black Sea, and thence by the Danube unto Balgrade and
Buda. Their Gunpowder is made but in small quantities about Constantinople, but
comes from diverse places of Europe but that from Damascus is most esteemed: The
biggest size of their Bullets are from 36 to 40 inches Diameter, but these are
most commonly of stone, which they make use of in the Castles or Block-houses
situate on the Sea, as at the Castles upon the Hellespont, called anciently
Sestos and Abydos, and at the Forts at the entrance of the black Sea. Once an
Englishman Gunner of a Ship, which lay at Constantinople, had the curiosity and
confidence to measure the dimensions of these Bullets; but being apprehended in
the very act, was imprisoned for a Spy; but by the intercession of our
Ambassador then Resident, with much labor and some expense was at length
released.

Of the Gebegees.
These are Armourers; so called from the word Gebes, which signify in Turkish
as much as Arms of Back and Breast; they are in numbe 630 distributed into 60
Chambers, and have their Quarters near the Church of Santa Sophia in
Constantinople; their Office is to conserve the Arms of ancient times from
rust, by cleaning and oyling of them, so as to remain as Trophies for ever of
the Turkish Conquests: their pay is from 8 to 12 Aspers a day; their Officers
are first the Gebegibaschi who is their Commander in chief. 2. The (...), who
are so many Masters of their Chambers. On all Expeditions these Armourers are
necessary Officers, and oftentimes in days of Battle distribute forth the
antique Arms, of which they have the care, into the hands of the Janissaries:
but those of these men that are indifferently rich, and have favor and
friends, enjoy their pay with ease at their own homes; and like other (...)
signifies a Family, as also a military Family; so Spahi Ogiaghi, the Order of
the Spahees; Senischeri Ogiaghi, the Militia of (...), etc.
Ogiacks are capable of being made Oturaks, or retaining their pension with a
dispensation from the War.

Of the Delees.
Delee, or one of the Visiers Guard


Delee signifies as much as a mad fellow or a Hector; these are the Prime
Viziers Lifeguard, and are in number from 100 to 400, more or less, according
as the Vizier is more or less rich and splendid in his retinue; their pay is
from 12 to 15 Aspers a day; they are by nation of Bosna, or Albania; their
habit is very ridiculous according to this Picture; they are men chosen for
their great stature and stomachs; they speak big, talk of nothing but killing
and adventurous exploits, but in reality their heart and courage is not
esteemed proportionable to their bulk and bodies: in the City they march before
the Vizier on foot, and make way for him to the Divan; on journeys they are too
heavy and lazy not to be well mounted; they have a Captain over them called the
Delibaschi; their Arms are a Lance after the Hungarian fashion, a Sword, and
Pole-Axe; and some of them carry a Pistol at their Girdle. This sort of People
being naturally more faithful than the Turks, and more inclinable to the Vizier
Kupriuli for being of the same Country, he maintained 2000 of them for his
Guard; which was so great a curb to the Janissaries and the other Militia, that
they were never able to execute any Conspiracy against him. The same course his
Son the present Vizier, follows, and is doubtless next the Grand Signiors
favor, his principal security.

Of the Segbans and Sarigias.
It is not to be omitted that the Beglerbegs and Pashaws maintain always a
Miltia called Segbans, to whose custody the charge of the baggage belonging to
the Horse is committed, and a select number called Sarigias, to whose care the
baggage of the Infantry is entrusted; these serve on foot with Muskets like
Janissaries and the others on Horseback like Dragoons in Christendom; their pay
besides their meat is 3 or 4 Dollars a month. The Beglerbegs have oftentimes on
occasions of their Rebellions enrolled many of this sort of Militia to
encounter the Janissaries; the which was practiced in these late times by Ipchir
Pashaw, Hasan Pashaw, and Murteza Pashaw, who having listed great numbers to
fight under this denomination, the Vizier Kupriuli for terror and more easy
destruction of this people, proclaimed through all Asia, that strict
inquisition should be made after the Segbans and Sarigias, and that it might be
lawful for any one to kill and destroy them without mercy; by which means many
were butchered in several places, and 30000 of them revolted to the Sofi of
Persia.

The Muhlagi and Besli.
Are the servants of Beglerbegs and Pashaws; the first make profession of a
principal art in good Horsemanship, and exercise themselves in throwing the
Gilid, which is a Dart much used amongst the Turks, in the true management of
which there is great dexterity; and because there are considerable rewards
bestowed on those who are expert herein, the Turks practice it on Horseback as
their only exercise and study: very much delight herein the Grand Signiors have
always taken, and to be spectators of the Combats between the servants of
several Pashaws born in different Countries and Nations; who from a principle
of honor to their Nation, and hopes of preferment, contend with that heat and
malice one against the other as surpass the cruelty of the ancient Gladiators;
and not only limbs or eyes are lost in this skirmish, but oftentimes sacrifice
their blood and life for the pastime of their Prince. Such as are observed to
be bold, active, and dexterous at his Game, are preferred to the degree and
benefit of a Zaim or Timariot. The Beslees are footmen, who for their great
abilities in walking and running, attain oftentimes to be made Janissaries.

And thus we have now, with as much brevity as may be, run through the several
Degrees, Numbers, Institutions, Laws, and Discipline of the Turkish Militia by
Land: whose farther progress into Christendom, and damage to the Christian
Cause may the Almighty Providence so disappoint, that his Church, corrected and
grown more pious by this chastisement, may at length be relieved from the Rod
and Yoke of this great Oppressor.

CHAP. XI. Certain Observations on the Turkish Camp: and the Success of the
last Battle against the Christians.
IN the year of our Lord 1665. the Earl of Winchelsea, our Lord Ambassador for
certain Affairs of His Majesty and the Company or Merchants, having commanded
me to meet the Great Vizier in his return from the Wars in Hungary, through ill
or rather uncertain information of the Visiers motion, I was forced to proceed
as far as Belgrade in Servia on the Confines of Hungary, 23 days journey from
Constantinople, where finding a good part of the Turkish Army encamped near
that City, for better convenience and expedition of my business, I entered
within the Quarters of the Spabees, and pitched my Tent as near the Visiers and
the other principal Officers as consisted with due respect; (...) which place I
remained seven days, until the Army removed toward Adrianople; and not having
fully completed my business there, I marched and remained other 13 days
together with the Army: in which time I had leisure to make some reflections on
the Order of the Turkish Camp.

In the front of the Camp are Quartered the Janissaries, and all others destined
to Foot-service, whose Tents encompass their Aga or General: In the body of the
Camp are erected the stately Pavilions of the Vizier, of his Kahija, or chief
Steward, or Councellor, the Reis Effendi or Lord Chancellor, the Tefterdar
Pascha or Lord Treasurer, and the Kapisler Kahiasee or Master of the
Ceremonies; which five Pavilions take up a large extent of ground, leaving a
spacious Field in the midst, in the center of which is raised a lofty Canopy,
under which Offenders are corrected or executed, and serves to shelter from the
Sun or Rain such as attend the Divan, or other business with the Officers of
State. Within the same space of ground also is the Hasna or Treasury, in small
Chests one piled on the other, in form of a circle, for guard of which 15
Spahees every night keep a Watch with their Arms in their hands. Near these
Quarters are the Tents of Pashaws, Beghs, Agaes, and Persons of Quality, who
with their Retinue solely make up a considerable part of the Turkish Army. In
the Rear are the Quarters of the Spahees, and others that attend the
Horseservice, as Segbans, Sarigias, and others. On the (...) hand of the Vizier
without the Camp, are placed the Artillery and Ammunition, which in the time I
was there was inconsiderable, the great Cannon remaining in Buda and in the
City of Belgrade, only 40 or 45 small Fieldpieces of Brass (as I reckoned
them) each drawn by four Horses, marched with the Vizier, more at that time for
State and Ostentation than for real Service.

The Pavilions of the Great Vizier, and other Persons of principal Office and
Quality, may rather be called Palaces than Tents being of a large extent,
richly wrought within, adorned beyond their Houses, accommodated with stately
Furniture, with all the convenience of the City and Country, and in my opinion
far exceed the magnificences the best of their Buildings; for being but for few
years continuance, the maintenance of them is beyond the expense of Marble and
Porphery, or the perpetual Edifices of Italy, durable to many Olympiads and
Myriads of years. With these Houses and movable Habitations, which with the
Posts that support them are of great weight and bulk, the Turkish Army marches
daily four, five, and sometimes six hours Journey; all which baggage is carried
on Horses, Mules, and Camels: The great Persons are furnished with two sets of
Tents, one of which as the Vizier rises, is advanced the Conack or days Journey
beyond; so that in the morning leaving one Tent, another is found at noon ready
furnished and provided at arrival; which is the reason why the Turkish Camp
abounds with such (...) of Camels, Mules, and Horses of Burden, with so many
thousand Attendants on the Baggage, which are of a vast expense, and if duly
considered, is a matter of the greatest state and magnificence in the Turkish
Empire.

Though it is reported by those who are Soldiers, and have experienced the
Valor of the Turks in Fight, that their Victories are obtained by multitudes
of Men, rather than by art, or Military Discipline; however the Conquests they
have made on the parts of Christendom, is a demonstration undeniable of some
supereminent Order in their Army, which recompenses the defect of knowledge in
the true Mystery of War; and this Regulation (in my opinion) proceeds from
nothing more than the strict prohibition of Wine upon pain of death (two men
being executed during the time of my Residence there for bringing a small
quantity of it in the Field) for hereby men become sober, diligent, watchful,
and obedient. In the Turkish Camp no brawls, quarrels, nor clamours are heard;
no abuses are committed on the people in the march of their Army; all is bought
and paid with money, as by Travelers that are Guests at an Inn; there are no
complaints by Mothers of the Rape of their Virgindaughters, no (...) or
Robberies offered on the Inhabitants; all which good order tends to the success
of their Armies, and enlargement of their Empire. As on the contrary, the sloth
of the Germans and other Nations in their Councels against the Turk, the
liberty given to the Christian Soldiery, or rather the difficulty to correct
it, proceeds from nothing more than intemperance of Wine, which moves in the
Soldiery a lust and promptitude to all evils, and is occasion of the horrid
outrages they commit, quarrels among themselves, and disobedience to their
Officers, and betrays oftentimes a whole Army to ruin by surprisal: for how
can those men be watchful, whose heads are charged with the fumes of Wine, and
not yield opportunity of sad advantages to so awakned an Enemy as the Turk?
Busbequius who had been Ambassador from the Emperor to the Grand Signior in
two several Embassies, and had known and seen the vigilance of the Turkish
Camp, attributes much of their success against the Germans to the ancient vice
of Intemperance of his Country: Neque vero, says he, graviore imperio Turcae
(...) premant, quam nobis dominantur vitia, luxus, crapula. And so sensible are
the Turks of the abuses and disorders which arise in their Camp by the use of
Wine, that they endeavor all that is possible to debar their people from it,
and therefore 2 or 3 days before the Army arrives at any place, Officers are
dispatched before to seal all Taverns and make proclamation against the sail of
Wine: for though it be against their Law to drink Wine, yet drunkenness is now
become so common a vice amongst them (as we have already declared in the second
Book) that scarce one in ten but is addicted to a (...) intemperance therein.

The Camp is always clean and free from ordure and filth; there being holes
dug near every Tent, which are encompassed about with Canvas for the more
privacy and accommodation in men's necessary occasions; and whenever these
places become noisome and full, they are covered with earth, and the Canvas
removed; so that the whole Camp is clear of all excrements of men, as also kept
more free from other stench (which may cause putrefaction,) than the most
orderly Cities of the world. If the march be in the summertime and the weather
hot, the beasts of burden and baggage begin to travel about (...) a clock in
the evening, and the Pashaws and great Vizier presently after midnight; who are
accompanied with so many lights as equal almost the brightness of the day.
Those that carry these lights are Arabians from the parts of Aleppo and
Damascus, men used to travel on foot, who in Turkish are called Massalageeler,
over whom is a superintendant or chief called Massalagibashee, whose office it
is to govern and to punish these people, and is liable to answer for their
disorders: the lights they carry are not Torches, but a bituminous oily sort of
wood, which they burn in an Iron grate carried on a staff made in the form of
our Beacons; and of the same fashion with those lights we see drawn in ancient
Hangings, and Pictures which represent night pieces of Roman Stories.

And since I have discoursed something of the Turkish Camp in this their return
homewards, it will not be much from my purpose to acquaint the Reader with what
cheerfulness and alacrity the Army marched this way after their ill success;
and also to declare the occasion that put a hook into the nostrils of this
great Oppressor, and diverted him for the present from the farther spoil of
Christendom. After the taking of the Castle called Serinswar by the great
Vizier, built by Count Serini (the which was the first Original and occasion of
the war) and the defeat of the Pashaw of Buda near Lewa, by Count Susa
Governor of Gomorra; the Vizier made many and various attempts to pass the
River Raab, to make some conquests in the parts of Croatia and Siyria, but by
reason of the Forts the Christians had made along the banks of the River, in
every adventure lost considerable numbers of men; at which loss of men and
time, and the ill success near Lewa, the Vizier being greatly moved, made
another adventure on the twenty seventh of July 1664. advancing with the gross
of his Army as far as Kerment, a place between the Rivers Raab and Terne,
endeavoring there to make his passage with better success; but by the valor
of the Hungarians and the assistance of the General Montecuculi were repulsed
with extraordinary slaughter.

On the first of August following the Turk made another considerable attempt,
and passed over in one place 6000 Janissaries and Albanians, and in another
where the River was foordable, and not above ten paces broad, the whole body of
the Turkish Horse crowded over in vast numbers, which caused the Christians to
join their Forces into one Army, and retreat farther into the Country, and put
themselves into a posture of giving battle to the Enemy.

As soon as the Turkish Army had thus waded over the water, the night following
fell so much rain, and such a deluge came pouring down from the mountains, that
the River which was foordable the day before, did now overswell its own banks,
and not passable without Floats and Bridges. As soon as the Army was thus
passed the River, the great Vizier dispatched immediately Messengers to the
Grand Signior to acquaint him of his progress and passage; which news he knew
would come very grateful; because in all Letters from the Grand Signior he was
urged by threats and positive commands to proceed forward in his march, and not
to suffer the impediment of a narrow ditch to be an interruption to the whole
Ottoman force, which was never before restrained by the Ocean. The Grand
Signior having received this intelligence, as if the whole Victory and Triumph
over the World consisted in the passage over the Raab, was (...) with such an
extraordinary joy and assurance of victory, that all Hungary and Germany were
already swallowed in his thoughts; and when by a second message he received
intelligence, that a forlorn hope of the Enemy, consisting of a thousand men,
was cut off, the Ottoman Court was so transported with the joy and assurance of
Victory, that to anticipate the good news, the Grand Signior commanded that a
solemnn Festival should be celebrated for the space of 7 days and 7 nights,
called by the Turks Dunalma; in which time the whole nights were spent in
fireworks, shooting great Guns, vollies of Muskets. sound of Drums and
Trumpets, revelling, and what other solemnities might testify their joy and
triumph. But scarce three nights of this vain dream had passed, before the
Grand Signior awakened by intelligence, contrary to what was presaged and
expected, of the defeat of the best part of his Army, shamefully commanded the
lights to be extinguished; and the remaining four nights appointed for joy, to
be turned to melancholy and darkness. And indeed this rash joy was the more
shameful and ridiculous, by how much more fatal and destructive the loss was to
the Turks. For they being now got over the River, and the Christians drawn up
in Battalia, a most furious fight began, which from nine a clock in the
morning, until four in the afternoon continued with variable Fortune; at length
the Turks assailed by the extraordinary valonr of the Christians, which were
now of equal number to them, began to give back and put themselves into a
shameful flight, leaving dead upon the place about 5000 men, and the glory of
the day to the Christians: the Turks who always fly disorderly, knowing not
the art of a handsome retreat, crowded in heaps to pass the River, the Horse
trampling over the Foot, and the Foot throwing themselves headlong into the
water, without consideration of the depth, or choice of places foordable after
the great rains; those sinking, catching hold of others that could swim, sunk
down and perished together; others both of men and horse through the rapidness
of the stream were carried down the River and swallowed up in the deeper
places: the water was dyed with blood, and the whole face of the River was
covered with Men, (...), Garments, all swimming promiscuously together; no
difference was here between the valiant and the cowardly, the foolish and the
wise, council and chance, all being involved in the same violence of calamity:
Non vox and mutui hortatus juvabant, adversante unda, nihil strenuus ab ignavo,
sapiens a prudenti, consilia a casu differ, cuncta pari violentia
involvebantur; Tac. lib. 1.
so that the waters devoured a far greater number than did the Sword; whilst
the great Vizier standing on the other side of the River was able to afford no
kind of help or relief, but as one void of all counsel and reason, knew not
where to apply a remedy. This defeat though in Christendom not greatly boasted,
by reason that the destruction of the Turks, which was most by water, was
partly concealed to them; yet the Turks acknowledge the ruin and slaughter to
have been of a far greater number than what the Christian Diaries relate,
confessing that since the time that the Ottoman Empire arrived at this
greatness, no stories make mention of any slaughter or disgrace it has
suffered to be equalled to the calamity and dishonor of this. On the Turks
side were slain Ishmael Pashaw lately of Buda, and Chimacam of Constantinople
by a shot from the enemy in his passage over the River, the Spahee Lar-Agasee
or general of the Spahees, and several other Pashaws and persons of quality
fell that day, 15 pieces of Cannon were taken, with some Tents and other rich
spoils: Of the Christians were slain near a thousand; those of note were Count
of Nassau, Count Charles of Braconstorf Captain of the Guards to (...), Count
Fucher General of the Artillery, with many other Gentlemen of the French
Nation, who deserve ever to be chronicled for their virtue and valor.

The Turks were with this news greatly ashamed, and dejected, having but two
days before demonstrated excesses of joy, congratulated the happy news one to
the other, (...) Presents abroad after their manner, derided the Christians
living amongst them with the news, exprobriated them with a thousand injuries,
applauded their own virtue and valor, and the righteousness of their cause and
Religion. But on a sudden, intelligence coming contrary to their expectations,
such a dampness fell upon their spirits, that for some days there was a deep
silence of all news at Constantinople; they that the day before sought for
Christians to communicate to them the miracles of their Victory, now avoided
their company, ashamed of their too forward joy, and the liberty they had taken
to contemn and deride the low condition of the Christian Camp. And now the ill
news not being able to be longer concealed, Prayers and Humiliation were
appointed publicly to be made at all the Royal Masks both at Constantinople
and at Adrianople, where all the Emaums or Parish Priests with their young
Scolars were commanded to resort, singing some doleful Chapter of the Alchoran.

The minds of the Soldiery after this defeat were very much discomposed,
tending more to sedition than to obedience, every one took license to speak
loudly and openly his opinion, that the War was commenced upon unjust and
unlawful grounds; that Comets lately seen to fall were prodigies foretelling
the ill success of the War; that the total eclipse of the moon, which portends
always misfortunes to the Turks, should have caused more caution in the
Commanders of engaging the Army, until the malignancy of that influence had
been over-passed; and calling to mind the solemn Oath with which the Sultan
Solomon confirmed his Capitulations with the Emperor, particularly vowing never
to pass the Raab or places where the Turks received their defeat, without a
solid or reasonable ground of War; all concluded that this Invasion was a
violation of the Vow, and an injury to the sacred memory of that fortunate
Sultan, and that all enterprises and attempts of this War would be fatal and
destructive to the Musselmen or Believers, and the end dishonorable to the
Empire. This opinion was rooted with much firmness and superstition in the mind
of the vulgar, and the rumors in the Camp (that the Vizier had been cause of
the Soldiers flight, by commanding them to retreat after they were engaged,
upon a false alarm that the Enemy in great numbers were coming to fall on the
Quarters where the Viziers person remained; and that this error was the first
original of the slaughter that ensued) augmented their discontents and
animosities against the Government. The Soldiery besides was greatly terrified
and possessed with a fear of the Christians, and amazed upon every alarm; the
Asian Spabees and other Soldiers having Wives and Children and Possessions to
look after, were grown poor, and desired nothing more than in peace and
quietness to return to their homes; so that nothing could come more grateful to
this Camp, no largesses nor hopes could pacify the minds of the Soldiery more
than the promises and expectations of Peace. And this was the true cause that
brought on the treaty of Peace between the Emperor and the Turk, in such an
instant contrary to the opinion of most in the world; and gave occasion to the
Vizier to embrace the Propositions offered by the Here Reninghen, then Resident
for the Emperor (who was carried about according to the motions of the Turkish
Camp, to be ready to improve any overtures of Peace that might be offered): the
Vizier to show his real intentions, flattered and caressed this Resident with
the Present of a Horse richly furnished, a vest of Sables and a commodious
Tent, whilst the Propositions and Condescentions on the Turkish part were
dispeeded to Vienna; which were returned again with an entire assent to most of
the Articles; and those wherein there might be any difference, were to be
referred until the arrival of the Extraordinary Ambassador, who was supposed
might reach the Ottoman Court by the end of April. The Asian Spabees were
overjoyed at the news (...), and immediately obtained license to depart, and
most of the Militia was dispersed, every one with joy betaking himself to his
own home. But this Ambassador missing of his time alloted for his arrival,
above a month later then he was expected, put all things into a strange
combustion. I was then in the Camp when it was whispered, that the Treaty was
at an end, that the Christians had deluded them, and caused them to disband
their Army, that so they might fall upon them with the greater advantage; the
misfortune of which (according to the custom of the Commonalty) was charged on
the heads of the Governors; and the too much credulity of the Vizier. But at
length on the 28. of May 1665. news coming that the Ambassador from the Emperor
was arrived at Buda; the Vizier the next day departed from Belgrade with his
whole Army, which I accompanied as far as Nissa, about nine days march toward
Adrianople; and there having put an end to my business, and wearied with the
slow pace, and heats, and other inconveniences of an Army, I took my leave of
the great Vizier, and proceeded forward by longer journeys, to attend the Court
at Adrianople: And that I may give my Reader an account of these Countries, and
the nature of the people that inhabit them, I hope it will not be judged much
besides my purpose, if I entertain him a little with a relation of some part of
my journey to Belgrade.

On the 29th of April 1665. I departed from Adrianople toward Belgrade, and on
the first of May I lodged at a Village called Semesge, the first Town I came
to, inhabited by Bulgarians who are Christians, that day being a Festival: the
women upon the arrival of Guests came running from their houses with Cakes of
dough-baked bread, which they called Togatch, only laid upon the Coals between
two Tiles, which they soon kneaded and prepared for the stomachs of Travelers;
others brought Milk, Eggs, and Wine to sell, and what else their homely
Cottages afforded, which they pressed on us with much importunity, the younger
and handsomer callenging a priority in the sale of their Provisions before
those who were ancient and more homely: These Country Lasses had that day put
on their holy Garments, which put me in mind of those dresses I have seen in
pictures of the ancient Shepherdesses in Arcadia, being a loose Gown of various
colors with hanging-(...); their arms had no sleeve but that of their Smock,
which though it were of Canvas or some very (...) Linen, was yet wrought with
many various works of diverse colors; their hair was braided, hanging down at
length behind, which some had adorned with little shells found upon the Sea
shore, tied at the end with fringes of Silk, bobs, and tassels of Silver; their
heads were covered with pieces of Silver Coin of different sorts strung upon
thread, and their breasts were in the same manner decked; those being most
honored, and esteemed most rich, who were best adorned with these strings of
Coin, and Bracelets on their wrists, with which every one, according to her
ability, had dressed and made her self fine. Amongst these we passed with
plenty of Provision and a hearty welcome; for these people called Bulgarians
inhabit all that Country to the Confines of Hungary, they till all that ground,
pasture vast numbers of Cattle, and are industrious and able Husbandmen, by
which means and the liberty they enjoy by the small number of Turks which live
amongst them, they pass their time with some reasonable comfort, and are more
commodious in wealth than they suffer to appear outwardly to the envious eye of
the Turks. Their Language is the old Illyrian or Sclavonian Tongue, which has
much similitude with the Russian; because this people is said to come
originally from beyond the River Volga, and so by corruption are called
Bulgarians or Volgarians.

On the third of May we arrived at Philippopolis, where we were civilly
entertained at the House or Monastry of the Metropolite, or Greek Bishop of
that place. By this City runs the River Hebrus, having its original from the
Mountain Rhodope, in sight of which we traveled toward Sophia, of which Ovid
thus speaks,

Qua patet umbrosum Rhodope glacialis ad Haemum, Et sacer amissas exigit Hebrus
aquas.

The City of Philippopolis is situate in a large and open Plain, and Level,
whereon are great numbers of little round Hills, which the Inhabitants will
have to be the Graves of the Roman Legions slain in those Fields. A certain
Greek had once the melancholy dream of much Treasure buried in one of these
Hills; and this fancy so often troubled him in his sleep, that it took a
strong impression in his mind whilst he was waking, and so far troubled him,
that he could take no rest nor contentment until he had eased his mind to the
Nasir-Aga, who is he who oversees the Waterworks and places of pleasure
belonging to the Grand Signior in that Country. The Turk, though he had a great
mind to the Treasure, durst not yet open the ground, until he had first
acquainted the Grand Signior with the mind of the Greek, who upon the first
intimation dispatched away Officers (so apt the Turks are in matters of profit
to catch even at a shadow) to open this Hill; to which work the Country
Villages were summoned; and whilst they dug very deep, not well
understanding the manner and art of Mining, the Earth broke from the top, and
buried seventy persons in the ruins: And so the work ended, and the Greek
awaked from his dream. This Town has one part of it built on the side of a
little Hill; two others are also near it, which appear like Bulwarks or
Fortifications on that side the City; all the rest of the Country thereabouts
being a dead Plain or Level. At this place remains no other Antiquity besides
the ruins of two ancient Chapels, built of Brick, in the form of a Cross; one
of which the Greeks hold in great devotion, and report to be the place wherein
St. Paul preached often to the Philippians; and with that opinion they often
resort thither, especially on days of Devotion, to say their Prayers: The Walls
of the City are likewise very ancient, over the Gates of which is writ
something in the Greek Character; but Time has so defaced it, that to me it
seemed not longer legible: And so ignorant are the Greeks also, even such as
were born in that City, and are Priests and Coloires (which are the strictest
sort of Religious Men amongst them) who have nothing more to do than to attend
to their Office and Studies, that they cannot give any reasonable account of
the original of that City, who it was built by, or any thing else of the
History of it, and with much admiration they hearken to us, when we tell them
any thing what our Books relate concerning it.

From hence I departed toward Sophia, passing in this Journey the Montes
Haemi, called by the Turks Capi Dervent, which is as much as the Gate of the
narrow way; the ascent hereunto is rugged and sharp, commodious for Robbers,
who there have such Caves and places of refuge, that they defy very
considerable Forces that are sent against them. On the top of this Hill is a
Village of Bulgarians, where the Women used to the diversity of Tavellers, are
become free in their discourse, and only entertain strangers, whilst their
Husbands are in the Field, or with their Cattle, or fly away for fear of some
injury from the Turks. Descending hence is a very narrow enclosure, on both
sides being environed with high Mountains and Woods, which is a shady and
melancholy Journey for the space of two hours; to this place the Heidouts, or
Heyducks (as that people call them) frequently resort in great numbers out of
Transylvania, Moldavia, Hungary, and other parts, which taking the advantage of
these close Woods, discharge Vollies of Shot on the strongest Caravans, and
rolling stones from the Mountains in the narrowest passages, do as much
execution as with Cannon; for, as I have understood, in one of those Dervents
(for there are many of this nature in the Journey to Belgrade) 18 Thieves only
killed above 300 Merchants, who for security united together, and their whole
Baggage and Goods became a prey to the Robbers. In these places, thus fortified
by Nature, the Inhabitants resisted the force of the Grecian Emperors, and
killed Baldwin Earl of Flanders after he had subjected the City of
Constantinople. Amongst these Bulgarians is a sort of people which they call
Paulines, who had in former times a strangely confused notion of Christianity,
pretending to follow the Doctrine of St. Paul, used Fire in the Sacrament of
Baptism, and preferred this Apostle before his Master Christ: But there being
some Roman Priests in those parts, that observing the ignorance of these poor
people, and their willingness to be instructed, took the advantage, and reduced
them all to the Roman Faith, to which now they are strict and superstitious
adherers.

Through those narrow Dervents before spoken of, we arrived after three days of
weary (...) (...) (...), a place so wholly Turkish, that there is nothing in it
that appers more antique than the Turks themselves; it is situated in a
pleasant Plain, or broad Valley, between two high Mountains, the highest of
them wearing a snowy head in the heat of the summer Solstice, which is the
reason that that City is cool and wholesome, but of a subtle penetrating air,
being supplied with admirable waters of easy digestion, which come pouring
down in great abundance from the Mountains, and supply the Town with plentiful
streams in all parts of it, and are said to be waters of those Fountains which
Orpheus delighted in. There are besides these cool Waters, certain Baths
naturally hot, to which the Turks resort very frequently, being of the same
nature and virtue with ours in England. From this place we made nine long days
Journey to Belgrade, in which passage there is nothing more memorable than the
desolation of the Country; and being there arrived, we pitched our Tent in the
Camp, where after six days we marched back with the Army, to whom nothing could
come more joyful than their return home, and the conclusion of the War; by
which may be observed in some manner, how far the nature of the Turks is
degenerated from the ancient warlike disposition of the Saracens.

CHAP. XII. Of the Turks Armata, or Naval Forces.
HAving particularly run over the Force of this formidable Enemy and scourge of
Christianity by Land, we are now to take a view, according to the true method
of this Discourse, of the strength of their Fleets and Maritime Forces; which
though to a Nation situated on the Continent, are not so necessary or
prevalent to defend themselves from their Neighbors, or transport their Power
and Conquests into other Dominions, as they are to a people whose Habitation is
encompassed by the Sea; yet certainly a Prince can never be said to be truly
puissant, who is not Master in both Elements; For not to expatiate on the
common Theme of the Riches and Power which arise from Navigation, it is
sufficient, considering how often the mighty force of the Ottoman Empire has
been foiled and baffled by the small Republique of Venice, for want of true
knowledge or success, or application of their minds to Maritime Exercise, to
demonstrate of what efficacy in most designs is a well provided and regulated
Fleet.

The Turks are now very much weakened in their Naval Forces since the War
against Candie and are so (...) in their hopes of success at Sea, that Ships
and Galeasses, called by them Mahumes, are wholly in disuse amongst them;
whether it be that they want able Seamen to govern them, or that they despair
of being able to meet the Venetians in open Sea (for which those Vessels of
Battery are only in use) they are fallen into a fancy of light Galleys, a sign
that they intend to trust more of their safety to their Oars than their Arms;
of which in the year 1661. (after the loss of 28 well-provided (...) wrecked
with their Men in the Black Sea) the Vizier Kuperlee built thirty others for
reparation of that loss, but of that green and unseasoned Timber, that the
first Voyage many of them became unserviceable for their Leaks; and the rest,
at the (...) of the Fleet in the Month of October following, were laid up
amongst the old and worn Vessels.

It may seem a difficult matter to assign the true reason why and by what means
the Turks come to be so decayed in their Naval Forces, who abound with so many
conveniences for it, and with all sorts of materials fit for Navigation, as
Cordage, Pitch, Tar, and Timber, which arise and grow in their own dominions,
and are easily brought to the Imperial Gity with little or no danger of their
Enemies. For Timber, the vast Woods along the Coast of the Black Sea, and parts
of Asia, at the bottom of the Gulf of Nicomedia, supply them: Pitch, Tar, and
Tallow are brought to them from Albania and Walachia; Canvas and Hemp from
Grand Cairo; and Bisquet is in plenty in all parts of the Turks Dominions.
Their Ports are several of them convenient for building both of Ships and
Galleys; the Arsenal at Constantinople has no less than a hundred thirty seven
Voltas, or Chambers for Buildings, and so many Vessels may be upon the Stocks
at the same time. At Sinopolis near Trapesond is another Arsenal: at Midia and
Anchiale, Cities on the Black Sea, are the like; and in many parts of the
Propontis, the Hellespont, and the Bospborus, are such Ports and conveniences
for Shipping, as if all things had conspired to render Constantinople happy,
and not only capable of being Mistress of the Earth, but formidable in all
parts of the Ocean: and yet the Turk for several years, especially since the
War with Candia, and their defeats at Sea, have not been able at most to
Equippe a Fleet of above 100 Sail of Galleys, of which 14 are maintained and
provided at the charge of the Beyes of the Archipelago, for which they have
certain Isles in that Sea assigned them.

The Turks do neither want Slaves for to bogue at the Oars of the Galleys; for
Tartary supplies them with great numbers; besides, diverse persons in
Constantinople make it a Trade to hire out their Slaves for the Summers Voyage
for 6000 Aspers, running the hazard of the Slaves life, who returning home safe
is consigned to the possession of his Patron: And if want still be of Chiurma,
as the Turks call it, or Slaves for the Oar, a collection is made in several
Provinces of the lustiest and stoutest Clowns, called by the Turks Azabs, but
by the other Slaves Chakal; these are chosen out of certain Villages, one being
elected out of every twenty houses, the hire of which is 6000 Aspers, for
payment whereof the other 19 Families make a proportionable Contribution. Upon
receipt of their pay they give in security not to fly, but to serve faithfully
for that years Expedition: But these men unused to the Service of the Sea,
unskilful at the Oar, and Sea-sick, are of little validity; and the success of
their Voyage may be compared to that in the Fable of the Shepherd, who sold his
Possessions on the Land, to buy Merchandise for Sea-Negotiations.

The Soldiers which are destined to Sea-service are called Levents, who come
voluntarily and enter themselves in the Registers of the (...), obliging
themselves to serve that Summers Expedition for 6000 Aspers, and Bisquet for
the Voyage; the stoutest and most resolute of these fellows are those called
Cazdaglii, who are a certain sort of Mountaniers in the Country of Anatolia,
near Troy, whose Country I once passed through, with some apprehension, and
more than ordinary vigilance and caution to preserve my life; for being all
Robbers and Free-booters, we admitted no Treaties or Discourses with them but
with our Arms in our hands. Others there are also obliged to Sea-service, who
are Zaims and Timariots, and hold their Lands in Sea-Tenure; but being not
bound to go in person themselves, they bring or send their Servants (called in
Turkish Bedel) to supply their place, every one providing one, two, or more,
according to the value of his Lands, as we have before declared in the Chapter
of the Zaims and Timariots. Some Janissaries are also drawn out for Seaservice,
and some Spahees of the four inferior Banners; and not to make too bold (...)
the veterane Soldiers, command only such to Sea as are new and green
Soldiers, lately registered in the Rolls of the Spahees.

The Auxiliaries of the Turks Forces by Sea, are the Pirates of Barbary, from
those three Towns of Tripoli, Tunis, and Algier; but these of late years have
disused the Custom of coming in to the Turks assistance; yet oftentimes they
ply toward the Archipelago, and to the Levant, but it is to supply themselves
with Soldiers, and recruits of people for increase of their Colonies.

The other part of Auxiliary Forces is from the Beyes of the (...), being
fourteen in number, every one of which commands a Gally, and for their
maintenance have the contribution of certain Islands in that Sea allotted to
them; the which are better manned and armed than these of Constantinople, but
these neither, are not willing too much to expose their Vessels to fight or
danger; in regard that being built and maintained at their own charges, and
their whole subsistence, they are the more cautious how they venture all their
Fortune in the success of a battle: These Beyes also give themselves much up to
their delights and pleasure, and employ more thoughts how to please their
appetites, than to acquire glory and fame by the War; what they gain in the
Summer, when joined with the gross of the Turkish Fleet, is the Prize of the
Grand Signior, but what chance throws upon them in the Winter, is their own
proper and peculiar Fortune.

The Gunners of the Turkish Fleet are wholly ignorant of that art, for any
person who is either English, French, Dutch, or any other Christian Nation,
they design to this Office, whether he be skilful or unskilful in the
management of Artillery; having an opinion that those people are naturally
addicted to a certain proneness and aptitude in Gunnery; in which they find
their error as often as they come to skirmish with their Enemy.

The chief Admiral or Generalissimo of the Turkish Armata is called the Captain
Pashaw; his Lieutenant General is called Tershana Kiahiasi; the next Officer is
Tersane Emini, or Steward of the Arsenal, who has the care of providing all
necessaries for the Navy; but this place being bought, as almost all other
Offices, occasions a necessity in these persons to rob Nails, Anchors, Cables,
and other provisions of the Fleet to satisfy the debts they contracted for the
purchase of their places: in the like manner does every Reis or Captain of a
Gally keep his hand in exercise as often as convenience offers; these are all
for the most part Italian Renegadoes, or the race of them born and educated
near the Arsenal. The Officers command their Chiurme or slaves in corrupted
Italian, which they call Frank; and afford them a better allowance of Biscuit
than is given to the slaves in the Venetian Armata.

The Turks now despairing of being equal to the Christian Forces by Sea, and to
be able to stand with them the shock of a Battle, build light Vessels for
robbing, burning, and destroying the Christian Coast, and afterward to secure
themselves by flight, and also to transport Soldiers, Ammunition, and
Provisions for succor of Candia, and other places of their new Conquests near
the Sea shore.

The Arsenal at Venice is so greatly esteemed by the Turks, that they seem not
to desire the conquest of that place for any other reason more than the benefit
of the Arsenal; as a Person of great quality amongst them said once, that had
they made a Conquest of Venice, they would not inhabit there, but leave it to
the Venetians, in regard that the City affords not fresh water, which is
necessary for the use of their Mosques, and their washings before Prayer; but
that the Arsenal and a Tribute would satisfy the desires of the Grand Signior.

But the Turks are not likely to be Masters of this Seat of Neptune, whilst
they so unwillingly apply their minds to Maritime affairs, who being conscious
of their former ill success at Sea, and how little use they make of those
advantages they have for shipping, acknowledge their inabilities in Sea
affairs, and say; That God has given the Sea to the Christians, but the land
to them. And no doubt but the large possessions and riches they enjoy on the
stable Element of the Earth, is that which takes of their minds from a deep
attention to matters of the Sea, which is almost solely managed by Renegadoes
amongst them, who have abandoned their Faith and their Country. And it is happy
for Christendom that this faintness remains on the Spirits of the Turks, and
aversion from all Naval employments, whose numbers and power the Great God of
Hosts has restrained by the bounds of the Ocean, as he has limited the Ocean
by the Sands of the Sea shore.

The CONCLUSION.
BY the Discourse made in the three foregoing Books, it will evidently appear
what sort of Government is exercised amongst the Turks, what their Religion is,
and how formidable their Force; which ought to make the Christian World
tremble, to see so great a part of it subjected to the Mohammedan Power, and yet
no means thought of to unite our Interests, and compose our Dissentions, which
lay us open to the inundation of this flowing Empire: To which I shall add this
one thing very observable, That the Grand Signior wages his Wars by Land
without any charge to himself; an advantage not to be paralleled by the policy
of any Government I ever heard or read of before; for his Spahees and
Janissaries are always in pay, both in War and Peace; his Zaims and Timariots
have their Lands to maintain them; and other Militias enjoy the fixed Revenue
from their respective Countries: and yet notwithstanding through the expense of
the Naval Forces, the building Galleys, and the like, matters not provided for
by those who laid the first foundation of this Government, the Revenue of the
Empire has been bankrupted, and by the corruption of the Officers, or ill
management, been sold for three years to come, until all was redeemed and
restored again by the wisdom of that famous Vizier (...), whom we have had
occasion so often to mention in the foregoing Treatise.

We cannot now but pity those poor Borderers in Hungary, Styria, Croatia, and
other parts subject to the Incursions of this cruel enemy, since we know that
in the last War not three English miles from Vienna many poor people have been
surprised, and fallen into the hands of the Tartar and (...), and sold
afterward into perpetual Slavery. This Consideration ought to move us, who are
barrocado'd and fortified by the Seas from the violence of our Enemies, to
bless God we are born in so happy and so secure a Country, subject to no
dangers but from our selves, nor other miseries but what arise from our own
freedom and two much felicity; we ought to consider it as a Blessing, that we
have never felt any smart of the Rod of this great Oppressor of Christianity,
and yet have tasted of the good and benefit which has proceeded from a free
and open Trade, and an amicable Correspondence and Friendship with this People;
which having been maintained for the space of above eighty years, begun in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory, preserved by the Prudence and
admirable Discretion of a series of worthy Ambassadors, and daily improved both
in Business and Reputation by the excellent Conduct and Direction of that Right
Worshipful Company of the Levant Merchants, has brought a most considerable
benefit to this Kingdom, and gives employment and livelihood to many thousands
of people in England; by which also His Majesty without any expense, gains a
very considerable increase of His Customs.

The sense of this benefit and advantage to my own Country, without any private
considerations I have as a Servant to that Embassy, or the obligations I have
to that Worthy Company, cause me to move with the greatest sedulity and
devotion possible to promote and advance the Interest of that Trade: And as
some study several ways, and prescribe Rules by which a War may be most
advantagiously managed against the Turk; I, on the contrary, am more inclinable
to give my judgment in what manner our Peace and Trade may best be secured and
maintained; knowing that so considerable a welfare of our Nation depends upon
it, that a few years of Trades interruption in Turkey will make all sorts of
people sensible of the want of so great a vent of the Commodities of our
Country. And therefore as I am obliged to pray for the Glory and Prosperity of
His Majesty our gracious Sovereign; so likewise, as that which conduces to it,
for the continuance of the Honor of this Embassy in Turkey, and the
profitable returns of the Levant Company.

FINIS.

