A LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE WISE and FOOLISH, THE GODLY and UNGODLY.

Wherein They may see, how much it Concerns them to be Wise unto Salvation,
before it be too late.

By JOHN RYTHER, Minister of the Gospel in Wapping, near London.

Prove. 9.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, and the knowledge
of the Holy is understanding. Prove. 12.23. But the heart of Fools proclaims
foolishness. LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Henry White, at the three Bibles in
the Minories, 1677.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
THe Design of the Author, by presenting thee with this littie Piece, is no
other than casting in his Mite, with many other abler Hands, toward making
thee Wise to Salvation; which indeed is The Wisdom, The true Wisdom, and will
make thee one of Wisdom's Children, in such an Age, wherein so much folly and
madness appears, especially in reference to Men's greatest Concerns, viz. The
concerns of Eternity, and a future World.

This true heavenly Spiritual Wisdom, will be thy greatest interest, living,
and dying; therefore it is high time to look about thee, whether thou art a
wise, or a foolish Virgin; whether thou have got this true Oil into thy Vessel
and Lamp, left thou, for all thou have trimmed thy Lamp, should he shut out
from going in with Christ, to the Supper of the Lamb. Did thou never read
that word in all thy life? Who is a wise Man, and endued with knowledge among
you? Let him show out of a good Conversation his works, with meekness of
wisdom, Jam. 3.13. (So say I) O show thy wisdom! make it appear, render it
visible to all Spectators, in that thou art so far from making a mock of Sin,
that thou dare not meddle with it at any rate; that thou abhor'st it as Hell,
that thou fliest from it as from a Serpent that thou do hate it as a Toad;
this shows thy wisdom thou see before thee, thou considerst Actions, and the
consequences of Actions, and do act like a rational Man; What will this
sinful Course of mine, end in? Is it not a discovery of Childlike folly, to
play with a Rattle-Snake, and take it up in our hands, because it has a
shining skin, and looks with a splendid outside; or to swallow a Pill of
Poison, because it is pleasant and gilded? Or to venture on Ratsbane, because
it is sweet? Such folly, such madness is this, in poor Sinners, in thousands of
poor Souls, that play with sin, put it into their Bosoms, nay, keep it as a
sweet morsel under their Tongues, because it pleases and flatters for the
present. It was good Counsel of the Philosopher, Look upon Pleasures going, and
not upon them coming. O, poor Sinners, how does want of Heavenly Wisdom (which
much consists in fore sight) carry many a soul veiled and mufled to Hell! O
therefore, when thou readst this Piece (let me beg of thee) consider as well as
read; read, read leisurely, and make not too much haste over good Ground: This
is the fault of most Readers, they do not mind their stops. As thou read,
take Pauses, and ask Questions, Is not this so? O, my soul! Is not this true? O
my Conscience! Can thou evade it, or deny it? Is not this the Truth that must
Judge thee another day? Another Request I have to thee (Read believingly) If
thou believe not, why do thou read? Will it not be lost time, and is there
not too much of that precious Sand run already out of thy Glass? O, how hard it
is to bring Sinners to believe, before they feel! Thou that wilt not believe,
so much Folly is bundled up in thy heart, now ere long, will lament thy
infidelity and thy folly together, when it will be past hope. Sinner, let me
ask thee this Question: Have thou not been fool enough already, but thou must
hold on to be so, whatsoever God, Conscience, Ministry, Word, or Rod say? O,
hear that good Counsel be-times, and practice it. The fear of the Lord, is the
beginning of Wisdom. And a good understanding have all they, that do hereafter.
Begin to be wise then, before it be too late, and God say, He will put no more
pieces, such pieces, into the hands of such Fools. Consider, consider, poor
souls, you have but a little time to get Wisdom in, a little time to get the
true Oil; your Glass is running fast, and often meets with an Invisible hand to
shake it too; nay, you cannot tell what sudden stop this frail Glass of your
Lives, may meet with. O therefore, will you yet loyter? Will you? dare you
stand idle any longer, that have lost so much time? That have done so little
work? and yet have had so many pieces in your hands? But like so many poor,
stupid, foolish ones, had not hearts to make use of the same. Do you never ask
your own hearts the Question, Is there any Wisdom in the Grave, any Work in the
Grave, whither you go? Is not this life your only Market for this Commodity? O,
that Sinners did but think the Grave too dark a Shop, to do any Soul-work in,
they would not certainly leave so much work undone, when they come to die! Ah,
Sinners, when will you be wise? Do not you know, either now or never, for
Heavenly Wisdom? Remember the foolish Virgins, when they cried, Lord, open,
open unto us, came a day after the Fair: Now the door was shut, and it was too
late. I have one other Request to thee (good Reader) Either read (as one
resolved to Practice) or lay down, and never read at all: what will thy reading
else be, but one day a great Aggravation, both of thy sins and Condemnation?
What, to read and never the wiser? To read and never the better? What, to be
convinced of Folly, and never labor after Wisdom? To go on in thy Folly, while
thou know thou do so? O, how sad is this! If thou shall grow any wiser
for Heaven, by thy reading the Piece now put into thy hand, the Auther has
both his Desire and Design, and begs thy Prayers that it may be a Blessing
still to thee, and others, in the Hand of God.

Thine, In the Service of the Gospel, J. R.

Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock, at Sin.
SInner, or Believer (for one of these thou art, that takes up this little
Piece to Read) I will propound a Question to thee, and beg thee in bowels to
thy Soul, to propound it to thy self, and press thy Heart to return a direct
Answer; the Question is but short, but yet of great weight and worth. O my
Soul, what am I? Is it not an easy Question to ask? How soon may thou put this
to thy own Soul? But, O how hard is it to Answer! Am I a Fool, or a Wiseman?
Am I wise to Salvation? Am I a foolish Virgin, or a wise? Can thou not Answer
it? Look seriously into the ensuing Treatise, and thou may meet with
something that will contribute toward a Solution of the present Question.

Fools make a mock at Sin. The Text is a very brief, yet full Description of
all ungodly Persons; who they are, They are fools.

1. We have the Persons described, They are fools. 2. We have the Practice,
They make a mock at Sin.
I. Their Persons, They are fools.

1. They may think themselves Wise; they may be wise in their own Conceit, but
they are nevertheless Fools. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is
more hope of a fool than of him, Prove. 26.12.

2. They may be wise in other men's Conceits, and be cried up for Wise Men in
the World, yet Fools in Gods account. Their Posterity approve their sayings,
they are written down in other Men's Kalenders for Wise Men, but what says God?
How are they written down in Gods Calendar? This their way is their folly,
Psalm. 49.13.

3. Probably these Men may be wise for the World. The Children of the World are
wiser than the Children of Light in their Generations, yet they are Fools. He
that gets Riches, and not by right, he leaves them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a Fool, Jer. 17.11. He is a Fool for Eternity,
though a Wise Man for this present World.

4. These Men may be wise to do evil, and yet the greater Fools. For my People
is foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish Children, they have no
understanding, they are wise to do evil, Jer. 4.22.

There are two words in the Hebrew for a Fool, and they are both given to
ungodly Men in Scripture, [Nabal] Foolish, or Evil, such a Fool as has his
understanding faded and depraved, whereupon he becomes vile and wicked. The
other word for a Fool is [Moreh] which signifies one Rebellious. If a man have
a stubborn and rebellious Son, etc. Deuteronomy. 21.18. there we have the word: Such
an one is a Fool, it signifies (as Mr. Answ. from this comes the Greek word
(...).
one observes) one that changes and turns to the worse, yea, in Heart and
Action, and in particular turns from, and opposes the Word of God. It seems
Fool and Rebels are the same with God.

II. We have the description of their Practice in the Text, they make a mock at
Sin. Thus is their Folly made manifest. Thus they proclaim their Folly, they
make a mock and scorn of that which is the Object of Gods wrath and vengeance,
they sport themselves with it: Fools sport themselves in doing mischief. It is
a sport to a fool to do mischief: But a Man of understanding has wisdom, Prove.
10.23. O what Fools are these, to mock at that which cast the Angels out of
Heaven, Adam out of Paradise, which brought Christ an Errand from Heaven to
Earth, and which, without Repentance, will send them on an errand from Earth to
Hell. And what, Sinner, make a mock at Sin? thou may as well make a mock of
God, of Christ, of Heaven, of Hell, of Damnation: And art thou so hardened, that
thou can find in thy heart to laugh in the face of all these? What, Sinner,
not one spark of Reason, nor Religion left thee? At what a rate have thou
sinned, that can make a mock at Sin? Such an one as thou, art in the highest
form of the Devils school: Thou sit in the seat of the scornful, Psalm. 1.1.
Or, in the chair of Pestilence, as the Septuagint reads it.

Observe. 1. Then ungodly ones (or Sinners) are Fools in Gods account, in
Scripture account, which is Gods Calendar. Observe. 2. To mock at Sin is the
greatest discovery of Folly in the World: Fools make a mock at Sin.
First, That ungodly Sinners are Fools. You may see God calls them so every
where in Scripture where they are mentioned. Prove. 1.7. The fear of the Lord is
the beginning of Wisdom, but Fools despise Wisdom, and Instruction. There are
natural Fools, who are defective in principles of Reason; but it is meant of
Spiritual Fools, or Fools in a Spiritual sense, who are defective in principles
of Religion. The whole body of the Apostate Children of Israel are called a
foolish, and unwise People, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Sin is called madness and folly,
Eccles. 7.25. The wickedness of folly, even of foolishness and madness, 2 Chap.
12. It is not only folly, but madness. When God brought the poor Prodigal home,
he is said first to come to himself, he had played the fool and the madman
before, to leave such a Fathers house. Nay, the highest Acts of Sin, are called
Folly in Scripture. As that act of Shechem defiling Dinah, it is called working
folly in Israel, Genesis 34.7. and that act of Amnon to Thamar, 1 Samuel 13.12, 13.
Thou will be as one of the fools in Israel.

But we shall now demonstrate to the sinner, what a fool, what an arrant fool,
an ungodly Man is, be he who he will.

1. Is not he a fool that neither fears, nor foresees evil and danger; when
they are fast approaching? Does not Wisdom consist in foresight? Are not the
wise Man's eyes in his head, while the fool walks in darkness, Eccles. 2.4. viz.
He acts rationally and judiciously, while the sinner, the fool, walks on
without either fear or wit. The prudent Man (says Solomon) foresees evil. Oh,
says he, yonder is a Storm, I must prepare for it; this is Wisdom, and he hides
himself: But the sinner goes on, blunders on, and is punished, Prove. 22.3. He
blunders on, until he blunder himself into Hell at last, by taking no warning.
He considers not, sees not his danger, therefore fears not. He sees no Wrath,
nor Hell, nor Damnation, to lie before him: He does not foresee, therefore he
does not fear. He does not foresee his miscarrying to all Eternity, he does not
foresee that if he goes on, he is lost for ever; therefore he does not foresee
it: But now a wise Man foresees it will be thus, and therefore he sets himself
to work out his Salvation with fear and trembling.

2. Is not he a Fool that understands not his way? The wisdom of the Prudent,
is to understand his way: But the folly of Fools is deceit, Prove. 9.13. They
think they understand their ways, and think they are right, their ways are
right in their own eyes: But alas! they deceive their own Souls, they walk in
darkness, and know not whither they go; they think they are going to Heaven,
and alas, poor fools, they are going to Hell.

In their folly they go rstray, Prove. 5. ult. O poor sinners, that are walking
into Hell, are not you fools? What could you say, if an Angel should meet you,
and ask you this question, Whither go you, poor sinners? What art thou bound to
Hell? What meanest thou to run so fast? Wilt not thou be there soon enough?
Take up sinner, take up: Why do thou thus spur on? What could thou answer
to such Questions, thou poor foolish sinner. If thou be right, why does Wisdom
cry after thee to turn thee? Ho, every one that is simple, turn in hither,
Prove. 1.22. O, how does Wisdom see poor Souls traveling in the Broad-way, like
Fools going to the Stocks, and cries after them, How long will ye simple ones
love simplicity?

3. Is not he a Fool that takes no care to prevent afterclaps of Danger? Wisdom
consists in foresight and in prevention: Is it not the property of a fool to
say, I had not thought, my sins would have brought me to this? Does not the
Lord in his Word, and in his Rod, cry out to poor sinners, (as Jonathan said to
David) As the Lord lives, there is but a step betwixt thee and death? Oh! says
God, sinners, sinners, there are but a few steps betwixt you and death; a few
Years, Months, it may be Days, betwixt you and Hell, betwixt you and Ruin; and
yet such Fools are poor sinners, that they are not solicitous to prevent their
misery. Oh, how it will cut poor sinners to the Heart another day, to sign out
that dolesul note, We had not thought the Great God was in good earnest with
us. We had not thought Divine Threatenings would have proved such Realities! O
this will be the Worm that will so woefully torment them! We were told of all
this beforehand, and might have prevented it. O then they will cry out, what
Fools they have been: But all too late, they see their folly by the light of
that fire that so intollerably torments them.

4. Is not he a Fool that does not consult the end of his way? The end in all
wise Agents is first in Intention, though the last in Execution. Here is the
difference betwixt Wisdom and Folly: The one says, What will this end in? As
the Apostle argues in that case, What fruit had you in those things whereof you
are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death, Romans 6.21. But now a
Soul that is not wise for Heaven, and Salvation, may say, What will this Way,
this Course, end in? Will not this be bitterness in the latter end? Will it not
be Wrath, eternal Death, Damnation, in the end? This is a way that seems right
to a man: But what is the end of it? The end of it is Death, Prove. 14.12. Ah
Sinner, Sinner! Art not thou a fool that never looks before thee? Wast thou
wise, would thou not look before thou leapst? Why do not thou ask thy
soul, O my soul, what will this sin of mine end in? Whether will this Course
and Way of mine at last lead me? Is not sin the Devils high way to Hell? And
does not this Course lead down to the Chambers of Death? Ah, poor fool? All
wise Men that have their Eyes in their Heads, pity thee, they see whether thou
art going; and thou will see too when it is too late.

5. Is not he a Fool that cannot tell how to make a good choice? Wisdom you
know is much seen in choice. The trial of a Fool has sometimes been made thus.
Fools and Idiots are not to inherit Lands; and when they come to try them, they
lay down Apples, and Gold, and if they choose the Apples before the Gold, they
are concluded Idiots. Oh, does not God put this to trial, sinners, foolish
sinners! Here is Gold and Apples laid before you, Creature Comforts, the
Accommodations of this Life: What are these but so many Apples (as Josephus
tells of) that grow about the Lake of Sodom, that look bravely to the Eye, but
as soon as touched, they crumble to dust? And do not many thousand poor foolish
Sinners, choose these before the Gold? Before the Gold tried in the Fire (viz.)
Real Grace. Such as make such a choice are fools, and shall never Inherit. Did
not Moses tell the People of Israel, he laid Life and Death before them, (
Deuteronomy. 30.19.) and put them to their choice? And Oh! what folly sinners is it,
to choose Death rather than Life. Oh! this will be the sting of thy eternal
misery, that thou like a foolish wretch, did make such a choice; it was thy
own choice; thou art undone for ever, but it was thy own doing: Thou thy self
art the cause of all this. This will justify God in thy own Conscience to all
Eternity: Oh, what crying out is there (Sinner) in Hell! What a fool was I to
make such a choice! I might have been happy for ever as I am now miserable, if
I had made a wise choice.

6. Is not he a Fool that is afflicted day by day, and still goes on and keeps
his course of sinning still. A reproof enters more into a wise Man, than an
hundred stripes into a Fool, Prove. 17.10. A Fool will be a fool still, give him
one blow after another until you tell an hundred. O how many blows have many
sinners had! Sometimes a blow in their Estates, another while a blow in their
Bodies; another while a blow in their Families; sometimes in their Trading;
nay, added to all these, sometimes in their Souls, by Convictions under
Ordinances. And thus God lays on time after time: But what comes of all these
blows? Alas the poor sinner is a fool still; he goes on still. Bray a fool in a
Mortar among Wheat with a Pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him,
Prove. 27.22. These Fools are worse than Madmen and Bedlams, they are often
restored to Reason again by Correction and Severity. Poor sinner, have not thou
been such a fool? O how many blows have thou laid under! How many Rods has God
spent upon thee? How often has God made thee sick by smiting thee? And yet
Gods Rod has not whipped out the bundle of Folly that is wrapped up in thine
Heart. As thou have been, so thou art a poor foolish one to this day. O poor
sinner! what if upon thy incorrigibleness, the Lord should say to thee, as he
did to them, Why should you be smitten any more? You rebel more and more. O how
sad would this be! Sinners, did you never read that word, Prove. 19.29.
Judgments are prepared for the scorners, and stripes for the backs of Fools.
Thou art both, whilst thou make a mock at sin: It is no wonder if the Lord
have Rods for such backs.

7. Is not he a Fool who has a price put into his hand, and has no heart to
use it? Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get Wisdom, seeing
he has no heart to it, Prove. 17.16. Ah sinners! how many opportunities have
you had in your day to get Wisdom for your Souls, for Heaven and Eternity, and
you have let them slip? O what grand folly is this, to play the fool for your
precious souls! Is this to redeem your time? Is this to walk as wise ones? As
those that are wise to Salvation? Is he a wise Mariner amongst you, that when
the Wind presents, will stay on the Downs, or drinking a shore, and so loose
his Voyage? Is he a wise Man, Merchant in your repute, that does not esteem his
Seasons to buy his Goods and Commodities at the best hand? Is he a wise
Husbandman that does not observe his Seasons, for getting his Seed into the
Earth? And this is the case of poor foolish sinners; the motions of the Spirit
presents the Gales of Grace, comes about in Ordinances, the Commodities for
another World, may be had at the best hand? Seed for Heaven may be sown, and
yet all these Prices sinners have no heart to make use of. Ah poor sinner! Are
you not like Ephraim, silly Doves without an heart?

8. Is not he a Fool that neglects the doing of that now, which he never shall
have opportunity to do hereafter. Now sinner is your Summer, your
Gospel-Summer, your Harvest for your Souls. And is not he a wise Son that
gathers in Summer, but he that sleeps in Harvest, is a Son that causes
shame, Prove. 10.5.

O, how many Summer-Seasons of Grace have you had, and yet what little Winter
stores have you laid in? What little store of Grace, what little store of
Experience, what little store of Gospel-Promises; and is not this wisdom in
Summer, to provide for an approaching Winter? There are four things (says
Solomon) that are little, but exceeding wise; the Ants they prepare their Meat
in Summer, the Conies they make their Houses in the Rocks, they provide against
danger: The Locusts they go out in Bands, they provide against the assault of
an Enemy, and so go out together. The Spider takes hold with her hands and is
in Kings Palaces, she fortifies her self against danger, Pro. 30.24, 25, 26.
They are all, we see provident Creatures, they provide in their present time
against time to come. Ah poor sinners, you cannot do your work hereafter! Now
is your day to work in, there is no work in the Grave whither you go. Either
now or never is the cry of Ordinances, the cry of Preachers, the cry of the
motions of the Spirit of God; And will you still be such Fools, as not apply
your selves to your present work? Is it not great folly to loose such
opportunities, as you shall never have the like? Ah sinners! tell me, tell your
own hearts, would you be such fools in other things? And is it nothing to play
the sool with your precious souls, with precious Seasons of Grace? Come
sinners, ere long you will be of another mind, either here or hereafter; either
when you die, or are damned.

9. Is not he a Fool that for short and momentary Pleasure, will part with
eternal and everlasting Joys? Was not that Cardinal a Fool as wise as he
thought himself? Who said, he had rather loose his part in Paradise, than in
Paris. We read of some that fancied a kind of Eternity to themselves here in
their enjoyments; and what-says God of them, Psalm. 49.11, 13. Their Posterity
approve their sayings, but this their way is their folly. Their inward thought
was, their Houses should continue for ever, etc. Ah sinners! Is not this
egregious folly and madness, for a mess of Pottage to sell an heavenly
Birthright? For an interest in Earth to let go Heaven? For Paper and Packthred
to let go the Commodities themselves? The Commodities of Eternity, for the
fashions of this World that passes away? Alas poor Souls! Are not your sinful
pleasures short-lived? Nay, when they are gone, do they not leave a sting
behind them? Was it not good Counsel of the Philosopher, Look upon Pleasures
going, and not coming. What are they but like the crackling of Thorns under a
Pot, make a blaze to warm for the present, and are gone. And for such things as
these to loose an eternal Inheritance that fades not away, O what folly and
madness is this.

10. Is not he a Fool, that repents when it is too late. O what folly is this!
Wisdom appears in preventing repentance: Ah what a fool was Esau, when he had
sold his Birthright, Genesis 27.34, 38. He then came in, and cried with a great
and bitter cry, yea, an exceeding bitter cry, and loud unto his Father, bless
me, even me also, O my Father. And Esau said, have thou but one Blessing
Father? And he lift up his voice and wept. But alas, all this was too late, it
was out of due season: Therefore we have the Author to the Hebrews telling us,
Heb. 12.17. That when he would have inberited the Blessing, he was rejected;
for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with Tears.

Oh the folly of the afterward Repentance! The foolish Virgins it is said also
came afterward; their Repenting was too late, the door was shut; they pray
now; they cry now; they knock now; they repent now; but alas! all is now too
late. Ah foolish sinners, you should have done it sooner! Hell is full of
repentance but it is insignificant repentance, it will never alter their
estates: Consider now these ten Demonstrations, and sinners, you may by them
know whether you be fools, or no. Fools in Gods account, or no; fools for
Heaven, or no. O sinner, will thou be in good earnest one half hour, now in all
thy life, now that thou have read over these things, will thou promise me
before I go any further? Will thou be so kind to thy soul, as to think them
over? To ask the Question again and again? O my soul, art thou such a fool as
now thou have heard of, as now thou have read of? Be in sober sadness with thy
own heart, and see thy face in this Glass, that thou may know thy state. Now
sinners, if your Judgments be a little concerned, I would then have you apply
things home to your own Consciences.

Application.
Let us then improve it, learn we hence. If the ungodly Man be the Fool in Gods
account. O what difference is their betwixt Gods reckoning and Man's. God does
not judge as Man judges; Men and Women are not what they are in Men's looks, but
what they are in Gods. He is not commended, who is commended of Men, but whom
the Lord commends. Men say so and so but what says the Scripture? This i^ the
Voice of God. You may think your selves to be something, and you may be
nothing, ( Gal. 6.3.) and others may think you to be some thing, and yet you
may be nothing yea, worse than nothing. O what a poor empty thing is it to take
up in a name, to live with others, and yet be dead. To be counted a Wise Man, a
Sober Man with others, and be accounted by God for fools. O what satisfaction
can there be in being wise for Earth, and yet be fools for Heaven. He is only a
wise Man that passes so with God now, and will pass so with him at the great
Day: Thou may go with Men now, with Ministers now, yea, with Churches now,
and yet not go with God then. O how current do many Souls go now with Men, that
I am afraid will be found counterfeit Coin at the great discovering Day: O
then, never take up in the reckoning and judgment of Men, as to thy Eternal
state.

Secondly, Then learn we hence, where true Wisdom consists. O how much are the
Sons of the Earth mistaken! Men may be well for the World, may have deep Heads
for the compassing the things of this present Life, and yet be fools for their
precious Souls: The Rich Man in the Gospel was so, for all his projects: Thou
fool, this night shall thy soul be taken away. Men may be wise Men for great
Gifts and Learning, and yet fools for their souls. Thou have hid these things
from the Wise and Prudent, and revealed them unto Babes, Mat. 11.25. Alas, this
Wisdom was Foolishness to the Greeks, which were the great Scholars of their
day, 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer
of this World? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this World?

Here it will be inquired, in what particulars then does true Wisdom consist?
wherein lies this true Spiritual Wisdom?

1. Is not this true Spiritual Wisdom, to provide for ones Eternal well being?
And is not he a wise Man that is wise unto Salvation? And that thou from a
child (says Paul to Timothy) have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Now, this is the only Wisdom that
comes from above; nay, this Wisdom also leads the Soul thither again. Can
thou be wise, and never secure the interest of thy precious Soul? Is this thy
wisdom to neglect thy Eternal Concerns? Thou would be accounted a fool to
neglect the concerns of thy Family, of thy Trading, of thy Ship, of thy Shop.
And are not concerns of Eternity of greater moment? Sinners, can you think it
your wisdom to cumber your selves about many things, while you live in a total
neglect of the one thing necessary? Would any think him a wise Man, that did
eagerly pursue Feathers blown up in the Air, while he neglects his Shop and
Trading in the World? Would that Merchant be accounted a wise Man, that while
he should be at the Exchange, should amongst a company of Boys, be following a
Kite blown up in the Air? And yet this is the case. Ah sinners, your Spiritual
Wisdom lies in pursuit of your best interest.

2. Is not he a wise Man, that does that which he came into the World for? This
is great Heavenly Wisdom. Poor sinners, do you ever consider for what ends you
came into the World? Was it to follow your lusts? Was it to take your swinge in
sin? Was it to be swallowed up of your sensual pleasures? Was it to gratify
the wills of the flesh Did God give you immortal souls to pursue such sensual
employments Sure sinners, God had other design in sending you into the World;
thi^ was your errand thither to sue ou^ your pardon, to get an interest i^
Christ, to get your peace made u^ with God: Do you ever think of these things,
poor Souls! This is to be wise for another World.

3. Is not he a wise Man that does his proper work in its season? Wise Men will
not only be found working, but they will be found employed in their proper
work. Blessed is the Servant whom his Master shall find so doing (viz.) doing
his proper work. It is a great piece of Christian Wisdom to find out, and fall
upon ones proper work. The wise Servant will be found doing what his Master
has peculiarly set him about; is it humbling our souls for some particular
guilt? Is it getting power against sin? Is it getting the sense of ^he Pardon
of sin sealed up to the ^^ul? Is it laying in more Grace for a Rainy day? O to
be doing this york is great wisdom! This is pro^er work, and further this must
be ^one in its season too; this work ^ust be done while it is to day. Work
while it is to day, etc. Herein is wisdom, to observe Times and Seasons for
such works, the neglect of which occasioned God to complain of his own People,
Jer. 8.7. Yea, the Stork in the Heavens knows her appointed times, and the
Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow; but my People knows not the Judgment
of the Lord. All these Creatures have a natural instinct, to know their times
and seasons. So in this case, there is much wisdom. O sinners, what a sad thing
will it be, when God shall say unto you upon your Deathbeds, when you cry to
him for Mercy, and Pardon. O, you should have done this in time! in its proper
season, while you had health and opportunities, calls and motions of the Spirit
of Grace upon your hearts. But now it is pastime, I will not hear you; Prayer
is now out of season, and Repentance out of season. O now it is bast time! O
how will this cut the soul! Will not this be bitter? Will ^t not reach to the
heart?

4. Is not he a wise Man that gets his work done for Eternity, while he has
means, and helps, to further him? O says the wise Man, it may be I shall never
enjoy the like means and opportunities. It may be never in all my days, sit
under the like Ministerial Showers again, it nay be never be under the like
^reathings of the Spirit. O therefore, says the soul, I will hoyse sail, will
no longer sit still, but up and ^e doing. Ah poor sinners! Can my of you tell
how long your day of Grace may last? Have you any lease ^f your
Gospel-Liberties, any more ^an of your Lives? Can you tell but ^our Sun may be
darkened once more ^t Noon-d^y? And if your Light hold be on^e more put out,
would ^our work go on well in the dark? ^nner, sinner, will thou never be
brought to debate these matters of Concernment soberly with thy self?

5. Is not this wisdom to get that done, which if you let alone undone, your
souls are undone for ever? O, say wise Men for the World, this must we do. Why,
what is the matter there is a must upon it? Else we are undone, our Wives and
Children undone. Well, and there is something that must be done, or else your
souls are undone; and this is the dreadful undoing of all. Thou may be undone
(as thou call'st it) as to thy Estate, as to thy Trade, and may recover it
again; many have been so. But when thy soul is undone, thou art for ever undone.

You will, it may be, ask what is this undoing?

It is to be lost for ever. To be damned. To be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his Power. Alas!
what mourning is there over lost Ships, sometimes amongst you? over lost
Relations? over lost Estates? But what are these to the loss of souls? The
former are recoverable losses, but the latter is an irrecoverable loss. And O,
what wise Man will hazard such a loss? If your Ventures at Sea be considerable,
you will be solicitous to ensure. O poor sinner! your Ventures are very great,
and it will be your great wisdom to ensure; and know you this for your comfort,
the Ensurer shall never fail, nor break.

6. Is it not wisdom to be doing that which you have been doing so long, and is
not yet done? O, says a wise Man, I have been often about such a Business and
Concernment, and one thing or other does put me off, and I have neglected and
delayed it, but I will no longer defer it. O, Wisdom will say thus for the
soul, Have not you been often resolving solving to break off your sin, often
thinking you would turn from the evil of your ways? Saying with the Prodigal, I
will arise and go to my Father. But O sinner, is it not yet to do? Have you to
this day been as good as your word? O poor souls! what if Death should clap an
Arrest upon you, before you get it done? Have you any lease of your Lives? May
not you be sought for in the Morning, and not be found? Is it not then wisdom
to put off that no longer which you have put off too long already?

7. Is it not wisdom to do that now, which is impossible to be done afterward?
A wise Man will not hang a Business of Concernment upon may-be's and
uncertainties? O no! Thus will a wise Man argue, It is certain it may now be
done, but it is certain it cannot be done afterward, if it be not done now.
There is no wisdom nor work in the Grave. He that dies a fool, shall be damned
for a fool. He will have more wisdom in Hell, or however he will there see his
folly, but he must bear it, and the merit of it to all Eternity. Now is the day
of Salvation; and wise Men (I have told you) take Time by the fore-lock, they
redeem it: It cannot be done afterward. O, how positive is God in the case!
Luke 13.25, 26. When once the Master of the House is risen up and has shut to
the Door, and you begin to stand without and to knock at the Door, etc. But
what was the answer? Depart from me, I know you not whence you are. Yet they
plead privileges: We have eaten and drunk in thy presene, and thou have Taught
in our streets. O, they would not be said nay! but does Christ call his first
words in again? O no! I tell you, I know you not, depart from me: Be gone you
wretched and damned souls, be gone. O cutting words! Were these wise Souls or
Fools, judge you?

8. Is it not wisdom to do that, which we have but a little time to do it in?
Were you to live the age of Methusalem, or the age of the Patriarchs before the
Flood, you then might have something to say for your folly, in delaying the
great work of your sou's. But alas, what is your Age before God? David answers
the case, Thou have made my days as an handbreadth, and mine age is as nothing
before thee, Psalm. 39.4, 5. Suppose, sinners, that you should live threescore
Years and ten, a full Age: what is this? You have an hundred Years work to do
in this time; and what is a days time to a weeks work? Or a weeks time for a
years work? This is the case, poor sinners. Time is short. And is not he a
foolish Traveller, that has a Journey that is large to go, and only a Winter
day to do it in, and yet he will have it Noon ere he set out? In short days,
you say, it is now Noon, and now Night. Alas, poor sinners! It is not only Noon
with many of you, and the Sun of your Life may set at Noonday, but at four a
Clock, or five of the Clock, in some of your days of Grace? And is it not
wisdom to make haste before it be night, a night of utter Darkness, eternal
Darkness with you? O sinners, spur on, put on, and mend your pace, else you
will be nighted.

9. Is it not wisdom to do that now, which will bring great returns of wisdom
when you die, when you come to your Journeys end? Wise Men will be doing that
for the present, which will turn to good account, though they see not good of
it for the present. So a wise soul for Eternity, for Heaven, this soul will be
doing that which will bring great returns. Wise Merchants, and wise Mariners,
study to make good returns. Here come your returns, you wise Christians, when
you come to die, O then, the soul will have returns of Peace and Comfort. This
was the return that Hezekiah had: Lord, remember me, how I have walked before
thee with an upright and a perfect heart. O that is a sweet word of Peter's:
Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, unto
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11.
Is it not greatly your wisdom to make this sure, to have Peace, Joy, and
Comfort, upon a Deathbed at last.

10. Is it not wisdom to do that now, which you shall not have to do
afterward? Now thou art moved, breathed upon, convinced, inclined, and have a
good will to repent, and to return from the evil of thy ways: O do it speedily,
for it may be, neglect this time, and thy Heart may be hardened. Jezebel had
space given her to repent in, but she repented not. Alas poor sinner! it may be
thou will be judicially hardened, instead of mourning, repenting, or believing
afterward. Now if thou put these together, and compare them with the other ten
in the Doctrinal part, I think sinners, you may easily see who is the Fool, and
who is the Wise Man, and which of these you belong unto. Come sinners, rouse up
your selves, if you have played the fool thus long, for the Lords sake, for your
souls sake, for Christ's sake, let me beg of you, let me prevail with you, that
you play the Fools no longer; lest, as you have lived, you shall die, lest you
die Fools. And let me tell you, sinners, there is no fool like the dying fool,
for the dying fool will be the damned fool.

Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock at Sin.
WE have done with the Description of the Persons in my Text, the ungodly Man,
the Fool. We are now come to the Discovery of his Practice, He makes a mock at
Sin.

What he is, you have heard; but now we must enquire what he does. The Text
tells us, He makes a mock at Sin. He is not only a Fool, but he manifests his
folly; according to that word, Prove. 13.16. A fool lays open his folly. Or,
spreads his folly, lays open the dung of his own foolishness. (Some read
it) The shame of his folly shall be spread abroad, (one reads it) The heart of
fools proclaims foolishness, Prove. 12.23.

Wherein does this discovery of this folly consist? The Text tells us, They
make a mock at Sin. Some think the sense of it to be this, Thus some carry it.
They make a sport of it. Seek not to appease the wrath of God kindled against
them for it, but amongst the Righteous there is favor: (viz.) Among them the
favor of God, when they have offended, is sought for by all means; and being
sought for, by mercy is obtained. Others thus, Fools not finding the Scourge of
Sin, (viz.) the Punishment of it, not tied to the Act of it, as if they were
mocked, when they are told of the Punishment of it to come, they make a mock at
it, and go on in their wickedness. The favor therefore the Righteous shows
them, is quickly to let them feel the Rod of Justice; while they punish the
offense, they show great love to the Offender. (Some read it, Arias Montanus in
loc.
) [Stultorum quisque palliabat delictum.] Every Fool will hide his fault. And O
what folly is this! The favor therefore that the Righteous show him, is to let
him see his sin. I think it is a good reading, They make a mock of sin, (viz.)
A small matter, a light matter of it, a matter of Laughter and Merriment, Sport
and Recreation. O what an height of sin, what a degree of impudency are such
sinners arrived at! Mocking at that upon Earth, that souls are mourning for,
and ever in everlasting burnings! what sinners, mock at that now, that you must
mourn over here, or hereafter, to all Eternity? What, make a Jest of that which
is matter of Damnation? Is going to Eternal Flames, sinners, a jesting
business? Ah poor sinner, thou shall assuredly have enough of mocking at sin,
when God shall mock at thee, as thou once mocked at sin. Stay here, sinner, read
no further, unless resolved thou will consider the next words thou readst. If
all this while thou have not laid one word to heart, can thou read it without
fear and amazement? I will also laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your fear
comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwind: When distress and anguish comes upon you, Pro. 1.26, 27. The
meaning of it, is, sinners shall be so tormented in their own Consciences,
Ridere Dei est nolle humanae Afflictioni miserere, says one.
their sin and guilt laying hold upon them, as if God mocked and laughed at their
torment. This laughing of God, is, that he will not have pity upon humane
Affliction.

The Observation I would insist on, is this:

To make a mock of sin, is the greatest discovery of Folly in the World. We
must inquire, First, What is meant by such as are mockers at sin.

Secondly, We must inquire into the Pleas that lead sinners into this great
piece of Folly.

Thirdly, We must inquire into the Reasons, why it is such great folly, To make
a mock at sin.

Fourthly, We must Improve it, by way of Application.

1. What is meant, or who are meant by such as are mockers at sin?

1. Sometimes this Mocking is taken for Deceiving: as she said to Samson,
Judges 16.10. Thou bast mocked me, and told me lies, deceived me. So poor
sinners, they deceive themselves, while they mock at sin. Observe how my Text
comes, In the folly of fools is their deceit. They deceive themselves, while
they make a mock at sin. Ah sinner, whilst thou art mocking at sin, do thou
know what thou art doing? Art thou not deceiving thy own soul?

2. Sometimes it is taken to Jest, or Sport, even to Derision, ( Psalm. 44.13.)
either by Words, or Gesture. Thus they make a mock at sin, making a sport of
it: that is made a deriding matter with sinners which is a damning matter with
God: God takes notice of the gesture of Persons in such cases. Against whom do
you sport your selves? Against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the
tongue? Isa. 57.4. These are actions of scorn, and God takes Cognizance of
them: The Lord sees you, sinners, when any of you make a mock at Him, or his
Word, Ways, or Servants. This in the General.

1. By making a mock at sin, is understood a slighting, and deriding at the
Threatenings of God; usually they that make a mock at sin, make a mock at the
approaching Judgments of God. Thus Lots Sons in Law did, he was to them as one
that mocked. Thus did the Jews in Ezekiel's days, when they took a scornful
Taunt, Ezekiel. 12.27. The Vision is prolonged, the Vision is prolonged; the
Vision that he sees, is for many days to come. Tush, say poor sinners, this is
far enough off; as those Scoffers did in Peter's time, Where are the promises of
his coming? So say these, Where are his Threatenings, are they not long a
coming? As those did, who said, It is not near, let us build Houses, this City
is the Chaldron, and we are the Flesh, Ezekiel. 11.3. The Prophet Jeremiah had
Prophesied about thirty Years before of the Chaldeans besieging the City, as
you may see. What see thou Jeremiah? I see a seething Pot, and the face
thereof was toward the North. Here was that now they spoke of: Now, say they,
the old Prophet is mistaken, is this a likely thing, that after thirty Years,
such a strong City as Jerusalem should be the Chaldron, the seething Pot? They
speak of it by way of a scornful Irony, but yet it came upon them. Ah, sinners,
you may mock at that which hangs over your heads, and is ready to come down
upon you.

2. Before sinners arrive at this height of sin, they mock at the Messengers of
the Gospel; there is this to be understood in making a mock at sin. We read of
such as mocked the Messengers of God sent amongst them, until the wrath of God
broke out against them, that there was no remedy: O now, it is no wonder if
they make a mock at sin, seeing they mock at those that are sent to denounce
Divine Threatenings against sin.

3. There are such as make a mock ^t the People of God: Thus many ^id at David,
He was a derision to them, he was the Drunkards song. We read of such as sit in
the seat of the scornful. 1. Some of these mock at the sufferings of the People
of God, which is no small degree of sin, that say, Aha, aha, so would we have
it. You know what God said to the Posterity of Esau, Obad. 12.13. Thou should
not have looked on in the day of my Peoples Calamity, neither should thou
have spoken proudly in the day of his distress, etc. O what a sad story was
that, of the People of God, Lam. 2.15, 16. All that pass by, clap their hands
at thee, they hiss and wag their heads at the Daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is
this the City that Men call the Perfection of Beauty, the Joy of the whole
Earth? This is the day we have looked for, we have found, we have seen it. Now,
this is a great height of sin, to mock at Gods Peoples sufferings and sorrows.
2. Many mock at their Duties and Services, at their very Prayers, and this is
also a great height of sin.

4. By making a mock at sin, is understood such as make a mock at the Ways of
God, at the whole Cause of Religion: Such as scoff at Holiness, there are many
such in the World, that mock at Prayer, at Hearing, at the strictness of
Religion, at the Ordinances of God, yea, make a mock at Repentance for sin.

2. Inquiry, What are the leading Occasions to this Folly, of making a mock at
sin? They pretend something for it, this is their folly, but they have some
pretended Reasons for this their wicked practice.

1. Occasion of this sin being long before it be discovered, it lying long ^id,
occasions sinners to make a mock at it; they think because it is ^ong before it
be discovered, that it will never be. Alas, poor sinners! ^ll this while your
secret sins are set ^n the Light of Gods Countenance. O what folly is this, to
think to hide ^hy sin, and prosper? You sinners, that talk of your sins being
hid, d^o you ever consider these things? While your sin is hid, your
Consciences will sting you: O how will it fly in your Faces! Did not the guilt
of Joseph's Brethren do so, after many Years it had been hid? When guilt shall
have a Resurrection by Conviction, and shall walk in your Consciences, O how
dreadful will this be! what a fearful Spectrum is unpardoned guilt, when it
walks in a^ awakened Conscience? Ah, sinner do thou ever consider this? What
though thy sin be hid, yet it will wal^ in thy Conscience? 2. Do tho^
consider, though thy sins be hid, ye^ God has all thy secret sins in h^
Treasures, ( Deuteronomy. 32.34.) are the not laid up in store with him? A^ they not
sealed up among his Treasures? Ah, sinners, what fools a^ you to think God has
forgott^^ them, until he has forgiven them Though you have cast them behin^
your backs, yet God has Treasured them up: And, O, dreadful will this be when
the Lord shall open these Treasures, to bring them forth against you. 3.
Sinners, did you ever consider, there is a Court-Day coming, in which you must
have all the Books opened, and it will be read out of these Books, what has
been hid for many Years; all sinners Indictments are drawn out of these Books.
And the Dead were Judged out of those things which were written in the Books,
according to their works, Rev. 20.11, 12. 4. Do you ever consider, sinners,
that God often discovers that, which sinners labor to hide most: If it be thy
design to hide it, God will make it his design to discover it. Ah, sinners, how
sad is it to carry on contrary Designs to God? 5. Did you ^ver consider, that
you have not more ways of sinning, than God has of discovering. Sometimes God
makes use of Conscience to discover sin, sometimes he makes u^^ of Providence
to discover sin, as in Jonahs case. The storm is sent to discover the guilty
Person, sometimes by Ordinances, sometimes by such as were Partners with you in
your sin. Ah, sinners, put all these things together, and you will see hiding
of your sin is a poor Plea to make a mock at it.

3. Sinners are led into the evil o^ mocking at sin, by sin growing successful
and prosperous. When the^ see the path of the wicked to prosper O how are they
hardened by it! Prove. 1.24. The prosperity of Fools sl^ them. Such Fools are we
to thin^ a prosperous Condition a good Condition, but it has been the undoing
of many a poor Soul to all Eternity O how did the Church of the Jew ( Hos. 2.7,
8.) run from God after other Lovers, until God hedged u^ her way with Thorns,
and mad^

Wall to prevent her? And how ^id the Prodigal, like a foolish Son that causes
shame, run from his Fathers House, ( Luke 16.17.) until his Father sent a
Famine after him, and denied him Succor in his Apo^acy; For he would gladly
have fil^ed his belly with the Husks which the (...) wine did eat, but no Man
gave unto ^im. Rubs in the ways of sin are ^^eat Mercies; what mercy it is to
^ave a Rub in the way to Hell, to ^^ing a sinner to a stand, that stand ^ay
bring him to a turn: First, the ^^ner comes to a stand of Consideration, before
he comes to a turn of conversion. I considered my ways (says David) and turned
my feet to ^y Testimonies.

3. Another thing that leads Fools (...) make a mock at sin, is Gods defer^^g
Punishment: when sinners see (...) escape the strokes of Divine Ven^^ance, then
they begin to think (...) at sin is but a sport. Because God kept silent,
(viz.) did not presently thunder upon them with the Tokens of his Wrath: What
was the use they made of it? They thought God was like unto themselves, Psalm.
50.21. Now they fall into Atheistical thoughts concerning God, and surely this
will lead them to make a mock at sin, if they once come to make a mock at God:
Thus were they hardened, upon whom Sentence was not speedily Executed. O how
many poor fools have been hardened, and flattered by this, to the Gallows here,
and to Hell hereafter.

4. Another thing that leads Fools to make a mock at sin, is, they never have
felt it a Burden upon the back of their Consciences: An^ poor Soul that has
felt it weigh, (...) dare say, is past making a mock a^ it. David will tell you
how (...) weighed upon him; It went over h^^ Head as a Burden, yea, as too
heav^ a Burden to bear. It is the heavie^ thing in the World, to such as have
felt the burden of it; and it is the bitterest thing in the World, to such as
have tasted the bitterness of it. It is true, Afflictions are heavy burdens,
and Temptations are heavy burdens; Doubts, and Objections, that press in upon
many a Believers soul, are heavy burdens; but alas! these are all light things
comparatively, to the guilt of sin. What a burden was sin, upon the backs of
Angels? Did it not tumble them headlong into Hell? What a burden was it upon
our first Parents, did it not tumble them out of Paradise? O what a burden was
it to our dear Lord, Jesus Christ! Did not he cry out under it? Though they
were not his own sins, but our sins which he took upon him. And could you mock
at this, if ever you had felt ^t? Ah what fools are poor sinners! many
Thousands are sunk into the Pit of Eternal Perdition, with the weight and
burden of their sins, upon the back of their Immortal souls.

5. Thing that leads sinners to make a mock at sin, is custom in sin. This is
very hardening, we say it is a second Nature. Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum
peccati.
Alas, when Souls have got a custom of sinning, then they begin to make a mock
at it, being hardened in it. O how often does the custom of sin, take away the
feeling and conscience of it. That is a great word in the Prophet, Jer. 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin? Or the Leopard his spots? The^^ may you do
good, that are accustomed to do evil? And yet how ordinary is it, for these
poor Fools to plead a custom for sinning, which is so far from being a Plea,
that it is an aggravation. I have, say Sinners, gotten a custom of it, I
cannot leave it. Tell a sinner of his Drunkenness, of his Uncleanness, etc. O
h^^ has gotten a custom of it: Is this any Plea, thou foolish sinner? Suppose
a Malefactor before a Judge of Assize, should plead thus, My Lord, the
Indictment is true, I confess the Fact; but I have gotten such a custom to
Steal, and play the Thief; or, I have gotten such a custom of it, to cut
Purses, that I cannot leave it, therefore I crave your Lordships favor. Would
this pleading Mittigate, or Aggravate the Offense, think you? And yet is not
this the Case of Thousands of sinners? Some have Allegorized that passage of
Lazarus being dead four days, as though it set out a sinner dead in his sins
and trespasses; dead the first day ^y conceiving sin, the second day by
consenting to sin, the third day by committing sin, the fourth day by ^ustome
in sin; so that a Sinner accustomed to sin, is not only dead, ^ut buried in
sin, and a Gravestone ^olled upon it, and now no sense being. left in this
sinner, being dead in sin, he becomes a mocker at sin.

6. Another thing that leads foolish ones into mocking at sin, is, because it
does not appear to them at present in its proper colors, it appears to them in
Disguises, in Masks. Sinners do not look at sin, in two Glasses, and so have
not a right view and prospect of it. (1.) The Glass of the Law, this will make
sin^ to appear in its proper colors. Si^ (says Paul) that it might appear sin^
it did not appear sin before, it did not look like it self before; it had a
painted Face, but now it has death in the Face of it, yea, Hell and Damnation
in the Face of it. Sin revived, and I died, Romans 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The
Apparition of it, the sight of it killed him. O what (...) thing is sin, that
thou mockst a^ poor sinner! The sight of it will ki^^ a man. He had been
looking upon his sin in the Glass, of the Law, the Commandment. Alas! Do not
the most of sinners in the World, look upon sin like a painted Lion, that
cannot take a Man by the Throat. O, but the Law of God will let you see, it is
a real Roaring Lion, and will tear you to pieces, if you get it not pardoned.
(2.) There is the Glass of the Gospel, to show you sin in its proper colors.
The Gospel lets you see, sin is the Knife that cut the Throat of Gods Isaac
(viz.) the Lord Jesus Christ. This was the Dagger that stabbed the Son of God ^o
the Heart. This was the Spear that let Water and Blood out of his side. The
Nails that fastened his Sacred Hands to the Cross. And if ^hou had such a
sight of sin, could ^hou, nay, durst thou, make a mock (...) sin?

7. Another thing that leads Fools (...) make a mock at sin, is, their unbelief
of the severe Threatenings of ^od against it. Though the Lord has threatened it
with Eternal Condemnation, with Destruction, yea, everlasting Destruction from
his Presence, and the Glory of his Power; to lie under Wrath to come, without
the least hopes of Mercy, to all Eternity. But alas! these sinners are such
fools, that they put them far from them, and so make a mock at that they should
mourn over. Did they believe the soul that sins shall die? Did they believe
that the wages of sin is death? Did they believe that the ways of sin do lead
down unto death? Did they believe that Jesus Christ will come in flaming fire,
rendering Vengeance to them that know him not, and obey not the Gospel? Could it
be that they durst make a mock at sin? But alas! Do not all these severe
Threatenings, seem to them like so many idle Tales; as things spoken they think
merely ( in Terrorem and that God will never make the^ good upon them. But what
a dream, what a delusion is this? God will as surely perform his Threatenings,
as he will his Promises. Not one Threatening shall fall to the ground, no more
than one Promise.

8. Another thing that leads Fools to make a mock at sin, is this; A secret
apprehension that they have taken up, that God will never call them to an
account hereafter, for what sin they run into now. O, if poor sinners did but
reckon of a day of Account, of standing before a Judgment Seat, of being called
before Gods Bar; could they, durst they make a mock at sin? Did the Thief in
the act consider, I must answer for this before the Judge, would it not strike
him with dread and terror, while he is about it? Would he then make a mock at
it? What, at that which he must answer for? And sinner, has not God said, we
must all appear at his Judgment Seat? And that to give an account of all the
deeds done in the Body, whether they be good or evil? And has not he told us,
after death we must come to Judgment? And that we must give an account for
every idle word, at the great Audit-Day? Then surely, we must for every action,
Mat. 12.36. 1 Pet. 4.5. Is not Christ Judge of the Quick and the Dead, before
whom we must all appear? And sinner, is all this in Jest, can the Holy God thus
dally with guilty sinners? What is all this an idle story? Is this only a
Romance? Are these only big words? Come, come, poor sinners, you will find
every syllable of this to be true, and will you go on mocking at that which you
must be accountable for to an Impartial Judge? Will the Judgment Day be a
mocking matter? Is the dreadful Tribunal of God a jesting Business? Then go on
like Fools, and make a mock of sin.

9. Thing that leads Fools to make a mock at sin, is, a wretched Conceit
sinners have taken up, that God will forget sin, as fast as they commit it.
Tush, say they, will God remember? He has said in his heart God has
forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it, Psalm. 10.11. And so poor
deluded souls go on, making a mock at it. Ah poor sinner! what a madness is
this in thee, to harbor such a Conceit! God did foresee such a piece of
Atheism as this in the hearts of the Sons of Men, therefore he has laid us in
with plentiful Texts of Scripture against it, Deuteronomy. 32.34. Is not this laid up
in store with me, and sealed among my Treasures? God has laid them up, to
bring them out when occasion serves. Therefore you read that in Job, Job 14.17.
My transgression is sealed up in a bag, thou sowest up mine iniquity. Some read
it, Thou packest up mine iniquity. Others complicate them together, Lays one of
them upon the top of another. Former sins with present sins, to make up the
pack, and aggravate one another. When the great Assizes come, we read how
sinners must be proceeded against, out of the Books which are written, (says
the Text, Rev. 20.15.) O poor Sinners, will you, dare you, make a mock of that
which God keeps a Remembrance of, which God Books down. Sinners, think what you
will, your sins are so far from being forgotten by God, that your iniquity is
marked before the Lord, as he told them, Jer. 2.22. No, no, the Day is coming,
God will reprove you, and set your sins in order before you, Psalm. 50.20. An
Allusion to letters in a Book that are set in order, all in a row, before one.
The Lord has, Sinners, such a Book where all your sins are Recorded; and out
of this Book you shall one day be forced to read all in their proper order; you
will then see God has not forgotten any of them, no, not so much as the
circumstances of them, All is remembered.

10. Another thing that leads Sinners to make a mock at sin, is their stifling
and strangling their Convictions of sin, until they bring themselves under
obduracy of heart. Many sinners at first sinning, are arrested with the
Accusations of their own guilty tormenting Consciences, but then they run into
one Diversion or another, to swallow up and drown their convictions and
troubles; as Cain did, when he went out from the presence of God, and dwelt in
the Land of Nod, and buildt a City, Genesis 4.16. Which some think, was to divert
the troubles of an awakened guilty Conscience: Many wounded Souls will run to
their Pleasures for a little ease, others to their Comforts, others to their
Callings; and at last, their Convictions wear off, and then the Sinner comes to
be hardened, and now he arrives at the height of sin, even to make a mock of it.
For usually, Persons who have been under some common work and troubles for Sin,
and not being thoroughly wrought upon by them, become Mockers and Scoffers
afterward. O therefore, Sinners, look that your Convictions be through and
through. O beg of God they may not be transient like a flash of Lightning in a
Room, that makes it a little lighter for the present, but leaves it dark when
it is gone. Now, Sinners, you have heard the occasions, that leads you into
making a mock of Sin; Will you remember to pray against them, that it may not
be thus with you, that you be not the Fools in the Text.

Now to convince you, poor Sinners, that this is the greatest Folly in the
World, to make a mock at Sin.

1. Is it not Folly to make a mock at that, which you must certainly either
mourn for here, or hereafter? As merry, poor Sinner, as thou art, thy mirth is
but madness. I have said to Laughter, thou art mad; and to Mirth, what does it?
Eccles. 2.2. It holds in this sense, it lays a foundation for sorrow, and
bitter lamentation. (1.) Here, if God have a design of love upon thee, he will
bring thee to mourn over that which thou have so often mocked at. Can you ever
(sinners) expect to be pardoned, if you have not repented? Does he comfort any
that do not mourn? Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Ah, Sinner, if thou did but remember in thy Jollity and Madness, when thou
art making a mock of Sin, ere long thou must be made to mourn over it, and cry
out of it, as a burden too heavy for thee to bear. Would not this check thee in
thy careere of Madness and Folly? (2.) If thou mourn not over it here, it will
be worse, thou will be made to mourn over it hereafter, and then thou will
mourn without hope. Now thou may have hope of pardon, there is hope
concerning this thing, but this afterward mourning, is altogether hopeless;
which makes me remember the sad condition of that poor sinner, Prove. 5.11, 12,
13, 14. And thou mourn at last when thy flesh and thy body is consumed, and
say, How have I hated Instruction, and my heart despised Reproof? And have not
obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me. I was in all evil in the midst of the Congregation and Assembly. Whether we
took it of mourning here in old Age, (as some) or of mourning in Hell (as
others) yet it holds true: O what a mourning will this be! (Some read it
Quoniam) Because I have hated Instruction. (Others read it Cur) Why have I
hated Instruction: As being a Confession, he had no Cause, no Reason, to do so.
We read it (Quomodo) How have I hated Instruction? As being an acquitting Gods
Justice in his punishment. O, how have I hated Instruction, and it is but just
with God, I now should be thus dealt withal; God is Righteous in all this, that
is come upon me. And is not this folly? great folly to lay the foundation of
such mourning, and such bitter mourning?

2. Is not this Folly, to mock at that which the Righteous God hates with a
perfect hatred, yea, and will be revenged of? Did poor Sinners see, God hated
sin, would they make a mock at it? That you make a matter of Mockery of, God
makes a matter of hatred of. As in that case of Idolatry, so in this, he says,
Do not the abominable thing my soul hates, Jer. 44.4. And it is said of Christ,
He loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity, Heb. 1.9. And do you think this is
a mocking business, Sirs? Nay, God's hatred boyls up into Revenge: Shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? And is it not a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the Everliving God? Who has said, Vengeance is his, and he
will repay.

First, God will either be avenged of Sin here, or hereafter. He often takes
Vengeance of it here, and shall Sinners make a mock at Gods Judgments? How many
thousands has. God taken Vengeance of in this Life? How has Gods Righteous
Judgments often taken hold of this wicked Person, or that wicked Family?

Secondly, Hereafter we read o^ Christ coming in flaming Fire, 2 These. 1.8. to
take vengeance on poor Sinners that know him not, nor have obeyed his Gospel.
And do not we read of the Vengeance of Eternal Fire? ( Jude, ver. 7.) And is
this a mocking matter with you? Will there be any Laughter, any Mocking, any
Drollery in Hell? Now, you Sinners make a mere piece of Drollery about Sin, but
stay when you come under a sentence of Damnation, that will be no Drollery with
you.

3. Is not that Folly, yea, great Folly, to make a mock at that which grieves
God? We would not grieve the dearest Friend, thy dear Father, thy dear Husband,
thy dear Wife, would you willingly grieve them? And, O what folly is this to
grieve God! to grieve that God that thou daily live upon, that is thy dearest
Friend in the World? Do you know what you do Sinners, when you grieve God?

First, What, grieve that God tha^ you depend upon for your lives, for the
lives of your Souls, for the lives of your Bodies, who can both kill Body and
Soul: He that is Lord of your Lives, and can seal a Lease of Ejectment when he
will; Turn you out of your Clay Cottages at his pleasure.

Secondly, Is it not folly to grieve him, that can call you to an account when
he will? You must be accountable to him for your grieving of him, at his own
time and pleasure.

Thirdly, Is it not a folly to grieve him that we cannot contend with? Is there
any standing out with God? Did ever any harden himself against the Lord and
prosper? Job 9.4. Did you never, Sinners, read that word seriously over? Can
your hearts endure, or your hands be made strong in that day that I shall deal
with you? (says the Lord) Ezekiel. 22.14. You may, it may be, endure through the
hardness of your hearts, the day that Gods Servants deal with you: But, Oh
Sinner, God's day of dealing with thee, will be another kind of Day!

Fourthly, Is it not folly to grieve him, that has done you so many
kindnesses? Is not this great Ingratitude, and is not this Folly? O foolish
People, and unwise, will you thus requite the Lord?

4. Is not this Folly to mock at that which cost Jesus Christ his precious
Blood? What died the Lord Jesus Christ for? Was it not the Remission of sins?
Without shedding of blood (says the Apostle) there is no Remission. Heb. 1.3.
When Christ had purged by himself our sins, he sat down at the right Hand of
the Majesty on high. Ah, poor sinners, do not you tread the Blood of Christ
under foot, and account it an unclean thing, while you make a mock at sin? O
hard hearted wretches, can you make a mock at that which let out the Heart
Blood of Christ! Can you make that a matter of Laughter, which made the Lord
Jesus sorrowful, even unto death? Can you mock at the Gall and Vinegar that
those cruel Jews, that Crucified our Lord, gave him to drink? Would you have
Laughed to have seen him hang upon the Cross? You all, that make a mock at sin,
do as much as if you Laughed at him when he went to Execution: And is it not,
Sinners, to Crucify him again, and to put him to open shame?

5. Is it not a Folly to mock at that which brought the Curse into the World;
until Sin entered into the World, there was no such thing as the Curse known;
and to mock at sin, is to mock at the Curse. O, what madness is this! To mock
at that which shortly you must feel the effects of! which consists in two
things:

First, Death Temporal. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
Would you know how Death, that King of Terrors, entered into the World? and
has such an universal and uncontrollable Regency in the World? (The Apostle
answers it) Death entered into the World by sin, Romans 5.12. Ah, sinners, will
you make a mock at Death? Is dying a jesting matter with you? Will you mock
when this grim Sergeant shall Arrest you? Will not then your mocking be turned
into mourning? Does the guilty condemned Malefactor, when ready to be turned
off the Ladder, use to die mocking at the Executioner? I believe, when you lie
a dying, you will tell another story.

Secondly, The Curse that sin has brought, consists in eternal Death, called
the second Death. The first Death, that consists of separation, betwixt Soul
and Body; but the second Death, that consists in a separation betwixt the Soul
and God; it is called, Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord.

6. Is it not a Folly to make a mock at that which has made many a poor Soul
go groaning under the weight and burden of it, many a Day, yea, many a Year?
Poor sinners, you may sport at it for a while, but if the Lord once make you
feel the Load of it, and lay upon you the Sense of it, then your Note will be
changed. What was it that made David cry out, Psalm. 38.4, 5, 6, 7. My Wounds
stink, and are corrupt. And at another time, My Sores run day and night, and
cease not. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day
long. I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. What was the
matter? What occasioned this tumult in the Soul of poor David? He tells us, For
mine in quities are gone over mine head as a burden, as too heavy a burden for
me to bear, etc. And, poor Sinner, will thou mock at that, which other gracious
Souls have so sadly mourned over? Poor penitent Souls, are called weary and
heavy laden Souls. And shall it be to you a jesting, mocking business?

7. Is it not a great Folly to mock at that, which Satan is so earnestly
solicitous to draw Souls into? It is the great design of Satan, to draw Souls
into Sin and Guilt. It is called, The work of the Devil. O how industrious is
he in tempting! O how diligent is he, in laying snares for poor Sinners! And
shall Sinners mock at Satan's snares? Are not Sinners his Vassals and Captives?
And is this a mocking matter to be tied to his Chariot Wheels? To be lead in
triumph by this devourer and destroyer of Souls? Would you make a mock at a
company of poor Captives, that are taken by the Turks? and there put into the
Galleys, or cruelly beaten and abused, by their hard hearted Patroons? And is
not this the case. Ah, poor Soul! thou art Captive to Satan for all thy
mocking: Thou art in a worse condition than any Galley-Slave in the World,
though thou art not sensible of it.

8. Is it any mocking matter to mock at that, which degraded Angels and Men?
How came Angels to be degraded from that Dignity and Honor, in which they were
Created? We read an Answer to the Question, 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not Angels
that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into Chains of
darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment. These Angels were glorious Courtiers
once, though condemned Prisoners now: What was then the matter for which they
were thus severely dealt with? They rebelled against God, and so were degraded
from their first Station. Jude tells us, They kept not their first Station,
their first Estate, Jude, ver. 6. Secondly, Sin degraded Man, and shall we mock
at that which degraded us from that excellent State in which we were Created?
Man being in Honor abides not, he is like the Beast that perishes, Psalm.
49.12. Or, Adam ledged not in Honor, no, not one night, as the Hebrew reads
it. And the Septuagint, He understood not. He understood not the Excellency of
that Estate in which he was Created, and so was degraded. And (...) this a
mocking matter, Sinners? To be degraded and stripped of that glorious Robe of
Original Righteousness, with which he was in his Primitive State clothed? To be
robbed of Communion with God, and Conformity to God, in which consisted his
Excellency, and to be degraded of this Glory, O, sinners, is this a mocking
matter? Put all these Particulars together, and weigh them in the Balance of
the Sanctuary, and lay them to your hearts, and then ask your Souls this
Question: Ah, my Soul, is sin a mocking, jesting Business? Argue them over with
thy Soul, and see, if thou can bring thy self to a sober sadness in this
Debate, and make a discovery of thy Folly, in thinking sin to be a mocking
matter.

Application.
Is it such egregious Folly to make a mock at sin? Then it informs us of the
madness of all impenitent, secure, merry Sinners. There are a company of Jovial
Sinners, in this mad Age of this World, that are running headlong to their
eternal Ruin laughing, that swim down merrily the stream of the sins of the
present day, to that Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone; and the misery of
it, there is no stopping them, because they are insensible whither they are
going. They say, there is a Serpent, that when Travelers are bit with it, they
die Laughing: And is not this Sin, this Serpent? Do not many die eternally
Laughing? Go to the Pit of eternal Perdition, as some ranting condemned
Malefactors do to Execution. But alas, poor Sinner, for all thy Laughing, and
Mirth, and Mocking at sin now, ere long, thy Note will be altered, when thou
shall be stated irrecoverably; Where there is nothing but weeping, and wailing,
and gnashing of Teeth.

That such Merry Sinners may be reduced a little to their Reasons and right
Minds, let me ask them a few Questions; and beg of them, as they love their
Souls, that they would put them home to their own Souls and Consciences, before
they go hence, and be no more seen.

First, Do thou know, O poor foolish Sinner, whither thou art going? Did
thou never ask thy heart this Question, whither thy sin, and mocking at sin,
will lead thee at last? Will thou meet with thy merry Companion in another
World, to rejoice together, to sport together, as you have done upon Earth? Is
there any such Trade driven on in Hell? Are there any Mockers at sin there? Is
there any Mirth and Jollity there? Does not the infallible Oracle of the Word
of God tell us, there is weeping, and gnashing of Teeth? Is there one word of
Laughing? What, Sinner, never come thus close with thy own Soul, before thou
lie on a Deathbed? Come, Sinner, be persuaded to put the Question home, it may
so prove, thou may bless God for it, to all Eternity.

Secondly, Do thou remember, Sinner, what thou art doing while sinning? Art
thou not provoking a Great and Good God? What art thou doing, O my Soul!
treasuring up Wrath against the day of Wrath? Wounding thy precious soul, and a
wounded spirit who can bear? Every time thou sinnest against God, art thou not
carrying Fuel to the Eternal Flames, to torment thy own soul? Does not every
one that sins against God, wrong his own soul? And what is this, a mocking
matter?

Thirdly, Do thou remember, Sinner, what a little time thou have to enjoy the
pleasures of sin in, thou art so mad upon? These are but for a season, and then
thou will say with him, O, for how short a pleasure, have I lost a Kingdom!
Will not thou ere long, be saying, O, for how short a pleasure, have I lost a
precious, Immortal Soul, and an everlasting Kingdom? Methinks, Sinners, the
shortness of your time, should make you think of something else, than making a
mock at sin. O, that Sinners would be persuaded to argue in the midst of their
sinful mirth and madness. O, but will this last always?

Fourthly, Do thou remember wherefore thou came in the World? Do thou
never ask thy own Heart the Errand thou came on hither? Was it to sin, or
make a mock of sin? Was it to dishonor that God, that gave thee Life and
Being? Did God give thee an Immortal Soul so to degrade thy self, as to mock at
sin? Did God send thee into the World, to lift up the heel against him, that
had Bowels and pity in his Heart toward thee? Was it to laugh at him, who
mourns for thee? To spit in the Face of thy dear Redeemer, who has wept over
thee, as he did over Jerusalem (as I may say)?

Fifthly, Do thou remember thou must answer for thy bold presumption? Is not
this bold presumption to make a mock at sin? Did thou ever see a condemned
Malefactor laugh in the face of an angry Judge? And yet what is this less, poor
Sinner, that thou do, when thou make a mock at sin?

Sixthly, Do thou ever remember the Day is fast approaching, that thou will
cry to the Mountains, and to the Rocks, cover us from the Wrath of the Lamb,
that sits upon the Throne? O what a change of thy Tune is here, poor sinner!
now thou can not make a mock at sin! O now thou feel the burden of sin
intolerable, and insupportable! O, how will such Souls cry out of it!

The second Use.
Is it so, that it is so great a folly to make a mock at sin? O then, be
cautioned (poor sinners) how you glory in that, which is your shame, and run on
in that, which will be your ruin! If you glory in that which is your shame,
(observe) it is said of such, Their end is destruction, Phil. 3.19. You have
heard, what a folly it is to mock at that, which will certainly cause your
mourning another day? May it not be said to such, Woe be to them that laugh,
for they shall mourn. You will find, sinners, it is no laughing business one
day: Is it not a folly to make a mock at that, the Righteous God hates with a
perfect hatred? Reflect upon the former particulars, and will you not take heed
for all these warnings, how you go on in these sinful Courses? Shall all this
be said unto you in vain, poor Sinners? Do you think, God, and Christ, the
Spirit, Scriptures, Ministers and Conscience are all in Jest, while they tell
you the danger of making a mock at sin? Can you rationally think, that God has
said, what he has said against sin only [in Terrorem:] No, Sinners, you shall
all know, that sin is such a two edged Weapon, that there is no jesting with it.

First, be cautioned against making a mock at sin: This is the highest degree,
that Sinners arrive at in this Life, it is the height of sin; it is bad enough
to sin, but it is worse to make a mock of it. Sin is folly, but to make a mock
at sin, is the height of folly and madness: Would not you think him a Madman,
that should wound and gash his flesh, and all this while laugh at himself for
so doing, and because he does not feel it at present, conclude that he shall
never feel it afterward, would not every one say, he was fit for Bedlam? And
is not this the case of Sinners, that make a mock at sin? They are like him
(you read of, Mar. 5.5.) that was among the Tombs and Mountains, and cut
himself with stones. So sinners are cruelly gashing their own souls, and yet
all this while like a company of condemned Prisoners, Singing and Ranting
before their Execution. Would you not think him a Madman indeed, that should
laugh in the face of the Judge, passing a Sentence of Law upon him, to go from
the Bar to the Gibbet? This is such an high degree of sin, that Scorners are
said to be in the highest Form in Satan's school, and that he is a blessed Man,
that is not one with them in this Form. Blessed is the Man that walks not in
the council of the ungodly. Here is one degree, one form in this School. Nor
stands in the way of sinners: Here is another Form of Sinners, and this is
still an higher Form. Nor fitteth in the seat of the scornful, Psalm. 1.1. This
is the highest Form in in all the Devil's School. This is to take the The
Septuagint reads it.
Chair, it is called the Chair, or Seat of Pestilence. To note the height, and
hainousness of it. Other Sins are like ordinary Diseases, but this is the
Plague, this is the Pestilence, this is the highest Infection, the highest
Malignity of Sin: Such Sinners have taken their Degree, they are Masters of
this Black Art, and are in the Chair. For the Hebrew [Moshab,] is used for a
Chair. And will not you be cautioned, poor Sinners, against such a piece of
Sin, which is the highest degree of Folly and Madness?

Secondly, O take heed, poor Sinners, of making a mock at sin! This degree of
sin arrived at, very rarely are poor sinners converted from; (I do not say) but
the Lord has had Mercy of some gone thus far. But such Instances are very
rare, very seldom heard of. When a sinner is gotten into this Seat, or Chair,
it is a very hard thing to raise him. They frequenly die upon this Seat; Satan
puts forth all his power, to hold his own; he lulls them asleep in this Chair;
it is the Sinners sleepy Chair, and their sleep usually is unto death. Those
die of a Spiritual Lethergy, they are not in an ordinary way recovered, if at
any time they be. Some of Satan's snares are more easily broken, but this holds
many, until they be found dead in it: The Bands of mockers are usually made
strong. O then, poor Sinners; will not you take heed of coming under such Bands?

Thirdly, O take heed of being mockers at sin! many times such have had strange
testimonies born against them. O, how often has God reached forth his hand
against such, in a very eminent manner! He has not let this sin, of all
others, go unpunished. When Men come to glory in their shame, then God makes
their end destruction: Judgments are prepared for sinners, and stripes for the
backs of fools, Prove. 19.29. They must be sure great Judgments, that are
prepared Judgments; yea, prepared Judgments by the great God. It speaks the
greatness of his Judgment, as preparing Mercy speaks the greatness of his
Mercy: How great are those things (says the Apostle) God has prepared for
them, that love him. They are Judgments too; not one Judgment, but variety of
Judgments: Little do such sinners know, what they expose themselves unto: When
the scorners are punished, the simple is made wise, Prove. 21.11. It seems the
Punishments are so great, that they become teaching Examples unto others. They
that mocked the Messengers of the Lord, did not wrath come upon them, and that
without remedy? 2 Chronicles. 36.16, I might give you Instances out of History, but
I refer the Reader to Doctor Beard's Theater of Gods Judgments. To Mr. Fox's
Book of Martyrs, and to Mr. Clerks Examples, least this Piece should swell too
bulky for the Readers Purse.

Fourthly, Take heed of mocking at sin, in this doing, you mock at God himself,
and will God be thus mocked? Mocking at sin, is virtually mocking at God. 1. Do
not you in thus doing, mock at the Justice of God? Who many times makes
Examples of such Persons: If he be a Just God, and will reward the Proud and
the Evil doers, will you mock at sin, that God in his Justice is engaged sooner
or later to punish? Is not he the Judge of all the Earth, and will not he do
right? He that makes a mock at Stealing, and Murder, and Robbery, does not he
make a mock of the Judge upon the Bench, that sits to pass Sentence upon these
Crimes? And will a Judge upon the Bench bear it, to be mocked by the Prisoner at
the Bar? O, sinners, what do you do when you laugh at the Justice of God, which
ere long, must pass a final and an irreversible Sentence upon your immortal
souls! 2. To mock at sin is to mock at the Holiness of God. Is God an Holy God,
and cannot look upon Iniquity? Is God so Holy a God, that without Holiness, no
Man shall ever see him? Is God so Holy a God, as he is Glorious in Holiness? Is
God so Holy a God, as he cannot be approached unto but out of the hand of a
Mediator? Is God so Holy a God, as he could not bear the sin of the fallen
Angels (though thought to be) only sin in thought? Is God so Holy a God, as to
cast Adam out of Paradise, upon his Fall? Is God so Holy a God, as he will not
let sin go unpunished, in the dearest of his Children? And will you not take
heed how you mock at sin, lest you mock at the Holiness of God? If God was not
an Holy God, then you might mock on, but God being thus Holy, look you to it,
poor sinners. 3. While you make a mock at sin, you mock at God's Threatenings,
has not the Lord dreadfully threatened sin? What stand all his Threatenings upon
Record for? What has God told Sinners of Wrath to come for? Is all this false
Fire? Are all Gods Comminations in vain against sin? Is there any thing in all
the Word threatened with Judgments here, and Judgments hereafter, like sin? Is
not the wages of sin death? Has not God that will make it good, said, The soul
that sins shall die? And shall not his Word of threatening, as sure be made good
upon Impenitent Sinners, as his Word of Promise shall be made good to Penitent
Believers? You forget, Sinners, that sin which you mock at, is the Butt that
all the Arrows of Gods Threatenings are levelled at? Could you run on in Sin,
but that you sin off your souls, the sense of Gods Threatenings against Sin?
Should not you say, Sure there is something in it, something more than ordinary
in it, that Sin should be thus threatened by God? 4. Do not you make a mock at
the Patience of God, while you make a mock at Sin? Do not you say with those
Mockers, and Scoffers, that Peter speaks of, Where is the Promise of his
coming? So many, that see for the present, that God does not punish Sin, that
Sentence is not speedily executed; therefore their hearts are hardened, and they
go on mocking at Sin. They see not that God is a Word, and a Blow, so quick as
Preachers make him to be; but the Lord keeps silence, and so they run on making
a mock at Sin. O, but poor Sinners know, the longer the Blow is fetching, the
heavier it falls! Abused Patience, turns to Incensed Wrath. If he have long
refrained himself, and held his peace, when he cries, He will then cry like a
Woman in Travel, and devour all at once, Isa. 42.14. Poor Sinner, though God
has long kept Silence, yet he will not always keep Silence; therefore, poor
Soul, look to it, remember, remember thy Blow is coming, though it has been
kept off a great while. 5. While thou make a mock at Sin, thou mockst at the
Power of God, as though God's Power could not reach thee, while thou art
mockking at sin. As though Gods Arm was shortened, that he could not strike thee
dead in the very Fact, when thou art making a mock at sin. Have not many been
so? How soon were those forty two Children destroyed by the She-Bears that came
out of the Wood, while they made a mock of the Servant of God, in saying to
him, Go up thou Bald-head, go up thou Bald-head, 2 Kings 2.23, 24. Could not
God as speedily reach thee by his Power if he pleased, while thou art making a
mock at sin? 6. While thou mockest at sin, do thou not make a mock of the
Word of God, that has so and so described sin in its proper Colors; that is
the only true Glass to represent the ugly Face of Sin in? do not you contradict
all the Scriptures have said of Sin, when you make a mock of it? Is Sin such an
evil as the Word says it is? What, and you make a mock of it? Is sin so
dishonorable to God, that it pollutes his Name? Is sin so defiling to precious
Souls, that it pollutes them? Is it so dangerous, that it will without sincere
Repentance, certainly Damn them? Has not the Word told you, it grieves the
Spirit of God, it wounds your own Consciences, it kindles the Fire of Gods
displeasure against Nations, Churches, and Cities, and Families, and particular
Persons? and is all this a mocking matter? And has the Word of the Lord said
all this of it, and much more, in Jest? And will God bear his Word to be mocked
at? Would not any King be angry, to have his Royal Proclamation laughed at, and
made a mocking Business of? 7. While you make a mock at sin, do not you make a
mock of the Messengers of God, the Ministers of God? They are sent to you from
God, to lay open to you the danger of sin, of continuing in sin, of mocking at
sin; our Business is to Decry sin, and Preach down sin: Cry aloud, and spare
not (is our Commission) show my People their Transgressions, and the House of
Jacob their sins, Isa. 58.1. It is our Work to turn Men from their sins, and
while you make a mock at sin, you do but make a mock of us and our Message. Is
it no sin to mock at them which mourn over you? While they are weeping over
you, you are mocking them? But, remember, While you despise them, you despise
him that sent them, Luke 10.16. You mock their Master. Lastly, Take heed how
you make a mock of Sin, for in this you do but make a mock of Christ the Son of
God. Ah, Sinners, Sinners, how do you, with those Jews, deride Christ. Luke
16.14. They derided him. The Word is [Blew their Noses at him.] The highest Act
of Scorn and Contempt imaginable. You cannot mock at Sin, but you must mock at
Christ; this is to Crucify the Son of God afresh; this is to put him to open
shame; this is to account the Blood of Christ which was shed for Sin, an
unclean thing; this is to make a mock at the Sufferings of our dear Lord Jesus.
What did he Die for? Was it not to Purge away Sin? Was it not to take away Sin?
Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the World. Do not we expect
Redemption, and Remission of sin through his Blood? What, and make a mock of
sin? This is to spit in the Face of a Dying Jesus, of a Satisfying Christ. Now,
Sinner, hear the Call of God, and ask thy own heart, if it be not high time to
be wise for Salvation. Ah, poor soul! have thou not played the Fool too long in
running on in sin, in making a mock at sin. Now, hear the Lord, saying, O ye
simple, understand Wisdom; and ye Fools, be of an understanding heart, Prove.
8.5. Forsake the Foolish and live, go in the Way of understanding. The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy is
understanding, Prove. 9.6, 10.

FINIS.

