SOLITUDE IMPROVED BY DIVINE MEDITATION; OR, A Treatise proving the Duty, and
demonstrating the Necessity, Excellency, Usefulness, Natures, Kinds, and
Requisites of Divine Meditation.

First intended for a Person of Honor, and now published for general Use.

By Nathanael Ranew, sometime Minister of Felsted in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Nathanael Ranew and Jonathan Robinson, at the
Kings-Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXX.

To the Christian Reader.
PVrposing some Improvement of Solitude in the late mournful year, when death
was so largely commissioned to destroy by that dreadful Pestilence, I made
choice of this excellent Subject of Divine Meditation.

The best way of thinking and mind-employing, is this Meditation.

The right Art and Skill of it, is a rare attainment.

The due Practice of it, is a most noble self-entertainment.

A pious Heart has three happy ways of self-entertainment in solitary; three
rare ways of being least alone, when most alone.

The first way of self-entertainment, is the Ordinance of reading and searching
the Holy Scriptures, the pure, perfect, and infallible Word and Will of Christ
concerning us. There Christ has prepared his rich feast of fat things full of
marrow, and his Royal Banquet of heavenly Truths. There he sets forth the great
varieties of sure Directions, precious Promises, high Examples, rare
Experiences, and the help of all his holy Ordinances to feed and satiate the
hungry and thirsty spirit.

The second way of self-entertainment, is Divine Meditation, by either
pondering of spiritual things, for improving knowledge, and exciting practice;
or by a weighing all other things whatever, for reducing them to a spiritual
end and use.

The third way of self-entertainment, is private Praying, such as is both
bottomed and bounded by Christ's will in his Word; such as is both prepared and
assisted, made wise and warm by serious Meditation.

Meditation stands between the two Ordinances of Reading and Praying, as the
grand Improver of the former, and the high Quickner of the latter, to furnish
the mind with choice materials for prayer, and to fill the heart with holy
fervency in it.

The Naturalists observe, that to uphold and accommodate bodily life, there are
diverse sorts of faculties communicated, and these among the rest.

1. An attractive faculty to assume and draw in the food. 2. A retentive
faculty to keep it, being taken in. 3. An assimilating faculty to concoct the
nourishment. 4. An augmenting faculty for drawing to persection.
1. Meditation is as the attractive faculty to help to assume and take in
spiritual food. This it does by helping to act Judgment, Wisdom, and Faith, to
ponder, discern, and credit the things which Reading and Hearing supplies and
furnishes.

2. It is like the retaining faculty, by assisting and corroborating the
memory, helping to lock up the Jewels of divine Truths sure in that Treasury.

Meditation makes a rational memory of things, which is the surest.

There is in man a sensitive memory, in which he participates with sensitive
Natures, such as beasts, they have a kind of memory. There is also an
intellectual or rational memory, wherein man partakes of the like Nature with
Angels, they have their faculty of memory. Meditation superadds to the
sensitive memory, the help also of a rational memory, whereby spiritual things
are secured as under double lock: what we rationally remember, is best
remembered.

3. It is like the assimilating or digesting power, by helping to concoct
spiritual food, and turn it into spiritual nourishment. This it helps to
effect, by being instrumental to work things more powerfully on the will, in a
free choice, firm purpose, and ready obedience of the excellent Truths of
Christ; and likewise by working on and into the affections of love, joy, and
the rest to cleave unto, and be inflamed toward the things of Christ. A
spiritual digestion is not by head-work, but heart-work, when the will
deliberately and resolvedly chooses, and the affections earnestly embrace
heavenly things. Meditation highly conduces to this spiritual digestion by its
pondering, proposing, and edging efficaciously, such reasons and incentives as
work the heart into compliance and obedience.

It is like, lastly, the augmenting and growing faculty, to help the good heart
to grow better, and shoot up higher Heavenward. There is one creature, the
Crocodile only, which is said to grow all its life time; so must the true
Christian do. Natural things grow by new assumed nourishment, acted upon by the
inward growing power. The real godly man has an inward growing power implanted
by the new life given to him: But this, as by other means, so by frequent
Meditation, is much assisted, and carried on. Meditation waters and cherishes
the plants of heavenly graces. It helps them to root deeper, shoot higher, and
grow stronger. Such Christians as meditate most, will grow most, be growing to
the end.

What in all Christianity is there, that Meditation is not a furtherance to?

That saying is excellent, worthy of duest weighing: Intellectus cogitabundus,
est principium omnis boni; The meditating mind is the beginner of all goodness.
On a sinners part it is the rise of his initial returning to God, of his first
converting, Ezekiel. 18.28. In the Saints and persons converted, it is their way
to progressive converting and renewed repentance. Psalm. 119.59. I considered my
ways and turned, etc. The more consideration, the more conversion. The great
inlet of man's first Apostasy (besides infidelity and pride) was his
incogitancy. Our first Parents lost all for want of due thinking; not for the
want of acting imagination, or any thinking; that could not be; but for want of
that consideration which should have been. They did not consider all things to
be considered.

The overflowings of impiety, aggravated by impenitency, and men's rushings into
sin so eagerly and boldly, have been greatly from want of consideration. Jer.
8.6. No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one
turns to his course as the horse rusheth into the battle. Their not returnings
were from neglect of self-reflectings. In any Nation when God intends to work
great returnings, he stirs up that people to self-bethinkings, 1 Kings 8.47. If
they shall bethink themselves. He minds them of considering, to bring them to
returning, So a particular person, when he first comes in to God, he comes
first to himself, and that is by consideration and self-bethinking, as the
Prodigal, Luke 15.17.

In Natures Rational, the first mover is the mind by consideration: In grace,
the first mover is the mind by holy Meditation. The Christian that would set
all the wheels of the soul on going and improve, that would do great things,
and have great seize, great things effected on the heart, and in the
life, much light and wisdom, much warmth and fervor, high resolution and
courage, large proficiency in godliness, must be much in Meditation.

The greatest Scholars of the world have not been only great Readers, but
Students much in musing and pondering. The most eminent Saints in all Ages have
bin this way excellent, as Job, David, Solomon, and others, in the Scriptures;
as Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, and other Saints in succeeding Ages.

Upon these, and sundry other considerations, this ensuing Treatise was taken
in hand.

My purpose at first was only a private piece, for the service of an honorable
personage, very exemplary in this pious practice. This occasioned also my
taking the greater liberty in the manner of expressions. My intendment once
accomplished, I entertained no thoughts of a Publication, till some intimate
Friends, having the sight of the Copy, importuned me to let it come sorth for
the general use; upon which, a Review of the whole being made, with diverse
Alterations and Additions, to reduce it more to the help of all, I resolved to
let it come abroad, though imperfect enough. In the first framing, because I
could not make use of my Study usual helps, Sentences, and Quotations (the
ordinary trimmings) were wanting. And being not willing to farther trouble my
self, make the Treatise swell, and the price rise, I thought it best to let it
pass as it is now presented to thy view.

The present Age is full of Books; there be Books too many, and yet too few.
Knowledge and wisdom will never in this world arrive at a Nil ultra; yet we
must ever tend to perfection, and press hard to the mark. And when so many
still write after so many excellent Treatises on the same subject; this ensuing
may the better pass in the crowd. Though there be the greater lights of Heaven,
the Sun, and Moon, and Stars of the first magnitude, yet the least appearing
Star is some luster to the Heaven, and light to the Farth. Though some pieces
of gold Coin are current, being fair and down weight; yet those more worn and
light, may pass in greater payments.

Shall this ensuing Treatise Issue in persuading, or provoking thee to the due
practice of holy Meditation, to make thee a true and real Meditater, or a
better and a higher Meditater, to teach thee to take a turn often in the Garden
of God, and take the fresh Air of Paradise, to be mentally in serious musings,
often mounting up to Heaven, and return more enlarged and inflamed, more wise
and warm at the heart: Let me only request this of thee, to improve some of
that acquired warmth in thy way of fervent praying, for him that is ever thy
Servant in the things of Jesus,

Nathanael Ranew.

THE CONTENTS
PART I.
CHap. 1. Of Divine Meditation in general. page 1. Chap. 2. Containing a
description of Meditation. page 9 Chap. 3. Meditation our duty and obedience.
page 14 Chap. 4. Of the Requisites of Meditation. page 16 Chap. 5. What the
will must intend in Meditation. page 19 Chap. 6. Of the proper Object of Divine
Meditation. page 24 Chap. 7. Of the Requisites in and concerning Meditation.
page 29 Chap. 8. More Requisites in Meditation. page 32 Chap. 9. Of Meditation
in applying the mind to a proper Object. page 35 Chap. 10. Meditation includes
an intension and seriousness of thoughts. page 38 Chap. 11. Meditation includes
a scanning and diving of the thoughts into a thing. page 42 Chap. 12.
Meditation includes a dwelling of the thoughts upon a thing proposed. page 45
Chap. 13. Meditation is an affectionate acting. page 48 Chap. 14. Of the
Affection of desire acted in Meditation. page 51 Chap. 15. Of the Affection of
Love acted in Meditation. page 52 Chap. 16. Of the Affection of Delight acted
in Meditation. page 53 Chap. 17. Of other Particulars in some special
Scripture-expressions. page 57 Chap. 18. Of the Ends of Meditation. page 64
Chap. 19. Of Meditation relating to our selves. page 69 Chap. 20. Of the
particular Ends of Meditation respecting our selves. page 73 Chap. 21. Of
producing habitual wisdom by Divine Meditation. page 77 Chap. 22. Meditation
kindles and inflames the Affections. page 81 Chap. 23. The end of Meditation in
reference to the will. page 87 Chap. 24. Meditation a grand supporter of a
Christian course. page 93
PART II.
CHap. 1. Of the Kinds of Meditation. page 97 Chap. 2. Of the way and manner of
daily Meditation. page 101 Chap. 3. Rules about Meditation. page 102 Chap. 4.
Of one chief end of Meditation as to our selves, namely, Salvation. page 107
Chap. 5. Of things conducing to the chief end. page 109 Chap. 6. The Holy
Spirit the Applier of Meditation. page 111 Chap. 7. Of Meditation in reference
to the Ordinances of Christ. page 114 Chap. 8. Of Meditation on the Word and
Promises. page 116 Chap. 9. Of the Spirits drawing to Christ by the Promises.
page 117 Chap. 10. Of the things Meditation may best perform on our part. page
120 Chap. 11. Some Particulars added to the former general. page 124 Chap. 12.
Meditation on daily self-denial. page 129 Chap. 13. Of other Particulars to be
meditated upon. page 132 Chap. 14. Of Meditation on the Lord's Day. page 137
Chap. 15. Of occasional Meditation. page 142 Chap. 16. Of Meditation on the
deceitfulness of the heart. page 149 Chap. 17. Of Meditation on the four last
things. page 155 Chap. 18. Of Meditation on Death. page 160 Chap. 19. Of
Meditation on Judgment. page 171 Chap. 21. Of Meditation on Hell. page 181
Chap. 22. Of Meditation on Heaven. page 191 Chap. 23. Of Meditation on things
providential. page 201 Chap. 24. Of ejaculatory Meditation. page 204 Chap. 25.
Of the Grounds and Reasons of Meditation. page 210 Chap. 26. Other Grounds of
Meditation. page 216 Chap. 27. Of the ends and uses of Meditation. page 219
Chap. 28. Of other ends of Meditation. page 222 Chap. 29. Of grounds supporting
the Duty of Meditation. page 231 Chap. 30. Of solace and spiritual pleasure in
Meditation. page 233
PART III.
CHap. 1. Containing the Improvement of the whole Doctrine of Meditation. page
242 Chap. 2. Another Improvement of the duty of Meditation. page 245 Chap. 3.
An Improvement by way of Humiliation unto those that have begun this work of
Meditation so late. page 249 Chap. 4. A Reproof to those that are yet to begin
this work of Meditation. page 252 Chap. 5. A Reproof for negligence in this
Duty, after experiencing the benefit and sweetness of it. page 263 Chap. 6. A
persuasion to all such who never yet used Meditation. page 270 Chap. 7. An
Exhortation to the Godly, to take heed of neglecting this duty of Meditation.
page 278 Chap. 8. Of the Evidences of Meditation. page 290 Chap. 9. Directions
relating to Meditation. page 296 Chap. 10. Directions to young Christians newly
converted. page 312 Chap. 11. Further Directions to young Christians in some
particular cases. page 318 Chap. 12. Of Meditation respecting weakness to
imperfection of Grace. page 325 Chap. 13. Of Meditation in respect of stirring
and prevailing corruptions. page 322 Chap. 14. Of Meditation respecting
Assaults from Satan. page 331 Chap. 15. Some Directions for Occasional
Meditation. page 342 Chap. 16. Directions for Ejaculatory Meditation. page 344
Chap. 17. Directions for strong Christians. page 347 Chap. 18. More particular
Directions. page 351 Chap. 19. More Directions to old Christians. page 360
Chap. 20. More Directions for setting Meditation on work. page 363 Chap. 21. Of
Meditation respecting those that are called Fathers. page 369 Chap. 22. Of the
particular management of Meditation of those called Fathers. page 373 Chap. 23.
The Conclusion exciting every one to a constant daily performance of this
excellent duty of divine Meditation. page 376
BY reason of the Authors absence from the Press, several faults are escaped,
which the Reader is entreated to correct, or heartily pass by.

SOLITUDE IMPROVED IN MEDITATIONS Upon DIVINE MEDITATION.
THat so noble Subject, and necessary Duty, of Divine Meditation, I have now
chosen, by Christ's assistance, to speak of to you.

Of Meditation in general, according to Scripture-latitude, in the various
Kinds and Considerations of it there expressed. My Text therefore, must not be
one single Scripture, for the total foundation of what I shall tender, but the
universal vote, and passages asperst through the Bible: some of which are these
you may please to turn unto.

1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon these things. There Timothy, and in him, by way of
proportion, every person, is commanded Meditation. Psalm. 1.2. In that Law does
he meditate day and night. If the blessed man does so meditate, then all who
will be blessed, must do the like.

And Psalm. 77.12. I will meditate on all thy works. Both the word and works of
God, must be the godly man's meditation.

Psalm. 63.6. and Meditate on thee, in the nightwatches. And Psalm. 104.34. My
Meditation of him shall be sweet. God must be meditated on, and that Meditation
should be sweet.

Obs. From these and the like passages scattered over the Bible, the
Observation or Conclusion is this: Pious Meditation is the Duty of every
Christian; or, It is the high Institution of Christ, and greatly Incumbent duty
of Christians, to exercise themselves much in holy Meditation.

A rare and soul-enriching way, such as none know the sweetness and blessed
Incomes of it, but such who exercise themselves in it.

Philosophers tell us, there would be no life or motion in the lower World, if
the Sun and Celestial Bodies stood still.

Physicians say, if the Heart did not continually beat in the Body, there would
be no life and motion in the little World, Man.

And Experience proves, if there were no Springs or Weights in Watches and
artificial Engines, they could perform nothing.

What the Sun, Moon, and Stars are to life and motion here below, what the
Heart is to the Bodies life and moving, and what the Springs and Weights are to
Motions Artificial, that in a high degree is Meditation to spiritual Life and
Motion.

Of the various things tendered to us for truths, this is the great Trier, the
Percolation and Refiner, the Melioration and Improver. Such things that come to
us crude and raw, become mellow and concocted by Meditation. It is the Golden
Scale to give Divine things their due weight. The Souls Rare Limbeck to effect
the highest Operations, to extract the richest Spirits for Heart use.

Meditation is of that happy Influence, it makes the Mind wise, the Affections
warm, the Soul fat and flourishing, and the Conversation greatly fruitful.
Psalm. 119.

Who can but practice it, continue it, contend to larger improvements in this
Heavenly Art, that has once experienced and fed upon the surpassing sweetness
and refreshments, the unspeakable solaces and ravishments, both had and
heightened in it?

To speak of it adequately I cannot, it is such an attainment that none know
the All of it. Nothing but progress in the daily practice, can help to
comprehend it. There is still, a plus ultra, a Going and a Knowing further.

I shall speak to four things only concerning Meditation.

1. The Precedents upon the File of Scripture, or some rare Examples of the
Practice, and but briefly. 2. The Nature, Ingredients, Qualifications, and the
several sorts of Meditation: and here I must be something large. 3. The
Grounds, and supporting Reasons of it, to manifest it. 4. The diverse
Improvements of it to diverse sorts of persons.
First, The Precedents on the Sacred File, recorded Instances in Scripture.

There are among others, four Instances, which I shall single out, four famous,
holy, and eminent ones.

The first is that of the godly Patriarch Isaac, Genesis 24.63. Isaac went out, in
the Evening, to meditate. God is a most free Agent, as in all other actings, so
in conferring his Scripture Honors. He honors whom he pleases, and when and
how he pleases. He is bound to give no account of his matters. And often we see
him in his Goings and Doings, but cannot by searching find him out. Job. 11.7.
Divine Sovereignty and Wisdom, is pleased in the Scripture Records, to fix the
first honor, of this practice of Meditation, on holy Isaac.

Doubtless, his so excellent Father, holy Abraham, did use to beat this path to
Heaven, who walked so much with God. Doubtless those other Patriarchs and
Saints, living before Abraham, traveled much in this heavenly Road. Enoch for
his walking with God, so highly honored, was no stranger to this way.
Questionless it was one of his walks. He certainly used to go to Heaven
Mentally, before he was translated Personally. He used to ascend up by
Meditation, before his happy translation. But Isaac is he who first is
mentioned, for acting this holy Meditating. It may be he exceeded and excelled
in this Heavenly Art and Practice; and because it was a Duty performed
privately, and that was not known, God would reward and honor him openly, by
making it known, and that some hundreds of Years after, by Moses his holy Pen.

It Is probable there was something more than ordinary in it, which occasioned
this first Record of Meditation. However, this was the holy pleasure of God so
to fix it; to place it first on the File of godly Meditators. Isaac is the
first mentioned Meditator in Scripture Records.

Instance 2. The second (which is the fullest to all intents and respects) is
that high and noble Precedent of holy David, That man after Gods own heart:
among other reasons, I believe, for his beating so much this path to Heaven:
for the frequencies of his visits made this way.

He soon became a man of Great Troubles and Difquiets: yet then in them, he
would resolutely cut out his way, and keep his course of holy Meditation;
witness those many Psalms penned in and on occasions of his troubles, and
styled his Meditations. He after Saul's death is crowned King of Judah, had his
great multitudes of high Employments, was a mighty Warrior, and so must be
exposed to highest hazards; yet nothing, in no time whatever, should check or
retard his course. Though he had his Head full of Thoughts, his Heart full of
Troubles, his Hands full of Work, nothing should hinder him in this high
Exercise of his so experienced sweet Meditation.

In Psalm. 1.2. He makes Meditation the Character of a blessed man, To meditate
in Gods Law day and night. And what he makes a Rule for others, he makes good
in his own Example.

Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy Law, it is my Meditation all the day! there is
the practice of the first time the day, and a full Example, and Practice, All
the day.

And Psalm. 119.148. Mine Eyes prevent the Night-Watches, to meditate in thy
Word; there is the practice of the other time mentioned in the Character in
Psalm. 1.2.

Not a Watch set in the Night, but he had his Meditation. O most admirable
frame of spirit! A King and a daily Meditator, and a night Meditator also!

It was not Family Business, nor State Affairs, not Wars Urgencies and
Difficulties, that so could crowd in and impose upon his thoughts, but he would
have his spiritual retreats, his soul repasts, in Meditation, mount up to
Heaven by it. Trace we him with the Eye of duest Observation over the Book of
Psalms, (the Psalms which are the choice and rare Records of his Exemplary this
way actings) we find most excellent Patterns, of all sorts, as for this holy
Exercise: Singular Meditations sometimes of the great Works of God, as Psalm. 8.
and Psalm. 19. and Psalm. 104. etc. wherein the Fire kindles and flies up, in the
highest strains. His heart, like the most rare and exquisite Engine and
Instrument, produces-such raised and sublimated things, that transcend
sometimes all the strains of Rhetoric and Poetry in the world, as some very
learned men observe.

Sometime his Meditations (and there they ply more, as of nearer concernment)
are on the Word of God, as Psalm. 19. and Psalm. 119. etc. and what passages and
praises has he, most high and sweet, and savoury, that what can be fuller and
high, for the nature and properties of it!

Sometimes the most blessed God himself is the high subject of his Meditating:
and what transcendencies of thoughts, what Raptures and Ravishments, what
Instances of highest Soul transportings has he this way recorded for us,
purposely to put us upon pursuit of the like Glimpses and Tastes, by suitable
first breathings and pantings after sweetest communion with him!

It is evident, he was a grand Master in this Art of Meditation, by the so
exquisite pieces drawn to the life, and reserved for use and imitation in the
Book of Psalms.

3. The third Pattern is that of the so wise Solomon, in Ecclesiastes, who gave
his heart, as he says, to seek and search, and to know wisdom, Eccl. 1.13. and
v. 17. chapter 2.12. David's strain of Meditation, proceeds principally on matters
in themselves spiritual, as God, his Word, and Ways, and sometimes on the Works
of God. Solomon's more upon things natural, and the ways and works of men, Eccl.
1.13, 14. but to demonstrate the insufficiency of all things in the world, and
all the works of men, to make up true happiness, without the true fear of God,
and keeping his Commandments, Eccl. 12.13.

This is the sum and scope chiefly of that his Book, that Book of most deep and
great Considerations, and excellently useful Meditations, for all to obtain
wisdom by.

It is (of all) the choicest piece of Scripture, in this kind; it sets us an
accurate Copy, of regular and fruitful Contemplation and Meditation, of all
things under the Sun, which we should strive to imitate and write after. Chap.
1.14. It is left us thereby to learn from him, the so great Experimenter and
Tryer, the wisest and most exquisite weigher of all things, and the Finder of
their extreme insufficiency and vanity.

To teach every person, by this his so eminent and exemplary acting, his
successful searching, to do in the like manner. To infuse his spirit, and lay
it asteep strongly and deeply in this Meditation, of Creature vanity, and the
vanity of all men's labors under the Sun.

Yea to sink this down to the bottom of the soul, there to fix and root it
self; thence as by a most potent and predominant principle, to work and act up
to more weanedness from things of the world; and to more wariness, of our being
ensnared by them.

The fourth rare Instance is of the female Sex, That of the Blessed Virgin
Mary. Luke 2.19. But Mary kept all these sayings, and pondered them in her
heart. This is the remarkable and special Example of Meditation mentioned (that
I know of) in the New Testament: We have none so punctual and plain, which I
can remember, as this.

Some signal honor is hereby intended to this so Blessed Virgin, to be so
noted, more than others, in the Gospel Records: and thereby held forth, as a
pattern, and provocation to all after Ages.

The Scriptures silence, as to other Saints practice in this Duty, is not a
Negative or an Exclusive of their doing it: Because it is not said of every
one, they Pondered, or Meditated, we must not thence infer they did it not.

David in the first Psalm and second Verse, says, the Blessed man meditates in
the Law of God, day and night. He therefore makes it a necessary Duty, and
certain Character of every godly person, in some sincere measure, and constancy
performing of it.

As the people of God are all taught wisdom to salvation, so this peculiar
wisdom, this way of Meditation, of the great concerns of Gods Kingdom, and
their most precious immortal Souls, to give things of the highest importance,
their due and down weight, their due and down weight in the Balance of a holy
Meditation.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature and Description of this solemn Meditation.
MEditation according to the usual Notion and Acceptance, is taken for any
serious or earnest thinking of any matter whatsoever, for what end soever,
whether it be good or evil. So Meditating is used in the Scripture, not only in
a good sense, but in an evil sense. So Psalm.

But ordinarily it is taken in a good sense, for a holy Mind Exercise, or
acting the thoughts in any seriousness upon any matter in a spiritual manner.
There is a double kind of Meditation.

1. That which is more set and solemn, when a man is serious in thinking of any
thing for some spiritual end, and so as to allow some due space of time for a
right performance of it.

2. There is that which is called Meditation of Ejaculation, which, though
serious, yet is more short and quick, and sudden, wherein the soul darts up to
Heaven, and makes a short visit thither.

I shall begin with the first, that which more commonly is called Meditation.
The other shall follow in its due place.

Therefore having mentioned some Scripture Instances or Examples of Meditation
as to the practice of it, I shall come to handle the Nature and Description of
the set and more solemn Meditation.

Here first I will endeavor to present you with the true Picture, and
Description of Meditation, in some Scripture lineaments and proportions: and
afterward the Explication and peculiar handling of them.

I shall give you the Description in this manner; It is that Ordinance of
Christ, and Obedience or Duty of a Christian, whereby he acts his spirit into a
right pondering of either heavenly and spiritual things, or any other things,
in a holy manner, unto spiritual and holy ends and improvements only.

1. Here is the more general Nature founding it.

2. The more peculiar Nature and particular Requisties finishing it.

1. The more general Nature, in a double Aspect: The first looks up to Christ,
it is his Ordinance, his Institution. The second looks down to man, it is his
Obedience, his Duty.

2. Here is the particular Nature and Requisites. Where first

1. The Object. I will consider the Proper Object of this Meditation, in two
parts; 1. Things spiritual and heavenly. 2. Things though not in themselves
spiritual: yet in a spiritual manner looked upon.

2. The acting on it. The acting on this Object, by way of right pondering;
where many particulars will be opened.

3. The Ends of this Meditation, for only spiritual ends, or the ends to be
levelled at, must be spiritual and only holy.

1. The more general Nature of Meditation, we speak to: It Is 1. Christ's own
Ordinance. 2. And then man's Duty and Obedience. It is Christ's own Ordinance, as
those Scriptures forecited, and many other, which will be after-named, prove.

Three things there are in an Ordinance of Christ, which I shall speak of.

1. The Rise and Original, it is heavenly. 2. The Nature, it is spiritual and
holy. Yea, 3. The use and end, it is for a help.
1. For the Rise and Original, it is glorious and transcendent: it comes as far
as Heaven; it is Heaven-born and bred. It bears Christ's Image and
superscription, Brings his Broad-seal and Commission, it is one bright beam of
Christ's Sovereignty, shining down upon us, One holding out of his Golden
Scepter, for us to touch the top of it. It comes with the King of Heavens Must,
it must be yielded to, done as the strict and high Command of the great King of
Saints, given in Indispensible Necessity: yea with the very same Cogency and
Necessity, that Praying, Hearing the Word, or any other most usually yielded to
Duty does.

Commonly (as by our daily practice we prove it) we lay not such stress upon
Divine Meditation, as we do upon other Scripture Institutions. As if there were
a less weight of Christ's Regal Scepter in it. As if it were not so current Coin
of his, but rather like some light Gold, which we need not receive, except we
please. Whereas this Duty of Meditation comes in Christ's Name, to every soul;
and with a Commission as full and firm, as any other Gospel Command or Duty
whatsoever.

2. An Ordinance of Christ is holy. Every Institution is a participation, and
carries a stamp and beam of God's glorious Holiness. Not only of his Regal
Authority, but of his inconceivable Holiness and Purity: The Holiness of God
is, that glorious Attribute of his, whereby being free from all Impurity, he
wills and orders all things for his Name and Glory.

The holiness of an Ordinance, is chiefly that by which it is laid and levelled
full at the grand scope and mark of God's highest praise and honor. It must be
looked on, and represented to us, as an Appointment for the most High God, his
Highest Interest. All Religion is principally for living to the Living God,
Romans 6.7. Heb. 9.14. All Ordinances are but the higher and more eminent ways
given us, for exalting him. So many ascents and rising grounds, whereby he may
mount aloft, and become more transcendently great and glorious. If this be not
the predominant Ingredient in our performances, we are quite mistaken; and so
take his blessed name in vain. This therefore being the chief thing, this
Ordinance of Meditation stands charged with, must accordingly be minded and
meant in it, God's Institution of it. First, for his own highest Interest, his
intending it first for himself, who so infinitely surpasses all Created Beings
and their total Interests, whatsoever they can amount unto. This is the second
Considerable, an Ordinance is Holy, chiefly instituted for lifting up God.

3. An Ordinance is helpful, for our heavenly help; by Grace and the Lord's
Condescension, it is an Appointment and Institution for us. For our chief
Interest, the Highway of our Souls help: an Intendment and a Means to the main
Mark of Happiness: The singular way of our God's devising: The sweet way of our
great Prophets Teaching: Christ's first setting me up a Light, and therewith
lending me his hand of help; all Gospel Ordinances carry light and help with
them: The Scriptures call them ways, Psalm. 119.3. They are Gods ways, and they
are also our ways. They are first the King of Heaven's Highways, his
Institutions and Appointments for us: And they are our ways, our Highways to
travel up to the City of God, Heaven: our ways to walk in to our chief
Happiness.

I must look upon Christ's Ordinances, not as mere Impositions and
significations of Christ's Sovereignty; not as Burdens and Tasks, the products
and effects of severity; but such as are the Demonstrations of his Graciousness
and Pity: He sets me, and shows me the way, who justly might leave me to lose
my way, and to lose my self; to lose both my Labor and Life, Heaven and
Happiness, and that for ever.

These three forementioned Considerations, ah what exteam need has every one,
to give them the keenest edge, to make Meditation more penetrative and
powerful? To both facilitate it to us, and fortify it in our Hearts?

Ah when we are to Meditate, how do we still find our spirits all overrun and
tainted with carnal and hellish Repugnancies, and recoilings against it? Romans
7.21. how biassed and acted with strong diversions from it? How sunk down
suddenly, in deadness and flatness in it? How overcome. with fainting fits and
feebleness in it, from the poisonous Fumes and dangerous Damps, ascending out
of the Hell of Corruption, lying at the bottom of our spirits? And how still
abused by the frequencies of our hearts Deceitfulness and Miscarriages about
it? The more high, holy, and conducing any Ordinance of Christ is, the more
fearful and sad are the Demonstrations of the Enmity and Hell in our Hearts,
acting against it. Domine Gehenna sum, Lord I am Hell, said that devout
Meditator.

Ah what Floods, what Seas of Considerations have we need of, to quench these
Hellish sparks that rise up in our Bosoms? What need of all the Heavenly fire
we can make and kindle, to extinguish this Hellish Fire, that so quickly burns
and flames up? As we see the Sun to extinguish the Fire on the Hearth:
Celestial Fire our Culinary Fire.

This may suffice for the first thing, Meditation is an Ordinance of Christ.

To come to the Second, it is our Incumbent Duty, our Obedience to the great
Lawgiver Christ.

CHAP. III. Meditation our Duty, our Obedience.
2. Meditation our Duty. MEditation is not only Christ's Institution and
Ordinance, but every ones Incumbent Duty and Necessary Obedience: not like the
Free Will Offering, a matter merely arbitrary, and as a dealing by way of
courtesy. Not for a Casting in, as a Redundancy, over and above all other
Duties, but is and must be performed as a Duty of indispensible necessity, 1 Timothy 4.15. Psalm. 1.2.

1. A Duty in reference to Christ. Necessity in reference to Christ himself; an
Obedience to his Law, a subjection to his Crown Imperial, an homage and service
due to him, as the Sovereign Lord of our Souls, and of that Meditating and
pondering faculty he endowed them with.

Meditation is Jesus Christ's Reservation in the great Gift and Grant of our
Souls Thinking power. He has endowed us with that so Noble Faculty of minding
and musing, and also with a large Mind-Charter, and liberty of thoughts, for
our own occasions and sober Recreatings, in our Contemplations or Studies. But
yet, it is always provided, that a holy Tribute, out of the whole of our
thoughts, is still duly to be paid in, and that as an acknowledgment both of
holding our thinking faculty upon him, (Romans 11.36.) and our best way of
employment of it: and this to be done, in the due seasons, both Ordinary and
Extraordinary. The neglect of this Duty, is a denying of his Right and Royalty
over my thoughts, and over that which is so eminent an Endowment of the Mind,
and given in to the Spirit by God, for its chiefly Thinking of him that is so
High and Allsufficient, and the surpassing excellent things of God, as being
the Souls best acting. Certainly thus the Saints in the Scripture acted highly
upon this account, of their paying in the Reserved dues of Christ, their Liege
Lord, 1 Cor. 6.20. His Dues and their Duties moving strongly, to act highly in
this work and way.

2. Duty to my self, and my own Soul Concernments, is another great
Consideration here.

In all, doing Duty, there is a doing my self right, paying in to my own Soul
its due. Neglecting in any kind my Duty, is a wronging my own soul. Prove. 8.36.
He that sins against me wrongs his own soul: Performing it is a doing my Soul
Right. Yea, holy Duties are the Highest doings of right to our Souls. There Is
no way of doing better to my self, than going in the King of Heavens Highway.
His ways are my Souls best ways, wherein I act best for my self, and when I
perform them in them in the best manner.

This leads me to the next particular, the Requisites, and the Ingredients of
this Meditation considered as a holy Duty, which are these next following.

CHAP. IV. Of the Requisites in Meditation.
THere are these three things I shall mention, as the Requisites for holy
Meditation, as a Duty.

1. That I call a Foundation, or Preparative to it. 2. Those things that are
for the forming and framing it as to the parts and proportions. 3. The things
that finish it up.
1. As to the Foundation or Preparative to it, This must be laid above in
Heaven, by the Dispositive or Preparative work of fervent Prayer. The
foundation of this Soul Affair must be, as a Learned man says of the
Foundation of the World: The Foundation of the World, he says, is the. Third
Heaven, which is of a constant incorruptible Nature, of no pre-existent
principles, and so not liable, as other things are, to corruption and
resolution: and which as to the unequal or outward superficies, or the highest
part, is only bounded or terminated by its own limits, or terms of Essence, and
Quantity: but in its concave or bollow superficies, or the lowest part,
contains all inferior things, and is fixed immovable. If the Foundation of the
great World is laid by the Third Heaven, the Foundation of this great Work of
holy Meditation must be laid in Heaven, laid by the Soul's strong mounting up
thither, and fixing it self there by fervent Prayer, as the great Preparative
to this Meditation. Fervent Prayer: The word in the Hebrew used for Meditation,
(...) which signifies also Prayer, Prayer and Meditation being so near a kin,
and the one helping mutually the other.

1. To begin with a bringing the Soul into the Glorious and Tremendous Presence
of the Great God, and under his so pure and all-seeing Eye. 2. To act the Soul,
and lay it as it were asteep in self-abasings and humblings, for its former
miscarriages and failings in, and present unfitness and indisposedness for,
what is now undertaking. 3. To exercise fresh Self-denyings, as to any
sufficiency of ability to perform any thing herein acceptably and profitably.
4. To act vigorous and strong recumbencies on Jesus Christ, for his both
Teachings and Touchings of our Spirits, and upholdings likewise in the work. 5.
To procure and beget a warm temper in us, such as may make the heart to Glow
all the Duty over.
2. As to the forming of the Duty in the Parts and Particulars of it.

1. It must be bottomed and rise from the Spring and Great Principle of Motion
and Action, which is the will; in a both free choice, and firm purpose. A
resolvedness, and rooted purpose: Thus David Psalm. 119.48. I will meditate in
thy Statutes, and verse 15. I will meditate in thy Precepts. The evil heart
says, I will not Meditate: Satan says (so far as he can hinder) you shall
not: And the profane World says, you need not. But the holy heart says, I
will Meditate. This is my free and firm purpose, and nothing by Christ's
assistance shall divert me.

The Philosopher says, that in every virtuous action there must be a choice of
Will, it must be (...), be Elective, come free from the Spring of the Will, and
run in Resolution: otherwise it is not a virtuous Action.

The Scriptures, for all Religious Actings, call for Willingness; Psalm. 110.3.
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy Power; or as it is in the Hebrew,
A people of willingnesses, thy people: And in diverse places, call for Readiness
in what we perform to God. No work in the World can challenge that intense
degree and share of Readiness and Freeness, as Christ's work, and such ways as
have a clear and lively Stamp of his Royal Will and Command. No higher
Character is given in Scripture of a Real Godliness, than freest Choice of Will
and Readiness. To Choose the good part, Luke 10.42. To Choose the things that
please God, Isa. 56.4. and as in abundance of places is to be seen.

A Carnal heart acts from Carnal Wisdom, and self-Interest, or from Passion and
self-biassing affection, but not from pure freeness and deliberate Choice of
Will. That is not the Spring and rise of his Duties, as it is in a good and
holy heart. A good heart acts from purpose, a well and deep set purpose: Acts
11.23. with purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord. And Psalm. 119.106. I have
sworn and I will perform, etc. So the Will, for holy Duties must put forth in
Purposes, firm Purposes, varieties of fresh Purposes: Act all the still needful
and conducing Purposes, any Duty in any respect calls for. There are many Rare
and Rich Attendants and Properties, Ingredients and Excellencies, Divine and
Heavenly Beauties, appertaining to holy Duties, which the Will must intend and
make its free firm Choice of, which the purposes of the Will must lie level to
and make after, as the proper and proportionate Marks and higher Tendencies.

CHAP. V. Of the Purposes for this.
I Shall name Five Particulars for this. There must be,

1. An aim and firm Purpose to make the Duty a Right Work, to make sure it be
made true. 2. A free and full Purpose of a Wise Work, to have it a Work of
Spiritual Wisdom. 3. A firm purpose for a vigorous and spirited performing. 4.
A strong purpose of watching and earnest striving against all Diversions and
Interruptions. 5. In a firm purpose of Utmost endeavor of success, and having
the Right and Kindly End and Fruit of the Duty.
1. A right Work.

1. The Wills purpose and intendment must be to make the Duty of Meditation a
Right Work; to make sure it be made true and and sincere: John 4.24. Not a
Carcass, a Painted piece, without Soul and Substance, a Formality without
Power. Not a mere work performed, as it were to flatter God, who looks for a
Duty, As they in Psalm. 78.86. are said to flatter God with their lips, but
their heart was not right with him. We are ready to flatter him (instead of
Realities) with our Modes of Meditation, and Fashions of Thinkings, with our
Formalities, without Realities and Truth, and the work's being sincere. It must
not be a flattering of God, but a true pleasing him, from being true it self:
It must not be a work dawbed over with the untempered Mortar of our own hearts
self-deceitfulness, setting up a thing to show like it, and be something near
it only, and putting thereby a Cheat upon our selves. Nor make it a thing only
to stop the mouth of our Consciences, keep them from calling on and challenging
of us; but to design it strongly and firmly, to purpose, through God, to
proffer to and please him with a sincere Work: Genesis 17.1. Walk before me, and
be sincere: This must be understood, certainly, of every Walk and Path we go
in: Not a walk in some one way, or diverse, and not all; but in every walking,
sincerity must be a Property, a Qualification designed, and firmly resolved:
and we must not be satisfied unless it be Right Meditating, such as Scripture
requires, and Saints in Scripture practiced; yea that they told God himself
that they performed, Ps. 119.23. And doubtless David durst not tell the
Heart-searching God, he Meditated, if he had done it formally and
hypocritically, and not been sincere and upright in it.

Again, It must be a wise work.

2. The Intendment of the Will, must be for making this Duty a Wise Work, to
make it a Work of Spiritual Wisdom: The Apostle, Ephesians. 5.15. says, Be not
fools but wise, understanding what the will of the Lord is. And 2 Timothy 3.14.
there is mention of wisdom to salvation: And Prove. 9.12. Wisdom is called on for
our selves.

1. Wise in respect of God. Certainly, as Solomon did things of great
Excellency to show himself very wise; so when the most High God's Honor is
concerned, and when he will be present at our Performances, and comes as it
were purposely to them, shall we present him with any foolish piece; not design
a wise work, and be seen acting wisely?

2. Wise in reference to our selves. Should we not also strongly purpose to
make this Duty a Wise Work, a Work of sure Wisdom for our selves, and lay it
fully level to the grand mark of Eternal Salvation for our selves? Solomon,
Prove. 17.21. says, The Father of a Fool shall have no joy: so the Parent of a
foolish acting, will have no joy: It is the Godly prudent acting, whose Fruit
is Peace, and which issues in Heavenly joy. O how sweet and comfortable is that
Duty, in which we have acted up to the Rule of sound Wisdom! This is the Second
Particular, a Duty must be Purposed and Intended to be a Wise Work.

3. A spirited and lively work. There must be a firm and strong Purpose and
Intendment for a vigorous and spirited, a lively and warm Work. Romans 12.11.
Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. In every Duty we must have a Purpose of
striking fire, of making the heart burning hot: It must not be lukewarm, in an
indifferency, that is but lazy; nor Blood-warm, that is but low. But the Souls
Purpose and Design must be for highest heat and fervency, greatest vigor and
activity. As Artists in some High Operations, endeavors the hottest Fire.

As warmest Preaching and warmest Hearing, as the Disciples hearts burned
within them, when Christ opened the Scriptures, Luke 24.32. And so warmest
Reading, and warmest Meditating. David's heart, while he mused, the fire
burned, Psalm. 39.3. So when we Meditate, we should intend a warm work, to be
very warm at the heart.

4. A striving against all lets. In a strong purpose of earnest striving
against all lets and interruptions. The whole work of a Christian here, must
not only be vigorous and sedulous, but striving and contentious. Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the strait Gate. Every single and particular Duty must
bear a part of striving to enter in at the strait Gate: For this is to be
applied to every particular Duty, though Christ speaks only in General, bidding
us strive.

Two things make up the Notion of striving.

1. First Intension and Earnestness.

2. Secondly Contention against Opposition. When a man strives, he acts
earnestly: and when he strives after or for a thing, he strives also with that
which is against him. Striving is against something, that letts or opposes: In
all Soul-work, and peculiarly in this of Meditation, the throng of Difficulties
is great, the Oppositions are many, therefore the purposes and Resolutions of
heart must be strong and high. None ever carry on their work well, Who are not
first well resolved, and still renew and link one firm purpose to another, to
hold on their course to the last.

5. A purpose for the kindly issuing of Meditation. The Will must purpose
firmly, to endeavor still the kindly issue and success of the Duty. Look,
says the Apostle, John 2.8. ye lose not the things wrought: who would set up
at the Labor in Vain? Christ's sweet Promise is, Isa. 65.23. The seed of the
blessed of the Lord shall not labor in vain. The way among others, of having
it performed, is by grounding our endeavors in strong and rooted Resolutions,
for that running and pressing on, and looking after our Duties doing; until the
work winds up, and issues in the spiritual ends, in the sweet success it is
appointed unto: such as increase of Holiness and Grace, and improvement of
Communion with God. Finis Coronat Opus: Success sets the Crown on the head of
the Work: Resolve to get the Crown still set on the Head of every Duty, that it
shines in the glory of success.

These are the five special Branches, this Root of Resolution should put forth;
these, as so many precious corner-Stones, should lie at the Bottom of this
Building, the better to bear it up.

These should be, as so many great Arteries branching forth from the Heart, to
convey vital spirits into the body of this heavenly Duty of Meditation, and
keep it alive, and warm and improvingly active.

CHAP. VI. Of the proper Objects of Divine Meditation.
FRom things of a remoter relation to the subject in hand, I pass to such as
are the nearer, the more intrinsical and peculiar. And here comes first to be
handled, the Matter, or the Object of this Meditation. When the wise King
Solomon was to build the Temple, first he is providing the rich and precious
Materials, then he proceeds to the framing and fitting of them, and then to
erecting and finishing that glorious Structure. That which next is to be done,
is first to look out the Materials of our work, and then the framing and
finishing up, is to follow: The Materials, or objective parts, are far more
rich and precious than those of Solomon's Temple. They are, as our Description
of Meditation holds them forth, either

1. Such as are more properly and purely spiritual and heavenly in their own
Nature. 2. Or things considered, in a Spiritual way, and to a Spiritual end and
use.
It is not the Consideration of things as to their Entity or Being, that is
Metaphysical: Metaphysics treat of Entities, of the mere Beings of things. Of
the first Being, namely God; and of secondary Beings derived from God the first
Being. It is not the Consideration of things as Rational; the Rational respects
things have one to another, this is Logical: Logic, that considers respects of
things, as Causes, Effects, Subjects, Adjuncts, and the like.

It is not the Consideration of things in their particular Natures, and Natural
properties: This, Natural Philosophy Contemplates.

It is not the Consideration of things Civil, Moral, or Political: these,
Moralists and Statesmen are exercised about.

Neither is it the consideration of particular Crafts and Trades: this is
Mechanical, and but a work prudential, and Humane, not Divine. But this
Meditation has Objects of a far higher Sphere and Rank; things of a Divine and
Theological Consideration.

Nay, nor yet is it the mere Study of things Theological and Divine. A man may
be a Student in Divinity, beat and busy his Brains, about the high points and
Mysteries in it, may read and muse on Matters Divine, and yet not be a
Meditator, such as we speak of, not act Divine Meditation. A man may act upon
things as Notions, and as matters of Knowledge; or to make up an Universal
knowing person, he may act Contemplation for Curiosity: for such an use, as the
Heathen man Aristotle made of reading Moses his first Chapter of Genesis;
whereof he passed his undue and heathenish censure, that Moses affirms all, but
proves nothing, he read first, and then pondered; and then censured. But he
acted not Meditation, not that we speak of: It was not a consideration of
spiritual things as spiritual, and for spiritual ends; but only as wise man
acts his thoughts, upon things as New, for New notions, and improving
Knowledge. Many thus consider things Scriptural and Divine, study them, as we
call it, study Books of Divinity, study things in the Scripture; but they act
not the Duty of Meditation. They act upon things as Matters Intellectual and
Rational, not as Heavenly and Spiritual. Act for Notion and Speculation, and
not for Holiness. Act Curiosity, not Christianity.

The right Meditater far transcends any mere Student, he acts a more Noble
part, has a more Noble and sublime manner of Operation. Aristotle's studying
Moses Writings, and David's Meditating in the Law of God, how far do they
differ? So a Heathen's or a Mahometan's, or a Jew's, or any such persons
studying matters in the Bible, differs greatly from Meditating in it.

Nay, many Protestants are great Students in Divinity, that never Meditated:
they dwell upon the study of it, but touch not with the least of their fingers
the hard work of holy Meditation.

But to return to our matter in hand, and to speak to this subject of
Meditation: Formerly it was said, that Spiritual things, or things in a
Spiritual and Heavenly manner considered, are the proper and adequate Object of
this Meditation.

And bear, O how large and fair a prospect has the Spiritual Eye to Expatiate
and Recreate it self in! The Infinitely Glorious and All-sufficient God, the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as the Scripture reveals: The vast world, the
frame of Heaven above, and Earth below, with all the so innumerable things
contained in them.

Their sundry Natures, Properties and Uses, with the so beauteous and various
Excellencies of them. The mighty Sustentations and Preservations of all things
Created, as to their Beings, their Faculties, and their Acts.

The most wise, righteous, and holy Governing of them, with a most steady and
never erring hand unto their particular ends; and with a most certain winding
them all up ultimately, in the Supreme scope of the great Creator and Governor.

Then that peculiar Government of the rational Creatures, Angels, and Men: The
unspeakably sad full of some Angels, and all Mankind. The Recovery of some men,
and their Eternal Salvation, by Christ the Redeemer, God in our Nature: Here,
here is matter of Meditation, The great mystery of Godliness, as 1 Timothy 3.16.
And particularly, the four last things, as they are called, namely Death,
Judgment, Heaven, and Hell.

Besides, there is for Meditation, the whole Book of boly Scriptures, now
complete in the New Testament-times: with the Ordinances of Christ, and the
Covenant of Grace. And lastly, the Meditation of that so great concern, our own
particular Estates, how matters stand with us, and are like to be with us to
all Eternity; which Eternity challenges and imposes on every person, the
greatest both intensions and frequencies of thoughts. But though this be so
great; yet again what is there in all the vast circumference of the whole
world? I say, what is there, although never so small, but by a wise and holy
heart may be an Object improvable to an excellent use and end? As the Art of
Chemistry can extract rare and efficacious Remedies, out of Dungs,
Putrefactions, and Poisons.

That Soul must be a pitiful, vain, and barren piece, that wants matter and
mind to move and act fruitfully, in so large a sphere and compass as Meditation
has: It affords the whole latitude of all things properly spiritual: And it
comprises likewise all other things, which, in some respect or other, wisdom
can improve by this rare Art.

No Artist in any way of Operation, with all his rare Instruments, and
efficacious Engines, can operate more eminently than an Artist in this holy
kind may do.

Of this the Scriptures give plentiful proof in the many Precedents left us in
it for imitation. So we see it in holy David, in many of his Psalms (besides
them of the Word of God, his greatest Subject of Meditation, in those made of
God's great works) yea the works of his common Providence and Guidance; as the
growing of the Grass, and Herbs, and Trees; the singing of the Birds among
their Branches, in the waters, the playing of the Leviathan, the innumerable
creeping things in the Seas, and the going of the Ships in them, as Psalm. 104.
The wise Solomon has his Meditation of the Horse-leach, with her daughters,
Prove. 30.15. The Ant in her Industry, Prove. 26.14. sending the Sluggard (that
turns on his Bed, as the Door on the Hinges, that often moves, but never
removes,) to her to learn Industry, Prove. 6.6.

Yea sometimes, the most inconfidenable things the Scripture takes notice of,
for us to mind the Hairs on the head, which all are numbered; the Sands of the
Sea, which though so weak and small, is thereby bridled. The Dust of the Earth,
by Gods power, as in a Measure comprehended, Isa. 40.12. And not only God's
great works and high actings, but the lowest actions of men, and the meanest
actings of the inferior Creatures, are in Scripture held forth, as occasions
for this Meditation, as advantage grounds for the ascending of thoughts, and
raising up the Mind Heavenward.

All this pains taken by the Spirit of God, in the Scriptures, is to show what
a wise and fruitful spirit may extract, by this holy Art of Meditation; yea, to
teach us how constantly thought-busie we should keep our hearts (like that
wonder in Nature, the so wise and laborious Be) still in gathering some
Celestial sweetness from every Flower of Scripture or Providence, or any other
Object we stay upon.

CHAP. VII. Of the Requisites for Meditation.
FRom the Object and Matter of Meditation, we must next come upon the
Requisites and Qualifications, and the things contained in it, and constituting
of it.

Here by the way, there were two sorts of Meditation mentioned.

1. That which is set and more solemn. 2. That which is short, sudden, and
ejaculatory.
1. The first that, which more properly is called Meditation, is that so
frequently we have spoken of in the Scripture, and mentioned in our
Divinity-Books, and in Discourses. Meditation in the ordinary acceptance of
the word, taken for a work of time, seriousness and solemness, that must have a
due proportion of Time, Labor, and Diligence, to effect that upon the heart,
it is to be used for.

2. There is that which is called Ejaculation, sudden quick acting, or
ascending of the Soul to Heaven. This is a holy spark flies up out of the
heavenly Fire, burning suddenly in the heart, this is but Meditation rather
more improperly so called. Of this I shall speak something hereafter.

But that we are now to proceed upon, is the Meditation more properly so
called, more set, solemn Meditation, a business of time and seriousness.

There are diverse things, I shall mention eight Particulars, or Requisites for
this Meditation. There are eight Requisites I shall mention.

1. There Is requisite a Holy Awe and Reverence, a putting on a reverential
frame of heart suitable to the holiness of the Duty.

2. There is requisite a Retreat of the Thoughts, calling off the mind from all
its preceding excursions or engagings otherways.

3. There Is requisite, the setting of a strong Guard, and so sure a Watch upon
our slippery spirits as we are able, to secure it against all diversions.

4. Meditation, as to the Form and Nature, proper Notion and Essence, consists
in Application of the Mind and Thoughts, and setting them upon the Subject or
Matter intended to be considered.

5. Meditation, as to the Nature and Essence, consists, as in Application of
the Mind to, so in the intension and due seriousness of thinkings on a fit
Object.

6. In a diving and searohing of thoughts, scanning for a best discovery.

7. In a Commoration and due stay of the thoughts upon the work in hand,
without precipitation and undue hastening.

8. It Is requisite there be an infusing and intermixing the life and beauties
of such affections as are suitable and proper for the Duty.

1. Meditation it must have the Dispositive and Preparation of Holy Awe and
Reverence; a still engaging the Spirit to, and imposing upon it, and framing of
it, unto all that holy Awe, and highest Reverence, which this so excellent Duty
calls for, both in the Entrance, and over all the Performance. I say Highest
Reverence, as that which is to be done in the so infinitely pure presence of a
God; a God whose eye is observing in a special manner our hearttemper, not only
in a Duty performed in his view, but a temper presented and tendered to
himself, as an Homage and Honor. As a way of Ingratiating our selves with him,
as a way, and one of our sweetest ways of higher Intimacy and Communion with
him.

The Spirit of a Creature perfect, much less of a sinner, it cannot have too
strong an Infusion, too deep a Tincture of holy Reverence.

This is the first Requisite, a deep Tincture of holy Reverence contended to.

CHAP. VIII. Of the second Requisite.
THE next Requisite is in sounding a Retreat of the Thoughts, and calling off
the Mind from all preingagements, not only Evils and Vanities, but all Business
and Duties. Nothing must detain the thoughts, or divert the thoughts, when we
design and intend Meditation. God complains of men when Bodies are brought, and
Hearts are left out: well may he complain, if we go about Meditation, a Mind, a
Thought Exercise, if we let the mind and thoughts be sent abroad, and not
called home.

The Philosophers say truly, that intention can be only of one thing at one
particular individual time. Divinity tells us, there must be no allowance of
disintention, neither a giving way to a seizure of Impertinencies to keep
possession of the Mind; that will keep off that which is incumbent, and our
present Duty.

David, Psalm. 119.113, says, he hated vain thoughts, when they were Intruders,
when they crowded in: much more as they were Excluders, and crowded out good
thoughts. Therefore most of all, when they obstructed and interposed at the
time of his Meditation. Therefore being so rare an Artist in Heavenly
Meditation, he still would shake out and empty the Vessel of his heart of other
previous improper thoughts. Do, as Nehemiah, when Tobijah had laid up his stuff
in the Temple, he throws it all out to make way for the proper Furniture.

Musing in this sort therefore must have its Preparative, its stand, and its
retreat off and from all impertinent thoughts: a making the Coast clear, a
setting the mind free, disburdening and disclogging it: Casting off all weights
when we are to run this Race, and mount up the Hill of Divine Contemplation.
Now is the time, to call to by-thoughts to void the Room, and leave it free for
other thoughts to enter.

This is the Second Requisite, a sounding a Retreat to the thoughts from all
other things.

3. When Meditation is to be performed, there must be a strong Guard set, a
sure Watch kept upon all Avenues and Passages, on all the Inlets and Outlets of
the heart.

As Jehoiada the Priest set a Guard round about the young King, when he was to
be Crowned, 2 Chr. 23.7. so when this Duty is endangered, and ready to be
hindered from having the Crown of a right performance set upon it. The Scripture
Rules impose Circumspection, great Caution in all our Concernments, but more
peculiarly in things pertaining to God, and his Worship, Eccles. 5.1. Take heed
to thy foot, etc. so Take heed what you hear. And Take heed how you hear. So
there must be heed, and a great take heed how we Meditate. The strongest Guard
is little enough, yea too deficient and weak, for the holiest heart, and the
best exercised in this part of Godliness. O how inconceivably evil is every
heart in its leakings and runnings out, in its rovings and wanderings, in its
slipperiness and inconstancies, and likewise in its sinkings and fallings,
instead of keepings up in its heat and heavenly vivacity, and keepings on in
any evenness and equality.

No Sieve is more unapt to hold water, no hand more unable to hold Sand, or Oil
poured into it, no bone, which often has been out of joint, is more apt to
dislocate and slip out of place, than is the best heart to slip off, rove, and
range from this Duty, in Diversions and Admissions of Impertinencies. When we
are most serious and intent, suddenly our carnal Spirits give us the slip, and
are gone: Like the Bird if the Cage be but open: Or, the Prisoner if the Doors
be not fast and watched. Or, if the heart get not out in Diversions, it falls
flat in Deadness and sudden Coolings: Like the Iron in forging, no longer hot,
than the Workman keeps blowing: like melted Metal, which cools as it runs and
is pouring forth.

This made David in the Psalms, so often and earnestly to call for Quicknings,
from the sense of his frequent heart-coolings and sinkings.

The Acting of Meditation must not be going up a Hill of Ice, where footing is
both slippery and cold, but like the going up the Burning Mount Etna, where the
footing if not firm, yet is that which the Travelers (as they say) feel warm:
Or like Moses, Going up the Mount to God, which was steady and earnest till he
came to the top: Still a due Guard must be kept about our hearts in this so
important soul affair. An Intense care must be used, and a holy fear against
all Diversions, all heart-sinkings, and against all Disappointments also; that
we lofe not the real benefit and comfort of this work.

These three now Explained Particulars, are as Requisites or Attendants of
Meditation: The next four, are the special things, wherein the Nature and
Notion of it consists.

CHAP. IX. Meditation in applying the Mind to a proper Object.
4. MEditation stands in an Application, and bringing the thinking power of the
Soul upon the Object, or Thing to be Meditated of. Taking that Great Engine of
the Spirit, and setting it to act upon some fit subject.

The thinking faculty, is a rare Endowment; an Engine whereby the reasonable
Creature can draw up and take in any Object, and act or exercise it self about
it, for that use or end we aim at in our thinking.

In all Meditation, there must be an Applying and Conjunction of the mind and
the thing. As Sensitive seeing, must have some union, virtual union, with the
thing seen: so Intellectual seeing, seeing by the Eye of the understanding,
must be, by a bringing the thoughts upon that is to be thought upon. The
Scripture has this Expression, of setting the heart upon a thing, Hag. 1.5. So
it is in the Hebrew, that which we Translate Consider your ways, is, put or set
your hearts upon, etc. In Consideration or Musing there is not only a taking of
the heart and thoughts from foregoing minded Objects; but a putting or setting
it on some New thing, setting that on there where it was not set before.

The sinful heart of it self will run any way; upon Earthly things, upon evil
things, or upon Impertinent and unseasonable things; not come to, or keep upon
that it should intend and mind: Therefore it must be taken as by strong hand,
and set upon spiritual things, set on Musing and Meditation of heavenly things.
A carnal heart is like the Loadstone, it cleaves to nothing but Steel or Iron,
and both of them easily unite: but the heart must be of another property, and
act in a higher way. And a good heart, though it thinks too much Earth-ward,
runs often wrong; yet it will set it self in its thinkings right, on right
Objects, make it self and them to meet and unite. Psalm. 119.112. David tells
us, how he did, he inclined his heart to Gods Commandments, both to keep them,
and to meditate on them. He took and bent his heart, as a thing bending too
much to other things; set his mind on Musing on it. He found his Heart and the
Law of God too far asunder, and so would continue, unless he brought them
together and made them one. If he had not brought his heart to the Word, he had
never Meditated: The Object cannot apply it self to the Mind, but the Mind must
bring it self to the Object. No Holy Duties will come to us, we must come to
them. Many in a secret folly and sluggishness, would have things do alone of
themselves, without their stirring or acting: but they mistake, it is something
like to Mahomet the Deceiver, who once told the People that were met by his
means, to see him have a Mountain, upon his call, to remove and come unto him:
but when the Mountain would not come, he boldly then tells them, if the
Mountain will not come to Mahomet, Mahomet must or will go to the Mountain.
What he did attempt in pretense, and act in impudence, but was fain to go at
last to the Mountain, that would not come to him: I say, like to this we are
ready to do in slothfulness, we look that Duties should come to us, that they
do themselves, and we do nothing: But that which will not come to us, we must
go to it: We must bring and set our hearts to this and all other Duties. There
must not be a letting the Mind lie still; that so matter of Meditation may come
to us, and make us Meditate: But we must bring and set our hearts to Objects of
Meditation, and make this Happy meeting, of Excellent Objects, and this
excellent Musing power. This is the more to be Contended for, in that this work
of Holy Meditating has so many busy Adversaries, but chiefly in the constant
progress and carrying of it on.

Ah it is extremely against the grain of a natural heart, to be broken off from
its customary wildness, wanderings, and rangings of thoughts.

To cage up it self, and become tame and tuned to serious Musings and Thinkings
Heavenward. In the best heart, that sin that so easily besets us, it will be
ready quickly to interpose, and cut off the Passages, otherwise open.

O how the heart strives to beset and block up all Passages, when we are
beginning to enter on this Work! All the whole Garrison of dis-inclinations and
repugnancies, the Hellish heart, venoms, and contrarieties take instantly the
Alarm, and endeavor to hinder the hearts conjunction with spiritual Objects by
this Meditation. The Soul under its Complications of Lusts and Corruptions, is
as if you had a Bowl of many Biasses clapped upon it, all ready to draw diversely,
but all from the Duty in hand: And as Natural Corruptions will be acting
Contrarieties and Diversions; so old Customary Evils, haunts and wonts will be
calling upon us, coming to give us their visits, calling us off to some other
way.

Satan also, and the Power of darkness will not be absent at this time, that
may turn so much to his prejudice, but he will be sure (if he any way can) to
divert thee totally, and cause the whole current of thy thoughts to run out in
useless Impertinencies.

Great Circumspection must therefore be still used in our settings upon this
Duty: A work well begun is half done. This is the Fourth Requisite, the
bringing the Heart and a Spiritual Object to meet, and be brought to the Eye of
Consideration.

CHAP. X. Meditation in a serious Thinking.
5. MEditation includes, as an Application, so an intension and seriousness of
thoughts.

Serious Objects, and serious work, must have thought-seriousness: an
earnestness, and acting the vigor of the thinking power. We can think
slightly, but this we call not Meditation; but serious and earnest minding must
be ever an ingredient of due performed Meditating.

In Scripture it is sometimes expressed by the term of Considering. Psalm. 119.95.
I will consider thy Testimonies: That is, mind them with a serious and earnest
thinking. So Psalm. 77.5. I considered the years of old; he acted in not a
slight Eying, but serious Musing.

Thus Solomon in his Ecclesiastes, often expresses it, by the term Considering;
Eccl. 4.1. I Considered all the Oppressions under the Sun: And v. the 4. I
Considered all Travel. Consideration (besides the bringing of the Mind unto a
thing) includes also seriousness, an intension of the Mind upon the Object.
Sometimes in Scripture it is expressed by the word Pondering, Prove. 4.26. Ponder
the paths of thy feet: That is, earnestly mind them. So Luke 2.19. Mary is said
to ponder the sayings of Christ in her heart; she made it a work of great
seriousness.

There is a slight and easy thinking, an acting of thoughts cursorily, and
when a thing is out so soon as in; and the thought off so soon as on: and there
is a serious thinking.

The Mind of man has not only an ability to act, but can put forth an
exceeding great seriousness. That as in things Natural they have not only power
to act, but can also act intensly and vigorously.

Thus in things Inanimate, as in Fire, how hot and intense may it be? In brute
Creatures, how earnestly can they act, when they put forth their strength? As
the Horse in running, the Eagle in flying. In things Artificial, to what
intense degrees can diverse Instruments and Engines operate, and discharge
themselves? O what can this Engine of the Mind of man effect? what heights of
seriousness can it arrive at? What contributions of earnestness can it pay in,
when it is highly concerned, when it is edged by some real or supposed grand
interest; as some weighty Affair, urgent Business, some imminent Danger to be
escaped, some rare Pleasure, high Preferment, vast sum of Treasure, or such
like Engagements? Yea what can the Mind, as to a high seriousness, act
sometimes upon Objects totally unworthy of the thoughts? vain thoughts can be
very eager and intense.

If we can be so serious in matters inferior, certainly Divine and Spiritual
matters must needs claim a far greater share of seriousness. There should be no
earnestness of thoughts on any ground or interest whatsoever, like to this
Meditating Earnestness.

There are several spheres of seriousness of thoughts which we may observe men
move in, Steps and Ascents of Seriousness.

1. Countrymen, in their lower ways, have their plodding seriousness; how
earnest do diverse of them appear in minding of their Occasions, which they
account great?

2. Citizens, in their higher ways, have their higher and more improved
seriousness. O what are the various earnestnesses, how strange and amazing to
consider, are the daily beatings of Brains, and intendings of Thoughts, on
daily occasions by multitudes of persons in avast City?

3. Students and Scholars, in their ingenious ways, what intense and earnest
Musings do many of them habit themselves to; and what improved Heightnings of
the ways of studying to they contend unto? The highest seriousness makes the
best Scholar.

4. Statesmen and Soldiers, what seriousness do their Grand and Important
Affairs for the Public (that lies at the stake to be preserved and advanced)
engage and draw forth? How great is the great Politicians seriousness about his
Designs?

5. Debauchery and Vice has its sinful seriousness. Sensuality, Uncleanness,
contemplative Fornication has in all Places and Ages given highest evidence of
unparalled seriousness: what ever has raised and wound up the seriousness
more; as in amorous Poetry and wanton Romances, and such like filthy writings
appears? All sorts of Vices and Lusts, the lower they lie in the sink of the
sinful heart, the higher they act, in saddest seriousness and studyings for
carnal satisfaction.

6. The Black Train of Hell and Devils, have their unspeakable heights of
Seriousness and Musings for Souls-destroyings.

But whatever Spheres and Heights of seriousness there can be, spiritual things
of Right, must challenge of every Christian, a far other and better seriousness.

The perfect Rule of Religion obliges Christians to outdo all others in their
greatest seriousness.

7. Doubtless the Saints in all Ages have excelled in this kind. In their
Retirements and happy Engagements between Christ and their Souls.

Such as Enoch, who walked with God, such as the other holy Patriarchs, such as
Job, and other eminent ones. And peculiarly David, that so rare Artist in this
way: What may we also say of the Holy Prophets, blessed Apostles, glorious
Confessors and Martyrs, and the eminent Saints and excellent Lights of the
Church? these no doubt have been highly serious, in their Heavenly Meditations.

Certainly the rare Artists of the World, neither Apelles in Painting, nor
Phydias in Carving, nor Dedalus in Contriving the Labyrinth at Creet, nor
Archimedes in devising his Mathematical Instruments, nor Plato, Aristotle, or
any of the great Philosophers did arrive at greater seriousness in study, than
the Worthies of Christ in the passages mentioned before, neither than that
seriousness of such as lived after the Apostles; as holy Ignatius, Cyprian,
Justin Martyr, Ambrose, Austin, and others of the Ancients, rare men in
Contemplation: And such as not only the Blessed Reformers abroad, Luther,
Melancthon, Bucer, Martyr, Calvin, Zanchy, and others of them were, but such of
our own Martyrs, holy Cranmer, Latimer, Bradford, and the rest of that glorious
Army; and as many after them, in the several parts of these Nations; one of
which would say, he thanked God, that for twenty years together he had studied
nothing but the Bible and his own heart. I believe none of those Philosophers
and Artists ever acted any seriousness to that height and sweetness, that the
holy ones of Christ have done.

But it is time to come now to the next thing.

CHAP. XI. Meditation in a searching and scanning.
6. THis Meditation, besides Application of the Mind to the Object, and
intension or seriousness on it, includes a searching and scanning, or diving
deep, an extension of thoughts, a looking about or endeavor of
Comprehensiveness, in respect of the Object, so far as we can. To make as
perfect and full a view of it, and to see into the Dimensions and Extents of
that we think on. Thus when a man studies a thing, He endeavors an Extensive
and a Comprehensive seeing, and having the fullest view. He sets it not before
him to see a little, but the most he can.

The Scripture phrase I cited of Proverbs 4.26. and that of Luke 2.29. of
Pondering, includes this particular likewise we now are to treat of. In
pondering there is both first the Minds applying it self to a thing, and the
intending its acting, and then this third of an acting, of searching and diving
into it, or knowing what we can of it.

Pondering is an Expression taken from Goldsmiths, and Tradesmen, that desire
to know the full weight of a thing, and thereby the value or worth for their
profit and use: Thus the Merchant weighs his Merchandise, the Goldsmith weighs
his Silver and Gold, the Jeweller weighs his rich Pearls, Rubies, and Diamonds,
to know them more exactly. There is exceeding great weight and worth in
Heavenly and Spiritual things: Meditation must hold the scales, to weigh, so
well as we can, these so rich and precious things, these Diamonds, and Pearls
of Heavenly Treasure: yea weigh them as things that unspeakably surmount all
other things. As Prove. 2.4. Wisdom must have a searching for, as for hid
Treasures: as the searching for, and searching in the Gold and Silver Mines; in
which there is not only great earnestness of search, till the Rich Vein is
discovered, but being once found, there is a following it with exactest
Industry, and utmost Curiosity, to find not a part or quantity of the Treasure,
but all the Riches scattered over the whole Mine, part after part. A Christian
in his Exercise of Meditation, must act the part of the Exquisite Miner, to dig
deep, dig over all the Mine, and gather up the Riches of it, the lesser and
greater quantities, as they come to view, in the Mines of Spiritual Treasure.
Travelers tell us, that in the Persian Gulf at a certain season of the Year,
great store of a kind of Shellfish is to be found near the shore, in which
Shellfish they find the precious Pearls bred in their Shells: But the way of
finding them is by Diving, there are men that have an Art of Diving down to the
bottom of the Sea, and bringing up their Baskets filled with these Shellfish;
the Shells being opened, they find and take out the Orient and Rich Pearls, of
several proportions, some of them very great and rich; whereby they greatly
enrich themselves and those that deal in them. Meditation is the Spiritual
Merchants Art of Trading for Heavenly Riches, Pearls of great price; but there
must be a Diving deep. If we have not this Art of Diving, we shall lose the
rich Pearls: the deepest diving down in the practice of Meditation, comes up
with the Greatest Returns of Soul Enrichments.

Solomon in Eccl. 7.25. has a very emphatical Expression, to hold forth this
we are upon: Our Translation has it, I Applied my heart, but the Hebrew has
it, I Compassed, and my heart that is Compassed to search, and seek out Wisdom:
Or, I and my heart Compassed, so in the Margin we have it. There Is Coming upon
a thing, and a Compassing a thing, the heart in Meditating is to compass in a
thing, as well as it can. They say in Philosophy, that wisdom lies in
Perspection, Introspection, and Prospection, that is, in viewing thoroughly, all
over, viewing inwardly; and viewing what may be eventually, what may be the
issues of things, it prys into a thing, and looks round about a thing: makes
the Mind endeavor an Extensive and Comprehensive knowing, as was said.
Meditation in Spiritual things, should be like Nehemiah when he came to
Jerusalem, and would go view it; He went and viewed first one part, and then
another, till he had gone round. So Meditation looks largely, views what it can
take in and consider.

As God took Moses to the top of Mount Nebo, Deuteronomy. 34.1. showed him all the
Land of Promise, part after part round: Thus when we go up this Mount of
Meditation, we must search, view, look round, take in as large a prospect as we
can.

This is the Sixth thing Meditating includes as to the Object, a spreading our
Eye, looking as largely, and seeing so much as we can, for the Ability and
Opportunity is given us.

CHAP. XII. Meditation is a Dwelling of thoughts.
7. MEditation includes a Dwelling or a Commoration of the Thoughts upon the
Object, drawing out the Golden thread of Holy Thinking to its due length,
giving the mind its full scope and allowance of Abode on the meditated matter.
Meditation is in Scripture, and often particularly in the Book of Ecclesiastes,
expressed by the phrase of Considering.

In Consideration, there is, 1. Application of the Mind to an Object. 2.
Intension upon it. 3. Pondering of, or searching into it. And this 4. thing of
Commoration, or the Dwelling of the Thoughts for some due space of time, for
viewing and reviewing. For second thoughts, bettering of Thoughts, and better
completing this great Soul Affair of Meditation. This Meditation needs must
have that allowance that all Great Musings and Considerings have. Such as Rare
Artists, Exquisite Engineers, Deep Philosophers, and great Statesmen, all Noble
and Ingenious ways must have for their times of studyings: they must have their
due space of time for thinking, and lengthen out their mindings in that time;
to make as we say, no more haste than good speed. A staying a while will make
an end the sooner, make the work the surer.

Meditation is not a hasty hurry of thoughts: that is Precipitation, not
Meditation. It is not gathering half-ripe Fruit, that which has not its time
for the Influence of Heaven to come down upon it, and its own internal
principle and power of its Nature, to produce a kindly maturation, a kindly
ripening. We will not have (for want of time) our Bread dough-baked, or meat
raw-roasted: knowing that which is not rightly prepared for the body, may breed
Distempers, if it bring not Death. It is not the way to thrive, look well, and
be strong, lively and cheerful: why should we gather our souls precious fruits
half-ripe? feed our Souls with doughbaked Bread for want of a little time? Some
things must have Infusion for taking forth the Spirits and Tinctures of
Colors. Others a due time for percolation and straining, for a segregating and
seperating of the finer parts from the Feculent and Dreggy: And some things a
longer space, in a slow and constant Fire in the Operation, or the cost and
labor is lost: Intensions for effecting things greatly beneficial and
admirable, are most freely allowed a larger proportion of time, both for
frequencies and Repetitions of Musing seriously. But O how too ordinarily do
the best of Saints fall short of the actings of Rare Artists, in their higher
Operations, in their stands and abodes of thoughts for more curious
Observations, and ntellectual satisfactions: Usually we are too hasty and eager
to have Duties over. The Soul is in pain till it be delivered of them. In
Meditation it is hard (sometimes at least) to take off the thoughts for it,
from preingagements of other thinkings, and apply them to the duty. But harder
to become duly serious in acting in it, harder yet to Dive and Ponder, and
hardest of all to hold up in an abode of thoughts, and dwell long enough, and
after views to make reviews, to re-act the same thinkings, to taste things over
and over, when the freshness and newness is past, when by long thinking the
things before us seem old; we are ready to grow dead and flat in a performance,
except we stir up our selves often in it. It is hard to hold on and hold up,
unless we hold up a wakeful Eye, a warm affection, a strong and quick repeated
Resolution; yea, and without often lifting up the Soul to Christ, for fresh
recruits of strength to hold on. David that so excellent Artist in this way,
says he will Meditate, Psalm. 119. often says he will. Doubtless he not only
said I will, when he was to make his entrance into this hard work; but likewise
for continuance in it, to keep up his heart from flaging, till he well ended
his work. It is not the Digging into the Golden Mine, but the Digging long,
that finds and fetches up the Treasure. It is not the Diving into the Sea, but
staying longer, that gets the greater quantities of Pearls. To draw out the
Golden Thread of Meditation to its due length till the spiritual ends be
attained. This is a rare and happy Artainment: This is the Art, but of the ends
of Meditation we shall speak hereafter.

CHAP. XIII. Of Affectionateness in Meditation, or the life and luster of it in
the intermixings of suitable Affections.
THree things we proposed in treating of this Divine Meditation.

1. The right Preparative to it, fervent Prayer. 2. The main Foundation of it
in the free choice of the Will. 1. To firmly purpose a right work that it be
sincere. 2. To purpose and intend a wise work. 3. To design a warm work. 4. To
have it earnest against lets and oppositions. 5. To have it a successful work.
3. The Forming and Finishing of it. For the Forthing and Constituting of it,
which is, 1. By a Reverential frame of heart stirred up, answerable to the Duty.
2. By first sounding a Retreat of the Thoughts from all other Objects. 3. By
setting a strong Guard upon our slippery Spirits.

Then as to the constituting the work.

4. By setting the Thoughts on the Object. 5. By seriousness in Thinking. 6. By
searching of Thoughts. 7. By a staying and abode of Thoughts. 8. For Finishing
the work, by intermixtures of the Life and Beauties of such Affections, as are
proper and suitable for the Duty. It must be an affectionate acting, warm and
zealous, lively and vigorous. So David's Meditation, Psalm. 39.3. while musing
the Fire burned. Not only it should be so eventually, but by way of
concomitancy; when we Meditate with the Mind, we should be warm at the Heart:
The fuel and fire of holy Affections, must come to the offering up this
Sacrifice. There must be an Affectionate acting, which brings the life and
beauty into the body and face of the Duty.
They say Beauty must have these four things.

1. Perfection or Intireness of parts, no part wanting. 2. Proportions due, no
part too great, too little, or unsuitable: And proportion of Color, White and
Red in a just proportion. 3. There must be Right Order of parts, that nothing
be misplaced. 4. There must be spirit and vivacity appearing in the Face, as a
chief Ingredient or superaddition to all the rest, as that which adds singular
grace and luster to all. So besides the parts and chief lineaments, there must
be that which compleats the Beauty of Meditation: Those things which are as,
not only the Beauteous Colors, but the freshness, liveliness, and spirits
aspersed, and appearing over all the Face of this Rare Piece, this Excellent
Performance.
That as the Heart, with its Diffusions of Heat and Spirits in a due
proportion, makes a comely, graceful, and lovely Color, which in
Heart-Distempers, Faintings, and Sinkings, disappear and vanish: So the Holy
Heart with its Diffusions of heavenly warmth and spirits, heavenly
affectionateness, makes Meditation comely, beauteous, and lovely.

If Meditation be only Head-work, and not Heart-work, it is like a Picture
without life; like a Student that studies in a mere acting of Wisdom only.

The right and genuine Meditation is an affectionate thing: as the Head acts,
the Heart glows. The life veins of warm Affections run and disperse themselves
through the whole Duty, and give luster to it. This we may see in the
Meditations of that great Artist in this kind, in holy David you may see a
beauty and excellency of Holy Affection mixed and interwoven, like the Gold in
the Tissue with the Silk, and sparkling in his this-way-acting. Affections
appearing set as so many Rich Stones, Rare Beauties, and Glories among his
various Musings.

There are Three sorts of Affections that shine gloriously in David's, and
other holy men's Meditations, left upon Record in Scripture, which needs must be
patterns to provoke us to imitation.

1. The Affection of Desire. 2. Of Love. 3. Of Delight. I shall briefly
dispatch them.
CHAP. XIV. Of the First Affection, Desire.
1. THat Affection of Desire wound up, and let out to pantings and longings
Heavenward, and being above, in this Heavenly Exercise of Meditation. David
with his Meditating of God and his Word, he tells us what longings and
heart-pantings he had. Psalm. 119.20. His Soul breaks for desire, which he had
to Gods Testimonies: How was this? to have the Book of the Law? no it was to be
exercised in it, to an improving of Meditation on it. Ps. 1.2. Ah he could not
Meditate enough, act freely enough, far enough: The Commandment was so
exceeding broad, as he says, Psalm. 119.96. so very broad, and his heart so
narrow: Sin so incompast and straightened him, that his Soul breaks, that he could
have no larger thoughts. Such an edge and eagerness of Affection, such a large,
strong, and vehement desire, should be an attendant, an assistant of
Meditation, one strong Feather impt and added to the Wing of Contemplation to
make it mount up fast to Heaven.

Ah, say Christian, Lord that my soul could Meditate still better, fly
farther, mount higher, be more upon the wing, make sweeter and more happy
discoveries, and prove a greater proficient in this Heavenly way! Meditate with
desires and breakings of Soul, to dart up the highest you can to Heaven, and
stay there.

CHAP. XV. Of the next Affection, Love.
2. THe next Affection, which sends a Great Artery of vivifical Heat, a glowing
Heat into this Meditation, is that of Heavenly Love, Love to the Duty and the
Excellent things to be Meditated upon: Love is the great Heart Fire, made to
warm every holy service: Ps. 119.97. O how Love I thy Law, it is my Meditation
all the day? Love led him into this pleasant soul walk of sweet Meditation, and
Love kept him company, kept his heart warm in it. The fulfilling of the
Commandment is Love, Romans 13.10. and Love is the fulfilling of this Commandment
of Meditating: It is performed in Love. This Heart vital Heat of Love, must
move to and in Meditation: must glow through the whole work all the time of it.
Meditation is either of the infinite beauties of the most blessed God, the
infinite perfections and surpassing glories of his Essence and Attributes, and
of the Three Persons in that Essence: or else of the precious Word or Works of
God, his general Providence and Government, or his peculiar Governing of the
reasonable Creatures, especially that so stupendous work of Redemption by
Christ, and all those things which are reducible to his praise; which must
needs, being so beauteous, have their surpassing loveliness. And therefore
there is great reason to act love abundantly toward them: To have Meditation
still richly perfumed with actings of burning love all over it.

O let Love ever come in and act its part in Meditation, wherein the Souls Eye
is not only glancing, but wishly viewing the surpassing beauteous things of
Heaven, or such things as may lead up to Heaven. Ah if I cannot ascend in a
Flame of love, yet let me in Meditation fly up in some sparks of Love. If my
heart cannot burn in the flame of Love, let it keep warm upon the Embers of
Love. Let Love give it a spirit, vigor, and liveliness: As Solomon's Temple was
inwardly all overlaid with Gold, let this rare work of Contemplation be
overlaid and inlaid with Love: Cant. 3.10. as Solomon's Chariot in the
Canticles, the midst of it paved with love; so let this Chariot of
Contemplation the midst of it be paved with Love.

This is the Second Affection, Love.

CHAP. XVI. Of the last Affection, Delight.
3. THE last Affection, to make a threefold cord, to draw up the heart in
Meditation, and that winds the work up higher, and that is a great superadded
Beauty and Glory, is the Affection of Delight, Joy and Pleasure.

Meditation must not be a dull, sad, and dispirited thing: Not a driving like
the Chariots of the Egyptians, when their Wheels were taken off, but like the
Chariots of Aminadab, Cant. 6.12. Make me like the Chariots of Aminadab, that
ran swiftly: So let us pray, Lord in Meditation make me like the Chariots of
Aminadab, that my swift running may evidence my Delight in Meditating. Holy
David makes Delight such an Ingredient or Assistant here, that sometimes he
calls this Exercise of Meditation by the Name of Delight, Psalm. 119.16.
speaking in the foregoing Verse of this Meditation, I will Meditate in thy
Precepts; in the 16. verse, I will Delight my self in thy Statutes: which is
the same with Meditation, only with superadding the excellent qualification due
Meditation should have; This Name is given from this noble concomitant.

As Wisdoms ways are all paths of pleasantness, so this path it has its
pleasantness and sweetness: Contemplation has its rare and most pleasant
walks: No Habitation has such Rooms, such Galleries within, of pleasure: Nor
Gardens without with such Walks and Curiosities: No Situation, or Stand, such
Prospects and varieties of delightful Eye-Objects as Meditation enjoys. All
Objects that Nature or Art can present to the Eye, are mere Shadows and
Nothings in respect of the rich and rare Furniture the Eye of Meditation is
provided with. The Traveller, whose fect and helps have carried him the
farthest, whose Eye and Observation has viewed and taken in never so much
variety and Curiosity, that has recreated, ravished, and satiated it self never
so largely, with any of the most taking things the whole Worlds fullness
comprises; has not, cannot come near to, and compare with the transcendencies
of purest, highest, Soulrefreshing, ravishing Delights, this high Operation and
more sublime acting, conveighs and gives in: where the Object is spiritual, the
Eye Spiritual, the heart holy and spiritual, and the way of acting upon this
Spiritual Object is Spiritual, as every way or Ordinance of Christ is. Or where
the Object is excellent, the faculty exercised on it is excellent: the Medium
or way of Applying the Faculty to the Object is Excellent: There the Delight
and Pleasure is most rare and excellent.

There are sundry sorts of pleasures: There are sensitive pleasures of the
external Senses, as of Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, and the like: These are very
various and very great, too often too bewitching and besotting.

There are Fancy, Imagination-pleasures: I say the pleasures of Fancy,
which are rare and higher than those of the outward Senses: Imagination and
Fancy which is a quick, sudden, short, and shallow apprehension of things (it
is not judgment that ponders) but a sudden slight taking in and acting: this is
(especially in some sorts of persons) a very high Spring and strong Feeder of
Delight or Pleasure; of Pleasures that come like things fresh, quick and
spirited to the Body and Senses. Phansies, O how they perfume, like richest
scents, please like briskest and most racy Wine! Phansies (though often very
fond and vain) yet are great insets of Delight.

3. There are Intellectual Pleasures, Rational Joys and Delights: These are
more high, sublime, and refined, and therefore more sweet, such as the
Pleasures of understanding new, rare Notions, excellent Speculations, and
apprehensions of solid and precious Truths, and the Minds Musings on them,
Tasting, feeding on them; this in it self is a more transcending Delight than
the two former; though Phansies weigh more with some, yea, though sensual
Pleasures take most with abundance.

4. But there are beyond the former, namely, those that are spiritual
Pleasures, Delights found and felt in a holy and spiritual Heart, in one that
has a Principle far above Sense and Fancy, and Natural Reason: that a
renewed Mind, a Spiritual Understanding, a Wisdom from above only reaches and
relishes; and these are best and sweetest, when they are not only taken into
the Soul, by an act of apprehension and conceiving of them, but when they pass
into the more inward Room, or Office of the Mind, into the Judgment; when they
are there detained in Consideration, and by Meditation give down their
delicious sweetness, like Grapes in the Wine Press: Meditation is such a Soul
Engine, such an instrument of such a manner of Operation, that nothing in the
World, the highest Objects of Sense, Fancy, or mere Natural Reason, can act
with that Complacency and Delight.

Solomon in his Ecclesiastes, that rare Record of his so large and infallible
Experience of all things for Pleasure and Delight, tells us he found nothing so
sweet, and which he could act upon with that Delight, as when he acted up in
Meditation, Eccl. 12.13. David often expresses what joy he acted, in this
soul-engagement: yea tells us as he did, so he will delight himself in it, and
the Heavenly Objects of this Heavenly work: Heavenly things and a heavenly
heart meeting in Meditation, will act and make the purest pleasure.

Meditation therefore must have this Attendant of Delight; which like a flame,
like the Chariot of Elijah, carries up the soul in musing into Heaven.

CHAP. XVII. Some other particulars added in some special Scripture expressions.
BEsides these three Affections of strong Desire, ardent Love, and holy
Delight, that like Heat, and Spirits conveyed from the Arteries (arising in the
heart) into all the Body, to add to and complete what we have in some measure
expressed; there are these Three or Four things, I shall a little speak to.

1. Meditation should be a work very savoury on the Palate of the Soul. 2. It
should be sweet and pleasing to it. 3. It should be with satiety in it. 4. With
an Admiration, as the Crown on the top of it.
1. It should be performed, not as a thing that is dis-relishing, but savoury
to the Spirit in the doing: Romans 8. Those that are after the Spirit, savor the
things of the Spirit.

There are some things are unsavory in themselves, others though savoury, yet
not savoury to some Palates. The things of Heaven are none of them in no degree
unsavory in themselves: Meditation is not so in it self, but to a carnal
Spirit, it is one of the greatly unsavory things, greatly displeasing and
disrellishing: But to the Spiritual man it is not so, but a work singularly
savoury, like Isaac's savoury meat, like feeding at some noble Feast, where a
good stomach, and a right Palate, feed and savor, still savor the delicacies
and varieties successively, every thing is savoury. There are some things
savoury, as Nature yields them; others, and in great variety, as Art reduces
and orders them; and accordingly there are very admirable diverfities of
savoury things, which have their degrees of savouriness: What great varieties
are there made by Art, from the meanest food, to the highest delicacies? yet in
the Gospel Feast of Fat things full of Marrow and Wine on the Lees well
refined, in the Feast of all heavenly varieties; Meditation has more
unspeakably rare dainties, than all that Nature or Art can yield. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear has not heard, what God has prepared for them that
love him. Not the greatest of the greatest Princes, not Solomon's most Glorious
reast, not Assuerus. his Royal Feast, not any of the Persian or Roman Emperors
so much spoken of in Histories, could occasion a Feeding with such high
savouriness, as may be had in the rich and precious things Meditation has to
feed the Soul with. Therefore, O let Meditation be still most savoury, let
every spiritual thing be very savoury; as there are more varieties of Objects,
and higher degrees of Excellency in them, endeavor a suitable, an extensive,
and an enereasing savouring: As men at a Feast pass from the first Dishes to
the after Dainties, with a more eager feeding and better relishing. This is the
first thing.

As Meditation should be savoury, the soul well relishing of it; so likewise

2. It should be sweet. This I further add, in that the Spirit of God is
pleased to honor this pious expression of the Holy Prophet (by recording it
for us) who after a most heavenly Torrent of Elegancy in expressing the
surmounting Excellencies of God in the wonderful ways of his workings and
governings, says there in the close of Psalm 104.34. His Meditation of God
should be sweet. How sweet must Meditation be upon infinite sweetness, and from
whom all other sweetness, Creature-sweetness, Word and Ordinance-sweetness,
derives it self?

Psalm. 119.103. O how sweet is thy Word to my taste, sweeter than Honey to my
mouth! This must be chiefly by Meditation: It is that which presses and sucks
out the rare sweetness in the Precepts, so Holy and Righteous: in the Promises,
so precious: in the incour agements, so high: and in all the excellent things
in the so perfect word of Christ. He not only asserts the sweetness he found in
Meditation; but is transported with high Admiration: And when he could not
speak of it to the height and fullness, then (which is our usual manner) when we
are at a loss for expression in words of comprehensiveness, to wrap up our
selves in the elegancy and terms of an Interrogation and Admiration; yet not
contented with this way, for fuller representing his experimented sweetness, he
takes up a comparison, says sweeter than Honey, which in that pure Air of that
blessed Land of Canaan, was the most surpassing sweet Honey in the World. Yea,
in Psalm. 19.10. Sweeter than Honey, and the distilling of the Honeycomb, which
is the sweetest of all others: But this was in holy Meditation, that made the
Honey melt in his mouth, and give down its sweetness. Meditation that drives
the Hive, drains the Honey, and drops in the delicious sweetness into the
Musing Spirit. Lord teach us the way of this Heavenly Art, and make this Honey
drop, and the Heavenly Manna of Divine Truths fall richly into our hearts. This
is the second particular.

3. Meditation may and should be attended with an Heavenly and spiritual
satiety: Psalm. 63.5. My soul shall be satisfied, as with Marrow and Fatness,
when I remember thee on my Bed, and meditate on thee in the Night-watches. His
rare hours introduced and made returns of Heavenly satisfaction.

The largeness and excellency of it he sets out by a very suitable expression,
satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, which to the stomach yields the best
satisfaction, the speediest and sweetest, the most large and lasting. No food
satiates better than Marrow and Fatness. So Isa. 25.6, 7, etc. The Gospel
Feast, is a Feast of Fat things full of Marrow. There are the Fat things of a
perfect righteousness applied, of a full pardon obtained, of Reconciliation and
Peace with God made, John 1.12. and glorious Adoption conferred through Christ,
the Feast of the Feast, together with the satisfaction of the blessed Image of
Christ, in the beauteous lineaments of Holiness and righteousness, light and
life, of all Graces and Excellencies, and all drawn to the life, and wrought up
by the Holy Spirits Inhabitation and Operation, and arising from Believers
happy Union and Communion with Jesus Christ and his fullness. And likewise as a
glorious superaddition, that of Assurance of a most happy condition, and of the
unchangeable love of God, and that blessed Hope of Eternal Life, which strews
Sugar, drops unspeakable sweetness and satisfaction upon and into the holy
heart, 1 Pet. 1.8. These and sundry others are the fat things full of marrow,
and make up the Feast; and are from the actings and industries of this happy
way of Meditation: As therefore the Heart is hungry and thirsty, in continual
Lingrings and Longings, and never quiet, Meditation must carry it to this royal
Gospel Feast, and thereby meet with a blessed fatisfaction, not being contented
with the sight of the Feast and the delicacies of it, without attaining some
happy satiety.

The Prophet Isaiah mentions one dreaming of eating, but when he awakes his
soul is hungry: If we look not well to it, Meditation may be but such an
unprofitable thinking, as when we have ended it, we may miss of this
satisfaction, find our souls empty. It must be still so managed, that it prove
a help and cure to my Soul's inordinate lingerings, and improve to a spiritual
satisfaction.

Plutarch in his Morals tells of one Pythos, who finding a rich Mine of Gold,
and out of his eager desire to have the Treasure in the Mine, was so
continually attending at the Mine, that he neglected his comings home to his
Meals: To confute his covetous industry, his Wife one day (instead of providing
him food) prepared nothing but Golden Dishes, with several sorts of Meats cast
into the forms of sundry things edible, but all of Gold; whereby he could
observe a curiosity of invention, but was disappointed of feeding and satiety.
We must not in our Meditation content our selves with feeding the eye for
curiosity, but endeavor feeding the Soul unto satiety, heavenly satiety. Ah
let my Spirit mind more a fullness of satisfaction, than newness of Notion;
carry it from Head-work to Heart-work, from bare speculation, to rare and
ravishing satisfaction!

This for the third particular, Soul satiety.

4. Admiration. Let me, to set the Crown on the head of the Duty, add one
thing over and above, let Meditation be carried up to admiration; not only
should we be affected, but transported, rapt up, and ravished with the beauties
and transcendencies of heavenly things, act Meditation to Admiration, endeavor
the highest pitch, coming the nearest to the highest patterns, the patterns of
Saints and Angels in Heaven, whose actings are the purest highest Ecstasies and
Admirations. Thus were these so excellent Artists in Meditation, David an high
acter of Admiration in Meditation, as often we see it in the Psalms, so in Ps.
8.1. and the last Verse, Ps. 31.19. O how great is thy goodness? etc. Psalm.
104.24. O Lord how manifold are thy works? etc. And in other places David's
Meditation and Admiration were as his Harp well tuned and excellently played
on, in rarest airs, and highest strains; as the precious Gold, and the curious
burnishing, or the richest Stone, and the exquisitest polishing and setting of
it. So blessed Paul, who was a great Artist in musing, acted high in
admiration, his soul was very warm and flaming up in it: It was as a Bird with
a strong and long wing that soars and towers up aloft, and gets out of sight.

Thus sundry of the Ancients, as holy Austin, Bernard, and others of those, who
have recorded their rare hours of Meditations and Transportings of Admiration,
liftings out of themselves, and liftings up to Heaven. A precious Minister of
Christ often in his life time would wish, he might die in the heavenly Exercise
of singing a Psalm, in which he used to be transported in Meditation and
Admiration: At length he had, in singing a Psalm, his holy wish, dying in the
performance; whereby he was rapt up (after his ravishment, in the Duty) into
Heaven, changing his place, but not his work. Another, a man eminently learned
and heavenly, riding with a friend in his Coach, he fell into a rare
Contemplation and Discourse of the glory of Heaven, and the beatifical vision;
in which he was so highly ravished, that within a short time he was suddenly
taken from this Earth, to take his possession of that Glory he had so before in
Contemplation.

Thus I have weakly endeavored some explication of this happy work of holy
Meditation.

It must first be begun with fervent Prayer. It must be founded in a purpose
of, 1. A right work. 2. A wise work. 3. A warm work. 4. A strong purpose of
earnest striving against all impediments. 5. An endeavor of the kindly issue
and success.

It must have likewise,

1. Putting on a holy Reverence and Awe. 2. A Retreat of thoughts from all
other Objects than such as we are to muse on. 3. A strong Guard must be set to
keep off all diversions. 4. A setting on the thoughts on the Object. 5. A
seriousness of thoughts. 6. A searching of thoughts. 7. And then a staying and
dwelling of thoughts. 8. An intermixing of heavenly affections, 1. Desire. 2.
Love. 3. Joy. And Meditation should have 1. A savouriness. 2. A sweetness. 3. A
satiety. 4. Come up and be carried on with holy admiration.
There remains one thing more to be spoken of in the Description given of
Meditation.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Ends of Meditation.
MEditation we described to be an institution of Christ, and duty of a
Christian, wherein the Mind acts upon spiritual things, or other things in a
spiritual manner, by a due considering of them, and this to holy ends or
spiritual uses only: Now the Ends of Meditation are three.

Three great Ends of our Meditating.

1. Such as refer to the most high God. 2. Such as respect our selves. 3. Such
as relate to others.
1. Such as refer to the most high God. Meditation is to be the motion of the
heavenly spirit, Heavenward; to carry it up to Heaven and keep it a time there:
A looking of the Eye of the mind, and a lifting up of the heart, a making a
stay, and taking a spiritual solace in Heaven with God.

All Duties we perform must be done to the living God, Heb. 9.14. to serve the
living God. If otherwise, our Duties are but dead works, loathsome as dead
Carcasses. A living work must have for its supreme end the living God. God that
is the first and best, must have the first aim and levelling to.

They say in Philosophy, the last end must have the first intending: The first
looking at, as the first ground and mover to any work. And as they say in
Optics (the peculiar Art that treats about the nature of seeing of Objects)
Quod primo radiat, est primo visibile; that which first irradiates, sends forth
that which through the Medium first conveys it self to the Eye: This is first
visible, and that is light.

The first thing the Eye of Meditation should fix upon, is that which is the
light of lights, and that is God, who is all Light, Beauty, and Glory.
Meditation should be chiefly acted to see God, and to aim at glorifying of God
above all, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

The Gentiles wise men, and great Philosophers, because their speculations were
not acted to the glory of God, were vain imaginations, Romans 1.

Whatsoever the aim be, if the glory of God be not the real scope; nay if it be
not the master mark, the work is miscarried; and but a ravelling out of Time, a
losing of Labor: Meditation must make sure of the right method, and order of
aiming the glory of God, like the Sun in the Heavens that outshines all other
Lights below and above, and that which is to be seen before, and above all
others; so this must be eyed and aimed at likewise, far before all other.

Three things to be eyed. Ah we should eye, 1. The Infinite Glories and
Resplendencies of the Eternal and All-sufficient God. 2. The infinite distances
and heights he is in above us. 3. And the infinite Obligations that ever lie
upon us, to exalt him beyond all.

As in the making of our whole man, whereby he is total owner of us, and
proprietor in us. And in our preserving, whereby we are yet more highly bound.
And in the provisions for our Eternal happiness, which is far beyond all the
former.

Therefore there is an absolute necessity of this Method and Order, of still
first aiming every Duty, and Acting at this grand mark; and then to make it the
striving and pressing hard of our Spirits to it. O that in my thinkings, in the
ascendings of my thoughts, this glory of the great God may ever still ascend:
For no thoughts nor actings can truly ascend, if they go not up to the blessed
God and this glory of God; if God goes not up higher in our thinkings, they
then go not higher than self, and which is but indeed downward, and not upward
at all. Nay, it is a worse descent than that also, it is Destruction and
Hell-ward whatsoever is Self-ward, and is not to the advanceing of the great
God. Meditation is not only to be acted to God as a Duty, but as this Duty, in
its peculiarity and propriety, as being a peculiar straight line to God, as a
singular way for our taking aim, this high aim at exalting the praises of God.

Thus did that rare mark-man, holy David, as it is admirably conspicuous in the
Psalms, in Psalm. 103.12. In the very entrance he lays a strict, a repeated
command upon his Soul and all that is within him, to bless, and bless, and
praise God: Yea not only lays his Meditation level to the mark; but raises up
his spirit to take the purest, the fullest aim; this both by a selecting and
improving of spiritual reasons, the strongest he could find, and the most
quickening Motives he could apply, all that his heart might carry up (in a
heavenly flame) the highest praises of God. Thus you shall see him very
frequently acting his Meditation up with the greatest fervor to this exalting
highly of God.

Meditation is a peculiar visit made to the great God; a Mind, a Thought visit,
wherein as to a great friend, the Soul, as it were, comes and says to God,
Lord, I come to see thee, I now come purposely to see thee, to spend some fit
portion of time with thee, and I come for that high Honor and Observance I am
infinitely obliged to tender to thee: Every Meditation is giving a fresh visit,
and thereby a new tender of highest Honor we own to this best of Friends, This
is the first end.

2. The next end, is our highly pleasing of God, which by Meditation we are to
intend: God will be both obeyed and pleased with our respecting and acting of
every appointed way; Meditation is the best way, the most pleasing way of
thinking. Col. 1.11. We are to walk worthy of the Lord to all pleasing.
Therefore this must be performed to an intended pleasing, a due serious
thinking, a pondering and dwelling of the thoughts upon heavenly things, and
chiefly upon the infinite Beauties and Excellencies of God who is the perfect
Thought and Heart-knower, the exquisite Searcher and Observer of Soul-actings:
But then most, when purposely pleasing is designed: This must very highly
please him, when we especially design pleasing, with our most wishly eyings of
him, yea, to intend the doing our best to please him, and this, O how should it
greatly also please us! David, Psalm. 19. last v. prays for pleasing God, Let
the Meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and
my Redeemer. So it is not only to be prayed for, but made the holy aim of
Meditation with our utmost care. Favorites to great Princes, what industries
do they use to please them, especially that their thoughts offered in Counsels
may be acceptable? Thus, how did Philotas, who was Alexander the Great's
Favorite; and Meeenas, Augustus his Favorite? and so among our selves diverse.
But how near goes it to them. if their Counsels please not? as with Achitophel
when his Counsel pleased not Absalom; and on the contrary with Hushai, when his
Counsel pleased. So when Hamans Counsel was rejected; and how contrary with
Mordecai, when his Counsels were resented? Pleasing of a Prince is a great
encouragement: But pleasing of a God, is a sweet Soul Contentment; it is most
worthy striving after: O how unspeakably sweet will the finding and feeling of
this, prove in thy heart, when Meditation is performed purposely to please thy
God; when it runs in a pure stream, when thy spirit reflecting on its actings
in Meditating, makes discovery of this holy aim of high pleasing the most high
God? As the Scripture commands pleasing, the Saints are peculiarly commended
and greatly honored for it. As with wise and well bred people (obliging and
pleasing in good things) great pleasing is a great praise. As Abel, Enoch, and
others from this character of pleasing God. It is a heavenly ambition to
earnestly design pleasing, as in all others, so in this walking with God in
Meditation.

CHAP. XIX. Meditation respecting our selves.
2. AS there should be such aims relating to the great God, so Meditation must
have its advantageous aims respecting our selves.

1. The Grand Scope and End of our own happiness. 2. All other Subservient and
Excellent Ends.
1. The grand End of our own happiness, and working out our own salvation, is
the next spiritual end, that Meditation as a mighty Engine should set on going
to effect. It should be sure to be ordered up, and duly aimed at, acted
according to the aptitude and fitness of any way in it, to further this
important end: Musing and right Meditation has a most rare tendency and
helpfullness, as to the working out salvation. As it is a sanctified means on
Gods part: so it must be an earnestly employed help on our part: We must
Meditate ever so that it may help on salvation; we must mean it and level it
sure, not any way deceive our selves, but take the best and surest aim.
Salvation challenges the best eying, the fullest, steadiest, strongest aiming
of every way and help. Soul happiness must not have slender aims, we cannot
have aimings too serious and intense.

Let my aimings here have the keenest edge of seriousness, be elevated the
highest, made the firmest and the most extensive: Let them take in universally,
whatsoever may most instigate to, and quicken in this high operation,
proportionate it to this working out salvation, the so great Gospel Salvation.

Thus did the prodigal (who represents the Returning sinner) when sensible
first of his unspeakable misery; and thence apprehensive of the great
obtainable Felicity, the so glorious Gospel salvation; never did he so act any
thinking, made such warm work of it as now. In like manner the Jailer, Acts 16.
having such a dreadful awakening from sense of a lost condition: O what a
pondering of Salvation was that, from a heart so warmed and edged? when
Extremity of Misery has the deepest sense, Meditation of Salvation and
Recovery has the highest seriousness What can have such a thinking, as when
one thinks for life, and that eternal? Let Meditation take in 1. Those
Considerations that are most awakening, that unspeakable misery comes upon us
by sins so innumerable: As contracting on the person such horrid guilt, and
conveying into the heart such hellish filth. Every sin with the aggravations
contracting a debt to Divine Justice, and that entered into God debt Book,
which we never can pay or get pai^ without a surety, but must bring destruction
in Eternal fire.

3. Then weigh the great uncertainty of life, and how certain death casts every
one upon an Eternal state unavoidably, upon inconceivable Eternity.

4. Then must be weighed the Mighty Enemies and multitudes of hindrances lying
in the way of escaping.

2. Next come the Considerations that are the most highly encouraging to strive
to enter in at the strait Gate, such as the Scriptures fullness supplies. O how
great and prevalent are those in the Gospel, to wise and warm us, to strengthen
and heighten Meditation. As Eternal life, which in the believing heart is
already begun, with sure promise of carrying it on to perfection, by our yet
co-working with the holy Spirit of Christ, working in all his, which we must do
continually: Phil. 2.12. Work out your own salvation, etc. What may I say of
conjunction with God, by union with Christ, by Faith of Communion with Christ,
in justification and pardon of sin, a most glorious righteousness,
reconciliation, adoption, with a sure title to Heaven, and the glorious graces
of Christ, his image, holiness, wisdom, life, power, peace passing
understanding, joy unspeakable, with establishment, growth in grace, victory
over all Enemies.

Ah what wishly lookings should we exercise daily at this so great salvation,
and the transcendencies and perfections of it; and at last such an outlet of
all evils, such an inlet of all good, such a Crown of Glory, with all the
inconceivable Excellencies of it, and the perfect fruition and vision of God
for ever.

I have been longer on this than was my purpose, yet shall crave leave for one
thing more, and that which is (after all momentous cousiderations besides) the
greatest, of strongest influence and efficacy, that is the vastness,
inconceivable vastness of Eternity: Not Eternity merely in the abstract, only
considered in it self, but in reference to misery or felicity. I say, to all
other inducements add Eternity; hang on this great weight of Eternity of
Misery and Felicity. Endeavor with thy utmost Art and Industry, by all
resemblances, to have che liveliest and most operative representations of it.

Breathe thy soul often by healthful exercise here, breathe thy soul frequently
up this Hill of Eternity. whatsoever thou meditatest on, let still this be one
Object, entertained in thy serious thoughts, this vast Eternity: Let this have
its due time.

2. Holy Meditation has, besides the former, several other excellent ends to
be aimed at and improved to. As Artificers do with their Gold, beat it out
sometimes to its utmost ductility and extensiveness: Improve this Gold of
precious heavenly Objects, beat them out to the utmost by this Hammer, this art
of Divine Meditation.

The Art of Medtiation will, like Solomon's Temple overlaid with Gold, overlay
thy heart with Christ's pure Gold, and make it rich and glorious.

Ah therefore Christian, act up thy Meditation to these precious ends, and
chiefly lay a mighty stress upon that so momentous thing, Eternity of Son.
Misery or Felicity.

So I have at last dispatched these first things.

CHAP. XX. Of the partieular Ends of Meditation in respect of our selves.
THere be various Ends of Meditation respecting our selves: I shall mention,
among others, these seven particular Ends, relating to our own spiritual
advantage.

1. For a principal improver of saving Knowledge. 2. For to make our Knowledge
Clear and Distinct. 3. To found a Rich Treasury of Truths, and make them sure.
4. And to be an introducer of habitual wisdom, an acquired habit of wisdom, to
the first given wisdom, in heart renovation. 5. For a Kindler of Heavenly Fire,
and Flame in the heart. 6. For a Mighty Corroborater of holy purpose. 7. To be
a constant quickner of the Christian course.
1. Meditation is for a Principal Improver of saving and heavenly Knowledge: To
set as it were more Lights on the Golden Table in the Temple of the holy heart,
to repleuish the Golden Candlestick with more and better Lights, and glorious
burning Lamps, to yield clearer light in the dark heart. Psalm. 119.97, 98, 99.
I am wiser than my Enemies, for thy Commandments are ever with me; that's in
Meditation continually, as v. 97. Thy Law it is my Meditation continually, or
all the day, v. 99. I have more understanding than all my Teachers, for thy
Testimonies are my Meditation, and v. 100. I understand more than the Ancients,
etc. Here Is an assertion in a kind of gradation of the successfulness of his
holy Meditation, namely understanding, wisdom, and excelling in them: Wiser
than his Enemies, yea than his Teachers, yea than the Ancients, that have had
longest time, largest opportunities for greatest Knowledge and highest wisdom.

Meditation is the ground, inlet, and improver of Knowledge. It is not the
great and much reading makes the Scholar, but the studying and pondering that
is read. It is not the reading much that makes the knowing Christian, but the
meditating on what is read: Reading without Meditation is like swallowing much
meat without due chewing; that makes a lean man, so this makes a lean mind.
Many read and hear Much, but understand little; because they bring themselves
so little under this Ordinance of Meditation. If thou would be right
excellent in Knowledge, be rich in it, and of a higher stature in wisdom than
others, as David was; strive to write after his rare Copy in abundant
Meditating.

2. Meditation is to make Knowledge clear and distinct. The Apostle, Phil. 1.9.
mentions love, its abounding in Knowledge and Judgment, and in other places we
have mention of discerning and judging. As to matter of Learning in Arts and
Sciences, they have the most clear and distinct heads, have their Notions most
methodical, distinct, and most mellow, who muse most; contrary, those are the
weak and easy Scholars that muse least. Diverse Christians have their heads
full of raw confused things, a company of broken ends, Notions of small use to
themselves or others, for want of due digestion in Meditation: Gold Oar without
refining and sound hammering is of little use; want of Refining keeps the Metal
base, want of Hammering makes it brittle, it will not be burnisht up to a full
and perfect brightness, it will not obtain a just firmness: You cannot have so
rich Plate or Vtensils, no Vessels of it for your special use. The minds of too
many Christians lie strewed over with precious truths, but neither clear or
distinct: They are like Houses or Closets where the rich things, Furnitures and
Rarities lie covered over with dust, or want brightening; or are so dissevered,
lie so scattered and out of place, that scarce any thing is for any present
use. So there may be multitudes of Notions and Truths in the mind, but are
obscure and confused, a dust covers them, a Curtain is drawn too far over them,
they are of little use, because Meditation is little used: Meditation is that,
and must be that which methodizes them, that sets them in order: Meditation
brightens them and helps for to make them clear, helps them to a luster.
Clearness, and distinctness will not be had without giving down-weight in due
Meditation: And without a clear and distinct apprehension of things they are of
little light to thee Christian; of less influence as to others instigation and
encouragement. A Scholar that has his Notions raw and obscure can make (at the
best) but a Bungler. An Artificer, any Tradesman that has not his Art, but
imperfectly, will make of it but a mean way to live and subsist: he that
understands his way in Religion, will prove the wise, warm, and fruitful
Christian.

3. Meditation is to be a chief help to the Repository and Treasury of Truths,
to lay and lock up store of precious and useful Truths more sure, to fix the
lights of truth firm, make them stand fast in the mind. Serious Meditation is a
great advantage to memory, the Souls Treasury, that lays up precious Truths in
the close conveyances of the understanding, and locks the Doors fast: Such as
Meditate most, will have the surest memory for things heavenly.

Holy David, to lay up and hide the Word in his heart, as Psalm. 119.11. did it
as, by other, so by the way of Meditation: As in the 15. Verse, by Meditation,
and v. 97. Continually. As Truths came to him, so made he them sure by
Meditating: his Treasury and Stock grew richer and were kept the safer. As in
Scholars, not the multitude of Books, or great Reading will make a Treasury of
precious Notions, and make them sure for use, but the due afforded allowance to
the clearing and fixing of them by Meditation. Christians that Meditate will be
rich in knowledge, and keep it sure.

CHAP. XXI. Of the next particular, the fourth end to produce habitual wisdom.
THE next particular end of Meditation is to produce an habitual wisdom, in the
Mind of a Christian: To be a moulder and former of the spirit into habitual
wisdom, to superinduce upon the first Fundamental (that infused wisdom, given
in renovation and heart-change) I say to the first saving wisdom, to superadde
and introduce an habitual wisdom (acquired as they call it) such a wisdom as
makes a Christian more knowingly and wisely skillful and ready for his way and
work; to be beyond a mere Learner, to prove an Artist for working out his own
salvation.

There is an infused knowledge, and an infused wisdom, a wisdom stamped upon and
given into the Mind in its first renovation and conversion, for then a man
ceases from being a stark fool for salvation, as the Scripture makes all in the
state of Nature, Prove. 1.22. etc. but by conversion and change of heart, and by
union with Christ first, and then communion with him, as the wisdom of his
members; by this they become wise, by an infused wisdom, whereby they are wise
indeed, wise to salvation; wise whereby the right and chief end and happiness
is discerned, and the right way and means to that end is discovered, and both
thereupon designed and intended. But this is but a lower measure at first, a
Seed, a grain of Mustard Seed, as the Lord compares the state of Grace begun in
the heart, Mat. 13.32.

But beside the former infused wisdom there is requisite an acquired wisdom, a
superaddition to the other: This is a noble help, and an improver of the first;
that as to the Eye of Reason and natural wisdom, Learning and Experience and
Exercise brings in an Habitual wisdom, enlarging the Natural. As it is with a
Scholar, or an Apprentice to a Trade, First his Tutor or Master infuses
principles for the wisdom or skill of his Profession or Trade, whereby he can a
little begin to act or work, make trial, though but in an imperfect manner; but
then by minding and musing of his instructions, and by exercise he comes at
length to an acquired habit, to act and work knowingly and with facility,
because he has a new wisdom to understand his way. But without minding and
musing he would never have had the way, the Art or Trade intended. Meditation
(beside others) is a singular help to Habitual wisdom, to attain the Art and
Trade of Christianity, Prove. 14.8. It is the wisdom of the wise to understand
his way. And Ephesians. 5.17. Be not fools but wise, understand the will of the Lord.
Though they were excellent Christians, by the large measure of wisdom they at
their first conversion received, yet he calls upon them to seek for more, to
improve the wisdom infused to farther wisdom, to a spirit of wisdom, to an
acquired habitual wisdom, to be Artists in their way, and excel in it. Nothing
does so mould the mind into habitual wisdom, as Meditation; nothing so improves
and enlarges spiritual understanding, makes to understand our way and rule of
walking, as Meditation, as serious and repeated thinkings.

In natural, or any Civil Affairs, wisdom in and about them is not obtained by
bare thinkings, slight, short, and transient thoughts, or by seldom, and now
and then in a fit to think and away, but by serious thoughts, weighings and
ponderings, yea by frequencies and constancies of thoughts and mindings. This
way of thinking makes a man wise in his way, Trade, or in any business
emergent: Its impossible to be wise with this acquired habit of wisdom, without
taking time, making a stand, an abode of thoughts, and those serious also.

If we are hasty, short, give not due allowance of Time, and down weight of
thoughts, serious thoughts, we will not come up to habitual wisdom; nor
likewise we shall not act as wise Christians are required to do, if habitual
wisdom be wanting: No man can act wisely, or in height or eminency of wisdom,
except he act by a perfect principle, as the Angels and Saints in Heaven do, or
as a perfect Artist, that has a perfect skill and hand at some Art or work:
The most of good Christians, though they have true saving wisdom for the
substance, yet have little, very little wisdom to understand their way, little
of this acquired habitual wisdom. This is the reason of their being so
frequently to seek, so at a set, and at a loss, not knowing what to do: The
want now of this wisdom, is from want of Meditation, serious and frequent
musing to frame and mould the mind into habitual wisdom, and so increasing in
wisdom daily.

That a Christian may be an Artist, and have his Trade, have head and hand
adapted and readyed for it, this must be by habit, through custom and use.
There are these four special things, excellent advantages in a habit among
others.

1. It lays in ability for doing. 2. It induces facility in doing. 3. It breeds
delight and complacency with doing. 4. It holds up evenness and constancy in
doing.
A Scholar or an Apprentice put upon Employment for learning an Art or Mystery:
At the first he wants (for the present) the ability to act as an Antist, a
Logician, a Philosopher, or the like, and so the facility, pleasure, and
constancy cannot be come at; because they are the higher steps or stories built
upon the first, that of ability: But when by time he has accustomed himself in
a way, he comes to an habitual knowledge and skill, and that habit brings
ability to do; and with ability goes facility, easiness to act in the art or
way; then with facility is pleasure and delight attending, what we do with ease
is pleasing. Then what breeds Pleasures, brings also constancy, and doing with
evenness and equality. O how desirable is this wisdom in Christianity, how
highly is it to be contended for, to have this wisdom, this Art of going to
Heaven, of living to the living God, to arrive at a doing with an improved
wisdom, a wisdom of superadded ability, with a happy facility of acting, a
sweet delight in acting heavenward, and a beauteous, a glorious evenness and
constancy: Not to be and remain still weak in our Trade of godliness, not be to
seek so often, as not knowing our way in diverse cases, not to drive so hardly on,
not to be so dull and heavy, nor yet so unevenly and brokenly to carry on our
work, but with all forenamed advantages, to be daily still experienced to
higher encouragements.

This is a grand end of Meditation to work up to habitual wisdom, to help a
Christian to excel in this soul Beauty of an exquisite Artist and Operatour for
Heaven and Eternity.

CHAP. XXII. Of the fifth End of Meditation to kindle and inflame the
Affections.
5. MEditation has not only its excellent ends and uses, relating to the
understanding and mind, but also is of singular use relating to the Affections.
Meditation is that which keeps alive the fire on the Altar, and helps to make
it burn: It is that which both gathers the sticks, the fuel, and materials for
keeping the fire from going out, and that which kindles them, blows upon them,
and makes them burn and flame up to Heaven.

In the Levitical Law, the fire upon the Altar must never go out, but it was
kept burning by the Priests continual minding it: If they had not minded that
fire continually, it would have gone out. The fire in the holiest heart it must
be kept in, kept burning continually by Meditation and constant mindings:
Meditation is a great Heart-warmer, it renews and increases spiritual heats,
drives away dullness and dead heartedness, brings a new life, strength and
vigor into the spirit, when it faints and flags.

They say of the Loadstone (that wonder in Nature) when either by carelessness
in keeping it, or by some accident it loses its virtue, yet by laying it some
good space of time in the filings of Steel, it will again recover its virtues;
when the spirit of a Christian by not looking well to it, loses of its heavenly
heat and liveliness, the way of recovery is by laying it asteep in this so
warming and quickening Meditation. O how burning and flaming may we often
observe the spirit of the holy Psalmist David, in his acting of Meditation? As
Psalm. 39.3. My heart waxed hot within me, and while I was musing the fire
kindled or burned; Musing made him hot, yea burning hot at the heart. Thus often
in the beginning of a Psalm we find his heart low and discouraged, but as this
Musing was acted and heightened, his spirit grew hotter, and at last flies all
on a flame, flies up to a very high pitch of heavenly heat. O how do all the
conscientious Practisers of Meditation, ever and anon experience these happy
heavenly heats, and heart-enlargements! Ah if all the Saints so glorious
heart-quickenings were gathered together, what a rich Chain of Pearls, Pearls
of rare Experiences, would they make up of the heart-warming Efficacies of
Meditation?

Meditation is a mighty Engine to kindle cooling hearts, and make them flame in
fervency: The Rule of effecting a business, especially entangled in
difficulties, is first as they say Removendo prohibens, and applicando
promovens. That is, by removing the Obstacles first, and then applying
furtherances. Meditation is instrumental to heart-warmings and quicknings:
First by making a grand inquest into the occasions of heart-coolings, and
helping to remove them. Then secondly, by stirring up to the efficacious means
of warmth and quickening; its a rule among the Schoolmen, that every Negative
is founded in an Affirmative; that is, every not doing is founded in some
positive act of doing something else. And as to the like purpose, we say in
Philosophy, The intention of one thing is the dis-intending of another:
Meditation makes an enquiry, and thereby a discovery of that which hinders
spiritual heat: The extinguishing of fire and heat in Nature, is either by
casting on much water, or smothering it, by either throwing on much
incombustible matter, or hindering the airs openness, and its free coming to
it, which choaks it, or by withdrawing the Fuel upon which it feeds. 1.
Meditation finds heart-coolings to proceed from a giving way to and the present
prevailing of some corruption or lust, that like water quenches the fire. They
say that some rich spirits and rare extractions, if taken in some acid or sour
Liquor, the sour Liquor turns the edge of those spirits, and frustrates their
operation: As cold clammy humors at the head of the Nerves or Sinews, stop the
course of the Animal spirits, and occasion the Numm, or dead Palsy: Or as some
cold Poison taken in, quenches the vivifical heat and spirits, endangers if not
induces death: So a corruption or sin let out and given way unto, chills, and
cools, and quenches the heart-heat, and the longer yielded to, the cooler will
the affections grow.

A Sin given way unto, damps the heart-warming Ordinances, quenches the
heart-warming spirit, obstructs thy communion with a heart-quickening Christ.
Hoseah -- Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take away the heart: what is there
spoken of a more total taking away the heart in evil men, is true of a gradual
taking away the heart, the heat and liveliness in godly men.

2. Meditation on due Enquiry finds heart-coolings to arise from Christians
smothering their heat with heaping up businesses and troubles upon themselves,
launching too far into the Seas of worldly Affairs and over-carings. The thorny
ground had the word choked by cares and affairs of this life: what cares and
business does to the Word, it does to the hearts warmth; can thou entangle thy
self in the matters of the World, and thou will cool apace. The farther a man
Travels from the Sun Northward, the cooler he is: Turn your face from Heaven to
the World, go far, and you come to not only cool, but freeze. Or as she in the
Roman story that out of a design to enrich her self, contracted with the Enemy
to betray the Castle, for that which the Soldiers had on their left arm
(meaning their Golden Bracelets) but the Soldiers, instead of their Bracelets,
threw their Shields on her, whereby she instead of being enriched was smothered.

To engage in a throng is the way to be smothered: The world will smother thee
if thou engagest too far, it will still cool thy heart-heat, make thee of a
warm and lively, a cool dead-hearted Christian.

There is a Fish called the Torpedo, if you touch it with your bare leg, or
hand, it presently nums that Limb that touched it: Touch with thy heart upon the
world, it will leave it number; there is no such way to keep in thy heat, as to
keep out the world, avoid the danger of a Crowd of businesses and cares.

3. Meditation upon searching, discovers the decay of heat is from decay in
heart-warming Ordinances, where the Sun of Righteousness shines warm upon thee,
whereby the Soul-heat is both preserved and encreast.

Abatings of heavenly heat, arise from drawing away the fuel of heavenly
duties, or thy own remissness and negligence in them.

If a man shall cast away his Clothes, leave his food, and decline the means of
preserving heat and life, he must needs grow cold, if he be not quickly killed.
If a man reads not, meditates not, prays not, hears not, or is negligent and
formal herein, he must needs like a dying man grow cold: It much depends upon
the lively performance of holy duties, that you keep Heart-warm, or that you
decay in your fervor by carelessness in the means: Meditation will mind you of
this, and put you upon mending it in time.

The Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. forsook or left his first Love,
his Heart-heat; and Christ intimates, he had left off his first works.

2. Meditation is instrumental to spiritual vivacity and warmth, applicando
promovens, by helping to apply the things, that recover and promote heat and
liveliness. I will name but two things in this, 1. Meditation mightily helps
here, by being a great instrument of searching out, applying and working home
the Scriptures Heart-warming considerations, such as the quickening Spirit, the
inditer of the Scriptures, that knows what things are most proper and
proportionate for recovering or increasing heat, what he has left upon record
to use in this case.

As consideration is the first mover in the soul, so warm considerations are
the first warmers: O what a latitude and fullness has Meditation to fetch
heart-warming considerations from! If the Eye looks up to the Heavens, what
abundance of Heavenly bodies, for conveyance of light and heat it soon
discovers? But if the eye of Meditation looks into the Scriptures, what a
prospect of various rare and glorious passages is there to be found of
Considerations? Like abundance of richest Spirits, highest Cordials, and
preparations of all sorts, in Artists Shops and Closets. O what heart-warming
considerations can Meditation fetch and apply from the infinitely blessed God,
his infinite Excellencies, Eternal Love, sweetness unspeakable, of the sense of
his Favor, and the like: Ah what heart-warming considerations from Jesus
Christ, to behold him and view him all over, in all he is in his unexpressible
Glories? In all he has done, whereby he has out done all that ever was or
shall be done?

What warming considerations in respect of the Holy Spirit, the grand and
mighty applyer of Redemption, by his habitation and operation? What in respect
of the Word, the Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, and Examples in it of sundry
sorts, all for our help and comfort? What of the Covenant of Grace, so sure and
sweet? What in respect of our selves, souls state, and all the great concerns
of it in salvation? Meditation can never want heart-warming considerations, can
bring stores of Arguments of all sorts, and blow upon them, to make the heart
kindle and flame, although it was chill and dead, and never so low brought.

Lastly, this Engine of heavenly Meditation produces heart-warmth and vivacity,
by taking thee out of the shade and cool, and leading into the Sunshine of
Heart-warming Ordinances, wherein the Sun of Righteousness arises, and shines
warm, and his quickening spirit breathes warm upon thee, Rev. 2.5. As a cure of
cooling and decaying Love, Christ counsels the Angel of that Church of Ephesus;
first to repent, and then to do his first works. Negligence in holy Duties,
omission of them, or remisness in them, introduced a cooling of his Love;
therefore what was lost by not doing, must be recovered by such a doing as the
first was; that his first works done again, might be a rekindler of his first
Love: Disuse of Exercise abates the natural heat and vigor, but returning to
it, will again recover it. Meditation when it finds the failure and defect,
will provoke and engage to the just Remedy and Relief.

I have now dispatched at length this second End of Meditation, its being for
quickening the Affections. The next follows.

CHAP. XXIII. The End of Meditation in reference to the will.
MEditation, as it is to be a helper to warm the affections, so for a means to
strengthen and fix the holy purposes and resolutions of the will: It is not a
wavering and weak purpose, or a feeble resolution will serve for a foundation
for building so high as Heaven, for carrying on so great and hard a work as
soul-saving. The Scripture mentions cleaving to the Lord with purpose of heart,
Acts 11.23. Holy David often in the Psalms tells us of his will, his purpose of
heart, and his heart was fixed, Psalm. 119. and Psalm. 108.1. Meditation is
singularly instrumental here.

1. Of fixing and deeper rooting of the grand general purpose of pleasing and
glorifying God, and working out our own salvation.

2. It Is greatly instrumental for corroboration and for strengthening the
lesser Roots of derivative purposes, that spring from the grand purpose, that
are the particular Abettors and Helpers of the main and general forementioned
purpose. In every holy heart there is planted at first conversion, that
fundamental and noble purpose of pleasing and glorifying God in all things
without exception: This purpose also must be often renewed, have its
reiterations for corroboration. There must be also derivative and subservient
purposes, particular purposes, in reference to advancing the main purpose, and
the Souls chief end and intendment, purposes for particular soul-concerns,
particular Duties either respecting Mortification of particular corruptions,
and particular self-denials, or that respect particular graces and duties, in
the seasons required for them. Every particular Duty and Soul concern, must
have the hand of a peculiar purpose lent it to assist it. Right undertaking, as
it must have the mind acted in wisdom to direct it, so it must have the will
acted in purpose, deliberate purpose, to effect or endeavor it. Grace in the
will must work it into a due purposing for the particular occasion of every
particular incumbent Duty, Purpose of heart to ground Performance.

The Scriptures give frequent instances of both general and particular purposes
this way practiced. First of the general and grand purpose; thus David very
often in the Psalms declares, so Psalm. 119.8. I will keep thy Statutes; there is
a general purpose superadded to the first purpose that he did when he first
gave up his heart in conversion to his God: Thus in the 69. Verse of this
Psalm, I will keep thy Precepts with my whole heart; there is another general
purpose. And Psalm. 116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the
living, there is another of his added general purposes for serving God. Psalm.
119.57. Thou art my portion, O Lord, I have said I will keep thy word. There he
tells you what he had done in the time past, he had said, as in the former he
says, what he would do for the future.

So in the 106. Verse, he tells you what a purpose he had taken, such as had a
confirmation of an Oath, or as some express, it had quasi vim Juramenti, as it
were the strength or force of an Oath, yea here tells you what he did in time
past, and what he will do for the future: I have sworn, there is the time past:
And will perform, there is purpose for the future: A recalling of his old
purpose, and a renewing of a fresh purpose to back the old. So others of the
Saints in Scripture are to be observed, to accustom themselves frequently to
strengthen the first general purpose, with the additions of frequent following
purposes. As Jos. 24.

So for particular purposes, for particular coming occasions, we have frequent
instances of holy men's practices. In reference to avoiding sin, Psalm. 101.3. I
will set no evil thing before my eyes. In reference to taking heed to our ways
and words, Psalm. 39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with
my tongue. In reference to trusting on God in difficulties, waiting upon God,
worshipping God, praying, praising, and all sorts of Duties and Graces, Love,
Joy, Hope, Courage, Constancy, and the like.

Purposes and Resolutions general and particular, and the frequent use of them:
Linking purpose to purpose, strong purposes are still necessary for every
Christian that will work out salvation: Yet all must be done in the strength of
Christ, else they will not hold, but wear out, and snap asunder.

Now Meditation is rarely instrumental herein.

1. Instrumental to make our purposes wise, we must ponder and consider before
we purpose; rash purposes and more sudden, without due bottoming in a previous
Meditating, will prove but miscarryings and abortions. They are like foolish
building on the Sand, they soon fail: A purpose, the more deliberate, the more
durable.

2. Meditation helps to make purposes strong and firm; we have need of strong
purposes for the great things of Eternal life: we have strong opposition from
corruption within, and temptation without: Meditation helps mightily to
strengthen Resolution.

1. By repairing to your spiritual Magazine, and thence fetching forth strong
spiritual Arguments to raise strong Resolutions and Purposes. Arguments out of
the rich stores of Scripture, of all sorts and natures, to relieve the weakness
of the will in purposing: Meditation acts a Divine reasoning, disputes you into
a purposing, when it shows you have so much for it, and nothing at all against
it.

2. Meditation selects and sharpens Arguments, sets home, and improves them
upon the conscience, that you must yield, must resolve, and firmly, strongly,
in such matters as none can be higher.

O how many strong and unanswerable Arguments can Meditation come furnished
with, to dispute against carnal unresolvedness, to plead for your acting strong
Resolutions for any part of an enjoined Duty? What weight can it put into the
Balance to cast the Scale for Gods and your Souls interest? I need not name
the heads of Arguments, such as the indispensible necessity of the Precept and
means, the great sinfulness of unwillingness, the excellency of the thing, with
the sweetness, comfort, confidence, and advantages attending it: But this I
shall add, The excellency of a Christian lies chiefly in his will; and the
excellency of that will is in the height of its purpose and resolution, freest
purpose and choice, firmest resolution and determination for the work he came
into the world to do: And the great Assistant, on our part, of holy resolution
is holy Meditation, applying fit reasons to stir up resolution, and instigating
to all those ways that breed and cherish it. And this latter is another
particular whereby Meditation is a relief and fortifier of good resolutions and
purposes.

2. Meditation, I say, is a great strengthener and stablisher of holy purposes,
both as it is a directive, and instigative; as teaching us what are the ways to
help us in purposing, and as instigating and provoking to the Ordinances and
means, that will water the Plants of holy purposes, make them root deep, and
shoot up high, flourish and bear fruit. If our purposes are weak; if our hearts
in purposings are apt to slip out of joint; no sooner set, but as soon slipped,
or ready to dislocate and be out of joint; what remedy then have we but
consideration or falling to meditate, to make a true inquiry first of the right
and proportionate ways of healing this will-malady, this heart-infirmity? 2.
And then Meditation instigates to a due use of discovered helps, of infirm and
inconstant resolutions, draws you to and through the whole circle of means,
provokes you to try every Remedy to cure these abortive purposes. It directs
and leads you to all the Ordinances of help, to the promises that make over
help, to a Christ and all his Fullness of help, to the holy Spirit for his
applying effectually of help, to stirring up Faith, to acting recumbencies and
restings on Christ in the Promises, to stirring up our selves, to humble our
selves for our failings in our purposes, and to strive against them, watch our
hearts slipperiness, and to labor keeping our resolutions and purposes better.
In Natures order, doing is upon resolving, resolving upon considering; so in
grace, performing is upon purposing, purposing arises from pondering and
meditating. The Saints in Scripture that acted the highest resolutions,
exercised the deepest Meditations, as we see, in that man after Gods own heart.
Fits and flashes of Fancy, never breed firm purposings; but such resolutions
that lie longest asteep in due preceding Meditation, have the deepest tincture
and holding Color. Longer I have been upon this particular, as a point more
material, because the art of raising and fixing, heightning and improving holy
resolutions, is such a happy fruit of Divine Meditation, ordered to that
blessed End.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Moditation as a grand supporter of the Christian course.
4. MEditation is for a constant keeper up and supporter of the Christian
course, as to the evenness of this Golden thread, without decays, sinkings,
stands, and interruptions. 2. As to improvements and goings on to perfection.
3. And as to conflictings with Enemies and Oppositions.

This was holy Paul's practice, by still taking in the highest provoking
considerations, minding and due pondering of them; it made him to labor so
abundantly, to press so hard to the mark, forgetting the things behind, and
looking to the things before.

He meditated on the Price of the high calling, kept his Eye on the Crown of
righteousness, he kept his Eye always on the stores and varieties of Gospel
encouragements.

A Christian of the greatest consideration will ever keep up best his evenness
and constancy.

New fresh Meditations are new Soul feedings, new meals, which add new
strength and vigor; they make a Christian like Elijah, when he had eaten, to
travel with new strength to Horeb the Mount of God.

There is a Beast in the West Indies they call Pigritia, which signifies sloth,
for its strange slow pace, which is going fourteen days a stones cast; and they
have contrarily a glorious Bird called the Bird of Paradise, that is seen
generally flying, and in a very expedite motion.

Diverse for running the blessed race of Godliness, go creeping slowly, making
little haste or progress, certainly they meditate little. The swiftest of foot
in Christ's way are the frequent serious Meditaters; Meditating makes the Birds
of Paradise, the Christians of the perpetual motion. I might add more to this
particular, but I hasten to the next.

CHAP. XXV. Of the End or Use of Meditation in reference to others.
3. THe third and last End or Use of Meditation named, was in respect of
others: As the former ends were in reference first to God, then toward our
selves: So this we come now unto, is in respect of others.

Meditation in reference to others, to persons of all sorts, is to fill the
treasure of the heart with good things, and to fit the good man out of the good
treasure of his heart, to bring them forth to furnish others, and be
serviceable to their spiritual condition. Luke -- The good man out of the good
treasure of his heart brings forth good things. He first lays in a good
treasure, stores himself with the riches of heavenly treasure, and then brings
it out: It is not a work merely of fancy and imagination, but chiefly of
Meditation and Consideration: Imagination takes in varieties of things in a
promiscuous manner, without differencing or distinguishing. Imagination makes a
collection, Meditation makes a selection and dijudication: Meditation observes
what precious things are offered us, and lays them up, and discerns what are
not precious, and lays them by; yea by Meditation there is not only an old
store laid in, but there will be also an adding of new. It is this rare Art of
Meditation that both founds and fills the treasury with old and new: Fancy
and Imagination, as it is in diverse, may fill the mind with trash but not with
Treasure, with things that glister, but are not Gold.

It is this Meditation that makes discerning betwixt the precious and the vile,
that takes up on searching the treasure found and discerned, and lays it up in
the treasury of a good heart: And this is first for the good man's own store and
supply, but then it is also for to enable him to bring forth, for others use
and help, to bring forth in first discourse, that is spiritual and savoury for
the Nature, and that likewise is seasonable and suitable for the occasion
offered, to bring and show forth the Apples of Gold in their Pictures of
Silver, as Solomon says of a word spoken in season; likewise to hold forth
things that are exemplary as to a fruitfulness in walking, to bring forth the
good things of light to shine out, light of precious edifying truths, and light
of rich and rare experiences, and to bring out the good things of a heavenly,
quickening, comforting, and encouraging Nature. Meditation, as it is the great
way of gathering up things that are useful, and filling the heart-treasury; so
it is to be the way of direction to open it, and bringing forth in discourse
the good things stored up: And by this imparting them to others, we our selves
have a double advantage often following. 1. A clearer and more distinct
apprehension; as Silver and Gold brighten by use, not by lying up. 2. A warmer
and livelier Affection, and when they come forth warmer by discoursing, they
are the apter to warm others and make their hearts burn within them.

This then is one End, one great and excellent End of this so excellent way of
Meditation: That as face answers to face in water, so heart may answer heart
in warmth. When things have been well warmed in the Forge and Furnace first of
Meditation, and then in our Communication; Fire may kindle Fire, and one warm
heart may occasion another. Discourse, that is the mere product and fruit of
Fancy and Memory, and has not some rise and tincture of warm Meditation;
some discovery of heart-heat is like flashes of lightning, or the shining of
the Moon; they make a show, but warm not; No body is warmer by the one, no
heart is warmer by the other.

CHAP. I. Of the several kinds or ways of Meditation.
WE now, from the diverse Ends of Meditation, proceed to the several kinds, or
ways of it.

Meditation is either that which is more set and solemn, or that which is more
sudden and short. 1. That which is more set and solemn; and this is either the
more ordinary and daily, or that which is extraordinary, upon some more
peculiar Occasions, both which the Scriptures hold forth in the recorded
Precepts and Precedents therein.

1. The necessity of daily Meditation. The first way of solemn Meditation, is
that which should be daily: That as private Praying and other Duties, are a
Christians daily ways of exercising himself in Godliness and walking with God;
so holy Meditation is one golden path in the great Road to Heaven, one way of
breathing his soul daily up the Hill of Eternity, and meeting with God in the
Mount.

Psalm. 1.2. The holy Prophet makes it a Character of the blessed man, that he
Meditates in the Law of God day and night: Where we have held forth, as they
say, Gratiam and Gradum, the Grace and the Degree of that Grace; the Grace, he
does Meditate; the Degree, day and night: Thus much hereby must then be
employed, that as it is to be performed often, so it cannot well be performed by
the Rule in this Scripture passage, if every day in course there be not
something done this way, either more or less; certainly we cannot give God and
our souls concerns too much measure.

So Psalm 119. He tells us his daily practice, to Meditate both in the day and
night. Now his Example, being a King and under such varieties of important
Affairs; so many and so great as none can have more: And if he had still such
cares, troubles, and dangers attending, might not these have excused to some
abatement of his constancy? but it did not: This therefore leaves all sorts of
persons without excuse, none being able to allege, that which he could, or not
more urgencies of daily occasions: There is no doubt, that as it is a work lies
upon every one, so sure as the day returns and the fresh businesses of it; so
this Meditating of right does challenge for it self some fit season and portion
of the day, being one of the great businesses for the Souls help.

As no Christian can plead exemption from this daily incumbency, this daily
soul affair; so no good prudent Christian can conceive, but he may find out in
the revolution of the day, some at least fit opportunity for serious
Meditation: Or if not in the day time (the time of action and avocation) yet in
the night upon the Bed, the time of rest and freedom. What was said of that
great Warrior Hannibal, making his way into Italy over the high rocky
Mountains, the Alps, with Fire and Vinegar, Hannibal will either find a way,
or make one; and is said of Love, It will creep if it cannot go; a good heart
will find or make its way over Mountains of Difficulties and Business, to have
Communion with Jesus Christ, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3.

Ah it is most sad, if I can allow so many hours in the night for rest and
sleep, so many in the day for business and emergencies, so many for eating and
drinking, so many for company and discourse, yea so much time for pleasure,
play, for trivial things next to nothing, it may be for things worse than
nothing, for sins and lusts, and that no part of the twenty four hours must be
afforded for serious thinking, thinking of things ten thousand times more
momentous and concerning than the total sum of matters, that sweep away and
swallow up precious time so much. The good Christian cannot but at least close
with the eternal obligation of this duty: And the wise and fruitful Christian
cannot but yield some compliance with the practice of it, and let this come in
for its due share in the time of the day, as one important business to be
dispatched, and that must still contribute to the right making of it up, and
improvement of it. After some evidence of the equity of this daily Duty, I come
to speak to the Nature and way of this Meditation. This being of all other
sorts the principal, which therefore challenges a more distinct and careful
handling.

If Christians very well understand not this way, or fall very short of the due
manner and order of it, the work is neither so pleasant or successful as it
might be and should be, and questionless is to Christians such as are the great
Artists herein, such as have been well practiced and experienced in it. I shall
therefore now endeavor to show the Nature of it, and something of a Method of
due proceeding in it.

In general, it is that daily exercise whereby we single out purposely some
spiritual or useful matters, to act the searchings and ponderings, which
according to our ability and opportunity of the day we can exercise for our
spiritual advantage.

The Mind is a Spring always running in thinkings, a Wheel always turning, a
Forge always framing, a Wing ever moving; it is the most active, busy, nimble
thing in all the world, therefore has the greatest need to be well looked unto,
to be kept, as Solomon says, Prove. 4.23. With all keeping keep thy heart; to
be guided with the best skill and care, with the steadiest and stiffest rein,
like a Horse of highest metal, ready to run away with his Rider; it will run
wildly away, and carry the soul into vanity, folly, and self-mischieving.
Meditation is a spiritual rein and curb, and the peculiar designed way to
reduce, rectify, and order it.

To bring the hearts thinking power into the highest subserviency, the greatest
usefulness to the main, to the Souls grand interest: Therefore there is a great
necessity upon every good heart, of daily and much Meditating.

CHAP. II. Of the manner and way of daily Meditation.
1. EVery Christian is to awake with God in the morning, Psalm. 139.13. as David
when he awoke was ever with God, at his awaking times in the night, by thinking
of God: so chiefly when he awoke last, when the night was past, with all the
dangers of it, and the day dawned, then the morning star of Meditation arose in
his heart. The first work in the morning is to awake with God, and the noble
thinking faculty, which upon awaking will instantly awake, and begin to stir,
begin to act: Let it be awakened into this sweet way of self entertainment, by
engaging of it in holy Meditation. Look we that the heart be first of all
seasoned, sweetened, and perfumed with heavenly thoughts.

1. Begin we with serious reflections upon the great goodness and tender
mercies of God in our preservations from Satan's malice and mischiefs; what
affrightments, in noises and appearances, in violence and harms would he
exercise, if he were let loose upon us? What other harms from wicked men,
usually taking the advantage of the dark and still night, when all are at rest,
besides harms from accidental occasions that we are liable to. There is also
the great mercy of Beds to lie on, rest without tossings, ease without
torments, sleep without holding our Eyes in awaking, having our sleep sweet,
awaking with refreshing, having our formerly weary bodies and decayed spirits
revived and cheared, and we our selves under a new adaptation and fitness for
the succeeding days occasions. There should be also a stand and abode of
thoughts upon any thing in the night which is more signal and remarkable, that
comes down from Heaven, as a brighter beam of favor to take the Eye with, that
is let down as a more peculiar hand, to take up our thoughts to Heaven by, that
is sent as a more special Love-token, stamped with more legible Characters of
the care and kindness of a God toward us.

2. When the nights past mercies have had some due Reflections and Musings, had
a down-weight of improvement endeavored, for warming and enlarging the heart
toward our good God: If then it conveniently may be, nothing to the contrary
interposing, and that justly may hinder, the next thing then for the way of our
thoughts should be to look forward, to the day coming on, and the spiritual
concernments of it; or if it then cannot at the present be, yet so soon as we
can to set to and engage in this so useful Meditation.

CHAP. III.
HEre the more particular Rules we may use for this daily Meditation, are these
following. I say, the Rules we may use for the particulars of daily Meditation,
and for Method herein, may be such as these following.

1. Meditation of setting up the Master Mark, the glorifying of the most high
God. 2. Next unto it, Meditation of Eternal happiness in the enjoying of God.
3. Meditating then after it of the sure and adequate means for attaining them
both.
And these are therefore to be Meditated upon.

Meditating on 1. Jesus Christ, the only way to the Father by his work of
Redemption.

Meditating on 2. The Holy Spirit the great applyer of Christ and his
Redemption.

Meditating on 3. The holy Ordinances of God, the usual ways of the Spirits
coming to apply Christ by.

Meditating on 4. The Word of God, chiefly the Promises of the Gospel: These on
Gods part.

Meditating 5. On our part, by our use of the Ordinances, and the Word and
Promises, and that Faith and holiness whereby we come to union and communion
with God, glorify him, and obtain salvation; Faith as the instrument of
receiving Christ, and both Faith and Holiness, or the graces of Christ as our
principles of life and power, to live unto God, and growing up to perfection
against all opposition.

1. The first thing according to the rule of best wisdom, which lays the surest
foundation in any course, is first to take into most serious consideration, the
supreme and chief end, and to act a fresh setting up before us, that
Master-Mark, and scope of the most high God, and the glorifying of him, to be
continued as we can through the whole course of the day; I say, this so high
incumbency and duty of looking still at, and levelling all to the glory of God.

Meditation of this glorifying God, for pure, lively, and highest advancings of
it, this is the Souls best operation, and runs most parallel to the perfect
work of Heaven. Heavens higher acting is Contemplation of the most blessed God,
for the most transcendent exaltings of his glory: The Rule of Scripture is, To
do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. And this Rule must therefore have its
place and power here; therefore this daily Meditation must take it in, and set
it up. It must be every ones wisdom to bottom our day Meditation, with the
still eying of, and aiming at the glorifying of the most high God. To begin
with the fresh thoughts, and also the warmest frame of Spirit, for farthering
the supreme end, the glory of God, and with it, as fit to be annexed unto it,
that which is wrapped up with it, our own Eternal happiness. Philosophers and
Divines have several Maxims about the Supreme End: To mention some of them to
help us here: As,

1. Finis summus, est maxim appetibilis; The chief End is of all things else
the most desirable, Psalm. 73.25. Matthew. 6.9. If (as it is most sure) it be most
desirable, then this, as was said before, is the chief point of wisdom, to
chiefly eye and aim at this chief End: and then sure it is most proper in the
method of our daily Meditation, to mind this one of the first, and how to
advance toward it anew, on the opportunity of a new day begun upon us.

2. Secondly, there is another Rule given, which is Finis ultimus praescribit
Regulas totius vitae, sed ipsi fini nonpraescribitur; That the last or chief
End prescribes or gives the Rules of the whole life, or course, but the last
End has no Rules prescribed to it.

In all cases the End of any thing, that gives the Rules to that thing.

Thus that has profit and livelihood for its End, that profit and livelihood
gives the Rules to the Trader, and all his actings are reduced and ordered to
profit and subsistence.

That of men's particular or a Nations interest, as it is called. The particular
interest of persons in particular: Or the Public interest and chief good, that
gives the Rules to private men, or to Statesmen; their actings must be to
their interest, the chief good or End: So the Souls grand interest, real
highest End and Interest, gives all the Rules to all a Christians wise, truly
wise actings.

Thus in Phil. 3.13. I press hard to the Mark; first he set up the Mark, or
that was set up before him to aim at: And this made him press hard, and run in
the right way so earnestly, made him use all the right means, and the due
manner for attaining to it.

So this of eying the Supreme End, as the right sure way, as the sure wisdom
for a man's self, Prove. 9.12. this should be first taken in, and come under
fresh consideration. That which gives the first rise to endeavor, that which
must vitally influence, and strongly instigate, yea fix and stablish our whole
course.

The course rises or falls, strengthens or weakens, bears up or breaks off in
evenness, or unevenness according to our more or less lively, and fresh
lookings at, and ponderings of the chief End.

This we see in all undertakings, the manner, earnestness, and evenness of any
course, is from the manner, earnestness, and evenness of man's eyings of his
chief aim and interest designed in it.

In a Watch and diverse artificial Motions, the evenness and expediteness of the
motion is from evener or unevener, stronger or weaker drawing of the Spring,
the first mover. Thus is it in godliness, a Christians motions are answerable
to his eyings more or less of the main end: Christians complain of their daily
dead-heartedness, and unevenness; it much arises from the so little or listless
lookings at the main Mark. Paul looked earnestly, and he pressed hard: In Archery,
those who eye the Mark most earnestly and steadily hit the oftenest and
fullest. The wisest Christian is the most earnest, equal eyer of the main End.
There be many particulars in this head, which according to prudence and leisure
may have their seasons of ponderings.

The variety will breed delight, and set an edge upon the Spirit, apt to grow
heavy and weary; they are such as these: As the considerations of the most high
God, in all his infinite Glories and Perfections: His All Sufficiency, in his
Knowledge, Wisdom, Holiness, Righteousness, and the rest: But chiefly in his so
infinite and unchangeable Love, and Riches of Free Grace: The Infinite
obligations, eternally lying upon us, for glorifying and exalting of him: The
infinite excellencies and fullness of the second Person, and his infinite Love,
in undertaking with his Father, to Redeem lost sinners: And the infinite love
of the third Person, the Holy Spirit, the applyer of Redemption. Some most
serious Meditation of God, and glorifying him, to give down into the heart a
glowing heat and liveliness, for all the following day, is still fit in some
measure to be practiced.

2. The next should be some serious musing on that next End, our own salvation
and Eternal bappiness, farther to be wrought out, to be our day labor, by the
opportunity of a new begun day, a day, which will bring us nearer to the Ocean
of Eternity.

CHAP. IV. Of the next End, Salvation.
NExt to the highest Gods interest, must be mused seriously upon this great
soul-interest; Prove. 9.12. If thou art wise, thou art wise for thy self. 2 Timothy
3.1. Wisdom to salvation. This, because self is so near and dear, and the
immortal Soul so unspeakably precious, the heart being once stamped with a
spiritual high strong self-love, will have a mighty influence of warmth abiding
on the Spirit.

Here two things are to be attended and practiced. 1. Meditation of Salvation
in a more general Notion and Consideration, works little or nothing, but the
pondering of particulars in Salvation: It is a Rule in Oratory, and so in
Preaching, that for moving and drawing the affections, generals and things in a
confused manner spoken, they hit not, work not, draw not. It is the distinct
seeing and viewing of particulars which moves and affects to purpose: So
Meditation to be effectual must particularize the things comprised, in some
sort, in this happiness and salvation: As that so blessed freedom from sin in
the guilt, in pardon, and righteousness, from the dominion of sin, by power,
life, image of Christ, and holiness, and the glorious privileges of a
Christian here, and Everlasting Glory hereafter; and such like.

2. There Is another Rule among Orators, that things moving the Affections,
they do it either Magnitudine aut Praesentia, by their greatness or excellency,
or by their presence or nearness: As the greatness of a person, or the presence
of a person; or the greatness of a good or evil, or the nearness and presence
of it.

1. The greatness, the surpassing greatness of Salvation, as Scripture sets it
forth, Heb. 2. That so unspeakable deliverance from such a height, breadth, and
length of Misery by sin; and that inexpressible happiness by union with Jesus
Christ. The so great things of this glorious state, should fall by our
Meditation upon the Affections, and daily, like fire from Heaven, kindle them
greatly.

2. Things move by their presence or nearness: the remoter the Object is from
the Faculty, as the Objects of the External Senses, as Seeing, Hearing, and the
rest; or the farther a thing is apprehended to be, as any Place, or Time, or
the like, the less it affects: But the presence or propinquity of a thing moves
most, as when a Poison or dangerous thing is near or present, as an Antidote or
a help when near, when Death or Deliverance is at hand, when a Friend is
present, or the like, this moves most. So the way of Meditation here, is by
representing salvation as present or near, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3. escaping Hell as
now, being put into possession of Heaven as now; if I were now dying, and my
Soul sitting on my lips, ready to take its flight as now; if now the last Trump
were sounding; now Jesus Christ seen coming to Judgment; now the Sentence of
Absolution passing: Let me thus season and strengthen Meditation by this kind
of representation, seeing it as near, as present, now acting, now doing, or now
having, and fully possessing this Salvation.

CHAP. V. Of the Means conducing to this chief End.
THE next thing in spiritual wisdom, to be the Object of daily Meditation, is
to give (as we can) some allowance of serious thoughts, of that which should be
the due and adequate means, conducing to the chief End, of Eternal life, with
the glorifying of God, as formerly we have mentioned.

1. Christ the way. Therefore the next thing (being the highest and uppermost
of all conducing Means to the Supreme End) the next thing I say, to be the
great Object of Meditation, must be Jesus Christ, our way to the Father, and
our highest way of glorifying him: None comes to the Father, says Christ, but
by me, John -- Initial coming to God by Faith to Justification, Reconciliation
and Union with God is by Christ: All other after comings, and glorifyings of
God, are still by Christ, as also all salvation is treasured up in him: so it
must be the best way for our Meditations method, to be daily acted in some
measure upon our mighty Savior, our great and only way to our great and chief
End, so he calls himself the way, John --

Here what a most glorious and delicious Object has the Eye of Meditation?

Christ, in Isa. 65.1. calls, Behold me, behold me; ah what a Spirit must that
be, that for such an infinite Beauty cannot afford one cast of the eye, one
wishly look in the whole compass of a day; that can look every way freely,
fixedly, and unweariedly, but Christward?

The Spouse in the Canticles, her Eye-walk was among the Excellencies and
Beauties of her Beloved the Lord Christ, his pure Colors, White and Red, his
most rare features and exact proportions of every part, his Head, Locks, Eyes,
Cheeks, Lips, Hands, Legs, and all his glorious perfections, and then adds to
fum up all, that he is altogether lovely: So lovely that her Eye affected her
heart, and so beloved that she fell sick of love.

Ah when a heart is strongly enflamed with a Love to Christ, the eye will be
acted in most wishly lookings upon Christ; as the love grows, the earnest
lookings will grow.

Here then the Rule is, to Meditate in some due measure on this Glorious
Object, so both infinitely excellent in himself, and so mighty a Savior unto
us. His infinite Riches and Preciousness, in his Natures united, in his Offices
conferred, in his graces fullness, perfect performances, most perfect
Redemption, his infinite love, pity, willingness to save lost Sinners: The so
great free offers of himself, and giving himself to us, applying his whole
Redemption to us, by his mighty operation in us: Some singular seriousness and
rigor of Meditation cannot but daily be due, as that first and chief means to
the chief End. Christians that least look at Christ, and least distinctly view
him, will make the slowest progress, and such as study him most, will have the
easiest and most expedite coming up to the main Mark.

CHAP. VI. Meditation of the Holy Spirit, the Applier of Christ and his
Redemption.
2. SOme due proportion of Thoughts-seriousness is proper to be daily acted, in
reference to the mighty, and only applyer of the work of Christ's Redemption,
the holy Spirit, and our great daily helper. The Holy Spirit first comes to the
Soul and person of a Christian, applies Christ to him, brings Christ into him,
makes him his Temple, and an Habitation of God and Christ to dwell in the
heart: The Spirit comes, inhabits, sweeps and cleanses; furnishes the heart
with light, that was darkness; with truth, that was error and deceitfulness;
with power, that was weakness; life-warmth and qualifications of heavenly
Graces, that was cold, dead, and altogether sinful, and draws the glorious
image of Christ upon the Soul: He enlivens, establishes, enlarges, and
encourages, and fills the Spirit with peace and joy unspeakable. We act from
his blowings on the Gardens of our hearts, then the spices of Graces flow.
Cant. 4.16.

The Wheels, Ezekiel. 10.17. moved from the spirit in them; so a Christian moves
or not, as the Spirit moves or not. Every day, and for every Duty in the day,
there is need of a new blowing of the Spirit, that the Spices may flow: new
moving, that the Wheels may move us.

We must neither grieve, quench, or resist the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. 1 These.
5.19. Act. 7.51. The Spirit who is our Helper and Applyer farther of Christ,
and receiving of his fullness.

If we will act wisely, the Eye of the Soul by Meditation must daily be
pondering the necessity of the Holy Spirits Influences, stirrings up,
strengthenings, and enlargements: when we neglect and slight the Spirit, and so
want justly his help, we must needs drive on heavily: But when we mind him and
have his assistance, this wings the Soul and makes it to move strongly and
nimbly to the main mark.

If the Question were asked, what were the highest thoughts the mind can
possibly think, they would be such as these three following.

1. That thought of the so infinite and all admired love of God the Father, in
giving freely his Son for Sinners. 2. That thought of that infinite and all
amazing love of God the Son, in giving so freely himself for his Fathers
Enemies. 3. That thought of God the Holy Spirit's infinite love, astonishing
love, in so freely giving himself into such dunghill hellish hearts, to make
them his glorious Habitation, his Palace and Solace, to be the mighty
heart-helper and Comforter. This Spirit then must not be grieved by the least
neglect, but highly and constantly both honored and cherished, with our utmost
thought-preciousness and earnestness, that so thinkings may work up to
liveliest lookings for him, lookings to listenings for his knockings at the
door of our Hearts, listenings for ready lettings of him in; and being let in
we may give him the highest and freest Entertainments, with yieldings of the
fullest obedience unto him.
It is reported, that formerly, sometimes Travelers Sailing by the Coasts of
Arabia the happy, have had by the Winds blowing off the Land, such rare rich
smells, and perfumes of the precious spices, that (without the Experience of
it) it is hardly credible. Sometimes the Holy Spirit so blows on the Garden of
a Christians heart, that the Spices in such sort perfume it, with Ravishments
of Peace and Joy, that are inexpressible, and then it runs apace to the main
mark.

Ah then it must be best to enter on the work of the day, by an early and
earnest eying of this glorious Helper, the Holy Spirit, who is sooner ready to
lend us his helping hand, then we are ready for it.

CHAP. VII. Of the next particulars, the incumbent Duties of the day.
3. THE Ordinances of Christ are the next general things Meditation may fix on:
The Ordinances are our ways of communion with God, the ways whereby God
conveighs himself to us, the King of Heavens highways of spiritual Commerce
and Trade. The Roads and Paths wherein the Holy Spirit walks, and comes to
apply himself to us; and our ways in which we are to go forth and meet him,
apply our selves to him, fix an heavenly intercourse and acquaintance with him.

The Winds blow from all the Quarters of Heaven, and the Holy Spirit breaths
and blows from all his heavenly Ordinances: We may therein look for the
breathings of the Spirit, but we must not look for the Holy Spirit out of his
own ways.

The Prerogative of the Spirit is, not to be absolutely tied to Ordinances; but
our liberty, is not to be loosed from them: We are tied to the ways of Christ,
which are our warrantable ways for communion, and waiting his Spirits comings
and assistings.

The Eye of Meditation should act daily in such fresh and vigorous lookings on
the Ordinances, as may more highly commeid them, raise their price, represent
them more lovely, reduce us to more evenness in performance, by finding them
more easy and sweet in continued use, and exercising our selves in them; and
induce still higher admirations, by experiencing their help and efficacies. The
Ordinances of Christ have their high ratification in the Holy Scriptures for
their power and efficacy. The Saints in all Ages, have given their great
confirmation, set their probatum est to every of them, by millions of
encouraging experiences.

When that Ordinances are more precious, they are the more efficacious: O let
our Meditations daily scope be, to make them more precious, that they may prove
more efficacious.

Like that eminent pattern, that great Meditater David; that high progress he
made in Meditating of the ways of God, set the Price higher, made his heart
warmer.

He Meditated and he valued more, admired more, and he acted more eminently,
and arrived at last at that pitch, which has left him on Record in the highest
rank of Saints that ever lived. The Ordinances therefore are most worthy our
daily musing on, as for their own excellency, as the King of Heavens high
Institutions; so, as the Holy Spirits walks, wherein he comes to meet us, and
have communion with us, and apply Christ more unto us.

CHAP. VIII. Of Meditation on the Word of God, and the Promises, whereby the
Spirit first is given, and after works.
THE Word of God is that sure wisdom revealed unto us by God, to lead us by his
Counsel to Glory: That only infallible Rule given us to walk by: It is the
Golden Scepter of Christ, for the Subjects of his Kingdom to come and touch the
top of: The dear purchase of Jesus Christ for the only Rule of his Redeemed;
the breathing and dictate of the Holy Spirit; the high product, and that
clearest shining forth of the brightest beams of Infinite Wisdom, Truth,
Holiness, Righteousness, Mercy, Free Grace, Love, Power, and all Glories and
Perfections of the Author, for the blessed Ends it is bestowed.

It is the excellent Instrument in the hand of the Spirit, whereby he effects
his great Soul-saving work; whereby he brings about that work of wonder, the
applying of lost sinners to an All-sufficient Savior first, by effectual
calling, and then applies Christ more and more, building them up more in him
unto perfection. If I look for the Spirits operation, I must look for, and
apply my self to the help of that rare Tool and Instrument he operates by.
Think what an Engine it is, what most admired glorious work he has effected by
it; upon millions of blind Eyes, hard Hearts, Persons impotent, Crippled in
their Souls, Dead in sins and trespasses, at the dreadful distance from God, of
Haters and Enemies of him, and all things leading to him; enlightening them,
healing them, and reconciling them to himself, and his Word and Ways.

CHAP. IX. Of Meditation of the Spirits drawing to Christ by the Promises.
AS it is the Instrument in the Spirits hand, and without which it would do
nothing, could not awaken, humble, and convert the Soul; so it cannot either
convert and bring in, or confirm and build up without that most signal sweetest
part, the precious Promises; and the Promises would do nothing out of the hand
of the Holy Spirit, and his efficacious managing of them.

The Grounds and Encouragements of all our drawings near to God through Christ
by his Spirit in his Ordinances, are the Promises of the Gospel, and the
Covenant of Grace.

Sinners must not draw nigh to God, without his Warrant and Command first given.

But a Command will not be yielded to, unless there be the encouragement of a
promise of an acceptance and help, in both the first, and all other after
approches to God. Psalm. 119.49. Genesis 32.9. Exodus 34.6. Number. 14.18.

And the Promises must be managed and ordered by the Holy Spirit, else they
will have no vigor or efficacy, as to either initial application of Christ, or
to any farther and fuller application of him. Ephesians. 1.13. The Spirit is called
the Spirit of Promise, as given by the Word of Promise, Gal. 3.2. Received ye
the Spirit by the, etc. 2 Cor. 3.38. The Gospel (that is by the Promises of it)
is called the Ministration of the Spirit; which is not only of the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, but the saving operations of it, from its
inhabitation.

It is called the Spirit of Promise, as conveying and working all to us and in
us by the Promise: Christ and his Grace is not offered by God, nor received by
a Christian, by any man (I mean grown up person) but by the offer of him in a
Promise: there is no immediate acting upon Christ, for a first, or after and
fuller receiving of him, but by the medium, the way of an intervening Promise.
God holds forth, and Faith sees it, and takes Christ offered in the Promise,
Acts 10.43. To him give all the, etc. As the Spirits humbling, is by his
whetting, and setting home by his art, the threatenings of wrath and death
Eternal, so the comforts of the Spiritare by his setting home the promises of
salvation: And further supplies of Grace are by the promises through the
cooperating of the Holy Spirit, bringing us to receive farther of Christ his
fullness by the promises, that are Yea and Amen in him, 2 Cor. 1.20. But all
this farther operation of the Spirit, and receiving more of the Grace of
Christ, it is by Meditation and pondering of the Promises.

Fresh receivings from Christ must be founded in fresh Meditation of the
Promises.

The more intense and earnest the ponderings of the Promises of growth and
increase are, the larger will your desires, the more earnest your endeavors be
after more of Christ.

Christians are sometimes in great haste to believe strongly, but cannot reach
it, because they meditate on the Promises slenderly. They make the best work of
it, who dwell and act most upon the promises, that still Meditate from promise
to promise.

By the Promises, we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Cleanse our selves from all pollution of Flesh and Spirit, perfect holiness in
the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

There be great varieties of precious promises for Justification,
Sanctification, and the rest. There is a transcendent Truth, Goodness, and
Freeness in the Promises, great and rich supplies made over to Believers by
them: But they will not give down their Milk, without our due mindings and
daily Meditatings on them: Meditation must press out the Juice and sweetness,
gather the rare Honey that is upon these Flowers of precious Promises. If Bones
be full of Marrow, it must be gotten out by pains and knocking: The Promises so
full of marrow and sweetness, must yield it forth by Meditation. Lay sound
weight of Meditation on them, to press out the Spirit and virtue in them.

If therefore a Christian would daily have his recourse to Christ, if he daily
would touch Christ, so as to have virtue go out of him, for healing and help in
any kind; bring your Eye to the hand of the Spirit, and to the Promise, which
he must be expected to work your coming to Christ by, and fresh receivings of
Grace from. Meditate well, that you may speed well: Let the promises mellow in
thy heart by Meditation, that thou may find how sweet they this way are.

CHAP. X. Of the next thing Meditation may best take in, which is that on my
part I am to perform.
5. IF I would perform in the Day what is incumbent on me to be rightly done, I
must Meditate of the way where the Holy Spirit may meet and help me; Meditate I
must of my necessary putting my hand to the work of Christ, and bearing his
burden, and the need I have of the Spirits lending his hand to help me, who
helps our infirmities: I must eye the Rule of the Word, by which the Spirit
teaches me, and the precious promises whereby he encourages me.

And in that all my conversation in the Day must be holy and heavenly,
comfortable and fruitful, I must meditate of stirring up the grace given me, to
act by the help of the Spirit, upon Christ, and to him, for working out my own
salvation, and the glorifying of God thereby.

This must be (if I consider) the living the life of Faith more peculiarly, and
exercising of, likewise; every Holy Grace the work of the day requires:
Therefore next, my Meditation may be upon the Graces, that in the Duties of the
day, are to be exercised for to be improved.

Without the exercising of these Graces all the conversation is carnal, not
spiritual, all Duties are but dead carcasses, and loathsome to God. I must think
how my daily course must be a living to the living God; a living peculiarly to
him, that dyed for me, and rose again; and a living to the blessed Spirit, that
dwells and works in me, and is my mighty helper.

Likewise, I must consider, it must be a living very exemplarily, toward all
men, especially the godly, that my light may shine before them, to provoke and
profit them all I can.

1. Particularly, I must Meditate of living the life of precious and glorious
Faith, the Grace of Graces; Faith as to the whole word of God, all the
precepts, promises, threats, and Recorded Examples; acting more peculiarly
Faith in the promises, and by the promises on Jesus Christ, acting more on his
All Sufficiency to save, and for receiving fresh strength and supplies for the
Duties and Occasions of the day ensuing. Likewise through Christ I should think
of my access to the Father, of trusting to Gods All Sufficiency, his Wisdom,
Truth, Righteousness, Holiness, Goodness, Mercy, Love, Free Grace, and all his
infinite perfections; with his providence, preserving and governing all things,
to the least; and toward my own self in particular, in a most excellent, wise,
holy, and righteous manner, to the salvation of his people, destruction of his
Enemies, and his own Glory.

2. I may Meditate (at least sometimes) of the other soul-beauties, of heavenly
Graces; as of that grand rare grace of Love, holy Love; that which is the
fullfilling of the Law, the great Breeder and Feeder of all Obedience.

Love; which daily as a Fire must be blown up, and made to burn afresh in the
heart, and enliven the daily course: Ah what a Christian may do, by keeping his
heart hot and burning in Love!

3. Joy. Meditating of living the life of heavenly peace and joy, rejoicing in
the Lord always: Not living the life of sadness and pensiveness, most unbecoming
an Heir of Eternal Glory.

4. Hope. Meditate also I may of heavenly Hope, which makes not ashamed, Romans
5.5. Heb. 6.19. An Anchor sure and firm to ride out all storms: And of all the
Graces, as of holy Fear, Humility, Meekness, Patience, Contentedness, Zeal,
Courage, Constancy, all the Chain of Graces, mentioned in 2 Pet. 1.5. and other
places.

The whole days actings should be considered so, as not to be a complication of
vanities, follies, and careless walkings, but a showing forth, and shining in
the glorious beams of heavenly Graces and Excellencies.

5. Meditate daily I should of the spiritual dangers I am surrounded with by
spiritual Enemies: That principal and Arch-Enemy the Flesh, that sin which is
connatural to me, dwells in me, Romans 7. and so easily besets me, Heb. 12.1.
that is always present and too prevalent; the Fountain and Forge of all other
sins; the Heart Touch-wood and Tinder for temptation: The ground out of which
all the stinking and poisonous weeds of Lust grow up; and that ground and
foundation of the deepest tincture and grain Color of all soul-defiling
Habits, and customary sins, that so enslave and lead a sinner captive.

2. Of that so potent Adversary Satan, his subtlety and depths, vigilance, and
unwearied diligence, whetted by implacable and improving malice. 1 Pet. 5.8.

3. The World, that Bait for Satan's Hook, and great Engine whereby he acts, by
the many sweet Allurements on the one hand, and Determents on the other hand.

These I must every day watch and war with.

Therefore, I must daily consider my helpers, God the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, 2 Cor. 8.9. Ephesians. 6.13. The Armor of God I must put on for every part,
and my fighting in the strength of Christ, by whom I may be made more than
Conqueror, Romans 8.37.

And for the last general, there must be Meditation of the unspeakable
preciousness of time, running on without possibility of a stand, or least stay:
With the Frailty of life, Psalm. 39.4. with the uncertainty of it, and the
certainty of death, and unavoidableness of that which will cast me upon
Eternity.

These are the more general things, among which my Meditation may take its
walks, and upon which my seriousness may daily sit down to make its spiritual
advantage by: I must add now things more particular.

CHAP. XI. Of some Particulars to be added to the former Generals.
THere are some things in particular I may add, which may help to direct and
quicken a Christian in his daily course.

1. For the Scripture I daily read, or hear, to endeavor some thoughts which
may help to higher quickenings, and heart-enlargings, by farther fresh
ponderings of the surpassing Excellencies and mighty Efficacies of the
Scripture; to think of a required higher rising estimation, more inflamed
affections of Love, Joy, Hope, Longing, and the rest, seen and so observably
conspicuous in the Saints in Scripture; to light our Candle by their flame: And
the more rooted resolution I should take up and engage in, to be more (by my
looking into the Glass of the Word) transformed into the image of it, 1 Cor.
3.18.

Of Faith in the Word. I should farther think of that Faith I am necessarily to
act, in the truth and certainty, and usefulness of the Word, I now am to be
exercised in; and of my mixing of Faith more abundantly with it, Heb. 4.2. As
to any Doctrine, Precept, Promise, Threatening, or Examples, and whatever is
there related for my use.

Of Wisdom. I should think also of the Wisdom which that I read requires, in
selecting that out is most conducible, is my proper portion, and best fitting
my souls condition. As Samuel at his Feast, set forth something peculiar for
Saul, 1 Samuel 9.23, 24. Joseph caused to be prepared for his Brother Benjamin,
Genesis 43.34. God will now be seen, if wisdom be used to hold forth a peculiar
prepared portion. Some Eye Salve to anoint mine Eyes, Rev. 3.18. some rich
Balm to heal some sore, some corrosive to eat out some proud flesh, some
Cordial for a strengthener and chearer, some piece of spiritual treasure to
enrich me, some rare Jewel for ornament wanting to me; something there is now
in my hand, for my now spiritual advantage, if I can see it; and see it I may,
by that which must be the Auxiliary and constant Assistant of my reading, if I
would meet with a due profiting, which is my conscientious and careful
pondering, weighing, and weighing this pure Gold, stored up in Christ's rich
Treasury to make me rich.

Reading brings me Meat, Meditation brings forth the sweetness.

Reading brings the Coals to the Wood, Meditation makes the flame.

Reading brings me the Sword of the Word, Meditation whets it.

Reading barely, proves pouring water into a Sieve; Meditation is putting Gold
into a Treasury, the former lets the Water out, the latter locks the Gold up.

O let me read much, but let me also Meditate much, that Meditation and Reading
may be commensurate; my Souls digestion proportioned to its Reception, its
taking in by Reading; let me Read and Meditate, that I may not have a meagre,
lean soul, like them that have an eager appetite, and a weak digestion; but
that it may be fat and well-liking, by this good digestion of due Meditation.

2. Some lively and vigorous Meditation should be daily performed, in reference
to private Prayer; I say for assistance and furtherance of secret
Closet-Prayer, that so important and sweet Soul-Exercise.

1. Of that importancy and concernment, that the main stress both of the whole
work, and likewise of the hearts after warmth and life in the day, lies greatly
on it. 2. Of that heavenly sweetness, that it is the chief way of our private
familiarity with God. 3. Of that excellency, that it is our only way of private
speaking unto the great God, of having the high honor and favor of whispering
in his ear, access in private to his bosom and bowels, and the chief way of
procuring his private Signet and Seal of blessed assurance of happiness. The
way it is of the souls freshest, freest, and most elevated actings; such as
oft-times praying in company must not, cannot bear, and the way of strong high
Exercise of sundry Graces.
1. It sends private Embassies daily to the King of Heaven by Faith. 2. It
carries up daily the soul to Heaven in a Chariot of fire by love; and 3. It
leaves continually an Agent in the Court of Heaven by Hope.
Its the great heart-warmer by privacy, giving the greater advantage of
importunity, without any check from the presence of others.

The great heart-humbler, Melter down and Refiner, instrumentally, by actings
of sound and kindly Repentance: Making the dross and embasing mixtures of
Corruptions and Lusts to pass away, and the heart become purer.

Its the peculiar advantage to learn and act the rare art and secret of
wrestling with God, and returning with the high encouragements of holy
overcomings of him.

It is the way of the rarest hours, highest soul-Raptures, richest pourings in
of comforts, and most happy experiencings of the descendings down of Heaven in
purest, sweetest, largest soul-satieties.

Therefore for richest furnishing us with fittest matter for a best heart frame
to perform this daily duty, performing it in the most spiritual and effectual
manner, for doing it, as to outdo former, all former doings, we must look to
lay the Foundation deeper and larger in better and more suited Thinkings and
Meditatings, think to the utmost, to pray to the best. The same word in the
Hebrew signifies, as diverse of the Learned say, both Meditation and Prayer.
First it signifies Meditation, and then by a Metonymy of the Cause for the
Effect, it signifies Prayer. To show what Prayers should be still presented to
the great God, such as have some due weight of Meditation, which are made out
and made up of Meditation, or have at least the best seriousness we can. That
great man of Prayer, the Psalmist David, ordinarily calls his Prayer his
Meditation; and peculiarly his Prayer in the morning (the foundation of the
following days work) his Meditation, Psalm. 5.1, 2. in that excellent and warm
beginning of that Psalm: Prayer and Meditation, like Hippocrates Twins, born,
lived, and died together; so Meditation and Prayer rise, and warm, and grow
servent; or cool, fall, and decay together: Prayer cherishes Meditation,
Meditation feeds Prayer.

O let my Spirit be still warmed, inflamed, and melted down in Meditation, that
it may run and flow and flame in this heavenly devotion, and both issue in my
daily wiser and warmer working out salvation.

3. My serious and curious Mindings must make sure to single out, and set in
full view that or those things I particularly want, and are most proper and
necessary for the now, for my souls present state.

There is no godly man, but has ever something which concerns him most.

Some corruption stirring that must be subdued, some Temptation to be
encountered, some Grace to be endeavored, some comfort or help supplied.

It may be many things may be the present, if not urgent concerns.

CHAP. XII. Meditation of daily self-denial.
IN the next place let me Meditate of what I want as to self-denial and
Mortification, evidenced by the weeds of corruptions coming up in my spirit,
Mar. 8.34. or ready ever and anon to arise and get ground, and all still upon
that grand interest of self, or the Relics of the Roots or Stumps of it: This
which has not been spoken to, this self-interest, the taking of it down in my
heart, is one of the greatest concernments Meditation daily should fix upon:
Self is the great Hinge the carnal heart hangs and turns upon: There the Center
is self, the Circumference self, all the lines are drawn from self and to self.

Self is the great Rival and Competitioner with the infinitely surpassing God,
and contends for superiority with him, yea self sits in the Throne, wears the
Crown, holds the Scepter, and self is the sinners all in all.

1. All positive actings in sensualities, pride, and covetousness, and other
evils are but to satisfy self. 2. All negative ways and omittings of good, are
but to gratify self, to ease slothful self, loath to be put to stir, least
willing to labor, toil, or strive, least of all to lose, smart, and suffer.
Self claps the great strong Biass on the soul, is the spreading prevailing
poison in it, and empoysons it all over.

Self is highest in the estimation, nothing passes at so high a rate, not God
himself.

Self is highest in the affection, nothing so near as self.

Self is highest in the purpose and intention, nothing so aimed at as self.

Self in the conversation, it has the endeavors, earnestness, and equality:
It is like the most dangerous seizing, deep rooting, and spreading poison, of
greatest virulency and prevalency: Thus it is in a natural heart. In a holy
heart, though the most high God, by the power of Grace, be now highest, really
chief, yet that remaining part of self, the pieces left behind, often as it were
do justle him, frequently justle him, to get his place and sit uppermost, for
what do sins, when our minds, wisdom, desires, and wills, and our ways, when
they thwart and cross his mind, wisdom, will, and ways, but as it were justle
him, and strive to be uppermost?

Hereby self sometimes (out of carelessness) self it seems to have regained the
Throne, and repossest it self of the sovereignty lost.

In the best heart there is so much of this bitter Root springing out, so much
of this soul-bane, so much of this Touch-wood, Tinder, Powder to presently
take, and instantly blow up, so much of this Idol, this Dagon set so near the
Ark, that it has need of the greatest daily mindings and ponderings, as the
greatest Enemy that has gained the greatest advantage of us, it lies still in
our Bosoms: Its like the worm that breeds and feeds of the Bodies own flesh:
This of all others is the greatest Idol; I say, self is the greatest Idol that
ever was or will be. There Is no Image of Jealousy like it in the Eye of a God,
therefore no one thing requires a more daily minding, for a daily watchfulness;
Mindings for the effectual help and relief against all particular lusts, which
are but the lesser Branches of the great Root of self, the Scouts and Forragers
sent forth from the Head-quarter of self.

This self it is that is the great correspondent and confederate with Satan; if
self were not the ground within, of his attempts from without, he could do
nothing.

The Mathematician boastingly said, tell me but where I may place my Engine,
and I will shake the Earth. Satan knowing where to place his Engine, knows how
to shake us and worst us, if we watch him not, and this self.

I must mind it most, and trust it least; labor the most peremptory and
constant denyings of it, and as my highest wisdom, to mortify particular Lusts
that are all fed from this great Root, and likewise to keep off Satan from this
advantage ground.

I have it may be enlarged too far upon this: very brief I shall be on those
that remain.

CHAP. XIII. Of some other particulars which may be sometimes Meditated upon in
the day.
1. A particular sin. IT will be my wisdom to consider that sin or corruption
which troubles me most, which out of this spring of self and sinful interest is
more apt to owse out of my heart, and make a breach in the Banks that Christ by
his grace has made there. That particular evil which is so strong, stirring,
and striving, to carry me down the stream and keep me under: I was upright,
says the Prophet, Psalm. 18.23. before him, and kept my self from mine
iniquity; that sin which had been of peculiar prevalence, and would be so
again; the sin that had special edge and eagerness, too often appearing and
endeavoring it, attempting to make its escape from his watch, his
heart-keeping, and appear in act and power.

There is some corruption or evil in every spirit, which like some rank weed in
the Garden is still putting up, or ready to put forth, like some leak in a
Vessel, ready to run out by it.

This needs a special minding and considering suitable to its dangerousness, as
that which will be a thorn in the Foot, hinder our going, work disquiet, dash
our confidence before God, and weaken our hands from our work.

I must peculiarly consider this daily, that it get not at any time ground of
me, but that I gain upon it more, that I watch it, fight it, look that this
Gangreen spread not, run not up to my heart, but that I stop and kill it.

Minding it duly will provoke to endeavor a right course, for the just cure
and sound healing of it.

Meditation may be also of what other evils are busy in my bosom, what are
stirring most, what are getting any ground, and what are losing it.

2. What graces I want, or have most need of, to enable me more to lift up the
Name of Christ, sweeten my spirit with peace, ease my course, and render me
more serviceable to others.

Every day I should well attend to what Gospel Ornaments and Jewels I ought to
put on and wear before others, to make my conversation shine, Col. 3.12. 2 Pet.
1.5, 6, 7.

Pliny reports of Poppaea, the Wife of the Roman Emperor Nero, that when she
was to go abroad, she still would be decked and adorned with such abundance and
varieties of most precious Stones and Jewels, as it dazzled the eyes of the
Beholders.

And I have read of a like manner, of the Mogul or great Emperor in the
East Indies; who if on some special times he sits out to be seen by the Common
people, he puts on such great numbers of Diamonds, Carbuncles, Rubies, and
other glistering and glorious Jewels, as they cannot without great admiration
behold him, yea can hardly, by reason of the Suns shining and reflections,
discern his face, the glory of the Jewels is so great. Christians must consider
their putting on, and wearing the rich Ornaments and Jewels of heavenly graces,
to shine gloriously in them, and take the Eyes of all that behold them with the
discoveries of the Soul inward Beauties of Faith, Love, Hope, Joy, Fear,
Humility, Meekness, Patience, Contentedness, heavenly mindedness and rest, to
the glory of Christ, in whose beams of Beauty and Glory they ever should shine.

3. When holy David in his course of Meditation, after matters of his private
concernment, closes so ordinarily the whole Meditation, with that grand
interest of Zion, the Churches case; may not this be then a Rule to our
Meditation, for a high demonstration of our public spiritedness, our constant
mindings of that superlative and transcendent interest of God in this world,
the glory of his great Name in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the people
given to him, their peace, prosperity, and glory, and the disappointments of
all their Enemies Designs, which also is an Article in their Heavenly Jointure?

Some other particulars might farther be mentioned to be taken in by
Meditation, such as matters of our callings and daily converse in varieties of
Companies and Friends, and how to be right Christian in them, excel in
improving them to their proper uses and ends, for the glory of God.

4. Meditation for review of the work of the day. There remains but one thing
more to be added, namely, in the close of the day, should be, or is fit to be,
that Meditation of review, or that overlooking of matters in the foregoing day,
to make a happy closing it up, by a fresh humbling our selves, and returning to
God, and acting new Recumbencies on his free, rich grace in Christ, by the
precious promises, to sweeten our lying down.

5. And in the Night season, that great time with David and others of the
Saints, When I awake, let me be ever with God, and my Meditation of him sweet.
Psalm. 139. and Psalm. 104.

The sum of that has been mentioned about daily Meditation, is

1. To enter the Duty at our awaking with Reflections on the matters of the
Night past, the preservations and comforts especially of that time. 2. To look
forward to the incumbencies of the coming day, and how best to redeem it; by
Endeavor
1. To act a fresh setting up the supreme end of glorifying God. 2. To have a
serious musing on the next end, my own Eternal Happiness. 3. Then to mind the
proportionate means to the mark or end I aim at.
1. Therefore first to look wishly at the fullness of Christ, freely offered,
as the way to God and happiness. 2. To Meditate on our mighty helper the Holy
Spirit, the great Applyer of Redemption. 3. Meditations on the Ordinances of
Christ, the walks and ways the Holy Spirit comes in, and applies Christ to the
Soul by. 4. Meditation of the Word and Promises which the Spirit in the
Ordinances uses, as the peculiar instruments of drawing the heart to Christ,
and of applying him daily more. 5. Meditation of the several Graces to be
continually (on the occasions requiring) exercised and improved. 6. Meditation
of our spiritual Enemies, the Flesh within, Satan and the World without.
More particularly.

1. Meditating in reference to reading the Holy Scripture, with those graces I
am to exercise in my Reading. 2. The Meditation private Prayer calls for, if I
pray before reading, or when I can and am any time in the day to pray
privately. 3. Meditation of what is the chief grace I am defective in, or the
peculiar blessing I want at present. 4. Meditation of the grand interest of
God, as relating to his Church in the world. 5. The Meditation of review, or
self-examination in reference to things of the day past.
These heads I have mentioned, not to impose on any, as to matter or method
absolutely, but to propose some things, which if not always necessary, yet that
may be performed, in some degree, as ability and opportunity admits.

Diverse of the particulars (if daily Meditation be judged necessary by us) I am
sure then they inust be judged necessary for such as daily will observe it.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Sabbath, and Lords day.
THere now remains but one thing more to be added to what has been said
concerning daily Meditation, namely, the Meditation relating to that eminent
day of God, first the seventh day of the week, now in the New Testament times
changed to, and called the first day of the week, and the Lord's Day.

1. As to the rise, nature, ends, and advantages the Sabbath in the Old
Testament, and the Lord's Day in the New, it is the best day that ever the world
saw, or shall be seen on this side Heaven.

2. It was and is that day wherein the infinite Glories and Excellencies of a
God, have shined brighter and warmer on the spirits of men, than in any other
days beside; namely his infinite Wisdom, Power, Love, Goodness, Mercy, and
Riches of free Grace.

3. The Sabbath, as some judge, had its rise so early as in Paradise, or when
man was in state of innocence; it must then be of very great Antiquity, and a
rarity of great worth. And,

4. Then it must be that only holy day which man in state of innocence had; and
possibly, if he had stood, should ever have had afterward.

5. After the first institution it had the most glorious and tremendous
promulgation and sanction, such a delivery and ratification, as no other Law
(except those that were spoken at the same time) ever had, namely, by Gods so
wonderful and most astonishing appearance on Mount Sinai, in the sight of six
hundred thousand persons: There it was one of the ten words spoken by Gods own
mouth, by God first spoken in the ears of all that so prepared and awakened
numerous multitude, and after in the Mount was written with the finger of God,
written on the first Table of Stone, before the six Commandments of the second
Table. This Commandment thus written, was with the others reserved in the
Golden Ark or Chest, made purposely by Moses from Gods Command to keep the
Tables, and then by Gods Appointment was to be preserved in the glorious
Tabernacle made by Moses, and there it was to be with highest honor preferred
to be kept in the Holy of Holies.

6. Though some yield it not, yet others judge the Sabbath had its change, from
the seventh to the first day of the week, by the Lord of the Sabbath, Christ
himself, or at least by his Apostles from his Authority.

7. However it be changed, yet it is looked upon as grounded on that so amazing
part of our Redemption, Christ's so glorious Resurrection on the third day after
his Passion.

8. The Sabbath formerly was the Old Testament Churches fixed time, to behold
as in a mirror the glory of God the Creator, his Eternal Godhead, Power,
Wisdom, Goodness, and most glorious Excellencies, in the so admirable frame of
Heaven and Earth, and the so various and curious pieces in it, all most
exquisitely wrought and finished.

It was the peculiar time for setting up the Ladder of the Creatures by
Contemplation to climb from Earth to Heaven with.

But now changed into the first day of the week, it is the Christian Churches
time for beholding as in a mirror, the glory more peculiarly of God the
Redeemer; now not in his Humiliation, but in his appearing and begun Exaltation
in that his glorious Resurrection from the dead, that his concerned people
might joy with highest and most heavenly rejoicing, for this rising of the Sun
of Righteousness, to be under the warmest and most vivifical beams of his
infinite love.

9. Let me Meditate of this day, as the time afforded for largest spiritual
advantages, no day being so eminent for me and my Soul as this day.

10. Let me Meditate of this day as that happy season, wherein the Ordinances
of Christ do run in a fuller higher, and stronger current.

More is offered me on this great soul-mart day than on other common
Market-days, other weekday opportunities; it is the day whereby in some
respects I have far better Ordinances, the Public; in Communion with Christ,
in the midst, among those that are gathered together in his Name.

And then by the Public I have better advantages for the Private, to perform
them better. Private Duties having a better time and better helps, I must
thereby be minded of my better performance.

11. It is the eminent day of meeting with God in his upper walks of more
solemn Ordinances.

12. The day of days for our best speaking with our God, and of highest
familiarity with him.

13. It Is the great time of our hearing from God, and having him most eminently
to speak to us: There be no hearings from God like this days hearings, no such
voice, no such efficacy can be expected as on this day.

14. It is the day wherein God sits out, and is most to be seen; the great day
of seeing Gods goings in the Sanctuary, seeing his Power and his Glory: No such
day for this as the Lords own day. Ps. 63.2.

15. A day of feeding more on the Feast of fat things full of Marrow, Isa.
25.6. Of being brought into the Kings Banqueting House, having the Banner of
Christ's love spread more amply over us, than at other times, it being the day
wherein the highest flamings up of his unspeakable love appeared, in that he
not only died, but rose again from the dead, without which all his other labor
and sufferings had been lost, and our souls been also lost, 1 Cor. 15.

16. It is a day dropped down from Heaven, may serve to give a taste of the
Sabbath and day kept there, and to set a Copy for us here to write after, in
our holy restings and actings, attended with heavenly refreshings.

God that made all things, when he had finished his work, he then rested on the
seventh day, and with his example of resting, gave the precept of sanctifying
the seventh day to the Church of the Old Testament.

And the Lord of the Sabbath, Christ Jesus, resting from his work, and rising
the first day of the week, gives the Example, and with the Example the Precept
of resting and keeping holy the first day of the week to the Church of the New
Testament, as some think, which therefore, Rev. 1.10. they say is called the
Lords day, as the Ordinance of the Supper is called the Lords Supper, as
instituted by him.

17. It is the day of resting the body from labor, of respiteing the mind from
worldly thoughts and cares, and of refreshing the spirit with heavenly Manna,
which rains down now on this day more plentifully; and with water of life that
runs more abundantly in the pure Channels of holy Ordinances.

18. Meditated on it should be, as the season of the best reciprocations,
mutual actings between Earth and Heaven, wherein the soul has the advantage of
acting higher and more vigorously, to glorify and please God, Psalm. 24.5. and
wherein God commands the blessing more, and affords assistances more usually
than on any other days, as experiences prove.

19. Its a time to come from sweeter and fuller communion with God in Christ
(whose blessed day it is) to come with our faces shining and hearts flaming,
made better to be on Earth, fitter to live in Heaven: And hereupon

20. To leave upon the spirit a more eager longing fully to enjoy the Lord of
the Sabbath, and have time turned wholly into Eternity.

These or such like Meditations may be suitable and quickening for improving the
great opportunity of this day of Christ, and we cannot think too much, or too
seriously for this great occasion.

Having in some measure thus endeavored to open and illustrate this point of
daily Meditation, both that which may be suitable for the six days, and for the
Lords day, I pass to the next sort, Occasional Meditation.

CHAP. XV. Of Occasional Meditation, and that which is more extraordinary.
SOlemn Occasional Meditation comes now to be considered, which is the souls
taking of time for, and acting Meditation on some particular selected subject,
either out of the Word of God, or among the Works of God, or something
providentially falling out, or something concerning our selves, any thing
offering fit occasion for fruitful Meditation.

They may be chiefly referred to these two heads.

1. Either such things as purposely we (out of varieties of subjects before us)
do single out for Meditation, to help and quicken us in godliness.

2. Or some new fresh thing, which the hand of Gods Providence holds forth,
for our particular observing and improving.

1. That which we ourselves, out of varieties of subjects, may or do single out
for our spiritual advantage.

Here the scope and compass our Eye has to make its choice of, and fix upon is
very large: The Eye in Meditation has before it the fullest, fairest prospect
can come in view: Here is a breadth, length, depth, height, a compass and
circumference that in point of lawful liberty, you may look from Earth to
Heaven, yea through the whole world, in all its vastness, and varieties of
objects in it; and beyond them all, unto him that is so infinitely above them
all, God himself, in all his so inconceivable exaltations and perfections.

O how narrow then must that Spirit be, which shall be straightened and at a loss,
for matter to employ and busy its seriousness about?

That has so large a Field to walk in, and so great varieties, as the vast
world, Heaven and Earth, and all things in them; and the infinite God, with so
many infinite excellencies as are in him, and yet to seek how to Meditate? Ah
how barren, low, and poor must that spirit be which is enriched with so great
provisions for mind and thought entertainment, and for times improvement, and
yet cannot fruitfully employ it self, on some one thing or other that presents
it self to us, and invites our seeing and pondering of it.

Although Meditation has so great a latitude and liberty; a liberty to travel
farther, and see more by far than all the great Travelers that have bin in the
world: yet spiritual wisdom teaches us to endeavor the most advantageous way
of engaging our thinking power in Meditation. For the wisdom of this way we now
are upon, it needs must lie in that manner and order, as most may conduce to
the great and main end of glorifying God, and our own salvation. It is most
true, that in point of liberty it is my Christian privilege to take and set
before me any profitable subject to intend my thoughts upon, when no particular
occasion of Meditation does otherwise oblige me: I say, when no particular
contrary obligation is upon me, I may choose to meditate either on this or that
useful subject as I please.

I have the whole Creation for my Eye-walk, my Meditation, and spirits
recreation: yea, and farther than the whole world extends; I may go to
contemplate him that is the highest; if I please, like David and other Saints
of God, I may with my Eye walk and look among the Works of God, the so
excellent and unimitable pieces of his most admirable framing: On all the so
stately Fabric of the world, any of the rare built stories lower or higher,
any of the rich Furnitures or exquisite things contained in it.

First I may view the lower story wherein I am; fix upon the precious things
the Earth has within, the riches of Minerals and precious Metals, Silver,
Gold, and the so useful other sorts; the riches of all sorts of precious
Stones, Diamonds, Carbuncles, Rubies, Emeralds, and all the rest.

I may view the innumerable exquisite things upon the Earth, from the Moss and
imperfect Plants, to the Grass made for the Cattle, to all things growing in
the whole Garden of Nature, and more peculiarly made for the service of man;
among all the Herbs, Flowers, Shrubs, and Trees of all sorts, and see in them
the so fair Characters of the infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the great
Creator, written most legibly on them.

I may Meditate on all sorts of living Creatures, from the least and lowest
Mite or Insect, all creeping things, with all Beasts and Birds, that go upon
the Earth, wild or tame.

Consider I may their several Natures, Features, and Shapes, Beauties, and
Excellencies; and withal, the serviceableness and usefulness of them, to that
poor Clod of earth, man, for whom they are,

I may look to the Waters, Fountains, Rivers, and vast Seas, with the
innumerable things and Creatures about and in them, Fowls, Fishes, and these of
so many Kinds, Forms, and Shapes; all of them the demonstrations of the
infinite glories of that unimitable Artist the great God. My Meditation also
may, with the Psalmist, take in the eternal and mighty Hills and Mountains,
with the Rocks, Sands, and Bulwarks made against the raging Seas, that they
return not again to cover the earth, Psalm. 104.9.

I may go up to the higher stories of this Fabric of the World, to the Waters
above, to the Clouds and their Bottleings up of Waters in them, and that so
great wonder in Nature, the invisible and so powerful Wind, which carries the
Clouds from place to place, whereby they at length open, fall down, and water
the thirsty Earth with Dews and Showrs; they also serve to purge and purfie the
Air we breathe in.

I may eye other sorts of Meteors or Exhalations, and things appearing in the
Air, as those fiery and dreadful sometimes impressions, making us to wonder;
the falling Stars, flying Dragons, fiery dartings of some, and fixing standing
brightnesses of others, of several shapes. To all these I may add that Voice
of God, the fearful Thunder, and the concomitant Coruscations and Lightnings;
Lightnings also sometimes alone; all these are mighty and stupendous
operations of the great God.

Higher yet I may go, to another higher story, that of the Starry Heaven;
contemplate the so innumerable Stars of several glories, and wonderful motions
and influences, with the beauteous Moon to shine by Night, and her changings,
encreasings, and decreasings, and hidings; and that Eye of the World, the most
glorious Sun, all so admirably meditated upon by the Psalmist, Ps. 8. Ps. 19.
Ps. 104. Ps. 136.

I may go yet one step higher to that third Heaven, the Palace of God, where
also Christ is in his humane Nature exalted, and appearing in highest glory: It
is also the native place of the glorious Angels, and the place of happy
reception, entertainment, and habitation, of the spirits of just men made
perfect, Heb. 12.23. But of this more particularly hereafter.

But among all, I may more peculiarly muse, and in musing greatly wonder at
that one thing, namely Man, Ps. 8. the making of him in so great excellency,
and all things in the World for his use and service; all for a little speek of
dust, with a little spark in it of an immortal soul. O what is man, that a God
should be so mindful of him, and do so for him! But O what must man then be,
that so little minds God! and what must that man be, that does not, that cannot
or rather will not find mind Employment, how to engage and act that rare
endowment the thinking power, in the rich and ample provisions purposely made
for objects of mind entertainment? All this being then my Eye-scope, and having
so great varieties of Eye-walks, so large a latitude to exercise my thinkings,
so profitably to act this holy Duty of Meditation, I am left wholly (if I
neglect it) without all excuse.

If I still daily let my thoughts run and ravel out in vanities and
impertinencies, and can fix no where usefully for my spiritual good.

But in that multitudes of things may breed confusion, prudence must direct to
find out the best method and order, that so I may meditate with more ease,
pleasure, and advantage. My best Wisdom therefore is to consider of the fittest
way, if not in it self, yet at least for my particular ability and times.

1. As either to meditate of some portion or passage of holy Scripture, some
Precept, Promise, Threatening, Direction, Encouragement, or Example, or some
Grace, Virtue, Vice, or Sin: And for more delight and help, meditate I may by
setting one contrary against another; as one Promise being singled, or some of
the Promises, I may turn upon the Threatenings: If I meditate upon a Reward and
Blessing given to any, turn I may to the Punishment and Evils that have been
inflicted, or are threatened, Reward on Obedience, and Punishment on
Disobedience. 2. Meditate I may over the heads and chief points of Religion in
order, as I can set them; or as some short Bodies of Divinity and Catechisms
comprise them. 3. Or something of the Works of the great God, as Creation, that
so amazing and utterly inconceivable Work, set out as it is in Genesis the
first, and in other Scriptures: Or Providence, God's so strange and admirable
preservation and governing of all things in the World, from the greatest to the
least in it, and about it, every motion, mutation, and disposing of it to a
sure end, his own highest glory. 4. Or something particularly of my own
spiritual condition, for my more peculiar benefit. As, 1. Something which may
make me wiser to salvation, and add to my Treasure of spiritual truths. 2.
Something may make me warmer, and increase my heat of holy affection. 3. Or
something which may strengthen and fix my souls great purpose of walking with
God, and render me a more highly resolved person for Heaven. 4. I should as a
grand business, the affair of chief concernment, meditate frequently and most
seriously about the case of my soul, how in very deed it is, 2 Cor. 13.5. both
without any self flattery on the one hand, or self injury on the other hand,
Psalm. 36.2. Neither making my self and state better than it is, nor worse than
it is, Lam. 3.1. That I may not on any mistake be confident, presuming fondly,
John 2.4. nor diffident, desponding and discouraged weakly. 5. I must
frequently meditate of the evil and most deceitful heart, that arch cheater I
continually carry in my bosom, and therefore am never to be secure, but always
awakened for fear of its falseness and deceits: Meditate therefore of that so
excellent Scripture, Jer. 17.9. The heart, etc. Therefore I shall more largely
speak to it.

CHAP. XVI. Meditation should often be of the hearts great deceitfulness.
MEditation should be very frequent of the hearts great deceitfulness. The
right and best way of this Meditation, lies in these four particular paths.

1. In pondering the infallible certainty of it, and particulars in it. 2.
Pondering the sad condition every one is under by it. 3. Weighing the sad
attendants and consequences. 4. The way of deliverance and relief.
1. It is best here to begin with the Meditation of the infallible certainty,
of this so superabounding heart deceitfulness.

1. This first is to be minded, as that which is asserted so by a God, for whom
it is impossible to lie, Heb. 6. being infinitely wise, holy, righteous, and
good; he affirms it, and that before, and to the very faces of all persons: He
has written, recorded it in his Scripture of truth; he has commanded all
persons to read what he has there recorded; he has preserved miraculously
these Records against all haters and opposers, Men and Devils; and among other
ends, that men may have a Glass, a perfect undeceiving Glass, to show men that
they never would or could see or believe, if God had not held this Glass to
them, and made the true and lively representation of the hearts deceitfulness
above all things by it.

2. These Scripture assertions of the hearts deceitfulness, are from that God,
who is the only both heart-framer and heart-searcher and knower, Ps. 33.15.
having his Eye, omniscient Eye also, every moment and least particle of time
upon it, and every where, in every Chamber and corner, every part of it;
therefore he must needs know exactly all the hearts deceitfulness, and
desperate wickdness. As he made the whole frame of the Soul, and all the
faculties, the Springs and Wheels of that exquisite frame, so he knows all the
foulness and soil of sin which has fallen in, and which it has gathered, all
its motions irregular, all its stops and stands, all its commissions and
omissions, all its defects of principles, all its corrupt principles: Therefore
knowing the both natural powers of the Soul, with all superadded corrupt
principles evilly inclining, aims and interests biassing and leading: he
keeping also such an Eye ever upon it; for of the things in the whole world,
there is no one thing the Eye of God looks so upon as spirits and hearts: He
must know the deceitfulness of it, by being the only Maker, and likewise the
continual Observer of it; and therefore if he affirms it how deceitful the
heart is, it must be so.

3. But besides, there can be nothing in the heart to alter and change it, to
restore and raise it from this bad state, but he knows it; his Eye is ever upon
the heart, he keeps always an awakened Eye, that is still watching it, narrowly
viewing it; he is the heart continual searcher and tryer, Psalm. 7.9. He tries
the heart and the reins.

4. He must also be Judge of the secrets of men's hearts, Romans 2.16. God shall
judge the secrets of men's hearts, etc. therefore all deceitfulness of it,
therefore he must know it, and it must be true, Romans 2.2. The Judgment of God
is according to truth, and the Word of truth whereby he will judge.

5. Take in also the recorded demonstrations of it, such as God discovered,
foretold, and after came to pass, setting a seal to this infallible truth.

Hazael 2 King. 8.19. was by Revelation from God, told it by Elisha, and with
much seeming abhorrence disclaimed it, yet instantly is confuted, and had his
mouth stopped. The Apostles were told of their forsaking Christ, and Peter of his
denying of him, which he would not believe, Mar. 14.50. yet within a very
little time appeared: Scripture Records of the hearts great deceitfulness are
left us to conclude and confirm us herein. But O how hard is it to see, to
believe against our selves! Our own great frequencies of Experiences, the very
instances out of the Nurseries of our own hearts; the evil Plants that put
forth fresh continually of their fruits deceitfulness, prove it to our faces,
if we make Observations of them as we ought to do. O there is not one day if we
are watchful, but is full of sad instances from Morning to Night: At all times
we may find our hearts ready to commit cheats upon our selves, and in soul
concerns, as to our spiritual Estates, O what grand deceits are we too apt to
have therein!

As particularly, in respect of God, how ready to think erroneously of him; as
to his omniscience, truth, holiness, righteousness, mercy, free Grace, power,
and providence, and such like? As the self condemned Drunkard, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
says, I shall have peace though I add drunkenness to thirst: And he in the 50.
Psalm v. 21. Thou said I was like to thee: so the best are out of predominant
corruption, very ready to commit great mistakes and deceits, in respect of
their own sins, graces, the things of God, and things of the world, there is no
end of naming; excellent Treatises are written of this hearts deceitfulness.

2. Meditation should proceed to the unspeakable sadness of this heart Temper,
every one should cry out with the holy Apostle, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from this deceitful heart! out of the hands of this
Deceiver so great and so near, gotten so far within me, and that will be a
cursed inmate, so long as this House of the Body stands, and will not out
utterly whatsoever hard usage it finds!

O how sad is it to have such a self-betraying companion, so deeply rooted
within me! To have in my own Bosom, such a continual Forge and Fountain, acting
and running in so violent Tides, high Spring-Tydes, ever and anon, carrying me
down to that I must so sadly bewail, and smart under!

3. The attendants and consequences of this heart deceitfulness should greatly
be pondered, as to be so fooled by my self, by trusting my self, Prove. 28.26.
He that trusts his own heart is a Fool: May I not trust my own heart, without
having such a Character and Brand upon me? O then what a Fool have I been, and
that Millions of Millions of times? O how great a Fool exceeding often, in
suffering so notorious Cheats to be put upon me? such a Lust or Corruption to
clap a Biass on my Heart, and Fool lead me? lead me so far, so deep into the
dirt, so far from home, from Heaven, from God, from peace, comfort, hope, and
heart of returning! How many and many ways have I been a fool? yea and still am
daily most unwise; he that is so easily and ordinarily unwise, must be a fool
to purpose. Whosoever shall be but twice or thrice cheated by the same person,
and not beware, will be accounted no wise man; but for a sinner to be not
twice, or thrice cheated, but thousands of times by the same deceitful heart;
cheated with the saddest, saddest imaginable deceits, must be unwise indeed. O
how sad is it that we cannot by all experiences take heed of this deceitful
heart!

I can take heed of every one better than my self; it may be I scarce will
trust any body in worldly affairs, but my self that is worse than any without
me, that I will trust, and so be deceived: O let me often think what trusting
my own heart is, and needs must come unto.

I had need think well of the foolish Builder, Mat. 7.26. that built his house
upon the sand, grounded his hopes of salvation on a false bottom; and of the
wise Builder, who built his house on a Rock, by real building, by precious
Faith on Christ. And let me likewise meditate often on the ten Virgins, the
foolish deceived with a Lamp of outward profession only, and the wise that with
their Lamps provided Oil, of Grace, a heart right-renovation.

4. Meditate, first, on the heart-knower. Against heart deceitfulness, let me
as the sure way look up continually to the only perfect heart-knower, to beg
most earnestly his help, to show me my hearts deceitfulness.

Secondly, on Christ my wisdom. Let me mind this well, that Christ only must be
my wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.31. my teacher, whom I must apply, and rest on peculiarly
for his wisdom and teachings daily, to extricate and carry me out of the
Labyrinths, and many secret windings of my so deceitful spirit.

Thirdly, on the Spirit my helper. And must consider the mighty helper, the
Holy Spirit, to help me against my self-deceivings, Romans 8.26. He helps our
infirmities, and he helps against this infirmity of being so ready to be
cheated.

Christ by his Spirit, he can and will deliver me if I trust upon him, he has
given me his Word.

Fourthly, the Word. I must meditate on the Word, there are the sure Rules and
ways revealed, to show how to undeceive my self: The Word, Heb, 4.12. is a
discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart; if I make it my Exercise
to meditate in the Word of Christ, he by his Spirit with the Word will teach
and help me, if I obey it.

I have endeavored a little, this being so important a concernment, to help
our Meditation in it; and those that believe and fear their hearts deceivings
most, will ever speed best; those that trust their hearts most, will smart most.

CHAP. XVII. Of diverse other things for solemn and set Meditation.
6. SOlemn and serious Meditation, a very great and diligent consideration, I
should often act in reference to that arch Enemy without, namely the Devil, who
though he be an Enemy without, yet gains and maintains all he can, a
correspondency with corruption within me.

Satan I must consider as fallen from God, and so from his primitive station
and happiness, into damnation and Hell, fallen out implacably with God, and for
his sake with his best Creature on Earth, man. Out of his implacable hatred,
his aim is to drown men in the same Perdition and Hell with himself, 1 Pet.
5.8. He seeks whom he may devour, Rev. 2.24. he has his deceits, depths,
methods, and arts of both tempting and troubling, 2 Cor. 2.11. And these acted
with the purest enmity, keenest malice, utmost vigilance, and unwearied
diligence.

He has the higher ground of us by far, as being a Spirit, and of the highest
rank of Creatures, as to his Nature and Essence, and is thereby most wise and
strong and agile: He is immortal, never can dye, nor in any sort decay, as we
and other creatures decay in strength, senses, and exercising of our souls
faculties, understanding, memory and others; as he is never dying, nor in the
least decaying, so he has been, is and ever will be to the worlds end, trying
and tempting. Trying and practicing upon the innumerable sorts of persons, of
all Sexes, all Ages, (that are capable in the least degree to be tempted) of
all ranks, conditions, relations, in all places whatsoever, through the vast
inhabited earth. Job 1.7.

He also enlarges his experiences, puts still fresh on his file; improves
continually his arts of deceiving; and does he not grow more bold, raging, and
busy, as his time grows shorter? Rev. 12.12.

Pondered well it should be, that it is not one single Devil to tempt us, but
there are Legions, very many of them; and they are all one huge Army of Devils,
under one great Head, The Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. Rev. 12.7. His
Angels are his assistants, which constantly and exactly comply and cooperate
with him. The Devils never are divided, do not jar and act against each other,
but are all of one interest of destroying Souls, and accordingly do
harmoniously contend.

Often in Scripture mention is made of Satan and the Devil, as if he were a
single one: But this may be to show their unanimity and unity.

The Scripture has sufficiently warned us, and related his attempts and
prevailings; as first upon Adam and Eve in their state of innocence and
perfection; yet he then (though they knew not only their own happiness, but all
their posterities, though never so numerous, lay at the stake) he then by his
Artifices, and subtlety prevailed.

After that, upon the second man that ever was, upon the deceived Parents first
born Cain, therefore 1 John 3.12. Cain is said to be of the wicked one; and on
sundry other wicked all along still the current of time.

Yea prevailed he often has upon the very best Saints that ever the world had;
Job, David, Peter, and others, Job 3.1, etc. 2 Samuel 24.1. Mat. 26.3. he
forbears none: Therefore it is very much to be considered, and how he is to be
watched and warred with; and the Armor of proof is to be duly minded, and the
putting of it on, Ephesians. 6.13.

He that has conquered him, the Lord Jesus, and that has conquered him for
his members; this glorious conquest must be meditated upon, as the strongest
Cordial in the case; and way of taking it, the Promise, with the way of acting
by the Promise, Praying and other Ordinances given for our help, this need be
often a great Meditation.

7. That Enemy the World should have its due Meditation: Its allurements on the
one side, its oppositions on the other: I must meditate on the diversities of
baits, the latitudes of Pleasures, heights of Honor, heaps of Wealth, 1 John
2.15. Friends, Relations, Company, Converse, Cares, Business, and all my Lets,
Diversions, Entanglements, of all the evils; in Troubles, Forcings, Frauds,
Plottings, and all ways of ensnaring and ruining me. Also the World (in so many
respects being suited either to my natural inclination, or my customary
readiness for closing with it; or otherwise to my fears and cowardice, softness
and fickleness, weakness and weariness to withstand or overcome it) Yet I must
consider how the Saints have overcome the world, by acting, as Moses and
others, their self-denial, looking to the recompense of reward, looking to him
that is invisible, and especially to Jesus, the Author and finisher of our
Faith; and by Faith and Patience both enduring and gloriously overcoming.

8. Sometimes I may very fruitfully meditate on the wants and weakness of my
Grace begun in some measure, 2 Pet. 1.5. its often ebbings and flowings, its
stops and stands: A little progress at the best my so carnal heart makes; also
of the extreme need I have of continual stirring up, and exercising Faith,
Love, Hope, Fear, and other Graces, thereby to grow stronger, and put forth
vigorously on all occasions; minding also the helps I have in Christ's holy
Ordinances, encouragements in the precious promises, and supplies by the
blessed Spirits operations out of the so great fullness of Christ.

9. Often I should apply my seriousness to that so concerning particular, the
continual and fast running out of the golden sands of my time, and special
seasons for working out of my salvation. The time is short, faith the Apostle 1
Cor. 7.29. Psalm. 39.5. Behold thou have made my days as an handbreadth. Seasons
past can never be recalled, seasons present cannot be stopped from running out:
Opportunity is the greatest Talent, as the saying is, as that whereby we employ
all other Talents.

Therefore we are so often earnestly called upon, for redeeming time, as Ephesians.
5.16. Redeeming the time. Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it
with all thy might, for there is no work in the Grave, etc. Though time and
seasons, as the course of the Heavens may be made to stop, if the Sun as in
Joshua's time, should miraculously stand still, Jos. 10.13. or as in Hezekiah's
time go back, Isa. ^.8. yet men's particular time then did not go back, or stand
still; so our particular time of life cannot go back or stand still, Job. 9.25.
and 14.1, 2. and ver. 5.

Life every moment shortens, and is melting down into its appointed period.

Life is a thing of the greatest contingency and uncertainty, there is no
Ensurance Office set up for it.

It passes swiftly without pause or stop, this the Scripture both minds us
greatly of, and furnishes us with rare precedents of the Saints serious and
moving Meditations about it.

O let me then look on them and do likewise I let me use and improve the
patterns purposely there recorded, to help and quicken my forgetful dead spirit.

I next come to speak of the four last things, as they commonly are called,
Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven.

CHAP. XVIII. Meditation of Death.
THE uncertainty of life last mentioned, leads me to the subject next akin to
it, that so considerable and consequential point of Mortality, Death, and
Dissolution. O that here I could be the highest Artist to speak most fitly and
movingly to this subject Death, or at least to do something which might prove
effectual to some such proper and proportionate way of directing and quickening
this so necessary and useful Meditation. This is the great momentous and most
highly concerning thing, the end and winding up of life, and all affairs and
matters relating to it, and that which casts me, and determines my condition
for all Eternity in woe or happiness. Let me therefore endeavor the best I can
at all times to improve my thinkings of it.

1. Let me first begin with the meritorious cause of it: That which Heathens
knew not, Nature saw not, Philosophy and Learning could not find out, nor
reach; only holy Scripture tells me, and shows it to be that most black inlet
sin, Romans 5.12. Death entered into the world by sin, and v. 17. By one man's
offense death reigned; not only entered, but reigned, has mastered, and will
master all sinners. Sin, that greatest evil in the world, sin the only
contrariety to the living God that gave life to man at first, and ever since;
sin, that only injury to the blessed God, bred and brought death, the greatest
misery to man here; sin that provoked God to pass the sentence; sin occasioning
the vindictive cause, the Justice of God, to let in death, death with the
consequences of it, that would follow without a Mediator that Adam knew not of:
Death so considered, is the way of the very deepest revenge a God can take.

But then this black part of it, bodily death, without that blacker Train of
Hell and Eternity in it, is that which must challenge a very great proportion
of ponderings.

2. Let me look at, not only the rise of it, and the bare wrath occasioning the
inflicting it, but that so fixed and irreversible sentence, that like the Law of
the Medes and Persians cannot be broken, Heb. 9.27. It Is appointed for all; the
universality of sin has given death an universal sting; and the Statute of
Heaven has empowered Death's Extensiveness over all, and set a seal of
irrevocableness to it as to all men. Therefore it is appointed, I must think,
particularly for me; whatever I am, or do, or can in utmost possibility do. I
must not once think of making an escape from it.

Yea let me consider, as I must die, so the very Year, Month, Day, Hour, and
Moment is immutably fixed, and can never be altered, Job. 14.5. the place also
where, the means whereby, the manner how, all circumstances about it are
unchangeably determined.

3. But how material is that particular of the uncertainty of the time and
manner to me? that is a reservation and secret kept in the Lord's own breast,
not possibly to be exactly known before, without it be revealed, as Christ of
the Great Day of Judgment says, Mat. 24.36. Of that day and hour knows no
man. And Verse 42. Ye know not what hour your Lord will come. And 44. In such
an hour you think not your Lord comes; so the two latter may be applied to this
of death, when he calls for an account of our Stewardships and Talents, and
passes particular and personal Judgment.

3. Let me pass next, to the Meditation, serious pondering of the nature of it,
and that great dreadfulness of that most terrible of terribles, that King of
terrors, Job. 18.14. Here that I may duly look on it, let me look up for a God
to teach me, as to number my days, Ps. 90. so to be wise to consider my latter
end, to do that hard work, overcome that difficulty of looking Death-watd.
Nature abhors the thinking of it, Corruption all it can opposes it; but Grace
must bring and fix earnestly and often the Eye upon it, familiarize death to
me, let me then Eye my dissolution, the parting of the two nearest, dearest
friends, the Soul's taking its sad farewell of its former dwelling; its going,
going in an instant out of the Body, and then that which Death does as an Enemy
to all former Life concerns; and as an entrance upon an Eternal Condition.

1. As an Enemy to all enjoyments how sweet soever: Pleasures all now quenched,
Honors now all dashed, Riches and Estate now all lost, Power now utterly ceast.

2. An Enemy to all Relations, Friends, Acquaintance; now must I shake hands
with all nearest and dearest, the sweetest and most helpful Relations.

3. An Enemy to all Employments, necessary or pleasurable, no Work, no
Business, no Invention after it.

4. An Enemy to all Opportunities and Means of Grace, never to read the Bible
more, never to hear one Sermon more, never to receive the Lords Supper more,
never to make one Prayer, the shortest of one of the fewest words more; and
then also when thou art just launching into the length of vast Eternity: But
now must be Prayerless and totally helpless, yea now thy Souls condition
becomes becalmed, and thou can not obtain one gale of the Holy Spirit to blow
upon thee, and help move thee in any measure.

5. Its an Enemy quickly to the curious frame and so exquisite building of thy
body, with all its parts and members, made with such adaptations and
sutableness whatever, with all the Tempers, Qualities, Offices, Abilities, and
Actings of it: An Enemy likewise to all the senses; seeing, hearing, the two
disciplinary, with feeling, tasting, smelling, the so likewise necessary.

6. It is an Enemy and Destroyer of all comeliness, and beauty, form and shape:
And all these former by being the Enemy and Destroyer of that thy so sweet and
precious life; by making that Jewel drop out of the Cabinet of the Body: or
rather driving forth thy immortal and invaluable soul, bringing with it a Writ
of forcible entrance, coming with an Execution, to turn out that old inhabitant
of the body, securing it from regaining possession, making it stand empty, and
thence exposing the body to rot, ruin, turn to dust, and expose it to
Oblivion, as if it had never been.

But then upon thy Souls thus leaving thy Body, immediately and instantly it is
cast upon a state of Eternity; of Misery if thou were not in Christ, or
felicity if found and dying in him.

When Life ends, Eternity begins: O this all amazing Eternity; this so vast and
inconceivable Eternity, no way to be expressed or set forth, no way to be
understood or known, a Glass that is ever running, a Chain that is ever
lengthening: who can number the Sands of this Glass, who can reckon the links
of this Chain of Eternity, without stop or period, bound or end? O let me be
ever musing of this Ever! have it so full in my Eye, while I have time, this
moment of time here, that it may wind up and leave me in possession of most
happy Eternity.

But to affect my spirit aright, and be wise in the due managing of this
Meditation of dreadful Death, let me look to and ponder the Scripture Commands,
for remembering and considering my latter end, and the Arguments strongly
inducing to it. How frequently and earnestly is it urged upon all? O let me lay
the weight and stress of them close to my heart, not suffering it to put by the
thoughts of death, how awk and averse soever my carnal spirit is toward it!

Let me therefore not only muse on the sentence, the peremptory and irrevocable
sentence passed upon all in general, and so upon my self in particular, but on
it as ready to be executed this hour, yea this moment, for ought I, or any in
the world can tell: Ah let me say to my self, the Warrant for my death at this
very instant may be sealing, and immediately in a moment put in Execution. Ah
therefore should I not still daily represent and realize to my heart, my own
particular coming Death! represent it by those frequent Examples the hand of
Death brings, and sets full before my face, to force my Observation!

The deaths of both strangers to me, and familiars with me, of near Neighbors,
dear Friends, sweetest Relations; bereaving me, it may be, of the Father that
begat me, the Mother that bare me, the Children of my bowels, the Wife of my
bosom, or the Husband that was my guide and stay; or some other very
comfortable Relation, and so the comfort of any such Relation ceases.

All Relations are broken, by this Bond-breaker, this Tie-dissolver, Death.

When I see these thus called away, and must be my Relations no more, should
not I hear my self called upon to come away (shortly it may be) after them?

O but with these near warnings without me, let me take those nearer warnings
upon me, and within me, inevitably still seizing me. Let me take those many
successive summons given for my own personal change.

Ah how many are those joggings the hand of Death daily gives me, for my
awakening into that serious pondering, of that death I either seldom, or
slightly mind!

How many strokes may I observe Death daily gives at the Root of the Tree,
making, as it were, the Chips fly in my face; making me smart by Pains, Aches,
Weakness, Craziness, Failings, and Fallings of the spirits and strength, and
increase of Infirmities; by all declaring he is making at me: And how many
pieces of my house of Clay may I see crumbling and mouldring away, now one and
then another: After the morning of my Age, my Sun soon gets up higher, soon it
is noon, afternoon, and night with me.

How soon is the Sun at the height with any in the bright and warm beams of
bodily beauty and strength? but how impossible is it for to say effectually to
it, Sun stand thou still and go not down, for the least moment? How soon
appear, one way or other, the tendencies to death in and upon us?

Decay in Beauty and Comeliness. Sometimes, yea ordinarily, when we are in the
Flower, presently the Beauty and Comeliness begins to blast: The best and
fairest Face, as to the pure White and Red, soon either becomes paler, or
higher colored, after grows darker and deader, still one way or other worse.
As to the feature and curious shape of Face and whole Body, soon that likewise
changes, either by a contraction in leanness and thinness, or by an extension
in corpulency and grossness: Both the curious and rare Colors and Features
change, warning us of tendency to the last great coming change. Or sometimes an
intimation is given by the Grinders of our food, whereby we live, by the
decayings still of the Teeth; the Teeth which are absolutely the hardest and
strongest things about us, these so soon decaying, as it is in most, plainly it
demonstrates that the softer and weaker things in and about us, and so the
whole frame, will go at last. By this, the soon decaying of the bardest pieces,
Death seems to set his black mark on us, we have his mark in the mouth; and by
their decayings and rottings we touch, as it were, these his warnings
continually with our Tongues, thence to mind us of what change is coming.

For when the Teeth fail (the Grinders and Meat Preparers, made to fit meat for
the stomach) this causes the stomach to act less perfectly; and on its failing
in degree, all the dependencies must needs fail in their Offices.

But if these-Deaths Marks begin not so in some, yet how do we find generally
some other marks of decay set upon us?

If Death come not early, yet how soon upon most does he set his mark? most
observably on the very top of our Houses of Clay, bringing forth gray Hairs on
the highest part, the Head, and turning them whiter every day; Making the
Almond Tree to flourish, as Solomon elegantly in Eccl. 12. And in how many
Elegancies does there the Wise man discover and represent rarely the decays of
the Body in old age? all as demonstrations of Deaths being continually busy
about us, both to prepare and reduce us to his possession.

What varieties of warnings are given us in the impairings of this or that
Member, or of several parts of the Body; by sometimes Sores, Imposthumes,
Fistulas, Gangrens, and parts corrupting, showing a coming dissolution: How
many mortal Diseases (besides others shaking the Houses of our frail Bodies) I
say incurable Diseases, whereby we are told that Death has us now fast in his
hand?

If not so, yet what warnings otherwise are given, in the senses beginning to
fail? as our Sight growing dimmer, Hearing duller, and in the rest. And as in
the parts more common, so in the noble and principal parts, in the Liver,
Heart, Head, and others; these not performing so perfectly their Offices,
whence the spirits, strength, and motion are impaired, the Flesh wastes, the
Skin wrinkles, Memory and Understanding likewise decay, and appearances of
death come all the Body over; what are all the forementioned and concurrent
decays, but a being Death-smitten? a coming out full of the Tokens of Death?
What are all these successions of decays, but so many added links of that great
Chain Death holds in his hand, and draws us to him by? All Messengers that have
the sound of their Masters feet, Death behind them.

O how exceeding gracious is God in his Multiplications and Connexions of
warnings, who might smite every Sinner, without any notice of death given!

Therefore as a piece of highest wisdom, let me strive to represent the
possible suddenness of Deaths sad coming upon me; and this by all the ways and
inducements I can apply. The Examples, such as are in Scripture, of Abels
death, Lot's Wife, Nadab and Abihu, Vzzah, Amnon, Abner, Ananias and Sapphira,
Herod, and others: And in History and Experience, of so many and so various
ways suddenly snatched away.

Not a Year, or some small portion of time, but it furnishes with fresh
Examples: What has befallen others, may befall me, I have no security against
sudden death; but wheresoever, and in whatever time death may seize me.

If I Travel, a Thief may kill me, my Horse may throw and kill me, the Coach or
Carriage I pass in may ruin me; on the Water, I may there be drowned; on the
Land, and when I am passing in the Streets, some casualty may dispatch me; at
home, by some mischance or sudden distemper, something at the Table, Fire, Bed,
or other place, within or without doors; some Imposthume, Palsy, Apoplexy
kills, or some venomous inward vapor may strike me to the heart.

Multitudes of Experiences we continually have: If not suddenly Death seizes,
but is a stroke with warning, either shorter or longer, yet it comes at last,
in the way, and at a time, or hour I just know not.

My best way therefore is to, frequently in my thoughts, put my self into the
condition of a present dying: How it must be with me, let me look on my self
how certainly, without flattery, I am prepared to dye! If I have a Christ in my
bosom, the Love of God assured, and can dye in the Lord, 2 Cor. 13.5. dye in
Faith, and look Death in the face boldly, resign up my soul freely into Christ's
hands, these make for this Agony the highest Cordial; these furnish me with
Armor of proof against this Enemy.

But let me then look on my self as having no means farther to preserve me, all
Physic, Art, and Experiences withdrawing their usual help, Friends standing
about me, pitying, lamenting me, but not able to evidence more than their kind
wishes, and I my self perceiving Deaths summons sent me, as to King Hezekiah,
but without expecting any Messenger after to be sent with better News: Prayers
now and all such means also reversed, and proving labors lost, I now feeling
my decays and hastening away; my disquiets and pains increasing, strength
failing, spirits sinking, heat turned into chillness; Cramps, contractions of
Nerves and limbs following, breath shortening, speech faultring, heart pangs
and agonies now multiplying, the whole frame of the body shaking, the Hands
snatching, Eye-strings, as they say, breaking; and after many deep heavy
sighings and groanings, the Soul comes forth with gaspings, and sitting upon my
quivering lips, upon the last gasp takes its nimble flight, leaves its old
habitation to rottenness and corruption, and launches forth into an everlasting
new condition.

Lord teach me so to number my days, see how frail I am, Psalm. 90.12. Psalm.
39.1. let me so often realize this dying to my self, in most serious
Meditation, put my self into this condition of Deaths coming, and acting his
part, his utmost on me, that I may both familiarize and facilitate this so
dreadful and difficult work, that I may be greatly desirous to be dissolved,
and be thereby with Christ, which is best of all; O that I may perform this
last work best! which that I may, and make that great Enemy my great Friend, my
Losses greatest Gain, let me still mind Christ's healing this bitter water,
making it sweet, making this Deaths-day better than the Births-day; let my
thoughts be on the Sting's pulling out, that it cannot hurt, if I am Christ's.

Death is ours if we are Christ's, and for our most high advantages, as being
the great outlet of all evil and misery, I now shall sin no more, be tempted
and ensnared no more, the World shall now be corruptions bait, and Satan's Hook
no more, Satan shall never throw at me any fiery dart more, God will never
desert me, hide his face from me more.

All Miseries, Crosses, Losses, Poverty, Shame, Pain, Sickness, Weakness,
Weariness, Faintness, Hunger, Thirst, Cold, Nakedness, Labor, Toil, Cares,
Fears, Sorrows, and Disquiets, and whatsoever of this life's Evils can be named,
is at an Eternal end.

And Death becomes the great inlet of all good, to flow in most abundantly; a
passage to Heaven, to be possessed of a Crown of Glory, to enjoy the innumerable
company of Saints and Angels, to be with Christ, and seeing God face to face,
and fullness of felicity for evermore.

CHAP. XIX. Of Judgment after death.
ON the sad parting of those two dearest friends, Soul and Body comes instantly
the doom and sentence, Heb. 9.27. the particular Judgment of the person, to
pass and be put in execution, to an Eternal Estate, either of Happiness or
Misery, immediately as to the immortal Soul, and afterward at the General
Resurrection of Body and Soul in Conjunction.

This therefore little foregoing Day of Judgment, upon which, by the Bodies
mortality and necessity of dying, and the Souls immortality and necessity of
not dying, every person comes to be stated in eternal misery or happiness
unavoidably; is a point of most high consequence, to be well considered, deeply
weighed, often dwelt upon in our most prudent improvements of retiredness.

A very great frequency, and repetition of our best thoughts and serious
ponderings, must be the Tribute of this concern, this vertical point, this
Judgment which casts the scales, and makes full weight for misery or felicity
for ever; For as the tree falls, so it lies, as Death leaves, Judgment, this
particular Judgment, finds us, dooms us irreversibly; there is no bringing a
Writ of Error, no Appeal to be made, no pardon now the Judge will give, no
petition he will receive, no stay of proceedings can in the least be granted,
or looked for on any ground.

This to every particulat person in some respect is his great day of Judgment,
this disposes and dispatches, this secures and keeps me for the great general
Assize and Judgment; this is the Foundation that will be the Superstructure,
this is secret, that is solemn, this for a private execution, that for one in
open view of all.

But this Judgment particular strikes the first stroke of utter undoing, or
lends the first hand of help to an eternal saving, and without which the great
Judgment does not proceed.

Ah then well may I afford this Judgment a great frequency, largeness, and
seriousness of thoughts, which launches the Ship of my Soul into the Ocean of
Eternity, which lets my Soul, either presently to sink into the Bottomless Pit,
purposely sends it thither, casts it into the Lake of Everlasting Fire, or
sends it into Abraham's bosom, into the harbor of eternal happiness, and enters
this Jewel into the Cabinet of Heaven. Ah how unspeakably considerable is this
particular Judgment! The very moment of my death, that is uncertain, and the
very next moment after death comes certain Judgment, irresistably, and
irrecoverably, and determines our state of Eternity.

CHAP. XX. Of the general Judgment Day.
BUT then particular Judgment foregoing, this is but the foundation and
introduction of the following.

The private and partial execution on the Soul separate from the Body, shall
have a public and most solemn both manifestation and consummation with it.

1. This day, among other ends, is reserved for the so great and glorious
manifestation of the infinite holiness and righteousness, grace and mercy,
wrath and severity, and other Attributes of God; never in this world having
their so full discovery, as now by the intendment and most wise contrivance of
a God they shall have, before Angels and Saints, Devils and wicked men.

The Judgment-day, Romans 2.5. is called the day of the Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God; of that righteousness, that so great and glorious
Attribute so little understood, less considered, so much questioned and cavil'd
at, the highest declaration and fullest Revelation that ever was, shall be then
made and seen by all.

So the rest of Gods Attributes shall obtain their meridian height, and shine
forth in their most perfect resplendencies.

Therefore it needs must be a very great day when it is so intended, purposely
to be the greatest day that ever was or can be.

2. It is also purposely constituted for the highest glory of Jesus Christ,
that he may both be admired of Saints and Angels, and magnified in the sight of
all wicked men and Devils.

Therefore he now is to appear in the highest glory, splendor, and power: And
he being made now the visible Judge, this must be most glorious, in that it is
the consummating work of his Mediatory Kingdom, preceding immediately his
delivering up his Kingdom to God the Father, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor.
15.24. For the method and most fruitful way of this so very necessary
Meditation, I conceive it may be,

1. To begin with those Scriptures that most clearly and distinctly present us
with the infallible certainty of this grand point.

2. To then gather up the Remarkable particulars of it in Scripture, as to the
Nature, Manner, and the things that both accompany and follow it.

3. How to manage it, to our being best moved and stirred up by it.

1. For the infallible certainty of this Judgment day, let me look out those
Scriptures in the Old and New Testament, that speak perspicuously of it, and
then labor by Meditation and Prayer to sink deep into my heart, to lay them so
strongly to infuse, as to leave a deep abiding tincture upon it.

To be put into a full possession and assurance of Faith, in this so high
soul-concernment.

In Jude 14. Enoch the seventh from Adam, that so walked with God, and that was
first translated, prophesied of the Lords coming to Judgment.

Job, who is supposed by the Learned to have lived when the Israelites were in
Egypt, and before Moses time, in his 19. Chapter, 25, 26, 27. verses, has a
most clear and full assertion of his Redeemers being the last day on the Earth,
and seeing him then, etc.

Solomon, Eccl. 12.16. God shall bring every thing to Judgment, every secret
thing, good or evil: Dan. 12.2. They that sleep in the dust shall arise, some
to shame, others to life.

In the New Testament, out of Christ's the Judges own mouth, Math 25.31. to the
end. This Doctrine is most fully, with the particulars and manner of it,
described, and in the other Gospels often.

So the Apostle of the Gentiles, Acts 17.19. At Athens, the great University of
the World, he tells them God had appointed a day to Judge the World in
righteousness, and by the man Jesus, etc. Romans 2.16. In that day that God shall
Judge the secrets of men's hearts.

So we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, etc. 2 Cor. 5.10.

2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. Christ shall come in flaming fire, to render vengeance
to all that know not God, and obey not the Gospel.

And Revel. 20.12, 13. to the end, I saw the dead stand before God, and judged
according to their works, etc.

The varieties of places in Scripture, are like many Candles lighted in one
place, like multitudes of Lights in the Heavens, all to give light to us below,
that we might have clearest discoveries, firmest Faith, strongest instigations
to yield full compliance and obedience, with greatest readiness, pleasure and
sweetness.

O I must answer for having the Scriptures, the varieties, perspicuities,
convincing Reasons, and persuading endeavors of the Spirit of God toward me
in them and by them.

The more in the Scripture is done for me, the more will be required of me:
This for the first.

2. The particulars remarkable to be gathered together, of this day, as the
nature, manner, etc.

1. I must meditate of the Person, the so great and glorious Person that shall
be Judge, which is God himself, as the Scripture often tells us; as Eccl.
12.16. Romans 2.16. as was mentioned before, God shall judge, etc. Though this be
greatly considerable, under which our Faith must be concluded; and this alone
well pondered may greatly awaken, awe, and provoke us to all fullness of regard
and care: yet the Word tells us farther, it is God, by Jesus Christ, so in Acts
17.19. God has appointed a day in which he will judge the World, by that man
he has appointed. Has committed all judgment to the Son.

It is not committed to the holiest man that ever lived, nor to any mighty
Angel, it is too high an Honor, too great a Work, for any created Nature, only
fit for him that is God and man. For, by being God, there is both an Omniscient,
and Omnipotent, an infinitely Holy, Righteous, Good, and Merciful Judge; And by
being Man, there is to all men's eyes a visible Judge, that the Scriptures may be
fulfilled. And this for the Saints surpassing joy, but the wickeds greater
daunting and terror, let in by the eyes both of the one and other: All must be
judged by a Judge their eyes shall behold.

2. For the time of his coming, Mat. 24.42. it cannot, will not be known: At
what hour your Lord will come, you know not.

3. For the suddenness and secrecy of his coming, 2 Pet. 3.10. The Lord will
come as a Thief in the night. Math. 24.44. At an hour you think not your Lord
comes.

4. For the place whence he sets out and comes, 1 These. 1.16. The Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven.

5. It will be in power and great glory, such as never was, and never the like
again shall be; never did the Sun of Righteousness ascend to and shine in such
a Meridian, such a transcendent height of glory, Tit. 2.3. Looking for the
glorious appearing.

6. For the company and retinue, it is all the whole Court of Heaven, come to
wait on their King of Glory. All the glorified Saints and Angels leave Heaven
empty, to make up his Train, thousand of thousands giving their attendance,
Jude 8. With thousands of his Saints. 2 These. 1.7. Comes with his mighty
Angels. Math. 25.31. Comes, and all his holy Angels with him. O what an
unspeakably glorious attendance this is!

7. For the dreadfulness of his coming, 2 These. 1.7. Christ is revealed coming
in flaming fire. 2 Pet. 3, 10. The Heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
the Elements melt with fervent heat, the Earth with the works in it burnt up.

8. As a preparative to the Judgment, Christ descends from Heaven, 1. with a
shout (never was there such a shout made, in all the time the world stood) 2.
with the voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of God; the Voice and Trump at
Mount Sinai, where six hundred thousand might hear, that was a glorious and
most dreadful voice and sound, but nothing like this. Never such a voice, that
which will make the whole world ring, and the dead rise out of their Graves,
and with the same bodies, the same numerical bodies, that lived here.

3. Those that are alive, shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an
Eye, on the sound of the Trump, 1 Cor. 15.

4. The dead in Christ shall rise first, be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, 1 These. 4.16, 17. O blessed and most
joyful meeting of the Saints that were on Earth, now raised, changed, and
caught up to meet and see the Lord Jesus their Savior, and now the glorious
Judge, coming to consummate their happiness in soul and body together, to die
no more, and to meet with all the Saints and Angels come from Heaven, and to be
for ever with the Lord, never to be from him again.

5. But others that were wicked and now raised, with the other black Troop that
were in Hell, and now have their Souls united to their bodies: All shall be
brought before Christ the Judge (according to the opinion of some) sitting on a
high Throne in the Air, the Saints and Angels all attending about him.

9. For the manner of these proceedings, alluding to the manner of men's
Judicatures, as Revelations, Chapter 20.

1. All persons small and great are brought, and stand before God, that is
Christ, God and man.

2. The Books are opened, the Book of Gods Omniscience, and the Books of men's
hearts and consciences, not in an imperfect state of ignorance and
forgetfulness, but fully prepared for their work of answering at the Tribunal
and Bar of Christ.

3. It is a judging men, according to their works, for that has been done in
the body, good or evil, Eccl. 12.16. And a judging every secret thing of men's
hearts, Romans 2.16.

Some conceive, that seeing there will be the Revelation of the righteous
judgment of God, Romans 2. therefore it will have a long time, to judge the cause
of every person, in all particulars, that so the righteousness of the judgment
and sentence of Christ, with the Execution of it, may fully appear, and none to
have any least objection against it. But others think there will not be so
particular a discovery, and trial of all things, relating to the Saints, but a
more general one.

However Christians must be diligent to be found of Christ, without spot and
blameless, as 2 Pet. 3.14.

10. When the cases of all have been tried and made to appear, the Sheep having
been separate from the Goats, and set at Christ's right hand, the Goats on the
left; the sentence then passes, that most comfortable sentence for the Sheep,
the Righteous (now so judged by the heart-knowing and most just Judge) Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. And that terrible
sentence on the Goats, now openly convicted, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. To which the Saints and Angels all give
their full approbation, as also to the doom upon the Devils.

11. Upon which the most righteous execution follows, of both the sentences;
for the righteous, and against the wicked ones.

To make all this obtain a more efficacious impression daily on my spirit, let
me strive to represent this Day as now come, that I hear the Trump sound, see
the dead rise, the living all changed in a moment; looking up I see Christ
coming in the Clouds, with great glory, Angels and Saints all attending him,
Christ placed on the Throne of Judgment; all persons convented before him, and
my self among the rest; my case tried, my works, words, thoughts, and all my
secrets judged, and my state for all Etemity determined, and now when the World
is all on Fire, the wicked sent into that everlasting destruction, the
righteous going with Christ into Heaven and everlasting happiness; what my own
particular condition is like to be.

If I can come before Christ, the all-knowing Judge, with confidence and
exceeding joy, shall be absolved, and hear that joyful sentence, Come thou
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee.

CHAP. XXI. Of Meditation of Hell, and Death Eternal therein.
THE very naming of Death is dreadful, Death Eternal is much more dreadful, but
a being in Hell, the worst place possible, is most dreadful of all.

Hell, though in the mere mentioning it makes such a jarr upon the spirit of
any; though the least touching on it, by a but glancing thought, the least
touch be like the needles sharp point to the Apple of the Eye, so acute a pain
and smart; yet must the Eye of the soul, by Meditation, not only touch it, but
take it close to it, but dwell upon it.

Death natural, in the but very thought, has a very high attending regret, we
cannot endure to look deathward, but O how greatly unwilling to look in the
least this sad way, destruction-ward, Hellward, toward death Eternal!

The first is tasting Gall, but the second is a drinking Poison: The one has a
deep attending reluctance, the other a double died antipathy. It Is the harshest
task for a sinner, it is a hard for a Saint, to fix willingly, and dwell in
Meditation, on so sad and dreadful a subject as Hell is: yet is it that, which
must be done, and by a holy wise spirit, may be both confidently and
advantageously done. The best Christian on earth will lose nothing by sometimes
looking into Hell, and fixing the thoughts there. No man ever yet fled from
Hell, but first fixed his thoughts in some proportion on it: No man will fly
fast enough from this Pit of perdition, this Lake of Fire, if he do not often
look toward it, and keep his Eye upon it.

Hell and Death Eternal are set down in Scripture, for both evil and good men's
flying; but this cannot be compast without frequencies of earnest ponderings
and meditatings.

For a right proceeding in this Meditation,

1. Let me first look to that which is my infallible rule, the testimony of
that God, who founded Hell and laid the corner stone of it; who first threatened
and prepared this Prison, this Pit of destruction; who knows all the large
dimensions of it, all things in and about it, and cannot, nor will not, in the
least deceive us in it.

He has given us his Word, to tell us, and that under his own hand, in great
numbers and varieties of passages, that we cannot rationally conceive, he would
so do, mention and give it so many times under his own hand, were there no such
thing, no local Hell, and second Death Eternal.

My way therefore, as a good Christian, is to look up, gather Scripture
passages; passage after passage, all over the Book of God, as I find this
asserted in them. O shall my lives time ravel out, without any redeeming it, as
to this particular, of giving due, down weight of thoughts, frequent serious
thoughts, as opportunity can be had, of Death Eternal in Hell?

I must not only say, there is a Hell: I must not only give it for granted, as
most persons do, but I must be concluded under the Scripture Authority; See it
and say it, upon due persuasion, upon clear demonstration, demonstration on
conclusive argumentation, Arguments chosen as so many Arrows taken out of
Christ's Quiver the Scriptures, levelled right, flying round up to the mark, and
hitting full my unbelieving and recoiling averse spirit, making it fall down
under this weighty truth, reducing it through Christ's help, to a firm and
operative belief, yea so to assent to, and ponder this so high concern, as to
work off all my usual wonted easiness and slightness of thinkings on this
particular: And to arrive at a contrary habitual seriousness, and earnestness
of mindings, frequent thinkings; yea let my spirit not rest, till I am reduced
to, and improve, under the powerful and prevailing provocations of it, to
whatever so great a thing calls for from me.

That I may daily more answer the intendments of a God, in relating this Hell,
so plainly and plentifully in his Word, for my due notice of it.

My way then must be, a course of serious pondering the Scriptures; passage
after passage, wherein the second Death and Hell is set forth, in the several
Books.

As in Isa. 30.1. Tophet is prepared of old, even for the King, he has made it
deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord
like a stream of Brimstone does kindle it. An elegant description in an
allusion: So those many clear passages of Christ's own mouth set down so
plainly, as words can utter.

Math. 5.22. and 29, 30. In that very first Sermon of Christ's on the Mount,
there he mentions Hellfire, and casting into Hell, three several times. Mat.
11.23. Brought down to Hell.

Luke 16.23. The Rich man is said to be in Hell. Pet. -- It Is called a Prison,
Prisons being the wors: of places, made for securing and punishing. Rev. 20.1.
A bottomless Pit. Luke 16.23. A place of torment. Mat -- Their worm dies not,
alluding to that worm that breeds in, and feeds on the body, is lying gnawing
and cannot be cured.

Their fire goes not out: Fire is the most quick and active, the most
tormenting and torturing Element. It Is Brimstone that is the fuel, which is a
most combustible, noisome and suffocating matter.

It Is called utter darkness: Darkness is a most dreadful and disconsolating
thing, as that of Egypt: For the company, it is only wicked persons perfect in
sin, and most wretched Devils, the worst of Creatures: Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

O how hot and scorching must that fire be, that purposely is prepared for
utmost torment? Not like Nebuchadnezzars Furnace seven times hoter, but seventy
times hoter, that which is inconceivable.

In Scripture, Hell or the state of misery, is expressed by the terms of second
death; death, one death in any kind is very dreadful, above all other things:
but after dying a first death, then to come and dye a second death, and this
not so easy as dying any bodily death millions of times over. If a Malefactor
should die the most cruel death, and then be made to live again, and then die
that death a second time, yea thousands and thousands of times over, O how sad
were the case of that person, that must be so under the both fears of that
death first, and then the torments and pains! But what is all this to this
second death, being under the fullness of infinite wrath, and that for ever?

The inflicter of this misery, is no less than an infinitely wise, holy, sin
hating, and an omnipotent God: acting in the purest and fiercest wrath,
endeavoring the fullest revenge the damned creature is capable of, and for
which it purposely is made a vessel of wrath, and that vessel is preared to
receive and hold this wrath.

1. Prepared by being widened, extended, as it were, to receive the fullness of
wrath. As the Saints shall have their spirits elevated and extended, to the
utmost, to be made fit to receive the fullness of glory and happiness: so the
damned have their spirits widened and enlarged, their understandings and hearts
in the utmost extensiveness, that they be brimfull of wrath.

2. Prepared by being purposely strengthened to the utmost, as Vessels are made
strong to hold the strongest Wine or Liquor, to hold and keep in that wrath
poured into them.

Were Hell but to have the least torment in the least member, or sensible part,
as in the Toe, Finger, or the like for ever: or but one torment in a noble
part, Head, Liver, Heart, or a complication of many sad diseases for ever; how
intolerably sad were this state? but to have all possible trouble and torment
both in body and soul, set on by a God for ever: O how unspeakably sad is this?

All the forenamed, this imprisonment, this tormenting, this worm, this fire,
the weepings, the wailings, the gnashing of teeth, is not for an hour, a day, a
month, a year, an age, nor a thousand years or ages, or what can be reckoned,
by millions of millions, but for ever; no rest for ever, no ease for ever, no
hope of any deliverance, or degree of it for ever: but sorrow, torment, and
terror, sinking in despair and hopelesness for ever, ever, ever.

O then to improve this Meditation, and make it operative upon my spirit, Let
me first look upon Hell begun, in that terror and horror, the wicked
instantly upon their raising up from the dead, and changed, are seized with:
The hot burning Coals of Hell are thrown into their bosom, fill them up and lie
burning and scorching, as they are both bringing to the judgment seat, and are
standing before Christ at the Bar, all the time of their arraignment. Never did
any poor guilty prisoner stand in such a fear as this fear, and were so amazed.

2. The then unspeakable shame. Then all the time of their arraignment, and
especially on the pronouncing of that dreadful sentence which will be passed
and executed: O what must be the unspeakable shame, mixed with the continuing
and increasing sad horror, Dan. 13.

O what must be that shame, when all things possible concur, to load and cover
them with shame? never was there nor can be such a shame poured upon any.

A shame in the greatest concourse, that ever was, or can be; all the Saints
and Angels, yea all the wicked and the Devils, every particular ashamed, also
before all their own company, in this so desperate state. 3. And especially a
transcendent shame, in respect of the infinitely glorious Judge, the Lord
Jesus, despised and sinned so against by so many.

Ah what must be the shame of wicked men, to stand uncovered, with open faces,
to see the so dreadful Judge, looking the arraigned person full in the face,
looking with the most wishly Eye, and stern countenance upon, I say, their
uncovered faces? to have all their sins ripped up, every one adding still to the
shame; but then when the dreadful sentence passes, O what the shame will
farther then be?

And yet far more, when the sentence is Executed, they driven away, and all
Devils and men, thrust into the Dungeon of darkness, what an everlasting shame
will that be? Now, O now to think of all their unexpressible losses, of such a
Bill of losses, as never was seen; loss of God himself, his face and communion
with him, Father, Son, and Spirit; loss of the company of all the Saints and
Angels, lost Heaven, and all its glory lost, and all that happiness that arises
from all; such a state as is so good and glorious, to that utmost possibility
as the Creature is susceptive of and can have; and for that so all sweetning
and satiating eternity: And then, which greatly aggravates the misery, as
Christ himself expresses it, Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all, etc. So to see all
the Saints, to see all the godly Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the
other.

To see Moses, Samuel, David, and all the holy Prophets, to see all the blessed
Apostles, Peter, John, Paul, and all the Disciples of Christ, with all the
glorious Martyrs, and Confessors, in all times; and all the innumerable company
of Saints, in both former, present, and after Ages; all these known in their
times; but neglected, scorned, opposed, persecuted, and destroyed, yet all
these to be taken up with Christ into Heaven; but as other sinners, so thy
woeful self dying without a Christ, shut out, and have Heaven Gates shut up,
locked and barred against thee for ever; and withal also, ah locked up fast in
the Dungeon of darkness, and filled up full in soul and body, with unspeakable
torment never to end.

And to realize this more, and make it more effectual on thee that art saved,
after the Judgment is ended, sentence of condemnation passed, let me imagine my
self looking after this Herd of Goats, all driving down headlong to the Lake of
fire and Brimstone, seeing them taken hold of, and haled to the Prison of Hell,
and immediately shut in, presently seized with wrath and torment, filled brim
full up, with unspeakable woe and torture.

Then could I but go near, lay my ear to the door of this Prison, and listen
earnestly, O what would be the dolours, the groanings, cryings, roarings,
yellings, shriekings, that so many, and many thousands, altogether tortured,
would be heard to make. The noise of a few Prisoners condemning, of Passengers
in a Ship drowning, of men in Battle killing and dying, makes a most hideous
impression, makes a man's ears to tingle, and his heart to ache and tremble: But,
O what is, or can be like unto this hideous noise and cry, of so many
innumerable millions, of all sorts and sexes, men and women, under such
intolerable torments? O but might I have liberty and security to make an ocular
observation, with my eyes to see the Gates of that horrid place open, to see
the lake of Fire and Brimstone flaming, to look in and see the tormented in
their so woeful condition, most sad postures and behaviors: All the multitudes
and throngs of persons, and the persons in particular I desire to see and view.
There I might see that first Murderer Cain, appearing in his Chains and
Tortures, and on my demanding who he was, he answers, I am that cursed one,
that killed my righteous Brother Abel; here, here I have bin already, so many
thousands of years, and here I must remain to be tormented for ever.

In another place appears another, it may be wicked Saul, that persecuter of
holy David; in another Achitophel, or Haman, Herod, Judas, and abundance of
such strewed all over this Prison: Sinners of all sorts, Idolaters,
Superstitious, Profane, Wizards, Witches, Swearers, Cursers, Prophaners of the
day of God, with disobedient to Parents, Murderers, Adulterers, Thieves, Liars,
Covetous, and all others of several Sexes, Ranks, and Conditions.

If I might ask and be answered, upon enquiry, by the persons I see there,
would not one come and say, I am such a one, another say, I am such; and so
others? Would not one come and show me, there in such a place are those that
were drowned by the Deluge; there are the Sodomites burnt with fire and
Brimstone; there is Pharaoh and the Egyptians, those drowned in the Red Sea;
there is such and such Enemies and Persecuters of Christ and his Church of old;
there are the heathen Persecuters, and the Antichristian Enemies; there such
Apostates, such Hypocrites, such loose Christians; in this place such a man or
such a woman you knew, and in that place another; there you see them, and in
the same sad case with my self?

But should I ask of their several conditions, and what they continually feel,
O what doleful Relations would they give in, of the scorchings of that fire, of
the gnawing of that never dying worm, of their deepest sorrows, highest fears;
and above all, of their overwhelming and unspeakable despairs? Prove. 18.14.
Here when God suffers but a spark to fly out of the Furnace of Hell, and fall
into a sinners bosom, as Judas, Math. 27.5. O how intolerable does it prove?
But when the whole pile of Hell's fuel and fire shall be laid and fastened on
sinners by the hand of an Almighty God; O what must that torment and that
despair amount unto, and then when under infallible certainty of a lengthening
out to all Eternity?

O let every one Meditate often and most seriously, of this so dreadful state;
not be shye of a looking this way, of a looking into this Lake of Fire, and
realizing all the so dreadful things comprehended in it: Not contenting thy
self with thy yieldings and giving it for granted, and never ponder, never
labor to any purpose, to be rightly affected, stirred up to take a sure course
for escaping it. But let this terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11. awaken,
provoke, and persuade every one to fly from this wrath to come; and fly to
that Christ, make sure of him that only can deliver us.

CHAP. XXII. Of Heaven and Happiness Eternal.
THE last thing I shall mention in this part of solemn and set Meditation, is
that of Heaven, and Happiness Eternal therein; Hell is not so miserable a
state, but Heaven is as transcendently glorious and happy: The one being
purposely for demonstration of the fullness of Gods hatred and wrath, the other
for the highest manifestation of the riches of Mercy and Free Grace. Yea this
being the thing the Lord is so infinitely pleased and delighted in, must needs
have the fullest and most glorious manifestation that is any way possible for a
God to make, and his Creatures can be apprehensive and receptive of, and
therefore the state of Glory must be glorious indeed, Eye has not seen, ear
has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what
God has prepared for such as love him. There he is speaking of things but
dispositive to happiness, the blessings of Grace, Peace, Joy, and heavenly
Privileges given in Christ: but then, if happiness only begun, be so glorious,
O what is happiness finished up, and consummate?

For our way of proceeding in this Meditation, I conceive it best, by laying a
full Scripture ground, in gathering those choice Flowers, springing up thick,
in the rich Garden stores of the infallible Scriptures, and are purposely
growing there for the hand of faith to gather, and the Eye of our dim weak
sight, to be healed and cleared, to believe and see the glory of Heaven by.

It is not a way of mere general thinkings, or that of Fancy or Speculation
of our own, but first laying a Scripture, great and firm foundation: And then
after to improve those Scripture assertions, by all the ability and help we
can, of Reason and Inferences of best Representations and Resemblances, of
Imagination and Invention.

General apprehensions, and grantings of Scripture truths, deceive and destroy
many, when they are rested in: General notions of Heaven and happiness;
granting it there is a Heaven and no more, makes many miss of it, miss for want
of more distinct apprehensions, well grounded believing, and due deep sinking
of it to the bottom of the heart, there to lie glowing, to warm and kindle the
affections, to provoke into a laboring, a mighty striving to win the Crown of
glory.

The way is (as wisdom in all other cases of consequence teaches) to come off
every day from general confused thoughts of Heaven and happiness, restings on
and runnings away with a supposed doing enough.

If we still grant there is a Heaven and Happiness, every day to endeavor
distincter and clearer thoughts and knowledge.

Generals will not serve, grantings must not be made the enough of a wise
Christian, he must have an extensive and enlarging clearness, an increasing
firmness of Faith, in the Doctrines, the great points of salvation. But we
having this so prime an Article of faith, that which has wrapped up in it so
rich a Treasure and preserves, as it were, that so inestimable Jewel of
happiness, man's last end; that which is the great foundation and instigation of
all a Christians strivings and hopes (for he has no hope in this life for
happiness here.)

This therefore should not be turned off, nor terminated (as too often is done)
with a granting or bare assent; but still obtain of us a fuller, firmer,
warmer, and more operative seeing and belief.

Now this cannot be, without diligent gathering in, and better still Meditating
on particular Scriptures, asserting, and clearly manifesting this main Article,
and man's chief end comprised in it.

The Jewish Church had this typified in the Holy of Holies, as Heb. 9.3.12.24.
Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which were the
Figures of the true, but into Heaven it self. This was, that by the visible
place, faith might be stirred up, to eye and view the invisible typified state
of glory.

Psalm. 73.24. David tells us of it, and was assured to be received up into
glory; that is into Heaven in glory. Dan. 12.23. Of them that sleep in the
dust, some shall awake to everlasting life, and shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and some as the stars for ever.

The Church of the New Testament, in the writings given by Christ to it, have
this Doctrine of Heaven and happiness, abundantly and most clearly set forth.
The first mentionings of it, are out of the mouth of him, that with the Father
and Holy Spirit made it. Math. 5.3. in Christ's first Sermon, Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. So verse 10, 12. The
persecuted for righteousness, theirs is, etc. verse 20. Mention there is again
of it, Verse 34. and v. 45. and 48. Chap. 6. v. 1. v. 9. The first passage in
the Lord's Prayer. At least twelve several times in this first Sermon of Christ
this Heaven is mentioned. And as in the Gospels, so all the new Testament over,
you may, many scores of times, find and see it lying, as a most shining and
glorious Diamond in the Mine, or as in a rich Cabinet, for to be viewed and
labored for. The multitudes of places, well weighed, must needs hold forth, to
all that shut not their eyes wilfully, a Local Heaven, a place of happiness and
glory.

It is no Allegorical Heaven, as some have dreamed, or may ignorantly imagine:
when it is asserted in so many clear passages, which, all of them, in our
reading or hearings, should have their due weight, weight of thinkings, and
efficacy on us, for firm believing, and answerable endeavors for not losing,
but enjoying it.

For the rank of places, what it has, the Scripture tells us, it is the third
Heaven; the first being that where the Clouds are; the second where the
glorious Lights, Sun, Moon, and Stars are; this third above them all, called
therefore the highest Heaven. This third and highest Heaven is most
inconceivably excellent; not made of any preceding matter, much less of any
elementary matter. Some say it was made immediately of nothing, and with it
were also made, concreated, the Angels; all at the same instant, Heaven never
being empty of Inhabitants.

The Sun, Moon, and Stars were made, not the first day, but the fourth day, for
Furniture of that Heaven, under the highest Heaven.

2. It is the largest, and most capacious place, as that which comprises or
surrounds all the inferior world, and things in that.

O here, here is Rechaboth, room enough.

In this world, here is crowding, pushing, crushing, of the Saints: The wicked
world would quite cast them, every one, out of it, to be left alone and enjoy
all, to be let alone, and have none to see and shame them any way: But the
Saints shall all be brought at last, into a large place, where none shall
molest or trouble them. Heaven is a Rechaboth indeed, a most large place.

The Globe of the whole Earth and Water, is, as Geographers tell us, at the
least, one and twenty thousand and six hundred miles in compass. The Air above
encompassing in that, and especially the uppermost part of the Air, must needs
be far more in compass than the Earth and Water.

The Moon alone is very great, though something less than the Earth; some of
the Planets are judged far greater than the Globe of the Earth. The Sun by some
is judged to be one hundred sixty six times greater than the whole Earths
Globe; which others make yet far greater: which then must be some millions of
miles in compass, according to that account. The fixed Stars, which all are
above the highest Planet Saturn, are by the Learned, every of them, judged
greater than all the Earth; the least of them eighteen times bigger than the
Earth; those of the highest magnitude, and the most glorious brightness, an
hundred and eighteen times bigger than the whole Earth. Of these fixed Stars
who can tell the numbers of them? those which are reckoned, are but some
hundreds in their Constellations. How exceeding then vast must this starry
Heaven be, if the Planets and fixed Stars in it, are so great and numerous?

O then how unspeakably vast and large must this third Heaven be which
compasses round all the Earth, Air, and the starry Heavens? What a Kingdom for
Territories is this? What a place for Christ to prepare Mansions for his in?
What a place for the all-glorious God and Jesus Christ to keep a Court in
highest splendor and magnificence in? And the Lord Jesus the Savior, that
purchased this inheritance with his own blood, for him to be ever viewed,
loved, admired, glorified by all his Saints to the highest in?

Of all imaginable places, this, this is the place, this is Room, this is a
place so large as the hearts of the Saints can wish.

3. As Heaven is the largest for capacity and quantity, so is it the best place
for quality and excellency. 2 Cor. 12. It is called Paradise by that blessed
Paul who was taken up thither, to tell upon his return what a place it was.
Paradise mentioned, Genesis 2.8. it was the best place that ever was on Earth; it
was the summary of all necessaries and delicacies for Adam, in that perfect
state, his accommodations, recreations, and abundant delight; fit therefore to
resemble the place of glory by. And so our Lord Christ thought, when he calls
it by this name of Paradise; Luke 23.43. To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise: The best place it was made, because for the best Creature on Earth.

Luke 16. It is called Abraham's bosom: Abraham in his time was the most
eminent person living, called the Father of the faithful: No place for a Child
can be so proper, so desirable, pleasing, and contenting as the most loving
tender Fathers Bosom; O how a Child loves the Bosom! O how desirous are the
Children of Abraham to be in his Bosom.

In other places, it is a place of glory, riches of glory, a Kingdom, a Crown
of glory, an eternal weight of glory; a state where there are Pleasures for
evermore, Rivers of pleasures, joys and fullness of joy.

For every Saint the highest entertainments, in all respects; for the Senses.

1. The Ear has such ravishing Music and melody, as that best and greatest
Consort, of all the innumerable companies of Saints and Angels, can make.

2. For the Eye, the Palace of Heaven is unspeakably beyond all places,
prospects, and objects, that Nature and Art could ever yield.

The persons of the Saints, as to the numbers so innumerable, must needs make
up the rarest Train and show (as to their sorts and differences) that ever Eye
saw. O what a ravishing sight must that be to see Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and all the Holy Patriarchs? Moses, Samuel, David, and all the Holy
Prophets? Peter, Paul, John, and all the Holy Apostles? All the blessed and
glorious Martyrs of Jesus Christ? All his godly and serviceable, painful and
laborious Ministers? All the precious Saints, Kings, and Governors, and others
that are recorded in the Bible: And not only Men, but holy Women, Sarah,
Hannah, Ruth, Esther, and others in the Old Testament; the blessed Virgin, and
Elizabeth, with the Women that followed Christ, and ministered unto him, Mary
Magdalen, Johanna, Susanna, Lydia, Dorcas, Priscilla among the Apostles helping
them, all the Disciples of Christ which believed in him: with all the eminent
godly lights in the Church after the Apostles; and all the Saints in all after
Ages to the worlds end?

And then for all this Train, in their sorts and ranks; as to their bodies, to
be so all over glorious, to shine as the Sun, and brightness of the Firmament
for ever, O what a show and ravishing entertainment is here for the Eye!

But that which is the top and height, and far surpassing all the other, is
that sweetest, most ravishing sight of the most glorious body of Jesus Christ;
The highest beauty that ever Eye beheld or saw, far outshining all others, as
the Sun exceeds the Stars: Ah here, here will be a sight indeed.

Ah but then to behold him in his highest discoveries of his sweetest,
loveliest lookings and smilings on all his Saints with him, and upon thee in
particular.

To see his countenance composed and ordered, purposely to beam forth in
fullest Manifestations of surpassing sweetness of most intense affections
toward his so dearly beloved Bride, now present with him in the glorious
Bedchamber to behold him and enjoy perfect communion with him.

3. O but what entertainments are there, as to the soul and spirit, for the
faculties of Understanding, Will, and Affections? how far transcending those of
the Senses? as the beatifical vision, seeing God face to face, with all
intellectual satisfaction as to all the truths in the Word of God, all
Mysteries, Prophecies, and difficulties, and whatsoever may conduce to the
glorious happiness of the Saints: satisfaction also, as to the works and ways
of God, Creation and Providence, all the Riddles and dark things so far made
known as is needful.

Likewise as to the will and heart, the beatifical fruition, enjoying of God,
Father, Son, and Spirit, and his infinite sweetness, to all possible fullness
and perfection.

Likewise all happy communion with Saints and Angels, to all delight and
pleasure. And for all this both body and Soul are prepared, strengthened,
elevated, and enlarged to the utmost extensiveness.

As all imperfections and sins are utterly removed, so all grace and holiness,
light and wisdom, heat and flame of heart communicated, and in a blessed
reciprocation, a mutual acting: God the infinitely alsufficient, communicating
himself to the glorified, to their utmost capacity; and they reacting and
putting forth their grace and holiness, to their utmost ability: O how
unspeakably sweet and satiating must this continual intercourse be?

For the close of all, let me think my self, after a glorious and blessed
Resurrection and absolution by Christ at the Judgment day, freed utterly from
all evil; feeling likewise my complete happiness coming on so fast in my now
passage up to the place of glory; and then instantly finding it finished,
finished on the first setting my foot, as it were, within the Gate of Heaven.
And now I think, what a prepared and furnished place I am in: What company of
the Saints, Angels, and Jesus Christ also I have: What fruition of the most
blessed God; what sense of the pleasures, joys, satisfactions, and most
ravishing sweetness, under all security, under that which superadded heightens
and sweetens all the rest, the Charter of inconceivable eternity: Ah then, let
my frequent and intensest thinkings be, not a looking down to Earth, but up to
Heaven, breathing my soul up the Hill to this City of God, in contemplating the
Glories of it; often let me walk this so pleasant walk. Who will look and pore
on a dark Dungeon, that has the Sun to behold? who will, (that means to hit
the mark) look quite besides it? who is it can go to Heaven, that thinks most
another way? that has a down-look, as we say; a Beasts Eye, that has no
Muscle of elevation? Ah such as look most will long most after, labor most for
it. O therefore, let my Eye every day be walking to and in this Paradise,
solace it self in taking a turn still there, be walking in this upper Eye-walk
by Meditation, till I come to see God face to face, till I look my self into
this Heaven I look on.

I have now dispatched this point of Occasional set Meditation, as to the first
branch: Meditation of such things we our selves single out, and set before us,
and take some special times for, which were in these particulars.

1. Meditation on some passage or portion of Scripture. 2. Or going over the
chief points of Religion in order. 3. Meditating of some of the works of God.
4. Or something of my own spiritual state, to make me more wise or warm, or
active for God. 5. Or how the case of my soul stands. 6. Or of my own evil
hearts deceitfulness. 7. Of my Enemies, Satan and the World. 8. Of my wants and
weakness of Graoe. 9. Of the swift passing of time and opportunities. 10. Of
the shortness of my life. 11. Of death of the body. 12. Of Judgment after
death; and of the Last Judgment. 13. Of death Eternal, and Hell. 14. Of Heaven
and Eternal happiness.
These are the heads of this first Branch.

CHAP. XXIII. Meditation on some things providential.
THere is but this one thing (which I will briefly dispatch) remaining yet to
be spoken of; and then I come to the last sort of Meditation, that is by a
short and more sudden way, Ejaculatory Meditation. I say there should be
Meditation on something providential, a matter the hand of providence acts or
orders, holds forth and offers to our viewing and serious thinkings. The great
God, as he always is guiding and ordering all things in all places, in Heaveu,
Earth, and Waters, and among all Creatures, especially the reasonable, and
chiefly above all in his Church, and for his Saints, against his and their
Enemies. As he is guiding with his hand, all the concerns of particular persons
to the supreme end, his own glory, and likewise infallibly to the salvation of
his Redeemed: so there is ever and anon something observable, particularly
providential; something which as the hand of providence holds forth, so the
heart of prudence and godly wisdom will take up; that purposely it will set it
self to see, search, and improve; as it may be something sometime of the Church
of God abroad, or something of the People of God at home, or in the place
particularly we live in: It may be there is some dispensation, to some of our
Relations or Friends, or some matter falls out in our Family, or yet nearer on
our person and personal concerns.

There is seldom any space of time, but the great Governor of the World is
doing some remarkable thing, it may be some admirable and glorious, it may be
some amazing and stupendous, it may be some terrible and very dreadful work,
if we have our eyes in exercise, and will observe.

Indeed Gods goings sometimes, Psalm. 77.19. His footsteps cannot be seen, but
are very secret and unsearchable. And there are others of his workings, which
are more easy for all to behold and understand.

There are varieties of Providence, successively following each others; which
we should wait and watch for, which we should take, as they come, fresh and
warm out of the Lords hand, and apply them warm to our hearts for a more kindly
operation.

Meditate we should upon Providence, while they are just new and fresh, so we
shall give them, or rather our selves, the advantage of a more ready and
affectionate pondering, a more profitable minding. If I could still improve in
Meditation of the Promises, and in a wise, warm, lively also Meditating of
providence; in the one see better daily the riches of free Grace, in the other
the glorious governings of a God in wisdom, righteousness, and goodness: How
would my spirit, under the dews of this fruitful Meditation, be shooting up?
how would it prosper? They are the highest form Christians, that are arrived
here, at the contemplation of the works and great providence of God in the
world.

In 1 John 2.13. He writes to some he calls Fathers, others young men, others
Children. Some by Children understand, such as are (as to Meditation) taken up
with the promises, and matters of justification, pardon, and peace; young men,
are such who are gotten farther, and exercised about sanctification, and
conquering strong corruptions.

Fathers, that beyond both, are taken up, and arrived at ponderings, and
contemplations of the works and ways of God, and his great actings in the world.

So it is sometimes needful to Meditate on the Providence that are more
obliging and engaging, more awakening and inciting, such as are as it were the
special hand of the Lord touching us, taking bold of us, framing and ordering
things for us. And here there is great reason, our Meditation should be more
serious and curious: as wherein we may see Gods so particular goings and
workings toward us, and for us.

Psalm. 18. All that excellent Psalm over, David there enumerates and records
all Gods goings toward him. O then with the Psalmist, let my soul meditate on
all the works of God; list and file up up the dispensations of his observable
providence toward others and my self: Meditate on his so merciful
preservings, directings, prosperings, and all other sorts and ways of
Providence; that I may admire and exalt him, depend, and trust, and wait upon
him, and walk so before him, that his ways may ever be mercy and truth toward
me.

I have now dispatched the second branch of Meditation on particular
Providence; and thereby the second general kind of Meditation; which is, set
and occasional Meditation at particular times of leisure.

The last sort of Meditation comes now to be handled.

CHAP. XXIV. Of more short and ejaculatory Meditation.
BEsides solemn and set Meditation, there is also that which is sudden and
short, wherein the soul acts, as one breaking out of a Throng or Crowd, goes
aside from disturbances and diversions, or breaks off from some present and too
pressing business, to take breath and respite it self; whereby it makes a stand
of thoughts, turns the stream of former thoughts, and like a Bird that was
sitting on the ground, rises and mounts up aloft, to sing and sport it self;
even so a holy heart, in heavenly mindedness, will get out of the throng of
cares and business, will be often breaking off the thread of earthly thoughts,
and interpose some heavenly, dart up to Heaven, make a short visit thither,
refresh it self with some heavenly dainty; take and taste of the Manna above,
look up to God, to Christ, his Spirit, his Grace, his Promises, his Providence
and gracious orderings, have a running Banquet of heavenly sweetmeats, when it
cannot sit down and feed at large by a fuller set Meditation.

As there are ejaculatory Prayers and wishes, when there is not opportunity for
more solemn enlargements; there should be also sudden and short meditatings,
quick interposings of good and holy thoughts, then when the urgencies of
Affairs, encumbrances, diversions and interruptions by company, hindrances in
any kind, will not admit the opportunity of an abode of serious thoughts; then
sudden dartings up the soul to Heaven may be had, be a refreshment; as
Jonathans tasting the Honey, with the top of his Rod, when being in pursuit of
the Philistines he could not take a full meal. David (that meditated so much)
must needs, in respect of his great occasions ( Civil, and Military, and
Domestic) make much use of this short way of Meditation, when he often could
not go the other larger way.

As he was frequent in his sudden short prayings, so must he be much in short
sudden meditatings, which were the ground commonly of his prayings.

The Psalms show his frequent using this short way of meditation and praying:
Thus Psalm. 15. a Psalm of but five verses. So Psalm. 127. a Psalm of five
verses: and Psalm. 125. the like: and Psalm. 123. has a Meditation of four
verses: Psalm. 131. is a Meditation of three verses: and Psalm. 117. is a
Meditation of but two verses: yet the spirit of God is pleased to have it
recorded. Many other Psalms we have very short, that were his quick
Meditations, left all for teaching us to do likewise, looking on his example.

This Meditation, though of shorter time, yet so far as we can, must have its
Regulation and Governance.

1. It should (so near as we can) have its stamp and ingredient of holy
reverence.

All thoughts of holy things must not be (how sudden soever) acts of rashness
and over-haste, without heed and fear, the name of a glorious God is upon every
Ordinance, that must not be taken in vain.

2. It should be the product and issue of holy lingering after God and
communion with him; from a thirsting for God to taste a little, when we cannot
have fuller draughts of him.

3. It should be the glance of a spiritual Eye, looking from love, being
enamoured with God and Christ, and heavenly things: Not a looking from Custom,
and an use to satisfy conscience, calling for something may look like a Duty;
but from the strength and predominancy of the fire of heavenly love: Psalm.
119.97. O how love I thy Law, its my Meditation all the day: As other, so this
sort of Meditation, must have a rise from love. Love breeds longing and
looking, it introduces a pleasure in a looking, though but a glancing of the
Eye, on the surpassing beauty and loveliness of God and Jesus Christ, and the
glorious things of Heaven.

Ah how excellent is this frame of spirit, how sweet and pleasant is it to have
the Eye often on these so rare beauties, from being, as the Spouse in the
Canticles, both really and deeply in love!

4. It should be aimed and levelled at the right mark, pleasing and glorifying
God, and for communion farther with him, that he may see how the pulse of our
Souls beats, how the Eye looks, how we act, and how our hearts make still their
holy escapes from the crowd, and obstructings of occasions, to give him a
friendly, spiritual visit, to let him see the fervor of our love by endeavors
so often as we can, to do him homage and honor: As when we would show our high
respect and honor to any person, we make the more frequent visits, when we
cannot make long stay. So here when throngs of indispensable occasions, hinder
the set and larger engagements in Meditation, make we it up in shorter visits,
in often thinkings; short visits rightly aimed bring sweet peace.

Let it not be therefore so hasty, as we observe some Children, called to go to
a place, that run without their errand, to act without aim; right aiming the
end lays the foundation of a Dutys excellency: O let my spirit, if I cannot
think and dwell long upon heavenly things, through weakness, let it make up the
defect by thinking often. Let the dartings upward be the livelier and thicker,
like a Golden Chain which is very long, though the Links be very little.

O let me trade, drive a quick trade with littles; Light gains make a heavy
purse, little frequent tradings will gain me much here.

This short often acting up, will make my heart keep still open to Heaven; keep
the pathway thither beaten plain, easy, and so make it pleasant for my spirit
to walk in, make this Meditation highly sweet, a rare refreshing.

The frequencies of thinkings heavenward, will have this threefold advantage,
these three excellent fruits.

1. Frequencies of heavenly thoughts will breed and cherish an habitual
heavenly mindedness unto that primitive Grace, that habit of regenerating Grace
(which brings a tendency, and bent of soul, making it incline heavenward) it
will superadde an habitual heavenly mindedness, a heart peculiarly and
powerfully ready, and active heavenward. As an Artist which has not only
reason first to dispose him, fit him for his Trade, but the peculiar habit, a
head and hand for it to understand and act as an Artist.

2. The frequencies of heavenly, will thereby be an exclusive and thruster out
of earthly thoughts, the right way of a compendious cure: It Is not the way so
much to stand watching, and striving to drive them away; to be on the defensive
barely, but to be on the positive, in acting good thoughts, that will keep out
bad. As if Wine first fills the Vessel, there is no room for Water: if a
Treasury be full of Gold, there is no room for rubbish.

3. This frequent short darting upward, will end with leaving an after
sweetness upon the palate of the spirit; short, when heavenly, will be sweet,
as every crum of Sugar leaves some sweetness on the palate; every drop of pure
live honey, a delicious after relish, so this short Meditation.

The Manna that dewed down upon the Israelites Camp, lay like small Coriander
seeds; which they gathered, ground, and made their Bread of, which had a rare
relish.

This sort of Meditation may gather still some little seeds of heavenly Manna,
soul-Bread, with new fresh delicious sweetness following.

The heavenly minded person may, as the manner of some is, go ever with some
rich tasted, and sented thing in the mouth.

Whenever cares and diversions press hard, hang heavy, draw strongly, greatly
disquiet, and weary thy spirit; here is an outlet, an escape, a rare way of
interposition and soul easing diversion, yea of a short though sweet, and
heavenly solace.

It may be looked on as a shadow, a resemblance of the blessed Apostles sudden
carrying into the third Heaven: Instantly thou this way art above, though
presently below again.

This is far surpassing all the sensual and sinful pleasures in the world:
These short tastes, by giving our worldly occasions the slip, and mounting up
to Heaven; These short visits made there, these spiritual short applications
made to Heaven, to the blessed God, to Jesus Christ for communion with him and
the Father, have more sweet, pure, powerful, and heart elevating joy, than is
possible to be had in any carnal or earthly things.

They at the highest, brightest, and sweetest, have something to top, dim, and
embitter them, Prove. 14.13. Even in, etc. But every way of godliness, is a path
of pleasantness, and sweetness, which none know but such as try it.

I now have (through Christ's assistance) finished this last way of Meditation,
sudden and ejaculatory; and so the whole nature and several kinds of
Meditation, with such things as are comprised in it, according to my slender
ability, and the opportunity I now could have. I am now next to come to the
cogencies and strengths of Reasons, which are for the farther evidencing and
supporting of this so important Duty of holy Meditation.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Grounds and Reasons of this so necessary Duty of Meditation.
SO great and necessary a Duty must have its support of strong Reasons to
conclude it, and help to bear up the spirit better under the weight of it.

Divine and infinite Wisdom must needs impose and require nothing without great
and sufficient Reasons.

I shall therefore endeavor to propose sundry of them in their clearness and
strength, as I can in this short intended piece.

The grounds and farther demonstrations of this Meditation, I shall reduce to
these four heads.

1. First from the natural order and dependencies of the Faculties of the
reasonable soul; and the several principles of Grace given into those
faculties, to enable the soul rightly to exercise it self to godliness.

2. From the transcendent Excellency of Divine matters, which must have their
due and full mindings.

3. From the use and several ends of Divine Meditation.

4. From either the great accruing advantages, or the prejudice upon the due
performance, or sinful neglect of this required Meditation.

1. Ground. From the natural order and dependencies of the souls faculties, and
the graces laid into these faculties, for enabling a Christian rightly to
exercise godliness. God as he made man an excellent creature for excellent ends
and operations, so he has made the mind and understanding to be the souls eye,
guide, and director: The first great Wheel, the first mover, directing and
setting the other faculties of the will and affections in going and doing their
several offices.

And because man's nature is corrupted and disabled, of it self alone, to
perform things spiritual and holy in a due manner, without a new heart, a new
mind, will and affections all sanctified by new principles given in to them:
Therefore he must have a new light and knowledge, for his natural darkness,
ignorance and error: A new wisdom, for his natural folly: A new power and
goodness of will, for the natural depravity: A new stamp of order, power and
life in the affections, and holiness in all the heart, for the disorder and
unruliness. The order in both Nature and Grace, is to act from the purpose,
intention, and choice of the will, and heat of affections: But first, the will
acts from the understanding; that is the Golden Candlestick which holds the
Light, and is the spring that brings all motion about, that sets all the wheels
of the soul on going: We first must see, and have our guide, before we choose,
affect, or act.

The Will (as they say in Philosophy) is Potentia coeca, a blind faculty.
Therefore the understanding must guide at first: Therefore it must first act by
thinking, seeing, and showing, what is to be done; in all rational actings,
thinking must be first.

And to come nearer to our purpose, in all works of wisdom, the understanding
must act, not hastily, but with heed, not with precipitation, but pondering:
All heed and pondering requires time for the minds bending it self to a thing,
searching into it, staying upon it, by musing and meditating: After due
consideration comes the conclusive dictate of the understanding, that this or
that is to be done; and before it be done, the Will first spontaneously chooses
it, and then doing follows upon determining. Now as things done rationally
and rightly, should have, not bare sudden transient thoughts, but ponderings by
time taken; Prove. 4.26. a fit proportion of time: Nothing of moment should be
done on a bare present apprehension, unless it has formerly passed under the
test of deliberation; so wise persons act still: True it is, we do many things
in hastes and hurries; but this is more like brute creatures than men: It is
the order God has set in Nature, first of all to consider, then to act.

All wise doing is with a first vveighing: otherwise it is folly and vanity,
without comeliness, without profit: As in Nature God has set this order, the
mind must first move, and wisdom in the mind will first ponder and weigh; not
act on slight but precedent serious thinkings: So in Religion, in all the
matters of it we are to perform, first there must be minding: None must ever
in Religion say, I mind not what I do: The understanding in spiritual wisdom,
must ponder and consider all things to be considered; and the will then must
choose, and the affections move by the graces in them orderly; and then the
executive power must act, in subordination to the mind guiding, and the will
choosing and intending.

As the understanding, will, and affections, are as the several natural links
of the soul; so consideration (the so noble act of the understanding) is to
breed and ground the choices and intents of that Queen regent, the Will, and
the orderly motions of her handmaids, the several Affections; and then must
follow prosecuting and doing that was purposed by the Will, and pondered by the
understanding.

As consideration in things Natural, is fundamental and necessary to due
choosing and doing of all things: so Divine Meditation is fundamental and
necessary in some degree to the spiritual actings of the Will, movings rightly
of the Affections, and a religious regular performing what was piously
purposed, and piously first pondered and Meditated upon.

All the Graces that make up the Golden Chain; the Graces that are the
supernatural soul enoblements, that are planted and reside in a renewed heart
by way of principle and habit, are planted and laid into the several faculties
of the Soul, as their relief and help, to sanctify them and empower them; some
in the mind, and others in the will and affections: These faculties have all
their several Golden Links of the Chain of Graces aspersed among them, and laid
into them: But as the faculties of the soul are all guided, drawn, and moved by
the first Mover, the understanding, and the act of considering: So the graces
of the soul, all the Golden Links of the whole Chain of Graces must move by the
first Link of the Chain, the light, spiritual wisdom and actings of it by this
Divine Meditation. This Link must draw first: Spiritual wisdom exercised in
this holy way of Meditation, must be a constant foundation and rise to all the
Duties of godliness.

This should be at the bottom, and a still quickner to all prayings, readings,
hearings, and the rest: Nothing is well done, that is not first well thought
on, although the Duties of godliness are reciprocally helpful, mutually lending
a hand each to other; as Reading, Hearing, Praying, are to Meditating, and
Meditating is to them in different respects; yet Meditation should and must
help to make us our firm, even footing, and lively walking in Christ's ways.

All things from first to last in our way of Religion, and walking by that
Rule, have their due guidance and managings by this helm and hand of Meditation.

God every where in Scripture, when he would have those come right and return,
that have gone wrong, and such to go on that have well begun, he calls them to
consideration and minding their ways; Hag. 1.5. Consider your own ways in your
hearts; and again, verse 7. Isa. 46.8. Bring it to mind. Put your hearts upon
your ways, in the former; here they must bring their doings upon their hearts,
by considering: Ezekiel. 18.28. He considers and turns. Consideration is the
rise of returning: Luke 15.17. The Prodigals returning, was upon his
considering: common wisdom acting in consideration, is the souls helm; and
spiritual wisdom, acting in Meditation, is the Christians Helm; as the Word is
his compass, and the Gales of the holy Spirit fill his sails, and make him
move. We cannot look for a Ship to sail well, without the Helms steering well:
Meditations Helm must steer our course; our course to the Harbor of true
happiness, must have its rise in due consideration, as the Scripture every
where shows.

O let me, Lord, keep up ever this right order and method in my walkings; let
Meditation be the spring that carries all the Wheels of my spirit right and
even; that still pondering all my paths, my ways may be established.

This then I propound, as a principal ground of the necessity of Meditation,
that dependence of the Will, Affections, and actings spiritual, on the
understanding sanctified, and furnished with light and wisdom for salvation;
which wisdom and light is the guide to, and stirrer up of the will, affections,
and endeavors by the means of Divine Meditation.

This I have the more now insisted on, in that the great failings of all sorts
rise from neglect of this consideration and Meditation, because this
consideration is no more considered.

All Christians that would have the Will purpose, the Affections move, the
executing power endeavor well, must use the grace of spiritual wisdom, that is
the first wheel in the heavenly frame of spirit, and wisdom by the way of
Meditation, to set on going all the wheels of other graces dispersed through the
heart: The Graces planted as principles of spiritual life, strength, and
motion, and given to animate all operation.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the second ground of this so necessary Duty of Meditation.
HEavenly things should have not only a mere seeing and knowing, but a minding
and meditating, from their obliging and challenging excellencies ( Prove. 8.6.
and 22.20. Excellent things, have I not written to thee excellent things, says
Solomon. Phil. 3.8. For the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, etc.) their
so far transcending excellencies, their rare objective excellencies, give me
leave to call them so; that is, they are not only excellent things in
themselves, though never known or shown to us, but they are made to be
excellent objects for our observation and minding: All made to be minded; but
some of them more peculiarly made and prepared, made great, made high, deep,
and large, filled brim full, yea running over, with both native excellency, and
likewise sutableness for us, sutableness for our spirits to act and make their
chief abode of seriousest thoughts upon; for a spiritual and holy eye to fix
upon, and be pleased in. As in Philosophy they reason, if there be objectum
sensibile, an object of the outward sense (and that which especially is
excellent) if there be Odours and rich Scents; if sounds, excellent sounds; or
if there be rare Color, Feature, Motion; and that so excellent object Light,
especially such glorious Lights as the several Stars, the Moon, and the most
glorious Sun; there must be those Senses of smelling, hearing, seeing, which
may perceive their objects and receive the pleasure and benefit of them,
otherwise they must be all in vain. If there were no Creatures with any Senses
to perceive these Objects of Color, Light, and the rest, to what end were any
of them?

What use would Color or Light be of, without any eye to behold it? The
omniscient God he cannot need it: The Angels and Spirits being without bodies,
they do not need it: Creatures blind, and Creatures made without sense;
Elements, as Earth, Water, and the other: Elementaries, such as Stones, Metals,
Trees, and such like insensitive things, they need it not; neither need any
smells, sounds, or tastes, only the sense is suited to the Object, and the
Object to the sense: The Object is made or manifested and shown for the sense.

So if there be spiritual Objects, and no spiritual eye fitted for them, and if
spiritual Objects be held forth and shown, and there were never any eying of
them, they then in that respect (as to their holding forth) would be in vain:
And the spiritual eye would be in vain, as if the eye had no Object to behold,
it would be in vain, and as no eye at all.

Therefore does God in Scripture call so often for a beholding of the things of
Heaven, because of their excellencies purposely shown for that end: Joh --
Behold the Lamb of God. 1 John 3.1. Behold what love the, etc.

Therefore when there are such abundance of spiritual and heavenly things, set
out in such rare Colors and proportions, shining in such high splendor and
glory: When so many most bright and beauteous, when so great and extensive
rarities and excellencies, beam forth and shine so gloriously in heavenly and
spiritual things, there then needs must be an Eye, a spiritual Eye, for these
so excellent Objects, to behold them and be exercised about them.

Yea, when there is such a height, depth, latitude, and length, and vastness
every way, of dimensions of excellency shining in them; and this purposely,
that they may be viewed and admired, and also improved; therefore there must be
an answerable eying and considering.

1. A real sincere acting of minding and meditating, to answer their most real
worth. 2. A deep searching of thoughts, to answer their height and depth of
excellency. 3. An abode and dwelling and enlarging of thoughts, to answer the
latitude and extensiveness of excellency in them, that all their glory and
excellency, so near as can be, may be known and tasted.
The excellencies therefore of spiritual things are for eying and pondering,
the greatness of their excellencies for great eying and earnest Meditating.

Therefore we find that great Artist in Meditation, the holy Psalmist, so
busying his thoughts and meditating in several things; as about God and his
Glory, Greatness, Holiness, Righteousness, Truth, Mercy, Severity, and Power,
Psalm. 104. Psalm. 12.6. About the Word of God, in those shining rays of its
infallible Truth, Purity, Perfection, mighty efficacy, and glorious
excellencies, Psalm. 19.7, 8. Psalm. 119. And so about the works and ways of God,
2 Timothy 3.16. The blessed Apostle Paul was so acted in his thoughts about the
Word of God and the Gospel, Christ and Free Grace, the fullness of Christ,
Ephesians. 2.4, 7. the workings of his Spirit, and the whole mystery of godliness,
1 Timothy 3.16. Thus other Saints in Scripture, Prophets, Apostles, and diverse
else.

The wise hearted will have their eyes thus exercised, they think bare knowing,
without due Meditating, is an undervaluing of spiritual things.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the third Ground of this Meditation, as to several ends and
uses.
THE third great ground of this necessary Duty is from the Ends, and the great
concernments of them, as to all sorts of persons.

1. For a sinners first conversion to God.

1. Meditation is a Duty incumbent on, and highly necessary for persons yet
strangers to God, to bring them home; Ezekiel. 18.28. Because he considers and
turns, 1 King. 8.47. If they bethink themselves and turn; returning of the
sinners is upon considering and self bethinking; thus the Prodigal, Luke 15.

No man ever truly converts to God, without some consideration of his Misery,
with his absolute need of Christ and his Grace, and flying to him.

Although the efficacious drawing of a sinner be Gods work, he awakens,
convinces, humbles, and he changes the heart; yet not without the sinners
considering, minding, mourning, seeking, and striving. God converts men as
reasonable Creatures, and conversion is founded on the deepest set reasons, and
the strongest working and prevailing arguments in the world. God he awakens,
and the sinner looks about and considers, he reasons with himself, as the
Prodigal, and out-reasons himself, but by Gods mighty working, keeping down the
hearts corruption, and by its quickening the soul with a new living principle,
and so he resolves and returns to God: If more would muse and consider, did do
it duly, more, God enabling, would return.

When the one is to be done, the other shall be done, men shall come to
consider and ponder.

2. For all renewed repenting.

There Is great necessity of consideration for our renewing our returning
continually; for holding up an evenness and constancy of renewed repentance.
Psalm. 119.59. I considered my ways, and turned my feet to thy Testimonies:
Fresh godly sorrow, self-loathings, serious returnings, must have new fresh
considerings of the sinfulness of sin, and laying loads of aggravations on
particular new warpings and miscarriages. Especially greater Repentings require
a deeper and larger foundation in consideration, as David did in Psalm. 51. that
evidences great and deep thoughts of heart.

3. For a vigorous acting of Grace.

For vigorous acting any Grace, Faith, Love, Hope, Fear, Humility, Patience,
and others, as is frequently seen in the Saints in Scriptures, what reasons and
persuasions, they drew out of the depths of considerations; Job, David, others!

All the heart Graces are stirred and acted in some measure by consideration,
either of the command enjoining, the Promise encouraging, threatening awing,
examples exciting, arguments in some sort or other inducing and helping.

It is something that works and weighs, is first pondered before the soul acts,
or is rightly moved. A Christian acts not as Water or Fire, which move by their
own inclination: But as men act in things as men, which is by choice and free
election, but upon preceding instigation of Reason and consideration.

Grace, though it be a spring of living water, it is not that which runs over
of it self: That Is for Heaven, where the heart will be full and run alone: It
is not like the springhead of Jordan, that ran of it self, but like Jacob's
well, that had always water, but must always be drawn: It must be drawn out by
consideration.

Christians mistake and complain often of their hearts, and would have them like
a running Spring, to run, to act alone: when here in the best, though there be
water, as in Jacob's Well; yet the well is deep, there must be drawing for
every drop, or none will come. Therefore to make it come, the Bucket of
Consideration must be letting down, and pulling up, and so pouring forth. What
the Apostle said to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift that is in thee, must
be said to all, and done by all, that would do any thing.

Some Horses, we say, go on mere Metal, without out provocation of switch or
spur; others will go well with some stirring up: So our hearts, if good, will
go on in godliness, but not on mere Metal, but with provokings of
considerations.

There should be endeavored the best and strongest mindings and reasonings, if
we would act Graces vigorously and strongly. There Is a necessity that strong
purposes and resolutions, for believing, trusting, loving, hoping, all acting,
all enduring strongly; be bottomed in strong mindings and considerings: The
fuller the consideration, the better the actings of Graces; the stronger the
spring in the Watch, the better all the Wheels move.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of other ends of this Meditation.
4. FOR all Duties and holy performances, there is great necessity of
Meditation, in some due measure, for a due, wise, warm, lively, and spiritual
acting them, acting from the right principle of Grace within, by the right rule
eying the Word, and to the right mark and end, salvation: Real and vigorous
performing in this sort must have some good allowance of pondering what we are
to perform.

This is very conspicuous in holy David, so great a performer of holy Duties,
Praying, confessing and praising; his prayings, and all things in that way, he
calls his Meditation. Certainly, those so excellent Psalms of prayings and
praisings were no flashes of a merely raised fancy, or some hasty runnings
over of a hot Brain; not an uttering what came next, but the passages so rare,
spiritual, and heavenly, and so strongly rational; as they had a touch from
Heaven in the Spirits guidance and assistance, so they had a tincture from a
wise holy heart within, laying them asteep in consideration, and acting them
with it in highest heeds and mindings, concurring with their utterings. Things
so well spoken, must be well weighed, especially when they also were to be
Scripture Records. For holy Prophets and Scripture Penmen were to use their
own natural gifts, and their graces, in their writings, though the Spirit of
God infallibly guided, sometimes raised and elevated them above themselves:
Duties of Religion ebb and flow, are more lively, spiritual, and heavenly, or
more dead, carnal, and such as run lower, according to their fomentings and
feedings from the warm spring of Meditation; thus in our praying and other
duties we may daily experience.

Christians complain they are dead-hearted and cold, slight and perfunctory in
performances; confessions are not accompanied with heart-meltings, shame, and
self-loathings; Petitions not with fervency, strong cryings, and earnest
wrestlings; Thanksgivings not with that flame of love, and joy, and high
admirings of the so great goodness, and rich free Grace of God in his ways and
dispensations toward us; commonly the cause is, the spring of Meditation is
stopped, the soul runs not in such a current of considerations and quickening
reasons as it ought, and used to do.

When any part or member of the body fails in heat, sense, or motion; where
there is actio laesa, as the Physicians say, there is principium laesum; that
is, where is an action or acting hurt or hindered from its natural and usual
way, there the principle and feeder of that action hurt and failing, is hurt
and failing it self.

As when failing of sense or motion in an Hand or Leg, it is number or cannot stir;
this is from the cold clammy humors lying at, and obstructing the heads of
those Nerves that did convey motive or sensitive spirits to that part is number or
motionless. Now,

Meditation is a head or rise of motions spiritual, Reasons and Arguments are
as the Nerves that convey and stir up heat, spirit, and motion into holy
performances.

This is one very great cause holy Duties are no more lively and warm, the cure
must be in removing the obstructions, opening the springhead of Meditation,
making that run fresh and full in such considerations as may warm and quicken:
The wisdom of Christians therefore is to take as we said, that great Artists
way, the holy Psalmist, that acted godliness so eminently; and among others
upon this eminent acting still of Meditation, he tells how he prayed day and
night, and how he still praised and highly rendered his thanksgivings and
blessings, and he tells you how, he meditated day and night.

And he tells you his Meditation assisted and contributed, as Psalm. 5. He tells
you his Prayer was his Meditation, because assisted, quickened, and prepared by
Meditation: If Christians would use to Meditate more carefully and constantly,
it would help to keep up better the vigor of Prayer, so would it likewise keep
life and warmth in all other holy duties.

No Christians are warmer at the heart, and livelier in holy services, than
those who meditate most; but never expect the one without the other: Keep this
Fountain open and still running; this is the water to drive the Mill, the Wind
that moves the sails, the spring in the Watch that carries all the Wheels and
keeps them going, I speak as to that is to be done on our part, otherwise God
does all in all.

5. Meditation is necessary to be an exclusive and keeper out of evil and vain
thoughts, and to dislodge them; naturally all the imaginations of the heart are
evil, and only evil continually, Genesis 6.5.

Vain thoughts lodge and repose, as in a Bed, in a carnal heart: Jer. 4.14. How
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Ephesians. 4.17. Walking in the
vanity of your minds: The way and walk is in the vanity of the mind. To
dislodge these lodgers, and shut them out, is by accustoming and exercising the
mind to good thoughts, to be the excluders of bad thoughts. The Learned Sir
Francis Bacon observes, as the cures of bodily diseases are by applying things
contrary to them, so the defects of the mind are helped by contrary studies:
Poetry makes men witty, History wise, the Mathematics subtle, Natural
Philosophy deep, Moral Philosophy grave, Logic and Rhetoric able to contend,
these Arts help the defects of Nature, by working contrary habits proper for
the cure of those defects.

So in spiritual distempers and defects, there are suitable cures and remedies,
by applyings and actings of the contraries: So Romans 8.13. If ye mortify the
deeds of the body by the spirit: All sins, particular sins are mortified by
those Graces are contrary to those sins; so distrust is mortified by holy
trusting, passion and wrath by godly meekness, Pride by Humility, worldly
affections by heavenly affections still acted, and so evil thoughts by good,
roving, wandering, and wild imaginations by Godly Consideration and Meditation:
which accustoming our selves unto, will work off customary, vain, and wandering
thoughts; a holy principle of Meditation, the sinful principle of evil
thinkings.

It is not so much the striving and tugging against corruptions to keep them
down, though we must both watch and war against them, but the acting of the
contrary Grace that best relieves us; to strive after a bare suppressing of sin
and of evil thoughts in particular, comes to little.

This is a kind of being only upon the defensive; for an observing and marking
the risings and stirrings of corruption and sins, it may be with a good measure
of grief and reluctance, but this is rather a telling and reckoning the evil
thoughts and stirrings, and lying exposed still to fresh assaults, leaving
corruptions opportunity to return so often as they will, than to abate and
suppress them: It can do little unless we go this way to work: The best and
nearest way to dislodge and exclude evil thoughts, is by lodging and acting
good thoughts, in this way, this ordinance of Meditation, which will keep us:
God keeps us, when we keep his and our way: The way when they come, as we
should against evil thoughts act detestation, but withal act diversion; act not
detestation alone, but diversion: Let thy heart both turn inwardly against
them, and turn also from them, by turning upon something is both spiritual and
seasonable.

So soon as the Poison of evil thoughts would infect, take the antidote, the
best preservative of diversion to, and acting of good and holy thoughts, the
art of diversion is better than mere acting still of striving and opposition.

Yea, Secondly, Meditation is to be exercised, not only as an exclusive of bad
thoughts, but for an introductive of good thoughts, good thoughts in a way, for
an arriving at habitual heavenly mindedness; for an introductive of heavenly
mindedness, where there was formerly a walking in the vanity of the mind: Genesis
6.5. All the thoughts of the heart evil continually; customarily, habitually
evil: for, I say, an introductive to heavenly mindedness; and likewise for an
improver of heavenly mindedness daily.

In handling the Explication of the description of Meditation, when the ends of
it were mentioned, among other ends, this was one; Meditation must be performed
to be a moulder and framer of habitual heavenly wisdom, making the spirit of a
Christian habitually wise; so I add now, Meditation is to be performed, to
introduce, and after that, improve an habitual heavenly mindedness.

It is not only incumbent on thee to shut out evil thoughts, and endeavor good
thoughts, to take up the old lodgings of the evil, and so thrust and keep them
out, but thou must by Meditation, by constant using it, endeavor habitual
heavenly mindedness.

In all truly gracious hearts, a principle that inclines, that introduces a
bent and tendency of soul heavenward; but this at the first is a tender bud,
it is but weak and inclines weakly, acts feebly in comparison of after time,
when it is grown and strengthened by exercise; when we exercise and use to
meditate, this dips and dies the spirit into the tincture and Grain Color of
habitual heavenly mindedness.

Though the first fundamental inclination, and bent of spirit heavenward, must
be sought till it be found, the carnal earthly mindedness changed into
heavenly; yet this, if we were never so assured of it, must not satisfy; here
no Christian must set up: But to the now first principle and the fundamental
habit obtained, this superadded acquired habit, should be this second grand
endeavor, and intension, first to have the spiritual habit, the new
fundamental heart-tendency, then to have this inclination heightened, ripened,
and corroborated, by habit attained upon frequencies and constancies of
practice, and using this heavenly meditating. This David, the excellent example
of actings in this highway to Heaven, God says of him, when he was very young,
when Samuel came to anoint him, he was one whose heart he looked on as being
principled with piety and real holiness, he had a heart inclined, set for God
and things heavenly; but he acted holiness, exercised himself in it, and in
this particular way of Meditation, till it ripened and arrived at habitual
meditation, from holding up a constancy in it. This may be gathered from the
character he gives of a godly man, and from his own still practice; Psalm. 1.2.
In the Law of the Lord he meditates day and night; when a man begins to be
godly, has the principle, this will incline him to begin this godliness, this
meditation: But then godly wisdom teaches to practice it, for to use
meditating, to get a hand at this rare work, to come to an habitual heavenly
mindedness: So David that was so wise, so excellently wise, as Psalm. 119.98,
99. he had acted the fundamental principle, Psalm. 119.112. He inclined his
heart to keep all the Commandments always; and he exercised meditation to
babitual heavenly mindedness; for he tells us, Psalm. 119.97. Psalm. 63.6. he
meditated all the day, meditated in the night watches; when he still awoke he
was ever with God. He gets the habitual heavenly mindedness, and then it was
easy, and by being sound easy, it was withal his delight Meditation at first,
the burden and yoke of heavenly Meditation, lying on the weak shoulders of the
new Convert, with only his new principle of grace begun, is a hard and heavy
work; though the spirit be willing, yet to perform it is weak: But when this
work is carried on, and daily practiced, then by custom and habit (an acquired
habit) then it is easy, then it is the great soul-solace and delight. David's
habitual beavenly mindedness, was the rare product and issue of his meditation;
he found it so, and therefore followed the faster: Therefore this ought to be a
grand intendment: A heavenly mindedness, when it is habitual, when it is
corroborated, and of a young tender Plant is grown to be a Tree of strength,
and yet is growing more; this is a rare excellency, and gloriously sweet
attainment; a heavenly minded man, how excellent is such a one generally in all
men's ties?

This makes a Christian still with God, have his way above, his conversation in
Heaven, Psalm. 139.18. Phil. 3.20. feed on Manna, fill with peace and joy,
overflow and abound in singular fruitfulness toward others.

Out of the abundance of heart-heavenliness the mouth speaks, and the whole
conversation shines in an exemplary walking.

Therefore the heart must be meditating upon heavenly things, that it still may
be framing and fixing bigher in habitual thinkings. Meditate thy self into
heavenly mindedness, that so blessed and glorious frame. To conclude this third
Reason: Therefore the Scripture holds forth Meditation in several sorts. 1.
Daily doing it in course. 2. Then occasional meditating as a superaddition. 3.
And that of ejaculation, or short and more sudden darting up the thoughts to
Heaven, to come in as an Auxiliary and supply, when the other Meditation, more
solemn and set, cannot be used; Ejaculations may often interpose in our course.
This is a wedge may be driven in, enter the throng and crowd of occasions; when
matters lie before us as tough and knotty pieces of wood, when they will not
give way to meditation at large, but hinder it, this wedge may and will ever
enter, if we apply it, to keep up the constancy of heavenly mindedness.

Ah how should my spirit bless abundantly that God, who has so fully provided
for a lying open of (...) way to Heaven, that my soul may mount up (...) so
frequently, and be either detained above by (...) Contemplation, or at least to
touch at Heaven by (...)

CHAP. XXIX. Of the fourth ground that supports this Duty of Meditation.
4. THE fourth and last ground to support this weighty work of holy Meditation,
is the consideration of the great advantages or disadvantages, arising from the
careful performance, or careless neglect of it. Every Ordinance of Christ has
holy advantages attending it; those who use them aright, daily experience how
good it is to walk in the King of Heaven's highways.

1. The first I shall name, is that so glorious advantage of improving our
communion and acquainunce with God, Job. 22.21. 1 John 1.3. No communion we can
expect, much less can we improve it, out of the use of holy Ordinances, whereby
we draw near to God, and God to us: Although God himself be not so tied to
these ways, but he may come to us, when and how he pleases; yet we are tied to
Gods Ordinances, as our ways of acquaintance with him; and when in a holy
manner we draw near to God, he has promised to command the blessing to us,
Psalm. 133.5. Psalm. 24.5. He shall, etc. Meditation being then his Ordinance, it
is a way of communion, a singular way of acting our spirits toward him, of
acting our minds and thoughts in a way of reference to him, either more
directly or less; sometimes Meditation is acted on his infinite excellencies,
in seeing his infinite beauty and loveliness, admiring and glorifying him; and
by this Contemplation we come to an improvement of our knowledge, to understand
more of him, an enlargement of affections, encouragement of our wills, chusings
of him, and aimings at his glorifying and exalting; excciting and stirring up
the Graces of Faith, for stronger recumbencies on his All Sufficiency, love to
cleave more, humility to stoop and submit more, patience to endure more
willingly, and other Graces to act higher in their spheres and ranks; by all in
the ways of exercising them, to own him and have him more to be our God.
Meditation helps to move and carry the soul, and all that is of it and in it,
toward God: And when we act upon him, open the doors of our hearts to him,
Rev. 3.20. God he comes in and manifests himself in his Grace, Quicknings,
Supportings, Comforts; he sups with us, as Rev. 3.20. and we sup with him, he
is pleased and delighted with our Graces exercised toward him, and we sup with
him in his manifestations of himself to us, in his helpings of us, gladding and
chearing our spirits, ravishing our hearts with the tastes of his love.

CHAP. XXX. Of solace and spiritual pleasure, another end of Meditation.
2. AS it is a way of singular communion with God, so it is for a heavenly
walk, of great soul-solace and delight; a path of pleasantness, to walk, turn,
and recreate thy spirit in; as Solomon, Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, all her ways; all the particular paths in those ways, and
therefore this way; and it is made purposely by Christ, for his people to walk
and turn in: One of the stately large high walks in the King of Glories Garden,
for thy walk and sweet refreshings. Traveling abroad to see sundry Countries,
Towns, Cities, and the great varieties of Objects there, is counted a rare
sight, a great pleasure and contentment.

Traveling with the Eye of Reason, amongst the great mysteries and rare
secrets of Nature; and by searching, curious exquisite searching, to make new,
strange discoveries of Natures implanted excellencies; the makings and framings
so admirable, the properties and efficacies so strange and amazing in so many
sorts of things. This traveling in these close walks, these hidden ways ending
in new, rare and useful experiences, is a very singular pleasure to many, but
peculiarly to elevated, and refined parts and wits. But traveling with a
spiritual eye, among spiritual, holy, and heavenly Objects, and to see this
whole prospect, take a view of all the varieties of heavenly beauties and
glories, meeting us in our walk; this is a ravishing solace indeed, beyond all
others, as far as Diamonds transcend the dirt, or the glorious lights of Heaven
do clods of Earth or Dunghils.

In Psalm. 119.14, 15, 16. the Psalmist tells what in Meditation-walks he met
with, more solace than in all riches, of which he had so great abundance, a
Kingdom of his own, and the rich spoils of other Kingdoms also.

Carnal and sensual persons, study sometimes, and act great curiosity to
heighten and enlarge pleasures, and to find out new, rare pleasures, not tasted
before: Often they are at a loss, and discomposed, for a not having some new
pleasures, as being cloyed with the old. But here is a way for a heavenly
spirit, of unwearied walking, of ever tasting larger pleasures: Of ever finding
fresh and higher, more pure, more permanent pleasures, such pleasures that
enlarge the heart, and then enlarge themselves in it; such pleasures that come
fuller, fresher, sweeter in, and then there fix and dwell.

Joh. 15.11. Our Savior tells us of a full joy, and of a remaining joy: who
can tell you such happy tidings, where else any such joy is to be both felt and
fixed? But in such ways where Jesus Christ, the water of life, springs forth and
flows; the Saints meet with it, drink of it abundantly; meditate to drink,
meditate and drink: They meditate, and in their walking meet with rare, rich
things, surpassing sweet: Psalm. 104.34. David faith his Meditation of God was
sweet; certainly it was so, and he means unspeakably sweet; meditation on the
word and works of God, were abundantly sweet, O how sweet must meditation of
God himself be?

Meditation brings in, and gives down sweeter and more surpassing pleasures,
than all earthly carnal things can; so much beyond them, as Manna from Heaven
is beyond basest bread, meanest fare; as the Wine of Christ's miraculous
making, beyond the water it was made of.

Three things especially make pleasures excellent.

1. When the pleasurable things are rich and excellent, as Nature yields them,
as rare fruits, rich spices, and the like. 2. When they are rare and excellent,
as Art redutes them, as Art meliorates and perfects them. 3. When they have a
right and curious, an exquisite receiver, and perceiver: As when purest
Fountain Waters are fetched fresh, in a pure clean Vessel, and have a curious
Taster: Or as the richest Grape, by the best art, is made into Wine, put into
the best Cask, and has best ordering, and then comes to an exquisite Palate:
Or some excellent Flesh or Fish is by the best art prepared, and by the
exquisitely right and curious Taster diseerned.
1. Meditation it has those kinds of Objects, which in their own Nature are
most transeendent, purest Springs and Rivers of Water of life, the things most
soul-satiating, and unspeakably delighting; the most glorious God, the
unsearchable riches of Christ, the holy Spirit the great Helper and Comforter,
the pure and perfect Word, the precious promises, heavenly Ordinances, glorious
Grace, and eternal happiness. These are in themselves most excellent, and
therefore the highest ground for our Meditations walk, for solace, and
pleasure, and he highest.

2. They have the most excellent means of preparing and fitting them for a
right taste; the Art and skill of the blessed Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.21. Prove. 8.9.
by his fitting them, and ordering them to the best sutableness for us, both for
our minds and hearts, understandings to know them, wills and affections to
close with them: They are made plain and perspicuous, persuasive and operative;
they have a suitableness conferred by an infinite wisdom of a God that knows
how best to deliver them, as he has done it in the Scriptures.

3. They have the best ways of receiving and perceiving, namely the highest
kind of wisdom, a rectified and elevated understanding, with a stamp and rare
principle of spiritual judgment, 1 Cor. 2.7. and heavenly mindedness,
discerning and savouring of spiritual things, in allowing and approving of
them, 1 Cor. 1.15. He that is spiritual discerns, Phil. 1.1. Approve things
that are excellent.

So the Will and Affections they receive, and have the excellent principle of
relishing, and savouring spiritual things, in choosing and complacency, in love
and joy: O how I love thy Law, Psalm. 119.97. Thy Testimonies are the joy and
rejoicing of my heart, Psalm. 119.111. This is from the principle of Grace, that
gives in an ability of relishing the sweet and savoury things of Heaven.

But when all these concur, as it is in a holy heart, and in reference to it,
the pleasure is most surpassing, far beyond others, where the nature of the
pleasures is lower, the preparation lower, and the receiver and faculty of
tasting, of either outward or inward sense, or of a mere natural and carnal
heart, in its best wisdom and moral excellencies, is far lower. Meditation is
the rare way to soul-solaces, and sweetest pleasures, as bringing in the most
excellent delicacies, and stirring up the holy heart to act its principles in
the Mind, Will, and Affections, of tasting and relishing them, and so to have
let in the sweet pleasures and refreshments of them.

The rarest hours, and richest soul Banquets have been prepared and come to,
usually by this way of Meditation: when the spirit goes up to Heaven by holy
Contemplation, Heaven comes down to us by rich Consolation. Heavenly comforts
meet us balf way, fill us brim full, and sometimes to such runnings over, as we
know not how to bear up under the glorious fullness of them: Never does any
sensualist or any sinner, in his way, taste of such pleasures; Prove. -- Meddles
not with Saints joy.

It is not possible that sensual and brutish pleasures should be such as
intellectual; nor intellectual in merely sinful spirits, such as spiritual and
heavenly Meditation, being a spiritual operation acts higher, returns the
purest, highest and most ravishing pleasures. Let the Saints Experience give in
evidence; and if sinners try upon heart changing and elevating Grace, they then
will find, that no sensual, nor any pleasures of most raised Fancies, or
highest notions can hold proportion with spiritual pleasures let into the
heart, and tasted from this Divine Meditation.

There are many other high advantages I may add; as particularly,

1. As for brightening and clearing of knowledge, this was mentioned on a
former occasion.

2. Meditation serves for improving the judgment; the most judicious Christians
are such as meditate most: Persons of a short spirit, whose thoughts are not
full length, not well sized, where thoughts touch as a perfect round thing, on
a perfect plain; as lightening passes through the Air, and stays no time: Not
like the Sun that not only shines but stays, that staying of his light makes
the best discoveries of things; so when things are stayed, and have fuller
length of time; this is the way to be a judicious Christian, to attain a spirit
of judgment; the shorter you think, the shorter will you be of a judiciousness
in the things of Heaven.

3. Meditation keeps up and improves an awakened and tender conscience, as
bringing in more plenty of light, and acting it more upon the spirit, acting
stronger reflections, deeper searchings, fuller discoveries in respect of the
frame of the spirit within, and the conversation without: They that study
themselves most, will be most awakened to greater sensibleness, care, and fear,
and set the strongest watches upon their deceitful hearts.

4. Meditation makes a Christian keep up his actirity and liveliness; the best
actings are bottomed on the heart, put best in frame by raised elevated, and
most spiritualized thoughts: It is greatly conducing to greatest growth; souls
if we would have them fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92. have the Garden of Graces,
and the Beds of Spices flourish and flow forth, they must have as the other
helps of heavenly Ordinances, so the hand of a constant Meditation to water
them: he that best orders the first Wheel, the first Mover, will have all the
following move more regularly and exactly.

The spiritual disadvantages must needs be great where holy Meditation is
neglected and never used, or but seldom, or slightly used. The advantages may
be the rule of judging the disadvantages; but I shall in particular mention
some of the spiritual disadvantages, and then come to the improvement of all
that has been said.

1. The first disadvantage, and that is a prejudice to purpose a total neglect
of Meditation, or an usual doing it slightly and formally, not seriously and
diligently, is a great and principal ground of men's abiding in a state of
vanity, a living wholly to no purpose, but utterly besides the grand end that
man was made for, that supreme end, the infinitely wise God, the maker of man,
and thereby the total and absolute proprietor in, and owner of his all, and
that end of living to God, and glorifying him; vanity, I say, in a wholly
missing his end and chief mark: For who can take aim at any mark, that eyes it
not, or looks not earnestly and evenly at it; that either looks quite another
way, or looks with a regardless eye at the best? The blessed Apostle tells us,
he looked with another eye, Phil. 3.13. with an eye that looked not off, or looked
easily; but the best mark had the best aim, he looked for life.

The Scripture calls a sinner a vain man, Jam. 2.20. for his living besides his
main end, ever in every thing missing that chief end; which rises from being
wanting in aiming right, and that want of aiming is for want of minding. Never
can aiming, which is an act of the Will (intending is an act of the Will,
aiming is the intending of a mark) never can aiming be right, unless
considering or meditating be right, be due and earnest, with evenness and
constancy: That heart which comes not to be reduced to minding its chief end,
will miss it utterly at last.

The reason why there is so much vanity in the best, is partly, yea greatly
upon this little minding, this slight, uneven, and seldom looking wishly and
well at the main mark of God and happiness.

2. Disadvantage, sinful security, a sleepy soul state, and heart hardening, a
sinking and decaying in godliness, is grounded much upon disuse of meditating,
especially Meditation of review and self-reflections.

Jer. 8.6. No man repented, every one rusheth into his course: Not considering,
bottoms both sinners, and Saints security, and growings worse.

If fallen asleep, if falling and in a declining state, awakening and recovery
must be by self-bethinking, 1 King. 9.47. No wise man but has need of frequent
reviews, and weighings again over and over, of the best of his doings, much
more of the Errata, the Errors of them.

3. Givings way to evil and vain thoughts, will follow your neglect of good
thoughts.

The mind will be ever busy, if not in good, then in that is evil; giving way
to vain thoughts is very dangerous; men by giving way to vain thoughts provoke
God to leave them, to give them up to a walking in the vanity of their minds,
Ephesians. 4.17. and at last as to a customary vanity of mind, God may give them up
to judicial dis-relishing, and abhorring holy things, and the thinkings of
them, and so perish in them.

O let therefore the good hand of my God, so stay up and act my weak and
warping spirit, with the strongest and most efficacious Reasons and
inducements, in this so greatly important and necessary, so sweet and blessed
an Ordinance, this heavenly meditation, that I may ever prove a better Artist
in it, a better Christian by it!

Having now dispatched the reasons and grounds of this so great and necessary
Duty of Divine Meditation, with those things which concern the nature, and
several ways or sorts of it; I must now come to the fourth and last propounded
particular, namely the right improvement of the Doctrine or assertion of the
necessity on all, to meditate upon heavenly and spiritual things, to exercise
themselves in this so concerning, advantageous, and blessed business.

CHAP. I. Of the improvement of the Doctrine of Meditation, by way first of
instruction.
THis being so concerning a work, and having so strong an influence upon the
whole course of Christianity; let us now endeavor to beat out this Gold,
extend it and make it appliable to the state and condition of all sorts of
persons, in all the useful ways we can.

1. Inference. Then if Meditation on spiritual things, and earthly in a
spiritual manner, in such seriousness, searchings, and dwellings of the
thoughts upon them, for such high and holy ends, is so needful for all
Christians to exercise.

Instruction 1. It serves then to hold forth a light of instruction to all that
own the Lord Christ, the Golden Scepter of his Word, and the obligation laid so
indispensibly on them, to see how they are called upon to own and observe it,
to tread and walk continually in this sweet and pleasant path, this so
righteous and good way.

Diverse there are who call themselves Christians, and would be counted good, if
not so good as any, which yet lead a life of inadvertency, and quite
overlooking of it, mind not this Meditation; as if it concerned them not, as if
they were not at all obliged, but free from any such engagement of their
thoughts, any employing of their serious thoughts this way.

O how many are there to be found, that never considered what that noble eye of
the understanding was given for! they use it as if it were made to look only
downward, or any other way but upward and heavenward; that lose, contentedly
lose, the principal end of that so rare faculty, made most peculiarly to mind
and contemplate heavenly beauties and excellencies.

What was said by Duke Alva, he did not use to look up to Heaven, this may be
said of too many, yea they may say it of themselves, they do not use to look up
to Heaven, by meditating on the things above. Ah sad eye, and sad frame of
spirit, but saddest state, not to have God, nor the things of God in the
thoughts; to have an eye made purposely for them above all, but uses to look
from them, not toward them, that fixes on the Earth, that has their eyes All,
and Heaven the allowance of a Nothing.

2. Others mistakingly think Meditation may concern some sorts of persons, but
not them; they have no leisure, they have no Learning, as others have.

We read of a King, when a Treatise of happiness was presented unto him, would
not look on it, but said he was not at leisure. O how many are there too like
him in this, they are not at leisure? They can find time for looking every way,
on every thing fond fancy carries them to, but it is for others who have
time, and a mind to it, thus to employ it in Meditation.

3. Others there are who think religious seriousness and musing of things
heavenly, the greatest folly, the worst bestowing of thoughts and time, they
loath all trouble of consideration this way, license their thinkings to a
roving ranging liberty, let their thoughts fly, as Children do their Arrows,
any way and every way, but to no certain mark at all; with such any way is
vanity, but walking in the vanity of their minds, Ephesians. 4.17. with them no
thoughts are savoury, but such as are remotest from Heaven; a seriousness and
sixing their thoughts is a fettering to their freeness of fancy; all stay of
thoughts is a mere tediousness, and the more spiritual the things are they are
persuaded to mind, the more unkind entertainment they meet with.

O that ever that eye, which the great soul-maker bestows, purposely and
principally, to act its seriousness and best mindings, on best things, should
be so strangely perverted to an only minding the worst! O what a wonder is it,
that the great Giver of this great Talent of the thinking power does not
totally take it away, does not let it quite quench in a seizing stupidity, and
loss of reasons use, as it happens to some by sad Diseases; or that the
wildness and wickedness of fancy, be not revenged with wildness of frenzy,
and striking all such wilfully mindless sinners mad, as sometimes some are,
and it may be partly on this account!

O let every one take heed of provoking their God, in such a sort, and set
themselves to ponder what it is, not only to forget God carelessly, but to
refuse to remember him purposely and designedly; purposely to refuse minding
those things of Heaven, which like the lights of Heaven, have purposely the
greatest ^^stre and glory, that they may have the greatest ey^^gs and lookings
upon.

Every one therefore should learn to be concluded under this great truth, under
the great necessity and importancy of this Duty, see it most clearly Christ's
blessed way, for the frequent and constant walk of his thoughts, to improve
communion with God, and perfect holiness by.

Lord clear up my Eye to see daily more into the excellencies of this heavenly
way, and have my spirit lifted up and enlarged in it.

O let me not faint and grow weary, but have the Loins of my spirit girded with
strength, my goings held up in this path of pleasantness, unto the end.

CHAP. II. A second improvement of this truth by way of conviction and for deep
humbling.
2. Use. LET this serve for conviction and deep humbling of every one for no
better discharging this obedience to the Lord of our spirits, and that thinking
power of them. The natural faculty for thinking was given by God, chiefly for
spiritual objects, and for acting it self in a spiritual way; as the bodily eye
is given much more for beholding the light of the Sun, than the light of
Candles.

That so precious Talent of the thinking power was not lent us by our Lord to
embezle and ravel out, but to employ and improve for his best advantage; not to
be as water spilt upon the ground, not to be as a spring of pure excellent
water, which empties it self into some near noisome ditch, or is swallowed up
in some Bog or Quagmire; O no, it was given us for excellent ends, to act and
be in exercise, to put forth its strength and vigor upon things most excellent
and high in themselves, and most sweet and suitable to it.

1. Therefore let every person look back and be greatly humbled for those times
of childhood and youth, and that excessive vanity of thoughts, and evils,
continually evil imaginations, as Scriptures charge all with, Genesis 6.5. O let
us learn much to be humbled, for being so long under the total neglect, and
daily exclusion of all thought-seriousness, not at all complying with, but
dis-relishing, but refusing, all reducing of the thoughts to any due mindings
and ponderings of heavenly things.

In that forecited 6. of Genesis, the Lord when he was threatening the drowning
of all the Earth, he saw the wickedness of man was great, and then among
others, when he is making a review and looks back to former times, the times of
men's youth, he casts, into all, the sum of sins; the youths sins of thoughts,
the then evils of its imaginations, with the aggravations; reckons not the ways
only, and wildness of youth discovering it self to others, but the evil
thoughts of youth, and punishes for them with other sins; I say drowned the
world for youth sins, yea youngest times thoughts.

Though youth be least considerable, and youths thoughts least of all
considered, yet the holy God puts these mites into the black bill, makes the
weights of thought sins to help cast the Balance, hangs these about the
sinners necks to help drown them in the flood.

O let us then look back to them, be duly humbled for them; humbled for that
All of the evil of imaginations, humbled that there was then no consideration,
nothing of this so incumbent Duty, this then, even in youth, so needful duty: O
what a sad time was that, which did not, would not meditate, that could not,
would not spare time; time from pleasures, play, vanities, and follies; time
from very toys, trifles, poor petty despicable things, yet so eagerly minding
them, and being so taken with them, enslaved, led, and befooled by them.

Ah when the holy God at the great day before all the world, shall bring forth,
the eager mindings of youth, the toys, vanities; phansies, and follies of
youth, set them all in order, and then show what the things of Heaven and
happiness discovered and tendered are, all the so rare and most inestimable
things proffered in the Gospel together; I say, when all the trifles and
vanities of youth, and the bendings of the mind unto them, wholly to them; and
all spiritual things in the Scriptures, in their natures, and heights of
excellency, and the not minding, but refusing to mind them, shall be laid
together; O what will be the unspeakable shame and confusion, silence and
stoppings of the mouths of mindless sinners? O what to such as are snatched away
in their youth, in the heights of their minding vanities, and so fond refusals
of meditating on spiritual things, as not being at leisure yet, as not thinking
it proper and seasonable to be serious so soon.

Ah then if the case of youth, mindless youth, will be so sad at the great day,
when things shall appear as they are, when an infinitely wise and righteous God
will make every sin appear in its exceeding great sinfulness; how now should it
humble all for their youth regardlesness, refusals to allow time for heavenly
thoughts; to let precious youth be so embezled?

If we mind not sins of youth, God may soon make us to possess them, Job. 13.26.

If we are truly humbled for them, this may as it were spare God a labor, save
us that heart-smart in troubles and terrors, which like gravel in the tender
eye, or smaller motes there, may occasion great pain.

Those little things of youth, and which by many are resolved into nothing, or
have a pardon of course: Ah these sometimes God blows into the eye of
conscience like clouds of dust, that we may feel how great a weight of trouble,
how hot a Hell the least sin can bring upon us.

The least arrow in the Quiver of Gods wrath, dipped in the least measure of its
venom, bred by the least sin, can wound, torment, and drink up our spirits; O
therefore sadly sometimes, let every one look over the time of youth, which so
long, for intending vanities, dis-intended and considered not things serious
and spiritual, but put them by: Put them by as mere niceties and
impertinencies, yea as very burdens and yokes; but chiefly having been called
so often upon, by the Word without, and the holy Spirits sweet motions, together
with the frequent calls of conscience within.

O the time of youth may for ever humble all, cause us to look on it with great
self-loathing and heartbreaking, with fresh runnings of the spring of sorrow
and shame for our follies and frowardness in refusal of returning, and to cry
out with the Psalmist, Psalm. 25.7. Lord remember not the sins of my youth; O
give a free and full pardon for that fond time so wasted, without consideration
acted upon any spiritual concernment, to any purpose, but all lost.

CHAP. III. Another particular cause of humbling, for so long neglect of
Meditation.
3. improvement. FOR humbling greatly every Christian, in that at the best and
soonest we began so late this seriousness of thoughts, this Duty of Meditation,
which challenges of all the very first consideration and pondering; the very
first buddings out, and first blossomings of the considering power, should
begin with our spiritual concernments, not letting it act blindly, ignorantly,
evilly, and impertinently, but knowingly, wisely, and in a right manner; the
rule allows not taking the first step, nor any other after wrong. Ah how long
has it been, how long have the best of Saints, the soonest blossoming and
ripened young Christians, how long was it before consideration and meditation
began in their hearts, before the Scepter of Jesus Christ, held forth in the
Laws and Commands of Meditation, was attended, would be yielded to? How long
e're that any of our fond and froward spirits would cease their vanities and
wildness, follies and impertinencies of thoughts? When wisdom in any one begins
to act, then consideration begins; no hopes of young heads, till they begin to
put forth and act consideration, then begin they to be wise, or give hopes of a
being hereafter wise, when they prove considerate; then begins that which is
wisdom for thy self, when thou come to consider, when thy spirit begins to
beat the Golden path of Meditation.

Ah then let it humble us, it was so long before the first and fundamental
Meditation or Consideration, before that first engaging the heart to
seriousness and a due minding, that initial and introductive considering for
true turning to God with the whole heart.

Formerly in one of the grounds of this point we mentioned the necessity of
consideration, and pondering our unspeakable misery by sin and God's
displeasure, in order to conversion to God.

As all that are truly converted are truly humbled, so all truly humbled and
converted are made first truly serious and self-bethinking, reduced to this
Meditation of their inexpressibly miserable condition.

Conversion to God stands as it were on two feet, comes about by a double
inlet, of a twofold Consideration or Meditation.

1. A serious Meditation of now seen and felt unspeakable misery, that load and
burden of sin and Gods wrath laid on, and this must be deep, sink down into the
soul and press it, and soak through the soul, in sorrowings, in meltings, in
weariness of spirit, and in willingness to be eased of the present pressure.

2. Then a most serious Meditation and Pondering of the rich free grace of God
the Father, reconcilable in a full Savior, offered in a free firm Covenant and
Promise of salvation, to every sinner without exception.

These two great considerations are the foundations and inlets of the great
heart-mutation and conversion: Therefore these are of the greatest concernment
of all other considerations; yea these are such considerations, that no other
are to be reckoned upon, till they have been performed effectually.

Ah therefore how exceedingly should this humble all persons whatsoever, for
their former so long neglect of this introductive and fundamental
consideration: Hos. 8.5. God cries out, How long will it be e're they attain to
innocence? Ah how long was it with any, with the very earliest self-bethinker,
before he used the eye of his mind in consideration? Consideration to view, not
that was far off, but that was, of all others, the nearest; to see himself, and
himself also in his nearest concern of all others, that eternal condition of
his immortal soul.

Ah what an humbling charge should this bring up to every spirit, to every
bosom! O how should it shame thee and me, and every one, to think how long it
was before we began to do that might be called thinking, before I once began to
think to any purpose, how long my thinking and considering power was merely
abused by me, was both diverted and debased by a continual running like Water
beside the Mill, ravelling out like a golden Thread, spoiled as fast as spun,
by a neglect of winding up and right using? Ah how sad and self-abasing
reflections should this often occasion to us? Ah, think we sadly, how long so
noble a faculty as the understanding is, how rare an acting the acting of its
consideration is, how high a concern eternity of happiness is! how necessary,
in order to happiness, conversion is! and how needful consideration to
conversion is! And yet to lose all the right and best use of this considering
power, this meditating, by engaging it in impertinencies and very nothings,
mere shells and shadows, instead of realities and things of worth, true worth
and excellency; to be so long like the Prodigal before we came to our selves,
were seen sitting in our right mind, entering upon Meditation for that great
soul-affair, Conversion.

CHAP. IV. For humbling those that are totally yet to begin Consideration for
Conversion.
AH then in the next place, as it was for great shame universally to all
persons whatsoever, for so long neglecting consideration, and meditating of
their souls condition, and for conversion; so how far more should it humble
all, that never as yet so meditated to that great and principal end Conversion,
so as Conversion followed Consideration; never had the first corner stone laid
of that consideration, which bottoms and grounds conversion, that hitherto have
had all their precious thoughts scattered in rovings and wanderings of spirit,
acted and wasted upon vanities and follies, things that perish, that cannot
profit in the day of wrath, that will prove sorrow, shame, and anguish of
spirit in the latter end.

Ah how many are there who for improving that great talent of the thinking
power, employing it for those so high ends it was peculiarly designed to and
given for, for wisdom to salvation, and glorifying God the giver, that have
daily all their thoughts either vile or vain; that walk in the vanity of their
minds, that is, in a constancy and prevalency of mind-vanity, vanity exclusive
of good thoughts and all right seriousness, and productive of nothing but the
weeds of evil and vain thinkings! The way of their thoughts is a successive
taking step after step in vanity, one vain thought follows close, treads on the
heels of another for haste; all the walking of that so working, active, busy
mind, is nothing but continued vanity. O how sad a frame of spirit is this, how
sad a sign and symptom, if not healed by a new frame of heart, symptom of
deepest danger of ruin and destruction hastening on apace!

Some-Diseases in that so noble part the head, are most dangerous, the Cure is
hard, the Killing quick; when vanity seizes the mind, when men from vain
thoughts arising in them, come to allowing of them, and from allowing to a
walking in the vanity of their minds, vanity of thoughts becomes an habit, and
when it becomes habitual, then the danger is high: All habits, evil habits, are
like old rooted Diseases, hardly, if ever, cured; O when men walk in the vanity
of their minds, God may be provoked to a giving them up to walk on, and so be
at last ruined utterly for want of a timely returning from it.

O how should this awaken such, that have so this way ravel'd out their youth;
it may be, lavisht and lost their best days of riper years, yea peradventure
are arrived at an old age, and are old withal in this way of vanity of
thoughts! Old and vain is sad to purpose: Ah when younger, when elder, yet
never could allow or would find time to become serious: A young head, and a
vain head, all wildness is a sad beginning.

A grown man ripened in Reason, but not yet beginning, not so far as budding
out in consideration, not arrived at the wisdom of minding soul-concerns,
that is worse, and a sad sign.

But for a man to have gray hairs here and there, and to be yet to begin wisdom
for self, in self-bethinkings, never to have laid the foundation of meditating
on the highest soul-affairs, thereby to convert, O this is dreadful, sad beyond
all; ah to ravel out the most, the best, the all almost of thy time, and never,
never to interpose one times, one hours, serious Meditation, or never to
meditate to purpose, so as to convert to God truly, but be still to begin to
return to God, contenting thy self with a just nothing done, of that greatest,
and which should never be the last, but first dispatched, business of all others!

Ah, but what will all prove at last to all younger or elder, if there be a
going on without consideration, without conversion? young, and strong, and old,
are all liable to death, yea to a death that may be on thee suddenly; who can
(all things considered) think in any wisdom, he can be so secure, that he needs
not yet be ready for dying? Ah, if that black Sergeant of death claps thee
suddenly on the shoulder, serves an Arrest upon thee, presently to come away
and give up thy account, in what woeful case will thou then find thy self, what
terror and confusion will instantly seize thee?

It will most certainly come, that thou know; but when it will come, that
thou can not know; ah think therefore of it beforehand; make it thy case as
now come, and by the symptoms of it had really seized thee, that thou were now
drawing on, had but a few hours or minutes to continue in this world, and
then be cast upon eternity, be cast upon eternity, and before thou ever have
come to any consideration which issued in a real conversion, and thereby to
make some sure provision for thy eternal salvation: Ah put this case, this
dying case, put it soon enough, and close home to thy bosom, let it stay upon
thy heart, let Death as it were lay his cold hand on thee, and conceive that
thou feel it touch thee, and take fast hold of thee to carry thee instantly
away, and so cut thee off from ever having one opportunity, the shortest space
imaginable, for consideration, any possibility of conversion to God more; that
time and means must now be no longer, because thou must be no longer in the
land of the living.

O but then think, O seriously think what immediately will follow after, ponder
thy particular doom, thy souls sentencing to an everlasting state. Think not
only of thy souls leaving its old ruined Tabernacle, but of its launching forth
into that Ocean of Eternity.

Think what an Eternity thine Eternity must now be, who wasted all thy time
lent thee for Eternity, and that so precious talent of opportunity trusted with
thee, to trade for Eternity, for a most happy Eternity, and making that sure, 1 Timothy 6. 2 Pet. 1.

And to affect thee more abundantly, and work upon thy spirit to purpose,
think, O think of, besides thy own particular day, of that great day fixed and
appointed by the great Governor of all the world, for judging of every person,
every work of every person, the secrets of that persons heart, yea every secret
thing good or evil, Eccl. 12. Imagine then that great and terrible day of the
Lord to be come, thou see the Heavens departing as a scrowl, the Elements
melting with fervent heat, the Earth with the works therein burnt up; imagine
thou see the Lord Jesus descending from Heaven with his mighty Angels, coming
with the voice of the Archangel and the trump of God, see the dead arising,
the living all changed in a moment, and all persons whatsoever convented and
brought before Jesus Christ the Judge, such a Judge as never any was, in any
degree to be compared with, so unspeakably excellent and glorious, sitting on
his high Throne, in highest and most transcendent majesty and glory, as there
cannot possibly be greater.

Among all that are to be judged, imagine thy self there appearing at the
Judgment seat to make thy personal answer, and take thy Eternal doom; that
presently thou art called, come thou sinner, come, hold up thy hand at the Bar,
answer for thy self; that thou hear the Judge call, read the indictment,
read it aloud, and answer thou sinner to every part of thy charge.

1. First thou that stand here at this Bar to be tried, thou have a noble
faculty of reason, and understanding, and with it a power of thinking, and
meditating given into thy soul, and that, above all others, to meditate of
heavenly things; thou answerest, it is true, Lord, I cannot deny it.

2. Thou also had my Word, a perfect rule, to direct thee, my Ministers to
persuade thee, my Spirit to draw thee, thine own conscience to call upon thee,
which also called loud, often, and earnestly upon thee to consider; yes, Lord,
thou answerest, it is most true.

3. Time also and opportunity thou had, space sufficient allowed thee to
meditate and consider, if thou would have done it; a time of youth, and time
enough then, also a time of, it may be, riper years, and old age; a time of
many years, great patience, waitings on, and strivings with: True, Lord, thou
answerest, I had many opportunities to consider.

4. But when thou should have remembered thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
thou did forget him, would not think of him, of his Word, of his ways, thy
own state, and thy souls concerns.

Thy first fresh years were spent in walking in the sight of thy eyes, and
minding vanities; thou could find time enough to think of thy pleasures, thy
play, sports, and pastimes, thy excesses, filthiness, looseness, but not of thy
God, or thy souls great affairs. At such a place, in such a year, such a month,
such a day of that month, such an hour, or suchhours of that day (is it not so
sinner?) there and then thou were thinking, musing, devising for such a
pleasure, such a sport, such a vanity, and such a wickedness; and the following
day, at such a place, and such an hour, doing the like; and so day after day
thy thoughts were lavisht, lost, let out on impertinencies and mere vanities,
but purposely taken and turned from all religious seriousness, all
soul-matters: Was not this thy usual way to ravel out that thy youths time in
never minding thy God, and the things are holy; never to consider any thing to
any purpose indeed? What say thou, sinner, to all this charge of embezling
that precious time of tender and more pliable youth? Are not all particulars
charged against thee true? Yes, Lord Jesus, I was such a one, as to every
particular, and cannot deny any thing charged.

5. Ah, but beyond that time, thou livedst up to riper years, and when the time
of fond fancy and folly wore off by the ripening of reason, on thy coming to
man's estate, then had you more reason far, more to mind and meditate on the
great concernments of God and your soul; I then looked for seriousness, when you
now could be serious, and serious enough in things of lower concernment, as for
your calling and business, for getting wealth, and growing rich, to be great
and high, and have abundance; ah, how could thou studdy, muse, beat thy
Brains, in the day, and in the night appointed for rest and sleep, how did thy
worldly mindedness act thee? thy mind running, thoughts intending, multiplying,
with all possible earnestness, and eagerness? Ah, friend, what have been the
multitudes of thy musings, day after day, in such and such cases, business,
bargains, purchases, and projects? What an engrosser of thoughts has Mammon
been in thy covetous frame of heart, and what a most shameful excluder of good
and heavenly thoughts continually? Yea, I have to charge thee farther, before
men and Angels, with thy studyings and contrivances, the deepest and most
intense thoughts of heart thou have had, for credit, applause, and honor, from
men like thy self; for rising, growing high, getting power, and being great in
the world; O how this, this, friend, provokt and engaged your thoughts,
studyings, plottings, all the soul-earnestness that was in thee, to be
accounted and applauded, to be great and high? but you never would be half so
serious, spend any such proportion of time to get Honor that comes from God,
and to be one the Lord commends.

Sinner, is not all this also true? can thou deny any one part of this charge?

No, Lord, says the Prisoner, it is all very true.

Over and above, thou have meditated and devised, and that many and diverse
ways, for satisfying thy lusts in every way thou likedst, and were pleased in:
Meditated for mischief, taking revenge, which was none of thine, but mine, as
now appears; yea, for opposing good causes, persecuting the godly, such as
would be upright in their Generation, and not be wrapped up in the wickedness of
the times.

Ah what, of all others, what depths and heights of musings and devisings has
thy heart of hatred, thy keenest hellish malice brooded and brought forth
against my Saints, these Saints that lived with thee, here they are before
thee, see them; there is such a godly painful Minister, and there is another, and
there are all the rest you hated and opposed; here, friend, are such Christians
you have plotted against, and persecuted so often; there is such that lived in
such places about you, there is such who lived in the same Town with you, here is
one that lived the very next door to you, here be those who were in the same
Family, of your familiarity, of your daily converse with, and your spiteful
opposition to; here is such a fellow servants, such a Brother, or Sister, such a
Child or Parent, such a Husband or Wife, hated and scorned for godliness sake:
This, this has been thy manner sinner, from thy very first to the end of thy
days, which have not been few; all the thoughts of thy heart evil, all but
steps in the long walk of the vanity of thy mind.

Thoughts thou have enough, thy mind that meditated enough, was ever acting;
busy enough, but bad, thou would not meditate the right way, on the best
things, on holy and spiritual things, not in all thy time, so as to convert and
turn to God. What say thou, wretched sinner, is not this charge, all this
indictment, in every particular true, witnessed and proved to thy face? Do not
I, the heart-knowing Judge, know it is every tittle true? and does not thy own
heart, thy own bosom, the Book of thy conscience, show it to be true, cannot
but yield it so? Ah true, true it is, Lord, all in every tittle most true, I
cannot deny it, nor will contend to justify or excuse my self in the least.

7. Then sinner thou acknowledgest thy self, by all that has been shown and
proved to thy face, and by thy own confession of all, that thou art guilty;
what say thou therefore to the whole charge? Guilty, or not Guilty? Guilty,
guilty, Lord, What have thou then to allege, why sentence of condemnation
should not pass upon thee? Ah, Mercy, mercy, Lord, I beg mercy, I have only
mercy to entreat; O pity, pity, mercy I most humbly crave. No, no, it is now no
time for mercy, for any pity, time was when thou livedst under the free ten-of
it; but now time's past, now go thou cursed wretch, that would never
consider, never meditate; go thou foolish sinner, thou lazy slothful sinner,
that would not take the pains, and dis-ease thy self so far, as to engage in
a little thought-labour; go thou stubborn stout-hearted sinner, that would
not stoop to take up this easy yoke, this light burden, of being sometimes
rightly serious, of a now and then some few minutes time meditating and
pondering matters spiritual and eternal; but only worldly, carnal, and
perishing matters, these, these were the things had all thy mindings, all thy
seriousness and earnestness, and thy constancies of thoughts; go therefore thou
foolish, lazy, stubborn sinner into that place, which is prepared for all such
as thou art; Take him away, bind him hand and foot, cast him into utter
darkness.

Most just, just and righteous is it, Lord, cry all the Bench of Saints and
Angels; full evidence, and his own confession there is, that he would not obey
this righteous Law, would not use his thinking power, to think of thee, Lord
Jesus, nor the things of thy Kingdom; nay he would not bethink himself, think
of his immortal souls highest concerns, but minded wholly other things than the
main: O it is most righteous, righteous Lord, that thou have judged thus.

When the sentence is thus pronounced by the mouth of Jesus Christ the Judge;
when all that innumerable company of Saints and Angels have unanimously (not
one dissenting) approved the righteousness of the whole proceeding, and just
doom and sentence; what then presently follows, but driving away from the face
of Christ, dragging and haling to the place of Execution, thrusting into the
pit of darkness, a filling up with scalding wrath brim full, and a sealing up,
in that woeful place and state, for ever and for ever?

Ah, then thou that art and have never, never been serious in minding the main
concerns of thy immortal soul, serious in every thing rather than therein: O
look, look to it before it be too late.

Ah, never be quiet, till thy spirit comes to this happy attainment, comes to
fix and setle in seriousness of daily meditating, in walking this way with
evenness and constancy, and so make it easy and sweet. Ah never be content,
till from mindlesness and disuse of thinking thy thoughts the right way, acting
the seriousness of them upon things that challenge it most, till thou come to
thy self, as Luke 15.17. come to humble thy self greatly, to say with deepest
sorrow, self-abhorring and shame, O what have I done? what have I been? how
many years have I run out, void of all due consideration? how many and many
millions of steps have I taken in the great Road of vanity of thoughts? Ah how
near am I come to the end of my days, or how near may my end, for ought I know,
be, and so for want of thinking and meditating, I may perish for ever? Ah at
how low arate have I set my precious soul, set my body, my whole person, my
hopes, my God, his Christ, his Spirit, his Grace, Heaven, happiness, and all my
high concerns, that never thought them worth a thought, or a few thoughts in
this way, this holy way of Meditation? never weighed them so in the Balance,
unless to find them too light, outweighed by every worldly, every bodily and
carnal concern? O unwise, silly wretch, that I have all this time been, that I
should deal thus by my self, be so cruel and so heedless, the foolishest
adventurer, the most idle sluggard, to live in a lothness to be at the pains of
a sometimes meditating and thinking, though the gains be, or might be, beyond
all thoughts.

Ah, now therefore, now, now, if it be not too late, by the Lords help, I will
begin to bethink my self, now I will set my self to do my utmost, now to make
haste, and use all the means I possibly can to repent and reform, that I may be
recovered from my vanity of mind and conversation, and at last be wise unto
salvation.

CHAP. V. Of being humbled for negligence in this Duty of Meditation, after
experiencing the fruit and sweetness of it.
ANother improvement of this Doctrine is for due humbling of all such who after
experiencing the success and sweetness of heavenly Meditation, both that first
soul-seriousness, into which they were drawn, drawn by the Holy Spirit in
effectual vocation, and grounding their so happy conversion to God, and
believing in Christ; and then likewise after their usual and daily exercising
holy Meditation, that whence they have had so sweet Communion with God, those
rare hours wherein they have been wrapped up, with that blessed Apostle, into the
third Heaven, and tasted of those glorious and soul-ravishing pleasures and
joys that are unspeakable.

Ah Christian, to experience so often the surpassing sweetness of this happy
way, this path and walk to Heaven, and tread it no more.

1. To fail so frequently in that so needful daily Meditation, do it so little
or so slenderly. 2. To take so seldom into that path of Occasional set and
solemn Meditation, that also of so great advantage, large incomes of light and
wisdom, warmth and quickening, strength and encouragings. 3. And to act no
oftener that so easy, quick, and expedite ejaculatory meditating, whereby thy
soul may give encumbrances and overcharging business the slip, take breath,
ease it self, mount up to Heaven, make a short visit, and return refresht,
quickened, and enlarged.
A Student never does himself such wrong, as when he reads much and muses
little, for then he either receives in, or retains nothing; or cannot manage
his Notions: We never order and dispatch Affairs worse than when we Meditate
least.

And so a Christian never loses more labor, does his soul-affairs worse, than
when he muses not, and warms not himself by this exercise of Meditation. Diverse
profess a faculty and ability, as in Sciences and ways of Learning, in
Mysteries and ways of Trading and Dealing, yet are but slender proficients, can
do little but bungle, because they study and muse no more to know their own way.

Many Christians are but bunglers, to what they might be, make a large
disproportion between their profession and their proficiency, their practice
and their profit, because they meditate no more to understand their way.

2. The great, not only ignorance, but dead-heartedness and spiritual chilness,
with the brokenness and unevenness of Christians in their walkings, arises much
from a negligence in this Meditation; either negligence of not doing it, but
ceasing sometimes; or negligence of slackness and slothfulness in ceasing
fervency and industry for the manner. David's manner of meditation, in the
fervency and the constancy of it, will keep up David's affections fervent and
flaming affections; and David's constancy and evenness of conversation.

3. Little meditating makes lean Christians, of little life, little strength,
little growth, and of little usefulness to others. Heb. 12.12. There Is mention
of feeble knees, which also occasions the going with no steadiness, and the not
making of straight steps.

As it is often in the body thus, from a failing in the head, obstructions of the
Fountain, and feeder of sense and motion; so this among others, this failing in
Meditation, is a great occasion (though there be diverse other causes) a great
ground of Christians weak feet, and going no stronger and steadier: Meditation
that should influence, stir up strength and motion, is obstructed, disused, and
neglected; Meditation must still lend a hand of help to every spiritual
undertaking, first ponder, then proceed: We can perform nothing well in worldly
affairs, without well considering; so in spiritual matters, what duties can be
well performed, what graces rightly exercised, what in all Religion that can be
named, can be rightly ordered, if you mind not seriously, consider not before
the doing it, as well as mind and attend it in the doing?

Serious thinking is fundamental to all right doing; O what are the innumerable
advantages that thy constancy in this course would still bring in? and what
have been thy losses by neglect, and will daily increase upon thee by it? Ah
therefore consider, be awakened and strive to be humbled for all thy failings
and neglects; especially thy fallings off from, and disusings of this so
necessary and excellent Duty; look to thy first beginning in it, and thy making
no better entrance into it.

First undertakings, if not so well and through, prove great inconveniences,
and if not looked after and amended, may occasion a less seriousness and care
ever after; but however they require a making up and bettering: that which
serves a young, weak, and unexperienced Christian, must not serve a grown
Christian, one old in his way.

O but be humbled for thy improving no more in this Art of Meditation, for
being no better Artist, for having so little of this heavenly habit, and
heart-readiness, from thy frequencies and constancies of not only acting, but
earnest and vigorous strivings, which intend and strengthen, improve and
increase the habit.

Be humbled for no higher seize in this happy way, which we should be
most perfect in and ready for; in which we should still have an increasing and
heightening complacency and pleasure to perform, with a striving to do it
better, as to heart-readiness, better as to heart-power, and purpose,
resolvedness against oppositions and hindrances.

Ah then look, mournfully look we, and with shame and self-abasings, on all and
for all our failings, and for all our guilt contracted for this Duty neglected.

1. That our progress and improvement has been so small. 2. Our inequalities
and unevennesses so many. 3. Our fallings off and desistings, and lyings so
long, or any space of time, before returning and recovering, and by our
dis-using, contracting an unwillingness, a spiritual lothness, a doing with
more difficulty, or by refusals and denying of doing this Duty, to thereby
aggravate our sin.
Therefore, I say, for all these admitted and added, let us be deeply humbled
before God, and mourn over so many and great neglects he has observed in us.

Ah therefore say, I have sinned greatly in what I have done, 2 Samuel 24.10.
say, I will do so no more, Job. 34.32. Ah, so to slight, to forget the concerns
of God and my soul, to let my eyes be in the corners of the earth, to let my
soul lose so its lookings, by eying vanity; to imbezel my precious thoughts
upon the by, and overlook the main.

May not my God come and challenge me for great unkindness, unworthiness, and
folly? What, thou my child to be so vain and unwise? when thou have to
contemplate thy God, in his infinite all sufficiency; thy Savior, in all his
matchless beauty and fullness; thy Sanctifier, in all his operations and
consolations; thy perfect rule, the Scriptures, with all the treasures of
heavenly truths in them; and when thou have all the excellent and admired works
and ways of a God, the condition of his Church and people, thy own souls state,
and eternal salvation, together with all such things that continually stand
full in thy view.

Ah, to have so many paths for the feet of thy spirit to walk in by Meditation,
so many rare Objects, for thy Eyes entertainment and employment, and to thy
sweetest solace, largest satisfaction, and yet in any degree, to miscarry the
golden seasons of this so heart-enriching Meditation.

Ah may not my grieved God, and his grieved spirit, grieve and sadden my herein
so sinning spirit? may not my neglects of Meditation, not seriously and
frequently thinking of him, and such things that nearly, highly concern him,
justly occasion my Gods neglecting of me? Neglecting me, by withdrawing his
hand from his blessed impulses, infusings of heavenly thoughts, judging it not
meet to give down good and holy thoughts, into a spirit distempered, diverted,
by too usual admittance of earthly, evil, and carnal thoughts, and disuse of
holy Meditation.

Who will plant the most precious flowers among heaps of poisonous weeds?

Who will mix their richest, purest Wine, with puddle, dirty Water; or their
Gold and Diamonds among dirt and dung?

Ah, this is the way for my God not only to withdraw himself, but to let Satan
the foul Spirit loose upon me, to trouble me, to haunt me, to follow me, with
all manner of disquieting and discouraging thoughts, with temptations of injury
and stealing, revenge and cruelty, uncleanness and filthiness, and sinful
sensualities, and such like evil thoughts against others.

Ah, may not this neglect of good thoughts and due Meditation, be justly met
with, and expose me to the blackest and most horrid thoughts and temptations,
such as those of Blasphemy, thoughts as thick as Hail, and that daily haunt me,
darting horror and Hell into my spirit, making my heart to tremble, and my
hair to stand upright on my head?

Ah, may I not (if I amend not the sooner) not come to that so sad and dreadful
temptation, so contrary to Nature, the temptation of self-destroying, thinking
it may be best to be rid of my trouble, though it be so horrid and unnatural,
and will render the case so dangerous and dubious?

Yea, may I not have self let loose upon self, my own heart to worry it self,
my bosom opened, the Book of my conscience held open before me, and my eye held
to a looking continually into it, seeing my sins set all in order before me,
making me a magor missabib, fear round about, a terror to my self?

And to all, may not my God plunge me into the depths of dissertion, set
himself against me, let all his waves pass over me, let me see and feel nothing
but his wrath and Hell; that I who would not meditate as I should, shall now
nothing but meditate as I would not, meditate nothing but terror?

O therefore to prevent all this, or whatsoever may befall me on carelessness
and neglect, O let me call to mind my former times, my former tastes and sweet
solaces, had in my walking up this bill of Meditation; those rare hours, sweet
enlargements, strong consolations, happy and encouraging experiences I had when
I kept up my vigor and constancy, as in others, so in this blessed way and
exercise of holy Meditation; and being greatly humbled, let me keep closer to,
and walk with an evener foot in this heavenly path.

CHAP. VI. A persuasion to all such who never accustomed themselves to this
work of Meditation.
IF Meditation be so necessary a Duty, let this then prevail with every one
that hitherto has done nothing in it as yet, or that which has been to no
purpose. O that this sin can be laid to thy souls charge, that yet thou art to
begin to meditate of the great things of thy God, and thy own soul. That thou
should have so rare a power in thy soul, of thinking and meditating, a power
also that is so active and busy continually, and yet never employed aright; so
great a Talent entrusted for use, and either hid up in a Napkin, or wasted and
ravelled out in vanities, impertinencies, and wickedness.

1. Seriously, I beseech thee, consider, thou can be no good Christian, no
truly godly person (whatsoever thou or others think of thee) that have been,
and art no complier, but a refuser in this particular. Ah, this strikes thee
home to the heart, dashes quite thy confidence and hopes, grounded on thy
calling thy self a Christian.

That clear passage proves it undeniably, Psalm. 1.2. The blessed man meditates
in the Law of God day and night: The least that this place can hold forth, must
be a doing this duty in a course and way; he that is a blessed man, is not only
one that pretends to Religion, but practices and uses Meditation, has an
inward delight in the Law of God, and from delight in it, meditates on it, in a
constancy and ordinariness; not acts a now and then bare thinking, when others
mention it, Ministers preach on it, or in the reading of it; to think of it
then when it cannot well be avoided; but a serious and purposely meditating, a
keeping up a conscientious and complacent constancy in it.

If therefore continual Meditation of the Law of God, his Word, and the
Excellencies in it, be the character of a godly person, think well of it and
thy own condition; flatter not thy self with that kind of false godliness,
which falls short of the true character of true blessedness.

2. Consider thou can be no true subject of Jesus Christ, that do not
submit to this Law of Christ, this Meditation: It is in Scripture made one of
the imperial Laws of the King of the Church, who gives every subject of his
this charge, lays this command indispensibly, and repeats it frequently,
records the examples of the Saints, who practiced it diligently, as David and
others; therefore thou disownest this Law, thou disownest the Lawgiver Christ,
and so he takes it.

3. Ah then what is it that reigns in thy heart, that sits in the throne and
sways, but the Tyrant sin, sin that has dominion over thee, sin that is the
great obstruction and hinders thee, sin that is the great Biass of diversion
that draws thee quite another way?

1. It is merely the vanity of thy mind, in which thou walk, that keeps thee
from walking this way.

2. It is thy sinful folly; the wise in heart will muse and consider, and most
consider things of the most concernment, what is it which has made all the
spiritual fools, but sin? The Scripture fool is the sinner, and wherein is the
folly seen more, than in not considering things most considerable?

3. Thy not meditating, it is from the tides and currents of unmortified lusts;
lusts in dominion and reign, lusts that ingross thy thinkings, lusts that
engage and set thy thoughts on work, and intend them.

In every predominant lust there is a predominant scope and tendency, an end
and aim that gives the rules and laws; as therefore the lusts aim lies, so all
the thoughts and seriousness are levelled; as the lust-aims and marks are, so
are the mindings: If lusts of sensuality, riot, drunkenness, uncleanness, and
voluptuousness; if these or any of these be predominant, all the strength of
the mind and its musings run out at that leak, that passage.

If covetousness and worldly mindedness be predominant, all the studyings and
thinkings run down, and are carried away by that outlet.

If pride, vainglory, and affectation of honor bear sway, then the thoughts
and contrivances act up all that way, climb up that Hill.

Thy serving lusts and pleasures, being inslaved by them, is the ground of thy
thoughts subserviency to them; they set up an exclusive of good thoughts, shut
the door against all godly seriousness, turn the Engine of the thinking power
into an instrument and forge, for themselves to act a sinful seriousness, to
farther only the satisfying of them.

I have read in Pliny, that the Romans attempting a discovery of some more
unknown places of Africa, could not proceed and succeed in it by reason of the
innumerable sorts of Serpents and poisonous creatures, which filled the
Country. Thy heart is like that Country, full of dangerous lusts, which overrun
it; there is the true reason why thou will not, can not meditate, because the
predominant lusts in it engross and enslave the whole thinking power, lusts
rule thy lookings, thy hearts sinfulness has seized thy seriousness, sweeps
all thoughts in to it self and service. One lust shares now one proportion of
thoughts, another lust goes away with another part, and so among them all, who
take their turns in thy heart, they gather up, and appropriate all thy
seriousness and vigor of thoughts, all that are to any purpose; all other
thinkings are so short, slight, seldom acted in comparison, that they amount to
nothing, millions of them make no more than motes in the Sun would contribute
to make a Mountain, because there is commonly nothing of seriousness in them;
when they are acted toward things spiritual, they are but smoke or chaff that
flies away: And consider why lusts have thy thoughts so enslaved to them, it is
because lusts and sin have that Empress of thy heart, thy love; for as thy love
is, so are thy thinkings; thou pretendest thou love God, and with all thy
heart, but it is no such thing; that which has the love most, has the eye
most, Vbi amor, ibi oculus, as the common saying is; who ever could truly say
they loved any person most, and thought of that person least, but of other
things every day and hour more?

O consider this well, how evil it is thou meditatest not by reason of thy
reigning corruptions and lusts that will not let thee meditate; and lusts have
thy thoughts from having thy love.

4. Why as to thy own frame of spirit is there a neglect of this holy Duty? it
is from sin reigning in the relishing part, the palate of thy soul; sin that
takes away thy taste, and makes godliness unsavory: Those that are after the
flesh, savor the things of the flesh, Romans 8.5. Ah, not to meditate from such
a sad cause, from a not savouring the things of God! finding no sutableness, no
sweetness, no pleasantness in spiritual things! none in the Word and ways of
God, in the precious promises, heavenly graces, glorious privileges, given to
the Children of God! none in an infinitely sweet and blessed God, Father, Son,
and Spirit! none in the things above, but all in the things below, not because
they have no savor or sweetness in them, but because thy carnal heart has no
principle of savouring of them!

5. Nay is it not from sin that lodges and breeds in thy bosom a hellish enmity
against any thing is holy? Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity to God, and so
against every thing that comes from God. Ah but sinner, this is the blackest
thing in thine or any bosom, this is the loathsomest thing in all the world,
it is the chief feature and lineament in the face of Satan, the most abominable
part of Satan's heart, and the very worst thing in all Hell; nothing is, or will
be more evil in Hell, than their enmity, boiling up, and running over
continually against God.

6. But who is he that has unhinged thy heart, in respect of this Duty of
Meditation, that acts thee to this awkness, and bars the door against it? is it
not Satan that dwells and rules within? Satan that is thy souls implacable
Enemy, and the great adversary to this Meditation? And what is his reason of
hindering thee, his grand reason, but that he knows this to be the way of
coming to a man's self, and converting to God?

Of all such things that are dispositive and assisting to Conversion and Faith,
Satan is the grand enemy to this consideration and meditating of a man's
spiritual condition; if thou will do Satan's will, and gratify him the best
thou can, if thou will give him the best security of utter undoing thy self,
let him see and know thou will not consider and muse on thy souls concerns, but
look quite another way.

7. Whither do thy thoughts sink and soak, but into the base Earth, and in the
base things of it; he that looks with his bodily eye, if he looks not upward,
may look many other ways than downward, right forward, on the right, or left
hand; but thy soul's eye, if it look not to things above, it looks downward to
the things below, Col. 3.5. the base dry earth drinks up all thy thoughts.

8. When will thou begin to think, to think to any purpose indeed, when will
that time be? shall it be when thou art most timeless and heartless? when thou
have least leisure, least fitness, bodily fitness and disposition, of ease,
strength, spirits, and senses? when thou have least heart-fitness, of desires
and willingness, which with time will wear away and be less?

The longer thou disusest thy self to good and setious thinkings, the less fit
and disposed thou will every way be, and the more will vanity of thoughts grow
upon thee, dye thy mind into the grain Color of habitual vanity; the more will
thy heart grow up and ripen in an aversness from all good thoughts, harden and
grow more sinfully and desperately set against seriousness, all such meditating
as is necessary to true repenting.

9. Will thou defer thinking and considering till it be too late, till time and
the season of grace shall be no longer, till life, and soul, and Heaven be
irrecoverably loft? Will thou lose this short time here, till thou come to an
Eternity of time, to think of thy neglects of thinking? to muse when it will do
no good, when musing on thy not musing and meditating, will turn into torturing
and tormenting thee for ever?

Ah, therefore now while it is called to day, now while thinking may do thee
good, good to converting and saving; ah now bemoan thy self, and sad, so sad,
dreadful, and dangerous state; never rest or be quiet till thou becomest a
serious person, one that uses his thinking power to the right end, and in the
right manner, to meditate thy self home, as the Prodigal did home to his
Fathers house, to be received with great joy.

1. Consider therefore, this is one part of wisdom indeed, of wisdom for thy
self, when thy soul concerns have their allowance of due consideration.

2. Never expect a cure of that worm, that Wolf in thy breast, of those
gnawing, grinding pains, and terrors of conscience, until thou by
consideration come to convert and turn to God.

3. Never will thou taste of peace of conscience, joy that is unspeakable and
full of glory, until thy thoughtvanity be healed, and thou becomest a seriously
meditating person.

1. Therefore begin at that first Meditation of thy unspeakable misery under
sin, Gods wrath for it, death eternal awaiting thee, and which by deaths soon
coming may seize thee, and seal thee up in it for ever.

2. Labor, that consideration may rightly issue in an awakening thee out of
thy deep security, in a contrition of Spirit, and a right preparative humbling,
dashing thy pride and carnal confidence.

1. To fear exceedingly, for thy so great misery and danger, by being under so
great wrath of a God, and the curse of his Law, Act. 16.29.

2. To sorrow and mourn deeply for this thy misery, thy mirth and laughter
being turned into heaviness, Jam. 4.9.

3. To despair of help in thy self, see the insufficiency of thy own goodness
and righteousness, and of thy own ability of wisdom to devise, will to choose,
or any power of thine to save thee.

4. To come from former carelessness and negligence, to an earnest care and
desire to be cased and delivered, Act. 2.37.

2. Then being weary and heavy-laden, endeavor the second consideration of the
way of relief and help.

1. By pondering the infinite love of God, his willingness to receive
brokenhearted sinners to mercy, pardon, reconciliation, adoption, and full
salvation.

2. The fullness of Redemption in Christ freely offered to all.

3. By pondering the Promises of salvation, righteousness, so perfect and
glorious pardon, so full of all graces and happiness: Christ must be received
in the Promises, rested upon as sure, good, and free.

4. By earnest, often praying for grace, faith, and other graces, a new heart,
and new principles, which will introduce a new power, and make godliness in all
the duties of it, and this of Meditation, sweet and easy.

CHAP. VII. An Application to such as are godly, and have tasted the sweetness
of Meditation.
2. Use of exhortation. THE next persuasion and instigation is of all such who
from a right principle planted in them by heart-changing grace, and their
experience from often and usual practice of Meditation, have tasted the benefit
and sweetness of it; to take heed of neglecting it, and to endeavor a
constancy and improvement in it.

As there is nothing harder than to hedge in the thoughts and govern them, so
how hard is it to make them keep and beat this path of Meditation, to have the
soul go, as with Hinds feet, most readily and with enlargements of steps in it?
The holiest heart is too apt to flag and be weary, in the best pathway to
Heaven.

Meditation has a strong and active Enemy in every bosom; when any would do
this good, evil is present, in backwardness to it, regret and reluctaney rises
up, puts in a caveat, hangs a weight and clog to hinder, which watchfulness and
resolution must spy out and cast off: Cast off every weight, says the Apostle,
Heb. 12.1. Every weight the flesh casts upon a Duty, the spirit must cast off,
and then run; sin at all times can easily beset us, and now at this time we may
easily find it.

How easily will sin beset us with excuses? how easily with whole Troops of
Arguments will it charge us? how easily with swarms of diversione, diverting
thoughts, purposes, affections, will it seek to warp us? this thing, and the
other, and a third, and a thousand, that fly about as thick in the heart, as
motes in the Sunshine.

1. Meditation is harder than some other Duties of godliness; for in other
Duties the body comes in, as an assistant to the soul, and lends a hand of
help: As in praying, there may the voice come in, which is a great furtherance,
keeping better up the minds intention, and keeping better off deadness and
distraction: In reading, the eye is exercised, and the mind is the better, as
to attention and heeding, if not to heat and intention: The eye affects the
heart; so preaching has the ear to convey and make the better impression: But
in Meditation, the soul acts single and unassisted, without a stirring up, or
exciting by any sense, or any help from the body, and so it is the harder, as
the condition of our Nature now makes it: In the state of imperfection, we need
the bodies help to farther the soul in its workings in some sort.

2. Meditation has least opportunities of coming under observation of others,
and thereby less provocation and encouragement for doing well, by either bad or
good, before whom, in other cases, our light should shine, and God by them be
glorified.

3. Meditation is hard, in that it is an acting of the quickest faculty, and
the most slippery piece of the soul; nothing is nimbler than the thinking
power, no act in the world quicker, and of more expedite motion than that of a
thought, and nothing sooner slips off the object, or thing acted upon, and
makes a way faster to a new, than the thinking faculty; like the Bird put wild
into a Cage, the door is no sooner open, but she is gone.

Meditation is harder, being not bare thinking, a flash, a sit for an instant,
a touching; but a fixing and stay of thoughts, a detaining them, which
otherwise are as Oil in a man's right hand, that will not be retained: A carnal
heart counts all Ordinances, and spiritual engagements, but coming into bonds,
tyings with Cords, longs to break them and be free, so does it by this Cord and
tie of Meditation; it is harsh work to the flesh.

O it is a most high attainment, to be able to say, O God my heart is fixed,
Psalm. 108.1. fixed as to the purpose of heart, the choice and intent of the
will, so to have the head, the mind, to cease the rolling, ranging vanity and
slipperiness, and to act fixedly in the way of seriousness, not be a
lightheaded, but a musing man, a person of ponderings, and thought-stayings;
like the Be that lights on the Flower, and stays to have the Honey with her
e're she removes.

4. Meditation is the harder, in that Satan has greater power upon, and more
immediate passage to the faculty of imagination, than other faculties of the
will and affections; he works not so immediately on the will and affections, as
upon the imagination, and there he endeavors interruptions by his injections
and suggestions; there he endeavors diversions to think quite another way from
the work in hand, and disturbances, casting in by-thoughts, and sundry objects
of different or contrary nature to the duty we are in.

As Satan filled Ananias heart, but first by filling the imagination with
thought of covetousness; so he can cast suddenly into the best heart thoughts
and apprehensions, when about the best work, to disturb and hinder.

Besides, consider his malice is great against Meditation, knowing how great
advantage comes to us by it, and how much disadvantage to him.

Satan is much prejudiced by ponderings; he ever watches when this work is
taking in hand, and therefore Christian, thou have greater reason of taking the
greater heed; to watch him that so watches thee, to fight him that fights
against thee, and so envies thee the help of this Ordinance, that would not
have thee enjoy the freedom of one good, one serious thought, but is casting
the dust of evil thoughts in the eyes of our minds, when they are looking up to
Heaven, but principally he envies and opposes seriousness, searchings and
dwelling of thoughts upon spiritual things.

Satan deals with us here, as deceitful Courtiers and Counselors have done
with their Masters, diverting them from minding their affairs, and all right
seriousness, by pleasures, and new devices, under the pretense of freedom from
encumbrances, and trouble and enjoying themselves; but that hereby they might
more securely prosecute and compass their own private interests. Satan had
rather we should do any thing than keep up a seriousness in Meditation (or any
other holy Duties) which may keep us awake and in a watchful posture, against
his enterprises.

5. Meditation is the harder, by reason of the exemplary mindlesness of so
many, we daily meet and converse with, who refuse and slight all seriousness,
as unnecessary niceness, or neglect it, out of slothfulness, and lothness to
trouble themselves.

Bad Examples are very infectious, apt to convey a secret poison into men's
hearts, when they heed them not; by touching this pitch, the best are ready to
be defiled.

6. Meditation is like the road or passage, where many things meet us, justle
us, and are ready to turn us out of the way; cares they strive to come in,
businesses and multiplicity of affairs, sudden emergencies, and sundry things,
that may attempt to interpose; and these, if our watch and guard be not the
stronger and stricter, will miscarry the Duty.

Yea sometimes one Duty may drive out another; often we let holy duties
interfere, and cross each other, hearing, praying, and the rest, sometimes
there is hastening from one to another, sometimes letting one detain us so long,
that others are cut short, and so helps are turned in part into hindrances,
opportunities for some Duties into obstructions to others, when godly prudence
allows every thing its season and due proportion of time.

The external hindrances to Meditation are many from common business, and
things of this life; and we often create our own hindrances by our sloth and
imprudence, not carefully redeeming and wisely ordering our times and
opportunities.

Ah then my soul, if Meditation be so high, so hard, as to its spiritual
nature, and has withal such Enemies and oppositions, look to it then I must
the more cautiously, but not less resolutely perform it.

The Moralists say, that difficulty is cos virtutis, the incentive and
heightener of magnanimity; to a great and heroic spirit nothing must be so
great as to outlook it and discourage it: The greater and braver fish swim
against the stream; the noble Christian by difficulty and opposition is
cautioned, but not cowed out.

If there were nothing to set against and weigh with the former cautions and
arguments from Enemies and opposition, if no high inducements and advantageous
arguments to put into the scale of persuasion, to weigh against such as fill
the scale of diswasion, it then might the more reverse and turn the edge of thy
courage (yet arguments from evil and mischief, in many cases are sufficient
alone) the danger of an armed Enemies approaching, as in Jacob's case; the
danger of deadly poison, prepared for thee, or infection coming very nigh thee
is enough. But we have encouragements, and those in full measure, pressed down
and running over. As Elisha to his servant discouraged, when encompast in
Dothan, we have more with us than against us: What if there be a principle of
flesh, that makes opposition; yet thy principle of spirit and grace, is a real
ground of hope and help: If thy grace, Christian, be true, though but a grain
of mustard seed, it will live, and hold, and act and grow, act into endeavor
and striving till it overcomes: A principle will help thee.

1. Consider, a principle introduces an inclination, a bent and tendency of
heart against the inclination and contrary tendency of corruption, Psalm.
119.112. and it is a principle must live, and the contrary carnal principle must
die; Romans 6.11. Reckon your selves dead unto sin, but alive unto God: Sin as to
the purchase of Christ is dead in the Saints totally, and it is dead in the
habit and root initially and in part, in respect of the communicated and
inherent grace of Christ, which upon union with Christ, begins the death of sin
in mortification, Romans 6. 2. A principle, besides inclination and tendency,
introduces power and ability; as the Flesh has its power, so the spirit and
grace has its contrary power. 3. A principle introduces facility; though the
Flesh makes Duties hard, yet the Spirit is ready, and makes godliness easy. 4.
A principle introduces delight and complacency, the Flesh acts reluctance, the
Spirit delight and pleasure, Psalm. 119.47. 5. A principle works holding on and
constancy, Gal. 5. as the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, so the Spirit against
the Flesh ( Psalm. 119.12. last part of the verse) not only begins but holds on;
a principle will help you to hold on, for God will hold that on, Phil. 1.6. He
that has begun a good work in you, will finish it to the day of Christ. 6. A
principle is blessed, by the using of it, with progress and growth; the flesh
that shall decrease and waste, but the grain of Mustard Seed shall grow to a
great tree, Math. 13.32. 7. A principle shall be crowned; by contending and
striving, with glorious conquest and victory; the Spirit wars against the
Flesh, and it conquers in the issue, by its still warring; judgment is brought
forth to victory, Romans 8.37.
Ah, never be discouraged for any thing within, be very sensible of sin within,
and the stirrings of it, but sink not under the sight of it, take thou
encouragement, Christian, to fight it, and to subdue it; if thy hearts badness
appear, its backwardness and crossness to any Duty, know you can get nothing by
giving way, but by going on and striving; and use this herein as thy rule, wear
out thy own backwardness to and weariness in a Duty, by doing it in a resolved
constancy, wear out the indisposition to duty, by doing that Duty, and doing it
fervently.

2. What if Satan be such an Enemy, yet have we not more and stronger with us
than him? we have the holy Spirit that helps to pray, and he will help us to
meditate.

If he sees we are laboring to get up the Mount in Meditation, he will give us
his hand to help us up; if Satan and all Hell be against us in this or any
other Duty, he will be for us, yea, Father, Son, and Spirit are and will be all
assistants to us: Do we not use to say, God came in at such a time, in such a
Duty? He delights to see how the pulse of thy spirit beats heavenward, how the
eye of thy soul looks upward, how it fixes its looks of heavenly love upon him;
he delights to help up thy heart in its holy Meditation, to help it tower up to
Heaven, to taste of those surmounting glorious delicacies, prepared for his
beloveds entertainment and highest solace.

What others in their exemplary carelessness, hold forth what their mindlesness
is, they use; must not have any impression of discouragement, or prove to us
any impediment.

It is no staying till we can take every one along with us in our journey to
Heaven.

Neither must the example of any, the highest, the greatest, the richest, the
wisest, and learnedest, the nearest related, the dearest affected, nor any
under any consideration whatever, have that ill influence upon us, either to
discourage or divert us, weaken our hands, or hinder our making straight steps
in this blessed path of meditating diligently upon heavenly things.

Neither let the cares and pleasures, business and affairs of this world,
hinder this soul great affair of serious Meditation in the seasons of it.

The Saints of Christ in all ages have found a way to this duty, as well as
others, and that through the throng, and multiplicity of crowding and justling
occasions. As it is said of our Lord Christ, in Luke 4.30. when they of
Nazareth, angry with him, thrust him out of the City, and would have cast him
down headlong, he passing through the midst of them goes his way; the Saints of
Christ have made their way, passing through the midst of businesses and
emergencies, troubles, and disquiets. They had a wisdom given them to find out
a way, they had a will, a purpose, and resolvedness fixed, so as to overlook and
overcome obstructions and lets, from throngings of business, and multitudes of
still successively interposing diversions: That holy David who had so many
highly urging and pressing occasions, as no man now, whatsoever he be, can have
more; yet he made his way continually through all the throngings of so high
importancies, and most urgent affairs; he had a wisdom given to find a way, and
a will to resolve to Meditate, and he did it daily.

Psalm. 119.48. He says he will meditate in Gods Statutes; when he so
determined, certainly he did it not rashly, and without consideration of his
many occasions and weighty affairs, and those great diversions which he might
after meet with at home and abroad, in Peace and War; yet thus he resolves: And
Psalm. 119.97. he says it, and to the Lord himself, that he did it, and all the
day; first he says he will, then says he does meditate, and says it to the
all-knowing God.

It therefore hence appears how feasible and practicable this Duty is;
notwithstanding cares, business, troubles of all sorts whatever, from the world
and living in it, there is an attainable will.

1. A godly heart may come to say I will, may set an universal purpose of
heart, a firm purpose, and a purpose of equal extent, to the whole latitude of
Gospel Duties, and whatsoever the Word requires. 2. And likewise he may have a
latitude of wisdom, to understand his way, every way he is to walk, Prove. 14.8.
The wisdom of the wise is to understand his way. Psalm. 119.98. Thou have made
me wiser than mine Enemies; and 99. I have more understanding than my teachers:
There David discovers he had wisdom for his way, and how he arrived at such a
height of wisdom, and directs us how to come by it. 3. And as a Christian may
come to say he will do such a required Duty, and arrive at the wisdom of doing
it, so by grace he may come up to an answerable extensiveness of practice and
performance, walking in all the ways of the Lord, as Zacharias and Elizabeth,
Luke 1.6. David often professes his both universality, as of his heart-purpose,
so of his practice, as the 119. Psalm, and others, abundantly show.
Yet first fixing our purpose in the strength of Christ, then following after
the wisdom of our way, making it a grand scope to attain the wisdom, the right
and sure wisdom of our soul affairs, to be Artists in Religion; and then
falling close to practice what we resolve and understand; this with Christ's
help will make our work, any work upon our hands to prove easy, Prove. 8.9.
They are all plain to him that understands, easy the old Translation has it:
we have a saying in Divinity, Iter ad pietatem, est intra ipsam pietatem, the
way to godliness is within godliness; that is, the way to learn it, is to act
it, and the way to facilitate and make it easy, is by exercising our selves
still in it, setting upon, and keeping up the practice of it: He that does much
in it fervently and frequently, will come to perform with increasing facility:
Slack and listless doing, slight and negligent performing may come to loathing
and leaving, end with the disadvantage of a far worse temper of heart-aversness
than there was at the first.

Formality in Religion ends often in falling first off from it, and then falling
out with it; contrarily doing with care and fervency, increases spiritual
strength, and the increase of strength makes the work more easy.

In using to do it earnestly, we arrive at a doing easily: O therefore let
every one be highly encouraged to hold up our constancy in this excellent Duty,
to walk with an extensive and increasing evenness and equality, in this so
pleasant high road to Heaven, both in daily Meditation; in that for the
entrance, and that other for the ending of the day; in also the occasional
solemn Meditation, that rare way of spiritual improvement in wisdom and
heavenly warmth; and in that way of Meditation, by short and sudden
ejaculations. This threefold cord will draw strongly Heavenward, will make thy
soul go from strength to strength, from warmth to warmth, from pleasure to
pleasure; make thee keep upon the wing, mount up aloft, and not be weary by the
successive varieties, and the abundant sweetness flowing hereby into thy bosom;
and to wind up this instigation in a word, 1. Is my heart dead at any time and
listless, how soon will Meditation quicken it, and reduce it into activity? 2.
Is it barren and unfruitful alone or in company, what rare rich matter can
meditating bring in, and spread over the barren soil of my spirit, and make it
soon put forth fruitfully? 3. Is it chill and cold, without wonted warmth and
vivacity, what fuel can it fetch to kindle a fire on this hearth, fuel from
Heaven and Earth, from the Word and Works of God, and all sorts of objects
whatever, spiritualizing them for my use, what sparks can it strike, what coals
can it kindle and blow up into a flame to thaw my frozen heart? 4. How high a
preparative is Meditation to prayer, to enrich it with choicest materials, to
enliven it, and make it burning hot in holy fervency? 5. How rare a dispositive
to hearing the Word of Christ, to open the everlasting doors of the heart, to
widen the heart for a letting in more freely of heavenly Truths, and increasing
the good hearts treasure, to make us swift to hear, to hear with the largest
and liveliest affections, readiest purpose, most raised and fixed resolutions,
to receive and obey the Word in every thing, most abundant readiness to be
molded into the form of Doctrine that shall be delivered? 6. What an
efficacious helper is Meditation to spiritual digestion, and reducing divine
Truths into sound and good nourishment, which miscarry in others for want of
due meditating?


And what a mighty assistant is it to holy Duties? what is there performed
wisely and with vigor, unless directed and assisted by Meditation?

For to make the instigations more full, we may look back to the ends of
Meditation, and the afterward grounds were given and enlarged upon, which being
many, will be too long to repeat.

Two things only remain to finish this Improvement.

1. The Evidences and Characters of a right and due Meditation. 2. The
Directions and Rules for the best managing of it.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Evidences of a due Meditation.
FOr the Evidences of a due and right Meditation, it must have the Nature,
Properties, and Attendants of it; and therefore it is not to be taken up as a
custom, as a thing made to stop the mouth of a calling and urging conscience,
or a mere acting for Notions, a study and search of Curiosity, to know Novelty,
or to know much, and be able to hold discourse with others.

But it must have a higher nature, purer ends, and be performed in another
sort, then an only wise or a learned man, yea then any formal Christian can act
or compass of himself.

And for the Characters of a right holy Meditation, there will be no need to
fetch any other lights of discovery, but only to take up and hold those to this
intendment, which were opened in the discovery of the nature of divine
Meditation.

1. As making it our real and high obedience to God, the sovereign Lord of our
souls, and to the golden Scepter of his Word in that express Law of his, laid
upon the thinking power, and grounded upon the high and infinite obligations he
has on us, to impose this thought-tribute, and homage, a pure obedience to
him, and doing his will herein.

He that meditates aright, has been taught and learnt to obey God, to yield it
to him as his due. I am under my God, says the right Christian, and infinitely
obliged to all which he commands me. This among others, is one of his righteous
and holy Laws, one great signification of his Royal will; I must not, will not
deny it, dispute it, or put it from me, but comply freely with it.

And this comes from that spring, that root which lies at the bottom of the
heart, that supereminent love to God (the holy hearts chief good) and the great
ground of all right obedience.

Romans 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and so is it the fulfilling of
this particular Law of holy Meditation, love to God, so infinitely excellent in
himself, and who has so unspeakably loved the holy soul.

Therefore if it be the right and genuine obedience, it has this high, this
warm spring of love running in this channel, this of Meditation, an
over-powering constraining love that breeds this thinking, this looking of the
soul in Meditation.

O therefore try if this heavenly love has first been planted in the soil of
thy heart, if from a new heart circumcised to love the Lord above all; that
thence thou come to love Meditation, because thou love the Lawgiver first,
who writes his Law, and writes this particular Law in thy heart by love to it,
by making thee a lover of Meditation.

2. If Meditation be genuine and right, then is it from a choice of will,
wrought up by the power of holy love subduing and mortifying carnal and
formerly predominant unwillingness and stubbornness, reluctance and refusals of
this work, and framing it to willingness, freeness, and fixedness of purpose to
do it, and hold it, Psalm. 119.48. I will meditate, says the holy Psalmist;
Meditation arose from resolution, from a will fixed, and that arose from love
acted, and working the will to resolution. Therefore in the 97. verse of this
Psalm, he speaks it to God himself, O how love I thy law! and what fruit does
this noble root of love put forth? it is my meditation all the day: Meditation
of the Law proceeds from love to the Law.

Love lay at the bottom, and that engaged the will into a firm resolution to
meditate. Never is the will freer, and its purpose firmer, then when love
inclines and engages it. The highest and strongest resolutions that ever were
taken up by any holy heart, were the rare products and sweet fruits of heavenly
love, love efficaciously exciting the will, winding it up to the top, and then
fixing it fast.

3. Where the work of Meditation is right, the aims and ends of it are pure,
spiritual, and holy, it is carried beyond and above self; it is an acting with
self-denying: self is neither the total, nor the predominant ingredient in this
undertaking.

That which Christ calls for, of denying a man's self, Mark 8.34. in the extent
of all Christianity, must particularly be performed in this duty.

Self- seeking must not be uppermost, not the main intent or inducement: For
this is the Sphere an unsound heart moves ever in.

The aim and end in the best natural man is never higher then self, and no
other really then self, and that because he chiefly loves himself.

But a right work must be aimed and acted above all to the living God.
Therefore Zec. 7.5. God tells them their fasting was not right, because they
did it not to God; so is Meditation, or any other duty not right, if it be not
to him, aimed above all at his Glory.

In this respect therefore, Religion is in Scripture called Godliness, because
it is a frame of spirit acting above all self ends and inferior respects, unto
the living God above all.

So Heb. 9.14. To serve the living God; works not done to the living God, are
dead works; a living work is aimed and levelled to the living God.

The end more particularly must be the glorifying God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Do all to
the glory of God. If eating, drinking, and such inferior things, then much more
holy duties must be done to Gods glory.

There must be an inward powerful principle that can aim so highly, really, and
an acting of that principle that God is actually glorified.

It is not enough to say we do, as many erringly affirm, they aim their duties,
when they never had first that right principle of Holiness wrought in their
hearts. Without the principle of Holiness it is impossible to have holy
aimings, holy ends. It Is impossible without an eye to see to level at a mark.

Wheresoever there is a right doing, there is a potent elevating principle, that
sets the spirit above the predominancy of self-seeking, and acts it into a
reality of God-exalting above all, that kindles and inflames the soul into an
ardency of desire, love, delight of glorifying God in every undertaking.

This is unspeakably sweet, and heart-gladding; nothing pleases a holy heart
more then when the heart below can run in some degree parallel with the hearts
of Saints and Angels above, in hallowing and advancing the highest God, and his
Name.

Try we therefore if our meditating be a real acting up to the grand scope and
highest end, the exalting of God, if his honor be indeed the preponderating
inducement and greatest soul-aim.

2. Happiness and our own Salvation was the next aim formerly mentioned,
happiness propounded and declared in the Gospel, and no other. To this next
subordinate end must all the golden lines of holy duties tend, here they must
center. Every right duty must be a real levelling at Gospel-happiness, that
which God proffers, and Christ has purchased.

If Meditation be right, it is a part of true wisdom for our selves, Prove.
9.12. Wisdom to salvation, as really aimed at it, as any marksman aim at his
mark,

God, next to himself and his glory, allows and requires to look and seek,
labor and strive for eternal life and happiness; and all our duties, as they
are subservient to his glory, so our own happiness is complicate and wrapped up
in it, yet not above it, or equal with it, but next under it. Accordingly
therefore, in this duty, as in all others, our aim at happiness must not be a
mere self-seeking, it must not terminate only in our selves; but our own
happiness must be aimed at for glorifying God by it.

We must aim at happiness, and being in Heaven, thereby to be in a most perfect
state, that we may attain the most perfect principle for the highest exalting
of God.

Althugh in Heaven, seeing more, and tasting more, and having the vessels of
body and soul filled up with glory and happiness, makes our state more
glorious; yet the end of that seeing, tasting, and all enjoyings there, are to
put us into a most perfect capacity, highest heart-readiness, and alacrity,
upon the most over-powring incentives to lift up to the utmost the glorious
praises of God. This then is a very considerable particular, that besides
glorifying God, the supreme end, aiming at our own salvatition, must be more
then for our selves.

We use to speak of several spiritual ends relating to our own spiritual good,
which we are allowed to set up, and seek, and strive after; yet all these must
have this reduction, must all have this glory of God for their chief end.

The last end, as has been said, gives the rules to all both subservient ways
and ends.

Therefore in our examination, let us take in all the spiritual ends before
spoken of, for heavenly light and larger knowledge, for a spirit of wisdom to
be wiser to salvation, to be warmer at the heart, melt off all encumbrances,
make up to Heaven better, to fix our resolutions firmer, strengthen our grand
purpose of still walking with God, to stablish our course, and make straiter
steps for our feet, and to press harder to the mark. Are our spirits acted to
these aims, and all those other, Meditation is so excellently and usefully
appointed to?

2. Do we meditate in the right way of calling off our thoughts from
impertinencies and diversions?

Do we set a strong guard upon our spirits, and watch them diligently?

Do we act Meditation in bending our minds to it, strive to act with all
seriousness we can? Do we act searching and pondering, and keep up constancy of
thoughts till we both bring our hearts to the heavenly temper, and the duty to
the kindly issue it should have, and cannot be content with any thing, but that
a God who sees our actings will approve of?

CHAP. IX. Of the Directions relating to Meditation. First, for such as would
begin.
AFter some Characters given of a right Meditation, I shall next speak of
Directions or Rules to be observed about it. The Rules must be suited to the
several sorts of persons that will set upon this work, or proceed in it with
success.

1. If it be a person who would enter upon this way, being sensible of the sin
of hitherto neglecting it, and is now willing to be advised how to perform it.

Then consider, it is no undertaking it, or hope of doing it aright, and
holding on with constancy, and to the spiritual advantages of it, unless there
be an endeavor after a right principle, a living spring within to found and
still feed a due performance of this spiritual work.

To undertake it without, thou will find it too high and hard, arrive at the
best, at a formal doing, a slight and overly doing, and in the end grow weary
of it, and cast it off, and so return to it no more.

Therefore thy great intendment, to which thou must bend thy self and whole
soul (which should not, must not be given over, until it be effected) is to
make sure of a new heart, this will bring in a new power, a new principle,
introduce a bent and inclination of spirit, a love unto it, a firm and abiding
purpose, a rooted resolution for doing it against all difficulty and
opposition. This will make the duty of Meditation easy, and also sweet; by the
pleasure and advantages found in this heavenly way, thou will be encouraged to
hold on, success will encourage thee, that will sweeten the way to thee, and
help to stablish thee in it.

Though thou can not change thy own heart, and make it new, lay in a new
principle of Holiness; but it must be God who gives the new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26,
27. And works the will and the deed of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Yet
as he calls thee to convert, and in order to thy converting, requires thee to
consider, and bethink thyself; so is it thy necessary and important duty to
consider and ponder deeply and frequently those things, and in that manner and
order which are most effectual to that end, and which God uses to set home. For
by putting thy self into Gods prescribed way of seriously and frequently
considering, thou may meet with a help, with God helping at last, who helps
them that seek him diligently, and give not over striving.

That relation is remarkable of the bad Son whom his father dying, calls to
him, and gets him to make this promise, That every day he should for but one
quarter of an hour meditate of some one thing or other, what he would.
Accordingly he every day employs a quarter of an hour, or some time in serious
thinking: But this at last most happily issues in serious considering his
sinful state, and a real converting to God at last.

Thus often it has come to pass, when persons have set themselves to consider,
as God in Scripture exhorts, it has ended in a true returning; so the Prodigal
is described, Luke 15. So Ezekiel. 18.

If thou art very desirous more particularly to be here directed what to do to
obtain the right principle, and thence the right way of acting this duty and
others in the holy and spiritual required manner.

I must not engage far in so large a point, yet if I exceed something, it will,
I hope, get pardon. Only I shall mention some particulars more necessary for
this so weighty a concern.

If really and in good earnest thou will engage, strive to purpose for
obtaining a sure principle of performing this or any duty aright, a principle
of Grace and Holiness, a new heart, and a new spirit.

1. You must go about it with the greatest seriousness that ever thou can,
and endeavor the firmest and strongest purpose for prosecuting it, till thou
have attained it. But then thou must see thy utter inability without Gods
lending a hand to help thee in so high an undertaking.

It is thou must endeavor, but God he must draw thee. Joh. 6.44. No man can
come to me unless the Father draw him. Thou must strive for, but God must give
repentance. 2 Timothy 2.25. If God will give repentance. Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned. Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will I give you. Yet God must
see us, when he calls for returning, to endeavor, and strive, and wait for his
giving, who works the will and the deed of his own good pleasure.

2. Thou must resolve to sequester thy self at times, at fit seasons from all
diversions, not suffering any thing then to interrupt thee: thou must sit alone
as Lam. 3.28.

3. Do all thou possibly can to be awakened out of thy deep security, so long
and so dangerously rested in. Ephesians. 5. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up
from the dead, etc.

For this thou must gather all awakening considerations the Scrpitures furnish
thee with, concerning the inconceivable misery every sinner is in.

But consider, things spoken in general in Scripture, and not brought and set
home on thy self in particular, will not work to an awakening. Neither will thy
saying and acknowledging thy sinfulness and misery in general, serve; Generals
humble not, Generals hit not home.

A single Arrow or Bullet will not serve against a whole flock of fowls, but
scattering shot must be used.

Take therefore all the warmest considerations thou can, and heap them as
coals of fire on thy own head, bring them home to thy own heart, to melt down
thy frozen frame of sinful security.

Do all thou can by the light of the Scripture, and beg, beg most earnestly
the light of the Holy Spirit to convince thee of thy extreme misery. It is he,
Joh. 16.9. That convinces of sin and misery.

Endeavor to thy utmost to rightly found this work by most industrious
striving, to see the exceeding sinfulness of sin, Romans 7. the abounding evil in
it, Romans 5. And do this by fullest possible pondering the great transcending
evil of the lesser sins, or such as are comparatively small, and we count not
great; see it in examples, as Vzzas dying by an immediate stroke for but
touching once the Ark, 1 Chro. 13.10. The Bethshemites for an only looking but
into the Ark; fifty thousand and seventy persons were slain by an hand from
Heaven, 1 Samuel 6.19. Adam and all his posterity with him were undone by his
eating of a fruit, because forbidden, which in the nature was no immortal
thing, as idolatry, murder, etc. but sinful, by a peculiar precept of trial
broken. Yea, if Adam, when he was the representative of all, had sinned the
least imaginable sin in one commission, sinned in one sinful, one vain thought,
it had been his own and all his succeeding posterities ruin, nay in the least
omission. Though there be many sorts of sins, with sundry measures and
aggravations, yet there is none so small, but is crimen laesae majestatis
infinitae, is high Treason against an infinite Majesty.

This is a grand intent of God in the whole Bible, and in also his punitive
Providence, to demonstrate Gods heart in his dislike and loathing all sin,
that it might blot out our mistakes, and reduce us, stamp our judgments and
hearts with a suitable impression, a sense of all sin, or whatsoever is but
near to it.

Therefore among others, that is very remarkable, Number. 6.9, 10, 11. The
Nazarite, not only by purposely touching a dead body, or coming to it, was
unclean: But if any dyed suddenly by him, he was to bring his sin-offering and
burnt-offering to make atonement; which was to manifest by the Type the purity
God requires, and his distaste of any the least likeness or nearness to any
defilement of sin.

Dwell and dive deep as ever thou can, into the abounding sinfulness of every
the least sin.

Thence reason and ponder with thy self, what is thy unspeakable misery, that
art guilty of a whole lifetime sins, such an innumerable company of sins, in
thoughts, affectings, purposings, speakings, doings; in acts, ways, habits, and
all thy heart evil that has ever dwelt in thee.

And if thou will overlook them, and not consider them, thou shall be judged
one day for them all. To methodize this grand Inquiry and Soul-search, and to
have the kindly issue in a due awakening, strive to avoid all confusion of
thoughts, and to do it distinctly, and in the best affecting manner thou can.

Rules of Art are not here necessary to be used, but the way of thy best skill,
by Gods assisting, thou can take to set an edge, and give more efficacy to
this undertaking; thou may single out first that sin or lust which dares and
pinches thy spirit most; touch first where thou art tenderest and sorest; on
that which items thee most, flashes fullest, like Lightning in thy face, makes
thy heart oftenest ache.

It Is the counsel of some great Divines, to pitch upon some gross sin first;
seek ease first where thou art disquieted most, or that is likely to give the
first blow. The Scriptures set sinners to consider their doings, especially
their ways, which are continued doings. These should more humble than mere
particular acts; but both acts and ways should be viewed, as they can be
recalled and brought to mind, and then put all into the scale to make down
weight, and contribute to fuller awaking.

But above all sinning any, or diverse sins, into ways, and then walking these
ways into wonts, those worst defilings and soul-enslavings of cursed habits;
such as habits of sensualness and intemperance, habitual covetousness and
worldliness, habitual pride and presumption, self-exalting, self-seeking,
habitual vanity of thinkings, and such like. These great chains thou art bound
with and enslaved by, Tit. 3.3. Serving diverse lusts: Lusts served are sins
formed into habits.

These old rooted soul-diseases, these heart-gangrenes should well be eyed, and
much awaken thee.

O it is sad to find thy self going to Hell in a custom and by a habit, binding
thee and haling thee thither.

To all, as highest aggravations, add the consideration of that sin of thy
Nature, that emptiness and deprivation of all spiritual life, power, image of
God and his glory, conjunction and communion with God and all happiness; with
cursed inclinedness to all the sin in kinds and aggravations, that the whole
World, Hell, and all, ever acted, or can act for ever.

And that blackest piece of Hell dropped into thy heart, the worst, very worst
thing in Satan's heart, that enmity and borrid repugnancy, crossness and
contrariety to all the extensiveness and dimensions of whatsoever is good, is
holy and righteous; yea that highest monstrosity and transcendency of impiety;
enmity to that God that gave at first, and ever keeps up thy being; and which
is the height of that height, the utmost venom Hell could hatch, and heart can
breed, that horrid enmity to the very Being of God himself. Before Grace, no
guilty sinner but wishes God were not, and if he could, would dethrone and
destroy God utterly. And above all yet intimated, take in the superabounding
sins against the Gospel, neglectings and refusings of the only remedy and
relief of an undone soul, which is the greatest possible soul-wronging: Prove.
8.36. wisdom affirms it, Sinning against me, says Wisdom, he wrongs his own
soul. All sin wrongs; but the meaning is more: he wrongs with the greatest
possible wrong, the highest can be done, to refuse Christ's Salvation. And which
is yet far exceeding all self-wronging, there sin so touches the very apple of
God eye, strikes so provokingly at his very heart, and dashes down his most
darling design, the utmost and highest that he ever went, or will go; the
highest exalting of the riches of infinite free Love and free Grace.

I have heard by a good Hand, that one of the Dukes of Muscovy, while he stood
talking with a poor Peasant of the Country, pitched a Spear he held in his hand,
upon the poor man's naked foot, there digging with the point of the Spear into
it, and the slave (for so they are generally) durst not complain.

O! Gospel-sins dig not into the foot, or hand, or eye of a God (if I may so
speak) but into his heart, and the very top and crown of it. Every sin against
the Gospel, kicks so at the very bowels of God, so dishonours him in that his
tenderest, upper interest, as nothing can higher offend, and therefore not
expose to deeper danger.

For farther help, take the Book of Conscience, thy Souls Register, and God
Remembrancer. Look over all the black Items there on the File, that it will
certainly one day produce, and set before thy face.

For yet surer assistance, take the perfect Rule and Glass of the Law and Word
of Christ, therewith duly comparing thy life and frame of heart, that by the
Laws coming, sin may the more abound.

O but the Law, not only discovers guilt, but denounces a most dreadful curse.
Gal. 3.10. Cursed be every one that continues not in all things written in the
Law, to do them. And as the Law, so the Gospel curses with a more dreadful
curse for not obeying it, in true coming to Christ by Faith. O what a curse
must this then be, to be accursed first for original corruption in all the
hellish wickedness of it: And then to he cursed for all thy innumerable actual
trangressions. Accursed for the first act of sinning. Accursed for the next
act. And for every new sin to have a new sentence, be under a new curse. For
every, every evil thought, every evil affection, purpose, word, work, every
commission, every omission, every day, for all the sins of it, to be accursed,
from the beginning to the end of it. Really by the curse, to be separated to
evil, bound over to death eternal in Hell. How should this startle and awaken
thee?

O but there is yet that is more dreadful, to be continually for sin, under the
hot displeasure and abiding wrath of a God. Psalm. 7.11. God is angry with the
wicked every day. Joh. 3.36. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on
him. This God, so angry for sin, how infinitely able is he to take revenge, and
how resolved is he, unless thou turn to him? O what is that death eternal, that
Hell provided to punish sinners!

How frail is thy life, by which thou art kept from falling into the Lake of
fire and brimstone?

How certain is thy death, and how uncertain is thy dying time? It may come in
a moment, and then thou art cast upon eternal ruin.

Consider, thy sins, after commission, grow not less, wear not out, are not
less dangerous. Sin is the same for substance, though thy sense of them be
less; we greatly deceive our selves herein, as if sin, the longer after
commission, were less; but the guilt of sin is the same, the defilement the
same, the curse against them is in the same force, the wrath, displeasure, and
resolution of God to revenge them, full out the very same, and Gods remembrance
of them is ever the same. Hos. 7.2. I remember all their wickedness; and how is
that? They are before my face. If they are not before thy face, as God can set
them, yet they are before his face, Psalm. 50.21.51.9. that is, seen and
remembered as a thing set full in a man's eye, and his eye full on them.

I have been too bold in thus enlarging. O it is hard to awake from the deep
sleep of sin. But this must be endeavored all thou can, and God he is to be
entreated to help and do this for thee. There must be an awakening by
conviction really and undeniably, seeing and acknowledging thy most woeful
condition.

Conviction in the understanding must end in contrition, and a working down to
the affections: In a fourfold affection, answering a fourfold distemper. 1.
Upon Fear. 2. Sorrow. 3. Despair. 4. Desire and care to be eased.

1. To tame presumptuous boldness and confidence in thy coming to fear, that
for all thy sin and danger feared not. As it is said in that particular case,
Jer. 36.24. Though so great sinners, and so severely threatened, yet were they
not afraid, but burnt the Roll. To say we have sinned is not enough, there must
be real pungent fear, Acts 2.37. pricked at the heart on sight of the sin of
killing Christ, a real and deep fear, to a wounding, piercing the heart and
thick skin of security, hindering the feeling of a woeful state, coming to be as
really sensible as thou do in assured and great danger, Act. 16.29. the
Jailer came trembling. God by his Spirit, the spirit of bondage, works this
fear, Romans 8.15.

2. There must be a dashing the usually carnal jollity and mirth. Jam. 4.9. Let
your laughter be turned into mourning, and joy into heaviness: this all the
Scripture calls for. A man condemned to dye a cruel death, if persuaded he must
dye, will not laugh and be merry, but mourn.

That mirth used at other times, is not to be used now.

3. To dash the deceiving, usual, carnal hopes which are the house built upon
the sand. Hopes of salvation on no true bottom, but fond fancy, mere
imagination. There must be despair as to all worthiness and ability in a man's
self, or any creature, or in God and Christ hoped, as many do, in a false way,
Deuteronomy. 29. Psalm. 50. Acts 2.37. What shall we do! implies, as I take it, (beside
other things) despair of what formerly they hoped and trusted on.

4. To curb and cure carelessness and a not desiring any other condition than
their present: or an only cold, as it is in many, and a fluctuating desire;
there must an edge be set upon desire, an earnest great desire to be eased of
the trouble and burden of sin and Gods wrath, Acts 16.29. What shall I do? and
Acts 2.37. What shall we do? implies an earnest desire to be eased. And
accordingly there must be an applying thy self to all the ways thou know,
and going to others that can advise thee. Praying especially often, and as
earnestly as thou can. Confessing and bewailing greatly thy present
condition. Upon being truly awakened, and thence made really sensible of thy so
woeful state, weary and heavy laden. After the first dispositive Meditation, and
the impressions made on thy heart through the Lords help, then a second
Meditation must next be mightily intended, and diligently followed, Meditation
on the means and manner of using them, for getting out of thy so sad estate,
and coming to a safe and happy. As he, Acts 16. What shall I do to be saved?

Here must be laid at the bottom of this work that so necessary consideration,
That none can help himself, and attain the mercy of a God in a meritorious
Savior, unless God the Father by his Holy Spirit, the mighty Applyer of
Christ's Redemption, draw efficaciously the weary sinner to the soul-easing
Savior, works faith to come, and rests on an all-sufficient Christ.

The first step in this great soul-concern, must be laboring to divert the eye
from a total or too much viewing of sin and Gods wrath, and earnestly endeavor
to be duly deeply possessed of the infinite mercy, love, riches of free favor
in Christ, in whom he is placable, and infinitely willing to show mercy.

1. Willing, in that he has, in his abounding wisdom and prudence, contrived
the way of Reconciliation in Christ, Ephesians. 1.

2. Willing in infinite love and riches of grace, he appointed his own only
Son, anointed him with all fullness of grace, sending him, and causing him to
work and procure Redemption perfectly in all respects, and then in making the
most free, imaginable, and possible proffer and tender of Salvation in Christ.

A discovery and tender in the exceeding great and precious promises, promises
that are as so many strong yernings and loud soundings of the bowels of a God
to sinners; promises most firmly fixed, as being all the ingrost particulars,
and the golden clauses of the Covenant of Grace, signed and sealed with the
most precious blood of Christ, and therefore ordered, and in all things most
sure.

The Promises and Covenant, are by most highly demonstrating (that hardly to be
believed and trusted to, by once awakened sinners) that free rich love of God
in Christ. by demonstration of it, the intendment is sirst, to found and breed
faith in weary heavy laden sinners, and after to build it up and perfect it.

Meditation should first fix upon the promises of free justification and pardon
of sin; and as humbling arises not from a confused general apprehension of fin,
or many sins, but distinct particular viewings of particular evils: so
comfortings and coming to relief, must be by singling out and pondering the
promises of mercy in particular. As a drowning man that scapes by a taking hold
on a particular thing, hand, or cord.

But the thing, the greatest and highest for breeding and founding justifying
faith, is first pondering the infinitely all-amazing and adored free love of
God the Father, Joh. 3.10. 1 John 3.1.

1. This is that so rich Mine, out of which the most precious Cornerstone
Christ himself was taken. 2. For principally glorifving this riches of free
grace, the Earth for a Stage was set up to begin the discovery and revelation
of it. 3. The great Assize of the great day of Judgment is chiefly appointed
for higher manifestation of it. 4. And the highest Heaven, with the state of
Glory there, is purposely founded and conferred on the Saints, for the highest
demonstration chiefly of free saving grace; not Angels glorification, but
redeemed Saints glorifying, is for free saving graces greatest glorifying, and
highest exalting.
Dwell here, till largest apprehensions and highest admirations swallow up and
drown all thy fears, doubts, and discouragements, raising thy spirit up to
hope, trust, and consolation.

But this so infinitely free love of the Father, must be connected with most
wishly viewing and most earnest pondering the highest proof and evidence of it,
in that greatest possible gift, Gods own Son, God in our Nature. Joh. 3.16. God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that, etc. Here after
all thy black and sad thoughts and disquiets, is the richest, strongest, and
surest Cordial for a fainting heart. A Christ in whom all fullness of wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption dwell; That out of his own
infinite love, became man, was in the form of a servant, performed the whole
Law, pacified the wrath of God, purchased perfect and eternal life, by laying
down his life a ransom. 1. A Christ freely offered by God the Father, Isa. 55.
Come and buy without money. 2. Freely offering himself, Joh. 7.37. If any man
thirst, let him come to me and drink. 3. Freely offered, and to be taken as the
Bride and the Spirit say, Come and drink of the water of life freely, Rev.
22.17. This free grace must be applied by the promises of grace and pardon more
especially and first. Christ is not offered by God the Father, and the Lord
Christ offers not himself, nor the Holy Spirit offers not, neither draws to
Christ, but on the ground of the promise of forgiveness and salvation. Nor can
it be taken by man, as a learned Divine expresses it, but mediante promissione.

The promises particularly must be pondered duly, often and often.

Ponder 1. The goodness of them, they are good, sweet indeed to a needy thirsty
spirit.

Ponder 2. The sureness and firmness, by a God that cannot lie, Tit. 1. All yea
and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.

Pvnder 3. The freeness of them. Nothing so free as they that come only from a
God, only for his own Name sake.

Ponder 4. The seal of them, in the rare and abundant examples recorded for
encouragement of sinners of all sorts, received to mercy. So 1 Timothy 1.16. I,
says the Apostle, was received for a pattern to them that hereafter should
believe to eternal life.

The promises must be pondered, prayed often over, as those which are for the
wounded, weary, and heavy laden, to breed faith; not only to feed it, but
found, and feed it also; to begin, and to build it up. Never leave pondering
the promises, Gods love, and Christ's fullness offered in them, until pondering
comes to hope, hope to thirsting, thirsting to highest prizing, prizing to
selling all, and buying the Pearl, till thou come to renouncing thy own
righteousness, thou casts thy self upon God in Christ, by the promise first
rested on, promise leading to Christ first, and to God by Christ; and not only
Christ for justification as thy Priest that purges guilt, and makes atonement,
but as thy Prophet and King for light and holiness, for a new heart, a new
principle, a new wisdom and power, a quickening power, from Union and Communion
with Christ, Romans 6. by the inhabitation and operation of his Spirit; by faith,
that hand that receives all from Christ; when by faith thou art justified and
sanctified, and receivest by influence from Christ a living principle. Now thy
heart is put upon the right hinge, for rightly performing holy duties, praying,
reading, hearing the Word: And now thou can meditate aright, in a holy and
happy manner, with wisdom and some skill, choice of will, complacency, and
constancy. And now Meditation will prosper in thy hand. Now as David's blessed
man, thy delight will be in the Law of God, and in that Law thou will meditate
day and night. I have been longer herein by much, then was my intendment; come
we to the next Directions.

CHAP. X. Of Directions for Meditation, respecting such as are young Christians
newly converted.
OUr next Work, after Directions to those that desire to successfully practice
holy Meditation, having formerly neglected it, is to treat of the Directions
for young Christians, who are but entered upon their way, how best to order
their right principle received, to their best advantage in this way of
Meditation.

1. Here, as the Rule of learned Physicians is, in curing of diseases, that
universals are first to be intended: So first your Rule is (to enter and engage
your selves into that great Road, and most ordinary work incumbent, of daily
Meditation) herein to contend and strive after an habitual holy frame, to habit
thy self as thou art able, to the right daily Meditation.

1. Habit and accustom thy self to the mornings Meditation, in awaking so still
with God, in serious thinkings of, and admirings his goodness and mercy in the
night past.

Begin to accustom thy self to first looking up to God, and that most seriously
and earnestly, that so near as may be, God ever may be the first in thy
thoughts. Psalm. 139. When I awake, I am ever with thee. And Psalm. 5.1. and 3.
Give ear unto my meditation -- In the morning, O Lord, will I direct or set in
order, as the word properly signifies, and look up. He awaked into Meditation,
and acted that Meditation, in lifting up his heart in praying. To improve holy
thoughts and holy desires, Gods being ever the first in our thoughts on
awaking, is certainly more his due and proper right, than any other things in
the world.

It is also the very best thought-bestowing, the best laying out our precious
thoughts for our own profit; best as to the help and furtherance of grace; best
for fresh incomes of sweet peace.

When first we act Heavenward, we act freest and freshest, when the spirit
acts upward, before lusts and corruptions are stirring, before Satan begins to
interpose, and before the world comes in to us, to hang on its weights upon our
hearts.

It is far more acceptable to the Majesty of the high God, to have the first
visit and homage; likewise more beneficial to our selves, to get the start of
other things, to give our hearts first a heavenly seasoning.

The vessel will be the sweeter, and retain an after better savouriness for the
coming day, when this is well and seriously done. Visit God early, and he will
visit us early. This awaking will occasion the Holy Spirits awaking and blowing
on the garden of thy heart for the spices to flow.

2. Come then to that Meditation relating to the duties of the succeeding day,
this then must be well attended for making a good entrance into this new course
of Meditation.

1. Here to strive after the true wisdom of this way, to be an Artist in some
measure, a wife Meditater. At the first we cannot be too wise, nor understand
too well a way new begun. Nor never can we here be so wise for doing any part
of our spiritual work, but we may learn more.

2. To have a due temper of warmth, fervor, and vivacity, this must be minded,
Romans 12.11. Fervent in spirit. To begin a course dully, act easily, and not
earnestly, this wrongs thee much, it hinders the otherwise obtainable faeility
of doing, with that rare sweetness attending a holy seriousness, and the rich
improvement of the main stock, that stock of grace given for increasing. A
habit comes not up by remiss actings, but by earnest actings. Cold water cannot
be made boiling hot, and kept so, by adding lukewarm water, but water very
hot. Easy actings will disintend and abate the habit, where attained; and
hinder the attaining, where aimed at. Easy endeavors will setle in a
spiritual laziness, set up at a formality; but equal and earnest, will itroduce
a strong habit and high.

Get the habitual fervency by daily actings of heat, and being fervent in every
doing. So when the Apostle urges fervency of spirit, he means a fervency in all
serving the Lord at all times.

3. As you must do this in reference to daily Meditation in the general way of
it, so habit and accustom thy self to meditating of thy chief and supreme end.

To a due and earnest meditating of God, and glorifying him; for this gives the
Laws and Rules to all thy course. If the question were, What is the best
thought arising any time in any heart, it is that which is of God, the
glorifying of him.

The purest highest thoughts of a God exalting him, must needs excel all other
thoughts, more than the Sun excels all candles or least lights whatsoever.

Use thy thoughts with David and other holy men of God, to bear strongly, and
act ardently upon this. This lays the foundation daily deeper of thy
self-denying, Mark 8.34. that so hard and tough work.

Self would not rise up and float so high in any good heart, if glorifying the
infinitely better God were more meditated daily upon, and had its more due and
down weight in the scales of the Christians thoughts, had more serious musing
upon.

4. Habit thy self, gain upon thy self as to serious daily Meditation on the
next end and scope, thy own eternal happiness and salvation.

Let not this so momentous concern want its weight in thy daily meditating; let
it have still some at least serious pondering: and this not only at thy first
entrance upon this way of daily meditating, then when thy fears and feelings of
wrath remain fresh in memory. But here is the Art and frame to be endeavored,
to grow up in more habitual seriousness of musing on this great salvation.

This was the blessed Apostles way; he not only at first when Christ humbled
him, began it, to meditate how to be saved, but eyed it daily, accustomed
himself into serious, more serious minding it, Phil. 3.13. I forget things
behind, and press to the mark. He kept his constant aiming, and aimed better,
still more fully, and therefore the act being stronger, the habit must be more
intended.

The habit of meditating here, should not sink and be in a consumption,
decline, and grow weaker, or but keep up alive; but it should root deeper, put
forth stronger, shoot up higher to the mark. Salvation should have quicker and
more lively impressions on us, like the natural motion, though slack at first,
yet quick at last.

That Is more natural and genuine which grows still stronger, like rich wine
more strong and spirit by keeping close.

5. Contend to habiting thy self to ponder those particular means making up to
the grand ends of glorifying God, and thy happiness in enjoyment of him for
ever. Namely,

1. Accustom thy self to as high and transporting thoughts of Jesus Christ, his
fullness of grace freely offered, and thy daily putting him on more, and growing
up in him. And this by Meditation of the precious Promises and the Faith,
whereby thou must through them, receive from Christ, and live by it.

2. So accustom thy self daily to Meditation of the Holy Spirits dwelling and
operating in every good heart, without whose assistance thou can not perform
any good; therefore must not be neglected, grieved, quenched, resisted, but
prayed for and cherished, earnestly expected, and highly entertained.

3. Accustom thy self to some seriousness of thoughts of the Ordinances of
Christ, the ways of our Communion with God (we have no other means for it) and
the walks wherein the Spirit comes.

4. Use to cast a wishly eye on all such conducing things, formerly mentioned,
as thou can have opportunity.

5. Look to well enter into, and fix upon the Meditation, daily examination, of
review, looking over matters of the day, and if hindered at any time, help it
by after-industry. I say the Meditation of Review in the close of the day, to
see, and judge thy self as to thy hearts frame, and thy carriage in the time of
the day.

This at the first is like the working with an Awkhand; this must not be
slubbered over, slightly done. But being harsh and unpleasant work at first,
thou must so manage it in care and constancy, that thou may gain a hand at
it, it may become easy and pleasant. Suarez a Jesuit says of himself, that his
times of self-reflection, and examining his conscience for matters of the day,
were the sweetest part of all the day.

Thy Rule must be to perform this work, so as it proves easier and sweeter, and
thereby thou improvest in it.

The more impartial and sincere you are in it, the sweeter you will find it.
The more accurate and exquisite your inquiries and heart-searchings are, and
the more impartial toward your self, the sweeter peace, the higher boldness
and confidence will thy heart be filled with. For this brings in the clearer
evidence of thy sincerity, thy impartiality.

Nothing perfumes the spirit of a Christian with sweeter peace and more
heavenly joy, than a clear discovery of the hearts uprightness and integrity,
which by searching our hearts, and impartially judging them, we attain. As
Psalm. 26.1, 2. David prays, Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine
integrity. And Psalm. 139.23. Search me, and see if any way of wickedness be in
me. This came from his own first impartial searching, and finding his
sincerity. Usual and diligent self-searching brings in, and keeps up a settled
peace and confidence, by a man's being daily more assured of sincerity and
heart-uprightness.

Be careful therefore and diligent in this self-searching.

CHAP. XI. Of the Directions for particular Cases of young Christians, how they
should do therein.
BEsides these more general things, last mentioned, I must next come to the
Rules of Meditation, as to thy particular case and condition.

Here, that thy Meditation must pitch upon, will be either,

1. The Case of thy assurance, either wanting, and not yet attained, or else
weak and feeble. 2. It must be something relating to sanctification, thy weak
grace, and many imperfections here, the purging of thy heart from diverse evils,
subduing of new rising and stirring corruptions; some particular sin that
haunts and troubles thee; some temptation which follows thee; some cross or
affliction lying heavy upon thee: or any other particulars wherein thou art
concerned, here to meditate how to have help the best and speediest.
1. That is a principal point of wisdom, to study and ponder the case of thy
peace and assurance of Gods love and favor, if not yet obtained; or but
enjoyed in a small measure, accompanied with diverse doubts and fears; to
meditate how best thou may come to assurance, and be strong and stablisht in
it.

How to have thy good condition made out to thee, and thy fears,
discouragements, and doubts may seatter and be driven away.

Here thou must be willing to take pains, and resolve to exercise very humble
patient waiting, Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, he shall
strengthen thy heart; wait, I say, on the Lord. Psalm. 130.4. There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. 5. I wait for the Lord, my
soul does wait. 6. My soul waits more than they that watch for the morning. I
say humble patient waiting, until by frequent ponderings and searchings, thou
art replenisht with such a furniture and treasury of Scripturegrounds, Gospel-
reasons, and inducements; and these so full and clear, as thy heart now changed
by the gracious help of the Holy Ghost, who assures by the Gospel-promises,
arrives at the skill and wisdom, as to be able to answer thy own cavilling
doubting spirit; and to repel the false reasons that Satan uses to hinder thy
peace and assurance. Assurance is chiefly bottomed on our sanctification
assured. So Divines say, assurance of Election, Justification, Perseverance,
and Glorisication, cannot be without assurance of Sanctification, this being
the ground of our assurance in the other four.

In particular thou must labor to draw forth out of the sure Word of Christ,
the infallible Characters and clear descriptions and evidences of the new
creature, and of sincerity of grace; then meditate and ponder so duly upon
these sure evidences and right Scripture-descriptions given of the new Creature
and sincerity of grace, as to come to as clear and distinct an understanding of
what is held forth to thee as thou can. I pass diverse things might be
mentioned, and shall touch on the following.

1. As that change and renewing of the mind and judgment, which in respect of
sin, is to have it out of measure sinful, Romans 7.13. The greatest evil in all
the world, as that only contrariety and emnity to the greatest good, namely the
infinitely blessed God, his insinite holiness and purity, and all his so
infinitely glorious Attributes; yea his very Being, with his Sovereignty and
Government; all his most holy, righteous, and good Laws, and Word, the
signification and demonstration of his Sovereignty over us, and of his will
concerning us. Hereby likewise manifesting the extreme injuriousness and
unrighteousness in sin, in regard of God, whom upon infinite and indispensible
obligations we are engaged perfectly to obey.

And as the abounding sinfulness of sin must be seen, so as the judgment
disallows all known sin, the very least; so there must be an universal liking,
and an allowance of all good, of all known Truths, and all known Duties; Truths
as revealed by God, and to be believed by us; and Duties commanded by God, and
to be performed by us.

2. In seeing the fullness, 1 Pet. 2.7. of beauty and excellency, with the
mightiness of Christ to save in all respects, all that come to God by him by
faith, with the vanity of all earthly things to make us happy, and the
excellency of Grace, Holiness, Faith, Love, and the other required heavenly
graces and soul-abilities and beauties above all other endowments. This is the
first part, the first right change of the mind and judgment, 1 Cor. 2. Whereas
the natural man knows not the things of God, nor can he, because they are
spiritually discerned.

2. The next part of the new Creature, is that change and new heavenly frame of
that noble faculty the will, Romans 7.18. To will is present. Often in the Psalms
David mentions his will, his choice, his curpose, his firm and rooted
resolution, Psalm. 119.8. I will keep thy statutes. Verse. 30. I have chosen the
way of truth. Verse. 106. I have sworn, and will perform to keep thy righteous
judgments. Isa. 56.4. That abuse the things which please, Gods own description
of a gracious frame of spirit, by a gracious choice. Contrary, a sinful
unconverted heart is described by thusing things that are sinful and provoking.
I say the change of the will is a high evidence of sincerity, a choosing of God
for our God, choosing of Christ, his offered grace, above all him to our
Righteousness and Justification, our Wisdom, our Sanctification; so coming to,
taking of, trusting on him, is an act of the will, in choosing him, a choosing
the holy ways of God universally, Psalm. 119. Respect to all thy commandments.
This not so much in knowing, as purpose of heart for keeping all.

To add but one thing more. The new Creature is principally seen in a new will,
and a new will in a new aim, altering utterly that old, sinful, carnal aim, of
carnal self, and satisfying of it, sinfully aiming at only or chiefly self, and
satisfying self in worldly and carnal things. This Idol Self, the grand aim is
taken down, is no more the souls Master-mark, that gave all the Laws, made
every thing serve to it, and end in it; eyeing of self chiefly, aiming at,
seeking and striving most for self, is changed; and there is a new Master-aim, a
new mark to which it designs, and principally drives at, God and his glory,
serving and pleasing him. This evidently appears in the Saints in Scripture.
They exalt God, called such as seek God, serve God, live to God, to Christ,
Psalm. 22.26. Psalm. 24.6. This the generation of them that seek him, and deny
themselves: Romans 6.11. Alive unto God, 2 Cor. 5.15. Live not to themselves, but
to him that dyed for them.

1. Universal allowance of all known good in the mind. 2. Universal abhorrence
of all known evil; choosing all good, and an universal purpose of will, to
please God in all things, are the things the sincerity of them stands of those
two noble faculties renewed. 3. A real change of the corrupt, carnal, and
disorderly movings of the affections, to a making them holy and heavenly, to
setting them on the things above, and taking them off really the things below,
from their usual sway, rule, violent running to carnal and earthly things, and
from their customary and predominant deadness, flatness, and remissness to and
in spiritual and heavenly things.
A change really upon the great and leading affection, love the great weight
that carries all; Amor meus est pondus meum, as the devout Ancient said. My
souls love is my souls weight, the strong biass that still leads it. Hence
arise the other holy affections, they are acted from love, desire, delight,
sorrow, fear, hatred of all known evil, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord,
hate evil, Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way. A Character it is of a wicked
man, he abhors not evil, Psalm. 36.4. But a holy heart when it comes even new
out of the furnace, is new cast, new made, it is stamped with predominant love to
God and his ways, and with new self-loathing and sin-abhorring, Ezekiel. 36.26. A
new heart will I give you. Verse. 36. Then shall ye remember your evil ways, and
shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your
abominations. I shall add no more particulars. The truth and sincerity of this
whole work wrought first in thee really, and then known, must be the ground for
evidencing of thy assurance, which must be done by comparing the pattern of the
new Creature, described in the infallible Word of Christ, and the copy of it
drawn in thy heart.

Such serious searching and due meditating with praying and other ordinances,
must be on thy part; thou must, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make thy
calling and election sure. But withal there must be a due consideration, and
praying for the evidencing and sealing Spirit of Christ the Comforter, and
diligent still attending upon those ways and means of grace the Holy Spirit
uses to come and seal and comfort in.

I know other things might be mentioned, especially in a purposely handling
this Doctrine of Assurance. The manner of Gods working in such as are
effectually drawn to Christ, differs in circumstances, and in the sensible
perceivings of it, accordingly as God pleases to work: and assurance, as the
Spirit pleases, is given in a different way.

But trying by this change upon the heart in a renewing the mind, subduing, and
turning that great wheel of the soul, the refractory and stubborn will,
changing the main aim from self and the creature to God in Christ. Really
plucking up the affections rooted in the earth, and finding them set upon
things above; an evident change and turning the grand affection of love out of
its old channel, and a placing it upon God, his Word, ways, and people, the
Saints above all other things: when these things freely given thee of God, and
by the Spirit of God received, are made known to be in thee, 1 Cor. 2.12. this
is a right assurance. O pray, pray for this sealing and assuring Spirit, this
will help thee against the fears, doubts, deceits of thy own heart, and Satan's
methods, and clear up thy good condition to thee.

This assurance attained, the next Meditation must be of the best ways of
keeping and preserving it, which must be endeavored; yea, of thy growing up to
the riches and fullness of assurance, to a Plerophory, as it is called. The
preserving of assurance, and growing up in it, 2 Pet. 1.10. must be by care and
diligence used about it, and used for exacter walking in all Christ's ways.
Endeavors of mortifying thy corruptions, combating with Satan and the world,
and getting victory, Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes, I will give him a white
stone with a new name. The white stone is thy Justification, the new name is
Adoption of Sons, both assured upon victory obtained.

There must be a tender care of obedience to and compliance with the Holy
Spirit, and of not grieving of it. Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God
whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption. If thou would have the Holy
Spirit a sealing Spirit, thou must not be a Griever of that Spirit, by any
ordinary neglectings and ilightings of it, or by contrary walkings to it;
wilful and presumptuous evils especially provoke and grieve, and will hinder
assurance. Psalm. 85.8. God will speak peace to his Saints, but let them not
turn again to folly.

This in David, Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones
thou have broken may rejoice. Some Saints by their falls have felt it long, it
may be ever after, as great bruises in the body. Others upon care and
fruitfulness, have kept their peace and assurance long, it may be to the last.

CHAP. XII. Of the next Meditation, namely, how weak and imperfect thy Grace is.
THis is a Meditation very necessary for making thee very humble, greatly
fearful and careful, and highly to provoke thee to contend to a growth and
strength of grace, to be rooted and stablisht daily more.

When a soul comes to look and search into himself, sees what little grace he
has, what abundance of corruptions, and in what power they show themselves.
When he finds how he is assaulted by Satan, and ensnared by the world, and
things of it, he sees how necessary it is to consider what in this case he is
to do. This therefore after assurance in some degree obtained, and how to keep
and increase it, may well be the matter of Meditation.

Meditate then of thy grace received, the weakness and imperfection of it, and
how to help and strengthen it, especially thy Faith, that great fundamental
Grace, that serves as the eye to see Christ, the foot to come to him, and hand
to take him, lean upon, and to take and receive from him.

In the case of weakness of grace, thy Meditation must be upon that purposely
conferred fullness, Cor. 1.19. that fountain-fulness, which is in Christ (...)
whom by faith thou art united, engraffed into (...) to partake of the sweetness
of this Vine, Joh. (...) of the fatness of this Olive, 1 Cor. 1.^^. (...) made
to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification. 1. Meritoriously, so he has
purchased these. 2. Efficaciously, he imparts and communicates these. Joh.
15.5. Without me ye can do nothing, without first a real ingraffing into
Christ, Joh. 15.4. without a vital influence from him, and without a new
continual acting trust, and recumbency on him. But Phil. 4.13. I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me. Consider thou must, that he will
help thee: If Christ did first help thee, when thou were a stranger and enemy
to him, now much more will he help thee, being reconciled: If when thou had
no union, were no member of his, he made thee a member; much more being a
member will he supply life, strength, and growth to make thee a perfect member:
he must make his body in all the members perfect at last. They must grow
therefore, that he may be a head perfected, in all his members perfection.

The way Christ will teach thee, seeking to him. The work Christ will work for
thee, trusting in him.

2. Then as thy Meditation must be of Christ the Well of living waters, and his
fullness, so (because the Well, though a living Spring, yet it is deep) how to
come at it, how to draw. The next Meditation therefore must be of our means
vouchsafed us to draw, and of particularly that, by which all the Saints, in
all Ages, have drawn out of this Well of Salvation, and received grace for
grace.

Therefore this Meditation must be of that precious powerful Faith, whereby
Christ is received; initially, by our first union and communion with him; and
received also gradually daily, and for our building up to perfection in him,
Meditation must be, as of Faith, to fetch supply from Christ.

3. So of the way Faith has to act, namely, by the precious Promises of
Sanctification, in which Christ assures thee, he will not break the bruised
reed, nor quench the smoking flax, Matthew. 12.20.

That the Kingdom of Heaven at first is as a grain of mustard seed, but it
becomes as a great tree, Matthew. 13.31, 32. That the good work in any heart God
will finish to the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6.

Thou must repair to the rich Treasury of the Gospel, gather up the Pearls of
Promises scattered all over it, string them up in Meditation, and ponder their
infallible Truth, abundant Goodness, and most transcendent Freeness.

4. Next thou must meditate duly of the way for the full Breasts of the
Promises, to give down into thy longing spirit, their sweetness and help. This
is by Christ's appointed Ordinances, praying, and the rest, wherein thy Faith
must act upon the Promises, and by them upon Jesus Christ; and so, though that
Well be deep, Faith is thy Bucket, the Promises the Chain, the Ordinances the
Hands to let it down, and draw it up, filled with living water for thy thirsty
soul to drink.

CHAP. XIII. Of Meditation of Corruptions stirring, and often prevailing.
THis Meditation must proceed upon the Promises of sin-subduing and mortifying.
Mich. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities. Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have
dominion over you; for ye are not under the law, but under grace. A man under
the Law, it gives no strength against sin, Romans 3.20. It discovers sin, and
irritates sin, Romans 7.8, 9. but gives no strength to subdue it. But being under
Gospel Grace, that gives power to mortify sin. Those that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. They are dead to
sin, Romans 6.2. by Christ, purchasing the total mortification, and dead by an
Initial and begun sanctification, that from being implanted into Christ's death,
and his sin-killing grace, sin receives its deaths wound, and shall bleed to
death upon it. But this by applying frequently the promises of mortification,
exercising Faith by them, exciting Faith to rest on them. Let us therefore, as
for other cases, so for this, gather up variety of promises of sin-subduing.

Let thy eye in Meditation go from promise to promise. First, set one promise
before thee, and dwell upon that, look to Christ in that, and thence draw help
from him, resting on him, for making it good to thy souls case, and then go to,
and dwell upon another, ponder that, and rest again upon Christ in that
promise, and so successively upon others.

Thou have great varieties of Promises, that thy eye in Meditation might be
more delighted in walking in this Garden of Christ, among these pleasant sweet
flowers; and that Faith might by the variety feed more to the full upon them.

In the case of a particular corruption, sometimes, yea, it may be often too
hard for thee. Thy now Meditation must pass in a more particular manner.

In great pondering of the sinfulness of this sin, as the Scripture in the
diverse passages of it, sets it forth, in the kind and nature, in the degrees,
aggravations, and abounding sinfulness of it.

1. In the terrible threatenings denounced against it, which discover Gods not
dealing tenderly, and handling it as it were gently. What David said of Absalom
in his rebellion, and warring against him openly, Deal for my sake gently with
the young man Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.5. that we are ready to do, with applying the
Threatenings to our corruptions, loath to apply him too hot, and too home, and
let these Corrosives continue their time, because of their smart and pain: But
we should both get store of threatenings, give them all the edge we can, apply
them close, and let them stick fast, and stay their just time, to issue in due
fear and awakning, and make thee more willing to forego thy sin.

The Threatenings of the Law, and Word of Christ are of great necessity, and use
for godly spirits, so God and the Saints in Scripture used them for humblings,
awaknings, and reformings.

2. This sins sinfulness in Examples. In the Examples of severity, recorded
both of wicked and godly persons, Gods severity to them, yea Examples of
sometimes high and amazing severities against sins looked on as low and little
in their nature, God cannot over-punish any the least sin here. The highest
severity is lower, and far beneath the Hell due for the least sin. O let
Meditation apply all the Engines, discharge all the great and small shot, give
it all the broad-sides, and Thunders of Threatenings of wrath, death, and Hell,
spit flames of fire in the face of this sin; get all the strongest Arguments,
highest Incentives, with all possible means and ways to help in this case.

When a Ship has sprung a Leak; when the Sea has made a remarkable breach,
men presently run, study, and apply all possible ways of stopping it.

When thy soul has sprung a leak, that will certainly sink thee, without due
help, in time used.

When the Sea of sin has made a dangerous breach, speedily use all effectual
means to heal it. Faithful Physicians, when a Patient is endangered by that
disease which is a case of great difficulty, how do they study and strive, with
utmost Art and industry, to cure it? When it is a great Soul-case, of most
dangerous distemper; when a Tendency to great mischief; when a high
Disadvantage to peace, comfort, strenght, growth, fruitfulness, there should be
both hastening and heightning, utmost intending of thoughts, care, industry in
all possible ways. Do it to save heart-smart and hazard. Do it to save God a
labor of using sharper means, sad, soaking, long, and abiding trouble to make
thee consider, make thee willing to part with that member, that right foot, or
hand or eye, whatever it be. Ah! but above all, take that highest inducement,
and strive to be the greatest, most industrious and exquisite Artist, in
selecting sweetest, strongest, and most efficacious Gospel-arguments for
aggravating thy sin, and loosning thy heart, unsoddering it from that sin that
cleaves so fast.

And let the Masterpiece of all be the deep and great ponderings of the so
astonishing and amazing coming, and humblings of the Lord Christ, all his
abasings, the deepest that ever were; all of especially his sufferings, his
agony, apprehension, and by betraying, his arraignment, condemnation, derision,
buffeting, spittings on, scourging, and crucifying, with the weight of the
wrath of God, and his withdrawing for a time, and then giving up the ghost. All
these unparalled Sufferings from most inconceivable love. Lay this great
abasing home to greatly humble thee; This soul exceeding heaviness, to work
thee to suitable sorrow; this Blood so precious, to warm thy heart, to melt it,
and work it to willingness, to leave this sin, that more peculiarly spilt it;
this blood of God, and his life that he laid down for it; to thy free laying
down of it, of this peculiar Christkilling sin.

CHAP. XIV. Of Meditation, in respect of Temptations and and Assaults by Satan.
4. THere is thy Meditation and considering, (...) reference to thy case, as
tempted, (...) be thou art under sad Temptations, (...), dreadful and horrid
things injected, (...) heart ache and tremble, that arnaze and confound thee,
that haunt thee, that thou have no freedom or quiet, that storm thee so
violently, thou know not what to do.

After peace and assurance is obtained, and power also in some good degree
gained, the Lord sometimes lets Satan loose, in several ways, he in infinite
wisdom judges fittest for most holy purposes, as referring to himself and his
own glory, for most gracious ends, as respecting his own children, their
spiritual great good. If thy case be thus to be tempted, it may be very sorely
assaulted: Consider that now thou art not to be scared and disturbed, as at a
strange thing, unusual with Gods Children, though new to thee.

Thou art not to be sadned and dejected with sorrow and discouragement, not
disturbed and confounded, as neither heart, nor head, resolution or reason,
grace or experience, counsel, or any thing can help, and be effectual.

1. But now, one excellent and proper way in this case of sudden disturbances,
from sudden assaults, is a turning from thy imaginations, thy sudden and short
thoughts that are raising hurries, violent passions, and disturbances in thee;
to endeavor serious and deliberate thinkings, to do what in us lies, to check
imagination and fancy, and hasty apprehensions thence flashing, and flying
like sparks from a blazing matter; and to let the Sunshine of reason, serious
and religious reason, put out the fire and candles of phansies and
imaginations; to quench and slack their heat and haste. There is nothing our
foolish hearts are apter unto, then these short sudden thoughts, flashes, and
hastiness, without heedings and stay.

Hastiness of thinking comes on us as Lightning sometimes on the dry thatcht
house, sets it instantly on fire, and comes as Lightning with an after
Thunderclap, strikes all into fears and confusion, shivers and scatters all
confidence and consideration, into such confusedness and discomposure, that
nothing at that time will prevail with us. Like the Sea, when a strong wind
has raised the billows high, it rages and roars, and cannot suddenly rest.

The way in all cases of troubles by sudden apprehensions and short thoughts,
is to help our selves by thoughts of depth and length. Depth of seriousness,
things soaking first into thy mind. Length also of abode and staying with thee
a fit space of time, that allowance of time which a serious and weighty thing
ought in full to have.

Thus the relief of Temptations working discomposing impressions, from Satan's
sudden and thick dartings, and our sudden receivings in imagination and short
thinkings, and thence coming quick upon the minds, passions, and affections,
must be ejected by contrary seriousness, and time-taking in thinking.

Until we can in some sort cease to be sudden, short, and hasty in our
apprehensions, until fancy and imagination sway less, and judgment in
seriousness and pondering prevail more, that we are habited and accustomed to
wisely weigh things that come into our minds, Satan will be too hard for us, by
making our hastiness our hurt.

This was one reason of David's miscarriage, when he under temptation in Psalm.
116. he tells us, verse. 11. He said all men are liars. But he found the reason,
it was in his haste. His being failed by the temptation, was by the haste of
his spirit in imagination, thought too short, too sudden, and passion was
stirred too soon. He did not ponder what promise was, and the experiences he
had to stay him. Thus the blessed Apostle Peter, whom Satan winnowed; he came
thick with his darts of temptation, Peter was too short in consideration, which
made him so sudden in fear, and that occasioned his fall. If he had used such
consideration, as led him to repent afterward, had used consideration in the
time of tentation, he had not been led into it.

Thus Divines give the account of that fall that ruined Adam and all his
posterity. He did not duly consider; he acted imagination and incogitancy, not
wisdom and prudent pondering.

This was one way the Apostle used in the case of temptation by affliction,
Heb. 12.3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. They considered not, but were too hasty, too
forgetful, and therefore so discouraged at the Cross. Therefore he endeavors
to bring them to consideration, to extinguish short apprehension and sudden
thoughts which occasioned fears and discouragement.

This is a right way to relieve disquiets from any sudden imaginations, and
from the subtle quick dartings of Satan. Let that which comes suddenly be
thought on seriously, viewed over and over.

Creatures apt to start and fright, as Horses young and of high metal, we bring
them close to the things they fright at, make them look on them often, and touch
them, that time and looking may teach them not to start. If temptations were
entertained not with sudden short thoughts and imagination; but with abode and
seriousness of thoughts in consideration, this would much advantage us in times
oftemptation, and disappoint Satan's designs.

2. And this leads us to another effectual way, and in part illustrates the
former particular, namely, that help of diverting the mind, earnestly striving
when suggestions and injections charge thee, to think quite another way. Take
in good thoughts, and be as earnest and intent as thou can, that Satan may
see thou art not at leisure, haft no mind to parley with him, there is no room
for such a guest, the door is barred against him.

This is a good Rule in Reason, to make a diversion of the thoughts; when any
thing troubles us, and proves a disturbance, a diversion is the cure. When
Satan comes, thou have ways enough for thy thoughts to divert by things of
excellency in abundant variety, to entertain and detain with the highest
pleasure and satisfaction, thy most serious thoughts.

3. But another help, and that our Lord Christ has taught, when Satan would
tempt him: fly up to Heaven by prayer, Mark 14.38. Pray that ye enter not into
temptation. When Hell rises up, arms and charges against thee, this is ever a
ready help, to fly up to heaven, to charge him, complain of him, and call for
the help that is stronger than Satan, the mighty Spirit of Christ, against that
malicious Spirit. Prayer is a both rare diversion of thoughts, and a piece of
Artillery that will do execution most effectually, and never fail, if in faith
and fervency. He fears nothing more than prayer, and feels nothing more. If he
can discourage prayer, he triumphs. But as our Lord, when in an agony he prayed
more fervently, and had an Angel sent from Heaven to strengthen him: So if thou
art in an agony, a sad buffeting of Satan, pray more fervently, and an Angel
from Heaven, yea the God that is the strengthner will help against this Angel
from Hell.

Meditation in this case of Temptation must be ordered by Scripture-rules, by
having such apprehensions of Satan and his temptations, as the Scriptures
(which hold forth the sure Notions and Considerations of things concerning our
spiritual state and affairs) as that teaches. Ah! when we are guided by our
own Notions and conceits, Satan will be too hard for us by his subtilties,
methods, depths, and deeeits, which he has and practices. He can outwit us,
far out-reason us, when we have never such parts and perfections of reason and
learning, and all humane accomplishments.

But when we take the Scriptures for our only rule, then have we the most sure
and supereminent wisdom, the infinite wisdom of a God against the narrow wisdom
of a creature, the infallible wisdom of a God against the falsehoods and lies of
a creature. Ephesians. 6.16. The Apostle bids take the shield of faith to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked one. No shield is proof, and large enough to
cover us, and quench his fiery darts: But that of the Doctrine of Faith in the
Scriptures, held forth by the grace of Faith in the holy heart; this will do it.

This was the way the Captain of our Salvation used when Satan so boldly
tempted him. He might have dealt diverse ways with him, and at first sight dashed
him. He might have told him, it would be utterly in vain to tempt him; It was
impossible for him to prevail; chid him for his audaciousness, to assault the
Son of God. Reasoned with him, and disputed him quite down. Ruled him, and
commanded him out of his presence so pure and glorious, as he so often
afterward rebukt him, restrained him, and dispossessed him out of so many.

But he only looked to the Scripture, used and held forth the Scripture, and
nothing is recorded else. Three darts the Devil throws, three different
temptations he uses. Those three some of the Learned, (which in 1 John 2.16.
are called the All in the world) 1. Sensuality, in that, Make these stones
bread, to feed thee. 2. Pride, in that, Cast thy self down, to presume proudly.
3. Covetousness, in that, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me. He tempts him to covet all the Kingdoms of the world, contrary
to contentedness with his present poor condition. But the three darts of
temptation are quenched with the using a threefold Scripture; so Satan is
disappointed, and goes away shamefully beaten. Beaten by only using this Weapon
of the Word. The Word must be thy help in all cases of temptation.

1. The Word as thy only sure directive and guide for all right conceiving of
Satan and his temptings.

We must not mis-apprehend, mis imagine Satan and his workings. As we must not
frame any false imaginations of the most blessed God, so we should not frame in
our minds any false imaginations of Satan and his temptings of us. But this we
do, and must do, when imagination goes alone, and takes not the Rule of
Scripture, but takes the fond and feeble principles of a dark and deceitful,
and of a dastardly and slothful spirit, loath and unfit to combat. The Notions
and discoveries of Scripture are our sure way of help.

1. As what the Scripture infallibly manifests Satan to be; as to his nature,
he is a Spirit, but not a God. He is exceeding wise by nature, crafty and very
subtle by long improved experience, but infinitely (O Christian) below thy God.
Though he has a depth of policy; yet he has not the Master-reach.

Though he has a very extensive and an abounding experimental knowledge in
many things, and knows men, and much of particular persons, can look far into
them, yet has he not the advantages which the Heart-maker, and the
Heart-scarcher, Jer. 17.10. and the Heart-knower, 2 Chronicles. 6.30. the only
Heart-knower. He cannot see with any direct looking on, and into any heart; but
he sees by an indirect eying, guessing and gathering by circumstances, and
going by consequences, and not by infallible arguments. Both indirectly and
imperfectly also it is he knows any heart, and the workings of it.

2. As to his power, though he be mighty in strength to make impressions upon
elementary natures, and things belonging to men, as houses, goods, cattle, any
enjoyments of such a sort; and upon bodies and lives of men, when God pleases
to permit him, as we have it most evidently in the 1. and 2. of Job; yet he
has not such power to work upon the souls of men, as to destroy them, or to
disturb them, or to discern and discover their hearts, their thinkings,
affectings, aimings, or any actings of the reasonable soul. Neither can he hurt
the soul, either to destroy it, or to defile it, or to force it, to think, or
affect, or purpose. He can force no man to sin, in the least commission of
evil, or omission of good.

He cannot persuade, terrify, or trouble, without first our giving leave, and
giving way. He gets ground by our first giving ground; he leads when we let him
fasten his chain, and draws when we suffer our selves to be drawn. Jam. 1.14.
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and is enticed.

Satan casts forth the bait, but we first catch it before he catches us; he
cannot make us take in the bait, no more than the Fisher can force the fish to
bite and swallow his bait; he tenders only, and the fish takes it of its own
accord.

Satan can throw his dart, but it cannot enter, unless we will; if we will
yield, and not encounter with our arms, but walk unweaponed, and not fight.

3. Though Satan has the greatest gall, deepest, and most highly improved
hatred, of an irreversible edge, boiled up to the highest Hell-dyed
implacableness; yet this Serpent is not so formidable, as the infinite love of
God to thee is comfortable. What can his malice weigh against the goodness of
thy God that endures continually?

4. Though Satan be unweariedly busy and sedulous, yet he is not, cannot be so
industrious, careful, wakeful, working for thee, and disposing all things for
thy greatest good, Romans 8.28. as thy God is. He never can outdo thy God, his
doings against thee, cannot outdo thy Gods doings for thee: No not in any heat
or height of any temptation.

When he tempts thee, buffets thee, haunts thee, he must not be looked upon as
one at full liberty to do what he lists. He is not the Ruler of all things,
governs not the world by himself alone. But he is under thy God then when he
tempts thee; yea, thy God governs the very temptation. Satan can cast out no
more of his serpentine venom than thy God permits. He casts not out one drop or
the least quantity, without thy Gods first giving way.

5. As thy God governs by still giving Satan leave, and limiting him when he
tempts, as he limited him in Jobs case; so his letting Satan tempt, is not for
him to have his will, but that thy God may have his own holy will, both to
teach thee, and better thee much, to support, encourage, and yet humble much
thy spirit, that thy God sees is needful for thee.

Though temptations are like fire to melt the metal, yet not to mar, but mend
it, to purge it, cast it into a new mould, that it may be polisht and
brightned, and so fitted more for thy Gods praise.

Though the best Physicians sometimes use severe and sharp remedies; yet the
trouble, pain, sickness caused by Evacuations, Corrosives, Causticks, Cuttings,
and such like, are not intended for themselves, but for recovery, soundness,
strength, and the good of the Patient, though at present he may not so like or
believe it. So is it in thy Gods suffering thee to be tempted sorely, and long
buffeted; and this must be considered and believed. Thy Gods suffering thee to
be tried, is only for gracious ends, which after the temptation is well over,
will clearly be seen, and thankfully acknowledged.

Ah! thou will say, I could not have been without this temptation, or these
tryel, in this nature, manner, me sure, so sharp, so long, so many. Never had
my experiences been so rich, my Faith and trust, love and cleaving, hope and
waiting, humility, patience, courage, contentedness, and other graces so
appeared, so improved, acted so high, to the praises of God, and reflected and
brought in such peace and joy to my own bosom. Ah! how out of this evil God
has wrought my good? Out of this roaring Lion this eater brought meat, out of
the strong sweetness, as Samson of the honey found in the Lion he vanquished,
Judge. 14.8.

6. Though Satan be such an enemy, and his molestations so great; yet
Meditation must gather up the reliefs and encouragements the Scripture supplies
thee with. All discouragement arises much from a single, or too much pondering
and poring on a present evil, without a due looking to the means of relief,
escaping, or enduring. Therefore Meditation here must, (...). Eye God as well
as Satan, his love, faithfulness, pity, power, and all things making for
comfort. 2. The purchase of Christ buying victory by his blood. 3. The presence
and help of his Spirit against the evil Spirit, and the defense he will be sure
to make of his own house and Temple, and the things of it, to save it from harm.

7. Lastly, thy Meditation must look up, and labor to write after the copies
of the Saints, that have courageously combated, and gloriously conquered,
especially upon thy Captain General, who overcame not by his mere infinite
power; but by means at hand, and ready always in thy power. By the Scripture I
have singled out a few things on this occasion; whole books, some less, some
very great have been written very learnedly and experimentally of the Doctrine
of Temptations, wherein large direction and help may be had for such as are
tempted; but I have rather exceeded already, and therefore will add no more in
this particular.

CHAP. XV. Some Directions as to occasional and set Meditation.
SOme Directions might be next inserted, concerning that Meditation used on
special occasions, and which is more therefore solemn, and at larger leisure.
As in the Law, besides the daily Sacrifices, there were particular solemn
times, where the work was much more; more Sacrifices offered, more Rites
observed, and time spent in those Services was more. This Meditation must be
performed according to the nature and scope, and such Rules as best godly
wisdom can suggest for it.

1. As choice of the fittest season and opportunity, doing it when we are
freest from avocations, and fittest as to frame, temper, and strength of body;
when we are liveliest and freshest, and not sunk, tired, dispirited; that the
good and lively present temper of body may the better help and assist the soul,
and the soul thereby more orderly and vigorously, more intensly and
deliberately act.

2. Choosing the fittest place, is a prudence and great advantage for avoiding
disturbance and interruptions; and to have the golden thread of Meditation run
smoothly on without breaking from any diversions. We must in faithfulness to
our own spiritual interest; wisely watch, and strongly resolve to put by every
thing that may divert or disquiet us in our now intended Meditation.

A darksom place, or that is purposely made something dark for avoiding
distractions from the eye, and to be better composed, more serious and intent,
is a good furtherance to Meditation, if we are not timorous, and apt to fright.
Isaac, Genesis 24.63. went out in the evening to Meditation. It may be the
duskishness of the time might be part of his purpose, because he could less see
about, which the lightsomness of the day would not so suit.

All things which prevent scatterings of the thoughts, and abate seriousness,
which may conduce to intending the mind, and quicken to the duty in hand,
should so well as we can, be considered and applied, until by frequent
practice, we get a hand at this work, that thou provest an Artist in it, and
arrivest at a heavenly habit, to work readiness, easiness, and constancy in
doing it.

The Prophet, Psalm. 108.1. says, His heart was ready, so the old Translation
has it; the new Translation, My heart is fixed. The word in the Hebrew
signifies first ready or prepared. Then secondly it signifies fixed. We first
fit, prepare a thing, sharpen it before we drive it into the ground, and then
drive it in and fix it. So act seriously and often, that thy heart may be
ready, and may also be fixed, and this by a habit which brings readiness and
fixedness, as in other holy duties, so in this of Meditation.

CHAP. XVI. Of Directions, in reference to short and ejaculatory Meditations.
1. HEed here must be taken, that neither these short and quick actings of the
soul in ejaculations Prove exclusive of the more serious and solemn, or take
off from it, from either the daily Meditation, or the solemn occasional
formerly spoken of: Nor that we lay more stress upon these short and frequent
dartings up of the heart, than upon our daily Meditation, or the other; that
this short thing be not made to stand for all, or almost all else meditating.

The heart of the best person, is a deceitful and slippery, an inconstant and
fickle, a dull and slothful piece, under a lothness to do good, especially that
which is high and hard, that comes not off easily, and that which must have
time, a space, and good proportion of time. This we are ready, at least in our
hearts, to call tedious, and think too long; although there be but bare
allowance of so much time as the very necessity, for the well-doing the duty
requires. As naturally a slightness and shortness to have a serious duty
quickly over, pleases much; so a tang of this, yea too much of this carnal
hastiness is in the best. Any spiritual performance we would often have over
before it be on, and get into the heart, before it be warm in the heart, kindle
it, quicken it, draws it up to Heaven, and has its efficacy and real ends.

Things that are hard, and work trouble, we are ready quickly to call tedious,
and because other occasons may call loud, our corruption present has an itch
for any duties being over, ended so soon as begun.

Therefore thou must look this short, sooner over work, get not ground of the
other more serious and solemn Meditation; that a help convert not it self into
a hindrance; that it justle not out the solemn, or rob it of its due.

Holy duties are to be all Links of the same golden Chain, Pearls all strung
upon the same silken thread; the greater must not keep off the less, nor the
less the greater: Both must have their just allowance of place, come all upon
the thread, make up the chain entire, and be all our helps in their connection.
Holy duties must not clash, not be their own hinderers by opposition, one set
against another; or derogating one from another. But as the noble parts in the
body, and the meaner parts, have all their several places, offices, uses for
the good of the whole; yet with their diversity act not contrariety, but a
sweet harmonious subserviency mutually to each other, and to the whole.

2. Neither must this sort of Meditation be slight and remiss, grow into, and
setle in a mere customariness and formality. It must not on the one hand shut
out the more solemn Meditation; nor on the other hand fix in an easy and
slight performing. But must have its true and spiritual, warm and lively acting
with reverence, care, pure aiming, to have heart, for the shortness of time, to
ascend up to Heaven, making a short visit, for meeting with some
soul-refreshing, by a sight and taste of the pleasures and delicacies set ready
for all that travel this road of heavenly Meditation.

We must look it be a right work, how short soever; that it be the use of our
spiritual Archery, from a right principle, to take a true aim at the mark, fly
round up to it, by acting spiritual skill and strength, some wisdom and warmth,
as the nature of the work will admit.

That it be not a flash, a fit of fancy, a mere custom which calls on us, and
carries us, but a spark of the holy heart-fire within flying up to Heaven.

3. This being a short visit made to Heaven, a journey of less charge and
labor, and of a quick dispatch. It therefore should be done the oftener, and
with greater frequencies.

From friends that are near, we expect more frequent visits. Common and easy
things we look to be done more constantly to us. What thing in the world is so
cheap as a thought? What is so short, and of so quick a dispatch?

A thought-visit is the easiest visit. God expects of us it should be frequent,
very often; and reason urges to a greater frequency, for making up that which
this sort of Meditation must want of the more set and solemn.

As they say of gold, that it is found either in the Oar mixed, or in the lump
and small pieces (Pipins as they call them) but purer, or else in sand and
small dust, very pure and good. But the small golden sands, when they are many
gathered, and put together, may make so large quantities for use, as that is
found in the Oar, or lump and greater pieces.

Many golden sands of precious ejaculations will amount to much, and help to
make a Christian rich at last. Though great gains in trade fill the purse
sooner, when ordinary; yet light gains when thick, will make a heavy purse also
at last. I will add no more Directions for younger Christians in their
Meditations, having already exceeded. Now we must come to Directions for others.

CHAP. XVII. Directions for more grown and elder Christians.
1. YOu must daily contend to better establishment and confirmation in this way
and work of Meditation, Psalm. 119.15. I will meditate in thy precepts; and
verse. 18. I will meditate, etc. David had formerly meditated, accustomed
himself to this rare practice, was not now to begin to resolve or do. Therefore
his meaning must be a fixing his resolution and purpose stronger. The Apostle
Paul often for the establishment of those he wrote unto, prays earnestly, 2
These. 2.17. Stablish you in every good word and work, in every duty of
godliness.

The best Christians, and most established in their way, have always need of
more establishing, as to their graces and frame of heart; so to their duties
and whole course of godliness. There must be an earnest care and striving, as
you have begun and practiced, so to be stablished. Not to begin, and then draw
back, nor yield to do with a weakness, weariness, and unevenness; but here to
say as David often, O God my heart is fixed, I will meditate. Meditation is
neavenly, but hard in it self, comes off sometimes harder. The best heart is a
slippery piece, that sometimes not only flags and falls low, but sometimes also
fails; the purpose within, and the practice without may have their stops and
faltrings: The Watch may want a winding up. There may be failure in the
practice, from a failing in the purpose, a fit of dying away may come upon
thee, if there be not a constant care of stability.

A good man's heart must be like Solomon's Temple with the two Pillars set up in
it, Jacin and Booz, establishment and strength.

2. As thou must endeavor establishment, so strive for improvement. Growth is
necessary both in Graces and Duties, as the Scripture shows.

1. There must be care to improve in the Art and skill of holy Meditation. To
understand thy way better, Prove. 14.8. The wisdom of the prudent is to
understand his way; not only with an initial understanding it, but a
progressive understanding of it. Not only to know in the same degree, and to be
always alike at the last as at the first, but to understand far better.

As the wise Artificer that contents not himself with the same measure of skill
in his way, but to be a better Artist, proceed to a perfection.

If a Christian be trading for Heaven in good earnest, he will strive every way
to excel.

Not like a Bungler, that does in a poor pitiful manner, just to live and no
more; but as an Artist, and man of ingenuity, to live plentifully.

I must study how to study better, to comprehend the whole wisdom of my way, to
live more fruitfully to others, serviceably to God, comfortably to my own bosom.

Not to only just so much skill as will serve to get creeping, but for flying
to Heaven.

2. To learn how to kindle a fire in my heart, and do my work warmer.

Strive to more affectionate Meditation.

To have things have a quicker passage from the head to the heart.

That the spiritual things meditated on, come sooner to my heart, kindle it
quickly, and make me all on fire. Bom. 12.11. Fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord.

It is not to be taken only for real fervency, but growth. He would not have
them no warmer and fervent at last than at first: So Meditation should heap
hotter coals upon thee, make thy fire a flame.

This by Meditations applying warmer, and more heart- quickening reasons and
arguments.

We call motives (reasons for doing a thing, a duty of Religion) Incentives.
Meditation should strike fire, and blow it up into a flame.

Strive to have Meditation more heart-warming; not only to have it more
notional, but cordial; not only a shining, but a burning light, as it was said
of John Baptist.

That Is Meditation to purpose, when the head moves the heart, brings in light
and heat also. The Moonlight is pleasant, but the Suns is best, because
chiefly it is with vivifical heat, it is the worlds warmer. Therefore see,
search in Meditation for such things, and manage them in such a manner, as may
warm thee at the heart most, make thee daily warmer.

1. Warmer in that grand affection, that strong spring of spiritual operation
Love; love to the work of Meditation, love to heavenly and spiritual things,
the lovely, beauteous, and glorious things which Meditation brings and sets
before thee, to highly treat and entertain thee. Principally most inflamed love
to the highest beauty and glory, for whom most peculiarly that best affection,
the best piece of thy heart was made, the most blessed God, Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit.

2. Warmer in ardency of desire, to keep in and improve in this heavenly way of
Meditation, Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for the desire it has to thy
judgments; which soul-breaking was for looking into them by reading, reading
for meditating to present and supply new heavenly matter, that he might
exercise himself there by Meditation, know Gods will, and be better affected,
more resolved and enlarged. That desire so earnest was greatly (among others)
to be at that his rare mind-exercise of Meditation, the best way of thinking
that possibly can be, none like this; this had this holy man's chief
heartworkings; nothing had that share of constant seriousness; here were his
longings to breathe his soul up this hill; he grudged the time that gave stop
or interruptions to this best thought-work.

3. Warmer should Meditation be, as to delight and complacency, to not only
burn and be fervent in love and desire, but to flame up in joy and delight;
more generally, men like a fire, best when it flames. The holy Prophet, Psalm.
119.47. I will delight my self in thy Commandments. Meditation in the word is
the holy hearts walk of pleasure, a broad large walk, Psalm. 119.96. Thy
Commandment is exceeding broad, so our new Translation; exceeding large, so the
old. We so far live a duty, as we act delight. When David says he will
delight, he meant not the mixture of a mere drop, or smallest spark of delight
should be stirred up; but a great, yea growing delight. Delight in Meditation
should not only live and have a being, some moving; but should thrive and grow.
As every Ordinance should prove a still greater pleasure: So Meditation should
prove a more refreshing soul-eye walk, an ascent from delight to delight, to
higher delight, till we come to the top in ravishments and highest attending
admirations.

CHAP. XVIII. Directions more particular.
1. WHatever thou meditatest upon, let it not be only an intuition, or dying a
thing, or a mere recognition or remembrance. Or if diverse things come before
thee, let not thy work be a bare enumeration, or as it were a telling them
over, to be able to say, I have thought of such and such things in particular;
but let it be a review with something that new is, with some new
considerations, as thou art able.

Something fresh, which may bring the better savouriness and sweeter relish,
that may set a better edge, and quicken things more upon thee.

Meditation, though it be not for feeding fancy with curiosities; yet should
be so ordered, as to season and sweeten, suit and prepare things to more
spiritual delight, and to a larger perceiving of that extensive and abounding
savouriness and excellency in holy things.

Every Meditation should endeavor a more exquisite preparation, better still
reducing things that we ponder, both to spiritual advantages, with spiritual
pleasure accompanying.

To do this most easily and effectually, our way is to improve and quicken
Meditation by our gathering up the graciously afforded varieties of
Scripture-passages relating to those things Meditation is to be upon, gather
the varieties of Scripture-passages about that particular subject you mean to
meditate on.

The Scripture in the diversities of passages about particular subjects, is
like a rich banquet, where are set before thee great varieties of rarities:
There are all manner of subjects. All the credenda and facienda, all things to
be believed and practiced in order to salvation. There are great varieties of
heavenly Truths, for knowledge and wisdom, and right believing. Great varieties
of Precepts, Rules, and Directions for due practice. Many Promises and many
Threatenings to back the Precepts; sundry Patterns and Precedents to assist
them, and make them (and thereby) the Precepts more effectual on us.

Often in Scripture the same things are expressed in a various manner, in a
different, a new mode and fashion, in new trimmings as it were, and new
dressings, to both edify and also please us. Variety in expression carries often
variety of Notion, holds forth something more to be learnt, and affords
something that may gratify our spirits, as to pleasure and delight.

So the lame thing has it may be varieties of Arguments and Reasons for
conviction and demonstration, Inducements to persuade and lead.

Arguments and Inducements, with the highest Art of Reasoning, with the best
improvement of Rhetoric and Persuasion.

Thus if thou meanest to meditate upon God, or Jesus Christ, or the Holy
Spirit, upon Faith, or Love, or any Grace, upon any duty, any sin, any
affliction: Thy way is to see what the Scripture has and holds forth in the
several passages of it; as concerning Faith, of the Nature of it, of the
effects and properties of it, privileges coming by it, reasons to persuade to
believe, to live by Faith in all conditions; how great variety of expressions
have you for all things relating to Faith, so of other particular subjects?

By this variety taking up one expression after another, at such times as you
can best, how may thy Meditation be carried on with great delight and to great
advantage?

This is one excellent way to order and improve thy Meditation, take varieties
of Scripture-passages about any particular subject thou will meditate on.

1. For Scripture- expression has a bottom and foundation of sure and
infallible truth, which comes from God that cannot lie; your Meditation goes on
sure ground.

2. Scripture-expressions are suited for us by the so infinite wisdom of a God,
who knows how best to declare his own mind, and how best to convey and teach it
to our capacity and condition. None can speak so to me as God in the Scripture
does.

3. Yea Scripture-expressions are sanctified by God, to enable us to sanctify
him in this and all other duties. This therefore is our best way to feed on
these rarities, this rich banquet of so great varieties, when we are to
meditate. Hereby we may ever have matter abundantly to meditate; never be to
seek, and for the manner, perform it with great delight and pleasure, which
will otherwise be a weariness.

This certainly was the way of the highest Artists in Meditation, David and
other holy persons upon Record in Scripture. They could not but see the same
things to be repeated, yet often in a various way of expression; therefore must
conclude, that the holy Inditer had his wise intendment in so various
expressions. Therefore their godly wisdom must teach them when they meditated,
to go in that way the Spirits condescending intent led them: So let it be thy
Rule, for thy help for to make thy Meditation pleasurable and profitable
together.

I will mention some Instances.

The Grace of Faith is thus variously expressed.

By trusting in God, Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart. Isa.
26.4. Trust in the Lord Jehovah; and in other places, Psalm. 37.5. By rolling
our way on God.

By taking hold of Gods strength, Isa. 27.5. and diverse others: In reference to
Christ, by seeing the Son, Joh. 6.40. Coming to Christ, Matthew. 11.28. And
believing on and in Christ often. Love of God, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Love thy God with
all thy heart and with all thy soul. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Love thy God with all thy heart
and soul; and a third is added, With all thy might. Mark 12.10. Christ adds to
the three former, With all thy mind. Certainly these varyings had their intent;
were that when we meditate of these or other graces, we should furnish our
Meditation, and improve by them.

Thus things cited in Deuteronomy are variously expressed from those very
passages and particulars in the former Books: So the Chronicles express
differently things in the Kings, and the Four Evangelists vary the expressions
of the same things, both the matters historical and doctrinal; and all the
Scripture over, this is practiced. Variety of expression calls for observation,
and holds forth often some peculiar Notion and Instruction.

Let this therefore be thy Rule in Meditation.

2. Be sure frequently and earnestly to meditate both of thy supreme and chief
end, and of the proper and proportionate means thereto conducing. But do daily
something more to purpose in that great Meditation of the supreme end, as
wisdom teaches, and being that in its nature which deserves the highest and
first things; that also which gives Rules to all thy other actings and
endeavors, that glorifying and exalting God above all. Do very much in
collecting together, spreading before thee, well considering, acting the most
vigorous and intense Meditation of all such things which may reduce thee to
higher apprehensions, warmer affections, firmer resolutions, and more earnest
and even contendings for glorifying him that is God, and there is none beside
him; for him that only gave thee thy all, body, soul, life, and only preserves
thy all. That gave his only Son to death, to save thy souls life. His Spirit to
draw thee to Christ, or thou had never come. To dwell and work in thee, and
do all for thee, as to applying Christ, and all fellowship in Christ, and with
him, and has so infinitely obliged thee. Therefore how sinful, how unworthy to
not honor and glorify him, how unkindly he takes it, and how it grieves him?
Let Meditation gather up, and indusstriously strive to improve all it possibly
can.

Ah! how that holy Apostle was looking and striving this way, how near was this
glorifying God to his heart, how much in his eye and endeavor, how often is he
speaking of it? How earnestly does he provoke all he had to do with, to it? 1
Cor. 10.31. Whatsoever ye do, if eat or drink, do all to the glory of God;
acting all to it, must imply an always minding of it.

3. Lay sound stress likewise in Meditation as to that thy next chief end
self-saving, to have more serious thoughts and industrious pressings on hard to
work it out, and make thy calling and election sure. To work it out against all
difficulties and oppositions, look more earnestly up to Heaven, and into
Heaven. And it is good when thou think of Heaven; be then so bold with thy
self, and faithful to thy self, as to lead thy thoughts to think of Hell, and
ponder that place and state, taking often the weight of the crown of glory, the
worth of the Jewels of that Crown, and think in greater earnestness of the
Riches of that Kingdom of Glory, thy own unspeakable happiness, with that rare,
rich, annexed Jewel Eternity. The losing of it, is from not looking on it; most
losing it, from looking aside to the world. The best go but slowly to Heaven,
because they mind it so remissly, and move so easily. A way, the best way to be
the best Marksman at Heaven, should be every Christians great study. This is
wisdom for thy self to meditate, study thy self into the Art of winning the
Crown of Glory. Weigh Hell and Heaven, unspeakable, insufferable, and eternal,
eternal torment and woe, with inconceivable and eternal, never fading happiness
and highest glory. Represent more effectually, see, feel more sensibly the
fearful and woeful case of a damned soul, realize it with the best industry and
Art thou can use; and be not so sinfully soft, nice, and tender of touching,
or of dwellings and searchings by this way of thoughts; force thy self to feel
the pains and scorchings of this Hell prepared, and the fullness of Gods wrath
poured out; and then represent and realize to thy self happiness and glory,
with thy utmost ability and industry, as if thou saw it in all the fullness,
tasted it, and were feeding to the full at Christ's Table in his Kingdom.

There are strange Artifices to get Crowns and Kingdoms. Ah! act Meditation
into an evergrowing, more covetous of the gain, ambitious of the honor,
contentious for to have the victory over all difficulties in the way of this
most transcendent Crown of Glory.

The wise Merchant seeks and buys the Pearl, Mat. 13.46. The wise Meditater
weighs, strives for, and wins the Crown.

3. Improve Meditation all you can, as to the grand and most principal means,
be very high and hard Students for that excellency of knowledge, the knowledge
of Christ, and him crucified, and better applying of him. To see daily more
what a way Christ is to the Father, what fullness dwells in him, Col. 1.19. how
freely he is offered, how mighty and ready he is to save to the uttermost.
Uttermost of guilt, by righteousness and forgiveness; of wrath, by
reconciliation; of shame and vileness, by dignity and adoption through his
blood. To the uttermost of darkness, by being our light; uttermost of our
errors, by being put on as truth; uttermost of folly, by being applied as our
wisdom; uttermost of corrupt affections and carnal aims, choices and distempers
of will, and finfulness of the whole soul, by being our sanctification. 1 Cor.
1.31. Yea to the uttermost f all misery, and to perfect felicity. Strive to
meditate better, to have Meditation issue in a growing knowledge of Christ,
sweeter savor, stronger recumbencies on him, larger receivings from him, more
intimate fellowship with him, and a more worthy walking of him.

4. Let thy Meditation be more improved in that particular of the great Applier
of Christ to thee, and mighty Helper of thee, the holy Spirit; how to better
entertain him, and by obeying, please and delight him, and not grieve him; that
he always may be ready to assist, enlarge, and comfort thee, seal thee, and
shed abroad the love of God in thy heart.

5. Strive after a better meditating on all the precious promises, so as more
to strengthen Faith, heighten Hope, and have the fuller Communion with Christ
by them.

6. So meditate of the Ordinances, as they be more highly valued and endeared,
and be more instrumental for thy meeting with God in them, and commanding his
blessing by them, of light, warmth, strength, and encouragement.

7. Mightily contend to exacter musings and ponderings of thy hearts great
wickedness and deep deceitfulness. Make Meditation a better clue and thread to
lead thee into all intricacies and windings of that maze and labyrinth wherein
thou art so ready to be lost, and art often lost. To know it more perfectly in
all its cheats and deceits, but with an earnest looking up to God the
heart-searcher, to manifest thy self unto thy self.

So for the methods and dephts of Satan thy unwearied enemy, which will not be
understood unless studied and minded much. 2 Cor. 2.11. We are not ignorant,
says the Apostle, of his devices. He was not ignorant this way, this must be
knowledge, by minding and studying of them. Though God teaches, yet not
without our endeavor, setting our thoughts to search and find out his
practices and subtilties. If we are careless herein, God may instead of helping
us against him, let him loose upon us, to act his frauds and fury, that our
buffetings may awaken us into mindings of him, and endeavors of being
acquainted with his devices.

Meditate therefore more to be an experienced skilful Artist here, and grow
more cunning to see into his practices.

8. Meditate more of that enemy the world, that makes the baits for covering
Satan's hooks, without which he could not so catch, as often he does; neither
could we be so caught from our own corruptions, if things of the world did not
occasion our deceivings. The fuel and tinder is without, the spark and fire is
within; the lust is within, but the bait is without. Jam. 1.14. Every one is
tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence and enticed. If the
bait were nothing to us, there would be no catching of us; if the world were
vanity, all things as crucified to us, having no beauty and loveliness in them,
there would be no danger. Meditate to a discovery more of the worlds vanity,
and that insufficiency in every thing but God, to make us happy; and to thereby
a weanedness of heart from those things that will neither fill or fix, satisfy
us, or stay with us.

CHAP. XIX.
But more particularly.

1. THou must earnestly act and strive to improve thy Meditation on those
things which concern thee in thy rank and age of Christianity.

There are some Babes, little children in godliness, others are young and
strong men, others are fathers, so 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. The strong men must act
according to their age and rank in Christianity, not as babes or little
children; the strong Christian must not, does not look to little childrens
lessons, return thither, and strive to no more. Heb. 5.12. To use milk, stick
at barely the Principles of the Oracles of God and Doctrine of Christ, Chap. 6.
v. 1. But uses strong meat, takes forth the higher lessons in Religion, beyond
children. The Apostle says, The word was in them, and they had overcome the
wicked one. They were (besides knowledge of the Principles) improved to such
knowledge of the Word, higher knowledge, that they knew what was proper of the
Word, and how to use it, as fitted them, to combat with Satan, and overcome
him. The strong Christian must be busied in higher matters; therefore must act
Meditation higher, study and learn those lessons, not of the lower forms, but
above them. To learn the Horn-book or Primmer, and keep there, learn no
further, cannot become a grown man. A Christian beyond a Babe, must feed above
a Babe, a younger one, feed on strong meat, must meditate higher, of growing in
grace, mortifying corruptions which are rising up; overcoming temptations when
they assault, come it may be thick and fierce. Afflictions that may charge
smartly, and all such lessons which Scholars of a higher form in Christ's
School, are usually set to learn and take forth. These thou must make thy
study, thy peculiar Meditation, for finding out the best way of proceeding in
these duties.

The young weak Christians, Christ sets not them so high and hard tasks at
their first entrance into his School, Joh. 16.12. I have many things to say,
but ye cannot bear them now. Higher matters of knowledge, harder matters of
practice; but stronger Christians must have stronger meat, and stronger
exercise also than Children and Novices. And this for Christ's higher glory, the
stronger Christians greater improvement and encouragement. This must be thy
now-way of Meditation, how to act higher in thy now higher rank. In a word,
that thy knowledge, wisdom, strength, courage, all thy graces may be felt more
vigorous and improving, be more evident and shining, and Christ in them for his
glorifying.

2. Meditation, let it be managed for the best thou can, as to all particular
cases, and there ply most where thou have most pressing need. Thus David and
other holy ones of God endeavored the exercise of Meditation to that
particular case which then concerned them, to beat out their best way of help,
as often in the Psalms and other places, Psalm. 23. Psalm. 52. of Doeg, Psalm. 63.
Psalm. 77. Psalm. 142. Particular cases had their particular Meditations, as the
titles of these Psalms, or their matter shows.

In a particular case, thou now (it may be) art put upon something new to thee;
here Meditation should be used and continued for, and until a right and sure
way be discovered for thy best help; the true and sure Scripture-way the Saints
have gone and found relief in: As what Abraham in his trials did, what Jacob,
what Job, what David, what many others in the Old and New Testament did, our
blessed Lord, his Apostles and Followers did.

As in cases of diseases, dangers, troubles, a wise man will study the right
means and manner how to be helped. Thus in all cases, especially new tasks,
trials, troubles, and dangers, Meditation should be exercised according to the
Scripture-directions and exples left us.

If the very particular case, or kind of difficulty be not to be found in
Scripture, then you must by your Meditation gather your direction by the Rule
of Proportion. Look what was like it, look if there be not the same in kind;
yet what is to be found as high and great, not inferior to thy case, if not
higher.

1. Thy particular case, it may be, is some prevailing corruption, or that
which stirs and much troubles thee, which Christ suffers thee to be disquieted
by, sometimes overcome with, to show thee what is in thy heart, to humble thee,
and what need thou have of his Spirit and Grace to help thee. Thus it was with
Job, David, Jeremy, and others.

2. Some buffeting it may be of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.7. Paul had it; so it may be
thy temptation is high, it may be horrid against God, unnatural against others,
against thy self. This Christ in his wisdom permits, for learning thee to be a
good Champion for him, and to experience his succouring and supporting of thee.

3. Or it may be some sore and sharp affliction, some sudden surprisal, which
must add to it, as a quicker fire, to refine thee the better.

4. It may be the case of desertion, God withdrawing, hiding his face, leaving
thee in the dark, as was David's case, Psalm. 51.12. Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation; of Asaph, Psalm. 77.7. Will the Lord cast off for ever, Psalm. 88.
Hemans case. Look out and weigh what in these cases the Saints did, and beat
out thy way so well as thou can.

CHAP. XX. Diverse farther Rules.
OTher Particulars yet may be added to the former; as,

1. Thy setting Meditation on work for wisdom in that great concern, of keeping
thy heart with all diligence, Prove. 4.23. The Art of Heart-keeping, one of the
greatest skills; therefore for the attaining, it must have great study to be in
some degree a Master in this Art, and be better in it. 1. Meditation to learn,
thought-government. Other lessons formerly took thee up more than keeping thy
heart, than governing thy thoughts, which among other means must be, by 1.
Considering the excellency of the thinking faculty in it self. 2. The uses it
is for. 3. The poison of sin that has gotten up to thy head, and is
occasioning such vain and vile thoughts, such wildness, rovings, inconstancies,
and readiness to multiply and fix upon either bad or by-things. 4. The
necessity of reducing them, dislodging them, those vain and vile imaginations.
Jer. 4.14. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? says God to the
Jews. They should neither lodge, as in wicked men, neither enter or stay in a
good heart. 5. There should be a coming to have, and improve in thee an
habitual heavenly mindedness.

Strong Christians must have a power and rule over their thoughts, and not be
satisfied without it in some sort, remembering Gods pure omniscient eye upon all
the thoughts, Romans 2.16. and his judging hereafter of them at the great day. 6.
Thoughts are the souls inlet into the affections and will, the rise of willing
and affecting, and through them of acting and doing. They are very quick and
nimble, yet can be very deep, intense, and serious; great reason therefore thou
have to study, to meditate, to contend to the due regulation of them.

2. Thy Meditation must engage in that hard lesson, the way of ruling thy
spirit, as to the affections, pondering and beating out, how to govern them.
Among the Heathens, the Philosophers and wise men had very rare Rules and
excellent Sayings about the right ordering the affections: But while they beat
the bush, they lost the bird. They had not the Word of God, they knew not
Christ, nor sanctifying Grace, whereby the wisdom and only right principles of
governing these so unruly affections, can be attained, and they tamed and tuned.

1. The task is, how to take them off where they are misplaced, and set them on
right objects, off the things below, and upon the things above, where they are
both rectified and elevated, and truly enobled.

2. As how to take them off wrong objects, so to take them down, when they are
too hot, high, violent, eager, to turn their edge.

3. To stir them up, and make them move, that either would not move, or but
slowly, move lazily, and not with that due, earnest and expedite quick motion
when they ought to do it.

These comprise the whole Irregularity of the affections. The true and sound
cure must be well studied: Although such as are Christ's have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. Quoad animi propositum and
cordis purificati principium, as to the inward living principle, and the real
heart-purpose, initially and gradually, in little degree (for that which is in
no degree begun, is not a grain of mustard, is nothing at all.) Though those
that are in Christ have crucified, as we said, their carnal affections in some
degree: Coming in of Christ and Grace into the heart, gives the carnal
affections a deadly dash, like the taking of some incurable poison given to
kill gradually. The first taking gives the advantage for deaths seizing; yet
this is not enough, as experience sadly shows: there must be a studying and
great pondering, how to rule the daily discovered unruliness of the affections,
and how to cure them, which is not the Philosophers way, nor the wise moral
man's way, which is to curb and moderate them; but the Scriptures directed and
commanded way; and therefore the Christians way that he must use, and that is
to crucify and mortify them. Col. 3.5. Mortify your affections that are on
the earth. The Art and sure way for carnal affections, as so, and then to study
to order these affections which are noble natural plants, and dispositions of
heart, that they may be acted by graces principle on, and for things heavenly,
with a real warmth and a growing fervency.

3. Strongly thou must resolve, and most exquisitely endeavor to study and
meditate for the government of thy will. The will in its nature and rank is a
most noble faculty, the Empress of the soul, the spring of action, the weight
and biass for motion, the door that opens and admits in choosing, or shuts out
in refusing; that which sets up the mark and aim, every end and interest, and
likewise makes choice or rejections of the means to the end. In its corrupt and
carnal state, it is the wickedest piece in every person; it sets up the
greatest Idol in the world; Self, in the Throne above God. Nothing in Scripture
has so great, frequent, and high complaints and charges brought in by God
against it, that which is the most hellish and devilish piece in its
repugnancy, contrariety, stoutness, and stubbornness against God, and whatever
is holy; and the hellish hold-fast of evil, chiefly when it receives the
grain-colour and scarlet-tincture of habit by customary sinning.

In hearts changed by grace, it is in a great measure still carnal, and
accordingly in part has all the forementioned wickedness, and is ready to act
it, if it be not the better watched and ordered continually.

Being then in the best men so evil, it needs the best study, the most serious
and constant Meditation to find the best way for it, to rule this unruly will.
1. Especially as to base self-aims, in which it is the most slippery, and
soonest swayed, hastily burried, and entangled. 2. And as to the cursed
contrariety and hellishness against the Law, will, ways of God, and God himself.

The Art of ruling this Ruler in chief, is well worth thy chiefest Meditation;
the wretchedness of it will disquiet; the pliantness and obedience, holiness
and purity of its aims, choices, and refusals will comfort most, as carrying
highest evidences of thy sincerity.

4. Meditation has great need to act its part industriously and accurately, as
to know how to govern the tongue, that rare instrument, called by David, Psalm.
188.1. his glory. But by sin, called by the Apostle, Jam. 3.8. An unruly
member, full of deadly poison, that sets on fire the course of nature, is set
on fire of Hell, verse. 6. David prays for a watch before his mouth, Psalm. 39.1.
I said I will take heed that I sin not with my tongue, and keeping his mouth
with a bridle. To refrain evil words, requires care; to refrain vain and idle
words, requires a curiosity and exactness.

Study this Art, not as Pythagoras the Philosophers Scholars, that had their
quinquennium silentium, first spent five years in his School to learn silence,
but all a man's life is too little. But there is more to be learnt than just
silence, and that is savouriness of speaking. Prove. 10.20. The tongue of the
just is as choice silver; the heart of the wicked is little worth: then and
therefore the tongue of the wicked is little worth, because the heart, out of
whose abundance the mouth speaks, is little worth.

Study the Art of savoury speaking, by getting three things. 1. A good treasure
in thy heart. 2. A wisdom to discern times of speaking. 3. A true, godly,
humble boldness to speak, and not be ashamed, Psalm. 119.46. I will speak of thy
testimonies before Kings, and will not be ashamed.

Meditate for the true Scripture-way for speaking.

5. Meditate how as to fill up with heart-beauties of graces within, knowledge,
wisdom, holiness, and every particular grace, so to have a fruitful, shining,
exemplary conversation suitable to thy rank and station in Christianity.

How to walk worthy of the Lord to all well-pleasing, Col. 1.11. To all
fruitfulness in every good work, in all conditions, and in all relative duties,
as husband or wife, parent or child, master or servant, and the rest. It is
hard to be good indeed, harder to be growing better; hard to become and suit a
change in condition never under before, hard to come up to relative duties, and
be Christian in them, and so good as a well-grown Christian should be. Some are
very heedless here, they too little mind a proportionate growth herein, as in
other parts of godliness; but this must be minded. Meditate universal growing,
how to honor thy longer standing in godliness, by shooting up and spreading
out more.

6. Lastly, Make it thy great study, how to have suitably to thy rank in
godliness a richer treasury and stock of experiences, useful and rare
experiences for thy own and others advantage; make Meditation a great observer,
a diligent gatherer, a careful layer up of experiences choice and precious, to
have a large treasury, to bring out of it new and old.

CHAP. XXI. Directions to Christians of the uppermost Rank.
3. FOr such as are Christians of the highest form in Christ's School, such the
Apostle in this, 1 John 2.13. calls Fathers; not for their long living here, or
being long Christians, visible Members of the Church, as for great growth and
improvement in real godliness; much Knowledge, Wisdom, Experience, Faith, Love,
and Eminencies of Christianity: their Meditation like the highest Artists, must
be acted higher.

1. The Meditation of such as are fathers, should carry higher in all the ways,
and concerning all the several points and particulars formerly expressed, and
relating to all persons in general, in all the sorts of Meditation.

1. In the daily Meditation, to be more eminently exercised and constant, in
drawing out a thread of far exacter evenness and equality, without such
frequent breakings off, and inconstancies that younger Christians more
unprincipled and unpractised, weaker ones not so enricht with a stock of grace,
usually fail in.

2. In this daily Meditation, to be more excellently skilful and wise, like an
old eminent Artist that takes up his work, and performs it with rare skill and
dexterity, and little or no study, acting out of a habit excellently, without
being to seek, raw at his work, or awk-handed, as imperfect Artists are. An old
Bungler is a shameful sight; but an old rare ready Artist is glorious.

3. To be more abundantly warm and affectionate, acting with greater fervor,
in a stronger stream of purer love, higher flame of all holy affections, aims
more spiritual, and richer proportions of all the ingredient assistant graces
required. You must be herein (as a Meditation so important) an out-doer of
such, as are in the ranks below thee; and of thy own former seize and
actings, making sure to do in some degree suitable to thy longer standing, and
larger opportunities of being a most high proficient in this daily duty.

2. Thy Meditation more peculiar and occasional (which in a more fignal manner
thou sometimes chusest to exercise for thy souls refreshing and enlargement)
must have a more accurate management in thy hand; it should be a singular
acting, thy right hand should have her rare cunning.

O what work, what rare spiritual and heavenly work does the holy Psalmist
David ( old in this so excellent and sweet way of Meditation, this his
peculiarly set and selected solemn Meditation) does he make of this way of
meditating in several of the Psalms he has left us on Record! In his younger
times, the times when he first gave up his heart to God, he soon learnt to
excel in this Art of Meditation. He was the sweet singer of Israel, but withal
a rare practitioner of heavenly Meditation. Not as the too usual way of the
world, whose music is often a rather memorizing the Heathen Gods and Goddesses,
or that ravels out in mere wanton fancies, but keeps not any due bounds, nor
has any right tendency. But his way and excellency was in Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual songs, for making melody in his heart to the Lord. Not for the Temple
only, but for his private recreation. This we have appearing, Psalm. 59. When
Saul sent, and they watch the house to kill him, mentioned 1 Samuel 19.11. So
Psalm. 34. When David changed his behavior before the King of Gath, mentioned
in 1 Samuel 21.13. Thus Psalm. 52. Of Doegs wickedness, recorded 1 Samuel 22.9. So
Psalm. 57. and 14.2. When David was in the cave, recorded 1 Samuel 24.3. Psalm. 56.
compared with 1 Samuel 21.11. On which occasion also the forecited 34. Psalm was
made, and Psalm. 63. that so rare affectionate one, and many others, which in
his way of occasional meditating, he penned when a very young man. Six years he
was banished by Saul, or thereabout, forty years he reigned; was thirty years
old when he began to reign; therefore he must be between twenty four and
thirty, a young man, when he penned the Psalms about Saul's persecutions. Thus
as he recreated himself with all sorts of Music, so he rarely improved it by
exercising himself in a way of holy Meditation, reduced his Harp, Lute, and all
others to heavenly use; so after when he made musical instruments for public
Worship in the Temple, by Gods prescription, he meditated Psalms for that
Music, assisted by Gods inspiration. But as all along his time he acted
Meditation, and by time excelled more in it; so (pardon this long digression)
he came not short of his former actings when he was old, yea when very old.

O what rare pieces are those last Meditations in 2 Samuel 22. Psalm. 18. It has
a twice recording for the more full commending to serious considering of all
that read the Bible.

And the next Chapter, 2 Samuel 23. When he was to dye; after all his meditatings
and songs, we have his last Meditation, set intended Meditation, his Swan-like
song, purposely left in the first part of that Chapter. He goes not out as a
candle in a stink, but like a rich perfume cast upon fire, in a most sweet and
heavenly rapture. The best wine should be at the last. Certainly no old
Christians should live, act, or perform at the same rate a younger Christian, a
weak, and but little grown person does; but do higher, rarer things, be ever
upon, not only doing, but self out-doing; not only on endeavoring something,
but excelling, still contending to self-excelling. Last works more than first,
Rev. 2.19. that is better than first. The formal Christian in a sort may do
more; the right fruitful Christian does better last; not more only in number,
but in weight, in intrinsic inward excellency, a better way, a better wisdom,
warmth, delight, evenness, exactness in all duties, and this Meditation does
become the old aged fathers, their crown of glory is their exceeding
themselves, and evidencing of it.

3. In your short sudden ejaculations you should strive to excel.

1. How thick should these heavenly sparks fly up from thy heart, not as
sparks from a common fire, but like sparks out of a burning flaming furnace,
like David, Psalm. 139. When I awake, I am ever with thee. So night and day, all
the day thy Meditation should be carrying thee upwards; make many mountings up
to Heaven.

2. How quick and expedite should this flight to Heaven be, not slow, but
nimble, as the flight of longer and stronger winged Eagles. Thou should have
less weight hanging on thee. Heb. 12.1. Casting off every weight. The weakest
must begin to cast off; the stronger must have cast off more; the old Christian
must have cast off most weight, have most strength, therefore may mount up
quicker and higher.

How pure and spiritual should thy short thoughts be, like the sparklings of
the purest and strongest wine long close kept. Yea, thou should be able to
draw with the threefold cord of daily, occasional, and ejaculatory Meditation
(these interwoven together Meditations) draw more strongly off things below, in
fuller diversions, higher despisings of all empty vanities, and draw more
vigorously upward. The setting thy affections on things above, thy eminent
acting and fixing them, should be by an eminent first using and habiting thy
spirit to heavenly mindedness. The strongest, steadiest, and most improved
affections arise from exacter and more earnest Meditations. The deeper the
foundations of thoughts, the higher the stories of thy affections mount up.

CHAP. XXII. The particular managing of this Meditation.
IN particular thy Meditation should so be managed, as to the matter of
knowledge and wisdom, as to render thee the highest Artist in thy trade of
godliness.

1. To be full of knowledge above the weaker Christians, Romans 15.14. I am
persuaded you are full of knowledge. The young Christian must get knowledge;
the strong must have much more: But the old Christian must be very full to be a
teacher of others, Heb. 5.12.

2. To have meditated so, as to arrive at much wisdom, to understand thy way,
and order it best.

A wise Christian is a person of great excellency; it is very highly extolled
in the Scripture.

This David, though not presently, yet attained in time, as Psalm. 119.99, 100.
I have more understanding then all my teachers: I have more wisdom then the
ancients.

3. To have the richest treasury of heavenly truths, the fullest stores of
precious experiences, Meditation is the greater gatherer of them, and the
improver of them on all occasions.

It becomes not a Christian of long standing to be poor and unfurnished of
holy experiences.

The Psalmist we may see drawing forth his experiences, and telling them to
others, Psalm. 3.4, 5. I cried, and he heard; Psalm. 18. almost all the Psalm, he
puts all the pearls of deliverances (experiences that way) on one silken thread
of this one Psalm together. So Asaph, Psalm. 77.6. I call to remembrance my song
in the night, what joy he formerly felt, though now he wanted it: Thus often the
Saints in Scripture. The Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.10. Who has delivered, and does; he
had his experiences ready.

4. More peculiarly your great exercise (which others cannot so well reach) is
to be much implied in the deepest Mysteries, the highest points of Faith, and
the hardest matters of practice. I mean not so much such sorts of difficulties
in Divinity, those which great skill in the Tongues and Arts will require, and
that must have long time, much study, which the necessary occasions of very
many cannot admit, and are not necessary for every man to understand.

But such higher matters of godliness, as may more, Jude 20. edify you in your
holy faith, increase your obedience to a more fruitful and exact walking, Ephesians.
5.15. See ye walk circumspectly, accurately, or exactly, the word is; thus, the
higher contemplations of the Nature of God, his Attributes, and Titles, the
Works of God, Creation and Providence, his wise, righteous, and holy
Administrations and Government.

1. Government in the whole world, and all things in particular in it to the
least circumstance, the falling of a hair from the head.

2. Government, and that so rare and admirable toward the rational creatures;
but most observable astonishing toward his Church and his dear Saints. This,
as some of our Divines say of Gods Government of the world and matters in it,
is to be one of the great Meditations of Christians, that are by the Apostle
called Fathers, who having obtained formerly much acquaintance with other
truths, of more necessary use for their then rank and standing, now are to
busy themselves in these high Mysteries for furthering Faith and Godliness.

The Mysteries in the two Books of Scripture and Nature, are the two Tropicks
or Lines between which thy Meditation should move and bound, run its course,
and keep within this compass, which is useful and safe.

In sum, let thy Meditation be improved all thou can for the setting up of
the main mark, for the fullest aiming at it, the hardest pressing toward it,
with all contendings for an excellency of wisdom, eminency of holiness,
exemplariness of conversation and exact walking, together with all
industriousness after that peace which passes all understanding, joy
unspeakable and full of glory, the establishings and heightning of them, with
longings and hastnings after that appearing of the Lord, and crying, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

Conclusion. Now this so highly important duty of holy Meditation, having been
as to the nature, kinds, necessity, and excellency so fully discovered and
demonstrated; the great sinfulness of neglecting it evinced; the dangers
following the neglect manifested; the practice with such high inducements, and
powerful Scripture-arguments urged home; and the way respecting all sorts of
persons in so many Rules and Directions cleared.

Application general. Then all who know these things are utterly inexcusable,
that know these so greatly necessary things, and will not comply with the
careful practice of them. Ah! therefore let every one most earnestly beg it of
God, to write this his Law of holy Meditation in his heart; to give the right
wisdom to understand the way of it, the firm purpose and resolution constantly
to perform it, yea, the practice of it with sweetest solace and highest
delight. Let me say to my soul, Necessity is laid upon me. It is an Imperial
Law of the great King of Heaven; if I do it not, great guilt will be
contracted, great wrath of a God will be kindled, my soul will deeply be
wronged. If I have not, act not good thoughts, my heart will act evil thoughts,
will fill with evil thoughts, will fix and habit it self in them, be quite
overrun with them.

I shall have a spirit stained, deeply dyed into habitual vanity of mind; yea,
I may be given up to judicial penal vanity of thoughts. It may be to terrifying
and most affrighting thoughts. That I which would not be brought to think of
the threatenings of a just God and his terrible Curses; That would not meditate
of that greatest of evils sin, of my heart and life-sins, shall have all my
sins set in order before me, held and kept staring me continually in the face.
That I who would not meditate of the most blessed God, his Christ's fullness, his
Spirits sweetness, his Heaven and everlasting Happiness, shall now have
represented to my thoughts, and be made to see Satan, Hell, and eternal Death
continually before me. Yea, to be under such amazements and terrors, to be so
haunted and followed, that at last it may be insupportable, and quite overwhelm
me.

O therefore let me not so sin against my own soul, and for ever undo my self
by wilful or heedless neglecting this duty, which lies so indispensibly upon
me, and may be so advantageous to me!

O how many are continually guilty of self-destroying, for want of a timely
self-bethinking? By a slighter thinking, for want of serious thinking? By a too
short thinking, for want of the necessary allowance of time and space for
thinking? By a too seldom thinking, and not using due frequency of thinking? By
acting mere fancy and imagination, and not wise consideration? Adams first
state was good, yet mutable; but it was not a sin or imperfection to be
mutable. And though this mutability of his will was a ground of his fall; yet
it was his incogitancy was the first blamable cause, he fell by acting sudden,
too hasty imagination, and not due consideration, he considered not all things
to be considered. Thus ever since, the falls of sinners are generally more by
incogitancy, haste, and hurries of fancy and imagination, want of consideration
(though there be sins also of deliberation, not precipitations, but
presumptions.)

When God reduces a sinner, he brings him from swaying fancy and carelessness
to considerateness, Ezekiel. 18.28. Because he considers and turns; he breaks the
reeden Scepter of fancy and inconsideration, and brings in, and sets up the
golden Scepter of wise consideration. So Acts 2. Men and brethren, what shall
we do? Acts 16.30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? But O what pity is it that
any soul should perish, for want of a little thinking? Shall I suffer my self
to be of that simple sort, and to be carried away in that crowd to utter ruin?
If I never yet walked in this heavenly thought-way, the greater reason I have to
hasten into it.

But if I have tasted, tried, and found the surpassing sweetness and advantages
of it, have I not high encouragement to make a farther progress still in it?

And if by long beating this path, I have largely experienced the most abundant
pleasantness and sweetness, have I not then greatest inducement to go on the
more both evenly and earnestly? Ah! then, my soul, consider with thy self the
liberties, the latitudes, the pleasures, and satieties which thy eye may still
expatiate and recreate it self in, by this rare Art of Divine Meditation.

Look to thy ways, thy eye-ways, their varieties and excellencies, which are so
many, and of that transcendency, that there never were, nor can be any so
various and spacious, of that delicacy, beauty, and glory.

The wise and holy heart has far the advantage of all the great Scholars and
Artists, all the highest Nobles and Princes, he has better walks and rarer
eye-entertainments in his happy way of Meditation.

Ah! then, my soul, how can thou in the least sort be slothful and backward
to this so pleasant performance, and soul-enriching way, this so easy ascent
to Heaven, by the paths and steps purposely made thee to mount up thither?

See what plenties of rare provisions are made to entertain and take up thy
thoughts; What multitudes of fittest objects; What sweet and precious things
lie full before thee, to give thee a full employment, at all times, and with a
very great variety, to be a preventive of weariness and cloying, and introduce
a more fullness of satiety and delight.

Thou have that great Book of the whole Creation, all the several, most
stupendous and glorious Works of God, to take and look over all the gilded
leaves, and there to meditate on wonder after wonder.

Thou may carry thy eye over all the Earth full of Gods Riches; descend into
the bowels of it, meet with all the hid Treasures and Rarities locked up in the
Makers rich Cabinet there below: Thou may go upon the so large extended
Waters, through the paths of the Seas, see the things of excellency in the one
and other. Thence thou may ascend up the steps and stories of the Air and
Firmament, the glorious Heaven beyond it, with the so glorious Lights of such
astonishing magnitudes and motions, orders, and influences. Thence then mount
up thou may to the highest Heaven, that most holy place, the Worlds most
glorious piece and fabric, that Palace of the King of Glory, with all his so
glorious Retinue and Attendants of millions of millions of most happy Saints
and Angels.

O what an ample provision is this for my spirits particular help and solace,
my eye-accommodation and recreation? Yea, how unspeakably gracious must I have
declared my God to be toward me; had I only been favored with the ten
thousand part of the things my Meditation can recreate it self upon?

Ah! but, my soul, thou have more graciously afforded thee by thy God another
book, that richest Treasure of most infallible, necessary, and saving Truths;
there may I most highly meditate and satiate my self with that highest Mystery
of godliness, all the wonders concurring and meeting to make it up; and among
them, that most especially of the so astonishing, so all-amazing Mystery of God
manifested in the flesh. The very highest thought-walk given for a created
Nature to take its most ravishing solace in. Not only for sinners redeemed by
the Lord of Glory; but those of that uppermost rank of Nature that never needed
a Savior from sin; yet being mutable creatures, might all have fallen. But in
Christ their Head, being given in their election to him, and thence preserved
by him. These blessed Angels have this Mystery of Godliness, this Lord of Glory
Jesus Christ, their Head of continuation of happiness, the most transcendent
object of their highest contemplation and admiration.

O what an account then shall I render to my God, if I do not design and
endeavor Meditation in some good degree proportionate, and answering the so
inconceivable eye-obligation and engagement herein lying on me.

But O my soul, this is not all, thou have yet another Book besides that of the
Creature, and the other of Scripture; the book of thy own self, state, and
heart, wherein with singular advantage thou may constantly busy thy thoughts
most seriously. And if thou art Christ's Temple, know his dwelling in thee,
thou may find it like the so glorious Temple of Solomon, built of costly
stones of spiritual excellencies, over-laid with that pure gold of inward
Holiness and Sanctification throughout. Having in it that fire of heavenly love
descended on it, burning in it; the Altar for offering thy self by Christ in
thee a whole burnt-offering; the golden Altar Christ for the perfuming of all
thy services to ascend as Incense up to God, and be pleasing, most sweet, and
acceptable with him. There you may find the golden Lamps with the seven
glorious lights, the Lord of light, thy wisdom, making thee light and shining
in heavenly knowledge and wisdom. Nay, there may be found the golden Ark with
the Testimony, the Law by the finger of Christ written on the fleshly tables of
thy heart, and the Mercy-seat or Propitiatory, whereby thou art made to God a
friend by Christ who is the Propitiation, residing in the Temple, the hidden
man of thy heart; the Cherubims of glory cover thee, and thy whole man made the
Temple of the Holy Ghost dwelling and working in thee.

O what precious matter of Meditation may thy own glorious state, and the
beauties of Graces and Holiness, the new creature formed in thee, after the
image of Christ, and the Spirit of life and power, to the highest praise of the
infinite love of the most blessed God, afford thee; even that God who in riches
of free grace has thought upon, and from all Eternity chosen thee to be a
vessel of glory and honor?

O how many and many rare objects, as have been formerly expressed, are given and
set before thee to improve Meditation upon? And to and above all, if there be
not enough, large enough, high enough, sweet enough, and satisfying; thou have
to search and dive farther into the infinite power of the Allsufficient God,
especially his infinite loveliness and sweetness, to take thy highest solace,
fullest satisfaction in.

Ah! then my soul, lift up to the utmost thy self in most glorious praises unto
thy God, who has appointed such a way as this of heavenly Meditation, to hedge
in thy thoughts, wildness, and wanderings; to help up thy thought, otherwise
earthliness: Bless him with all that is within thee for vouchsafing and
sanctifying so happy a way for thy both thought-imployment and improvement.
Bless him with all heart-enlargements thou can for making thee so spacious
and large walks.

Most highly rejoice in him who has afforded thee so transcending, pleasant,
and delightful walks for thy thoughts to take their happy turns in.

Say unto thy God, O what is man that thou art so mindful of him? so mindful of
that silly mind of man, as to prepare and fit for him such blessed mind-walks,
and these in so great variety of excellency, spiritual excellency for such pure
pleasure, and ravishing delight.

O then my soul, never deny the doing of this work, never defer the doing to a
better time, when time is now.

O be not heartless and listless, dead and dull, not uneven and inconstant in
the fervent performance of it.

O daily contend to higher excellency in this heavenly Art, to have the wings
of thy spirit longer and stronger, to soar a higher pitch, to take a more
nimble flight, and make larger returns of blessed advantages, in peace, joy,
satisfactions of ravishments and highest raptures of spirit, and by this assent
of holy Meditation, mount up still higher and higher till thou touchest Heaven
it self, till contemplation ends in vision and fruition of the most infinitely
glorious God himself. Vision is accompanied with plenary and most perfect
satisfaction, perfect happiness for ever. To which most unspeakably glorious
God, the most infinitely highest Beauty and Excellency for the eye by
contemplation to act and dwell upon; the Father, chiefly in his infinite riches
of free Grace; the Son, in his infinite fullness of Redemption; the Holy Spirit,
in his most glorious Inhabitation and Application of that Redemption, be
Honor, Glory, and everlasting Praises of Saints and Angels for ever. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.

FINIS.

