BLESSEDNESS, OR, GOD and the WORLD Weighed in the BALANCES OF THE SANCTUARY
AND THE World found too light.

Preached in a Sermon at Paul's, before the Right Honorable the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Commonalty of the City of London, on a Thanksgiving-Day, for the
prosperity of our Navy in a conflict with the Spaniard, October 17. 1656.

By Francis Raworth, Teacher to the Church at Shore-ditch.

London, Printed by T. Maxcy, for John Rothwell, at the Fountain in
Goldsmiths-Row in Cheap Side, 1656.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT TITCHBURNE LORD MAjOR, And the Right Worshipful
the ALDERMEN of the City of LONDON.
Honorable, and Beloved,
IT cannot be denied, but that our greatest happiness in this world is, That we
have liberty to make provision for the world to come; yet generally so unhappy
are men, as that they little ponder upon their future Crown, and little
consider of their present race; but either they vainly mis-spend their time (to
allude to the Roman Emperor) in gathering Cockle shells, in heaping together
the Mammon of unrighteousness; or in a more degenerous way, in a base drudgery
for the lusts of the Flesh.

The Profession of Christianity laboreth under two Extremes; some pretend to an
Anticipation or prevention of Heaven, and would fain persuade us that there is
no state of Glory after this life: These men, notwithstanding their present
Triumphs, are under great Temptations; and in a sober sense, are rather besides
their wits, then above Gods Institutions.

Others charge the faithful Professors of Religion with usurpation against God,
with Antedating the state of Perfection, as if they did confound the
distinction between the Church Triumphant and Militant: No, say they, Purity
and Holiness are our aim on earth, but our possession only in Heaven: These
Sensualists may learn, that the great change of man is made in this world, and
only confirmed in the next; the Tribunal Bar Regenerates no man, but
publicly and finally acquitteth the Regenerate: Heaven must first enter into
us, before we can enter into Heaven; though the perfection of Purity be only
in Heaven, yet the principle of Purity is to be had on Earth: He that dies a
sinner, shall never rise a Saint: He that by the Love of the Brethren shoots
not the gulf here, shall never pass from death to life hereafter: He that has
not God to be his Lord now, shall never have the Lord to be his God. Woe be to
that man that was born, and is bred, and shall be buried in sin, that goes out
of this world in that condition that he came into the world with, happy had he
been that he had never been born; happy, if when dead, he never should have had
a resurrection, because he shall arise, not so much to be judged, as to be
condemned.

Nothing is so much discoursed of as blessedness, yet nothing so little
understood; some place it one thing some in another, yet both amiss; some men
would be happy, but without communion with God, which is impossible: These
should know, That God has not only Mines of Brass, but Mines of Silver and
Gold; and that though the enjoyment of this world be not an Argument of Gods
anger, yet its no argument of his peculiar love, and therefore we must take
heed of valuing the good things of Gods footstool, above the good things of
his Throne.

My work in this Sermon, has been to give the world its due, both in its white
and black sides: I have weighed the blessedness of this world and of the next,
in the Balances of the Sanctuary, and notwithstanding this world be pondrous in
a providential sense, yet comparatively, by the verdict of God himself, it is
found too light; to which when you had given a patient hearing, you were
pleased by your order to importune its publication: I have satisfied your
request, and my prayers to God are, That because it is a subject of the highest
nature, that it may have the deeper Impression on your hearts: That as God has
lifted you up into the seat of Honor, so you may lift up that God with
Thankfulness: That as you have public Opportunities to do good, to restrain
Profanation, and discountenance Error, so you may have hearts suitable to your
Opportunities. That as God has thrown into your laps the outward Happiness of
this World, so you may prize the Benefactor, and set a greater Estimate on the
light of his Countenance, the least beam whereof is worth ten thousand Worlds.

Your Honors, and the Churches Servant in the Gospel, Francis Raworth.

PSALM. 144. ult. Happy is that people that is in such a case; yea, Happy is the
people whose God is the Lord.


WHatsoever the Prophet David, (whose Character is, A man after Gods own heart)
does undertake, he performs it cordially and heartily: If he be in a
gratulatory vein, and fall to the praises of God, he cannot nullify and debase
man too low with him; He is but vanity, and his days are but as a shadow, not
worthy to be taken notice of, ver. 3, 4. And he cannot magnify and advance the
Lord too high; He is his Goodness, his Fortress, his Tower, his Deliverer, and
his Shield: If he be in a praying posture, he is so pathetical and powerful, as
if God, q. d. could not deny him audience: Bow the Heavens, O Lord, and come
down, send thine hand from above, and deliver me out of great waters; I, and
with such a majesty and life, as if he had the key of Gods Armory to open it at
pleasure, and to throw out swords and flaming fire of wrath against the wicked:
Cast out lightning, and scatter them; shoot out sharp arrows, and destroy them,
ver. 5, 6, 7. Finally, If he begin to exalt God, he sets him out with such
beauty and excellency, as no Creature or created comfort can be preferred
before, no not possibly be weighed in the balance with him; to which purpose it
is observable, that as the maledictions threatened against David, were presented
by the Prophet under three forms, of War, Famine, and Pestilence; so here in
the latter part of this Psalm, the Blessings of God are expressed under three
contraries; against the Pestilence is opposed this Petition, That our sons may
be as Plants grown up in their youth, ver. 12. Against Famine, That our Garners
may be full, affording all manner of store, ver. 13. Against War, That our oxen
may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in nor going out, that there
be no complaining in our streets, ver. 14. And my Text is an Epiphonema, with
which he concludes, Happy is that people that is in such a case, etc.

There is a double blessedness, sinistra beatitudo, a Blessedness of the left
hand, a Blessedness of this World. And secondly, There is dextra beatitudo, a
right hand Blessedness, a Blessedness of Grace, of Salvation; This Blessedness
is the aim of men on earth, but the perfect possession only of men in Heaven:
Accordingly there is a double interpretation of this Text, suitable to the
double Blessedness in it; One interpretation proposes it by way of
competition, Blessed is the people that is in such a case; that is, while
others are annoyed with the Pestilence, have prosperity; while others are
consumed by the Famine, have plenty; while others are destroyed and harrassed
with Wars, Tumults and Alarums, have peace and quietness in their Borders, sic
aiunt, ferunt: This is the Popular rumor, this is the only Language and
Dialect of the vulgar: If they can but have these things, they think themselves
happy; whatever become of Religion or of their immortal souls; but David stands
up as offended with this vote and verdict: How now? Is this true Blessedness,
to enjoy the shell without the kernel, the Ring without the Jewel, to live like
a Beast, and die like a Dog (and having no portion in God) afterward to be
damned like a Devil? No, no, says the Prophet, this is a false Maxim, a man
may be thus imaginarily happy, he may have riches, honor, plenty, pleasures,
and the world at will, and yet be really in a miserable case to all eternity:
But if you speak of happiness, I will put you a better case, Happy, yea thrice
happy is that people, whose God is the Lord; a notable Epanorthosis and
correction of the Opinion of worldly happiness. But the second interpretation
more probably supposes it to be spoken by way of subordination and comparison;
as if David had said, You call poverty, and disgrace miseries; and you call
riches, and honor happiness: Why? let this be granted that there is some kind
of felicity in this world, and that it is better to be rich then poor, to be in
honor, then in disgrace: I will not affirm that there is an inconsistency and
inchoherency between a possession in this life, and a propriety in the next;
let it be so, that a people in such a case is happy (and so it is a Synchoresis
or grant) it is true what you say, How happy then is that people, that has not
only peace without, but peace within; that has a portion in this world, but
yet not this world for their portion; that has a title not only to the
streams and Creatures, but also to the Fountian and Creator? yea doubtless,
happy indeed: Well fare that man, that Nation, who in this sense have God to be
their Lord; and farewell the contrary.

Prop. The proposition from hence is, That the greatest happiness in this
world, is not to have this world to be our happiness; but in our Worldly
happiness, to have God to be our Lord.

The truth whereof will the better appear, by setting before your eyes, as in a
Table, and by weighing as in scales, the happiness of this world, and the
happiness of Gods people.

1. We must make an Anatomy of the World, view it, and see what it bids toward
happiness, and without offense I presume I must personate the moral or mere
worldly man, and show you the happiness of being in his case.

1. Let health, strength, and an (...), or good temper of body appear: and
indeed, what is a velvet Pantofle to a dis-joynted foot; a Velvet Jacket to a
broken arm; the most delicate vyands to a dis-eased Stomach? The world, my
Beloved, is like an Hospital of diseased Patients; Here stands one man crying
out of the Toothache, there sits another tormented with the stone; there lies a
third distracted with the Colic, a fourth wracked with the Gout: And who is
there in this great Assembly that can say, For my part I know not who you speak
to, I feel no distemper, I bless God I ail nothing; But how many are ready to
complain with him that cried out, it is true, God has set his Rainbow in the
Heavens, his mark in the clouds, that the world shall not again be drowned with
water: But what is that to me, that am like to be drowned presently? So what is
Peace and Tranquillity abroad, when I have a burning fear within my body? what
is it to have plenty in the Land, when I have a lingering Consumption and Fever
in my blood? It is true, there is never a gracious heart, but would of the two,
rather be a Lazarus here, then a Dives hereafter; rather (if God put it to his
choice) beg his bread on earth, then his water in hell; yet as to this world it
is better to fare delicately, then to be a Beggar, to be a Dives then a
Lazarus; for a man to have work for God to do, and to have ability of God to do
it, while others groan out their days, and waste their precious time in
languishments, for others to have good blood running in their veins, to have
their bones, as the Prophet speaks, full of marrow and strength: Who would not
think himself happy to be in such a case?

Secondly, What though a man have health, if he enjoy not his Liberty? I must
confess, It is better to be a Gally-slave at Algiere, then to be a drudge to
the Devil; it is better to be a Cato in a Prison, with shackels and fetters
about ones heels, then a Caesar in the Senate house, with a chain of Gold about
his neck: Yet how sweet is freedom, not only in Conscience, but of Body? Whom
does it not pity to see another Body to be a Gaol to his Soul, and his House
to be a Prison to his Body? And who would not give the greatest sum, with that
Greek Captain (in another sense) to obtain this freedom, Matthew. 22.28. When I
take a view of our weekly Bills of Mortality in London, I find a report of so
many dying in one Parish of a Fever, of so many dying in another Parish of a
Consumption, etc. But when I cast my eye down to the bottom of the Leaf,
suspecting still that I should see some Funerals of the Plague, contrarily for
these 12. months and above, I find there nothing but Ciphers: Ah Lord, how
unthankful are we for such a blessing! when thou might as justly as
suddenly, turn our Ciphers into Figures, cause our faces to gather paleness,
hang our streets with mourning, and make us know what an happiness health and
liberty is, by the doleful and dreadful effects and restraint of the Plague and
Pestilence.

Thirdly, But what a case were man in, though he had his health, if he wanted
Relations and Friends? How comfortable is it in the Marriage state, for a man
to have his Table compassed about not with Thorns and Briars, but with
Olive-plants, emblems of peace: How much better is it for a man to have so many
children to call him Father, then to have so many pieces of gold to call him
Lord? Therefore it is, that when God would give us an Inventory of Jobs
happiness, he first sets down his piety, A man fearing God; but descending to
his comforts in this life, he begins with his children before his estate: Item,
says God, Job had given him so many sons and daughters, whereas certainly some
ungodly men count children but Bills of charges; and its an ordinary thing to
say, such a man has a fair estate, and would be an happy man but that he has
a great charge of children. Man is immortal, not only Physically in his soul,
because that dies not being immortal; not only morally in his name and
reputation, if godly, because God has engaged himself to make men afraid to
pollute the names of them (who while living feared his name) but also
naturally, in regard of offspring, a man leaving so many Lamps burning behind
him, as he has children surviving; and as it was an Old Testament curse to be
barren, and to have no light, so also for God to put out a man's Lamps, and in
that sense, to leave a man no light to follow him: Happy, or Blessed am I, said
Leah, (when Zilpah her maid bare Jacob another son) for the daughters will call
me Blessed; and she called his name Ashur.

And as for friendship, a Friend is a man's second self, he cares at all times,
he is particeps curarum, partaker of our care; he is (as Alexander was wont to
boast) the best treasure: We know diseases of stoppings and suffocations, are
the most dangerous in the body, and it is not much otherwise in the mind: You
may take Sarza to open the Liver, and Steel to open the Spleen; flour of
Sulphur for the Lungs, but no receipt, in a moral sense so opens the heart, as
a faithful Friend: The Parable of Pythagoras is obscure, but true, Cor ne
edito, Eat not the heart: Certainly if a man would give it a hard phrase, those
that want friends to open themselves to, are Canibals of their own hearts: Two,
says the Wiseman, are better then one, when one falls, the other helps
him up. To have health, and liberty, and relations, and friends, is comfortable
under God, and who does not applaud his happiness that is in such a case?

But Fourthly, What though a man had all these Providential favors, if he
wanted an Estate; though its a thing more honorable to be master over his
Lusts, then to be master of a great estate; and more glorious for a man to have
Grace, Love, and Faith, and Patience in his heart, then silver and gold in his
purse; yet who knows not but Money is a Queen, and those that abound in it are
Kings upon earth with men; that the Borrower is a servant, I often a very slave
to the Lender; that he that has riches, has wherewithal to give, which
because its an imitation of God, is better then to be on the receiving hand;
that it is somewhat for a man to be able to defray his charges as he passes
out of the world, and when he is dead, rather to have the Parish left to his
children, then his children to the Parish: And riches (as the great Statesman
says) are so honorable among wordlings, that its hard to distinguish between
virtue and fortune; for the most virtuous, if unprosperous, have been despised;
and the most impious, if prosperous, have ever been applauded. It is certain,
that its only the right hand of Christ, the light of his countenance that must
save, that must embrace us; yet his left hand may be under our heads, the
mercies of this world may help keep us from murmuring and distrust, they may
uphold us: It is not for nothing that God coupleth Poverty and Shame together,
Prove. 13.18. The reason whereof may be either, because poverty usually makes
men ashamed (though in it self its no more shame for a man to be poor then to
be honest) and often is a temptation to men to do things that are shameful; and
that Solomon intimates to us, that there is greater danger in extremity of
want, then in excess of wealth: Give me, says he, neither poverty nor riches:
Why so? Not riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? A
desperate Interogatory indeed! but yet not poverty neither: Why so? Lest I be
poor, and steal, and take the Name of God in vain: Mark it, the Temtation of
Riches is Pride, but the temptation of Poverty, is sacrilege against God, and
it is a greater sin to Blaspheme God, whom we own, then to turn Athiest and
deny him.

But,

Fifthly, How can this man be yet happy, if in his wealth he want Honor and
Reputation? It is known that our Lord and Master lost his good name, and was
mis-called, before he lost his life; and sure enough there will, to the comfort
of the righteous at the last day, be a Resurrection of their Names, as well as
of their Bodies: Though it be the affliction of a just man to be traduced, yet
its the sin only of the Traducer; for though we have the command of our ears,
yet we have no bridle to restrain others tongues, and its an ordinary, yet a
royal thing to do well, to hear ill: And let no man be despondent that his coat
be torn, if his conscience be whole; yet it must be acknowledged a great
Blessing, though not to be flattered, yet to be well reported of; not only to
have a good conscience toward God, but a just credit before men; and if a man
lose the opinion of being good, though yet he be good, he may be packing out of
the world for any advantage of doing good; for though a good conscience be
necessary for our own salvation, yet a good name is necessary for the salvation
of others; and though it be the care of men generally, rather to be thought
honest then to be honest: To covet a milk white name, and to be cried up and
down the world, to have the encomiums of men, There goes a righteous man, there
goes a charitable man; yet its an honor for a man to have a pot of ointment,
and to have no dead flies in it to make it stink, Eccles. 10.1. And a good name
is rather to be chosen then great riches, and loving favor rather then silver
and gold; though such may not have the Lord to be their God, yet happy is he in
a moral sense that is in such a case.

Sixthly. But how inestimable were a man, and so a Nation, with all this
respect, if they should want Dominion and Empire: It is a promise that Gods
People shall possess the Gates of their Enemies, Genesis 22.17. and that their
Rule shall extend from Sea to Sea. The Athenians reckoned their great Empire to
be their greatest glory: Alexander thought himself unhappy that he had not
another World to Conquer: Caesar had rather be King of a Cottage, (he so loved
Rule) then the second at Rome: The King of SPAIN gives for his Arms a Shield,
with the Sun rising and setting on it. It is observed, That he that has the
command of the Sea has the command of the world, and he that has the command
of the Navy, has the command of the Sea: Now let us suppose a Nation to have
riches at home, and power abroad; for a Nation to be Admiral of the vast Ocean,
to wear the victorious Flag, and to bring all others under the Lee, and to
strike Sail to them as supreme, to be instrumental hereby to report their
glorious acts in the world, that all Kingdoms and Crowns should admire and
honor them; What Nation that had this opportunity to bridle their Neighbors,
and awe their most distant powers into a respect, would not count it their
glory and happiness to be in such a case?

Seventhly, But what is Wealth, and Honor, and Dominion, without Peace? How sad
is it to consider, that while we contend for an ounce of truth, we lose a pound
of love? that like children in the dark mistaking our enemies, we strike our
friends that are nearest us? How many are there with us that have once shed
their blood together, that now are ready even to shed the blood one of another?
Hitherto we have in England been running so far from Babylon, that we are
building a Babel; what one calls truth, another calls error; what one calls
order, another names Tyranny and Cruelty; but what if Providence should now
confound our confusions? Hitherto we have, like Noah's Ark, been tossed up and
down upon the waves of public contentions, and endless controversies; What if
Providence should send some Dove with an Olive Branch of Peace, to give us
intelligence that our waters shall be assuaged, that our swords hereafter shall
be turned into plow-shares, that we shall neither smite one another with the
sword of the tongue, nor with the tongue of the sword; that the falling out of
Lovers, shall be the renewing of love; that if we cannot love one another as men
of one Opinion, yet we shall as men of one nature and of one Nation; that
though we cannot bury all our controversy, yet we shall banish all our
contention: Suppose, my Beloved, the Wolf should now lie down with the Lamb
(that he may do, and yet not be turned into a Lamb) and the Lion should eat
straw like the Ox, and a little child should lead them; suppose that every man
should (...) under his own Vine and Fig Tree (instead of men's longing after
their Neighbors Vineyards, like Ahab) What if sound and sollid knowledge, even
of moral righteousness, should revive amongst us, and should increase
extensively and intensively, as waters upon the Sea; and that in England, the
mountain of the Lord, there should be no destroying thing; that we should
rather mind the stearage of the whole Ship, then the guiding of our particular
Cabins; rather consider the common Principles of Reason and Religion, to unite
us, then the disputable Points in Church and State that seek to divide us: I
believe none among us but would deem this Nation happy if ever it should come
to be in such a case. But though this be much,

Yea Eighthly, For Governors to be as the Angels of God; for Princes to be
Shepherds, to make it their business to defend the People, and for the People
to make it their business to defend their Princes; For Magistrates to paint the
Walls of a Nation, and not to pluck up also the Foundation; to beautify a
Kingdom with Peace, and to build it also with Righteousness, that those in a
Nation that have no will to do Justice, should have no power to do injustice;
that the Mountains should bring forth Equity, and the little Hills Peace, Psalm
72.3. That the grand Principle of Nature should universally be put into
practice amongst us, for no man to do to another, but that which he would be
content another should do to him; that there should be satisfaction given for
wrongs done to all parties; that a composition and composure should be of all
Injuries, by a sweet Amnesty or Act of Oblivion; What a Golden Age would such
things make? For though Morality be not Grace, nor Justice to men Righteousness
before God for Satisfaction; yet what a shame is it for People to pretend to
Gospel Light, and yet not to live up to Natural Light? And assuredly, I had
rather converse in common dealing with a man that is but a Moralist, though he
be no Christian, then with a Professor, an high Professor of Christianity, that
is not a Moralist.

But if we could imagine a Blessedness of Health, without permanency, we might
call an intermitting Ague a good day without health.

If a Blessedness of Plenty, without permanency, we might call one man's surfeit
in a time of dearth, plenty.

If Peace a Blessedness, without permanency, we might call a nights sleep in
the midst of a field of Arms, peace. If Riches without permanency Blessedness,
then a traitor might be a landed man, that is condemned and must die to morrow:
Now suppose what we there call Blessedness, should be possessed, not only by
this present Generation, but by Providence entailed on our Posterity, and the
ages to come? Whose Vote is it not that we might see this good? and who has
faith to believe that God will render us thus happy? Yet were we thus happy, it
were nothing comparable to that happiness which follows, of having the Lord to
be our God, the Lord God to be our Portion.

And now I come to take off the vail, and show you the world in its deformed,
at least, defective color, in respect of the liveliness and loveliness of
their estate who have an interest in the God the Lord. Yea happy, etc. Happy,
Ashrei. Happiness is the subject of most Books, of all Tongues; Aristotle
begins his Ethics with Happiness, David his Psalms with Blessedness; so Christ
himself the Gospel, Blessed are the poor, etc. It may be noted, That no
Grammarian among the Jews could ever tell us what this word Ashrei signifies,
as no Philosopher among the Gentiles what Happiness is; some place it in one
thing, some in another; the Peripateticks place it in Contemplation; the
Stoics in Contemplation and Practice; the Academicks in Practice; the Epicure
shot nighest the mark (however time has represented them) they placed it in
the delight that did arise from virtuous Actions. Some Critics say Ashrei is
an Adverb, and signifies Happily; others rather conclude it a Substantive, and
that P^ural or Dual, and so its to be rendered Blessednesses: And the reason why
a gracious man is so called, may be either because his happiness is a Catholic
happiness: God is not a partial or fragmentary, but a full and perfect good; as
all the Lines meet in the Center, so all the happinesses that are scattered in
the Creature, center in God. Or secondly, Because such an ones happiness is not
only in the Present, but also in the Future Tense; he is happy (its true)
here, but imperfectly, his greatest happiness is yet to come; here indeed
happiness enters into him, but hereafter he shall enter into happiness. The
Moralist speaks at a great rate, when he says, Call no man happy that has a
great Estate, but him that lives up to the Prescript of Reason and Law; He that
sees no man with whom he would change his condition, he that loses that he
cares not to enjoy, and enjoys that he cannot lose: And in a spiritual sense he
only is such a man whose God is the Lord: Methinks the words are here
represented as Antiphanys, Dialogue-wise, The world begins, Happy is he whose
Sons grow like Olive plants, yea says David, whose God is the Lord; the World
succeeds, Happy is he whose Oxen are strong to labor, and that Nation whose
streets knows no complaining; yea, says David, whose God is the Lord; still
that is the note of a gracious heart, as he rescribed back nothing but King of
France, King of France, King of France; and why happy such a man above a
worldling.

1. He that has outward happiness in the world, may not have a title to the
Lord; but he that has God to be his Lord has a title, a spiritual title to
the World: The Corinthians were ready to quarrel about their properties; I am
of one from Paul, says one, I am from Apollo, said another; tush, said a
third, I care neither for Paul nor Apollo, give me Cephas, I am for Cephas: The
Apostle rounds them in the ear, what says he, Is Christ divided? will you
contend for a part? All men are gain, not only Paul, Apollo, Cephas, but all
things, life, death, things present, and things to come; But by what tenure?
Why? Because Christ is gain: When we lost our Title to God, we lost our
comfortable title to the Creatures, and no wonder the Creature rebels against
us, since we have rebelled against the Creator: The Creatures may justly say to
unregenerate men, that hunt after, and dig for happiness in them; I say,
Honors, Riches, Pleasures, may say to such, as Samuel did to Saul, Why come ye
to us, since God is departed from you? He is a Rebel that harboreth him whom
the King has Proclaimed a Traitor: And what comfort can that soul have, to lay
his head in the bosom of any Creature, when God himself has turned his back
on him? But he that has a new title to God, has a better title to outward
comforts, he holds them in capite: God has provided for him a Kingdom, and
therefore does not grudge him crumbs? How sweet are those mo^sels of bread, that
by Faith are dipped in Christ's blood? not that property comes by Grace, but it is
cleared up by Grace: Many a man has an Estate, and a child of God enjoys the
comfort of it: The worldly man may say, This house, this child is mine by
Creature right; a Saint says, These are also mine by Covenant right; but you
may have all worldly happiness and not be happy.

Therefore secondly, Grace claims a title to all the Ordinances of God:
Preaching is thy Chariot, to bring the Lord down to thee: Prayer and
Meditation, are wings to carry thy soul up to God. It is generally believed,
and without scruple among the judicious, that the visible, and not the
invisible Church, is the prime and proper subject for the dispensation of
Gospel Seals, but his title to them that has a right to Christ, is
indisputable: He that can say the body and blood of Christ is his, may
challenge and claim the Bread and Wine that signify those as his: He that has
right to the Pearl, has right to the Casket: He that is married to the King of
Glory, ought not upon any pretenses whatsoever, to be kept out of the Presence
Chamber, and from prayer, while others stand like strangers without doors
knocking, and speaking to God at a distance, as slaves to a master, you have
freedom to enter into the Palace of Heaven, and cry, Abba, Father: The
Ordinances are the glory of a Nation, and where ever God goes, his Ordinances
go too, and where ere they reside and abide, he abides too.

My Beloved, God and his Institutions go and come from and to a Nation
together; as its the honor of a Nation to say, Jehovah-Nissi, The Lord is our
Banner, in a Military sense for God to fight for us; so a greater for others to
say of any Nation, Jehovah-Shammah, The Lord is there, in an Ecclesiastical
sense: The Ordinances are the comfort of the soul, they are not as some new
Anti-scripturists calumniate, the Grave wherein Christ lies, but the Throne
whereon he sits as King of the Church; and we were better lose our evidences
for our Lands, then part with the seals of the Gospel: Is it then a small
matter to have liberty to tread in Gods courts, to sit under the tree of Life
and dew of Heaven? to have commerce with Angels, to have communion with the
Lord of Glory; when thou art hungry, to have freedom to run to Gods House for
Bread; when thou art distracted and troubled with doubts of thy Faith, thy
salvation, to have recourse, with David, to Gods Sanctuary for resolution, and
that by thy title to the Lord, as thy Lord?

Thirdly, Thou have moreover a propriety in all his Providence; his
Providence are thine for thy satisfaction; if thou want enlightening, he is
thy Sun; if defending, he is thy shield; if a Nation be fearful, he is a wall
of fire without; if fainting, he is a well of water within: They may be without
many things, but we have the Broad-Seal of Heaven for it that they shall want
no good thing: Thou art in trouble, and if thy Friend could but see thee, How
happy? God is therefore Omniscient: Thou art weak, if thy Friend could help
thee? God is therefore Omnipotent, El Shaddai, All-sufficient: If thou art
weak, he has a shoulder to carry thee; if feeble, a bosom to warm and cherish
thee: He that has him that is all, has all.

Secondly, For thy security, and that 1. To sustain thee: If thou go into
the water, I will be with thee; if into the fire, I Will be with thee, said God,
q. d. If thou burn, I Will burn too; if thou drown, I Will drown too: Hence it was
that Israel was safe in the Red Sea, and the three children secure in the
Furnace: God may cast his child down, and so his Nation, yet not cast them
away; he often breaks your hearts, that he may not break your backs. 2. To
order all for thee: The Devil may turn Cordials into poison, but providence
turns those poisons into Cordials again: God has his fairest ends in our
foulest ways, when temptations have sucked our corrupt blood away, those
Leeches shall be taken off; when you are provoked to storm at God, and quarrel
with the seeming inequality of his ways, are ready to judge his present
carriage to your souls, inconsistent with the hopes of election past, or future
glory: Let despair vail, and murmuring be tongue-tyed, and consider the Lord
thinks it better rather to bring order out of these spiritual disorders, then
not to suffer those disorders to be at all: Its easier for vain man to wrangle
with the Almighty, and to set up in his pride an Anti-Providence in the world,
then rightly to discern what God is a doing; we neglect to consider his way
which lies open, and no wonder then we are hampered in finding out his ends,
which are secret: Its sufficient, though God for the present seem to scrible to
a natural eye, yet he will, before he has done, make his Copy fair: Though the
building of Sion seem confused, here lies a beam, there an heap of mortar,
there unhewn stones, yet all things in the end shall serve this great
Architect: God has not more glory now, then we shall have good (according to
our capacity) hereafter, Romans 8.28. Gods house may be stormed, but it shall not
be shattered; Sion like a bottle may be dipped, but it shall not be drowned; who
dare invade that Nation where God is Pilot, or levy an army against that people
whose God is the Lord? For,

Fourthly, All the Promises of God are thine, both first for this life: I
profess Christians, though we slightly overlook the Oracles of God: Yet as
there is not one c^mmand we could miss, we stand in need of so much holiness;
so there is not one promise (though there be thousands there we could miss) we
stand in need of so much comfort: And moreover, there is as much reallity in
the promises of your God, as there is of formality in the promises of men; what
men speak falsely, God speaks faithfully: And if any poor soul say, If God be
mine, why then is not comfort and peace mine? Can a man have God to be his
Lord, and yet be tormented with so many doubts, scruples as I am? Yes, your
comfort is not always so much as your title (your title is to Christ, to peace
of Conscience, to a full and perfect joy in the Spirit, but your comfort may be
little) but yet your title is always more then your actual comfort: The reason
why you are perplexed in your consciences, is not because you have relation to
God, or because their's no satisfaction for you in the Bible, but because you
want a mouth to suck the breast of Consolation, and an hand of Faith to reach
the Pearl of Price: God always has a promise for your Faith, but you have not
always Faith for a promise. Specially the promises are yours,

1. For the Perseverance of your Graces: I fear, says a Believer, I shall one
day fall by the hand of this Saul, of this lust; no, says God, The house of
David shall grow stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul weaker and
weaker: But though I depart not from God, yet God may depart from me; he may
give me a Bill of Divorce, and recall my sense of his Love, and the testimonies
of his Grace: No, says God, I will be your God, and I will not depart from
you: The truth is, our Faith could not keep us, unless the power of God kept
our Faith: Therefore the Apostle tells us, We are kept by Faith, but it is also
through the power of God to salvation: You say you may fail, because Gods
promises are your conditions, but remember withal, your conditions are Gods
promises, he bids you make you a new heart, that you may see your weakness, and
his faithfulness; therefore he says, I Will take away your stony heart, etc. God
is on both sides the Covenant of Grace, and though the evidence of a Believer
may be blurred and blot^ed, yet the Seal remains on, and is never broken off:
Whatever Doctrines some vent against the immutability of special Love, yet we
may easily know by experience, or rather, I confess, by Scripture, That God
has other ways to correct his children, then by casting them out of his Family.

2. To pardon infirmities and sins: God has an hook to fetch in your
wanderings, and a breast to take in your weaknesses: Christ has righteousness
against your unrighteousness, blood to wash our tears: Your Coin, though it
have some allay, yet if it have the right stamp, that shall not hinder its
currency in Heaven: If you bring your duties to the touchstone, God will never
bring them to the Balance: O how happy are they, that though the world see it
dirty under their feet, can themselves at that time see it fair above head!
That when riches, and health, and friends fail them, and they cannot say, we
have clothes to cover us, or food to refresh us; that can yet say, Blessed be
God we are not miserable, for we have the promises, the honey-combs of
sweetness still by us. And though you have but little in possession, yet,

2. For the future you have riches in Reversion: Is he an Infidel that will not
provide for his Family, and will God neglect his own? Shall ever any be able to
write Infidel on Gods door? He is a Father, and as he now lays out by
Providence, so by Promise he has laid up for his Children: Will communion with
God in his Ordinances satisfy you? if not, you have a promise of communion
with God above Ordinances, where the Sun shall not shine by day, or the Moon by
night, for the Lamb shall be your light: God has already prepared Heaven for
his, and wonder not at the crosses, calamities of this life, for they are our
Fathers foils and fires to prepare his for Heaven: Earth is the place where you
seek happiness; Heaven is the place where you shall find it. A great part of
our Estates lies in Bills and Bonds, and it is kept for you in your Fathers
hands till you come to Heaven: You may look for much, and often turn over your
Evidences, I mean your promises, and see your future riches, but you will never
know all your Estate till you come to enjoy it, and then you shall have as much
peace, as much glory in possession, as now you have in hopes: If therefore the
promise of a Land of Canaan, after a Wilderness; the promise of an Harbor,
after storms and tempests, will make you happy, you cannot be miserable; and if
the sense of the joy of Heaven, if the Contemplation and Beatifical Vision of
God; if the actual participation of Glory, with the Communication of the beauty
and face of Christ himself can take away your miseries, then you shall be
happy, for the Lord shall without doubt of scruple, then manifest himself to be
your God.

Fifthly, You have a title to all the Attributes of God, his Providential care
is yours: the eye is the tenderest part of the body, the apple is the tenderest
part of the eye; now you all are as dear to God as the apple of his eye, Zech.
1.8. A man will rather endure a thump on the back, then a touch on the eye:
When you are asleep, God is awake; when you are in a fit of temptation,
careless of his glory, yet even then he is careful for your salvation: Israel
that is kept, may both slumber and sleep; but he that keeps Israel cannot
sleep, no not slumber: God so provides for all his children, as if they were
but one, and so provideth for every single or particular child, as if he had
never another child to provide for in all the world besides: The Lord has a
Book to write down your names, and a bottle to put your tears in. His power
likewise is yours: the Lord has not so much need of your patience, as you have
of his power; and as what the Lord is, he is for you; and as what the Lord
has, he has for you; so what the Lord can do, he will do for you. Though the
promise of God be the measure of your faith (and therefore beware in times of
trial, of charging your selves for unbelief, when God himself possibly does not
in that particular command you to believe) yet your faith is not the measure of
his power: The Lord usually does for his Church more then they believe, and we
must believe he can do more for his Church then he does; nothing but
contradiction (to speak reverentially of God) passes omnipotency: Gods people
have a double guard, one within them, and that is, The finger of God, the
Spirit; another without them, and that is, The arm of God, his Power; a double
hold also on God, as he has that double guard on them; Promise what he will
do, experience what he has done: As Sions cause is good, so she wants not as
good a Champion to maintain it: The name of the Lord is a strong Tower; and
though the righteous cannot rest in a name of Godliness, yet they may in the
name of God; and therefore in times of trouble they run to it, Prove. 16.10.
Lord, may Syon say, Support under trials, and deliverance from danger, is an
Article of thy Covenant; And will not the Lord be faithful? Are our infirmities
many? the Lord our God has mercy to pardon them: Are our corruptions many? he
has power to subdue them: Are our sins great? he has love to cover them: What
a Constellation and Center of Attributes are in God! Righteousness, Holiness,
Wisdom, Power, Grace, and mercy? I, every one of these Attributes is God; and
as when Mithridates espoused the daughter of a poor laboring man, the General
to testify the approbation of his choice, sent the old Father a Cap full of
gold, with which he being over-joyed, runs up and down the streets showing of
it to all the people, crying out, All this is mine: So may the people of God,
whose Promises, Providence, Ordinances, Attributes, Graces, are theirs,
triumphantly signify to the world, All these are ours; and that which is more
then all this, if more can be, you whose God is the Lord,

Sixthly, Have a propriety in God himself, in Christ himself; as the Lord, when
he could swear by no greater, swear by himself; so he having no greater thing
to give, gives himself: Christ, who is the beloved of the Father, and the
Firstborn of every Creature, he likewise is yours, your King to Rule you, your
Priest to satisfy for you, your Prophet to Indoctrinate and teach you; his
Death, and Resurrection, and Intercession are yours, not only for
signification, but for efficacy: His blood, his precious and pearless blood is
yours to pardon you; His glorious and sweet Spirit is yours, to purify and
purge you: And for all things else in the World, they are,

1. But short and transitory: Riches are well called Movables, and ere long
they will either take their leave of us, or we shall certainly take our leaves
of them: Honor is but brittle, it is even like Glass, of which they say, when
it shines brightest its nighest melting: And for the rest, how uncertain are
all things, money for the Thieves, Merchandises for the Winds, Cattle for the
Rot, Buildings for the Fire? The glory of this World is in it self but the
Scheme, but the Picture of Happiness, and it will not sit so long before your
eyes, as that you may draw its Picture, its gone before you can say it is here:
But suppose Worldly happiness were long, yet,

Secondly, Its Insatisfactory: Worldly comforts are even like drink to the
Dropsy man, increasing thirst; like Wood to the Fire, enlarging its Flame: The
chest may be filled with gold, but God only can fill the heart: These things
cannot make you happy, because they are desired not for themselves, but for
other things; but the Lord is desirable not for something else beside himself,
but only for himself: Deus propter Deum: If you have Riches, you may look
beyond them and see Honors to tempt your eye; if you have Riches and Honors,
you may look beyond them, and see moral Wisdom to tempt your head; if you have
all these, you may yet look beyond, and see health to tempt your heart: And
while these partial and imperfect happiness lay before you, you may look beyond
them all, and see a necessity of something else, that is, God to be your God:
But let a man be made an heir of salvation, let a man be adopted into the
Family of God, and be able to say, The Lord is my God; and I provoke that man
to say its true, God and Christ, and Heaven and Grace are mine, but I want
something else besides these in the world to make me happy: These things are
not universally good; clothes are but for the back, meat for the belly, music
for the ears, flowers for the smell and eye, etc. but the Lord is a Catholic,
a viscerate and entire good, he is Almighty or All-sufficient: As a man that
has a mind to some particular dish, can find all dishes in that one dish; as
suppose Patridges, Capons, or Pheasants: So a child of God can find all
things in God, riches, honor, pleasure: The covetous man makes his gold his
God, but a gracious heart, says God is my Gold: A man may have silver, but
silver shall never satisfy him without God; but if a man love God, he will
satisfy him without silver: When a poor Beggar is matched to a Royal Prince,
she views his Palace, she surveys his gardens, and pleases her self in a
delightsome prospect of all his greatness and glory, and can say, These are
mine, for the Prince himself is mine: So because you have a title to the
Fountain, the streams are yours: Whatever happiness is scattered here and there
abroad in the Creatures, it is all virtually, eminently, and superlatively in
God. I read of a couple of Ambassadors, the one a Spaniard, the other a
Venetian, and they did both of them extol and prefer the Revenues of their
particular Masters; said the Venetian Ambassador, My Master has so many chests
of Silver and Gold; alas, said the Spanish Ambassador, Your Masters Treasures
have a bottom, but my Masters Treasures in the Indies, have a Root, a Spring:
So may a true Saint say to the World, your riches and comforts have a leak or
limitation; but my Lord Jesus, his comforts and riches, his Treasures, have
neither Banks nor bottom: God is mine, and if he can make me happy I shall not
be miserable: This, this my Beloved, is your Inventory for Happiness, that can
say, The Lord is our God.

I shall now come to the Application of the Proposition, and treat with your
Consciences in these following Deductions or Conclusions.

First Conclusion from hence is, a Vindication of that true Opinion that Gods
people have of the false happiness of the World: Wicked men are infiliciter
felices, unhappily happy; you feliciter infelices, miserable in your
Imagination, but happy really and indeed: You rightly and righteously
determine, that a man may have a gay coat and a festered Conscience; a great
Estate in his hands, but little or no true comfort in his heart; that though
Riches have not so much as the wings of a Sparrow in flying to us, yet they,
when gotten, make to themselves wings, and that of an Eagle, to fly away from
us: That worldly delights are but as a Snow-ball, which being with much pains
heaped up together, melts presently if the Sun do but shine out: That
restless man, in wrestling and contending for what he desires, is but like a
child running up and down in a pleasant Meadow after a painted Butterfly,
which when he has taken, all the recompense it affords, is, but only to
besmear his fingers. You speak truly and soundly, when you say, That a dram of
Grace is worth a pound of Gold; that all the contents and Creatures in the
earth are but mere Ciphers, unless God be purposed to set on the first Figure:
That while a Diadem sits light on a Princes head, it may for all that lie
heavy enough on his conscience: That there is no indivisible connection between
a Kingdom on Earth, and a Crown in Heaven: That a man may possibly swim in a
Sea of Pleasures in this World, and yet sink into an Ocean of wrath and
Brimstone in the next: That a man may be so honorable, so rich, so glorious,
while he lives, that every man may be ready to say, There goes an happy man;
yet that man, when he dies, for want of a configuration to Christ and title to
God, may be miserable to all Eternity. Could men carry their estates beyond the
Line of Mortality, and with their money ^ee the Angels at last day to plead for
them, to prevent the Sentence of the Judge of Heaven and Earth; or after that
Sentence is pronounced, bribe the flames of Hellfire to be pitiful toward,
and not to prey on or torment them: this were something for worldly happiness,
but when we see that there is no advantage, though a man gain the whole world,
if yet he lose his own soul; that all these sublunary felicities, are
consistent with Gods eternal indignation, that these things, neither singly nor
jointly; can so much as assuage grief, put off cares, much less adjourn death
or prevent Hell, where there is no remission of sin, no intermission of
punishment; where the pangs of the damned are not only for the present
intolerable, but for the future interminable. Who would not pray with a
gracious heart, Lord let me be rather miserable for a time (as the world
speaks) that I may be happy for ever, then that I should be happy for a season
only, and after that miserable for ever: Lord, though I desire to be of the
number of those Christians that have their hope and expectation in this world,
yet deliver me from those worldlings, whose entire portion is in this world, is
this world, Psalm. 17.14. Now we are ready to call the proud, happy; to lift up
them high in our thoughts, that are lifted up in the world; but when Jesus
Christ shall come to give to every man according to his works, and in flaming
fire to render vengeance to them that know him not, on the one hand; and on the
other hand when he shall come to make up his Jewels that now are despised, and
to repair their reproaches before God, in the sight and audience of men and
Angels, that now are triumphed over and trampled upon by men: Who would deem
himself happy at that day, if he be not in their case whose God is the Lord?

The second, Deduction: Here we see, as in a Looking-glass, the false Opinion
that worldly men have of true happiness, or of the state of the godly: How
ready is a wicked man to compassionate the children of God? Alas, says he, To
what purpose are these men so precise and exact? It may be there may be a
Judgment day, it may be not; and how miserable are they to provide for that
which no man living ever saw, while they neglect that which is obvious to their
very senses? Honors are certain, riches are certain, and while they expect
their food, they starve; while they pretend after a Kingdom, they go naked,
while they call God Father, they want even the bread of children; Whereas no
man is miserable in another man's account, but in his own: You may possibly see
a Joseph in Prison, while Pharaoh keeps a Court; a Job on a dunghill, while a
Julian is on a Throne: You may see them poor and reproached, but did they ever
tell you they were miserable; and when they were without Estates and
reputation, that they wanted them to make them happy? never say a child of God
is miserable, till he say so of himself. A wicked man may have Blessings, and
yet not be blessed; and a child of God may have curses (still from men) and
yet not be cursed.

Its observed, That men thus varyed their Opinion about happiness, because they
supposed the fruition of that whereof they were destitute, would make them
happy: He that was poor, said, If I had but riches, I should be happy; and so
riches came to be called happiness: He that was in reproach, said, Oh! If I
were but respected I should be happy, and so respect and repute came to be
called happiness: He that was diseased said, If I had my health I should be
happy, and so health came to be accounted an happiness: The natural man is
mistaken in his verdict; the Saint says, I account all things loss and dung
for Christ; the natural man; I account Christ loss and dung for any thing else
in this life: The Saint seeks for happiness in crosses, Job 5.10. but the
natural man or Philosopher will as soon seek for light in darkness, heat in
cold, fire in water, sweetness in gall and wormwood, as for comfort in
calamities. Hence Christ reads a Lecture contrary to nature, Not blessed are
the merry, but the mourners; not the lofty, but the weak; not the Mammonist,
but the poor in spirit, Matthew. 5.3. Vos editis beatos esse pauperes. Ergo ut
tanto facilius f^atis beati, omnia bona vobis adimimus. Juliani scomma in
Christianos factum.
Those eight Beatitudes, are the eight Paradoxes of the world: As Christ said,
He had bread to eat that his Disciples knew not of; so the Disciples of Christ
have an happiness to enjoy, that the natural man knows not of: The World should
consider, That a man can never properly be miserable, till he lose that which
made him happy: You that call outward things your happiness, your Greatness
your happiness, your Gold and Silver your happiness; when your greatness is
abated, and you made little or low before the people, when your Gold and silver
is cankered or corrupted; when the scales turn, and you meet with poverty, your
happiness is gone, you are miserable: But because the happiness of a Saint
consists not in these things, but in Communion with God, but in the
Justification of his PERSON, and a title to everlasting life; therefore
whatever you take from him you make him not miserable, till you can take from
him his God, his Justification, his everlasting life, for these are the things
that make him happy: Suppose a man that has thousands per annum should lose a
few farthings, his Estate suffers no loss, because he has not suffered in,
has not lost his estate: Or take a Traveller that has a precious Jewel about
him, a Jewel of inestimable price; he has some loose money, some spending
money for his journey in his pockets, but his Jewel is made secure in some
private place about his body; a company of thieves surprise him and rob him of
some few shillings, or some small pence; do you think this man, when he comes
to the next Town, would run up and down the streets like a mad man, and cry, I
am undone, I am undone? No, because whatever he has lost, he has kept and not
lost his Jewel: How can a child of God complain of the loss of outward things,
of friends, of estate, while his God and Christ, his Pearl of price are safe?
As he, said a wise man, will not pine at his bad fortune, while Caesar, while
his Emperor is safe: When they have lost God, then they may justly exclaim they
are undone. Even Plato could recommend to the Writers of his age, that they
should chracterise to posterity no man to be happy that was wicked, and no man
to be miserable that was good: There is no greater thing on earth then man;
there is no greater thing in man then his soul; and there is no greater thing
in the soul of Man then God. 'Twas a vain conceit of that Potentate, who
refusing the name of Pius, would be called Foelix; but Scylla, surnamed Foelix,
accounted it not the least part of his happiness, that Miletus, surnamed Pius,
was his friend. Piety is the best friend to Felicity, though Felicity, outward
Felicity, do not always befriend Piety: Foelix, Acts 24.22. thought Paul
unhappy, but Paul knew Foelix miserable; because though he might have a chain
of Gold about his neck, he had not a dram of true Grace in his heart, the Lord
was not his God.

Third, Conclusion: This Text rectifies a latent and secret error, a rash
suspicion, as if a man could not be great and good together, rich and righteous
at the same time; as if a man might not have Gold in his chest, and yet Grace
in his heart. My Beloved, That man is not miserable that has a proportion in
this world, but he that has his Portion in this world, or this world for his
portion: And though outward excellencies be not godliness, yet a man may have
outward excellencies, and yet have godliness too; as a wicked man may have some
sparks of wrath here, yet the Furnace of wrath is reserved for hereafter; so a
child of God shall have his inheritance hereafter; yet he may have some
legacies, some largesses, some common gifts of Providence here: Covetousness is
not the Attribute of Riches (for all covetous men are not rich so all rich men
are not covetous) but of the Man: Though a man cannot serve God and Mammon, yet
he that has served Mammon may serve God, he may have God and Mammon; I, and
through Grace, may serve God with his Mammon: Here stands a poor man in rags,
and for ought we know, he is covetous; there sits a rich man, a wealthy
Alderman, and we trust charitable: Its notable that God does indifferently
dispose of the black and white sides of Providence: Many times he bestows the
good things of this world on evil men, there we have an argument that these
things are not goodness in themselves, and don't make a man happy; and often he
dispenses these outward good things on the godly; and then you may see Job,
the richest man in the East, and Solomon King of Israel: Here we have an
Argument, that these things are not evil in themselves, and so don't conclude a
man miserable that has them.

The Apostle gives a charge to rich men that they be not high minded, but no
charge that a poor man become not rich, 1 Timothy 1.17. The Prophet tells us, That
though here there be a difference between man and man, yet in the bed of the
Grave the poor and rich meet together, and God owns himself the Maker of them
both, Eccles. 9.1. And therefore we find in the Gospel, poor Lazarus in the
bosom of wealthy Abraham; I, Christ himself bids us not to throw away our
Treasures, but to lay them up by employing them.

The Father acquaints us, That one day meeting two men in the streets, the one
a Gallant, the other a Beggar, censured neither, but had this charitable
reflection on himself, There goes a Beggar, and for ought I know, may better
bear his Cross then I do; and there goes a rich Gallant, and for ought I know,
may have a better heart under his velvet Jacket then I have. The Lord gives,
and the Lord takes away, says Job, so that Riches are GODS gift, as well as
poverty, and for ought I know, you may enjoy your Honor and your graces too,
your favor, your lawful favor with men, and the smiles of Gods countenance too;
you may keep (and so to improve them by Charity) your wealth, your strength,
and your relations, and your title to God, and the grace of God too: I know
nothing but that you may be rich and happy, if you will be rich and godly: I
don't love to hear a poor man declaim against riches, and a beggar to spit at
and vilify a Crown: Religion may be the pretense, but the heart may be
deceitful for all that: But for Magistrates that are highly advanced, to be
lowly minded; for Kings to throw down their Crowns at Christ's feet, and to say,
Let him reign (and for ought I know, Christ may put them on their heads again)
for such learned men as Paul, that know the price of Learning, and have known
the value of worldly felicities, for these to count all nothing for Christ,
this is to enrich riches and honor, honors indeed.

Let men beware of discontented humors in these times: The Fox dispraiseth the
Grapes he cannot reach; let poor men beware of prjudice against men because
they are rich; and it may be rich men may think better of the poor, and of the
Lord our God for their sakes.

Fourth Corollary: This condemns the despondency of those that profess
themselves to be the people of the Lord: It is strange to consider how the
wicked many times deport themselves so comfortably, so cheerfully, as if they
were the children of God; and on the contrary, the children of God carry
themselves so melancholily, so despairingly, as if they were wicked men, and
had no interest in God at all; they rejoice when they should mourn, and you
mourn when you should rejoice. Christians! Is the Lord contented with you, and
is not God sufficient? Will not you be contented with him? Is the Lord
satisfied with a My son, give me thy heart, and are not thou satisfied with
this, the Lord has given me his spirit? toll meum, toll Deum: Its remarkable
that all the Beatitudes are fixed on unlikely conditions; to intimate, That the
Judgment of this world, and the Judgment of Gods children differ about
Blessedness: Shall that man rejoice that has but his Angels of gold to smile
on him, and will thou not rejoice that have the Angels of God, I, the God of
Angels to tend on thee? Is not he sad that has only a claim to the dirty and
muddy streams of Peace, and outward prosperity, and will thou be sad that have
a title to the Wellhead of Comfort, to the Spring and Fountain of Happiness?
Shall he be merry that can but say, This mirous House, that Manor is mine; and
will thou not be glad, when thou say, That this God, the Landlord of Heaven
and Earth is mine? Religion is no melancholy thing, though the Religious may be
often melancholy; and what ever worldlings fancy, though often the body be sad,
yet the heart of a child of God keeps Holy Day; and if he be troubled, it is
not because he is Religious, because the Lord is his God, but because he is so
carnal, and doubts of that claim: And surely one great reason why we are not so
composedly cheerful enough, it is because we are not Christians enough.

Is God thy Father, Christ thy Redeemer, the Spirit thy Comforter; and will not
this support thee? Have thou sometimes such triumph of heart, that thou would
not exchange those few sweet minutes for all the World? and do thou live in
the longing and thirsting for Death and a Resurrection, and after them the
sight of Glory, and an immutable and immortal state of Heaven and Happiness,
where thou shall sigh and sorrow no more? And will not these hopes relieve
thee? Has the Gospel disappointed thy thoughts? Did thou unadvisedly enter
into Covenant with God? Is not there that felicity and favor in Gods presence,
that thou did promise thy self to find in him? Will thou change portions,
and exchange properties with the world? Shall this man have thy pardon of sin,
and thou his riches? that man thy hopes of Glory, and thou his Lordship and
Honor? Speak out, what will thou take for God, what price for thy soul? Will
Pleasure and Past-time buy it? Will Riches or Revenues buy it? Are not all
these things partial and improportionable, to the God of Glory and Center of
all Happiness? If the World cannot come up to thy price, and thou can not mend
thy market, for shame be satisfied and be at rest? If you would credit
Christianity, and commend thy God to the lost world; get comfort in thy
conscience, away with unjust scruples against thy entitled peace; part not
with thy privilege or thy God, till thou can meet with better: If you value
not your own peace, have an estimation of Gods glory.

What will carnal men say? Would you have us part with all for God, when you
are ready to part with God for nothing? Why do you exclaim against our
worldliness and our vain Pleasures, when you your selves do seem to count
Mortification and Heavenliness a burden? either keep your breath to your
selves, and reprove us no more, or live up to your interest, and to honor your
God? How do you convince us it is worth the while to sell all for the Pearl of
price, that when we have done so, we should think our selves miserable after
the bargain? It seems rather by the anxiety and perplexity of your minds, that
you envy our comforts in the world, to which for shame you dare not return; and
would esteem it a piece of your happiness, if we would be miserable with you
for company? But let the world consider, that a Saints want of comfort proceeds
not from the insufficiency of his purchase, but from his want of faith to claim
it: And let Believers consider, that as their unbelief is uncomfortable to
themselves, so it reproacheth God. Hence many have denied God, and so have
turned Atheists, because they could not maintain Gods All Sufficiency, and live
like Epicures: Habitual distrust of God, is a greater Blasphemy in some sense,
then a total denial of God; for what greater shame, then not to believe him
whom we profess cannot deceive us, and not to be content with him whom we
acknowledge to be All-sufficient? Verily the poorest soul in all this
Congregation, that can but say, God is mine, is happier then if he could say,
all the Mines of Gold and Silver in the West Indies are mine.

Fifth Inference: By way of persuasion to the worldly happy, that they would
look after the Lord: Why will you seek any longer, vitam beatam, a blessed
life; in regionem mortis, in the Region of death? Pearls in the dust, and
Heaven (compararatively) in Hell: Will thou perish for that which shall perish?
Do thou love Gold so well, as to run into Hell fire to fetch it? Thou
proclaimest thy happiness because of an healthy Body; and will thou be less
happy in having a sound Conscience? How happy were thou, if besides these Rings
of gold, thou had but the inestimable Jewel, if in thy Terrestrial and
Earthly Paradise, thou had but in the midst thereof the Tree of Life, Jesus
Christ? You ought not to throw away Christ when you embrace the world, neither
need you prodigally throw away the world when you embrace Christ. Christ and
the werld may dwell both in one house, though not in one heart: Be as covetous
as thou will, be as ambitious as thou will; would thou have earth, would
thou have this World? so thou may, and Heaven, and the next too.

As Achsah, when her Father gave her a Portion, desired a Blessing, so do thou
at Gods hand, and say, Lord, Thou have given me the nether springs, but I yet
want the upper springs; thou have given me the Streams, but what are all they
without the Fountain? As thou art not content with my things without my self;
so Lord I have thy Gold and Silver, thy Comforts and Creatures, but these are
not thy self; all these I may have, and yet be poor, naked, be hopeless in this
life, and a damned wretch to all Eternity. As the Father brings in King Ahab,
sitting in his chair of State, with his Nobles attending about him, and
environed with all outward glory, in the three years Famine, crying out, What
avails all this, if yet the Heavens continue to be Brass and the earth Iron? So
what is it to have Friends and favor, etc. and to have a hard heart, a
reprobate mind; for God to frown on me, for to live like a Rebel and Runagate
without Christ and the Covenant of Promise? It is true, you should have sought
the Kingdom of Heaven first, and then all things would have been added to you;
but yet since you have begun with the World for Gods sake, for your souls sake
end with God; you are already in possession of temporal Blessings, will it be
any damage to have the accession of eternal happiness? Are you jealous, lest as
you should gain Christ, you should lose the world, and that as Grace comes into
your hearts, that your Estates must needs go out of your hands? Have there been
many, that in the midst of their outward pomp and splender, that yet have cried
out Undone; and that for want of Gods presence and will, their riches
impoverish you, their wisdom make you fools, and their Plaster wound you? Can
All Sufficiency it self undo you? Will security always bar out wrath? Will
your Opinion never alter concerning the World? Will Jesus Christ never be
precious? Will there not come a time when the favor of God will be more
necessary there, then this man's favor is now? What will you give for a Christ
at the last day? Will the sense of your past joys, kill the then stinging worm
of conscience? Do but try what peace of conscience means after your troubles,
how much the Pearl of Price weighs after your worldly experience; and if one
smile (after true possession) of Gods favor, if the least assurance of the
pardoning sins, do not outweigh all things else, return to the world and to
your lusts again. Its reported of Pyrrhus, That one day he opened his mind to
his friend Cyneas, and told him, If he were but Possessor of Italy* what then,
said his friend? Why then if he could but conquer Africa; what then Pyrrhus? O
then if he could but subdue Asia, he would be at rest, and be merry with his
friends; so you may be now, says Cyn^as, without all that trouble.

Sixthly and lastly, By way of Satisfaction: How shall I have evidence in the
enjoyment of worldly (happiness, or) goods, that the Lord is my God?

A. 1. If thy Estate come to thee by descent, Industry, or the bounty of
Providence; it is one thing to have what we have be Covenant, another to have
it by Extortion* Many can say, This Estate, this Land is mine, because God is
mine; but others have occasion to say, If God had been mine, this had not been
mine: It is a current, but unhappy Proverb in England, Happy is that child
whose Father goes to the Devil; the meaning of it is, The Son often comes by a
great Estate, and the Father sells his soul to get it for him; but better it
were, that the estate should never come to the children, then that the father
should go to the Devil for it, Ah Lord! How sollicitous are men to adorn the
bodies of their children, but how careless for their souls? How many leave vast
Estates to their children (there is no hurt in providing for their Families,
that is a duty) but this is their misery, their Oppression and Extortion, which
procured them entail the curse of God on those Estates: Woe be to them, says the
Prophet, Isa. 5.8. that join house to house, and that lay field to field, till
there be no place, etc. Then woe be to me, said a Landed Extortioner, and to my
children.

2. Another evidence of our true enjoyment of this world upon a good ground is,
when we can see God in what we enjoy: The Language of Esau is, I have enough;
but Jacobs Dialect is otherwise, The Lord has given to me; and that which is
remarkable, he says of his children, Which the Lord has graciously given to
me: One would think Jacob were speaking of the pardon of sin, of the hope of
the Messiah, or of everlasting life. Grace seems to be the language of the
Gospel, and proper only to spiritual Blessings; but a gracious heart sees not
only providence, but Grace in what he has; he sees grace in his cat el, grace
in his children: The rich fool in the Gospel talked at a great rate, I will
pull down my barns, and I will bestow my fruits; all belike was his own, God
was not in all, in any of his thoughts: Though we must not look on the
Creatures with doting eyes, so as too much to admire them; yet we must not look
away from them with shut eyes, so as to neglect to see God in them: How
comfortable is it for the soul to see the love of God to him in the love of his
children, and the protection of God ratified to him in the obedience of his
servants to him, and the Image of the King of Glory in graven in all his Coin,
on all his gold and silver?

3. We may know the Lord is our God in the fruition of the world, by the
enjoyment of God in them: It is nothing for a man to find a piece of
Parchment, a Deed signed and sealed, unless there be Land conveyed in it; so
the possession of a great Estate is no Argument of Gods love: You have the
Deeds, the Conveyances, the Honor and riches of Gods left hand, but by what
title? Evidences (my Beloved) are Evidences to them that have a title: If a man
enjoy God in his Goods, he has a title with his Evidence, a better title then
that the worldling has: It is a suspicious thing to find Goods in a man's
house, and for him not to be able to tell how he came by them. My soul, How
came thou by thy Estate, is it given to thee as to a Son, or as to a slave?
thou art advanced into high place, but since thou art lifted up, have thou
lifted up God in thy Honor? Ah Lord! How many are risen in honor, but forgot
that hand that lifted them up, and the ground from whence they came? Are your
Estates as Looking-glasses, to see God in, to see his wisdom and care, and
load-stones, to draw out your love by? Are they wings to make you mount up to
Heaven, or no? If they be not wings, they will be weights to sink you down to
Hell: Do Riches make you charitable? Does Honor make you humble? Does your
strength make you watchful? Do you not cast away the Net, now you have got the
Fish? Are you in satisfied when you have the cap full of gold, till you have
the kiss? To allude to the competition of Cyrus his two Friends, Chrysautus and
Artabarus; are your turns served of God, and do you turn your backs on God? Are
you the better for your goods, and the more in love with the Rose of Sharon for
your beauty? Can you bless God the more for your Blessings, and say, There was
a time I was poor and passionate, but as God has given me riches, so also a
thankful heart, as God has increased my store, so he has increased my Faith;
and the higher I am, the more holy; the greater, the better? If so, we are
happy; otherwise it were better we had had less of this World, then that like
the Moon at the full, we should be more distant from the Sun; then that with
Jonathan we should follow the chase, be exact Professors, or Professors of
exactness, no longer then till we meet with honey. It is a serious Observation
of a great Traveller, That notwithstanding all the Religious pretenses of the
Court of Rome, That the Indians have brought more of the Spaniards to worship
their gold, then the Spaniards have brought of the Indians to worship their
God; that is, The Indians have made more Infidels, then the Spaniards have made
Christians.

4. When we employ our Treasures for God, then we spiritually enjoy our
Treasures from God: They are not Goods to us, if we do not good to others with
them: We are too ready to receive the Token, and to neglect the Contents of the
Letter that God sends us. We say such a man has an happy Estate, when he has
a great Estate; but whatever the Estate be, the man is unhappy if he be not
charitable: Wherefore David giving the Character of a blessed man, tells us,
Blessed is the man; What man? not he that has riches, but he that considers
the poor: Consider how to bestow them, Psalm 41.1. Oh that men would consider
they are not masters of their Estates (and it is well if their Estates be not
master over them) but Stewards: And the Language of a gracious Steward is, How
shall I dispose of my Trust best for my Masters use; where shall I find a
naked back, that I may clothe it; an empty belly, that I may fill it; an aged
Christian, or Minister of God, past the labors of their special Callings, that
I may succor and supply them. And it would be a noble enquiry of Magistrates,
whom God makes successful against Babylon, how shall we consecrate the gain
taken from them to the Lord, for Sions good? for the advancement of the Gospel,
and Ministerial Propagation of Christ's Kingdom; for the preservation of Gospel
Ordinances amongst us, from the Invasion of Profaneness, and the attempts of
Heresy and Atheism? But where are these ubies? How many are laden with
Blessings, and yet load God with Curses? How do men employ their Estates rather
against, then for God; like water putting out the fire, and like clouds
hindering the sight of the Sun? But there is a time a caming, when ye men of the
World shall see that Charity was the best Usury, that a good Estate was better
then a great Estate; when they shall take their leave of this World, and the
glory thereof; when they shall by Death be summoned out of this life, and lose
their Estates and their Souls together; how happy soever they have been
accounted of by men on earth, yet when they shall arrive to that Infelicity and
ruin, Who would be in their case, whose God is not the Lord?

FINIS.

