A SERMON Preached at the Primary Visitation OF THE Right Reverend Father in
GOD, JOHN, Lord Bishop of NORWICH. JUNE, 20th. 1692.

By GEORGE RAYMOND, A. M. Minister of St. Lawrence in Ipswich.

LONDON: Printed for Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall. MDCXCII.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of NORWICH.
My Lord,
YOUR Lordship's pleasure to have this Sermon published, is founded (as I
suppose) upon this Opinion; That the Meditations it contains are useful, though
obvious; and have a genuine force, though not set off with Illustration, nor
enforced (as they might have been) with artificial Arguments. Indeed my aim in
preaching it, was only to be a Remembrancer of such apposite, and seasonable
Truths, as might merit to be considered; and the consideration of which might
promote in us of the Clergy, a faithful, wise and close attendance on our
Ministerial Charge. To which end, if the Publication may in any sort serve; I
am abundantly rewarded for my Labor, and shall ever rejoice in my Obedience to
your Lordship's Commands; Which however shall be always most readily observed by

Your most Humble, and Dutiful Servant, GEO. RAYMOND.

A SERMON Preached at the Primary Visitation, etc.
EPHESIANS. IV. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ.


I Have thought it unnecessary in this Auditory, to travel into the Context, or
spend any of the time in unfolding the Text: but have designed only to offer to
your meditation, such useful Observations, and practical Remarks, as the words
furnish, suitable to our present Occasion. The general Instruction contained in
them is this; viz. That the Sacred Ministry appointed by Christ in his Church,
when he ascended up into Heaven, is a signal Pledge of his love to, and care
for it. For whether that Ministry were Extraordinary, and to continue for a
time only, as that of the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists; or whether
Ordinary and Perpetual, as Pastors and Teachers; the end of both is for the
perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ.

(...),] For the compacting The original notion of the word (...) is to compact
or knit together, either members in a Body, or parts in a Building, Exodus
15.17. Psalm. 40, 6. more largely it signifies to prepare, corroborate; and
lastly, to perfect, as the building of a House is the perfecting of it. So
Hesychius, (...), Ham. in 2 Cor. 13.11. c.
or knitting together, the Saints, or Christians sanctified unto God, by their
Calling, and fellowship in the Gospel of his Son. And this may afford us the
first useful Note or Observation; viz. 1st, That regular communion and
fellowship among Christians, is necessary to the edification of the Church: But
the Separatist (whatever his Pretense be) neither edifieth himself, nor the
Church of God. As a House is finished by compacting its several Materials; so
Ministers edify the Church of Christ, by holding Christians together in Unity
and Peace, in orderly Assemblies, and regular Communion. This Chapter contains
an Exhortation to Christian Unity; and this is one Argument by which the
Apostle presses it: viz. That the Ministry left by Christ in his Church, as
the greatest Pledge of his kindness, may have a consummate effect, and fully
answer the ends of his Love. For verse 16. From Christ the whole body fitly
joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
body unto the edifying of it self in love. They therefore profane the Ministry
they pretend to, and destroy the Church which they should edify, who are the
Authors and Abettors of uncharitable Schisms, causeless, and unchristian
Separations. He that has not more regard to Christian Unity, and the Churches
peace, than to his own Honor, Humor or Interest, wants the Spirit of a
Minister of Christ; is like to make sad Work, and to give a dreadful Account of
the Ministry committed to, or assumed by him. And they who forsake their
regular Ministers Inexpiabilis and gravis est culpa discordiae, nec passione
purgatur. Cypr. de Unit.

Aliud altar constitui, aut sacerdotium novum fieri praeter unum altar, and
unum sacerdotium non potest; Quisquis alibi collegerit, spargit: Procul ab
hujusmodi hominum contagione discedite; vitate lapos qui oves a Pastore
secernunt. Id. Ep. 40.


for better Edification, purer Ordinances, or upon the new pretense of Absolute
Loyalty, do as a Man that pulls down his House for the more easy coming at
the Roof, to mend the Tiles, or beautify the Ceiling. But I will not enlarge
upon this Note.

2. We may observe, That the Office of Ministers does respect the Body, or
Church of Christ; and private Christians in order to the whole as Members of
the Body. The perfecting of the Saints, is in order to the edifying, and
consummating of the Body of Christ. Whence it follows, that the Governors of
the Church must take such order, as tends to General Edification; and may not
consult the Opinion, Fancy, or real Benefit of some individual Christians, to
the detriment and offense of a considerable Body of Chistians; much more of the
whole Christian Church. Neither may Ministers gratify the desires of private
Christians, to the breach of public Order. It becomes private Persons to be
modest, and tractable to public Discipline, lest they be found guilty of
obstructing the Work of the Ministry, and frustrating the tender Love of Christ
to his Church: Whilst they are so perverse, that if they be not gratified in
every thing, (and yet so fickle as scarce to know what pleases them;) all must
go to wrack and confusion by their obstinate Separations. Indeed an excellent
Prudence, generous Charity, tender Compassion to the Infirmities and Prejudices
of Men, are highly requisite in the Authors of public Constitutions; but
Humility and Modesty becomes those, who are to observe them; and by both these,
when they happily meet, shall the Church be edified, particular Christians
growing up to perfection by regular Submission to wise Constitutions, sincerely
ordained for public benefit.

3. The words teach us the Divine Original of the Ministry; it is from Christ,
appointed by him in his Church for the Edification thereof. Let men therefore
so account of us as Ambassadors, and Ministers of Christ; and let us show the
faithfulness requisite in Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
Christ has given to his Church Pastors and Teachers; and when he ascended into
Heaven, entering into his Kingdom, the first Act of his Royal Authority was the
constituting, and sending these his Officers and Messengers, into the World. He
sent the first with a power to provide themselves Successors, for he promises
to be with them to the end of the World Matt. 20.20. John 14.16.
. He gave them their Commission, furnished them with Instructions, and
appointed their Subsistence; for the Lord has ordained, that they who preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. both the Preachers and their
Maintenance, are his Ordinance.

The same Light of Nature that taught Heathens to hold Assemblies for Religious
Worship, directed Cum multa Divinitus, Pontifices, a majoribus nostris inventa
atque iustituta sunt, tum nihil praeclarius, quam quod Vos eosdem and
Religionibus Deorum immortalium, and summa Reip. Praeesse voluerunt. Cicer.
Orat. ad Pont.
them to have also a distinct Order of Men, to officiate and preside in them.
And if such an Order be necessary, then must there be some known and regular
way of separating Persons to, and investing them with the Sacred Office;
otherwise the Office it self fails by being laid in common. Justice cannot be
administered, but by select Persons commissioned thereunto; nor is it sufficient
to make one a Magistrate, that he has the Gifts and Spirit of Government,
unless also he be legally Authorized and Appointed thereunto. So there can be
no orderly Administration of Sacred things, no Work of the Ministry, unless
there be a legal way of separating and ordaining Persons to that Work. And if
such Ordinations Acts 14.23. Tit. 1.5.
in the Apostolical times were judged necessary, whenas Persons were designed
to this Sacred Ministry by the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost; how much
more needful are they now, when men must fit themselves for the Ministry by
diligent Study, and virtuous Conversation? Upon which account it is now
absolutely necessary that there should be a power to judge of the Abilities of
Candidates, and to provide for the Church-Ministers, duly qualified to
officiate therein, which Power cannot be executed, nor this provision made
without maintaining a distinct Order.

In whose hands this Power of Ordaining is lodged, has been the Subject of a
pernicious Controversy, managed by the Authors and Abettors thereof, with more
of the Will and Passion, than of the Understanding. Some contend that the
Peoples Call, and others that the Presbyters Hands are a sufficient designation
of any Person to the sacred Office. To which (not designing Enlargement, nor
Controversy) I briefly answer; That we have no such Custom, nor the Churches of
God before us: for from the beginning it was not so (...). Ignat. Ep. ad Magnes.

(...). Id. ad Trull.

Inde (Sc. Christi dispositione) per temporum and Successionum vices,
Episcoporum Ordinatio, and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, ut Ecclesia super
Episcopos constituatur, and omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem prapositos
gubernetur. Cypr. Epist. 27.


, as has been abundantly demonstrated by many Learned Writers. The Power of
Ordination was from the beginning lodged in the hands of the Bishops; and this
Order universally received as conformable to Apostolical Practice, and the mind
of Christ Nec Episcopus computari potest, qui Evangelica and Apostolica
traditione contempta^, nemini succedens a seipso ortus est. Cypr. Ep. 76.

Constat id esse ab Apostolis Traditum, quod apud Ecclesias Apostolicas fuerit
sacrofanctum* Tertul. adv. Marc. 4.5.

Habemus annumerare eos, qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis,
and successores eorum usque ad nos. Iren. l. 3.3.

When I shall see all the Fables in the Metamorphosis acted, and prove Stories;
when I shall see all the Democracies and Aristocracies in the World lie down
and Sleep, and awake into Monarchies; then will I begin to believe that
Presbyterial Government, having continued in the Church during the Apostles
times, should presently after (against the Apostles Doctrine, and the Will of
Christ) be whirled about like a Scene in a Masque, and transformed into
Episcopacy. In the mean time, Episcopacy being confessed to be so Ancient and
Catholic, must be granted also to be Apostolic. Chillingw. p. 324.


. Both the Antiquity and Universality of this practice is confessed by the most
learned of our Dissenting Brethren, as might be easily showed: and certainly
the Controversy, with respect to present practice, would soon be decided,
would but our said Brethren fairly and impartially consider these two or three
things; viz. That the usage of our Church in this matter, is conform to the
Primitive and Constant Practice of the Churches of Christ; and that the Laws
only require Obedience to this good Order, but do not exact any Declaration of
their Opinion concerning it. That Episcopal Ordination does not exclude, but
comprehends the Peoples Suffrage, and the Presbyters hands. (...). Ignat. Ep.
ad Ephesians.

A primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine consilio vestro, and sine
consensu plebis ^ae privata sententia gerere. Cypr. Ep. 6.

In ordinationibus Clericis, fratres Charissimi (Sc. Clerus and Plebs) solemus
vos ante consulere, and mores ac merita singulorum communi consilio ponderare.
Cypr. Ep. 33.

Ordinationes sacerdotales, non nisi sub populi assistentis conscientia fiant.
Ib. Ep. 68.


That they do not allege, much less prove the Bishops presiding in this
matter, to be sinful; therefore a Separation from the National Church upon that
account, must be causeless and sinful. That to oppose established Order which
is not unreasonable, and to assume and execute an Office in contempt of such
public Discipline and Constitution, is to walk disorderly, and work Confusion,
which is not to be Followers of God and Christ Quid enim non periculum metuere
debemus; quando aliqui de Presbyteris nec Evangelii, nec loci sui memores,
neque futurum domini judicium cogitantes, quod nunquam antecessoribus factum
est, cum contumelia and contemptu praepositi totum sibi vendicant? Cypr. Ep. 10.
.

I will not say (as some do) that God has tacked the Efficacy of Sacraments,
and of his Grace, and consequently the Salvation of Men, to the Punctilio's of
Ordination; so that there is no work of the Ministry done, but all the Flock
lost, and undone; if the Minister does not derive his Orders from some one of
the Apostles by an uninterrupted Succession. The Consequences of this rash
Opinion are dishonorable to God, and prejudicial to Piety; and the practice of
the Church of England needs no such defense. See the Preface to the Office for
Ordination.
But certainly this may be said, and ought to be considered, That the Usurpers
of an Office, and Invaders of well-establish'd Order and Discipline, can very
little expect a Blessing from the God of Peace and Order; nor can be Ministers
unto sound and orderly Christians. They therefore who, according to the public
good Order of the Church, are appointed to the Sacred Office, with the Suffrage
of the People, the Approbation of the Bishop, by the Imposition of his Hands,
together with those of the Presbytery, being regularly called and ordained, may
say with the first Ministers of Jesus Christ (though not in the same plenitude
of sense) That they are his Ambassadors, set by him in the Church, and that the
Holy Ghost has made them Overseers of the Flock.

4thly, The words lead us to reflect upon the grand importance, and singular
utility of the Sacred Ministry, which Christ has appointed in his Church, as
an instance of his tender care over it, and for the edifying and consummating
thereof. Upon this Usefulness of our Function, rather than upon the conceited
Dignity of any indelible Character, may we justly value our selves: and for
this ought the people to esteem their ministers very highly in love for their
works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.

The important Usefulness of the Office may appear from the Character the Holy
Scripture gives of those who are invested with it, and from the Instances of
their Duty which it declares. The persons to whom this trust is committed, are
by reason thereof styled, not only Pastors and Teachers, but the Servants of
the Lord, 2 Timothy 2.24. and that in a transcendent sense beyond the rest of
Christians: (...), 1 Cor. 4.1. (...), Romans 15.16, (...), 1 Cor. 4.1. Luke
12.42. (...), 1 Cor. 3.9.
yea Stewards of God, and of his Mysteries; Rulers over his Household, to give
them their portion of meat in due season. They are also called Builders of that
House, Presidents and Guides in, and over it: Ambassadors of Christ, and
workers together with God, for the conversion of Sinners, the edification of
Saints, and salvation of Souls. And the particulars of their Duty are
answerable to these Characters of their Persons and Function.

For 1st, Their duty it is to hold Assemblies for Religious Worship; and to see
that all things there in be orderly performed, and for Edification; that so
Christians Heb. 10.24, 25. Coloss. 2.2-19.
may be provoked to good works, and knit together in love; and glorifying God
with one mind, and one mouth, may be edified in love, and increase with the
increase of God. So the Scripture declares this instance of our Ministry,
together with the admirable fruits and benefits of it.

Again 2dly, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel,
bringing glad tidings of good things, Romans 10.15.

Now unto this we are ordained; and this is what we have solemnly vowed, viz.
to feed the Flock with sound Doctrine, diligently to teach, and instruct out of
the Holy Scriptures the People committed to our charge. See the Interrogatories
in the Ordination of Priests.
Thus, the Loving Kindness of our Blessed Savior, foreseeing the perpetual
need of his Family, has provided for their constant relief. That the heavenly
Doctrine, that Bread which nourishes to Eternal Life, should constantly be set
before, and broken amongst them: That the study and labor of those who give
themselves to this very thing, may be profitable to such who are encumbred with
variety of Secular Affairs: That saving Knowledge may be so advantagiously
inculcated, as to render gross ignorance next to impossible, and spiritual
wisdom easily attainable: That by a particular application of general Truths,
good thoughts may be instilled, and good purposes from time to time excited in
the hearts of the People.

That the cogitations of men's hearts may be met withal, their prejudices
detected, their Consciences awakened, and pressed upon duty: That the
Understanding of the Weak may be assisted, and the reigning Vices and Errors of
every Age and Place corrected, by men skilful to apply the Sacred Truths, and
to press such portions of them as are most apt and seasonable: especially that
those practical Truths which men sufficiently know, but are willing to forget,
and averse to consider, by being frequently inculcated, pathetically urged, and
set in a proper and commanding light, may make their genuine impressions upon,
and produce their salutary fruits in the hearts and lives of Christians: That
they may be frequently reminded of their solemn Obligations, and made sensible
of the connection between Faith and Holiness, between the avowed Principles of
their Creed, and the bounden Duties of a Christian Life.

The benefits of this Ministration are so many and great, that it is hard to
number or weigh them. And the Ignorance, Barbarity and Wickedness of those
places where Preaching is quite omitted, or triflingly performed, is a
demonstration of the necessity and usefulness thereof. A Consideration
sufficient of it self to engage Ministers unto a serious and faithful discharge
of this part of their Office, and Vow; and the People to a thankful and
conscientious attendance on this Ministry, and to stop the mouths of those who
think Preaching to be the least (if any) part of our Office, and very little of
that sufficient. In Religionibus suscipiendis, caput est interpretari, quae
voluntas deorum immortalium esse videatur. Cicer. Orat. ad. Pontif.
It is certainly because such men's Consciences cannot bear the light of wise
and good Instruction, that they are so willing to part with it. But of that
more under the next Head.

Farther, 3dly, We have the Office of private Guides, as well as public
Teachers. We watch for souls, as those that must give an account, Heb. 13.17.
We must feed the flock, taking the oversight thereof, 1 Pet. 5.2. We vowed at
our Ordination, Ordinat. Office, Interrog. 4.
With all faithful diligence to use both public and private Admonitions and
Exhortations, as well to the sick as to the whole, within our Cures, as need
shall require, and occasion be given. Many and great are the benefits of this
work of the Ministry, faithfully discharged on our part, and duly complied with
by the People. By this means may we resolve their particular Doubts and
Scruples; rectify their Errors and Prejudices; help them to judge impartially
in their own case; inculcate good Thoughts; animate good Purposes; regulate
their Zeal; fortify them against their most powerful Temptations; comfort them
in their Sorrows, and confirm their Hopes; and, by some one private Conference,
more advance their spiritual Estate, than by many public Sermons. And for
these purposes ought we to be acquaint with our People, watching for
opportunities to do them what good we can; and giving them occasion and
encouragement to use us as Guides and Helpers, though not Masters, of their
Faith. Would to God men would duly consider, that the Sacred Ministry may be
profitably used, beyond the public Exercises of it: and that, if they steer
amiss through contempt of the Pilot's skill, they are guilty of their own
ruin; obnoxious to God for the neglect of his gracious Provision; and perish
in their Pride or Presumption.

4thly, The benefit of great and good Examples is readily owned; and such, in a
singular manner, the Ministers of Christ are designed to be. They must be
Ensamples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.3. showing themselves, in all things, patterns
of good works. We must carefully look, that there be a good agreement between
our Doctrine and our Practice; lest we teach our People to be Unbelievers and
Atheists: whilst they consider us as a sort of Sophisters, that would impose
upon them, what they plainly see we do not believe our selves. (...). Ignat. ad
Ephesians.

Qui autem dicunt tantum, non faciunt, ipsi praeceptis suis detrahunt pondus.
Quis enim obtemperet, cum ipsi praeceptores doceant non obtemperare? Bonum est
recta and honesta praecipere; sed nisi and facias mendacium est: Incongruum
atque ineptum est, non in pectore sed in labiis habere bonitatem, Lactant. l.
3. c. 16.


Blessed is that good and faithful Servant, who keeps the Commandments of
God, and teaches men so: he shall be great (i. e. his Reward shall be so) in
the Kingdom of Heaven. And though an Age of general Licentiousness, and wherein
good Discipline is altogether relaxed, does but little recommend holy
Institutions; yet even then it is visible, that the sacred Ministry is a check
and bridle to the Vices of men; restraining them from the havoc which they
would otherwise make of all Godliness and Sobriety. But I should exceed my
limits, if I should proceed to unfold of what signal use it is, to have an
Order of men eminently holy, both in profession and life. And these, Lastly,
under the Sacred Obligations of their Office, and (as they will render a good
account thereof) engaged to be constant Intercessors for the people: to pray
continually and fervently for those under their Charge, and for the good
success of their Ministry among them.

What has been said, shall suffice to evince the grand importance, and signal
usefulness of the sacred Ministry; and to admonish us, that we profane not the
dignity of our Office, by substracting from the Utility thereof. Always
remembering, that useless Authority or Power is scorned by wise men, and hated
of all: But the Minister of God for good, shall (besides his Reward in Heaven)
have esteem and love from men, for the benefit they receive from him.

5thly, We observe from the words, the necessity of continuing the Work of the
Ministry in the Church of Christ. For it must last as long as the Church can be
edified; till it be consummated by it. Till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, v. 13.

The Extraordinary Functions of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, ceased
with the reason and occasion of them; but the Ordinary Ministry of Pastors and
Teachers must abide for ever in the Church; because ever needful for it. St.
Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, prescribes the Qualifications of
Persons to be ordained unto the sacred Ministry: and these have nothing in them
extraordinary; require not the Gifts of Tongues, or Miracles, or of Discerning
Spirits; are not appropriate to any one Age, but describe the Persons that will
be necessary, and useful, through all succeeding Ages of the Church. See 1 Timothy
3. Tit. 1.6, etc.


Our Blessed Lord has made provisions for the lasting needs of his Church;
that his Household may not want Stewards, nor his Flock Pastors, nor his Works
(which is the salvation of men by the knowledge of the truth) those that should
labor therein. So long as there must be Christian Assemblies held, there must
be an Order of men to officiate in them: a Church and a Pastor, or a
Congregation and a Minister, being in right reason necessary Relatives, as well
as in fact and usage derived from Primitive and Apostolical practice. Public
Preaching (whatever some object) will be needful, so long as men are born
ignorant, live viciously, or remain imperfect. So long as there is error,
wickedness, and weakness in the Church; so long as there is a secular life to
divert men from their holy purposes; a Devil to tempt, Sinners to entice, or
Heretics to seduce. The Usefulness of this Ministration is readily
acknowledged by pious Proficients in Christianity; and sure the Ignorant and
Vicious have the least pretense, of being above Ordinances, and of having
superseded the necessity of Teaching and Exhortation. They who are so willing
to forget their known Duty, need such Monitors to stir them up by way of
remembrance; and it is the force and restraint of such Admonitions which they
feel, that makes them so desirous to be rid of them. So that the sort of the
men who are the only Cavillers against frequent Preaching, is next to a
demonstration of the usefulness thereof: Men who are very industrious either to
debauch, or expose the Clergy; secretly hating them for the Authority of their
Doctrine, and Influence of their Example; not valuing any part of their Office,
unless, perhaps, their last ministration of Prayers, and the Holy Communion
upon the approach of Death; foolishly trusting to that which can least help
them; and imagining to patch up a wicked and ungodly Life, with a religious
End. For the use of the Ministry is in the time of life and health, by public
Preaching, and private Admonitions; by good Example, and wise Application; to
lay restraints on the vicious Inclinations of men, and to cherish their
virtuous Dispositions and Purposes: and by renewing holy impressions upon their
Spirits, to form them by degrees into a fixed Religious Temper; by reiterated
Persuasions to prevail with them to give up themselves unto, and become sincere
Disciples and Followers of the Holy Jesus. They who resist this Grace of God,
cannot love the Instruments of it; but they who receive the Grace of God, and
the benefit of our Ministry, will always give him thanks for, and acknowledge
the usefulness of such Authorized Guides in their way to Heaven.

But I dismiss this, intending to speak somewhat more largely of the last
Remark or Observation, which will contain a particular Address to us of the
Clergy. Viz.

6thly, If the Edification and Perfection of Christians be the end of our
Ministry, then we may note, what diligent Application, and holy Prudence is
necessary; that we may level every Exercise of our Function at that Mark; and
neither shoot beside, nor short of it. For we have not only such variety, but
also such contradiction of Tempers to deal withal, that whilst we seek the
edification of one sort, we are in danger of offending and destroying others.
Give me leave to lay before you some of the difficult Cases of our Ministry;
not to discourage, but caution; to add fervor unto our Prayers for the Divine
Assistance, and to excite a studious application, and prudent diligence, that
we may not do the Work of our Lord negligently, nor betray the Trust committed
to our Charge.

As for instance; In preaching (whatever some imagine) it is no such easy
matter to show our selves Workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing
the word of God 2 Timothy 2.15.
for if we employ but little pains and thoughts about the business, how can we
expect that God should bless, or the People regard, what we our selves trifle
withal? And yet if we be very studious and thoughtful, it is odds but we shall
overdo; and though we may edify our selves, shall be Barbarians to the
Congregation, and speak unto the Air 1 Cor. 14.9, 11.
. There is a loose way of talking that profits none; and there is a closeness
of reasoning, too elaborate for common understandings.

Again; If Pulpits affect the Pomp and Dress of the Stage, who can forbear
concluding, That the Actors upon either have much the same design, i. e.
Applause and Money? And yet on the other hand, there is a slovenly dress and
mien, that exposes the Ministry, and gives too great occasion for the Contempt
of the Clergy.

Farther; If we neglect to enforce our Exhortations and Instructions with
pertinent Citations of Holy Scripture, we Preach without Authority and Effect,
as to the generality, whose Consciences are readily commanded by the Word of
God, when their Understandings cannot reach the Force of an Artificial Argument.
And yet if we deliver in Scriptures by Number, rather than Weight, or multiply
Sacred Phrases, without their proper sense, we oppress and nauseate some of our
Auditors, and expose the Sacred Oracles, and our selves.

If we accustom our selves altogether to General Discourses, and Soft
Harangues; to what purpose is it thus to stroke the Consciences of our people
(as a Reverend Prelate of our Church expresses it), with Feathers dipped in Oil?
Yet if we be very particular, and mightily fervent, there be some whom we shall
exasperate, instead of persuading, or who will be more apt to ridicule the
indiscreet Fervor of the Preacher, than to weigh the Truth and Importance of
the Exhortation.

If we descend not to the particular estates of men's souls, and their Cases of
Conscience, we harden them in their folly, or abandon them to their Doubts and
Scruples, without remedy. And yet Sermons that are very Casuistical, (by a
misapplication almost inevitable) are in great danger of doing more harm than
good. It is hard to determine any Case by General Rules, because every man's
Case is diversified by Particular Circumstances.

Again; If in our Sermons we do not exhibit Rational and Judicious Notions of
the Christian Religion, we furnish Sport to the Profane, and give Scandal to
the Thinking: These we provoke to go over to the Party of the Deists, if at any
time we obtrude upon them trifling and silly, or misshapen and monstrous
Notions of the Christian Faith and Doctrine. Yet on the other hand, if we
depart but a little from the vulgar prejudices, popular schemes and modes of
speaking, we are presently suspected or despised by another sort of men, and
lose with their esteem of us, our advantage of edifying them.

If we soar aloft into the Clouds, deal much in Mysteries, we shall tickle
some, who imagine themselves wrapped into Heaven by such Discourses, and admire
because they do not understand; but then we disgust the wiser sort of Auditors,
and we profit none. Yet if we treat of the common Practical things in a plain
and familiar manner, this is apt to be despised by many, as a mean Performance;
because we tell no News, we merit not Attention.

But I have said more than enough upon this Head, to show the difficulties
attending our Ministry, and requiring our Study and Prudence; and that it is
not so slighty a business (to him that will discharge a good Conscience) to
provide an hours talk for Sunday. We are perhaps at the same time to deal with
persons that hate Preaching, because it disturbs their Conscience; and meditate
Revenge on the Sermon by Exposing it; and with others who are excessively fond
of Preaching, but in such a fashion and dress, as the Profane can easily
ridicule. We are at once to treat with, and persuade, the Judicious and the
Ignorant, the Timorous and the Confident, the Ingenuous and the Stubborn; such
whom nothing can awaken, but the Terrors of the Lord, and the Damnation of
Hell; and such too, whose Faith in God we desperately shake, if we offer to
graft upon it any terrible opinions of him. But I dismiss this, and will be
more brief in the following Instances.

If we Catechize not diligently, we neglect our Duty, and omit what seems an
important work of our Ministry: Yet if we do it at all, we know not to what
purpose, nor which are the properest Methods, because we can get no account of
the Success of any. They who are sent to be Catechized, are too small to
receive any great benefit thereby; and they who might receive it, will not come
for it.

Again; In visiting sick beds, we can do but little; yet often do too much; and
by our tenderness to the dying, betray the living into false securities. Whilst
we are intent to cherish good beginnings, we are in danger of encouraging a
presumptuous dependence upon a good end, (as they call it); i. e. A Deathbed
Contrition, with the Minister's last Office, and the Church's Passport, as a
sufficient and safe Plank for Shipwrack'd Souls.

Our Conversation also is a weighty subject of our Prudence and Care; that we
may edify by our Example, as well as our Doctrine. If we keep at a distance
from the people, we give them occasion to think us Proud, and themselves
despised: And if we be very familiar, we are in danger of losing that Reverence
and Authority which recommends our Advices and Instructions to them. If we shut
up our selves from Conversation, or be morose and sour in it, we misrepresent
our Master, and his holy Religion: And there be those that will not fail to
impute such Monkishness to the Notorious Qualities of that Tribe, Ignorance and
Hypocrisy. But if we use our Liberty, and converse freely, what vigilant
Circumspection, and strict Guard, will be always necessary, to secure decorum
in our selves, and that we be not Witnesses or Allowers of the Extravagancies
of others, nor give them encouragement to pass their bounds?

Finally; in the very demanding of our Dues, we meet with difficulties, and
have need of Prudence: If we do it with Rigor, or but Exactness, that is apt
to create a Prejudice against our Persons and our Instructions; and if we be
remiss, then they that cheat us, learn thereby to undervalue and think meanly
of us.

These, and many more, are the Difficulties that require our Wisdom, and will
employ our most prudent application: For it is given us in charge, That no man
despise us, Titus 2.15. And that we give no offense in any thing, that the
Ministry be not blamed, 2 Cor. 6.3. Neither is it our Reputation only that is
at stake, but the Credit of Christ's Religion, the Interest of his Kingdom, and
the Salvation of the Souls committed to our Charge: For whom, if we do not
faithfully bend our selves to do the best we can, we are guilty both of their
destruction, and our own.

It cannot be expected that I should prescribe Rules to the forementioned
cases; that is the subject of each ones Personal Wisdom and Study, according to
the Gift bestowed upon him. But let the consideration of our important Charge,
and the Difficulties that attend it, effectually prevail with us, to stir up
the gift of God that is in us 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy 4.14.
; by diligent Study, by assiduous Attendance on our Ministry, and (above all)
by continual Supplication and Prayer.

God that gives wisdom liberally to all that ask, will not deny his immediate
Servants the measure necessary for the discharge of that Office which he has
invested them withal. Our Lord, whose Ambassadors we are, has promised to
give us a mouth, and wisdom, which all our Adversaries shall not be able to
gainsay or resist; Luke 21.15. We may therefore pray in faith for extraordinary
assistance upon extraordinary Emergencies; and for the Conduct and Success of
faithful and well-advised Endeavors in ordinary Cases. Let us then join devout
and fervent Prayer to assiduous Study: remembering always the Vows Continually
to pray for the heavenly Assistance of the Holy Ghost from God the Father, by
the mediation of our only Mediator and Savior Jesus Christ; that by daily
reading and weighing of the Scriptures, ye may wax riper and stronger in your
Ministry.
of God that are upon us, and that we are not sufficient for these things. Let
us charge our selves with the oversight of the Flock, as those who must render
an account of them: be sure to make their edification our Design; to have their
profiting in wisdom and holiness, in serious consideration and chief regard. To
be diligent in Prayers, and in reading of the Holy Scriptures, and in such
Studies as help to the knowledge of the same; laying aside the study of the
World and the Flesh. Ordination of Priests.
See that every Sermon of ours be fraught with some pious Design; accommodated
to the People with our best skill, and offered unto God for his Blessing. Let
us speak as the Messengers of God, and as becomes the Majesty of Divine Truth
Non diserta sed fortia, non ad audientiae popularis illecebram culto sermon
fucata, sed ad divinam indulgentiam praedicandam rudi veritate simplicia. Cypr.
Ep. 1.
. Not with ostentation of Wit or Eloquence, nor dealing in curious
Speculations, or fruitless Controversies; but endeavoring to fasten important
Truths in the Consciences of others with all that Authority and venerable
regard that they have, Cum de rebus ab ostentatione submotis agitur, quid
dicatur spectandum est, non quali amaenitate dicatur; nec quid aures
commulceat, sed quas adferat audientibus utilitates: dissoluti pectoris est, in
rebus seriis quaerere voluptatem; and cum tibi sit ratio cum male se habentibus
and aegris, sonos auribus infundere dulciores, non medicinam vulneribus
admovere. Arnob. adv. Gent.
or ought to have in our own. Let our Sermons be affectionate, but weighty; our
Zeal discreet, and tempered with a sense of humane Infirmities and Prejudices;
but yet our mien and fervor such, as may manifest that we are in earnest, and
executing the Trust we have received from God. Let us be very careful, that we
may be Ensamples to the Flock; of humble and hearty devotion in the Church, and
of blameless and useful Conversation out of it. Let us converse under a
constant Guard, and with a sense of the decorum that befits our Character, and
may adorn our Ministry. Fly the Conversation of debauched and vain Persons; and
let the Virtuous and well-disposed see that we love their Company. Be forward
to all good Offices amongst our People, and slow even to necessary Contentions
and Suits.

In a word, Let us ever aim at doing good; act soberly and advisedly, and pray
constantly to our Heavenly Lord and Master for direction and assistance; and
this general care of our Duty will entitle us to the help of God, and procure
us wisdom from him sufficient for the difficult Instances of it.

FINIS.

