A TREATISE OF Sacramental Covenanting WITH CHRIST.

SHOWING The ungodly their contempt of Christ, in their contempt of the
Sacramental Covenant.

And calling them (not to a profanation of this holy Ordnanice, but) to an
understanding, serious, entire dedication of themselves to God in the
Sacramental Covenant, and a Believing Commemoration of the Death of Christ.

By M. M.

LONDON, Printed for J. Sims, at Gresham-Colledge-Gate in Bishops-gate-street.
1667.

TO THE READER.
Readers,
UPON the perusal of this Treatise, I find the Subject of it to be needful and
seasonable, the Design of it high and excellent, the Style exceeding plain and
pressing, purposely suited to the capacity of the Ignorant, for whom it is
written: Concerning all which, I think it meet to inform you at the entrance,
as foreseeing that in all these it is not unlike to be much mistaken.

1. Some think that a Sacrament is a narrow and barren, and not very necessary
Subject to be treated of: But such understand not, that it is the most great
and noble Subject, as being the very Summary and kernel of all our Religion:
for it contains in it the whole Covenant between God and Man, wherein he
gives himself to us as our GOD, our reconciled Father, our Savior, and our
Sanctifier, and we give up our selves answerably to him, and thankfully accept
his gift upon his terms. For the two Sacraments are the solemnizing of this
sacred Covenant, wherein we profess with seriousness, resolvedness, and
fidelity, to dedicate and devote our selves entirely to God our Father, our
Redeemer, and our Regeneratour: Which if we do sincerely, the saving benefits
of the Covenant are ours: In which sense the Ancients truly taught, That
Baptism certainly washes away all sin.

2. Therefore this Doctrine must needs be seasonable, at a time when our
lamentable differences about Sacraments, have, with great numbers both of the
conscientious and the careless, brought them under abuses, omission, or
contempt. Many persons, whose desires are to worship God according to his will,
believe that it is their duty, to hold the communion of Saints, in Churches
which have a more holy constitution, guidance, Discipline and administration,
than most of our public Churches have; from which, because the Law restrains
them, some of them communicate now here but in secret, and some so seldom
there, as is next to a total omission. The more ignorant people seeing these
shun the public communion, encour^ge themselves the more in their careless
omission and contempt of it: Some of them think that it is but a thing
indifferent, and a Ceremony which may well enough be spared without any danger
to the Soul. And others have some reverence for it, and think that it is not to
be approached without Repentance and great Preparation: But they do the more
negligently and quietly omit this preparation and the Sacrament it self, when
they see it omitted by so many, whom they esteem above themselves. But what? Is
it the design of this Treatise to drive all these men in their impenitency and
ignorance to this Sacred work? And to draw them to imitate such of the same
Herd, as do it only to avoid the penalty of the Law? I know many that read but
the Title of this Book will say, Is it now a time to draw the ignorant
multitude to the Sacrament? Were it not fitter to seek that stricter discipline
might keep them from it, till they are prepared and know what they do?

3. To this I answer, That the design of this Treatise is not to persuade any
to eat the Body of Christ and drink his Blood, in an undiscerning, profane, or
unworthy manner: Nor does it tempt men to Covenant with their lips, and leave
their hearts behind them: But it teaches men to understand what the Sacrament
is, and what a holy and solemn Covenant is there to be renewed with God: And
how essentially knowledge, Faith and Repentance, and resolutions for a holy
life, are necessary for that Covenant. And because most ignorant ungodly
people, are so strange to their own hearts, that we cannot convince them of
their sottish contempt of Christ and holiness, by any proof but what is
palpable and past denial; therefore the Author takes advantage of their
profane neglect of this Ordinance to convince them. And while a superficial
Reader will think he is but drawing them to the Lords Table, the truth is he
takes this but as an advantage to draw them to the Lord himself.

The main design of the Book is to convince poor, impenitent, unholy souls, of
the absolute necessity of a speedy, resolute, faithful consent to the Covenant
of Grace, and a sincere devoting of themselves to God, through Jesus Christ;
and then that they will solemnize and seal this Covenant, in this holy
Sacrament. No one that Reads the Book will think that there is any (...) of
sufficient warning, against the profanation of the Sacrament: Blame him not for
drawing men to Christ and to Conversion, and you will find here no cause to
blame him, for immethodical drawing them to the Communion of the Church.

4. And the great plainness and largeness of the style (which to some will seem
tedious) must be imputed to the Authors earnest desire to save men's souls,
which makes him studiously condescend to their capacities. The more men
understand already, the fewer words will serve their turns: and to such an
accurate and sententious style will be most acceptable But the Ignorant must not
only have plainness, but copiousnesse, and much Repetition and inculcating of
the same things. They understand not that which is briefly and accurately
delivered, though the terms be never so common and familiar: and those that
have due compassion on the Ignorant, will best like that style which most
promoteth their information and conversion; and will judge of the means by its
aptitude to its proper end.

The Lord give the Reader the saving benefit, and the worthy and faithful
Author the comfort, of these earnest exhortations, in a plentiful success. And
O that the judge^^nt which has turned so many thousand excellent Books of late
into ashes, may warn the negligent to use such holy instructions with faithful
diligence while they have them, in order to their preparation for the hastening
day, which will cast the earth and all its Glory into more terrible Flames!
Amen, Come Lord Jesus.

Acton, the Year and Month of Londons Flames Sept. 1666. Richard Baxter.

THE CONTENTS.
CHapter 1. The Introduction, lamenting the ignorant vulgars contempt of their
Salvation, and showing the design of this Treatise. Page 1 Chap. 2. What it is
to do this (to celebrate the Communion) in remembrance of Christ; And I. That
it includes the true knowledge of him. Page 34 Chap. 3. II. A right remembering
Sin; the occasion of his Death. Of Repentance, with considerations to work and
promote it. Page 48 Chap. 4. III. A right remembering of the great end of the
death of Christ to Redeem us from all iniquity and sanctify us. Of Faith and
Covenanting with Christ. Page 76 Chap. 5. Persuasions to accept of the
Redeemer, and give up the Soul in Covenant to him. Page 96 Chap. 6. IV. A right
Remembering the benefits procured by his death. 1. Of Justification. Page 130
Chap. 7. The second benefit is sanctification. Page 139 Chap. 8. The third
benefit is eternal Happiness with God. Page 151 Chap. 9. V. It must be a
thankful Remembrance. Page 155 Chap. 10. VI. It must produce an holy Love to
Saints. Page 158 Chap. 11. Use, An invitation to come to Christ and his
Sacrament, with Motives thereto. Page 168 Chap. 12. Sacraments are not to be
accounted vain, because externals. Page 196 Chap. 13. Against too seldom
communicating in the Sacrament. Page 205 Chap. 14. The Objection of unfitness
answered. As proposed by the doubting and careless. Page 209 Chap. 15. Obj. We
are not in perfect charity, but at variance with our neighbors. Answered. Page
234 Chap. 16. Directions for a due preparation and right receiving. Page 242
Chap. 17. Directions for duty after the Sacrament. Page 286
CHAP. I. The Introduction, lamenting the Ignorant Vulgars contempt of their
Salvation; and showing the design of this Treatise
THe blessed God who in these last days has spoken to us by his Son, and more
fully and clearly revealed the way to life and immortality, which Christ has
brought to light; has abundantly manifested his infinite wisdom and goodness,
in suiting and accomodating his commands and institutions, to the meaness of
our capacities; and, as a God who knows our frame, has so fitted himself and
the revelations of his will, with a respect to our weakness, that nothing but
affected ignorance, and mere wilfulness, can keep out the understanding of what
he has taught us, or hinder the performing of what he commands us.

The Doctrines of the Gospel, which are of necessity to be believed in order to
Salvation, and upon which an holy life is built, are few and plain, which we
may find sum'd up in our common Creeds. As for the precepts which are given to
be the rule of our life; how easy are they to be known and remembered, how
exceeding reasonable in themselves, and most agreeable to our rectified
natures, and apparently tending to the unspeakable advantage of particular
Persons, Families, Towns, and Commonwealths: the Gospel being designed, not
only to bring men to glory and pleasure hereafter, but to better the world at
present, and to make this earth a kind of type and shadow of heaven; and so it
would be, if men were but more generally brough^ under the power and influence
of the Christian Religion, which does not only forbid those sins which are
destructive to the happiness of societies and single persons, as the Laws and
Religion of the Heathens might also do: but strikes at the very heart of
wickedness, and gives the surest directions and best helps, for the utter
removal of the cause and root of all disorders in the world, which it would be
beside my purpose at present to speak of. None have cause now to complain, that
they know not what to do to obtain eternal life, since he that runs may read
his duty, To love God above all, and our neighbor as selves, to do as we would
be done unto, to repent of all our sins, and betake our selves to the mercies
of God through his Son Christ Jesus for a pardon, to be humble, holy, chaste,
and temperate; is any of this difficult to be understood? Have we not a plain
word, directing us how to lead the whole course of our life? And have we not a
monitour within us, the Spirit of God by our Consciences in most cases, telling
us how we should behave our selves? The sum of all is comprehended in our
Baptismal Covenant, to Renounce the Devil and all his works, the world with its
pomp and vanities, the flesh and the lusts thereof, and to be devoted to the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And as our duty is easy to be known, so is it not
difficult to be done, where there is first a willing mind: for indeed in this
is comprehended all, to be unfeignedly willing to be such as God would have
us, and to do all that he bids us. So that none can excuse himself for his
disobedience, which is nothing else but obstinacy or gross negligence. And
though of our selves we are poor weak creatures, yet through the almighty
grace that is offered to our assistance, we may be enabled to do all things
needful for our happiness; and those weaknesses that cleave to us, which we
allow not our selves in, but strive against and bewail, we are assured,
through the merits of our precious Savior, shall never be laid to our charge.

And as the great truths and duties of our Religion are thus plain and easy,
so the positive institutions, whereby I mean the Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, are few and clear: being neither burdensome to be practiced, nor
the meaning of them hard to be understood. Does not that form of words, which
Christ has enjoined to be used in Baptism, whereby we are solemlny received
into the number of professed Christians, sufficiently show the meaning of it?
namely, that we are hereby consecrated and given up to the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. And does not our being Baptized with Water, very plainly hold forth
our washing and cleansing from the stains and pollutions of defiled nature, and
from the guilt of sin, by the blood and Spirit of Christ. And who knows not,
that the Lords Supper is for remembrance of Jesus Christ that Died for us? The
breaking of the Bread, and pouring forth of the Wine, how fitly and evidently
do they represent to us, that his body was broken, and his blood shed for us?
And the Elements of Bread and Wine, which we commonly use to nourish and
refresh us, do naturally signify that strength and comfort which we receive
from Christ, as I shall hereafter show at large.

Since then the truths of our Religion are so evident, the Duties so reasonable
and excellent, the Ritual part the Sacraments so easy, so few, and so
exceeding profitable, may it not well be expected, that all who profess
themselves owners of that Religion which Jesus Christ has taught and
established, should be well acquainted with these weighty truths; diligent in
the practice of Duty to their Maker and Savior, and to one another; and most
devout and serious in the observation and use of these holy Sacraments, and
constant in their attendance upon all Ordinances, as public Prayer and
Preaching whereby they may be instructed and enabled to know and do the will of
him that sent them into the world. But alas, alas, to the dishonor of God and
our profession, and to the grief of all that long after the advancement of true
goodness in the world, by sad experience we find the quite contrarary even in
this our Nation, that we look no further. God forbid that I should go about to
disparage the glorious fruits of our Reformation from Popish ignorance and
superstition; no, blessed and for ever praised be our God, for that unspeakable
mercy to this unworthy Land, for the happy effects whereof, doubtless thousands
of souls are praising him in glory, and thousands more yet on earth have cause
to be infinitely thankful for that clear light which visited this corner of the
earth, when sunk into little less than an Egyptian Darkness: So that I verily
believe there is no Nation under the Sun, where there are greater numbers of
knowing hearty Christians, who walk agreeable to the Gospel rule, such that
would be owned and approved by Christ himself and his Apostles, were they now
amongst us and will be at the day of their appearance before him. But having
said this to prevent exception and mistake, give me leave to resume my
complaint, that still there are so many that are in Darkness in the midst of
Light, and that walk as in darkness, not as children of the light.
Notwithstanding the means of knowledge, multitudes remain in gross ignorance,
and are unacquainted even with the great foundation-truths of the Gospel; and
can it then be otherwise, but that they should be vicious, careless, and
worldly? And many who have a superficial knowledge of their Duty, and confess
its best to be careful in doing of it, yet are themselves wilful and gross
neglecters of it, and live in open violation of Gods holy Laws. Many there are
that can talk religiously, and are ready in the Scripture, that yet will not by
any means be brought to forsake those sins, which they find Gods Word every
where condemns, nor will they set themselves to live such an holy serious life,
which is again and again so expressly and earnestly urged upon them. As ^or the
Sacraments, though most are careful to bring their Children to be Baptized, yet
I pray God it be not more out of Custom than Conscience, for some of these can
give no tolerable account of the Reason of that Ordinance, nor why they would
have their Children partake of it, only as they see their neighbors do, so do
they. But yet there are far fewer, who make any conscience of enforming their
Children what a strict Covenant they are entered into, how they are related and
solemnly engaged to God: for alas, can we expect Parents should teach their
Children to walk as becomes those that are in Covenant with God, when they
themselves live rather like Rebels to his Majesty, than faithful Subjects?

And as for the Lords Supper (which I intend to make the subject of my
following discourse) how sadly is it neglected in many places; or else rusht
upon inconsiderately and carelessly, as if it was but a matter of course, and no
such a dangerous thing to receive it unworthily, as Scripture assures us that
it is. How many hundreds, yea, thousands are there in both City and Country,
who make no conscience at all of coming to the Table of the Lord? perhaps they
may come once a year, and scarce that. Nay, many go from one year to another
and never appear there: as if they acknowledged not they had a Savior died for
them, or as if he had not bid them thus to remember his Death, or as if his
Death were not worth the remembering. Oh careless, stupid sinners, what have you
got to take up your thoughts and minds, that Christ himself is thus forgotten
by you? You can think well enough of your Children and Friends, yea, of your
Cows and Sheep, and your very Swine, and must Christ have no room in your
thoughts or memory? Do these indeed deserve more love than he? Have they done
more for you, than he has done? Or can they do more than he is able farther to
do, and willing also if your wretched obstinacy did not prevent him. I know you
can say many of you, that he deserves not to live who can forget Christ, and
that you do indeed remember him, and take him for your only Savior: and will
pretend that you have God always in your mind, when you are about your work,
or upon the way, and you think we must take your word for it, because we know
not your hearts, and cannot disprove you, but if one may judge by your
carriage, you manifest nothing less. If one follow you from morning to night,
he shall scarce hear one serious word come out of your mouths; you spend not
half an hour in a day in Prayer, either with your familys or alone; plain
enough we can hear you swear and cu^se, and take Gods holy Name in vain, but
scarce ever so much as once to mention him with reverence. What ever company
you light into, you are still talking foolishly and vainly, or else only of
your own worldly affairs, but nothing that concerns the service of God, and the
salvation of your souls. But for many of you, I need no other evidence against
you, than your gross neglect of this Sacrament of the Lords Supper. If this
Paper fall into the hands of any such (and I hope God will direct it into their
hands, for it was for such that I did chiefly intend it) If I say, thou who art
reading these lines, be guilty of neglecting this Ordinance of Christ from one
year to another, when thou have frequent opportunities and invitations to
partake of it, let me ask thee how thou have the face to say thou remembrest
Jesus Christ, when thou will not do such a small thing as he enjoins thee to do
in remembrance of him? never taking care to prepare thy self and come to his
holy Table. Can thou remember him, and yet forget his command? and absent thy
self from those who meet together to celebrate his remembrance, at an ordinance
appointed by Christ himself for that very purpose? Ah poor creatures, that you
did but well know your selves, and your own necessities and concernments, then
could you never be sounmindful of Jesus Christ, you would as soon forget your
daily bread. Oh did you well know what he has done for you, and under what
engagements you stand to him, you would sooner forget your dearest friend who
had saved you from death, and daily fed you, and clothed you, and kept you
alive: for indeed this, and much more than this, do you owe to the Redeemer of
mankind. Oh that you would but believe and consider, what glorious unspeakable
treasures of love and goodness he has purchased for, and will bestow upon you,
if you will accept them upon his terms, and then you would no more forget him,
than you could forget your Prince or Landlord, from whose bounty you were in
daily expectations of a plentiful estate. And if you would but see to get your
selves well informed of the nature of this holy Ordinance, distinctly and
clearly to apprehend the reason and use of it, and what privileges and
blessings are contained in, represented and sealed by it; I dare say you would
more long to partake of it, than of the most delicious banquet, or sumptuous
feast that ever was prepared. But what do I talk of? who can persuade carnal,
sensual, stupid creatures, to believe that there is any substance, any worth in
those things that their senses cannot reach to? what care they for that which
no way tends to the pampering and pleasing of their flesh? Give me leave before
I come to what I principally design, a little to lay open the wretched
carelessnesses of the generality of men, and briefly hint at the cause; that
they may be ashamed of themselves when they see their picture and description,
and seek out for the cure of their distempers.

Who would not, by the lives of most, conjecture that they thought themselves
sent into the world, on purpose to get food and raiment, and to make provision
for the flesh; and that they had reason given them for nothing else, but to be
more witty and politic in carrying on their worldly designs? And how well
would it be for them at the last, if those souls should have the greatest
reward, which were most loving to the body, most solicitous for its welfare,
and did toil most in its service. But what an heavy doom will light on them, if
they must hereafter fare (as for certain they must) according as they employed
themselves in seeking their own proper happiness, in the pleasing and serving
of the great God. Oh the strange folly and bruitishness of these men, who are
so forward of themselves, to seek out after any thing which they believe makes
for their temporal good, and yet will not by any means be drawn or driven to
that, which is indeed for their spiritual and eternal good, yea, and their
temporal too, so far as may consist with these. As if when they are contriving
and working for the body, then only they were about their own business, but
when they are minding the matters of their souls, they were employed for some
body else, in works that will be of no use or advantage to them: when yet God
himself has told us, that in the matters of Religion, If we are wise we are
wise for our selves. But this comes to pass, by reason of that sottishness
which inclines poor creatures to judge of all things by their sense, and to
measure their goodness by their suitableness to the flesh. This makes the whole
Gospel to be a mere riddle to them, and little more regarded than a strange
story: for it treats of spiritual invisible things, wherein immortal souls are
concerned, and they forget that they have such souls. To hear of spiritual food
and raiment, to put on Christ and to feed upon him, all which we meet with in
the word, are mysteries of which they are willing to be ignorant. To be made
glad with the light of Gods countenance, to have fellowship with the Father and
the Son, to be beautified, adorned, and enricht with graces and good works; and
the like expressions are so dark and knotty, that they know not what to make of
them: They account nothing beauty but what they can look on, nor bravery, which
makes not a noise and show in the world: They know no Raiment they need, but
what they wear on their backs, nor any food but that which they put into their
bellies. That only do they account pleasure, which they feel in their throats,
or which is so gross, that horses and dogs have a share in it as well as they;
and nothing must pass for honor with them, but having respect in the world;
and that they count their chiefest riches, which they put in their purses, and
lay up in their bags. And this same blindness and carnality, amongst all other
mischiefs that it does, occasions the contempt of that sacred appointment of
Christ, the commemoration of his death, by partaking of his Supper: For here is
nothing provided to give that entertainment to greedy raging Sensualists which
they covet and hunt after. It is indeed very well worthy our observation, that
so far as our senses might be helpful to us in the service of God, he has
graciously condiscended to use such means as might work upon and affect them,
that thereby faith it self, our apprehension of those things which we see not,
may be quickened and advanced: which, as in some other instances, so in this
Sacrament especially is made manifest: for here we have a crucified Christ
plainly held forth to us, and the benefits we receive by him, are signified by
those material things, bread and wine, which we eat and drink. And thus far God
has made provision for sense it self, the more to excite and stir up our dull
spirits; but so far as the pleasing and humouring the senses might be an
hindrance to the soul, God has made no provision for them. Here Is no such
pomp, and gaudiness, and outward splendor, as may gratify wanton carnal
minds. Papists may devise such things (instead of Christ's Institutions which
they steal away from the people) to the quenching of all true zeal and
spiritual affection in Gods service, but the Gospel warrants not any such
hurtful devices, and our Church does justly reject them. Nor is here a feast of
dainties to satisfy a luxurious appetite, or feed an hungry belly. Here Is food
for the soul indeed represented, and conveyed by these Elements to the worthy
receiver, but the most are so ignorant of their concernments, that they never
yet found such a thing within them as a spiritual hunger. What, a soul be
hungry? how can that be? Alas, they have so much to do to supply the
necessities of their bodies, that they cannot have while to regard their souls.
No, they may sink or swim, starve and damn for them; for they have other
matters to mind which they hold more necessary. Is it not a wonder what we read
Matthew. 22. at the beginning, that when the King had made a Marriage for his
Son, and prepared a feast, and sent forth his servants to invite the guests,
they should make light of it, and begin to frame excuses, that they had other
business to do, and this and that way to go, and therefore could not come?
What, not come to a feast, to a sumptuous Marriage Feast? to a feast made for
the Kings Son? And when servants were sent on purpose to invite them to it?
Were not these a strange sort of stubborn foolish men that would disobey their
own King, sending them such a courteous message as this? Reader, do thou not
condemn them in thy own thoughts? Do thou not think thou would never have
been so silly and obstinate as they, if thou had been so sent unto? But for
all thy thoughts, its well if thou prove not guilty of the very same fault thy
self. For what was the matter, think thou, that these people would not come
when they were invited? Why alas, there was no such fare made ready as they had
a mind to, Be sure had there been but such good cheer as would have filled
their bellies, they would have made have enough, and would have invented
excuses how to get in, rather than to stay away.

But this is a Parable, showing what entertainment the most do give to the
Gospel, whereby we are invited not only to a wedding feast, but to be even
married our selves to the Lord Jesus Christ, the everlasting Son of the Father:
And yet this message, the matchless mercy whereof may astonish men and Angels,
I say this message is slighted: Men will not come to Christ that they may have
life. Adulterous souls go after other Lovers, and will not be espoused to the
Lord of glory: They see no form nor comeliness in him why they should desire
him. They hear great commendations of him indeed, what an excellent glorious
person he is, no less than the Son of God made man, whose love was so great to
mankind, that he laid down his life for them: but in the mean time, What has
he? what is to be got by him? what estates will he settle on them? what honors
will he advance them to? what? why they shall through him have their sins
pardoned and subdued, their hearts sanctified, and at length shall be received
into everlasting glory. -- Nay, if this be all, they have no mind to come on;
but when their consent is desired, they have some excuse or other ready at
hand; and either they will not come at all, or else not yet, or not so thoroughly
and heartily as they are commanded, and in such a wilful refusal of grace do
thousands persist and perish. And though I suppose this forementioned Parable
does not directly and primarily belong to the Lords Supper, yet it may by
consequence be very well applied thereto: Since here is a Marriage Feast of the
Kings Son, here are the great blessings and mercies of the Gospel held forth
and offered, and all who come duly prepared and sincerely disposed to accept
the same, shall be assured of them; and hither do Gods Ministers exhort all to
come in the appointed regular way. And what is the effect of their Message? why
the most make light of it. Hither to this holy Table are people called to give
up themselves to God, to testify the truth of their sorrow for sin, and to
renew their resolutions against it, and so to receive a sealed pardon, and a
title to life everlasting; but for their parts they have no such liking to
these spiritual good things which are so freely tendered them. The truth is,
their sins as yet they are loath to leave; for they see no great hurt in them,
nay, they think they find much good at present, and do not use to trouble
themselves much with the thoughts of that mischief they may hereafter do them,
and therefore they have no such high thoughts of Christ for his being able to
mortify and remove their lusts, and so to save them from the misery these
would bring them to: They can very hardly be persuaded that there is any such
excellency in an holy life, that they should so speedily and solemnly resolve
upon it. And though they can like well enough to go to heaven when they must
needs leave this world, yet they look upon that day so far off, that they are
in no great haste of making sure their future happiness, but think it may be
time enough to do that a great while hence. And can any man wonder if those who
are no more sensible of any benefit they have by Christ, are very slack and
negligent in a thankful remembrance of his death, and of those benefits which
thereby we enjoy and hope for, which is the great end of Celebrating this
Sacrament? No marvel if such as these always find one excuse or other, to
keep away from that which they have no more love to, and the necessity and
advantage whereof, they are no more acquainted with. If there was but any
matter of gain to be got by it, any thing which made for the flesh, we should
need no such ado to get them thither: We may be sure, if the King should but
proclaim that he would give six pence a piece, to all the poor throughout
London, that would repair to White Hall, there would need nothing but the
knowledge of it to get them together. Oh what running and crowding and craving
would there be: He need not send any Messengers to beseech and persuade them to
receive his Charity. But when the Sovereign Majesty of Heaven and Earth by his
Heralds Proclaims to all: Ho every one that is willing let him prepare
himself, and come hither to receive an earnest of infinite and everlasting
treasures, there are few will accept the offer, as if it was of no value; and
as if the Apostle was mistaken, when he prefers the blood of Christ before
such corruptible things as silver and gold. Nay, I Will warrant you, in those
Parishes where you shall find so few at a Communion, did but any rich man
amongst them make a feast, and invite the whole Town to it, you should find
but few stay at home. But now when God himself calls them to his Table, and
there has provided them food which came from Heaven, true Spiritual Manna,
even the Body and Blood of Christ which is meat and drink indeed, they find no
great appetite to this Banquet. All the great words they hear of it work not
with them: For in all such cases it is not other men's words and opinions that we
judge by, but our own relish and feeling. And whilst men have got such corrupt
dispositions, and carnal affections that they savor only those things which
are gross and earthly like themselves, What wonder is it if they undervalue
that which is so unsuitable to them and in which they can feel no more taste
than in the white of an Egg. A Swine prefers his own swill before the greatest
dainties that can be provided; And a voluptuous sinner that is wallowing in the
mud of fleshly pleasures, would not willingly exchange conditions with the
glorious Angels, that always behold the face of God.

Oh whither is the Soul of man degenerated? Into what a low and sad estate is
it fallen, that it finds sweetness in any thing rather than in that which is
truly pleasant? How cheerfully and contentedly can people set themselves to any
thing rather than to that only work which God has appointed them, even the
working out of their Salvation? From morning to night they can follow their
worldly business without complaining, and yet know not how to spend one day in
seven, nor one half hour in a day in the service of God, for the saving of
their own Souls. Oh what pains do many poor men take only to get a livelihood
in the world, and yet think everlasting life worth no regard or care at all.
They can be content to spend their thoughts, and strength, and time upon
vanity, to lay out their money for that which is not bread, and to labor for
the wind; but when God says, but give me your hearts, he is denied. If this
careless generation had but Houses and Lands, Money and Goods, proffered them
on the same terms that Heaven is, how greedily would they lay hold on them? If
a rich man should say to them, Love but this Gold more than the Dirt under your
feet, and you shall have it; Oh how quickly would they purchase it, and never
think the condition hard? If the poor man was enjoined to prefer bread bfore a
stone, and to desire it more, and then it should be given him, do you think he
would ever be without it? And yet when the blessed God offers them ten
thousand times greater mercies upon such terms as these, they refuse them, as
if they were required to do some great thing, for that which was not worth
their labor. What does God command us, but to love himself more than empty
creatures? To value an everlasting Kingdom, before the frail comforts of this
short life? And yet we will not do it. He bids us but love our best part, even
our Souls, more than these vile bodies; and to take most care for that which
deserves most, as being the more excellent. When he enjoins us to fly from sin
and embrace holiness, it is as if he should say, Beware of that which will do
you the greatest mischief, and close with that which will do you the most good;
Accept of Liberty and freedom, and do not lie in Prison and Fetters; be in
Health and not in Sickness; and yet men will not be persuaded. When God says,
prefer my pleasant service, before the bondage of the Devil, and thou shall be
happy for ever; he does as it were say, Be but heartily willing to accept of
happiness here, and thou shall have it hereafter, but the most are unwilling.
And upon this it is, that not only God, but all the world, yea, themselves,
will for ever lay the blame of their destruction, by their resolvedness and
willfulness in the ways of sin, they are merciless murderers of their own
Souls. The Devil may tempt, and the world may allure, but they cannot not force
them to sin. There is not one of all those millions that perish, who can truly
say, that he was unfeignedly willing to have saved himself, but could not. But
as for those that perish from amongst Christians, they have least of all to
plead in their own excuse. For they have been exhorted and besought again and
again, to put away their evil-doings, to renounce their lusts and turn to the
good ways of God, and yet they would not hearken. What though the Devil
enticed them to wickedness, did not Gods Spirit also move upon their hearts, to
have drawn them to holiness? But they who knew not how to resist the Devil as
they were commanded, could resist and grieve and offer despite to the Spirit
of Grace. Whilst they knew not how to reject nor get away from a sinful
Companion, they could put off their Ministers and godly Friends with flat
denials if not with contempt and jeers. What though the flesh was craving for
forbidden fruit, unlawful pleasures and satisfaction? Yet did not Conscience
contradict and check it? Why then should flesh which had no reason for its
desires be hearkened to, and obeyed, whilst Conscience which is the voice of
God, must be slighted and silenced? Tell me whoever thou art, that make a
Trade of sin, and live in the neglect of thy Duty to God that made thee, and
keeps thee alive, not accounting it the business of thy life to serve and
honor him, but go from one day to another without the serious thoughts of
his glorious Majesty and all his wonderful works and mercies, thou who see no
need of hearing or reading Gods Word, of constant Prayer, or receiving
Sacraments, that put off the thoughts of Death and Judgment, and art
careless of making preparations for the same: Tell me I beseech thee, what is
the reason, of such a wretched, sinful course as this? Is it because thou
know no better? Was It thou never told how thou ought to behave thy self?
Did thou never hear who it is puts men upon sin, and what wages they have for
it at length? Did thou never read nor hear of a Savior that came to call men
to repentance and holiness, and laid down his life to save all that will be his
faithful followers and Servants? It Is very strange indeed if thou have lived in
any such dark corner, that thou were never acquainted with these matters. But
it is most likely thou have heard them again and again, but all has been to no
purpose. What do thou not know who made thee, and why thou wast made? There Is
few Children but can answer such questions as these, and yet how few men that
consider them or that live as if they knew them.

There are indeed many to be found, especially of the meaner sort, who tell you
they cannot read, nor are Book-learned, and therefore they hope God will hold
them excused and not require much of them, but yet these people have learning
enough to look to their business in the world, and if they be sick, they will seek
for help, or if they are wronged they will look out for rel^ef. And what have they
not learning enough to know, what they must do to be saved? Have they been idle
and unwilling to learn so much as to read plain English, and do they think this
will serve their turn to plead for their ignorance and neglect of Duty, and
wilful Rebellions against God? What were they taught or commanded such
difficult things, that none but Scholars can understand or do them? They can
tell as simple as they are, that the light of the Sun is greater than the light
of a Candle; that Gold is better than Brass, that a King is above a Constable;
that its better to have an estate of their own, which they shall enjoy as long
as they live, than to be Tenants to another, to be turned out when he will. Do
they know these things, and is it any harder to know that God who made all
things, and put that goodness into them which they have, is better than all
those things which he made, and therefore should be preferred before all
Creatures; That he who is Lord of all should be obeyed above all; that to be
like him is better than to be like the Beasts; that a certain everlasting Glory
is more worth than short, uncertain comforts here below. Again, these men knew
well enough how to eat and drink, and to take heed of what might hurt their
bodies; they could avoid the persons and places that were infected; if the
house was on fire they would run out of it, and call neighbors to help to
quench it; if they are upon the way, and are told of quicksands and quagmires,
they can avoid them. And yet have they not learning enough to do good to their
souls, and to take heed of that which will destroy them for ever, and hearken
to others that warn them of their danger? They can be diligent enough to please
those that do them good turns, and to beware of offending such as can undo
them. And yet do they account it such an hard matter to love and please that
God who has given them all the mercies they ever enjoyed, and to take heed of
provoking him to anger who can kill both body and soul, and cast them into
Hell? Yea, further, let those very people that cannot read, have a paper given
them that tells them how to cure any disease they are troubled with, they can
go to a Neighbor, and get him to read it to them, and they can mark it so
diligently as to follow its directions. Or if they be in any trouble about
their estates, they can carry their Deeds and evidences to a Lawyer, and pray
him to peruse them, and tell them how the case stands with them. And what could
they get no body to read the Bible or some good book to them, that might direct
them in the way to salvation? Or could they not have hearkened carefully to
their Minister, whilst he was telling them what they must do? Or might they not
have gone to him in private and desired particular instructions for their
souls? Nay there are few Families of the poorest, but one or other amongst them
can read; and might they not have taken some spare time, and have read
together, and discoursed one with another about the state of their souls, and
what was to be done in order to everlasting happiness. The plain truth is,
there are few but can show diligence and skill enough in any worldly trifle
that they think does at all concern them; But (as I hinted before) they are so
insensible of any advantage that is to be got by minding the things of Religion,
that they disregard them as matters of no worth or consequence. For I cannot
imagine whence this strange and damnable carelessness should come, but that
first of all, men forget that they have souls which will never die, but must
live for ever in another world either in joy or torment according as they
behaved themselves in this: For certainly the sound belief, and frequent sober
consideration of the true nature of the soul, is the great foundation and
support of seriousness in Religion, the great design whereof is to help this
immortal soul to an happiness suited to its Nature. Wherefore, if the soul it
self be forgotten, how can it otherwise be but God will be forgotten also, and
the Duty we owe to him neglected? For though if we were ingenuous, his mercies
to our bodies might engage us to love and serve him; and the most carnal men
may so far remember God as to look for health and wealth, and outward comforts
from him, yet this cannot bring them to any heartiness in Religion, which
consists very much in denying the flesh, and thinking meanly of all things here
below; and therefore no man can serve God as he ought, but he who believes that
he rewards his diligent Servants with an everlasting happiness in the fruition
of himself: for nothing but the hopes of this can bear out men in those
difficulties of suffering and obedience which they may be called to. But if men
have no regard to their souls neither will they take any heed to please God,
nor make it their business to get to Heaven hereafter, which is nothing else
but a state of happiness principally prepared for a reasonable soul in the full
enjoyment of God* neither will they take care to prevent their falling into
Hell, which is that state of misery whereinto they that forget God are turned,
and chiefly appointed for the punishment of the Soul. And hence it will
unavoidably follow that they will undervalue the work of redemption, and
disregard the Lord Jesus, who wrought this work in behalf of the Sons of men,
to recover their souls to God, to purchase the pardon of sin and enable them
sincerely to please God, and so to prevent their damnation and bring them to
eternal Glory. And if they have no esteem for Christ then needs must they
slight the Word and Sacraments whereby they should be brought to acquaintance
with him to be interested in, and related to him, and to receive the
communications of grace from him.

Now though there are few that will acknowledge themselves guilty of such
ignorance of themselves, such contempt of God and glory, and of Christ the way
thereto, yet their actions do to plainly show it. For certainly if they had any
true knowledge of their own souls, they could not but take more pains to save
them than they do, even out of love to themselves; when as now they never in
all their l^ves many of them, are so much as once brough^ seriously to ask the
question, How they should do to be saved? No nor ever withdrew themselves into
private for an hours time on set purpose to consider what their spiritual
condition is, and how they stand related to God, whether as friends or enemies,
and whether they must go when they depart out of this life. And tell me then do
these people indeed remember to any purpose that they have souls that must
either be saved or damned for ever? What though they may sometimes hear
Sermons, or read the Bible, yet do they use when they come home, or when they
have laid aside their Books, soberly to think of what they have read or heard?
Do they consider how it concerns them? Do they examine themselves by the Word,
and apply it home to their own consciences and guide their lives by it? Do they
regard it as that by which they must shortly be judged? And though they may
sometimes put up a prayer to God; yet do they perform this duty as seeing any
need of it, taking any delight in it, or as expecting any good from it? Do they
before hand think what they stand in need of, and so pray to God for a supply
of their wants, not only of their Bodies but Souls, in as good earnest as they
can ask their neighbor for any thing they lack. And in the very act of
praying, have they any awe and sense of God upon their Spirits, as they would
have if they were putting up a Petition to a Prince or Judge? And do they mind
what they have been about when they come from the Duty? Do they carefully wait
for an answer of their Prayers, and patiently expect those blessings which they
desired from God, such as strength against sin, and grace to serve him? And do
they do what is in their Power to procure what they pray for? Thus you may be
sure it would be with them if they were in good earnest in their Prayers. For
when they go to any great man to request a favor from him, they attend what
answer he makes, and their thoughts are much upon it, and they are deeply
concerned for the success of their request. Though they have been Baptized
into the Name of Christ, yet do they ever use to think what they are thereby
engaged to, and see to answer that engagement? And suppose they do sometimes
come to the Communion, yet did they ever come to it with such a kind of
Spiritual appetite and expectation of strength and benefit as they go to an
ordinary meal? Or are they careful before hand to fit themselves for the Duty
so as to profit by it? Whatever they may pretend, it is most manifest that
Religion is not taken by them, for the great work of their lives. They are far
from spending their time, and busying their minds like men that were sent into
the world on purpose to serve God, which they can say is the reason why God
made them. It is not their chief study and work so to know and please their
Maker, and to get their Peace made with him through the Lord Jesus, that they
may live with him hereafter in Glory for ever. No, no, to the Consciences of
these men I dare appeal, this is the least matter of a thousand with them, and
there is scarce any thing which they less regard. They hear their Minister
about these things as if he was telling them a story of no concernment, or
spoke in a strange Language, which they understood not. Was he but telling them
the way to thrive in the world, and get store of riches, they would hear him
more attentively, and remember better what he said to them, and not think they
had done enough when they had stood in the Church for an hour as now they do.
He that has made any trial may easily see that this sort of people do not give
the same heed to one that discourses to them about the matters of their own
souls, as they do to him that speaks of earthly things. If you talk with a
Citizen about his trade, or with a Countryman about his Corn, or Cattle, or
the weather, or any the like subjects, they can hold discourse with you well
enough, but if you come to speak of the unseen Kingdom, and the way thereto;
What need we have to search into our souls to see that we have got, a good
sound Title to that Glory; If you do but tell them of the shorness and
uncertainty of life, exhorting them therefore to get well prepared for death
and Judgment; How strange is such language as this to the ears of many? Some
laugh at it as babbling; others give you a bare hearing, but are little affected
with the weightiest matters delivered in the most piercing words that a man
knows how to speak. Nay many times they will be taken up with other things so much
as not to mind or understand what is said to them, nor do they afterward
remember it, but are as much moved with the barking of a Dog, or blowing of the
wind, as with the most serious affectionate exhortations you can give them.
And indeed how can men take any great pleasure to hear of things that are not
in their own element, but as it were, out of their reach? Would not the plain
Countryman be ready to laugh and wonder at a Scholar that should talk to him
in Latin, or make him tedious discourses of any point in Philosophy though he
spoke in plain English? What Is all this to him? He understands it not; or if he
did, he may think, what should he be the better for it. And does not the Word
of God tell us that the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit, but
they seem foolishness to him, because they are Spiritually discerned. The
Doctrine of Regeneration by the Spirit, to those that never felt it, is still
as strange as it was to Nicodemus. And except we have beforehand got some
inward apprehension of the things that we hear of, all talk of them is but as
an empty sound, that signifies nothing. Wherefore no marvel, if they who think
so seldom, and understand so little of God, and Christ, and a work of grace,
to be wrought on their hearts, are no more affected nor stirred when they hear
of them. And whilst they perceive no profit they should get by these things,
what should they hearken to them for? They cannot by all you say, get one penny
more in their purse, nor a meals meat, nor a suit of clothes; and these are the
most desirable enjoyments they are acquainted with. And it is no great wonder
when we consider the education of the common sort, if they be of such a
wretched temper. For perhaps they were born and brought up by Parents like
themselves that knew not how to acquaint them what they were made for, in any
such manner as was likely to do them good; and it may be never so much as se^
them to School, to learn to read English; and in their childish years it cannot
be thought they should have much understanding in Religion, when they think of
little else but their meat and play; and when they grow up to riper years, they
are set to Trades, and to work for their livings: (I speak of the meaner sort)
and when they come to be settled in the world, and have Wife and Children, then
they have enough to do to provide for their Families, and cannot spare time to
learn the way to Heaven, and if they live to be aged, they think themselves too
old to learn, and are too deep rooted in their ways to be drawn to forsake
them without little less than a miracle, and so there are multitudes even
within the sound of the Gospel, that live and dye in lamentable ignorance and
senselesness. I know all this while in every state and time through which they
pass, the most have opportunities for learn^ng their duty, if they had any
heart to it: but their minds are still possessed with something else.

And though they may be somewhat constant in keeping their Church, yet this
being a thing they have always been wont to before they knew what they did,
they still hold on in a customary manner, without duly considering what they
come thither for; not thinking that the Minister speaks to them and about
matters that are for life or death: the discourses also which they hear being
upon particular subjects they are like to profit the less by them, in that
they have not such a sound and clear knowledge of the chief points of Religion,
as may enable them to understand and profit by Sermons. And though from
Children they may some of them be able to repeat their Creed, and Commandments,
and Lords Prayer, yet truly its very easy to say these over a thousand times
without being much affected with them, or well understanding them, only
pattering them over by rote: especially if they never had these principles
clearly laid open and explained to them. It may be also many of these never had
any particular close counsel given them, tending to awaken them to an
apprehension of their condition to convince them of their sin and misery by
nature, and put them upon searching in good earnest after the way to escape
damnation, and be truly happy for ever. Or if they have been so exhorted, yet
they will not be brought to think of these things soundly by themselves, and to
seek to God by prayer for direction and assistance. It is no easy nor trifling
matter for a man wholly to change his thoughts, purposes, affections, and
manner of life, as all must do that turn from sin to true godliness. Such a
change as this is not likely to be wrought without much consideration, and
sober settled resolutions on man's part, to which the grace of God would not be
wanting to make them effectual. I know it is also the grace of God that puts
upon them, but yet it is Man himself that by the assistance of this grace must
thus Consider, and thus Resolve. But now when should people set upon this work
of considering what they should do to be saved? Something or other still
happens in the way that keeps them from the work, or takes them off before it
comes to any good issue. Either they are sleeping or working, eating or
drinking, or playing and idling, dressing or undressing; or have some whether
to go, or somebody to speak to; or in some company that they cannot leave; or
have some business in their heads which they are contriving, or else are in
sickness that unfits them for action, or some trouble has befaln them which
puts their minds out of order, or some happiness and prosperity which puffs
them up with a foolish flashy joy; or they have some brave things in
expectation which they are musing on, and pleasing themselves with beforehand.
Some such matters as these, I dare say, fill the heads and hearts of most from
one years end to another throughout their whole lives. These and such like are
the things that come into their minds as soon as they are awake, and then
presently they are set about one thing or other, or light into some company
that takes them up for that day, and the like happens to morrow and the next
day; and whilst the present time never appears convenient for the solemn
performance of this great work of Repentance, it is by the most posted off till
it is too late, and then in vain do they repent to all Eternity that they did
not repent in Time. Now it could not be that they should never have a spare day
or hour for the consideration of, and setting upon the work they were sent into
the world for, but that they are guided in the course of their lives by this
practical deep-rooted opinion, that their only business hereis to make this
life as comfortable as they can; and therefore that to get food and raiment and
riches for themselves and their children, to enjoy pleasures and be well
accounted of in the world are the best things which can be imagined; whereupon
they wholly bend themselves to the attainment of these things; and on they go
in a giddy heedlesse manner, never well examining whether this their way be not
their folly, nor taking much notice what the principles and opinions are which
have the greatest power upon their lives, and whence their actions flow; which
principles may be so wrought into their natures, that they shall lead and rule
them whilst they are secret and not distinctly known and weighed. And indeed
this conceit, that the good things of this life are most to be set by and
sought after, has its first rise from our corrupted natures, which being fallen
off from God and contrary to him, incline us to seek happiness any where
rather than in returning to his love. And then in Childhood, and for some years
after we have very weak apprehensions of any thing but what is before us, being
wholly ruled by our senses. And when our miserable mistakes have once taken
root, and are become natural to us, its one of the hardest things in the world
to be freed from them: for we are prone to be so conceited of our own ways,
that we are by no means willing to be contradicted, much less to call our
selves fools for all we have done, and begin the world anew, as if we had never
set one step forward in the right way. And it must needs be the more difficult
to convince men of the folly and baseness of such a carnal worldly life,
because they observe it to be the custom of the most about them, high and low,
even of such as are counted wise and judicious, worshipful and honorable
persons. And what, may they think, can they be so foully mistaken, who did but
follow the course which they saw such men lead before them? And this indeed is
one great cause of the mistakes and destruction of men, that when they come
into the world they choose rather to follow the examples of their neighbors
than the rules of right reason which they should gather from Gods holy word,
and a due examination of things; and therefore they take to those actions, and
that manner of life which they see others follow, without well thinking whether
they do wisely or not: just as if a man should see a company of people upon
the way running as for their lives, pretending that they are in pursuit of some
great matters, and thereupon should presently set in with them, and run along
as fast as they, without farther enquiring what they look for; till at length
when they are all tired, he perceives they had no other design but perhaps to
catch flies, which when they have they know not what to do with, or to lay
hold on some pretty bird which they could not overtake: even thus when a man
sees those about him running and riding, striving and swea^ing to get houses
and lands, and all outward enjoyments, he thinks it needless to enquire
whether these things be worthy all their labor; no, that is taken for granted:
for sure, may he think, these men are no fools, but know well enough what they
do, and therefore without deliberation upon the matter, he joins with the rest
in laboring and contriving for these worldly things, taking all the pleasure
in them that they will possibly yield. And whatever help is afforded them for
the carrying on of this design, they will readily and thankfully comply with.
If you supply them with what they were seeking for, they will greedily receive
it, or if you will give them sure directions how to get it, they will hearken
to you and diligently follow your advice. But whatever is presented that no way
conduces to these their carnal ends, that which makes them no richer nor
higher in the world, nor gives their senses any delight is like to be
altogether slighted by them. What mean thoughts therefore must they needs have
of Sermons, Sacraments, and all spiritual advantages which are only means for
the getting of an happiness quite of another nature from that they are seekin
after?

I hope this large preface (which indeed I did not design) will not be
altogether useless, nor seem impertinent; since they who so little care for
hearing or reading Gods word, for prayer or receiving Sacraments, who are
listlesse to all duties, and feel no sweetness in them, all such may hence
learn what is the root and ground of this distemper, what it is that makes them
out of taste with these rich and savoury provisions which all healthful souls
do so dearly love, even because their secret, but most powerful, thoughts
are, that they have nothing better than their Bodies to provide for, and that
to do this is the chiefest business they have, and that nothing is of any
great use which makes not for this end. But it would be quite otherwise with
them if they were indeed clearly convinced, and soundly persuaded that they
have souls which will never die, and that these are their best part, and
deserve most care, and are as much to be preferred before the body as a man
before the horse which he rides on; and that these their immortal souls can
only be made happy by the favor of God, out of which they are fallen by sinning
against him, and that the great work of this life is to get all breaches made
up betwixt God and them, that so when they leave this world, they may be
restored to perfect happiness in the enjoyment of God; and that they can no
way be thus reconciled to God but by Jesus Christ, by whose merits and
mediation their sins may be pardoned, and by whose holy Spirit (which is given
by the Father through him) they can only be so changed and sanctified that
they may be made meet for the inheritance of the Saints in the heavenly light
of Gods presence and love. Was the sound belief of these plain, great and
commonly acknowledged truths but well rooted in the hearts of men, so as to
overpower and change their affections, we should soon perceive them to be other
kind of persons in all their behavior. If they took it for the business of
their lives to work out their salvation, being convinced that they had nothing
in the world to do but this, and what is in order to it, then would they
diligently labor after a saving knowledge of a crucified Christ, which
comprehends in it the whole of religion. And then they would highly prize and
diligently attend upon those means which Christ has appointed for the
manifesting himself, and conveying his saving benefits to the soul. They would
take care to be found in those ways wherein Christ is like to be found.
Whatever had relation to him would be very much esteemed by them; and they
would never be at quiet till they had done their best to make it sure that they
had got an interest in him, and through him a title to the Fathers everlasting
love. They would then rightly inform themselves what is required, of all that
must be saved by Christ, and these conditions they would endeavor to come up
to, and perform. They would be willing to enter into the most solemn Covenant
with him, to take him for their Savior in all his Offices, by him to be
brought to that glory which God has prepared for true Believers: and the
keeping of this Covenant would be their study and care through the whole course
of their life. Now though considering these things, it might appear a very fit
method for the curing of men's mistakes, and direct them in the way to
blessedness, first to represent and demonstrate to them that they have immortal
souls, and that the love of God is their only portion, and that this can no
way be obtained but by the Lord Jesus, and then to show what is required to
make us partakers of happiness by him; yet since these things are in some sort
known, and readily confessed by the most, I shall at present wave this method,
and choose rather to drive at the last of these, which will be found to contain
all, namely to direct and exhort poor souls to enter into Covenant, and make a
through closure with Jesus Christ, that through him their sins may be subdued
and pardoned, their persons and natures reconciled to God, that they may be
blessed for ever in communion with him. And even this is my chief design in
laying down the following Directions to a due preparation for, and a right
receiving of the Lords Supper, and in giving Motives to the serious and
frequent performance of that duty, which I look upon principally as a
solemnizing and ratifying our Covenant with God by Jesus Christ, and the
sincerity of the heart in making this Covenant, and our faithfulness in
keeping it, is the very heart and scope of Christianity. For my intention in
treating of this subject is not merely to persuade people to come to the Lords
Table (alas what a poor thing is that to be rested in!) but to instruct them
for a right coming to, and hearty receiving of Christ himself, then to come to
the Sacrament, there to make and renew their Covenant with him in a more
formal and express manner, the more to affect, and deeplier to engage
themselves. For this being a sensible and solemn thing, will be apt to make the
stronger impression upon men's spirits; and perhaps they will be sooner
persuaded to this work because it is so much fitted to sense it self. But the
great danger is least they should rush upon that which they understand not the
reason of; and think they have done enough by bare receiving the Sacrament,
without considering to what purpose they do it: which would be greater
madness, and of worse consequence than for a man to run and lay his hands upon
the book and kiss it, and use the like ceremonies of an oath, and never mind
what he swears to, nor afterward think what he has done, though it was about
a matter of life and death. And therefore I shall endeavor by Gods assistance
to prevent this miscarriage by showing what is the nature and design of this
Ordinance, in a right participation whereof consists so much of religion: since
hereby a man professes and engages himself to be a sincere obedient
Christian, which may be understood by this comparison before I come to speak to
it more fully, that more ignorant Reader may the sooner have the notion fixed on
his mind. It is much what, as if the Governor of a City after there had been a
seditious insurrection of the Citizens, should offer pardon to all that would
acknowledge their fault, beg his pardon, and return to their former subjection
and peaceable behavior; and moreover should enjoin all that were thus affected
to come take a piece of money which he would give abroad, or to partake of a
feast which he would make on purpose for the entertainment of such; now would
it not be madness, and gross impudence, and dissembling for any to receive
this money, or go sit at this Table, who were resolved yet to continue their
rebellion, and would employ that very money, and the strength they received
from his meat against him that gave them, whenas hereby they were to testify
their resolutions to be faithful and obedient? Even thus has it pleased the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of rebe^l^ous degenerate mankind, to proclaim
free and full pardon to all that will heartily repent of, and turn from their
wicked ways, and take him for their Lord and Savior, and submit to his
directions for their attainment of happiness; and withal he has commanded
all that will thus become his disciples, first to be listed under him by
Baptism, whereby they are visibly entered amongst the number of professing
Christians, and afterward they who were baptized in infancy are to come to
this Sacramental Feast, and there to join with their fellow-believers in a
personal profession of their willingness and resolution to stand to that
Covenant whereinto they were engaged by Baptism, in testimony whereof they eat
the Bread and drink the Wine, whereby the Body and Blood of Christ is
represented, as I shall further show anon. Now would it not in like manner be a
strange piece of folly and monstrous hypocrisy for any man to rest satisfied
with his having been baptized, or his receiving the Lords Supper, and think
himself therefore a Christian good enough without taking care to perform those
promises which he then made, but rather encourage himself in sin by the
consideration of what he had done, as if he might the more safely rebel
against God; because he had expressly vowed against all such rebellion. Could
there be a more desperate, dangerous wickedness than to make such a wilful
mistake? And yet I wish there be not thousands guilty of it. Alas, alas! how
few that have taken the earnest-peny, and wear Christ's Colors, that ever think
to any purpose what they are hereby bound to? How many in effect renounce their
Baptism by their ungodly lives, and either neglect the Lords Supper, or come
to it to pacify their Consciences that they may sin the more freely, rather
than to strengthen and engage themselves against every sin? As for Bap^isme I
shall not insist on it, though I grant that this is the leading Sacrament
appointed for the testimony of our being first devoted to God, which engagement
we ought to call to remembrance, and renew at the Lords Supper, whereof
according to my promise I now come to speak.

CHAP. II. What it is to do this (to celebrate the Communion) in reremembrance
of Christ. And I. That it includes the true knowledge of him.
AND being desirous to contribute some assistance to those that need it, to
bring them (through Gods blessing) to a conscientious performance of this great
duty, I observe there are two sorts of persons faulty herein; either such as
neglect it, or that miscarry and fail in the manner of doing it. Those that
neglect it are either such that do it out of mere wilfulness, as the grossly
vicious, that will not come to this Sacrament because they think this would lay
an obligation upon them to forsake those sins which they never intend to part
with whatever come on it, and the stupid senseless ones, that know not the worth,
nor see the need of this Ordinance, or any other duties of Religion, who live
as heathenishly as if they had never heard of God and Christ, and another
world, nor do they care to be instructed in these points, as if they were not
at all concerned in them; or else they are such that abstain from it out of
doubting and fear, not thinking themselves worthy, or not knowing whether they
are worthy or not. Of this sort there are many excellent Christians, who too
much indulge to their own melancholy and despondent apprehensions; and also
many weaker, but, I hope, honest well-meaning people, who seem to have a great
esteem for this Sacrament; but having always heard what a dangerous thing it is
to receive it unworthily, dare not venture upon it, not being well acquainted
with the nature and reason of it, and being doubtful whether they are fit to
come or not, being also, I fear, too languid and heartless in desiring after
it, or in making preparation for it, and for such as these principally do I
intend my Directions. By those that are guilty of miscarriage in the doing of
this duty, I mean such as rush upon it ignorantly and rashly, not well weighing
what they do, and who, notwithstanding their customary attendance at the Lords
Table, continue their old sinful course of life. These also, I hope, may
receive some benefit from the following Discourse, together with the most
profane and ignorant, whilst I shall endeavor plainly to show the intention of
this Sacrament, and persuade them to attend thereupon in a regular manner. For
since, in behalf of those for whom especially I write this, my great business
is to show who it is that is worthy to partake of this Ordinance, and wherein
this worthiness does consist; the method I will ^ake shall be this, namely to
show for what purpose it was appointed by Jesus Christ, and thence to discover
those qualifications and graces which are required in the Communicants, that
they may receive it aright to those purposes for which it was appointed: and
after I have done this I shall lay down some arguments or motives to quicken
all to come to, and celebrate it in this due manner, and then briefly direct
those that intend to come. As to the first what was the reason and end why this
Sacrament was appointed, I know not whence we should be better informed than by
looking back to the time of its first appointment, and to see what Christ tells
us he did ordain it for, and this we may find expressly set down, Luke 22.19.
when he had broke the Bread and distributed, he adds, This do in remembrance
of me. And the same words he used also after the delivery of the Wine, as
appears by the Apostle S. Paul's relation, who delivered unto them what he had
received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. where after the giving of the Cup is
added, This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me, and so again
ver. 26. says the Apostle, As often as ye eat th^^ Bread, and drink this Cup,
ye do show the Lords Death till he come, that is, you publish and represent it
to the world, you acknowledge and commemorate it. So that by this it is plain
that the great end of this Sacrament to which all others may be reduced is,
that by the celebrating thereof we may remember Jesus Christ, and especially
that we may keep up the memory of that inestimable mercy to mankind, his dying
for us; a mercy which should never be forgotten by those on earth, and shall
never be forgotten by those in heaven. Now hence it follows, that they who are
in a capacity and fitness rightly to remember Christ and his Death, are worthy
to partake of this Sacrament which was set apart for that purpose: wherefore
without going any farther I shall show what is necessarily required to,
contained in, or immediately flows from this remembrance of Christ, that so we
may the more distinctly apprehend what is required of us to make us worthy
Receivers: And herein, I suppose, will be found comprised those several graces
usually laid down for the due qualification of Communicants, as Knowl^dge,
Repentance, Faith, New obedience, Brotherly love and Thankfulness. And as I go
along I entreat thee, Reader, seriously to look into ^hy own heart, and examine
thy self whether tho^ find in thee these qualifications or not; whether thou
find those graces wrought in thy heart, which may enable thee so to remember
thy Redeemer as may be acceptable to him; that so if thou find thy self such
a one as is described* thou may give God the praise, and take to thy self the
comfort of so great a mercy, and be encouraged to proceed in this and all other
holy duties; but if thou find the contrary, that thou may with all speed
and earnestness see to get thy heart changed, and thy wants supplied. And to
this end (since I intend no other Application) I shall under every Head
endeavor to help thee in thy enquiry into the state of thy soul, and in thy
seeking after those graces which thou may be convinced thou art destitute of,
and have hitherto been content without them; and in this part I shall be the
larger, as taking it to be most necessary, though having so large a field
before me I shall labor to confine my self.

1. First then in order to a right remembrance of Jesus Christ, there is
necessarily supposed a knowledge of him: for our memory contains only those
persons or things which we before have known. How could he keep the Fifth of
November as a Thanksgiving for our deliverance from the Popish Powder plot, who
has not some knowledge beforehand that such a Plot there was laid by the
Papists, and that by divine providence we were delivered from it? No more can
any man remember Christ as he ought at the Sacrament, except he knows who this
Christ is, in his Person, and Natures, and what his Offices are, what he came
into the world for, what he has done and will do for us. And indeed this
right knowledge of Christ necessarily requires and contains a knowledge of all
the chief points of Religion; of which I hope thou art not ignorant who ownest
the name of a Christian. It Is a shame for thee if thou art, having such means
and opportunities to inform thy self as thou enjoyest: having liberty to read
thy Bible, plain Catechismes, and other good Books, and to hear Gods Word
publicly Preached. Notwithstanding all which advantages I doubt there are many
to be found, who are very dark, even in the first principles of Christianity,
as not accounting it any part of their business to trouble their heads with
such matters. And that which a man makes no great reckoning of, nor thinks
himself much concerned in, though he may hear it an hundred times over, he will
scarce have so clear an insight into it as he that has heard it but once or
twice with diligence and attention, applying his mind to it, as to a matter
that is for his life. He that hears a Physician directing him to a medicine
that will recover him from some desperate disease, is far likelier (if he have
the use of his reason) to take notice of, and fix in^o his mind what is told
him, than another that fits by, who holds himself nothing concerned in it. So
surely if people thought it any great matter to save their souls for ever, they
would soon see to get acquainted wi^h the way to salvation, and not remain in
such brutish ignorance as multitudes do. And for the h^lp of such I shall run
over those Heads of Religion, which more especially are required to enable us a
right to remember Christ at this Commemoration-Feast, which he has established
in his Church. Know then that God at first made man in an happy e^tate, even
Adam and Eve our first Parents, who if they had continued happy so should all
we their posterity have been too; but the condition of their continuing in that
estate, being perfect obedience to all Gods commands, they fell from it by
breaking a particular Command, eating of the fruit of a certain Tree in
Paradise, whereof God had enjoined them not to eat, even of the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, as you may read at large Genesis 3. Thus their hearts
were turned off from God and fixed upon the Creature which was pleasing to their
senses. Hereupon they became liable to the wrath of God, who had before
threatened, that in the day they eat ^hereof they should die the death, which
included in it all kind of misery whatever it should please God to inflict They
being thus become sinners they begat Children like themselves, conceived in
sin, and brought forth in iniquity: for who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? and beside that corruption of nature which did cleave to their
Children, the guilt of their sin might also most justly be imputed to them,
they being as common persons representing all mankind, who had stood with them
if they had stood, and fell with them when they fell. But their Children as
they grew up became guilty of actual sins in their own persons, to which their
wicked natures did incline them, which did more expose them to the wrath of
God. This condition was the world brought into by sin, become ignorant of God,
prone to all wickedness, and deserving the greatest misery, even everlasting
torment; and in this estate God might justly have left us, he might have given
us up to our own hearts lusts, and so one by one as we came into the world and
rebelled against him, might have destroyed us for ever without any remedy. Yet
he did not thus, but was pleased out of his own infinite wisdom to provide for
us a Savior when we had thus un^one but could not help our selves. And who was
this Savior but his own eternal only begotten Son, very God of very God, who
in fullness of time became Man, and by the power of the Holy Ghost was
conceived in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and born of her without the least
stain of sin, and was God and Man in a wonderful manner united in one person.
This was that Jesus Christ of whom we read in the Gospel, who after he had some
time preached his Gospel to the Jews, laid down his life as a Sacrifice to make
satisfaction for the sins of the world, and rose again on the third day, and
after forty days continuance on earth he ascended into heaven, and there is
exalted to sit at the right hand of God in that humane nature which he assumed,
and there he lives for ever to make intercession for us, that the benefits he
has purchased may be given out to the sons of men. And these benefits are such
that show him to be a perfect Savior every way fitted to our necessities. For
by his undertaking this work of our Redemption, he did as it were reprieve the
world, and kept us from being suddenly destroyed by divine justice, which
otherwise would have laid hold on us, and did obtain for us that we should be
tried once again for our lives, so that our first fall should not be our
damnation, if we would accept of that way of Salvation which he had procured
for, and revealed to us. Now since our first happiness did consist in our
being like to God, being righteous and holy and obedient to him, that it might
appear that Christ consulted for his Fathers honor, as well as our interest;
the way to salvation which he appointed was this, That we should love God above
all, and count it our greatest happiness to be reconciled to him, that we
should humbly acknowledge and repent of all our sins, of nature and practice
whereby we had provoked his anger against us, and be sincerely willing to live
in obedience to his Laws, and that we should own him the Lord Jesus as our
only Redeemer, and depend upon him only for ability to perform these
conditions, and to obtain the pardon of sin and the favor of God upon
performance of them. And then that we might have this ability who by the fall
were become weak and unable for good, but strongly bent to evil; Christ by his
death obtained of the Father, that the Holy Ghost, the third person of the
Trinity, should be employed to bring men to the performance of those conditions
which Christ required of all whom he would save: And accordingly the Holy
Ghost, in pursuance of this work, did inspire the Apostles and their fellowers
to write and preach the Gospel, and sealed to the truth of it with miracles,
for the conviction of all that should hear it. And in some places in all ages
has enabled men to make it known; and moreover this Holy Spirit does accompany
the Word to the hearts of the Hearers, and where he is received does enlighten
the mind, and soften the heart, and heal, and change, and sanctify the nature
of man, and restores him to the image of his Maker, and begets in him a strong
love to God and a willingness to please him in all things, and brings him to
an hearty sorrow for, and an hatred of all his sins, and enclines and enables
him to come to Christ, to believe in him, to love and highly to esteem him for
this work of Redemption which he has wrought, ascribing it wholly to his merit
that he has hopes of mercy from God and any power to please him. And then for
all those who by this assistance of the Spirit are made willing thus to come to
Christ and to God by him, for these Christ has purchased that their sins should
be forgiven them, and greater measures of the Spirit bestowed on them; in a
word, that they should have all things good for them here, and be received into
everlasting glory hereafter. But all they who reject these offers of
sanctification and salvation, shall die in their sins, and be everlastingly in
torment with the Devil and his Angels. And this same Jesus Christ will be the
Judge of all men, and at the end of the world shall come with great glory and
power, and raise up the bodies of all that were dead and change those that are
alive, and shall pronounce and cause to be executed the sentence of absolution
and glorification upon the righteous, and the sentence of condemnation upon the
wicked. This is that Jesus the Redeemer of the fallen world, whose memory ought
to be so precious to you. And these were the weighty causes, and the glorious
effects of that death which you show forth, and keep up the remembrance of, in
celebrating the Sacrament. I suppose it needless to turn you to the particular
Texts of Scripture proving these things, they being so common and well known;
and the truth of them so plain that they cannot well be doubted of by any that
own the Christian Religion. And I hope they are neither so many nor so
difficult, that you should pretend you want time, or learning, or wit to get
well acquainted with them. I dare say you could learn other kind of matters
than these, if you could get any worldly advantage by it. If Books were Printed
that should teach you how to be rich and honorable, to live in ease and
pleasure to enjoy health, long life, and all kind of prosperity, you would pore
sufficiently upon such Books, and beat your brains day and night, but you would
get to understand and remember them. But if indeed you have so little regard to
your souls, that you will perish for lack of knowing those things which might
easily be known, your damnation is just. And as for you that think the most
sottish ignorance is excusable because you are no Scholars, and yet take your
selves for as good Christians as the best, let me tell you plainly, if you be
without the knowledge of these principal Heads of Religion, you are not fit to
be so much, as called Christians. Are you Disciples of Christ that are so
blockish and stupid that you have not yet learnt the first principles which he
teaches his Scholars? Nay if you refuse to learn them, you thereby renounce
Jesus Christ, to wit, as he is your Prophet and Teacher; which if you do,
expect not salvation from him. And as without being acquainted with these
fundamental truths you are able to perform no duty aright; so especially not
this of receiving the Lords Supper: for, I say, can he remember Christ as he
should that knows not who he is, what he has done for him, or what need he
stands in of him? And they who being in this wilful blindness venture upon
this Ordinance, must needs do it to their own hurt, coming to it as a common
meal, or merely for custom and fashion sake; and so are guilty of the very
same miscarriage which the Apostle represents as so dangerous, 1 Cor. 11.29.
They eat the Bread and drink the Wine, not discerning the Lords Body, not
having that knowledge of Christ who is there represented, whereby they might be
enabled to give him that reverence and honor which is required of all that are
admitted to these mysteries.

I need not sure spend time in examining the Reader whether he know these
truths before laid down or not. If thou have the use of thy reason thou can
tell, I hope, what it is thou know, and what thou do not, wherefore take
thy self to task, and go over the several points of Religion, as I have before
briefly mentioned them, if thou think fit, and take account of thy own
apprehension and understanding, and where thou findst thou art most wanting, be
diligent to inform and satisfy thy self: and to this purpose make conscience
of hearing the word Preached, and of reading the holy Scriptures in private. And
get well acquainted with the grounds of Religion, as you may find them in
Catechismes, or the pl^inest Books that treat of them. But think it not enough
to be able to say the bare words, to repeat your Creed without book, or the
like, but labor well to understand them, and fix them deeply upon your minds,
as those things which are of greatest necessity to be known and remembered of
any in the world. But yet barely to know and remember them will not profit you,
except you so digest and improve them, that they move your affections, and
guide you in your conversation. Its a most lamentable mistake to think that the
mere saying of what you believe, and what you are to do, will save your souls:
as if there was some strange force in the very words, which would make them
useful to all that should patter them over: for by this means a Parrot might
pass for a good Christian. If you had a Receipt given you directing you how to
cure the Toothache, do you think it would take away the pain to get it without
book, and say it over by rote? would you not rather see to read it and make use
of the medicine which it should appoint? Even thus must you read Gods Word and
good Books, to know what is your duty, that you may set with all your might to
the doing of it. And indeed your knowledge is defective till it come thus to
affect your heart: wherefore let that be the mark by which you may judge of its
truth and sincerity, if it raise your affections and leads you forth to action,
1 John 2.3, 4. For if you know that God has in himself all fullness of
goodness, and know that you are needy and indigent, and can only receive
supply and satisfaction from him, you cannot but desire after him, and seek how
to get a part in his love. If you know that you are in your selves lost undone
creatures, and that Jesus Christ and he alone, is able and willing also to
recover and save you, you will then betake your selves to him for healing and
saving mercy. If you know that sin is your disease, bondage and dishonor, and
holiness your glory, liberty and health, you will readily comply with the
Spirit of God to be freed from sin, and to be made as holy as your nature is
capable. This then is true and saving knowledge which must be in all that can
affectionately remember Christ at the Communion. Of this knowledge Christ
speaks, Joh. 17, 3. This is life eternal to know thee, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And of this the Prophet speaks, Isa. 53.11,
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, that is, he shall
justify those who have such a sound and working knowledge of him as leads them
to the performance of what he requires of them. For if men once come indeed to
know that Christ is the Son of God, who earnestly desires their good, and
enjoins them nothing but what makes thereto, surely they will readily then
hearken to and obey him. All this I add to knowledge, because it is very
imperfect till it become thus fruitful; and will not vindicate those in whom
it is, from the imputation of ignorance.

Now to get your knowledge to be thus powerful upon your hearts and lives, I
cannot advise you to any more necessary course than these two, 1. Humbly to beg
of God to work the truth with power upon your souls, that you may receive it in
the love thereof. When you go to hear or sit down to read, beseech God to
accompany the Word by his mighty Spirit that it may sink into your minds and
not become unprofitable; but that it may enlighten and awaken you, and reach to
the very inwards of your souls, and give you such insight into your selves, and
such a discovery of your duty, that you may vigorously be carried on to the
performance of it. And then 2. You must often consider of those truths that you
know; you must dwell upon them in your minds till you are molded, changed and
wrought upon by them. For want of this Consideration chiefly it is, that so
many remain in ignorance: and that many others who have some slight knowledge
are no more bettered by it: for you must meditate upon what you read or hear,
that you may more clearly and distinctly understand it, which you cannot do if
words slip out of your thoughts as soon as they are out of your ears. And then
after the doctrines of the Gospel are well understood, you must farther
consider wherein they concern your particular case, and what use you are to
make of them: for otherwise how is it possible they should profit you? Though
you have never so much book-learning, and brain-knowledge, what are you the
better for all, if you improve it not your own good, by this serious
consideration? Can you think ever to have a profitable saving knowledge of
Christ, if you use not seriously to think of him, what need you stand in of
him, and what benefit he will be to you, and what must be done to make him
yours; Can you get your sins mortified and pardoned, if you will not so much as
bethink your self what an evil thing sin is, and what your particular sins are?
Can you be move with the hopes of glory if you have it not in your thoughts?
Can you escape your danger if you forget it, and so are out of fear? If then
you would ever have any profit by your knowledge, follow the Apostles advice to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.7. Consider what is said to thee at at any time, and that is
the next way to obtain from the Lord understanding in all things; so likewise 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all. If you have not time to spare purposely for
meditation, yet take time as you are upon the way, or about any business which
will permit you. And let this be the chief subject of your thoughts, which I am
sure deserves them most, even how you should do to obtain salvation by Jesus
Christ; and never leave following on this enquiry, till you be fully resolved,
to set about what is required of you to that purpose.

As there must be this sound knowledge of Christ and of the chief points of
Christian Religion in all that can duly remember Christ at a Sacrament, so it
will be readily granted, that this Jesus Christ must be believed to be indeed
the Savior of the world as is declared in the Scriptures: and all that is
there laid down of his Incarnation, Life, Death Resurrection, Ascension
Intercession and coming again to Judgment must be believed to be true. I will
not make a distinct Head of this, because its necessarily supposed in the
former as I have explained it: for our knowledge of these truths is never like
to be effectual with us, if we are not first of all persuaded that they are
truths. And the Reader might be offended if I should make any question whether
he believes the Christian Religion, and takes Scripture to be the word of God,
and acknowledges that Christ is the Son of God, and the promised Messiah of
whom the Prophets all along in the old Testament foretold. But though there are
few who openly deny or seem to doubt of these things, yet I fear there is a
great defect, and too common even in this part of Faith which consists in an
assent to the truth of the Gospel. For many there are who take little pains to
settle their belief upon sure foundations, which would bear a shaking if any
assault should be made; and can give little reason why they are of this
Religion or opinion rather than any other, except because this is that they
learn^ of their parents, and is professed by their neighbors, and set up and
countenanced by the Laws of the Land: and surely these are but weak arguments.
But here let me add as before, that granting you do believe all that the
Gospel reveals, yet this is not enough except your belief prevail with you to
do what the Gospel requires in order to your salvation. And this is indeed the
surest way to get your Faith well strengthened and confirmed even by yielding
obedience to the truth, and trying by your own experience, what benefit comes
by conforming your selves to the will of God revealed in his Gospel, whether
you can find the promises made to such obedient ones in any measure fulfilled
to you; and when you have found this, you will say with the Apostle, You are
not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, because you have begun to find it to be
the power of God to salvation. Our Lord himself tells us, Joh. 7.17. That if
any man will do his will, he shall know of his doctrine whether it be of God
or not: This is like a man's tasting of Honey, which will give him more
assurance of its sweetness than all arguments could do: and this will make
him confidently to affirm it, though the cunning'st Sophister should endeavor
by subtle arguments to persuade him to the contrary; his experience will
confute them all. This is the reason why great Wits and profound Scholars
sometimes turn Atheists and Infidels; whilst the honest weak Christian that
has relisht and well digested the truths of Religion, holds them so firmly in
his heart, rather than brain, that he can die for that which he cannot so well
dispute for. Thus far then I hope you see its manifest, that to your right
remembrance of Christ, and so to make you worthy Communicants, its necessary
that you know who this Christ is, and what you have to do with him, and to
believe that he is indeed the Redeemer of mankind, and that all that Scripture
speaks of him is true.

CHAP. III. II. A right remembering Sin, the occasion of his death. Of
Repentance, with Considerations to work and promote it.
IT may as easily be understood, that if at the Sacrament you keep up a
Remembrance of Christ, and in an especial manner show forth his death till he
come, then you must needs Remember what was the occasion of his dying, and that
was the sins of the world. Had there been no Sin we had needed no Savior. Had
we continued in our first estate, we had needed no Restorer, Now hence it will
naturally follow, that no man can duly celebrate the Sacrament, whose eyes
have not been opened to see the exceeding great evil that is in sin, and to be
convinced of his own sins so as to lament and hate, and resolve against them.
For is it possible for that man to to Remember Christ's Death as he ought, that
sees no hurt in that which put him to death? Nay, that loves the very Nails and
Spear that were thrust into his hands and feet and sides, and intends to
crucify him afresh when he is gone away? And all this does he that never yet
saw the odiousness of Sin, and that is not heartily set against it, but
secretly retains and cherishes it. Can he rightly Remember Christ's death, who
sees no great need he stood in of it, nor is sensible of any great advantage
that comes to him by it, but rather thinks Christ might have kept his blood to
himself, and that it would be a disadvantage to him to attain the ends and
benefits of his bloodshed? And such wretched blasphemous thoughts in effect
has he that sees not his sad estate by reason of Sin, and that thinks it would
be to his loss to part with it. Wherefore since it evidently appears that true
Repentance is so absolutely necessary to qualify and fit a man for this
Ordinance, where it is to be renewed, and to which he must come with an humble
broken heart, let me desire thee to put the question to thy own heart, whether
thou know by experience what it is to repent of, and be truly humbled for
Sin? And that thou may the better know what I mean, let me ask thee, Did
thou ever yet seriously consider what thy condition is by nature, and by reason
of thy careless sinful life? And have thou found thy self sensibly affected
and stirred with this consideration, so that thou have been verily persuaded,
that thou art in thy self a lost creature, and except there be a way for mercy,
art like to perish for ever? And have thou been convinced that Sin is the cause
of all this misery and danger which thou art liable to? And have thou hereupon
heartily grieved for, and bewailed thy wretched miserable state? Have thou been
humbled for the Sin thou broughtst into the world with thee, and for all the
sins which thou know by thy self and can remember thou have at any time
committed? Have thou been careful to search into thy heart, and to look back
upon thy life past, that thou might find out what thy particular sins are,
that thou may confess them before God, and forsake them? And have thou
indeed been so sensible of the evil of Sin, chiefly as it is rebellion against
that God who made thee, and has sent his Son to Redeem, and Spirit to
Sanctify thee, and has daily given thee so many mercies to engage thee to
please him, have thou, I say, seen so much vileness and baseness in thy
dishonouring and provoking so good a God, that this consideration has melted
and broke thy heart, and wrought thee into a bitter hatred and loathing of
every known sin, so that thou have earnestly desired to be delivered from it
which is so odious in its self, and so mischievous to thee? And have thou been
therefore deliberately resolved by the help of God without any more delay, to
put away far from thee whatever is displeasing to God, and to return to him
from whom thou have fallen, and to an obedience to those Laws which thou have
violated and contemned. Examine thy self faithfully, whether thou have ever
experienced such a change of thy mind as this I have described, which may well
be called Repentance unto life. Or rather on the other hand, do thou not find
that thou art such a one still as ever thou wast; as earthly and carnal as
ever, as hard-hearted and stupid, and as mad of Sin as ever, and know not
what it means to have thy heart broken for thy offenses committed against the
great God of Heaven and Earth? Nay, it may be thou prid'st thy self in being of
the very same mind and disposition that thou art now, ever since thou can
remember. Thou art one that have always loved God, and believed in Christ, and
bore a good conscience toward all men; and then I fear all is little better
than stark naught with thee: for though there may be multitudes of good people
in times of light and having good education, that cannot distinctly tell, when
they were in a more especial manner wrought upon, and brought home to God, yet
few, if any, but can remember that once they were much worse than they are;
even that they were too like the rest of the world, but now they find they are
washed and cleansed. Perhaps when thou have sworn, or been drunk, or committed
any the like wickedness, thou could cry, God forgive me, and say thou art a
great sinner, but still go on, and remainest as bad as thou wast. If this
indeed be thy case, if thou art yet a mere stranger to this work of Christ upon
thy soul, who is exalted in (...) first place to give repentance, thou art at
present very unfit to drink of that Blood which was shed for, and which seals
the Remission of sins.

Now (that I may proceed in the method I promised, by directing to the
attainment of those graces which are wanting) in order to the breaking of thy
hard heart, and humbling thy soul for Sin, I might advise thee in the first
place to look back into thy heart and life, to find out thy particular sins,
not being content in the general to confess thy self a sinner, as all men
are: for this is not so likely much to work upon thee, but to fasten upon thy
most remarkable sins, and dwell upon and bewail them: and so all lesser evils,
and that body of death which thou carriest about thee continually, which was
born with thee, and is the ground of all the rest. In this method partly may
you find David's confession, Psalm. 51. at the beginning to the 5. verse.
Further I might direct thee earnestly to beg of God to open thy eyes, and show
thee what thy estate is, and discover to thee more of the evil of Sin, before
thou feel its sad effects when repentance will come too late. Moreover thou art
to use all other means appointed for the working of a true and saving sorrow
for Sin, as to observe what God speaks against it in his Word, and to attend
diligently to the most searching and awakening Preaching; and to be much
employed in those considerations that have a special tendency to the begetting
of this frame; and of this sort I might name several, as for instance, to
think frequently how great and gracious a God sin is committed against, and
what particular reasons thou have to serve and please him, from the mercies and
means thou enjoyest; think how he stands related to thee as thy Creator,
Preserver and Ruler, and therefore disobedience to him is most odious, impudent
and undutifull. Withal its good to consider how much hurt Sin does to the
soul, which is so excellent a Being, how it defiles, debaseth and disquiets it,
how it exposes the whole man to all kind of evils and sufferings here on
earth, and to everlasting torments hereafter, and deprives men of those
unspeakable joys which are to be had with and from God. But to avoid
tediousness I shall pass over these and many the like considerations, and
keeping to the Subject in hand shall rather direct thee to fetch matter for
humiliation and repentance from the Cross of Christ, the remembrance whereof
at the Sacrament should still keep up and renew thy godly sorrow. If then thou
art one who never yet saw any great hurt in Sin, but for all the ill
language which is given it, can quietly and lovingly entertain it, let me
beseech thee a while to fix thy thoughts upon a crucified Savior, and then
remain of this wretched opinion if thou can. Behold the Son of God become
Man, a most innocent holy person, whose whole life was spent in doing good, who
healed Diseases, cast out Devils, pitied all that were afflicted, taught the
ignorant, prayed and wept for poor Sinners: after all, behold this blessed
Jesus, who had never in all his life been guilty of the least sin in thought
word or deed, nor ever gave just cause of offense to any man living, behold him
I say, in the Garden a little before his crucifying, sorrowful even to the
death, in such a bitter agony that he sweat great drops or clots of blood; and
what inward pains and sorrows do thou think must those needs be, which put
him into such an unnatural sweat as this, though his patience was as much
greater than any mortal man's, as his sufferings themselves were: for we cannot
imagine that he who so calmly bore all those indignities and cruelties which
were offered and inflicted by insolent men, should be less patient in regard
of those sufferings which he underwent immediately from God, but we may
conclude that these were infinitely the greater. Then after this beginning of
sorrows, and after he had been most vilely abused and set at naught by the
Rulers, the chief Priests, the Soldiers and common people; after he had in a
jeer been clothed in a purple Robe, with a Crown of Thorns on his Head, and a
Reed in his Hand; after he had been laughed at, spit on, whipped and buffeted,
behold him brought forth to be stretched upon the Cross, where his enemies
stood gazing, shouting and wagging their heads at him; whilst his tender hands
and feet are struck through with nails that fasten him to the wood, and in his
soul he felt that pain which wrung from him that doleful complaint, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Now let me beg thee to dwell a while upon this
Subject with the reason and bowels of a man, and then tell me whethe^ in thy
Conscience thou think it was for a small matter that the Lord of Glory
underwent such gr^evous sufferings. What? was Christ so prodigal of his Blood
as to shed it for a trifle? or was God so cruel as to put his own dearly
beloved Son to all this smart for an inconsiderable thing? Certainly if thou
art a Christian thou can not harbor any such base thoughts. Well then, what
was it that put Christ to all this sorrow and shame and smart? Ah friend, it
was thy sin and mine, and the rest of the worlds that was the cause, and can
thou then imagine it an harmless thing? If thou doubt of what I say, hear the
plain word of God, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. Surely he has born our griefs and carried
our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed. All
we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also
suffered for us. ver. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the
tree. -- Gal. 3.13. And at the institution of his Supper he acquaints us that
his blood was shed for the remission of sins, Mat. 26.28. When Man had rebelled
against his Maker, and broke that Law which threatened destruction to him that
should break it, there was no other way that we are told of, but either he
himself must undergo the punishment he had deserved, or some one else on his
behalf. And therefore Man being spared, there was found no way for the
satisfaction and honor of offended justice, but by these sufferings which the
Lord Jesus our Surety underwent: who being so glorious a person, even the Son
of God made Man, he only being made a sacrifice for sin could condemn sin in
the flesh, discovering to all the world that sin was a most heinous evil, so
hateful and displeasing to the blessed Majesty, that he would not forgive to
any man the least iniquity without satisfaction made, and no other satisfaction
would he accept but the Death of Christ, who is become our propitiation, and
has made an atonement for us. And can there be possibly imagined any argument
of greater weight to bring all considerative persons to detest and forsake that
which has been found so mischievous? And give me leave to improve this
consideration in two or three particulars, that so it may be the clearlier
discerned, and the force of it more felt.

1. Methinks it may be great matter of humiliation to us, to think that we
should be so hainously guilty in departing from God, and living in rebellion
against him, that we could not by any means avoid his deserved wrath, but by
these bitter sufferings of the Lord Jesus. Certainly, Reader, had thou been
present when Christ was so abused by the cruel Jews and their Rulers, it would
have moved thee to compassion, if thou had only thought him innocent. But if
moreover thou had known he endured all that for thy sake, would it not have
affected thee much more? If thou had seen him spit upon, mocked, and stricken
with the palms of their hands, if thou had beheld the blood running down when
he was scourged, or heard his groanings in the Garden, or upon the Cross, and
then had thou^ht within thy self, all this is for my sake, this have I been
the cause of, would it not have moved and melted thy heart? If thou should
now see any of thy friends put to cruel tortures to free thee from them, would
it not make thy heart even bleed within thee? And why then may it not have the
same effect upon thee, to set a dying Christ before thy eyes, who as he became
poor for our sakes, that we through his poverty might be made rich, 3 Cor. 8.9.
So he was chastised that we might have peace, received stripes that we might
have healing, as in that forequoted 53. of Isaiah. But yet I remember what our
blessed Lord when he was going to suffer, said to the Women that followed him
weeping, Luke 23.28. Daughters of Jerusalem weep n^^ for me, but for your
selves and your children; so say I, poor sinners, weep not for Christ out of a
kind of pity to him, that he should unjustly (as to men) be put to so great
smart, but weep for your selves and your sins that were the cause. And this is
that I chiefly intend under this Head, that seeing Christ has bore such an
heavy load upon thy account, amongst the rest, thou may hence learn the true
nature and desert of sin, of thy own sins which thou art wont to make so light
of. Certainly the very torments of the damned do not more plainly discover the
evil of sin, and Gods hatred of it, than the sufferings of Christ do. For it
is evident, that the greatness of the punishment, where the Judge is knowing
and upright, is a plain argument of the greatness of the offense; if you
should see a man by the way hung up alive in chains, you would soon conclude it
was for murder, or some the most horrid wickedness, that he was so dealt
with. And as evident it is, that the worth and eminency of the person who is
punished speaks the offense proportionably of an higher nature. If we should
hear that a King who is both just and merciful, had caused his own Son's right
hand to be cut off, we might well conclude there was some more than ordinary
cause; but especially if he, being guiltless himself, had suffered this for
another man's sake, we should reasonably infer, that it was a crime of the
highest nature, for which was made so dear satisfaction. Now what must we think
when we see the Lord Jesus upon the Cross, who though he felt pain and sorrow
only as he was in our nature, yet was that nature so nearly united to the
Divine, that its said, God purchased his Church with his own blood, Acts 20.28.
so 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his
life for us, that is, Christ who was God as well as Man, laid, etc. the like,
to mention no more, we find, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. If then we consider one so far
advanced above men, laid so low; one holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners, suffering such grievous things, may we not in all reason conclude,
that the sin which caused this was out of measure sinful, for that is the worst
word that can be given it; its nature being so odious that nothing can be said
of it sufficient to express its vileness. Good Reader then let me persuade
thee to judge of sin by this evidence, and never more to hearken to thy own
flesh, or to the subtle Tempter, or thy foolish Companions, that would make the
believe there is no such hurt in those sins that please thee, that thou need'st
not be so careful to avoid them, or so deeply humbled for them: That Devil who
would persuade thee that it is such a matter of nothing to provoke God to
anger, knows and feels the contrary in himself. So much hurt as there is in a
Devil compared to an Angel, in hell compared to heaven, so much hurt he has
learnt there is in sin. Beware least thou come to learn it by such sad
experience thy self. But that I may finish this, let me once again ask thee,
whether thou dare say, that Christ underwent greater sufferings than he
needed to have done, in order to make satisfaction for our sins, or that God
laid on him more then in justice he ought when he was become our Surety? If
thou dare not affirm either of these, beware how thou mincest and lessenest
thy sins when thou should repent of, and bewail them: for by so doing thou
do in effect thus blaspheme God. Oh then let sin be called to the bar;
indict it for a murderer, as well thou may, accuse it as guilty of the
bloody death of the Lord of Life, show all the wounds and stabs that it gave
him; and see that thou pronounce sentence against it, even utter death without
any pity or remorse; and heartily lament thy own baseness, in having so long
given loving entertainment to such a monstrous murderer and traitor. And when
ever thou find'st any favorable thoughts of sin arising in thy breast, call to
mind what it did against Christ, and let that make thy heart rise against it,
and even boil with an holy hatred and desire of revenge. And let the frequent
remembrance of those streams of blood which thy sins fetched from him, open thy
eyes to shed streams of tears, or however work thy heart to an unfeigned sorrow
for all thy iniquities, for which thy Savior was thus wounded.

2. The next thing I would have have thee to enlarge thy meditations upon in
the sufferings of Christ, in order to the bringing of thee to a kindly
repentance, is that unspeakable love which is hereby manifested to the lost
sons of men: when I speak of Repentance, I mean not merely thy shedding of a
few tears, but an inward change of thy mind, as I before showed, that thou
should turn from Sin to the love of God; and I know not what can be more
likely to produce this, than to show thee the intolerable evil and mischief of
sin, that thou may turn from it, and the infinite goodness of God, that thou
may be drawn to him. Both these the Cross of Christ most admirably holds
forth, so that well might the Apostle call Christ crucified, the wisdom of
God, and the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. How it shows the evil of sin to
bring us to loath and leave it, I have already shown, and shall do more in two
following particulars. That which I would now set thy thoughts upon, is, the
inconceivable love of God in giving Christ for us, and of Christ in being
willing to lay down his life, that as many as believe in him might not perish,
but have everlasting life. Consider seriously how the great God has sent after
thee a poor worm, the God whom thou had sinned against makes thee offers of
peace, the God who needs thee not, yet appears desirous of thy happiness, when
he might have poured out everlasting wrath upon thee, he was willing to show
his compassion. And see what he has done in order to thy recovery. He has
sent his own Son made of a woman, made under the Law, and delivered him to
death for our offenses, and accepted of the satisfaction he has made on the
behalf of all, that shall by him come to that God from whom they are fallen: and
by his death not only pardon of sin, and deliverance from hell, but a glorious
Kingdom that shall never fade is purchased for all true Believers. So that here

1. Thou see plainly there is hope of pardon and acceptance upon thy hearty
sorrow for, and resolutions against sin. And whom would not this encourage to
come in, freely acknowledging and protesting against their former backslidings
and rebellions. If indeed thou wast past hope, it were as good keep thy sins
while thou may, and make thy best of them. But this is not yet thy case; and
if it hereafter should be, thou may thank thy own wilfulness. For Jesus
Christ has brought in a better hope: there is by him liberty proclaimed to the
captive, freedom to all that are bound, ease and rest to all that are
burdened, a pardon to all that are penitent. And what? will not this make thee
stir? Is a golden Scepter held forth, and will thou not lay hold of the
opportunity? Is God willing to put up all the affronts he has received from
thee, if thou will now come and submit thy self, and will not this bring thee
in? Is he ready to be reconciled, and art thou backward? what? do thou rather
hold off, because he does so invite and importune thee to him? Because he is
pleased with so much earnestness and compassion to call thee off from sin to
himself, do thou the more securely run on in wickedness? Oh base
ingratitude, and mere madness! Because there is hope of pardon discovered by
the Gospel, as procured by Christ, therefore, even therefore, do wretched
sinners harden their hearts, and embolden themselves to continue at a distance
from God, as if it was a matter of nothing to get their peace made with him, or
as if he must of necessity pardon and save them, let them live as they list.
Thus vilely do they pervert the very design of the Gospel. Whereas were they
ingenuous and reasonable, they would acknowledge it to be a most forcible
motive and engagement to cast away sin, to hear that there was hopes of having
forgiveness and favor from God. If a company of Subjects should rebel
against their Prince, what course would be more effectual in all probability
to reclaim them, than to assure pardon to all that would throw down their arms?
But if they should be so base as to abuse the mercy of their Prince, and think,
because he was so compassionate, they might the safelier persist in their
rebellion, it is but just they should be destroyed. If thou love thy soul, then
beware how thou abusest the grace of God. Will thou put away from thee the evil
of thy doings, wash thee and make the clean, and so with humility and
submission fly to God for mercy? if so, this mercy through Christ shall be
assuredly thine. But otherwise, know there is not a word of comfort for thee in
the whole Gospel, nothing but what may strike thee with terror. For remember
well, that the death of Christ gives all the encouragement in the world to
Repentance, but not the least to Sin. Yea, it has done more to destroy sin
than all the terrors and threatenings of the Law. Well then, though thou art a
lost sinner, departed from God, once without hope, yet behold the God of heaven
and earth takes pity on thee, he would not have thee utterly perish, though
thou have done so much to destroy thy self. He calls thee back to him, if thou will hearken and obey, and humble thy self before him for thy departure from
him, and for all the dishonours done to his holy Name, and wilt now at length
devote thy self to his fear, thou need'st not doubt of his favor. So then
here is hope of mercy that may encourage all that hear it to Repentance.

2. And in the next place there is so much love and goodness manifested in
that way whereby this mercy is procured and tendered, that may serve to work
upon the hearts of all but flat Infidels, or brutish sinners that will not be
brought so much as once to consider of it, or seriously regard it. Here is love
that passes the full comprehension of Men or Angels. Here are mysteries and
unsearchable treasures of goodness. Wherein could God commend his love more to
the fallen World, than in giving his Son to die for us when we were without help?
And what greater love can be shown than that which Christ has manifested in
laying down his life for his friends? nay for enemies, that they might be made
friends; for the ungodly that he might reconcile them to God. Vile wretches
that we are, no more to be affected with this amazing discovery of divine
bounty! Its true indeed, there are many things we are yet ignorant of, which
makes this love the less apprehended in its due dimensions. Did we know more
the infinite Majesty of God, and our meannesse compared to him, and how
provoking a thing Sin is, and how contrary to his nature; did we know more what
strange condescension there was in God's manifesting himself in flesh, what
bitter things our blessed Savior endured for our sakes; did we know the
greatness of that misery he has saved Believers from, and of the glory he
has prepared for them, did we clearly know these and all other heightning
circumstances, our admiration and astonishment would be unexpressible, as it
will be when they are more fully revealed to us. But though at present we ^re
much in the dark, yet so much of them we know, that would we duly ponder them,
we should even amazed cry out, oh the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
goodness of God! And what? will not this prevail with thee, oh backsliding
sinner, to deal ingenuously and dutifully with that God, who has revealed such
abundant mercies to win thee to himself? when thou had undone thy self, and
the Law which thou had broke had past its sentence upon thee, when thou
might justly have expected the execution, behold, without thy seeking, a
gracious reprieve. And more than so, when thou might have had a Pursuivant
speedily dispatched to hurry thee to deserved torment, behold a Savior
interposing to prevent thy ruin. Instead of an unchangeable doom, behold an
Act of oblivion, assuring pardon upon easy conditions. Do but deliberately
weigh these things with that seriousness which becomes a man, and see if there
be nothing in them that may persuade thee to a sound repentance for sin, and a
speedy return to the God of love. What do thou think, if thou wast a mean
Tenant, and had wilfully, in some discontended fit, plucked down the House
thou liv'st in, and so wast in danger to lie in the open fields, and to be
severely punished as thou had deserved; what now if after all this, thy
Landlord, pitying the misery thou had brought thy self to, should courteously
come to thee, and offer to build up thy House again in a more sumptuous manner
than ever, and set it at a lower Rent, only requiring thee to confess thy
former folly, and promise to be so guilty no more, but to live thy new-built
House, and do thy best to keep it in repair, and to accept of his help for
what thou could not do thy self; and suppose he should even impoverish his
own children through this courtesy to thee, what do thou think thou
should now do in this case? is it any hard matter to determine? would
thou not think he d^served to be taken for a madman that should stand
justifying his former offense, and would not thankfully accept these courteous
offers? I dare say, Reader, if this was thy case, thou art not so foolish or
stubborn, but thou would quickly resolve what to do, and this mercy and
bounty of thy Landlord would even win thy heart for ever, and thou would
think thou could never be sufficiently thankful for his kindness, nor do
enough to make him amends. And would indeed the gentleness and liberality of a
man, thy fellow creature, thus affect thee, and shall not the loving kindness
of God, which has appeared in Jesus Christ, have much more power upon thee?
Do thou not believe that our God has done as much to engage his creatures to
himself as this comes to? Has not he shown as much pity and tenderness to the
souls of men as that would be to the body? If thou doubt it, look back upon the
state of man, and consider Gods gracious dealings with him. Did not he by his
own folly and disobedience cast himself out of Paradise, and by wilful sin
deface, and even destroy the workmanship of God? And yet did not God take pity
on us in our blood, when we were cast forth to the loathing of our persons? Did
not he contrive the way for our reconciliation to himself, and beseech us to
accept of it? And do we not read, that in order to our enriching the Son of
God did as it were impoverish himself, and that we might be filled with the
fullness of God, emptied himself, and became of no reputation. And what an
heart must that prodigal Son have, who will not be affected with the kindness
of his Father, who takes care for, and seeks after him, when he had foolishly
forsaken his Family, and done what he could to put himself out of his Fathers
care? And is courteously entreated to return back to that comfortable ^tate and
relation whence he had banished himself, and upon condition of his return sees
another better estate provided for him, instead of that he has wasted; and
finds his arms opened to embrace him, against whom he had lift up his hand.
Methinks if thou believ'st that God has shown such love to man, it cannot but
have some force upon thee, to bring thee back again to him from whom thou have
run away, and so long kept at a distance; and must needs prevail with thee to
cast away with grief and shame whatever is displeasing to him, and does
estrange thee from him. And except thou be an unreasonable Infidel, thou can
not but believe it; for it is plainly revealed in Gods holy Word; where also we
find the greatness of this love inculcated, in Gods having regard to us, and
first looking after us, when we took no thought for our selves how to get his
favor, 1 John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved
us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. Romans 5.6, 8. For when
we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. God
commends his love toward us, in that whilst we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us. And as Christ died to bring us to God, so the consideration of this
love should dr^w us to him. By this mercy chiefly we are engaged to offer up
our selves a living sacrifice to God, which is our reasonable service. Judge
thy self, is it not most reasonable, that we should give up our selves to that
^od, who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, and with him
freely gives all good things to his people? Can thou then find in thy heart
to go on in provoking so good a God, and in sleighting such matchless love? If
thou can, certainly thou have banished all gratitude, and have scarce one
spark of common ingenuity left in thee, yea, thou have put off thy manhood, and
art become little better than a senseless bruit: for what should sooner work
upon a reasonable creature to love another, than extraordinary and
undeserved-kindnesse which he has received from him? Nay, I might go farther,
and tell thee, and that justly too, the very beasts themselves have more good
nature than such a stupid, unthankful sinner as thou: For they have some sense
of a good turn, and some love to those that do it: they know those that feed
them and keep them, and use not to do them any mischief. The Dog does not use
to bite his Master, nor the Horse to kick at him that looks to him. And so
indeed God himself complains of ungrateful men, that when the Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his masters crib, yet they did not know their Maker and
Preserver. But to be short, let me tell the plainly, if thou find'st thy heart
nothing moved with all this love that God has revealed, in sending Christ to
save us from wrath to come, by his own sharp sufferings, I can no way see but
that thy case is full as bad, yea rather worse than his, who believes not a
word of all I have said. Nay, how indeed can it be imagined that thou believe
these things, if they make no impression upon thee? except thou never use to
think of them after thou have read or heard them: but there is the wonder if
thou do believe them, how thou can choose but think on them, and think
again, till at length they work some good effect upon thee. But if thou have
hitherto been so strangely careless, let me once again desire thee now at
length to set upon the sober thoughts of this unconceivable mercy manifested in
the Gospel, that when thou had even destroyed thy self, God should make haste
to thy help; that he should send his own Son to undertake for thee, who was
also willing to this work, and should upon him punish thy sins, and now after
all only calls thee to cast away thy sin, and to return to his love; which if
thou will do, he is willing to be reconciled to thee. And see if there be not
good cause that thou should hearken to these invitations, and whether there
can be given any just or tolerable excuse for thy disobedience. If the
bitterest enemy thou had in the world should but save thy life when it was in
his hands, much more if he should endanger himself, or undergo any loss for
thy safety, I am confident this would soon take off thy spleen against him, and
make thee very ready to be restored to his friendship. And why the goodness of
God should not be as prevalent with thee I cannot imagine, if it be but soundly
believed, and well thought on.

3. I may farther add, to engage thee to return to the Lord, from whom thou
a^t fallen, another argument drawn also from the goodness of God, shown in the
death of Christ, as hereby it is most clearly discoverd, That there is some
unspeakable happiness which was purchased by the Lord Jesus for those that come
to God by him, and to which he invites empty miserable creatures. Thou can
not imagine that God makes all this ado with men for nothing. It was not upon
any trivial errand that he sent his Son into the world; nor are they any
slight inconsiderable things which he offers to as many as will receive him.
Its true, the mercy had been rich and glorious, if Christ had only died to
save us from misery, and to have procured of God, that we might have been
reduced to nothing rather, than to fry in everlasting burnings: and no tongue
can tell what a privilege the damned in hell would account this. But over and
above we read of a Kingdom of glory which Christ will give to his followers.
And how great this is, judge by the price that was paid for it; not silver or
gold, or any such corruptible trifles, but the precious Blood of the Son of God
without price, whose utmost value cannot be expressed by Men or Angels; and no
more can the glory hereby obtained. For if the Merchant be wise, the worth of
his Jewel may be guest at by the price that he paid for it. Precious is the
Soul of Man, and full dear did the redemption thereof cost, more than the the
whole world, or ten thousand such worlds as this: And is not, think you, the
souls portion answerable to its own excellency? And the purchased Possession
answerable to the greatness of that cost that was laid out for it? When a
common Slave may be freed for a few shillings, half a Kingdom will be thought
little enough to redeem a captive Prince: and we afterward see there is as much
difference betwixt them when they have got their liberty, the one sits on a
dunghill, the other on a throne. For certain then Christ Jesus came into the
world, and laid down his life to exalt those that hearken to him, to the
highest joy and bliss of which the nature of man is capable, in delivering
them from all sin, rendering them exactly conformable to God, and placing them
in constant full communion with him. He that so loved his Church that he gave
himself for it, to sanctify and cleanse it, by all this designed to present it
^o himself a glorious Church. Upon this account therefore methinks thou
should easily be persuaded to cast away sin, which is thy misery, and return
to God, who is thy only life and happiness, and that no mean happiness, as I
have told thee, is evident, amongst many other reasons. by the infinite value
of the price that was given for it. Oh little do any, even the best and wisest
on earth, conceive what are the full fruits of Christ's blood; what miracles of
divine love those are, which through endless millions of ages will keep alive
the admiration, joy and praise of Angels and Saints; and fill the mouths of
Christ's Redeemed ones with continual thankfulness, for that wisdom and mercy
which contrived and wrought their delivery and exaltation. So that you see,
laying these things together, the death of Christ, as discovering the mercy of
God, lays the greatest engagement that can be upon the sons of men, to break
off their sins, and return to the obedience and love of God: in that there is
so much mercy procured and tendered as may beget hope, and encourage to
repentance, which is not like to be rejected; and as there is so great love
expressed, as may well call for the return of love, and even soften the most
stony heart; and as it discovers so great a blessedness to be had in God
through Christ, as may prevail with all that love themselves, to make out after
it, and depart from sin, which alone can keep them from it. And that is the
second Consideration which the Death of Christ helps us to, in order to the
working of a kindly Repentance, namely the great goodness of God hereby
revealed to poor sinners.

3. From all that has been said, will more clearly appear the heinous nature
of sin, as a farther motive to Repentance, in that it is a contradiction to all
this love of God, and an undervaluing of the greatest mercy that was ever
bestowed upon the world, being in effect, a trampling under foot of the blood
of the Lord Jesus, whereby we should be sanctified. And hereby I mean those
sins which have been committed since men heard of the Gospel. For as the evil
of sin did appear in the greatness of those sufferings which Christ underwent
to procure a pardon, so these his sufferings do exceedingly aggravate their
sins, who have continued in them, after they have been told again and again
what their Savior has done to make satisfaction for them, if they would not
undervalue and despise it. Oh how have you made a shift so often to hear and
read of the life and death of Christ and yet have done all that in you lies to
cross the end of his coming into the world, and to make his Death of none
effect to you, whilst yet you pretend to believe that his design was wholly for
your good? Oh unthankful wretches, to make such a requital for such
unvaluable love! As if you studied how you might most dishonor and displease
him, who thought not his own life too dear to lay down for you. Could you see
him upon the Cross wounded, torn, and bruised for your sakes, and could you
think of no other recompense but to give him fresh wounds by your wilful sins?
Did he once despise the shame and endure the cross for you, and could you find
in your hearts again to put him to an open shame, and as it were crucify him
afresh? Did he indeed deserve such dealing as this at your hands? Bethink thy
self, Reader, whether this has not been thy case. Have thou not lived in those
sins which Christ died to deliver thee from. And what have thou thereby done
less than proclaim, That there is more to be got by thy lusts than by thy
Savior, that its better to remain in thy polluted corrupt estate, than to be
washed in the blood of Christ, whereby our consciences are purged from dead
works to serve the living God? And did they vilify Christ more, that contemned
him, jeered him, and put him to death? If thou take thy fleshly pleasures, and
worldly profits, to be of greater advantage than any thing that can accrue to
thee by Christ's Death, do thou not think as basely of him as any of his
Crucifiers did: And had thou been there with this frame of heart, is is not
most likely thou would have joined with them, what ever thou may now
think? As they hated Christ because he told them the truth, and reproved them
for sin, and therefore did all they could, to rid themselves of one whose
preaching and presence was such a burden to them, so do thou appear in effect
an hater of Christ, his life and doctrine, whilst thou walk so flatly
contrary thereto. And what is this less than desiring that there was no God nor
Christ to govern and judge thee, no such Rule as the Gospel to be thy guide.
Nay, let me tell thee, thou who have professed thy self a Christian, and yet have
behaved thy self thus unworthily toward Christ, thou art herein more guilty
than the Jews themselves: for what they did was very much out of ignorance, but
thou, after thou have known that he is the Son of God, and that he laid down
his life for our sins, have manifested all thy contempt of him, and rejected
him from being thy Savior, whilst thou would not be saved by him from thy
reigning lusts, which thou have loved more than him, as Judas loved the money
for which he was hired to betray him. After thou have known of that friendship
which by the Cross of Christ was shown to the ruined world, yet thou have been
an enemy to this cross, whilst thou have made thy belly thy God, and minded
earthly things; whilst thou have delightfully lived in the practice of any
known sin. What then, were the Jews pricked to the heart when they were
convinced that they had crucified, that Jesus, whom God had made Lord and
Christ? and shall it not have the same effect on thee, to consider thou have
been guilty in some sort of the same wickedness, and have shown forth the very
same spirit that was in them? For think not thy self more blameless, because
thou never saw Christ, nor had any hand in his Death, nor did join with
his enemies in accusing, condemning and reproaching him, but criest out against
them as monsters of men, that persecuted the most spotless Innocence with such
savage fierceness: for all this while, thy guilt may be as great as theirs,
whilst thou have as great an enmity against the image of Christ, and the Law of
Christ as they had against his person. And that thou do not wound him, and
spit in his face, is not from the goodness of thy nature, but because he is
out of thy reach: for were he now before thee, and could it gratify thy lusts
so to deal with him, its much to be feared thou would not stick at it.
Whilst the Pharisees condemned their forefathers for killing the Prophets,
they followed them in the very same sin. And suppose a Father had two Sons, the
one at man's estate, the other an infant, and the elder of these by following
wicked courses should break his Fathers heart, and occasion his death: and the
younger when he was grown up should lead the very same life that the other did,
but yet should take on him very much to condemn his Brother for being so
disobedient and hard-hearted; as to bring his Father to the grave: is it not
plain for all this, that had he been in his Brothers stead he would have done
the same that he did? since he also takes those courses which were so grievous
to his Father. Thus it is to be remembered that Sin was that which put Christ to
death as well as the Jews, and this Sin is it thou love, though thou seem
to hate them. And as those Jews put his body to pain by their cruelties, so
do thou grieve his Spirit by thy wickedness. And know, he takes it as
hainously from thee, that thou should thus displease him, as he did from
them that they should persecute him to the death. Nor art thou like to get a
pardon at any easier rates than they, even no other way, than looking on him
whom thou by thy sins have pierced, and bitterly mourning for this thy
bloodinesse and ingratitude. What say thou then after all this? can thou
without tears and groans look back upon all the disorders of thy life, whereby
thou have done all that in thee lay, to make those wounds of thy tender
compassionate Savior bleed afresh, which he first received upon thy account? I
believe thou thought not of this: no, if thou had, one would think thou
could never have done it. Thy design was only to please thy flesh by all
thy sensual courses; thou wast only full of projects to maintain and raise
thy self and thy posterity by all thy worldly designs and businesses, wherewith
through thy whole life though have been so swallowed up. But thou see how the
case stands; that this while thou have been most viley rejecting, and even
trampling upon the Lord Jesus, who would have have brought thee off from thy
vain conversation, from all thy ungodliness and worldly lusts, and has
followed thee with his Word and Spirit to that end, and has pressed thee with
arguments drawn from his matchless love, discovered by his Death, and has
besought thee to regard him, yea to take pity on thy self, but thou have made
light of all, and have gone on as securely and quietly in the ways of sin, as
if thou had never heard what sin did upon Christ. And what? art thou resolved
to do so still? shall nothing stop thee in thy career? will thou not stay to
hearken what a way it is thou walk in? nor think what unvaluable mercies
thou all this while treadest under feet? Have thou not yet sufficiently abused
thy Redeemers love and patience? have thou not made him wait long enough in
vain? will thou still make show of deafness to all those messages he sends
thee? If so, yet be thou sure of this, thou shall not be able to say at thy
appearance before him, that thou never knew that sin was such an evil thing,
and so provoking to him: for beside all other warnings that thou have had, I
now declare to thee who read or hear these words, that if thou still
continuest in thy loose ungodly life, living in swearing, cursing,
drunkenness, whoredom, covetousness, cozening, malice, or any other known
sin, and wilfully neglectest thy duty to God, going whole days without prayer
or reading Gods Word, profaning the Lords Day, neglecting Sacraments, if thou
hold on this course, thou do no better than again crucify and deny the Lord
that bought thee, and so have no reason to complain, if thou fall under the
same condemnation, which thou thy self wilt acknowledge, Judas and Pilate, and
the rest of Christ's enemies deserve: and therefore that thou may not be found
amongst them, loaded with the same guilt at Judgment, I do once again in the
name of Christ beseech thee with all speed to change thy heart and life, and
use all means appointed to that end, and after all thy wanderings, now at length
return to him the good Shepherd of souls, who laid down his life for his sheep.

4. Lastly, the Death of Christ may powerfully move thee to repent of, and
forsake all sin, as it holds forth this weighty, but sad truth, That all those
who are despisers of this Death, and by living and dying in their sins reap no
saving benefit by it, shall in their own persons undergo insupportable torments
for this their unbelief and wilful impenitence. If thou believe the Gospel,
thou can not but acknowledge, that all men had been in a most miserable
condition if Christ had not died; and thou will grant that sin is a most
perilous mischievous thing, and an unspeakable provocation to the most holy
God, since nothing could appease his wrath but the Death of Christ, without
whose bloodshed we had obtained no remission: And what then do thou think is
like to be thy case, if through thy own fault, thou art never the better for
all Christ has done, but must thy self answer for thy sins, and bear the
punishment they have deserved? Let the Death of Christ, I say, instruct thee
what thou art like to expect if this be thy condition. If, as he himself
speaks, such things were done to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry?
If he who was without the least stain of original or actual sin drank such a
bitter cup, when he stood in our stead, what will be the portion of their cup,
who, being poor frail creatures, must make satisfaction for their own sins? How
will they ever (...) up under all the load of Gods hottest wrath, when he shall
meet them in judgment, and cause his fury to rest upon them? And above all,
thy impenitent, obstinate continuance in sin, and contempt of Christ, will lie
heaviest upon thee in the day of vengeance. These sins aganst the Gospel,
against mercy, the greatest and freest mercy are most provoking to God, most
inexcusable in themselves, and will therefore prove most pernicious to sinners.
Methinks then, if thou had but any regard to thy self, to thy own ease and
comfort, this should make thee out of love with sin, to consider how dear its
like to cost thee, how pleasant soever it may now seem. It was not for nothing
that Christ felt so much sorrow and pain, as thou shall know to thy everlasting
woe, if thou pluck the heavy judgments of God on thy own head, by sleighting
him who would have kept them from off thee. Assure thy self, poor sinner, as
bold and confident as now thou art, thou will never be able to contest with
that wrath, which exercised even the strength of Christ to bear it; thou art
never like to go away lightly with that which he felt so heavy. For shame at
length leave thy foolish plea, that God will be more merciful than to torment
his creatures: for have thou not seen how he bruised his own Son, who never
offended him, how he bruised him, I say, for our iniquities, and will he then
spare thee, who in thy own person have been a most stubborn, hard-hearted
rebel, and have cast away with loathing the mercies that were again and again
even pressed upon thee? Thou have no reason for such fond expectations. What?
will thou tell Christ at Judgment, that thou did not believe that ever God
would be so severe, as to punish thee so dreadfully and everlastingly as his
Word threatened? and that therefore thou took'st somewhat more liberty in thy
life than he allowed thee? Dare thou come with such a plea as this? But if
thou should, what will thou answer to Christ; when he shall lay open, what
he underwent for thy sake, and how thou made light of his love? will not this
soon silence thee? If he ask thee whether thou had not evidence and proof
enough of the evil and danger that was in sin, by his suffering so much for
others transgressions, will thou have any pretense left to justify thy self? I
may perhaps urge this consideration, but I mention it now as offered to us by
the sufferings of Christ, which do most plainly declare, that doleful are the
miseries prepared for those who get no good by him, but die in their sins:
which may bring all that are not in love with damnation, out of love with that
sin which will at length plunge them into it. And thus you see how many motives
to true Repentance are afforded us from the serious meditation on the Cross and
Passion of Christ: as this discovers to us the heinous nature of sin; and as
there is such mercy and love hereby revealed, as may work upon, and reclaim all
that are ingenuous, grateful, or wise for themselves; and as this makes sin
more monstrously vile which shall be committed against such mercy; and as it
shows that all men living in sin, dying out of Christ, are like to undergo
unsufferable torments for their obstinacy. And thus I have finished the second
qualification which is necessary to all worthy Commucants, to wit, True
Repentance, an unfeigned sorrow for, a detestation of, and a turning from all
wilful sin in heart and life.

CHAP. IV. III. A right remembering the great end of the Death of Christ to
Redeem us from all iniquity and sanctify us. Of Faith and Covenanting with
Christ.
IT must needs be, that if we rightly Remember the Death of Christ in the
Sacrament, we must then Remember to what end and purpose this was: and this we
shall plainly find in Scripture to be, that he might Redeem man from that
sinful miserable state he was fallen into, and restore him to a state of
holiness and happiness in the enjoyment of God from whom he was fallen. So 1
Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God. Ephesians. 2.16, 17, 18. Heb. 7.25. And this
is the meaning of all those places which speak of the Redemption we have
obtained by Christ, if we take it in its largest signification. And to this
purpose he offers himself to men to be their Redeemer, to confer upon them
the pardon of their sin, and give them victory over all their corruptions, and
the temptations of Satan, and to lead them by his Spirit through this dangerous
world, till he shall bring them with triumph into the kingdom of the Father.
Now hence it follows, that no man can Remember Christ as he ought, who will not
receive him to these ends and purposes for which he offers himself, which is
our believing in him. For is he a fit man to celebrate Christ's Remembrance who
has no love for him, nor any liking to his undertaking, nor will be persuaded
to comply therewith? And such are all they who reject him and the tenders of
his mercy, except they might have them in their own way, and that do flatly
contradict his design in becoming our Mediator by continuing still in their
natural corrupt estate, alienated from God, and liable to his wrath: that is,
who are unbelievers. So that here I mean no more than, That without Faith in
Christ we cannot rightly Remember him, without we so believe that he is the
only Savior of mankind, that we resolve he, and none but he, shall be our
Savior in the way that he himself thinks fit. But to make it yet plainer, how
unfit all such rejecters of Christ are to come to this holy Supper, consider
that our receiving of the Sacrament is appointed to be on our part, as a token
and sign of our making and renewing our Covenant with God in Christ, in which
if we be sincere, then it is a seal on Gods part, of his being in Covenant with
us; a confi^mation of our belief, that he will be our God, and fulfill all his
promises to us; and herein he gives us an earnest and pledge of the future
blessings which we shall receive from him through his Son, as I shall show
under the next Head. Does it not then hence appear, that all those who will not
be held in any such Covenant, are most unfit persons to come to this Sacrament;
the very design of our coming to which, is to show that we are a people in
Covenant with God: and by this solemn action, taking and eating the Bread, and
drinking the Wine, we are to testify that we are so, and do hereby bind our
selves so to remain. What would this be, but with much formality to mock that
God who will not be mocked, and even to run upon our own damnation, provoking
the Lord to destroy those, who so impudently take his name in vain. By this
practice men are guilty of a downright lie, yea, of grossest perjury: for
Christ in effect says, All you, and you only that take me for your Lord and
Savior, come and partake of this Feast which I have appointed in remembrance
of the Redemption I have wrought for you, and yet multitudes who will not take
him for their Lord to rule over them, nor will be saved from their sins by him,
thrust in and partake of this Supper. This is just, as if a General of an Army,
having a mind to single out some of his Soldiers for some design, should say,
All you that are willing to go along with me, hold up your hands, and yet many
should hold up their hands who refuse to go: what would this be but to befool
themselves and abuse their Leader? Or, as if at the first appointment of the
Passover it had been commanded that they, and they only should eat of the
Paschal Lamb who would go out of Egypt into Canaan under the conduct of Moses:
and yet many of the Israelites should prepare and eat it, either because they
were hungry, or because they would do as the rest did, without ever thinking
what was the meaning of this action, or what they hereby engaged themselves to,
being resolved still to continue in Egypt, neither caring for Moses, nor the
Canaan which he should lead them to. Thus when Christ commands, that all those
who will depart out of the Egyptian bondage they are in to sin and Satan, and
be guided by him through the wilderness of this World till they come to the
heavenly Canaan, that they should appear at a Feast which he has made on
purpose to entertain them, there throng in others to this Table who have no
right to eat thereat, as having no resolutions to leave their sin, and thus to
follow Christ, who would lead them to glory. These are the men that are found
without their wedding garment, whom the Master of the Feast will draw out from
amongst the rest, and dispose of them to a place and company more suitable for
them, as you may read, Mat. 22.10, 11, 12, 13. So that I hope you see that its
a most unsuitable and unlawful thing for any man to address himself to this
Ordinance, who is not heartily in Covenant with God, since herein he professes
himself to be so, and therefore if he be not, he will be found a liar both to
God and Man.

But since this is made by some the very nature and design of the Lord's Supper
to be a Foederal rite, or an action testifying and confirming a Covenant
betwixt God and man, as in the Eastern and other Countries they were wont to
ratify their Leagues by feasting together, and as they who eat of the
sacrifices offered to Devils, therereby had fellowship with Devils, as the Jews
by eating of their sacrifices held communion with, and professed subjection to
God, as you may see them paralleld, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. since I say,
this is on man's part a sign of his being in covenant with God; I shall somewhat
fuller explain what this Covenant is, that you may understand whether you are
cordially entered thereinto, and are willing to continue in it, that so you may
know whether you are like to be entertained as worthy guests at the Lords
Table, which is proper to his Vovenant People.

In a word then, the Covenant which we renew at the Lords Supper, is the very
same with that you were entered into in Baptism, when you were baptized in the
Name of, and thereby engaged to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and therefore
to those duties which we owe to God in the several relations wherein he stands
to us, which are denoted by the Persons of the sacred Trinity: That is, we are
hereby obliged to acknowledge God the Father to be our Creator and Preserver,
and therefore to behave our selves as his creatures ought, submitting our
selves to his Commands and Providence, and placing our happiness in pleasing
him and enjoying his love; God the Son made man, that is Jesus Christ, we are
hereby bound to take for our only Savior, through whom alone we hope for the
pardon of our offenses, and for ability to serve and please God, and for
acceptance and happiness with him; And God the Holy Ghost we promise to take
for our Sanctifier; to have our souls by him renewed after the Image of God,
and those graces given into us which were purchased for us by Christ, and the
evidences of Gods love, and of our title to the future blessedness to be
cleared up, and assured to our consciences; the Holy Word also which he
inspired the Prophets and Apostles to write, we are hereby engaged to take for
the Rule of our faith and life. And this is your entering in^o Covenant with,
and being consecrated to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: which does
necessarily suppose and include our renouncing the flesh, the world, and the
Devil, which is in effect the same with Repentance for sin, which I spoke to
largely under the last Head: For he who is truly humbled for and resolved to
forsake sin, does hereby renounce his flesh which is pleased with sin, and will
not make carnal self his chief end, and he also renounceth the world which is
the fuel and food of his lusts, all that wherewith the carnal part is
gratified as matters of pleasure, profit, honor, and the like, not regarding
them as means to his happiness; and he renounceth the Devil, who, by
temptations drawn from these wordly things, would entice him to sin, and that
wicked nature also which does the office of a Tempter within him. All you then
who have been baptized into the Christian Faith, are thereby bound to take God
for your Supreme Governor and chief Happiness, and Jesus Christ for your
Mediator and way to the Father, and the Holy Spirit for your Sanctifier and
Guide. And since you were Infants when you thus were first dedicated to God, it
behooves you that are now come to the use of reason, and are resolved by the
grace of God to be steadfast in this holy Covenant, to come to the Lords Table
and there profess these resolutions, and by the receiving of this Sacrament in
the presence of the heart-searching God, and all your Fellow Christians, to
renew your engagement that you will take God for your God, and that you will be
his people. Since then it is so plain that they, and they only are worthy
Communicants, who have in heart made this covenant with God in Christ, which
they are to profess, solemnize and confirm, by eating and drinking the
Sacramental bread and wine; it remains that all, who would not venture upon
damnation by doing this unworthily, ought to enter into a faithful examination
of themselves, whether indeed this be their condition and frame of heart, or
not. And let me beseech thee, Reader, faithfully to set upon this Work, as a
business of the greatest concernment that ever thou had to do in thy life,
namely, to see that thou art sincerely in covenant with God through his Son;
for this is the very heart and substance of Religion, the sum of all
Christianity, and that upon which thy everlasting happiness wholly depends;
Know but this once, and thou may know that Heaven will be thy portion
should thou dye at this hour.

And here that I may do what in me lies to help thee to the true knowledge of
thy self, let me first advise thee to look carefully into thy own heart, for
that is thy surest way, if thou art but well acquainted with the workings
thereof, and wilt deal impartially. And in this searching into the state and
temper of thy Soul, I would wish thee to put these questions to thy self which
I shall ask thee, and to give in a true answer.

I demand of thee then, what is that great good on which thou have placed thy
highest love? the obtaining of which thou have made the great business of thy
life, and which if thou could but attain to, thou believe thou should be
satisfied and made perfectly happy? Can thou say, and that truly, that God
has the upmost place in thy heart, that his Authority swaies thee most, and
that, for the main, all things that concern thee are regarded but in order to
him? Do thou make it thy principal study and trade to please him? And do
thou count of nothing as fit to make thee a portion but his everlasting love?
If it be thus with thee, then thou may safely conclude that indeed thou have
made God thy chief end. But enquire diligently whether it be not quite
otherwise, and whether thou have not set up thy self in a distinction from God,
becoming thy own Idol? Art thou not possessed with high thoughts of thy self?
loving and admiring thy self separate from him who gave thee thy being? Its
true, the man who is most heartily devoted to God has the greatest love and
veneration of himself, but it is as he is Gods creature; and it is his soul
which has his highest esteem; and he seeks his happiness by subjecting
himself to God, and therefore preferres, adores and admires God infinitely
above himself, regarding himself in and for God, accounting it the end of his
being to serve his Makers will, and desiring no other felicity, than the
feeling of that love of God which he manifests to all such humble obedient
ones. But the carnal man, though he may have some reverence for God; and may
yield him some tribute of service, some prayers, some praises, and some
subjection, yet all this is but in order to his carnal self, for the procuring
for it, such things as cannot be had without God; so that God is regarded but
as a means to Self, and with a respect hereto is all his service of God, for
the manner and measures of it, framed and limited. Thus may the covetous man,
whose chief end is to enrich himself, pray to God for riches, praise him for
riches, be so far just and charitable as he thinks may forward his thriving;
yea he may be in all things so far religious as hinders not his chief end, but
let this once come in competition with any duty to God, so that by serving him
he should impoverish himself, you shall soon perceive what is his God, and what
rules him most, as you have an example in the young man that came to Christ,
Mat. 19.21, 22. wherefore examine, I say, whether thou art not a lover of thy
self more than God. Does not thy own will and fancy ordinarily guide thee in
thy actions and affairs? and is not that course taken which most conduces to
the interest of thy flesh? should thou not then account thy self well enough
provided for, if thou wast but completely furnished with all that in the world,
which tends to the accomplishing and gratifying of man as he is an inhabitant
of the earth? And is not thy labor most for, thy desire after, thy delight in
such things as tend to the pleasing and advancing thy self in the world? Have
thou not been most taken up in making provisions for thy flesh, thinking with
thy self, that to be happy, was to live a merry life, and take thy ease and
pleasure; or else to get more money than thy neighbors, and to have more
respect and esteem, that wherever thou go thou may be praised and admired?
Have thou not taken those for the happiest men that have the greatest share of
these things? and have thou not therefore envied them? and hated them if they
have stood in thy way and kept thee from the like? Reader, what says thy
conscience to this? Do but hearken and it will speak plain, and tell the
truth. Sure thou can not but know what thou make the great end of thy life,
what it is for that thou desire to stay in the world; what thou risest for
every morning, and for what thou go into this company and that, and take
all thy journeys, and wholly employest thy hands and head. All this is either
for God or for carnal Self principally: for there cannot be two chief ends.
And if thou art one that live to, and idolizest thy self, for shame take not
on thee to love God above all as thou usest to do: for indeed thou do not
truly and properly take him to be God, nor thy God.

Again, let me ask thee, have thou ever found in thy soul powerful and
prevalent convictions, that thou have no way to attain true happiness, nor to
escape misery but by the Lord Jesus Christ? And have thou thereupon heartily
consented to his offers, and to the conditions he has appointed for the saving
of thy soul, being willing to be taught and governed by him, only hoping for
pardon of sin, grace and glory, to be given to thee by God through him, and for
his sake? Put the question to thy own heart, did thou ever yet see an
absolute necessity of Christ, so that thou took'st thy self for an undone
creature without him? And has thy soul been kindly and thankfully affected
with this amazing mystery of love, that God has shown to poor helpless
sinners through his Son? Has it warmed and rejoiced thy heart to consider it?
Thus in some good measure will it be with thee, if thou art a true believer in
Christ. And this depends upon the former: for if thou have taken the
everlasting enjoyment of God for thy chief happiness, thou will then be ready
to comply with that way which leads to this end: and that is only showed to us
in and by Christ, who is himself the way to the Father, and none can come to
God but by him. And when thou art once thoroughly persuaded of this, thou can
not but willingly resign thy self to him, consenting to be saved by him on what
terms, and in what way he shall appoint and prescribe to thee: and this firm
and prevalent consent of thy soul is true and saving faith, to which the pardon
of sins and everlasting life is promised. This is coming to Christ, receiving
him; and several other way it is expressed in Scripture, but most commonly called
our believing in him, which includes in it, our trusting to him for all mercy,
our harkening to his teachings, and our resolution sincerely to obey his
commands, and imitate his example. Examine thy self well then, whether thou
have such a sound faith wrought in thee or not. Have thou not rather contented
thy self with a sluggish, unfruitful belief, that Christ is the Savior of the
world, without ever minding thy own particular need which thou stand'st in of
him? nor ever making enquiry what he would have thee do to be saved? Have not
thy eyes been so far blinded, that thou never yet saw so much evil in sin as
should make thee look out for a deliverer, and prize him who has done so much
to redeem thee? but can make shift well enough to live without Christ, so
thou can but get those things which thou now take to be more useful for
thee, in order to thy happiness. Thus will it be with thee if thou have set
thy heart upon the pleasing, and advancing of thy carnal self; thou art not
then like to see any great need of Christ, or any excellency in him that should
make him desirable: for he came not into the world to help carnal wretches to
the enjoyment of their idols, but to turn their hearts off them, to the living
and true God. And therefore as they who have chose this God for their portion,
do make it their great work to get an interest in Christ the Mediator, and
do live upon, and make use of him to bring them to their portion, so they that
have made the pleasing of their flesh with any worldly thing their ultimate
end, they are diligent in the using of all means that may help on this their
base end. The voluptuous, brutish sinners hunt after sensual pleasures in
their meat and drink, wantonness, sloth, excessive sports, and merry joviall
company. The covetous man who has a greedy insatiable fancy to gratify,
wholly spends himself in treasuring up wealth, and he tastes sweetness in
nothing but his gains. His Bonds and Bills, and Leases are better things to him
than the Covenant of Grace; and his Houses, and Lands, and Money, more precious
than the Blood of Christ. And so the proud and ambitious that would fain have
much esteem and honor in the world, (which is the most natural vice to almost
every man) they pursue their design by laboring to get into high places, to
make great men their friends; recommending themselves to the world, by their
sumptuous Houses, great Retinues, rich Clothes, gentile deportment, and the
like braveries; others by their strength, beauty, wit, learning, and the like
accomplishments of body or mind. Thus you see, according to the nature of men's
happiness, they make use of means to reach it. Search well therefore, whether
some of these or the like empty trifles have not been more set by, and labored
for, than ^h^ist himself. If so, never say thou take him for thy M^diatour:
for it is apparent, thou do not make him so. No, but those things are indeed
thy Mediators, which thou make use of to accomplish thy selfish dedesigns.
And hereby thou do in effect as much reject and vilify Christ, as if thou
did revolt from him, and take Mah^met f^r thy Savior. Oh beware of deceiving
thy self in this point, which is so easy, so common and dangerous: to talk of
trusting and relying on Christ, whi^st the heart relies most upon some outward
enjoyment to bring it to the happiness it seeks for: and the most they look
for from Christ, is, to have him keep them from Hell, after they have been all
their days gratifying their lusts, and serving the Devil, but they never think
of improving him as a Mediator betwixt God and their souls, expecting all
their mercies of this life and the next, to come by him; and by him offering up
all their services to God. Wherefore I beseech you to remember, that nothing
will prove you sincerely in Covenant with Christ, as one of his living members,
but a through, steadfast willingness to be brought to happiness by him in his
own way, and let it be your care to examine whether you are thus heartily
willing.

And then lastly, have thou submitted thy soul to the powerful workings of the
Holy Ghost, to renew and regenerate thee? Have thou faithfully rendered up thy
self to him, to be transformed into the divine likeness, to have thy
corruptions purged away, and all saving graces implanted in thee? It is the
office of the Holy Ghost to carry on Christ's interest in the souls of men, to
fulfill all the pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power, to
bring them to the Father by the Son. No man can cry Abba Father, and be filled
with a childlike disposition and nature, but he who has received this Spirit
of Adoption, and no man can call Jesus Lord, and be heartily subject to him,
but by the help of this almighty Spirit. He shows men the vanity of the
Creature, and the goodness, the fullness, and all sufficiency of God, and
enables the heart firmly to cleave to him; He convinces men of sin, and shows
them the odiousness and danger of it, and discovers to them a Savior, by whom
they may be Redeemed from all their iniquities, from the dominion, and from the
condemnation of sin: and he begets in the soul a saving faith, making men not
only willing but earnestly desirous to accept of Christ to both these ends.
Reflect upon thy self then, whether thou have experienced any such workings in
thy soul or not, whether thou art changed by this divine power into a new and
heavenly nature, and art hereby become a new creature, as all in Christ are,
old things being done away. Have thou ever found the vigorous and warm movings
of this holy Spirit upon thy heart, conveying light and life to thy dark soul,
dead in trespasses and sins? Have thou carefully cherisht these motions, and
complied with this sanctifying work, which spread^ it self through the whole
man? And art thou willing to be governed by him, to hearken to his voice within
thee, and to that word which was inspired by him to be a lamp to thy feet? If
these things be so, then indeed thou have performed the engagement that was
laid upon thee, by being baptized into the name of the Holy Ghost. But call thy
self to account, whether it has not been quite otherwise with thee. Do thou
not still remain in the carnal selfish state, alienated from the life of God
through a blind mind, and a wicked stubborn will, being still at enmity with
him? Have thou not quenched the Spirit, and stifled convictions, and resisted
his operations upon thy soul? Art thou not rather guided by the seducing spirit
and thy own unmortified lusts? Do not these still remain in strength and
power, so that whatever they draw thee to, must be done, let the Word and
Conscience say what they will? If it be thus, never boast of having God to be
thy Maker, nor Christ thy Redeemer: for if thou art not sanctified by the Holy
Ghost, God will never own thee for his, who accepts of none but an holy people.

Thus by looking carefully into your hearts, you may discern whether you are
truly in covenant with God or not. And if this seem any matter of difficulty,
to know what your hearts are: or rather, least you should pretend your hearts
are thus right when it is no such thing, I shall give one instance more whereby
you may know how you stand related to God, and that is by the consideration of
your lives and conversations: for, if you are sincerely devoted to God in your
hearts, then you must needs show it in the holiness of your lives, which is
nothing else but the keeping of that Covenant which is made betw^xt God and the
soul. If you do indeed f^llow after holiness, it is a sign you account it your
chief happiness to see God. If you are patient and unwearied in well-doing,
it is a sign you seek for honor and glory with God. And if you keep the
Commandments of Christ endeavoring to walk as he walked, it is manifest that
you love him and believe in him. If you bring forth much fruit, hereby you and
all men may know that you are Christ's Disciples, that you are living branches
of him, the true Vine; then have you received Christ if you walk in him. And if
you show forth the fruits of the Spirit in your lives, it is a sure token that
his graces are sown in your hearts. If you are led by and walk after the
Spirit, then indeed the Spirit is with and in you, and you live in him, Gal.
5.25. But on the other hand, it is as certain thou art a stranger and Aliene
from this Covenant I have before described, if thou be one that servest the
Devil rather than the true God. Make what profession thou will to love God and
believe in Christ, if thou allowest thy self in any one known sin, all thy
great pretenses will at length come to nothing. What, does that man love the
Lord, who does not hate evil? Nay, who delights in that which the Lord abhorrs,
and wherewith he is grieved and provokt to fury? Does he take Christ for his
Lord who will not be obedient to him? Does he take him for his Physician who
would not be healed, but had rather keep his diseases? Beware as thou love
thy soul of that dangerous mistake, that thy belief in Christ may serve turn
well enough for thy salvation without an holy life: for if thou leadst not an
holy life, it is most certain thou do not truly believe in Christ. For it is
not enough to prove thee such a Believer as shall be saved, to trust in Christ's
merits and hope God will be merciful to thee for his sake, but it is also of
absolute necessity that thou believe in him as Prophet, and King, and accept of
him to teach and govern thee, if ever thou hope for any saving benefit by him:
and therefore thou must believe his Promises and threatenings, and faithfully
endeavor to yield an universal obedience to his Commands, and to follow his
footsteps; So that to say thou have a good faith in Christ whilst thou live
an ungodly life, is as flat a contradiction as to say, thou art faithful to
thy Prince whilst thou risest up in arms against him: and so much as an oath of
Allegiance and fidelity to their Sovereign does tie men from Rebellion, so much
does saving faith bind them against wicednesse. And to talk of keeping thy
faith firm whilst thou live in disobedience to thy Lord, is as if a Wife
should say, she was careful in keeping her Marriage-covenant whilst she lived
in open adultery. Thus much here I was willing to speak of this, that thou
may be the more plainly convinced, that if thou live in or love any sin,
and wilt not leave it, though Gods Word and thy own conscience condemn thee for
it, that then thou art not sincerely in covenant with God. Wherefore look well
into thy life, consider thy ways, how thou behavest thy self toward God and
man, and in all thy carriage in the World. Art thou not a wilful neglecter of
thy duty to thy Maker, living without a sense or acknowledgment of him in all
thy ways, not so much as once in a day, or perhaps in a whole week settling thy
self seriously to pray to him in thy Family or Closer, nor taking any pleasure
in reading his word, or in thinking and speaking of him to thy own and others
advantage? Do thou profane the Lords day, and turn thy back with contempt
upon the Ordinances of God? Art thou not used to swearing, cursing, and taking
the holy Name of God in vain in thy common discourse? Or, art thou not guilty
of lying, cozenage, injustice in thy trading and dealing with men, of
oppression and unmercifulness to the poor? Do thou not live in envy and
malice, allowing thy self in railing, backbiting and slandering? Or, do
thou not riotously abuse the good creatures of God, eating and drinking to
excess, unfitting thy self for Gods service and studying only to please thy
pallat? Do thou not pollute thy soul with wanton thoughts, discourses, and
unclean practices? Do thou not mis-spend thy time in idleness and vanity,
carelessly wasting precious hours that should be improved for Gods honor, by
getting or doing good? Do thou not give way to thy pride in thy discourse,
carriage or attire, lavishing money and time for the gratifying of this base
lust? Put such questions as these to thy soul, and answer them impartially and
truly. And if thou live in any of these or the like wilful sins, be assured
thou have been false to the Covenant which thou wast entered to in Baptism: But
if thy conscience can truly witness for thee, that thou hate every false
way, have a respect to all Gods Commandments, earnestly desiring and diligently
endeavoring in all thy ways to approve thy self to the most righteous God,
longing after nothing more than that thou may walk unblameably before him,
then thou may safely conclude that thou art one of Gods Vovenant People: and
as such he will own thee, and to thee belong the privileges and benefits of
the Covenant, and therefore the Seals of it too, so that thou have very good
warrant to address thy self to this Sacrament, whereby all the Promises of God
are confirmed to his people, and whereby they profess the hearty rendering up
of themselves to him.

By this time I hope thou see what it is to be cordially in covenant with God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which all are engaged to by Baptism, and which
Covenant they renew at the Lords Supper, namely, to love God above all, and to
account his love thy chiefest happiness; to accept of Jesus Christ as thy only
Savior to bring thee to this happiness; and to be willing to be sanctified by
the Holy Ghost, and led by him in the ways of holiness. Now, if thou findst
thy self strange to all this, and did never yet feel thy soul brought under
the bond of this Covenant: my next work is to persuade thee to it, even to
beseech thee deliberately and seriously, but yet speedily, to make a firm and
everlasting Covenant with God to be his upon his own terms, to be absolutely
devoted to him in heart and life, as thou wast in Baptism. Something I shall
say to prevail with thee if possible for the performance of this weighty
indispensable Duty. But by the way take notice that all I am exhorting thee to,
may well be included in this one word, even Believing in Jesus Christ, which is
that qualification I am now upon, discovering the necessity of it in all
Communicants. And this I would have thee to observe, that thou may the better
understand what I mean when I press thee to faith in Christ, as making it all
one with the Covenant now mentioned: For, as I have before intimated, He that
truly believes in Christ receives him in the quality and office of a Mediatiour
by him to attain to that happiness which he offers to men; and consents to be
brought to in that way which he thinks fit to direct. Now the happiness he
offers is the enjoyment of God in glory, and this he has procured for
Believers by his satisfaction and intercession, and fits them for it by his
Spirit, which cures all their distempers, and raises them to a perfect love of
God and likeness to him, and so makes them capable of full communion with him,
which is their blessedness. So that to receive Christ as he offers himself to
us (which is our faith in him) not only signifies our dependence on his merits
for the pardon of sin, but also includes in it our love to God above all, to
whom we hope to be reconciled and brought nigh by Christ, and contains in it
our resolution to submit to the working and guidance of the Holy Ghost, who
purifies the heart, and enables us to follow after holiness till we are
brought to the sight and fruition of God. I shall attempt to make it as plain
as may be by an easy comparison. Suppose a King had banished a great company of
Subjects for rebelling against him into a foreign Country, where they stay so
long, that they have even forgot the manners and language of their own Nation,
and are become wild and barbarous like the people they converst with; and after
some time this King, taking pity on his banished Subjects, should agree with
his only Son, that if he would venture upon the hazards and troubles of so
long a journey, he should take a chief Officer along with him, and go to these
rebels, with proclamation of pardon to all such who should acknowledge their
crime, and were willing to return into their own land, there to live in the
obedience and favor of their Sovereign; and in order hereto would come to this
Officer to be taught by him the language of their Country, and how to behave
themselves so as they might please their King, and be fit to be in his
presence; when now the King's Son should come to these men, and show them his
Commission, and persuade them to be ruled by him, who is come so tedious and
dangerous a journey to free them from the miseries of banishment, proposing the
terms on which he will deliver them, all those that believe he speaks true, and
has power to help them, and being willing to be delivered upon his conditions,
do put their trust in him, by his means to be restored to the favor of their
Prince and their former habitations, they do by this very action manifest
their love to their native Country, and their willingness to live in
obedience to their King whom they had displeased: and do hereby also engage to
accept of this Officer that accompanies the Prince, to teach them the language
and manners of the Country they are about to return to. The application of
this to the matter in hand is very easy: for in the same manner does Faith in
Christ, and our acceptance of him, implie our love to God, and desire to live
for ever in his favor, which is that Christ offers us, and by his death has
purchased for true Believers; and it implies also our willingness to be
sanctified by his Spirit, that we may be made meet to live for ever in the love
of God.

Oh hearken then and give ear, all you lost sinners, (somewhat to pursue the
former comparison) all you that are the posterity of sinful Adam, who by his
transgression banished himself out of Paradise; you that are wandering up and
down in this wilderness, and have even forgot the heavenly Country, as if you
were made only to be inhabitants of this lower world, here to live with the
Beasts a miserable life for a while, and hereafter to die like Beasts that
perish; and accordingly make it your only work to run, and ride, to labor,
and toil for such things as are needful for this present life, without
regarding that which is to come: whilst you are thus estranged from God,
forgetful of, and daily running farther and farther from him, behold a message
of glad tidings, and great joy is dispatched to you from heaven. The great God
that made you, takes pity on you, and is even grieved to see what a misery you
have plunged your selves into, when he made you so happy. He is by no means
pleased, that such noble Creatures, lately raised out of nothing for such
glorious ends, should, through their own folly, and the subtlety of the
tempter, be debased into such a wretched, sordid slavery. Wherefore, in
pursuance of his gracious designs for your recovery, and to show how his bowel^
yearn over you, he has sent his own Son out of his bosom, who is one with
himself, to take our nature upon him, and to become one with us, that he might
be every way fit to be a Mediator betwixt God and us; that he might teach us
by his doctrine, encourage us by his example, and make atonement for us by his
death. Accordingly all this is done, the Son of God is come into the world, and
has abundantly evidenced his Commission from the Father, to treat with lost
mankind about their reconciliation to him; for the procuring of which
reconciliation he laid down his life, and being risen again, he furnished his
Ambassadors with authority to assure all, that life was given to the world, and
this life was in the Son, so that he who has the Son, has life. And this is
that message which the Ministers of the Gospel at this day, and to the end of
the world, are to proclaim to the sons of men. This, Sirs, is the joyful sound
that is now in your ears: If you will but trust your souls with Christ, and
consent that his Spirit should teach you the language of Canaan, and work in
you an heavenly nature and disposition suitable to the state and place he would
bring you to, then shall you be happy with God for ever. What say you then?
shall Christ be your Redeemer, to bring you to glory upon these terms or not?
What have you to object against him? Do you think he does not mean as he
speaks? or that he cannot do what he promises? Dare you question his power,
his willingness, or his truth? If you will not believe his Word, yet give
credit to his Death. Does not that tell you he is in good earnest with you, and
fully bent upon the Redemption of mankind? And beside the miracles wrought by,
and upon him, which fully witness for him, let his Resurrection put you out of
doubt, that him has God the Father sealed to this Office of Mediator: by this
is assurance is given to all men, that he is the Judge of to be world, and
therefore that all are delivered into his hands, to save or condemn as he shall
think fit: and he has plainly declared, that to those who receive him, he will
give power, to become the Sons of God, but as for those who reject him, upon
them the wrath of God abides for ever. But these things I shall branch out into
two or three particular considerations, to persuade you, if it may be, to
accept of Christ the Prince of peace, who comes with the tender of peace to
your souls: to accept of him, I say, to wash you in his Blood, and sanctify
you by his Spirit, that at length he may present you without spot or blemish
into the presence of his Father.

CHAP. V. Persuasions to accept of the Redeemer, and give up the Soul in
Covenant to him.
1. AND first consider, I am only persuading you to be Christians, which you
profess your selves to be. And will you not indeed be what you profess? Why
do you embrace the name, if you dislike the thing? I know you have false
measures whereby you judge of Christianity, and think perhaps, that all who are
Baptized, and keep their Church, and call themselves Christians, are so indeed:
but you should rather say, such do profess themselves so to be, but they are
not so in Gods account, except they are true to this profession. He that wears
a Noble-mans Livery seems to be his Servant, but if he will not acknowledge him
to be his Master, by doing what he commands him, you will scarce say such a
one's his Servant, however, not a Servant to be maintained, but cashiered and
punished; and if you are but such kind of Christians, you will acknowledge it
was as good you were open Infidels. Will you think it enough to prove a man
your friend, that he calls you so, and gives you many good words, and promises
you great matters, and in the mean time secretly does all he can to hurt and
displease you? Even thus has Christ decided the case, and told us who are his
friends, not they that only speak honorably of him, and pretend great esteem
for him, no, but they who do what he commands them, John 15.14. And if you
will not do thus, and yet will needs please your selves with a conceit that
you are Christians, notwithstanding, you may easily be convinced, that if your
Christianity will not bring you to be listed with the friends of Christ, but
leaves you amongst his enemies, its like to do you very little service.
Wherefore he is only the true Christian, who takes Christ in all those
relations in which he is represented in the Gospel, and is willing to perform
the duties that these relations bind him to. And to such a receiving of Christ
I am urging you. Can you be Christians without taking Christ for your Lord? And
can you do this without you are willing to be governed by him? Is he a
Disciple of Christ that will not learn of him, and that will not believe what
he speaks to be truth? To give an instance or two, Christ bids you learn of him
to be meek and lowly, and if you will not do thus, are you indeed any of his
Disciples? He tells you his yoke is easy, and his burden light, and therefore
requires you to take them on you; if now you think them hard and heavy, and
therefore reject them, do you not in effect give him the Lie? He tells you he
is the author of eternal salvation to those that obey him, and if you refuse
obedience to him, and yet pretend you hope to be saved by him, can you count
this believing in him? When he would redeem you from your iniquities and you
will not part with them, do you take him for your Redeemer? So that its
evident you are not really, and in Gods account Christians, except you are
willing to be guided by Christ to happiness in the way which he has revealed;
wherefore you must see to come up to this, or be reckoned as Heathens and
Infidels and accordingly dealt with: and choose you whether, if indeed you find
any difficulty in the choice.

2. Consider seriously what a kind of design it is that Christ comes to you
upon, and see whether it be not most reasonable you should comply with him. He
offers himself to be your Savior, and what can you say why you should not
close with this offer? Examine what hurt there is in that work of Christ upon
your souls against which you are most prejudiced. He would take off your
affections from earthly things that cannot satisfy them, and set them on
things above, which will prove a durable portion. He would cure the blindness,
bruitishnesse and deadness of your souls, and raise you to the greatest
liberty and freedom of mind, and to the most reasonable excellent life whereof
you are capable. He would bring you out of darkness into light, from pain and
grief to the most manly joys; he would deliver you out of the noise and tumult
of your lusts and passions, and settle you in a sweet and steady peace. Instead
of being unserviceable to God and Man, and destroyers of your selves, he would
make you fruitful and useful in your generation, and your own truest friends.
I speak of the present effects of his operation upon your souls, which would
receive an unspeakable advancement, by being freed from the dominion of Sin and
Satan, wherein Christ finds you. For certainly to be thus enslaved is the
greatest misery that can at present befall you, as it debases and defiles you,
and puts you out of that order in the Creation which God placed you in. Nothing
in all the world can be so much disgrace to you as this: for of reasonable
creatures, you are hereby become like bruits, yea in some sense worse, and
instead of the image of God, you bear the image of the Devil, through your love
of sin and enmity to holiness. And do you think there is no hurt in all this?
No? not in becoming idiots and fools, living contrary, to, and below your
reason? nor in being like the Devil, whom you cry out upon, and pretend to
abhor? Is it no dishonor to you to have him to be your Father whilst you do
his works? Well then, I hope you have nothing to say against Christ, who comes
to recover you to your selves, to bring you into your right wits; to show you
your former folly, and make you ashamed of, and humbled for it, that you may
forsake it: whose design is, to raise you to the privilege and dignity of your
natures, by repairing Gods image upon you which you had lost, bringing you to
love that which is best for you, to beware of what would hurt you, and to be
weaned from those things that will leave you, and cannot make you happy. And if
you have nothing to object against all this, much less can you speak against
his intention to keep you from misery, and make you blessed for ever, if you
will hearken to him, of which I shall speak by it self. Where then does the
matter stick? what can hinder you from coming to Christ, who only calls you to
him to take off your load, and lighten your burden, and to give you ease and
rest.

3. Consider what Christ has undergone in order to the making of your peace
with God on condition of your acceptance of him. He became poor to make you
rich; He became the Son of man that you might be the Sons of God; he came down
from heaven to raise you thither; He entered into combats with the Devil that
you might be enabled to conquer him. He bore the worst the world could do, and
overcame all its assaults, that you by him might overcome the world. He drank
the bitter cup, the dregs whereof you had otherwise been drinking eternally.
When the sword of justice was even ready to sheath it self in your bowels, he
came betwixt and received it into his own. He willingly gave up himself to the
death, that bitter, cruel, shameful death, that your souls might live for
ever. He bore your sins that they might not lie on you as an heavy load, to
sink you into the lowest hell. He was made a curse that you might escape it and
obtain a blessing. And after all this that he that he has done and suffered
shall he be rejected? Has he done thus much in order to your deliverance, and
shall all be lost as to you, as if it had never been done? What? has the Son
of God, manifest in the flesh, shed his warmest hearts-blood to be as a Balsome
for your wounded souls, and are you not willing it should be applied? Methinks
common ingenuity should tell you that such matchless love as this should not
be so slighted. If you was taken captive by the Turks, and a dear friend
should venture his own life to free you thence, sure you would be willing to
return with him, though you might have great offers to stay behind, if it was
for nothing else but to gratify your friend who had ventured so hardly for
you, that you might not give him cause to repent of his labor. And what? shall
the blood of Christ be as it were spilt on the ground, and have no effect on
thee? How hard is that rock whom this will not soften? I beseech thee, Reader,
again and again, to think what Christ has gone through to deliver thy soul
from the jaws of death, and then think whether it be just and reasonable that
he should reurn without his errand. I know I have mentioned this before, but I
shall not stick to inculcate it ^gai^ and again, that it may have some force,
some power upon thy heart. And to that end, before I leave this Head, let me
entreat thee to imagine, that thou saw Jesus Christ now before thee all in
blood and wounds, calling thee to him as he did Thomas, bidding thee to thrust
thy hands into his side, and put thy fingers into the print of the nails, and
suppose thou heardest him saying to thee, Look here, Sinner, behold these
token^ of my love, see what I have endured on thy behalf: oh be not faithless
but believing, be not perverse and obstinate, but willing to come to me who
have felt so much pain to procure thy ease, if thou do not wilfully refuse
it. Cast away those sins which have used me thus; trust thy self with me, who
have given such costly evidences of my desire to do thee good; accept me for
thy Redeemer who have paid so dear a price for thee; own me for thy Lord, who
have thus bought thee out of slavery; follow me in the way I shall show thee,
that I may bring thee safe into the presence of the Father, whom I have
reconciled to thee: Suppose, I say, thou should see Christ even covered over
with his own blood, importuning thee, thus to forsake thy sins, and accept of
his grace and mercy, what would thou say? what answer would thou give?
could thou find in thy heart to contemn him, to stop thy ears to his
requests, and go away without regarding him? or would thou tell him he had
not done enough to engage thee to him, and that thou saw no reason to
hearken to his offers, that thy sins were more sweet and precious than grace
and glory, and any thing he would give could possibly be* Surely thou durst
not. And if not, then let not thy heart and practice return the same answer to
me, who, in the name and stead of Christ, beseech thee, that thou will through
him be reconciled to God. Even by all those wounds which Christ suffered upon
the Cross, by all those pangs and dolours which he felt in his soul, by his
cries and groans, by his tears and blood, I do, as upon my knees, beseech thee
to give an hearty entertainment to this Lord Jesus, who was thus bruised and
wounded for thy sake. Oh let him in thee see the travel of his soul and be
satisfied. No longer cherish those lusts which resist his entrance, off with
thos^ bars and bolts that have locked him out; down with those strongs holds
that have stood out against him; let the gates of thy heart fly open, and let
this King of glory come in cheerfully, thankfully receive him, and absolutely
render up thy self to him, to be disposed of as he shall think fit, only
begging that thou may be taken into the number of his Redeemed ones, and be
enabled to perform the duties enjoined them, and be fitted to enjoy the
privileges assured to them. This is that faith in Christ which I would so fain
persuade and beg thee to, and that by the consideration of what thy Savior
has endured upon this account, that through faith in him thou might be
pardoned and saved.

4 Consider, as what bitter things Christ underwent to purchase salvation for
thee if thou reject him not, so, what a m^st reasonable c^ndition he has
appointed thee to perform, that thou might obtain salvation by him: even thy
unfeigned willingness to accept him for thy Redeemer, and thankfully to
receive the benefits which he has purchased for thee. And will not this induce
thee to enter into Covenant with him, when the terms there of are so fair and
gracious. This thy hearty consent, that Christ shall perform the whole work of
a Savior to thee, and for thee, is the chief thing required to make thee one
of his members. This is the great Command of the Gospel, to Believe in Jesus
Christ. So that thou have nothing to say on thy own behalf, if thou should
be found at last to have neglected this duty: for tell me could thou have
desired any thing more favorable? If thou had been enjoined some great
thing, would thou not have done it? much more now thou art only required to
be willing to have Christ, and life with him, and all shall be thine, will thou
not be brought to this? But still remember the offices of Christ must not be
divided, nor his benefits separated. He must be taken for thy Lord to rule in
thy heart, and govern thy life, as well as for thy Savior to keep thee from
misery; and thou must be as willng to feel in thy soul the power of his Cross
crucifying thy lusts, as to have the merit of his Cross procure thy pardon;
now thou must be brought to the love of heaven above earth, if thou would be
received thither by Christ when thou leavest the earth. But yet in all this, it
is but the consent of thy soul which is principally required, in order to the
attainment of the offered mercies. And would thou have matters brought down
lower yet? Would thou be saved against thy will? And haled to heaven when
thy heart is against it? Or would thou have such kind of exceptions as these
put in with the conditions of thy salvation? That thou may have liberty to
trample on Christ's blood, and yet be washed in it from the guilt of sin; that
thou may have leave to serve the Devil, and yet receive from Christ the wages
he gives his faithful servants; that thou may be allowed to love creatures
more than God, and yet that God should love thee with his dearest love; that
thou may live without grace, and yet when thou die be received into glory.
Would thou indeed make such terms as these if it was left to thy own choice?
Thou could not sure be so foolish, so bas^ly disingenuous. If not, then come
in and submit to those conditions that are now offered thee, than which thou
can not, if thou be well in thy wits, wish for any that should be more
suited to thy ^^se and interest. Hearken then to the free and affectionate
invitations of Christ himself, Ho! every that thirsts, let him come to me and
drink; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely, Isa. 55.1.
Joh. 7.37. Rev. 22.17. Give not Christ cause to complain over thee, that thou
would not come to him that thou might have life; that he would have
gathered thee as a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings but thou would
not. Oh what a cutting thought will this be in hell, to remember at what cheap
rates thou might have escaped that misery, but would not! how easily, how
certainly thou might have been happy for ever, but thou would not! The
way was shown thee, and thou wast exhorted and besought again and again to walk
in that way, but would not hearken. Christ would have been thy Savior as
well others, but thou would have none of him, being in the number of those
rebellious ones, who would not that he should reign over them. And how utterly
inexcusable will thou be at the day of accounts, when it shall be asked thee,
what reason thou had for thy not closing with Christ, when he offered to have
saved thee? what answer can thou then make, except this may go for an answer,
that thou wast fully resolved against it? What though thou had not wit or
learning to improve for Christ, nor an estate to lay out for him, yet had
thou not a will to embrace him and his tenders? Could thou not have loved
him, and have given up thy self to him? Could men or Devils, or any thing but
thy own wretched obstinacy and perverseness have hindered this? Thou who art now
reading this, who have heard the Gospel, again and again, can not pretend
ignorance: for thou have been many times informed, and once more let me assure
thee, that if thou art willing Christ is willing, yea he is earnestly desirous
of thy happiness, and had rather thou would turn and live, than go on and
die: yea, he has set himself full in the way to prevent thy damnation, so that
thou can not get to hell, but thou must tread him under thy feet, who stands
betwixt to keep thee thence. If now at this very moment thou will comply with
the design of Christ, to save thee in the way he has established, he will
surely perform all his promises to thee. But beware of deceiving thy self,
pretending that thou art willing to have Christ, and that thy heart is wholly
set on him, whilst yet in thy actions and conversation thou art not subject to
him: for the tenor of thy life will be sure to follow the bent of thy heart.
If the temptations of Satan do ordinarily prevail with thee against the
commands of Christ, does not he possess thy heart who can thus put thee upon
action? If thou followest thy pleasures or worldly business to the neglect of
Gods service, is it not plain thou love the world and thy flesh more than God
and holiness. Can thou be diligent to please those whom thou hate, and to
injure and provoke, such as thou love best? These are too gross pretenses to
pass for current, and thy own conscience cannot but be convinced of their
vanity and falsehood. If thou consentest that Christ alone shall be thy Savior,
thou will depend upon him only for thy salvation; if thou art willing he
should govern thee, thou will in the course of thy life yield obedience to him.
If thou say thou have not power to be willing, prithee examine what this
means but that thou art absolutely unwilling, and then whose fault is that? Who
is it, I would fain know, hinders thee from being willing? or whom do thou
think to lay the blame on? Be assured the holy God will clear himself, if thou
should lay the cause of thy damnation on him, as if he did not give thee
grace enough to change thy heart: since thou did not improve that measure of
grace which was given thee, and did by thy wilfulness keep out what was
farther offered to thee: And thou will have small comfort in laying the fault
on the Devil or thy wicked companions: thy accusations of them will be far from
acquitting thy self. They shall dearly answer for what they have done, but yet
thou will still be left liable to justice: yea thou will be found to belie the
Devil himself, if thou say he was the chief cause of thy ruin: for he could
never have deceived and undone thee, if thou had not been willing to hearken
to him and be deluded by him. Nor could thy companions have drawn thee to sin,
if thou had not first been in love with it: for neither they, nor the
tempter, whose instruments they were, could thus prevail with them whose hearts
were against it. Neither will it excuse thy rejection of Christ, to say thou
never had sufficient reason given to draw thee to him, and that thou never
heardest of any such advantages to be had by him as might allure thee: for thou
shall then be made to acknowledge, that in the thing it self there was reason,
abundant reason for thy acceptance of him. But if it did not prove sufficient
to work upon thee, why was this? Was the Gospel unreasonable, or wast not thou
unreasonable in sleighting it? Was it hid from thee? If so, was it not because
thou did permit the God of this world to blind thy mind, and keep thee from
the knowledge of the truth? If thou art still in the dark, is it not because
thou love darkness more than light? Art thou not so fully bent upon the
satisfaction of thy lusts, that thou will hear of nothing that should draw thee
from them? Art thou not slothful and negligent, and wilt not mind things, nor
consider seriously of thy sin and danger, of the love of Christ and thy need of
him, and the like subjects, the meditation whereof, through the blessing of
God, might have softened thy heart, and bowed thy will to a thorough compliance
with the Lord Jesus. And do thou indeed think that thy wilful affected
ignorance shall be held as a sufficient plea for the neglect of thy duty* I^,
when thou fett'st thy Servant to work in thy shop, he should shut up the door
and windows to keep out the sun, or by night should purposely put out his
Candle and then pretend he could not see to do his work, would thou take
this for a good excuse? And do not thou do thus, who wilt not hearken to,
nor consider of the word without thee, and putt'st out the light of thy
Conscience, tha^ Candle of the Lord within thee, whereby thou might be led
to Christ, had then criest thou can not find the way to him? If a Prince
should send a Proclamation to Rebels, promising pardon to those that would come
in, but threatening destruction to such as should persist: if they stop their
ears when it is read to them, and will not enquire after the contents of it,
will he excuse them afterward to say they never heard any invitations to lay
down their arms? Nor, farther, can thou truly say, that Christ requi^ed
harder things of thee, than this willingness of heart to be saved by him: for
wast thou once brought to this, whatever else he requires from thee would
appear easy. So far as thy will is made conformable to his, there will
appear no more difficulty in obeying his commands, than ^n ^ungry man finds in
eating, or than a dutiful child finds in pleasing a loving Father. To do his
will would then be thy great delight, thou would find a new nature within
thee, carried forth with a mighty power and sweetness to all those acts of
obedience that flow from a willing soul. But yet farther for thy conviction,
Suppose a Nobleman should offer to a Beggar, that if she would put off her
rags, and wash her self, and put on the apparel he had provided, and leave her
vagrant life to come and dwell with him, and be his loving and faithful Wife,
that then he would marry her, and instate her in all his honor and riches:
would thou say there was any thing required of this woman besides her
willingness to become his Wife? I hope, to throw away her rags, and leave her
wandering companions, and live like a person of honor, does not look like the
paying of a Portion, or doing difficult works. And this is thy very case; poor
and naked the Lord Jesus finds thee, only covered over with rags and filth,
these he bids thee to strip off, to wash thee and make thee clean, and put away
the evil of thy doings; to renounce thy lusts, to forsake thy sinful courses
and companions; to put on the white Robes which he has provided for thee, to
be clothed with his perfect righteousness, that the guilt of thy sins may not
appear, and to be adorned with the graces of his Spirit, that thou may be
lovely in the sight of God, having thus put on Christ; and he offers to espouse
thee to himself, and become thy Husband and Head, and make thee a Jointure of
heaven it self, if thou will continue in love and faithfulness to him all thy
days* Where then is the Dowry that must be given him? No, he asks for none,
it is thy self he desires, and bids thee come boldly without money or price.
What easier terms, what fairer offers would thou desire? Shall I then
prevail with thee or not? Even as Abraham sent his Servant to seek a Wife for
his Son Isaac, so do I now address my self to thee from my Lord and Master
Jesus Christ, earnestly desiring to espouse thee to him as a chaste Virgin. With
Commission from him I make these tenders to thee. Behold this hour a message of
infinite concernment and greatest favor is sent to thee: Christ Jesus the King
of glory offers himself, with all he is and has, to thee, and by me his
Servant thy consent is now demanded. What answer do thou give me? Will thou
be married to him or not? Will thou not give me that comfortable answer that
Rebeckah did to Abraham's Servant, Genesis 24.58. I will go with the man. Shall I
make up the match this day betwixt Christ and thy Soul? If thou say no, God
that stands over thee will witness, thy own Conscience will witness, yea,
these very lines shall witness against thee, that Christ did freely offer
himself and salvation to thee, and thou did perversely reject him. But God
forbid thou should do thus foolishly: in the bowels of Christ let me
beseech thee not to turn the deaf ear to this message: Do not read these
things slightly, as if they concerned thee not: but rather stay a while, and
let thy thoughts dwell upon the matter. If there be not all the reason in the
world for what I urge thee to, slight it and spare not, but examine things
well, and see thou contradict not thy own reason, nor undo thy self by
inconsiderateness. Once again then I ask thee, art thou willing to betroth thy
self to Christ, forsaking other Lovers that have sued for thy heart? Will thou
promise to cleave to him at all times, and in all conditions, and through the
assistance of grace, to be faithful and constant in thy love and obedience to
thy lives end? If thou say yes, and art sincere in this resolution, then doubt
not but it will be accepted and ratified in heaven: what thou have done this
hour will be recorded by God himself, and remembered for ever. And do thou make
have to thy private chamber, there more expressly and solemnly to profess this
thy engagement to Christ; and come to the Lords Table there to seal to and
confirm this Marriage-Covenant; and let it be thy care all thy days to continue
steadfast therein, and then doubt not but Christ will perform his part to a
tittle.

5 That I may be yet the more likely to bring thee to this saving faith in
Christ, which is nothing else but thy consent to be married to him, to receive
him for thy Lord and Savior, as I have before explained it, let me entreat
thee to consider the advantages thou shall hereby receive from him. If thou ask
me what these are, I may answer, they are so great that I cannot tell thee;
they are such as thou must not, thou can not fully know till thou art possessed
of them. He that was perfectly acquainted with them all, might be to all
eternity in revealing them: for so long shall the true Christian be in enjoying
them. But yet least thou should think these were but words to draw thee on
and deceive, thee, know, that I am able out of the Book of God, to tell the so
much of thy gains by Christ, in a line or two, as will certainly bring thee to
him, if thou will be ruled by the truest reason, and persuaded to choose what is
best for thee. In one word then be assured, thou shall have all that may make
thee truly happy in this world and the next for ever. Psalm. 84.11. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Romans 8.28. And what can thy heart wish for more? That very day wherein thy soul
is thoroughly brought over to Christ, thou have right by virtue of his rich
promise, to all that is in heaven and earth that may be for thy good, and
accordingly shall enjoy it, as thou come to need it, and art made meet to
receive it. So soon as by faith thou art united to Christ, the guilt of all
former sins is done away, and for the future thy services shall be accepted,
and thine imperfections forgiven: for God is become thy reconciled Father, and
will love, own and bless thee as his Child. And can thou want any thing who
have God to be thy Father, who owneth all things? yea, who have him to be thy
portion who is better than all things? All his attributes, his wisdom, power,
truth and goodness will be engaged on thy behalf, and employed for thee; his
works, his word and all providence shall help forward thy happiness. All thy
outward affairs thy heavenly Father, who knows what thou have need of, will see
to and regard; at all times he will so dispose of and provide for thee, as
shall be most for thy advantage; no affliction shall befall thee, but will
prove as Physic to thy soul; in all estates and conditions he will be near to
thee to direct and preserve thee, if thou retain thy integrity, so that neither
men nor Devils shall prevail against thee to thy ruin. And the Holy Ghost will
be thine to enlighten; sanctify, guide and comfort thee, to assist thee in
duties, and to seal thee up to everlasting happiness. When thou die the Lord
Jesus will receive thy Spirit, and preserve thee from the roaring Lion, and the
pit of destruction; and vouchsafe thee the beginnings of happiness with
himself, which shall be completed and perfected at the great Resurrection day,
when thou shall be raised up by his power and brought into appearance, not in
wrath but in mercy, and shall be publicly owned by that Christ, whose person
and cause thou did here embrace and own; and by him thou shall be openly
justified from all accusations of Satan or the Law; and shall be presented pure
and holy into the presence of the Father, and shall be eternally blessed in the
enjoyment of all those treasures of infinite love and goodness, which God has
laid up in store for believers. This, is the inheritance which we come to by
Christ: we are made heirs of God, yea coheirs with his own Son; we enter upon
the joy of our Lord; with him we shall abide in the mansions that are in our
Fathers house. Then at length we shall know all the designs of Divine wisdom
and love, when they shall be accomplished in us and for us; and by the fruition
we shall understand, what is that exceeding and eternal weight of glory, for
which there were made such wonderful contrivances, such solemn preparations by
that God who does all things like himself, being infinitely wise and good, Then
shall we reach to, and find those glorious things that are spoken of the City
of God; yea those things which it was neither lawful nor possible for Angels
or Men to utter. To be short, thou shall then be advanced to the utmost
possible perfection of thy nature; thy soul shall be fitted for those actions
and employments which are most suitable to it, even the loving and praising thy
Maker, Savior and Sanctifier; and shall be made capable of tasting the most
ravishing, satisfying sweetness and joy in these employments; in pleasing the
blessing God, and in feeling thy self encompassed with the warm embraces of his
dearest love. And as this thy blessedness shall be infinite and unspeakable, so
shall the continuance of it be eternal. Nor shall thy delight be once abated
or interrupted through all this eternity, but be ever exalted to the highest
pitch; it shall always flow, yea overflow, but never ebb. This is the joy
which has no end, no measures or decay. This is the glory which Christ will
give his servants: not as the world gives, gives he unto them. This, he tells
us, is the will of him that sent him, that every one that sees the Son and
believes on him, may have everlasting life. Joh. 6.40. The water which he gives
us to drink shall be, in those who partake of it, a well of water springing up
into everlasting life. And some beginnings of this divine life now, there are
brought into the soul, whilst it is made in its measure conformable to God, and
is carried out after him with the strong workings of love and desire; and feels
the shedding abroad of his love in it self, and lives in the joyful
expectations of an advancement to the abundance of life, the perfection of
bliss which I before mentioned. And now, Reader, if thou believe all this,
which I think thou must needs, except thou take the Gospel for a cheat, if then
thou believe it to be true, I would know of thee, whether the invitations
Christ makes thee to come to him, be not backed with sufficient motives, to
prevail with all that are not quite beside their wits in matters of the
greatest moment* By this time I hope thou see that thy Redeemer seeks thy
interest, whilst he is so importunate with thee. What is all for, in the result
but this. That thou would make thy self blessed for ever. This he commands
thee, this he beseeches thee to. And shall such commands be disobeyed? shall
such requests be denied? Good Lord! How strange a thing is this? That man, a
reasonable Being, whose wisdom sets him above all other creatures on earth,
should be thus wooed, thus called upon and entreated to be happy, and yet that
he should stand dallying and deliberating whether he had best be so or not;
yea, that he should peremptorily refuse to be so. Which should I most admire in
this case, the distraction and base ingratitude of man, or the inconceivable
mercy and patience of God, so long to bear with such unworthy creatures, and so
frequently to renew the offers of blessedness, and even press it upon them?
Well then, do thou think there is any gain in godliness? Is there enough to
be had with Christ to make him and his gifts worth the accepting? For that I
tell thee still is all that is expected from thee: be but cordially willing to
take him and all his benefits together, and for certain all shall be thine.
Thou shall find every promise of the book of God made good to thy comfort; yea
thou shall find ten thousand times more than ever thou could understand or
conceive from the fullest promises, the highest expressions that ever thou
mett'st with concerning the privileges of Believers. Shall all that is said
then bring thee to be one of that number or not? Do thou know where to make a
better bargain for thy self? If so, take thy own course and make thy best on it:
for be assured, Jesus Christ needs not thee. His glory does not so depend on
thy subjection to him that it should be lessened in case of thy disobedience.
Do thou as thou will, he knows how to secure his own interest: but fain he
would persuade thee to take pity on thy self, and save thy own soul. If there
be any in all the world that has done more for thee than Christ, or that will
do more, hearken to him and spare not. But before thou conclude there is any
such person or thing, examine matters well on both sides, and then do as thou
see meet, Indeed the case is so plain that the veriest child or fool almost
may know how to decide it. Bethink thee well what thou art like to have from
the world, from thy lusts, from the service of the Devil, or from any thing
that would keep thee from Christ. Can thou think that the satisfying of thy
senses with what they call for, or pleasing thy fancy with things super fluous,
or living in idleness and wantonness, in pride and pomp with the applause of
the world, is any or all of this better than the love of God, better than the
fullness of joy to be had in his presence, or better than the rivers of
pleasure at his r^ght hand for evermore? But be they as good as they will, do
thou think they will last always? Or has the Devil any future reward for his
servants, when their miserable slavery in this life is ended? Amongst all his
temptations, did he ever so much as once bear thee in hand, that he would make
thee happy for ever? It is possible for thee to be ignorant, that the pleasures
of sin, besides their emptiness and baseness, are but for a seas^n? So that if
thou remain without Christ thou have no whi^her to go, nothing to trust to,
that will not miserably fail thy expectations. Look round about thee, and see
if thou can find any other foundation to build upon, to raise an happiness
to thy self. And when thou have but considered a while, with that seriousness
that beseemes one who has a desire to do himself good, I doubt not but the
language of thy soul will be like that of Peter to Christ, Joh. 6.66. Lord
whether shall I go? thou only have the words of eternal life. Thou one^y have
revealed it, thou alone directest to it, thou only have purchased it, thou
only have promised it, and thou alone can bestow it upon thy people:
wherefore to thee, Lord, I betake my self, renouncing all things that stand in
competition with thee; be thou my Lord, let me be thy servant; let me live to
thee here, and let me live with thee for ever hereafter, pertaking of that
glory which thou have obtained of the Father for thy faithful ones. What say
thou? Does thy very heart agree to these words or not? Say yea or no before
thou go any farther. I am sure thou have nothing like reason to give, why it
should not. Oh give not Christ cause to wonder at thy obstinacy and unbelief,
who when he came to bring thee salvation was rejected. Once again, I assure
thee, he comes not to undo thee. Think not thou shall lose by him, because he
calls thee to mortification, self-denial, and bearing the Cross. If he would
take thee from any thing which is dear to thee, it is only because it is
hurtful: and he will give thee better delights, more noble employments than
those he calls thee off from. Thou shall part with nothing by his service which
thou could have kept long, and instead of it thou shall receive a treasure
that shall never be taken from thee. But if thou art so fast bound to thy
profits, thy pleasures and thy sweet sins, to which thou have been long
accustomed, that thou will not be persuaded to take thy love off them, and set
it on Christ, but art so swallowed up with them, that thou turnest the deaf ear
to all these entreaties; if this be thy resolution, that Baal shall be thy god,
and him thou will worship, that the world shall be thy portion, and to it thou will cleave, that sin shall be thy trade, and in it thou will live: Remember
then thou had thy choice: Christ tendered himself, and all his saving mercies
to thee, but thou did deliberately prefer other things before him, and
therefore thou have no wrong done thee if thou go without him. If this be
thy thanks to him for his matchless condescension in inviting thee to glory,
grudge not if hereafter he exclude thee from it. And now get thee to thy idols
which have so taken up thy heart, that there was no room for Christ, except he
would have the leavings of the world and flesh, which, be it known to thee he
never will, he will have the highest place or none, and since he must not have
that, go thy way I say, and make the best of thy idols, thy riches, thy
bravery, thy carnal joys and empty honors, thy dear friends and pleasant
companions; suck all the sweetness they will yield, and keep them as long as
thou can: and when thou see where they leave thee, and what thou have
brought thy self to, then let thy Conscience reflect, whether once thou had
not an offer worth the acceptance.

6. But this brings me to the sixth and last argument to prevail with thee to
give up thy self to Christ, and that is the sad and doleful effects that are
like to follow upon thy rejection of him. If God be just and true, thou art not
like to go smoothly away with the guilt of this heinous sin. Something to this
purpose I mentioned before, and therefore shall be the briefer now, only in
faithfulness and love to thy immortal soul, that thou may never be able to
say but that thou had fair warning given thee, I now come to tell thee, that
if thou stand out against the mercy that is so freely held forth to thee,
refusing to receive thy Savior on those terms, and to those purposes for which
he demands acceptance, thou art then like to be as miserable, a forlorn, undone
creature both body and soul, as ever trod upon the earth, or saw the Sun. Make
as light of these threatenings now as thou will, but if there be a God in
heaven, be assured they will be made good upon thee, as shortly thou will feel
to thy everlasting sorrow, if thy speedy conversion do not prevent it. Think
not I take any delight to dig in the bowels of hell, and throw flashes of fire
in thy face merely to terrify and daunt thee: no, but I would fain, if
possible, prevent thy misery, by discovering what it is like to be, if thou
throw thy self headlong into it. And oh that I could speak any thing that might
make some impression upon thee, not only to bring thee to a fright, and there
leave thee, but a little to awake thee to a sense what a mischievous thing that
sin is which now thou art so deeply in love with, that thou may see to get
thy hands rid of it, before it be too late to wish thou had done so: Even
during this present life, whilst thou art without Christ, thy condition is most
sad, however thou may applaud and bless thy self in thy worldly enjoyments:
For thou art this while under the load of thy original sin, and all the
transgressions which thou have actually committed in thought, word or deed,
since thou came into the world, the least of which, without pardoning mercy,
would drown thee in perdition. Thou have no certainty for an hour of any of
those things which thou possessest, but art liabl^ to as short warning as the
rich Fool in the Gospel, who was called away in that night wherein he bid his
soul take its ease, eat, drink and be merry. For thou can not show any true
title, by virtue of a promise from God, to the least of all thy comforts: But
thou stand always exposed to that wrath which thou art treasuring up for thy
self against the day of wrath. Thou lie wholly at his mercy whom thou art
daily provoking to fury. In all thy ways which are so defiled, the holy God
beholds thee in anger, and even loathes thee for thy filthiness. And he alone
knows how short a while he is determined to wait on thee: thy glass is
running, his patience is expiring, death and judgment are hasting, hell is
ready burning, and thou can not promise thy self a moments safety. Whilst
thou art sleeping or waking, eating or working, talking and laughing, the heavy
doom hangs over thy head, and thou have every day reason to expect the
dreadful vengeance of the Lord to seize upon thee, nothing but mere mercy has
kept it off this while, which will not always last. At night when thou go to
bed, its a great hazard but thou may awake in flames, and never more see the
comfortable light; or when thou go out of doors, it is a question whether
thou may not with Judas, go to thy own place, the infernal mansions, before
thou returnest home. For ought I know or thou either, this may be the last Book
that ever thou may read, this may be the last warning that ever thou may
have. Think a little whether this be a comfortable case for a man to continue
in, and what wise people they are that venture all upon a Repentance hereafter.
Moreover in all the troubles thou may meet with in the world, I know not what
support, what comfort can be administered to thee: for there is none to be given
thee from God, I am sure, whilst thou art a resolved enemy to him. What shift
thou make to get a little ease and relief at such a time I cannot but wonder:
only the remnants of thy carnal comforts, and the hopes thou have of seeing
things better, its like may help thee to some false peace. But alas poor man,
Death will shortly arrest thee; Death that will strip thee of all that thy
heart delighted and trusted in; Death that will break the neck of all thy fond
hopes, and utterly frustrate thy expectations; Death that will carry thee out
of thi^ beloved world into a place, to which thou have been a mere stranger,
not thinking of it at all, or but coldly and seldom, or with horror and
averseness; this Death, I say, will shortly lay hold on thee, and then whither
will thou look for comfort, who art a stranger to God and Jesus Christ? Into
whose hands will thou commend thy departing soul, who would not whilst thou
wast living resign thy self to the God who made thee, and bought thee with his
Sons blood? Can thou expect Christ should now receive thee who would not
be persuaded to receive him? What? receive a rebel into the kingdom of peace?
A filthy Swine into the communion of Saints? No, never expect it. And if he
will not receive thee who must? If heaven may not hold thee what place, will?
Thou can easily answer these questions. And when, by a resurrection to
condemnation, thou art made, with all the rest, to stand in the presence of thy
Judge, how will thou then appear before him? For the Lord's, sake, yea for thy
own sake, poor sinner, thou that can not be brought to like of Christ, nor
his holy Laws and ways, not the sanctifying work of his holy Spirit, put these
questions, as thou read them, close to thy heart, What will thou then say to
Jesus Christ for this thy contempt and dislike of his person and government?
Dare thou then justify thy unbelief and impenitence when he calls thee to
answer for it? Or who will thou get to plead for thee, when the only Advocate
shall condemn thee? Who will thou make thy friend, when he, who alone could and
would have been so, is, through thy own fault, become thy greatest enemy? Dare
Angels or Saints speak a word for him against whom their Lord shall speak? Or
would they if they durst? No, they will approve his righteous sentence. Will
the Devil take thy part do thou think? Has he any power there to secure his
followers? Why it is he that is thy accuser, and if need be, would rather
aggravate those faults which he drew thee to. Will thou then hit him in the
teeth with the large promises he made thee, and call on him to make them good?
Alas, he will but laugh at thee, and scorn thee, and make thee acknowledge, that
most justly are all they so served, who would trust to the Devils delusions
rather than to Gods promises. Or do thou expect relief from thy companions in
torment? Ah poor creatures, they would rather help themselves if they could,
but cannot: Oh then! with what an heart, with what a countenance will thou hear
that last doleful sentence, Depart from me ye cursed! when thou shall look
round about and see no help, no hope, but that down thou must lie in that
burning lake, which the breath of the Lord's fury like a stream of brimstone
does kindle, what a posture will thy soul be in? I can tremble to conceive it,
easier than I can express it. And when thou have lain some thousands of years
in that place of torments, what then will the workings of thy heart be? when
thou have felt that tribulation and anguish which comes upon those that work
evil, what thoughts will thou have of the ways that brought thee thither? what
would thou not do for the least dram of hope in that miserable despairing
state, for the least glimmering of light in that gloomy darkness? But there is
none to be had, no nor ever will be through a whole eternity: the force of
which word eternity, and the meaning of Hell, is now known and felt in another
manner, than when careless sinners could laugh at the mention of them, or
sleep, whilst they were preached on. But what? can thou not persuade thy self
that there are any such torments prepared for unbelievers? If not, its to be
feared thou art one of those unbelievers for whom they are prepared: But if
Scripture may convince thee, read amongst other places, 1 These. 1.8, 9. Mat.
25.46. Joh. 3.36. and then tell me thy judgment. Now indeed all this is but
talk; Hell's out of sight, and the most terrible words are but wind: and
therefore it is there is so little care in the world to make sure his favor
who can save them from this misery, which, because it is neither seen nor felt,
is slighted and forgotten. Should a King take a company of men out of prison,
who had committed some fault worthy of death, and offer pardon to those that
would be sorry for their crime and promise never to be guilty of the like, but
threaten Death to those that would not; and withal should show them pardons
ready sealed, and great hopes of money to be given to the penitent, but racks,
and gibbets, and fires ready kindled, for the execution of the obstinate: Do
you think this would not easily prevail with them, when they saw in good
earnest what was like to betide them? And if Christ would take this course, and
show heaven and hell, if that were possible, plainly to their eyesight, its,
like the most stubborn sinners would be awakened: but he will not do thus, nor
is there any reason he should. Since we are made men to be ruled by reason, why
should he deal with us like bruits that must be led by their senses? yet
because he will not take this way with them, brutish sinners disregard him, as
if they needed him not. But ah Sirs! all you that could see no need of Christ,
when he was so urged and pressed upon you, when shortly you shall see all the
world stand before him, and shall behold the devouring flames, into which all
they must be cast, who have not a part in his love, then you will see what
benefit comes by Christ, then you will no longer count them fools, that took it
for their greatest business to get an interest in him. Then, if the most
passionate wishes, that you had been so wise, would do you any good, if the
loudest roarings, and bitterest cries for mercy might preval, you would think
them all well spent: but alas, all will be to no purpose. Cry Lord, Lord, with
never so much noise and earnestness, if thou wast here a worker of iniquity,
no other answer shall thou obtain, but, Depart from me, I know thee not. And
thou thy self shall be forced to acknowledge, that this Sentence is as just as
terrible. For did not thou here hid Christ to depart from thee, thou
desired'st not the knowledge of his ways? and is it not just he should then
command thee to Depart from him, as one he will not know nor own? Heaven thou
did refuse, since it was to be had on no other terms than submission to
Christ, and therefore thou must needs fall into Hell, since there is no third
place provided. But perhaps thou will flatter thy self with a conceit that none
of these things shall come upon thee, in that as thou pretendest thou putst thy
whole trust in God that he will save thee, and reliest upon thy Savior Jesus
Christ alone, to be kept by him from hell and the power of the Devil. But
beware, I beseech thee, how thou cheatest thy soul into that misery, whence no
trick or wile can ever fetch thee. Do thou put thy trust in God he will take
thee to heaven when thou die, who now allowest thy self in those very sins
for which he has threatened to turn men into hell? If indeed thou do so, then
I hope it is some promise of his that thou bottom'st thy trust upon, or else it
is a vain confidence: now show me, if thou can, one promise in the whole book
of God, that gives thee the least ground to hope for happiness, whilst thou
continuest in an unregenerate natural estate, in love with thy sins; take thy
Bible, and turn it over from one end to the other, and see if thou can find
any such place: but I could show thee an hundred Texts, where wrath is
threatened to all unconverted sinners, continuing such. So that in plain
English, thy trust in God is no more than a wretched presumption, that he will
be so merciful as to break his word to save thee; and if indeed this word
prove false, than thy confidence will not deceive thee, but if it prove true,
as for certain it will, then woe be to thee, for all this pretended trust. And
of the very same stamp is thy reliance on Christ whilst thou rebellest against
him. For tell me, prithee, does the Gospel say, that every man who shall
believe that Christ will save him, shall be saved by him, let his heart and
life be what it will. I am sure neither Christ nor his Apostles ever made known
such a doctrine: and if thy faith be grounded upon any other Gospel than Christ
has revealed, thou art like to go seek another heaven than that he has
promised. For he has told thee plainly, that without holiness thou shall
never see the Lord; that he is the author of salvation, only to those that
obey him; and that he takes off condemnation from none but such who walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit. Now if thou do truly believe in Christ,
thou will set thy self to seek for happiness in the way that he has
appointed, not in one of thy own devising: for else it is a sign thou do not
depend upon him for salvation, but on thy own fancy or Satan's delusions, or
whoever it is whose directions thou followest rather than Christ's. If thou wast
in a place where two ways meet, and one man should bid thee follow him in this
way, and another should bid thee follow him in the contrary way, if thou
would come to thy journeys end: is it not plain that thou believe him whom
thou followest? Or if thou had some dangerous disease, and an able Physician
should tell thee, that if thou would depend upon him, by the help of God he
would recover thee, and should leave with thee such and such Physic to take,
if in the mean time thou should take a conceit, that thou might be well
without following his advice, and some one else should direct thee to an easier
and cheaper way, whereupon thou throwest away his medicines, do thou then
depend upon this Physician for cure? Thus the Lord Jesus, the great Physician
of souls, assures thee, if thou will depend on, and trust thy self with him, or
believe in him, he will keep thee from that everlasting death whereof thou art
in danger, and to this purpose he sends his Word and Spirit to cure thee of thy
ignorance and wickedness, which is the disease of thy soul, he would bring
thee to Repentance, and thoroughly purify and sanctify thy heart: but thou
think this a tedious course, and wilt by no means submit to it, come on it
what will; but fanciest thou may be saved without so much ado, and that
forsooth by reliance on Christ. Is not this a very wise business, to rely on
the Physician for health, and throw away the Physic that should procure it? I
know well enough what thou would have, Christ shall keep thee from hell, but
yet by all means he must give thee liberty to live in sin; that is, he must let
thee carry fire in thy bosom, but yet he must keep thee from being burnt; he
must let thee drink poison, but yet he must keep it from griping thy bowels.
But believe it, Christ came not into the World for any such ends. This he has
purchased, That no sins, great or small, shall damn the man that is truly humbled
for, and forsakes them, and depends upon him for a pardon, and is made holy in
heart and life: but not, that he who lives and delights in sin should escape
misery, which is indeed a kind of impossibility. For man is in bondage, and sin
is his fetters; now the Son would make us free, he would set the captive at
liberty, but must he not then take off his fetters? We are polluted, Sin is our
filth, Christ is the fountain opened for our cleansing: and can we be clean if
we will not be purged from our filthiness? We are slaves to Satan through our
lusts, by which he leads us whither he will, Christ would deliver us from this
slavery: but must he not then break these chains? Sin is the spawn or seed,
hell is the fruit and offspring: and if the seed be permitted to grow, must
there not needs be the fruit? And this shows how man plainly destroys him self,
whilst he will hug his lusts which are a Serpent in his bosom, presuming that
for all that, they will not sting him. Man by his sins had deserved everlasting
wrath, Christ came to save him from sin, and so from wrath: and if men will not
believe he came to this purpose, or will not improve him in order thereto, must
they not needs die in their sins, and so abide under that wrath which was
before upon them, and which still follows after sin, Joh. 8.24. and 3.36. Acts
4.12. Ignorance of God is one part as well as cause of man's unhappiness, and
if men wilfully close their eyes, that the light which Christ brings to the
world can have no entrance, must they not of necessity remain in darkness?
Excessive love to our bodies, and to the comforts of this life which we shall
be stripped of, and want of delight in God and his holy service is the great
misery of a soul, and does engage it in those strifes with it is Maker, that
cast men into an hell upon earth, and kindle the unquenchable fire: and if they
will not give way to the Spirit of Christ, to turn the bent and inclination of
their hearts from the world to God, do they not retain their own certain
misery? Thus thou see how impossible it is, even in the thing it self, for
all rejecters of Christ to escape damnation, supposing they are but continued
in being, and left to themselves, both which, Scripture assures us, will befall
the impenitent in the future state. But know moreover, to the breaking of thy
heart in time, thy condemnation is like to be much more heavy for thy rejecting
of Christ, than it would have been, if he had never come into the world, or had
never offered mercy to thee. Can thou in thy own Conscience think, that thou
who have been so importuned and begged by so many arguments, to accept of
Christ, shall escape as easily as they that never heard of him, or but very
darkly? Shall not he that abuses ten Talents be more severely dealt with, than
he who hides but one? why else does Christ denounce such woes against Chorazin
and Bethsaida, threatening them with worse punishments than Sodom and Gomorrah?
was it not because they enjoyed more mercies and greater means for Repentance?
Do we not read, Heb. 12.25. that they who refuse to hear the Son speaking from
heaven, shall much less escape, than they who refused to hear the Prophets of
old? And of a sorer punishment whereof they are worthy? Heb. 10.29. Though I
would not have thee neglect the means whilst there is any hope, yet let me tell
thee, it had been better for thee to have never heard one word of the way to
salvation by Jesus Christ, than having heard to fleight and disregard it. Every
Sermon thou have heard, every Book thou have read, and every exhortation thou
have had and neglected, will sink thee so much the lower into hell. These very
lines which thou art now reading, if they be not improved, will, without
Repentance, be remembered to thy smart another day. Be thou well assured, though
God be the Father of mercies, and a God of bowels, yet he takes account of the
mercies he affords his Creatures, and takes notice how they improve them: and
if they be abused, they shall be severely reckoned for. God will not be mocked
by rebellious Creatures, nor shall his precious gifts be trod under feet, and
they that do such things escape unpunished. Above all then, how will the love
of Christ in dying for them make their doom more sad, if they be not
constrained by this love. What torments can be great enough for the ingratitude
and perverseness of such? If thou, Reader, be one of them, I dare appeal to
thy self, whether thou deservest not, for thy unbelief and impenitency, greater
sufferings than if Christ had never died. For suppose there was a traitor, who
for his treason being condemned to die, the Kings own Son should be content to
have his right hand cut off (to satisfy the Law, and terrify the people from
the like guilt hereafter) that he might obtain a pardon of his Father for this
poor man, and when he had got it, should come and tell him what he had done,
assuring him, that if he will but take him for his deliverer, relinquish all
his traitorous designs, and become a good Subject, he shall not only have a
pardon, but be taken into the Court, and there live in the greatest favor and
honor: but suppose he, when he has heard all, instead of a thankful
acceptance of his pardon upon these conditions, should kick at the hand that
offers it, and turn his back upon him with contempt, asking him who wished him
to trouble himself for him; nay worse than this, suppose, whilst the Prince is
holding forth his pardon, he should endeavor with a Knife that he had got to
stab him to the heart, would thou not think that such a wretch deserved the
greatest tortures that could be devised? And more for this his latter obstinacy
than for his first treason? And if thou be found guilty of the very same, yea
worse perfidiousnesse and ingratitude against God thy Maker, and Jesus Christ
thy Redeemer, will not thy own Conscience conclude it most just, that the
heaviest judgments should be thy portion? Wast thou not liable to death, to
all kind of misery for thy sin? Did not the Son of God humble himself to take
on him thy nature? and then to die a most shameful cursed death to purchase
thy pardon? and yet when he offers it upon condition, of thy acceptance of him
for thy Savior, and becoming a faithful subject to the Sovereign Majesty,
thou art so far from being brought to this, that thou rather take
encouragement from this mercy held forth by Christ in the Gospel, to continue
in disobedience to God, than which thou could not offer a greater injury to
thy Savior, to make him as it were a patron of thy wickedness, doing far
worse than they that crucified him, whilst thou endeavourest quite to pervert
and take away the end of his Death, which was to redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.
And if indeed this be thy case, can thou say one word in thy own excuse, why
all the plagues that are prepared for rebellious sinners should not be poured
out upon thee, who thus scornest and abusest thy compassionate Savior?

By this time, I hope, thou art convinced, that there is abundant reason why
thou should accept of the Lord Jesus Christ to bring thee to the salvation
he has prepared for his people, in that way which he himself has prescribed.
That thou might not want arguments of all sorts, I have plainly told thee
what is like to come of thy obstinate refusal. And now after all I again demand
of thee, whether thy heart be brought thus thoroughly to consent, that Christ
shall be thy Savior, and take his own way with thee, to keep thee from misery,
and bring thee to true blessedness? Art thou resolved to give up thy self to
him, and follow his directions, or not? Shall all that has been said, do
nothing to incline thee thereto? Do thou think it better to be commanded to
go from Christ hereafter, than to come to him at his command for salvation
here? Can thou bear his heaviest indignation rather than his easy yoke and
light burden? Is there any thing in becoming Christ's faithful servant worse
than being the Devils everlasting bondslave. Bethink thy self whilst thou have
leisure, and cease not these thoughts till thou arrivest to a true sense of the
things that concern thee, and at length art firmly resolved, without any more
baffling or dallying, to bind thy self over to Christ by a firm Covenant, to be
wholly his, never to depart from him, but in all things sincerely to comply
with him, and be guided by him, that thou may escape the vengeance thy sins
have exposed thee to, and obtain that glory to which he will assuredly bring
thee. This is that Covenant with Christ or faith in him, which I have been all
this while persuading thee to: wherein I told thee is contained thy Covenant
with God the Father, to love and honor him above all, as thy Maker, Ruler, and
End; and with the Holy Ghost to be sanctified and led by him. Which Coven^n^
every man must be cordially entered into, that he may be fit to partake of the
Lords Supper, whereby he does profess to consecrate himself to the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; that is, to be a true Christian, as by, his Baptism he
stands engaged. And this is third qualification which is requisite to all
Communicants. And if I should name no more, hence it may sufficiently appear
who is fit to come to this Ordinance; even he that being acquainted with the
Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ, believes all that is there
related to be true, and is sensible of, and deeply humbled for all his sins,
being steadfastly resolved, by Gods assistance, presently from this time forward
to forsake them, and is unfeignedly willing to receive the Lord Jesus, to be
his Savior upon the terms of the Gospel, that is (as I shall next speak
particularly) he that relies upon him alone for the pardon of his sins, and is
willing to be sanctified by his holy Spirit, that he may be made fit for an
everlasting communion with God, upon whom he has placed his highest love. This
is the man whom Christ will bid welcome to his Table. Wherefore, Reader, if
this be a description of the state of thy soul, let not Satan, or thy own
fearful misgiving heart persuade thee, that thou art unfit to partake of the
privileges held forth to Believers: but with a cheerful boldness address
thy self to this Feast, which thy gracious Lord has appointed for thy
refreshment and strengthening, till he take thee to himself into his heavenly
Kingdom.

Since I have already thus far discovered, what kind of persons Communicants
ought to be, from the nature of this Ordinance, as it is for a Remembrance of
Christ and his Death, which cannot be without the knowledge of him, repentance
for sin, and believing in him, I may therefore be briefer in the particulars
that follow, in showing what more is included in Remembering Christ at the
Sacrament, since they serve but farther to illustrate and confirm what I have
already mentioned concerning the qualifications of the Receivers, and since I
may repeat some of them in directing those that intend to Communicate.

CHAP. VI. IV. A right Remembering the benefits procured for us by the Death of
Christ. 1. Justification.
HE that Remembers Christ's Death as he ought, cannot but Remember what were the
benefits, purchased by his Death for those that believe in him: which benefits
are held forth and represented in the Sacrament, and by it conveyed and assured
to the worthy Receivers, and do call for suitable dispositions and affections
in them, as I shall show particularly. Of these benefits I shall name three
which are the principal and contain all the rest: And these are Justification,
Sanctification, and Glorification.

1. The first is Justification or the pardon of sin (for the difference betwixt
them is so small that I shall here take no notice of it) which pardon Christ
has obtained by the satisfaction he made to divine justice, by his perfect
obedience and grievous sufferings, for the sake whereof, Believers are releast
from the rigor and curse of the Law, received into the favor of God, and
preserved from those miseries which otherwise had according to their desert
befaln them, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us. Heb. 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sin^,
etc. Heb. 9.26. -- But now has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself. Romans 3.23, 24. For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God;
Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ; with multitudes of the like places. And the Bread and Wine set apart
for the Sacrament, do represent Christ's Body that was given and broken for us,
Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24. and his Blood which was shed to procure our pardon,
as you may read expressly, Mat. 26.27, 28. And he took the Cup, and gave thanks,
and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it: For this is my Blood of the
New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. That is, This
Wine does signify and represent my Blood, in which the new Covenant betwixt
God and man is founded and established, and by which remission of sins and all
other consequent benefits of this New Testament or Covenant are purchased. And
those Sacramental actions of giving and receiving the Bread and Wine to eat
and drink it, do hold forth and confirm the mutual Covenant betwixt God and
man. As it seals to the Covenant on man's part, (that he will receive Christ as
he is offered, and be devoted to him, and to God by him,) I have spoken to it
under the foregoing Head; and to all who sincerely do thus, God hereby seals
to them, that he will be their God, reconciled to them through his Son; and
that Christ with all his benefits shall be theirs; and therefore as one
principal benefit, that all their iniquities for Christ's sake shall be
forgiven them. Even as the Minister, who is here in Gods stead, offers them the
Bread and Wine, whereby a crucified Christ, with the blessings he purchased, are
signified, so does God make over all these to a believing soul, which does as
really and truly, though in a spiritual manner, receive Jesus Christ, by
consenting to take him for his Lord and Savior, as with his hand he takes, and
with his mouth eats, and drinks the Bread and Wine. Now in answer to that
particular privilege, pardon of sin, which hereby is assured to us, there is
required in us a dependence upon Christ for this pardon; that is, an
expectation and hope, that God for his Sons sake will pardon our sins, that
they shall not be charged upon us, to condemn us at the great judgment day,
but that we shall then be cleared from all accusations, and secured from those
miseries into which the ungodly shall be sentenced; and this we are to look
upon as sealed to us by the Sacrament. And it is to be considered, that this
dependence upon Christ for a pardon, is one part, or an effect of our saving
faith in him: for they who believe that he is the Redeemer of the world, and
are willing to be saved by him from their wickedness, and so from hell, they
will rely on him to obtain forgiveness by him; and according to the knowledge
they have of their Repentance and Faith, the conditions of this mercy, they
will the more confidently expect it. But as it is oftentimes difficult to bring
the truest Believers to this act of faith, in that measure as may give them
comfort, so is it more difficult to beat the most negligent out of this refuge,
who would cheat themselves with a conceit, that to hope for mercy through
Christ is all that is required of them. But know, the pardon which God offers is
not barely upon condition of our willingness to accept of Christ to teach and
guide, to sanctify and save us, which I have often mentioned, as that believing
in Christ which the Gospel calls for, and entails salvation upon: and then they
in whom this willingness is wrought, are bound to believe, that all Gods
promises, made to such as by his grace they find themselves to be, shall be
fulfilled: and therefore particularly they ought to believe, that according to
his promise, he will blot out all their transgressions, for his sake who was
bruised for them; and upon the strength or weakness of this persuasion does
their comfort very much depend, though not their safety so much, since the want
of it commonly proceeds from an ignorance of themselves, rather than an
unbelief of the promises: to which I shall say something hereafter, least any
should think they must not come to the Sacrament, because they have not a
confident persuasion that their sins shall be pardoned, and therefore think
they have no Faith. Now from what has been said it farther appears, That none
but penitent Believers are worthy Receivers: for to such, and none but such,
does God in the Covenant of Grace promise pardon, and therefore to them only
it is that he conveys and assures it by the Sacrament, which is a seal of that
Covenant, and ratifies no more than what that promises. And indeed none but
such do in good earnest desire or seek after a pardon: for none but they are
soundly convinced of their need of it, by reason of their breach of that Law
which does accuse and condemn them. Ignorant senseless sinners, that run on
desperately in their wicked courses, without any thought or fear of those
judgments that are ready to be executed upon them, and never take to heart how
they have incensed the Divine Majesty against them, do not use much to busy
their thoughts how they should turn away this wrath, and prevent this misery.
The fear of sickness, poverty, disgrace, or the like temporal evils, does
much more take them up than the fears of hell, and accordingly their daily care
is to avoid those rather than this. He that is sick prizes the Physician,
whilst he that is in health, or thinks that he is so, cares little for him or
his medicines. A poor prisoner that has newly heard the sentence of
condemnation from the Judge's mouth, and knows he is a dead man in Law, what
would not he do to get a pardon from the King? Or oh how thankful would he be
to the man that should do it for him? Whilst another that knows not himself to
be guilty (though he may really be so) would take himself little beholden to
any one that should make him such an offer, to wit, of the Kings pardon. Even
thus should you come to a stupid sinner, and be able to assure him, that God
was reconciled to him, he would be very little moved with the tidings, for this
is not a matter whereof he used to make much doubt, or greatly concern himself
one way or other: but could you surprise him with the news of a great Estate
being fallen to him, oh what an ecstasy of joy would you cast the poor man into?
I confess when these careless ones come to be awakened on a deathbed, or by
a fit of sickness, then they do indeed earnestly desire, that their sins may
be forgiven them. Notwithstanding the great affection they had to the Devils
drudgery, they have no mind to receive the wages which he affords them. Though
they have loved sin so well, that they would never part with it whilst they
could keep it, yet since now they can keep it no longer, by no means are they
willing to go to that Hell to which their sins directly led them. Loath they are
to take leave of their lusts till they come to the very mouth of the grave, but
then fain they would rid their hands of them: for they know, if they go
together one step farther they are like to rue it for ever. Whilst they could
cast the pleasures of sin they wallowed securely in it, but now sickness has
spoiled their taste, and put them out of temper, they seem somewhat more
indifferent to it: but especially fearing, least they have already had all the
sweetness, and that nothing but bitter dregs are at the bottom of the cup,
therefore now at length they would throw it out of their hand. And this I fear
is ordinarily the best of a Deathbed Repentance which many build their hopes
so much upon. They may be in good earnest afraid of being damned, and therefore
are sorry that they have brought themselves into such danger: but what is this
to an ingenuous sorrow for having offended a good and gracious God, and to a
loathing of sin for its own vileness? which are necessary to make our
Repentance right. And not only at death, its like, but in time of health also,
there are many who would be very willing to have their sins pardoned, if it
might be upon any other condition than forsaking them. If bare confession and
begging of mercy might serve turn, or if coming to the Sacrament might serve
turn, and yet still they might live as they list, few would go without a
pardon. But remember God nowhere assures pardon to any man absolutely, but upon
a certain condition, which except we perform we cannot look for the promised
mercy. What this condition is, I have before told you, even that you should
repent of, and give diligence to forsake all sin, and receive Christ to be your
perfect Savior: upon no other terms therefore expect to have a pardon
confirmed to you by the Sacrament, which will no farther avail you than as it
receives power and efficacy from the promise, without which it is a seal to a
blank paper that will warrant you to claim nothing. Suppose a Landlord should
make you a Lease of an House, upon condition that you would own your self his
Tenant, and yearly pay him some small quit-rent and should set his seal to this
Lease, all this would stand you in no stead, if you denied that you was his
Tenant, and refuse to pay the Rent he required. Wherefore to know whether your
hope of pardon be upon good grounds, and such as will not fail you, examine
whether you are such kind of persons as I have before described, whether you
are humbled for, and brought out of love with every sin, and do with firm
purpose of heart cleave to the Lord Jesus.

To bring you thus to depend upon Christ for a pardon, in a right manner, and
upon sure grounds, the considerations I laid down under the last particular may
be of use, since this is one part of that faith in Christ, which I there
exhorted you to; that was an acceptance of him in all his Offices; this has a
peculiar respect to his Priestly Office, and is called Faith in his blood, Romans
3.25. Only to add a word or two more, for the quickening of all such who have
not much laid it to heart, how to get their sins pardoned, as if they thought
it was a thing of no great consequence: Consider I beseech you, whether the
Incarnation, Life and Death of Christ was not a matter of huge importance to
the world? and tell me, Reader, do not think thou art as much concerned
herein as any other man? Had not thou as much need of his Death as any? And
therefore does it not stand thee upon, to see whether thou sharest in the
benefits of it as much as it does any man breathing? And tell me farther, if
all this preparation in the Gospel had been made for thee only, and Christ had
come down from heaven, and suffered on the Cross for thy sake alone, that thou
might be saved by him on the same terms that now thou may, and should have
sent thee a message calling thee by thy particular name, assuring thee of all
this, and beseeching thee to accept of these offers of life: do thou think
all this would have convinced thee of the greatness of Divine love, and of thy
need of mercy? And would it have awakened thee to make out after the same, and
to do all that was required to obtain it? If so, why then will thou not now be
persuaded to the same care? Since the Gospel speaks to thee as particularly as
if it named thee, and the mercy is as great, and thy need of it as much as if
thou alone wast concerned in it; and thou shall never have the less benefit,
nay rather more, by having others to share with thee in it: but thy misery, if
thou miss of a pardon, will be never the less, for having many companions in
the same sad case with thy self.

Once again let me ask thee, thou who now art so insensible of thy need of a
pardon, that thou will not take pains to get it in the way thou art commanded,
would thou be contented at any rates, absolutely and expressly to part with
all hopes and expectations of it? If thou might be hired with a thousand or
ten thousand pounds, would thou for such a sum of money, profess thou
did renounce all right and title to Jesus Christ, and all hopes of mercy
through him? Or would thou give this under thy hand in writing to the Devil,
or to any man that would help thee to a great Estate? what would thou think
of those who should do thus? would thou not look upon them as most wretched
forlorn creatures? Why, be it known to thee, if through negligence and
stupidity thou seek not out after an interest in Christ, that thou may be
pardoned and saved by him, thy condition will at length be found as miserable
as theirs. If there should be certain acres of ground in Ireland, promised to
any one that would go thither to possess them, he that would not take the
pains to go over, would have no more advantage by them, than he that should
formally renounce his righ^ thereto: Even so by carelessness and sloth may
thou lose all benefit by Christ, as certainly as those poor creatures that are
drawn to make compacts with the Devil, and sell away their souls for a thing of
naught.

To conclude, if nothing I have hitherto said will move thee, consider, I
entreat thee, whether this thy undervaluing of pardoning mercy will remain
always. Sins thou have I know thou will acknowledge, yea, many and great sins,
such as would sink thee to the lowest hell if they be laid to thy charge: Do
thou not grant this? And thou can not but know, that there will at length
come a day of reckoning for these thy sins: and do thou think when thou must
stand before the Judge, and give up thy account, that thou shall not earnestly
desire a pardon then? will it then seem as indifferent a thing as now it does?
Then, I say, when without it thou must be sentenced to keep company with the
Devils, in the midst of scorching flames, for ever and ever. And thou can not
sure be so ignorant as not to know, that none shall have a pardon then but
those who got it now: that is a day for examining and declaring what our estates
are, whether good or bad, that we may be dealt with accordingly, not a time for
getting them made better, if they were naught before. Wherefore if thou be
not a very bruit, only to mind what is before thee; if thou have any foresight,
any belief of this Judgement-day that thou art going to, now rouse up thy self,
and with all speed and industry labor to get that pardon, which within a
while, to thy own most lively sense will be so needful, and stand thee in so
much stead. And when thou art wrought to such a sight of thy misery as makes
thee desire after mercy, and to such a loathing of thy sins as fits thee for
it, then thou may be assured, that God for Christ sake will be gracious to
thee, and thou may comfortably address thy self to the Sacrament, and take
it as a farther assurance from God, that his promises of mercy shall be made
good to thee.

CHAP. VII. The second benefit is Sanctification.
2. THe second great benefit purchased by the Death of Christ, and held forth in
the Sacrament, is Sanctifying, Saving Grace, for the enlivening and
strengthening the souls of Believers. There is no truth more plain in the whole
Gospel, than that one great end of Christ's Death was, to obtain from the
Father, that the holy Spirit should accompany the proclaiming of the Gospel to
enlighten the minds and soften the hearts of those who should not wilfully
resist his workings, that they might entertain the truth in the love thereof;
and that on these, greater measures of grace should be poured forth, to make
them in all things conformable to their Maker according to the capacity of
their natures: which was the great design of the Redeemer, even to restore
apostate creatures to the image of God wherein they were created, that so they
might be made meet for his service here, and the fruition of him hereafter. A
most lamentable mistake it is to confine Christ's death only to the procuring
of a pardon, and keeping sinners out of Hell, since this was but in order to a
work of grace on their hearts, and only such who submit to this work shall at
last have a share in the absolute pardon. For suppose a company of prisoners
were taken in War, who being weak and wounded, cannot return into their own
Country, but must presently be put to death by the King that took them; and in
the mean time comes their own Prince, and pays a great sum to obtain, that the
execution of them may be put off for some time, and that his Physician may use
medicines, and apply plasters to as many as are willing, and that all such,
when they are made whole, shall be sent to their own homes: and the rest who
will not be ruled by the Physician, but spit out his potions because they are
bitter, and throw away his plasters, because they make them smart, they are to
remain in their prison, and be put to death as they were sentenced. Here we see
the ransom that was paid, was first to stop the slaughter of the prisoners,
and to get liberty to use means for their recovery to health and soundness,
and secondly to obtain, that the recovered should be set free to return to
their own Country; and not only the contempt of the ransom, but of the
Physician, would bring death. Thus had we by the Fall, both brought our selves
into danger of present destruction, and disabled our souls, that we could not
return to that state whence we fell; but the Son of God undertaking our
Redemption, obtained for us, that the sentence of condemnation should not
speedily be executed, and that there should be assured hopes of escaping
destruction, and returning to happiness, for all those who make not their
condition desperate, by continuance in sin, and rejecting of the cure which his
Spirit would work upon them: now the work of his Spirit is to plant and
increase grace in their hearts, to heal the diseases, and remove the weakness
which sin has caused, that they may be enabled to walk in the ways of
holiness to their everlasting rest; and the sending forth of his healing
Spirit was the fruit of his blood: Now as it will assuredly damn men to despise
the blood of Christ, as if it was of no force to be a ransom, nor to attain
those ends for which the Gospel says it was shed, so is it as dangerous and
damnable to resist and slight the Spirit of Christ, let them pretend what
esteem they will for his blood. A like mistake also it is, flowing from the
former, to limit the notion of free grace to mere pardoning mercy, whenas it
includes sanctifying (...) so: for in the instance now given, the Physic I
hope was as free a gift to the prisoners, as the ransom that was paid for
them, notwithstanding this was without them, and the other to be taken into
them. And in like manner is the giving of the Spirit into us, as purely from
the grace and mercy of God (though merited by Christ) as the giving of his Son
for us, and accepting of us for his sake. This I was willing to hint, least any
when they hear or read of being saved by Free grace, should dream of a
salvation to be had by a mere pardon, without being sanctified by the Spirit.

That the making men holy in their hearts and lives was a principal end of
Christ's Death, without which no happiness is to be attained, is, I say, a
truth so evident in the very tenor of the Gospel, that it may seem needless
to produce particular proofs; yet amongst the rest read these few, Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc. Ephesians. 5.25,
26, 27. -- Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it, etc. and that it might be holy and without blemish. 1 John 3.8. The Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the
Devil. 1 Pet. 3.24. Who bare our sins -- that we being dead to sin should live
unto righteousness. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. -- According to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. Read also Mat. 1.22. Luke 1.75.
Romans 6.11. Galat. 1.4. Tit. 2.12, 13, 14. Heb. 9.14. Now though I acknowledge
it is by the help of the Spirit, that we are brought to believe: for faith it
self is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. yet I think we shall ordinarily find the
promises of the Spirit, to be made to those who are already Believers, to
advance and carry on the work of God upon their souls. And to this end, and of
this nature is that Grace which is (...) and given forth by the Sacrament; even
to refresh and nourish the souls of Believers, to confirm and increase those
graces that are wrought in them. and to bring them forward to farther degrees
of perfection. And this much the very elements themselves do teach us: for as
Bread is the support and stay of life, and Wine that which makes glad the heart
of man, and both are needful for the maintaining of life and increasing our
strength, so are the Body and Blood of Christ alike necessary and useful to
our souls: for he himself has told us, that his flesh is meat indeed, and his
blood is drink indeed, and that he who eats his flesh and drinks his blood
dwells in him, and has eternal life, with much more to the same purpose,
Joh. 6. The proper meaning whereof as will appear by the Context, and the
occasion of that Discourse, I suppose, is, That they who believe in him, having
the same expectations of spiritual life from him, that they have of temporal
life from their food, and accordingly receive, digest and improve his doctrine,
hoping for remission of sins through his Blood, giving entertainment to his
Spirit, and are filled and fed with those graces which he gives out, that all
such shall live forever. And then in a secondary sense, these words may be
applied to the Sacrament; so far as this faith in Christ, whereby grace is
expected and derived from him, is here particularly acted: for thus he who in
the Sacrament eats the flesh and drinks the blood of Christ has eternal life;
that is, he who comes with that fitness of soul as to be made partaker of the
blessings and mercies hereby presented, and earnestly desires, that of Christ's
fullness he may receive suitable supplies of grace. To the same purpose seems
the Apostle to speak, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is
it not the communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many members are one
body. As if he should have said, Hereby we have a communion with Christ
himself, we profess our relation to, and interest in him; and the benefits
which come by him are communicated to us who truly believe in him; his Spirit
is diffused and shed abroad upon us, and thereby we, who make up one mystical
body, whereof he is the Head, being united and ingrafted into him, as members
do live by him, being acted and upheld by that life and vigor which he gives
and continues to us.

Since then here is spiritual food, sanctifying grace held forth and
communicated to souls rightly disposed, this farther informs us what kind of
persons Communicants ought to be. The dispositions of soul particularly suited
to this benefit are, 1. An earnest desire after grace to be given in, and 2. A
resolution to improve this grace received. Hither Christians are to come,
earnestly longing to have communion with Christ himself, who is not only the
Master of the Feast, but the very food whereupon the Believer lives; and this
communion we have by his liberal communications of the graces of his Spirit to
necessitous souls. This desire of grace is that which is signified by those
expressions of hungring and thirsting, which we so often meet with in
Scripture: answerable to which the spiritual things desired are represented by
things to be eaten and drank, as by Bread, Meat, Milk, Water and Wine. And they
are her^ shadowed forth under the elements of Bread and Wine, and must be
hungered after by all that come (...) this Ordinance: which teaches us, that
none are fit to come, who have not already received such beginnings of grace,
as may cause them to long for more; who have not such a spiritual life wrought
in them, as may put them upon care to have this life supported and increast.
None can feel hunger but they that live; none can desire after greater measures
of grace, who have not in some sort known and tasted the sweatnesse and
excellency thereof. But no humble souls need therefore be discouraged, as if
they were not worthy to feast at this Table, where none are welcome but such as
have true grace wrought in them, since they may be confident of their
acceptance, if they can really find in themselves an appetite to the provisions
made for them, an hearty and sincere desire that their spiritual wants may be
supplied, their weakness strengthened, and all their distempers healed: and
what true Christian, whose grace is never so low, but finds in himself a love
to, and a longing after more? But this indeed condemns those who feel no need
of any nourishment for their souls, and therefore either wholly neglect
Sacraments, and other means whereby it is to be had, or else come without any
Stomach at all, and content themselves with the shell and outside of the duty,
which will never feed them. These full souls that loathe the honey comb are
like to be sent empty away, whilst the hungry only shall be filled with good
things. Now to such sickly, listless souls, that even nauseate the most
wholesome food, I would say something briefly in order to their cure, to bring
them so far into frame that they may come with quickened appetites, and
enlarged desires to the Lords Table, as perceiving there are such good things
here to be had, which they do most of all stand in need of.

1. In order hereto, labor to get sensible what needy empty creatures you are:
for till then you are not like to seek out for a supply. Consider, I mean,
chiefly how to destitute you are by nature, and to this very day, of that which
is the true riches, the beauty and dignity of the soul, in that you are so
unlike to God, so full of corruption and wickedness, so empty of that
Spiritual wisdom, that holiness, humility, heavenly-mindednesse, and the
like excellencies, which alone can render you amiable in the sight of your
Maker. You cannot imagine, if you have well studied your own hearts, that you
brought into the world with you, all that grace which is of absolute necessity,
to perfect and accomplish your natures; and it is too sad a sign you are still
without it, whilst you have no more mind to those means which God has ordained
for the conveyance and increase of it. How happy a thing now was it, if you
were but thoroughly convinced of your own wants! when you do but perceive you
need food, or raiment, or physic, how industrious and impatient are you till
you have one way or other, got what you would have? And thus ardently desirous
would you be after the graces of Gods Spirit, if you did rightly apprehend,
that these are the food, and clothing, and physic of the soul. But alas, how
do people generally labor under the sottishness, and self-conceitednesse,
which was charged upon the Laodicean Church, that thought her self rich,
increast with goods, needing nothing, and knew not that she was wretched and
miserable, poor and blind and naked, Revel. 3.17. It Is one of the greatest
difficulties in the world to bring men to judge of their poverty or riches by
the temper and frame of their souls; to convince them that they are poor and
needy whilst they are graceless, though they should overflow in wealth and
abundance of all external things.

2. Wherefore in the next place, let me advise you to beware of a secret
mistake which ruins millions, in imagining that outward comforts may serve
well enough to make amends for all your necessities; that the husks of worldly
enjoyments may serve, instead of the bread that is in the Fathers house. Oh
take heed of inordinate thirsting after these puddles, or of wallowing in them.
Do not so eagerly pursue such unsatisfactory trifles as carnal profits and
pleasures, which divert you from the pursuit of those things that most concern
you; but examine well what there is in them to do good to an immortal soul,
which you cannot but account your best part. Beware then of being so devoted to
the pleasing of your flesh, that you should be thereby stupefied to a
regardlesnesse of your soul. The luscious fare which the world affords, cloys
the mind of man, and spoils his appetite, and puts him out of relish with his
own most proper food. This is the undoing of the most, they are so full of the
creature, if not in their hands, yet in their hearts, that they have no mind
nor room, to entertain any thing of God there. Every man breathing finds
himself a needy creature, that cannot live upon himself, but must have
something from without brought in to give him satisfaction: but then the misery
is, they think their wants are all of that nature, that things here below may
supply them. The poor think, there is nothing they need so much as better food
and raiment, more plenty and ease and esteem in the world; and they who abound
in these things, because they see others excel them, think they want such and
such greater Estates and Dignities to make them happy. Though they find after
all their seize, that still they are restless, discontented, and wanting
something else, they scarce know what: which might convince them, that it is
only from God they can receive satisfaction, by having their natures perfected
with those graces which may fit them for that communion with him in love and
delight, wherein the soul of man can only find rest and contentment. This, I
say, they might learn from those restless infinite desires of their own
hearts, if they would but heedfully attend to the nature thereof: but being
more cruel to themselves than any parent to his child, when the soul calls for
bread they give it a stone; endeavoring to put it off, with those things that
concern the body alone, whilst that within them, which is most needy still
remains so, and is suffered to pine and starve. As if an hungry man should fill
his mouth with meat, and let nothing down into his stomach. Whilst you are
fondly endeavoring to quiet your minds, and accomplish your selves with any
thing that is without your souls, be it riches, pleasures, honors, friends,
and all the accommodations of the outward man which the world most dotes upon,
you are as verily besotted and deceived, as he that thinks to ease a violent
pain at his heart with putting on a rich Suit of Clothes: or to supply the want
of enlivening blood and spirits by painting his face. Your necessities and
diseases are deep and inward; your very souls are out of order, and nothing in
the world will do you any good but what gets within you, and changes your
apprehensions, desires and affections, and makes you quite other persons than
now you are. Wherefore I would beg you to fix this truth deep into your minds,
That since you are become poor and naked through the loss of Gods image, which
was the riches and beauty of the reasonable creature, it is never like to be
well with you, till you be again restored to his image: which is by being
brought to the knowledge and love of him, to an universal submission, and
exact conformity to his will,

3. And when you are brought to this knowledge of your wants, and the nature of
them, then consider well, that it is by Jesus Christ alone that you can be
satisfied and supplied. The Law was given by Moses, but by him comes grace and
truth, 1 John 1.17. He is the Mediator through whom, and for whose sake we
receive from God whatever our souls stand in need of. He by his death has
purchased all things necessary for our salvation; he is ascended on high, and
has received gifts for his people. As King and Head of his Church, he
communicates to his members those graces, that by his death and intercession he
has obtained for them, and they are replenisht with the fullness of him who
fills all in all. And then you are to take notice, that Christ has appointed
duties to be performed by us, and set up Ordinances, which we are diligently to
attend upon, and by his Spirit accompanying them, he conveys grace to the
hearts of those that are conscionable in the use of these means. Such are
harkening to, and meditating upon the word, Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them by thy
truth, thy word is truth. 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk
of the word that you may grow thereby. And prayer to the Father in his name,
Joh. 14.13. Luke 11.13. -- How much more will your heavenly Father give the
Spirit to those that ask him. Jam. 1.5. If any man lack wisdom let him ask of
God, who gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given
him. Such also is the Sacrament of Baptism, being duly improved, Gal. 3.27.
For as many of you, as have been Baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Romans
6.3, 4. 1 Pet. 3.21. And lastly this receiving of the Lords Supper, which is
our feeding upon Christ who is the Paschal Lamb sacrificed for us, and herein
to believers in a spiritual sense, is afforded a communion of the body and
blood of Christ, as we may find in the Apostles words before mentioned. And
when you have but arrived to a sense of your own indigence and Christ's fullness
suitable thereto, there will necessarily arise in you, desires after a
participation of that fullness, which will bring you to, and prepare you for
those Ordinances wherein these desires may be gratified.

Lastly, I would advise you to beware, of ever entertaining a conceit, that you
are become so full now, that you need nothing: for that is a plain sign you are
poor and know it not. Your stomachs are filled with wind instead of solid meat.
And whilst you are puffed up with this self-conceit, you will be hindered from
seeking after what you really want. He that thinks his Barns full when they are
empty, may through this mistake first lie in idleness, and after come to
beggary. He that dreams of such a perfection, as makes all helps Christ has
appointed needless to him, neither knows himself, nor considers what a God he
has to serve, nor what a Law he has given him to walk by. It Is much to be
feared, that he who thinks he has grace enough, has yet got no saving grace
at all. He that knows enough is very ignorant, he that is humble enough is still
exceeding proud, and so of the rest. For he that has tasted that the Lord is
gracious, longs after fuller communion with him. He that drinks of the water
Christ gives, though his sickly thirst after creatures will be cured, yet will
such a thirst after more of Christ arise in him, as will never be quenched, till
he be drencht into the ocean of grace and joy. Wherefore study thy self, study
the duty of this whole present state, wherein we are enjoined to grow in grace,
and learn hence so much humility, so much wisdom, as to own thy necessities,
and not go about to cover them: for they will not always be hid, but rather use
all means to supply them whilst they are afforded.

And as there is required in all Receivers an earnest longing, after
sanctifying grace which is here vouchsafed; so the other qualification suitable
hereto, I told you, is a Resolution to improve this grace; that is, to lay it
out, and show forth the fruit of it in an holy conversation. This is an effect
of the former, and indeed necessarily flows from the nature of grace, which is
no way desirable but for use and exercise: not is it possible that in should
ordinarily lie still in the heart, and not be brought forth into act, and shown
in the life. He that desires patience, humility, purity, temperance, to what
purpose is it but to overcome the temptations, which he meets with in the world
to the contrary vices, and to show forth these fruits of the Spirit in all his
converse? Whence it appears, that no man is wor^hy to come to the Lords Table,
who is not resolved by the grace of God to live an holy life, and to be led by
the Spirit in all his ways. He that has got any sin which he is resolved to
keep, is not like to have any desire after that grace which should mortify and
quell his sin; nor any mind to remember that Death which was to deliver us from
this present evil world. He Is like to be far from a right remembrance of
Christ, who will not be persuaded to imitate him: for certainly that is one end
of our remembering his Death, that we may thereby be drawn to follow his
example, which he gave us then as well as in his life, by his constancy,
patience, charity to his enemies, and ready resignation of himself to his
Fathers will* As he walked so ought we to walk, and from his very death may we
fetch directions for our life. This resolution for holiness which I am
speaking of is indeed one branch of our Faith in Christ* being no other than
our consent to take him for our King, to guide and govern us in all our
thoughts, words, and actions: and therefore having said something to it under
that Head, as also the former of Repentance, I shall at present pass it over.

CHAP. VIII. The third benefit is eternal happiness with God.
3. THE last of those benefits which I named, obtained for us by the death of
Christ, and to be remembered at the Sacrament, is eternal happiness. It is by
his resurrection from the dead, and consequently by his death, that Believers
have a lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not
away, reserved in the heavens for them, 1 Pet. 3.4. It was his blood that
redeemed them to be Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 5.9, 10. He gave his flesh
for the life of the world, Joh. 6.51. By Jesus Christ God calls us to eternal
glory, 1 Pet. 5.10. He opened the entrance into Paradise which sin had shut up.
It was his will not only that they who believe in him should be kept from the
place where Satan was, but that they should also be with him where he is, Joh.
17.24, This he prayed for, this he died for; and is gone before to prepare a
place for them, and keeps them here to prepare them for that place, and being
ready they shall enter into the Kingdom. He receives their Spirits when they
die, and will raise up their bodies at the last day. Now their life is hid with
Christ in God, and when he appears, then shall they also appear with him in
glory, Coll. 3.3, 4. Be we sure then, this Death of Christ cannot be remembered
as it ought, if the glory purchased thereby be forgotten. How can we remember a
dying Christ, but withal we must call to, mind, that he vanguisht this death,
is risen again and ascended into glory, whither in due time he will exalt his
people. Moreover that Covenant which is sealed to by this Sacrament, promises
an everlasting Kingdom to Believers: and can any man forget such a benefit,
even whilst he is receiving a confirmation of his right to it? Again here is
that grace given out which is the pledge, the seed, the beginning and forecast
of glory; here is the meat which endures to everlasting life: and who can
forget his Journeys end whilst he is taking food to strengthen him for his
travel? To conclude, here is a communion of Saints, which does in some measure
shadow out and signify that perfect communion which they shall have one with
another, when all the Elect shall be gathered from the four corners of the
earth, and with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall sit down, and for ever remain
in the Kingdom of God. Now hence it appears, that the worthy Receiver must be
one, who has taken the heavenly glory for his portion; who has got a treasure
above, and there placed his heart and his hopes: for none but such a one can
with any life and raisednesse remember this glory which is to be revealed. He
that is wont to solace himself, with the contemplation thereof, will rejoice in
every thing that has a relation to it, much more in the remembrance of that
price that was paid for it. But how can the earthworm, whose soul lies
grovelling upon the dust, bring himself to any affectionate thoughts of hidden
treasures, which cannot be got into his bags not coffers, which he cannot so
much as get a sight of. Nor can the swinish voluptuous sinners, that feed upon
none but the muddy delights of sense, take any comfort in the forethoughts of
pure and spiritual pleasures, such as are prepared for exalted purified souls.
Any, whoever they be, that place their chief con^entment on earth, are not
like, with any pleasure, to think of that time, when they must leave this
earth, and enter upon another state, where are no such sensual enjoyments as
here they blessed themselves in. Ignorant, narrow souls have no heart to think of
what shall be thousands and millions of years to come. These poor sordid
spirits are so glewed to the little trifles of the world, that they look not so
high as after Crowns and Scepters, which Christ has in store for his faithful
followers. And they who never took much pains to secure or clear up their
evidences for heaven, but have taken it for granted, that they must needs go
thither at last, or counted it an indifferent thing whether they do or not,
will be far from those lively apprehensions of the greatness of that love
which purchased it, and of the excellency of the bliss it self, which are
necessary for him who can rightly remember either. Now to bring those who are
yet strangers hereto, to such an apprehension of the glory to come by Christ,
that they may choose it as their portion, and so be joyfully taken up in the
expectations thereof: in one word, I would desire thee, whoever thou art, that
have but so much common reason as to distinguish between good and evil, to
consider well whether thou have not a sou^ as well as a body, and whether this
soul must not remain in being and alive, when thy body is rotting in the earth,
and whether then it does not as much, yea infinitely much more, concern thee to
seek out for somewhat, that may at that time make thy soul happy, than for what
may now please thy senses. Yea, since thou must live somewhere for ever, think
whether it is not more worthy thy care, to provide for an everlasting
well-being, than for the comforts of a frail short life. If thou art thus far
convinced, then make an impartial search, whether there be any thing here
below, that is able to make thee perfectly happy. Thy houses and lands, thy
pleasures and honors, will any, or all of these give in all that felicity
which thou desire or need? Are they of the same nature with thy soul? or
will they last as long as it will last? must not all thy merry days at length
come to an end? And will thou be ever the better for all thou have enjoyed when
once it is over? will the remembrance give thee any satisfaction? In that night
wherein thy soul will be required of thee, what advantage will thou have from
the goods thou had laid up for many years? yea or from those goods thou had
lived upon the years before? When the earth and all its works shall be burnt
up, where will all thy possessions and treasures be? If thou have nothing to
live on, but what will be turned into flames, what will thou then fix upon? At
that day when there shall be no marrying or giving in marriage, no wives or
children, no relations or friends, whose society will afford any such comfort
as here it did; when the interest of Princes and great ones, whose favor was
here thy shelter and thy pride, shall all be vanished, what will thy confidence
in men avail thee? Examine these or any other outward prop whereon thou
leanest, and see whether it be not a broken reed: And if so, except thou art
resolved against thy own happiness, methinks thou should now only make
choice of that which will never give thee cause to repent what thou did, as
all things will, but the eternal glory which God has promised to those that
love him. But he that can once upon good grounds say, This heaven is mine, I
shall see the face of God with joy, and live in his love for ever, may now lead
a serene and cheerful life in the midst of all occurrences; and need not be
daunted at Death it self, but rather rejoiced, as it takes him to the
possession of his treasure, wafts him to his own home. Wherefore, if thou love
thy life, be persuaded to aim at this highest glory; let nothing short of it
content thee, think no condition hard to get it; rest not till thou have made
it as sure as thou can that it is thine; and then having thus fixed thy end,
thou may travel on with alacrity and speed, and take abundance of comfort in
the forethoughts of thy future bliss, in using all helps afforded in thy
journey to it, and in the remembr^nce of that precious blood which was shed to
purchase it, and by consequence will be fitted to celebrate the Sacrament.

CHAP. IX. V. It must be a thankful Remembrance.
IT is not possible that the death of Christ can be remembered as it ought,
without the most hear^y and unfeigned thankfulness to God, for so great and
glorious a mercy. Has he the heart of a man that can co^template the
sufferings of Christ, and the infinite unspeakable benefits thereby procured
for poor sinners and not find himself raised to return thanks and praise to
God, for his gracious dealings with mankind? This duty is so proper to the
Lords Supper, that hence it anciently obtained the name of Eucharist, a return
of thanks. Since then, every man who partakes thereof, ought to be thus truly
thankful to God for his love revealed in Christ, this again acquaints us what
kind of persons Communicants must be, namely such who are capable of rendering;
acceptable praise to God, which does but give farther evidence of the necessity
of those qualifications before laid down. None but such as have been made
sensible of the evil of sin, and of the danger they were thereby liable to,
will be heartily thankful for that mercy which prevent^ this misery, by
purchasing and vouchsafing the forgiveness of their sins. How formal and
hypocritical are his thanks like to be for Christ, who never yet saw, what
need he stood in of him? Will he thank you for a plaster who never felt
himself wounded? Can he have any grateful sense, of the love that plucks poor
sinners as brands out of the fire, who never perceived himself in any such
danger? Can he be thankful for ease and rest, who never felt his strong lusts,
nor the curse of the Law and wrath of God, as any load or burden upon him? Nor
can he be thankful for the grace that is given by Christ, who had far rather
keep his sins, than be renewed and sanctified. Little thanks will he return for
the light who is but disturbed and troubled with it, and so far shamed by it,
that he cannot pursue his wicked designs with that freedom and eagerness as
he could before whilst he was more in the dark, where he had still rather
remain. How can he thank God for grace who rejects and despises it? For being
taken out of the snares of the Devil, who wilfully fastens himself into them?
Will he praise God for liberty and ability to serve him, who says of his
service, what a weariness is it? and thinks it would be better for him if he
might live as he list, and never be put upon so much trouble as godliness
brings along with it? Nor can he be thankful for the glory to be had by
Christ, who has not a sound persuasion of the certainty and excellency of it,
and who has not firmly resolved to take it for his portion. He that knows
nothing better than bodily enjoyments, and would think himself undone was he
stripped of these, is like to be very cold in giving thanks for spiritual
blessings. In a word, he that is sensible of no great benefit he shall have by
Christ either here or hereafter, cannot be expected to have any great measure
of thankfulness for this mercy which he so little understands. And this is the
case of all unhumbled, unsanctified ones, to whom the Gospel is hid, their
minds being darkened by the God of this world. And if these poor senseless
creatures should with a few feigned words pretend to give God thanks for Jesus
Christ, yet would it be but the sacrifice of fools, a mere lip service, and
therefore no way acceptable to the most holy God. Yea indeed they would hereby
but very solemnly mock the Divine Majesty, whilst they thank him for those
mercies which they will not accept at his hands; praising him for Jesus Christ
and the benefits he brings, whilst they will have none of him or them, on the
terms that God propounds. No, no, it is only the broken-healed heart, the
humble raised soul that can be feelingly and affectionately thankful to God
for a Savior, who has wrought so great works for them, and in them, and laid
up such great provisions for the time to come. They that were lost but are
found, they that were dead but are alive, in these will their heavenly Father
take pleasure, and these will rejoice in his love, and return praise to him who
sent his Son, to seek and save that which was lost.

To bring men into such a state and frame, that they may be disposed and
enabled, from an inward sense of his goodness, to render such thanks to the
Father of mercies, as may be well-pleasing to him; I should only only need to
repeat what was before laid down to bring them to accept of Christ, which when
once they are brought to, and arrived to any hopes of their acceptance with God
through him, then both in heart and voice, with their lips and lives will they
adore and praise him, who called them out of darkness into his mavelous
light. Wherefore study well your many and great necessities which Christ alone
can supply. Consider to what miseries by sin you stand exposed, from which he
alone can keep you. Remember what he did and suffered, how low he condescended
for the sake of man, and remember your own utter unworthiness, that ever the
least love or regard should have been manifested to you; and yet consider what
great things are done for you into how good a state matters are brought, what
abundant blessings are freely bestowed on the humble and believing, what rich
and precious promises are made them, what mercies are given for this life and
that to come, grace and glory, and whatever is good for men, nothing is
withheld from them. Let but the consideration of all the rich and precious
privileges which Christ gives to his servants sink into thy soul, and then
thou will find it even impossible, not to magnify the author and purchaser of
such gifts; nor will thou be able to refrain from expressions of thy gratitude
and love; and therefore may worthily come to the Sacrament there to exercise
and express those holy affections.

CHAP. X. VI. It must produce an holy love to Saints.
HE that rightly remembers the Death of Christ, and and well considers the
infinite love herein shown to mankind, cannot but be thereby wrought to an
hearty love to all his fellow Christians. And that is the last qualification I
shall mention, necessary for all Communicants, and which flows from their
remembrance of Christ, to wit, that they be in charity with all men, and have
an especial endeared love to all true Christians, both those that communicate
with them and others. To this great duty of brotherly love we have the most
forcible engagement that ever could be imagined, by the example of our blessed
Lord laying down his life for us; and his behavior at death, even praying for
his persecutors, does sufficiently tell us how we ought to behave our selves
toward our bitterest adversaries. We see then what a spirit we shall have
wrought in us by a right remembrance of our dying Savior, not only toward our
friends but our enemies themselves. As for that love that ought to be amongst
all true Christians, we find this is the new Command, that he has inculcated
upon us, and obliged us to by the great example of his unparalleled love, that
we also should love one another, Joh. 15.12, 13. 1 John 3.16. And this he has
made the very badge of his true disciples, whereby they should be known from
the rest of the world, Joh. 13.34, 35. And one particular end of our meeting
together at the Lords Table, is to testify and strengthen our mutual love.
This we show by our eating and drinking together, which is the custom of
friends: and this is one reason why this Sacrament is called the Communion, in
that Christians have here the most endearing fellowship with each other. For
hereby is not only represented their union with Christ their Head, and their
spiritual communion with him, but that nearness of relation they have amongst
themselves, being mystically united into one Body, whereof Christ is the Head,
1 Cor. 10.17. For we being many are one bread and one body: for we are all
partakers of that one bread. Each Christian is so related to and joined with
the other, that they go to the making up of one body, as the several grains
compacted together make one bread; and by their joint participation of this one
bread, they declare themselves to be but one body, the Children of one Father,
living in one Family, and feeding at the same Table, upon the very same food,
even upon Christ himself, who is the true bread that came down from heaven; and
upon their being united to Christ as Head is founded this their so near and
intimate relation to each other, to be Fellow Members of the same body; as they
that have the same Sovereign are fellow Subjects, they that have the same
Parents are brethren: And by their feeding on this Sacramental food, and
Christ himself therein, from whom the whole body being fitly joined together
makes increase, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. having
here a communion with him which fills and acts them with the same Spirit;
hereby, I say, they receive a farther bond and disposition to the greatest
unity of hearts and affections. So that we are especially engaged before our
attendance upon this Ordinance, to go our way and be reconciled to our brother.
The leaven of malice, amongst all other wickedness, is to be purged out when
we keep this Feast, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. And indeed we shall find this the general
sense of people, that they ought to be in charity with their neighbors before
they come to the Sacrament, whilst they discover too little sense of the
necessity of other graces that are equally needful; yea, whilst they remain
destitute of this very charity it self, which they acknowledge to be so
necessary: for alas! they are not so easily brought to the practice of their
duty as to acknowledge and commend it. For the plain truth is, none can rise
up, to this excellent temper of spirit, wherein one half of our Religion
consists, but he who is engrafted into Christ, and transformed into his
likeness by the spirit of love; which may d^rect those who are yet void hereof
what course to take for the attainment of the same, namely to get united to
Christ by a living faith and fervent love, whereby they shall find kindled in
their breasts a new affection to all that do with them love the Lord Jesus.
For certainly it is not enough for us, that we have no malice in our hearts
against any, nor wish them any hurt; this is a poor description of Christian
charity, and may be found in a Turk or Jew: but there ought to be in us, beside
a general love to all mankind, which makes us desirous of their good, a
peculiar tender love of all Christ's faithful servants, which causes us to
take delight in them, as such in whom we behold, the image of God shining forth
in their holy conversations, and begets in us unfeigned desires for their good
both of soul and body, and makes us willing to contribute our assistance
thereto, according to our ability and their necessities, inward or outward, and
it inclines us to rejoice in their good in some measure as if it was our own;
and hereby our hearts are so knit to them, that we hold greatest familiarity
with them, and take pleasure in their society and conference, and more
especially in joining with them in the worship and service of God. This is a
most sweet affection, and the exercise of it is exceeding pleasant to a
gracious soul: which, was it more common in the world, would reform it from a
wilderness into a kind of Paradise, and the perfection of it, will be one
great part of our future happiness. But this true Christian love can dwell in
none but such in whom God dwells, who is love. Only they who are recovered out
of the selfish carnal state, and are brought home to God by Jesus Christ, are
the men that are capable of this sincere love to their brethren, for which many
clear reasons might be given, was it needful and pertinent. But this may
suffice for all, that this affection is grounded upon and follows our
spiritual relation, and therefore a man must first be in Christ himself,
before he can love another purely as his brother in Christ, as a fellow-member
of the same body. He that has not submitted himself to his Prince, cannot love
another upon account of his being a fellow-subject with him to the same
Sovereign. And hence it is we find this given in as a character of our
Regeneration, 1 John 3.14. Hereby we know we are past from death to life
because we love the brethren. Most certain it is, that they who find not in
themselves a love to any people in the world upon account of their being made
like to God in Holiness, are destitute of true love to God himself. Wherefore
I would advise you to try your selves by this note; look into your own hearts,
and look abroad amongst those you hold your dearest friends, and examine what
it is that draws out your love toward them. Are they therefore dear to you
because they appear to you to be lovers of God, and such as have a great zeal
for his glory, because they are of pious exemplary lives, and therefore (so
far as you can discern) of gracious spirits? Do you love them as those that
are bought with the same blood, and sanctified by the same Spirit with your
selves? As such who are helpful to your souls, or receive help from you, and
walk in the same holy way, and with whom you hope to live for ever in the same
glory? Or is not all your affection founded upon carnal reasons, and bestowed
only upon your kindred, or such that have done you courtesies in worldly
matters; but as for the rest, you see no reason, why you should love one more
than another. Nay farther, do you not find your hearts secretly rise against
such holy persons, as I before mentioned, so that you had rather be in any
company than theirs, and could even wish the world rid of them, because their
blameless lives do condemn and shame yours, and sometimes their loving
admonitions check and disturb you, as Lot was a trouble to the Sodomites? Are
you not so far from a reverent esteem of godliness, that you can rather
scoff at it, though pe^haps under other names, and are prone to think it
nothing else but fancy and folly to be so shy of sin, and so extreme careful
to please God? If it be (...), for certain you are no better than haters of God
himself, as he is holy and just, though it may be you think not so much by your
selves. He that loves the Father will love the child also, so far as he is
like him: he that loves the person will love his picture. He that loves not
his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? 1 John 4.20. Wherefore see to get your hearts deeply affected with the glories
and excellencies of the blessed God, and you will find your selves carried out
to a great esteem of any shadows, and resemblances of these in his people. Let
Christ be once the chiefest of ten thousand to your souls altogether lovely and
desirable, and then you will count those in whom he has copied out himself,
and shed abroad his own Spirit, to be the only excellent ones upon earth, in
whom you will take great delight. You will then so fall in love with his image
wherever you discern it, that in comparison thereof you will even disdain all
those worldly excellencies, which do so dazzle the eyes of short-sighted,
mean-spirited ones. That humility, purity, reverence of the divine Majesty,
gentleness, goodness, and all other fruits of the Spirit, which display
themselves in the behavior of the truly sanctified, will make them appear more
honorable in your eyes, and render them far more dear to you than those, who
have nothing to commend them to your esteem, but that they have great Estates,
wear brave clothes, and have high titles conferred upon them: Though you must
not be wanting in those respects that are due to outward greatness, yet if you
be Christians of a right stamp, you will be such as David mentions when he
describes a Citizen of Zion, Psalm. 15.4. One in whose eyes a vile person is
contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord. Yea farther, you will see
more reason for your love to those that are holy, than to your brethren or
nearest kindred in the flesh, or than to those that are only of the same
opinions and principles that you your selves are of, which do lamentably
confine and regulate the affections of the most. But the right Christian temper
is far more generous and large; for being derived from the bowels of Christ,
it begets the same disposition in the souls wherein it dwells, according to
their capacity, that is in Christ himself. And therefore they hate none, they
envy none: as for the wicked miserable ones, they pity, and even mourn over
them, as we find Christ did, and with patience and meekness are ready to give
them all the help they can, to bring them out of their uncomfortable dangerous
estates; but all whom they have reason to believe Christ loves, that walk as he
has enjoined all his friends to do, these they dearly love; And such errors
or infirmities, which will not cause Christ to withdraw his favor from them,
will not take off their affections: for they dare not pretend to greater
strictness than their Lord, least what they might call pure zeal for him,
should be found pure selfishnesse. And therefore they dare not make their own
private apprehensions, which they find not in the Creed nor in the Gospel, the
standard and measure of such as must pass for godly, and be thought worthy
their regard and esteem, which is the constant note of one addicted to a party:
but, I say, they would have their friendship as large as their Lord and
Masters, since it is for his sake that they have any friends at all. Such is the
affection which Gods Spirit works in his people, and with which they are
possessed so far as they are framed and molded by his Spirit.

But moreover the charity requisite in Communicants, consists not only in a
cordial love to the godly, whom they are to reckon upon as dearest friends,
but also in forgiveness of injuries to all that are their enemies, and have
done or endeavored to do them wrong: which temper is of flat necessity to all
that would come worthily to this Ordinance. Hither men come expecting a pardon;
and can he look for a pardon of his many and heinous sins from the great God of
heaven and earth, who will not forgive some small offense that he may have
received from his fellow creature? Small, I say, for the greatest injury that
can be done us by another is exceeding small, and not worthy our notice so
far as we our selves only are concerned therein. Selfish men will never
believe this, but it is a certain truth, and so plain, that many sober heathens
do with great earnestness inculcate it. Alas, what can they do but a little
hinder out thriving in the world, or deny us that respect we would have by
their careless carriage, or speak meanly or falsely of us to lessen our credit?
Such like trifles as these are the worst that we shall ordinarily meet with,
from our bitterest enemies: And are these such unsufferable injuries, that by
all means we must seek to be revenged? Surely such a wicked spirit cannot enter
into the breast of a Christian, that remembers what he has done against God,
and yet what he expects from him, and what he has already received.

And indeed there is nothing more likely to bring us to the performance of this
duty to our brother, than the serious consideration of the infinite mercy God
has shown to us in sending his Son, and freely tendering forgiveness through
him. This we find pressed upon us, Ephesians. 4.32. And be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. Col. 3.13. Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if
any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do
ye. And to engage us the more, our forgiving of others is made a condition of
being forgiven our selves, Mat. 6.14, 15. For if ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. How
hard-hearted must that Servant be, who, when his Lord has forgiven him ten
thousand talents, takes his brother by the throat, and casts him into prison
for an hundred pence? How just is it that all the former debt should be charged
by his Lord upon such a servant? as you may find in the parable at large,
Matthew. 18. from 23. to the end, where, after Christ had told, how terribly that
unthankful cruel servant was dealt with, he adds ver. l^st, So likewise
shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not
every one his brother their tresp^sses. To love God above all; and our
neighbor as our selves, are the two great Commandments, whereon depend the Law
and the Prophets, and which comprehend all our duty: and to both of these we
have the greatest help, and strongest ob^igation by the Death of Christ that
ever could be tho^ght on. Shall we not love him that has thus loved us? And
shall we not show pity and compassion to others who have received so much our
selves? Yea, who shall be shut out from mercy if we be unmercifull? No spirit
in the world is so contrary to the Gospel as that of malice and revenge, and
retaining a secret enmity and spite against any person whatever. As thou
would escape the society and portion of Devils h^reafter, beware how thou
now entertainest this devilish nature, than which nothing is more frequently
forbidden in the Gospel, and nothing more flatly enjoined than the contrary
temper, Gal. 5.20. Now the fruits of the flesh ^re manifest, which are these,
adultery, f^rnic^tion, etc. hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders: ver. 22. But the fruit of the Spirit is
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
etc. Col. 3.8. But now you also put off all these, anger, wrath, malice,
blasphemy, etc. v. 12, 13. Put on theref^re (as the elect of God, holy and
beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-s^ffering. When the Apostle Paul wrote to the Corinthians to rectify the
disorders they were guilty of, in reference to the Lords Supper, the first
thing he falls upon is the Divisions that were amongst them, 1 Cor. 11.18. That
composedness of soul, that humility, self-abasement, and humble dependence
upon free mercy, which are so absolutely necessary for him that would profit by
this Ordinance, do all call for a quiet, charitable frame of spirit toward our
brethren, when we betake our selves thereto.

And thus (by Gods assistance) have I in some measure shown, from the nature
and design of this Ordinance, (which is to keep up the Remembrance of Christ)
how those persons must be qualified who can duly attend thereupon. To repeat
their description once again: They who are furnished with the knowledge of the
necessary fundamental truths of Christian Religion, and do believe them to be
indeed truths, being so verily persuaded that Christ is the Savior of the
world, that they heartily consent to take him for their Savior; and therefore
being humbled for, and resolved presently to turn from all their evil ways, do
humbly expect (or at least earnestly desire) the pardon of their sins from the
mercy of God for his sake; and are truly willing to have their hearts
sanctified by the Spirit of God given out through him, that they may lead an
holy life; and do depend upon him to bring them to everlasting glory in the
enjoyment of God, upon whom they have set their dearest love, and chose him as
their only portion; being sincerely thankful for the manifestations of his
wonderful love in Christ, and by the power of this love are in charity with
all men, forgiving their enemies, and having a peculiar affection to the
members of Christ: These, and only these are fit to partake of the Lords
Supper. Wherefore I entreat thee, whoever thou art, that would not wilfully
delude thy own soul, and rush upon this duty to thy hurt, take thy self to
task, and examine well whether thou art such a one as I have here described:
yea, if thou have any desire to escape everlasting misery, and be received into
heaven when thou die, examine thy self; for except thou be or becomest
such a one, as sure as God is true, thou art never like to be saved.

CHAP. XI. An invitation to come to Christ and his Sacrament, with Motives
thereto.
Use. MY next work now is to call upon and exhort all, thus to examine and
prepare themselves, and so to come and eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup.
Ho! all you that have any love to the blessed Jesus, who loved you to the
shedding of his warmest hearts-blood for your sakes, come hither and show forth
his death till he come. If Christ be precious to you, let his memory be
precious, and be you careful to preserve it by your due and frequent
attendance upon this Ordinance, set up on purpose for the Remembrance of him.
All you whose eyes have been opened to discern, the vileness of your natures
and conversations, come hither and give a kindly vent to your sorrow, beholding
sin at the worst, in those wounds that it gave to your dearest Savior. All you
that are indeed convinced that Christ is the true Messiah, come forth from God
to give life to the world, and are resolved to hearken to him that your souls
may live, come hither, and before God, Angels and Men, profess these
resolutions, and bind your selves over to him, to be his Disciples and most
obedient servants: Be not ashamed of the Cross of Christ, but a vow it before
all the world, that your hope of happiness is placed only in that Jesus, who
was slain and hanged on a tree, but is risen again and ascended into the
heavens; hereby own that you are Christians, let others be what they will. Come
hither all you that hunger and thirst after righteousness, and feed upon him
who here conveys of himself to the empty longing soul, and satisfies his people
with good things suitable to their wants. Come hither poor dejected drooping
soul, that do unfeignedly love thy Lord, but art afraid thou shall never
obtain his favor; come and see what he has done to assure thee of the
reality, the freeness and fullness of his love. Come and taste the provisions
he has made for thy comfort and rejoice in the sense of his bounty. All you
that expect shortly to look your Redeemer in the face, come hither and behold
him, where till then, you may most clearly discern him. Here stamp his im^ge
firmly upon your minds, that he may live in your breasts, though for a while he
is out of your sight, that till you shall see him you may never be forgetful
of him. Come hither young ones, and betimes list your selves under Christ your
Leader, here Remember your Creator and Redeemer in the days of your youth!
Come hither ye aged that have stood idle in the Marketplace, till the eleventh
hour of the day, now at length hire your selves under the Lord of the Vineyard
to be more industrious in his service for the hour that is behind. Come hither
ye poor and partake of a Feast that shall cost you nothing. Come hither ye rich
to a Feast more precious and costly than ever you were at, which cost the
Master thereof his own life to provide it. Come hither ye Masters, and promise
to become the servants of Christ. Come hither ye Servants, and by taking Christ
for your Lord become his Freemen. Yea, all you that have been the most
estranged from God, and greatest despisers of Christ, yet now at length if you
will come in, acknowledging the folly of your former ways, protesting against
any longer continuance therein, humbly imploring mercy and acceptance from God
through his Son, even you are invited hither, to testify the truth of your
return to him, and to receive the pardon that is ready for you. Behold, Wisdom
has builded her house, and furnished her table, and calls to all to eat of her
bread and drink of the wine that she has mingled; to all that are fully
determined to forsake the foolish, and go in the way of understanding. Hearken
you foolish prodig^ls, whose souls are out of taste with all solid food, through
your feeding upon the luscious delights of sin and the creature, which yet have
only deluded, never satisfied you: Cast away these empty husks, and come to a
plenteous Feast here made ready, wherein you will acknowledge there is
sweetness and fullness, if your distempers be cured, and your appetite and
relish changed. So large is the commission which Christ has granted, that in
his name I dare confidently invite all, whoever they are, or whatever they have
been, even the most profane and sensual, drunkards and whoremonger, the proud
and covetous, if now at last you will be persuaded to bid an everlasting
farewell to all your ways of wickedness, and for the time to come to walk in
the holy path, see that you are sincere and you may come boldly to the
Sacrament, there to manifest and confirm these purposes. If at length you are
weary of that miserable drudgery, wherein the enemy and tormentour of mankind,
the Devil, has employed you, laboring to keep you in bondage to sin, than
which there is not a more loathsome stinking dungeon, more intolerable chains
in all the world; if, I say, you would fain be delivered from this slavery, and
will take on you Christ's easy yoke, that you may find rest for your souls,
come hither and enter your, selves into his service, engaging to be subject to
him all the days of your life. In a word, all you that have been baptized into
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and understanding what that
signifies, do consent to the obligations thereby laid upon you, come to the
Lords Supper, and manifest this consent, and renew this covenant to be the
Lords.

Some considerations I shall lay before you, to quicken you to the performance
of this weighty duty, which I propose not so much to those who are already
prepared, that they would come to this Feast; but rather to all indifferently,
that they would prepare themselves, and come away without any longer delay.

1. To that end, first consider, this is the express command of Christ, as you
may find at his first institution of this Sacrament before mentioned, Luke
22.19. This do in remembrance of me. And to whom was this command given do you
think? only to the Apostles, or in them to all Christians? What reason can be
given why it should be peculiar to them and not common to others? They were
look^ upon and spoke to here, as Disciples, and therefore all Christ's Disciples
are concerned therein. And you cannot think this was an injunction that had
reference to that time only; the very phrase Remembrance speaks the contrary:
for this implies something that is past or absent; which shows they were to do
this after the Death of Christ should be past, and he ascended from them into
heaven, in remembrance of him and his Death. But to put the matter past doubt,
we have the practice of the Apostles after Christ's Death and Ascension, telling
us how they understood this command: and I hope we shall find none so impudent,
as to say they misunderstood it. Now though it was always wont to be accounted
profaneness, to violate the commands of Christ, yet there are a sort of men in
the world, that would make it a piece of religion forsooth, to contemn this his
injunction, and their disobedience to his Law must pass for a sign of their
perfection. But if they stand condemned by all impartial men, who, not only
in name but in deed, would bring more Sacraments into the Church than Christ
has done, giving the same honor to, and pleading for the same efficacy and
necessity of their inventions, as of Christ's own institutions, wherein the
Papists are grossly guilty: what do they better, who would cast forth of the
Church of those Sacraments, which our Lord has ordained, as if they were
useless unnecessary things, which is the doctrine of our Quakers. If there was
nothing else to be said in answer to the unreasonable pretenses of these men,
is it not enough that we have a plain command of Christ's to oppose to their
Fancy? He says to all his followers, Do this, and they say, Do it not: which
should we rather hearken to? And hereby judge what spirit that is, which rises
up in such flat contradiction to the voice of Christ? But farther, can they or
any man else show, that this command is founded upon such reasons, as makes it
of less force and obligation to us, than to those whom it was first given to?
Do not all the grounds of this duty which were then, still remain the same? as
I shall show more afterward. Wherefore let them either show where Christ has
repealed the precept which he once gave, or let them beware of falling under
the woe denounced against such, as not only break his commands, but teach
others so to do.

And little less guilty than these are they, who, though they will grant
Christ's command in force, yet give not obedience to it; and though they will
not say this Sacrament is unprofitable, yet by their neglect receive no profit
from it. All you that have been long since at years of discretion, and have had
frequent opportunities to come to the Lords Table, and yet have not cared to
inform your selves, what it is you should do there, what good you should get
by it, and so have taken no care to make preparations for this duty, but from
year to year have neglected it; what think you of this course. I beseech you?
Stay a while and reflect upon it. Did you never hear of a command given by the
Lord Jesus, that all true Christians should meet together at this Supper, and
there in remembrance that his body was broken, and his blood shed for them, eat
Bread and drink Wine set apart for that purpose? Has he given a command to
this purpose, or has he not? That it was spoken to the Apostles, I have told
you, hinders not, but that it belongs as well to you, since if you be sincere
Christians as they were, you have the same cause to do this that they had.
When Christ bids them deny themselves, love one another, and pray to the Father
in his name; do not these precepts reach you and I, as well as those
particular persons to whom he spoke them? And tell me if you can, why the case
is not the same, as to that command of his, which I have even now mentioned,
that we should Do this, receive this Sacrament of his Supper, in remembrance of
him. He that has commanded you to mortify your lusts, to love God above all,
he it is has enjoined you to do this; and if you think he ought to be obeyed
in one thing, why not in all? So then since you cannot but grant, that such a
command there is, what can you say for your selves who have disobeyed it? Are
you not hereby guilty of contemning the Authority of the Lawgiver? what say
you? Do you think you have herein behaved your selves as you ought? Can you
imagine, that this your negligence and disobedience is acceptable to the Lord
Jesus? Or do you not care whether it is or not? I hope it is not all one with
you to please or to provoke him. Does not then your Conscience by this time
smite you for your carelessnesse? If not, I doubt it is seared and senseless;
if it does, then let me ask you what you intend for the time to come. Will you
hold on that course which you dare not justify, which your own Conscience
condemns you for? Dare you still persist in the breach of a known law? Have you
any thing to say against the law it self, or against him that made it? Is it
not the law of Christ the Son of God, your Redeemer? And has not he power to
enjoin you what he pleases? Has not he right to govern you upon account of
his Redeeming you? And are not all things delivered into his hands by the
Father? Yea, does not the Father himself speak to you in and by him? Does not
he himself tell us, that the words which he spoke were the Fathers that sent
him? John 14.10. and 24. Can you then gainsay Christ's authority? If not, how
dare you resist it? Do you indeed take him for your Lord or not? Answer me one
way or other. If you do not, then call your selves no longer Christians: for
this your subjection is essential to your Christianity, as I have before
showed. If you do, then pray tell me, how can this consist with wilful
violation of plain precepts? Do you take him for your Master if you will yield
him no reverence nor fear? Will you not be as subject to your Lord as the
Centurions servants were to him? to whom if he said but, do this, they did it.
Let this be the trial whether you will or not: Behold Christ says to thee in
the Gospel, and now in his name, and with power from him, I charge thee, Do
this, come and p^rtake of his Supper which he has prepared for his friends and
followers. Here now is a D^e this: will thou obey it or not? If thou will not,
consider well, whether Christ be like to reckon thee, amongst his faithful
servants at last; and what thou would think of a servant of thy own that
should carry himself thus toward thee. What thy usual shifts and evasions
are, I shall take notice anon and give thee an answer. Only at present, let me
make have to entreat thee not to mistake me and deceive thy self, as if I was
thus earnest and importunate with thee for nothing else, but to go with thy
neighbors sometimes when a Sacrament is administered, and there take a bit of
Bread and a sup of Wine with a little seeming reverence, without any due
consideration before or after to what purpose it is. Can thou be so silly as
to imagine, thou have satisfied the will of Christ when thou have done this? Or
can thou think thy soul ever the better for it? Wherefore remember what it
was I first exhorted thee to, namely to examine and prepare thy self, and so to
eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup; to repent of, and set thy self against
all sin, and to devote thy self to Christ, and then to take the Sacrament as a
testimony that thou do so, and as a bond to oblige thee firmer to him. This I
have frequently told thee; and that thou may be sure to understand my meaning
and remember it, take it once again in this plain comparison: If a Master was
about to bargain with one to be his Servant, offering so much wages and a
shilling in earnest, and another that stands by, having a mind to drive on the
bargain, should persuade the Servant not to stand off, but to take his earnest,
do you not know what he meant by this? Do you think he wished the man only to
take the shilling, and go his way without any more ado? surely no, but to
agree with him to become his Servant, to do the work he should appoint him, and
to show his consent to this, should take the shilling that was to be given in
earnest. Thus, Reader, being earnestly desirous to drive on a match betwixt
Christ and thy soul, I would fain beg thee to take the Sacrament, as an
evidence of thy consent to become his faithful servant; but upon no other
terms I Will assure thee. Wherefore if thou be resolved against the diligent
service of God, and yet venturest upon this Ordinance, let the blame be upon
thy own head. Do not think to excuse thy self by saying, thou read'st a book
that told thee it was Christ command to all, that they should receive the
Sacrament, and that therefore thou did as thou wast instructed: for again and
again have I made known to thee, that none ought to do thus but true
Christians, such as believe in, love and obey the Lord Jesus; and this is that
to which thou art implicity urged by that very command which he has given for
thy frequenting his Supper. And this I would press upon all that perform this
duty rudely and negligently, as well as on those that altogether omit it. Let
not such careless ones imagine, they have hitherto rendered due obedience to
this command. For consider, when a duty is enjoined, all that is necessary in
order thereto is thereby enjoined, and the right manner of performing it also.
Thus when we are commanded to pray to God, by that very command we are engaged
to get the knowledge of God, and to believe that he can hear and help us; and
also to be reverent and serious in our prayers: for without these and the like
qualifications we may say over a many words, but we cannot properly be said to
pray. Thus when Christ commands us to eat Bread and drink Wine in remembrance
of him, he hereby commands us to get our hearts into such a frame, that we may
be fit and able to remember him with those affections, and in that manner that
it beseems ransomed men to remember their Redeemer: And therefore we must know
him, and be sensible of our own slavery, and be willing to be Redeemed by him,
and be thankful for his love, with the other qualifications which I have
before shown to be necessary to, and included in our Remembrance of him. If you
make a Feast on purpose to entertain a friend, you thereby suppose not only
that he should come to your Table, but that he should come with a stomach to
eat of your provisions. And when Christ invites men to his Table, where he has
provided spiritual food under the outward elements, do you not think he
requires all that come, that they should have an appetite to, and desire after
what he has provided for them? Thus then have I laid open to you the flat
command of Christ, whereby you are required to put your selves in a right
posture, and come to this Feast which he has ordained in his Church, as a
memorial of the Redemption he wrought for it. Whether you will obey it or not
I cannot tell, I leave that to your choice; if you have any reason that seems
stronger, than the will of Christ, do as you shall think fit; only remember,
the command I have been urging upon you, was given you by that Jesus who will
be your Judge, and whose sentence will pass acccording to that word whereof
this command is a part, and if you think you have got any such excuse, as will
bring you off clear at that day, though you be found guilty of contemning his
Law, I have no more to say, but at your own peril be it: Here I have given you
faithful warning.

Here I may farther add, that you have not only Christ's command, but the
example of his Apostles, Disciples, and the Primitive Christians to engage you
to this duty, wherein they were all conscientious and frequent, Act. 2.42. They
that were converted by the preaching of the Apostles continued steadfastly in
their doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers. And
this you may find was the practice of the Church of Corinth (and by consequence
of all other Churches then planted) in that the Apostle rectifies the abuses
they were guilty of therein, as you may find at large, 1 Cor. 11.17. to the
end. And are not we to walk as we have these for an example, and to be
followers of them as they are of Christ. Moreover they that are skilled in
Church History tell us, that it is most certain, it was the custom of the
primitive Christians, usually to celebrate this Sacrament every Lords Day at
least. And by the way take notice, though we have no particular precept in
Scripture how frequently we ought to do it, yet from thence we are taught,
that it ought to be done more than once, and the practice of those who best
knew the mind of Christ may inform us, that it ought to be done often; though
the particular times are left to the prudence of Church Governors.

2. In the next place I would wish you well to consider, whether you have not
good reason to conclude, that you shall receive much advantage from the
performance of that duty, which is recommended to you by the express command
of Christ, and the example of his first followers. Was there nothing else to be
showed but a command from him, whom you acknowledge your Sovereign, one would
think it enough to silence all objections, and bring you to obedience. But do
you not moreover believe, that Christ designed the good of his servants by the
institution of this Sacrament in his Church? Are any of his commands grievous
or unprofitable? Is not the whole design of Christian Religion evidently for
our interest, if we believe we have immortal souls? And can you imagine this
one duty to be an exception from all the rest? as having nothing in it which
may make it worthy our performance. Has not he backed his commands with
promises, that we might have all kind of encouragement to his service? Has not
he told us, that to those who keep his Commandments he will manifest himself?
Do you think then, that when Christ first set up this Sacrament, he hereby
intended any advantage to those who should celebrate it? If not, he appointed
them a mere piece of drudgery, in some respect worse than the Jewish Ceremonies
(for they had their use to the spiritual) and even as bad as those bu^densome
ridiculous Ceremonies, which make up so great a part of the Popish Religion;
but if you dare not affi^m this, then I would know, whether the same advantages
do not still continue to this Ordinance, which were first intended to be
communicated by it to the worthy Receiver? Again, did the Apostles and their
companions get any good by it think you? if not, it is strange they should be so
exact and frequent in it; i^ they did, fain would I know, why the same good is
not still to be got by serious diligent Christians. Certainly Gods treasures of
grace are not spent, his fountain is not drawn dry, no nor ever will be. He
that will be the everlasting portion of his people when this world is ended,
has enough sure in himself for the supply of all their necessities, whilst
they are traveling through the world. When millions of Saints have received
that grace which leads them to glory, there is not a jot the less for those
that come after. And as his graces are not exhausted, so neither is the way of
giving them forth changed; in the same manner that his Spirit accompanied the
word and Sacraments, at any time since the Gospel was published, in the same
manner it accompanies them still, for ought that any man living can show to the
contrary. Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. He who will be
with his Ministers till the end of the world, will be with his Ordinances till
then, and with his people in the conscientious use of them. Why should the
first Christians be tied to that which we in after-ages may neglect? Is not our
case the same with theirs? Are not our necessities as great? And may not our
profitings also, if the fault be not our own? To prosecute this a little
farther, as I promised. Is not the Death of Christ as great a mercy to us in
these latter days of his Church, as it was to them in the first? Have not we
the same pardon offered to us, the same promises given, the same heaven
prepared, and the same sanctifying Spirit to bring us thereto? Have we not then
the same cause to be frequently mindful of, and thankful for these mercies,
and the Death that purchased them, in all ways prescribed to that purpose? Are
not we still of the same nature that men were then? Such whose affections are
much raised and quickened by sensible things, by the help whereof we can with
greater clearness and power conceive of things spiritual; and can more
affectionately remember what is past, when we see it represented and acted
afresh before our eyes. Is it not therefore our wisdom and duty to accept of
such assistances as our Lord himself, in his care of us, has afforded? whereof
the Sacrament of his Supper is a principal one, every way fitted for that end.
Were they more dull than we, that they should need such quickening means which
we judge our selves past the use of? Had not we as much need as they to be
frequently renewing our more solemn repentance for sin, and covenantings with
God, that so the consideration of those renewed engagements we lie under, may
the more overpower us to faithfulness and perseverance in his service? Are not
our wants of grace as great as theirs? And therefore ought we not to wait in
all those ways whereby these wants may be supplied? which are the same now as
formerly. Is it not as rich a mercy now as ever, to have all the blessings and
privileges of the Covenant of grace, whether temporal, spi^ituall* or
eternal, not only represented, but made ov^r, and assured to us, in such a
familiar manner? Is not the exercise and strengthening of mutual brotherly
love, by the maintaining of the most endearing Christian communion, still a
most pleasant and profitable duty? now especially, when all men have learnt to
cry out, how cold charity is grown! Thus you see there are very many, and those
no small advantages that accrue to such as carefully manage this weighty duty,
and all of them continue still the same that they were in the time of the
Apostles. And let there be any other ground of their practice assigned, or any
other benefits which they hereby enjoyed, and I question not to prove, that we
have the same, or the like grounds, and are capable of the same benefits with
them. Thus have I shown you, that to come in a due manner to the Lords Table is
both your duty and your interest; there is a command given by your Lord,
obliging you to what is good for your selves, (and indeed so do all other his
commands if well weighed.) And what more can be said to work upon men, that
have any Conscience, or any self love, to give obedience? Wherefore if you be
Christians, yea, if you be Men; if you have any sense of Gods authority, or of
your own necessities, make all possible have out of that dangerous woeful
estate, which makes you unfit for, and unwilling to this so profitable a duty;
and your souls being made ready, let them bring your bodies hither. Having been
larger in these, I shall be brief in those that follow.

3 Is it not much to be feared, that whilst y^u slight the Sacrament, you
slight those blessings which hereby are represented, and assured to Believers?
You your selves would judge so by others in cases like this. If the King should
proclaim, that he will give Estates in some of his Plantations to all that will
come to the Court, and take Patents from him, and subscribe their n^mes to a
Bond, which only ties them to acknowledge they had their Estates from his
bounty, and to live there accor-to his Laws: is it not a sign, that they who
will not do thus much, do very little care for the Estates that are offered
them? And do not they manifest as little regard of heaven it self, and all the
promises of the Gospel, who are loath to be at so much pains, as to go to the
Sacrament, there to have all these confirmed to them? being unwilling to bind
themselves hereby to thankfulness and obedience to that God, who makes them
such large and bounteous offers. He that refuses a cheap and easy medicine,
which being duly taken may recover him from his sickness, may well be said to
undervalue his health. Thus is it too apparent, that thou little regardest the
health of thy soul, whilst thou sleightest those means, which, through the
blessing of the great Physician upon thy careful use of them, might tend so
much to thy healing and strengthening. If a shilling be offered me in earnest of
a thousand pound to be given upon some certain conditions, if I refuse to take
it, it is not so much the Earnest as the greater sum that I thereby reject.
Thus Heaven is assured to thee upon condition of thy faith and obedience, and
if thou likest it upon these terms, the Sacrament shall be given thee in
earnest, but if thou will not take the Earnest, thou putt'st away from thee
everlasting life. If a condemned man tear in pieces the Kings pardon, which is
brought to him, his fault is not so much the tearing of a piece of paper as his
contempt of the Pardon. Thus shall it be laid thy charge, not merely thy
despising a bit of Bread and sup of Wine, but thy sleighting all those rich and
unvaluable blessings which hereby were offered and assured to Believers. If
indeed thou prizest these, show it by thy setting a due esteem upon that which
has so near a relation to them; but if thou value them not, think not much if
thou go without them for ever: for whom can thou blame if thou miss of those
things which thou caredst not for?

4 Is not this neglect a sad sign, that thou performest no duty as thou
ought, nor to those ends thou should? For if thou did rightly improve
any, why should thou not be glad of all? Art thou not ready to try all
courses, and use all means for the continuance and increase of thy outward
welfare? and yet thou think every thing too much that is enjoined thee for
thy spiritual advantage, and therefore come not to this Ordinance, as
thinking thou may do well enough without it. They that are in health use not
to say, if they have one sort of food what should they do with another; or if
they eat one meal in a day, why need they eat another: and yet this is thy
language in reference to thy soul. So long as thou have been baptized, and
come to Church, and say thy prayers (and it is well if thou do thus much)
why may not this serve thy turn without coming to the Sacrament? Why tell me,
pray thee, what is thy design in these duties? Is it to get good to thy soul?
That thou may grow in grace, and get fitter for glory? If it be, why then is
not every duty acceptable to thee which would help on this design? But is it
not rather to be feared, that these are done out of custom, without expecting,
and therefore without finding any great advantage from them? And because the
neglect of that duty I am urging thee to, is too too common, and so no great
matter of disgrace, therefore thou make so light of it. And withal, perhaps
there is somewhat more pains requisite to prepare thee for it, and therefore
out of mere sloth and laziness thou hold off. Oh that thou wast but set in
as good earnest, to enrich thy soul with grace, as the most of men, and it is
like thou thy self art, to grow rich in the world! How many ways will they wind
and turn to get a little gain? If one course will not serve they will take
another; and if that fail, they will try a third; what they miss in one bargain,
they will seek to make amends for in the next. Thus would it be with thee, wast
thou a diligent Christian: thou would turn every stone, seek every corner
for the pearl of price. Did thou once by experience know the worth and
excellency of true Grace, and the satisfying sweetness of conversing with God,
thou would be very diligent in the use of all those means whereby these
advantages are to be attained: what thou had g^t at one duty, would prompt
thee to another, in hopes to find the like; or if thou had mist of thy hopes
in o^e, it would put thee upon another, there to get satisfaction. If thou
found'st thy self at a distance from God, or under fears of his displeasure,
thou would never be at rest with thy self till thou had found him whom thy
soul loved, and had got a renewed sense of his love to thy soul: in all those
ways wherein he gives a comfortable meeting to his people would thou give
constant attendance, ever earnestly waiting for the gracious and comfortable
manifestations of himself in thy soul. But since thou can so contentedly
miss one Privilege, and that of so great importance, it is a shrewd sign that
thou improvest not any as thou ought; and what a wretched starven case then
must thy soul needs be in?

5. Consider what a shame it is, that thou should be thus regardlesse of the
provisions made for thy soul, whilst thou art so greedy and forward after any
thing, that makes for the gra^i^ying of thy f^esh. Generally in the world men
refuse no pains to supply their bodily necessities, and yet when here is food
provided to their hands, they have no mind to it, because this is only suited
to their souls. H^w eagerly can they hunt after that which they are never like
to obtain, or which, if they do, will neve satisfy and fill them, whilst they
put away from them the savoury meat which God has brought to them: which would
be savoury if their taste was not spoiled. Whilst Manna is loathed that falls
before the tent-door, how do they long after the Garlic and Onions, and
Fleshpots of Egypt. May I not justly say that the Table of Devils is more
frequented than the Table of the Lord? What though men now adays do not offer
sacrifices to Devils as those Idolaters did, of whom the Apostle speaks, yet
do they not sacrfice to their own lusts? And is not this as acceptable service
to the Devil, and as provoking to God? And do they not maintain a fellowship
with Devils, whilst their nature is so conformable and their lives so subject
to them? Such are all swinish Epicures, who serve their own belly rather than
the Lord Jesus. Oh what multitudes have we got of such voluptuous ones, who had
rather bring sickness upon their bodies, and damnation upon their souls, by
pleasing their greedy unsatiable throat, than come to refresh and strengthen
themselves with such food, as, through the Spirit of life accompanying it, will
preserve both soul and body to everlasting life. Wisdom in vain sends forth
her Ambassadors, to stand in the highest places of the City, to call
passengers to the banquet she has made, whilst yet the destroyer of souls is
hearkened to, calling them off from the right way, telling them, that Stolen
waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant: and with these
unlawful pleasures do foolish sinners glut themselves, not remembering, that he
does but feed them for the slaughter, and that his guests are in the depth of
hell, Pro. 9. Oh how will this aggravate the condemnation of the p^ofane in our
days, that whilst they could not be kept out of the Alehouse and Tavern, but
lay there day and night, drinking away their wit, their money, and of entimes
the^r life it self, yet no entreaties could bring them duly to prepare
themselves, and come to eat and drink at the Lords own Table. Had thou but
such a favor offered thee as Haman, to be entertained at a banquet with the
King and Queen, how forwardly would thou accept it, and with what a pride
would thou boast of it, as he did? But yet when the King of glory invites
thee to be his guest, thou think not his invitations worth harkening to, so
mean are thy thoughts of his company and fare. Yea, do thou not see how
importunate Beggars are for an alms? They come to thy door, and stand begging
for bread, and will hardly be driven empty away: and yet when thou art thus
begged to accept of bread that comes from heaven, thou will not receive it.
Here men must be compelled, that is, importunately wooed to come in, and yet
they will not be prevailed with: or if they do come, it is oftentimes in such
a careless manner, that gives as much displeasure to him who sent for them,
and brings as much mischief upon themselves as if they had staid away. But of
this I spoke in the beginning, wherefore I shall only add, that it is to me a
matter of astonishment, that those who know their bodies will shortly be in the
grave, and who say they verily believe their souls must live for ever, that
those very men should with so much care and unweariednesse feed and maintain
their bodies, whilst willingly, and out of mere sloth, they suffer these
immortal souls to starve and perish eternally.

6. Consider, this is a juncture of time wherein especially thou art engaged, to
do all that in thee lies, toward the speedy securing of thy everlasting
happiness; and therefore in the most solemn manner, to consecrate thy self to
God at the Sacrament, there renouncing all the ways of wickedness whereby thou
have provoked him, that so thy peace may be made with him. For consider how he
has lately appeared in judgment against us, and shown that he has a sore
controversy with us: and shall not we, the surviving inhabitants of the Land,
learn righteousness hereby? Shall not we be so wise, as to meet him in the
way, before his anger be kindled against us in particular? It is to be feared,
the neglect of this very duty, and the gross miscarriages in the manner of
performing it, have done much toward the hastening of those judgments we have
lain under. And shall not this teach thee what to do for the future? Will thou
go on to provoke the Lord to jealousy? so that his anger should not be turned
away, but his hand stretched out still. And if thou art one, who have lately
been preserved from the very graves mouth whereinto thou wast ready to fall,
being in continual expectation of death, through the Visitation, or any other
Distemper, I would with thee to look back, and consider what were the thoughts
of thy heart at that time, thou, I mean, who had lived a loose and careless
life? Did not thy Conscience fly in thy face for all thy wickedness? And did
thou not resolve, that if God should spare thee, thou would become a new
man, and lead another kind of life than thou had done? Did it not terrify
thee to remember how thou had neglected praying, hearing, and receiving
Sacraments? And did thou not, make promises within thy self, that, if God
would try thee once again, it should be no more thus? But that thou would be
as diligent and constant therein for the time to come, as thou had been slack
and negligent before. Well now, God has tried thee according to thy desire:
thou who might have been sent to the place where Repentance will do no good,
art yet kept upon earth, to see what will be the fruit of thy afflictions,
where yet thou art within the reach of mercy, if thou throw not thy self out of
it. What then shall become of all thy good purposes and promises? Are they gone
as soon as thy sickness and pain are gone? Are they all forgotten already? Yet
be thou sure God will remember them: and fain would I persuade thee to remember
them too; and now in particular, having prepared thy soul, to address thy self
to the Lords Table, and there renew all those vows and resolutions which thou
made in the time of sickness and danger; and humbly implore mercy and pardon
for thy former carelessness, and all thy transgressions, and help from God to
walk more closely with him for the future. Let me now in season be thy
Remembrancer from the Lord, and bring to mind what engagements thou have made
to him, and see thou be faithful to them: But if they be slighted, and all
that I have said to thee slighted, because now thou art lusty and well, and
see no death near thee, and have something else to do, than to trouble thy
self with being so religious, as dying men use to be, yet let it sink into thy
thoughts, that there is just such another time coming upon thee; very shortly
thou will be sick again, and cast upon thy deathbed; and do thou not think
the very same thoughts will then come into thy mind again? When thou shall
consider thy self just lanching forth into eternity, and shall look back upon
all thy ungodly deeds, and thy undervaluing the means of grace, by an
improvement of which thou might have been made ready for such an hour as
this, will thou not then begin again to fall to wishing that it had been
othe^wise, and to purposing thou will be better hereafter, if once again thou
may be recovered. But when thy Conscience, with a redoubled fury, shall rise
up and (...) th^e remember, how thou did long ago, in the same condition,
seem as penitent as this comes to; but yet all come to nothing, and that
therefore thou have no reason to expect a farther trial; and shall moreover
tell thee, that it is most likely all this is out of mee^ slavish fear, and not
out of any true love to God and Holiness; how will thou be able to hold up
under such a dreadful charge as this from thy own awakened Conscience? It is
my great desire to prevent thy being then overwhelmed with such sad thoughts as
these; and if thou art but as willing, they may be effectually prevented, even
by speedily setting upon such a course, as will be the rejoicing of thy soul at
that day, when nothing else will rejoice thee, but the testimony of Gods
Spririt witnessing with thy Conscience, that by the Grace of God thou have had
thy conversation in simplicity and godly sincerity: For without this it would
be but a poor refuge for thee, to call for a Sacrament on thy deathbed, who
did slight it in thy health.

7. Consider, whether by this thy contempt of the Ordinances of Christ, thou
may not provoke him justly to withdraw them from us, and to bestow them upon
a people that will more prize, and frequent, and better improve them, than we
have done. If Children be so indifferent to their food, that they play with it,
or throw it away, it is fit it should be taken from them. When people are wanton
and curious, that they know not how to be pleased, but upon the least dislike
reject their spiritual food, it is a sign they want that best of sawces, a good
stomach, which it is just they should be brought to by being kept short. Or if
they be so lazy, that they think it more ado than needs, to be diligent in
those exercises of religion, which our Lord has appointed, and take the
greatest privileges for burdens, is it not just they should be eased of them?
for who will continue kindnesses to those, who take them for injuries? Yea, can
they expect any other, than ere long to be removed into a world, where they
shall never more be troubled with such heavy impositions? You that are now
ready to say, what a stirr's here with Sermons, Prayers and Sacraments, and
think all your time lost that is spent in them, and are vexed to think, that you
must have so many in^erruptions from your sins or worldly business, be content
a while, and you shall have no cause long to complain of these things you now
judge so grievous. There Is none of this ado in the Hell your ungodliness
leads to; but whether there be not sadder doings there, your experience e're
long is like to give you full conviction, if nothing sooner will convince you.
Do but judge reasonably, must it not needs be an high displeasure to God, to
see his Creatures contemn the most precious mercies, as if they were nothing
worth? How would you take it, if, when out of courtesy you had invited a poor
man to your Table, and had made ready the best that could be had for him, he
should find fault with your meat, and ask you why you troubled him to come from
home to such a poor Dinner as this? would you think he deserved to have the
worst bit there? If your Landlord, or any rich neighbor should bid you to a
Feast, would you send word by his Servant, that he nothing worth coming for,
but that you could provide for your self better at home? Or if you should send
such word, do you think you should be invited twice? And yet thus saucy and
unthankful, have you been toward the great God, whilst you have kept away from
his Table; notwithstanding which he has again and again sent forth his
Servants to invite you thither, in that way, and to those ends which he has
revealed. But, oh Sirs, do no more so foolishly, so impudently, I beseech you,
least at length you should move God, to withdraw from you the mercies you
trample on; and you, when it is too late, should be put to seek with tears
those blessings which once you cared not for, and therefore must never have.

8. Is it not a very great sign, that you forget Christ himself, whilst you can
thus quietly pass from year to year without Remembering him at the Sacrament?
Could you possibly do thus if you bore him upon your minds, and were sensibly
affected with the frequent thoughts of all his love toward you? Would you not
then take all opportunities to express this your thankful sense of his
kindness. The Children of Israel, we read, were enjoined to keep the Feast of
the Passover, as a memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt, and if, when
they were come into Canaan, they should after a few years have left it off,
might not God justly have taxt them with forgetting their deliverance it self?
And is not the case much what the same here? So we find, Exodus 12.26, 27. that
when their Children should see them keep this Feast, and ask what the meaning
was, they were to answer, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who
passed over the houses of the Children of Israel in Egypt, in that night when
he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. If now these Children, when
they were of capacity, should refuse to keep this Feast, as they were
commanded, is it not a sign, that either they believed not what their parents
told them, or else thought there was nothing in it worth the remembrance? Thus
if any of you should demand what is the meaning of our assembling together at
certain times, to eat and drink Bread and Wine in so serious a manner, it may
be answered you, This is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which he appointed
in the night wherein he was betrayed, for a memorial of that Death whereby he
destroyed the kingdom of Satan, and delivered his people. If you now take this
to be true, and think it deserves so solemn a Remembrance, come as you have
been directed, and join with the rest in this work; if you refuse this, you can
never sure have the face to say, that you do in your hearts Remember Christ.
If one that had bestowed some great matters upon the Town he lived in, should
order at his death, that the inhabitants of that Town should, upon a certain
day in the year, meet together at a Feast, to keep up the memory of his bounty,
if they neglected this, might it not well be said they forgot their
Benefactour? And does not your neglect of this Sacramental Feast, as plainly
show a forgetfulness of your great Benefactour who ordained it? Oh wonderful!
that ever men who have heard, who Jesus Christ is, and what he has done,
should be thus unmindfull of him. Ah Sirs, read the history of his Life, think
soundly of his Death, and consider then, whether he thus deserve to be
forgotten by you. Had he had no more thought of us, where had we now been, and
what had become of us for ever? Has he done so much for you, even without your
seeking, and when he requires so little of you, is he denied? If but a dying
friend should take his Ring off his Finger, and put it on yours, and bid you
look on that Ring, and remember him, should you not easily do it? But much
more, if this friend had upon any account given up himself to die for your
preservation, and should only engage you by remembering him, to beware of that
fault whereby your life was endangered and his was lost; would not the memory
of such a friend be ever fresh, and precious with you, if you had any humanity,
any sense of friendship and kindness? And would not your bowels be even turned
within you, whenever you beheld his Ring? But alas, how far comes this short
of the kindness which Christ has shown to poor sinners, in many
circumstances, as might easily be shown? And yet how is all disregarded with
the most? How few obey this, that was one of his last injunctions to his
followers before he offered up himself on their behalf, that they should feed
on his body and blood here represented, and remember and love him, who was
bruised and poured forth as an atonement for them, and set them selves against
the sins that occasioned all this. Can men be guilty of worse ingratitude.

9. If then Christ be so far from your thoughts, that you take no pleasure in
the Remembrance of him, Bethink you beforehand, how you will be able to look
him in the face, when you shall be cited to appear before him whether you will
or not. Be assured, whoever thou art, to whom the memory of Christ is no way
delightful, to thee his presence will be most terrible. If thou have been well
pleased to have him as absent from thy heart, as his bodily presence is from
the world, thou will never know how to abide the terror of his appearance, and
yet abide it thou must. It will then be with thee just as it was with that
wicked Servant whom we read of, Luke 12.45, 46. who instead of looking to his
Masters Family in his absence, to give them their portion of meat in due
season, as he was commanded, ver. 42. thinks within himself, that his Lord
delays his coming, and therefore begins to eat and drink and be drunken, and
what follows? Why the Lord of that Servant will come in a day that he looks
not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder,
and appoint him his portion with hypocrites and unbelievers. Even thus may
thou justly expect it will be with thee, who neglectest to take that portion of
meat for thy soul which Christ has provided for thee, and had rather pamper
thy flesh, and indulge it in gluttony and drunkenness. That very Jesus, whom
thou take no pleasure to Remember, and could be very well content never to
come nearer him, never to behold him, or to have any thing more to do with him,
even he shall at length surprise thee by the suddenness of his dreadful
appearance. Though thou would not Remember him, yet then thou must, thou
shall see him. Though thou could caft him out of thy thoughts, yet thou
shall not be able to avoid his presense, till he himself shall have utterly
banished thee from him. Though thou be unmindfull of him; yet slatter not thy
self with a conceit that he will forget this thy unworthy behavior: no, but
he will remember it, to recompense it on thy own head in that day of his
vengeance. A^ his people may firmly build upon it, that he will never forget
their labor of love, so may his enemies be sure, that he will not forget their
laziness and want of love. Will it not be sad for thee at that day, to call
upon the ro^ks and mountains to hide thee from his face, and all in vain. And
yet is it not just it should be thus with thee, who art now called into Christ's
gracious presence, into the nearest communion with him, and thou runnest away,
and wilfully hidest thy self, and wilt not be persuaded to come in. Alas! Man,
then expect other usage from Christ than here thou foundest in the day of his
patience, whilst he waited to be gracious. He will not come then to offer
pardons to the guilty, and to befe^ch their acceptance of them, and of the
Sacraments to seal them: no, but he will then only absolve all those who have
already got their pardon, and condemn those who have not: wherefore if thou
think it of any consequence, to look Christ in the face with comfort at the
last day, now get an acquaintance with him; put o^ thy wedding garment of
Repentance, Faith and Love, and come hither to be his guest; with an humble
boldness come and feast with him, yea feed upon him, and let him be made
familiar to thy soul, that his coming may fill thee with joy and not with
horror.

10. Lastly, If after admonitions and invitations thou l^vest in the neglect of
this duty, d^st thou not give us too much ground to fear, that thou art no true
Christian? I know it is not thy coming hither on any fashion that will
sufficiently prove thee a good Christian, but yet thy total forbearance may
rather make thee suspected to be none at all. For what have thou to plead on
thy own behalf? The greatest argument of thy Christianity is thy being
baptized: but this was done in thy infancy, and who knows, whether thou
stand'st to it or not, if thou will not publicly own that thou do so? If it
was the custom amongst us, that when a Father is listed into an Army, he
should set down the names of his Sons also, there to stand till they came to
sixteen years of age, at which time they were to go in and write their own
names, or else to be cashiered; if they, when they are come to these years,
should refuse to give in their names, do they not hereby show that they have
no mind to be Soldiers? And is it not a question whether thou ownest Christ
Jesus for thy Captain, if thou will not make thy appearance with the rest, at
times appointed for the acknowledgement of thy relation to him? If the King
should command all that were of age in a Town, to come to the Marketplace, and
there take the Oath of Allegiance, if they would be held for good Subjects, how
would they be looked upon, who should stay away and refuse to do it? Now have I
not before shown, how express the command of Christ is to all his Disciples,
that, beside all other duties, being rightly prepared, they should celebrate
this Sacrament in remembrance of him, as an evidence and symbol of their
relation to, and communion with him? How then can we hold them for true
Disciples that reject and slight it? But here give me leave, according to my
promise, to meet with two or three Objections against the performance of this
duty, before I come to give Directions for it.

CHAP. XII. Sacraments are not to be accounted vain, because Externalls.
1. Obj. PErhaps then some in the first place may say, What need have we of
such outward sh^dows and ceremonies, so long as we have the substance, Christ
himself, and do truly believe in him? What good can we get by such externa^l
services as these? These are low beggarly things, not suited to these more
spiritual times of the Gospel.

Though I have before said enough to this, yet because there are those who
confidently talk at this rate, and are very busy in perverting common people,
I shall say something farther by way of answer to it.

Ans. 1. And first I would demand of you, who is fittest to be Judge in this
case, what you ought to do, and what not? Are you Servants, or are you your own
Masters,? Came the word of God forth from you? Was Christian Religion something
of your devising, that you may frame it, and appoint the duties of it as you
shall see best? Or came this word to you only? Did he who revealed it to the
world privilege you, to pick and choose some duties and omit others, as you saw
good? If you say, yes pray produce your license and let us see it; for we find
no such thing recorded in that Word which we all acknowledge to come from God.
And if you have got any private orders contrary thereto, give us sufficient
evidence to prove them of divine authority, and then we shall be silent. But
till then it must needs be accounted str^nge impudence, for silly worms to
quarrel with the institutions of infinite wisdom. For if God's authority may
be regarded, rather than the fond opinion of proud and giddy men, we need not
be to seek what to do in this matter, Christ having so plainly commanded us, to
do this in remembrance of him, as I have before showed.

2. And since there is such a command, I wonder how it can be accounted an
unprofitable thing to obey it? Is there no profit in pleasing God? And can we
please him any other way, than by obeying his commands? Let the matter of the
command be what it will, if we know it be given us by God, that is warrant
enough for our practice, and ground for our expectation of benefit by it,
though we could not much see the reason of the thing in it self abstracted from
the command, (though here the case is otherwise, as I have also before
manifested.)

3. If any should say we now lie under no obligation to this duty, let them
show where Christ's command to his Disciples is repealed, or where there is the
least intimation given, that there was a time to come when it should be out of
date, and cease to oblige our Consciences. Nay, are we not taught there was no
such time to come? For do we not find the reason and end of this Ordinance
assigned to be such, as will make it necessary to the last day? And this to
prevent all exception plainly expressed; Hereby you show forth Christ's death till
he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.

4. Do not they who tell us the Sacraments are but shadows, and therefore now
to cease, hereby pretend a new dispensation of the Gospel, purer and higher,
than that which was set up by Christ and his Apostles, after the ceasing of the
Leviticall worship? For long after this we find Baptism and the Lords Supper
in use. Wherefore if they are now to be laid aside, is it not because that was
but an infant-state of the Church, wherein such ceremonies were requisite,
which are now needless, it being grown to greater maturity, and the members
engaged to be more spiritual, and taken off from those carnal services,
wherein such mean persons as the Apostles and their followers were conversant?
But do not they notoriously violate truth, as well as modesty, who tell us
this? Do we either in the Old Testament or New, meet with any Prophesies, that
intimate to us a new dispensation, or different way of ordering the Christian
Church, after Christ had fully established it? We find such frequently as to the
Jewish Ceremonies, but no where, that I know, relating to any Laws or Orders
that Christ has appointed. And none, I hope, will say our Sacraments were like
them, of a typical nature, and so to cease by the coming in, and
accomplishment of somewhat which they signified. Though the first Dispensation
under Moses was imperfect, yet where are we allowed to find fault with the
second introduced by Christ? Is not this Gospel-state the Kingdom that cannot
be moved, in opposition to the Jewish state of things, which was shaken and
removed? as we may probably interpret, Heb. 12.26, 27. Wherefore they who would
make us believe, that in these latter days the Church is to be reformed, not
only from the corruptions men brought in, but from the Ordinances which Christ
set up, what do they but trouble us, by endeavoring to pervert the Gospel of
Christ? approaching too near to those, whom the Apostle so vehemently
pronounces accursed. Gal. 1.9. Those indeed would have brought in customs
which Christ had abrogated, and these would abrogate such as he has ordained;
and when we remember who ordained them, it may sufficiently awe us from
sleighting them, though they may seem but lesser matters, and, as it were,
appendages to Religion. And it should make all sober Christians the more
afraid, of harkening after any new and more spiritual Dispensations of the
Gospel, when we remember the unspeakable mischief, which this groundless
pretense has done, and may do to the Church. Under this notion the Familists
vent their horrid fancies; and even Mahomet himself made use of this pretense,
when he first set up in the world: And so any man that has a mind to advance
some new way, which he can find no ground for in the Gospel, may pretend that
it is something higher and more excellent than Christ thought fit at first to
reveal, but now in these last days he has sent him as his Messenger to publish
it to the world. And as well may we hearken to any such Impostour, as to those
who tell us, that though, it is true, Christians at the first were Baptized, and
received the Lord's Supper, yet now we have nothing to do with these things,
being arrived to a more perfect state than they were acquainted with.

5. How unreasonable is it, that they should oppose those things which so well
agree together, and mutually promote each other? whilst they say they believe
in Christ, and therefore regard not this piece of outward service. But I wonder
where they find, that faith in Christ may excuse a man from receiving the
Sacrament: I should think it rather engaged him to it. Far be it from me to
press this duty, as that which will give men the least dispensation to neglect
any other, nay, I hope, I have sufficiently showed all along, that I press it
as a strong obligation, motive, and help to holiness, both of heart and life.
Hither should men come purposely to exercise and strengthen their graces; and
therefore it is a most foolish thing to say they have got grace in their hearts,
and will thereupon stay away. If you believe in Christ, come hither and
profess that you do so: for so he has bidden you to do; and be not so
ridiculous as to say, because you have faith therefore you will not in this
manner profess it. If a King should command all his Subjects that would go to
such a War, to come and set down their Names, and afterward come and answer
to them at a Mustering, would it not be a wise piece of business, for any of
them to say, he would fight in the War, and therefore he would not have his
Name set down nor appear with the rest at the times of Mustering? And is it not
much what the same, for any to pretend they will keep covenant with Christ, and
therefore will not make or renew it in that solemn manner he has commanded?
What? will thou say thou love Christ, and art sincerely thankful for his
love, and therefore wilt not join with thy fellow-Ch^istians, in the
remembrance of his mercy and expression of thy gratitude? Does this sound like
reason? And yet no better is to be found in thy objection. Might not the
Apostles far better have said, they needed not the help of this Sacrament, to
put them in mind of Christ, who was ever fresh in their thoughts? But on the
contrary, because he was so much in their thoughts, therefore were they so
frequent in this duty. And was thy spirit like theirs, thy practice would not
be so contrary. And let me tell thee farther, it is much to be feared, thou have
little or no grace at all, who sleightest any way that Christ has ordained,
for the increase of grace. A wise man uses not to say, I enjoy my health well,
and therefore I care not for my food, since this is the means for continuance
of his health. But it seem^ thou deniest, that thou can get any good by this
Ordinance, wherefore

6. In the next place let me ask thee, Do thou imagine thy self arrived to
the utmost pitch of perfection so that thou look upon all means and
Ordinances as things below thee? If so, I cannot now stand to show thee, the
pride and ignorance of this conceit, which are both so great, that it is danger
thou will not be convinced of either. But wast thou indeed so excellent a
creature as thou take thy self to be, yet methinks thou should not
imagine, that thou art above the exercise of grace, or returning thanks for
what thou have received, and even these reasons may bring thee to the duty I am
now pleading for. Or if this be none of thy conceit, do thou imagine that
the soul can get no good by external means, which work upon the senses? If
this be thy opinion, thou seem not to consider, the nature and frame of man
in this present state, wherein bodily things do so mightily affect him, and he
is beholden to his senses for all, or almost all the knowledge which he has.
By this reason men could profit nothing by reading or hearing, which is
contrary to all experience. And by this reason in the time of the Law no good
was to be got by those Ceremonies, that typified Christ to come, which is a
very bold assertion, and most unreasonable; and I hope the clearer
representations of him, and his benefits in our Sacraments, have much the
advantage of those darker shadows.

7. Is it not very great impudence and ingratitude, when Christ has chosen to
deal with us in such a sensible manner, as he saw most suitable to our natures,
for us thereupon to call his wisdom and goodness in question, when he calls
us to offer our bodies, as well as souls to him, and to glorify him both with
soul and body, shall we say he cares not for bodily service, and thereupon
neglect all those services, wherein the body is employed? And when he out of
indulgence to our weakness, has provided external helps meet for us, shall
we think our selves too high for them? Is not this most vile pride and
ingratitude? And consider, whatever we dare to speak in disparagement of
Christ's Ordinances, as if they were empty useless things, will be found to
reflect foully upon the honor of Christ himself the Lawgiver.

8. Where do we find any of the pious Jews before Christ's time, complaining of
their Ceremonies as burdensome, unprofitable things? Afterward indeed when
they were maintained in opposition to Christ, whom they led to, and ended in,
they are called beggarly Elements, and carnal Ordinances; but we hear not of
this language before. Though then God frequently expressed his very little regard
to them, compared to the more substantial duties of the moral Law, yet where
read we of any of the godly in those days that rejected or disused them? And
what is our bondage sorer than theirs? Has Christ put a yoke upon his
Disciples heavier than that he took off? and what do they better than say thus,
who throw off his gracious institutions, as a burden too heavy for them to bear?

9. Methinks this is so like the language of Infidels that all who have any
mind to be thought Christians should abhor it. What wonder would it be for an
Infidel to laugh at Baptism, or the Lords Supper, if he should see them
administered, and ask what good was to be got from washing with water, or
receiving a little Bread and Wine? But for one who pretends to ow^ the
authority of Christ, to speak after the same manner, seems something strange.
If God give a command to wash in Jordan for the cure of a Leprosy, it be-seems
none but an Heathen Naaman, to ask whether Abana and Pharphar Rivers of
Damascus are not as good as the Waters of Israel. And he discovers little more
religion, who shall sawcily demand, why Bread and Wine at his own Table will
not do his soul as much good as at the Sacrament.

10, I would fain know of these Men, whether Christ had power to appoint an
Ordinance of this kind, to the use of which, Christians in all succeeding
Generations should be obliged? if they grant he had, as I suppose they dare not
deny it, then let them lay what he should have said or done more to lay this
obligation upon them, than he has done in the present case. If again they
find fault with the nature of this Ordinance, as if it was not suited to be
pertual, because of its unprofitableness, let them tell when it begun to be so:
Was it from the first institution? or after a certain time? If from the
beginning, what was it ordained for? why would Christ set up an Ordinance that
was good for nothing? And why were the Disciples so frequent in it? If
afterward, let them name the time, and give the reason of its degeneracy. But
farther, was Christ able to make this Sacrament profitable to those, who should
conscienciouslie attend upon it? They who say he was not, must not take it ill
to be thought Infidels: but if they yield he was, then let them allege some
reason why he would not, or rather let them show wherein he has been wanting
to it to make it so profitable: If these fault-finders might have been at the
first appointment hereof, what a kind of one would they have had it, that it
might have been more useful than now they judge it is? Is it not the death of
Christ here set out before our eyes? and may not that in some sort affect us,
supposing we know the design of it, as well as discourses that reach our ears?
may not this awake us to livelie thoughts of Christ, of the reason and ends of
his death, and so quicken us to the exercise of repentance and faith, and stir
us up to desire after him, and to thankfulness for his love? and when our
souls* are wrought into so good a frame, may we not reasonably expect larger
communications of grace from that overflowing Fountain of goodness, who
requires nothing more than a right disposition in us, that we may be made
partakers of his bounty. Not to mention how fit a way this is, for the
conferring a right to, and giving assurance of relative and future privileges.

11. Besides the Example of those in the first ages of the Church, me thinks
the daily experience of the generality of sober Christians, may abundantly
confute this conceit, that there is no good to be got by frequenting the Lords
Table; were these demanded one by one whether they had not found the contrary,
I believe the most of them would profess they had; though through their own
fault they would acknowledge, they had not hereby profited so much as they
might. How many poor souls have come hither heavy and dull, and have gone away
enlivened? How many have come dejected and sad, and have gone away refresht,
and cheered, and have long after enjoyed the benefit of this duty? But if they
who make this objection, never found any such thing, it would speak more
modesty and justice too, to lay the blame on themselves, rather than on the
means which Christ has afforded them.

12. Lastly, I would desire all that are impartial to consider, how plainly God
has witnest against this sort of Men, who are the chief Patrons of that
opinion I oppose, in suffering them to be so infatuated and besotted in their
own minds; that, whilst they have impudently dared to reject the Ordinances of
Christ as needless things, they themselves have doted upon the most ridiculous
inconsiderable trifles, as if they were matters of some huge consequence. Have
not those very men, who cry down the Lords Supper and Baptism, of one sort or
other, beside many other duties, as formal things; yet with a great deal of
earnestness called upon us to say, thou rather than you, to a single person,
not to call Men Master, nor to put off our Hats one to another, with a
multitude the like fopperies? These it seems are substantial things which they
have devised, whilst Christ's own appointments are empty and carnal. What Is this
but a mark set upon them, (and few Sects are without one) to let the World know
they came not from God, that none who are considerative might be endangered by
their delusions? And let this suffice for answer to the first Objection,
whereon I have been the larger, in that it is of such ill consequence, and has
too far spread it self amongst giddy unstable people.

CHAP. XIII. Against too seldom communicating in the Sacrament.
2. Obj. IN the next place some may say, We have already received the
Sacrament, and so have satisfied the command of Christ, and therefore may be
excused from it for the future.

I should scarce have dreamt of such an Objection, had I not heard it used; but
to dispatch it in two words.

1. I have before acknowledged that Christ has not told us how frequently, or
how often in our lives we must perform this duty, but yet we may learn from the
words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.26. That it is to be done more than once: for
says he, As often as ye eat, etc. i. e. every time that you eat. And then I
have showed you what was the practice of the first Christians, which may well
hold the place of a rule in this case. Wherefore you ought to obey the
Injunction of your Pastor, so often as he shall in prudence, think meet to call
you to the Lords Table, since you have so much reason for obedience, and none
to allege for your refusal.

2. And in the next place, pray tell me, had you any reason for this duty when
you first performed it? you will scarce say no, I suppose, and if you had any,
then I ask, whether the same reason does not still continue? If it does, why
should not your practice be continued agreeably thereto? Have you not still
some necessities of soul which may here be supplied, as well as you had then?
Is not the death of Christ as well worthy your remembrance now as formerly? and
if you heretofore received any advantage by what you did, me thinks you should
be the more inclined to hold on therein. But here perhaps some may reply,
putting the objection in another shape, that they have often attended on this
Ordinance, and yet have found no advantage by it, and therefore being out of
heart and hope, are ready to throw it quite off. To whom I answer,

1. If it be thus indeed, you have great reason to acknowledge the fault is
your own. Either you have not been so diligent in your preparations as you
ought; or else you have been careless afterward, thinking you had done when
the work was over, as if no more was required to make a Sacrament strengthening
to your souls, than to make food nourishing to your bodies, barely to receive
it, and there is an end; when as there is a serious consideration of what you
have done, and a constant watchfulness afterward, necessary to make it
beneficical to you, as I may have occasion to show a non. And especially see
that you give not, a kind of allowance to some pleasant sin or other, which
you are hardly willing to be quite delivered from; such a secret partial
cherishing of any lust whatever, will be sure to keep you low and barren, and
render all means unprofitable. And thus is it also like to be with you, if you
are swallowed up in wordly businesses, or do too sweetly relish any sensible
enjoyment.

2. You who complain you can get nothing by Sacraments, will say the same, I
suppose, by other means and duties; and will you therefore cast off these two?
will you lay aside hearing and praying upon this pretense? you may as well: for
the reason holds as good for one as the other.

3. But farther, I would have you beware of mistaking your selves, imagining
that you profit not when you do. And therefore consider what your expectations
have been, and what you have found. Perhaps you have expected great joys, and
as it were, sensible assurances of Gods Love, and to be afterward freed from
all troubles and doubtings? or you have expected a perfect freedom from some
troublesome temptations wherewith you use to be haunted, and from the very
first motions of sin in your selves, and because you have found none of this in
those measures you looked for, therefore you conclude you have met with nothing?
But this is no right arguing: for these are privileges that you may go without
al^ your days, and yet thrive under the means too; and therefore by them you
cannot judge of your profiting: But if you can find the strength of sin broken,
and your heart more set against it, and you are more thoroughly persuaded to
comply with the whole will of God, being firmly resolved to keep close to him
to the last, discovering more and more the emptiness of all creatures, and his
alsufficiency, being more prevalently and steadily bent to choose him as your
only portion, if it be so, you may be sure you grow in grace, and are bettered
by the means you enjoy, and may be therefore encouraged to continue in the use
of them.

4. But lastly, however it be with you, yet be you patient and constant in
doing your work, and then leave the event to God. Wherein upon examination you
find you have been wanting to your selves, be more careful for the future, in
the due preparing and managing of your own hearts, and so wait upon God in his
appointed way. Let your desires be carried out after that which is most
needful for you, and which God has promised to give, chiefly after grace, and
secondarily after comfort, remembering all you have is to come from the free
mercy of a wise God, to whom you must refer it what measures of these you
shall receive, and how soon it shall be. Only, I say, let it be your business
quietly to wait his leisure, in the use of those means he has prescribed you,
for which I might give many reasons; but I shall wave all, only demanding of
you, whether those spiritual blessings you so earnestly long after are worth
the waiting for? If you say, no, you deserve to go for ever without them: but
if you grant they are, then pray tell me, whether is it more likely to attain
them, by waiting in that way wherein they are to be found, or by turning out of
it? This, I hope, is no difficult case to resolve. If your friend be gone a
journey, and you have a mind to meet him upon his return, are you not more
likely to meet with him, by holding on still in that road which he will be sure
to come, than by going back again, or turning to some by path, merely to
gratify your laziness or impatience? Wherefore, when your hopes are at the
lowest ebb, it is most unreasonable and foolish, to cry with that wicked King,
Why should we wait on the Lord any longer; there is no hope, wherefore let us
leave our duties, and cast aside all. Be sure there is no hope in such a course
as this, but rather a certainty of perishing, whereas if there be safety in any
way, it is in an obedient patient dependence upon God, yea, in this way there
is certain safety; embrace it therefore as your wisest, your only course. Do
but see that you wait for the Lord, and assure your selves you shall not be
ashamed, your eyes shall not always fail. Get into the Psalmists frame, Psalm.
130.5, 6. To wait for the Lord more than they that watch for the morning, and
at length shall the Lord manifest himself to the joy of your souls, as sure as
the morning light will appear to those who watch for it.

CHAP. XIV. The Objection of unfitness answered. As proposed by the doubting
and the careless.
3, Obj. SOme again there are, and those not a few, that will be ready to say,
They find themselves unfit for the Sacrament, and therefore dare not come,
least it prove to their hurt, rather than to their advantage. Several sorts of
persons may upon different grounds raise this objection. First, the sincere and
humble Christian, whose soul is in the dark, and through ignorance of himself,
or not considering the tenor of the Covenant, and through the prevalency of
temptation, or melancholy, he may without reason condemn himself, as if his
estate was worse than it is. To these I have something to say.

1. Why is it, you judge your selves unfit for this Ordinance? Is it because
you are not so qualified as I have before shown all Communicants ought to be? I
am confident, upon a true enquiry, you will find the contrary: Wherefore be not
hasty and rash in passing a censure upon your selves, as if you were resolved
to comply with, the design of Satan to keep you in sorrow; but examine things
soberly, and without passion, and then give judgment upon your state according
to true evidence. If you be found faithful Disciples, and unfeigned lovers of
Christ, you will grant your selves meet to come to that Feast which is made for
such. Tell me then in one word; Are you not from your very souls, willing that
Christ should be your Savior, and take his own course with you, to bring you
to God in glory? Is there any thing in all the world that your heart is se^
more upon than this, even that you may be saved by Jesus Christ? would you not
account the assurance of this a richer mercy, than to be made owners of the
whole world? Yea, would you not give a thousand such worlds as this, if you had
them, for the love of God in Christ? Is not this it which lies heaviest upon
your spirits, and makes you walk so sadly, even the fears least you are without
true grace, and should go without God and Christ for ever? And yet can the
Devil so befool you, as to persuade you all this while that you love not God?
Have you got any thing here below more dear to you than his favor? Do you take
delight in any course that you know is displeasing to him? Do you not long to
be made more conformable to him? To know and love* and enjoy him more, and do
him better service in the world? Would it not be the great joy of your souls
always to walk closely with him, and retain a strong sense of his presence and
all his excellencies upon your minds? To converse with him more feelingly and
powerfully, and in all your approaches to him, to be filled with a suitable
reverence, humility, seriousness, and all holy affections? Would any thing
please you more than to please your God? Are you not then best at ease when you
find your hearts most enlarged, and carried out after him? Had you not rather
be following after God in the ways of holiness, and the duties of Religion,
than to enjoy all the pleasures and merriments of sensual ones? Is there any
duty from which you would be dispensed with? Any command that you would have
abolisht? Had not you infinitely rather your heart was brought up to the
fullest compliance with it? Have you any lust which you would fain be allowed
to keep? Is it a trouble to you, that you must part with your sins or else be
damned for them? Or rather, is it not your greatest trouble, that you lived so
long without God, and did so much against him in the days of your
unregeneracie? And if you had that time to pass over again, would you not
prefer a life of the greatest suffering before such a life of sinning; And is
not your soul really burdened with those remnants of corruption which you yet
feel in your selves? Do you not strive against them, and earnestly desire to
be rid of them? Would you not account it a blessed privilege, to be more free
from ignorance, pride, earthlinesse, distrust, self-will, dullness and
distractions in holy duties? Would not a deliverance from these be more
welcome, than to be freed from any outward afflictions you may lie under? All
you that are sincere (and to such only I am now speaking) cannot but
acknowledge that the frame of your soul is such, as I have been enquiring
after, how harshlie soever, you may conclude of your selves notwithstanding.
And if such as you, that love God and holiness, hate sin, and are humbled for
it, have not right to the promises of mercy through Christ, I wonder who have?
Why therefore will you not come to receive the seal to those promises which do
so evidentlie belong to you or none? But after all perhaps you will cry, you
cannot believe, and therefore dare not come hither, since this is a Sacrament
provided for believers only.

This objection, I suppose, arises principally from your mistake of the
nature of saving faith. Wherefore tell me, I pray, what do you mean when you
say, you cannot believe. Do you not reallie believe, that the witness which
the Scripture gives of Christ is true? Whatever temptations you may have to
infidelity, yet is not this the prevalent persuasion of your minds, that
Jesus Christ is the true Messiah, by whom the fallen World is to be recovered
out of its ruins? Do you not believe him furnished with full power and
authority to accomplish this design. Do you not believe that his death was
sufficient for the ransom of the World, and all other truths concerning him
that you find revealed in the Gospel? And then are you not resolved that this
Jesus shall be your Savior, and none but he? Do you not from your hearts
acknowledge your selves miserable, lost creatures, altogether unable to restore
your selves, or to do any thing that may satisfy Gods justice, or in it self
deserve recompense or acceptance? So that you are convinced, if ever you are
saved it must be through Christ; And are you not earnestly desirous of this
above all things, that God for his Son's sake would pardon and save you? Yea,
more than that, are you not sincerely willing that Christ should rule in your
hearts, and guide you by his spirit, and frame you according to his will? Do
you not account his commands holy, just and good? And do you not desire
strength from him your head to obey them, and to conquer all temptations from
within and without that would draw you aside? Do you not believe the promises
which he has made, and the threatenings which he has denounced, to be
certainly true? And do you not desire more, that you may have a share in these
promises, than enjoy any created good? And do you not fear his threatened wrath,
more than any outward sufferings? Is it thus with you, as I am confident it is,
and yet will you cry out, that you cannot believe? What can you not believe?
Why, alas! you cannot believe you shall ever be saved by Jesus Christ. Is that
it then which your belief only sticks at? But suppose it does, you are not
therefore presently Unbelievers in Scripture-stile or in God's account. For
this is not that which is so much pressed upon you: observe well the language of
the Gospel, which ^uns thus, Believe in Christ and thou shall be saved, not
Believe that thou shall be saved by Christ. This absolute persuasion of thy own
salvation is not so much enjoined thee, however not in the first place, but
rather thy acceptance of Christ, that thou may be saved by him. And yet
methinks, if thou weigh things well, thou may be raised to such well grounded
hopes of thy own particular happiness, as may very much conquer these
doubtings and fears, which thou complainest of under the name of unbelief. For
let me ask thee seriously, why is it thou can not believe thou shall be
saved by Christ? It is not, I know, because thou doubtest of the sufficiency
of his satisfaction, or of the truth of his promises, or the graciousnesse of
his nature. For art thou not fully persuaded, that he will save all those who
truly believe in him? I make no doubt but thou art: wherefore hence it is
plain, that thy fears of perishing arise from an opinion, that thou art not a
true Believer. But this from thy own acknowledgments, I have made evident that
thou art, whilst thou believe that Christ is the only Savior of Mankind, and
art as willing he should take away thy sins from thee, as prevent wrath from
falling upon thee. So that it is rather for want of a clear knowledge of thy
self, than for want of faith in the promises, that thou can so hardly believe
thou shall be saved. Wherefore once again I ask thee, art thou not willing,
that Christ should deliver thee, both from the dominion and condemnation of
sin? If thou art, and wilt show it, by using the means he has afforded for
this end, then be assured, thou art a true believer, and as such shall be owned
and crowned by the Lord that bought thee. And therefore with great alacrity
come along with thy fellows, to the thankful remembrance of that eternal
redemption obtained for you, by the blood which ratified the everlasting
covenant betwixt God and his people.

2. What ever your weaknesses, corruptions, temptations are, let them not
detain you from, but rather send you with more speed to this Ordinance: For you
know not but this may be the means, which God will bless for the removal of
them. And take this for ^ certain truth, whilst you have no sin, but what is
the burden of your soul, and which you labor and long to be freed from, you
have no sin that makes you unfit for the Sacrament: nay more, this your sense
of sin makes you rightly fitted for it. And then there is less ground of
doubt, as to the fears and sadness you may labor under, or any temptations
with which you are troubled: You cannot sure be so weak, as to think your
selves upon any of these accounts, unmeet for your Lords Table: For you must
remember he never made this the qualification of his guests, that they should
come wanting nothing, but he calls hither the necessitous to supply their
wants. You come not hither only to be thankful for what you have received, but
to receive farther what your souls stand in need of. You would think he argued
at a very silly rate that should tell you, you must not go to a feast till your
hunger was satisfied, nor come to the Fire till you are warm: and yet no better
is the sophistry of Satan whereby he would persuade you, that whilst you feel
so many imperfections cleave to you, and lie under such great doubtings, you
must stay away from the Sacrament; when as this is one means appointed by God
for your relief: here is both physic and food administered to the sick and
fainting. And God may take this season of revealing himself to you, and
satisfying those doubts which you could no other way get rid of. Thus has it
been with many a soul, why may it not be so with you also?

3. Pray tell me, notwithstanding all these faults which you find with your
selves, yet do you not hold on in the performance of other duties? To instance
in one, do you not use to pray constantly? If you do, why then will you not be
brought to this work also? For assure your selves, if you be such whose prayers
are acceptable to God, your receiving will be acceptable also. Without a
dependence upon Christ the Mediator, and a resolution to conform your selves
to the will of God, your very prayers will be loathsome, but if these things be
in you, all your services will be welpleasing to him. Wherefore beware of
pretending so much reverence for this Ordinance, and so much necessity of
preparation, that least you should not demean your selves as you ought, you
will wholly neglect it* for sure you cannot think this according to your
Masters will, that you should run away from your work, for fear of miscarrying
in it. Nor pretend that this is of a nature so much different from all other
duties, that whilst you may do them you may not be admitted to this, since, if
you be sincere and hearty in one as well as another, endeavoring to improve
them to the end for which they were appointed, even to get nearer to God
thereby, be sure you shall be accepted in all. Moreover bethink your selves
what you would have done, had you lived in the first ages of the Church, when
the Christians were wont for the most part, at every time of their assembling,
to have a Sacrament. Would you then have ordinarily withdrawn from them? Or
would you not rather, have contented your selves with that measure of
preparation, that you had then been capable of making. Though, think not that I
am this while encouraging you to laziness, or to rush heedlesly and
inconsiderately hereupon: no, be as diligent as ever you are able, to prepare
your selves for so near an approach to the great God; but yet be not so
over-scrupulous as to keep back from the Ordinance, or make your coming less
profitable, through excessive fears. And remember still, that the habitual
devotednesse of the soul to God, without any hypocritical reserve, is the best
qualification for this and every other performance.

4. Lastly, one would think you of all persons, should not be guilty of
refusing your presence here, where there is a commemoration made of the love of
your dearest Lord. I speak to you that are serious Christians; well may others
slight this duty, if you that lie under so great engagements to it, will be
kept back by any Ordinary pretenses. You are such that are somewhat acquain^ed
with the greatness of that mercy, manifested in the Redemption of the World,
and will you be easily detained from showing forth that death, which procured
it? You are persons tender of your Master's honor, and sensible of your own
duty: show then that you are so, by obeying his command, and preserving the
esteem due to his sacred Ordinances, by your constant reverent attending upon
them.

Others there are, that may complain of their unfitness, who find themselves
at a loss in their preparations for this duty, which yet they are very willing
to set about, and are desirous of instructions for their right performance of
it. For these especially I have reserved some Directions to which I shall come
presently.

But there are a third sort, those the worst, and I fear the most, who will
confess they are unfit for the Sacrament, and therefore will by no means be
drawn to it, but will tell you, though they are not fit now, yet hereafter they
hope they shall be; whilst in the mean time there are no s^gns of any
preparation they make: for come to them one Month, or Year after another,
still they are in the same posture, and use the same excuses. Now the very
plain case of these persons, I take to be this; So much knowledge they have,
that they are convinced no man ought to come to the Sacrament, who is not
firmly resolved to forsake his sins, and to become a new man, if before he have
been a careless liver, and yet their Consciences tell them, that such and such
sins they are guilty of, which they cannot endure to think of parting with,
and such and such duties they believe, they ought to set upon, which yet they
have no mind to; and therefore so much modesty they have, that they will not
come to bind themselves, to that which they are not resolved to do; and this
while they fancy to themselves, that their case is something better, than if
they should go and make promises of amendment, and soon after break them; and
are apt to conceit, that they may as yet safely take somewhat more liberty,
than will be lawful for them, when once they have taken the Sacrament, whereby
they imagine they should be strangely hampered, and tied to a strictness which
they have no liking to: But yet hereafter, when they have tasted a little more
of the pleasures of the world, they intend to be take themselves to such a
course, and then they will be constant at Sacraments, and as devout as may be,
this they promise to themselves. I dare appeal to the Consciences of many,
whether such as these have not been their thoughts. Reader, have they not been
thy own? And commonly it is either tippling or wantonness, or love to an idle
and jolly life, and a listlesnesse to all pains and diligence in spiritual
affairs, and a misapprehension of serious holiness, as if it was a most
troublesome rigid thing, that are the ordinary causes of these, and most men's
continuance at a distance from godliness, and make them so backward to devote
themselves entirely to God. Now these I confess are not to be called
immediately to the Sacrament, but seriously to be dealt with in order to their
recoverie, from those sensual inclinations, and wretched delusions, which
render them so unfit for, and averse from it, to which purpose serve the former
exhortations to Repentance and Faith, whereon I staid so long. Only I shall
here discover to them, two dangerous mistakes, wherewith they seem willing to
impose upon themselves, and which chiefly hinder the performance of their duty.

The first is, A conceit that they may take some kind of liberty, for a loose
conversation, before they have bound themselves to the contrary by the
Sacrament, which thereupon they are much more backward to.

Now first I shall grant, that hereby a farther obligation is laid upon them,
to the greatest watchfulness against sin, and to a faithful discharge of
their duty to God, in the whole of their lives: and the wilful violation of
solemn engagements renders sin much more heinous: Wherefore it has been my
care all along, to make you understand, that it is not so much the bare
Receiving, that I would persuade you to, as to get your souls into a fitness
for the work, and to do it in a right manner. And once again let me warn you;
as you love your souls, not to come hither in love with your sins, or without
resolutions to turn from every evil way. Be it known to you, God will be
sanctified in those that draw nea^ him, and will severely punish irreverence
and profane rudeness, in those that pretend to his solemn worship and service,
as you may see in that terrible instance of Nadab and Abihu, Levit. 10.1, 2, 3.
And for unworthy Receiving of the Lords Supper, the Apostle tells the
Corinthians, For this very cause many were weak and sickly amongst them, and
many fallen asleep, and because they would not judge themselves, therefore God
judged them, 1 Cor. 11.30, 31. He Is an holy God, and commands all those to be
holy, that hope for acceptance in their approaches to him. And he is a God that
searches the heart, so that there is no hope of deceiving him. Wherefore stand
off, all you that have designed to persist one month or week longer, in your
rebellions against the Sovereign Majesty. Dare not to offer so great an affront
to him, as to thrust in amongst his subjects whilst thou art a resolved
traitor, as if thou would make a trial, whether he could discern thee in
that crowd. He Is a jealous God, and will not endure to be so tempted; And
sooner or later be sure, thy sin shall find thee out. If then thou dislikest
the holy Laws and government of Christ, take not an oath in a mockery, that
thou will be subject to him, which beforehand thou intendest not to keep.
Here Is no jesting or dallying; beware how thou playest with edge-tools. These
are serious things, wherefore either be serious and sincere in thy meddling with
them, or keep at a distance. Avoid, I say, all you loathsome* defiled sinners,
that are in love with your filth, and will not be washed and cleansed; whilst
this is your posture, you are no way fit to fit at the Table of the King of
Glory, there to Feast with his beloved friends, whom he has purified and made
meet for his fellowship and favor. But perhaps you will presently reply, you like
all this well enough, this is that you would have, and you agree with me to
stay away, as perceiving your own unfitness. And are you indeed resolved to
stay away, and to continue in this unprepared posture, as thinking you have
hereby some more dispensation for a careless ungodly life than others have?
Alas! poor wretches, how willing you are to be cheated into misery? And how
desirous do you seem of a freedom to do your selves the greatest mischief? But
a little to undeceive you. Let me assure all you that live upon this earth and
are endued with reason, whether you will bind your selves to God by this
Sacrament or not; there lie so many other indispensable engagements on you to
his service, that you have not the least liberty more than others to rebel
against him: and that will sufficiently appear, if you do but consider these
two things.

1. The relation wherein you naturally and necessarily stand to God. 2. Your
more express and professed obligations to him.
For the first, Consider, Are you not his creatures and ^e your Maker? And is
he not the upholder of your being, the lengthner of your lives, and the giver
of all your mercies? Is he not therefore your owner and Governor? Do you not
owe your selves, and all you have to him? And is it not your duty to serve and
obey him, whether you have promised you will do so or not? Do you think he has
no title to you, till in some solemn manner you have professed subjection to him?
Do you think the service you owe to God, is so purely a freewill offering, that
if you will render it you may, and if not, you are in no fault? By this reason
God must be much beholden to you for it. What, do not his Laws bind, till you
have given your consent? Must he ask you leave to govern you? Do you think it
is with you in this case, as with a Servant, that owes this man or that no
duty, till he has hired himself into his service? Sure you cannot be so
stupid. But rather, will you not yield, that from your very birth you are at
least as much obliged to obedience to your Maker, as any Child to his Parent?
And pray tell me, what would you think of that Child, who, when his Father bad
him do any thing, should stubbornly refuse, and tell him he never promised him
any such obedience? Would you think this a satisfactory answer? Do you not
easily perceive, that Children are bound to obey their Parents, even by virtue
of that relation they stand in to them, though they never enter into any
formal engagement to be dutiful? Even thus do you stand absolutely bound to
obey God, the Father of Spirits, before ever you profess you selves to be his
people: And all your professions, though they are as so many farther ties upon
you to obedience, yet they give not God any new right to you which before he
had not, only hereby you acknowledge his right, and promise to render him
what is his due. Hence then you may see what an absurd conceit it is, that you
may any whit more freely sin against God before you have taken the Sacrament,
than after. Can you be so sottish, as to imagine, that such excuses as these
will serve your turn at that day, when you must be called to render a reason of
your doing? When the Gospel first came to the Heathens, I hope, you will grant
they were bound to receive it, and yet they had never before given their
consent to be ruled by Christ, nor had made any Covenant with him. But why
stand I so long on a case so plain?

And then take notice farther; that by virtue of this subjection which you owe
to God as his creatures, you are bound to express your resolutions to serve
him, by what signs, and in what manner he shall appoint you; now he has
commanded you, to express these resolutions by receiving the Lords Supper, as
I have before proved: And will you disobey this particular command, and then
think, this will excuse you from obedience to the rest? To make the case plain
by a like instance: Suppose when the King had commanded all his Subjects to
repair to several places in the Kingdom, there to take the Oath of
Allegiance, many amongst them should absent themselves, and refuse to take it,
and afterward should conspire together, and rise up in arms against him, do
you think it would excuse them, to plead that they never swore Allegiance to
him? Why, first it was their fault that they did not, since they were commanded
to do it; and then however, they were engaged to peace and faithfulness by
living in the Kingdom, and receiving protection from their Prince. Even thus
will your neglect of Sacraments be charged on you as a fault, for which you had
no reason, but will be far from being admitted as an excuse of any other
sins, against which you were sufficiently tied, by your living merely upon
God, and receiving all you had from him.

But then in the second place consider, you are already obliged by your own
promises and professions, to walk in the fear of the Lord, and therefore have
not the least ground to al^ow your selves in sin, from your not having received
the Lo^ds Supper as an engagement against it. For bethink you a little, do you
not profess your selves to be Christians? And what is the meaning of that, but
that you worship God by Jesus Christ, and acknowledge him to be your Maker and
Ruler, and Christ to be your Savior? And accordingly, are you not devoted to
God by Baptism, whereby you stand bound to renounce the Devil, the World and
the Flesh, and to be Christ's faithful servant to your lives end? I confess,
you were thus consecrated to God by your Parents in you infancy, when,
according to the Law of God and Nature, they had full power thus to dispose of
you: but now you are come to years of discretion, do you consent to what they
have done or not? In plain English, Do you renounce your Baptism, whereby you
stand obliged to be the Servants of God and his Son Christ Jesus? You that I am
now speaking to, will, I know, deny this with great earnestness, and cry, God
forbid, that you should be such apostate wretches, from Christians to turn
Heathens and Infidels. Well then, if you acknowledge your selves under the bond
of your Baptism, assure your selves, you are hereby as much tied from the
least sin in thought, word or deed, as you can be by the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. What will you do then in this case? will you dare to run on in those
sins from which your Baptism does bind you, and so renounce it in your
practice, whilst you own it in profession? Or will you hereafter be so silly as
to abstain from the communion, for fear of engaging your selves to an holy
life, to which you stand engaged already by your own consent. If you continue
in this mind, it is too plain a sign that in your hearts you disown your
Baptism it self: and what a case are you in then? For let me ask you, if you
had been born of Heathen Parents, and were but just now come to the
understanding of the Christian Religion, and were acquainted what kind of
Persons they must be that owned it, would you be baptized into this Faith, and
hereby profess your resolutions to lead such an holy life, as all Christians
are commanded? If you say you would not, hence then it follows that you dislike
your Baptism, since if it was to be done again you would none of it. And if
indeed you wish your selves, in the case of unbaptized Heathens now, you are
reallie worse than they, and shall be in a worse condition shortly. But if you
say, you would readily be baptized if it was yet to do, then fain would I
know, why you are so backward to receive the Lords Supper, wherein you do but
renew the Covenant that is made at Baptism, acknowledging your selves to be
true Christians, and promising that you will remain so: what possible reason
can you devise for this unwillingness?

Withal take notice, all you that are baptized into the name and Church of
Christ, and do stand to your Baptism, you have hereby bound your selves to be
his faithful servants, to obey his commands, and to behave your selves in his
Church, as he directs you: Now he has commanded all Christians, that are of
capacity to prepare themselves, and so to receive the Sacrament of his Supper:
Do you not clearlie perceive then, how your Baptism binds you to this duty,
you being now come to the use of your reason? How is it then that you dare
neglect it, whilst you are so straightly engaged to it?

And further, beside your own Baptism, you Fathers that have Children, every
time you bring them to be baptized, do profess, before God and the
Congregation, that you renounce the Devil, the World, and the sinful lusts of
the flesh, that you believe the Articles of the Christian faith, and will keep
Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of your
life. And are you sincere in all this? If you are, why should you stay away
from the Sacrament, where you are required to profess and promise no more?
However, I hope, hence you may be convinced, that before you partake of the
Lords Supper, you are so far bound to an holy life, that you have no allowance
for the least sin any more, than you have afterward, which is that I am proving.

And this is farther evident by all other duties of religion, which you perform
to God, every one of which ties you to the most exact obedience to him. I
suppose you are not so Atheistical but that sometimes you pray to God, and when
you pray, do you not beg of him pardon of sin and grace to do him faithful
service? When you say the Lords Prayer, do you not therein beseech God to
forgive you your trespasses, and not to lead you into temptation, but deliver
you from evil? And what, dare you ask of him forgiveness of sin, whilst you
are resolved to continue in it still; I presume you hope to obtain what you
ask, and can you so much as flatter your selves with any hope that God will
pardon your sins whilst y^^ will not forsake them? Has not his word plainly
old you the contrary? And when you pray to be kept from sin and the power of
Satan, is it not to be supposed that you desire these things? and does not the
expression of your desires engage you to do what you can to obtain what you
pray for? and are you not therefore bound to take heed of sin, to watch against
and resist temptations? except you take God for an Idol, and make your prayers
in a mockery, as if your servant should come and entreat you to help him do
his work, and then run away, and never set his hand to it; or as if your Child
should pray you to keep him from falling into the water, and should throw
himself into it as soon as he had done; dare you venture thus to play and dally
with the All-mightie. And when you desire him to save your souls, and keep you
from Hell, it speaks you resolved not wilfully to destroy and damn your selves,
or else you are horrid mockers of God. Methinks you should never have the
impudence to come near him, or speak a word to him, whilst you are fully bent
to go on in those ways that are so contrary and provoking to him. The like I
might say of hearing the word, you are thereby engaged to give obedience to it:
for you cannot think sure you serve God sufficiently by hearing your duty,
whilst you set not about it. And for you to come to hear what God shall say by
his Minister, with a secret purpose to hold on in such and such courses,
whatever shall be told you to the contrary, is little less dangerous and
damnable, than to come to the Sacramnent with such wicked purposes. Let this
then suffice to remove your first mistake, that you may take liberty in some
sinful ways you have a mind to, before you have taken the Sacrament.

The second gross mistake which I find in your objection, is, that you think,
though at present you have no great mind to be so serious, as to set upon
preparation for the Sacrament, yet that hereafter you shall, when you have had
your swinge a while longer, and have taken a little more pleasure, being as yet
perhaps but in the prime of your youth, and thereupon you hope that God will
bear with you yet a while, since you have such good purposes to become his
servants for the time to come.

Should I go about fully to show you the vanity of this conceit, and your folly
in delaying to return to God, I might fill many sheets: wherefore that I may
not be tedious, I shall do little more than represent to you, the very true
language and import, of this pretense of yours, that so you may be ashamed of
ever using it more, or harboring it any longer. When you talk of staying yet a
while, before you cast off your old companions and courses, and bind your
selves to a godly life at the Sacrament, what do you in effect but say? That
when you have contemned Gods mercy, and grieved his spirit a little longer, and
done somewhat more to dishonor his name, then you will betake your selves to
him, and become his people; when you have done Satan yet a little more service,
then you will shake him off, and take Christ for your Master; when you have a
while longer trod under foot his precious blood, then it shall wash you from
all your sins; when you have run deeper on the score, and added something more
both to the number and hainousness of your transgressions, then you will come for
a pardon; when you have done somewhat more to make God your enemy, then you will
seek reconciliation; when you have let your lusts take deeper rooting, then
you will pluck them up; when you have made them a little stronger, then you will
subdue them; when the sore is festered then you will apply the Plaster; when the
gangrene is almost got to your vitals, then you will seek a remedy; thus
foolishly, thus presumptuouslie and baselie do they argue, who think it is too
soon yet to come home to God, and be religious in good earnest. I know you
would be ashamed to speak thus, and will scarce be persuaded there lodges so
much wickedness in your hearts, but for certain there does, whilst you retain
secret purposes, to go on in any way of known sin. Ah poor sinner! that thou
did but a little know what thou do, whilst thou standst thus unresolved
whither thou should yet bid farewell to thy lusts, and come over heartily
to God by Jesus Christ. Oh disingenuous creature! do thou think thou have not
provokt and dishonored thy Maker enough yet? Have thou not yet sufficiently
abused thy Redeemers grace and patience? Have thou not yet thrown away time
enough? and sinned away mercies and offers enough? Is sin so sweet and
profitable a thing that it should be so hard to determine whether it was best
be forsaken or not? Is God so hard a Master, and his service such a burdensome
thing, that sinners must be wooed to him with so much earnestness, and all
prove too little with the most? Is it so safe and desirable a state to remain
still in the gall of bitterness and under the wrath of God? Can you keep off
this wrath which you are plucking upon you? Have you both repentance and time
at your own beck? And are you sure of acceptance, how long so ever you stay
before you seek it? will holiness be good for you hereafter, and is it not
now? Or are you afraid of being happy too soon? wherefore weigh things well,
Sirs, and then resolve whether there be any wisdom, in delaying that work
which may be put off too long, but cannot be too quickly done: that work to
which in all reason and conscience you stand engaged every hour, even to be
divorc't from sin and Satan, and firmly betrothed to the Lord Jesus. How long
must he seek and sue for thy consent? Why should not he have thy youth as well
as any other? Does Satan deserve it better than he? Did not he die for thee in
the prime of his years, and why should not thou live to him whilst thou art
young? When will thou have put away that wretched disobedient answer, that it is
yet too soon to entertain him? Has he stood knocking for entrance till his
locks are wet with the dew of the night, and is it still too soon to open to
him and let him in? Oh beware, least thy continued stubbornness should even
wear out his patience; least thy perverse carriage should provoke him for ever
to leave thee; and least if still thou think it not time yet to break off
thy sins, and set upon a godly life, he should think it time to cut thee off,
and sentence thee to everlasting death. In the mean time know, that all thy
good designs, what thou will do, and be hereafter, will not be the least excuse
of thy present wickedness, nor make thy case any better with God; nay rather
they make it worse, since it appears thou art convinced in thy Conscience, that
thou ought to live after another fashion than thou do, and yet wilfully
neglectest thy acknowledged duty. I hope then I have said enough, to show that
thou have no refuge, no excuse that will hold, whilst thou absentest thy self
from the Sacrament, out of a lothnesse as yet to reform thy life, and do the
duties to which this would bind thee. Wherefore to conclude. If it be thy
purpose to continue in any sinful course, come to the Lords Table if thou
dare: for far be it from me to speak one word to encourage thee to forswear
thy self. But yet on the other hand, Go on in thy sins, and stay away if thou
dare: for thou art in danger every moment of dropping into Hell, whilst thou
remainest in such a state. Thou see then to what a strait sin brings thee, so
that turn thee which way thou will, whilst thou willingly carriest it about
thee, an Angel with a flaming sword stands full in thy way, threatening
destruction; whether thou come or come not, whilst thou continuest a
resolved sinner, thy case is sad and deplorable. But yet one way remains, and
but one that I know for thy safety, even with all speed to cast away thy sins,
and change thy heart and life: and then come as soon as thou will to the Lords
Table, there to profess this blessed change, and to confirm thy self therein.
And for thy encouragement take notice of two things.

1. It is not an absolute sinlesse perfection that here thou bindest thy self
to; even this thou should thirst and aspire after, but yet thou art not to
be discouraged, if thou never attain it, till thou art taken into the number of
the Spirits of just men made perfect. Mistake me not, as if I was indulging
thee an allowance in any the least sin, no, this is it I warn thee of, and
against this thou must covenant in the Sacrament, to wit, against a willing,
loving entertainment of any sin whatever. And thou shall be accounted true to
this Covenant, if thou hate and strive against all, and art humbled under the
sense of thy remaining imperfections, being far more desirous to be rid of
them, than to retain them, and if upon knowledge of any slip or stumble thou
risest again by true repentance, and recourse to the blood of Christ for mercy,
and to his Spirit for fresh strength, being resolved to take more heed to thy
ways for the time to come. It is here as if thou should promise thy
P^ysician, thou would be careful of thy health; this does not imply, that
thou will never be sick more, but yet it implies thus much, that thou will not
w^lfully bring diseases upon thy self, but wilt use the means that are
appointed to preserve thy health; and whatever sickness cleaves to thee will
be thy trouble, and thou will desire and endeavor to be freed from it. Even
thus art thou bound to regard the health of thy soul, and to look upon sin as a
spiritual sickness, and therefore never to fall in love with it, but to do
thy best toward its utter removal: Even those infirmities, to which the best
are liable, are not to be cherisht and pleaded for, no more than thou would
plead for the keeping of a little headache, or any bodily pain. Thou should
not by thy good will be guilty so much as of a vain thought, an idle word, or
the least motion to any sin; but yet it is not required of thee, to promise
absolutely never more to be guilty of any of these; nor art thou to judge thy
self unfit for the Sacrament, because thou find'st such imperfections cleave to
thee, so long as from thy heart thou abhorrest them, and do ordinarily
overcome all temptations to more gross and wilful sins. Whilst thou art in
the flesh, thy state is like to be so far imperfect, that it will be thy
daily duty to grow in grace, and to pray for the forgiveness of thy
trespasses; to improve Christ both as a treasury of grace, whence thou art to
be supplied, and as an Advocate with the Father, through whom thou may be
pardoned. This I mention, that thou may not say, I discourage thee from the
Sacrament, by making it an engagement to greater strictness, than it is
possible for man in this life to come up to, since, I do assure thee thou may
safely come hither, if thou art but sincerely resolved to do what in thee lies
to please God, and not to run wilfully into those actions, which thou know
are contrary to his will. And this also may take away that fond opinion of some
ignorant people, that it is best never to receive the Sacrament, till they come
to their deathbed, as thinking that every sin afterward will damn them; but
remember what I have told you, that we do not promise never to sin more, but
not to allow our selves in sin; and to this sincere endeavor to keep all Gods
commands, we are before as strictly tied by our Baptism, and therefore by your
reason this should be deferred till we come to die, as some of the ancients
did, partly through this mistake; and thinking this washed away all the sins
before committed. And if you should be of this opinion also, that the Sacrament
gives you a pardon of all your former sins, and therefore it is good to put it
off to your deathbed, consider well, that it is by virtue of Gods promises that
you have any ground to expect pardon of sin; and by those promises, to which
the Sacraments are seals, this pardon is assured to all penitent believing
ones; so that Baptism and the Lords Supper do seal your pardon, even of sins
that may hereafter be committed, if you truly repent of them, and betake your
selves to Gods mercy in Christ for forgiveness: But if you think, when you
have lived an ungodly life, to make up all by taking the Sacrament when you are
sick, know, to your timely conviction, this will not do the work, as you shall
know to your terror, if you depend upon it: for remember what I told you, that
if you do not truly repent of sin, it is not the Sacrament that will give you a
pardon, and this true repentance, few upon a deathbed have, that put it off
till then. Moreover, you that are for deferring this duty till you come to die,
I might ask you how you know, whether you shall not die suddenly, or have the
use of your reason taken away by your distemper, or be visited with the Plague,
that no Minister dare come near you? and farther, you seem not to consider,
that this Ordinance is exceeding helpful to us, for the overcoming of lusts,
and leading our lives as we ought, and this brings me to the second thing which
I would have you take notice of.

2. Namely. That if thou art but once come up to a resolution, to do thy best
against sin, and to please God, and addressest thy self to the Lords Supper,
with an earnest desire of grace to be here given thee from Christ, to enable
^hee to perform thy promises, thou may very confidently expect, strength and
assistance from him, and even now to partake thereof. Little do thou think
what a mighty blow thou might give to thy strong lusts, and to the kingdom
of Satan within thee, by such a firm resolution as this, made with an humble
dependence upon Gods grace, bound upon, and confirmed by taking the Sacrament.
Oh! if thou wast but brought into so ingenuous and good a frame, as to be truly
grieved, that Sin and Satan should have so much interest in thee, and did
heartily desire, that God would cast them forth, and take possession of thee
for himself, in how good a way wast thou then to a deliverance? If God saw thee
laboring under the burden of thy lusts, tugging with thy backward heart, to
bring it t^ him, thou can not imagine what help he would soon afford thee.
Wherefore sit not down in a faint dejection; say not, there is no hope of ever
getting up such strong lusts, which are so deep rooted in my nature, and so
confirmed by long custom, it is to no purpose to attempt it. Why man, must not
this work be done, or thou perish for ever? And the longer its delaid the
harder it is like to be. Thy case is sad indeed, but not desperate yet; Let
neither thy presumption, nor despondency make it desperate. The things that are
imp^ssible with men, are possible with God. Wherefore rouse thy self, and
gather up all thy strength: for be sure, sitting still will bring thy death.
Limit not Gods power, but ask thy own heart, whether thou art willing to be
cured: for no diseases are too hard for the Physician, that will take thee in
hand. If thou will but attend upon him, and humbly beg and accept his help; oh
how soon can he bring down all high imaginations, and every thought that
rebels against him, and subdue all things to himself. He has healed and
cleansed as vile sinners as thou, and conquered as stubborn hearts as thine. He
can so change thy nature, and the very temper and bent of thy soul, that thou
shall abhor those sins, which now thou think thou can not live without,
so that thou will choose rather to be torn limb from limb, or to take Toads and
Serpents into thy bosom, than to meddle, with what was once so pleasant; and
wilt wonder that ever thou should be such a beast, such a Devil, as to take
delight in that which was so hurtful to thy self, and so displeasing to God.
Oh let not then the seeming sweetness of any lust bewitch thee any longer, or
betray thee into a slothful neglect of thy duty: If sin would have made thee
happy, thou had found it long since, and yet what have thou ever got from it,
that comforts thee to look back upon it? Or that would do thee any good if thou
wast to die at this hour? And put it on thy account, nothing better will thou
get at the last. But little do thou think what thou losest one year after
another, whilst thou remainest estranged from God, and think an holy life
such a tedious difficult thing. Be persuaded then at length to make a trial,
and see what can be done in the case. Bind thy self by the most solemn vow to
forsake thy wicked ways, and to become Gods faithful servant, and come to the
Sacrament with this design; and if thou be sincere, thou may be confident of
receiving help from God, to keep this Covenant, which by his Word and Spirit,
thou art drawn to make with him. So much for the third objection.

CHAP. XV. Obj. We are not in perfect charity, but at variance with our
neighbors, Answered.
4. Obj. THE fourth and last that I shall take notice of, is very common in the
mouths of many, to wit, That they are at variance with their neighbors, and
therefore cannot with a good Conscience come to the Communion, whither none are
to come, but they that are in perfect charity with all men; and commonly they
allege, that they have Lawsuits, or some kind of quarrellings one with
another.

Ans. In answer hereto, let me ask you, who put this objection, whose fault is
it, that you are not at peace with your neighbors? I question not but you will
presently tell me, that the fault is theirs. But then farther, have you no
enmity in your minds against them? But are you willing to be reconciled to
them, and to do what on your part may conduce thereto? And though they be
cross and perverse, yet do you from your heart forgive them? so that you would
not take revenge on them, if it were in your power, but would do them good, if
they should need your help? It Is very like you will be ready to reply, that you
are thus well-affected toward them, and that the malice is only on their part:
and for the present I shall suppose you speak true; whereupon I demand, whether
you can be so weak, as to think that another man's sin, shall be laid to your
charge? If your neighbor be malicious, is that any fault of yours? Or does his
malice make you any more unfit for the Sacrament, than his drunkenness or
covetousness? What a sad case might the best Christian be in, if it was in the
power of every wicked man, that owes him a spite to make it unlawful for him
to go to the Sacrament? as by your arguing it would be. Suppose any malicious
Man should without reason pick a quarrel with me, and after I had used all
means to pacify him, should utterly refuse to be at peace, what is to be done
in this case? Must I stay away from the Sacrament till I can persuade him to be
friends with me? perhaps that may never be, and must I be bound to a thing
impossible? or be so great a loser through another Man's wickedness, which I
cannot help? Is it not enough for me to be reconciled to him in my own mind,
and freely to forgive him what injuries he has done me? how else would those
blessed Saints in the Primitive times have done, whilst they were maligned and
persecuted by almost all Men? we never find that they made this any pretense
to keep away from the Lords Table, at which they did so frequently attend. They
thought themselves guiltless (as well they might) whilst they prayed for their
Persecutors, blessed them that cursed them, not avenging themselves, but giving
place unto wrath, and not giving to any Man just cause of offense. And do you
but labor thus to behave your selves, and then never trouble your minds with
other Men's enmity against you. Yea, do but thus, and you will fully answer the
command God has given us, to live in peace and quietness. Romans 12.18. If it
be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men. Which words
plainly insinuate that it is not always possible to have the good will of all
Men, but yet we must labor for this, and do nothing that may hinder it, and
therefore above all must not bear, or discover ill will to them.

But here perhaps some will reply that they are forced to vindicate their
wrongs, and to go to Law with those that would abuse them, or that sue them
without cause; and therefore can they with a safe conscience receive the
Sacrament before the contention is ended? why, to this you must even ask your
own hearts for an answer. For (as I said before) if you this while have no
malicious design against them, but seek only to defend o^ right your selves in
a just and lawful manner, there is nothing that need trouble you in this case.
For in the thing it self, its not a sin to go to Law, if the cause and design
be good, no more than it was for the Jews to appeal to their Judges, to
determine matters betwixt man and man. And therefore when the Apostle condemns
the Christians, for going to Law one with another, before the Heathen Judges,
which made it utterly a fault, he yet advises them to set some in the Church
to judge betwixt the brethren, in controversies that might happen touching
their worldly concernment. 1 Cor. 6.4, 5. And these suits may possibly be
lawful on both sides, as when such a difficult case shall happen that cannot
otherwise be decided, and then both parties might maintain charity to each
other, if they were but such as they ought. But if without cause you are vexed
by men of contention, beware of acting out of wrath, spleen or revenge; yea, or
of doing any thing out of mere selfishness: for even in your temporal concerns,
about your estate, credit, etc. Gods interest should be more aimed at than your
own; and you should not so much endeavor to secure or recover these, for your
own sake, as that you may hereby be more capable of honoring God: and if you
saw that, through some circumstances, it might tend more to Gods honor, to
neglect a vindication of your right than to prosecute it, in such a case it
would be your duty to sit still. (They that have devoted themselves, and all
they have to God, will understand this and none else.) Hence you find the
Apostle expostulating with the Christians, why they would not take wrong, and
even suffer themselves to be defrauded rather than contend, whereby they did
then so much disgrace Religion. Verse. 7. Of that forequoted Chapter. But yet I
say, when it is your duty to maintain your right, against those that would
abuse you, you may do this, and yet have no spite against their persons, nor
any desire of their hurt, if your own hearts be right; and may really forgive
them, whilst you endeavor to avoid the injury which they would offer you. And
let this suffice on supposition, that you are thus well-affected toward those,
that make themselves your adversaries; which if you indeed be, I hope I need
use no more words to persuade you, that other Men's malicious behavior toward
you, need be no hindrance to your coming to the Sacrament.

But on the other side, give me leave to deal plainly with you, all you that
insist upon this reason for neglecting your duty, because there is difference
betwixt you and your neighbors, I strongly suspect that you your selves, are
very much in fault: and indeed you confess as much by your practice, whilst in
your words you disown it; for why is it you make this a ground of abstaining
from the Sacrament; but that your consciences tell you, you bear so much ill
will to your neighbors, that its a dangerous thing for you to receive it? Oh
look back upon your ways, and see whether instead of bearing wrongs, you have
not wronged and defrauded others. Have you not oppressed, or needlessly vexed them,
through eager designs of raising your selves by their ruins, not caring whom
you have injured and trampled upon, so you might but get your own ends? Of if
you will not own this, yet look faithfully into the temper of your souls. Do
you not stand vilely affected toward some that have done you injuries, and
whom you take for your enemies? Are you not backward to any through
reconciliation with them? Do you not stand upon your terms? and expect that
they should come first and humble themselves, and stoop to you, before you will
seek after any peace with them? your great spirits scorn to be first in this
work; nay its well if you are not resolved against it, let them do what they
will? Oh proud wretches! Is this like Gods dealing with the World? when we had
given him the offense, yet who was it began first to treat of a peace? Has the
great God given you this example, and yet are you too good, forsooth, to seek
to your fellow creatures to be at peace with you? If this be your goodness,
may not the Devil himself pass for good? for he has pride enough, and what is
yours better? But further, do you not cherish a secret spleen against them,
which fills you with implacable desires of being revenged on them, and makes
you grieved to see them do well in the World? whereas you could heartily wish
their ruin, and would delight to be in a capacity of doing them a mischief;
and long to bring them under you, that you might insult over them, and make
them repent that ever they displeased such as you, Oh divellish and monstrous
spirit! that ever it should dwell in the breasts of any that call themselves
Christians! Christians are they called they deserve not the name of Men.
Certainly, there are many as good Christians as these, hanged at Tyburn for
cutting Men's throats. For did not the fear of Man restrain them, you should
quickly see their envenomed rancour break out into as bad effects. But suppose
your malice be not boild up to such an height, yet if you harbor so much as
makes you unfit for the Sacrament (as according to your own acknowledgment you
do, whilst it keeps you from it) it is a plain sign your souls are yet under
miserable distempers, far from being truly sanctifi^d; you live still under the
power of self-love, unmortified pride or covetousness which are the secret
cause of this your discord with others. And alas! though these present
differences were ended, you would be far from a fitness for the Sacrament,
whilst you abide in the condition you are yet in, not having your peace made
with God, but being in enmity against him, through a subjection to your
reigning lusts. And therefore you might more truly say, you are not fit for
this duty, because you are proud, and covetous, and envious, than because you
are at variance with any one; only you hope for some kind of excuse, by laying
the fault on others, but that I have taken off before. And furthermore, is it
not a plain discovery, how little love you have to Christ and your own souls,
that you can willingly be so long absent from this Ordinance, upon such a silly
pretense as this, that your neighbors and you are not agreed. It Is a sign of
an ill stomach, when people are glad of an excuse to save them from eating.
What, could not you, if you had been so minded, have got an agreement before
now? Or at least, could not you have done so much toward it, as might have
satisfied your Consciences, that you were not in fault? Was there but any
worldly advantage to be got by doing thus much, you would soon set about it,
I Will warrant you. But being, I doubt, very indifferent to Sacraments, or to any
thing that concerns your souls, a very little reason serves to keep you from
them, since you find no want of them, nor can imagine how you should be much
bettered by them. And whilst you are in this wretched frame, be sure you shall
never want one thing or other to hinder you. To bring you to better
apprehensions of things, let what I have said before suffice: for I now hasten
to a conclusion; only let me wish you to beware of cheating your selves with
that m^stake, which I endeavored to remove under the last Objection, to wit,
That whilst you come not to the Sacrament, you may safely persist in such and
such actions, or in such a temper of mind, which ought to be changed before you
go thither: for thus you seem to think, whilst you stay away, because there are
fallings out betwixt you and others; being, it seems resolved to continue in
your enmity, and think your selves secure enough, if you come not hither in
this evil mind. If these be your thoughts, pray answer me these two things.

1. How can you desire of God the forgiveness of your sins whilst you refuse
to forgive others? Have you the impudence to do it? Or the ignorance and
presumption, to think such desires would be granted? See where the contrary is
expressly told you, in that forementioned place, Mat. 6.15. Nay, tell me
plainly, How dare you so much as say the Lords Prayer, wherein you beg of God
to forgive your trespasses, as you forgive those that trespass against you?
What, do you pray that he would remember your iniquities, and charge them upon
you, and take vengeance of you? For thus it seems you deal with those that
offend you. Or do you think to make your case somewhat the better, by never
saying this Prayer, or by leaving out this Petition? Can you imagine this will
hinder God from dealing with you according to the tenor thereof? Methinks you
should not be so weak: No, be you sure God will make good his word, that if you
forgive not, you shall not be forgiven, whether you give your consent or not.
If you say you do forgive your enemies, then I ask you again, why upon account
of any differences you should neglect the Sacrament? But if you dare not
forgive them, you see it is as dangerous to say your Prayers, whilst you are in
this mind, as to come to the Communion.

2. But again, If through these differences with your neighbors you are unfit
for the Sacrament, pray bethink you well, whether upon the same account you are
not as unfit for death? And dare you continue in such a desperate condition as
this? Do you not believe, that the charity which is required to make you fit,
for the Communion of imperfect Saints here on earth, is as necessary for your
admission into the communion of Saints in glory? Are you not fit to go to the
Lords Table? and are you then fit to appear before his Tribunal? Take this for
an undoubted truth, that if you so far allow your self in malice or any other
sin, that you are (according to the Gospel rule) unworthy of the Sacrament, if
you die in this condition, you will be thought unworthy of everlasting life.
Methinks then you should never dare to live in such an estate, wherein you dare
not die. You take it to be a dangerous thing to die out of charity with any,
and is it safe think you, to live out of charity, or in any other sin, for
those that are liable to death every moment? Wherefore, to conclude, my advice
to you is, that you would without any longer delay go to your brother, and if
you have wronged him, acknowledge it, and make all due reparation, and do what
in you lies to be reconciled to him: but if he prove obstinate, or have wronged
you, see that you heartily forgive, and clear your breast of all spite, or
desire of revenge; so being careful in all other respects duly to prepare your
selves, come to the Lords Table, there to receive a confirmation of peace
betwixt God and your own souls. And thus I have done with the several
objections that are made against this duty.

CHAP. XVI. Directions for a due Preparation, and right Receiving.
IN the last place, according to my promise, I come to give some Direction to
those who are willing to address themselves to this work; to instruct them for
their immediate preparation to, their behavior in and after the same. And
though I have already at large shown what the design of this Ordinance is, that
so we might the better know how to behave our selves thereat, and have thence
discovered what kind of persons Communicants ought to be, yet I shall in a few
words premise a repetition of the same, that you may the better apprehend and
remember it.

Know then, that it pleased our blessed Lord Jesus, in the evening of that
night wherein he was betrayed, to appoint this Sacrament of his Supper, partly
for the present comfort of his Apostles (who began to be cast down upon the
knowledge of his sufferings, and removal from amongst them) but principally
for the benefit of them, and all other Christians, in the times that were to
follow, even till he should come to Judgment, till which time it never ought
to be laid down in the Church. The great end of it was (as I have said) to
preserve fresh in the minds of all Christians, the memory of their Lord and
Master, and especially of that unvaluable mercy shown in his dying for them,
his Death being very clearly held forth by the breaking of the Bread, and
pouring out of the Wine. But we must not think, that it was for an idle
uneffectuall Remembrance of him, that he commanded this duty, but for such a
Remembrance, as might tend to the great advantage of our souls; even that by
Remembering our Redemption, we might be brought to have low mean thoughts of our
selves, who were lost and undone, but recovered by Free Grace; that we might
keep up a sense of the exceeding great evil of sin, which made us liable to
those miseries, whence only his Death can deliver us, and so might be stirred
up to a greater sorrow for, hatred of, and resolutions against sin, the
occasion of his Death; and that by the Remembrance of his love, we might be the
stronglier engaged to him, and here in a visible and express manner, might
solemnize our Covenant with him, and frequently renew our promises of
faithfulness. Moreover, here Christ has made a familiar representation of the
blessings he has obtained for Believers, that hereby we might be quickened to
earnest desires after them, and so being at present fitted, for the
communications of grace to our souls, might receive the same; and might here
also receive a confirmation of our faith, that we shall in due time enjoy those
privileges that are invisible, and yet to come. And farther, he has ordained,
that his Death should in this lively manner, at set times be represented to us,
that having it fresh in our thoughts, we may be the more powerfully moved at
such seasons as these, to celebrate and adore that wisdom and goodness, which
has so wonderfully appeared in the contrivance, and accomplishment of our
Redemption; and that Fellow Christians meeting together for this work, may be
the more endeared to one another, and quickened to long after a perfect
communion in the praises and love of God and their Redeemer, in that future
glory whereof they have here a shadow and forecast.

Now as the ends for which this Ordinance was appointed inform us, what kind of
persons they that frequent it ought to be, as to their habitual
qualifications, so do they also teach us, what ought to be the workings of our
soul in our approches to it; since here we are to exercise and put forth those
graces, which are before required to be wrought in us: but yet for your plainer
direction, I shall tell you more particularly how you ought then to behave your
selves; and lastly shall show, how you may improve it afterward to your
greatest advantage.

But by the way take notice, that I suppose you, to whom I now speak, to be
such as are heartily willing to come to the Sacrament, in that manner, and to
those ends which Christ has commanded: and therefore I suppose you to be
already so far convinced of the evil of sin, that you are resolved to forsake
it; and so far convinced of the greatness of those benefits that come by a
Savior, and of your need of him, that you are firmly purposed to accept of
him, as he offers himself to you, that you may be his, and he may be yours for
ever. And upon this account, I shall say little to put you upon, or help you in
that self-examination, whereby you may come to the knowledge of your own
estates, whether you have a true work of grace wrought in your hearts or not,
since I have before said so much to this purpose; but shall now rather direct
you, how to to exercise and express your Repentance, Faith and other graces.
Only as you go along, if you find your selves willing to perform the duties I
shall mention, you have reason to believe that your condition is good, but if
you refuse these you have too much ground to suspect, that all is not well with
you. And though it be usual to distinguish betwixt directions for an immediate
preparation to the Sacrament, and those that are for a right demeanor in the
act of Receiving, yet I shall choose rather to speak of both under the same
Head, since it has been my business all along, to bring souls to a fitness
for this work, and since in our performance of the duty, our hearts ought to be
kept, in the same disposition and frame that they were brought into, by our
preparations for it.

1. First then, I would advise you who intend to come to the Lords Table, to
set apart some convenient time, for the preparing of your souls for this
weighty work. It is a most serious business, and ought to be seriously taken
in hand. Let nothing here be done cursorily or rashly. Not that I would have
you daunted, as if it was a work of that nature, that you must either come
trembling, or else stay away for fear: no, but only see you be very serious;
for so you ought to be whenever you have any thing to do with God, even when
you so much as mention his name, or open a Bible, or come to hear his Word; and
therefore being now in a more especial manner to draw near to him, in a duty
wherein a miscarriage is more dangerous, it is very requisite that you make more
solemn preparation for it, since upon this, the right performance of it, does
very much depend. And therefore it is, that I would have you set some time
apart for that purpose, which will be most convenient in the week, or on the
day before you Receive: though I would have you be employed in this work more
than once or twice. But if you are Servants, and so are straightened of time, or
through poverty are constrained to daily labor, you must watch for the fittest
opportunities you can get. And it is no doubt, but you will find time enough,
if you will but be watchful to redeem time from idleness, and vain ways of
spending it. However, it is better to spare some time from your working, or
sleeping, yea, or eating, than to neglect those works, for which you had your
life it self: for it is of far more consequence, I hope, to save your souls
for ever, than to keep your bodies alive a little while, though you may very
well do both, if you be willing.

2. Having set apart some time, see that you be not only got alone, and your
hands taken off your business, but let your hearts be withdrawn from off all
worldly things, and set, as in the presence of God, upon an employment of no
small consequence; and humbly beg of God, that he would vouchsafe you his
presence and assistance in these your preparations, and in the work you are
preparing for; that he would set and keep your minds in a frame suitable
thereto; and graciously own, accept and bless you, who in obedience to him
have set upon this duty. And beg of him, that he would help you in the
searching of your heart, and reviewing of your life, that you may not only
have a sight of sin, but a right sense of its vileness, that you may not only
think of it, but grieve for it; and that all your meditations may be attended
with suitable affections, and that in all, you may be sincere and upright, that
so upon, good grounds, you may take comfort in the review of what you shall
have done, and by this present opportunity may be advanced one step forward
toward your eternal rest.

3. And when you have done thus, Let your first work be, to enter into such a
serious consideration of your own estate, both by nature and practice, as may
be most effectual to bring you to a sound repentance. The reason why I advise
you to this first, is, because you being now about to celebrate the remembrance
of the greatest mercy that ever was manifested to mankind, wherein especially
love and thankfulness are to be exercised, it is not possible you should
feelingly acknowledge it as so great a mercy, if you be not very sensible of
your own misery, and of that absolute need you stand in of it. Should you offer
money to one, who thinks he has no great want of it, he might take it perhaps,
but not with that thankfulness that another would, who is ready to starve for
lack of relief. A man that perceives himself sinking and drowning, with what
readiness will he lay hold on an hand that is held out to save him? Thus, the
deeper sense you have of your own vileness, the more will you admire Gods
goodness, in having any regard to such a worthless wretch as you. The greater
you perceive your sins to be, the more need you will see of pardoning mercy,
the more you will prize, and the closer you will cleave to Christ, and the more
readily will you come hither to receive the seal of your pardon. The lower
your humilations are, the higher ordinarily will you rise in praise and joy.
Wherefore it will be very needful, especially if this be the first time of thy
receiving, or though it should not, yet I say, it will be needful and
profitable for thee to take an impartial view of thy self, what a vile
unworthy sinner thou art, that so thou may think meanly of thy self as thou
ought to think and may be sincerely humbled in the remembrance of all thy
miscarriages. And for thy help herein I shall run over a few particulars.

Consider what a sinful nature thou brought into the World with thee, being
conceived in sin, and shapen in iniquity, and being hereby a Child of wrath.
Think how ignorant thou art of God, how much at enmity with him naturally;
how exceeding prone to all sin and how averse from goodness, as by experience
thou have sadly found, and did soon begin to find, so that thou may well
acknowledge, that in thy flesh dwells no good thing. And then remember with
brokennesse of heart, how early thou did set upon a trade of actual sinning,
wherein thou have been so constant all thy days. And call to mind the several
ages of thy life which thou have past through, and the particular sins of those
times; the sensuality and pride, and all the follies of thy youth; thy mispence
of precious time in idleness and foolish sports and pastimes. Reflect also
upon the sins of thy riper years, if thou art yet come to them, such commonly
as company-keeping, drunkenness and wantonness; or on the other hand,
covetounesse, over-eager following of the World, to the neglect of Gods
service, injuring and overreaching your neighbors, uncharitableness to the
poor. Call to mind also the places and relations you have lived in, and the
sins you were therein guilty of, as whilst you were at home with your Parents,
at School, or in service, or any other way disposed of: think whether you were
not guilty of telling lies, of disobedience, slothfulness and unfaithfulness,
which are the usual sins of those times. You will find it very profitable and
affecting, to be as particular and punctual as you can in this review, as to
think at such a place, in such company, I was guilty of such and such sins. And
then fetch in matter for your humiliation, by considering the several
aggravations of your sins, as your being devoted to God by Baptism, and yet
revolting from him, when you came to the use of your reason; receiving all you
had from him, and yet rebelling against him, abusing your mercies to the
dishonor of the giver. Moreover your sins are much the more heinous, who have
had good education, and been brought up to hear and read the word of God, and
have been plainly told what is your duty, and yet have neglected it; who have
had many a time convictions of the sinfulness and danger of your courses, and
yet have gone on in them, and have had some purposes of a reformation, and yet
have soon lost them; or it may be under some pangs of conscience, or in a fit
of sickness, you have made promises of amendment, and yet all came to nothing,
but after that you went on in a careless course of life. You whom I now
suppose to be thoroughly converted to God, let it grieve your hearts thus to
remember the sins of your unregenerate state, that you should live so long
estranged from God, and entertain such unworthy thoughts of him, and do so much
to provoke him, whom you have since found so good and gracious. How can you
with dry eyes think of that time, when you were like others, foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures? Me thinks you should
be filled with a kind of horror when you do but reflect upon that dismal
state: when you think how near you were to the burning Lake, and yet how
secure; and when you consider what a mere sink of loathsome sins your hearts
once were. Oh sirs! was not that a sad time, when you could take delight in
nothing but in doing your selves mischief? when nothing tasted sweet but
draughts of poison? when the very bent of your souls was contrary to God and
godliness? so that whatever had a tendencie hereto, was nauseated by you?
Prayer was a burden, hearing a burden, holy conference strange and troublesome,
and a godly life was accounted the greatest toil and slavery in the World; so
that you could go whole days and weeks without any thought of God, and never
feel any hurt in it. Oh can you without shame remember, how you have many a
time hearkened to Satan's temptations, whilst the good spirit of God has been
resisted and grieved? How did your loving Savior follow you from time to time,
and by his spirit and Ministers beseech you that you would be reconciled to
God? and yet you did stubbornly and unkindly put him off, when he had laid open
to you what he had done for you, and what advantages he came to bring you, yet
you slighted his offers, as if they were inconsiderable things. Are you not
amazed at your own daring impudence and presumption, to make the great God wait
on you so long in vain? He who in a moment could have stopped that breath which
he gave you, and thrown you into the Hell you deserved, that yet you durst
disobey his commands, yea, even reject the suit he made to you, to save your
own souls. But to proceed, you are also to call to mind your miscarriages,
since God by the power of his grace brought you home to himself, and showed you
so much of the evil of sin, that you acknowledged your former behavior, to be
full as vile as I have been representing it, and did engage your selves to him,
to become his obedient people. Now consider how you have answered this
engagement. And though since that time, your sins may not have been so gross
nor so frequent as before they were, yet they are now of another nature, and
capable of greater aggravations, as being committed against greater light and
experienced love, even against that God who has freely pardoned you and
received you into his favor. Think then how unsuitably you have walked to the
profession you have made, and the means you have enjoyed, how unthankful you
have been for mercies, how unfruitful and unserviceable since you became the
servants of God, though heretofore you had done so much against him; think how
little you have done as Parents, Masters, and Neighbors to advance his glory,
and consider and bewail all other failings, in the duties of your Relations. Oh
think what folly it was in you so much as to venture upon the least sin, who
have been convinced that its your own greatest hurt; or to start aside from the
holy path, to walk in which you have found to be infinitely most for your own
ease and advantage. Let it grieve you to find such remnants of sin yet in your
selves, any inclination to evil and backwardness to good. With sorrow look
back upon all your slips and haltings, and partial backslidings, that you have
made no more progress in holiness, nor got more good by the priv^ledges
vouchsaft you. Be humbled in the remembrance of your dullness, hypocrisy,
formality in religious duties, being either prone to neglect them, or slubber
them over in a cold and drowsy manner, or else to rest in them. Call to mind
also your unfaithfulness to the many promises, you have made of better
obedience, in your Prayers, or at the Lords Table; and especially review your
carriage since the last Sacrament, you who have formerly received it. And
having by such like considerations as these affected your hearts with a sense
of your iniquities, humbly betake your selves to God, and lay open all before
him by a free and full confession: acknowledge what wretched hainou^ sinners
you are, and how unworthy of the least favor, and beg of him to work and
increase in you that true and kindly sorrow for sin, which may fit you for
mercy. And cease not by your good will from this confession, till you find
your souls even melted within you, in the apprehension of your own vileness,
but however cease not, till you find in your hearts a loathing of every sin,
and of your selves by reason of it. And if you have but an inward sense of your
sores and pollutions, you will not want such words to express it, as will be
acceptable to God; only see that you be sincere, and let your heart make your
confessions rather than your tongue. Labor to be as sensible of your case, as
you would be if now you stood before a King whom you had offended, from whom
except you could beg a pardon, you must presently be put to death, of which
pardon there was good hope, if he did but perceive you to be really sorry for
your fault. Oh how affectionate and earnest would you be in this case! and
would have words at will to express your self. How passionately would you
acknowledge and bewail the offense you had committed? and with what vehemence
profess against ever being guilty of the like? And how importunately would you
beg for mercy, when you saw no other way but present death, if your
importunity did not prevail? Thus behave your selves toward God, and believe
that he stands over you now in your Closet, and hearkens to your Prayers, and
observes whether you be hearty in them or not. But remember all this while, it
is an inward-dislike and abhorrence of sin, wherein the truth of your
Repentance consists, more than in bare confessing it, and speaking against it
with the greatest fervor: these are required too, but beware of taking up with
these; Beware I say, as ever you hope for mercy, of retaining any secret
liking to sin, or the least thoughts of continuing in it still, whilst with a
great deal of stir you revile it as such an abominable thing. But rather, if
you find in your souls a kind of hankering after some old lust, not yet
thorowlie mortified, betake your selves to those considerations which may bring
you out of love with it, as how little its like to do for you, what an
happiness it does now, and will hereafter deprive you of, what a misery it
leads to, with other the like formerlie laid down; and quit not these thoughts,
till you find your selves turned against it. For once again let me assure you,
then, and never till then, is your Repentance right, when you are not only
brought to grieve for sin, but to hate it; when your hearts are not only broken
in the remembrance of it, but are broken off from, and thorowlie bent against
it.

Though this exercise of Repentance seems most properly preparative to the work
you are going about, yet in such a penitent humble frame would I have you be,
even when you are at the Lords Table. If you eat this bread and mingle the Wine
with tears, it will be never the worse for your souls. And must it not needs
affect thee to behold Christ's body broken, and his blood poured out here in a
figure, and then to think with thy self, [This was sin, my sin; even my pride
and earthlinesse, and all the wickedness of my heart and life, was part of
that load, which he bare on his own body on the Cross, when he cried out, my
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Might not the Lord call to me, and even
show me the Print of my many grievous sins, in his hands and feet, and the deep
stabs they gave him? and yet ungrateful wretch that I am, how little have I
valued this his love? how little has my heart been affected herewith? where
had I been, and what had become of me, if he had not thus undertaken for me? Oh
what had my sins brought upon me, if he had not interposed and kept it off? how
mad and senseless have I been, in venturing upon sin, harboring and delighting
in sin? Sin, which is so heinous a thing, that without shedding of blood it
will never be remitted; and for which no blood, but that of Christ's could
obtain a remission. How more especially heinous then is my guilt in
undervaluing this blood so much and so long, as I have done? How base was my
heart to give entertainment to sin after I had heard what it had done against
Christ? and to deny entertainment to him after I had heard how much he had done
for me? Was his kindness such as to bleed for my sins, and shall not I weep
for them, especially for the unkindnesse I have shown to him?] As God never
showed greater love to Man, than in delivering up his Son for our offenses, so
he never showed greater hatred of sin than by this action; and therefore
conformably as we ought hereby to be brought to the greatest love of God, so to
the deepest hatred of sin and humiliation for it. But I have formerly more
fully shown how the consideration of Christ's death, may bring us to true
Repentance, and what I there spoke chiefly of a change of state may be applied
to the particular exercise of Repentance, wherefore I shall insist no more on
this. Only let me meet with an Objection, that may perhaps be in the minds of
some, namely, That sorrow for sin at this time, scarce seems consistent with,
that hope of mercy, that joy and thankfulness, which are chiefly required in
the Communicant. Know therefore, that I press no sorrow, but what is a
preparation to joy, and does even animate and exalt it, whilst the humble
Christian reflects upon his own nothingnesse and unworthiness, and thence is
carried forth to the greater admiration of that mercy that has so favorably
regarded him. And take notice farther, that I would have the sense of Divine
bounty, chiefly to raise and keep up this humiliation, whilst we think with our
selves, Oh what wretched creatures are we, thus to offend so loving a Father,
who notwithstanding all our provocations, is yet compassionate toward us, and
upon our return to him is so readily reconciled. To retain this apprehension of
love in the midst of our mournings, will make them most ingenuous, and even
pleasant to our souls; and though it will make us sincere and deep in our
repentance, yet it will so moderate our spirits, that we shall not sorrow as
those without hope; and I could wish, that Christians in all their sorrowings
would observe this rule. But then, that such an ingenuous shame and sorrow as
this, is consistent with the greatest confidence of mercy, there is not the
least doubt, for which (to omit all further proof of a matter so plain) see
that very apposite Text, Ezekiel. 16.62, 63. And I will establish my Covenant with
thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, That thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the Lord God. It is to
be considered moreover, that the promises of joy are principally made to this
frame. The spirit of the humble and contrite, God has promised to revive; They
that mourn shall be comforted. And they who come to the Table of the Lord
weeping, are most likely to return from thence rejoicing.

4. And when you are wrought to this humiliation for, and hatred of sin, you
will easily be brought to the next part of your work, which is, steadfastly to
resolve by the grace of God, never more to give willing entertainment to the
same, but to be entirely devoted to God by Jesus Christ, to love, please, and
serve him all your days. I have told you how at the Lords Supper you renew your
Covenant, to perform those duties which you were engaged to, by being Baptized
into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Renouncing carnal self, you
profess to place your happiness in the love of God, and no farther to regard
or please your selves, than is consistent with his pleasure; Renouncing the
world, your own abilities, righteousness and worthiness, and all ways to to
happiness, which are set up against Christ, you profess to take him alone for
your Redeemer, and to resign up your selves to him, that he may bring you to
the fruition of God; and therefore Renouncing the Devil, who would draw you
from God and Christ, to gratify your lusts with earthly things, you profess
your resolutions to be led by the Holy Spirit of God, in those ways that lead
to his everlasting kingdom. You who are truly willing to all this, (for to
such I speak) I would have you in the most serious manner, to profess the same
before God, and especially in the prayers that you make, in preparation for the
Sacrament. Bind your selves over to him by the strictest vow, that he shall be
your God, and you will be his people. Profess to him, that he shall be the
portion of your souls, that you will have none in heaven but him, and will
desire nothing on earth in comparison of him, that if he will but vouchsafe you
his saving love in Jesus Christ, you shall be indifferent to all things here
below, as knowing that in his favor alone you are abundantly provided for.
Acknowledge his right to govern you and dispose of you, being your Maker and
Preserver, infinitely wise and good; and engage to take him for your Sovereign
and Lord, to render a sincere, unlimited obedience to his commands, and quietly
to submit to his dispensations. Profess to him, that you relinquish all right
to your selves, and give up all into his hands, to do with you what he
pleases; consecrating all to his glory, whatever he does or shall afford you,
being resolved, through his assistance, so to improve and employ it. Promise to
him, that neither your own will, nor the will of any mortal man, shall be
obeyed in contradiction to his. And bethink your selves of those sins, whereof
you have been more especially guilty, in thought, word, or deed; and of the
duties you have omitted: and engage your selves particularly against those
sins, and to the performance of those duties. And then Remember under what
notion you enter into Covenant with God, and what kind of creatures you are,
even poor lost sinners, loaded with much guilt, which you could never, by any
satisfaction of your own making, take off from your selves; and also exceeding
weak, so that you cannot by your own strength give that obedience to God which
he requires, nor vanquish the difficulties which you will meet with; wherefore
it is of absolute necessity that you accept of Jesus Christ, as your Deliverer
and your Strength: for he only who has the Son, has the Father also.
Profess then before God, your unfeigned willingness to close with the Lord
Jesus, to all those ends for which he offers himself to the world. Acknowledge
to him, that you neither expect mercy for any merit of your own, nor set upon
duty in your own might, nor look for acceptance of any service for its own
worth, but that you humbly depend upon Christ the Mediator for all that you
stand in need of: Acknowledge his right to rule over and in you, as having
bought you out of slavery with his own most precious blood, to whose mild and
gracious government you will therefore submit your selves. Profess your
willingness and earnest desire, to have your hearts purged and sanctified by
his Holy Spirit, and your lives thereby directed according to the precepts of
the Gospel. Thus profess your acceptance of Christ, and submission to the
Spirit, that you may be brought into the favor of God, and be enabled to
please and glorify him by your holy conversation: for all tends to this, even
to make you holy in heart and life. Therefore are we married to Christ, that we
may bring forth fruit unto God, R^m. 7.4. And the fruits of righteousness are
by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God, Phil. 1.11. In him we are
created unto good works. This is the effect of his death and resurrection, that
we might be dead to sin, but alive unto God, Romans 6. throughout. They are
Christ's Disciples that bring forth much fruit to the glory of God the Father,
Joh. 15.8. And therefore is the Spirit of life, given us through Jesus Christ,
that we may be made free from the power of sin and death, that the carnal mind
might be taken away, and we made subject to God, and able to please him; yea,
that we might rise up to an higher kind of life, more spiritual and heavenly
than was ordinarily attainable under the Law, Romans 8. the former part of that
Chapter. This being then the sum of all, to devote your selves to God by
Jesus Christ, to live in his love and fear, and in strict obedience to his
laws, till you shall be taken glory; you that are firmly purposed to do this,
and have made promises thereof betwixt God and your own souls, Do you eat the
Bread and drink the Wine in the Sacrament, as a confirmation of these promises.
Let this be remembered I beseech you, whatever you forget, That hereby you do
most straightly engage your selves to live a Righteous, Sober, and Godly life,
from this very day, and to the end of your days. This some give as the reason,
why the Name Sacrament is put upon Baptism and the Lords Supper, because they
are of a like nature with that Oath, which Soldiers were wont to take, to be
obedient to their General, and rather to die than to forsake their Colors,
which military Oath was called a Sacrament; and thus both by Baptism and the
Lords Supper are we consecrated to the service of God. A very Heathen
anciently, when he gave an account of the practice of the Christians, said of
them, that they did sometimes in their assemblies, by eating and drinking
together, engage one another to abstain from, theft, murder, adultery, and all
kind of wickedness; so right a notion he had of the design of this duty.
Imagine then you heard Christ saying, All that will hearken to me, and become
such as I would have them, both in their hearts and lives, let them come and
take this Sacrament, as a witness of their resolutions to cleave to me. And
let the voice of your souls in answer be, Lord, I am willing to hearken to
thee, to take thee for my Redeemer and Lord, and it is my unfeigned desire to
be holy as thou would have me, and it is my resolution from this time
forward, by the help of thy Spirit, to yield a sincere obedience to all thy
commands, and not allow my self in any known sin whilst life shall last, and in
witness hereof I take this holy Sacrament which thou have called me to. And
thus thou do plight thy troth to Jesus Christ, by partaking of these
consecrated Elements, as friends are wont to break a piece of silver betwixt
them, to bind each other the faster to the promises they make; or as the Man
and Woman express their consent to a Marriage, by their use of the Ring. And
hereby thou do in effect profess, that thou expectest salvation by Christ
upon no other terms, than as thou shall be found faithful in making and
keeping this Covenant with him. Thou may easily perceive this is no trifling
matter, and therefore good reason there is, I should advise thee to be serious
and deliberate in it, least by thy hypocrisy thou should even bind over thy
self to damnation: for if thy heart will not consent to such a Covenant as I
have described, think not I go about to persuade thee to dissemble with God.
But yet remember, there is nothing in all this, that may afford any ground of
hesitation or doubting, whether thou should do it or not, unless thou art
in a doubt, whether thou had best be saved or damned: for except thy heart be
brought to such a subjection to, and closure with Christ, it is impossible thou
should ever be saved by him. This Wedding Garment of Faith and Obedience,
which I would have thee put on, is as necessary for thy being received into
Heaven, as for thy being a welcome guest at this Table. And by the way,
consider how you have endangered your souls, you who have from time to time
received Sacraments, and never thought of any such engagement as this, which
yet the very action it self lays upon you, nor ever took care to be faithful
thereto. In what a daring manner have you laid your selves open to vengeance?
And how great is that patience, which has hitherto born with you? even whilst
you have been wilfully guilty of most horrid perjury. I mention not this to
drive you to despair, no, there is yet hope of mercy concerning this thing, if
now at length you are but sensible of your miscarriage, and will carefully
reform it for the future.

Whoever you are, that do now from your very hearts render up your selves to
God by your Redeemer, doubt not of a gracious acceptance: you that with such
designs do assemble to this Supper, (and none else are fit to come there) of
you will Christ say, when he looks upon you, as once of his Disciples who sat
about him, Behold my mother and my brethren, Mark 3.34. for as he there adds,
ver. 35. whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is his Brother, Sister
and Mother. Yea, to you will the Lord Almighty say, I will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, 2 Cor. 6.18. and and safely may you
regard your selves in this comfortable nearness of relation to him, which
brings me to the next.

5. You that are thus truly humbled for sin, and turned from it to God by Jesus
Christ, upon good grounds, may, and ought to believe, that God will make good
all the promises of his Covenant, which he has wade to such as you are.
Whereupon you may with an holy boldness beg the same at his hands, and
accordingly do it. Humbly beseech him to deal with you according to those
gracious promises, wherein he has caused you to trust. And for the
strengthening of your faith, consider some of the chief of them, and plead them
with God in prayer, and beg the blessings contained therein. Pray earnestly,
that the Blood of Christ may cleanse you from all unrighteousness, that your
iniquities may be remembered no more; but that you may have peace with him,
being freely justified by his grace. Beseech him to give you his Holy Spirit,
to carry on the work of faith with power, to enable you against temptations of
all sorts, to fill you with peace and joy, to lead you in the way wherein he
would have you to walk, and to perform that good thing he has begun in you to
the day of Jesus. Pray that you may be found in Christ, at that great
approaching day, and may stand before him with boldness, and be discharged
from all accusations, and set with the sheep on his right hand, and with that
little Flock be received into the Kingdom, which he has promised to all that
love him. And since you are as yet in the body, which stands in need of outward
comforts and supplies, and are in a World where you have relations, friends and
affairs wherein you are concerned, you have promises touching these also; and
may therefore confidently beg your heavenly Father, who knows what you need, to
take care of you and yours, and furnish you with what he sees convenient for
you; to direct you in all difficulties, and by his providence so to order all
your affairs as may tend most to his glory and your good. Ask these things of
God, and what ever you perceive necessary, and doubt not but they shall be
given into you more abundantly than you can ask or think, and look upon them as
confirmed to you by the Sacrament. But remember always, that it is for Christ's
sake that these mercies are conferred upon you, so that you are to acknowledge
your selves unworthy of the least of them, and confess if you had your own
desert, you should be stripped of all comforts, and be laid under the greatest
miseries. Profess therefore that all you hope for, is on the account of Jesus
Christ, who has purchased all things needful for the happiness of his people,
after a forfeiture was made of all by the fall of Adam: through him are these
good things promised, and these promises fulfilled. In the new Covenant founded
in his blood, they all accompany his Person; and are ascertained to those that
cordially receive him, as the Wife by taking a Nobleman to her Husband, is made
partaker of his estate and honors. So that having Christ to be yours, all that
is in Heaven or Earth to do you good is yours also, by virtue of that Covenant
which shall never fail: faithful is he that has promised, and will do it.

Wherefore this Sacrament, which you are about to receive, being a seal of that
Covenant, you are to take it as an assurance and pledge that all the blessings
of it, such things as I directed you to pray for, shall be bestowed upon you,
in that time and order which God sees best. Here then you see is work for
faith, if you would receive the comfort which this Ordinance holds forth. And
more particularly I shall tell you in two words, what it is for principally,
and in what manner you are here to exercise faith.

1. Look upon the Sacrament as sealing to you, a full and free pardon of all
the sins you stand guilty of, whether by nature or practice, so that none of
them shall be laid to your charge, so as to condemn you at judgment. And for
your clearer proceeding herein, you are to apprehend the Sacrament as joined to
the promise of pardon in the Gospel, and so to look upon it as a Seal annexed to
a Writing, that promises mercy to Rebels that submit themselves: And if a
King should send his Officers with many such Writings, to a Company of Men
that were risen up in Arms against him, and the Officer should tell them, Sirs,
here is a gracious message sent you from the King; here are Papers under his own
hand, wherein he assures a Pardon to such of you that will now come in, and
here is also his own Seal put to them for your greater assurance, all which for
your security, i will put into your hand presently, if you submit your selves;
They who upon this come in, and take these Papers, have a pardon thereby given
them, which they may boldly produce, if afterward they should be accused. Even
thus are you to conceive God's Ambassador, saying to you, A^l you that are
willing to receive Jesus Christ to rule over you and save you, he has promised
in his Gospel to forgive all your sins, and (beside that of Baptism) has
ordained the Sacrament of his Supper, as a Seal of this gracious promise, his
Instrument of pardon; and here I stand by his appointment to give out the same.
You now who find your selves willing thus to receive Christ, are to take this
Sacrament as an assurance that this promise shall be made good to you; and so
look upon it, and with this quiet your conscience when it is unjustly
clamorous, and silence Satan when he haunts you with temptations to despair:
Then say within thy self, [Here's the word of God assuring forgiveness to all
that take Christ for their Lord and Savior, which by his grace I find my self
inclined and enabled to do, and he has bound this word with his oath, and to
both he has added his Sacraments as Seals, and shall this threefold cord be
broken? what should give me satisfaction, if this do not? wherefore, be gone
Satan, shall I not rather believe thou art a liar, who tellest me, repent and
believe, and do all that I can, my sins are so great they can never be
forgiven, than once suspect that the most true God, will ever revoke that which
he has said and sworn and sealed to?] And at the great Judgment Day of Christ
will own his Hand and Seal; and then solemnly acquit thee, whom he now pardons
by his Gospel. Safely then may thou triumph with the Apostle, Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It Is God that justifies: Who is he that
condemns? It Is Christ that died, etc. And this Christ with his whole purchase
is made over to thee, oh believing soul. Even by this Sacrament is his blood as
effectually made thine* to wash off all the guilt that cleaves to thee, as if
thou had been bathed in his warm blood to that purpose, yea much more
effectu^lly.

2. The other Direction I would give you, is, That you take the Sacrament as an
earnest of the everlasting glory, which shall shortly without question be
vouchsaft to you, who remain steadfast in your Covenant with God. Here in like
manner you are to look upon the Gospel, as a Deed of Gift, whereby, through
Christ, an Inheritance in the Heavens is settled upon you, to which Deed also
the Sacrament does Seal. Even as an House is made over by the delivery of a
Key, and Land by a Turf, so there is a kind of conveyance of Heaven it self
made to you, by the delivery of the Sacramental Bread and Wine into your hands.
And when you receive them, imagine you heard God saying to you, Here, poor
soul, take this in earnest of that eternal life, which I have prepared for, and
will bestow upon thee. And if the heavenly Kingdom be thus assured to you, on
condition of your continuance in the love of God, you need not question, but
all things needful for your passage thither, are herein comprehended. If you
shall have glory given you, then be sure you shall have that grace which may
fit you for, and bring you to it, whereof I shall speak particularly under the
next head. And if you are thus richly provided for, as to your souls, do you
think your bodies shall be neglected? No, never fear it; whatever shall be
found really good for you, shall be vouchsaft. What shall you have Christ and
his spirit, grace and glory? And do you question whether you shall have food
and raiment? Will the Father make his Son Heir of all when he comes to age, and
will he not afford him a maintenance till then? only refer all your
concernments to God, to deal with you as he shall think fit, and question not
but he will dispose of all to your contentment, if you be reasonable. The whole
World is in the hands of your Father, and it is not for want of power or love,
if you have not the grea^est share in it; but it is from his wisdom and mercy,
which will rather give you the best. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for you, and has given him to you, how shall be not with him
freely give you all things? Romans 8.32. Would you have a larger word? Is there
any thing you want, not contained in this? The like you may see, 1 Cor. 3.21,
22. Things present and things to come, all are yours, ye being Christ's. And as
godliness thus has the promises of this life, and that which is to come, so
both sorts of promises are here confirmed to you by the Sacrament, which is a
seal of that full Covenant wherein blessings both of the right hand, and of the
left are given to Believers.

You may see then, I hope, by this time, that this is no common Bread and Wine
which is appointed for so great purposes. If a tuig was given into your hands,
whereby some great estate was conveyed to you, you would value it sure above a
common stick. Wherefore if you would not be lamentably wanting to your selves,
and Enemies to your own comforts, I beseech you, all you that love the Lord
Jesus, know your own privileges, and fix these things firmly on your minds;
and let not the greatness of them hinder your belief, since they are as sure
as great; but see that you apprehend a reality in all that is done at this holy
Table. See Christ himself in the Minister, see also the benefits that come by
Christ in the Bread and Wine, and steadfastly believe that these are given you
by Christ, as verily as the Elements are given you by the Minister. For pard^n
and right to eternal life are things to be believed not felt, so that it is by
believing that you must perceive the comfort of them. Wherefore, beg of God to
clear up these things to your apprehensions, to remove doubtings, to strengthen
your faith, and to join the inward seal of his spirit, to the outward
administration of his Ordinance. And do you take the boldness, though with the
greatest humility, to profess to God, that you take this Sacrament as an
earnest of all those mercies which you hope for from his bounty, as hereby you
deliver up your selves, and all you have and are, to his will and pleasure. And
as an earnest engages both the Servant and Master, to do according to their
agreement, so is God graciously pleased hereby to engage himself to his
Creatures; so that not only from his bounty, but from his justice and
faithfulness, may you expect whatever he has promised to do for you. There
being thus a sacred Covenant transacted betwixt God and your souls, see only
that you be not treacherous, and Heaven and Earth shall sooner fail, than God
will depart from one tittle, of all that he has said. With confidence may you
look upon God as your Father, Christ as your Head and Husband, the Holy Spirit
as your Comforter and Guide, the Angels as your friends ready at Christ's
command to do you service, the Saints in both Worlds as your Brethren; and the
full enjoyment of God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the joyful
communion of Saints and Angels, your assured everlasting portion.

6. Since you in your selves are poor impotent creatures, who without Christ
can do nothing, but must be beholden to that grace, which drew you to this
Covenant to hold you in it, and to help you to perform your part; and since
there is of this grace, even now to be given, but to the prepared soul, Let it
be your care to get very sensible of your spiritual wants, and to come hither
earnestly, desiring and expecting a supply; Consider well with your selves,
what graces you find weakest and most wanting, what duties you are prone most
to fail in and humbly beg suitable help and assistance. Examine what
temptations you are most exposed to, and oftnest overcome by, what corruptions
you find yet strongest in you, and especially what those sins are to which you
are inclined most by nature, and custom, or are most in danger of by your
employments or converse in the World, and represent all this in your prayer
before God, and beg of him more power and strength against them, and now by
this Ordinance to convey it to you: Look round about and consider well the work
you have to do, the difficulties you are to grapple with, the several relations
wherein you stand and the duties they bring along with them, and no^ ^ue out
for direction and assistance in all. And for your encouragement, remember what
I told you, that God has engaged himself to all you his Vovenant People, to
afford you whatever may conduce to your happiness, now since you stand in
present need of the supplies of his grace, you may confidently expect the same.
He that will bring you to the end, will give you the means. As if a King should
call some of his poor subjects, to give them great possessions in another
Country which he had conquered, and should also furnish them with store of
money and provisions for the way, even thus bounteously will God deal with you,
oh Believers. He Will put strength into your feet, and revive your fainting
spirits, that you may hold on in your way; you that wait upon the Lord, though
you have no power or might in your selves, yet shall renew your strength, and
run, and not be weary, and walk, and not faint, till you come to your journies
end.

By faith in Christ we are engrafted into him, as a branch into the Vine, and
are related as a Member to the Head, so that he is become the root of our life,
and from him shall sap and nourishment be communicated to our needy souls. He
is the dispenser and fountain of Grace, and his Ordinances are as
Conduit-pipes, and conveyances of the same. And of this nature is the Lords
Supper. Here Believers are made to drink into the Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.13. Which
words have a plain reference to this Sacrament, Baptism being mentioned at the
beginning of the verse. Come hither then, oh ye thirsty souls, and be
refresht with the waters of life that shall flow in upon you in abundance. Open
your mouths wide, and they shall be filled. Be not straightened in your selves:
for the bowels of Christ are not straightened toward you. Bring hither capacious
enlarged hearts, and you shall carry away accordingly. The anointing of the
Spirit, which is shed abroad upon you, is like the Widows Oil. 2 Kin. 4.6. It
will not stay running whilst there is room to receive it. Oh why is it then
that we are so empty? The fault is not in Christ, we must needs acknowledge:
But let us examine whether we have not stuffed our hearts with other things, that
leave little or no room for grace to be poured in there. Are we not filled with
the love of earthly things? Is not our delight most of all in profits and
pleasures? And our desires eagerly carried out after them? Do not
Creature Comforts so possess and fill us, that they even thrust forth the Holy
Spirit from his habitation? Do we not grieve him by our carnal joys and cause
him to withdraw from us? Oh! for shame let it be no longer thus with us. Alas!
how little can these narrow hearts of ours contain of the fullness of God,
though they were widened to their utmost present capacity? And shall we pinch
and straiten them yet more, by entertaining every trifle there? This is that
room which the King of Heaven would have entire to himself, and shall every
common guest, every Beggar be lodged there? Is it fit that Money Changers and
Merchants should fill the house of God? That it should be a thorow-fare for
every Vessel, every common and unclean thing? Oh let your hearts then be
consecrated as Temples for the Holy Ghost, not Dens of such Thieves as rob God
of his due, and draw away those desires and affections which he claims as his
own. And now let the gates of these Temples fly open, that the King of Glory
may come in. Now in an especial manner let your hearts be emptied of all
trash, that they may be filled with the good things which are here distributed.
If you were set to an heap of Gold, and bidden to carry away as much as you
could grasp, you would keep no dirt, nor stones in your hand, that would make
them hold so much the less. Loosen your selves then from the inordinate love
or thought of any created good, your Houses or Lands, your pleasures or
employments, withdraw your minds as much as possible from all temporal
concernments, with which whilst you are taken up, the edge of your desire after
heavenly things is extremely abated. And if you come not hither with great
expectations, you are like to be little the better. If you have no higher
designs, but with a little seeming Devotion to eat Bread and drink Wine, then
Bread and Wine are the best things that you are like to meet with: For is it
probable you should find that which you never look after? But if thou come
hither with an holy greediness after greater measures of grace, thirsting for
the living God, as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, and as the parched
ground gapes for the refreshing showers, then fear it not, thy desires shall be
gratified. Thou can not please God better, than by looking for the greatest
and best things from him, which bring most glory to himself, and do most good
to thy soul. Beg earnestly then, that by the power of his Spirit accompanying
this Ordinance, thou may partake yet more of a new and divine nature; that
thou may find strength and vigor diffused through thy whole man; and may
now receive some communications of that light and life, which Christ came into
the world that his people might have, and that they might have it more
abundantly; now pray that, his Death and Resurrection may have their power and
efficacy upon thee, that virtue may issue forth from him for thy healing. Beg,
that by this food thy lusts may be poisoned and destroyed, and every grace
strengthened and encreast. And be particular in thy desires. [Oh that something
may be done this day against my pride and passion, my worldliness and
sensuality, my distrustful fears and discontents. Oh that I may be delivered
from that listlesnesse, dullness and distractions, wherewith I am haunted in
holy duties. Oh that I may find my heart hereby drawn nearer to God, and
carried out with more unweariednesse and cheerfulness in his service; that I
may be better enabled for a conscientious discharge of my duty, in every place
and relation that I do stand in, and in the whole course of my life. Blessed
God, thou who know the state of my soul, give in to me, I beseech thee, what
thou see I need most. I have an hard heart, Lord soften it; a dead heart,
Lord enliven it; I am much in the dark, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon me. Make me more humble, holy and heavenly; Oh take this
season for coming in upon my soul, and bestowing more of thy self upon me, that
I may become more like to thee. These, oh God, are the mercies thou have
promised to thy people, and bidden them to ask; these thou art wont to convey
by thine ordinances; for these things therefore do I wait upon thee this day,
with no lower aims do I come to thy Table; with such precious things is the
Lord Jesus wont to feast his guests, and of his infinite fullness it is, that I
hope to participate; through him it is I hope to be strengthened with might in
my inner man, even to be made strong by the Grace that is in Christ Jesus, Oh,
will the Head let a member perish? Shall a branch wither for want of succor
and juice? Blessed Savior, thou who wast so willing to shed thy blood for us,
art thou not as willing to bestow the fruits of it upon us? Art thou not still
as merciful and tender as ever thou wast? Thou who did once so readily heal
diseases, and cure all that came to thee, have thou not as much mercy to souls
as to bodies? Lord, I believe thou art as able and ready to help as ever? If
thou will thou can make me clean, and it is my hope that thou will: Outward
means without thee cannot do it, yet here thou have bid us attend, and thus I
do, waiting for the descent of thy Holy Spirit. Oh grant the requests of thy
poor creature; Say to me, Be it unto thee even as thou will: yea, even as thou will, oh Lord, let it be unto me, who art ever readily and strongly inclined to
do thy people good.] Thus stir up your selves, and actuate Faith in such holy
breathings as these, and be assured, such additions of Grace as you are fitted
for, and God in his infinite wisdom sees meet at present to deal out, shall be
conferred upon you; and being refresht and strengthened with this banquet, you
may cheerfully walk on your way to glory.

7. From all that has been said of the greatness of the mercies here
commemorated, bestowed and sealed to, it will appear most reasonable and just,
that the hearts of all Gods faithful servants should here be raised to the
greatest height of divine love, thankfulness, and joy. I put these together,
because, though in the notion they are different, yet in the workings of the
soul they usually go together. That same goodness which works love and
thankfulness, causes joy too, as it is begun to be enjoyed, or strongly hoped
for. And this is a frame most proper to a Communicant, all his preparations
being much in order to it: Therefore should he get sensible of his misery, and
humbled for his sin, that he may have the more affectionate thankful sense of
the mercy that pitied and pardoned him. Wherefore labor much with your selves,
even beforehand, to rise up to this ingenuous and pleasant temper, which will
prove so acceptable both to God and your selves. Dwell intently upon that
amazing mercy, which God has revealed to mankind in Jesus Christ, which thing
the Angels themselves desire to look into: Ponder well the several heightning
circumstances thereof; the meannesse, sinfulness and misery of man, the
Majesty of God, the dignity of Christ, the greatness of his condescension and
sufferings, the fullness and freeness of his purchase and offers. Study all
his dealings with your selves in particular, whereby he has accomplished in you
the designs of his love; and continue these musings, till you feel a fire of
love and joy kindled within you. Let not Satan so far have his will of you,
as to cast you into these dejections, and groundless perplexities, which will
rob God of his praise, and you of your comfort. Let him not be able to persuade
you that God is cruel and unmercifull, and hardly reconciled to returning
sinners: Have you not the strongest, and most unanswerable demonstration at
hand, to confute him? would you desire, or can you have a greater evidence of
the graciousness of his nature, than that very mercy which you are going to
remember? even his giving his only Son to die for us, whilst we were yet
ungodly and enemies. And did he of his own free grace, without our asking, and
against our deserving, provide a Savior for us, and is he yet unwilling to
save us? did he find out a means for our reconciliation to himself, and is he
now backward to be reconciled? Does he importune us to take that, which he is
unwilling to give us? Be not, I beseech you, of such an easy belief of the
Devil's gross fallacies, and so hardly drawn to believe what God has not
only said, but done, so much to make it past all doubting. See the Apostle
arguing much after the same manner, Romans 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Oh let your hearts
then be filled with admiration of that love, which God has herein expressed to
men, the wondrous greatness whereof is such, that it almost surpasses our
Faith, and does far surpass our full comprehension. That there should be a
way for the recovery of self-destroying sinners, contrived by him whom they had
offended, and brought about by the death of his own Son, that they might be
raised to the highest happiness, even an eternity of the most ravishing joys,
in nearest communion with the Divine Majesty, and all this to be had for a
cordial thankful acceptance: This is the Lords doing, and well may it be
mavelous in our eyes; Great things has the Lord done for us, whereof let our
souls be glad. If an host of Angels came from heaven to proclaim these good
tidings of great joy to all people, shall not the Congregations of Christians
echo back their Glory be to God in the highest, who has sent on earth peace,
and shown such good will to men? Oh give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good,
and his mercy endures for ever, Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he
has redeemed from the hand of the enemy. Oh do you praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men; who has shown
mercy to such as sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and has broken
the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder; and has sent his
word and healed you, and delivered you from destruction. Oh do you sacrifice
the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing. Psalm.
107. Call upon your souls with the Psalmist in another place, Bless the Lord,
oh my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name; Bless the Lord, oh
my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who fogiveth thine iniquities, and
heals all thy diseases; who redeems thy life from destruction, and who crowns
thee with loving kindness and tender mercies, Psalm. 103. at the beginning. Oh
think what a deplorable condition we had been in, if God had left us in the
hands of Satan, to whom we had enslaved our selves, and had never looked after
us more. Oh what a dungeon had this world then been! where we should have lived
in darkness and fetters, in horrors and torments, and all as but an inlet and
passage to miseries infinitely worse, and altogether unavoidable. But oh
blessed, and for ever praised be his Name, who has visited the earth with his
goodness, and caused the rejoicing light to shine in dark and disconsolate
places; and has proclaimed liberty to the captive, and shown a strong hold, to
which he has called the Prisoners ^f hope to turn themselves, having laid help
on one that is mighty, sending forth the prisoners out of the pit by the blood
of the Covenant, Zach. 9.11. This is that blood which by the Wine in the
Sacrament is represented to you, yea, which is thereby put into your hands, and
given you to drink in remembrance of that which was once shed for you. And
shall not the hearts-blood of your dearest Lord warm and revive your souls,
inflame and advance your love? Will you not now begin that new song of the
heavenly Chore, ascribing blessing, honor, glory and power to him that sits
upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever, who by his blood redeemed
us, and makes us kings and priests unto God, Rev. 5. This is that blood to
which you owe all that you have or hope for; This quenched those flames, which
else had fed upon you for ever; This satisfied that justice, which else had
laid hold on you for your disobedience; This purchased an inheritance, which
silver and gold could not buy; This purges the conscience from dead works, and
makes the soul fruitful unto God; This pacifies the Conscience, and appeaseth
the disturbances that sense of guilt is apt to raise; By this blood of the
Lamb, it is, that the Saints in all their conflicts do overcome. And can you
withhold the most affectionate hearty thankfulness for this precious
all-healing blood? Methinks we should even be pained in our selves, as not
knowing how to give vent enough to our affections, especially when our bleeding
Lord is set before us. Oh let him wholly possess your thoughts, and do you
view that transcendent love which he manifested in his whole course, but
chiefly in the close of it, that all may beget in you some answerable returns
of love. Read, as you have leisure, those heavenly discourses which were his
Farewell Sermons to his Disciples, and his last prayer for them, which you may
find in the 14, 15, 16, 17. Chapters of John, and see there how love breathes
in every line. Follow him to the Garden, and there hearken to his groans, and
behold his bloody sweat, which proclaims him to be sick of love, of a love that
would not be quenched by those crimson streams. No, still he goes on, and go
thou after him with the Women that followed him to his Cross; and weep not, if
thou can forbear, whilst there thou see him die for love; even for love of
thee, poor soul, who do sincerely love him. Art thou not astonished at the
thoughts of it? What could the Lord Jesus see in such miserable worms as we,
that should incline him to undergo all this on our behalf? Nay, there is the
wonder, he saw nothing, and therefore he underwent it. Nothing did I say? yes,
he saw our guilt and defilement; for which he might have justly loathed us: But
he seeing all this our misery, was rather moved to a compassion for us; Such a
compassion as never dwelt in a mortall's breast, that he should pity those who
pitied not themselves, and die to recover those who had even murdered
themselves, yea, that he should die to make them happy, whose sins were the
cause of his Death, and even merit mercy for such as had no mercy on him, and
give life to them who took his away. All this was voluntarily done by the Son
of God, who became Man, on purpose that he might die, and do all this for the
sons of men. Let Plays and Fictions be hist off the Stage, let Romantic
follies be shamed into obscurity: for here is that which alone deserves the
name of Love; here is such Truth, as commands our belief; such worth and weight,
as calls for our regard; and such stupendous greatness, as may raise our
wonder. Here behold the power of love in the fairest display of it, that ever
was made to the world, since its foundations were first laid, beyond which
imagination it self cannot ascend, nay, which falls vastly short of it; how
vastly short then does expression fall? but yet oh that we could feel as much
as that little which we speak! Was it ever before known, that the Shepherd
should lay down his life for his sheep? not for innocent sheep, but to reduce
wilful straglers to his Fold; that he who was Lord of all, should die for his
Subjects? not for obedient Subjects, but for Rebels appointed to the slaughter.
Thus continue thy meditations till they have so good an effect upon thee, that
if Christ should appear to thee at this instant, as thou art got alone, and
should call thee by Name, as once he did Peter, and ask thee, Soul, Love thou
me? thou might be able truly to return his answer, Lord, thou know that I
love thee. And then to affect thee yet m^re* consider of Gods saving love in
Christ par^icularly revealed to thy soul, that he was pleased to say to thee,
when thou w^^st in thy blood, Live; Calling thee out of darkness into his
mavelous light, laying hold on thee by his Spirit, and recovering thee to
himself, when thou wast running far away from him; and many a ti^e preventing
and restoring thee by his grace, when ot^erwise thou had utterly ruined thy
self. Oh praise him that he left thee no^ in Satan's kingdom, under the power
of thy lusts, but with a strong hand and outstretched arm brought thee out of
that house of bondage; and magnify his name when thou beholdest that blood
wherein thy sins were drowned, as the Egyptians in the Red Sea. Oh bless his
name that he did not suffer thee to remain dead in trespasses and sins, yea,
that he did not strike thee dead in them, and sentence thee to the second
death, after which there is life no more. This is a fit season for recollecting
all the special mercies of thy life, which God has shown either to soul or
body, to thy self or thine, all which thou art to look upon as vouchsaft
through Christ, which makes the mercy infinitely greater.

And when you have thus endeavored to get your hearts brim-full with love and
joy, come and let them rise higher, and boil over at the Table of the Lord. Let
no sadness appear in your looks, nor a tormenting thought, by your good will,
seize upon your hearts this day. Come loathing sin as much as you are able, but
come loving Christ as much; Have as low thoughts of thy self as thou will, and
be as humble as thou can in remembrance of all thy vileness, but yet let thy
Soul magnify the Lord, and thy Spirit rejoice in God thy Savior. Thy gracious
Lord will not upbraid thee with any former unkindnesse and neglect of his love,
which thou art heartily ashamed of and sorry for. Wherefore though thou may
come blushing and weeping, yet come not into his presence daunted and
despairing. He died on purpose to ease your souls of all those fears, which
make you all your life time subject unto bondage. Will not you receive comfort,
for whom he has shed his blood, that it might be your Cordial? Let him see
you then improve it this day to that purpose: for your health and pleasure, if
it be solid, is his delight. And if he would have your joy at any time in this
World full, now it is; If you must ever more rejoice, this I am sure is a fit
season. This is our most solemn Thanksgiving Feast. Oh wonderful! That the
commemoration of the Master's death should be the Servants Feast. It is his
pleasure to have it so, and let us thankfully comply therewith. Instead of his
Vinegar and Gall, he gives us Bread and Wine, and better things than they. Here
he has made, according to his promise, Isa. 25.6. A Feast of fat things, a
Feast of Wines on the Lees, of fat things full of marrow, Wines on the Lees
well refined. And you may be sure the Master of this Feast, who entertains his
guests with an affection as great as their fare is costly, would not have them
sit there sad and dejected, as if they liked not their provisions or thought
themselves not welcome. Would it please you to see your friends in such a
posture at your Table? Oh question not your welcome, all ye lovers of Christ,
but when you are there assembled, imagine that you heard him saying to you, Eat
oh friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, oh beloved. Here he has brought you
into his Banqueting House, and his Banner over you shall be love. Here will he
comfort you with Heavenly Manna, and stay with Flaggons all you that are sick
of love. You Children of Abraham, that come from the slaughter of your lusts,
here does your Lord meet you as his type (Melchizedeck) met your Father, Genesis
14.18. Setting before you the Bread and Wine for your refreshment. And here
will he bless you; He shall cause you to sit under his shadow, and his fruit
shall be sweet to your taste. Here may you expect the most comfortable comm^nion
with Christ, that is to be had in this lower World. Here then believing in, and
loving him whom you have not seen, but whom you may here see represented, do
you rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

8. That your hearts may be more heavenly in this work, and so more apt to be
filled with joy, and to break out in praise, let me earnestly desire you here
to have an eye to a glorified, as well as a crucified Christ, to remember not
only his humiliation, but his exaltation. It was the mind of Christ, that his
Resurrection, rather than his birth or death, should consecrate a weekly
thanksgiving, to be observed by the Churh in all ages, which should be called
the Lords own day, and be spent in his praise and service. This being the
accomplishment of his labors, his final victory over death, and the grave and
all Enemies that did assault his own person, the memorial whereof must
therefore needs be most rejoicing to his servants: And as his Resurrection
cannot be remembered without his birth and death, which must of necessity
precede it, no more can his death be here rightly remembered, without we also
bear in mind his Resurrection and Ascension to Glory. Can we remember what he
was, and not think what he is? Sad meetings had we made indeed, if our Lord had
been held under the power of death, if such a thing may be imagined. All the
World then might well be in the disconsolate posture of the two Disciples, that
were travailing to Emaus, crying out We trusted this had been, He who should
have redeemed Israel. Luke 24.21. Then would our faith be vain, we should be
yet in our sins. But we may now comfort our selves, and use the Apostles
gradation, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It Is Christ
that died, yea rather that is risen again, and is even at the right hand of God.
And now with joy let this Resurrection and Glory be remembered as being the
forerunner of yours. When in your thoughts you have descended as low as his
Grave, and there stand weeping to think how your sins have slain him, imagine
you heard some Angel bespeaking you, in almost the same language that he did
the Women at his Sepulcher, Mark 16.6, 7. Fear not ye, for I know that you
seek Jesus who was crucified; He is not here: for he is risen as he said, and
is gone before you, not into Galilee, but into Heaven, there shall you see him.
When therefore you shall in this Ordinance see Christ crucified before you,
think with your selves, This is the Lamb that was dead, but is alive, and lives
for ever. By the celebrating of this Sacrament, you are to show forth the Lords
death till he come. Remember then he is to come, for this second coming would
Christ have you keep much in your thoughts as well as his first. He left not
this pledge of his love with his Church, as a dying Man leaves some gift with
his friends to put them in mind of him whom they shall never see more; but as
one who goes a long journey, leaves his P^cture with his Wife, that she may be
mindful of him in his absence* and be quickened to long after his return. And
good reason have you to be mindful of the Glory of our Lord, since you your
selves will be sharers herein, and so at once you remember both. Here I told
you, you take an earnest of the everlasting treasures; and the consideration
thereof is exceeding necessary, to raise your value of that which will
otherwise appear but worthless and mean. And conceive of your selves as in a
journey to that Kingdom, having here taken in by the way to refresh your
selves, as travelers are wont to tu^n in and bait. And like the Prophet, 1
King. 19.8. In the strength of this meal you are to go on toward the Mount of
God. These are provisions sent by your Joseph, to serve you by the way, till
you come home to himself. Yet a few more Sacraments, and you shall be past the
need of all. Here are some fragrancies and drops of sweetness for the
refreshment of Pilgrims, till the day breaks, and the shadows flee away, when
we shall get up after our Lord to the Mountains of Myrrh, and the Hill of
Franckincense. Here a Table is spread for us in the Wilderness, and some
clusters of Grapes pressed into our Cup, till we shall come to Canaan, and enjoy
the vintage. Behold in this transaction at the Lords Table an emblem and shadow
of the future glory, and let your thoughts take advantage from what is here
presented to ascend to the joyful contemplation thereof, yet within a while,
and you who are here his welcome guests, shall sit down with your Master at his
Table in his Kingdom; and there shall taste of the fruit of the Vine new with
him: and shall eat of a Manna that is yet hidden to you; and shall exchange
your present company for the society of innumerable Angels and perfect Saints.
And let this something quiet your minds, though not take off the quickness of
your desires, all you holy souls, who are acted by so noble and strong a
passion, that you are im^atient of that distance at which you yet find your
selves from him whom you love, and are even weary of the World where you cannot
fully enjoy him, much more of your own hearts that are so estranged from him;
comfort your selves: for within a very short while, your eyes shall behold him,
and you shall be fully satisfied in your most intimate access to and abode
with him. You may look back with joy on the Redemption Christ has wrought for
you, and may look before you, and lift up your heads with joy, as knowing the
day of full and final Redemption draws nigh. Only see that you now thirst
ardently after that spiritual communion with him which is here attainable, in
being possessed by him, and closely uni^ed to him, that being joined to the Lord,
you may become one spirit. This is the blessed, and only possible
transubstantiation, to be transformed into the likeness of Christ, which is of
infinitely more advantage to the believing soul, than if, according to that
monstrous Popish fiction, he should chew the very gross flesh, and swallow the
raw blood of Christ! For by this means his body would only be changed into
ours, but by the change I speak of, our Spirits become like to his. And if now
you hold but this fellowship with Christ in the spirit, shortly you shall have
a real presence even to the satisfaction of sense it self: Then shall you see
him as he is: for you shall be made like to him in that day of his appearance.
Then indeed shall Sacraments vanish as useless shadows, you having got the
substance Christ himself. You need then no more behold him in a Glass, but
shall see him face to face, and be perfectly changed into his Image. Oh the
difference that will be betwixt that clear sight and this dark, alas through
our own fault, too dark remembrance. Oh that is the comfort! we shall then have
laid by all that stupidity and dullness which here attends us whatever we are
about. That full view of our blessed Lord will for ever cure us of all
coldness and unbelief, and ravish us into one eternal, affectionate
admiration of divine love. If that joy which arose from faith and love, whilst
he was not seen, was unspeakable and full of glory, how inconceivable, how
transcendently glorious must that be which shall arise from his immediate
sight: If it be such a precious privilege to have a right to Heaven here
solemnly given us, what will it be to enter upon actual possession? Oh then,
Christians, whilst you are remembering Christ at his Table, let it rejoice your
hearts to consider, that he is remembering you at his fathers right hand, and
thither will shortly exalt you. All you whom the King of Glory now espouseth to
himself as it were by Proxy, as Princes take Wives by their Ambassadors,
remember that the day is hastening, when your marriage shall be more publicly
and triumphantly solemnized: when all you blessed ones shall be called to the
great Marriage-Supper of the Lamb. Yet a very little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry: And do you now get your souls mounted as
high as you can climb, by all the means that are afforded you, and stand ever
wishly looking, and diligently preparing for his appeearance; and never flack
your watch, nor let your expectations cool, till either you see him coming in
the clouds, or shall be taken up beyond them.

With some such Meditations as these, which I have suggested to you under each
Head, let your thoughts be taken up whilst you are employed in this duty, as
you shall find your selves most inclined, and as Gods Spirit shall direct you:
for you need not confine your self as to the method and form, but rather let
your affections have their free course. Only see that you watch narrowly over
your hearts through the whole work, that deadness and distractions may not
possess you. Keep up a strong sense of God's presence with you, and often lift
up your hearts to him for life and quickening. And let all the powers of your
souls be summoned up, and engaged in this action, with all possible vigor and
closeness. Let your minds be kept clear from sadning and from impertinent
thoughts, that you may attend upon the Lord without distraction, and be more
capable of those sweet foretasts of his goodness, which may be as a certain
pledge of your everlasting enjoyment of all that he has in store for his
people.

9. Lastly, let me in a word or two direct you to be careful in the exercise
of brotherly love. I need not stand, I hope, to repeat the advice I gave you,
to get all breaches made up betwixt your selves and brethren; to do all that in
you lies to obtain peace; and if that cannot be had, yet to forgive all
injuries that have been done you, and to cleanse your minds from rancour and
malice, and all desire of revenge; to this let the love of Christ constrain you.

And moreover, let your hearts be let out, with a sincere and strong affection,
toward all your Fellowmembers of that body, whereof Christ is the Head. A
pleasant sight it will be to your Master who is in heaven, to look down upon
you his Disciples, and see you here feasting together in mutual love and
delight, in the remembrance of all that love which he has shown to you, and in
the joyful expectation of what farther he has promised. And whilst your love
is stirred up to Christ himself, it cannot choose but be imparted to his friends
that are in sight; such who sincerely love him, and on whom he has set his
heart, and has shed on them his Spirit, whereby they are made like to him, and
therefore must needs be lovely in your eyes to whom Christ is precious; as
being also by this same Spirit made like to your selves; and when, in your
joining with them in this sacred action, you remember that these shall be your
everlasting companions in the joy of your Lord, and shall there join with you
in sounding forth his praises, this will farther engage you to them, as being
heirs together of the grace of God, and will work in you the beginnings of that
love which will hereafter be perfect and perpetual. Whilst your love is built
upon such right and Catholic principles as these, being placed upon a
Christian as a Christian, you hold a Communion in the Spirit with all true
Christians throughout the world; though your affections will be most sensibly
enlarged to those that you know, and with whom you hold a local communion in
the worship of God. And your joint assembling at this Table is a badge of your
mutual love, and an engagement to the firm continuance of it. Here are you
made to drink into one Spirit, by which you were Baptized into one body,
according to that Text I named, 1 Cor. 12.13. This Sacrament is, if I may so
call it, an Holy Philtre, whereby Believers are united in more fervent love to
their common Head, and to one another. The Blood of Christ is the only cement
and soder of souls. And this is that Christian love which they are taught of
God, to which they are inclined by their new nature, and which will easily be
brought into exercise, where the grace is first wrought in the heart; wherefore
it is needless to stay longer hereon, having also spoke somewhat largely to it
before. Only one thing let me suggest before I conclude this, namely, that you
take care to give a practical demonstration of this love, by contributing,
according to your abilities, to the necessities of the poor members of Christ.
This is a sacrifice wherewith God is well pleased; a work never out of season,
but now most seasonable; being an evidence not only of your compassion to the
poor, but of the steadfastness of your belief in Christ and his promises, and
of your thankfulness for his bounty; therefore you find both these mentioned
together, Heb. 13.15, 16. As we must offer thanks, so we must not forget to do
good and communicate. To quicken you to this charity, both now and any other
time, when fit objects are presented; Let me only desire you to imagine to
your selves, that the Lord Jesus, who was willing to part with his blood for
you, and thinks not an infinite glory too great to give you upon most easy
terms, that even he comes to you in one of his necessitous members, to see what
you can find in your hearts to bestow upon him; If you that have Estates think
he deserves nothing, let him have nothing; if he deserve but a little, give him
but a little; if your lusts have more right to your riches than he, then let
your lusts have them rather than he; Let Christ in his members starve, whilst
pride and luxury are maintained, if you think this be just. If you can improve
your Estates better some other way, take what you think the most gainful
course. For remember, Christ himself needs not anything you have or can do,
only he will try the kindness of your hearts. His is the earth and the fullness
thereof, and even his poor servants can he sufficiently provide for without
you. Wherefore if you give notwillingly and cheerfully, you may keep your money
to your self, for any good that an extorted charity is like to do you. But
remember also, you will be sure to lose and leave all that, which God has not,
one way or other; but by giving it to him you send it before you, and when all
things here below fail, you shall enjoy it with infinite advantage in the
everlasting habitations. And let this suffice by way of Direction for your
preparation to, and carriage in Receiving. A few words for your behavior
afterward, and I shall come to a conclusion.

CHAP. XVII. Directions for duty after the Sacrament.
1. WHen you come home, get alone, and bless God for the liberty and
opportunity of a Sacrament, which he has afforded you, and for all the
privileges that are thereby conferred upon you. And let your souls chew the
Cud, and retain the savor of those pleasant things you have been entertained
with; keep them still lifted up, and exceedingly gladded, in the sense of that
love which you have this day been celebrating and tasting, in the belief of
that pardon which you have received, in the hopes of that grace and glory which
have been assured to you. Meditations of heaven and the exercise of
Thankfulness, are now very proper works. Consider also what you have done,
what an obligation you have laid upon your self, how you are no longer your own
Man, having made a resignation of your self to God by Jesus Christ: And beg the
assistance of his Holy Spirit, to enable you to steadfastness and perseverance
in this holy Covenant whilst life shall last; and beseech him, that the
Ordinance you have been made partaker of, may become effectual to your souls
to all those ends that it was designed for, and which are attainable by it.
Think it not enough to read over these things, I entreat thee, but do
accordingly, and now betake thy self to Consideration and Prayer to those ends
I have expressed. Review moreover, what your miscarriages have been, and humbly
beg of God to forgive either want of due preparation, or coldness and
distractions; that your hearts have not been affected suitably to the
importance and excellency of the duty, and the Majesty of him with whom you
have herein had to do. And be heartily thankful for any measure of life and
affection, any raisednesse and comfort that God has been pleased to vouchsafe
you. And here by the way, let me caution all humble Christians, to beware of a
mistake to which they are too prone: to wit, To judge of their profiting in
this or other duties, by their present feeling, and so to think they get no
good, except their souls are as it were lift up and ravished with sensible joys;
and these only they take for evidences of Gods acceptance, and the having of
communion with him. But by this means you will often plunge your selves into
needless sorrows, and load your selves with unjust censures; and which is
worse, you will hereby become less thankful to God, as thinking you have
received little advantage, because you found not those delights you expected;
and will be in danger of becoming weary of the work, and ready to throw it off,
as thinking it unprofitable. Wherefore to avoid these ill consequences, and the
mistake that begets them, consider well, That it is the uprightness and
sincerity of your hearts in the performance of your duty, which may administer
most ground of comfort to you when you reflect upon it: for be assured, if you
have this ornament, you were really acceptable to him that looked down upon you,
though this acceptance might not be testified with the giving in of any
extraordinary joy. Let it not then trouble you, as if God was not well pleased
with you, because your affections were not raised up to an higher pitch, since
he does not look so much at fits of passion, as at the steady bent, and tenor
of the soul. Nor think because you mist of great joys, that you had no favor
from, nor communion with God: for consider again, That the truest communion
with God, is to enjoy the c^mmunications of his grace to your souls, whereby
you are made conformable to him: and you may enjoy these saving influences of
the Spirit, when you cannot feel his more abundant consolations. Moreover, the
fruit of this Ordinance is not so much to be discerned at present, as in your
after-conversation. For the great benefit you are to expect, being to receive
farther measures of Grace from the Holy Spirit accompanying these means, it
cannot be well known what Grace you have received, till you come to the
exercise of it; when temp^ations shall assault you. And, to allude to the
Apostles words in another case, Though this Ordinance may not at present be
joyous, yet it may afterward yield the peaceable fruits of righteousness to
those that are conversant therein. And lastly, If you are but sincere, as I
said, in your covenanting with God, it is your duty to believe, that you have
this day received from him, a seal to the promise of pardon and eternal life,
and in this belief may you take much rational and solid comfort, which
otherwise you are not like to find: And this is the ordinary way whereby the
Spirit conveys comfort to the Soul; first working in you a belief, that the
promises of God are in themselves most true, and enlightening you to the
knowledge of your own souls, and then enabling you to apply these promises to
your selves, as being such to whom they belong. Thus the Apostle tells us,
their rejoicing was from the testimony their Conscience gave of their
simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. Wherefore you are not so much to
expect any extraordinary immediate assurance from the Spirit, that you are the
Lords; But see to get good grounds for your faith, and so to have your hearts
filled with peace and joy in believing. Yet do not misinterpret what I have
said, thence to indulge your selves in any sloth or dullness, or to content your
selves with the bare doing of the work, without heeding the frame of your heart
therein; no, but take as much pains as you can, to raise them to the greatest
sensiblenesse and affection; and if you do so, you may reasonably expect to
find much sweetness and satisfaction in the work it self: but my meaning in
this caution is, that you should not look so much at the feeling of
extraordinary comforts, as at the integrity of your hearts in vowing your
selves to God, and the continuing steadfastness of your resolutions to be true
to these vows.

2. And that is the next thing I would exhort you to, even to disc^ver this
inward truth and sincerity, by your future holy and exact walking; This is that
which must crown all the rest. I may say to you as Moses to the Israelites,
Deuteronomy. 26.16, 17. You have this day avouched the Lord to be your God, to walk in
his ways, and keep his statutes; And the Lord has avouched you to be his
peculiar people; And you have promised to take Christ for your Husband and
Lord, to live in love and obedience to him, as you hope to be saved by him. One
thing now remains, that you go and do likewise. Say with the Psalmist, I have
sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm.
119.106. Now you have been remembering him that suffered in the flesh, arm your
selves with this mind, no longer to live the rest of your time in the flesh to
the lusts of men, but to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. Let it not happen
to you according to the Proverb, The Dog is turned to his own vomit again, and
the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. If God have spoke peace to
your souls, turn not you again to folly. Call to mind particularly what sins
you confessed and promised to forsake, and do accordingly. You that have been
guilty of drunkenness or gluttony, fornication and wantonness, pride or
covetousness, be so no more; you that have been wont to spend your time in
idleness and vanity, in sinful company or excessive recreations, spend it so
no more; you that have been wont to give way to your exorbitant passions, and
suffered them to break forth in unseemly actions and language, do so no longer.
You that are Masters or Servants, Parents or Children, Husbands or Wives,
consider well what particular duties your relations call for, and be faithful
in the performance of them. You that are Subjects obey them that are set over
you in the Lord. Toward your neighbors, and all with whom you converse, be
just and honest, loving and courteous, avoiding all backbiting, lying and
slandering, all foolish and filthy speaking. Be compassionate and charitable to
all that need your help in one sort or another. Be conscientious for the future
in the more immediate service of God: Be frequent and serious in his worship,
both in public and private, alone and with your families. Beware of swearing
and cursing, or of taking the holy Name of God or Christ in vain; make not
mention of him in your common discourse without due reverence, and that you are
not like to have, if at every turn you are crying, oh God and oh Lord, as is
the custom of careless people. Profane no more Lords-Days, as you may have
formerly done, but improve them to your souls good. Whatever talent you have,
of wit, wealth, time or honor, employ it to his honor, who entrusted you
therewith; In all things study to please God, and so commit your self and all
concernments to his will, and quietly submit to all his dealings with you
without murmuring or repining. To a sincere endeavor after all this, you have
bound your selves by the Sacrament, where you have taken God to be your God,
and have professed your selves his people. Wherefore, I beseech you, beware of
that dangerous, and yet too common mistake, To think this weighty action
termina^es in it self, and that all is done when the work's over. I have
endeavored all along to prevent this false conceit, and I care not how often I
inculcate it: for if this be not removed, all my labor will be lost, and so
will yours too, yea, and worse than lost: your receiving of Sacraments will
then prove but an idle unprofitable ceremony, and will help forward your
damnation rather than your salvation, whilst you heed not the design of it, nor
improve it to its due end. What would you think of that woman, that when she
had promised a man to be his wife, and was solemnly married to him in the face
of the Congregation, should think there was now nothing more required of her,
but that she might go whither she list, and live with whom she pleased? Even
just such is your folly and gross absurdity, who when you have been in the
most solemn manner engaging your selves to God, and have taken the Sacrament
upon it, that you will live in obedience to him, then think that you may go
away and live as you list. Beware how you make such mistakes as these: for
believe it, God's in earnest, whether you are or not: If you would not have him
take you at your word, you had better never have made such fair promises. Since
then the great design of this duty, is, to be an engagement to, and an help for
holiness of life, I shall finish this Treatise with a Direction or two for the
promoting and carrying on of ^he same.

1. And to that end first let me advise you, to be frequent in considering the
engagement you have hereby laid upon your selves, and let that hold and quicken
you to faithfulness. This is the principal thing which we are to do in order
to the due improvement of Sacraments to our advantage, even to remember often,
what a strict Covenant we thereby entered into, that by the remembrance thereof
we may be the more awed and restrained from doing any thing against it. Thus
ought you to make use of your Baptism, which is, I doubt, too seldom minded;
often you should think, how absolutely you are bound to take him for your God,
to whom you were so early devoted; Remember the end of it, and now see to
answer and attain i^, which you may find fully expressed, Romans 6.3, 4. Therefore
are we buried with Christ by Baptism into his Death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the Dead by (or for) the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life. Whenever you see a Child Baptiz^d, let it
bring to your mind, that you were once so dedicated to God, and admitted into
his Church, and then think how you ought to walk, who have such a bond upon
you. And thus improve the Lords Supper, where you have personally owned and
renewed your Covenant with God. Especially make this use of it when you meet
with temptations to any sin whatever, or when you begin to grow careless and
remiss in your carriage. If old companions should set upon you and entice you,
or if your own heart should incline you to any former sinful courses, then say
with your selves, [How can I do this and go back from the vow that I have made?
No, I must not, I will not; the oath of God is upon me, and shall I be forsworn
with the living and true God? How severely will he avenge himself on all such
dissemblers? wicked Herod seemed so fearful of perjury, that he permitted the
murdering of a Prophet to avoid it, and shall I be guilty of it, rather than
destroy my lusts, God's and my own greatest enemies? Most justly may I argue,
that for my Oath's sake, and for those that sat with me, I will not do thus:
For not one of my Fellow-communicants but might witness to God against me,
that they saw me make a Covenant with him. And God himself who stood over me
will be witness, as well as Judge. How then should I appear before him with
this heinous guilt upon me? Wherefore, Depart from me ye evil doers; for I
will keep the Commandments of my God. If you will come a long with me, and walk in
the holy path, come and welcome; but never hope to draw me back again with you,
into those ways that have cost me so dear, and which I have protested against.
I am now no company for you: For I have taken the Sacrament. Depart Satan, and
tempt me not from my Allegiance to my Lord and Master, I will not forsake him;
I have obliged my self afresh to be a Christian, a sworn enemy to thy Kingdom,
and a faithful Soldier under Christ's Banner, therefore depart from me: For I
have taken the Sacrament.] And think moreover with thy self [Hath God been so
gracious to me, as to vouchsafe me a pardon for all former transgressions, and
to seal it to me at his Table, and shall I go, and wilfully run upon the score
again? Should I thus turn his grace into wantonness and abuse his patience,
how justly might I fear that his anger will be kindled against me, and that he
will no more have mercy upon me? He, I am sure, will be true to his promises,
and shall I be false to mine, and so fall under his threatenings?] And after
this manner quicken your selves to duty, when ever you are apt to grow
listlesse to any part of God's service; and also quiet your spirits, when they
are ready to rise up in tumult, and discontent under any cross that befalls
you. Then think, I have resigned up my self to God as to a loving Father, let
him do with me what he please; therefore be still my heart, and rebel not
against, nor murmur at his righteous will. If you can but thus find your
selve^ more strongly bent against sin, and better able to put off ^emptations
to it, this is the surest evidence you can have of profiting by the Sacrament.

And beware of imagining, that any space of time can wear out the force of that
obligation, which is here laid upon you; which, as unreasonable as it is, one
would think was the opinion of m^ltitudes: for they will be very demure and solemn
a little before they go to the Communion, and a day or two after, but within a
very little while, all seems forgotten, and they are just such as they were
before. But for certain, God forgets not their promises, though they do, nor
will he forget their breach of them, as they will one day find to their cost,
if they take not another course. The bonds you are entered into, to render
hom^ge and obedience to God will never be canceled: For this is a debt you will
owe as long as you live, though you are always paying it. Baptism will be as
strong an engagement upon you to godliness when you are six^y, as when you are
but sixteen. And the same strictness the Lords Supper binds you to for a day,
to the same does it bind you all your days. Think now what an horrible thing it
would be to run into drunkenness, whoredom, or quarrelling the same day you
have received it, and know your sin is little less heinous, though it be a
Month or two, or twenty after it: for this breaks your oath as well as that. If
the Wife be guilty of Adultery twenty years after her marriage, her crime is as
great, as if it had been within a week after: for she had obliged her self to
conjugall fidelity, as long as she and her husband should live. And thus your
Covenant with God is not for a Month, or Year only, but for your whole lives.
If you should never but once have opportunity to receive the Sacramet, this
would ever after remain a forcible engagement, upon you: but yet God in his
wisdom and good providence has ordered, that this duty should be frequently
repeated, that it might the more work upon, and affect our minds, who are
prone to be so forgetful and dull. Remember then, the matter is now out of
your hands; you have given away your selves to God, and cannot revoke this
gift, since indeed you gave him nothing, but what was his own before. After
these vows there is no inquiry to be made, whether they should be kept or not.
Yet, this much i will say to you, if you can find a greater portion and surer
friend than God, a better Master than Christ, better work than his service,
better wages than life eternal, you may take your choice: for I would wish you
to nothing for your hurt or loss, nor does God you may be sure, that blessed
Being, who wants nothing out of himself, nor envies his Creatures any thing
that is truly good for them: but till you can thus better dispose of your
selves, keep your first love, and if you will keep it till then, I shall never
question your perseverance to the last.

And as you are thus to improve this Ordinance to quicken you to, and help you
in your duty, so may you make advantage of it for your comfort, by remembering
how God stands engaged to you by that Covenant to which he has here set his
seal, and which he will be sure to perform to you that depart not from him.
With this consideration repel all temptations to excessive doubtings and
despair. When the remembrance of former sins is ready to overwhelm you, have
recourse to your sealed pardon, and confidently take the comfort it affords
you. When you find the remnants of corruption yet so strong within you, that
you are afraid you shall never hold out, remember the Holy Ghost is in Covenant
with you to assist you in your combat, and will bring you off Conqueror, if
you throw not away your weapons: And let this encourage you the more to beg his
assistance; yea in all your addresses to God let it strengthen your faith to
apprehend him as in covenant with you. And if you are surprised by any sin, yet
whilst it is matter of grief and shame to you, and you are resolved to be more
watchful for the time to come, let it not cast you into such a sorrow, as
tends only to disquiet and consume your spirits; but remember God has assured
you through Christ the forgiveness of such weaknesses, and they shall not put
you out of Covenant with him; but know, if you are hereupon a whit the more
encouraged to a^y sin, it is a very great sign that this promise of pardon at
present belongs not to you. In a word, whatever difficulties you are plunged
into relating to soul or body, let this still uphold you, to consider, that God
has engaged himself to be with you in all estates and conditions, and to order
all things, so that the issue of them shall be for your advantage. And thus by
a frequent consideration of your own engagements at the Lords Table, and of the
privileges thereby conferred upon you, you will find your selves not only
comforted and cheared, but very much advantaged for the walking on more
steadily in the ways of holiness.

2. And to the same end, my next counsel is, That the Lord Jesus, whom you have
here been remembering, may ever live fresh in your thoughts. Let not your
remembrance of him be confined to Sacrament-seasons, but let him ever dwell in
your he^rts by faith and love. Set his example before you, and labor to walk
as he walked, who counted it his meat and drink, to be doing his Fathers will.
Behave your self as you believe he would have done, was he in your case.
Consider how meek and lowly he was; how little he regarded yea how much he
contemned the riches, honors and applause of the World, and learn ^ou to val^e
them at the same rate. Consider how patient he was in sufferings; how courteous
and gentle to all, to the vilest si^ners and his bitterest enemies, doing hurt
to none, but seeking the good of all: Copy out this lesson also. Willingly
deny your selves, take up your cross and follow him. Grudge not to be conformed
to him, though in suffering it self, and complain not till you are in a worse
case than he was, who had not where to lay his head. It Is like you think, if
Christ was on Earth, you would follow him, though but in the company of poor Women
and Fishermen, and though the most of the World should laugh at you for so
doing, why, know he will take it as well at your hands, if you will but tread in
his footsteps, and adhere faithfully to his interest, though it should cost
you the loss of all you had, and of life it self. And let the death of Christ
be much in your thoughts; let the love of God which was herein shown, be your
daily, delightful study, and ever leave a sweet tincture upon your spirits,
that by the power of love you may be moved and carried on in the whole of your
duty; Let this shame and drive you from sin, let this make you laborious and
unwearied in his service. When you are set upon by a temptation, stay so long
as to set a bleeding Savior before you; and think how you have much such a
case now before you as the Jews once had; to wit, whether Christ or Barabbas
should be preferred; whether your lust should be subdued, or your Lord crucified
afresh; If you approve of the Jews choice in this case, you had best imitate
them. If that which would murder your soul deserve to be spared, rather than he
who dyed to save it, then go on, give Christ a stab and sin boldly. Consider
further how Christ by his death has acquired a title to you, so that you must
glorify him both with body and soul as being not your own, but bought with a
price: Bought you are, not out of the hands of the Father, that you should now
have liberty to sin against him, but out of the hands of Satan, that being free
from sin, you may become subject to God, and the servants of righteousness.
How wilfully blind are they who take the more liberty in sin, from the
consideration of that death, which was undergone to redeem us from a vain
conversation? 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Where Is that Man's reason and ingenuity, who
when he was fallen into his Masters displeasure, and brought into favor again
by the great industry of the Son, should think he might now safely disobey his
Master? Though the Son pitied the servant so much, that he was loath to see him
perish, yet he loves his Father so well, that he will never purchased an
allowance for his disobedience; and indeed the servants disobedience is his
destruction. Christ died once to save the penitent, but he will never die more to
save those that remain wilfully disobedient. Consider also, Christ by his
death has purchased abundant grace for the supply of all your wants, and now
being at the Fathers right hand, has full power to give out of this store,
wherefore make use of him to obtain the same. Even as the Egyptians received
food from Pharaoh by the hands of Joseph, so must you receive all you have from
the Father by his Son Jesus. Let then the very life you live in the flesh be by
faith in the Son of God. By earnest desires vented in fervent prayers, be ever
deriving virtue and vigor from him your head. Be as desirous and craving as
you are necessitous, as hungry as you are empty, that the good God, acco^ding
to the riches of his grace, may furnish you with all plenty of spiritual
blessings, til you shall come up to the measure of the stature of Christ's own
fullness. Ephesians. 4.13.

3. If you would thus grow in grace, Be diligent in the use of all the means of
grace which Christ has afforded, and let them be used and improved as means.
You must, I have told you, be much in earnest Prayer to God in the name of
Christ, for what ever you are wanting in. Let not one day pass without the
practice of this duty; you that have Families call them together, and pray with
them morning and evening. If you neglect this, how little do you differ from
those Heathens who call not upon God, and upon whom he will pour out his wrath.
Be diligent in attending to the public preaching of the Word, and prepare your
selves beforehand with a resolution to obey what shall be made known to you to
be the will of God, and beg his blessing on what you hear. Consider when you
come home, wherein you are particularly concerned, in what you have heard, and
accordingly follow it: Setting against that sin, or upon that duty, that you
are thereby convinced of. When you can get time, spend it in reading Gods Word,
and good Books, which may explain and enforce that Word. Especially you that
have not much time on the weekdays, spend the remainder of the Lords day,
after public worship, in some such good employment, and waste it not in
idleness; no nor an hour at any other time. Read also to and with your Family,
and ponder of it afterward, that it may be more profitable to you. Often
discourse one with another about the matters of your souls, soberly and
seriously; that you may afford each other what help you can. It would be
exceeding well, if, when you sit with your neighbors, you would be thus
employed in holy savoury conference to the use of edifying, rather than in idle
chatting and talking of persons, and things that concern you not. But
especially they who are of the same Family, and are more nearly rela^ed, have
more opportunity and engagement hereto, and should be admon^shing one another
daily, and provoking to love and good works. For the Lord's Supper, I have
already directed you at large and I hope you will practice answerably, and be
frequent therein, not ordinarily neglecting any opportunity when you are called
to it. But as I desire you not to neglect these exercises of Religion, so on
the other hand as earnestly I would wish you to beware of resting in them, as
thinking all Religion is confined to them, and so becoming less careful of
your carriage, as to justice, temperance, inward piety, and all virtuous
actions. Methinks the wretched error of those Sects that throw off all external
duties of worship, and cry up themselves as above Ordinances, may teach this
wholesome lesson to all professing Christians, to beware of resting in these
things and framing to themselves a Religion out of them. These I grant are
parts of obedience to God: for he has commanded them, and they are ways for
the exercise and increase of our graces, and to be as helps to godliness; but
to think that they give any discharge from the practice of godliness, and make
amends for sins we are loath to leave, for which we do as it were compound with
God by these formalities, making sin our pleasure, and his service a penance
for it, these are conceits so gross, that methinks none but a Papist or one
willingly ignorant should entertain them. Religion is no road of performances,
but a new nature attended with a new life; It is the subj^ction of the soul to
the will of God expressing it self in all commanded acts of obedience; an eager
and ingenuous pursuance after the blessed God in all those ways where in he is
to be found, and whereby he communicates himself to the soul of Man, so that
there is no contradiction betwixt inward holiness and outward duties, but
much-what the same relation, that there is betwixt life and eating, breathing
and motion: for in these the divine life is expressed exercised and nourished.
But to think that Sacraments, Prayers and hearing, etc. may serve turn without
any inward holiness and universal sincere obedience, is as if a Man should
think, that the forced motion of a Puppet, should make it pass for a living
creature; that great promises may pass for performances, and that knowing what
we must do, and talking of it, may serve instead of doing what we are taught.
Let them lay this seriously to heart, who, when their practices are ungodly and
loose, think to salve all by keeping their Church, and saying their Prayers;
and all such who make more ado about the externals in devotion, than about the
right ordering of their hearts and lives, whereas all our devotions should tend
to better these.

4. If you would make good the promises you have made at the Lords Table, to
live a strict and godly life, you will find it of singular importance, yea of
flat necessity, to retain a great watchfulness over all your ways. Ever keep
up a sense of the danger you are in, by reason of the frailty of your nature,
the deceitfulness of your hearts, and the many temptations you are every where
exposed to; And therefore let this care secretly run through the whole course
of your actions, to beware of being surprised by sin therein. In all
emploiments, companies and affairs still keep up this watch. And think
beforehand where your danger is greatest, where you are most apt to be
overtaken, and there place the strongest guard. Set a watch over your eyes,
ears, appetites, tongues, hearts and hands, that you be not by them betrayed
into any miscarriage. When you find your self endangered by a present
temptation, then have some solid reason ready at hand to repel it, with store
whereof you should always be furnished, with reasons drawn from God, Christ,
Heaven or Hell, or from your Sacramental engagements, as I showed before; and
be sure, have a strong resolution to check the first risings and beginnings of
sin, before it have gone so far, that your judgment is bribed and blinded by
your affections; and have speedy recourse to the God of all grace, that he
would send you help from above. Consideration, Resolution, and Prayer, are
three weapons wherewith the Christian Soldier may do wonders against the
tallest sons of Anak, that shall assault him in his way to Canaan. Often take
account of your selves, and review your behavior in actions that are past; and
let one days experience still teach you how to live the next better. But upon
the sense of any miscarriage, let not your guilt drive you farther from God,
and put you into unprofitable vexations and horrors, but presently make have to
the throne of grace, get your peace made with God through Christ, and renew
your watch with more diligence than ever, but always with the most humble and
absolute dependence upon divine assistance.'It Is too probable, that some lazy
wretches will here fly out, as Naaman in a rage did against the Prophet, when
he heard he must wash seven times in Jordan for the cure of his Leprosy, which
he thought would have been done with a word speaking, so perhaps you will tell me,
that you had thought Receiving of the Sacrament would so have killed your
lusts, and cleansed your hearts, that you need have been at little care about
them afterward; and will be ready to ask, what good you got by it, if you must
take all this pains notwithstanding. You slothful souls, may you not as well
ask what good you get by Christ's death, and the giving of the Spirit? Since
notwithstanding both these, you must take pains, or else you are never like to
be saved. For know, God will have you employ the faculties he has given you,
and the work of Grace is to heal your faculties, and enable them for their
proper employments. He that made you Reasonable creatures, will make you holy
and happy as such; and the help which he affords, is to bring you to diligence,
and assist you therein, and by that means to save you. Thus Sacraments are
only profitable to the diligent and industrious, their use being to quicken
and strengthen, but they are no refuges for the slothful, no encouragements to
idleness. Never think that God will make such a way to heaven, that you may
walk in it without using your legs. It Is you that must do the things required,
though it be by Christ strengthening you, for whose sake also your frailties are
forgiven. Wherefore let me renew my advice, that at all times, and in all
things you would be watchful, and maintain an holy jealousy over those
hearts, that have too often shown what they have in them. Take this for the
greatest work you have to do in the world to beware of sin, and to be careful
to please God, as the Soldier's whole work is to serve his General, and the
Servant's to obey his Master; yea more absolutely than so ought a creature to
study his Maker's will; and account this work your own greatest happiness. So
avoid sin, and all occasions and appearances of it, as you would do the Plague
in a Visited Town; and be as careful to watch all opportunities of doing good
both to the souls and bodies of others, as men ordinarily are of laying hold on
their gain. Often ask your selves, wherein God is honored by you, or others
profited, and be ashamed to live to no better purpose than to eat and drink, to
sleep and dress your selves for work or play. And do not object against this
constant watchfulness, that it will take up all your time, and hinder your
necessary employments: for by using it awhile it will grow even natural to
you, and will no more hinder you in your affairs, than it hinders a traveller
in his journey, to take heed of running into bogs and ditches. Is it any hard
matter to be always careful, least you should hurt your bodies? Wherever you
are, and whatever you are doing, cannot you keep up this care, and yet follow
your business well enough? Why then can you not take the same heed of your
souls with as little trouble or hindrance?

5. To help you in this watchfulness, and guide you in an exact circumspect
walking, it will be exceeding profitable for you, at all times to retain upon
your minds a very awful sense of the presence of the most Holy God. Whatever
you are about, remember he observes you, and ponders all your paths, though you
perceive not him. Wherefore always order and behave your selves as before him.
Speak your words as in his hearing; Spend your time, and do all actions as in
his sight. You may easier run from under the heavens, than out of his eye. And
consider, he does not only look on you, but narrowly regard yo^, and concerns
himself with you, being highly displeased when you run into sin, and takes
delight in your holy conversation. In whatever company you are, be not drawn
away by them in a kind of flashy humor, as if the general looseness and
jollity did engage you to conform to them, but remember, God is in the midst of
you, who never gives you a dispensation to be wicked, and whom it more behooves
you to please, than all the world beside, though avoid all ensnaring company as
much as possible. Let this keep you from fear or sh^me, when you are called to
speak against Sin, or for God and Holin^sse; He Is near that will justify you,
you may therefore set your face as a flint. When you are alone, think not you
may sin the more securely: for God is with you, and eyes all your mo^ions as if
he had none but you to mind. In your addresses to God, a sense of his nea^ness^
will much awaken and affect you, and is one of the best helps against wand^ing
thoughts that you can have. Beware of ever being so far swallowed up with the
noise and hurry of businesses or pleasures, as not to attend to him that stands
over you. He that is present every where should be remembered at all times. Read
to this purpo^e, Psalm. 139. Such a powerful habitual sense of a present God
should you work into your minds, that you may walk as before him, even when you
do not actually think of him: as a Servant is all day doing that work which his
Master would have him, though he may not half that time be think^ng of him: So
though it be needful that you should often actually think of God, yet above
all, see that you never so forget him, as to do that which is displeasing to
him; And, to conclude this, in any doubtful action let this be one rule that
you go by, not to do that, which whilst you are about, you dare not boldly
think of Gods presence.

6. The last thing I shall say to you for the carrying on of an holy life, to
which you are bound by the Sacrament, is, That you be much in serious
meditation of the last things, Death, Judgment, and Eternity. The frequent and
lively thoughts of these will have a mighty influence upon your whole course.
To consider your latter end, is both a discovery of, and the way to wisdom.
Live every day, as he that knows not whether he has another day to live. Think
often, What if I had but another mon^h or year to s^end in the world, how
strictly and holily should I then live that time? How careful should I be of
my thoughts, words, and actions? How thrifty of my time? How serious and
affectionate in all my approaches to God? How ready and willing to do or
receive good? Why let me now live after this exact manner, since it may be I
have not so much as a month or year to come; however, very much I am sure I
have not, and my preparations, be they never so soon, will not be lost. Let
others fun^ralls put you in mind of yours: and flatter not your selves with the
hopes of long life, because you are young and healthful; but see to get your
souls in such a condition, that a long life may not be so much the matter of
your hopes, nor death the cause of your fears. And remember, you are always
going on to the Judgment seat of Christ, where you must have a trial of ten
thousand times greater concernment, than those that use to come before Earthly
Princes and Judges; when the case must be decided where you must live for ever,
whether in the highest joys, or the sorest torments. Had you not need then now,
to be getting a good cause: for according to the life you led here in the
flesh, will that sentence pass. The wicked must go into everlasting
punishment, and the righteous into life eternal The God who sees you now, will
Judge you then by Christ the Redeemer. Think what a life you shall wish you had
led, when you come to the end of it, and must be Judged for it, and lead such
an one now. When the sugared baits of sin are presented, and you have much ado
to hold off them, then think what bitterness it will be in the end; compare
the honey with the gall, the present delight which is vanished in a moment, with
the sting and pain which endures eternally, and then judge and act like
reasonable creatures. But above all, let your thoughts be even steept and
swallowed up in the pleasant contemplations of that glory, which shall be
revealed in, and bestowed upon all that love the Lord Jesus. Whenever you are
ready to faint and give out, remember the joy that is set before you, and let
that remembrance cheer and revive you. Consider what that goodness is, which
God has laid up in himself for them that fear him, till you find your love
enflamed toward him; and let that love put you upon more frequent thoughts,
and earnest longings after him. Only see to fill up all your time with
suitable actions, and then let it even please you to see your days post away so
fast. Always keep it on your thoughts, that you are in a journey to a glorious
Kingdom, and be often saying, Now I am one day, or month, or year nearer than
I was before. Stretch out thy self with a longing look toward thy Fathers
house, Shortly I shall be in the arms of my dear Savior, and shall be joining
with Saints and Angels in the triumphant praises of Jehovah and the Lamb. And
remember, this happiness consists chiefly in being made perfectly holy, and
therefore here must that grace be sown and grow up, that shall then be ripened
into glory. And the more holy you are, the nearer to heaven will you get whilst
you stay on earth, and the meeter for it will you be, when you are taken off
from the earth. Ever keep up such a sense of the excellency of this future
blessedness, as may blast all other things in your esteem, and deaden the
temptations that are taken from pleasures, riches and honors. Oh think how
perfectly provided for must he needs be, who shall have God for his portion!
How mad are they that would lose the least hope of this happiness for the
whole world! And they that look for such great things, what manner of persons
ought they to be in all holy conversation and godliness? Oh let nothing weary
you, or turn you out of the way. Hold out awhile longer, and you shall be
placed out of the reach of all temptations for ever. Fasten upon nothing on
this side heaven with any great delight or long stay: But still tell your
selves it is time enough to be happy when God shall take you to himself, so he
will but here vouchsafe you that converse with him, whereof we in this state
are capable, Let every thing you meet with be as a step toward Mount Sion, and
raise you nearer to heaven, and make you more desirous of it. And when you have
been thus meditating and preparing, waiting and desiring a while, you shall
assuredly find, that your labor was not in vain. Wher^fore let such
considerations as these make you steadfast, unmoveabl^, always abounding in
you^ Lords work, till at length you shall be translated into his Joy.

And thus I have dispatched those Directions I promised, for the promoting of
holiness, which was the last thing I had to do. It now remains, that we set
our selves resolvedly, and sincerely, to the practice of what God has revealed
to be our duty, which if we do, we need not doubt of his assistance and
blessing; but upon our perseverance in well-doing, to which we have obliged our
selves, may, through our Mediator, confiden^ly expect his gracious acceptance,
and his glorious C^own.

Now ^he G^d of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of his sheep, by the b^ood of the everlasting Covenant; Make you
perfect in every good work to do his will, w^rking in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jes^^ Christ, to whom be glory for ever,
and ever. Amen. Heb. 13.20, 21.

FINIS.

