The Earth twice shaken wonderfully:

OR, AN Analogical Discourse of Earthquakes, its Natural Causes, Kinds, and
manifold Effects; OCCASIONED By the last of these, which happened on the Eighth
Day of September 1692. at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Divided into Philosophical Theorems, picked out of many Famous, Modern, and
Ancient TREATISES, Translated into English; With Reference to that unusual One,
that happened in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, on the same Day, 8th. of September
1601. at the same Hour, which was sensibly felt throughout all Europe, and some
part of Asia in the same Moment, as much as it is found out.

A DORNED, With an Account of many stupendous and wonderful Events in Germany,
Italy, and other Kingdoms.

WHEREIN Some Observations are made upon the Circumstances, wherein these Two
Earthquakes agree, and the others wherein they differ.

By J. D. R. French Minister.

Joel 3.16. The Lord shall roar out of Sion, and utter his Voice from
Jerusalem, and the Heavens and the Earth shall shake; but the Lord will be the
Hope of his People, etc.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, at Sion's College, near Cripplegate; and to
be Sold at Mr. Cockrel, Bookseller, at the Sign of the Three Legs in the
Poultry, and at Mr. Vaillant, French Bookseller, in the Strand, over against
the French Savoy's Church, 1693/4.

IMPRIMATUR.

January the 1st. 1693/4. Edward Cook.

For the ever Honored and Worthy Thomas Brown, of Alsey, in the County of
Bedford Esquire a Member of the Honorable House of Commons, in this present
Parliament.
SIR,
IT IS the custom with those that Dedicate any thing, to adorn their
Frontispieces with the Panegyric Praises of their Mecenas. In which they
create Favors, and Illustrate their own Eloquence, unto which I was always
averse. But, forasmuch as the great Demonstrations of your Civilities and
Benevolence toward my Family, are always in my Memory; my Affections could not
but be moved with the Earth, and the Divine Providence at last afforded me an
occasion, which I had long sought for in vain, to repay some small
acknowledgment of a grateful Mind, by offering unto you the first Fruits of a
new Language (the Knowle^ge of which I attained to in your Neighborhood) then
Dedicate any thing new to you. Nay, it is very reasonable that this Treatise
should see again the same Country where it began to speak, or rather to stutter.

Yet if there were any need to mention more weighty Reasons and pass by these,
how innumerable of them, might be afforded, known both to me and the whole
Nation, in the enumerating of which a whole Volum might be defective? But that
which has been the greatest Motive with me, was the Piety innate to all your
Noble Family, and to your Illustrious Lady, excelling all others both in Beauty
of Body, and in great Parts of Mind. To which may be added the Candor and
Constancy of your Mind, free from all secular blemish; which Virtues you know
how prudently to use in the exercise of Justice, and the distribution of Right
to every one, in punishing Vice and Vicious Persons. On which, and on many
other things is founded His Majesty's (the most Prudent of Kings) and his
Counsel, Judgment, in conferring on you the Magistracy. The unanimous Concord
of the whole Country in choosing you to sustain their Parts in the most August
English Parliament, was upheld by this Foundation. On this incorrupted
Sincerity, leans the hope of its Patronage, and the Affection of a sincere and
faithful Mind, for the Conservation and Promotion of the Present State of
Affairs. But many Words become not the Candidate of a Foreign Tongue,
especially in so sublime a Matter. Pray, Sir, respect not so much the external
Meanness of the Person, as the Gratitude of his inmost Affection, after the
Example of that Prince who disdained not willingly to accept of cold Water
offered to him in the Hand of a Countryman, his Subject; But having perused
this Work, be pleased to accept of it as a Pledge of the eternal Deference I
owe to you, and disdain not to embrace it in your Patronage. In the mean time
that God will grant an Accomplishment of this, and many other Years attended
with his most gracious Benediction to you and all your honored Family, and
that the effluxion of this Age may be free from all Commotion and fatal
Alteration, either of the Earth, or of the Present Affairs of this Kingdom, is
the Prayer of

SIR, Your most devoted humble Servant, J. D. R.
April 9. 1693.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THAT common Saying, Objects move Powers, does not want its Foundation. An
Earthquake has served for the Subject Matter, for the exercising of so many
and so great Wits in Old Times, that it may seem needless to bring it upon the
Stage again: The Earth was no sooner shook on the 8th. of September last, but
that, that stupendous Event became the common Argument of the Discourse and
Writings of the Learned Men of this Nation. I betook also my self to the
Consideration thereof, and so set out the following English Treatise, for my
private improvement in this Tongue, without any design of publishing it, which
should never have come in print, had I not been overcome by the Persuasions of
many qualified Persons, and of several others of no ordinary Learning, to whose
Notice it came without my Privity, when it was finished; which was about the
end of December last, and before the Evangelical Exhortation to Repentance,
occasioned by the Earthquake writ by Mr. Beverly, and the Book of the Learned
Mr. Ray, concerning the Changes in the World, came forth.

And although it seems, that I ought now to be more against printing this
Treatise, by how much the more the number of Writers upon this Subject is
increased, yet many things being left untouched by them, which may give
occasion to Public Curiosity, and to the Wits of this Nation to exercise
themselves about, I have here yield to propound to the World. And as there are
many Circumstances in which the late Earthquake seems to agree with that, which
happened in the Year 1601. both in the Conjunction of Constellations, and the
Influence of the Planets, if we may credit Mr. Patridge; I thought it not amiss
for the satisfaction of the Reader, to give him my thoughts thereon; though I
do protest that I am very averse to the Observation of Omens, and that I am of
a very different Opinion from those who have dared to foretell that such an
Earthquake will be itterated here, as was in Sicily. God forbid that we should
by our sins draw down his Judgments so heavily upon our own Heads, but rather
in our Prayers to beg that God Almighty the Maker and Upholder of Heaven and
Earth, would be pleased to grant unto our Monarch and Monarchy the most
flourishing Prosperity, that the Constitution of this Kingdom and these happy
Islands may be at quiet, firm and unmovable till the end of Ages.

THE TABLE OF CONTENTS.
That all Earthquakes in themselves, are contrary to Nature. Their
Consideration is lawful.
CHAP. I. HOw many sorts of Earthquakes there are? and in regard of Natural
Causes, what sorts of Earthquake this was that we speak of, as well in regard
of its Circumstances, as in regard of its Effects. page 3. CHAP. II. What was
the nearest natural Cause of this Earthquake, as in regard of its breadth, as
in regard of its celerity, videl. the qualities and dispositions of some fiery
and subtle Vapors, hidden toward the Center of the Earth. To which may be
added the various influences of the Celestial Bodies, as far as their qualities
do prevail or resist. page 9. CHAP. III. The Earthquake by its Nature has not
an end properly; yet the effects thereof are commonly three specially evinced
both by Experiences and Observations of Examples, to wit, Sickness, Inundation
and Sterility. To which some would join the Pr^sages of some wonderful and
unusual Changes, etc. page 17. CHAP. IV. An examination of the Circumstances
wherein these two Earthquakes do agree or differ, both in their Form and second
Causes, in regard of the different Aspects of Planets as well as in their
effects. p. 30.
As a Corollary, Ten Problems are set rising Naturally from that Matter.
1. Whether that be true, which Pliny does assert, that France and Egypt are
seldom shaken, by reason of the cold of the one, and the heat of the other? p.
33. 2. Why Rivers decrease by Earthquakes? p. 34. 3. Why those places that are
either lying upon, or encompassed by the Sea or some River, be obnoxious to
Earthquakes? p. 36. 4. What credit may one give to the relation of Plato, of
the Island Atlantis, drowned by an Earthquake? p. 39. 5. Whether exterior wind
entering the Eart^ from above is able to move it? p. 41. 6. Whether
Subterraneous Exhaltations are generated by the Sun Beams? p. 43. 7. Whether
some more sullen times of Earthquakes are to be appointed for any certain
reasons? p. 44. 8. Why are Birds frighted in an Earthquake? p. 45. 9. Whether
the Vaults in Houses are safest against Earthquakes? Ibid. 10. If i^ the late
Earthquake is so ended, that the sole^^ Countries through which it went, are
secure from its itteration? p. 46.
THE EARTH Twice Shaken WONDERFULLY.
THEOREMS.
AS Rest is contrary to the Nature of Heaven, so is Motion against the Nature
of the Earth.

2. But in this they differ, that although no Natural Cause stops the Motion of
the Heaven, yet it may give some Motion to the Earth.

3. The Heaven never rested but once, Josh. 10.13. since the Creation that we
know of, and then not totally neither, but only in that part which is a Vehicle
to the solar Body; but the Earth is often moved.

4. And although the rest of the Heaven be in it self a thing as much to be
wondered at, as Motion in the Earth; yet the later seems to move and terrify
men's minds more.

5. For the Earth does more nearly touch us than Heaven, and we are more
sensible of danger, when the Foundation of the World trembles and is shaken
under us as though it were falling, then if any thing happen above our heads, or
that which was moved above us move no more.

6. Which Events as they do affect men's minds with a singular, and as it were
an amazing Admiration, so they excite and stir them up more dil^gently to
enquire after the Cause of the which, besides our own experience. Arist^tle
Witnesses in the 1st. Book of his Metaphysickt, Cap. 2. (...). Because of
Admiration, Men began both now and of old to Philos^phize.

7 Seeing therefore that, that Earthquake which formerly happened on the 8th of
September, 1601. between one and two of the Clock at Night, struck almost all
the Inhabitants of Europe with Admiration. I doubt not but that which happened
lately on the 8th. day of September last, excites many to the search of the
Cause and Nature of them.

8. Neither is this tracing, even of wonderful and unaccu^^omed Events, by
their causes any ways displeasing to God, seeing Effects themselves are more
clearly understood, when the Cause is known, and the clearer Knowledge of
Divine Works, begets clearer notice of God himself, and excites in us a greater
fear and awe of him: for clearness in the Understanding begets efficacy in the
Will and Ardour in the Affections.

9. Whilst therefore the Learned communicate to the World their Thoughts and
Observations of that unusual Earthquake which no small part of the World felt,
which Observations they gather from the Remarks they make of the different
Events that happened here and there, especially since that Town in Jamaica was
almost swollowed up by an Earthquake. I have been likewise prevailed upon to
put forth something that might be as an earnest, if by chance, by the comparing
of Opinions, the cause of this so stupendous an Event might more truly and
plainly appear.

10. I shall distribute the whole Matter into Four Chapters. The First of which
shall be of the Kind and Form of this Earthquake; The next of the efficient
Causes; and the Third of the Effects, and of their Signification and Presage,
at least as ordinary and common. Fourth, To which shall be joined an
Examination of Unformity or Disparity of one from another, both in their Form,
and in their Causes and Effects.

CHAP. I. Of the Kind and Form of this Earthquake.
II. THere are two sorts of Earthquakes, Trembling and P^lsation. The
differences of Earthquakes or their several Kinds, may be derived either from
the Force of the Spirit issuing out of the Superficies of the Earth, or from
the sound then made, and from other accidents and effects. Hence it is, that in
Lib. de Mun. There are reckoned eight sorts of Earthquakes. Georgius Agricola
lib. 2. de ortu subter. Makes four sorts of 'em, a Trembling when it quivers
lateraly; Concussion when it is moved on high and shelving (in sublime and
devexum;) arietation when contrary blows shake it. Lastly, inclination when it
is rolled like Water and the Waves. But the same Author in his fourth Book of
those things that proceed out of the Earth, page 14. more accurately divides
Earthquakes into simple and compounded, and then subdvides both into their
Species. Aristotle 2. Metaphys, reduces all sorts of Earthquakes to two general
Heads, to wit (...) a trembling and (...) Pulsus, which division I thought good
to follow in this place.

12. A Trembling is a Motion of the Earth according to its Latitude to the
right and left side. Aristotle in the forecited place (says) that (...) i. e.
trembling is toward the sides, and calls it also (...) and (...) from (...)
which signifies to brandish: for the leaping of the Earth is, as it were, a
brandishing. And this sort of Earthquke is frequent, but Pulsus and Arietation,
as they call them, are more seldom, which Aristotle testifies in his second
Book of his Metaphys, chap. 8. Pulsus seldom shake the Earth, for beginnings
are not so easily multiplied, etc.

13. Pulsus is a motion of the Earth according to its Longitude, to wit, when
it is moved up or down. Aristotle says, (...) and divides it into (...) Systole
and Diastole: to wit, either when the Vapor or Exhalation going up with
violence, heaps up great Piles like Mountains, or removes or breaks Mountains
themselves, or lastly sucks them into the Earth in its vasts gaping, as Pliny,
Speaks.

14. But that Earthquake whereof we have spoken in the beginning, was different
according to the diversity of places where i^ was.

15. In plain places 'twas a Trembling, because it shook the Earth l^^eraly to
the right and the left. Those who then felt the Quaking, a^^irm it to have been
a lateral one, like (...) ^ocking of a Cradle, and that th^se who lay in the
same Bed, that night it happened, were violently justled one against the other,
the clothes being carried from side to side; but wheither or no, there were the
same sort of Q^a^ing in all the places where it was. I am not very farward to
affirm. But on^ may be bold to conclude from the Event, that in most plac^s,
the Earth was not violently thr^st forward, but did mostly tremble. And
although this trembling (Tremor) be counted less peril^ous than either Pulsus,
Arietation or Inclination, yet it does not want its dangers, as those specially
then experienced that lived in the highest H^^ses and in Castles, from whence
the Voices and Exclamations of the Guards, were heard every where throughout
the Country, for when the Cradle is moved too much either to the right or left,
there is danger of the Child's falling out, so when the Fondations or Buildings
be moved laterally, both the Walls are in danger, especially in Towers where
the substerraneous Spirit being included within the Arches, does as it were,
force the Tower more either to this or that side; otherwise the hig^er the
Walls are, the more sensible is the shaking (called, Vibratio.) This is
certainly apparent from History, that the Town of Scarp, not far distant from
Florence, in the Valley of Magellum, between the Vesuvian and Apennine
Mountains, in the year 154* on the 3. of July did first Quake by such a sort of
Vibration, and afterward was so sh^ken, that most of the Houses were ruined,
great Cracks and Chinks being made in them, and 500 of the Inhabitants were
d^stroyed, which Eart^quake is related by Geor. Agricol. lib. de Natura rerum e
terra effluentium page 151. who Wr^t his Book the same year the Town was made
ruinous.

16. B^t in M^u^tainous places, to this Trembling was added a Pulse.
Eart^quakes are more noxious in Mountains than in Valleys, ^y reason the more
frequent subterraneous Cavities which there lie hid, into which the Spirits are
more copiously gathered and prevail more strong^y, but esp^cially where the
super^icies is solidly compacted and smoothly leve^led. Plinius lib. 2. cap. 8.
(says) Nec mo^t^sa talicarent malo, neither do the Mountains are without such
an inconvenience (evil.) I am sure the Alps and Apennine Mountains h^ve off^en
tr^mbled, which ^^ve occasion to that of Virgil Insolitis ^^^^cr^nt M^tib^s
A^pes And the H. Scripture, says, Naham. 1. (...) Mo^^tains are move^ by God.

Switzerland also felt it at the very same time. A noted Wi^ness of which
speaks after this manner. Whilst I was Traveling in Switzerland in September
and October, I found Men's minds terrifi^d more by that Earthquake, than I
perce^ved they were in the more close parts of Germany. And that it was no^ a
simple Trembling of the Earth, but a certain Pulsus and Concussion joined with
a Trembling, those things that I saw every where in those parts, the Effects of
this Earthquake, sufficiently demonstrated to me, of which I will mention but
one. There is a h^gh and scraggy Mountain two Hours Journey distant from
Lucern, not v^ry remote from that stupendous Mountain which Pomponius Mela,
call^, Fractum Montem, the Vulgar (I know not by what sort of superstition)
Pilat's Mountains, but the Inhabitants call it Burka (if I do remember) under
this Mountain on the Eight of September, about Two a Clock at Night, there
arose a dreadful Bellowing and Fragor to the great Co^sternation of the
Inhabitants that live thereabouts, there were elevated into the Air, as it were
thick Fumes, which filled all the Neighborhood; at lenghth the greatest part
of the ^op of the Mountain was broke off with a great noise, and tumbled down
into the Lake of Lucern, which runs by it, but from the other part of the
Mountain, which other People (called Vnderwaldensers) inhabit, some part also
being violently thrown down, is reported to have buried seven of the
Inhabitants: so in the 85th. year of the last Age, part of the Mountain was
broken off, three hours Journey distant from a certain Village called Hyborn,
under the Jurisdiction of the Canton of Bern's; situated above the Lake
Lemanus, from which issued a vehement Wind, which carried with it Stones,
Clods, and Trees; so that having passed over the interjacent Hills, at the
length the mesurable Village it self was overwhelmed and oppressed which the
Destruction of its Inbabitants. The like Examples do every where occurr in
History and Seneca, lib. 6. Not. quest, reports out of Thucidides, that A^las
was cleft and broken by an Earthquake not far from Locris.

17. Moreover one Earthquake is less frequent than another, and more
extraordinary; one being purely miraculous, the other compounded both of
Miracle and Nature.

18. An Earthquake merely miraculous is, when the Earth is shaken by the
immediate power of God, without the intervention of any Natural Cause.

Of which sort was that which happened at the suffering of Christ, Matthew. 27
51. Pliny mentions a certain great Earthquake lib. 2. Cap. 84. in the time of
Tiberius Caesar, Maximus, (say he) terrae memoria mortalium motus accidit
Tiberii Caesaris principatu, duodecim Vrbibus Asiae una nocte prostratis, i. e.
The greatest Earthquake in the Memory of Men happened in the Reign of Tiberius
Caesar, Twelve Cities of Asia being laid level in one Night. Cornelius Tacitus
in the end of his second Book, names them. But Niaphorus, lib. 1. Cap. 17.
says, Fourteen were destroyed. Saint Austin, lib. 2. de mirabilibus.
Seripturae Writes that Eleven Cities in Thrace were destroyed by that
Earthquake, which happened at our Savior's Crucifixion. Eusebius reports from
Phlegon (an old Author) that many Houses in the City of Nissa, in Bithynia,
fell down by the same Earthquake. But that Earthquake which Pleny mentions,
could not be that, which happened at Christ's Crucifixion; for they do'nt agree
in the numbers of years, for those Twelve Asiatick Cities fell in the third
year of Tiberius's Reign, but Christ suffered in the 18th years of the Reign of
that Emperor, or thereabouts. Moreover the saying of Dydimus is quoted
concerning that miraculous Earthquake which was at the suffering of Christ, who
says, Terrae Motus, etc. Earthquake often happened, but those which were before
and after Christ, were only in some part of the Earth, but in the time of my
Savior Jesus Christ, it was not some particular Earthquake, but the whole
Earth was shaken and torn from its Center: But I know not what credit one may
give to this Opinion of Dydimus. The Scripture says, the Earth is so founded,
that he shall never be moved, viz. as to its Profundity and Center, Psalm.
104.5. He has founded the Earth upon its basis that it should not be removed
for ever. A parallel place, to which is in Eccles. 1.4.

That Earthquake also happened at the Resurrection of Christ, is to be referred
to those that are purely miraculous, Matthew. 28.2. as is also that spoken of in
the 4th. of Acts 31. and that, Acts 16.26. and also that which happened a
little before the Promulgation of the Divine Law, Exodus 19.18. and that opening
of the Earth that swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.21. And that
which is mentioned, Amos 1.1. and Zac. 14.5. Yea, ye shall fly like as you
fled from before the Earthquake in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, which,
Josephus lib. 9. antiq. cap. 2. describes.

19. A mixed Earthquake, is that which has a Natural cause, but
extraordinarily, as it were increased by God, and in some sort enlarged beyond
the Power of Nature. God often makes use of Natural Causes in the production
even of miraculous Events, lest the Agents might not be hindered without
necessity, and that he might show that the Power of Nature, and second Causes
are not at all repugnant to the Divine Power, but subordinate to it. And,
Lastly, That he might show that he has the Power of Nature in his own hands
and disposal, and that he can either augment their force, or diminish it.

20. And this Earthquake is observed to be twofold.

21. One is restrained to some certain Place, and included within some tract of
Ground, so that it has an unusual vehemence of Spirits underground, and
wonderfully increased, from which arises destructive and great hurt. Of which
sort was that Earthquake which happened in the 20th, or as other reckon the
22th, year of Christ, of which we spoke before, whereby 14 Cities of Asia
perished. Such a one was that also that happened in the Reign of Herod the
Great, by which many Cities, Towns, and Villages being demolished in Judea,
30000 Jews perished, as Josephus says, in his 1st. Book of the Wars of the
Jews, chap. 14. So from the year of Christ, 1170. to the year, 1345. all
Germany was four times most grievously shaken, as one may see from Funccius,
Stumpsius, Sigonius, Cedrenus, and others.

22. Some Earthquakes are unusual and remarkable in respect of their Latitude
and Celerity, so that a great part of the World is shaken, and that some time
quickly as it were, in an Hour or in a Moment. Which sort of Earthquake History
mentions to have happened in the time of Valentinian the Emperor, in the year
of our Lord 369. by which the whole Earth was moved, in so much that many
Islands in the East, with a great multitude of Men perished by Inundation,
which is attested by Socrat. lib. 4. Hist. Eccles. cap. 32. Amianus
Marcellinus, in the end of his 26 Book. Paul Orosius, lib. 7. Hist. cap. 32
Funccius in Chronol. so in the year of our Lord 1117. almost all the World
shook, many Buildings being demolished every where by it, as Stumpsius relates,
lib. 4. cap. 40. but in the year 1443. an Earthquake shook Poland, Hungary and
Bohemia. King Ladistaus being not long after killed by the Turks, with a great
overthrow of the Christians.

23. To this sort of Earthquakes is referred that wonderful and unusual one
which happened in the year 1601. on the 8th of September, between one and two
of the Clock at Night.

24. For ^^s not probable that so great a Tract of this terren Globe, as that
Earthquake passed through, could be moved by the ordinary and accustomed force
of Nature, which not only our European Hemispl^^e, Germany, France, Italy,
Hungary, Bohemia, Thraoe, but Asia it self is r^ported to have felt. We have
not yet heard for certain l^^w ^^r that ^arthq^^ke reached into Asia and
Africa, but this is certain, that the gre^t^st part of Europe trembled, and
that, almost (...) the same ^^om^nt. Some Reports have lately been hatched,
that (...), that two Towns called by the Turks Tartos and Copera, were s^
allowed up by the gaping of the Earth, caused by that Earthquake, to the ^r^at
Consternation of the Turks, who from that time belie^^^ that si^^istro^s and
unlucky Events were pretended t^^ their Empire, which, if true, may make it
apparent, that this Earthquake was not every where a Tremor, but in some places
a Pulsus and (...): to wit, where the Spirits abound, or the Ground is porous
or gra^^lly; as it is about the Euxine Sea, and at Constantinople, which City,
if any in Europe, is infested with frequent and pernicious Earthquakes.

In the year of our Lord 1356. it was so grievously shaken, that a great part
of the Walls* where it looks into the Sea, fell down, with many Towers and
Buildings, so that 13000 Men perished in the City, the Earthquakes lasting
incessantly for 18 days. Agathias, lib. 5. page 541. relates a dreadful
Earthquake that happened in this City. A little while before these thing
happened (in the time of Justinian) the Earth was so dreadfully shaken at
Bizantium, that almost all the City fell down, after which another Earthquake
ensued, that was so great, that I think there never was, nor will be the like
again.

25. There are therefore two things in that Earthquake which make it
extraordinary and very miraculous, the breadth, and that it penetrated those
places, which are not subject to Earthquakes: and the Celerity of it.

And although the Mischiefs it caused in some Parts, may assure us ol^^i^s
vehemence, yet it is not so stupendous for its Mischiefs, as for its Latitude,
Celerity, and Presage. For we read in History of far more dreadful havoc and
destruction made by some other Earthquakes, and moreover we know from Physical
Principles, that those ^^^^b^i^gs that extend farthest, are not so highly
distrustful. For the force of Subterraneous Spirits, the more it is dissipated,
the more ^^^gui^ it is.

CHAP. II. Of the Cause.
26. Whether a Natural Cause can be assigned for both effects we must now
enquire.

27. That there was a Natural Cause (although not alone) is evident from
Observation.

28. For the time it self is such at is convenient for a Natural Earthquake, to
wit, Autumn, and also near the Equinox, for about that time Earthquakes are
wont to happen. Aristotle 2 Meteor cap. 8. says, t^uly Earthquakes happen
chiefly in Autumn, because those times are most Windy: Which Pliny also
relates, lib. 2. cap. 8.

29. It was also two of the Clock in the Morning, which is especially adapted
for Earthquakes. So Aristotle in the forecited place, says, there are more and
greater Earthquakes in the Night, and adds, (...), especially in the Morning.
And Pliny in the forecited place, says, the Morning and Evening Earthquake are
very great, but at the approach of day they are frequent, for the heat of the
day dissolves and dissipates their matter. Natural cold contracts and binds it.

30. The consequent effects also do Evince that the Power of Nature was present.

31. For ^o^ses and fragors issuing out of the Caverns of Earth, were heard
about that time in the Neighborhood, which is a certain discovery of the
Spirits and Winds agitated in the Cavities of the Earth, and as it were there
striving reciprocally. If but a little Wind blows in^o a V^ssel, a sound, and
as it were, a bellowing is heard. One from whence may conclude, what happen in
so spacious Caverns as those o^ the ^arth. Hence it is, that Aristole says, The
Spiritus ma^es a^n^ise under the Earth, as the Air being beaten up, sou^^s
variously, for there is no difference between this Spiritus and the Ai^^ (as to
the effect of the sound) for this Spiritus verberati^g upon every thing is it
self verberat^d upon: And Pliny lib. 2 cap. 8 says, There goes before and
accompanies them a terrible noise, othe^wise a murmuring like to bellowing or
the cry of Men, and the sound fragou^ of clashing of Arms, according to the
quality of the Matter receiving it, and the form either of Ca^^n or ^uniculus
through which it permeates, etc.

32 (...) g^^at Win is have ra^^^ after an Earthquake, when a Ca^^ has
immediately p^eceded it. This is also witnessed by experience and by Ari^^^tle
and Pliny in the forecited places, that Winds (...) after an ^^^thquak^^
because those Winds which (...) before sh^t in the Eart^, do brake out of it
into the Air. And (...) do assert the same concerning the Calm, to wit, that it
common^y goes before an Earthquake. In a Calm toward (...) ^a^y, ^ays
Aristotle, there happen very many and very great Earthquakes because most of
the Matter of the Winds is so restrained in the Caverns of the Earth, that it
cannot more the Air: Yet we must not deny that even sometimes in windy Weather
Earthquakes have happened, because all the Matter of them does enter into the
Caverns of the Earth together. And even at the time of our Earthquake about
three hours before it was observed to be somewhat r^en, and I will not here
make any tedious dispute with Geor. Agric. who says, lib 4. de Na^ura eorum que
ef^luant^e terra, That Aristotle, when he mentions the darkness of the Sun, the
calmness of the Weather, cold, a thin Cloud extended in length, did not intend
to discover ^he signs of Earthquakes (which Aristotle's Interpreters affirm)
but prove by those things which sometimes happen, that W^^d is the Cause of
Earthquakes. But both may be asserted without ^bsurdity, ^owi^, tha^ they are
signs of Earthquakes to come, and also evince that they are occasioned by Wind.

But h^^e we do no^ only acknowledge Nature, but join with it a singular force
of Divine Power, neither ought we to sep^^^te Divine Operations even from those
that are usual and often happen: seeing the very Heathens believed that there
was no Earthquake, tho never so small, but had something Divine in it, as it is
testified by Gellius lib. 2. cap 28 But ^s often as the Scripture speaks of
Earthquakes (which is often) so often do they divert our minds from the
consideration of Nature alone, to the acknowledgment of the Omnipotent Power of
the Lord, as Psalm. 60 2. Thou had made the Earth to tremble, thou had broken
it, and Psalm. 77.19. Psalm. 114 4, and 7. Tremble that Earth at the presence of
the Lord, at the presence of the God of Ja^^^: Also, Psalm. 10.32 He looks on
the Earth and it trembles; he touches the Halls and they smoke, Job. 9.6.
Which shakes the Earth out (...) place, and the Pillars thereof tremble, Nah^m
1.5. The (...) quake at him, and the Hills melt.

33. But what should be the next Natural Cause of so stupendous Effects, to
wit, so great Latitude, and so great Celerity in this Earthquake? This I
confess is difficulte to Trace, but I hope, I shall have leave to enquire
diligently into it.

34. Which that I may do, I will first set down some Principles, where one may
have good assurance for o^e Credit.

35 Seeing the Earth is round like a Globe, it has Lines drawn from the Center
to the Circumference.

36. These Line meet nearer about the Center, then at the Circumference where
they are farther distant.

37. Therefore the nearer any thing is the Center of the Earth, the mere
closely is it contracted, rashing violently from thence to the Circumference,
it is extended farther, and occupi^^ mere r^om.

38. The Spirit^^or V^pours are sometime^ more deeply hid toward the Center of
the Earth, but sometimes (and that more frequently) they are generated in
Caverns and Passages (meatus) near^r the Superficies of the Earth.

From the general Doctrine of Earthquakes in this place; I presuppose the Earth
is not otherwise moved then by Winds and Spirits engendered in its Cavitie^,
thence seeking an Exitus according to the quality of their Natures.

I know the Ancient Philosophers before Aristotle assigned other Causes of
Earthquakes, whose different Opinions concerning them are recited by Plutarch,
lib. 3. De Placitis Philosophorum, cap. 2. Seneca lib. 6. Mat. quest. Cap 4.
Pliny lib. 2. Cap. 79. but especially, Aristotle, 2 Meteor, cap. 7. But amongst
modern Authors Joannes Franciseus, Picus Mirandula, lib. 1. examinis doctinae
and vanitatis gentium, cap. 12. among which we must reckon Nicholaus Cusanu^,
who lib. 1. de Docta ignorantia, is of opinion, that the Earth is neither of an
Oval form, nor altogether Unmovable of it self. But no Opinion is more evident
from Nature and Experience, than Aristotle, who asserts, that Winds and
subterraneous Spirits are the Cause^ of Earthquakes; for the heaviest Bodies
are only to be moved by that which has the strongest Power to move; But among
all inferior Beings, the Wind or Spiritus is that which according to the
qualifications of its own Nature, has in i^ a Power more effective of Motion
than any other body (...), which is expressly testified by Holy Writs, when it
assimilates Angels to the Winds, Heb. 1.7. and many experiments do al^o evince
it: For with how great a force does a little G^n-Powd^^ diss^lv^d into Spirits
by the heat of Fire burst out of the smallest Machines. So we see the Spirit of
new Wine when seething, if the Fu^nell be stoped, do penetrate the Vessels,
that they may break ^orth It is sufficiently known of what Power they are in
our Bodies, and what great Co^vul^o^^, Symp^o^ns, and Pains they are the causes
of. So that Aristotle use h^ thi^ Example chiefly to confirm his Opinion of the
Cause of Earthquake.

39. These Spirits being deep in the Earth and closeley contracted, the nearer
they arrive a^ the Superficies of the Earth, the more they are dissipated and
scattered, and so they ex^end further in length and breadth.

40. And they more powerfully endeavor ^o extri^^e themselves; and they
^ssu^^on^ more s^vis^ly, by now much he more they are deeply laid in the Earth,
and closely contracted.

Which may be proved by he experiment of Fire, which when it is narrowly
contracted, b^eaks for h^^^e more violently man instant, when it has the
opor^u^ity of in A^itu^, to co^v^y i^ se^f o^t, which is apparent in Gun, where
the ig^^ou force of the Gunpowder being sh^^ in a nerrow room, breaks out
swifter than one can think or imagine.

41. Which Principles being presupposed, let us now show the Cause of the
Earthquake which we are treating of, which extended so far, and was ^o quickly
caused.

42. It was a Vapor or Spirit subtly disposed and bur^ed profundly toward
the Center of the Earth or at least the Center of Europe, or of those Countries
that were shaken, whence sallying out in great quantity and number, it spread
fare and near with wonderful Celerity.

Trembling in the Earth is nothing else but the Thunder in a Cloud, says Pliny,
lib 2. cap. 79. As therefore some Thunder reache^ further, and issues out more
violently than other, both according to the different disposition of the Cloud,
and also according to the quantity and quality of the Spirit deeply ^^ried in
the Cloud, or approaching nearer to its Superficies; so the greater or lesser
Latitude and Celerity of Earthquakes, is to be derived from the different
disposition and s^ituation of the Spirits. And that also, which we asserted of
the Center, is easy to be understood: For that which is placed in the middle
of a Circle or Globe, does more easily move the whole Globe, than that which
recedes from the Center toward the side of the Globe; which is well known by
them who prepare Fireballs, and throw them into the Air, often to the great
Admiration of the Spectators. And I call that the Center of Eu^ope, which is in
the midst of that Circle which is drawn from one Extreme o^ Eu^ope to the
other, in that space of the Terrene Goble in which Eu^ope is contained.

43. But whence comes it, that this Spirit is so deep, so subtle, and so ^wist?
Partly from the first, and partly from the second Causes.

44. The efficacy of Celestical Bodies does d^s^rvedly claim the first place
among second Causes, which rises from their different respect to one another,
or the mixture of their li^ht and rays. Such is the ^ower of the Subject as is
it self, seeing therefore Heaven is the first, che^^e^t, greatest, and swiftest
of all Bodies, its Force and Efficacy must need^ be the first, greatest and
swiftest; for Heaven is so closely connexed with inferior Bodies, that its
virtue may be tr^ns^us^d into the Earth and communicated to it, even in its
most abstruse rece^^es: Whither he efficacy of the solar Rays does reach, is
evident from the generation of Metals and other subterraneous Bodies, which i^
no ways possible without the Sun and its Rays.

45 The efficay and virtue of Saturn this very year was chefiest amongst the
Planets, whence it happened that Ma^ter and Fuel was afforded for cold Vapors
both above and within the Earth.

It Is an Astronomical Rule confirmed by experience, that the Knowledge of the
Earthquake is to b^der^ved from Saturn, it being a Planet effective of cold and
d^yne^s; And the first matter of Vapors is cold and dry, which being gathered
together at first, by the intervention of other Causes, ^ro^^s hot an^ is
rar^fied.

To which may be added the Qu^^rate Aspect of Jupiter and Mars, in July,
whereby cold Vapors are made hot and disposed for windy Temperament. It Is an
old Opinion confirmed by Reasons drawn from the Nature and Pro^ert^ of Planets;
and also from experience, that the Power of the three Super our Planets,
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars ^s most eminent in producing Earthquakes; the first
by his light does ^ncrease cold Vapors, which are made hot by the third, and
so tempered by the second, that the heat being neither able to subdue, nor b^
subdued, there are necessarily generated flatuous Vapors, whereof we shall
speak hereafter.

47 And when the Earthquake happened, the Sun was in the Sign of Virgo, which
is it self very much ad^pted for Earthquake.

48. There happened in the foregoing Month of July two Eclipses, the Moon on
(...), the ^un's on the Nineteenth, and no wonder (...) that ^^me diverse
^^po^^s were coll^^^ed within the ^arth, so (...) R^ys of the (...) being
weakened by their being (...) a^^sing from ram, could not be (...) all which,
the m^eting of two Eclip^^s i^ one Month ^s a pre^^ging Ev^nt.

That (...) by the Eclipses of the Sun and the Moo^; is the (...) of (...) 2
M^t^or, c^p 8 and of Pliny (...) which is confirmed by ex^^^ience^ ^o^ only
(...), but (...) r^c^ss^s b^^n ^^ene rat^d ^y the heat (...) R^^^s, ^es by a
certain Spirit, are purged from th^^ r^d n^^^^ (...) is which cannot be when
those l^^^ts are ^i^cl^p^d. For (...) s^p^^ f^uot^s ^umouts abound, and also
the po^^s of the ^a^th which the (...) would otherwise op^n, ar^ shut up, so
that he Vap^u^s cannot regularly and convenientl^ exhale: So says Aris^otle,
(...) M^t^or cap S. ^^^thqu^kes happen abo^t the time of ^clipses for (...) the
defect of ^i^ht, ^n cessa^^^y ^n^u^s the d^se^^ of ^eat, which i^ cau^ed by the
Sun or (...) on throughout the Air. Ne^^her does that A^^^^ (...) Rul^ want its
Found^t^on; many ^^conv^mencies ensue to the Wo^ld upon the Obscu^atio^ of b^th
the ^um^^aries of Heaven in the (...) M^nth. I don't sp^ake h^re of that eff^^t
of ^clip^es which is in Potentia and has its reg^rd to futurities, b^t of that
which is in Actu and accompanies an ^clipse con^dered in it self.

49. To which may be added that which is a ^earer Cause, to wit, (...)
Constitut^on of the Air, which in the p^^c din^ Summer was (...) ^^^apted for
the ^en^ration of flatuo^s Vapors.

50. About the beginning of Summer, there was very hot Weather, by which the
Faith was prep^red and disposed to engender and receive Vapou^s.

51. Which was foll^wed in the midst of Summer by continual (...), by which the
Earth being opened before, by the pr^c^ding (...), ^as (...) deeply w^tted,
that abundance of Humors must ne^^ssarily have b^^n ^^ored up.

Which c^n (...) the R^^n, is attested by A^istotle in the afor^said place, 2.
M^te^r, (...) (says he) happen in Spring and (...), but ^sp^ci^^^^ i^ ^^iny
Weather, because then th^re is a (...) E^haltation, which being in^^rcepted in
the nar^o^ passages of the E^^th, is there that in; because the Ca^ties of the
Earth are full, but when the Wind in contr^cted w^^hin a narrow place, it (...)
eff^^^ive of Mot^^n. And there is a remark^ble place in the beginning of the
Chapter, where he says, that the Earth is of it self dry, yet, but reason of
showers fa^^ing on^^, ^t has likewise much moisture which proceeds from the
(...) and ^^re which is in it self, and engenders much Spirits both within and
without it self Neither is there any reason why any one should ob^^^^ w^^t
Seneca says, in qu^st. nat^. That no rain is so great ^s to (...) to or We^ the
Earth above two Foot: For that is not true of ever^ shower of ^ain, nor of much
and continued rain, neither in the Superficies of the Earth, the only
conveyance of rain into the Earth, but it also is carried through the Caves of
the Earth that are open and is in great pl^^ry infu^'d into the in (...)
Recesses of the Earth, by Fountains, Wells, and Rivers which are increased by
rai^.

52. To which rainy Weather was added an unusual co^d in the Dog Days, by which
the Passages and Pores of it were so shut up, that the Humors gathered
together in the Earth could not evaporat^.

53. And the South West wind blowed for many days together, so that the Vapors
accommodated for an E^rthquake were en^^e^^d and nourished. For the South Wind
is warm and moist, so that i^ has been rightly observed by Aristotle, that it
is apt both to excite and nourish the matter that causes an Earthquake; and as
the ^outh-West Wind is near in place, so in temper and effect.

54. Which cold Weather was presently followed by a ca^mness and heat a little
before the end of August. So that the Vapo^^s which had been generated by
continual Rain within the Cave^ns of the Earth, grew dry: And a Vapor made
warm b^c^^^^es a sl^tuous. And when there arise such contention between cold
(...) or and heat, in which the cold is neither q^ite overcome and consumed,
nor the heat is altogether conqu^rou^, winds are eng^nd^ed. Which is rightly
observed by Physicians in the Bodies of Men, when he^t acting upon Phleg^n
cannot totally consume it, then are generated W^nds.

55. It could not be but that the Vapors contracted within the Earth by the
^pposing cold, both proper to the Earth, and also caused by the i^^^^^al
Constitution of the Air, should be deeply laid. No otherwi^e t^an it the
Spirits are more deeply concealed and constrain^d, when the coldness of the
Clouds does resist and constrain more s^iffly.

56. The subterraneous Fire scattered through the Cavities of the Earth, so
heated these Vapors sh^t up in the Earth very deeply, that it made them more
subtle and more a^il^, the Caverns thr^ugh Europe and other places being
disposed for it, for the Reas^^s a ^ore ment^o^e^.

That there is ^ire every where scattered through the Cavities of the Earth,
both the Fire which in many places break forth out of the most pr^found C^ves
of the Earth does evince, as also the hot Waters or Baths which rise in many
places, to add nothing of the engend^ing of S^^phur, Brimstone, and other
Minerals, in which there is an igneous force and nature. The burning of Aetna
equally celebrated by Peers and G^ographers, is described by Soin^us, c^p. 2
Heny, the Nephew of that ^^i^y, by his Sister whose death the V^suvian Mountain
caused, say, lib. 2 Epict. Not long ^^n^e the Island Georgia (one of those
isles they c^ll the Third) shaken by a dreadful Earthq^ake and gap^ng, there
^ssu^d out some much F^ame, so many ^ot Stores, so much Sulph^r and burning
^rimstones which were t^rown into the Air that many Houses were Bu^nt,
Inhabitants destroyed, Vine-yards and Gardens quite defeced. But whence come so
many Flames under the Earth? From the dry Vapors which being so closely
pressed in the Earth, and from several motions and agitattions in it, Fire does
necessarily Kindle: For Fire, says Aristotle, is ^igh^ed smoke. About the year
1541 Fire broke out of a fou^tain named Elis^um. Gregor. Agricola d^^^ squae
^ff^uunt e terr^l^b. 4. page 152. and Stra^o Writes, that so great ^^re issued
out of the Earth, that some Towns were consumed, and among them S^dom at the
Lake ^^phaltites: But we are t^ught better by M^ses in his sacred History.
Moreover as our Fire wh^^ it is shut in, is moved up and down by a various
Reciprocation, some doubt not bu^ su^te^ra^^ous ^ire is diversely excited, and
sometimes slies downwards unto the most profound Ca^e^nes, and sometimes
^pwar^s, toward the highest Parts of the Earth, as the ^arth is variously
changed and dispo^ed by Heaven and the Air.

57 ^n^ these I take to be the second Causes of that Spirit which lately shoo^
the Earth so swiftly and so deeply, which yet could not ^^k^ly produce to
unusual an Earthquake, by its Natural Power alone.

58. To which was added that chief and first Cause, God, who by an
extraordinary way of a^^ing, wonderfully ^ner^^sed the s^r^^^th of that
Spirit^s genera^ed within the Earth, an^ added one d^^r^e of force to ^t be^ond
its own Power, which Nature c^uld no add, so that this Earthquake may be
recko^ed not purely Na^ural, but mixed with both, as we a^^erted before. For ad
Miracles do not exclude Nature, but many include it, so that they increase its
force and virtue, and ext^rd it to that degree, to which it could not attain
unless the A^n ^g^^y Power (...) were superadded. The Scripture does prepose
unto is ^n evident E^^^^p^e of it in Sampson, whose predigious strength by his
b^ddy Temp^r, and all his Sinews and Mus^les were so exceedingly streng.
However God himself did reinforce and increase them so much that be could rent
into pieces a young roaring Lion like a Kid, Judge. 14.7. that he could break
the strongest Cords like a Linnen-thread or Flax; that he could slay a Thousand
Men, with the Jaw of an A^s, Judge. 15. That he could take the Do^rs of the
Gates of the City, and the two Posts, and carry them upon his Shoulders to the
tep of an Hill, Judge. 16. So the Divine Power of God did increase the natural
strength of David, that he could overthrew this prodigious and Stronglined body
Goliath with a S^ing only. 1 San^ud 17. To the same kind of Miracle we may refer
the Example of ^lijah. 1 King. 19. where it is said, that having eat a Cake and
drank Water out of a Cruise, he was so sustained, that in the strength of that
Meat he went forty days and forty nights unto Hereb, the Mount of God. There
are evidences enough throughout all the Doctrines of Divines concerning the
variety of Miracles, their many ^orts and their ends to show that these
strengthening and reinforcing of Natural Faculties, though supplied by God; may
fall out also on err Ages, as we have observed in a few words before in the
nineteenth Theorem.

CHAP. III. Of the Effects and Presages.
59. ALthough those things which happen contrary to Nature, have not an end
properly and perse out of Nature, yet they have their effects presages, and
portenta^, When Earthquake happ^ns besides its Nature, it cannot have an end
properly, and p^^se in respect of the Earth. For the end of every thing is
according to its Nature, 2. Phys. 3. But in respect of the Vapors or Spiritus
by which the Earth is moved, this end is assigned by Naturalists, that the
nature of that Spi^itus may be preserved whilst sallying out of the Earth, it
ascends into the open Air, making its own way out of the Caverns o^ the Earth,
in which it was included as in its Prison, so g^ning a place proper and
agreablee to its own Nature.

60. And seeing this Earthquake is mixed with Nature and Miracle, it has
Natural effects, and also its presages from the supernatural Ordination of God.

61. The effects will be as is the Cause, to wit, Praeternatural, that is
contrary to Nature.

62. Three of which effects are more especially to be feared, which both the
Nature of Earthquakes, and Experience, and the Observation of Examples do
evince, to wit, Sickness, Inundations, and Sterility.

63. Earthquakes cause Epidemical and Contagious Distempers, because the
Vapors in the Caverns of the Earth either contract rottenness or some venomous
qualities (especially if shut up in it for any considerable time) and thence
sallying out, they make impressions in the Air that surrounds us, which when
drawn into our Bodies by breathing, there must needs be impressed the like
qualities in the inmost Bowels of our Bodies; Neither do they only infect the
Air, but also the Water without which we cannot be. That the quality of
subterraneous Vapors is very prejudiciable to our Health, is testified by
experience in those places where the Earth abounding with Minerals, s^nds into
the Air frequent Exhalations, but especially if the Earth be porous and loose.
Neither need we go very far for Examples: Those Caverns which are at the Sharp,
and the Fountains of Schwalbuh may testify it, which are so much infested with
venomous Exhaltations, that Dogs or Hens carried into them, die sooner than any
one can imagine. Geor. Agric. has Writ accurately lib. 2. de not. rer. e terra
effluent. When at the beginning of the Book he Writes, the Air which is shut up
a long time in any Concavity of the Earth, rots and is made pestilent: And a
li^te after; there are in many places of the Earth serobes, exhaling
mortiferous Vapors, but no where more then in Italy, etc. Cardanus also in the
Appendix of his Work de Re^um varietate, explains the thing by some Histories
and Examples. Moreover the History of all Times teaches us what grievous and
pestilent Distempers have been caused by Earthquakes. Seneca lib. 6. quoest.
natu. attests that a Flock of 600 Sheep was destroyed by an Earthquake in the
Province called Pompeia. Sheep being of a very soft nature and carry their
heads near the Ground. In the 19th. years from the building of Rome, after an
Earthquake, followed a Plague, which lasting three years, there died at Rome
30000 men. So in the year of our Lord 748. after an Earthquake in Palestine a
great Sickness was prevalent in Sicily, Greece, and Thrace.

And in the year 801. when Charles the Great was invested with the Empire,
Upper Germany was infested with a vehement Earthquake, but especially the Coast
of the Rhine, which was followed by a Pestilence, which dreadfully afflicted
Germany and other Places. Stump. lib. 4. cap. 21. So in the year 1309. on the
Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul, all Germany shook, and the Plague
afterward raged throughout the Country, so that 60000 men are reported to have
died at Florence and 90000 at Lubeck. That God the Father of all Mercy would
grant, that no such consequence may happen from our late Earthquake, and that
the Epidemical Disease which now infest these Places, so near to a kind of a
putrid and malignant Fever may not be converted into a more dangerous
Distemper. The unlucky Eclipses and Positions of the heavenly Bodies this years
portend some such things in other Countries. The Northern Latitude of Saturn in
the Sign of Scorpius; and those four Eclipses of the foregoing year, two of
which happened in the Month of June, whereof that of the Sun was a stupendous
one for its Magnitude, will exert their Operations this year as the Masters do
reckon.

But that the Waters are also polluted by those Vapors is known by the
Fountains, which both before and after Earthquakes are wont to be impurer and
thicker. Which is also attested by Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 81. where, he says, The
Water in Wells is th^cker and not without a loath some smell, which odor is
Sulphu^eo^s and metalline, from whence one may certainly conclude that some
Vapors sallying out of the Earth, have mingled themselves with the Water.
Hence it is, that Pherecydes Pythagoras his Master foretold an Earthquake by
drawing some Water out of a Well, concerning which Pliny Writes, as by some
Divine Presage, lib. 2. cap. 29. Which Cicero m^ntions 1. de Divinat. Geor.
Agricol. lib. 4. de efflu. e terr. page 153. think that muddy Water in Wells is
most commonly a Sign of an Earthquake already begun, and he believes that no
proper and certain Sign of future Earthquake can be assigned, for those that
are delivered by Writers are either the Sign of an Earthquake just b^g^n, or
its Modas; so that they may happen w^^ho (...) future Earthquake.

64. (...) Earch are therefore wont to ensue Earthquake, (...) ^^olently
s^lying out of the Earth, (...) Caverns wa^^re^^ the (...) ^eous Waters are
(...) Water is (...) more abound (...) manner driven into (...) and (...) of
Fountains and R^vers.

(...) by A^^^^^le, 2. (...). cap. 8. Exhalations (...) with great Force, c^^^y
along with (...) whatsoever Wa^^^ (...) and he^^^ds in the same place, that
(...) Wills that blow the co^^ary way are the Cause of it, because (...) E^^th,
it cannot repel the Sea brought agai^^t it by another Wind Examples also
observed in History, (...) the ^am. For P^^c^p^u^, lib. 3. de bello Gothor^n,
page 3^3. (...) ribes the unusual In^n^a^^on of Egypt, as arising from an
Earthquake. About (...) time (...) Earthquake ^^ppe^ed which shook (...) Ach^ia
and the other places, about the S^nas G^^se^s, an^ (...) ^uit^ number of other
places and levelled ei^ht Citi^ ^oth Ground. And the Earth in some places when
it had gaped (...), cam^ again to its former state, but in other places (...)
so much cle^t, that the People of that Country were (...) m^k^ a large Circuit
to converte with one another. But in (...) Sea between The^^aly and Beotia
there arose so great (...) Co^m^^^ion (...) so great an in^ndation, that great
desolation was (...) of M^^atai^s, Ed^^ices, and Men. In the sea and year (...)
of Flev. Va^a^i^iam and Vale^s, the Sea to s^^led that o^erflowing Sicily, it
Buried in its Waves ^^^^nal Towas and V^lag^s. In the year 1508. a^ Earthquake
was so (...) most g^e^ou; I^^dation; t^roug^out all Italy and Germany. And wish
we might take example and experiment of that calam^y (...) the late Earthquake,
that we mig^t be brought to repenta (...).

In the same place it is sad, We have ne^s daily of ^ae (...) ous Inundations
through the Butchy of Juliers and Clav^s, and the Oriental F^iezla^d. We have
been eye Witnesses of th^^ ^^su^^ ^^creasing of the River Neker, which
overflowed in December and J^^m^^y, with a considerable damage.

How the Rome has oversloved, the Inhabitants know to their own forrow and
loss, where ^^at unus^a^ Inundation proceeding from the River and Rivulets in
December, between Strab^ang and Sp^re^, as it was fard to several persons, so
among the rest (...) the head of an Ancient Family.

65. Lastly, Barrenness is the consequent of an Earthquake because of the
envenomed Vapoars which while they p^rm^ace the pores of the ^^arth, leave
behind them their Venemou^ Footsteps, and (...) Qualiti^^ both on the Earth it
self, and also (...) the enlivening Power sit for the production of Corn is
(...). Wonderful and different were the Sentiments of the co^m^^ (...) People
after the late Earthquake, a^ is usual; and Husband (...) every where heard
interpreting this Earthquake as a Joyful O^n^^n^^ a singular future Fertili^y.
But this Conjecture is easily ^esuted by the consideration of Natural Causes,
especially since History (...) the contrary. For in the Year 315. from the
building of Rome, so great a Scarcity and Barrenness so lowed an Earthquake,
th^^ Li^y mentions it as remarkable that many threw themselves into Tiber,
where they made at one another to devour themselves. In the Year of our Lord
542 an universal and most grievous Famine ensu^d upon an Earthquake, that was
it self almost universal, as (...) Paul Diaco^^, lib. 16. The same happened in
the Year 1326. and again^^n (...). But as Plagu^ and Inundation do not follow
a^ Earthquake (...) but (...) so neither do B^^renu^^s and Fam^ne: For as the
Subterrancous Spirit^ are not always; equally disposed, so sometimes they are
les^ en^^omed and destruct^u^ and more subtle, that they ethale sooner, neither
do they so easily imprint on the Ground any quality no (...) to the Fr^it,
wh^en that we may experience in this Earthquake the next. Harvest, let him
a^one who is able to crown the Year with his B^^ssing gram.

66. And a this Earthquake was not only natural, but or kind to a miraculous
one, so also see us to contain in it the Presages and Porten a of some
wonderful and extraordinary Change; among Mankind I said before that God add^d
a Supernatural for^^ and degres o the Natural Causes of this Earthquake. And
God does nothing in vain, but direct all to some certain end and s^op^, so that
it is necessary something should be in this Earthquake more than could proceed
from the power of Nature alone.

67. But as Co^nets do not o^ themselves and their own nature cause or denounce
any Change in Kingdoms, and any other Hamane A^fai^^, so neither do
Earthquakes; but such events hap^^a in these wonderful and secret Works of
Nature from the disp^^^d and Ordinations of God, partly exciting Men's Minds and
p^om, ^ng them, partly terrifying them with those sear of Fu^uriti^s. The
Rainbow of its own Nature can neither be a surety for, nor confirm the Grace
and Covenant of God to the World, that there shall be no more an universal
Flood, but it does engage for, and confirm it by a supernatural Revelation,
which the gracious Counsel of God imposed on this work of Nature. The same must
be determined of Earthquakes, Comets, Chasins and other wonderful Meteors in
Nature.

68. But what change in Europe does this Earthquake presage? This neither I nor
any body else can easily tell. He alone knows who endowed the Earthquake with
the signification of Futurities, who increased and augmented the Power of
Nature; and lastly who has at his own dispose, both the Causes and their
Effects.

69. The Scripture, as far I could observe, speaks of Earthquakes after a three
fold manner.

70. Sometimes as of the Sign and Symbol of the present Grace of God already
held forth. As was that Earthquake by which the Apostles and other Members of
the Primitive Church were confirmed against the intermediate As^aults of their
Enemies, by the hearing and the presence of God from Heaven, of which Acts 4.
v. 31. But when they had prayed, says Luke, the place in which they were
Assenbl^d was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. To which is
to be referred that Earthquake that happened at the Resurrection of Christ, the
Angel of the Lord descending from Heaven, and Rolling away the Stone from the
mouth of the Sepulcher, of which, Matt. cap. 98. verse. 2. makes mention. To the
number of these Earthquakes does also belong that which is mentioned, Acts 16.
ve^s. ^6. But in the middle of the night, Paul and Sil^s were Fraying and
Singing of Psalm^, when on a sudden there was a great Earthquake, so that the
Foundations of the Prison were shaken, and the Doors were oppened, and all
their bonds were ^^^sed.

71. But as such Earthquakes are soldom, so they are merely Mira^^o^^: and such
Examples are not easily to be found either in the E^^tory of our own or former
Times: For the Sins of Men dese^ve o^h^rwise.

72. But the Scripture often speaks of an Earthquake as of the Messenger and
Witness of the Divine Wrath, and the presage of Punishment to certain Kingdoms
and Provinces for the Public and Private Sins of the eminent Ones. The
Scripture scarcely over speaks more frequently of any presage of the Wrath of
God and in pending Punishments, than of an Earthquake, as the 2d. of Sam. 22.
verse. 8. Psalm. 18. verse. 8. The Earth is shaken and m^ved, because his Wrath
is Kindled. Job 9. verse. 5, 6. Who remove^ Mountains, so as he is not observed;
who overturns them in his Wrath, who moves the Earth out of its place; So that
the Pillars thereof shake. So Eccles. 39 32. There are Winds created for
punishment, in the consummated time they pour out the strength and fury of him
that made them. And the like places in Joel 2.1. Na. 1.5. Amos 1. 1. Zac. 14.
Numb. 10.21. And God was pleased to promulgate his Laws by an Earthquake, Exodus
19.18. That he might testify that, that punishment was ready for the breakers
of them. To which must be referred that Earthquake which happened whilst Christ
suffered, Matt. 27.51. The Earth, says he, was moved, and the Rocks were split;
which was also a Testimony of Christ's Innocence. John in the Revela.
denouncing the Wrath of God and the punishments which are to be poured forth on
the later days, makes often mention of an Earthquake, cap. 6.12. Cap. 8.6. cap.
2.13. There was, says he, in that hour a great Earthquake, and the tenth part
of the World fell, and there were killed in the Earthquake 7000 men, and the
rest was terrified and gave Glory to the God of Heaven. cap. 16.18. There was a
great Earthquake, such as never was since Men were on the Earth, an Earthquake,
says he, so great. Which sayings although they have an Allegorical
interpretation, yet they may be taken properly; or at least they will lead us
to this, that the Scripture does commonly represent destructful punishments and
calamities by an Earthquake.

73. For nothing seems to be a greater punishment and calamity to Mankind, than
an Earthquake.

74. For all other fatal punishments are wont to ensue upon an Earthquake, and
we may sooner foresee War, Famine, and Pestilence, and so take heed of, and
avoid them by preparing proper Remedies, than we can foresee avoid and fly from
an Earthquake: seeing the Spiritus in the Earth is not restrained by any Humane
force, neither can we fly away from the Earth. Hence it is that Experience
witnesses, that Brute Beasts and Men are terrified by nothing so much as by an
Earthquakes; so we see that even the most savage and cruel Hearts of Tyrants,
that have their minds hardened most against God and Men, have been terrified by
Earthquakes. There is extant in Josephus, a memorable passage concerning this,
lib. 1. de bell. Jud. cap. 14. and lib. 15. Autiq. Jud. Where Herod a despiser
of God and Men, thus Speaks to his Army. Let not the Fear of inanimate things
(...) all terrify you, nor imagine that Earthquake is an (...) of future
dis^^^^ctio^; for the defects of the Elements themselves ^^e Natural, and infor
^o other los^ than, that which they cause; so that when they d^^happen, they
are inded^^y their own greatness. These Proph^^ne Speeches did the Tyrant then
utter, whilst he himself was so astonished in his own Mind, that he offered
Sacrifice for the appeasing of God, as Josephus mentions in the same place. The
Heath^^^s being always terrined by Earthquakes, began then in earnest to think
of appeasing God, and rightly of instituting their Sacrifices. Hence it is,
that Pliny says, lib. 2. cap. 8^. For there is not only in an Earthquake some
simple evil and danger, but an equal or greater Omen of something to come. The
City of Rome never t^^mbled (yet it shook in the year 537. about fifty seven
times) but it was the Omen of some future Event. Therefore that impious saying
of Seneca is repugnant to the Sense and Conscience of Mankind. The God^ do
nothing of these thing, neither is the Heaven or the Earth shaken by the anger
of the Deities. So Gellius, lib. 2. cap. 28. What is the Cause of Earthquake,
is not yet manifest: Therefore the ^^^cient Romans, when they either perceived
or were told that the Earth s^ook, commanded by their Edits that Holydays
should be kept, but in the publishing of them did not name the God ^^^^s usual,
for whom the same were to be kept, and Marcus Varro, says, ^^was so observed by
the Decide of the Priests, because 'twas ^ncertain whether the ^^^rth trembled
by the Power of the Gods or Goddesses. There is ext^nt in Rosinus, the History
of some Superstitious expiation, lib. 4. page ^6 where he says, That grievous
La^th^^^^es ensued upon the Death of Valentinian. Crete was vehemently shaken
with all Peloponnesus and the rest of Greece, except Athens and the Country
thereof, which they say, was saved by this means. N^storius the High Priest s^w
in a Dream the Athenians advised to prefer the Hero Achilles to the highest
Honnours, for this would be ^^st advantageous; he therefore being taught by
Divine Speculations, after having performed a solemn Sacrifice, placed the
^ma^e of the ^e^o under A^in^^^'s, so was Athen^ and ^ll its Lard s^^e from the
Earthquake. There is a p^^^^lled place in Synesius Cyre. Epis. 61. of Devotion
in the time of Earthquakes. God often ( say^ he caused an Earthquake in the day
time, and Men stood commonly upright whist they prayed, for the Ground was
shaken wherefore thinking the S^a^^^^ more severely shaker th^n the Land, ^^an
to the Heaven, (...) Christian of the ^^^^^^ive Church^^s^d not to fly to any
unkown God, but to the true one that shake; the Earth and implored his Grace
and Mercy; an Example of which pious Custom is related by Justinian the
Emperor, who when he heard that Antiochia was shaken by a grievous Earthquake,
in which a great number of Men had perished, presently laid down his Diadem and
Imperial Robes, and put Sackcloth, and published an Edict whereby he commanded
his subjects to Fast and Pray for many days, and to do all other things, which
testify a serious repentance. Sozomenus, lib. 6. cap. 2. Stump, lib. 7. cap.
28.

There is extant also an Epistle of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus to the People of
Asia, wherein he exhorts them not to lay the Fault of the Earthquake upon the
Christians, but rather religiously to invoke after their fashion the Author of
the Earthquake; It will not be absurd, continues he, to comfort your sorrow by
a just warning, for I have found out that in such occasions you do ascribe
these ordinary Events to some motive of envy, that the God, whom they trust
much to, may have; and whilst that you know not the Reasons thereof, you do
neglect every time the Worship of the other Gods, and so you endeavor to put
away and cast down the Worship of the immortal God, whom the Christians do
adore.

And there is no doubt but that many pious Men every where through Germany and
other Countries, devoutly and religiously followed that pious Custom of the
Ancient Church, and stirred up themselves to serious Repentance and ardent
invoking of God's name: which effect if it has not happened in all, yet the
thoughts of the Evils which have in all Ages ensued upon the Earthquakes, ought
still to stir them up and awaken them to true repentance, seeing those effects
have been observed by the most severe Writers of Earthquakes. For it is not
rash to say that commotions of the mind follow an Earthquake, as a Shadow the
Body. Neither does it want its natural Causes, for it is certain that the Air we
draw in, have several change of alterations by Earthquakes, and the
Temperament, and so the m^nners of Men are much affected with the temperateness
or intemperatness of the Air, and they are disposed by it, if we believe the
most kilful Physicians, and our own experience. Histories are full of Examples,
of which I will instance but one or two. Delus trembled about the time of the
Peloponnesian War (which was called immovable by Pindar, as Seneca relate out
of Callisthenes, lib. 5. Not. quaest.) Whilst Brenno was attacking the
Del-phian Temple, there happened so great an Earthquake, and so great a Tempest
mingled with Hail and Rain, that the Gaulois Army were almost overwhelmed.
Earthquakes happened often in the Carthaginian War, so that 'twas said at Rome,
an Earthquake happened 57 times in the same year, in which the Romans and the
Carthagians fighting at the Lake Trasimenian, were neither of them sensible of
a great Earthquake which was there, Flin. lib. 2. cap. 4 and in the 83. he
says, That two Mountains ran against one another, rising and retiring with a
great noise, by which concourse all the Towns were dashed to pieces and Cattle
between killed, which was in the year before the Social War, and says he, I
know not but it may be more fatal to Italy, than the War.

In the year of our Lord 369. many Earthquakes happened every where which where
followed by a most severe Persecution under the Emperor Valantinian, as is
attested by Hierome and Eusebius. In the year 455. a remarkable Earthquake
preceded those dreadful devastations of the Country of Attila, as is Witnessed
among others by Stump: lib. 4. cap. 54. So in the year 841. Herbipolis shook
about twenty times, upon which a bloody War ensued between the Emperor
Lotharin, and his Brother. So in the year 1171. a War broke out between the
French and Sweedes, when several Earthquakes had preceded it every where
through Germany. So in the same year 1171. a great War arose between the
Emperor Friderick the I. and Pope Alexander the III. In the year 1372. on the
first of June, a dreadful Earthquake shook Germany, and a little after ensued a
grievous War in Bavaria and Sweedland. Also in the year 1384. on Christmas's-
Eve, the Earthquake shook, and a little after ensued the dreadful War of Leopol
with the Switzers, which was both destruction to the House of Austria, and
fatal to the Young Prince Leopold. In the ye^r 1521. before Belgrade was taken
by the Turks, the Neighborhood shook for 3 days together, and many Houses fell
down every where. I cannot but set down the Words of a wise old Man, Gaspar
Peucer, which are extant in his Commentary of Divinations, page 389. The
Mountains of Suda and the Towns built there felt: Not only one or two, but
continual shakings of the Earth (which says History always denounce great Wars
and destructive Seditions) the Houses shaking as if it proceeded from the
distinct impulse of Winds. These things undoubtedly threaten dreadful
destruction and calamities, which I pray God mercifully mitigate for the sake
of his Church, and spare the innocent and guiltless Ages for the sake of his
Eternal Son Jesus Christ. But there is another Example fresher in our Memory,
viz. of the year 1590. when some parts of Germany, especially Austria, Bavaria,
and Misnia were shaken, which Earthquake is the more remarkable and worthy to
be compared with the late one, because it happened almost at the same time,
viz. on 5th. of September, and because a litte after the Tu^k^sh War grew more
outrageous in Hungary. And lastly, because a little after, as it were the three
supporters of Germany fell down. First in the same Month the Earthquake was,
viz. September the 25th. Christian the Elector of Saxony died, and it is still
fresh in the History what disturbances ensued upon it, in the Saxon and Misnani
Churches. Not many months after John Casimir the A^ministr^tor and Tutor of the
Elector Palatin died, who came behind none of the most Valiant Heroes. And
Lastly, William the Lantgrave of Hesse. The loss of which three Princes in so
short a time, all prudent Men thought ominous to Germany, as they do still, for
that Germany seem not yet either to have shamn'd or overcome that Omen. Neither
shall I here mention those Wars which Moschus again in the same year stirred up
in Lifland and Sweedland, nor the death of those Eminent Men Francis Hottoman,
Cujavus, and some others, nor that which happened in France, the Siege of
Paris, which continued for many months together, neither will I mention that
two years afterward, viz. in 92. seven other German Princes besides Casimir of
Excellent Memory, were taken out of this World, and that a War arose between
the two Elect Bishops of Labert, while the Canor's dissagreed about it; and
that in the same year, Clement VIII. was chosen Pope, who was formidable for
his craft and cunning. Which things seeing they are all thus experienced, let
us stir up our minds to serious and servent Prayers, and to the Observation of
the sinistrous Omens of the last Earthquake, and while we are deprecating the
Portenta, let us prepare our selves for future Evils and the fatal change of
Europe, foretold us by this Earthquake, and foreseen by Wise Men. For it is
possible either to shun decreed misfortunes either public or private, or to
render them more mild by piety, reason, due remedies applied from Counsel, and
by o^posing good contraty to those Evils. But let us consider that there are
two sorts of Motions in the Spirit of Mankind. There are some motions in the
good Spirits, and some in the ill-natured and wicked ones. And as it happens
that the illnatured Spirit do stir themselves for the ruin and destruction of
the best settled and ordered Kingdoms and Empires. So it happens often that
God stirs up some profitable and convenient Motions in the Spirits of the
greatest Princes, or in the Republics, wherewith all the evil design; and
machinations of the wicked are happily broken, and a good Peace and
Tranquillity is procured as well to these Kingdoms, as to the Church. To which
we may refer this great Revolution lately happened in this Kingdom of England.

A little before this Earthquake which happened in France, in 1601. the
Dauphine Lewis the XIII. was born in that Kingdom, and at the very hour of it
the late Elector Palatin had his Son born.

It is commonly said, that motions of Heroick-souls are great and easy.
Neither is History defective in Examples of the Birth of great Heroes and
Princes born just at the time, when there were Earthquakes. Writers, says
Hercules, was born whilst the Earth was shaking although I am not ignorant
what credit is to be given to the History of Hercules; yet this is apparent
from the Relation, that the Ancients thought that an Earthquake was an Omen and
Presage of a great and Heroick-soul in those whose birth happened at the same
time. But there are other Examples of Earthquakes extant in History, by which
God h^th (as by a portentum) attested his wrath against the enemies of the
Righteous, and his favor to the Godly, by some joyful Omen. Theodorus, lib. 5.
Hist. cap. 34. about the year 402. mentions, that Chrysostom was banished by
the Emperor Arcadius, b^t the first Night after his departure, the Emperors
Palace was shaken by some terrible an Earthquake, that being frightened by that
prodigy, he sent Messengers after him, and honorably received him, whom he had
ignominiously thrust out. And Ruffinus, lib. 1. cap. 28. Writes that Julian and
Jews were terrified from repairing the Temple at Jerusalem by a dreadful
Earthquake, which they were earnestly endeavoring to effect before, out of
hatred and ignominy to Christ. So God discovered his anger against Diocletian
the Cruel Persecutor of the Chr^stians, by an Earthquake, in which many
thousand Men perished. Theod. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 26. when a Council was held at
Antioch, where the Decrees of the Nicen Synod and Athanasius were condemned by
Arrians, not long after ensued a most grievous Earthquake, which lasting a
whole year, was very destructive to Antioch A^no 347 related by the Tripar.
Hist lib. 4. cap. 15. Evagriu^ lib 2. cap. 12. Funccius in the year 344. and
memorable in tha^ which E^tropius notes about the time the Arrian Heresy and
Tyr^nny spre^d through the East, that there were frequent Earthqu^kes, and that
those places shook grievously. Neither is that which the same A^thor relates
less remarkable, that presently after the Death of the Apostles Paul, Laodicea,
and Collossus were swallowed up by an Earthquake, so that the punishment of
those that contemned the Doctrine of Paul, might be conspicuous. And I seem not
to have spoken rashly, when I said that no punishment or calam^ty is more
grievous than an Earthquake, seeing it is an evil that can neither before seen,
nor easily averted by any Remedies. Pliny. lib. 2. cap. 82. prescribes two
Remedies against Earthquakes, viz. to dig many holes in the Earth, and make
many passages there; but this is both labourious and almost as dangerous to
Cities and Towns, as an Earthquake. But perhaps some body will say, we shall be
safe in Rivers against Earthquakes. I confess there is some safety in Rivers,
and Synecius whom I cited before, Writ is that in a great Earthquake; he
thought the Sea more secure than the Land; but that does not want its dangers
neither; for the bottoms of Rivers are obnoxious to Earthquakes, as we shall
show in our Problems, and the Earth may easily gape under the Water or some
heap of Earth plunged into the River from the Neighboring shore, may overwhelm
us, and sometimes Rivers used to be dried by Earthquakes, so that they that
seek safety in the Rivers against an Earthquake, may find their Death and
Grave. But I cannot conjecture what should be the meaning of that which
Agathias, lib. 5. says, is the true Platonic Opinions, that he that perished by
an Earthquake is to be esteemed more happy than he that saved from it. For if
an Earthquake be a most grievous punishment, which the Scripture attests, he
cannot be happy who is involved in an Evil, grievous in it self, and terrible
to all Mankind.

75. Lastly, The Scripture speaks of an Earthquake as of a Sign or the
forerunner of the last decretorial Judgment, at which a little before the end
of the World, that great Judge will appear with the Angels of his Power, who
himself, say Luke 21.11. That there will be great Earthquakes in every place
before his coming; And Matthew. 24.7. He makes use of almost the same Words. The
Prophesies of future Signs, respects both the destruction of the Temple and
City of Jerusalem, and the end of the World. Therefore that which is asserted
of great Earthquakes, may be accommodated to both those times. For Josephus
diligently observes how great Earthquakes preceded the last sacking of
Jerusalem.

76. Of this sorts of (...) good Men think that was, of which we are now
treating, by which the Son of God in this last Age of the World, would warn and
excite Men's minds, that they might seriously and timely prepare themselves for
the great Sessions, and hear that Sentence either of Eternal Life or Death,
never to be revoked. I see no reason why we should doubt that some Signs nearer
and greater forerunners of the coming of Christ to Judgment than others. And
therefore although this Earthquake be to be numbered among those Signs, as the
ingenious and learned Mr. Beverly elegantly insinuates, yet it is likely there
will be some other Earthquake more terrible, merely miraculous and nearer the
Day of Judgment. Which he may be applied to other Signs, as darkning of the Sun
and Moon, may be gathered from 24 of Matthew. and 21 of Luke, and from Acts 2.19.
where Peter cites that of Joel, I will give Miracles in Heaven above, and Signs
in the Earth below; Blood, and Fire, and the Vapor of the Smoke. The Sun shall
be changed into Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, before that great and
glorious Day of the Lord comes, etc*. Thou Lord Jesus come, com^ quickly, or if
it seems good to thee to delay, grant that while the Earth shakes and Hell
rages, while Kingdoms, Empires, and Kings are shaken and dashed one against the
other; the Church, thy little Flock may enjoy, at least a moderate quiet and
rest both here in England, and throughout the whole World. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of the likeness or unlikeness of these two Earthquakes.
77. IT remains now, that we may examine, in what these two Earthquakes do
agree, and in what they do differ, as well in their Forms and Causes, as in
their Effects.

As to the Form, it is said in the 15th. Theorem, that the first was partly
trembling and partly pulsative, according to the diversity of the plainness or
unplainness of the Fields. But all do agree, that this last was some kind of
panting or brandishing Motion, for the Earth was shaken lateraly according to
its Latitude; now that don't befall so in the Pulse or Vibration; and that sort
of Earthquake is more frequent. Upon the lassing of the first all Authors do
not agree: But as to this last, it is Witnessed from all places, that it did
last two Minutes. I will only mention these words of Mr. Edward d' Auvergne,
Chaplain to my Lord John Bathe, Governor of the Citadel of Plymouth, in his
Relation of the most ^^markable Transactions of the last Campaign, in the
Confederate Army, where he was, page 61. We felt an Earthquake, says he, which
lasted about two Minutes, and shook the Earth very violently. It was felt at
the same time all over Flanders, in many parts of England and France, and in
other places of Europe, we had it about two of the Cloek: It caused a great
Consternation in our new Garrison of Dixmuyde; some thinking at first that the
French had undermined several parts of the Town, and were in Ambuscades, going
to blow them up.

78. We may observe among the other Conformities of these two Earthquakes,
these two chiefly; the Conformity of the Month; and the Conformity of the Day.
Nay, we should make some consideration of the Time on the Day on both, to wit,
that the first happened at two of the Clock in the Morning; the last at two of
the Clock in the Afternoon, so it is only the intercalation of 12 hours; which
Event is remarkable enough. But now in regard of the Conformity of the Month:
We have observed in the 45 Theorem, that amongst the Planets, the Efficacy of
Saturn did prevail that year. The same is happened this last year; as it is
clear by the Observations of Mr. John Partridge, that Famous Mathematician,
upon the Month of September: He says so, the Month of September begins with
Quartile of Saturn and Venus. The Trine Jupiter and Mercury with a wet and
windy Air. 2dly. It Is observed in the 46 and 47 Theorems, that the Power of the
three superious Planets, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, is the most eminent in
producing Earthquakes. Besides it is constantly affirmed, that the first
Earthquake happened when the Sun was in Virgo. So were all these things
disposed at the time of this last Earthquake. These are the very words of our
forementioned Mathematician. All the mutual Aspects of the Planets in this
Month are Sol and Virgo, Luna and Libra, Saturnus and Sagittarious, Jupiter and
Gemini. Mars in Libra, Venus in Virgo, Mercurious in Libra, Cancer in Libra. At
last he does conclude thus his Observations upon that Month. The Quartile of
the Sun and Saturn, and the Sun and Jupiter, will in some measure influence
September also, etc. To which we may join, the Temper of the Air in that very
Month; whose first part was warm and wet by turns; but the most part warm and
windy: so if we confer these things with what is said in the 52 and 53
Theorems, we shall see that the Dispositions of the Air were the same, to wit,
rainy Wheather in the Dog Days. There was also a very high South-west wind in
that Month, tho it is true that the Air was calm enough that very day when the
Earth was shaken. Lastly, As these two Earthqu^kes had their Conformities in
their Causes, so had they in their Effects, though not in such a high degree.
It Is observed that there are three Effects proceeding from Earthquakes. 1.
Universal Sickness. 2. Overflowing of Rivers 3. Scarcity of Fruit or Barrenness.
As to the first, we did hear from many parts of France and Italy, that some
Malignant Fever did appear, and 'twas reported that some kind of Plague has
been discovered in the Province of Languedoc. We must adore the Divine
Providence, who has kept this Kingdom from all these Mischiefs, wherein it was
involved by so many Sicknesses, when the first Earthquake happened, in the last
year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. Bu^ as to the overflowing of Rivers, we had
lately too many proofs of this effect; so that I need not to enlarge in the
recital of many particular mischances that happened in many places almost
overwhelmed, where several Persons have been lost by the Flood.

We should now come to examine the third effect of Earthquakes in reference to
the first, that is the scarcity and barr^nness. But we leave it to be felt and
proved in France, where we know it is great. And though all sorts of Provisions
are grown so dear since the Month of December last, in this Kingdom, and
especially in London, yet that cannot be called scarcity; every one knows well
enough the difference between dearness and scarcity. The continuance of bad
Weather may always cause the same effect without any former Earthquake. We hope
then that the same Divine Mercy which has preserved this Kingdom, and gathered
therein so many thou^and^ of Foreign Souls, and provided them with Bread seven
years long by Miracle, will continue to send the same Blessings of Plenty unto
this Nation, who has pitied his distracted People: The past Events being a
kind of Security for the future. Whereupon we trust that God will spare these
Islands, wherein the Candlestick of his Gospel, has been kept fast, against
all the Attempts of Popery. And so we conclude that the seven past years of
Plenty are observable enough to put us in mind of the extraordinary and
miraculous Providence of God for our Relief in a strange Land: So it is to be
feared also that his design has been to warn us by this present dearness, to
be wary afterward, and to turn our selves from any abusing profuseness of his
Graces; otherwise the Bread staff of shall certainly be broken, it will be
without strength; It Is the threatening he makes by Ezekiel against the Land
which has sinned and grievously trespassed against him, Ezekiel. 14.13.

Some Problems as a Corollary both General and Special, which seem Naturally to
rise from this Matter.
1. Whether that be true which Pliny asserts, lib. 2. cap. 8. that France and
Egypt are seldom shaken, by reason of the cold of the one and the heat of the
other.

It Is certain that in there the cold and Northern Countries, Earthquakes are
more rare, because the Earth being not so porous and loose, does not so easily
open a passage for the Wind, which is confirmed by Olans Magnus, lib. 1. cap.
13. But yet Northern Countries are not free from Earthquakes, which History and
Experience abundantly testify. For in the year 1572. about the 6th. of
January, a grievous Earthquake shook many both public and private Buildings,
in the County of Borussia, to their great damage. And in the year; 1200. a
great Earthquake threw down many Houses every where through Poland, as is
related among others by Funccius, lib. 7. Chro. And even Sweedland and Denmark
have felt Earthquakes; so that France which is more meridional and hotter,
cannot be free from Earthquakes. And although Vapors and Winds are not easily
generated in hot Countries, and if they are, they are easily dissolved, yet are
these infested with Earthquakes. It Is true some write of Egypt, that there
never was any Earthquake, because it is composed of the Mud that Nile when it
overflows carries along with it, and so fitted to the former, that the Spiritus
can find no Receptacles. Yet Seneca, Lib. 6. Nature. quaest. says he dares
affirm against the Authority of great Men, that Egypt is sometimes shaken. And
there is a remarkable Disputation extant, concerning this in Agathias, Lib. 2.
Hist. Fol. 435. Where he says, About that time in the great City Alexandria
so^tuated by the River, an Earthquake was felt, which was short and sm^ll,
which all the Inbabita^ts (especially the more Ancient) esteemed as a great
Miracle, beca^se there never was any before, yet all being astonished at the
w^n^^r^ul and sudden C^ntingency; for fear came all out, which fear also ^^^d
d^ne, who was there for the sake of Laws and Litterature. Moreover, t^ose that
talk according to the Nature of things say, that Egypt cannot be filled with
Vapors seeing it is low even, but that Opinion was then discovered to be weak.
At the same time the Island of Cos, in the C^nfines of the Aegean Sea were
shaken by an Earthquake, but a little part thereof was preserved, the rest
being levelled to the Ground, and variously and almost beyond Credit afflicted
with Destru^tion; and when I did navigate from Alexandria to Bizancy or
Constantinople, b^ing carried by chance to that Island, such a lamentable Sight
did fall under my Eyes, that it cannot be expressed by Words, etc. so says
Agathyas.

2. Why Rivers decrease by Earthquakes? Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 8. Among other
Effects of Earthquakes, mentions the adverse Courses of Rivers, others say
backwards, because they understand it, as if Rivers ran back to their
Fountains, by reason of the lifting up of the Earth in the Channel, which
obliges the Rivers to a retrograde Motion. It Is commonly experienced that
Rivers are lessened and considerably decreased by Earthquakes for the first
days, which is within a few Months after followed by an Inundation. Rusa by
Lucern, no contemptible Riv^r of Switzerland, was so lessened by an Earthquake
in that place, where it first delivers it self out of the Lake, and where it
used to be the deepest, that the bottom thereof showed it self, and did not
recover it self in October, which is accounted by the Inhabitants as a Wonder.
About the time of the late Earthquake, there was observed a remarkable decrease
in the River Necker, which the great Rain that fell before in June, July, and
August could not prevent. And remarkable is that which Albertus Magnus, lib. 3.
Met. tract. 2. writes, That Necker River in Sweedland was swallowed up by an
Earthquake, so that for one day it appeared not for a Mile together. So we read
in that Earthquake which happened under The^d^sius, in the year 400. that were
going to pass the Sea were seen standing on dry Land. And in the year 1536.
about Joppa, in the Government of Judea, the Sea retired from the Shore for 3
Miles, and the bottom of it remained dry 3 days, and the River Jordan 2 days,
but after it came to the Shore again, the River ebbed again with a full
Channel, and the Waters of both of them were bloody, as is related by G^or.
Agricol. lib. 4. de natura eorum quae effluant e terra, page 140. There may be
a threefold Cause assigned for this according to the several sorts of
Earthquakes, for either the Fountains or Springs are obstructed by the
Trembling, and by the heap of Earth thrown upon them, whereby the Fountain
being stopped there, the Vein of Water springs up in another place, as Geor.
Agricol. relate of that Earthquake that shook the City of Scalpra, which we
spoke of before, that a Sulphurous Fountain broke out of a Neighboring
Mountain. And Theophrastus attests that new Fountains discovered themselves
whilst the Mountain of Aucto was shaken by an Earthquake. And an Earthquake did
cause Lados, a River of Arcadia to spring up. And in the Mithridatick War, not
only Lakes and Marshes, but new Fountains and Rivers sprang up by Apamea a City
of Phrygia, the old ones having been swallowed up by the Earthquake: See G^or.
Agri^. lib. de not. rer. efflu. e terra page 151. Also while the Vapors burst
out of the Earth with great force, they so dilate and loosen the porous and
sandy bottoms and sides of the Channels, that the Water of the River is sucked
within the Earth, or lastly, the Channels of the Rivers being elevated by the
Pulsus, turn the Waters b^ck again, so that they are received into the Gaverns
of the Earth. That which is asserted of the stopping of Earthquakes by the
tract of Rivers, is not usual in any places where the Bottoms and Banks of
Rivers are very porous and gravelly, when there is no Vapor stirring, but that
which is very near the Superficies of the Earth, so that being rep^lled by the
hardest parts of the Earth, which it could not penetrate, it is carried to the
River-banks, which by reason of their porosity yielding a Passage it sooner
exhales.

But when the Channels of Rivers are more solid and rocky, and when the Wind
that moves, is deeper within the Earth; and lastly, when the coldness of the
Water is an hindrance to the exhaling of the Vapors, Earthquakes stop not at
Rivers, but gather strength and impetuously rage under the Earth, which is
noted by Pliny, lib. 2. cap 8. where he says, That those who sail in a Calm,
easily guess when there is an Earthquake by the sudden swelling or s^aking of
the Wave, and those things that are in the Ships shake as much as in Houses,
and declare it by the noise they make; neither can the Birds sit without
shaking and fear. Which was lately experienced and attested by those who were
upon the Necker and the Rhine the 8th. of September, especially by the
Fishermen. whose Boats were strongly assailed by the Vapors falling out of the
bottom of the River, and Bubbles arose on the top of the Water, which is a
certain Indication of the Combat of the Water with the Vapors at the bottom of
the River, and the viol^nt propulsion of the Rivers in the manner of a Wave;
sometimes to this Bank, sometimes to the other, discovered the Trembling and
Viba^ion of the bottom. So 'twas observed in that grievous Earthquake, which
shook Ferrara in the year 1570. that the River Po was much troubled by the
leaping of Bubbles into the Air: which much con^irms me in the Op^nion (...)
propounded before of the deepness of the Vapors that caused the late
Earthquake's great extension and velocity: for the Vapors that is but shallow,
quickly exhales through the Channels of Riv^rs, so that neither rages nor is
perceptible there, as is in like manner argued by the renowned B. Aretius,
Prob. 172. where he thus writes; On the 6th. of April 1569. an Earthquake
happened in many places; for it is apparent 'twas at the same time at Bern, at
Thunn, at Strati^burg and many interjacent places, and that which is worthy of
our admiration is, it shook both the Banks of the River, when at other time^ it
has been observed Ear^hquakes used to end at Rivers: Whence it may be gathered
its ris^ was very deep.

3. Why are those places that are either lying upon, or encompassed by the Sea
or some River obnoxious to Earthquakes, as Aristotle says, lib. 2. Metor. cap.
8. Earthquakes are most violent in those places that the Sea runs by, where the
Country is loose and hollow, as about the Hellespont, Achaia, Eubaea, Sicily,
for the Sea seems to run under the Ground through the Straits about those
places: Neither is that place at the end of the same Chapter contradictory to
this; for, says he, there are no Earthquakes in the Isles of Pontus, (for so is
the Word to be rendered, and not in the Marine Islands) or very rarely. He only
insinuate; there, that there are not so violent ones, as in other Islands, by
reason of the cold of the Sea verging to the North, by which the Vapors are
thickened and made lumpish. Pliny follows Aris^otle, who took most of what he
has of Earthquakes out of him, cap. 8. de ortu Subter. page 29. where he says,
The Mountainous and Marine places are more especially infested with
Earthquakes, because they abound with Veins and Caverns made by the
Subterraneous Rivulets, that secretly disburthen themselves into the Sea, or
Lakes that are under the Mountains. And experience teaches us, that Cyprus,
Sicily, Eubaea, Mollucca, and those other Islands called Teritae are often
grievously shaken by Earthquakes, which Bernardin Scalantus and others relate
of the Islands China: And the reason is manifest, because those cav^rnous and
porous places intercept the Humors in their Cavities, of which, Vapors are
engendered, which when they endeavor to sally out, are obstructed by the Waves
of the Sea, and so ^hey are again hid in the Bowels of the Earth, the cold on
every side enclosing them and hindering their evaporation, so that being
agita^ed by this confl^^t, that is, heated and attenuated, they must
necessarily sh^ke the Earth. Neither are Islands only, but the Continent also,
obnoxiou^ to Earthquakes, though not in Campaign places, which are seldom
shaken, because they commonly have Caverns, as i^ observed in Germany and
France, as Georg. Agricol. lib. 4. de effluentibus ^^terra observes.

But Constantinople and Basil, in that part that borders on the S^a, or a
great River are examples of this; the one of which of all the European, and the
other of all the German Cities, is most infested with Earthquakes, as we showed
before of Constantinople out of Agathias's History; but Procopious plainly
attests, that Constantino^le shook for forty days together in the year 554. and
in the year 740. it was shaken twelve months together, beginning on the 7th. of
November, as is noted among others by Funccius. But in later Ages evea in our
own and Fathers memory, we have heard of frequent Earthquakes in that City,
which was felt by A. Gilpin Busbequiu^ among others, and writ by him in the
Epistles of his Turkish Embassy. And Stumpsius and others have writ, how often
and grievously Basil has been shaken. Benedictus Arretius in the aforesaid
Problem reckons up ten times, that Basil was sh^ken with great danger and loss
in the space of 800 Years. In the Years 801, 824, 829, 1021. when the whole
City was almost destroyed, the Church with many Houses being thrown into the
Rhine. And again, in the Year 1062, when a grievous Plague ensued upon the
Earthquakes, again in the Year 1356: on the 18th. of October it shook ten times
about Evening, so that the Church, Walls, Towers, and a great part of the City
being destroyed by it, there were a 100 Men killed. Stumpsius says, Live. 12.
cap. 28. That the Earthquake continued all that year, and that Basil shook ten
times in an hour. In the following Year 1357. there happened another also in
the Year 1444. as likewise in the Year 1456. it shook again; but in the Year
1533. most terribly, as we read in Munster, not without great Commotion of
Mind. The la^e Ear^hquake was not a little perceived at Basil. And Mentz has
sometimes been d^ngerously shaken by Earthquakes, and that thrice between the
Year 855, and 880. and the first time the Walls and the Church of Urban fell
down. Constance also by the Lake of the Rhine trembled nineteen times the same
day, in the Year 1295. The People of Strasburg often ran to their Tents out of
the City, by reason of the danger they were under from an Earthquake,
especially in the Year 1357. But I think there is no City upon the Rhine, or in
Germany, that is more frequently or dangerously shaken than Basil; the reason
whereof a Traveller seriously thought, when he was viewing its Situation, than
which a more pleasant one he never had seen, nor was like to see, and he thus
considered with himself, that the Cause of so great and so many Earthquake in
that place was partly common with other Cities seated by Rivers, and partly
proper and peculiar to that place. The common Cause is, that the River passing
by the City makes the Earth chinky, and then pours in Water into those Caverns
it has made, which deeply penetrating the Earth, engenders Vapors which being
obstructed by the cold of the Water, (...), cannot evaporate, but being kept
within the Earth longer time and varicusly agitated, are turned into blasts and
winds adapted for Earthquakes, but the peculiar and proper Cause of Earthquakes
in that City is; first, because the Rhine is there narrower and more
contracted, and being thus imprisonned, seeing it cannot overflow the Banks, it
is carried more impetuously, the force of the Water being contracted within it
self, and as it were, by undermining it makes the deepest places of the Channel
and Banks hollow and more cavernous than in other places; so that more Vapors
are apt to be generated and tarry there where they sind a receptacle, being
also enclosed and shut in by the cold of the Water or River. Another Cause is
the many Dens and Caverns that are in a high Hill by the Rhine, adapted for the
reception of Vapors, the Passage of which is easy and plain through the Pores
of the Earth leading to the Rhine. To which may be added that this Hill
situate on the Rhine, whereon a great part of the City is built, has every
where a solid Superficies which is stony, so that many Vapors being engendered
by the River flowing by, and imprisonned within the porous and cavernous Earth,
cannot conveniently exhale through those ways which they naturally seek, but
being denied a passage, and collected and coarcted by their stri^e and
reciprocation, and so gathering strength by their heat and ^a^ity, they
impetuously invade and shake that which hinders them from above, Lastly, It Is
probable there is much Subterraneous fire, where Basil stands, or not far from
thence, as there is at Baden, which is distant but one days Journey from
Basil, where there are many and great B^ths, as is usual in such places,
Exhaltations sallying out of the Earth even under the Waters of Limage that
flows by it, which grows hot at the bottom by the Subterraneous Exhalations, as
is often selft by those that go naked into that River. Moreover, reason it self
discovers, and the examples of flames often breaking out in an Earthquake
testify, what great power Subterraneous fires have to move the Earth, if they
be shut up within the Earth. So that Geor. Agricol. truly says, lib. 2. de ortu
and cau. Subter. page 27. That hot places, and where there are many hot
Vapors, are obnoxious to Earthquakes, because Subterraneous fire is apt to
beget a quantity of smoaky Exhalations sooner than a little heat. Yet Baden
that has so much Subterraneous fire is seldom shaken, which is because the
Exhalations there break out in great quantity, through the looser and thinner
Superficies of the Earth in regular Ways and convenient to their Nature. And if
the Superficies of the Earth were so disposed at Basil, that the hot Water,
which are perhaps in the Earth could have a passage and s^lly into the open
Air, their Vapors would exhale in a suitable way, and would be a certain
remedy against frequent and dangerous Earthquakes: Which since nature has
denied, perhaps it might be effected by Art, by every where digging and opening
Caves toward the City, which might exhale the preconceived Spiritus, which is
observed in some Towns which are seldom shaken, having some Caves dug to
make a passage for the Water; which remedy Pliny prescribes, lib. 2. cap. 82.
But I hope, God who has vouchsafed to commit the heavenly Doctrine and Academy
as a precious pledge and gage to it, will hereafter preserve that remarkable
City from those grievous Concusions whereby Cities use to be destroyed.

4. What credit may one give to the Relation of Plato of the Island Atlantis
drowned by an Earthquake? Pliny lib. 2. cap. 9. where he says, an Earthquake
took away all the Ground where Atlantic Sea is if we credit Plato. Which
relation of Plato's, that Pliny hints at, is extant in Timeus, where he boasts
of the Antiquity of the Athenians, who waged War for many thousands of years
before, with the Inhabitants of the Island Atlantis, which he says, was greater
than all Africa and Asia, and was afterward buried in an Earthquake, the
Atlantic Ocean being let in upon it. The Island Atlantis was swallowed up in a
great Gulf, which made it unnavigable by reason of the Mud of the Island that
was sucked in. Then that Atlantic Sea was Navigable, for it had an Island
before its Mouth, which you call the Pillars of Hercules: Which Island was
bigger than Lybia and Africa together, from whence there was a passage to other
Islands, and to all the Continent over against it, round about situated near
the vast Sea.

There are those that would erect two great Geographical Theses from these
Words of C^^^ias. First, That the America, or that which we call the New World
was known to the Ancients, especially to Plato. 2dly, That the first Inhabiters
of it came from the Continent of Asia into America, viz. by the Atlantic Isle.
To gain Credit to which Assertion of their own and the Authority of Plato, they
make the Situation of places so, that they say the Island Atlantis possessed a
great part of that Sea that is now called the Atlantic, that the Islands to
which they ascended from Atlantis, were those that are by the Mariners at this
day called Barlovent, Cuba, Spanish, St. John Boiquen and Tamaica: From these
places there was a way to the Continent, now called Terra firma, and so to the
Kingdom of Peru and America. If you ask what that Continent is, which Plato
says, is situated about Pontus? They answer, It Is that Southern Sea commonly
called Sur, which is called Pontus, by Plato, in respect of its greatness, if
compared with the Mediterranean and Atlantic Sea. Those that more nearly
consider the thing it self, and the Relation of Critias, think all this, is
asserted more out of a too great deference to the Authority of Plato, than any
probability in the thing it self. For that which he asserts of the
unnavigableness of it, by reason of the drawing of Atlantis in the Ocean, is
refuted by frequent Navigations thither: and those Wonders Critias relates of
the Origin of Atlantis are altogether fabulous, as also of its uncredible
felicity, and their waging War with the Europeans, of their Temple built in the
length of a Furlong, whose external Parts were filled with Silver, the highest
with Gold, and within there was in Ivory Arch chequered wi^h Gold, Silver, and
Copper. What Ruins of Atlantis are now to be seen under Water, as he asserts?
to wit, by those that cannot sail thither? but what Earthquake is so great, in
which a Country bigger than Africa and Asia may be sucked in? or what Sea is so
great, that could swallow up so great a Country, so that its bottom can be
so^^dee by no Hummer, which Seamen attest. But say they, Critias tells Timens
before, that his Discourse would be wonderful, but yet true. But what if things
answer not words? who would believe that to be true, where he says, That
Neptune falling in Love with ^^i^o, had T^ins sive times by her, divided one
Hill into five Orbs, two of Earth and three of Sea? and that the Atlantic Sea
can derive its Name from nothing but Atlantis, is too weak to be credited. For
there is the Mountain Atlas, in the middle of Manritania, from which it is
called the Atlantic Ocean, as Pliny says, Lib. 6. cap. 5. Where he also
asserts the little and contemptible Island Atlantis was situated over against
that Mountain.

Yet we must confess that oftentimes great part of the Earth is swallowed up by
an Earthquakes, Examples of which Pliry recites, lib. 2. cap. 91, 92. And not a
few received their Birth from the same Cause, as Nature would be even with her
self, as Delos that received from thence its Name, Rhodes, Nea, Thera,
Therusia, Aanaria, which the Greeks call Pitheusa, and three others not
notified by any proper Names, of which the first rises up among the Acolian
Islands, the other near Crete, the third in the Toscan Bay. Sometimes the Sea
has broke in upon the Land by an Earthquake: So Sicily was separated from
Italy, Cyprus from Syria, Eubaea from Baotia. Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 88. And
perhaps England from France. Servius explaining that Verse in Virgil, Et
penitus toto divisos orb Britaunos, seems to be of this Opinion; formerly,
says he, Britain was joined to the Continent; the Sea between Kent and Calice
lifts it self up so high, and is so closely contracted, that many are of
Opinion, that the Ground being dug there let in the Sea that was before
excluded, which is also alleged by William Cambden, that accurate Writer, in
his Chorographical Description of England and Scotland; yet he puts off that
Question from himself, as also another, which is, Whether Islands were before
the Flood? Of which may be consulted Benedictus Bordonius, who writ a
Description of all the Islands of the World.

5. Whether exterior Wind entering the Earth from above is able to move it? Of
which Opinion were not a few of the Ancient Philosophers Archelaus Callisthenes
and Metrodorus Chius think that the Wind which enters the Earth through those
Foramina which lie open, either to the Sea or to the Air, is the Cause of
Earthquakes. Yet Archelaus does not explain by what passages the Wind that
moves the Earth penetrates into it, either through those secret ones that lie
hid under the Sea, or through the open ones, or both. Callisthenes was of
Opinion, 'twas by the latent passages under the Sea. But Metrodorus thought the
Wind fell from above on the Earth, which is included in the Caverns. So they
both were of opinion, that some Wind insinuated it self into the Caverns of the
Earth, which was followed by more and more, which so pressed and straightened the
former, that finding no exitus it turned its force against the Earth and shook
it. Which opinion of the Ancients, Geor. Agricol lib. 2. de ort. subt.
battering to pieces, says, The exterior Wind does not seem able to effect an
Earthquake, because its Particles entering into the vast Caverns are dissipated,
or being contracted together have not so much force, for the Cold in so long a
space of Air extinguisheth its heat. Arist. lib. 2 Meteor. cap. 7, and 8. makes
no mention of exterior Wind, but ascribes Earthquakes totally to the Vapors
engendered within the Caverns of the Earth: In Lib. de Mund. if that be
Aristotle's, cap. 4. he thus writes: It often happens that exterior Wind
breaking into the Caviti^s of the Earth, being excluded any Exitus, by turning
it self within, shakes the Earth with great force; which may I think be thus
reconciled, if we say an Earthquake regularly (...), is caused by Vapors which
are engendered within the Earth, but sometimes it may happen, that an exterior
thi^ker and moister Wind being as with a Whirl wind thrust into the Caverns of
the Earth, is mingled with the Subterraneous Vapors, and so conjoyntly with
them shakes the Earth, when it could never separately and by it self. To this I
will add, that those that attribute Earthquakes to internal flatus, differ in
their Opinions: for some say that the Earth being void of all Life and Sense,
has some Spiritus engendered together with it, which Opinion, is constantly
defended by Aristotle. But there were others formerly who attributed such a
Life and Spiritus to the Earth, as in the bodies of Plants, and vital and
animal Spirits, as there is in Animals; which Opinion is espoused by one of the
Physical Writers; all other Philosophers that I have seen, are of Aristotles's
Opinion; as being most constant to reason and experience. For seeing the Earth
is a Principle and Element of all mixed bodies, consequently every mixed body
would live; yea, the Earth would be no longer an Element if it had life, for
living bodies have received their last complexion and perfection, which cannot
be asserted of Elements, which are designed by Nature for the constitution of
fuller bodies, as the Principles of all mixed bodies. But let us see how the
Earth is moved supposing it lives; as in the Body of Man, say those, who are of
that Opinion, when it is well, the Veins through which the Blood and Spiritus
pass, are not disturbed, but when it is not well, they never leave panting: so
the Earth, when it is in its natural situation, Vapors are quickly diffused
through its Veins, is obnoxious to no Earthquakes: but when it has not its own
situation, and the Vapors entangled with Ruin and Mud, find not a free passage
through the Veins, then there must necessarily happen a shaking of the Body of
the Earth, so the Earth is therefore moved by them, because it is in a Fever.
Seen. lib. 6. nature. quaest. thus attacks that Opinion: If, says he, the Earth
like an Animal is moved from this Cause, it will all feel vexation, for a
Fever in us does not more moderately impel some parts and others more quickly,
but runs through all with an equal degree. But Physicians will think this
reason of Seneca's weak; for one Member of an Animal may be infested (...),
with a trembling or palpitation; so that if we grant the Earth lives: part of
it may tremble and be shaken alone, for although it has not either Nerves or
Muscles, yet it has Veins and as it were Pipes on every side sill'd with
Spirits.

6. Whether Subterraneous Exhaltations are generated by the Sun Beams?
Aristotle's constant Opinion is, they are generated partly by the heat of the
Sun influecing them from above, partly by the heat of Subterraneous fire every
where dispersed through the Caverns of the Earth, as he speaks, lib. 2. Meteor.
cap. 8. The Earth of it self, says he, is dry, but it receives great moisture
from Rains, which growing hot by the Sun and the heat in the Earth, begets much
Vapors, both without and within the Earth; which Opinion is therefore
disaproved of by Geor. Agricol. lib. 2. de ortu Subter. page 25. because the
Sun draws all the Vapors it begets out of the Earth. But Aristotle will easily
answer, That some Vapors are therefore heated by the Sun, that they may be
drawn out; but some are engendered so deep within the Earth, that they cannot be
drawn out. I confess heat draws moisture to it self; does not drive it away,
but it does not draw out all its draws to it. Neither does that presently
obtain the end that acts for an end. The Refiners of Metals and Mines fetched
out of the Veins of the Earth, must needs, says Agricola, To hew a Ditch on the
Earth under the Crucible, to draw thither all dampness, for fear lest
otherwise, the strength of fire drawing out the moistness of the Earth into the
Crucible, it would grow swelled and burst to pieces with sudden loss and
squandering away of the Metal: If the heat does draw to it self the moistness,
much more can it put in a motion an Exhalation, and draw to it a Vapor which
is of the same kind with it self. This is true, yet they do not evince that,
which they were to prove, that the heat of the Sun does draw out presently that
Exhalation and set it at freedom, which it draws to it, that is not altogether
in the power of the Sun, there are these things that detain that Exhalation
engendered within the Earth, that it cannot fly whither it is drawn.

7. Whether Aristotle for any certain Reasons, appoints more solemn times ^o^
Earthquakes? We noted before in the 28 Theorem, that Arislotle wa^ of opinion
that Earthquakes commonly happen about the Equinox, in Spring and Autum: but
the accurate Searcher of Subterraneous things, Geor. Agric. page 29. is of
another opinion; where, he says, When I examine his Reason^ why Earthquakes
happen oftener in Spring and Autumn, than in Summer and Winter, by night than
day, in the night time at the breaking of the day oftnest, in the day ^ime at
noon, I find them weak and of little force, for he attributes all to the Sun,
which he does because, if it be without this, the Earth at all times of the
year would have the same disposition in it. The Sun, says Agricola, cannot be
the Cause, much less the Moon's Eclipse; because if the presence of the Sun
conduced to this, more Earthquakes would happen in Summer, than in the Spring
or Autumn; more in day time, than in the night; and if its absence be
influential, there would be more at midnight, than at break of day, in Winter,
than in the Spring or Autumn. Aristotle observed not that the scorching of the
Sun heating the Earth, draws those Vapors out of the Earth, not shats them in
it, that were neither generated by it, or were touched by internal heat after
their generation. But this is that (...), of which we disputed in the preceding
Problem. The Sun engenders Exhalations, which when they fly into the Air of
their own accord, are said to be drawn and extracted by the Sun, but I do not
grant that (speaking properly) the Sun draws forth Exhalations. But let us
speak as the custom is, that the Sun does draw Exhalations toward it, does it
therefore draw them out of the Earth? Agricola excepts: There is no stopping,
says he, that h^nders those which the Sun produces; for it would not engender
them unless its virtue could pierce into the upper part of the Earth, and the
Sun excites the Exhalations out of the Earth, by the same way the power of the
Sun penetrates into the ^arth, and so does not imprison them within the Earth.
The Reader sees, how ready an Answer is for Aristotle. The Sun, says Agricola,
would not beget Exhalations unless it could bring them forth out of the Earth,
yea, it begets many not to extract them, but to afford matter for the
generation of Metals within the Earth, as Gold, Silver, and also for the
generation of Minerals, as Sulphur, Brimstone, whose form is so exeellent and
profitable, that it may be called the end, for which that Celestial Body
efficaciously operates in and under the Earth by its Rays. But as we answered
before, Natural Agents are not so ordered, as always to attain the end of their
operation, because they act not deliberately, and cannot suspend the Action.
The Sun engenders Exhalations, by the innate power of its Rays, whither it be
able to bring them into open Air or not, neither does the eduction of them
belong to the nature or perfection of the Sun, but of the Exhalation, whose
natural (place, that is, that which it most desires,) is in the Air. But seeing
the frequency of Earthquakes both in Autumn and Spring is attested by the
experience of all Times, what reason shall we assign for it, if that which
Aristotle has given, is not available? Agricola answers, Because the internal
heat of the Earth sometimes procreates many Vapors, sometimes few, and where
many are imprisoned, they cause Earthquakes in all times of the year and day.
But with the leave of so great a Man, this is nothing else than to ask what is
in the Principle or in Question; for why sometime; more, sometimes fewer
Vapors are generated, is that, that is inquired after; which cause is not
within the Earth, but altogether depends upon a Celestial Body, which as it is
first, so it is most efficacious, both on the Earth and other Bodies.

8. Why are Birds frighted in an Earthquake, as is attested by Pliny, lib. 2.
cap. 81. Birds also, says he, sit not without fear in an Earthquake? It Is no
wonder if Terrestial Animals are frighted, while the Earth trembles, but how
can Birds, while they pass through the Air, perceive what the Earth suffers?
Birds have a thin and subtle, that is to say, an airy constitution of body, so
that they easily perceive every little alteration of the Air, and it is past
doubt that the Air may be affected and altered by an Earthquake especially in
Asia, and those places where the Air is more thin the subtle.

9. Whither the Vaults in Houses are safest? Pliny does affirm it in his 2d.
Book, cap. 83. Where prescribing Remedies and Aids against Earthquakes, he
says, Vaults and corners of Walls and Posts alternatively thrusting against one
another; where he speaks, I believe, of Subterraneous Vaults, in which the
Vapors being received in a more capacious place, do not rage so much, as in a
narrow one; although a greater Percussion may be in a hollow and round place,
than in a level. Those Roof and Arches that are above the Earth, are not a
little infested with Earthquakes: which we see by experience in the late
Earthquake in Switzerland, where the Roofs of many Churches were very much
cracked. At Lucern the Francician's Church was so shaken, that the Roof hanging
over the Chorus was so demolished, that it must all be repaired a new: and no
doubt many such like things happened in other places by the same Earthquake.

10. Was the late Earthquake so ended, that the Countries through which it
went, are secure from its itteration? We observed before two sorts of
Earthquakes, some are continual, that is, either continually ceasing or
lasting; and some interrupted or itterated at distinct times. In the year 554.
Constantinople shook forty days together, as Procopius attests, and in the year
740. a great Earthquake beginning on the 7th. of November, lasted there a whole
year, as is observed by Funccius, page 128. Chro. But this, I believe was an
interrupted and not a continual one. In the year 480. as is related by
Eutropiu, lib. 10. an Earthquake shook Germany a Month together. And remarkable
is that which is related, lib. 4. H^stor. tripar. In the year 344. an
Earthquake shook first Antiochia, and then almost all the East a year together,
when the preceding year the Arrian Faction assisted with the protection of
Constantius, had most cruelly persecuted both Athanasius and the whole Orthodox
Church, which we also mentioned before. In the 19th. year of Friderick the I.
Syria and Sicily begun, and afterward continued for many years together to
shake; some Towns being indamaged, others demolished, and a dreadful slaughter
made of living Creatures, as, George Agricola relates, out of the History of
those times, lib. 4. de not. efflu. e terra. page 151. where he adds, that an
Earthquake happened at Seville and Cordoua in Spain, which lasted three years,
which is very remarkable. In the year 741. twenty Earthquakes almost continued,
shook Wiritzbourgh, as Funccius observes. In the year 1276. twelve Earthquakes
shook Germany, there being but a little space of time between them, as is
witnessed by Stumpfius, lib. 5. cap. 1. In the year 1295. an Earthquake was
repeated at Constance 19 times. In the year 1531. a great Earthquake was
itterated 8 times at Olysippa or Lisburn, in Portugal. In the year 177. Basil
was shook 9 times in 9 months. That Earthquake which happened in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, was also interrupted, that is to say, was repeated; so that
between the first and second time (at which time it was not so vehement in
these places as at the first) it interposed about a quarter of an hour.

But that which was inquired after in the propounded Problem was, whither the
matter of an Earthquake reaching so far was consumed in those two shakes. I
would not here rashly assert any thing, nor frighten my self with sinistrous
Omens: I will only mention that, which if not necessarily, yet truly may be
determined for Physical Principles of interrupted Earthquakes: I will lay the
Theorems in order. First, When there happen^ a great Earthquake, that reaches
far and near, all the Vapors collected in the Earth shake it not together and
at once, but are interrupted for forty days, then for a year, and sometimes
they threaten another Earthquake in the same place for two years; for Vapors
may be contained so long within the Earth. This Aristotle asserts almost in so
many words, which is also confirmed by the experience of these examples we have
cited, and by such others: which also Aristotle explains by a very apt
Similitude; As the unnatural Pulses in our Bodies, says he, do not presently,
but by degrees and interruptedly end with the Disease: so winds no not sooner
leave off shaking the Earth, than the Relics of them are consumed. Another
Physical Theorem is, That interrupted Earthquakes commonly return in a more
vehement manner; for the longer the Vapor contends within the Earth, the
stronger it is rendered. The third Theorem is likely, That as Pliny writes of the
Plague, Lib. 7. cap. 59. That it has been a long time experienced, that it
goes from East to West, and if it happens otherwise, it every where prevails:
So an Earthquake goes from the South to the North, from East to West. This is
also certain that there are two sorts of Interruptions, one quick, when it is
suddenly itterated, the other slow when it is repeated after many Days and
Months. The last Earthquake had not any sudden renew all, but we have reason to
fear a slow one. To which we may add that the Eclipse of the Sun on the 27th.
of December, threatens us with its effects, and the Conjunction of Saturn and
Mars in Scorpio may add to it: of which this is their Rule; Saturn in Mars
shakes the Earth, which Rule experience confirmed in the year 1542. when after
the same Conjunction a great Earthquake shook Constantinople. And there will be
a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in July, as there was in October 1531. when
Portugal was grievously shaken. But we must refer the care of futurities to
God: It Is our duty to rest on his eternal presence, to correct past things, and
live now more chastely and piously as Mr. Beverly learnedly and fervently
exhorts in his Treatise of Trepidations of the Earth, page 132. which that we
may do, God Almighty grant, who alone can move Men's Hearts as he does the Earth.

FINIS.

