WORK and REWARD, OR THE TESTIMONIAL OF A BELIEVER FOR HIS Entrance into GLORY,
Examined and approved: In a SERMON at the Interment of the Virtuous LADY,
Margaret St. John, Wife to the Right Worshipful, Sir Alexander St. John,
Septem. the 3. 1656.

By Francis Raworth, Teacher to the Church at Shore-ditch.

London, Printed by T. Maxey, for John Rothwell, at the Fountain in
Goldsmiths-Row in Cheap Side, 1656.

To his Honored Friend, The Right Worshipful Sir Alexander Saint John.
Honored Sir,
THe great Design of God in this World, is to exercise man; and the greatest
interest of man, is to glorify God, who has provided the Touchstone of his
Word to try our hearts by, and the Balance of his works to weigh our Lives in:
So much strength as we have in a day of temptation, so strong we are; and since
Temptation is for our Probation, we have as much cause to bless God for our
support under Trials, as for our deliverance from trials: It is true, Satan
has his Sieve, and his aim is to separate the Wheat from the Chaff; to give
life to our sins, by the death of our Graces; but God has his Fan in his hand,
and his design is to separate the Chaff from the Wheat, to give life to our
Graces by the death of our sins.

I must acknowledge, That God has lately put into your hands a bitter Cup to
drink off (in the decease of your Virtuous and Beloved Consort) only this I
presume does support you, That your eyes are opened to see that it was of your
Fathers mingling: This affliction is a sharp Arrow, but it is shot out of a
sweet hand; amara sagitta, ex dulci manu Dei (as the Father speaks) How
excellent a thing is it, when Gods Rod is upon our backs, to have our hands
upon our mouths, and not to murmur? While unbelief commenceth an Action
against, and complains of the heavy hand of God to the World, for us to
complain rather of our own evil hearts to God? Your experience (Sir, I trust)
in Gods School, has acquainted you with the Equity of his Discipline and
Pedagogy. Oh! What an advantage have we over Satan, when we understand the
intent, and and possess the fruit of every Cross; when we can see our Lashes to
be our Lessons, our Corrections to be our Instructions, our Crosses to be the
Executioners of our Corruptions.

It was an Heavenly Prayer of him that said, Lord, I do not desire that the
Burden should be taken off, but that I might have stronger shoulders to bear
it: And an Heroic Experience of him that said, If any man would ride post to
Heaven, let him get up upon the Cross. The truth is, every affliction is Gods
Messenger, and every one of his Messengers have their Errand to deliver: The
Rod must be heard, or the Word will never be felt: Though all that are
corrected are not Gods children, yet all that are Gods children are corrected.
Afflictions are favors, and therefore when God threatens that he will show
mercy no more, he threatens that he will afflict no more. Ephraim is joined to
Idols, let him alone. Lord, rather (let every gracious heart say) let thine
hand be laid on me, then that I should be cast out of thy hand; rather frown on
me, then that thou should turn thy Face from, and not look on me.

But the great Advantage of our trial, is to come; here the Language of the rod
is easy and plain, but the Dialect of that Language is hard and difficult to
be known; conformity and self-denial, are indisputably the meaning of every
blow, but we are disposed to misconter Providence in Particular; what God
intends only for our exercise, we pretend is done out of his anger: And
therefore where the Text is obscure, we must be wary in writing Commentaries,
we must take heed of turning his Reubarb into Ratsbane, by reading wrath where
God never wrote it: There will come a time, when God will interpret his own
mind, and satisfy us, not only in the Regularity and justice of his Rods,
but in the Reason and suitableness of them; why we are almost burned and
consumed, while others were but singed; why he drew so much blood from us, more
then from others that seemed more exorbitant: God loves not to be stinging,
like the Be, he exhibits honey freely, but he stings upon provocation; his
wisdom and our necessity, weigh and prescribe every drop of gall that is put
into our Cups, and every lash of the Rod that is laid on our backs. A Cordial
is fitter for this man, a Corrasive fitter for another: Such a Christian will
be wakned by the light of a Candle, another stands in need of a Clap of
Thunder: How sweet is it to justify God, when he condemns us? At last day we
shall say, The Lord knew our distemper, and he let us blood in the principal
Vein; if we had not perished, we had perished: His Sunshine melted us, his
Hammer brake us. Blessed affliction! that made us see more ugliness and
emptiness in the Creature, and more excellency in God, that weaned our
affections from the world, and occasioned our more serious thoughts of Eternity.

It may satisfy us, That God deals with his, as the Persians, I take it, do
with the offending children of their Princes; they correct their Royal Garments
in public, but let their Persons go free; our Bodies are beaten, and our Souls
are bettered: Here we must be polished by Trials, and hewn by Hammers, and
hereafter we shall be laid into Gods Building; Nunc foris per flagella
tundimur, ut intus in Templum Domini disponamur, Afflictions are the fruit of
his Wisdom, Repentance our fruit of his Afflictions: The Lord grant that all
our storms may drive us nigher to our Harbor. I should humbly crave excuse for
this freedom, but that I know your Ingenuity, and that your condition requires
support; and as remembering that words spoken in season, are like Apples of Gold
in Pictures of Silver. I am sorry of so sad an occasion of presenting this, yet
so seasonable a subject to you: I request your acceptance of it; the advantage
whereof, is the desire of,

Your worships much obliged, to serve in the Lord, F. R.
From my Sudy in Shoreditch, December. 20. 1656.
Revel. 14.13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that they may
rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.


IN these Words we have two things; The Work, and the Reward of a Christian.

In the work of a Christian we have,

1. Something Employed: It is supposed, That those that die in the Lord, do
first live to the Lord; For as it is impossible for one that lives well to die
ill, so it is impossible for one that lives ill to die well; for on that to the
last lives to the Devil, to die to the Lord.

2. Something Expressed: They are such as die in the Lord: Some make a
difference, between dying for, and dying in the Lord, as if that belonged only
to Martyrs, this to all true Professors: Martyrs hic intelligi concedimus
solos vero negamus. Gorhan.
But the substance is, That when Gods children have done their work, they go to
bed, their Lusts die in them, and they themselves die in the Lord, as Children
in their Fathers arms.

Secondly, As we have the work, so likewise we have the wages, or rather reward
of Christians: And that 1. Generally: They are said to be blessed, Blessed are
the dead that die in the Lord: They are blessed in Hope while they live, and
blessed in Possession when they die: As a Christian cannot be fully happy
before death, so he cannot at all be miserable after death.

2. Particularly and Punctually: And that,

1. Negatively: Because they rest from their Labors; their labors in suffering,
their labors under sin, the labors of their Callings, and subjection unto
Temptations: The World was their Tempestuous Sea, Heaven is their Port and
Harbor; the Earth was the place of their working, Heaven the place of their
resting: In portu navigunt quare sopor fessis.

2. Positively, and their works do follow them: Though they leave the world,
yet they leave not their works behind them: The authority and warrant of all
this is premised. This Oracle is not the Invention of man, but the voice of
God; It is the Spirit (of God who knows the mind of God) that says so, Thus
says the Spirit.

Quaery, Why is it said from henceforth? Were not those that dyed in the Lord
before, happy?

Answer. Some say the Emphasis on this Particle, henceforth (...), q. d. Times
will now be troublesome; and as it was their blessedness that lived to the
Lord, at any time to die for the Lord; so especially it is their Blessedness to
die then: It is some mercy to die before times of Judgment, as it is a mercy
for some to die in times of judgment.

Secondly, Others refer it to their Blessedness immediately after their death;
that is, their Souls sleep not in their Bodies till the Resurrection, as some
dreamingly affirm, they are immaterial and immortal, and ^o sooner do they go
out of their earthly Tabernacles, but presently they ascend to Heaven: It is
probable that the Spirit hereby would also presignifie by way of contradiction,
the Opinion of the Papists about Purgatory, as if the souls of good men did
take that stage in their way to Glory: No, says the Spirit, their Purgatory is
in this world; here they are purified, and immediately upon the dissolution of
the union between their souls and Bodies; as their Bodies are blessed in the
hope of a Resurrection, so their Souls are presently blessed in possession;
those that die in the Lord, are thenceforth, or immediately blessed.

But I principally on this solemn occasion, pitch on the last clause; And their
works do follow them: First, for the Explication, then for the Application.

1. For the Explication here are two Quaeries to be answered.

Quaerie 1. What is meant by works?

Answ. There are 1. Evil works, as there are evil workers: The works of the
flesh are manifest, uncleanness, idolatry, strife and contentions, Gal. 5.19,
20. At death the sins of the godly leave them, and their Graces only follow
them; there sins shall be cast not into a shallow river, where they may appear,
and swim up aloft upon the waters, but into a deep Sea of Oblivion: We must
remember our evil works, and God will forget them; we must forget our good
works, and God will remember them.

2. There are also good works, or as the Apostle phraseth it, fruits; such as
are gentleness and joy, temperance and meekness, Gal. 5.22, 23. And these are
those works that follow those that die in the Lord.

1. Specially works of Charity; as they say of Oswald King of Denmark, that in
regard of his liberallity to the poor, his right hand, though he was dead,
withered not: Works of Charity, are in Scripture in a peculiar manner called
good works, (...), by way of principality and eminency, above many other works
that yet are good, in regard of the influence they have for to produce and give
a luster to all good works.

2. More largely: Though works of charity be good works, and necessary to
salvation, yet there are many good works, besides works of charity: Faith is
the work of God, and a good work; repentance is the work of God, and a good
work.

Charity is a Caelestial Orb, but not large enough for all the stars of good
works to shine and move in: Therefore when the Apostle speaks here of (good)
works, we are thereby to understand in general all works that are good; not
only a single Work, not only their Charity, but their Faith, their
Repentance, their Holiness, they all do follow them.

Quaerie 2. What is meant by their works?

A. 1. Here is noted propriety: Their own works follow them, not the works of
other men; which Criticism suggesteth to us.

1. The Absurdity of the Papist, who maintains that a man may be so righteous,
as that he may not only merit Heaven for himself, but for others also. It was
an arrogant saying of a Romish Pharisee, That he had done all for his own
Salvation many years ago, and staid in the world after that, only to gather
treasure for others: But as a wicked man shall perish by the hand of his own
unbelief, so the Just shall live by his own faith; not the Prayers and
Performances, not the duties and doings of others, but their (own) works follow
them.

2. The formal interest of a Believer in his works: They are his works, not
because he is the fountain, but because he is the subject of his Graces: Sin
otherwise is most of all things ours; yet in a favorable sense, as nothing is
so much our own before we work as our will, so nothing is so much our own as
our works when they are done; they cleave to us, whether as fomentations to
nourish us, or as Corrasives to gnaw upon us, that lies in the nature of the
work, but ours they are and cling to us; our Work seem to be more ours, then
our Faith is ours; our Works are ours as we have done them, our Faith ours as
we have received it: Faith is ours as our Goods are ours, Works are ours as our
Children are ours, Certe nos operamur, sed Deus operatur in nobis ut operemur.

Querie 3. What is meant by this, that our Works are said to follow us?

A. Though the acts of Grace be transient, yet their virtue is everlasting:
They follow us, Notes,

1. Their company to glory: As a Christian follows his work on earth, so his
works shall follow or accompany him to heaven; he goes not out of the world
naked and void of grace, as he came into the world; but he carries the garments
of salvation, the extrinsick and Red coat of Justification, the intrinsic and
internal white coat of Sanctification along with him, (...), they follow or
accompany him.

2. Their inseperability: Death may rob them of their estates, but death cannot
plunder them of their Graces; Death may separate their heads from their bodies,
but shall never separate or take their Crowns from their heads. The ambitious
man cannot carry his honor with him; the Mammonist cannot carry his Gold with
him; but the godly man shall carry his godliness, his holiness, his works with
him, as the shadow follows the Sun, or as the sequacious Ivy (hedera sequax)
clings to the Oak.

3. Their Honor and Dignity of State: Grace, we say, is Glory begun, and Glory
is Grace perfected: I, as God is glorious in holiness, so a godly man is
glorious in holiness, he is glorious in Grace, his Grace is his glory. As when
a Nobleman or Ambassador is to attend on or visit a Prince or Emperor, his
Gentlemen in their Braveries, and his servants in their Liveries, wait on him
to the Palace or Presence Chamber: So a Believer honors God in this world, and
God will honor him out of this world; he glisters and shines here in his silks
and embroyderies of humility, love and righteousness; and when he is called up
from this world, he goes not without his Retinue, his Graces, his works
accompany or follow him to Glory one Paradise (as he said) then enters into
anther.

From the words thus opened. I shall present you with this Proposition or
Doctrine.

Proposit. That when a Christian dies, his works die not with him.

There is a sixfold attendance on a true Christian by his good works or graces
when he leaves this world.

1. His works follow him in respect of that good report they leave behind him:
It is a Judgment to have our names writ on earth, but its an honor when our
persons are in Heaven, to have a name of honor on Earth: A wicked man expires
and goes out, but it is like a Tallow candle, leaving a stench behind him; a
righteous man expires and goes out of this world, but like a Wax candle,
leaving a sweet perfume behind him: His works in their report follow him.

1. In a blessed memory: Do well and hear ill is wrote on Heaven Gates, said
the Martyr; yet oftentimes do well, and hear well after we have done well, is
wrote on Heaven Gates: Of you it shall be said, this and that man was born in
her: While the poor curse the memory of the wicked, they bless God in the
remembrance of the righteous: Some men's names are rotten before their bodies,
but other men's names are alive and fresh, when their Bodies are rotten, being
laid in their Graves ( tantorum nominibus semper assurgo, said the Moralist, of
the mention of Cato and Lelius) The name of Lazarus is recorded, that is
supposed to be his proper name; but the common name of Dives is only related,
a certain rich man, (...), there is all to signify who he was, God thought him
not worthy of further mention; G d shows himself herein contrary to the world,
who have no name for the godly, poor, but silly wretch; or a by-name, as lame
Giles. 2. God makes a memorial of the righteous, Prove. 10.7. A good name, as
the Father observes, is the godly man's heir: The names of wicked men are either
altogether omitted, as in that place, or Recorded with Infamy, as Jeroboam is
mentioned in the Cronicles of Israel; Pilate in the Creed, Gardener in the
Martyrology; but the names of the righteous are famous: David is dead, but his
zeal for God lives; David, says the Scripture, was a man after Gods own heart:
Job is dead, but yet his patience for God lives; have ye not heard, or ye have
heard of the patience of Job: Abel was murdered above 4000 years ago, yet his
Faith is alive to this very day, he yet speaks, his tongue is out of his
head, and yet his faith is not tongue-tyed? Oh, says God, what a Believer was
Abel! some render it (...), passively is yet spoken of, that is, he is of
blessed memory, his name is honorable in the Church.

2. His works follow him in their report, by an happy example: A good man's
person is gone, but his footsteps are left behind him; when he is dead, and
gone to heaven, and beholds the face of God in glory; his example left
behind him, is a Looking-glass for others to dress themselves by, a Copy for
others to write after: This woman's charity, says Christ, shall be made mention
of where ever the Gospel shall be preached: The Father its true dies, but yet
he lives in his child that wears his image, especially in a moral sense, when
the child imitates the virtues of the father: When a friend bewailed to
Epaminandas's want of issue, that noble Captain replied, That he should leave
two fair daughters behind him, the Battles of Leuctra and Mautinea, in which
his memory should survive: A good man never dies childless, his examples of
Patience and integrity are his never dying offspring: In this sense Luther and
Calvin, and the rest of those Champions that wrote for Christ, and dyed in the
Lord, are yet alive in their words and works; And though their souls be in
Heaven, yet are they instrumental for the salvation of souls on Earth: As long
as their Works or Writings are extant in the World, they shall not have done
preaching to, as long as their holiness toward, and courage for God are upon
Record and published, they shall not have done converting of sinners to, or at
least of confirming of Saints in Christ, efficacior est vox operis, quam opus
voeis.

Secondly, Their works follow the Saints, many of them formally and really:
Indeed they take leave of Faith and hope, they are militant Graces, and only
suitable to the state of the Church on Earth; but Love is a Triumphant Grace,
and goes along with them to Glory: and now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these
three; but the greatest of these is Charity, the greatest Extensively, Faith
and Hope being more personal Graces, Love being communicative, rather here
protensively, in respect of duration; to save a man, Faith is great; in a man
saved, Love is the greatest: Faith, and Hope, and Repentance, go with
Christians vertually; as he that has the Spirits and Extracts of Herbs, is
said to carry the Herbs with him, and a Merchant that turns his Lands into
Pearls and Gold, is said to carry his Estate with him; so the fruit and
substance of Faith lives, though justifying Faith, or Faith justifying dies:
The Motto of Chawcer, Farewell Physic, may well be the Motto of a dying
Christian, Farewell Repentance, farewell Hope: Repentance is a plank after
Shipwreck, and where there is no sea, no water, there is no need of a plank: As
the Sword Bearer to the Emperor Charles, being a Protestant, carried the Mace
before his Master to the Church door, when he went to Mass, but his conscience
would not suffer him to go in with him: So in a sense Faith guards us to Heaven
Gates, and when it has done its office, there it leaves us: Faith follows a
Christian, as the shadow does the Sun, from one point of the Compass or Dyal to
another, until it comes to the Miridian, and there it leaves it; but love is a
Royal Grace, an Heavenly Peer, with State and Majesty it enters into Glory, and
dwells with the King of Glory himself to all Eternity: As Dr. Preston said,
when a dying, I shall change my place, but not my company: his Graces followed
him.

Thirdly, Their Works follow them in respect of the comfort of them; as the
wicked only leave their duties behind them, and carry their sins with them,
so the godly leave their sins behind them, and carry their graces with them,
they put off their garments when they go to bed. And here,

1. After death a child of God is comforted with the success of his works: How
comfortable at the last day will it be, for a Master of a Family to present his
servants at the Tribunal Bar before the Lord, and to say, Lord, Here am I, and
my servants with me, that not only wear my Livery, but also obeyed thy
commands: For the Ministers of the Gospel that have been faithful, to present
their flocks before the great Bishop and Shepherd of souls, and to say, Here
are the purchase of thy blood, the travail of our souls, the fruit of our
labors and tears: As the Ancient sweetly brings in the Apostles, like so many
File-leaders, severally bringing up their Converts to the Judgment Seat; Peter
attended with the converted Jews; John leading up the Asiatiques; Thomas the
Indians, and Paul the Gentiles: Et nos hic Pastores vocati sumus, and ibi
greges non ducemus? And it is the persuasion of many great Divines, That the
spiritual Fathers in Christ, shall know their children in Christ at that day:
Their success will advantage their comfort, and therefore it is part of our
duty to labor for success; though it must be acknowledged, that God rewards us
not according to the success of our labors properly, but according to our
labors for success.

Let none be discouraged that their faithful works have not their success with
men; for as the good Physician always heals not, so the good Preacher always
converts not: The success of our labors is his work, not ours, and God rewards
us not according to his own work (simply and abstractly taken) by the leave of
that yet true and famous affirmation, God crowns his own works in us) but
according to our works: He shall give to every man according to his works:
(...); we had better have one work writ in Heaven, then a thousand on Earth;
and though men may forget labors of love on earth, yet the comfort is, they
shall be reminded and rewarded by Christ in heaven; those that convert souls,
and run like stars on Earth, shall at last be Crowned, and shine like stars in
Heaven, Dan. 12.3, 4.

2. After death, a child of God shall be comforted with the Testimony of his
Conscience: And thus,

1. His Integrity shall follow or accompany him: Miserable is he whose
conscience condemns him, though all the world acquit him; but thrice happy is
he whose conscience acquits him, though all the world accuse him: A man may
have hypocrisy in him, and yet be no Hypocrite; he may slumber and sleep with
the foolish Virgins, yet be no foolish Virgin; while we are on this side our
Fathers house, we cannot but trip and stumble, though we keep the way; while we
are on this side Paradise, we cannot behold a Pomgranate that has no rotten
grain in it: This may support, that if we bring our Graces to the Touchstone,
the Lord himself will never bring them to the Balance; the charge of Hypocrisy
is familiar and easy, the proof is laborious and hard: We are not made Lord
Judges of men's Consciences, and therefore, notwithstanding private suspicions,
we must forbear, and refer the censure of the full and final estate of man to
God: Its the work of God to discover Hypocrites, not of man; while a man goes
about to discover an Hypocrite, let him beware, lest in seeking to find out
one he discover two, the searched and the searcher: Quam immensa est laetitia
de recordatione transacti operis? Possibly it may be said concerning many
Christians, who never studied to be conformable to the Critical Religion of the
World; as it was said of Father Paul the Venetian, because men knew not how to
convince him, either in his Profession or Life, they had only this common plea
against him, That he was an Hypocrite: But what a testimony will Samuel bring
with him at that day, to say in the audience of Men and Angels, Whose Ox have I
stolen? For blessed Paul to manifest at that day, This is the testimony of my
conscience, that in godly simplicity I have behaved my self in the world.

My Beloved, get a good conscience, for that is a thousand witnesses, and a
thousand witnesses will not at that day be so good as a good conscience: How
amiable will the face of true Grace be then? How abominable will the vizor and
counterfeit be?

2. His Charity and Love shall witness for him: Many have no greater sensible
evidence of their loving Christ, then by the love they bear to his servants
that wear his Livery, to his Children that bear his Image: But then the
scruples of the upright shall be dissolved, resolved, and they shall not need
so to puzle their brains to find the love of the Brethren in their hearts.

How refreshing will it be then, for a Believer to have occasion to say by way
of Praise and Testimony; the Lord gave me the loaf, and I grudged not to give
others the crumbs: God made my cup full, and I made it to run over for the
relief of others: It will, I am sure, it will be more comfortable for a man to
say, I have been good, and I have done good in the World, then to say, I had
(all) the goods of the World: Good works are a Treasure, and will follow you;
good and cordial Prayers are a Treasure, and they will go before you; and Faith
and Hope are a Treasure, and they will go with you.

It is strange to consider, how many bad words men have for good works, as if
to be charitable were to be Popishly affected; but if charity be
Antichristianism, Christ is the Pope, and Rome is at Jerusalem, Rev. 14.13.
Acts 7.59. Luke 23.43. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations, Luke 16.9. Not by way of merit, but by way of concomitancy, every
acting of every Grace will stand us in stead, a charitable act as well as a
repenting act: Quicquid pauperibus spargimus, nobis colligimus: I shall not
impose on your belief: But it is reported that Evagrius in Cedremus bequeathed
300 l. in his will to the poor, but took a Bond of Synesius the Bishop for the
payment of it in the other life, and the next night after his departure,
appeared to him in his shape, delivered in the Bond, cancelled and fully
discharged, saying, Take your Bond again, I am satisfied.

Thirdly, His perseverance will follow him: It were better for a man never to
set his hand to the plow, then to look and to go backward; better never to have
begun in profession, then to end in Apostasy. Perseverance is the Crown of
Grace, because it is the Crowning Grace: Perseverance is the Crown of Grace,
and Heaven is the Crown of Perseverance: Praise the Mariner when he is arrived
at his Harbor; commend the Soldiers valor, when he has got the day and won
the field: Hold on, and hold out Faith and Prayer, said the Martyr, Hold fast
that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown, says the Lord, Revel. 3.11.
How sweet will it be for a Believer to carry the testimony of his perseverance
in his conscience to the last Assizes, to have ground to say, It Is true Lord, I
have had many infirmities, many failings, yet my heart was upright, my heart
did not lay hypocrisy at my door; I confess, I often stumbled, I had almost
fallen; many a time have I offended against thy glory before the World, but
oftener have I grieved thy gracious spirit in private; yet through thy grace I
have risen, I have fought the good fight, I have run my race; and though I have
many ways forsaken thee, yet thou did not forsake and take thy farewell of me,
thou did pardon my sins, and heal my soars: We cannot but be shot at by Satan
while we are besieged, we get many a fall and bruise by the world and lust;
scarce a Jacob that wrestleth with God, but goes limping; yet where sin is a
Tyrant, not a King; an enemy at our backs, not a friend in our bosoms; it will
not be charged on us, so as to condemn, so as to damn us: What a comfortable
sight is it to see a Christian to contend against flesh and blood in this
world; to ruin with Christ, rather then to reign with Caesar? to march out of
the Battle, though wounded and maimed, yet with his colors flying to the
Grave? If they be blessed that die in, how blessed are they that moreover die
for the Lord? Mori pro Domino, Martyrum est, in Domino, confessorum. Bern.
Beatus est Petrus qui cruciatur, nec minus beatus est Johannes qui in Lecto
moritur. Aret. in Loc.

Fourthly, His works follow him in respect of Testimonies, ad extra, and so his
works shall find a probation.

1. From the good Angels: As they are Gods Messengers to us, so they are our
witnesses to God; the tears of repenting sinners, are the wine of Angels, they
rejoice in, therefore they must needs observe the conversion of sinners: Many
Actions done out of the view of men, are yet within the cognizance of Angels:
The good Angels shall give in their testimony against the wicked, and for the
righteous; such an one, Lord, was a Blasphemer, a Drunkard, we can witness to
it, we have heard him swear, we have seen him drunk; but such and such were
attenders upon Gospel Ordinances; were given to Prayer and Meditation, to
Repentance and good works: and as far as we can judge, were not only
Professors of sincerity, but sincere Professors; were not only called Saints,
Saints by calling, but Saints indeed by Dedication and Infusion; not only
called Christians, but Christians as they were called, Zech. 1.10.

2. His works shall find a probation from the very Devils: As at the great
day, in some things the godly shall acquit the Devils (for the Devils are not
always guilty; when we are filthy, we often paint the Devils blacker then they
are, to make our selves whiter then we are) and give them their due; so in some
things the Devils (as very Devils as now they are) shall acquit the godly. God,
q. d. will then say to Satan, as one of old, Satan, have thou considered my
servants, Job, David, and Peter; and Satan that accused them, while living,
shall then as it were justify them: Wisdom is too often condemned by her
children here, but Wisdom shall be justified by her enemies hereafter.
Providence will extort this confession from Devils; true Lord, they were great
sinners, but we cannot deny the truth of their repentance, and we did often
tempt them, when yet they were not overcome: Thus Religion shall be cleared,
not only by Divelish men, but by Devils: The Devils will then testify that
wherein Gods servants failed, it was much, because of their snares; that such
and such of Gods children had lived more comfortably but that they tempted them
to despair; had lived more righteously, but that they tempted them to scandal;
had done more work for God in his vineyard, but that they disquieted and
hindered them: Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you, said the evil
Spirit in the Acts.

Thirdly, He has a testimony of his good works from good men: Religion is now
made a party by too too many; and men became of an opinion not to serve God,
but to get Votes for their reputation: O what a refuge is it for the Hypocrite
to fly to the applause and (...) of Gods people! to cry up others for their
Heavenly-mindedness, that the Heavenly-minded indeed might not cry out against
them for worldly-mindedness; not but that the good opinion of good men is
considerable, but in se and separated from goodness of practice in our selves,
its but the varnish of Hypocrisy: As the evil Opinion of an evil man makes
not a good man evil, so the good Opinion of a good man makes not an evil man
good: yet as God is the witness of our heart, so good men are the witnesses of
our lives: The Rabbis have a fine Proverb, That he that does a good work,
bonum opus, gets to himself against the last day Advocatum, an Advocate; and so
many good works, so many Advocates (but Christ is our Advocate) but he that
continues so many evil works as he does, so many Devils, or so many Accusers he
procures against himself in Judgment: Good men will then testify one for
another; when Justice shall enquire what such and such were (not that God needs
man's testimony, but to speak to conscience, and according to the substance of
the process at that day) the righteous shall answer, Lord, since we are called
to be witnesses, we must needs say, That while such were a blaspheming thy
name, a scoffing at thy people; we knew them to be Blasphemers and Scoffers,
these and these of thy people were a praying, a hearing of thy Oracles, a
mourning for sin, they and we did comfortably and often serve the Lord together.

Fourthly, They shall have a probation from evil men: Their accusation is not
so considerable as their acquittance: Men, said he, speak evil of me, but they
are evil men that do so; and an argument for us from an adversary, is not to be
neglected: though wicked men curse the Saints while they live, yet they shall
bless and justify them in the day of Visitation, as the Apostle speaks.

1. Either when pangs of conscience seize on them: Or,

Secondly, When they come to die; as one said, O that I might be Craesus
living, and Socrates dying! Or as the Proverb is, Let me live in Italy, but let
me die in Spain: So Balaam, though he lived the life of the wicked, yet he
loved the death of the righteous; though men live Hypocrites, yet they would
die sincere; though many live by a form of godliness, yet they would fain die
by the power: Or,

Thirdly, They shall respect and honor them at the Judgement-day: Oh, will
Pharaoh say then, that I were Moses! Will Cain say, that I had been but
suffering Abel? Who would be a Rake-hell or a Ranter then? when many of those
that have been Judges, shall be judged, and the judged (many of them I mean)
shall be Judges; when Paul that once stood at the Bar, shall sit on the Bench;
for the Apostle tells us, That the Saints shall judge the world: That time is
a coming (though now the world judges the Saints, and one Saint judges
another) that is, shall be, q. d. Coassessors with Christ at the last day,
consenting to, and applauding of his Judgment of the world; when the Judge
shall say to the Cursers, Go ye cursed, the Saints shall say, Amen Lord; when
Rabshekah shall be thrown down to Hell, and Hezekiah taken up to Heaven: Who
would rise in that estate of wrath he was born, lived and dyed in? Those that
now accuse the godly for dissemblers and Hypocrites, will then publicly
confess their sincerity. Christians! Be not discouraged in your more strict
profession of Christianity; it is no matter what now they say of you behind
your backs, but what they shall be forced to speak of you to your faces at that
day.

Fifthly, Even the Spirit of God will bear a testimony to his works: What
though all men and Angels should condemn us, now God himself will not condemn,
but acquit us; as he has a bottle for our tears, so he has a file for our
Prayers, and a Book for our Works: Wicked men look on the infirmities of Gods
people, their mole-hills, as mountains; their motes, as beams, as sins of the
greatest magnitude, and on their own mountains and beams as mole-hills, and
motes: Men are merciless in their censures, but God has more equitable scales,
and can give Grains of allowance to his Gold.

Even as God seemed to stand Neuter for a time, while there was a dispute held
between Job and his Friends concerning his integrity; at length God steps from
behind the curtain, and pleads his cause: Who says my servant Job is an
Hypocrite? you charge desperately on my servant; but you have not spoke of me
the thing that is right, as my servant Job has done, Job 42.7. Gods people often
in their temptations, speak that against themselves that God never spoke; we
are but Hypocrites, we are cast out of Gods presence, these miscarriages of
ours have dissolved the Covenant between God and us, are inconsistent with
integrity or true Grace; but God, Revel. 2.2. knows their works, their
patience, their labors of love, their gold, notwithstanding some dross, their
sincerity amidst many failings, and will make them known to themselves and all
the World at the last day; the Lord will say concerning this and that man, I
know them to be cleansed by the blood of my Son, however men have cast dust on
them: Others have surveyed their lives, and seen some spots which they
themselves have lamented, and I know them to be Holy, and to have feared my
Name: Now if God shall justify, who shall condemn at that day?

Fifthly and lastly, Their works shall follow them in respect of a guerdon and
reward: In Scripture the word Work signifies three things.

1. The very act of Labor, so Solomon tells us, that in the Grave there is no
wisdom, no work, that is, no working for Heaven, Eccles. 9.10.

2. For the effect of labor; that which is wrought we call his work, as well as
the act of his labor; thus the fire will try every man's work, 1 Cor. 3.13.

3. For the reward of a Christians Labor: Work is taken for wages; it is usual
to put Prayer for the thing prayed for, or for the thing obtained by Prayer; so
Hannah, 1 Sa. 1.27. The Lord has given me my petition; that is, The child for
which I did Petition. It is usual to put sin for the reward or punishment of
sin, Genesis 4.13. My sin, that is, my punishment for sin, is greater then I can
bear; so also its usual to put the work, as for the reward of the work, and
that, 1. In malo; as Jer. 4.18. Thy way has procured this unto thee; this is
thy wickedness, that is, this is the reward of thy wickedness. 2. In bono, as
in my Text, their works followed them; that is, the reward of their works; they
had done their work, and now God rewards them through Grace: Their works die
not with them, as Hortensius his labors did: A cup of cold water shall be
produced, Matthew. 25. They forget their good works; When saw we thee an hungry,
or naked? But Christ remembers them, inasmuch as you did it to one of these
little ones, you did it unto me; those that have done well, shall have a well
done; those that have sown to the Spirit shall of the spirit reap everlasting
life; Glory, and Honor, and Peace, shall be to every man that works good, to
the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; if in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all men most miserable; as in Adam all dyed, so in Christ
shall all be made alive; as sure as we are gracious, so sure shall we be
glorious; as sure as Heaven enters into a man in this world, so sure shall that
man enter into Heaven in the world to come: To be brief in this, as certainly
as now the Crown of immortality and Glory shines in the eyes of Gods people, so
certainly shall it one day sit gloriously on their heads: Its easier to tell
what Heaven is not, then what it is; We may talk of the greatness of our future
reward, but we shall never know the weight of that Crown, till we have it on
our heads; the worth of that Livery, till we have it on our backs; the
greatness of that Glory, till it rest in and shine into our hearts: The reward
of good works shall be great.

Q. But why does the Gospel chiefly mention, or more apparently note the reward
of works of mercy, pity and charity, at the last day?

A. Upon four accounts.

1. Because good works are the fruits of Faith: There may be charity without
Faith, but there can be no true Faith without Charity: Moses in the
Ecclesiastic Story was wont to say, I like that Faith better that can be seen
then that Faith which only can be heard: Ubi bona opera non apparent ad extra,
ibi non est bonum opus ad intra.
So where there is no Charity, ad extra, without, there is no true Faith, ad
intra, within: So John Husse, Though Faith have a pre-eminence, because works
grow out of it, and so Faith as the root is first; yet Works have the
pre-eminence thus, both in that they include Faith (in Believers) in them, and
that they diffuse and spread themselves more then Faith does: And it is
remarkable, That though Christ refer often to believing in this life, because he
would be sure to plant and fasten that safely, which is the root of all, Faith:
yet in the next life his proceedings are grounded on Works, and he will judge
us according to our Fruits.

2. Because works are visible demonstrations of Faith: In Titles and
Conveyances where Lands are made over to us, we have Seals to our Writings, and
witnesses to our Seals; so here our persons are instrumentally justified by our
Faith (as we ordinarily speak) but our Faith is justified by our Works.

The evidence to God that our Works are good, scil. formally is our Faith; the
evidence to men that our Faith is good, probably is our Works: Men can give
testimony concerning our Charity; but Faith is a secret, and God only can
witness to that: Now God, who is all Spirit, will not judge the World
immediately, but by our Mediator, God-Man, that humane nature that hung on the
Cross, shall q. d. sit on a Throne; the Judge then shall be visible, and the
Persons to be Judged shall be visible, and the public process, shall in a
great part be concerning things visible too: God will so act at that day; as
that all men shall see the righteousness of his Process, he will judge, not
according to his secret counsels, his cabinet decrees, but according to
evidence, and his revealed Law. Now James says, Show me thy faith without
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works; this demonstration a
posteriori, is manifest. Faith like the Queen of the South, comes not alone to
Solomon, she brings her train after her: Faith is this Queen, let Repentance
be her Usher to go before her; and good Works, as Patience, Charity, Meekness,
the Court that follow her, so let her come to the King of Glory, in the
Presence Chamber of Jesus Christ in heaven: As long as we feel thy pulse
beating, we are sure thou live; yet the beating of thy pulse is not the cause
why thou live, but a sign by the effects. As Christ said of himself, when
the question was, whether he was the Messiah? View my works, said he, they are
they that testify of me: So I may say of men, their conversations, their works
testify what they are: Good works before men, are good witnesses of our faith
before God. God will then examine men of those things that man can bear
testimony to.

3. Because men accused, naturally and generally appeal to their good works, by
whom or by what will the hypocrite be tried? By Gods people? No; by the work of
Regeneration? No; for that is a mystery unknown to them: but by my works will I
be tried; why then to thy works thou shall go; thou boastest of thy works, but
where is their goodness! How can thy works be good, if thou thy self the
worker art evil! The Lord likes Adverbs better then Adjectives; Been better
then Bonum. Do your works proceed from a good heart, and do they tend to a good
end? Our works must not only materially be good (for there may be malum opus in
bona materia;) but the aim and intention of our works must be good also, or
else, notwithstanding our good works, we are evil workers before God. And
further, I believe that the mere outside Christian will then be found to have
been defective in good works; in some or other good work: Either he will be
charged for injustice in getting his estate, with which he has been
charitable; and that is not properly charity for a man, as we say, to steal the
whole loaf out of the cupboard of a poor man, and then to give him a crust at
the door: Or as the Spanish Proverb is, to steal a Goose, and stick down a
Feather.

Or secondly, For partiality in doing good: We may observe, That all Causes are
required to make an Action good, but one defective Circumstance will render an
Action bad.

Fourthly, Good works will then be called in for Evidence, because by them we
are like God: What one Evangelist has, Be perfect as your heavenly Father is
perfect; another renders it, Be you merciful as your Heavenly Father: Some
things God teaches us by precept, other things he teaches us by Example; as
to repent by Precept, to love by Example: Now we more imitate God in following
his Precepts, then in obeying his Commands: Simply so considered, we are more
like God in our Love, then in our Repentance; hence God in Scripture is called
Love, but not Faith properly: A Believer that is a good man, a man full of
compassion and bowels of mercy, is the most godly, the most God-like man in the
world.

For the Application and Conclusion of this Doctrine, That when a Believer
dies, his works die not with him.

Use 1. Hence, is by way of Caution concerning good works: Good works, say the
Papists on this Scripture, go before in respect of Merit, but follow after in
respect of Reward; but the words speak of the Reward that follows, not of the
Merit that goes before; a Reward we acknowledge, Merit we deny; we shall be
rewarded according to our good Works, but not for our good Works: It is
sufficient to merit, that merit suffices not.

The Antinomians say, Good works are not necessary for Salvation; they might
better say, They are not necessary as to Justification; that is, that they
Justify not: He that beggeth Mercy, boasts not of Merit: Good works do not
go before, but follow us to Heaven: The blood of Christ, is the golden Key to
open the door of Paradise. It is reported, that the Doctrine of Simon Magus,
was, That a bare profession of Faith, without a reformation in the life, was
sufficient for salvation. Austin justly conceives that one reason why James so
prefers Works, Cave non tantum ab operibus malis sed etiam a bonis.
as to say, That Abraham was justified by them, was, because that some
Licentiats had so abused the Doctrine of Faith delivered before by Paul: Good
works are such things, as no man can be saved for them, and yet no man can be
saved without them: The truth is, we are not only not saved for our Works,
that we are not so much as saved for our Faith.

The greatest degree of Faith, is not worth the least or lowest degree of
Glory: It was height of Pride, that made a Jesuit say, Coelum gratis non
accipiam; the value of Faith grows, non ex persona credente, vel ex natura
fidei, sed ex pacto contrahenti, not so much from our condition, as from Gods
Covenant; He that believes shall be saved: There is no inconsistency between
these two Propositions, He that believes, and he that repents shall be saved:
For though we are justified by Faith only, yet not by Faith alone; that is,
Works justify not with Faith, and Faith justifies not without Works: Good
Works qualify the subject believing, but Faith is the proper instrument of
receiving the Covenant of Grace: Faith is an evidence to us of our
righteousness before God, and Works are an evidence of the truth of our Faith
before men: Out of the point of Justification, Works cannot be sufficiciently
justified or commended, but in the point of Justification Works are not to be
admitted: How hard is it to join together, what God would not have separated?
Faith and Works; so to work and repent, as if we were to be saved, q. d.
without Faith; and so to believe, as if we were to be saved without Works: How
difficult is it for a man, a moral man, to see the necessity of Faith? to cry
out, What though I am righteous before men, if yet I should want the
righteousness of Christ before God? My righteousness is but as rags, my duties
but as dung, my tears need Christ's blood: Lord! without thy free Grace, and a
Plaster of the merits of Christ, notwithstanding all my Prayers and
Performances I am undone. Luther well observes, how much the believing and the
begetting Abraham differs; the begetting Abraham was a worker, the believing
Abraham was righteous, his Faith was on Christ the object of Faith; and we are
blessed, not with the working, but with the believing Abraham.

Use 2. Is for the information about the aim and end of men in their Works: It
is curiously questioned, whether it be not a sordid way of obedience, for a man
to eye his reward in his obedience; but it is more becoming a Philosopher then
a Divine (I judge) to provoke his Auditors to virtue, without the least
reflection of a future reward.

If that be true which is affirmed by many, that Grace and Glory differ not
specifically, but gradually; and that be true which is affirmed by all, That
man's Happiness and Gods Glory be indisputably conjoined in Heaven; then
certainly we may have our eye to the Star, while we have our hand at the Helm;
we may have one eye to our Reward, as well as the other to the Work: As it is
no Prerogative act for God to damn the Hypocrite at last day, but an act of
Justice, sin being the antecedent cause of wrath; so the salvation of the
Upright, will not appear to be the product only of Gods Arbitrary Grace, but
(according to his revealed truth) the manifestation of his remunerative
righteousness; Grace in us being, though not the cause, yet the antecedent of
Glory:

Hence it is, that the Gospel deters us from sin, by arguments formed out of
Hell, as the unquenchable fire, and the terrors of the Lord; so it animates us
to duty, by arguments made out of Heaven and Glory: How does it embolden a
Believer to sail through Storms and Tempests, when he thinks on his Harbor; to
resist unto blood, and rather to die for, then deny Christ when he ponders on
his Crown? Let us endure the cold frosts, let us be content, though we are
buffeted for a while, cried the Martyrs of old, for Heaven will make amends for
all: There may be amor mercedis, a love of the Reward (as well of the Rewarder)
and yet no mercinary love, no amor mercenarius: When I will not love God
without this world, when I love or respect God only for riches and honors,
etc. this is a mercinary love; but not when I love God for the hoped perfection
of my Graces, for the moral obolition of my sins, for the contemplation of his
presence in light; for if the enjoyment of God be the essential Heaven, then to
love the enjoyment of God, is to love Heaven; and I am no more mercinary for
loving of God the more for Heaven, then for loving of the enjoyment of God:
Some have applauded the strength of direct obedience, without eyeing the reward
by an Emblem of a Lady, with a Water-pot in one hand, and a Firebrand in the
other, saying, She would serve God, though with the water Hellfire were
quenched, and there were no torments to punish her for sin; though with the
fire Paradise were consumed, and there were no everlasting happiness to reward
her, Yet methinks, though good use may be made of such Hyperbolies, they do not
so fully speak to a Christian under trials; they teach us how to run, but they
obscure the Garland; they teach us how to shoot, but in the mean time take away
the mark: Its true, God is principally to be beloved for himself, and vix
queritur Deus, propter deum; and so he may be, and yet be loved for Heaven.

We may pray and wrestle against sin for the love of our King, and yet have the
hope of a Kingdom to be enjoyed after the battle: The Doctrine of the
Resurrection, is the foundation of Religion; and he that considers not of the
Resurrection of the flesh, will hardly be drawn to mortify the flesh; I know
no such suggestion in the Bible: Sinners! Would you deny the lusts of the
flesh, and the pomp and vanity of the World, if there were no Resurrection, no
Salvation? And its a dangerous temptation to a perplexed conscience, to have
his sincerity tried by this touchstone; if you cannot serve God without a reward
in Heaven, you are an Hypocrite.

Use 3. Is for terror unto two sorts of Workers.

1. Evil workers. 2. Idle workers.
1. To Evil workers: Shall the works of Gods Children follow them, then by just
consequence your evil works, your lying, your scoffing at Religion shall follow
you: As righteousness shall follow the righteous, so wickedness shall follow
the wicked: Those that will not now find out their sins, Morientes divitias
hic dimittunt, and peccata sua secum portant.
their sins shall one day find out them, and judgment shall find out their
sins: Even as Destruction said to Pride, they being both invited to a Feast,
contending who should go before, and who should follow; said Pride, Go you
before; no, replied Destruction, I prae, sequar; Go you before, and I will
follow after: So here impenitency goes before to Hell, and the impenitent
sinner follows after; their sins reached to Heaven, (...), accumulata
pervenerunt; as one Mountain laid on the top of another, the same word as in my
Text, so one sin follows another, until the sinner and his sins meet together
in Hell: The wicked shall not carry their goods, but their evils with them:
They shall leave their Estates, their Gold behind them, but they shall carry
their oppression, their guilt with them; they shall lie down in their sins, and
their sins shall rise with them; their sins shall go into Hell with them, and
there stare them in the face; here a Regiment of Oaths on the one hand, there
a Regiment of Lies on the other hand: Happy would the wicked be, that they
could go naked out of this World, as free from their sins, as of their riches

If men shall be condemned for idle words, much more for ill works: How many
will then wish their Blasphemies against the Mediator unprinted, and their
slanderous Libels against men unpublished to the World? when God himself shall
read a black Bill or Indictment against them, out of every line they wrote, and
make every Volumn a Faggot to burn and torment them withal; and the more
Proselites men have gained to their damnable Errors, the more additions of
Wrath they shall have to all Eternity: As Christ said, Can men gather Grapes of
Thorns, or Figs of Thistles; So comparing Works to Trees, Rewards to Fruits;
Consider, Will thy gall and wormwood ever make pleasant Drink? These wild and
sour Grapes, ever yield sweet Wine: This ignorance, this impenitency, these
vulgar Oaths, and wanton dalliances, are these the seed-plot of Heaven, the
foundation upon which I build my salvation? No, no, my soul, as thou brewest so
thou must drink; as thou sowest, so thou must reap: Alas, how unfruitful have
I been in good works? how fruitful in evil? whilst others have been a praying,
wretched I have been a cursing; while others have spent their time in gathering
of Manna to feed their souls, I have been gathering of sticks to burn my soul
withal: I had a season to go into Gods Vineyard, the Spirit called, Conscience
called, Providence called, but I was idle, but I was evil: How can I, that have
so long stood idle (and O that I had only been idle and done nothing!) look
for the penny? or that have refused to mortify a last look for a Crown? or for
the Harvest of Glory, that have neglected my seed time? Can I think to find
the living among the dead? the Tree of Life out of Paradise? Heaven in Hell? O
that either my works had been according to my profession, or my profession
according to my works! Aut professio secundum opera, aut opera secundum
professionem: When the Saints die, they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them (through Free Grace in glorious rewards.) When the wicked dye, they
rest from their labors too, but their works follow them (through Divine
Justice) into everlasting punishment.

Thus many may everlastingly rest from their troubles in this world, and when
they have done so, go into a world of everlasting troubles; Opera sequuntur
bonos, persequuntur malos: Omnia mala, mali secum portant.

Secondly, As it reproves evil, so also Idle workers.

Ah Christians, How ready are we to neglect our Watch! to give over our Work!
to make the affairs of this world our (...), our main work, and the affairs
of Heaven our (...), things by the by. Volumus assequi Christum, sed non sequi,
how do we set our affections on things Temporal, while we neglect the things
that are Eternal! Are we by nature Children of wrath? have we seasons offered
us for reconciliation? and shall we neglect our Souls? Pretend the world
against God; and desperately venture our Salvation upon an Arbritary God, upon
an, it may be we may be saved.

Do we know already, that they that dye in sins, shall forever live in
everlasting burnings, and shall we dare live in sin, and go out of the world
in that same state of enmity against God, with which we came into this world?
Is heaven a Kingdom, and have we no violence to offer for it? Will this be a
sufficient Apology for any man to say at last day, "Lord, I never opposed thy
ways when I did not profess them; I did not despise the offers of grace,
though I did neglect them? Have you any greater work to do in the world, then
to look after the glorifying of God, and the salvation of your souls? I must
acknowledge, that in the first work of Grace, we are rather Passive than
Active, (for ut Deus operatur in nobis, ut accedamus ita operatur ne decedamus)
and that without the influence of Omnipotency we can do nothing but undo our
selves; and that when we have done all we can, we must say (not in a
Jesuitical Complement, but really) we are unprofitable servants, yet our
impotency contracted and nourished by our selves, excuses not, but aggravates
our weakness; though we cannot create the breath of the Spirit, yet cannot we
hang out our sails to entertain it; though we cannot make the Pool of
Bethesdah, the ordinances of God effectual for our cure, yet cannot we come and
lay our selves at the Pool to wait the motion of the Angel.

Is it not our duty to pray for, as well as to pray in the Spirit? Because God
works in us both to will and to do, shall we therefore sit still, and not
work out our salvation with fear and trembling? might not we have done more for
our souls then we have done? Does God compel us to run to a Tavern, when we
should go to Church? Is it no burden to be a Pack-horse and Drudge to the
Devil, and yet it is a burden to be a servant, a freeman, a Son of God? Will
it not be a greater trouble to suffer hereafter the will of God, Go ye cursed,
then now it is to do his will, Believe and repent? Non posse pretendiditur, cum
nolle est in causa? My Beloved, No work, no reward, no holiness, no Heaven,
roundly and plainly (as 'twas said in another case) either turn or burn; Do and
live is Evangelical Language, as well as Legal: Do on Earth, or suffer in Hell:
Find out a new Heaven if you can, for you shall never find out a new way to
the old; if ever you go before to Heaven, your works must follow you: Si non
vertamus verba in opera, Deus vertet verba in verbera, If we turn not our words
into works, God will turn our words into blows. It was the trouble of a Martyr
when he was led to the stake, that he was now going to that place where he
should receive wages but do no work.

Use 4. Is for comfort to the godly and holy: Your works of goodness shall
follow you, not your sins: Pharaoh followed Israel to the Red Sea, and there he
left them; the Pilot follows the Merchant-man to the Harbors mouth, and there
leaves him: That busy Divil, that now prosecutes you from one Ordinance to
another with his temptations; that envious World, that now persecutes you from
one place to another, with reproaches and revilings, shall then prosecute and
persecute you no more; farewell troubles and trials, farewell hardness of
heart, and unprofitableness under the means of Grace, and that for ever.

Remember Christians, that Death that is a Trap door to let some down into
hell, shall be a Portal or Gate to let you into heaven. That that stroke of the
King of terrors, that shall separate your souls from your bodies, shall
separate sin likewise from you souls: Your sorrows now are mixed with your
joys, your darkness with your light, you have indeed some rest while you
labor, how full then will your rest be, when you shall rest from your labors,
and work no more? this is your day of working, hereafter is your day of
rewarding; this is your seedtime, hereafter is your harvest; Si Deus tam bonus
sequentibus, quam bonus fuerit consequentibus? though here you sigh and mourn,
yet hereafter you shall sing and rejoice; though here you are as Pearls hid
in, and besmeared with dirt, yet hereafter you shall shine as the Sun: Then you
shall see the fruit of the travels of your souls, then you shall not repent of
your mortification and repentance; Then finally will it appear that that man is
happier that has had Saint Paul's Coat, with his heavenly graces, then the
Purple Robes of Princes with all their Kingdoms.

Fifthly, By way of Advice to all, That they may so carry themselves while they
live, that their works may gloriously follow them when they die. To which
purpose,

First, Be importunate at the Throne of Grace, that ye may be made the
workmanship of God, which you must be, before you can do the work of God.
Fiamus opus Dei, ut facimus opus Dei; your natures must be renewed before you
can do new actions: A bad man can never Theologically do good works, morally
he may, but he that does a moral work only, shall have a moral reward only; as
the wheel turns round, not to the end it may be made round: But on the
contrary, as the stemms must first be grafted on the stock, before they can
bring forth fruit, so we must be Branches in Christ, united to, and made one
with him, before we can be fruitful in good works.

The Church in the Canticles is described no where by the beauty of her hands
or fingers, though often by the beauty of other parts of her body, because a
Christian should abound in good works, and yet in silence without boasting. Or
Secondly, because it is Christ alone, that works all our works in us and Grace,
is not our Creature, but the manufacture of Christ: Bona opera non praecedunt
Justificandum, sed sequntur Justificatum.

Secondly, If you would have your good works to follow you, send them before
you: Now Repent, now Believe, and hereafter you shall have the reward of your
Repentance, and of your Faith; and as for Charity, part with that you cannot
keep, that you may obtain that you cannot lose: When the world shall leave you,
your good works shall follow you, your gracious actions; your good works are an
inexhaustible fountain, that shall never be dried up, a durable spring that
shall never fail; they are acts of time, short in performance, yet eternal in
their recompense: Non transeunt opera nostra, sicut transire videntur, sed
velut aeternitatis semina jaciuntur: Though they are sown in this world, they
shall spring in the next; that which you lay out for Christ on earth, you lay
up for your selves in Heaven; the hand of the poor is the Treasury, the
Gazophylacium of Christ; and by charity, in a Gospel sense, you make your Maker
your Debtor; and surely if thou be the Creditor of the Almighty, it will not be
long ere he come out of thy Books: How foolish are they that fear to lose their
wealth by giving it, and fear not to lose themselves by keeping it? He that
lays up his Gold may be a good Jailor, but he that lays it out is a good
steward. Merchants traffic thither with a commodity where it is precious, in
regard of scarcity: We do not buy Wines in England to carry them to France;
Spices in France to carry them to the Indies: so for labor and work, repentance
and mortification, there is none of them in Heaven, there is Peace and Glory,
and the favor of God indeed: Their works, in my Text, go with them, they dare
not go without their fraught: A Merchant without his Commodity, has but a
sorry welcome: God will ask men that arrive at Heaven Gates, ubi opera? Rev.
22.12. His reward shall be according to our works: Thou have riches here, and
here be objects that need thy riches, the poor; in Heaven there are riches
enough, but no poor; therefore by faith in Christ, make over to them thy moneys
in this world, that by Bill of Exchange thou may receive it in the world to
come; that only you carry with you, which you send before you: Do good while
it is in your power, relieve the oppressed, succor the fatherless, while your
Estates are your own, when you are dead, your riches belong to others; one
light carried before a man, is more serviceable then twenty carried after him:
In your compassion to the distressed, or for pious uses, let your hands be your
Executors, and your eyes your Overseers; and that I may not be mistaken, let
your Charity have these two Qualifications.

1. Let your works be done in Faith; as without works we cannot profit men, so
without Faith we cannot please God; we must be married to Christ, or our
children are not Legitimate, our works are not right: All our surviving out of
the Ark, will not save us from the deluge of Gods wrath: As Isaac said to
Abraham, Father, here is the Altar and the wood, but where is the sacrifice? so
at last day, when you shall knock at Gods door, and seek to enter, and hold up
your Lamps and cry, Lord! we are Virgins, we are Christians, we were hospitable
and charitable according to thy command, let our neighbors be witnesses of our
good works; but, will the Lord reply, True, here are your duties and your
works, but where is my grace of Faith? Are these a satisfaction to my Justice?
where is my Benjamin, the righteousness of my Son to plead for you? My Beloved,
There seems to be less glory in Faith, then in any other Grace, it seemed but a
sorry Grace, a Grace of no great virtue; Holiness is acceptable, because it
honors God; Charity is noble, because it profits men; Thankfulness is
melodious, because its the tune of Angels: Other works seem to make God a
Debtor, to give as it were something to God; but ad quid fides? What is Faith
good for? Yes, it is good for every good purpose, its the root of all the
Graces, its the richest Grace, because its the enriching Grace; if Faith go
before, Works will follow: Vbi Christus non est boni operis fundamentum, ibi
nullum est bonum aedificium.

2. As works of Charity must be qualified with Faith, (or else our haec ego
feci, haec ego feci, this and that have I done, are but faeces dregs, as Luther
says aptly) so they must be qualified with sincerity; while the penny is in the
hand, let Gods glory be in the heart: Your lights must shine, so that men
seeing your good works, may glorify God; but not that men should see your
works, and glorify you, and cry you up and down, There goes a charitable man,
there goes a great worker: Men judge of the heart by the work, but God judges
of the work by the heart: At the Judgment Bar it will be no excuse before God,
if the matter of the work be ill to plead the goodness of the heart; to say,
Though I was a common Blasphemer of thy name, a common neglecter of holy
duties, yet I had an honest heart; so when the heart is naught, there is no
pleading before God the goodness of the work; you fasted, and professed, and
were charitable; Will the Lord say (as he did to the Jews) but was it for my
Glory, for the exaltation of my name? out of the sense of my love? Cains works
had been good, if Cains heart had not been evil: How sad will it be for some,
to behold at the last day the mites of others to be received, and their own
talents rejected; the good works of many to leave them, and their evil works
only to follow them? Christus opera nostra, non tam actibus, quam finibus
pensat.

3. Work while you have time to work; cast up your accounts, before you come to
give up your accounts, or your accounts will cast up you: How vainly do many
talk of working for Heaven, when they are going from the place of working, to
the place of rewarding, of doing the greatest work, to repent, to believe, when
they have least strength to do them, of turning their souls to God, when they
can hardly turn their bodies on their beds? Believe it, believe it Christians!
its too much for one man, and that at one time, to look after a sick soul, and
a sick body together; if ever you would have your works to follow you when
dead, follow you your works while you live, be earnest in self-examination,
industrious in making your Calling and Election sure; like wise Virgins, Get
not only lamps into your hands, but oil also into your lamps: The Grave is a
place for resting from out works, not of working for rest: The Judgment Bar is
a place for the distribution of Justice, not for the dispensation of Mercy; now
or never, now if ever, work out your salvation, get the one thing necessary:
Surgunt impii non ad judicium, sed ad condemnationem: The wise man tells us,
There is no work to be done in the Grave, that is not a shop to work in, but a
Grave to rest in; that's not a time for the killing of the worm of guilt in our
souls, when the worms are gnawing and feeding on our bodies: God will not send
Prophets to the grave, nor set up a Pulpit in Hell for the Preaching of
salvation to the dead or damned.

Lastly I might add, Take examples from Gods Oracles, and from Providence,
follow them that have so followed Christ; as ever you would have your persons
follow Gods servants to glory, let your faith and love follow their examples
that are left behind on earth.

FINIS.
Good Reader,
IN regard of the known exemplariness of the conversation of this virtuous Lady
deceased, I am persuaded (from arguments brought as to the common good) that
this her following Character be annexed to my Sermon.

It is reported of a great man, that he had good Intellectuals, but bad Morals:
This honorable Lady had a good head, and also the addition of a good heart, not
to mention her acquaintance with several Languages; she was best versed in the
Language of Canaan; she was able solidly to maintain the controversies of the
Church of God against Papists, Socinians, etc. It was her Honor, while other
Ladies spent their time in reading Romances, and painting their faces, that she
spent her time in reading the Oracles of God, and adorning her soul: Her
private family duties, justled not out her public attendance on Gods
Ordinances, nor on the contrary; some few have hearts but want time; most have
time, but want hearts; but as God gave her time, so he also gave her a heart to
serve him: She never thought the Sabbath to be over, till the duties of the
Sabbath both public and private were over: She was able to comport her self
with the highest, yet she usually condescended, both in discourse and behavior,
to the lowest and meanest of Gods children: She brought forth much fruit, and
made but a little noise: She had much glory by her Face (but as Reverend Hall
says of Moses) in her proportion, she had more glory by her vail. I never heard
she was reconciled to any, for indeed, I never heard she had an enemy: The
Ministry have lost a judicious Favorer; the Poor a Physician; her endeared
Husband, the best Companion in this troublesome world. And that which is the
Crown of all, she acknowledged the imperfection of her own Duties, and the
necessity of Christ's righteousness. To conclude, she was of the number of those
few that lived and dyed in honor; she has done her work, and is gone to sleep.

FINIS.

