A JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE MADE INTO THE South Sea, BY THE BUCANIERS or FREEBOOTERS
OF AMERICA; From the Year 1684 to 1689.

Written by the Sieur Raveneau de Lussan.

To which is Added, The VOYAGE of the Sieur DE MONTAUBAN, Captain of the
FREEBOOTERS on the Coast of Guiney, in the Year 1695.

LONDON: Printed for The Newborough at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, John Nicholson at the King's Arms in Little Britain, and Benj.
Took at the Temple-Gate near Temple Bar. School.

A Certificate given by the Governor of S. Domingo to the Author of this
Journal, concerning his Service.
The Sieur de Cussy, His Majesty's Governor of the Tortoise Island, and the
Coast of St. Domingo.
WE do certify, That the Sieur Raveneau de Lussan has served in a Company of
Fourscore and Four Men with the Sieur Laurence de Graff, in the Quality of an
Ensign, against the Spaniards, His Majesty's Enemies; and that having gone into
the South Sea* he fell into the Company of other Freebooters, from whence not
being able to return, but by the force of their Arms; He has given upon those
Occasions signal Proofs both of his Zeal and Courage. In Testimony whereof We
have given him this Certificate* to which We have affixed Our Seal, and ordered
Our Secretary to Countersign the same.

Given at the Fort of Port-Paix, Le Cussy. the 17th. of May, 1688. By the
Governor's Command, Boyer.

A Copy of a Letter written by Monsieur de Cussy, His Maj^sty's Governor of
the Tortoise Island, and Coast of St. Domingo, to Monsieur de Lubert,
Treasurer-General of the Marine, upon the Subject Matter of this Author's
Iournal.
SIR,
I Have taken Notice from those Letters you have done me the Honor to write
unto me the preceding Year, that you Interest your self in the Affairs of the
Sieur Raveneau de Lussan; Wherefore, Sir, I have thought it my Duty to Inform
you of his Return from the South Sea, with Two Hundred and Sixty of his
Comrades, who got clear out of that Country, by the performing of Wonderful
Actions, the Particulars whereof I shall not enter upon, since he will have the
Honor to give you an Exact and Faithful Account of them himself, being the
only Person of all the Company that has kept a Journal.

I was in hopes to have got him embarked in the King's Ship, called the Marine,
which was to be gone in two days, and Monsieur de Beaugeau the Commander,
promised me to give him his Table upon your Account: But the said Sieur de
Lussan thinking the Frigate to be gone, stayed with meat Port-Paix, to wait an
Opportunity of meeting with another Ship that should be bound directly for
Diep. I heartily wish, Sir, I could meet with any Opportunity of serving you in
these Parts, I should do it with exceeding Pleasure, as being with all
Deference and Respect imaginable,

SIR, At the Cape, May 7, 1688. Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, De
Cussy.

A Copy of another Letter written by the said Monsieur de Cussy to the Father
of the Author of this Iournal.
SIR,
I Cannot let your Son be gone, without testifying to you how much concerned I
am in the Satisfaction and Joy you will have to see him return from so long and
toylsom a Voyage, as I am confident of your being sorry at present, that I had
not sent him home to you at the time you desired, which yet I should not have
failed to do, had he not been absent, and at whose return I delivered him one
of your Letters, which I always preserved safe with those of Monsieur de
Lubert, He has no occasion to make use of me, though I have made him an offer of
my utmost Service. I may say, without Vanity, that he has made the greatest and
finest Voyage in our Age, and that he has seen Countries, which a great many
People in the World content themselves to view in Maps, without desiring any
other sight of them, though they had all the Riches thereof bestowed upon them
for their pains. Besides the Pleasure you will have to see your Son again, you
will have also that of hearing him Discourse, pertinently enough, of his
Voyages and Adventures, there being no other besides himself of all the Company
that can give an exact Account thereof, as having all along applied himself to
keep a very Punctual Journal of all Transactions, which I am confident will be
pleasing to my Lord Marquess de Signelay: I have my self the Honor to write to
him concerning it, that so I might engage your Son to go and Present it to him,
which perhaps otherwise he would not have adventured to do, out of the little
Esteem himself has of his own Work, This is what offers it self at present for
me to write to you, assuring you I should take a deal of Pleasure to find my
self in any Condition to serve him, and that I am,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, De Cussy.
At the Fort of Port-Paix^ May the 18th* 1688.
CHAP I.
A Iournal made by the Free-Booters into the South Sea, in 1684. and in the
following Years.
IT is no very uncommon thing for a Child that is a Native of Paris, The
Authors first Adventures and Disposition.
to go and seek his Fortune abroad, and to entertain a fixed Design of becoming
a Man engaged in hazardous Adventures. This City, within which most of the
Wonders of the World are contained, and which is perhaps the greatest that can
be met with, ought, in my Opinion, to have the Preference of any other upon the
Face of the Earth. But who is he that can penetrate into the Secrets of Nature,
and give a Reason for some sort of Inclinations she works in the Minds of
Mortals? As for my self, I must confess I am not able to give an Account of the
Depth of my Desires; and all that I can say, is, That I have always had a most
passionate Disposition for Travel. Scarce was I Seven Years old, when, through
some innate Notions, whereof I had not the Mastery, I began to steal out of my
Father's House: It Is true, my first Rambles were not far, because my Age and
Strength would not allow them to be so; but they were so much the more
frequent; and I have often given my Parents the trouble to look after me in the
Suburbs, and that Place we call la Vilette: However, as I grew up, my
Excursions were the larger, and by degrees I accustomed my self to lose a slght
of Paris.

This rambling sort of Humor was accompanied with another, which I dare not
dignifie with the Name of a Martial one, but was such as wrought in me an
ardent Desire to see some Siege or Battle: I could not hear the Noise of the
Drum in the Streets without those Transports of Mind, the remembrance whereof
does still operate a kind of a vigorous Heat and Joy in me. It so fell out at
length, that I met with an Officer, with whom I had but a slender Acquaintance,
but my Warlike Genius quickly inclined me to make him my Friend. I looked upon
him as a Person who could be very serviceable to me in my Designs; and it was
with this Prospect I applied my self to manage him. The Siege of Conde being
happily commenced at this time, and he being obliged to serve there with his
Company, I made him the offer of a Sword that had hither to done neither good
not harm to any Man, but whi^^ I was passionately desirous to make use of. Here
(...) was that he gave me the first Instances of his Friendship, for he took me
freely along with him, and kept me all the Campaign; at the breaking up whereof
(...) returned with him no ways discouraged, or weary (...) War, as the
greatest part of them are, who have had but just a Taste of it. And this I tell
you was my first Adventure.

The second was not quite so good, for the Success that attended it, tho it was
alike agreeable to my Palate, and according to my Heart's Desire, I happened to
become a Cadet in the Marine Regiment, but I fell in to the Hands of a Captain,
who was* wondrous skilful to drain the Children of the Family of their Money;
so that this Campaign, wherein I hoped to have done the King some Service, was
worn away in Expence^ My Father gave more than he should, or I delerved to get
my Discharge, and to set me once at full Liberty to take to what I liked best;
It was not perha^ his Inclination I should do so, but it was mine, and was not
long to seek.

God, who it seems, was not willing to make me (...) of Conceit with the Trade,
was so much the better Guide unto me at this time, as I was ill-guided before^^
For Monsieur the Count d' Avegean, whose per^onal Merit has sufficiently
distinguished him in the Body (...) the French Guards, took me along with him
to the Siege of St. Guislain, where I failed not to meet with new Pleasures in
the use of Arms, tho it were never so hot. There were a great many Men's Lives
lost at this Siege which yet did not cool the Desires I had to hazard m^ own:
And tho my Parents, who could not well broo^ this my gadding Humor, were in
hopes the Fatigu^^ of War would cure me of it, they were mistaken in the
matter; for I was no sooner got upon the Stones (...) Paris, but I grew weary
of being there. I had nothing but Voyages in my Head, and those that were
longest and most accompanied with Dangers, appeared to m^ to be the best. For a
Person never to get out of his Native Country, and to be ignorant how the rest
of the Earth stands, appeared to me a matter that should be appropriate to a
Woman only; Whereas it was my Judgment, That a Man should never be confined to
one Place, and that nothing could suit him better than to make himself
acquainted with all those of his own Spe^ies. To travel by Land, I thought both
long and difficult, and therefore I concluded I could sooner and more safely
accomplish my Designs by betaking my self to the Sea; and now you find me ready
to go on board.

There was nothing omitted on the part of Parents that were full of tender
Affections for an extravagant Child, to divert me from my Resolution; But as to
Youngmen, such as I was, it may be said, as is usually done of Womenkind, That
what they will, God wills; and to say the Truth, I was overruled by my
Inclination herein; wherefore when they perceived, that absolutely to oppose my
Humor, would make me but the more opiniative; they proposed I should take a
Voyage for S. Domingo, where I should find Friends and Protection in case of
need; and as this exactly suited both with my Desires and Designs, and that
provided I could get to Sea, I did not care whither bound; I very readily
obeyed.

Diep was the Place where I embarked, Embarks at Diep for America.
and from whence I parted on the 5th of March, 1679. with greater Satisfaction
of Mind than I am well able to express: That Element; which, to the Generality
of Men, seems very frightful, appeared to me the most amiable and delightful of
any in the World. The Winds, if I May say so, wrought in me some Delight; for I
found that almost every little Blast brought us happily onward on our Way: And
I was so overjoyed to find my self in so desirable an Island, that I thought no
more of the Hazards my Voyage made me liable to. Let no Man therefore be amazed
thereat, if he finds none of them contained in my Journal. And seeing there are
other Persons who have been particular enought in their Relation given of this
Passage, I have this only to say, that I safely arrived, through the Mercy of
God, at S. Domingo; and if any one has the Curiosity to follow me in my
remaining Expedition, he must begin from thence.

I continued there, however, for above three Years not only in order to see the
Country, but through such Conjunctures as would not admit me to go out of it; I
found my self chained there to a Frenchman; that was so far from deserving the
Name of one, that his harde^ed Malice much better became a Turk. But what
Misery soever I have undergone with him, I freely for give him, being resolved
to forget his Name, which shall not mention in this place, because the Laws of
Christianity requires it at my Hands; tho as to matt^^ of Charity he is not to
expect much of that in me since he on his part has been every way defective in
the Exercise thereof upon my Account. But my Patience^ at last being quite worn
out, as being weary of those Cruelties, whereof I saw no end, I made my
Complaint^ to Monsieur de Franquesnay the King's Lieutenant, wh^ acted as
Governor since the others Decease; and who^^ Generosity proved to be a
Sanctuary to me, (...) readily consenting to take me to his own House, when I
staid six whole Months.

I had borrowed Money in the mean time, Resolvests turn Free-Booter.
and thought it was the part of an honest Man to repay i^ My Parents would have
been perhaps very willing (...) have paid my Debts, but they could hear nothing
from me, nor I from them; and the Letters they sent (...) passed through such
officious Hands, that they spared (...) the Charge of Postage. I was therefore
necessitated (...) seek out some other way to free my self; and this found in
meeting with that which satisfied the natu^^ Inclination I had for traveling.
I bethought my self (...) making one of the Free-Booters Gang, to go a Voyag^
with them, and to borrow for the Payment of (...) Debts, as much Money as I
could from the Sp^niards. Now these sorts of Borrowings have this Advantage
attending them, That there is no Obligai^^ of Repayment, as in our Country,
they being estee^ed the Product of a Just War; and seeing the place (...)
Action is beyond the Line, there is no Talk there (...) making any Restitution:
Besides which, we may a^ observe in this place, that there was then a Rupt^^
between the Two Crowns, and that we had a so mal Commission from my Lord
Admiral to infest (...) Spaniards.

There was no question to be made, but I could find a Captain that would
receive me; and I was not long in making the Choice, since there was not many
of them at that time to pitch upon. Laurence de Graff was the Man I most
fancied, who would make a special Corsair; and tho he had not been long
arrived, all that he wanted, was to be gone as well as I. We were in a few
hours time well satisfied with each other, and became such Friends, as those
are wont to be, who are about to run the same Rifque of Fortune, and apparently
to die together. This last indeed we should have reckoned upon with most
appearance of Reason, but it was what we least thought of. My Departure took up
all my Thoughts, I furnished my self with Arms and other small Necessaries, at
the Charge of Monsieur de Franquesnay, who was very ready to advance me some
Money, which I have paid him since, and whose kindness I shall never forget. At
last the day came, and I must freely say, it was, in my Opinion, one of the
best in the Course of my Life. On the 22d, of November, in the Year 1684. we
departed from Pettit-Guaves, on the Coast of St. Domingo, to the number of 120
Men on Board a Prize taken some time before by Captain Laurence de Graff, from
the Spaniards, which they sent as an Advice-boat from Carthagena on the Terra
Firma of America, to Spain.

Our Design was to go and join our selves with a Fleet of Free-Booters, which
we were in hopes to meet with before the Havana, a great City in the Isle of
Cuba to the North, and about fourteen Leagues distant from St. Domingo.

We anchored on the 4th of December at the Tortoise Island to take in Water,
and on the 6th sailed away in order to return to the Coast of St. Domingo,
which is but Three Leagues off, and where we arrived the 12th, casting Anchor
at Cape Francis, where we took in our full Store of Water and Wood. We left
this Place on the 17th, and were taken with a North Wind two Leagues from the
Road in such a manner, that we lost our Shalloop, which was too big to be put
upon our Gibbet. Toward Evening we sailed back to a Place of Safety, where we
were obliged to stay Two Days waiting for a Canoe we had sent to buy at the
Cape, from whence we came, such things a^ we wanted for making up the Loss of
our Chaloop.

On the twentieth we made ready to endeavor to rejoyn the Victorious, a Ship
that came with ^^ from the Cape, belonging to Nantes, and bound to the Isles of
the Wind, which had on Board the Commander of St. Laurence, Lieutenant General
of the French Islands and the Coasts of the Terra Firma of America, and
Monsieur Begone Intendant of Justice Policy, and the Finances of that Country,
to who^ we served as Convoy, left they should have been a^tacked by the Spanish
Pirogues that Cruise thereabouts. And indeed we had a great deal of Reason to
be concerned for the Safety of those Gentlemen who were in much Esteem with all
the Colonies of these Islands, because of the good Orders they kept, the exact
Justice they administered, and the Tr^^ quility the People enjoyed under them;
but we could not possibly set sight on this Ship, as not knowing wha^ Course
she steered.

The three and twentieth we steered our own Course and in the Evening
discovered a Ship to Leeward of us, to whom we gave Chase, but she braced (...)
to wait for us; and when we were come up (...) her, we found it was Captain le
Suer of Deep, who commanded a Flute called the Amerantha, whom (...) quickly
left, keeping our own Course. But on the Five and twentieth, which was
Christmas Day, we ha^ a great Calm till next day, when the Wind proving
contrary, obliged us to put back to the Port (...) Platta, on the Coast of St.
Domingo, where we (...) to the end of the Month.

On the First of January in the New Year, 168^ we doubled Cape St. Francis, and
next day by (...) in the Morning did the same by Cape Cabrott, (...) we doubled
that of Savona toward Noon, they being all situated on the same Coast, and
that day one of our Men died.

On the Fourth we sailed in sight of la Mona, next day coasted the Isle of
Puerto Rico, and la Savona and then steered South-East and by South, till the
Eleventh, when we discovered the Isles, of Ave, to-towards which we bore till
the Evening, and doubled them on the Twelfth about Eleven in the Morning,
keeping still the same Course till we came to the Isle de la Roca; where there
was also another Rendezvous of our Men of War to be, which we were going to
seek out.

On the Thirteenth, at Seven in the Morning, we discovered the main Land of
America, and were becalmed next Day, which continued to the Fifteenth at Noon,
when we had a fresh Gale, and steered North North-East till the Seventeenth,
when about Moon-setting we descried Two Ships and Four Boats to Windward of us,
about a Cannon-Shot's Distance, that had the Cape of us, which brought us upon
Deck to make all ready.

One of those Boats on the Eighteenth by break of Day, being a Tartane
commanded by Captain John Rose, as not knowing us presently, came up and ha^ed
us; and as our Captain had a Commission from the Lord High Admiral of France,
the Count of Thoulouse, we made answer from Paris, and put out our Flag; But
Rose who would not know us so, believing we had no other Intention in feigning
our selves to be a King's Ship, than to get clear off him, gave (...) Two Guns
to make us strike, insomuch that taking him really for a Spaniard, we knocked
out the Head of Two Barrels of Powder, in order to burn our selves, and blow up
the Ship, rather than fall into the Hands of those People, who never gave us
Quarter, but were wont to make us suffer all imaginable Torments, they
beginning usually with the Captain, whom they hang with his Commission about
his Neck: But one of the Two Ships came up with us in a Moment, and knowing
what we were, gave us a Signal, which was so much the more Satisfaction to us,
that instead of Enemies, which we took them to be, they proved to be not only
Friends, but those very Ships we were in quest of, which obliged us to put in
at the Cape, and spend that Day to visit one another.

One of these Two Ships belonged to Captain Michael Landresson, and was called
The Mutinous, but formerly The Peace; and the other to Captain Laurence de
Graff, whose Name was The Neptune, but once The St. Francis, and which he had
quitted, when he went in his Prize to St. Domingo to get a new Commission of
the Governor, his own that he had being then expired. The first of these Ships
carried Fifty Pieces of Cannon, and the other Forty four, and had both of them
been Two Spanish Armadilla's, who the Year before coming out of Carthagena, to
take the Ships commanded as well by the Captains, Laurence and Michael, as
those of Captains, John Quet and le Sage, were themselves taken by those, whom
they were about to become Masters of: And as for the four Boats, they were
commanded by other Captains, whose Names were Rose Vigneron, La Grade, and an
English Traitor from Iamaica; By them we were informed that they were watching
in that Place for the Patach of Marguerita, and a Squadron of Spanish Ships,
which they expected would sail that way, in order to take them.

On the Nineteenth we resolved to quit that Post, and did all we could to get
up with the Isle of Curassol, a great part whereof belongs to the Hollanders.
We sailed in sight of those of Bonuaira and Roube^; and about Two in the
Afternoon of the same Day, we chased a Flemish Boat that came from the Port of
Guaira, on the Continent, and was returning to the Town of Curassol, Two
Leagues to Leeward of which we anchored that Evening in the Port of Sanct^
Barba.

On the Twentieth we sent away a Boat, under the Command of La Guard, to the
Town to ask the Governor leave to buy us Masts for Captain Laurence his Ship,
that had lost them in an Hurricane near the Isle of St. Thomas. But this he
absolutely refused, and shut up the Gates against us. Upon the Boat's Return,
and Relation given us of the Governor's Refusal, I carried him a Copy of our
Commission, hoping to engage him by that means to grant us our Request; But he
still persisted to deny ^s while a part of our Crew scrupled not in the mea^
time to go ashore, and enter into the Town after having left their Swords
behind them at the Gate.

On the Twenty third our Ships weighed Anchor, in order to sail for Sancta
Crux, which stands seven Leagues to Leeward of this Town, and in our Passage by
the Fort we saluted it, who returned us Gun for Gun* But the Governor finding
we were two Hundred Men of us in the Town, informed us on the twenty fourth by
beat of Drum, that it was his Pleasure we should be gone, and return forthwith
on board our Ships, and that he would give us Shallops to carry us thither,
provided we paid him two Pieces of Eight a Man, I presently discerned it was
his Will we should not go back by Land, because we must for that purpose cross
a Lake that stands at the foot of the Fort, which he had forbidden us to pass;
And this made me go and tell him, we gave him thanks for his Shaloops, that if
we were minded to go by Sea to rejoyn our Ships, we had Pirogues to carry us
thither; and that we had no other design to get to them by Land, but for a
walk's sake: To which he answered, That the Inhabitants there scrupled to let
us see their Island; but for all that, he would not let us pass over the Lake,
and so we were two days before we could reach Sancta Crux, where our Ships were
waiting for us.

We came afterward to know the reason of the Governor's Displeasure against
us, which was, that Capt. Laurence, and Captain Michael's Ships had taken two
Dutch Ships before the Havana, that were fraught for the Spaniards, having two
Hundred Thousand Pieces of Eight on board, whereof one half belonged to the
Dutch Company, and the rest to the Spaniards. These last, with whom we were at
War, being the only Persons that were pillaged, were pillaged, were
indempnified by the Dutch, who had charge of the said Ships, and who shared
with them the other one Hundred Thousand Pieces of Eight that belonged to their
Company, which the Free-Booters meddled not with, being at Peaco with that
Nation; And they easily persuaded their Principals that all had been taken from
them, and so we were punished for the Knavery these Dutchmen practiced toward
their own People.

Though this Island of Curassol be well enough known in France, A Description
of the Isle of Curassol.
I cannot but take notice, as I go along, that the Temperature of its Air is
the same with that of St. Domingo, and produces the same sort of Fruits* that
the Land is almost level throughout, and the Country very naked because of the
little Wood that grows there, but almost barren in several places, and produces
little to the owners besides Maes and small Millet, yet it is watered with
several Springs and Rivers. The Town that stands upon it, is small but very
nea^, being encompassed with an high though very thin Wall; There is a good and
safe Port belongs to it, and the Fort that commands it as well as the Town is
very regularly fortified; the Inhabitants are of several sorts of Religions,
the exercise thereof being free, the chief of which is that of the Dutch, of
the Jews, as well as of others; each of whom have their respective places of
Worship in the Town. The chief of their Trade consists in Sugar that grows
there, and of Wool which comes from the Sheep which breed upon the place in
great Numbers: Besides the Skins of these Animals, as also of a great many Oxen
and Cows which they keep in the lowest and best watered Grounds of this Island,
where it abounds in Pasture: they are altogether affected to the Spanish
Nation, with whom they have the main of their Trade.

On the twenty seventh we made ready and steered our Course for Capella Vella,
which is on the Continent of America, where we designed to fix our selves in
order to wait for the Patach of Marguerita, whereof I have already spoken: The
same day Captain Vigneron's boat left us to return to the Coast of St. Domingo,
because they had not Men enough to make any thing of the Enterprise, there
being no more than twenty on board her.

Being come to the Cape by the thirtieth, we anchored there; and our next care
was to set a Vigie or some Sentinels, to the Number of fifteen upon the top of
it, to give us notice when they discovered the Patach but next day we thought
it more advisable to pursue this following method to get Intelligence: We sent
on the first of February Captain Rose's Boat to the Mouth of the River la Ache
on the Continent, inhabited by Spaniards, and about twenty Leagues distant from
the Cape where we then were, under pretense of trading with them, but in
reality with a design to make some Prisoners, that to we might be informed
whether the Patach was passed by that way or no; for it was usual for her to
take in part of her lading in that River.

While we waited for the return of this Boat, I and some others went a shore to
view and observe the Country about the Cape. I understood it was inhabited by a
most cruel, barbarous and savage Indian Nation, who are neither Friends to, nor
have Society with any other People whatsoever, no not even with the Spaniards
themselves, who live round about them. They eat without any distinction
whatever they can catch, and are afraid of nothing but Swords and the like
Weapons; but as for Firearms they matter them not at all; we were satisfied to
have a sight of them as we returned, without having the Curiosity to make a
trial of their Teeth, by going farther up into a Country, were there was
nothing to be got.

I am not able to forbear in this place to give a strange Example of what I am
speaking, A strange Story of the Savages.
and of what this People can do, whom I take to be the oldest Free-Booters of
America. The Marquess of Maintenon, Governor of the Isle of Mary Gallant, who
had the command of one of the King's Frigates called the Witch, having taken a
Prize of fourteen Guns, which he went on Board, and finding himself one day
separated from his own Ship, was constrained, in order to take in water, to
cast Anchor at Boca del Drago on the Terra Firma of America, which was
inhabited by the same Indian People as live at Cape la Vella. He brought his
Ship as near the Shore as he could, and bringing all his Cannon to bear on one
side, he sent under the Covert of them his Shalloop with two and twenty armed
Men to fill their Casks with Water. Now those Savages lying in Ambush upon the
Seaside, did not give the Shalloop time to land, but throwing themselves
headlong into the Water, and rushing upon them in spite of the continual Fire
made upon them from the Cannon of the Man of War, they carried her with the two
and twenty Men for above fifty Paces to Land, where after they had killed them,
every one took his man upon his Back, and moved them off; then they returned,
and swimming to cut the Cables of the Ship to make her drive a-shoar, they
hoped also to serve those on board the same Sauce, but as good luck would have
it, they had time to loose their Sails and to make ready to put farther off
from the Shore.

On the second we put our Ships into a Careening-Posture, and on the eight
Rose's Boat returned to us, and gave an account, that as soon as they had
anchored at the Mouth of the River la Acha, they sent a small Canoe with six
Englishmen in it ashore, they being of our Crew, and at Peace then with the
Spaniards, who agreed with them, that next Morning about Sunrising, they would
fire a Gun to give the other notice to come on board to traffic with them;
That in the night they had put thirty men ashore to surprise those of the
Spaniards that should pass to and fro; But that the Spaniards having discerned
the Snare that was laid for them, fired all night, which gave all the
Inhabitants the alarm; That next Morning our People fired their Cannon of
Signal according to the Agreement, and put out English Colors, but it was to
no purpose, for the Spaniards according to all appearance, had no inclination
for those Goods they supposed we would trade with them in, so that our Men
finding their design had miscarried, weighed Anchor and sailed away to join us.

As we were of opinion at last that there was no hopes the Patach would pass
that way, The Free-Booters disagree and part.
we held a Council on board our Ship about forming another Design, but not
being able to agree with Captain Laurence, (who was owner of two thirds of the
Neptune) because he would have imposed upon us; there were fourscore and seven
that quitted the Ship and went on board the Prize in which we came from St.
Domingo, and so left him on the thirteenth. He weighed and steered his Course
thitherward; Captain Michael, and Captain John Rose weighed also, and sailed
for Carthagena, and we who were irresolute what way to take, followed the
latter.

On the 25th we had a hard Easterly Breeze, which carried us beyond a River
that runs on the Terra-Firma, and is by the Spaniards called Rio-grande, where
we should have taken in Water which continues sweet within the Sea for three or
four Leagues from the Mouth of it, for all it rains so little, and provided you
take that which runs on the Superficies. About three of the same day in the
Afternoon, we saw our Lady de la Poupla which is also on the Continent, and the
16th anchored at the Isles of St. Bernard, from whence we parted in the
Eveninig with three Pirogues only, in order to get to windward of Carthagena,
to endeavor to seek us some Provision which they continually carry to that
place, and our Design had in effect the desired success.

We returned on the 18th with seven Pirogues laden with Maes, They take some
Prizes.
which we made good Prize: By the Spaniards that were in them, we understood,
that there were two Galleons at Carthagena, and that the Spanish Flota was at
Porto Belo, and that two Ships, one carrying twenty and the other twenty four
Guns would quickly put out from thence; but we did not think fit to wait for
them, because they could not assign to us any determinate time when they should
sail.

On the twenty second at Noon we weighed, and toward Evening discovered Point
Picaron on the Continent, and the Isles of Palmas: About two Hours within the
Night we doubled the greatest Point of these Islands. The next Morning, which
was the twenty third, we found our selves separated from Captain Michael and
Captain Rose, and then it was we took a Resolution of attempting to cross over
the Continent to the end we might get into the South Sea: In order to which we
sailed to the Bay of the Isle d'Or, which is inhabited by the Indians of
Sambes, that so we might know of them (who were our Friends) what success the
other Free-booters met with, who, we had been told, were gone thither some
Months before.

From the twenty third at Night to the twenty fourth we kept to the Cape, being
afraid of entering into the Gulf of Arian, and that Morning by break of Day we
made nearer the Shore, to discover where we were, and upon trial we found it to
be a Point of the Wind in that Gulf, which the Currents made us to double.

Between this Gulf and Cape Matance happened a very remarkable Adventure; A
strange story of a Spanish Soldier.
we had on board our Ship a Soldier belonging to the Spanish Galleons, whom we
had taken to windward of Carthagena, in one of the Pirogues whereof we found
the Maes before spoken of, who out of a despair to find himself made a
Prisoner, though he was very kindly used, took a Resolution, as appeared by
what followed, to throw himself into the Sea, to which end he went five or six
times upon Deck without being able to put his Design in execution, and that in
all likelihood, out of a secret resistance he found within himself to do it:
But at last, after several Attempts, he effected the same, which exciting my
Curiosity to enquire into the Circumstances thereof, I found he had put off a
Scapulary or kind of Cloak he wore, and laid it under the Carriage of one of
our Guns: And what is yet more extraordinary is, that contrary to what usually
happens in such cases, the Body which fell down with full force into the Water,
floated along time upon the Back by the Ship's side, though to our apprehension
he did all he could to drown himself; But when out of Compassion to save his
Life we threw out some of our Tackle for him to catch hold on, he not only
refused to make use of them, but turned himself upon his Face and plunged to
the bottom.

On the Twenty fifth at Eleven in the Morning we arrived and anchored at the
Isle d'Or, or Goldeu Island* and at the same time fired a Gun to give the
Indian notice of our coming. Then we went a-shoar, to know what that Flag was
we discovered at a distance from us, where we found three Men belonging to
Captain Grognier and Captain Lescuier's Crew, who told us, that they had
carried there because they would not go with the other Free-Booters, who were
on their Journey to the South Sea, under the Conduct of those two Captains, and
that as soon as ever they saw us, they had set up that Flag, as a Signal for us
to come up to them.

The Six and twentieth came some Indians with Letters on Board us, which were
directed to the first Free-Booters that should Anchor in that Road, to give
them notice, that they were gone, to the number of an hundred and seventy Men
to that Sea, and some small time before them an hundred and fifteen English;
Besides which they also set us some Instructions how to demean our selves
toward the Indians through whose Territories we must pass, wherewith w^ were
fully confirmed in the Project we had already formed of undertaking this
Expedition: And though we were but fourscore and seven Men, yet we made our
selves ready to be gone. In the mean time some other Indians came also on Board
us, by whom we were informed, that Captain Grogniet and Captain Lescuier were
still in their Territories, and not yet gone to the South Sea, which made us
write to them by one of those two Indians, to let them know that we were coming
to them.

On the Twenty seventh at Noon we saw Captain Mitchel and Captain Rose turn in
to the same Port, which made us go presently on Board, to know what made them
come in and Anchor in that Road. They told us they had been in Chase of a
Spanish Ship named the Hardy come from St. Iago on the Coast of Cuba and bound
for Carthagena, but not being able to come up with her, they were come into
this Port, as being the nighest, to take in Water. Then we shew^^ them the
Letters we had received, which wrought a Desire in many of them to come and
increase our Number, insomuch that an hundred and eighteen Men quitted
Mitchel's Ship, and the whole Crew of Captain Rose, being Sixty four Men, who
burnt their Vessel, when they had paid the Owners the price of it: We were not
then for delaying, but on the Twenty ninth quitted our Ships and went a-shoar,
where we encamped to the Number of Two hundred sixty and four Persons; but as
to the Ship belonging to our particular Crew we left her in the Hands of
Captain Mitchel rather than burn her.

CHAP. II.
Our Passage cross the Continent of America, to go to the South Sea.
Sunday the first of March, The Buccaneers pass over Land to the South Sea, and
other Observations.
in the Year 1685, after we had recommended our selves to the Almighty's
Protection, we set out under the Command of Captain Rose, Captain Picard, and
Captain Desmarais, with two Indian Guides, and about forty more of that Nation,
whom we took along with us for the ease of those who were most burdened amongst
us. We could no^ travel above three Leagues that day, and emcamped by a
Riverside, after we had passed through a Country that presently discovered a
terrible Aspect to us and then proved very difficult to travel in, because of
the Mountains, Precipices and impenetrable Fore^^ whereof it is full: And the
Difficulty of our Journey was still the more increased by the great Rains that
fell all the next Day. To say nothing, that in our ascending these Mountains
which are of a prodigiou^ height, we were clogged with the weight of our
Ammunition, Arms, and other Iron-Tools we carried with us: Upon our coming down
from these Mountains we got into a Plain, which though it were without any
Tracts or Ways, yet appeared very easy unto us, but that we were obliged no
less than four and forty times in the space but of two Leagues to cross the
same River, which because it ran between ver^ slippery Rocks, gave us a great
deal of trouble to (...) over it, being always in danger of falling.

On the Fourth we lay in an Indian Carbet, which is a spacious sort of a
Lodging, built almost like (...) Barn, wherein the People are wont to meet
together there we stayed next Day to go a Hunting, where we found great numbers
of Deer, and all sorts of Birds: Amongst others we saw a kind of Animal which
the Indians call Manipouryes, and we Trefo^^ because, as they go along, each of
their Feet leaves the print of this Simple in the Ground. This Animal is as big
as a small Bullock, but his Hair is not so long, and more slick, his Legs are
fhort, he has the head of an Ass, but a sharper Nose, and walks in the bottom
of the Water as well as on dry Land. They have here also a sort of Hogs, which
they call Vents, because of an opening place they have in the form of a Navel
upon their Backs. We may farther take notice of those Beasts they call
Agoutills and Ovistitills, which both the one and the other of them are very
like those Creatures we call Indian Pigs in France, but much bigger. The
Monkeys of this Country are almost as big as Sheep, live in Forests, and seldom
come down from the Trees, where they always find their Food. They are so hardy,
that though you shoot them with a Fusil in the Head, or through both Shoulders,
they shall not fall to the Ground, and many times for all you can do, they have
so much cunning in their fall, as to twist their Tails, which are very long
about a Branch of a Tree, where they hang and wast away, without any
possibility of com^ng at them, because they generally make choice of the
tallest Trees for the places of their Retreat.

I cannot without smiling call to mind what I have done to one of these
Animals, which after I had made several shots at him with my Fusil, that
carried off part of his Belly, insomuch that his Guts came out, held himself by
one of his Paws, or hands (if you will) to the Branch of a Tree, while he put
his Entrails with ^he other into that part of his Belly that still remained
whole.

There was another of them whom I shot with a small Bullet cross his Nose, and
who finding himself ^linded with the Blood that gushed out, had so much
^ndustry as to wipe it off with the Leaves of the Tree thereon he stood. Here
also we found Harats, which ^re a sort of Birds as big again as Parrots* to
whom they are very like, even to the note they have: but their Feathers are
infinitely more fine, for their Wings and Tail, which is very long, are of so
lively and ^right-flaming color, that you cannot for some time (...) your Eye
upon them without being dazzled. Here we saw those Fowls called Oecos, which are
pretty like unto our Indian Turkey-Hens, but with this difference, that they
have a small tuft of Feathers upon their Heads that resembles a Cock's Comb,
and a round of yellow about their Eyes; they differ from one another in Color;
the Male's Feathers being inclinable to red, whereas the Female's are blackish,
but they are never found a-sunder. Their Partridges are larger than our
Europeans, and their Flesh is whiter but not so good, and their Note is
different from ours. As to their Pheasants they are smaller than those in
Europe, and their Flesh nothing near so pallatable, but their Note is much the
same. Besides these, there are in this Country a multitude of other Birds, with
whose Names I think it needless to swell this Journal; because as the Islands
of America are full of them, there is already an exact account given of them in
those Relations that have been made of these Countries, and it is enough that I
give a Description of such as are not to be found in these Islands, or of
another kind: Yet I shall say this farther, that Lizzards breed here in
abundance, and there are different Sizes of them. They are Animals that
resemble pretty nearly those whom we call Cayements, of whom I shall have
occasion to speak hereafter. Their Flesh is good to eat, and their Eggs, which
are as big as Pigeon^ Eggs, have an excellent taft, and are much better than
our Hens Eggs. This hunting-bout was a great Relief to us, against that hunger
we had endured, because it was the first repast we had met with since our
Journey; but this I reckon nothing in comparison of the miseries which we were
to suffer in a vast number of other Adventures.

At last, after six Days painful and wearisom traveling, even beyond all that
can well be imagined we got to the River which the Indians and Spaniard call
Boca del Chica, that discharges it self into the South Sea.

On the seventh the Indians of that place carried (...) to see Trees that were
proper to make our Canoe^ of, in order to get down that River into the South
Sea; we presently fell to work upon them with (...) U^ensils and Iron tools,
which we had brought along with us, after we had agreed with the Captains of
these Indians for furnishing us in the mean time with Victuals, which consisted
in Maes, Potatoes, Banames and Magniot-Roots, till we had done our work, upon
condition that we gave them Cloth, Knives, Thread, Needles, Pins, Cissors,
Hatchets, Bills, Combs, and such like small Wares, which are in great esteem
with them: Though the Savages are not ignorant of the advantage that does arise
to them from these things.

It was partly with these Toys that we lived, and kept a good Correspondence
with them during our Passage through their Country; but what made the
Conjuncture still more favorable unto us, was the Resentment they had at that
time of the ill usage they had received at the hands of the Spaniards, against
whom they were so incensed, that they begged our Assistance to be revenged on
them. And had it not been for this, it would have been a very difficult task
for us, if not impossible, to cross their Country against their will, not only
because of their Numbers, which made them infallibly much stronger than we, but
also by reason of the many Forests, and difficult Passages their Country's
encombred with, which we could not have gone through without we had some of
themselves for our Guides. But for all this, we did not think our selves so
safe amongst these Men, but that we kept continually upon our Guard, because we
were well assured they were such Wretches, as were at the Service always of
those that gave them most; and that though they appeared one minute to be our
Friends, they might become the next the Spaniards, who are nearer Neighbors to
them. Their treacherous Dealings have proved fatal to some Free-Booters, who
have put too much confidence in them, when a small number of them passing
through their Country, these People gave notice thereof to the Spaniards, and
that they might give an exact account of their Number, they took them ^n a
defile, and as they marched along, they put a Corn of Maes into a Callabass for
every man that passed by, and when they had done, carried the Callabass to the
Enemy, who thereupon took their Measures according^^.

There is no sign of Religion, or of the Knowledge of God amongst them; they
holding that they have Communion with the Devil, and in short, when they would
know any thing, they spend the Night in the Woods in order to consult him; and
they sometimes foretold as some things, that have been true in the event in
every particular Circumstance of the relation they had given us. They lead a
wandering and vagabond Life, and fix their abode in no certain place. They
generally erect their Ajoupas or Barracks upon a Riverside, where they
continue till they have spe^^ what Sustenance they find thereabouts; and when
that is done, they go and do the same thing upon another River, and in this
manner spend the term (...) their miserable Lives. They go naked, except it be
that they cover a part of their Privities with a bit (...) Silver or Gold that
is made like a Candle-Extinguisher, and were I but satisfied that they had eve^
seen such a thing, I should think they took their mode^ from it.

When they feast, or hold other solemn Meetings they put on a Cotton-Robe all
of one Piece, and (...) usual with them, in a vaunting manner, to have (...)
bit of Gold or Caracoly of an Oval Form, hanging (...) their Nose, which is
bored through, and with th^^ they think themselves as fine as any in the World*
As for the Women-kind, they cover themselves from the Wast downwards with an
Herb or Cotton Cloth which they make themselves, and that they may appear
^iner, they color their Faces with Rocou, which is a small Grain that dies a
brown-red.

On the twenty third, as we had finished the building of our Canoes, we had
News brought us by a^ Indian, who was returned from conducting the one hundred
and fifteen English before spoken of to the South Sea, whither they were gone
before us; that they had taken, under the Command of Townsley their Captain,
two Ships laden with Provision, coming from (...). He brought along with him a
Man of Captain Groignict's Crew, who was lost in the Woods a hun^ting, while
his Comrades were making their Canoes i^ the same River where we were building
ours.

On the twenty eighth we received News again by an Indian Captain, who had
conducted Captain Groigniet, and Captain Esurier into the South Sea, in a
Letter which they sent us, that they would stay for us at Kings-Islands, and
desired us to lose no time, but to come and have our share in taking of the
Fleet of Peru, which they waited for* But for all the Expedition we could use,
our Conoes could not be finished before the last of March, when we drew them
into the River.

April the first we parted with fourteen Canoes carrying about twenty Oars
apiece, guided by twenty Indians, who made use of this opportunity in order to
participate of the Booty which they thought we were about to take from the
Spaniards, as soon as ever we got into the South Sea.

We rested on the fourth to tarry for our Men, who were behind, and to mend our
Canoes that were damnified by the Rocks and Flats we met with all along that
River. It cannot be believed what pains we had to bring them to the great Water
(as I may call it) for we met with places where they rested dry, so that we
were in a manner forced to carry them. This day died one of our Men of the
Bloody Flux, which was very rife amongst us, because we were forced to fast so
long, and by reason of the hard Feeding we had, and our continual dabling in
the Water.

On the fifth we put on, and about Evening found the River deeper, but so full
of, and encumbred with Trees, which the Floods had carried thither, that our
Canoes were in danger every Minute to be lost; and this day died two of our Men.

On the sixth we got to the great Water, where the River is wider and deeper,
and that day we spent on the Banks of it to dry our Sacks, which were wet
through with the great Rains that fell the day before; another of our Men died
this day.

From hence to the eleventh we did all we could to get quickly to the Mouth of
the River, Good news of Provision sent them by the other Free-Booters.
where we were informed by an Indian, that was come in a small Vessel to meet
us, the English and French Free-Booters had sent a shore in a little Bay called
Boca del Chica (that stands at the Mouth of that River) some Corn for our
Refreshment, when we should get down thither; for they could gather very well
by themselves, who had been so straightened there for Provision, whereabouts we
must be, and indeed we had so little, that we were reduced to an handful of
Raw Maes for each Man a day.

The same Day we received farther News, and by other Indians, who gave our
Guides notice to tell us that a thousand Spaniards being informed of our
Descent, mounted up along this River by Land with a design to lay an Ambuscade
for us: Hereupon we resolved not to stir, but in the nightime, and that
without noise, that so we might shun them, and this succeeded accordingly. But
we fell into another encumbrance; and that was, we being Strangers in th^^
Country, and knowing no more than our Guides how high the Tide flowed in this
River, we were surprised with the coming in of it, and drove ou^ Canoes and us
very far, so that one of them was overset with a great Tree that had fallen
into the River, and upon which the swiftness of the current threw it, but it
luckily fell out that no one was drowned; they quitted it for the Arms and
Ammunition that were lost; which could not but wo^^ some trouble in us, to see
our Men disarmed in (...) Country, where we could not go, but must have much
occasion to use them; but to deliver us (...) this Inquie^ude, God was pleased
to dispose of some of us, who left their Arms to those that had lost their own.

When we were got clear of these Dangers, our Guides advised us to row gently,
They escape the Spaniards.
for fear the Indian-Spaniards, who were our Enemies, should hear us* and who
lay in wait to attack us, some Leagues th^^ side the Mouth of the River, in a
place called Lestocads* we took their Council and when we were got over against
the said place, where the River is very broad we disposed of our Canoes in such
a manner, that by the favor of the night they appeared to be much less than
they really were. Now these Indian-Spaniard^ having some Glimpse of us, asked
who was there, and our Guides having answered, That what they saw, wa^ naught
but a few Boats belonging to them, with which they were going to fetch Salt
into the South Sea; by this wile we were spared the labor of engaging with
those Rascals.

On the twelfth in the Morning we cast Anchor, because the Tide came in, and
was against us, and about ten made ready, but toward Noon the Heavens were
overcast to that degree, that you could scarce see a Man from one end of a
Canoe to the other, and this was followed with such excessive Rains, that we
were afraid every Minute of being sunk, though we employed two men in each
Canoe continually to throw out the Water; and during that time one of our Men
died.

The same Day at Midnight we got to the Mouth of the River, and entered into
the South Sea, Arrive in the South Sea.
from whence we made directly for the Bay of Boca del Chi^a to see for the
Provision which we were told was there, and which we found accordingly; but
before this, we met with a Canoe of Captain Grogniet that waited for us, and
two Barks at Anchor. They had been purposely sent by the English, both to tow
our Canoes to the place where the Fleet of Free-booters were, and to bring us
more Provision.

On the thirteenth in the Morning we carried our Sick on board them two Barks
for their better Accommodation, and then weighed Anchor, in order to sail
altogether to an Island four Leagues distant from the Mouth of that River,
where we refreshed our selves for two days with the Provision the English had
sent us, which was a mighty comfort to us.

On the sixteenth we went off in order to find out the English and French
Fleet, whose Rendezvous was to cruise either before Panama, or at the Kings
Islands which were not far from this River.

We arrived at those Islands on the eighteenth, which stand thirty Leagues to
the East of Panama, where we found the largest of them, to look more like the
Continent than an Island, so spacious and mountainous it is: The same is
inhabited by those Negroes whom they call Marons or Fugitives from the
Spaniards, who upon making their escapes from their Masters at Panama* and the
adjacent places have made this a place of Refuge. This day one of our (...)
died.

We entered into this Sea at a very bad time, for about this height, there are
some Years wherein it rains every day for the space of six Months and we happened
to come thither exactly at such a Season.

I should think it would have been proper in this place, before I proceeded to
give a relation of our Adventures, to give a large and exact Description of the
South Sea, and this fourth part of the World, with which it is washed, and to
set forth the Longitude and Latitude of the Places; But as it is my design to
write of nothing but what was transacted by us there, (...) that this Country
is well enough discovered by the Geographical Charts that have been made of it,
(...) the Reader when he has occasion to be informed herein, have recourse to
them. I shall content my (...) with taking notice only, that all the Continent
th^^ respects the South Sea, stands East and West, and most of the Islands
North and South of it; and that (...) runs from East to South-East, to South
and South-West* and from the West, to West North-West, and to the North-West.

The Spaniards are the only Foreigners that posses^ these Countries, The South
Sea described.
since the unjust Usurpation they have made of them from the Aboriges, over
whom they made themselves Masters by such tyrannical and (...) Methods as have
been heard of throughout the World* They have good Towns upon the Seaside,
which reach from the height of the Islands of Dom-Fernardez, that are situated
at the Mouth of the Gulf of Magellan, or rather from Chily to the middle of a
straight that is between the Terra Firma and the Isles of C^lynfornia, which
the Spaniards call Mar-Berm^s^ through which its believed, a Communication may
be had between the Northern and Southern Sea* without going about by the
Straight of Anien; the chief of these Towns begin from the South, and (...)
A^rica, Sagna, Nasca, Pacha^ama, Lima, Cidade do (...) R^yes the Port of Callao
which is the place of embarking for this last, and where the King of Spain's
Ships anchor; that is the Fleet of Peru, Truxillo, Paita Q^eaquilla, ^a
Barbacoa, which is an open Mine from whence the Spaniards get a great deal of
Gold, Panama, Realeguo, Tecoantepequa, Acapulco, and several others, that are
as well Maritine as Inland Places.

Its above ten Years since the Spaniards, who dwell on all this Continent, have
not known what War was. Here they lived in a profound Tranquillity, and
Firearms was hardly in any use amongst them; but since the time that we found
out a way to go and visit them, they brought the English from Iamaica amonst
them. But though they have a pretty many of them at present there, yet the
Sequel of this Discourse will show that they are not much more warlike for all
that than they were before: But the White Indians that inhabit a part of Chily,
have been always their Enemies, and these are a People of prodigious bulk and
Tallness, who almost infest them with continual War, and when they happen to
take any of them, they take off the plate of their Breasts, as we do by a
Tortoise, and cut out their Hearts.

On the twenty second, which was Easter Day, their Fleet, who were gone before
us into these Seas, arrived at the Kings Isles where we were; they consisted of
eight fail, which, together with the two Barks, they had sent to wait for our
Arrival, made up in all ten Vessels. Of which take the following Account.

The first served as Admiral, and was a Frigate carrying 36 Guns, A List of the
Buccaneers Fleet and Commanders.
commanded by one Captain David.

The next was instead of Vice Admiral, had 16 Guns, and was under the command
of one whose Name was Sammes.

The third and fourth were two Ships commanded by Captain Townsley.

The fifth was a Ship that could have carried thirty Guns but had none, and was
commanded by Captain Groigniet.

The sixth was a small Ship commanded by Bra^dy.

The eighth was a long Bark commanded by a Quartermaster, with a Detachment of
Men drawn out of the Fleet.

And the ninth and tenth were the two Barks that came to meet us, whereof the
one was commanded by Peter Henry, and the other by a Quartermaster.

Of all these Commanders, Captain Grogniet was the only Frenchman, all the rest
being Englishmen, except David, who was a Flemming. As to the whole number of
our Men, they were computed at about eleven hundred, when they divided into two
Fleets: It remains therefore now that I should say, according to the
Information I have received from all that were engaged in this Enterprise, how
all these Ships fell into their Hands, by what means, and at what time they
came into this Sea.

In pursuance therefore to the order before observed, I am to declare, A brief
account of the English Adventures in these Seas hitherto.
that the English were the Owners of our Admiral, who in the Year 1682 on the
Coast of St. Domingo, surprised a long Bark belonging to a French Captain,
whose Name was Tristan, who was then with some of his Ships Crew ashore,
waiting for a fair Wind to sail together, to make War upon the Spaniards by
Commission from Monsieur Povansay, who was then Governor of that Island. The
English, who was superior in strength, drove the French out of the Bark, with
which they sailed to the Isle de la Torttille, whither a great many Ships go
every Year to take in Salt. The next thing they did, was to take a Dutch Ship*
on which they went all on board, and sailed afterward to the Coast of Guinee,
where they took several Prizes more; but they reserved none of them save the
Dutch Ship, which served as Admiral, and wherein they sailed, when we left the
South Sea, and was supposed to have been a Ship belonging to Hamburg. These
English became Pirates under the Conduct of a Captain of their own* and grew so
notoriously wic^ed by a great many odious Actions, performed not only toward
Strangers, but even those of their own Nation, when they met with any of them,
that to avoid being chased, which they would infallibly have been, they passed
from the North to the South Sea, by the Straight of Magellan.

They kept company for about eight Months with a little Frigate of eighteen
Guns, which they met with there in a short time after their Arrival, and whose
Crew consisted of English, French and Flemmings: But their good Correspondence
with the Corsair was of no long Duration, for happening to have some difference
with him, as he was one Morning giving the other the good Morrow, according to
the English Mode, he saw all his Crew come upon Deck; whereupon the little
Frigate, who sailed much better than the Pyrate came up with him, and having
brought all his Guns to bear, gave him a broadside, accompanied with a Volley
of small Shot, and then bore away, having slain the Captain and twenty of his
Men, in whose stead the rest of the Crew chose David beforementioned.

That little Frigate of sixteen Guns, got into the South Sea some time after
the other, as also by the same Straight of Magellan. I was told by one of the
Engineers on board her, that she belonged to his Royal Highness the Duke of
York, and that under pretense of coming to treat with the Spaniards, she was
sent upon no other account, than to take a Plan of those parts, the Situation
of the Cities and Seaports. Now Captain David meeting with her, made Captain
Suams come on board him, and threatened to take him, unless he would go and make
Wa^ with him; so that finding himself too weak to resist, he chose rather to
comply with the Pyrate, than be taken; and these two together took a great many
Prizes, which, after they had taken out what was for their turn, they burnt.

About a Year after, Captain Townsley came over* Land with an hundred and
fifteen English into these Seas, and at the Kings Islands took two Ships laden
with Provision and other Refreshments, whereof I have already spoken, coming
from Peru.

About a Month after, the Captains Groigniet and l' Escuier went also thither
over Land with two hundred and seventy Men, and who, being informed that the
English Fleet was before Panama, put ashore one night at Tavoga, an Island two
Leagues off from whence they discerned a Ship on Fire, and by break of day they
saw the English under fail They went on board them, and came to understand,
that Captain David had taken a Ship called the Saint Rose, laded with Corn and
Wine, bound from Truxillo for Panama; the President of which last place had
sent to him for to buy her, and in order thereunto, gave him the meeting at the
Isles of Pericos, that are a League's distance from the Port. But instead of
sending him the Money they had agreed upon for the Ship, he sent a Fire-Ship to
burn him, but the same, through the Cowardice and Ignorance of the Commander,
spent herself without doing the other any hurt; and this made Captain David
give the Saint Rose to Groignie and to l' Escuier's Ships Crew, who had already
lost their Captain.

As for the other five Ships commanded by Brands, Samely, Peter Henry, and two
Quarter Masters, they had been also taken from the Spaniards i^ these Seas by
the two first Frigates, who reserved them for those who came thither over Land.
(...) of all our Ships, there were none but the first two that had Guns, the
other eight had none, they h^ving been Merchant Ships, that made use of no^^ in
the South Sea, where no body but themselves had sailed a long time. And now
having told you what passed before this Fleet came together; we shall now
proceed to give an Account of our Adventures since our Junction.

On the twenty fifth of April we took an Advice-Boat going to the Fleet of
Peru, which was then (...) Anchor in the Port of Callao, that was carrying some
Packets from Madrid to Panama, and Letters from the Viceroy of Lima, wherein
there was an account given how many Men of War, Fireships and Merchantmen the
Fleet consisted of, and about what time the same might arrive at Panama. Next
day we examined the Commander of the Advice-Boat, but we could get no
particulars out of him, saving, that when he saw himself like to be taken, he
had thrown the King of Spain's Packets, and a Cascet of Jewels overboard.

On the twenty seventh we put the same Questions to the Pilot, who, according
to the Example of his Commander, would make no Discovery, because they had
taken an Oath together, rather to lose their Lives than to divulge any secret,
or to let the said Packet fall into the hands of the Free-Booters. On the 28th
two of our Men died.

On the Evening of the same day, Geeeks here, who they are.
we departed with two and twenty Canoes manned with five hundred men, in order
to go and take la Seppa, which is a small Town seven Leagues to windward of
Panama; and on the twenty ninth about ten in the Morning we discovered two
Ships bearing up to us, which when they came near, we found to be two Pirogues
manned with Greeks, which are a People composed of diverse Nations, to whom the
Spaniards gave this Name, and who serve them in their Wars. These they brought
some time before from the North Sea to this Coast, to defend them against us,
because they look upon them to be better Soldiers than themselves. We presently
sent out two of our best sailing Canoes manned with twenty Men each to attack
them. These Greeks* who quickly took us to be really what we were, i. e.
Free-Booters, made no delay to save themselves upon one of the Islands that
stands in the Bay of Panama; but upon their going ashore, they lost one of
their Pirogues, that split in Pieces, and left us the other; then they got upon
a rising Ground, with their Arms, and as much Ammunition as they could save,
and fought stiffly against us under a Flag of Defiance. And as the place where
we landed, was exposed to their Fire from the Ground where they had posted
themselves, and that the Ascent on that side where we stood was very difficult,
Beaten by the Free-Booters.
we were forced to take a great round to come at them another way, where we
found our Passage much easier. At (...) after we had fought at least for the
space of an (...) we constrained them to flee for shelter into the Woo^^ took
two of them Prisoners, besides their Color and found between five and twenty
and thirty sla^^ upon the Spot.

We were informed by the two Prisoners, th^^ those who had escaped, could not
be above an hundred men at most, that we might easily maste^ them if we
pleased, there being many wounded amongst them: They also told us, that they
hi^ an Account at Panama of a Re-inforcement the was come from the North-Sea to
the Fleet of Free-Booters; That the President of the Town had there upon sent
an Advice-Boat to Lima, to engage the Viceroy to detain the Merchant Ships in
Port, (...) further order, and with all speed to send a Fleet (...) Men of War
to fight ours, and drive us out of those Seas: But the relation given by these
two Prisoner we could not rely upon, since their Party had put (...) a Flag of
Defyance, they being three times the number of us.

After this Advantage, The Buccaneers take Seppa.
and our rejoyning the rest (...) our Canoes, we continued to prosecute our
design upon la Seppa; But as we were obliged before we could come at it to go
about two Leagues up a very fine and large River of the same Name, and on who^e
Banks they have Vigies or Sentinels always set, we could not choose but be
discovered, and find the Town allarmed and ready to defend it self: Yet for all
that, we fell furiously on, and too^^ it with the loss only of one Man; but
finding no great matter of Booty there, because they had saved most of their
Effects, we returned to our Canoes again.

As I shall have frequent occasion to make mention of the Word Vigie, it will
not be improper in this place to take notice, that by Vigier is no other thing
meant, than to set a Sentinel upon Land or Sea, and those who are thus set,
they call Vigies. The Spaniards maintain a great number of them for all their
Cities, Towns, and Villages; and even single Houses have Persons on purpose,
whom they send to all the rising ground round about, and River-sides, where
they have their Horses ready Night and Day, so that as soon as they discover an
Enemy, they hasten to give the Spaniards notice of it; who forthwith prepare
themselves not to fight. but to save their Effects.

On the first of May we rejoyned our Ships, who ^aited for us at a very pretty
Island, called Sippilla, about a League distant from the Mouth of the River la
Seppa, which makes up a kind of Canal, that forms the Bay of Panama, and do as
it were, make a Bar all along, that divides the Channel into two parts, one to
the East and the other to the West. Those Pleasures we met with ^n these parts,
justly deserve a Remembrance, whereof I shall give a little Description in this
place.

I say then, A Description of the Islands in the Bay of Panama.
that all these Islands are so curious and delightful, that they are usually
called the Gardens of Panama, and with very good reason, seeing all People of
Note in that City, have each of them one of these Islands for themselves, and
their Houses of Pleasure there also, with curious Orchards, watered with a
great many Springs of running Waters, adorned and imbelished with a wonderful
Variety of Flowers and Arbours of Jessamine up and down, and full almost of an
infinite number of all sorts of the Fruits of the Country, among whom I have
taken particular notice of four of them which are called Sappota, Sappotilla,
Avocata, and las Cayemites.

The first is a Fruit almost like unto our Pears, The Fruits growing there
des^ribed.
of a different Size, whose Rine is Greenish, and contains in the midst
thereof, two Kernels of an oval Form, appearing pretty pollished and sleek, and
are each of them, in the largest of these Fruits, somewhat bigger than an
ordinary Nut: When this Fruit ^t ripe, it is very soft, and when the Paring is
taken off, the Pulp is of a pure red Color, very sweet, and of an admirable
Taste.

The second is of the same form as the other, but no bigger than a Russet Pear:
It has an admirable taste, and under the Rind is of a whitish Color.

The third is of the same form as our Quinc^^ saving that the Ri^d is greener:
This fruit must be fully ripe, and very soft before it becomes good Food; and
then it is that you find the Pulp of (...) as white as Snow: The Spaniards eat
it with Spoon as we do Cream, and indeed the taste thereof is mostly the same.

The fourth is like a large Damason, and very ^^voury.

Besides these and a great many more, when with this Country is peculiarly
blessed; it produc^^ also a great many of those Fruits that are common to
Europe, as Apricocks, Pomegranates, Goyav^ Juniper, Cocoe, Bananes, Figs of
Provence, French and Spanish Melons, all sorts of Oranges, Citro^^ and Lemmons,
of which I shall give no Description no more than of the Trees that bear them;
But those who would satisfy their Curiosity herein, may (...) it in reading
the History of the Antilles writ^^ by Monsieur de Rochefort, in the Year 1668,
(...) was skilled therein, and gives a very good Account of them. All these
rich Presents of Fruits and pure Water, of which Nature made us an offer in
the^^ Islands, were a wonderful Relief to us, after those Fatigues we had
undergone in our Passage over th^^ Continent: To say nothing of the plentiful
Harve^^ we had of Maes and Rice, wherewith we found these Islands covered, and
which the Spaniards, I believe, did not sow with an intention we should enjoy
them* But these same Islands that afforded us so many delights, wrought also
afterward some sorrow in us, (...) which by and by.

On the eighth of May in the Morning we sailed away, and passed by the old and
new City of Panama; the old one was that taken by General Morga^ in the Year
1670, whose Churches and Houses seemed to us to be finely built, as far as we
could judge of them at such a Distance; there is none but the^ new Town that is
fortified, being defended with (...) good Wall and several other Works, but
that is only to the Sea-ward. This City is attended with an Inconveniency, that
as it is situated at the bottom (...) a Bay, and that the Sea ebbs very much in
th^^ Country, great Ships are left dry there, if they anchor nearer than a
League to the place: We got as ^igh it as we could with our Colors and
Streamers loose, and from thence went to anchor at Tavoga, which appeared to
us, as if it were a little enchanted Island, so agreeable and delightful are
those Houses and Gardens that are upon it.

On the ninth we ca^lked all our Ships, and next day sent out our long Bark to
cruise, in order to give us notice when the Spanish Fleet appeared in sight of
us; and on the thirteenth we made choice of these Ships that should engage it.
Captain David and Captain Grogniet were to board the Spanish Admiral, Captain
Suam and Captain Townsley the Vice Admiral, Captain Peter Henry and one of
Townsley's Prizes, ^he Patach; our Fire-ship was to keep herself under the
Quarter of our Admiral. Our other Ships were to attack the rest of their Fleet
according to their Strength, and our armed Pirogues were to keep off the
Enemies Fireships.

We heard this day a great many Cannon fired at Panama, the cause whereof we
could not guess at; and on the fourteenth we put ashore upon this I^^and of
Tavoga forty Prisoners, who were very cum^^ersom to us, and then weighed to go
wait for the (...) at Cape Pin: But this was much out of Sea^^, since the
Fleet, who was willing to spare us this Trouble, as well as that of attacking
her, was al^eady, without our knowing of it, arrived at Panama; having got in
under the Covert of one of those ^leasant Islands, through one of the two
Channels which I said was formed by them, and which hid them from us while we
cruised in the other Chan^el, through which we thought they would have ^^iled.

As we knew nothing hitherto of this matter, (...) that upon the return of our
long Bark, she told (...), she had discovered no Ships pass, we went and
^^hor'd at Kings-Islands, where the whole Fleet (...) the usual Oath, that we
would not wrong one ^^other to the value of a Piece of Eight, in case God (...)
pleased to give us the Victory over the Spaniards. (...) the seventeenth one of
our Men died.

On the nineteenth we weighed and anchored between the great Island, and those
in the East Channel, through which we thought the Fleet we expected would pass.
On the twenty eighth another (...) our Men died. Next day we made ready, a^^
sailed for Cape Pin. On the thirty first we ga^^ chase to two ships, whom we
lost in the night, a^^ which brought us back in the pursuit of them to the
little Islands of Panama, where we anchored on the first of June; and the same
Day we surprised tw^ Greeks upon the Island, where we had beaten them when we
went to take la Seppa.

On the fourth we sent two Canoes to the Isle (...) Sipilla, to endeavor to
take some Prisoners, the we might learn some News from them. There th^^ took a
Ship laden with Boards, which the Spaniar^^ were carrying to Panama to build
two Pirogues ^^stead of those we had taken. The Men told (...) that their Fleet
was got into Panama on the twel^^ of May: That on the thirteenth they fired off
a gre^^ many Guns for Joy, and that as soon as they we^^ refreshed, carreened,
and manned, they would (...) out to fight us, and would be ready in a sho^^
time.

On the seventh at Noon, They fight the Spanish Fleet.
Captain Groigniet, (...) had anchored sarther from the Island than (...) gave
us a Signal, that he descried the Spanish Fleet consisting of seven sail; and
this he did by low^^ing and raising his Flag seven times: We also (...) our
part made ready, and in doubling the point (...) the Island where we had
anchored, we discover^^ seven great Ships coming up toward us, with a blo^^dy
Flag in the Stern, and a Royal one on the Masts. Now it was that the hopes
which our Cre^^ had lost, when they understood the Fleet was (...) into Panama,
revived again, and the desire the had to enrich themselves at the others Cost,
(...) mated them to that degree, that most of them thr^^ their Hats into the
Sea, as thinking they had (...) Spaniards already in hold. We put our Ships in
^^der, and then disputed the Wind with them, which was at that time got to the
West. About three (...) the Afternoon we all, except Captain Groigniet, (...)
the Weather-Gage of them, and he failed, because he waited for the coming up of
his Canoe from the Shore, and cast about twice. Our Admiral finding himself to
Windward of the Spanish Vice Admiral, who was separated from his own Admiral,
gave us the Signal to follow him for to board him; in order to which, we
lengthned our Sprit-Sail, but our Vice Admiral took in his Flag, as a Token he
would deferr the Engagement till next Morning, hoping that Groigniet would get
the Weather-Gage in the Night: Toward Sunsetting the Spanish Vice Admiral,
who was to Leeward of us, saluted us with seven Guns without Ball, which was
answered by our Admiral with a whole Broadside with Ball. But Night coming on,
the Spaniards cast anchor, being better acquainted than we with the Currents
that run between these Islands, and they sent a small Vessel, that carried the
Lanthorn, to anchor two Leagues to Leeward of us, in order to amuse and ^ause
us to take false measures; And indeed we lay by all Night, that we might next
Morning be to Windward of the Lanthorn, which we took to be the whole Fleet.

On the eighth early in the Morning, we discove^ed our Error, and were all of
us strangely amazed ^o find our selves to Leeward of the Enemies Fleet, ^xcept
Captain Groigniet's Ship, and that of Cap^ain Townsley, and his Prize which
were to Windward: but it unhappily so fell out, that they were ^hips without
Cannon: The Spanish Fleet having ^^st anchor again an Hour after Sunrising, we
did (...) we could to get the Weather-Gage, but their Vice Admiral, who had his
Anchor apeak, and his ^^ils but very slighty furled, quickly plied to the ^ind,
which proving favorable to him, he bore ^^mediately upon our Admiral. Our
Vice Admiral (...) all he could to come to his Assistance, for the Spa^^sh Guns
had already incommoded him very much; ^ut his coming up, obliged the Enemies
Ship to bear (...) to Windward, which we endeavored to gain (...) that day,
though to no purpose; while the Spa^^ards in the mean while, under whose Cannon
we ^^und our selves, mauled us terribly, and this made our Admiral and
Vice Admiral to keep close together, and to resolve to die valiantly fighting,
rather than suffer any one Ship of the Fleet to be taken, though they could
both of them have saved themselves if they pleased, they being much better
Sailors tha^ the Spaniards.

Captain Townsley toward the Afternoon being to Windward of the Enemies Fleet,
sent his Pirog^^ on board our Admiral, to receive his Orders, while he that
commanded it, had both his Legs shot off by a Cannon Ball. About two the
Spaniards sent ou^ a Ship of eight and twenty Guns to hinder Captain Groigniet
to join us, as understanding by some Sp^niards, who had been our Prisoners,
that he was the strongest in small Arms of any in our Fleet, and that they were
so much the more fearful of him when they came to know his Crew consisted
(...) Frenchmen. At last finding our selves toward Evening much battered with
their Cannon (for the Spaniards would not come to boarding) we veered (...) the
favor of a Gale of Wind, to go and boa^ the Spanish Vice Admiral, that was the
best Sail^ and did us most harm: But we were no sooner u^ moored, than that the
Wind came about, which (...) us much Damage, for we were just come upon (...)
Enemies Ship, who not observing the Wind, (...) which we sailed, bore still
upon us, so far, (...) when we returned the second time, she was so (...) us,
that she was constrained to furl the end of (...) main Sail, for fear of
bringing her Foremast upon our Counter, and this made us put out our Ca^^^
which were upon the Towe that we might go bette^ and in this manner we defended
our selves till Ni^^^ approached.

Peter Henry's Ship, wherein I was, having (...) above an hundred and twenty
Cannon (...) was forced to make the best of her way, which (...) Admiral and
Vice Admiral perceiving, they put (...) Pirogues under sail, which they had all
along (...) to Windward during the Fight, in order to ^^tend us, because they
saw we were in an ill con^^tion. The Enemy observing our working, sent (...) of
their small Ships in pursuit of us, but as we (...) back upon her, she gave us
eighteen Guns, and rejoyned their own Fleet.

Our Long Bark, having, during the Action, been sorely handled; her Crew was
forced to leave her, and not having time to sink her, threw some Guns, which
our Admiral had put on board her, into the Sea, and then saved themselves on
board of one of our other Ships. Now the Spanish Prisoners, who we left behind,
finding they were now at Liberty, plied to put themselves into the hands of the
Spanish Admiral, but he taking this Bark for our Fireship, sunk her with his
Cannon before she came near him, not thinking their own People were on board
her.

On the ninth we could see neither our own nor the Spanish Fleet, which made us
steer for the Isle St. John de Cueblo, four and twenty Leagues to the West of
Panama, where, by the favor of an Easterly Breeze, we arrived on the
fourteenth; we ran our selves presently ashore, and it was high time, for we
had all along from the time of the Fight, five Foot of Water in the Hold: We
lost no time to put our selves in a condition to get up again before Panama,
that we might know what became of our Fleet, about which we were in great pain,
which we were put out of on the six and twentieth, when we saw them coming to
an Anchor in the same place where we were, who told us they did not fight any
more after our Departure from them. That the Spanish Fleet upon the ninth in
the Evening, had anchored within Cannon Shot of ours, and that both the one and
the other having made ready on the tenth, the Spaniards sailed away for the
Port of Panama; that Captain David had been hard plied by the Spanish Cannon,
especially with two Shots that carried off half his Rudder, but that he had no
more than six of his Ships Crew wounded, and only one killed; that Captain
Sammes was no less put to it, that almost all his Poop was sweept off, that he
had received several Shots between Wind and Water, that his Mate had his Head
shot off with a Cannon Ball, and that he had no more than three Men wounded:
And that in short, the other lesser Vessels had lost never a Man, and had but
very few wounded. Here I may truly say, and without exasperating the matter,
that it was a strange thing and next to a Miracle, that we, who were so few in
number, and had such pitiful Ships of our own, should be able to bear the Fire
of, withstand and fight so considerable a Fleet, in comparison of our own,
consisting of such good Ships, and manned so well as that of the Spaniards was,
whose Admiral was a Vessel of seventy Guns, though she had but fifty six
mounted, because she was too old. Their Vice Admiral had sorty, though she was
bored to carry sixty Guns; she was a very fine Ship and an excellent Sailor,
but also old. The Patach was a Vessel of forty Guns, though she had no more
than eight and twenty mounted. The Conserve had eighteen Guns, but was built as
well as the Patach, to carry forty. The other three were almost as big; besides
they had the advantage o^ Fireships, on board of which they had planted
Cannon, to the end that we might not take the^ to be really what they were, and
that so they might come near, and the more easily surprise us, than (...) we
were aware of them.

If we had met with this Fleet, as we were in hope we should, before they got
an addition of streng^^ in Panama; or that we had had but only the Win^ of them
when we attacked them, I do not question but things would have appeared with
another fa^^ than now they did, and that we should have posse^^ our selves of
their Ships to bring us back through the S^^eights with Wealth enough to live
at ease, whi^^ ^ould have freed us all at once, after a continue S^ccession of
Fatigues and Troubles, which w^ were forced to go through for three Years
longer, (...) well in those Places, as in our return over Land (...) the North
Sea, but Divine Providence had otherwis^ ordered it.

On the twenty ninth we parted from the Isle (...) St. John, to the number of
three hundred Men (...) five Canoes, in order to go and surprise the Tow^ of
Pueblo Nuevo, that was six Leagues off, thinki^^ we should get some Provision
there, whereof now (...) began to be in need. Being landed on the thi^^ first,
we took a Sentinel, but another escaped, which was the occasion of our being
discovered. We were obliged, in order to get at this Town, to go up a very fine
River two Leagues, and to make use of the flowing of the Tide for that purpose;
Before we came at it, we found a Retrenchment made for its Security, but ill
guarded. The Town is none of the best situated, though it stands upon the
Riverside, being surrounded every way with Marshes: We found neither People nor
Victuals there, and so we left it on the third of July; and next day as we
returned with our Canoes to rejoyn our Fleet, we gave Chase to a Bark, which we
took, and on the fifth we got to our Ships.

The English and we had a difference in the Descent we made upon this Town, The
English and French fall out and part.
for they being more numerous than we, would take the advantage of us, and be
Masters of the whole, and that so far, that Captain Townsley would have taken
Captain Groigniet's Ship away, which Captain David had given him, and give him
his own for her: But as he found he had to do with men, who though inferior in
number, would not tamely be thus put upon, he was forced to give over his
Pretensions; Yet we finding still that they continued to pretend to the same
Dominion over us, we separated our selves from them to the number of an hundred
and thirty Frenchmen without reckoning Captain Groigniet's Crew, who were two
hundred more, and after having banded our selves apart, we landed upon the
Island.

One of the chief reasons that made us disagree, was their Impiety against our
Religion, for they made no Scruple when they got into a Church, to cut down the
Arms of a Crucifix with their Sabres, or to shoot them down with their Fusils
and Pistols, bruising and maiming the Images of the Saints with the same
Weapons in Derision to the Adoration we Frenchmen paid unto them. And it was
chiefly from these horrid Disorders, that the Spaniards equally hated us all,
as we ^^me to understand by diverse of their Letters that sell into our Hands,
which I have got rendered into French, as may be seen by and by.

On the ninth the English weighed, and came to anchor about five or six Leagues
to Leeward of the place where we were building our Canoes, to fit up others for
themselves in Lieu of those they had lost as well as we, during the Fight with
the Spanish Fleet. We laid out for Trees fit for our purpose, and to that end
went into a Wood, which in these parts grows near to the Sea, of which we chose
the largest, which commonly are those Trees called Mapou and Acajou, and are
withal very tender and easy to be wrought, among them we found some so large,
that the single Trunk, after being hew^ and made hallow, could carry fourscore
Men.

While we were buil^^^ our Canoes, a Sentinel, whom we had set on a very high
Tree growing on the Seaside in our Island, as well for discovering, le^^ the
English, who knew we were employed about our Canoes, should come to take away
our Ship, as to observe if any Spanish Ship should sail between the main Land
and the Island whereon we were, came to tell us on the fifteenth, that he saw a
Ship out at Sea, steering South-West and by West, which put us presently upon
making ready to come up with her: We found her to be a small Vessel commanded
by Captain Willnet an Englishman, whose Cre^ consisted of forty English and
eleven Frenchmen, (...) whom we had never heard any thing till now: B^ they
told us, they had a long time ago passed o^^ I and into these Seas, and that
lately they had taken a Ship laden with Corn out of the Port of Sansonne which
is on the Continent, and the place of embarking from Guatimala, thirty Leagues
to the East o^ the Isle of St. John, and that going from thence toward the
South-Coast, they understood that the Viceroy of Lima had sent a Spanish Fleet
on purpose to chase and beat the Free-Booters, which ga^^ them to understand
there were others besides th^^ in these Seas; and that upon the good News th^^
were come in quest of us, in order to have a share (...) taking of that Fleet,
which they believed infallible but that they understood, when they came before
Panama, where they were in hopes to meet with (...) that the fight was already
over, and that we we^^ gone to the Isle of St. John: The other English, who, as
I have already said, were gone to anchor about five or six Leagues to Windward
of us, had also sent out a Canoe to know what this Bark was, which came up with
her as soon as we, and this made us very uneasy; for this Bark being laden
with Provision, those English influenced these new Comers so far, that they
took them to anchor in the same place where they were, except the eleven
Frenchmen, who left them and staid with us.

This Island of St. John Cueblo is about twelve Leagues in Circumference, A
Description of St. John Cueblo, etc.
standing East and West, and North and South, five Leagues distant from the
main Land, and separated by a narrow Channel (which is indeed no other than an
Arm of the Sea running in between two Lands) It is not inhabited, very
mountainous, full of Wood, and watered with very fine Rivers. It stands in no
stead to the Spaniards, besides supplying them with Masts for their Shipping,
which they have here in great abundance. When we stopped upon that Island, we
were in hopes to have fared well, so well stocked it was with Deer, Monkeys,
Agoutills, Lizards, and Banks full of Tortoises; but we were deprived of these
Advantages by two Inconveniences we labored under; The first whereof was, that
the English in less than fifteen Days had made such a Destruction of these
Tortoises, that but very few of them landed; The other respected our Hunting,
which after we had followed for a few days at first, we were bound to decline;
for having staid in this place longer than we designed, we were under a
necessity of preserving our Powder for fear, should we have spent it, the
Spaniards would have been quickly upon us, so that we staid a whole Month upon
this Island to the number of three hundred and thirty Men of us with eating no
more than two Tortoises in eight and forty Hours, and in seeking some Fruits in
the Woods wherewith to subsist, and with the eating of which some of us died,
as not knowing the Nature of them.

There are a sort of Serpents upon this Island whose stinging is so dangerous,
that if any one has not (...) certain Fruit by him, which he is to chew, an
presently to apply to the Wound, there is no escaping present Death for him, as
we found by Experience by some of our Men whom we lost in this manner, and who,
in their dying endured terrible Pains through the Activity and Violence of that
Fire which this Poison kindled in their Bodies. The Tree o^ which this Fruit
grows, is to be found upon the same place, as well as in the other parts of
this Country, being, as to its Leaves and Height very like unto our
Almond-Trees; But its Fruit resembles Sea-Chesnuts, though its of a greyish,
Color, and of a somewhat bitter taste, enclosing a whitish Almond in the midst
thereof. Its chewed altogether before the Application is made, and is known by
no other Name than the Serpents-Seed.

Here also about two or three Leagues up the Country, you have a great many
Cayemans, which are a kind of Crocodiles, that live both in the Sea, Rivers,
and on dry Land, and are of that ravenous Nature, that some of our Men have
been devoured by them.

On the seven and twentieth the English, who had left us, sent a Quartermaster
to us to know whether we would join our selves with them, as supposing they
were too weak, to go and take the Town of Leon, on which they had formed a
Design. And here we must acknowledge, that extreme Misery is so terrible a
thing, that it is almost impossible, when an opportunity presents it self of
being delivered, that it should be let slip, notwithstanding all the Repugnancy
of our Reason to the contrary. We had left the English by reason of their
Impieties, which we could not endure, and now we were ready to comply with the
Proposals they had made us of rejoyning them again. The Provision was on their
side, and this was a charming Bait for People that were ready to perish with
Hunger. We presently asked them for some Victuals: And as we had but one Ship
that could not hold us all, that they should give us another, because we were
not willing to be dispersed on board their Ships, as before, but this they
would not agree to. In the mean while as we were resolved not to recede
here-from, Famine forced thirty of our Men to join themselves with the English
as being unable to bear with the Fasts we were forced to keep. And on the
fourth of August four of our Men died.

On the ninth, when we knew the English were gone, we embarked to the number of
an hundred and twenty Men on board five Canoes commanded by Captain Groigniet,
and lest two hundred on board our Ship, and upon the Island, whom we ordered to
build more Canoes, and afterward to cross over to the Continent.

Having made a Descent there on the thirteenth, we came to an Hatto, which is a
kind of a Farm, where the Spaniards breed their Cattle: It was in the
Neighborhood of a Town called St. Iago, which is twenty Leagues distant from
St. John's Island. The People we found in this Hatto we made our Prisoners,
among whom, was the Master, who showed and conducted us to take a Sugar
Plantation in the River of St. Iago, where we were discovered. We sounded our
Prisoners one after another in order to know whether they understood any thing
of our Separation from the English, by telling them we came from the North-Sea,
and that they should show us where the Free-Booters were, which they said were
come into these Seas. They answered, they were gone to St. John's Island to
repair the Damage the Fleet of Peru had done them, together with other
Circumstances, which we knew better than they, without telling us one word of
what had happened between the English and us: Hence we conjectured they knew
nothing of the matter, and we could have been very well content that all the
Spaniards knew as little as they, for fear our Disjunction might render them
more forward to attack us.

After this Intelligence, we dispatched away a Canoe which we had taken in this
River, to carry our Men some Victuals, which we had found in this Hatto, and to
acquaint them, that we were going toward Panama, to see whether we might meet
with an opportunity of seizing some Barks, that so we might get out of St.
John's Islands; Because, as I have already said, our Ship was not big enough ^o
hold us, and that as soon as the Canoes were ready, they were to go and take
Pueblo-Nuevo, in order to get some Provision wherewith to subsist till our
return.

On the fifteenth we went ashore forty Leagues to Leeward of Panama, and
though we had no Guide, we got by Cock-crowing to a very pretty Estancia as
they call it, which was a lone House, and where we took fifty Prisoners of both
Sexes. Among these, there was a young Man and Woman of Quality, who promised we
should have a Ransom for them, and whom we carried to the Island Ignuana, a
Leagues distance from the great one, and where there is no other but Rainwater
to be had, which stands in the Cavities of the Rocks.

We staid for the forementioned Ransom till the eight and twentieth, when it
was duly paid us, and then went off, being first informed, that about eight
Leagues to Windward, there was a River, wherein were two Barks laden with Maes,
which on the nine and twentieth in the Morning we boarded and took. From thence
we resumed our Course to (...) and rejoyn our Men in St. John's Island, where
we arrived on the third of September. Here they told us, that an Hundred of
them, whereof ninety eight were come back, had gone on the five and twentieth
of the preceding Month, to Pueblo-Nuevo, as we had ordered them, where they
arrived on the seven and twentieth; and though they were discovered by the
Sentinels of the Town, they made themselves masters of it, and staid there two
days for all the continual and various Attacks made upon them by the Spaniards.
That the Commander of the place came with a Trumpet to speak with them, and
asked, why they carried White Colors seeing they were English (so he took them
to be) but without satisfying his Curiosity in the point, they constrained him
to be gone from whence (...) came. That eight of them being gone some distance
from the place of Arms, there were two of the number massacred by an hundred
and fifty Spaniards, who seeing so small a Company together, bravely fell upon
them; But with all the advantage they had, they could not hinder the other six
to recover their Main-guard, who fought retreating with extraordinary Vigor.

On the fourth we put out with six Canoes; and an hundred and forty Men on
board, whereof we detached two to go to the Hatto, we had taken on the eleventh
of August, to look after the Ransom of the Master, whom we kept Prisoner, and
with the other four returned to that Sugar-Plantation in St. Iago, in order to
get some Sugar-Cauldrons, whereof we had occasion. There we were informed, that
the Governor of St. Iago came thither after our Departure the first time we
took it, with eight hundred Men. We staid in this place till the ninth,
expecting the Answer of a Prisoner whom we had sent to the Governor, and by
whom we sent him word, that if he were minded to advance with his eight hundred
Men, we were ready; but hearing no news of him, we departed thence, after our
two Canoes had rejoyned us; and on the eleventh arrived on board our Ship and
the two Barks at the Island of St. John.

On the fifth we carreened our Ships and took in Water and Wood; we would have
left this Island, had it not been for the continual Rains that fell and lasted
eighteen days, and such bad Weather, that it was impossible for us to appear
upon Deck, having never seen the Sun all this time: And for this reason it is,
that the Spaniards call the distance between the Bay of Gurgona, and this
Island of St. John, The Droppings of the South Sea. You have but four Months of
good Weather here throughout the Year, and they are December, January,
February, and March; the other eight Months are incommoded with great Rains,
which falls almost without any Intermission, and which besides the bloody Flux
it brings, is so pernicious, that if a Man has been wet with it two or three
times, if he do not presently shift himself, it breeds large Worms between his
Skin and his Flesh, in form somewhat like unto a Quill, and about half a finger
long.

The Weather clearing up, on the fourth of October, we mended our Sails, which
were almost rotten, and made ready to be gone. And the same Day we had one of
our Men stung in the Leg by a Serpent, who died of it presently, as not having
taken care to provide himself with the remedy we have spoken of.

On the eighth we made ready and sailed for Realeguo, which is both a Port and
Town an hundred and fourscore Leagues to the West and by North West of the Isle
of St. John, and two hundred and sixty West of Panama. We had a small South
East Wind till the eleventh, and on the twelfth and thirteenth we steered West
North West, and that Evening descryed Land. On the fourteenth we had a
boisterous South Wind, which made us take in all our Sails, till Midnight, and
then came a Calm, till the seventeenth, when toward Noon we were surprised
with a South West Blast, attended with great Rains, which separated us from our
two Barks: It blew so very hard, that the Sea appeared presently very
frightfull, and put us so to it, that we began to be very apprehensive we
should be all cast away: But the Weather, (as God would have it) proving fair
again, we spent the nineteenth to set our Vessel in order, as well as to mend
our Sails with our Shirts and Drawers, wherewith we were already but very
indifferently provided. Toward Evening we discovered Land, and knew it to be
the Bay of Caldaira, whereof I shall give an account by and by. On the
twentieth we sailed in sight of that of Colebra; from thence we had moderate
Weather, and a South-East Wind; and on the one and twentieth we got to the
Height of the Morns, which the Spaniards call Papegaya's.

On the two and twentieth we found our selves over against Realeguo, a place
very remarkable for the high Mountains that surround it; and especially for a
high Sulphurous Hill that burns continually, and whose Smoke reaches a great
way, but the Tides next Night put us twenty Leagues to Windward of it. On the
four and twentieth we put out four Canoes with an hundred men in them, in order
to take some Prisoners, that we might receive some Information concerning this
Coast, where we never were before.

On the five and twentieth we put to the Shore and landed, and after a March of
three Hours, came to an Hatto, where we surprised the People, who gave us to
understand, that the English had taken the Town of Leon, and burnt that of
Realeguo: That the Inhabitants of Legoria, Granada, Sansonnat, St. Michell, St.
Salvador, and Villa-Nueva, which are Neighboring Towns to the two
forementioned ones, had sent a considerable Re-inforcement of Men to those of
the Town of Leon, who yet durst not attack the English, who staid there three
whole days; during which time they had sent several Messages to these
Re-inforcements to require them to fight in the Race Savana, which the other
still refused, saying, they were not yet all come together, that is, that they
were hitherto no more than six to one, and that they staid till they were
doubly increased.

On the six and twentieth, one of our Quarter Masters, who was a Catalonian by
Birth, One of the Buccaneers Quarter Masters deserts to the Spaniards.
fled to the Spaniards, which hindered us at this time from going to take the
Town of Granada, of which I shall speak in its due place, for we did not doubt,
but that he had given them an account of the Design we had formed upon that
place.

On the seven and twentieth we went on board our Canoes again, and made for the
Port of Realeguo, where the Rendezvous of our Ship was to be: We could land no
where all along the Coast, because the Sea breaks with so much Violence there,
when it is a Southerly Wind, that it is impossible to come near it. However six
of our Men swum with a design to fill some Casks with Water, which we were in
want of, but they could not do it, for the Spaniards followed us by Land all
along the Bank, and so it sell out, that one of our Men was unfortunately
drowned.

On the first of November we arrived at the Port of Realeguo, where we found
our Ship at Anchor. There are two Passages to this Port, whereof that to
Windward is best. It Is very narrow, and besides this, has two Mornes or little
Mountains, that form the two points thereof. Upon one of which the Spaniards
had a design to build a Fort. There is a very fine River runs into this Haven,
that bears the same Name with the Town, It Is safe from any Winds, and contains
within it ^ive Islands that are very good to carreen Ships in; there are but
three Leagues from thence up the River before you come at the Town: But before
we got there with our Canoes, we met three very strong Retrenchments, that had
been made for its Security upon the River's side, about a Quarter of a League
distant one from another, and which the English had half burnt. ^^bout a Musket
Shot from the Town, the Spaniar^^ had very fine Docks, where they build their
Ship^. It Is washed with this River, and stands in a very fine Country, watered
with several other Rivulets; and both its Churches and Houses, though then ha^^
burnt, appeared to us to have been beautiful enough. We are also farther to
take notice, that that River we have spoken of, has eight Arms, by which you
may conveniently convey any thing to the Village^ Sugar-Plantations and
Hatto's, whereof this Country is full, and which belongs to the Burghers as
well of this Town as of the neighboring ones, of which L^on, that is not above
four Leagues off, is situated (...) a very curious Plain. On the second we went
to take two of those Hatto's, from whence we carrie^ some Victuals on board for
those who were carree^^ing our Ships.

On the ^th. we departed to the number of an hundred and fifty Men, to go and
seize the Sentinels of the Town of Leon, and having surprised them on the
eighth, they informed us there were two thousand men in the Place, who yet not
trusting to their numbers, had taken all their movables, and carried them to a
place of safety. We returned on Board on the ninth, and next day set out to go
to a great Sugar-Plantation, two Leagues distant from this City, where we
arrived at Midnight, but found no Soul living there, the People being gone for
their security to the Town, upon the report that was spread abroad, that we had
taken some Sentinels. But as we were upon our return from this Sugar Plantation
to go on Board again, our Van Guard met with a Detatchment of Horse, upon whom
they fired, and made them fly, but the Captain was made a Prisoner, who upon
our questioning of him, told us, that he had heard of us a long time since, but
not knowing what Language we spoke, we had been taken for a Company of two
(...) and fourscore Mulatos, who were looking out to fight us, knowing we were
ashore, and who would be at that Sugar Plantation that Evening; we asked the
Captain what they were he had headed, and he answered they were a Troop of
Horse who guarded the Embarking Place belonging to that Sugar Plantation, (...)
that the Governor of the Town coming to know (...) were come to the Port of
Realeguo, had given them orders to retire in such a manner, as gave us to
understand that our Enemies kept a very good Guard, when they had nothing to be
afraid of, and that they would draw off as soon as ever they saw us near, and
in effect, we found them to be exactly the very same as represented to us: For
surely if they had had but any thing of Resolution and Courage, being as
numerous as they were in respect to us, they could have easily cut us off, is
often as we made any descent upon them, and thus many times we found our Safety
to proceed from their Cowardice, as much as from our own Courage.

On the 13th. the same Company of an hundred and (...) Men, left our Vessels to
go take a Borough Town three Leagues above the City of Realeguo, whose Name
was Pueblo Viego; we passed through this Place, which we found to be quite
deserted by its Inhabitants, because of the Excommunication they had thundered
out against themselves.

Some perhaps will be surprised to hear of this extravagant humor, An odd way
of Excommunication among the Spaniards of America
but there is nothing truer, then that when the Free Booters have several times
taken the same place from them, their Prelates after excommunicati^^ and
cursing the same, quit it entirely, and will not bury even their Dead whom we
killed, as supposing the^ for the foresaid Reason unworthy of Christian Buryal*
On the 14th. in the Morning we arrived at Pueblo Vir^^ from whence their
Sentinels had discovered us since the 13th. in the Evening, so that we found
the Enemy ^^trenched in the Great Church, and about an hundred and fifty Horse
upon the place of Arms. The Free-booters take Pueblo Viejo.
We presently fell to work, and after some Discharges, we put th^^ to slight,
but those that were within the Church, held (...) about half an hour longer,
and then made their (...) through a door that was behind the Vestry which (...)
had not secured. We staid a day and an half in (...) place, and carried away
all the Provisions we could (...) hands on, upon the Horses which we had, and
our (...) Backs, and on the 16th. arrived on Board our Ship. (...) the 18th. we
returned to take an Estancia, which was (...) League and an half from the said
Town, and the Ma^^^ whom we took Prisoner told us, that the day we (...) away,
six hundred Men lay in Ambush for us, on (...) way by which we were to pass;
but that with^^^ knowing it, we had returned by a different Road. (...) the
21st. we went on Board with our Prisoner, (...) promised us some Provision for
his Ransom; and (...) day we put another Prisoner ashore to endeavor (...)
procure it us with all Expedition.

On the 24th. came a Spanish Officer, who brought a Letter from the
Vicar General of the Province, (and all appearance) by order of the General of
(...) Rica, An amuse^ent of the Spaniards.
who sent us word there was a Peace made between the Crowns of France and Spain
for twenty year that they were joined together to make War up the In^^dels.
That therefore we ought to commit (...) farther Hostilities, and that if we had
a mind to (...) to the North Sea, we might come safely unto them, (...) have
our passage into Europe in his Catholic Majest^^ Ca^leons: We gave them an
answer suitable to the Proposal, being well enough acquainted with the (...)
Dis^^sition of the Spaniards toward us, who by the false pretense, thought to
have seduced us to come (...) more readily among them, who understood the
extreme Misery we had endured, by one of our People of whom we made mention
before, and who ran away to them to be freed from the long fasts he was forced
to with us.

On the 24th. we careened our Ships, and the next day put thirty Prisoners
ashore, part of whom we gave their Liberty to, and on the 28th. we made ready
to return and go in quest of our two Barks whom we had appointed to rendesvouz
at the Isle of St. John de Cueblo, in case we were separated from one another.
As we were going out of the Port, the Spaniards gave notice by the Fires they
made all along the Coast, what Course we steered. On the 3d. of December, we
found our Selves got above an hundred Leagues out at Sea, whither an North-East
Breeze had driven us; we bore again toward I and, and on the fifth went
ashore; We sent out three Canoes furnished with seventy Men, to cross the bay
of Colebra, and to endeavor to get some Provision along the Coast, as also to
discharge our Ships of so many Months, there being but too little Victuals left
(...) those who remained behind, and who went to the (...) of St. John: For as
to the Provision, we were able to get together, while we were ashore in the
Port of Rea^^^^, there was no great quantity of it, for the Spani^^ds knowing
of our coming, had carried it up far into the Country, whither we durst not go
and fetch it with (...) ^ew Men as we had with us, as not being yet
sufficiently acquainted with their Cowardice.

From Realeguo to Panama, there are a great many lit^^e Ports which you must be
well acquainted with before you can find them, for the Mo^th of them is very
(...), and if you once do miss them, its absolutely ^^possible to get ashore
along the Coast, the Sea being (...) always boisterous, and very high upon the
blowing (...) the least South-East and South-West Winds upon (...).

I have observed this difference betwixt this Sea and (...) of the North, that
let the Wind be never so violent, A Remarkable difference between the North and
South Sea^
(...) soon as ever it ceases, the Sea proves as calm as if it (...) never
blown, whereas in the other, for all the Wind allayed, it continues several
days in the same violent ^^^ation, as when it blew hard. I have also taken
(...), that the windy storms that are formed to Leeward, are much more
dangerous in the former, that those that come from the Windward; but in the
other, it is contrary, where a Ship generally esteems not her self to be in
danger, but from those that arise to Windward o^ her, at leastwise, if the Wind
be not subject to a very great Varation; to which we may add one difference
more, that the South Sea is pacifick enough upon the main, and very turbulent
upon the Coast, and That of the North is oftentimes very impetuous far out, and
almost always calm near the Shore.

The South Sea breeds in diverse parts of it a very great number of Serpents, in
color like spotted Marble, and are generally about two foot long; their sting
is of (...) venomous and killing a Nature, that when a Man (...) once stung by
them, there is no humane Remedy (...) can secure him from a sudden Death, and
that which (...) indeed very surprising, in regard to these Creatures (...)
that when the Sea by the boisterousness of its War^^ throws them upon some Bank
or other, though they (...) not go out of the Water, yet they no sooner touch
the Sand, but they presently dye.

On the Ninth, having still kept our course along (...) Coast, we put fifty Men
in three Canoes ashore, to (...) and take the Town of Esparso, which is three
Leag^^^ from Caldaira, and is the place that serves for a Port (...) it; we
took the Sentinells about the third Part of (...) way, who told us, that
besides the Inhabitants of (...) Town, there were five hundred Men whom they
(...) sent for, to come to their Assistance from Carthage, (...) the Alarm
given them by our two Barks that had ancho^ed in this Bay, from which they were
but just go^^ Upon this Intelligence, we bethought our selves, co^^^dering the
smallness of our Number, to put off this ^^pedition to another time, and so
returned with all (...) but in such want of Provision, that we were forced kill
and eat the Sentinels Horses, after four days (...) abstinence; and this sort
of Fasting, which was not (...) first that we had used, did not prove to be the
last (...).

Caldaira is a Bay that bears the name of six (...) that stand about three
Leagues to the East of (...) Mouth of it, A description of the Bay of Cald^ira.
and upon the Bank of the place of emb^^ king belonging to Esparso: This Bay,
which by (...) Geographers is called Nicoya; is one of the finest (...) in the
World; though the mouth of it be large, yet in lieu of that, it is at least a
douzen Leagues within Land, and comprehends a great many Islands of different
sizes within it; there is none but an Easterly Wind that can hurt it; the
bottom of the Bay is open, by means of very fine Rivers that run into it, and
by which you may ascend to several Villages, Hattos and Sugar Plantations,
whereof this Country is full. You may choose your place of Anchorage, according
to the length of the Cable, that is from six Fathom, increasing to any Hundred,
and the bottom is very good: I forgot to observe that the six Magazines of
Caldaira, whereof I have spoken, were partly built by the Inhabitants of
Carthage, who make use of that for their Port, for facilitating the Traffic
they drive with those living on the Coast of Peru, before we came to terrify
them.

Having on the 10th. gone on Board our Canoes, we went to a great Bananery that
stood in the same Bay; its a set of Fruit Trees which they call Bananiers, and
the Fruit thereof Bananes, with which we loaded our Canoes for our subsistence.
As we went ashore, we took the Sentinel of the little Town of Nicoya, from
which finding our selves at some distance, we did not then think fit to go up
to it, and so we directed our Course for Point B^rica, where we arrived on the
fourteenth: That is a very pleasant and delightful place, and among other
^^ings, we could not but admire a walk consisting of five rows of Coco-Trees
that run along the Bank for above fifteen Leagues in length, and that in so
orderly a manner, that though the same be no more then the bare work of Nature,
without any additional help from Art, they seem as if they had been all planted
on a Line.

This Fruit, which upon several occasions was so delightful to us, grows upon
the stock of a Tree, that is a kind of Palm, twenty or five and twenty Foot
high: Its (...) a Nut, but without making any Comparison of the begness of it,
for there are some of these Fruits that weigh twelve or fifteen Pounds, the
Shell is very hard, and thick enough; its wrapped up in a kind of thick
covering, made up all of Filaments, with which the Spaniards use to caulker
their Ships, it being much better then Tow, which rots in the Water in less
then an Years time, whereas the other is fed by it and waxes Green. If you
bore an hole in this Nut, there runs out a quantity of greenish Liquor, which
somewhat resembles the colo^^ of Whey, but of a sharpish taste, and pleasant
enough and when the Shell is broken, we find under it a Kernel, or what is
equivalent thereto, of the thickness of a Man's Finger, very white and
nourishing, which sticks very close to the inside. We left this place on the
twentieth, keeping our Course still all along the Continent.

On the 22d. having no Victuals to eat, we put sixty Men in our three Canoes
ashore, to go seek some for (...) and after travelling^ the space of a League,
we took a very curious Hatto, with two Prisoners, who (...) us we were within a
League and an half of the l^^tle Town of Chiriquita, and that there were six
hundred Men in it, which made us seize with all expedition upon as much
Victuals as we could, to carry it to the plan where we had left our Canoes, but
in our return thi^^^^ we found four hundred Horse in the way whom we fought
with all along retreatin^, till we came to the Se^side, They challenged us
again and again, and defied us a threatening Language to go to their Town, which
we did not fail to do some days after. In the mean time we but away for the
Isle of St. John, where arriving on the first of January 1686, we found our
Ship and two Barks a Anchor.

CHAP. III.
The Free Booters Voyage to the South Sea (...) 1686.
ON the fifth of January, in the New Year, we parted in the number of two
hundred and thirty Men (...) eight Canoes, to go and face the Townsmen of
Ch^^quita, and to give them the Visit they had de^yed (...) do. And so it was,
that this Island of St. John being about twenty Leagues from them, we went
ashore (...) the sixth, about t^n or eleven a Clock at Night, without being
discovered, but as we had no guide with us we marched on till day light without
seeing any Bo^^. We hid our selves on the seventh, all the day in a Wood, but
as soon as night approached, we came out and put (...) without discovering any
body, till the eighth in the Morning when we concealed our selves again in
another small Wood, and spent all the day in that place, during which time we
came to know that we had mistaken our measures, by going ashore on that side of
the River, whereas we should have gone on the other: This was cold comfort to
people so fatigued as we were; however as soon as it was Night, we made no more
ado, than to return to our Canoes, wherein we passed that River: when we were
got on the other side, we took the Town-Watch, by whom we were informed, that
the Spaniards had conveyed away all their effects, upon our being at their
Hattos.

On the 9th. we got to Chiriquita two hours before day, The Buccaneers take
Chiriquita.
we surprised all the Inhabitants who were for two days at variance with one
another, about going the Rounds, and after we bad secured our Prisoners, we
told them, that belonged to us, and that we were come to s^are them the Labor:
We surprised also their Court of Guard, where they were at play, and as soon as
they saw (...) amongst them, they flew to their Arms to defend themselves, but
as it was a little too late, we eased them of* that trouble also. Of them we
learnt, that there was a small Frigate up the River, which having touched in
going out upon a Bank of Sand, that lay at the mouth thereof, was forced to go
back, and so put the Provision which was her lading ashore.

About two in the Afternoon we perceived some Spaniards in a House at some
distance from the Town, which made us send five of our Number to fetch them
out, but when we drew near, those whom we had seen, having showed themselves
for no other purpose then to draw us out, disappeared, and presently about an
hundred and twenty more came out of a little nook where they had concealed
themselves, and beset us in such a manner, that finding no likelihood of
escaping, we resolved never to be taken alive, but to sell our Lives ^s dear we
could; to which end we immediately stood back to back, that we might face the
Enemy every way, and in this posture we fought them above an hour and an half,
at the expiration whereof there being no more then two of us in a condition to
fight, God was pleased that some of our Men who were upon the Guard should come
to our Relief, being driven thither by the Firings, for they thought before
they heard these ^ryes, that we were exercising our selves in shooting at a
Mark. When the Enemy saw this Reinforcement come, they made such haste to go
away, that it was impossible to overtake them: this succor coming in so
seasonably, did infallibly save our Lives, for the Enemy having already killed
us two Men, and disabled another, it was impossible we should hold out against
such a shower of Bullets as were powered in upon us from all sides. And so I may
truly say, I escaped a scouring, who could no^ be kept from being murdered,
and that without recciving as much as one Wound, but by a visible hand of
protection from Heaven. The Spaniards left thirty Mo^^ dead upon the spot, and
thus we defended our selves as desperate Men, and to say all in a word, like
Fre^^ Booters.

We burnt all the Houses in the Town this day, They burnt it.
least under the Covert of them, our Sentinels might be surprised, and that the
Enemy might come to insult us i^ the Night; when we had so done, we retired
into the great Church, where they durst not come to attack us, but contented
themselves to give us some Musket sho^ from time to time, and that from a great
distance.

Chiriquita Chiriquita described.
is a small Town that stands in a Plain of Savanas, from whence the sight is
bounded almost every way with no other than small, but very pleasant Thickets:
There are several Rivulets that traverse it in diverse places, and afterward
gently glide into these Savan^^ to water them. Its surrounded with a great many
Ha^^tos, and they drive no other Trade, but in Tallow and Leather: the Port or
embarking place belonging to it is on a pretty large River, from whence you
must ascend about a League to come at it. There is but one way to come in at
its Mouth, and the Spaniards themselves with out a B^oy will not venture to
enter it; there are three Leagues by Land from this embarking place to the
Town, and that through so pleasant a way, that none but such as we were, could
be weary of it, who had no other thoughts then to get Victuals to satisfye out
hunger which bore hard upon us, when we were going to take this Town; having
eaten nothing from the Fifth, when we left our Vessels, till the Ninth, that we
took it.

On the 10th. we left the place, taking our Prisoners along with us, to wait
for the ransoming of them upon an Island that is within the same River, making
choice rather of these places for that purpose, than of the Continent, and
where being obliged for a long time to stay for the Money, we should give the
Spaniards thereby (...) opportunity to gather all their force together, and to
pay us all at once, by overpowering us with Numbers; whereas these Islands to
which they could not come any other way then in Shaloops, and that openly, put
us out of care to reimbark according to the measures they took by Land. When
therefore we returned to our Canoes, which waited for us at the Port of
Chiriquita, we found the Inhabitants of that Town had laid an Ambushcade for
us, but we beat them off, and after the Enemy had (...) retired, they sent us a
person to demand their Prisoners, whom they said they would recover or perish
in the attempt. We told the Messenger we were very ready to give them up, if
they would come and meet us in the Race Savana to take them, and that if they
fired one single Bullet at us, they should have no quarter, which so humbled
their Pride, that we saw no more of them.

As soon as we were got to the forementioned Island, we sent part of our Canoes
to look after the Cargo of the small Frigate which the Spaniards of Chiriquita
gave us information of, where they found above an hundred Men entrenched; but
they could not hinder our Men from possessing themselves of what they went in
search for Among the Baggage they found some Letters, that among other things,
gave us to understand, that the Admir^^ of the Peru Fleet who was returned to
Lima, had been b^rnt with all ^or Crew, which was at that time four hundred
Men, by a Thunderbolt, and this was so much the more surprising and admirable,
that no Man living could remember to have heard any Thunder in that Country, no
more then to have seen it Rain.

On the 16th. The Ransom for our Prisoners came, and after we had set them at
liberty, we returned aboard our Ship, which rid then at Anchor at St. John's
Island. On the 20th. we concluded among our Selves, it was necessary we should
build large Pirogues, seeing we could make no farther use of our Ship, for want
of Sails, and we had nothing left to make them with, and still were less able
to take Ships from the Spaniards, on this Western Coast, where they had put an
entire stop to their Navigation, since we were come thither. O^ the 22d. we
made choice of tall Trees to make our Canoes and Pirogues of, upon the Banks of
a curious River, which we knew to be in the Island.

On the 27th. we descried seven sail of Ships out a Sea, which made us fit out
five Canoes to go and (...) what they were, and as we doubled one of the Points
of the Island, we discerned twelve Pyrogues, and th^^ long Barks, who coasted
it all along. We took the^^ presently to be the Fleet of Peru, that was come in
qu^^ of us; we gave our Men notice of it without delay, and at the same time,
resolved to put all we had on Board our Ship, into our Bark, and to go into
that River where our Docks were, there to wait the coming of our Enemy, where
they could not come to attack us, without losing a great many Men. This project
we put forthwi^^ in Execution, and after we had abandoned our Ships, which
could not be brought into that River, we ran h^^ ashore, least the Spaniards
should have any Benefit of in and put her into a sailing Condition, being very
well assured of our Selves, that they did not want Sails, as we did for that
purpose.

On the 28th. our Sentinels came to give us Noti^^, that six Pirogues plied
along the Shore, which made (...) at the same time put an hundred and fifty Men
to lie i^ Ambush on both sides the River, and then we set (...) with two of our
Canoes, from whence after we had seen them, we feigned to run away by going
back, to engage them to give us chase; But they suspecting a stratagem in the
case, bore directly upon our Sh^p that was run aground, upon which they fired
very sur^ously, though there was none left within it but only a poor Cat, which
they perceiving, they bravely boarded and burnt her, for the sake of the
Iron-work that belonged to her, which is a Commodity as rare as (...) dear in
some parts of Peru. On the first of February, the Spanish Fleet sailed away,
and left us at ease to ^^nish our Work, upon which we spent the remainder (...)
the Month.

We understood afterward that the Admiral of this Fleet had orders to put some
Fieldpieces ashore to demolish those Fortifications which they thought we had
made upon the Island, being induced to believe it was so, by by the report the
Prisoners, which we sent them, made of our Intentions. We to impose upon them,
having asked whether there were any Masons among them that could do our Work,
and sometimes obliged them to give as Brick for their Ransom, though we had no
need of them: there were no less then fourteen of our Men dyed in the Month of
February.

On the 14th. of March we departed from the Isle of St. John with our two
Barks, an half Gally of 40 Oars, ten great Pyrogues, and ten small Canoes, all
built of Mapou-Timber, except our two Barks; we gained the Windward point of
the Island to take a review of our Men, and found our Selves weaker by no less
then thirty Persons, since our separation from the English: But we formed a
design anew at the same time which had been put by for above four Months, which
was to go and take the Town of Granada, distant now from us, about two hundred
Leagues. To effect this Work, it was necessary we should be furnished with
Provision wherewith to subsist us during the Voyage, and we having none, this
made us send away our half Galley and four Canoes, to seek for some at Pueblo
Nueoo while the rest of the Company went to ^arry for us at the Isle of St.
Peter, which is two Leagues to Windward of the River Chiriquita, and to finish
somewhat that was still wanting to the complete Equipment of our Canoes.

On the 6th. of April, about three hours before daylight, we were got near to
the River of Pueblo Nuevo, They fight the Spaniards by Sea.
and by a clear light of the Moon we discerned a small Prigat at its Mouth, as
also a long Bark, and a Pyrogue. We came within Pistol shot of them, as
supposing them to be our English Freebooters, from whom we had separated. But
we found our selves quickly mistaken, for after we had haled them, they
answered us with an entire Volley of great and small shot, which made us now
conjecture that they were, and it was too true, a detachment left by the
Spanish Fleet in that place, when they left us at St. John's Island, as a guard
to two small Ships, which we knew they were lading with Provisions at the Port
of this Town, in order to transport the same to Panama. Our mistake was the
reason that we had twenty Men disabled to fight, by this first Discharge of the
Enemy, before we know well where we were, but after we were a little recovered
out of the surprise this adventure put us to, we fought them stiffly for the
space of two hours, though we had the use of no other Arms than our Fuzees, and
not one Cannon to discharge upon them; And they on their part defended
themselves so much the more vigorously in that they believed, we, after such a
surprise as we had been exposed to, would quickly slacken our Courage and give
way. They did all they could to make ready during the Fight, but we hindered
them, and no Man could appear in the Shroud^ but we brought them down, as well
as their Granadeers from their Round Tops. But finding the light of the Moon
now gone, we put off out of the reach of the^^ Cannon, as well to take care of
our wounded Men, which amounted to thirty three, besides four who were killed
out right, as to wait for day light, in order to terminate this Affair, which
we were not willing to leave undecided. But the Enemy did in the mean time
retire under the covert of a Retrenchment, which I have said already, they had
upon the Banks of this River, where the Country People who had heard the noise
of the Fight in the Night, were also come, which made us conclude, that if we
went to attack them in that place, we could not have that advantage there, we
had resolved to take of them; So upon approach of day, we steered our Course to
go and rejoyn our Canoes at the Isle of St. Peter, where we arrived on the
Eighth.

On the ninth we found our Selves in great want of Victuals, having now nothing
at all to eat, and this (...) us hard to it, more especially our wounded Men,
who^ we sent by our half Gally, (for their better convenience) on board our two
Barks, whom we had appointed to Rendesvouz in the Bay of Boca-del-Toro. When
this was done, we went ashore to a Town ten Leagues to Leeward of Chiriquita,
where finding none, we left it, and on the Eleventh in our return to our
Canoes, we found, in order to strengthen us under the languishme^^ which Hunger
had reduced us to, a regale of an Ambuscade of five hundred Men laid for us,
against whom for all our weakness, we made so good a defense, that we obliged
them to leave us free Passage, but yet not without the loss of two of our Men.
We went on Board in the Evening, to go join our Barks in the Bay of
Boca-del-T^ro, where we arrived the thirteenth, and went ashore; spending, our
Time to the sixteenth in hunting more especially for the subsistence of our
wounded Men, and here we found the same sort of Deer and Birds, as I have taken
notice of in our passage over the Continent, in great plenty.

On the same day we departed for the Bay of Caldaira, after having renewed our
Enterprise upon the little Town of Lesparso, of which I have already spoken, On
the 19th. being arrived in the Bay, we went ashore two hours before Day light,
and reached the Town; About Eleven in the Morning, we found the place was in a
manner entirely abandoned from the time we had taken the Sentinels, who, as I
have already observed, diverted us from going thither by the account they gave
of the Reinforcement that was come to them from Carthage: However we took some
Prisoners, who told us all the People were retired to this last Town, which is
four and twenty Leagues off; so that finding our endeavors all frustrated, we
returned on the 20th. to the Sea side to rejoyn our Canoes.

Lesparso is reckoned to be three Leagues distant from the Seaside, and the
way thither very bad, you cannot travel the length of a Gunshot in even
Ground, but the same is every where rugged, and full of little Mountains and
Hills, though beyond them the Country appears to be very good and delightful.
The Town is built upon an Eminence, from whence one may easily see all that
comes in and goes out of the Bay; This Town is in a manner encompassed with a
Rivulet that runs round it: Between it and Carthage, are very curious Plains,
with royal ways made through them, and that as well as any in Europe.

On the 21st. we victuall'd our selves with the Fruit of a Bananery in this
Bay, wherein our two Barks came to join us, and next day we summoned our People
ashore upon this Island as well to consult how we should attack the Town of
Granada, which we had a design upon, as to take an account of what powder they
had, as fearing many of them might use it in hunting: Here we enacted orders
whereby those were condemned to lose their share of the Booty got in the place,
that should be found guilty of Cowardice, Violence, Drunkeness, Disobedience,
Theft, and straggling from the Main Body without orders. When this was over, we
left the Bay the same Evening, and a strong Easterly Wind surprising (...) in
the Night, separated our Vessels from one another: At break of day, we told
thirteen Sail, wherewith we were amazed, knowing we had no more than a dozen,
and this made us give our Canoes the signal to chase, as well as we, that
Vessel that did not belong to us, be^ when we had continued the chase for about
an hour^ time, we perceived five more, and having come up with the foremost, we
understood 'twas Captain Townsley ca^^ from the Coast of Acapulao: He had left
his Ship ^ the Cape, over against the mouth of the Bay, where we had been, and
went with his five Canoes to find out some Bananes, having very little
Provision on Board. He told us that Captain David, with his Fleet was on the
(...) thern Coast, and that Captain Suams with his Ship was gone to the East
Indies.

We finding our selves now to be the stronger Par^^, called to mind their
former imperious dealings with us, and to show our Resentment of it, The French
oppress the English in their turn, but agree again
we made him and his Men who were in the other four Canoes Prisoners* We
boarded his Vessel immediately, of which having made our selves Masters, we
made a sham of taking ^ away, but our design being only to frighten them, (...)
left them for some time under the apprehensions of danger they were in. Then we
let the Captain know we were honester Men then he, and that though we had the
upper-hand, yet we would not take the Advantage of ^^venging the Injuries they
had done us, and that we would put him and his Men in possession of what we had
taken from them four or five Hours before. This moder^tion which we exercised
toward them, together wit^ their being informed by some of our Crew, of a
des^^ we had upon the Town of Granada, engaged them to desire we would take
them in to be our Associates in the Enterprise, and they being an hundred and
fifteen (...) number, we readily consented to such a Reinforcement as must
needs be useful to us.

On the 25th. we departed all together French and English in our Pirogues and
Canoes, leaving their Ship and our two Barks under the covert of Cape Blanck,
which is twenty Leagues to Windward of the place where we were to go ashore,
and gave orders to those that were appointed to guard them, to sail away six
days after, and to coast it till they came to an Anchor, at the place where we
should leave our Canoes.

On the 7th. of April we went ashore on a flat Coast, to the number of three
hundred and forty five Men, under the conduct of a very good Guide, who lead us
cross a Wood that we might not be discovered. We marched on Night and Day till
the Ninth, but notwithstanding all the precautions we took, we could not hinder
our being discovered by the Inhabitants of the Town of Granada, who were
fishing in a River about fifteen Leagues off, and though they made all the have
they could to advertise the Spaniards of our March, they could not have been
there time enough to have given the People Notice to remove all their effects,
considering the expedition we used to follow them, had not they (unhappily upon
our account) notice given them of us three weeks before by the Inhabitants of
Lesparso, who having seen the great number of Canoes we had, as we passed by
there, grew suspicious of our design.

The fatigue we had undergone during our March, together with the sharp Hunger
that pressed us, obliged us to halt and rest the Ninth in the Evening in a
great Sugar Plantation, that is about four Leagues distant from Granada, and
was in our way thither. It belonged to a Knight of St. James's, who upon our
arrival, we failed in take Prisoner, our Legs being at that time much more
disposed to rest, then to run after him. On the 10th. we set out, and upon our
approach near the Town, we observed an Eminence above it about a League off,
and two Ships upon the lake of Nicaragua, that carried, as we were since
informed, all the wealth of the Town into an Island two Leagues off. We took a
Prisoner in a Village that was in our way, who told us the Inhabitants of the
Town had entrenched themselves upon the place of Arms, and compassed it with a
strong Wall, since our Quartermaster who had run away to them, had given
information that we designed to come amongst them: He told us farther, that
that Place was guarded with fourteen pieces of Cannon, and six Petereroes, and
lastly, that they had detatched six Troops of Horse to (...) our rear while our
Front should be engaged with the Spaniards, if so be we should come up to them.

This Information which doubtless would (...) terri^ied any other but
Free-booters, did not reta^^ our design one Minute, nor hinder us, about two in
the Afternoon of the same day to come up to the Town, where at one entrance
into the Suburbs, we met with a strong party lying in Ambush for us, whom after
an Hours Engagement, we fell with that Fury (...) that we made our way over all
their Bellies, with the loss only of one Man on our own side, and from thence
entered the Town, where we made an halt to wait for the Answer of several of our
Company, whom we had detatch'd to go round and take Observation of a For which
we saw in a direct Line from the Street, by which we entered. Presently after
came a party to inform us, that it was a square Fort, and that besides the
Street we were in, they had also observed three more, that (...) out to the
other three sides of that Fort, by which the Enemy could discover whatever came
toward the^ through those avenues which were moreover all commanded by their
Cannon and small Arms.

We were not long in debate what we should do; ^ could easily see we were too
few to make our attack^^ those different ways all at a time. Wherefore after^
had got together all those whom we had sent out to (...) who for some time had
been detained by some light ^^mishes; we made our selves ready to fall on
through (...) Street alone where we then were, and 'twas well we (...) so, for
if we had dispersed our selves through the other^ the Horse which were in the
rear of us, and observed our Motion, would not have failed to he^ us in, whi^^
they durst not do while we kept all together.

After we had exhorted one another to fall on bravely we advanced a round pace
toward the said Fortification* As soon as the defendants saw us within a good
Can^^^ shot of them, they fired furiously upon us, but observ^^ that at every
Discharge of their great Guns, we (...) them down to the Ground, in order to
let their sho^^ over us, they bethought themselves of false (...) them, to the
end we might raise our Bodies after (...) tham was over, and so be really
surprised with the^ true Firing. As soon as we discovered this Stratage^^ we
ranged our selves along the Houses, and having g^^^ upon a little ascent, which
was a Garden-plat, we (...) upon them from thence so openly for an hour and^
half, that they were obliged to quit the Ground, to which our hardy Boys, who
were got to the Foot of their Walls, contributed yet even more then the other,
by pouring in hand Grenades incessantly upon them, so that at last they betook
themselves to the Great Church or Tower, but they wounded us some Men: As soon
as our People who were got upon the said Eminence, perceived that the Enemy
fled, they called to us to jump over the Walls, which we had no sooner done,
but they followed us: And thus it was that we made ourselves masters of their
Place of Arms, and consequently of the Town, from whence they fled, after
having lost a great many Men. We had on our side but four Men killed, and eight
wounded; which in truth was very (...): When we got into the Fort, we found it
to be a place capable of containing six thousand fighting Men, it was
encompassed with a Wall, the same as our Pris^ners gave us an account of; It
was pierced with many Holes to do execution upon the Assaylants, and was well
^tored with Arms. That part of it which looked toward the Street, through
which we attacked it, was de^^ded by two pieces of Cannon, and four Petereroes,
to (...) nothing of several other places made to open in the Wall, through
which they thrust instruments made on purpose, to break the Legs of those that
should be so (...) as to come near it, but these by the help of (...)
Granadeers, we rendered useless to them. After we (...) sung Te Deum in the
Great Church, and set four ^^ntinels in the Tower, we fixed our Court of Guard
in (...) strong built Houses, that are also enclosed within the place of Arms,
and there gathered all the Ammunition (...) could get: Then we went to visit
the Houses, where^^^ we found nothing but a few Goods and some Provi^^^ which
we carried into our Court of Guard.

Next day in the Evening we detatched a party of an (...) and fifty Men, to go
and find out some Wo^^^ that we might put them to Ransom, and some Boo^^ which
we were told they had in the Sugar Plantation ^eague off of the City: But they
were gone by the (...) we got thither, as not believing themselves safe in at
place, so that our Party came back re infecta: The (...) day we sent a Prisoner
to the Spaniards, to require (...) to ransom the Town, or else we would burn
it; ^^ereupon they sent a Monk to treat with us, who said the Officers and
Inhabitants were in Consultation about it, but that one of our Men whom they
had taken as be lagged behind, through weariness upon the Road, without the
Officer that brought up our Rear, his having taken notice of it, assured them
we would not burn it, because our design was to pass some Months after to the
North-Sea, by the Lake there, and to furnish our selves in this Town with
necessaries for our Journey, which we should not meet with if we fired the
Place: So that the said Man having given them such assurance, they would no
longer trouble themselves about giving an Answer to the Proposal we had made
for their ransoming the Town, They fire Granada.
which at last constrained some of us to set fire to the Houses out of mere
Spite and Revenge.

The opportunity which now offered it self unto us of passing through the Lake
to the North-Sea, was not at this time over favorable, and we should not have
failed to make use of it, if we had had Canoes ready in this place to go and
take two Ships, and the wealth of the Town, which the Inhabitants had carried
for the better securing of them into the Island which I have already said was
in the said Lake; which would have put a full end unto the Trouble we had been
in from the time we failed of seizing the Flo^a before Panama; But the term of
Dangers and Miseries which our destiny had still in store for us, being not yet
come, we could not take the Advantage of so favorable an Opportunity to get
out of those parts of the World, which though very charming and agreeable to
those who are settled there, yet did not appear to be so to an handful of Men,
as we were, without Shipping, the most part of our time without Victuals, and
wandering amidst a multitude of Enemies, against whom we were obliged to be
continually upon our Guard, and who did all that in them lay to deprive us of
Subsistence.

Granada is a large and spacious Town, situated in a Bottom, Granad^ described.
inclining to the Coast of the South Sea, whose Churches are very stately, and
Houses well enough built: They have several Religious Houses there, both of Men
and Women: The Great Church stands at (...) of the ends of the place of Arms;
The Country thereabouts is very destitute of Water, they having no other (...)
than only the Lake of Nicarague upon the side whereof the City is built, and
round about which you may see a great many fine Sugar Plantations, which are
more like unto so many Villages, then single Houses, and among the rest is that
belonging to the Knight of St. James's, where we lay in our March to the Town,
where there is a very pretty and rich Church.

On the 10th. we left the City, and took along with us one piece of Cannon,
with sour Petereroes, as not questioning but we should meet with Opposition in
our way, before we came to the Seaside, from which we were near twenty Leagues
distant, and therein we were not deceived; seeing the Spaniards waited for us,
to the number of two thousand five hundred Men, within a quarter of a League of
the Town, and presently charged us: But not dreaming that we had brought any of
their Artillery along with us, they were so terrifyed when we had fired two
Cannon shot upon their first Ambuscade, that they left us a free passage in
this place only, for though they saw a great many of their Men sprawling upon
the Ground, they ceased not all the way at certain distances to lay new
Ambushes for us, where they had no more success then at first. We took one of
them Prisoners, who told us, there was a Million and an half of pieces of Eight
long since ordered for the ransoming of their Town, in case the same should be
taken, and that the same was buried in the Wall, so as that it could not be
seen: But we had no inclination to go back in search of this Money, seeing we
found difficulty enough to rid our selves out of the Hands of so considerable a
number of Enemies as we had already to deal with.

We were forced that Evening to leave our Cannon behind us, after we had first
nailed them up, for the Oxen that drew them were dead for want of Water, having
traveled several Leagues through very great heats, without one drop of Water,
and through such a Dust, as choked both Man and Beast. But we reserved our
Petereroes, which were carried by Mules, who could better bear this
inconveniency. At last we lay in a very pretty Village, called Massaya, that
stands upon the side of the Lake, but from hence to the Water there is so great
a descent, that a Man of full growth appears to be no bigger then a Child: We
were received by the Indians in this place with open Arms, but the Spaniards
that had retired thither, knowing the extreme thirst wherewith we were
af^licted, had spoilt all the Water that was in the Village, hoping thereby to
reduce us to such necessity, that we might go by Night to drink to the Lake
that so they might lay some Ambush for us: But these Indians that came to meet,
and pray us not to burn their Village, remedyed this Evil, in assuring us, they
would supply us with whatever we had occasion for, as long as we staid there,
and particularly with Water. Taken with this their Submission, we granted them
their request, so much the more willingly, seeing they gave us to understand
upon several occasions, that they were more our Friends, then they were the
Spaniards.

All these Indians The misery of the Indians.
are a miserable People, whom the Spaniards endeavor to reduce and bring under
their Subjection by little and little, with a feigned gentlene^s practiced
toward them, to make them forgetful of those Cruelties and Tyrannies they had
heretofore exercised in those parts, and which they are not wanting still to
keep in remembrance. They have at present a pretty number of them there, whom
they have brought down from those Mountains where they had refugiated
themselves and brought them to submit in this manner. They have given them
places to build Buroughs and Villages upon, but all their Labor redounds to
the advantage of the Spaniards; So that being used as Slaves by them, they are
so weary of their Dominion, and the Barbarity showed them, by being made use of
as Pallisadoes by the Spaniards when they fight us, that if we had been People
fit to receive them; as often as they made an offer to take our parts, we
should have formed a very considerable Army, and it is certain, that if they
had but Arms and Protection, they would have infallibly shaken off the Yoke of
their pitiful Masters, being three times more in number then they.

We rested only one day in this place, to refresh our wounded Men, where two
dyed of the Cramp, which (...) all their Nerves, (...)
this is so malignant a Distemper in this Country, that when it seizes upon a
stranger that is wounded, it will certainly kill him: This same day came a
Father to us from the Spaniards, to redemand another Father from us, who was
one of our Prisoners, who had taken up Arms against us, and had his Pockets
full of poisoned Bullets: We required in exchange for him one of our Men, whom
they had taken, which they would by no Means agree to, so that we carried the
latter along with us, as far as the Seaside.

On the 17th. we left this Borough, and lay in another place three Leagues
beyond it, from whence we passed next day, and as we came out of a Forest to
enter into a Plain, we discovered five hundred Men upon an ascent, waiting for
our coming, commanded by the abovementioned Catalonian Quartermaster, that had
deserted us: They had put up Bloody Colors, to signify they would give no
quarter, which obliged us to lay by our white Colors, and display our Red as
well as they. We marched directly to the place where they were without
stopping, though they fired very thick upon us, and when we came within
Musket Shot, we detatched our Vanguard to beat them off their Ground, which
they did with wonderful Bravery; Here we took about fifty Horses, the Enemy in
their flight, cowardly left part of their Arms behind them, besides their dead
and wounded Men, by which last we understood that these People were the
reinforcement which the Inhabitants of the Town of Leon had sent to the
Assistance of Granada against us, and who were returned home.

After we had rested about an hour, we continued our March, and lay at a little
Town which the Inhabitants had forsaken. On the 19th. we lay in a Hatto, and
the next day in an Estancia, where we rested some days to refresh our selves,
and to salt our Provisions to carry on Board our Ships, where we knew very well
there could be no Victuals left. I always went before with an advanced Party of
fifty Men, to go and inform those who looked after our Vessels with our Return.
On the 26th. the rest of our Men came to the Seaside, where we reimbarked all
together, and understood that four of our Men wounded in the Fight at Pueblo
Viego were dead, but more for want of Sustenance than their Wounds.

On the 27th. we sailed for Realeguo, and on the 28th. anchored in that Port,
where upon our going ashore, the Sentinels of Pueblo Viego discovered us, but
that did not ^inder us to proceed and arrive at the place about Noon; The
Spaniards who had heard of our coming, fled every where, but the heats are so
excessive in these parts, that you cannot travel there this time of day, and
this made us go and see rather for some shade or tufts of Grass whereon to set
our Feet, then to run after the Enemy, however we took some Prisoners. We
tarryed there but two days, and after we had gathered as much Provision as we
could find in the Houses, and sent out a party to see for some Horses, whereof
they brought us an hundred, we departed on the first of May, and carried our
Provision to the River side at Realeguo, where our Canoes were, who carried the
same afterward on Board our Ships, while we went out to seek for more, that so
we might get together a good quantity, and not be obliged to consume it as we
brought it in.

On the 2d. we went to a Sugar Plantation to fetch off six Caldrons which we
brought away next day, and on the fourth set out for a Borough two Leagues
from Realeguo, which they call Ginandego, which some of the Inhabitants a few
days before prayed us by way of Raillery to go and Visit, as thinking
themselves sufficiently secured by a Rerrenchment cast up at the Avenue leading
to it, and that was defended by two hundred Men: We got thither on the fifth,
by break of day; But being discovered by the Sentinel, he carried the Spaniards
notice thereof, who gave us no occasion to desire them to quit it, after they
had given us a few Musket Shot; so that to punish their Rhodomontades, we
burn* the place down to the Ground: We took one of their people Prisoner, by
whom we understood that the Coregidor of Leon, who was very desirous to drive
us away from that Coast, had ordered all the Tements, as soon as we got to any
Place, to burn all the Provision they had, which to our sorrow was but to well
executed, not only here, but every where else, and was the cause also of that
Hunger and extraordinary toil which we were forced to endure in these Seas, as
long as we staid there.

The same day about Noon, came about eight hundred Men into a Savana from Leon
to fight us, the Sentinel which we had placed on the top of the Steeple, rung
the Alarum-Bell to give us notice to get together, and come out of the Houses
where we were dispersed: Whereupon we marched in a body of an hundred and fifty
Men, with red Colors to fight them, but as they could not endure to let us
come within Musket Shot of them, for they fled without any more ado, we were
obliged to retire, and on the 6th. went away to go on Board our Ships, which we
careened next day, as we also cleaned our Canoes.

On the 9th. we had a consultation together, about what way we should take, and
here we found our selves of two Opinions, one party was for going up before
Panama, being in hopes they had begun their Navigation again, as knowing we
were far enough from them; But the rest represented, that many times they had
such Years on that Coast, whereof that might be one of them, that eig^t Months
thereof was sad Weather, in respect to excessive Rains, and Southerly Winds
which reign there, and that therefore it would be more advisable to go lower
Westward, and winter upon some Island or other, and there to wait for fair
Weather.

Now these different Sentiments were pursued by us, They disagree and steer
different Course ^
and every Man having made choice of his side; Next day our Surgeons had
orders to give in an account of those among the wounded, who were crippled, to
the end we might make them Satisfaction before we divided. They told us we had
four Men crippled, and six hurt, to which we gave six hundred pieces of Eight a
Man, and a thousand to those that were crippled, as it was our constant custom
in those Seas, and it was exactly all the Money we had got together, that was
applied to that use: We made a Division of the Barks and Canoes on the 12th.
and we found our selves to be an hundred and forty eight Frenchmen, ready to
go up toward Panama (without comprehending the English under Captain
Townsley,) and the same number of French failed also to the Westward. Next day
our Provision was shared amongst us, and now it was that we divided into two
parts; those who were for the Westward, put themselves under the Conduct of
Captain Grogniet, and we that were bound for Panama, were commanded by Captain
Townsley; And then we went to Anchor at an Island (half a League distant from
that we left) to take in Water and Wood: On the sixteenth, Captain Groignet
sent us his Quartermaster to desire us to put none of our Prisoners ashore,
for fear they should give the Spaniards notice of our Separation, for as he had
a design to make a Descent upon them, he was apprehensive that such a Discovery
would make them more (...) and hardy to oppose him.

On the 19th. we made ready, and sailed for Panama* with Captain Townsl^y's
Ship and o^e Bark: We steered East-South-East, to South-South-East, and to
South-South-West, till midnight, when we were overtaken with a Storm, which
made us lie by till the 20th. at Noon, when the Weather proved fair, then we
steered East-South-East, to the 23d. when we anchored in the Bay of Colebra to
take in Water. We spent that day there to take Tortoises, which are to be found
in great numbers in that little Bay^h They are of different sizes, and we found
one sort of them so large, that one was enough for fifty Persons to feed upon
in a day. On the 24th. we put an hundred and fifty Men ashore, in order to find
out some Town or Borough, we having no Guide with us that knew this Country,
and after we had walked a League or thereabouts, we alight upon three Ha^toes
very near one another, where finding Edibles enough, we s^aid till the 26th.
when we returned on Board; Then Captain Townsley proposed we should go and take
the Town of Villia, which is 30 Leagues to Leeward of Panama, to which all of
us agreed, and that Evening we weighed, having a Wind blowing from the Land,
which served us till the 27th. at Noon, when it blew very hard from the
South-East, accompanied with Rain till the 28th. in the Evening, when it began
to allay, we were favored all the 29th. with a Westerly Wind, and that Evening
were brought in sight of Cap^ Blanch. On the 3^th. the Weather was fair enough,
but on the 31st. two hours before Day light, it grew very boisterous, so that
we were forced to put in for that Cape; we had a Thunderbolt fell upon the end
of ou^ great Sail Yard, which did no more then crack it: Having moderate
weather on the first of Iu^e, we steered East-South-East, and next day about
Noon, had a sight of Land, but it was so hazy, that we could not tell where we
were, however we steered East by South-East, to come near. The Weather being
now somewhat cleared up, we found we were between the Bay of Boca-del-Toro, and
the Point called Barica, when we sailed South and by South-East, to put out to
Sea, and then bore to the North-East, that we might reach the Isle of St. John
de Cueblo.

On the 7th, we put in at the Isle of Montosa, six Leagues to the Southward of
that of St. John; We set out three Canoes, with which we coasted round about
this last, and our Ships anchored at another little Island, which is half a
League to the East: While we were going round St. John's Island with our
Canoes, we found nothing there but one of our Prisoners, who having made his
escape from us when we were there, and being not able to get to the Continent,
returned to us: On the 10th. we went back to our Ships, and next day took in
our store of Water and Wood, and cleaned our Ships: There arose the succeeding
Night a North Wind that tore our Cables, and made us think we should be thrown
ashore; But as good Luck would have it, it came about and gave us an
opportunity to make ready, and to cast Anchor farther from the Shore. By the
favor of the Lightning we discovered our Canoes, and ^ound their Ropes also
broken, and that the Waves were throwing them ashore also, unless we had saved
them, though we could not hinder one of them from being s^aved to pieces.

On the 13th. we made ready, and sailed for La Villia, with a West-South-West
Wind, made Land on the fifteenth, and knew it to be the Cape called Morn a
Puercos, then we bore off to Sea with a hard Wind till the Evening, when the
Weather grew so very bad, that we did nothing till the 18th. but let our Ships
drive with a South-West Wind, having terrible Rain all the while till Noon,
when the Weather grew better, and being cleared up, we dicserned three Rocks,
which are called the Three Brothers, standing three Leagues to Leeward of the
Bay of Villia, whither we were going. On the 19th. we saw the Point M^^a, which
is Leeward of that Bay; We sailed all Night Northward to get to the Shore, and
next Morning at break of day, we found our Selves within five or (...) Leagues
of it, when we furled all our Sails except our Sprit-Sail: Next Evening we went
on Board our Canoes, and put on all Night after we had given our Ships orders
to lie by, The Buccaneers take La Villia, and a very great Booty
and wait for us at the mouth of the Bay where we were.

On the 21st. in the Morning we discovered the place where we were to go
ashore, and cast Anchor till Night came, as we also took down our Masts, for
fear they should be discovered from the Shore, and then made our selves ready
to Land, which we did on the 22d. (...) hour before day: But Experience telling
us we had (...) time enough before us to get to the place before day light
appeared, we put three Leagues off where we anchored, having no where in this
Bay above fifteen Fathom Water. That Evening we made for the shoar^ again,
which we could not recover before Midnight, because the Currents were against
us. After we had (...) Footing, we marched to the number of an hundred and
sixty Men directly to the Town, and took one (...) two Spaniards, whom we found
on the way, who told us that he was sent by the Alcaide Major to watch (...)
the Seaside, because they had seen a Ship and a Bark aloof off, which yet they
were so little alarmed with, (...) they had increased their Guard with no more
then twenty Men: We continued our march, and for all the Expedition we were
able to use, it was an hour after Sunrising, before we could get to the Town,
where we sound no resistance, half of the People^being then at Mass: (...) Men
and Women we took three hundred Prisoners, (...) whom we understood there were
three Bark^ in the River on which the Town was situated. We sent presently out
a party to take them, but the Spaniards having lo^^ no time, sunk one of them,
hid the Sails and Rudder ^ the other two, and cut down their Masts by the
middle so that the Party going on further, gave notice to (...) of us, whom we
had left to take care of our Canoe^ which they found at Anchor at the Rivers
Mouth, (...) we had taken Villia; We gathered together that day (...)
Merchandise which the Fleet had left in this Town computed by the Spaniar^ to
be worth a Million and (...) half, and to the value of fifteen Thousand pieces
(...) Eight in good Silver, which was an inconsiderable (...) to what we should
have found there, if the Spaniards in all these Countries, who are always
apprehensive (...) of the visits of the Free-Booters, had not hid their
Treasures out of our sight, many of whom chose rather (...) be killed, then to
discover the places where they (...) buried them.

On the 24th. we sent a party of fourscore Men (...) conduct a like number of
Horses laden with Bales (...) Goods to the River side, where we knew there were
(...) Canoes belonging to the Spaniards, on Board of which after they had put
them, they were to bring them to the Rivers Mouth, where ours were, but one of
our Men sent upon this occasion, was taken by the Enemy: The same day we sent a
Letter to the Alcaide Major (as they call him) in order to know whether he
would ^ansom the Town, and buy the effects we had seized: He sent us Answer,
that all the Ransom that he took upon him to give us was Powder and Ball,
whereof he had a great deal at our Service: That as to the Prisoners we had
taken, he committed them to the hands of God; ^^d moreover, that his People
were getting together as (...) as they could to get the honor to see us. Upon
the receiving this Answer which angered all our Men, (...) fired the Town, and
went our ways to lie in a place where our Booty was kept by our fourscore Men,
which was about a quarter of a League off: We were allarmed several times that
Night, and on the 25th. put the best and finest effects on Board the two
Spanish Ca^oes, because we could not carry off all. For our own Canoes, as we
have said, were at the mouth of the River, on Board of which we could have
laden (...) rest, but they durst not come up thither because of the Ambuscades
of the Spaniards who had already killed them a Man, as they were endeavoring
to come up to (...) pursuant to the orders we had before left with them:
Wherefore having laden the two Spanish Canoes, we (...) nine Men on Board them,
and the rest guarded them by Land all along the River side, while six hundred
Spanish did the same on the other side, without being disco^ered by us, because
of a great many Trees, Bushes and Thickets, that grow along the Banks thereof.
When we had marched on about a League, we came to a (...) so full of these
Trees and Thickets, that we could (...) pass it, so that we were obliged to
take a turn about which brought us off from the River side about two hundred
Paces, which was the occasion, as you will hear, of the loss of all our Booty,
and the Death of some of our Men.

As we quitted the place where we lay, we ordered those who had the charge of
our Canoes to stop in this River, The Spaniards surprise and retake the Booty.
at a place where there were three Spanish Barks, to the end we might endeavor
to bring them away; but when they came there, they were suddenly surprised with
(...) Ambuscade, of which the Spaniards were never nigard to us, and as they
defended themselves against them, the Current of the River drove them beyond
the three (...) and consequently far from us, which was exactly (...) they
would have, for as soon as they saw them in a (...) where we could not relieve
them; they discharged (...) Musket shot at them, with which they killed four
(...) wounded one: The rest made their escape to the (...) side of the River
and abandoned their Canoes, which dozen Indians who swam the River, carried to
the (...) niards, who cut off the Head of one of our Men, (...) was only
wounded, and set it on the top of a Pole, (...) we might see it, as we came
down the River.

After we had finished the Tour we had taken, (...) drew near the River again,
and being to come to (...) place where the three Barks were, and not finding
(...) Canoes, we thought they were still behind; but abo^^ an hour after, we
saw three of those who had the (...) of them, coming through the Thickers
toward us, (...) gave us a Relation of the Disaster that befell them, (...)
said that as they passed the Woods, they found (...) Rudders and Sails of those
three Barks, in two of whi^^ we embarked our selves all together, and sent out
(...) stantly fifty Men by Land before us, to seek out (...) Sails and Rudders,
giving them a Signal, that we wou^^ fire off three Guns, and that they should
answer us (...) as many, to show where they should find us, to the (...) they
might join us there. But at the same time that (...) fired our three pieces, we
heard the report of abo^^ five hundred, which made us immediately conclude
(...) Men were attacked, wherefore we delayed not to go (...) shore in order to
relieve them; but by the time we ca^ up, the Engagement was over, and had not
the River be^^ between them and us, the matter had not been ended (...) We
found one of our People in this place, who had (...) ped out of our Vessels,
after we had brought away (...) Ship tackle that were hid in the Woods.

After we were embarked, we asked the Captain (...) Horse of Villia, that was
our Prisoner, where it was (...) Spaniards could lay other Ambuscades for us;
he answ^^ it might be about the Rivers Mouth, and not only (...) but that we
should mistrust all those places, which see^^ed to give them any advantage over
us, and then (...) came to an Anchor, because of the coming in of the Tide.

On the 26th. we went ashore at the place where they (...) Killed our Men the
day before, we found the two ^anoes dashed to pieces, and the Bodies of our Men
whom they had wounded in several places after they (...) dead: One of them they
had thrown into the Fire, (...) put the others Head upon a Pole, as we have
said ^^ready. These Objects so enraged our Men, that they (...) off at the same
time four of their Prisoners Heads, (...) they set up also upon Poles in the
same Place. ^hen we took the Bodies of ours to bury them on the (...) side, and
before we got thither, we were forced ^^ree times to go ashore to break through
the Ambuscades ^ll for us all along the River, at the mouth where^^ we found
also that we were warned of by the Cap^^^n of Horse aforesaid, but we happily
freed our selves ^^om it, though with the loss of three Men, and one ^^unded.
At last we rejoyned our Canoes, where one (...) our wounded Men dyed soon after.

The River of Villia is very large, La Villia River described.
and at Low Water breaks at the mouth of it as on a flat Shore, about a ^^ague
to Windward stands a great Rock, which Night (...) Day, and at all Seasons, is
covered with a vast num^er of Birds called Fregates, Maubies, and great
Goziers, (...) live altogether by fishing: Great Ships cannot enter to this
River, they being obliged to anchor within ^^non shot in the Sea, but for Barks
of about forty (...), they can go up a League and an half within it: (...) Port
or place of Embarking belonging to Villia, is (...) a League and an half
higher, and the Town a quar^^^ of a League distant from it, its very well
situated, (...) its Churches are almost fallen to Ruin, though they (...)
very rich on the inside: Its Streets are very straight, (...) the private
Houses pretty well built, on the out (...) of it are a great many Hattos,
accompanied with ve^^ fine Savana's: The Town of Nata which is the nigh^^,
stands seven Leagues distant from it.

On the 27th. came a Person on Board us to redemand (...) Prisoners, with whom
we agreed for ten thou^^ pieces of Eight ransom, and threatened to cut (...) all
their Heads, if they did not send us the Money by (...) 29th. But instead of
that, he returned to tell us, that (...) Alcaide Major had seized upon those of
their Peo^^^, who were our Prisoners whom we had sent ashore (...) get
wherewithal to ransom their Wives, in revenge whereof we presently cut off the
Heads of two Prisoner^ and gave them the Messenger to carry to the Alcaid^
telling him, if he sent us no other answer, we wo^ cut off the Heads of the
rest, and after having put (...) Women upon an Island, we would go to take
himself: (...) same Person in the Evening returned to tell us, that (...) the
Ransoms would come, and that besides them, the would bestow upon us ten Beefs,
twenty Sheep, an^ two packs of Meal, the least whereof usually weigh^ an
hundred pound, every day as long as we staid.

On the 30th. they brought us back the Man, who they had taken, in Exchange for
the Captain of (...) that was our Prisoner; and as they show themselves (...)
fond of having French Arms, they pretended to (...) lost them that belonged to
our Man, for which we (...) them pay four hundred pieces of Eight: They
propose^ to buy them one of the Barks we had taken from the^ and agreed with us
for six hundred pieces of Eight, a^ one hundred pound of Nails, of which we
stood in (...) need, whereupoon we delivered her up, after we (...) first taken
out her Tackle and Anchors. They also ^^quired a Pasport from us, that we would
not retake (...) Bark, in case met with her out at Sea, but only the (...)
wherewith she should be laden, which we also gave the

Next day in the Evening they brought us the ten th^^sand pieces of Eight, They
receive the Ransom of the Prisoners.
as had been agreed upon, then (...) weighed, in order to go anchor at a place
that served (...) a little Port to an Hatto, where they were to give us (...)
hundred and twenty falted Beefs: We departed from thence on the fourth of July,
and anchored at (...) Isle of Iguana, to see and get us some Water, not (...)
ring to go and get us any on the Continent that (...) guarded with four
thousand Men: But after we had ^^^sed in some places, and found that the Water
was bra^^ish, we resolved rather than we would dye for thirst, make a descent
with two hundred Men on the (...) Firma, in order to procure us some in spite
of the S^^niards, whom we found about an hundred paces from (...) Seaside
lying upon the Grass, and after a short Fig^ put them to flight, seeing we were
a People would ^^^zard all for a small matter: This being over, we p^^sently
filled some Casks with Water, and reimbark^^ again.

On the 7th. we weighed Anchor and sailed for the King's Isles, and on the 9th.
anchored at Morn a Puer^^ fourteen Leagues to Leeward of the Island Iguana ^o
take in more Water, there being no Body there to op^ose us: We departed on the
10th. with a favorable West-Wind, and that day one of our wounded Men dyed. On
the 13th. we discovered an Island called Galera, which is to Leeward of all the
Kings Islands, and on the fourteenth we began to perceive the Currents that
reign all the year round between those Islands, which made us (...) farther off
to Sea. On the 15th. we had a North-West Wind, a fresh Gale which brought us
near Land, and three days after which was the 18th. discovered Cape (...), and
kept all day the at Cape, for fear of being discovered by the Inhabitants of
those many Islands that were round about us.

On the 21st. in the Evening we went on Board our ^anoes, and landed at
Midnight, but for all the Pre^^tion we had taken, we were discovered by the
Peo^^e* that were fishing for Oyster Pearls, which are to be and in great
numbers, sticking to the bottom of the ^ocks that are round about these
Islands: On the 22d. (...) the Evening we discovered from one of these Islands
^here we had made a descent, a Ship under Sail, to (...) we gave chase, and
came up with her two hours before day light, when without any more ado we
board^^* and made our selves masters of her: The Men on (...) told us the
Inhabitants of Panama did not think (...) were so near, and that as we had come
from the king of Villia, they believed we had chose rather to (...) gone and
wintered at St. John's Island, where they ^^ought still we had built a Fort,
grounding their per^^asions upon those shams, I have before observed, we (...)
formerly made, and still did as we found occasion. They told us also that six
and Thirty English and French were come from Peru in a Bark, with an intention
to (...) by the way of the River Boca-del Chica to the North (...), but that
the Spaniards having intelligence thereof, from the Indians, with whom they had
made Peace, since they had granted us passage through their Country by (...)
same River into the South Sea, went out to meet ^^em in great numbers, had
defeated the greatest party, (...) brought one Prisoner to Panama: Moreover,
that ^wo English Parties consisting of forty Men each, having an intention to
pass from the North to the South Sea, had been all of them Massacred but four,
who were still Prisoners at Panama; and lastly, that there was a Bark in the
River of Boca del Chica, that tarryed for eight hundred Pounds in Gold, dug up
in the neighboring Mines in order to carry it to Panama.

On the same day we returned on Board our Ships, and sound them at Anchor by
the greatest of the King^s Islands, and ordered our Carpenters to make an
Half-Galley of the Bark we had taken on the 26th. We put some Questions afresh
to the Captain of the said Bark, who told us, they were in daily expectation at
Panama of the Arrival of two Ships laden with Meal, which were to carry also
the Pay of their Soldiers from Limas; ^upon which Information we sent out our
Half-Galley, which was now finished, to scout without the Islands; On the 30th.
we departed with our Canoes, and went ashore upon one of these Islands, where
we surprised a Person that was come from Panama, whose Master was Captain of
those Greek Pirogues, whereof we have formerly spoken, who came on purpose
thither to be taken, to the end he might endeavor by Artificial ways to lead
us into a Snare of which I am ready to give ^ an account. This Man immediately
pretended a great deal of sincerity, in telling us several things, which he
knew we were not ignorant of, and some others, which we could not quickly and
easily come to know; and among the rest, that there were in the River of Seppa,
two Merchant Barks, and a Pirogue with sixty Indians ^o Board, whom the
Spaniards had armed since they made a Peace with them; That besides, the
Governor of Villia had acquainted the President of Panama, that one of our Men
whom they had taken, had assured him that thirty more of us, who had not been
informed, of the Peace, and good* understanding, there was between the Indians
and the Spaniards, were about to pass from this Sea to that of the North, by
the same way we all of us had come into the South Sea; And that upon this
Information, the President had sent an hundred Men into the River of Boca del
Chica to wait for them: But to compass his Design, which was to draw us under
the Forts of Panama, he told us in the last place, that they had a little
Frigate which came laden into that Port, and a Gaily that was sent out every
Evening upon the solved to take the Advantage of this Information which we took
to be candid and real, and not to neglect this opportunity of getting some
Vessels for our selves, whereof we stood in great need.

On the 1st. of August we sent our Galley for this purpose into the River of
Seppa, The Greek Captains Stratagem discovered, and he killed*
in order to take one of the Barks our Captain spoke of, and at the same time
we departed also with four Canoes to go and seize those Ships in the port of
Panama, being accompanied by our Greek Intelligencer, who intended to be our
Guide upon this occasion. He brought us two hours* before day light before the
Town, and as the Moon shone very bright, we staid for some Cloud to obscure it,
to facilitate our approach undiscovered to the Ships in the Port, whereof we
saw one already, which to our thinking had her Sails loose: And here was the
lure and snare to which the Captain lead us, but by the effect of mere chance,
or rather our own good Fortune, we turned away to a Ship which we unexpectedly
saw going out of the Port, and gave her chase, believing the same to be the
Galley that usually went out to scout, as we had been told: We took her without
a Gun shot, and upon Examination of the Captain who commanded her, he
discovered unto us, that the President of Panama had sent us a Greeck, who was
to suffer himself to be taken by us, and to whom he had promised a very great
Reward, if he succeeded in the project he had formed of destroying us, that the
means that had been agreed upon to effect it, were to bring us under the Forts
of that Town, allured with the hopes of taking those Ships there wherewith he
had amused us, and whereof that which seemed to us to have her Sails loose, was
but a sham Ship, a Pistol shot from the Port, which was built upon firm Land,
of ^orty Planks ill set together, in which they had set up Masts, and adorned
her with some Sails: And as this was the most apparent Object, and the first
that offered it self in sight; it was not to be questioned, but that we who
must believe the same to have been on the Water, being deceived with the
darkness of the Night; would not have sailed (being so greedy as we were to
take her) to row up to her, where our Canoes must infallibly run far ashore,
and that in the time that must necessarily have been spent in getting them off,
the Spaniards would have leisure to fall upon us, where they did not doubt, but
so great a number of Men as they had in so considerable a Town as that was,
would quickly overpower and destroy us.

This Information which came so seasonably, that it saved us from the certain
danger we were going to throw our selves into, was not so advantageous to our
Greek Captain, who being known by the Captain of the Bark, for the same Person,
of whose treachery he had now advertised us; we paid him for his Trouble, by
sending him to the other World, where he designed to have sent us, after which
we went to take the Island of Tavoga, which had been reinhabited since we had
left the Coast of Panama.

From the second at Night to the third, we left this Island, and went to take
that of Ottoqua which is two Leagues North and South from it, and which we
found peopled again: We made ready on the fourth to go and join our Galley,
whom we had appointed to Rendesvouz at the Isle of Sipilla, but we found her in
our passage with a Prize she had taken, being one of the Barks that were in the
River of Seppa, from whence in coming out, she had met with an Ambuscade that
killed her two Men, and broke the Arm of another.

On the fifth we saw five Sail between Tavoga and Panama, we presently bore up
to them, and found they were our own Ships that had given chase to a Bark come
from Nata, laden with Provision. The Master thereof finding he could not defend
it, threw himself into the Water and swam ashore, after he had made some
discharges with his small Arms upon them: On the sixth we went with our Prizes
to Anchor at Tavoga, and from thence writ to the President of Panama, that if
he would not give up the five English and French Prisoners, he had in that
place, we would cut off the Heads of fifty Spaniards we had in our Hands: But
hearing no News of him, on the seventh we weighed, and sailed for the king's-
Islands: We anchored on the ninth, to stop the Leaks of our Ships, and while
that was doing, we departed with our Galley and four Canoes for the River Boca
del Chica, as well to be informed whether it was true, that the ^^dians of
Sambe had made Peace with the Spaniards, as we had been assured, as to go and
burn all that was built of the Town called Terrible upon this fine River, that
it might be a defense to a Gold Mine they had near. We went also to fight the
hundred Men, which the Greek told us lay in wait for thirty of our Free Booters
that were to pass into the North Sea.

On the 11th. we arrived at the mouth of the River Boca del Chica: We lay at
Anchor there till Midnight, when we weighed, and as the Sea swelled, we
suffered our selves to be carried up the River at the pleasure of the Current.
About two in the Morning our Guide still believing we were far from the place
whither he was conducting us, made us put on apace, which did us great harm,
for instead of going to surprise others, we were surprised our selves; For
about a quarter of an hour after, we saw Fire, but there was no going back now,
for the River made a Bow, from whence the rapidness of the Tide coming in,
threw us in spite of our Teeth upon these Fires, which we came quickly to know
were kindled by those hundred Men we were in quest of, for they presently asked
us from whence our Canoes were bound, and being answered by our Guide pursuant
to our Order from Panama, they asked again who was the Commander, and we being
long in pitching upon a Spanish Name, they gave us a full Volley: But two
Petereroe-shot which we made at them, having forced them to quit their Ground,
we passed on, and Anchored out of the reach of their Arms, to wait for the ebb
of tide, that we might get out again, for as we could find no place to go
ashore above them, for the Country was full of Marthes, except at the place
where they were, we resolved to take them lower down, and so an hour before day
light we went back before their Entrenchment, after we had put all our Men
under Deck, and fired four Peterero-shots, wherewith we saluted them so
opportunely, that we wounded them a great many Men, and they made no great
firing upon us.

On the 12th. The Buccaneers beat the Spaniards out of their intrenchments at
Boca del Chica.
we took a small Vessel upon this River, wherein were three Indians; then we
went ashore with an intention to attack the Spaniards from behind their
Intrenchments, which commanded the River only; But they presently sent out
their Pirogu^ to take ours, which made us expeditiously return on board our
Vessels to defend them and to alter the manner of our attack, by resolving to
go to them before their Court of Guard, at the Foot whereof we went ashore in
spite of all the fire they made upon us, which lasted not long: For our
Petereroe and Musket Shot killed them a great many Men, which made them quickly
fly and leave us their Intrenchment, where we found a great many Dead and
Wounded Men, and took some Prisoners, among whom there was one named Alfier. He
was an Indian, who out of a blind Zeal he had for the Interests of the
Spaniards, took us for them as we were going on board our Canoes, and
reproached us highly, but we quickly disabused my Gentleman, letting the
Traitor know, to whom we had before been so kind in our passage by the same
River, that we were become his Enemies since he was become ours, and then put
him out of a condition ever to serve the Spaniards or to injure us.

Those whom we took Prisoners, informed us that we were discovered at the New
Town La Terrible, and confirmed the account we had before of the Massacre of
the three parties already mentioned, as well those who would have gone to the
South-Seas, as the other who were minded to return by the way of that River to
the North. Within this Entrenchment we found a Letter writ by the President of
Panama, to a Camp-master that commanded in the Town La Terrible, which is as
follows.

When the Enemy took La Villia, The President of Panama's Letter to a Camp
Master.
one of their Men was taken, who gave us information that thirty Men were to
set forth by the way of the River Boca del Chica to return to the North Sea, as
believing there was still a good understanding between them and the Indians. I
have sent you three hundred Men to defeat those Enemies of God and Goodness; be
sure to keep upon your Guard, be afraid of being surprised, and your Men will
infallibly be gainers in defeating of them.




Here it may be said that the Prisoners whom we took, were highly useful to us,
as well by giving us means to subsist in these parts, as to deliver us from a
great many 'Ambushes and Dangers, whereinto had it not been for them, we must
have fallen; witness this same, where the Spaniards would have spared our
thirty Men the pains of going to the North-Sea: At last when we had burnt their
Court of Guard, we took their Pirogue with some pounds of Gold-dust we found
there, and then went down the River: As for those three Indians whom we took in
the Boat, we sent them to tell their Comrades, that we had killed him who was
with the Spaniards, but that we had given them quarter, because they were not
amongst them, and this we did to endeavor to make them kind to us, and so
disunite and separate them from the Spaniards.

Being got down on the 13th. at Noon to the mouth of the River, we met with one
of our Barks, whom we had ordered to come and attend us thither. Those within
her told us, that while they waited there, two Indian Pirogues being deceived
with the sight of three or four Spanish Prisoners whom they had put upon the
Deck for that purpose, came of their own accord and delivered themselves up
into their Hands, with some Pounds of Gold they had found there; and that one
of those Indians who bore great sway amongst his own Nation, had a Commission
from the President of Panama, to arm several Pirogues, and to make War upon us:
We weighed that Evening, to go and join our Ships that were cruising between
Cape Pin, and Kings Islands, and there we waited for those of the Spaniards,
who, we were told, were to come from Lima.

We got on Board our Ships on the 17th. in the Morning, and that Evening in our
Passage by the Kings Islands, anchored to leave our Bark there to be Car^en^d:
Our people during our Absence, had p^t forty Prisoners ashore upon one of these
Islands, who accidentally happening to meet with (...) Canoes, which the
Spaniards had hid thereabouts, they made use of them to get off, and to go to
Panama to inform the Governor of the course we were to take, and that the Ships
we had left there were but weakly manned, which induced the President to send
some force to attack them: But God was pleased so to order it, that we were
returned with them to the rest of our Company.

On the 20th. we made ready to go to cruise about Tavoga, and that Evening
anchored before the Port of Panama, in order to learn some News: We saw two
Ships in the Road, whither the Town Canoes went and came all along without
Intermission; but not dreaming they armed them against us, we anchored on the
21st. at Tavoga.

On the 21st. by break of day, They took two Spanish Ships
we descried three Sail just upon us, which we could not discover before,
because of one of the Points of the Island, which kept them out of our Sight,
insomuch that one of our Ships that had not time to weigh Anchor, slipped her
Cable. As soon as they saw us make ready, they gave us some Guns, and as they
had the Weather-g^ge, they did not spare to make use of the advanta^^ they had
over us. We made five racks to get to Windward of them, and they could not
hinder us, but they lost the wind for want of Resolution, not daring to pass
between the Island of Tavaguilla and a Rock, where there was indeed passage for
no more than one Ship, but we ventured it, and at last got the Weather-gage: We
fought them till Noon, and knew not on which side the advantage lay, and though
they plied our Decks very close, we still persisted to keep them clear of them,
which was the occasion that they lost a grand opportunity of mending their
tackling. We threw a great many Grenades into their biggest Ship, one of which
had so good an effect, as to set fire to some loose Powder they had, which
burnt a great many Men, and this brought the Fight to end sooner then otherwise
could have been expected: For we came up at the same time with the said Ship
now all on Fire, and boldly boarded her, where notwithstanding the vigorous
resistance they made from the Stern, whither they had all retired, we at last
forced them to beg for quarter, and made our selves master of the Ship: At the
same time one of our Barks boarded one of theirs, and took it: The third that
was a kind of a Galley, who staid to the last, before she began to make her
escape, as trusting to her good Sailing, soeing her self now pursued by our
Galley, and two Pirogues, ran her self ashore, where she presently staved to
pieces, and but very few of her crew were saved.

They had in their little Frigate fourscore Men killed and wounded, out of an
hundred and twenty that were on Board: As for the Bark there were no more out
of seventy, then eighteen unhurt: Neither could we see above ten or a dozen in
all that swam ashore from the other Vessel that was staved: All their Officers
were either killed or wounded, and among others, the Captain, who received five
Musket Shot. He was the same Person that fought so stoutly at Pueblo Nuevo,
where he had received five more, and that had also laid an Ambuscade for us at
La Villia: But this last engagement rid us of him, for he dyed some time after.

While we were busy in mending the rigging of those Ships we had taken, and
throwing the Dead overboard we discovered two Sail more come from Panama,
which bore up toward us, whereupon we interrogated our Prisoners, in order to
know what they should be: They said they did not question but this was the
relief they sent them: At the same time we bethought our selves of a stratagem
to amuse and make them believe we were taken, which was by putting up Spanish
Colors in our own Ships and in the Prizes, with English and French ones under
them* As soon as these two Ships approached, they came up to our Ship, who
received them quite after another manner then they expected: They decoy two
Spanish Ships more.
Being thus surprised, they fired upon us with precipitation, and made off
toward the little Frigate which they supposed still to be theirs, who calling
to them to lie by, and the others not doing it, they threw some Grenades into
one of their Barks, which sent her to the bottom, while one of our Pirogues
boarded the other, wherein they found four packs of Cords, but all of the same
length, which they had made ready to eye us up with: But they reckoned their
Chickens before they were well hatched, and these Ropes was the occasion that
no quarter was given to those in the Bark, where they were found: We afterward
read the Commission of the Captain of the little Frigate, which imported he
should chase us as far as St. John's Island, and that when they boarded us, they
should spare none they found upon Deck, but only our Chirurgions whom they were
willing to save; and that Troops of Horse should march along the shore to take
care that none of us made our escape to land in any Canoe.

On the 23d. as we sailed away to go Anchor at Tavoga, we discovered another
Sail going back to Panama, whom we chased and took: She was a Shalloop whom the
President had sent to fetch off our Anchor, which we had not time to hale^ up
the day before, which he came to know by the means of a Canoe, who passing that
way, saw the Buoy. But for all the fatigues we had undergone in these
Adventures we could not but scoff and laugh at the President, who had sent us
Ropes to hang his Men, and also sent away to take this Anchor, wherewith to
Anchor our Ship in his Port, which he believed his Men would bring in: We
anchored this Evening at Tavoga.

We had but one Man killed in all the Fight, but there were twenty of us
wounded, among whom was Captain Townsley, who dyed most of them of their
Wounds: On the 24th. one of our Men dyed, and the same Evening we sent one of
our Prisoners to the President of Panama to carry him a Letter, wherein we
required his giving up the five Free-Booters who were his Prisoners, and to
send us some Medicines for (as we said) the use of his own People, (though in
truth it was for our own) we also complained heavily of the little quarter they
had given to the three parties whereof I have spoken, whom they had inhumanly
Massacred. He sent to us that Night the Commander of Seppa, who spoke a little
French, with the following Letter.

The President of Panama's Letter.
Gentlemen,
I wonder that you who should understand how to make War, The President of
Panama's Letter to the Free-Booters.
should require those Men of me that are in our Custody: Your rashness has
something contrary in it, to the Civility wherewith you ought to treat those
People that were in your Power: If you do not use them well, God will perhaps
be on our side on another occasion: And as for the little quarter you complain
we have given, you see the contrary by those that have been in our Hands for
some time past: If you please to put our Men you have in your power ashore, we
will take care to have them cured of their Wounds.


We ordered the said Officer to carry him our answer by word of Mouth, that if
they would not send us our Prisoners, we would send them the Heads of all the
Spaniards in our Possession. On the 25th. we weighed Anchor, and sailed away,
for fear they should for an Answer, send a Fireship, as they had done by the
English two Years before, and burn us: On the 26th. in the Morning we Anchored
at the Isles of Pericos, that are not above a League distant from Panama.
Toward Noon we discovered a Ship under Sail, and sent out our Galley to know
what she was; It was our own long Bark that was come from Careening, wherein
were sixty Men that were not present in the Fight. This day two of our wounded
Men dyed, though all of them were but slightly wounded, which is no matter of
wonder, for all the Spaniards Bullets were poisoned.

On the 27th. in the Morning came one to us from the Bishop, (who concerned
himself much in this Business, for he had stirred up the President to fit out
Ships against us) who brought us a Letter, which in substance was the same that
follows.

The Bishop of Panama's Letter.
Gentlemen,
THough the President of Panama has writ to you very inconsiderately, The
Bishop of Panama 's Letter to the Free-Booters.
I earnestly desire you to shed no more of the Innocent Blood of those that are
in your Power, all of them having been engaged by constraint to make War
against you: The President obeys the King's Orders, who forbids him to restore
any Prisoners of War; I Will do my endeavor to get the Men released, take my
Word and rest satisfied.

I am to acquaint you that all the English are Roman Catholics, that there is
now a Church at Iamaica, and that those four that are with us, having changed
their Religion, are willing to live amongst us.


This we saw was only a Pretense to detain our Men, and this sly refusal,
together with the Trouble we were ^n, for the loss of those who dyed
continually of their Wounds, through the violence of the poison that had got
into them, forced us, though with Reluctance to ^esolve to send twenty of his
Peoples Heads to the President in a Canoe, and ordered him to be told, that if
by the 28th. he did not send us all our Men, we would send him the Heads of all
the rest of the Prisoners. I confess this was a violent way of proceeding, but
we and no other method left us to bring the Spaniards to Reason, and we knew
them to be a People, who without we had showed this Resolution, would despise,
and be so much the more bent to ruin us in a short time, by how much the more
indifferent we showed our selves, for they are usually no otherwise courageous,
then when they believe their Enemies are of a dastardly Nature.

On the 28th. betimes in the Morning came a Person on Board, who brought us our
five Men, whereof four were English, and the other a Frenchman, together with
some refreshments for the wounded Men, and a Letter to this purpose.

The President of Panama's Letter.
I send you all the Prisoners I had in my Power, Another Letter of the
President's.
and if there had been more, you should have had them delivered; But as for
those that are in your Custody, I Will leave that to be managed according to your
own Honesty and the practice of War.


Hereupon we sent him a dozen of the most wounded amongst their Men, and writ
to him the following Letter.

A Letter for the President of Panama.
HAD you used us in this manner when we sent to you for the Releasment of our
five Men whom you sent us, The Buscaneers Letter to the President of Panama.
you would have saved the Lives of those Wretches, whose Heads we have sent
you, and whose Death you have been the occasion of: We give you a dozen Men by
way of Exchange, and require Twenty thousand pieces of Eight for the Ransom of
those that are still behind: But in default thereof, we shall put them out of
Condition to send us poisoned Bullets again, which is so manifest a
contravention of the Laws and Maxims of a just War, that if we were minded to
punish according to the rigor of those Rules prescribed thereby, we should not
have given one Man of them quarter.


Our five Men whom the Spaniards gave up to us, farther confirmed us in the
account we had of the Massacring of the three forementioned Parties in the
River of Boca del Chica, whereof they themselves were Eyewitnesses. About
twelve a Clock of the same day, which was the 28th. we weighed, and anchored
again at Tavoga to take in Water: And whilst Matters were concluded on between
the Spaniards and us in respect to the ransoming of their people, we required
they should come to a Treaty with us, which they consented to, and sent us
daily diverse Canoes full of Merchandise and other Refreshments, all which we
had Dog-cheap of them, except Meal, Biscuit, Meat, and other Provisions which
they Kept back, the reason whereof might be easily guessed at.

On the 29th. their Messenger returned, who gave us an account that he had been
about the City to get the Ransom, and that they had not got above six thousand
pieces of Eight together, but as we were eager to be gone, we told them they
must send us ten thousand pieces of Eight, or else we would go into the City to
fetch them the effect of this blustering was, that on the first of November
came a Canoe to tell us, that a Bark would bring us next day the Sum we
demanded; and on the second, two of our Men dyed.

As we saw nothing coming from Panama, we made ready and entered into the Port,
and when we had hung o^ our main Flag, we fired a Gun, they answered our
Signall^ putting up a white Flag upon one of the Bastions of the Fort, to give
us notice that the Money was not yet read^* which made us put out again, and
lie all Night at the Cape before the mouth of the Port: Next day came t^ us a
Knight of Maltha in a Bark, wherein he brought us ten thousand pieces of Eight,
and received the Priso^ers from us. On the fifth, we anchored at Ottoqua, i^
order to victual our Ships; on the seventh, two of (...) Men dyed.

On the Eighth, the Indians who had been our Guide^^ in our passage from the
North to the South Sea, and who kept close with us ever since, were taken or
m^rthered by the Spaniards upon this Island of Ottoqua, i^ revenge for the
Service they had done us: On the Eigh^ in the Morning we put fifty Men ashore,
to see if (...) could find the place whereunto the Spaniards had withdrawn
themselves, whom we could not find in their H^bitations, that we might know
what they had done (...) those Indians, but we could find nothing, save their
Maney and Baggage, which they had hid in a Vault.

The same day at Noon Captain Townsley dyed of his Wounds: We threw his Body
into the Sea according to his defire, with such Ceremonies as are usual upon
these occasions: On the tenth we weighed and came to an Anchor at
Kings-Islands, and two days after, dyed one of our wounded Men. On the
Seventeenth we put out with the little Frigate and long Bark, to sail to the
port of Panama, to see whether they had any Ships there that might come to
insult us, while our Vessels were a Careening: We had a North-West-Wind, so
that we could not reach the Isles of Pericos before the tenth, when we found
our selves under the forts of that Town. We furled our low Sails, and as the
Spaniards saw us bring to, they gave us three Guns, after they put up
Burgundian Colors upon the Windward Bastion: But when we understood there was
no Ship in that place, whereof we might be afraid, we went out a Cruising
between Tavoga and Sippilla, we being resolved to watch those two Ships that
were to come from Lima, and in the mean time we sent one of our Pirogues to bid
our Men careen the Vessels with all Expedition, and that they need fear no
danger from Panama. We had very bad Weather in this Channel; It blew round all
the points of the Compass, with such violent Whirlwinds, that the Sea grew very
boisterous: But on the 28th. the Weather proving more moderate, we discovered a
Ship sailing all along the Coast of the main Land, after which we sent two
Pirogues in chase: She would have entered into the Port of Panama, but they
firing upon her from the Fort, as believing she was one of our Ships, she
passed by, and our Pirogues took her: She came from Nato, and was laden with
Provisions and Sugars, which she was carrying to our Enemies, who had the
Charity to put her back to us.

On the Eleventh, being not able to see any thing of what we waited for, we
failed for the King's Islands, and as the Moon shone bright, we found the
Currents very strong there also, which obliged us to anchor in the Channel,
with all the Tides contrary to us, from twenty to forty fathom Water: We
arrived on the 16^^ at the Island where our Ships were careening, and found
them all ready done.

The Sea round about these Kings Islands whereof I have spoken so much, is full
of a great many very large Whales, who are infested by a Fish they call
Espad^^^, that assaults them continually with a kind of Fish-bone, like unto a
Sabre, fastened to their Heads, and (...) makes those monstrous Animals to give
such Leapt and Rebounds, that they raise themselves continually about the
Water: But to return from a great Fish to a small one, I shall say, that
besides Pearl-Oysters, which (...) to be found in those parts in great numbers,
there are also others that are exceeding good, and so large, that they are
forced to cut them into four parts to (...) them, and they are when roasted,
exceeding white.

We departed on the 18th. and sailed for those Islands that are in the Main,
where we came to an Anchor on the Nineteenth in the Morning, and on the
Twentieth put out with our Galley and two Pirogues to go to a Sugar Plantation
which stands two Leagues to Leeward of panarna, giving Orders at the same time
to our Ships to come and Anchor there Three Days after us. We possessed our
selves of the said Plantation, and seized all the People belonging thereto, who
told us there was a Courier come from Chiriquita to Panama, who reported he had
seen Two Ships, and as many Barks, belonging to the Freebooters, Anchor at the
Port of that Town, who came for Provision there, wherewith we were somewhat
surprised, and could hardly believe those Freebooters would have le^t so good a
Coast as that of Peru was, (whither we knew they were gone) to come thither
which is much worse; which difference has it rise from another than the
abundance and quality of the Provisi^n^ that the former produces, whereof I
shall give (...) an Account hereafter: We were also informed by these
Prisoners, as it was very true, that a Galley which we knew well enough was in
Building at Pana^^ was finished, that she carried Two and fifty Oars, Five
pieces of Cannon, ^and Forty (...); that there were, what with those come from
Carthagena and Porto Bello, Five hundred Men come to go on Board her and Two
Pirogues, and that they watched the opportunity of our passing before their
Port, as we had used to do, to the end they might put out in the Night, and
surprise us during the absence of our other Ships, whom they supposed to be
still a careening. On the 24th. we anchored at Ottoqua, to gather Mace and Rice
that were ^till standing on the Ground; and next Day being ap^rehensive,
according to the Report of our Prisoners, that there might be Freebooters at
Chiriquita, we sent a Bark thither to give them Notice, if she found it to be
(...) so, that we would come up to them as soon as we had taken in some
Provision along the Coast: we ^ut Nineteen Prisoners on the 29th, a Shore, and
made ^eady to depart with an Easterly Wind: we were got on ^he 30th. in the
Morning over against the Bay of la Vil^ia, we straitened our round Top, being
afraid to be (...) by it: we embarked in the Evening on our Canoes, (...) on
the 31st. at Midnight went a Shore. We were quickly discovered by a Party that
went the Rounds, which made us use all the diligence imaginable in order to get
into the Town, before they had time to make themselves ready: But our Guide
having lead us out of the way, another Party making the Round passed by, who no
sooner saw us, but they made all the have they could to get away, yet we fired
upon them presently, which dismounted three of them and one we took Prisoner,
who told us we were still three Leagues distant from la Villia, and that we
were gone out of our way, that all the People there were at their Arms, and
that they had had a Reinforcement of Six hundred Men sent them from Panama.
Upon this information we stopped short, and were forced to return back again,
because we knew very well that we were discovered, and that so we lost all our
Labor. Before we went on Board; we went to eat to an Estancia that was half a
League off from the Seaside, from whence the Spaniards brought us back by
charging our Rear, from time to time, till that we had rejoyned our Canoes,
whereon when we had* reimbarked, we found our selves so weary and fatigued,
that we deferred till next Day to go and join our Ship, and this being
perceived by the Spaniards, they fired so furiously upon us, that we were
constrained to go lie at Anchor farther from the Shore.

On the 2d. of November, we rejoyned our Ships that were cruising in that Bay,
They beat the Spaniards.
In the Evening we anchored between the Island of Iguana and the Continent
over against some Hattos we saw there, with a Design to go and see for some
Provision; to which end we went a Shore, on the third at Noon, where we found
the Spaniards got together, with whom we fought for half an Hour; They killed
us one Man, and wounded another* But they could not hinder us to go to the next
Hatt^ where we found no sort of Cattle, for the Spaniards (...) carried away,
and drove them before them; here we lay this Night, but the Spaniards being
unwilling to (...) us have any Rest, we were forced at Midnight to march out
against them, and made them quit the Field to us.

On the Fourth we returned on Board our Vessels, having brought only some
little Refreshments along wit^ us to our wounded Men; and that Evening sailed
away with a West Wind, keeping out to Sea to the Fifth (...) Noon, when we
returned to Land; at Midnight (...) steered South South-East, as near the Wind
as we could till the Sixth, that we were brought back to the Shore; about the
middle of the following Night, we discovered a Vessel under sail and joined
her: It was the Bark we had sent to Chiriquita, who meeting with very bad
Weather, was constrained to put back under the Morn or Cape of Puercos: On the
Seventh being not able to double the Morn because of the contrary West Winds,
we sent our Galley to Chiriquita, instead of our Bark; we could not double the
Morn before the Twelfth: and we had a blast of Wind in the Night that in it
self was favorable enough for our Course, but the Currents carried us so to
Leeward, that we were still on the Thirteenth Six Leagues to Leeward of the
Morn. We steered West North-West, bearing upon the Isle of Tigers, the which
stands Six Leagues North and South from the Continent, between the River of St.
James and this Morn or Cape of Puercos: on the Fourteenth at Night we were
apprehensive least we should be drove too near the Shore.

On the 16th. we arrived at St. John's Island, where we met with our Galley
returned from Chiriquita, having found nothing of what she sought for in that
Place, which still increased the Suspicion we had already entertained, that the
President of Panama had caused a false Report to be spread abroad, that some
Freebooters had been there, that so he might get us to quit his Port, and make
way by our absence for those Ships that were expected from Peru, to enter into
Panama, and this so much the more heightened our Courage, in that we came to
understand one Day after another the cowardice and dastardly Nature of this
proud Nation, who with her Three Decked Ships mounted each of them with Eighteen
pieces of Cannon, and having Four hundred Men on Board, were afraid of pitiful
Barks, who had but Four Guns and some Petereroes in all, with which however we
waited for them.

On the Eighteenth we brought our Galleys and Canoes a Shore in order to clean
them; two Days after we departed with an intention to take some Prisoners, from
whom we might obtain certain Intelligence of the Truth or Falsehood of any
Freebooters having been at Chiriquita, for they might have been gone before we
had sent thither, and upon our departure we appointed our Ships to Rendezvous
at the Isle of St. Peter, there to tarry till we returned. On the Morning of
the 24th. we went a Shore, Two Leagues to Leeward of the River Pueblo Nuevo,
The Freebooters take St. Lorenzo.
where, after we had traveled till about Four in the Afternoon to discover
some Houses, we saw Two Horsemen, one of whom we dismounted but he made his
Escape, and took the other, of whom we asked where we were; And being informed
that there was about half a League from thence to a Borough called St.
Lorenzo, we went that way and arrived there in the Twilight: Here we took a
great many Prisoners, who told us they had heard of no Freebooters from the
time we had taken Chiriquita, which now fully confirmed us in a belief of the
Amusement the President of Panama had entertained us with: on the 26th. we
returned to the Seaside with our Prisoners, and discovered our Ships that were
sailing to the Place of Rendezvous, to whom we sent a Canoe to give them Notice
to come and Anchor at an Island which is over against, and Three quarters of a
League distant from the Port of St. Lorenzo.

This Borough stands a League and an half within Land, A Description of St.
Lorenzo.
and is in my Opinion no more than a Village; It Is Inhabited partly with
Spaniards, and partly Indians, who, as I have already said, have been reduced
by degrees, and submitted themselves to the Spaniards: Its a very open Country,
and a Man is so far from being sure of what Place he is in, that he would
believe himself to be at Chiriquita, when here, so like is the one to the
other, as well in respect to the Borough and Places adjacent, as for the
course and disposition of the Rivers, wherewith it is watered.

On the 26th. in the Evening, we went on Board our Ships with our Prisoners,
and agreed with them upon what quantity of Provision they were to give us for
their Ransom; on the 27th. we sent the Father or Curate of the Place a Shore,
to dispatch the sending of it: on the 28th. the English who made part of our
Fleet desired us to come together in order to make a Division of the Ships and
Artillery we had taken, as being desirous to be in a Ship by themselves, which
was presently done: On the First of December, we sent a Canoe to the Continent,
and the Men that were in her told us, they had seen a Troop of Horse who
threatened them at a distance with their Cutlasses, which made us at Night to
the number of a Hundred Men go a Shore to see them: on the Second we waited for
them in their Town of St. Lorenzo, but no body appearing, we burnt it. As soon
as the Spaniards saw the Fire, the Commander of the Place came to offer us a
Sum of Money for the Ransom of the Prisoners, which we refused, because we had
much more need of Provision: We told them if they did not send us the same,
pursuant to the Agreement we had already made with their People, they should
have no more to do than to send for their Heads away from the Island. In the
said Commander's House we found the following Letter writ by the Tenient of
Chiriquita.

A Letter from the Tenient of Chiriquita, to the Commander of the Town of St.
Lorenzo.
SIR,
I Have sent you by way of reinforcement all the Men which I could get
together: The Tenient of Chiriquita's Letter, to the Commander of St. Lorenzo
use your endeavors to take one or other of the Enemy, to the end we may know
what they design to do, about which our Generals are mightily concerned: Order
the Cattle, to be drove away from the Seaside, and put them into a Place fit
to lay an Ambuscade, to the end that the Enemy severing from one another
according to their usual manner in order to kill them; It may be so much the
more easy for you to secure some one of them: But if you cannot do that, lay
an Ambuscade at a Place where you think they will put our Prisoners a Shore,
and let them show you those Persons whom they have observed to be most
respected on Ship Board; so that if God gives us the Advantage over them, do
not you cut them off, but send them to me; especially interrogate the Women,
that you may know whether they have met with some weak Fellow that has made
any Discovery unto them.


This Letter made us keep more upon our Guard than otherwise we would have
done, and we returned on Board our Ships that Evening: On the Third we went in
a Canoe a Shore, to see whether they had brought the Provision agreed upon for
the Ransom of their People, but instead of that we saw them busy in raising an
Entrenchment near the Place where they expected we should make our Descent,
which gave us to understand they pursued the Orders prescribed to them by the
foresaid Letter. On the Fourth, we put those Prisoners ashore upon the Island
where we had anchored, and left them there, without any further expecting of
their Ransom, that so we might secure our selves against that Ambuscade
whereunto we must have fallen, had we sent them to the same Place where we took
them.

In the Evening we weighed and sailed for the Bay of Boca del Toro, with an
Easterly Breeze that put us forward: on the Fifth we doubled the Point of
Porica, which is Ten Leagues to Leeward of that Bay; at the height whereof we
were becalmed till the Tenth; when toward Evening a small Wind blowing from
the Sea arose, The Bucaniers in great danger of being Ship-wracked.
which brought us to the Mouth of the Bay: But the same was followed by so
Terrible a Tempest, that our Ship lay for an Hour in such a manner that she was
under Water as far as her great Scuttle; and what amazed us was, that our
Ropes, Sheets, and Clulings, were cut so cleverly as if the same had been done
with an Hatchet: However, this tearing of our Rigging served us in good stead,
for had it not been for that, we had quickly gone to be Meat for Fishes: for
our Sails being held by no other than the Wind and Arms alone, the Sails,
Yards, yet stretched themselves out along the Masts, and our Ship by little and
little happily recovered her self: The Wind was allayed in the Dusk of the
Evening by a great deal (...) that fell, wherewith we were becalmed; and on the
Eleventh we had a Southerly Wind, which brought us to an Anchor in the Bottom
of the Bay.

The Mouth of this Bay of Boca del Toro, is about Four or Five Leagues in
extent from one Point to another, and Eight in depth. If you would enter into
it with safety, you must keep the Whip of your Rudder to Starboard, because
it is dangerous to keep to the East side. Here is good Anchorage every where,
and also a Covert; one may anchor in the bottom of the Bay, within Pistol shot
of Land.

There are Four Islands contained in it, that stand very near unto the main
Land to the East and North-East, but it is not safe to lie near them, because
of the many Rocks that are there. Several Fine Rivers discharge themselves into
it, and lead us up them to diverse Indian Carbets, who have neither Peace nor
are in amity with any People whatsoever, no more than those whom I have
mentioned when I spoke of Cape la Vella and Boca del Drago; which yet does not
hinder the Spaniards from passing their Caravans through the midst of their
Country, when they come from Costa Rica to Panama: But then they must be very
well guarded; and the great Road through which they pass, is not above Six
Leagues from the Seaside.

On the Twelfth we went to find out Trees fit both to make Canoes of for
carrying our Water, and Canoes of War: on the 25th. being Christmas Day after
we had, according to Custom, said our Prayers in the Night, one of our
Quarter Masters being gone a Shore, in order to take care about our eating some
Victuals, (for our Ships being a careening, all our Provisions were then put
out) one of our Prisoners, who served us as Cook, stabbed him with a Knife in
Six several places, wherewith crying out he was presently relieved, and the
Assassine punished with Death.

CHAP. IV.
The Freebooters Voyage to the South Seas in 1687.
ON the First of January, 1687. our Canoes being ready, we left this Bay and
failed for that of Caldaira, that we might victual there, and make an end of
careening our Ships: we left them there on the Second, after we had given
Orders to those who had the charge of them, to come and join us in the Bay, and
we embarked Two hundred Men in our Canoes, to crossover to la Cagna, which is a
small Island very inconvenient to draw near to, and stands about a League North
and South from the main Land, between Boca del Toro and Caldaira. We were six
days in our passage before we could get thither, having only put forward in the
Night for fear of being discovered: Being come on the Sixth at Night into the
Bay, our Guide made us put in under a Covert, and told us that to prevent our
being discovered, we should go a Shore in that Place, A pretty adventure of the
Freebooters.
which we had no sooner done, but we were conducted into a Marish, in the
sou^dest places whereof we sunk in the Mud to the very Middle, insomuch that
Five of our Men of whom we could see no more than their Heads, did not give us
a small trouble to pull them out with Cords we made fast to Mangles, which are
Trees of that Name growing in this Marish: So that not knowing how we should be
able to free our selves from this wretched Place, we lifted up our Guide to the
top of a Tree, to endeavor by the help of Moonlight to discover how far we
might be from sound Land: But he finding himself now at liberty, skipped like a
Monkey from Tree to Tree, and railed all the while at us, who could neither see
him nor do any more that threaten him, which I believe he little mattered. We
spent the rest of the Night in making about an Hundred steps in this sweet
Place, where we exactly went the Rounds, and from whence we could not come out
till break of Day, and not then neither, without being bedaubed all over from
top to toe, and having our Arms laden with Mud. When we were in a Condition to
reflect a little upon our selves, and that we saw Two hundred Men in the same
Habit, and so curiously equipped, there was not one of us who forgot not his
Toil, to laugh at the posture he found both himself and the rest in. At
length, after having inveighed against our Guide who had so cunningly saved
himself, when he saw us stuck fast in the Mire, we went into our Canoes again,
where we cleaned our selves as well as we could, as we did also our Arms, and
after having left our Covert we met with a very pretty River, whereinto we
entered and went up it about Two Leagues, where we landed at an Entrenchment.
There we found the remains of the Two Ships which the Spaniards had burnt, when
an English Freebooter, whose Name was Betsharp, came to careen in this Bay,
which made us suppose, They take Sancta Catalina, the Town of Nicoya, and a
good Booty.
according to the Relation that had been given us concerning it, that it was
the Embarking Place belonging to Nicoya. We followed the Road we found there,
and marching about Two Leagues, at the end of them we entered, by the help of
the barking of the Dogs, into a Borough called Sancta Catalina, where we took
all the Inhabitants Prisoners. Now as we were informed by them there, that
there was no more than three Leagues to Nicoya, we mounted sixty Men on
Horseback, in order to go thither; but we met halfway with two Horsemen, whom
we could not reach, and who returning back with full Speed, gave the
Inhabitants notice of our March toward them, in so much that by the time we
were got thither, they had already hid all their Effects, and were expecting
our coming upon the Place of Arms, from whence we drove them, after we had
sustained their first discharge, with which they neither killed nor wounded one
of our Men. While we were gathering what Provision we could together, we sent
out small Parties into the Neighboring Places, who brought us some Money, and
among other things, the Governor's Plate, and all his Movables.

On the 8th. we left the Town, and went to rejoyn our People at Sancta
Catalina, where we staid the remainder of that day: At Night came two of the
Enemy's Sentinels thither, one of whom we killed; for they, not knowing we were
in the Town, were come to give the Spaniards notice that they saw three Sail of
Ships enter into the Bay, and that they were Enemies; but this Intelligence
came too late. On the 9th. we left this Place to go join our Canoes again, on
which being embarked, we left one of our Prisoners ashore to go and raise the
Ransom of those we carried along with us; and on the 10th. we got on board our
Ships that ^ay at Anchor in the Bay. We had found among the Governor of
Nicoya's Papers three Letters, which were these that follow.

The Governor or General of the Province of Costa Rica his Letter to the
President of Panama; dated May 2d. 1686.
SIR,
THis Letter is to let you know of the taking of our dear Town of Granada by
Pirates on the Tenth of the last Month: The Governor of Costa Rica his Letter
to the President of Panama.
They came ashore at a Place where we had no Sentinels, we supposing there was
no occasion for it, because the Sea is so high there; they passed on cross a
Wood like so many Wild Beasts: We had the good Fortune to have notice of it by
our Fishermen, though we were already upon our Guard ever since the News we had
concerning them from Lesparso and Nicoya. They lay on the Ninth at the fine
House of Don Diego Ravalo, Knight of St. James, we were very well prepared to
receive them; but the way of Fighting practiced by these Men did so much
astonish ours, that we could not make that Resistance we had promised our
selves we should do: They fell on briskly, singing and dancing, as if they had
been going to a Feast; at length, after we had been fought bravely by them,
they won the place of Arms, with the loss of Thirty of their Men, according to
the Estimate of Don Antonio de Fortuna, a Person of good Experience in War, who
came to us some Months before. We are also of Opinion that they have lost their
General, for we saw a Man, that distinguished himself from the rest by his
Habit, fall.

After they had staid for the space of four Days in our Fort, they sent to
require us to Ransom the Town and Prisoners they had taken; but we being not
very forward to return an Answer to their Proposal, they burnt it, and went
their ways: Seignior Don John de Castilla, Sergeant-Major, went out to observe
them with his Men; but not knowing they took away our Artillery, he attacked
these Enemies of God and Goodness about a Mile from the Town; but they being
resolved to make their way through, or to die upon the spot, slew so great a
Number of his Men, that the rest fled, and left their Commanders alone.

We have taken one of their Men, who told us, they came to our Province upon no
other Design, than to know the strength of it, though it is not to be doubted, if
they had found our Vessels at Anchor, but they would have made use of them to
pass, by the way of our Lake, to the North Sea, and have abandoned their
Comrades, who looked after their Ships, and their way would have been
infallibly by Carthage. Monsieur the Governor takes his Measures thereupon,
and continues to Fortify his Retrenchment. I shall give you a more ample
Account of this Business by the first Caravan.


The President of Panama's Letter to the Governor of Costa Rica.
SIR,
This is to give you Notice of the Advices I have received from Carthagena, The
President's Letter to the Governor.
by the way of Puerto Belo. The King of France supposing he had received some
Affront from our Nation, sent Eight Sail of ill sorts before Calix, to demand
Contribution; and seeing there was so vast an inequality of Force upon this
Occasion, we agreed to give him half a Million, to withdraw his Ships, and
return to their Ports.

You know that my Lord Bishop on the 22d. of August forced me to send out three
Ships to fight the Pirates, that continued still before our Port, and took all
the Barks and Canoes that were coming in. Our Ships surprised them at break of
Day, which made one of the Pirates slip his Cable, and this was done, not for
to fly away; but through the Skill of the Commander. I saw the Fight from my
Ramparts, the Honor whereof I thought infallibly to have appertained unto us.
Having seen them draw near the Shore, I Sent a Chaloop to bring away the Anchor
of that Vessel that had slipped her Cable, in order to fasten her in our Port.
As soon as ever I saw them ungrappled, I dispatched away two long Barks or
Galleys to go and learn the News, and to bring those of the Enemy that survived
before me, though my Orders were, that no Quarter should be given to any that
were found upon Deck, to the end we might rid the World of these Enemies of God
and his Saints, who Profane his Churches, and destroy his Servants. In the
Evening they sent one of our Men to require me to give up five Men of theirs,
that I had Prisoners in my Town, and as my Prince forbad me to do so, I refused
it; but these new Turks sent me Twenty Heads, and I bethought my self, that for
the preventing of the slaughter of so many Christians, I ought to send them
their Men, with Ten Thousand Pieces of Eight, for the Ransom of Ninety of our
People, that were almost all wounded, which they sent us out of Three Hundred
and Thirty they had taken with them. Thus you see how God is pleased to afflict
us on all sides, let us take all for the sake of his Suffering for us.


The Tenient of Sansonat's Letter to the President of Panama.
CAptain Francis Grogniet is separated from his (...) at Realeguo, The Tenient
of Sansonat's Letter to the President of Panama.
and gone ashore with an Hundred and Fifty Men upon the Isles of Napalla: We
took three of their Men, who told us, that those of them that were gone up
toward Panama, had a Design (...) return to the North Sea. The Peace we have
made with the Indians will do us more hurt than good, we were concerned at
least to observe their Motion, and stop up that Passage. Those People seeing no
Place whereunto to retire, became as so many enraged Dogs. We had no need of
that, for wherever these Irreligious Wretches set their Feet on Land, they
always win the Victory. If you please, let them have free Passage, that we may
be at rest; they came ten or dozen times ashore, without knowing what they
wanted. Send us a Man who understands the way to Sea-fighting, for I am of
Opinion, they will never be able to get off from these Islands, and so it will
be convenient to go and take them there.


On the 12th. as we saw no Ransom come, we set ou^ to go our selves to Nicoya
to fetch it, where we arrived next day; we sent out several Parties also in
search of some Victuals, which the People had hid, and sent one to treat with
them about the Ransoming of their Town* The Tenient told us, the Governor was
gone for Relief to Costa Rica, and that he had no Orders to pay any Ransom
farther than what had been agreed on for the Prisoners, which was all ready,
and that (...) would not have us be impatient, if we received not the same as
soon as we desired it, because they having no Canoes, whereby to send the Money
to us by Sea, which might have been done in half a day's time (the Passaage was
so short that way) had been obliged to have it carried on Mules backs by Land,
which was four days Journey. When we had received this Answer, we sent again to
tell him, that our Intention was to have been gone next day, but that however,
seeing he waited in expectation of Succors, we would wait also; but at length
growing impatient that things were so long retarded we went our ways on the
seventeenth.

Two days after, The Spaniards pay the Ransom of the Inhabitants of Nicoya.
being the 19th. they came to the Seaside, over against the Place where our
Vessels lay at Anchor, and brought us the Ransom they had promised for the
Prisoners, whom we sent ashore at the same time. We gave them a Letter, which
we writ to the Governor, wherein we sent him word, if he would let us know
when his Reinforcement came, we should not fail to attend him, and that in the
mean time, if he did not send us so many Horse-load of Biscuit and Maes as we
required of him, for the Ransom of the Town, he might assure himself we should
go and burn it.

On the 20th. we weighed Anchor, and went to one of the Islands in this Bay to
careen our Vessels. On the 22d. we went off in our Canoes, leaving no more Men
with our Ships than were necessary to Careen them, and sought out some Hatto's,
where we might get necessary Subsistence, to the end we might lay by, and keep
in store those Provisions we had got together on Board, and whereof we should
have occasion in the Execution of an Enterprise we had formed upon the Town of
Queaquilla. On the 22d. at Night we went ashore at Caldaira, where we were
discovered by the Sentinels, who, as they made their escapes, set fire unto the
Savana's, in order to stop our Passage; however, this did not hinder us to
reach the little Town of Lesparso, which had been almost entirely abandoned
since the time of our being there before.

On the 23d. we had the Curiosity, or rather Humor to pursue the first Road
that offered it self to our view at our departure, and after we had marched
about a League on, we discovered about Two Hundred Horse upon our Flank, and in
our Rear: A Spaniard, who was advanced before the rest, made a thousand Mouths
at us, and reviled us as much, which gave us an occasion to hide five of our
Men, that were behind the rest, in the Grass, that was exceeding high upon both
sides of the way, and leave our main Body to march on; so that when our
Spaniard, who still followed our People, went to pass forwards, he was quickly
dismounted, and we made him make a Grimace in good earnest: We questioned him
according to our usual Ceremony, that is to say, by putting him on the Rack,
about the place where we were: He told us, we were on the Highway of Carbage,
and that all Places were quite forsaken from thence to this Town, which was no
less than Seven and Twenty Leagues, out of an Apprehension his Country had,
left we should go and force them to grant us Passage to the North Sea, as their
chief Officers had caused it to be reported among them. He also gave us
Information, that they had Four Hundred Men making their Rounds, whereof the
Two Hundred we saw, were of that Number, being detatch'd to observe the time of
our Landing, that so they might retire to a strong Retrenchment they had six
Leagues on this side the Town, for to beat us back in case we made that way.
Being thus preadmonished, we thought it not convenient to go any further, our
Design being no other then, than to know the Country, and to get us some
Victuals; so we returned to Lesparso, and on the 24th. rejoyned our Canoes.

On the 26th. we went ashore, under the Guidance of our new Prisoner, who
brought us to a Sugar Plantation, where we divided into two Companies to go to
two Hatto's, and took all the People we could meet with there, who informed us,
that several other Hatlo's and Sugar Plantations in the Neighborhood, had
altogether set out Two Hundred armed Men, who (...) gone in the Evening to
beat back the Crew of three of the Enemy's Canoes, that had landed at Colebra,
where they had killed and wounded diverse Spaniards, We presently imagined it
must have been Captain Grognist that was come up that Coast, and therein we
were not mistaken; we immediately returned back to the Seaside, to go with our
Canoes to meet him, and in our way heard the noise of several Cannon-shot and
small Arms, toward the Place where we had left our Ship-Careening, which made
us double our Pace, and reimbark in our Canoes.

As soon as we were got on Board our Ships, Captain Grogniet rejoyns the other
Freebooters.
we found Captain Grogniet with three Canoes there, who with his Crew had been
conducted to the said Place by one of our Canoes, whom they had fortunately met
in crossing this Bay; and the Firing we had heard, was made by the one and the
other for Joy of their meeting together.

Grogniet told us, Grogniet's Adventures.
that he came up this Coast with an Intention to find out an uninhabited Place,
to the end he might Land without Opposition, and to fetch (...) compass cross
the Country, to get the North Sea. We laid the Danger whereunto he must
necessarily expose so small a Number of Men before him, (they being no more
than Sixty in all) that if he were resolved to undertake so dangerous an
Enterprise, it were better he would stay with us until we found a favorable
Opportunity to repass together to that Sea, as being better able conjoyntly to
surmount those Difficulties which we might be exposed to thereby. Being
overcome with our Reasons, he staid with us; and after we had given him an
Account of the Adventures we had had since our separation from him, he also in
his turn entertained us with a recital of his, and told us, he had made several
Descents in the Bay of Napalla with various Success, and that among other
things in one of those Descents, the Spaniards had taken three of his Men, who
had been exchanged some time after for other Prisoners: But that the Spaniards
had so far corrupted those three Men with the fine Promises they made them,
while they were in their Custody, that upon their Return, they insinuated into
their Comrades, in order to betray, they ^^sinuated into their Comrades, in
order to betray them, ^^design of going to a very considerable Gold Mine, which
was Fourteen Leagues off from the Seaside, and as many from Tinsigal, and that
being pre-possess'd of making their Fortunes there, they had left the Island
where they were, to the Number of an Hundred and Twelve Men, and went ashore
upon the Continent, with an Intention to go to that Mine, under the Guidance of
the Prisoners, who knew the way, and toward which they journyed only in the
Nightime, for fear of being discovered; that those three Men who had been
exchanged, and sold their Friends to the Spaniards, pretended they were weary,
and had occasion to rest, that so they might not go with the rest; that for all
this, they departed two hours after, bringing to the Spaniards, who waited in a
convenient Place for them, all the Prisoners that were ashore in the said Bay,
and after some time, carried off the Arms and Ammunition of all the rest of our
Company that staid behind upon the Island, who had no mistrust of them, whereof
they laded a Canoe; but that the Treachery in the mean time had not had all the
projected effect, and that he and his Men got to the Mine without Opposition,
because the Spaniards, who had made all things ready for Massacring of them,
when going ashore, got thither later than they should have done, and that
through the fault of our Renegadoes, who had too much precipitated the
departure of their Comrades, whom they thus saved by pressing them on to their
ruin: That they had got no great Purchase at the Mines, because there had been
Orders given before for saving their Treasure; tho after all, it was not above
an hour's space that they had got away Four Hundred and Fifty Pounds of Gold,
that was all ready prepared. That yet they found some Pounds still left, and
took some Prisoners, who were surprised by them, as not expeeting their Company
so soon, and that they also did believe they had been defeated by the way, as
the Design had been formed against them.

That when they had staid two days at this Mine, and being intent upon
returning with his Men to the Seaside, he met with a Body of Spaniards on the
way, waiting his coming, and making a mien as if they would now upon his
Return, make amends for the fault they had committed, in not preventing his
Descent. Their Commander sent a Trumpet to Captain Grogniet, to know if he were
minded to fight; who being answered, that he desired nothing more: The
Spaniards sent a second time to tell him, that if he would give up his
Prisoners, they would grant him free Passage; But he boldly answered, That if
they desired to have them, they must come and fetch them by the help of their
Arms; and as for the Passage, he would open his way through in spite of them.
That having made themselves ready, the Spaniards had not the Courage to stay
for them, contenting themselves only with firing a few Mosquets at a distance,
and so fairly took to their Heels, while he pursued his March toward his
Canoes, which had, as Good Luck would have it, been left in a Place, where the
Renegadoes could not show them to the Enemy.

He told us moreover, that some time after his return from that Mine, they had
been at Pueblo Viego, by the way of a River that runs not above four Leagues,
and discharges her self into the Bay of Napalla; that they had surprised the
Town, and that after having rested there for some days, as they were coming
back to rejoyn their Canoes, they had met with an Ambuscade, laid for them
under the Covert of a Retrenchment, guarded by Six Hundred Men out of the
Garrison of Realeguo, which began to be inhabited again, with whom they had
fought a long time: But finding the Spaniards stood to it more tightly than
ordinary, they threw themselves into their Retrenchment, where killing all
about them that made any resistance, they wrought a great Slaughter amongst
them; That one part of them continued Prisoners; while the other fled without
any more ado, and forsook their Retrenchment as well as the three Colors they
had set up there: That the Free^^^ters had lost no more than three Men, but
that the Spaniards in the heat of the Action killed several Prisoners of the
one and the other Sex, which the other had brought away from the Town, who
after this went on board their Vessels: That some Months after, not concurring
with a Design which Fourscore and five of his Men had taken, of going down
toward the Isles of Caly^fornia, he had resolved with the Sixty that remained
with him to go up toward Panama, where happening, (...) I have told you, to
meet us, we gave both him and his Men room in our Ships, where we learnt this
whole Relation from them.

On the 30th. we quitted our Ships, and went in our Canoes into several Rivers
which discharge themselves into this Bay of Caldaira, and amongst the rest into
a ^ery fine one, whereon we went up Ten Leagues, in ^ll which space we always
found her of the same depth ^^d breadth. Several Spaniards told us, that a
matter of Forty or Fifty Leagues higher there was a Mountain, ^^om whence
arises the Spring of this River, and on the ^ther side of the same Mountain
arises also a Spring, ^om which runs the River St. John, that discharges its if
into the North Sea at the White Point,

We took a large Canoe, laden with Tallow, in this ^iver, which some time after
was of great use to us, by ^ay of Food, as we went to Queaquilla: We also found
the Hatto's on this River's side, where we refreshed (...) selves till the 6th.
of February, when we returned a board our Ships. On the 12th. we departed, in
(...) to go the third-time and visit Nicoya; We arrived ^^re next day in the
Evening, and presently detatched (...) Parties to get us Intelligence
concerning the Spa^^ards, who never appeared since they had threatened us (...)
their Succors, instead of the Ransom we required of them for saving their
Town, The Freebooters burn Nicoya.
which they still refusing to satisfy us for, we burnt it this Third time, and
on the 17th. went our ways.

But though we were forced to chastise the Spaniards in this manner, we showed
our selves very exact in the Preservation of the Churches, into which we
carried the Pictures and Images of the Saints which we found in particular
Houses, that they might not be exposed to the rage and burning of the English,
who were not much pleased with these sorts of Precautions; they being Men that
took more satisfaction and pleasure to see one Church burnt, than all the
Houses of America put together. But as it was our turn now to be the stronger
Party, they durst do nothing that derogated from that respect we bore to all
those things.

Nicoya was a small Town, A Description of Nicoya.
Pleasant enough taken altogether; Its Churches are very fine, and the Houses
as ill built; they have a pretty River there, that runs about one half of the
Town round; but when one is within, you cannot know which way it is you have
entered, nor how to go out, because of the height of the Mountains wherewith it
is surrounded every way.

We were no sooner gone from this Town, but the Spaniards sent to set Fire to
the Roads through which we were to pass, which yet we happily escaped, because
they had but just begun to do it: We took one of this Men who was hemmed in
between us and the Fire, and who conducted us to several Estancia's, from which
we did not return before the 20th. And on the 22d. wep^ Forty Prisoners a
Shore, who were too chargeable to be kept on Board with us.

Some Men perhaps may be amazed at what I have said concerning the burning of
the Roads, How the Spaniards burn the Roads.
but they would be much more so had they seen it as we have done there were two
sorts of Places where this burning was wont to be practiced, to wit, in the
Savana's and Woods^ when the former were set on Fire, whose Grass was almost as
high as our Heads, and also as dry in a manner as Powder, we found our selves
so besieged on the right and left side of the Road with the Flame, that it made
(...) feel it to some purpose, though the same were of no long duration; But when
these Roads lead through Convert and woody Countries, as in the present
Occasion whereof am speaking, and that once fire be fet thereunto,(...) may
see, according to the course of the Wind, the Country for several Leagues burnt
in a little time, to which the dryness of things does very much contribute,
They part from the English, and Grogniet again.
the Sun being exceeding hot at that Season.

On the Twenty third we sent our Quartermaster on Board the English, to make
an agreement with them: we proposed to go in Conjunction with them to take
Queaquilla (where the Spaniards drove a great Trade by Sea) upon Condition that
if we took Two Ships, we should cast Lots who should chose, and that in case
there were but one taken, that then we would put Fifty Men of each Nation on
board her, till such time as we could take another, which they would not agree
to, as insisting upon the First choice: So that seeing we could not bring them
to comply, we parted as well from them as from Captain Grogniet and Fifty of
our Men who staid on board him; so that they had an Hundred and forty two Men
in their Ship, and we an Hundred and Sixty two in our Frigate, and long Bark.

On the Twenty fourth we weighed and set fail for Queaquilla, which is the
First maritime Town on the South Coast as you go thither from Panama; we made
all the sail we could to get thither before the English, who had formed the
same Design as we had done; we lay by till the 25th. to get out of the Bay, and
in passing from the White Cape, we steered South South-West, South and by
South-West, and directly South to the 28th. in the Evening, that we had on our
Starboard side a West North-West Wind, bearing us to the South, which lasted
till the 29th. when we were becalmed in the Night: On the First of March
toward Noon arose a pretty fresh Gale from the North, which made us bear South
South-West, and South South-East, till the 4th. in the Morning, when an
Easterly Breeze took us and made us bear South; on the Fifth arose a North-West
Wind; and on the Eighth at Noon we passed the Equinoctial Line, leaving the
Isles of Galapa, which are below to the West, a douzen Leagues to Leeward.

These are Eight Islands that stand North and South of the Whihe Cape, and East
and West from Queaquilla; they are full of Sea Tortoises that land there every
Hour of the Day, and you cannot find a Place to tread on or walk along in the
Woods, for the great numbers of land Tortoises, Lizards, and Agoutils, that
retire thither: The Sea thereabouts is also so fruitful in the production of
Fish, that they come to the very Sands to die there, but these advantages on
the other hand are encountered with the want of Water, whereof these Islands are
entirely destitute.

The Wind toward Evening came to North North-East, and made us bear East and
by South-East to keep to the Continent; the Weather on the Tenth in the Morning
grew very dark, and we having a Southerly Blast, we bore East, and East and by
South-East till the Eleventh, when we were becalmed: on the Thirteenth arose an
East Wind, and we bore to the South South-East upon a tack, and North
North-East, and then lay by for some time, because we did not know the
Currents: On the 14th. having a North East Wind, we bore East South-East, and
accordingly as it blew fresh we steered East and by South-East, and East: on
the Fifteenth Two Hours before Daylight we had a Storm and then a South Wind,
we steered East all that Day, but we had such bad Weather the following Night,
that we could not carry our Sails; next Day about Noon the Weather grew better,
and an Easterly Breeze presented; we lay by till the Eighteenth at Noon, when
we discovered a Ship to Windward of us, to whom we gave chase till the Evening;
she proved to be the English Ship that had parted from us when we came out of
the Bay of Caldaira, who knowing who we were, put into the Cape, we came to
Leeward of her; but she spread out her Sails and got to Leeward of us; after we
had given one another this salutation, we put out for Two Hours to see which
sailed best, but knowing at last they were the better Sailors, and fearing they
might reach Queaquilla before us, we desired them to join with us in our
Design, to which when they agreed, we set fail together; we found our selves
much perplexed to know what Latitude we might be in, since we had not seen the
Sun for Ten Days together. But it happily fell out, that it appeared on the
Nineteenth; our Pilots computed we might be about Five and twenty Leagues to
Windward of Queaquilla, and Sixty Leagues from Land; but the Winds varied to
that degree, that we could make no way, and many times went contrary*

On the 20th. we had a West Wind, and steered East and by South-East till the
21st, when we were becalmed* On the 24th. arose a South Wind, and on the 26th.
an Easterly Breeze: at last the Wind persisting to be contrary, we were reduced
to great want of Victuals, for we had already been upon our passage longer than
our Provision would allow us, to which we may add, that Fish had till now been
so scarce, and hard to catch, that we had but little support from them: So that
having on the 28th. taken an Account of the remainder of our Victualling, we
were forced to retrench our selves so far as to eat but once in Forty eight
Hours: we also wanted Water, and had it not been for the help of Rain, we had
certainly died of thirst; but what made us amends for one part of our wants,
was that we found our selves all of a sudden in a Kingdom of large Fishes, such
as Emperors, Tunnies, Germons, Galdenies, Negros, Bonitoes, and several others,
to whom we gave no quarter, no more that to the Sea Wolfs, who for all their
ill smell could not escape us. During that time we bore to the North-East, the
Wind not allowing us to keep on our designed Course, that if the worst came to
the worst, we might by this course reach the Isle of St. John, pursuant to the
Design we had formed upon meeting with this contrary Wind, of putting in there,
in case the same continued all the way: On the 29th. after we had taken the
Latitude, our Pilots computed us to be opposite to the Isle of Platta, Thirty
Leagues to Leeward of Queaquilla: on the 30th. being Easter Day, we were but
one degree North Latitude; in the Twi light the Wind began to blow fresh, and
bore us East North-East: next Day the Wind came South South-West, we steering
East, East and by South-East, and East South-East: On the 3d. of April we were
becalmed; and as we had for the space of Two Days, by the computation of our
Pilots, sailed toward Land; they were of Opinion that the Currents deceived
them, of which we made our selves satisfied by the following manner: On the
Fourth the Weather being very calm we furled our Sails, and put out one of our
Pirogues, about whose Fore-Castle we spun Sixty Fathom of our smallest Rope,
made fast unto a Grapling Iron, and from that Coast she made from, the Tide ran
along her side with as much swiftness as the Current of a River, and bore to
the North-East: on the Fifth we caulked our Ships; toward Midnight a
South-West Wind presented it self, and we bore South-East.

On the 6th. in the Morning we discovered Land both to Windward and Leeward of
us, we veered to, least we should be brought too near, and steered South: On
the 8th. we were about Four or Five Leagues off, and our coasting Pilots knew
the Place to be Cape Pastao, which is under the Line Thirty Leagues to Leeward
of the Isle of Platta; we had all hands aloft, and steered South: On the 9th.
we bore to the South South-East till the Evening, and to the South-West till
Ten at Night, when we steered to the South South-East: and on the IIth. we were
got to the height of the Isle of Platta, Eighteen Leagues out at Sea.

On the 12th. at Noon we saw the Point of Sancta Helena, An Account of the
English Adventures.
which is Fifteen Leagues to Leeward of Queaquilla, and forms the beginning of
the Bay that bears the Name of that Town: On the 12th. at Night we saw Fire to
Windward of us; we lay by till break of Day, when we discovered a Ship Three
Leagues to Windward of us, and as we were becalmed, we sent Three Pirogues to
know what she was; they found her to be a Prize, laden with Wine and Corn,
which Captain David had taken as she came out of Nasca, and which was separated
from him; he had put Eight English Men on Board to Conduct her, who were to
have their Rendezvous in case of a separation, at the Isle of Platta: These Men
told us that after they had left St John's Island, they made several Descents,
and in several Parts of that Country, among others at Sagua, Arrica, and Pisca,
that in the last of these Places, a Relation of the Viceroy of Lima, came at
the Head of Eight hundred Men to attack them with Sword in hand, but that they
were vigorously repulsed, that they had also taken a great many Ships, which,
when they pillaged, they let go again; so that finding they had got to the
value of Five thousand pieces of Eight a Man, they had resolved to return to
the North Sea, and that as they sailed^ away for the Streights of Magellan they
fell to gaming, whereat many lost all they had got; that they had anchored in
the Road which leads to the Isles of Dom Fernandez, that stand upon the brink
of the Straight, to which Place came Captain Willnet, an English Man, who had
left them long before, and was come thither upon the same Design with
themselves of repassing into the North Seas by the same Streights; but that
Captain David had altered his Resolution, for that those of his Crew who had
lost their Money, were not willing to leave these Seas nor the Ship till they
had taken another; That as for those who had won, they went on Board Captain
Willnet, out of which Ship went also, at the same time, such of his Cr^w as
were without Money, in order to go and get some with Captain David, and that so
they were come back into the South Sea, to the number of Sixty English, and
Twenty French, as Willnet was gone through the Straight, for the North Sea;
that Captain Peter Henry was gone for the East Indies, presently after Captain
Suams; and lastly they told us (though we had been informed thereof before) that
the Spanish Fleet was a careening at Puerto Callao, which, as I have already
said, is the Place of Embarking, that belongs to Lima.

As these Eight English Men did not think that Captain David's Frigate would
rejoyn them so quickly at the Place of Rendezvous, they proposed going with us
to Queaquilla, which we so much the more willingly agreed to, in that they gave
us a share of their Victuals and Drink, and a little revived amongst us, that
usual meriment that had now for some time been exiled from us, by the
abstinences we were forced to undergo, wherewith we were extremely weakened;
Then we sailed all Night in their Company steering South-East and by East.

On the 14th. we furled all our Sails for fear of being discovered from Land,
near unto which we were: About two arose a Fog, by favor whereof we made use
of our main Sail of all, as well to come ready Rigged into the Bay, which is
Thirty Leagues in length, as to get to Windward of the River Queaquilla, and to
spare our selves also the Labor of rowing so much, for being so extraordinary
weak we had not strength to do it.

We steered all Night South-East; And on the 11th. discovered the White Cape,
which is the Windward Cape of this Bay; about Ten in the Morning, we embarked
to the number of Two hundred and Sixty Men on Board our Canoes, after having
given our Ships Orders to lay by in the Bay, till they heard News from us. We
steered all Day long for the Island Sancta Clara, with which we came up at Sun
setting; this little Island is in reality nothing else but a Rock, standing
East and West, Six Leagues distant from the Continent; we were obliged to cast
Anchor with all the Tides contrary to us, it being impossible to put into this
Bay against the Currents, where we found Six Fathom Water: And on the 16th. we
found our selves between Sancta Clara and la Puna, about Five Leagues from the
Shore.

La Puna is a very pretty Island, A Description of the Isle of Puna.
and may be discovered at a great distance at Sea, because of the Form of it,
resembling a Cardinal^s Cap; It Is Twenty Leagues in circumference, and stands
East and West, Two Leagues from the Continent, and over against the Mouth of
the River Queaquilla; There is a large Borough built upon it, where, in former
times, were kept the King of Spain's Magazines: Great Ships, that is, such* as
are Two or Three Decked ones, that cannot come into the River, Anchor between
it and the Island: We hid our selves in this Island all Day, and that with the
good Luck of not being discovered by the Sentinels, who were there to the
number of Forty of them, though we knew nothing of it: We departed in the
Evening, and got more Southerly, that we might not be discovered from the
Continent.

On the 17th. we hid our selves again in a Covert Place upon the same Island;
where after we had got an exact Account from our Prisoners of the State,
Situation, and Disposition of the Town of Queaquilla, which we were about to go
and take, we disposed of our Forces in the following Order: There were Fifty
Men making the Forlorn Hope, led by Captain Picard, who commanded our Frigate,
to attack the great Fort: Fourscore Granadiers, commanded by the Captain of our
Bark, were to be in the nature of Reserves, and to serve any where as there
should be Occasion for them: Captain Grogni^^ with the main Body, was to make
himself Master of the Town and Port: And Captain George Hewit, who was
Commander of the English Ship, with Fifty of his Men, was to attack the little
Fort, and a Thousand Pieces of Eight was promised to any one of the Ensigns,
whereof I was one, that should pitch the First Colors upon the great Fort:
Things being thus regulated, we left our Covert in the Evening, believing we
might be able to enter into the River of Queaquilla that Night, before Day
light appeared; but for all that, all we could do was to gain one of the Points
of the Island, which is over against the River, for we could have the advantage
of the Tyde's coming in but for three Hours, which was the Reason, that on the
18th. as we put off again, that we might the more readily get under the Covert
of the Island; Day overtook us, and so discovered us to a Sentinel, who set a
Cottage on Fire as a Signal to the other Sentinels, that were posted at
convenient distances on both sides the River, that he saw us, that so these
same might advertise the Town of it: As soon as we got a Shore, we marched
cross a Wood to get to the said Fire, where we found some of those that had
kindled it; whereof Two were killed, as they ^^ed to save themselves, and a
Third was taken, but we could get no Intelligence from him, for he was but a
little Boy.

This day we discovered a Ship entering into the River, we let her pass, being
unwilling to come out from under our Covert to fall upon her, for fear of being
discovered by those on the main Land, who we supposed knew nothing of us;
Because the Inhabitants of Queaquilla had not answered the Fire-Signal which
the Sentinel of La Puna had given them. Upon the approach of Night, we made
ready, and entered into the River of Queaquilla by one of the two Mouths we
found there, and by which goes in and out with the Tide so rapid a Current,
that it is enough to carry a Canoe two Leagues in an hour, so that we made four
in the space of two hours.

There are two very fine Islands in the two largest parts of this River (which
may be about half a League over) under the Covert whereof we hid our selves on
the 19th. all day long. We made ready in the Evening, and had the pleasure to
be carried up by the Current without the use of our Oars, for fear lest the
Sentinels, who are always placed on this River's sides, should hear the noise
of our Rowing: The Design of our Guide was to ^^ss by and Land beyond the Town,
because he knew it was weaker, and worse guarded on that side ^han on the
other; But his Project failed him, for the ^yde now going out, was as injurious
to us, as before ^t had been favorable, and forced us to go ashore, two ^ours
before Day, within Cannon-shot on this side the Town, from whence we discovered
a great many Lights, which they usually keep in their Houses all Night ^ong.

This Place where we landed is a Country full of Water and Shrubs, across
which we were forced to cut (...) Way with our Sabres; but we did not know we
(...) unhappily landed over against a Sentinel, nor that (...) an hour after
that, one of our Men, who was left behind to look after our Canoes, struck fire
to light (...) Pipe with, which he rashly did, contrary to the expr^^^
Prohibition we had given him; which being perceiv^^ by that Sentinel, he made
no doubt but there must (...) Enemies near: Because the Spaniards, upon pain
(...) Death, forbid their People to strike fire in the Nigh^ in so much that he
presently discharged a small Peter^^^^ to give the Fort notice of it, who
readily answered the same with a whole discharge of their Cannon. Being
overtaken at that instant of time with a Storm of Ra^^ we were obliged to put
in for shelter into a great Hou^^ we found before us, to light the Granadiers
Match^^ and wait till Day appeared, during which space t^^ Enemy ^ired
continually from the Town to frighten an^ let us understand they were ready to
receive us.

On the 20th. at break of Day we marched out (...) Order toward the Town, They
attack and take Queaquilla.
with our Drums beating, (...) Colors flying; and upon our approach, found
(...) selves stopped by Seven Hundred Men, who attack^^ us from under the
Covert of a Wall four Foot and (...) half high, and of a Ditch, wherewith the
same (...) encompassed toward the River's side; which made (...) presently
suppose it to be their Fort, having had (...) good Intelligence of the
Situation of the Place. Th^^ did all they could to repulse us, and presently
kill^^ some of our Men. Being encouraged with this litt^^ Advantage, they had
the boldness to Sally out upon (...) with Sword in Hand, but seeing we gave
them a m^^^ vigorous Reception, they fled without any more ad^^^ and contented
themselves with breaking down (...) Bridges, to hinder us from advancing; But
this cou^^ not prevent our crossing the Ditch, and get to the soc^ of the Wall,
whereof we rendered our selves Masters ^^^spight of all the Resistance made by
them, who wa^ not Proof against our Grenades, that drove them ^^^to the very
Houses, which are all of them built on ^^^pose for Places of Defense, in case
they be attacked and from whence in a short time we also drove the^* They fled
to the Place of Arms, and entrenched them ^^lves in a strong Caze, which we
call a Red^^bt, and which, when they had defended for an hour's time, they ^ere
also forced to abandon, in so much that we pur^ued them from Fort to Fort, till
we came to a third, which is the greatest, and most considerable of them ^l:
Here they defended themselves a long time; for ^^ey fired continually upon us,
by favor of the smoke of their Cannon, which hindered us from seeing them. When
^e were got to the foot of the Pallisadoes, they sal^^d out again with Sword in
Hand, and having wounded ^ome of our Men, they took one of them Prisoner, but
^e quickly made them leave him, and to run back into their Fort, after they had
lost a great many Men. At ^ast, being weary with about Eleven hours Fight, and
^ur Powder being now almost spent, we redoubled our ^fforts in such a manner,
that we broke in upon them, and made our selves Masters of this last Fort, but
not without loss on our side, since we had Nine Men killed, and a Dozen
wounded. We sent out several Parties at ^he same time to pursue those that
fled, who were still (...) sight of us, while the other Roman Catholics went
(...) sing Te Deum in the great Church, after we had first ^ut a Garrison into
the Fort.

The Town of Queaquilla is almost built round about little Mountain, A
Description of Queaquilla.
whereon stand those three Forts, two whereof are commanded by the third, which
is the ^rgest, and all of them Command the Town. The ^reatest, which is that
against which we had most to (...), is no where strong but to the River-ward,
and the ^^o lesser ones are upon the Descent of an Hill, which ^lso looks
toward the River, and are each of them ^urrounded with a thin but very high
Wall on the out^^de; we found none but Petereroes to defend it: There (...) a
Communication between these last two and the ^ther by a Covert-way, on each
side whereof are two rows ^f Pallisadoes filled with Earth, and defended also
with ^etereroes. In the great Fort, which is also beset with Pallisadoes, we
found Seven Pieces of Cannon, carrying from twelve to eighteen Pound Ball; but
they could not, because of the Elevation of the Place, bring their Guns ^o bear
low enough to incommode those that were in ^he Town, unless by thundering
against the Houses, ^hey should be buried in the Ruins of them. The Ma^azines
of Powder stand in the middle of the Fort, and are slightly enough built. The
Town, as I have (...) served, is to the River-ward encompassed with a (...)
four Foot and an half high, and three Foot thick: (...) Streets are very
strait: The Parish Churches, as well the Convents, are very curiously built;
the Houses (...) almost all built with Boards, and founded upon (...) for that
in the rainy time of the Year, which contin^^ from the beginning of January to
the end of Ap^^^ they are so incommoded, as to be forced to (...) Bridges, and
raise Banks of Earth in all the Streets, (...) keep off the Water and Mud.
Their chief Commod^^ is Cocoe, of which they make Chocolate. We to^ Seven
Hundred Prisoners of both Sexes in this (...) and among the rest was the
Governor and his Famil^^ He was wounded, as were several Officers and Men^
Quality, who fought more bravely than Five thousa^^ other Men that defended the
Place.

We found in the Place several sorts of Merchandi^^ a great many Pearls and
precious Stones, They got a ^^st B^oty in Queaquilla.
a prodig^^^^ quantity of Silver Plate, and seventy thousand Pieces (...) Eight
at least; though there were Three Millions amo^^ them when we came thither: But
as we were all who^^ taken up to make our selves Masters of the Forts; the laid
hold of that opportunity to make their escap^ along the River, with the
greatest part of their most ^^^luable Movables: When our Canoes were come to
^^^chor under the Town, we were not backward to (...) Four of them away in
pursuit of the Shallops that ^^^ried the said Riches of the Town away, but then
it (...) too late: They only took Two and twenty Thousand Pieces of Eight, and
a Vermillion Eagle gilt, that b^ served for a Tabernacle to some Church,
weighing Sixt^ eight Pounds, and was exceeding Rate, as well for (...)
Workmanship, as Two great Rocks of Emeralds, where with the Eyes of it were
made: There were Fourtee^ Barks in the Port, with the Galleys, against whom
(...) fought at Pu^blo Nuevo, and Two of the King of Spai^ Ships upon the
Stocks, almost finished: We agree^ with the Governor in the Evening about the
Price (...) his, his Families, the Town, Fort, Cannon, and Shi^ Ransoms, they
being to give us a Million of Pieces (...) Eight in Gold, and Four hundred
Sacks of Corn; an^ in order to forward the payment of the said Ranso^^ which
was to be brought from the Town of Quil^ ^ighty Leagues off, he desired us to
release their Vicar ^eneral, who was a Man of great Authority and Credit
amongst them.

We found this Governor's House so richly furnished, ^^d filled with such
precious Movables, that nothing in ^urope could be more Magnificent: The Women
of this own are very Pretty; but most of the Fathers or ^^^ks live here at
great Ease, and in such Familiarity ^ith the Fair Sex, that is far from being a
good Pattern and Example unto others: The Fathers hated us to that ^gree, that
they persuaded the Women, who had never ^en any Freebooters, we were altogether
unlike them, that we were not even of human Form, and that we ^ould both eat
them and their Children, which made them conceive so much Horror and Aversion
for us, that ^hey could not be dispossessed thereof, till they came to know ^s
better. But then I can boldly say, they entertained ^uite different Sentiments
of our Persons, and have given (...) frequent instances of so violent a
Passion, as pro^eeded sometimes even to a degree of Folly.

It Is not from a chance Story, An odd Story of a Spanish Woman.
that I came to know the ^^pressions wrought in these Women that we were Men
that would eat them; For the next Day after the taking of the Town, a Young
Gentlewoman that waited upon ^he Governess of the Place happening to fall into
my Hands, as I was carrying her away to the Place where the ^est of the
Prisoners were kept, and to that end made her walk before me, she turned back,
and with Tears in her Eyes told me in her own Language, Senior pur l^amor ^e
dios no mi como; that is, Pray, Sir, for the Love of God (...) not eat me;
whereupon I asked who had told her that we were wont to eat People, she
answered the Fathers, who had also assured them, that we had not human ^hape,
but that we resembled Monkeys.

On the 21st. Queaquilla fired by accident.
some of our Men who had made a Fire in the Day time, in one of the Houses of
the Town, came to the Court of Guard in the Evening without extinguishing of
it; so that at Night it set the Town on Fire; but the fear we were in least the
same should reach our Court of Guard, whereon was lodged all the Powder in the
Place, and part of the Merchandise and Riches of the Town, we were obliged to
get all carried on Board the Barks that were in the Port, and to bring all our
Prisoners into the Fort; and when that was done, we endeavored to put a stop
to the Fire, which (...) burnt down one third of the Town, notwithstanding all
the pains we took to put it out.

We returned on the 22d. in the Morning to our Cour^ of Guard, and fearing
least the Spaniards might refuse to pay the Ransom agreed on for the Town,
because of this Accident, we having promised by our Treaty with them not to
burn it; we took upon us to believe they were the cause of it, and sent them a
Letter, wherein we gave them to understand, we were much surprised at their
manner of procedure; That they should after our Agreement with them, come with
a mischievous Intention to burn the Merchandise and Corn that were of so much
use to us, and that we repented we had not left all the Town to be burnt: That
if they did not pay us what we had suffered by the Fire, we should send them
Fifty of the Prisoners Heads: They thereupon excused the Matter to us, saying
they must be some ras^ally spightful People that had done this, and they would
take care to satisfy us.

On the 23d. the Governor furnished us with a coasting Pilot, whom we sent in
one of our Canoes to see foe our Ships, (to whom we had given Orders they
should lay by in the Bay) to bring them to an Anchor at the Isle of Puna,
whither we were to go at our departure from Queaquilla, to wait, for the
promised Ransoms: On the 24th. finding one of our Men was Sick with the Stench
which the dead Carcasses, to the number of above nine hundred, lying up and
down the Town, occasioned: We went our ways after we had first dismounted and
nailed up the Cannon in the Fort, and carried Five hundred Prisoners, being the
best of the Inhabitants, along with us, into our Barks; wherein we arrived with
them on the 25th. at Puna, where we found our Ships ready to cast Anchor.

On the 2d. of May, The death of Captain Grogniet.
Captain Grogniet died of the Wound he had received that Day we took the Town,
when the Seven hundred Spaniards opposed our entering the Fort, and the same
Day died Four of our Men also: On the 4th. we sent our Galley to the Isle of
Platta, to see if Captain David's Frigate was come to Rendezvous there.

The time allowed for the payment of the Ransom of Queaquilla, being expired on
the Ninth, we granted them Four Days longer; The Spaniards treacherous.
but then we began to be weary of this delay, when a Spanish Bark that was wont
to carry us Provision, brought an Officer in her, who desired us not to be
impatient, for the Ransom would be quickly paid: Now this Dilatoriness made us
begin to susspect very much that there was some treachery in the Case, and that
they entertained us with hopes for no other end than to amuse us, till such
time as the Enemy were reinforced. And our guess was right enough, as will
appear hereafter; insomuch that we were constrained to use such severity
toward our Prisoners, which we knew would strike a Terror into our Enemies. We
made them through Dice for their Lives, and the Lot falling upon the Heads of
Four, we cut them off presently, and sent them to Queaquilla in the same Vessel
that had brought the said Officer unto us, by whom we let the Tenient
understand, that if the Ransom did not come within four Days, we would send
them the Heads of all the rest of the People that were in our Power.

Our Galley on the 14th. returned from the Isle of Platta, and related that she
had been chased about the Point of Sancta Helena by Two Ships, which she could
not discover what they were, and this made us that Evening send out one of our
Canoes that sailed well to see what those Ships might be: On the 16th. she
found they came to join us, they being Captain David's Frigate and a Prize he
had taken after the other had been separated from them, which we met before we
went to Queaquilla; they came with full Resolution to make a Descent at Paita,
in order to get some Refreshments for their Men, who had been wounded in a
Fight they had had with a Spanish Ship called Catalina, which they met Fifty
Leagues to Leeward of Lima, and was one of those that we had for so long a time
waited for before that Town.

This Ship Catalina was separated from Two more with whom she was returning to
the Port of Callao, Captain David worsts the the Spaniards at Sea.
when unfortunately for her she met with Captain David's Frigate, that sailed
much better than she, and could have taken her, without making as he did Two
Days Fight or it, had it not been that the greatest part of his Crew being
continually Drunk, failed Twenty times to come up close to board her, and
sufferred themselves to fall to Leeward because of their ill rigging, as often
as they found themselves to Windward of her; which being observed by the
Spaniards, they thought by putting up a bloody Flag, they would be quickly
brought to strike, but therein they were mistaken, and the quite contrary fell
out* For David's People growing sober on the Third Day and putting their Tackle
and Rigging into better order than before, the Spaniards were so terrifyed
thereat, that they ran a Shore where their Ship did not keep whole Two Hours:
David's Men in a Canoe went to save Two Spaniards who were about swiming to
Land, and now having escaped the danger of Drowing, told them that their
Captain having had his Thigh shot off with a Cannon Ball, had desired his
Lieutenant before his Death to lose no time, but to go without tarrying, to
acquaint the Viceroy of Lima, of the dangerous Estate the Frigate was reduced
to, that he might send without delay to her assistance.

Our Canoe which on the 22d. came to rejoyn us, and gave the foresaid
Information, brought also along with her Captain David's Prize, which he had
sent to desire us to get a Main Mast to be brought him from Queaquilla, as
somewhat of our Ransom, his having been very much damnified in the last
Engagement; And that till it came, he would Cruise without the Bay to prevent
our being surprised by the Spaniards.

I forgot to take notice that this Ship's Crew had at Paita, surprised a
Courier that was going from Queaquilla to Lima the third time, to carry the
following Letter unto the Viceroy, which clearly made out unto us the
suspicions we had entertained before, that the Spaniards deferred to pay us the
promised Ransom, that they might have time to prepare themselves to come and
pay us in a sort of Coin we had no Occasion for, and which we did not require
at their hands.

A Letter of the Tenient of Queaquilla, to the Viceroy of Lima.
SIR,
I Am to inform your Excellency, The Tenient of Queaquilla's Letter to the
Viceroy of Lima.
the second time, that the English and French are still at Puna; It Is several
Days since the term they had allowed us for the Redemption of our Prisoners is
expired; I have done it on purpose that your Excellency might gain time. They
have sent me four of our Peoples Heads: I will amuse them with some thousands
of Pieces of Eight from time to time, (though they have no Reason to be weary)
while your Excellency may please to come, and though they should yet send me
fifty Heads more, I shall esteem that loss to be much less Prejudicial to us,
than to suffer such evil-disposed People to live. Now, Sir, we have a brave
opportunity to get rid of them, provided your Excellency lose no time to do it.


We could not have received a more certain Testimo^y of the Thoughts and
Designs of our Enemies, than those discovered by this Letter unto us, so we
took our measures accordingly.

CHAP. V.
The remaining Actions of the Freebooters in the South Seas, during 1687.
THE best Winter Quarters which we had met with in these Seas, la Puna their
best, Winter Quarters.
and that of longest duration, was (...) of the time of our sojourning upon
this Island of (...) Puna, where for the space of Thirty odd Days that (...)
staid here, we lived mighty well; for besides the ^^ctuals which the Spaniards
brought us daily from Queaquilla, we had brought thither our selves a great
^^ny Refreshments, neither did we want Charms for (...) Ears in this Place, for
we had all the Music of the ^own among our Prisoners, which consisted of
Lutes, ^heorbs, Gittars, Harps, and other Instruments, I ne^r saw any where
else, wherewith they made a very fine ^onsort.

Some of our Men grew very familiar with our Wo^en Prisoners, who without
offering them any violence ^ere not sparing of their Favors, and made appear,
(...) I have already remarked, that after they came once (...) know us, they
did not retain all the Aversion for us, ^^^t had been inculcated into them,
when we were ^^rangers unto them* All our People were so charmed with this way
of living, that they forgot their past (...) series, and thought of no more
Danger from the Spa^niards than if they had been in the middle of Paris.

Amongst the rest, An Adventure of the Author's, with a Spanish Woman.
my self had one pretty Adventure among the other Prisoners we had a Young
Gentlewo^men lately become a Widow of the Treasurer of the Town, who was slain
when it was taken: Now th^^ Woman appeared so far comforted for her loss, ou^^
an hardheartedness they have in this Country one (...) another, that she
proposed to hide me and her self (...) some corner of the Island till our
People were gone, an^ that then she would bring me to Queaquilla to marr^ her;
That she would procure me her Husband's Offi^^ and vest me in his Estate, which
was very great: When I had returned her Thanks for such obliging offers, (...)
gave her to understand that I was afraid her Inte^^^^ had not the mastery over
the Spaniards Resentme^^^ and that the Wounds they had received from us, (...)
yet too fresh and green for them easily to forget them* She went about to cure
me of my Suspicion, by procu^^ing secretly from the Governor and chief
Officers, pro^mises under their Hands, how kindly I should be use^ by them. I
confess I was not a little perplexed herewith and such pressing Testimonies of
Good Will and Friend^ship toward me, brought me, after a little Consul^^^tion
with my self, into such a Quandary, that I did no^ know which side to close
with; nay, I found my (...) at length much inclined to close with the Offers
(...) me: And I had two powerful Reasons to ind^^^ me thereunto, one of which
was the miserable and (...) guishing Life we lead in those Places, where we
(...) in perpetual Hazard to lose it, which I should be fr^^ from by an
advantageous Offer of a pretty Wom^^ and a considerable Settlement; the other
proceeded (...) the despair I was in of ever being able to return into (...)
own Country, for want of Ships fit for that purpose But when I began to reflect
upon these things with little more leisure and consideration, and that I re^ved
with my self, how little Trust was to be given (...) the Promises and Faith of
so perfidious, as well as ^^^dictive a Nation as the Spaniards, and more
especi^^ toward Men in our Circumstances, by whom they (...) been so ill used;
this Second Reflection carried it agai^^ the First, and even all the Advantages
offered me (...) this Lady: But however the matter was, I was resolved, in
spite of the Grief and Tears of this pretty Woman, to prefer the continuance
of my Troubles (with a Ray of hope I had of seeing France again) before the
perpetual Suspicion I should have had of some Treachery designed against me.
Thus I rejected her Proposals, but so, as to assure her I should retain, even
as long as I lived, a lively Resentment of her Affections and good Inclinations
toward me.

On the 23d. we sent one of our Canoes to Queaquilla to carry one of the
Fathers thither, they being a People as much obeyed and respected by that
Nation, as the Viceroys themselves. The Governor gave this Man a full Power to
act as he pleased, even in opposition to the Obstructions which the Tenient
made against the Payment of the Ransom aforementioned. After his departure
came a Bark which brought us Four and Twenty Sacks of Meal, and to the value of
Twenty Thousand Pieces of Eight in Gold: They desired us moreover, to grant
them three days time for the Payment of the rest, which we allowed them, but
withal threatened, that upon their failure therein, we should seize upon their
Fort, and burn their Town and Ships.

Our Canoe returned on the 25th. who gave us an Account they would pay no more
than Two and Twenty Thousand Pieces of Eight for the rest of the Ransom, and
that the Tenient would pursue his Prince's Orders, who forbad the payment of
any; That he had Five Thousand Men at hand, with which he waited to see if we
would put our Threats in Execution. Upon this ^^^^ce and bold Answer, we had a
Consultation together, whether we should cut off the Heads of all the
Prisoners: The Plurality of Voices, together with mine, was, That it were
better we should go and look after the Two and Twenty Thousand Pieces of Eight,
than shed any more Blood; seeing also that our Design being to leave these
Seas, we had no farther occasion for these Executions to make us be feared; and
that after all, we were but too well assured by the Tenient's Letter, that the
Spaniards were setting all things in Order, to come and act their utmost Effort
against us, which perhaps would administer matter of Repentance unto us, if we
still persisted in our Resolution: That therefore we ought to accept of the
Offer, and to give up unto them no other than the meanest of the Prisoners,
without divesting our selves of those of Quality, who would be a Security unto
us for the rest: That while we waited for them, it was our best way to take
them along with us, and put off from the Shore, steering toward the Point of
St. Helena, where we should be out of danger of the surprises of our Enemies,
whose Motions we could every way discover at a distance. Things being thus
concluded on, we sent our Canoe to Queaquilla, who returned again the 25th. and
told us, that next day, the Spaniards would without fail bring us the Two and
Twenty Thousand Pieces of Eight to the Isle of Puna, where we then were.

We put the same day Fifty of our best Prisoners on board our Ships, and at the
same time weighed Anchor, and quitted our good Winter Quarters, where we left
the rest of our Prisoners, with two Canoes to Guard them, and to wait for the
Money promised us; giving our Men Orders to tell those that brought it, that
they should send us the remainder of what was agreed on, to the Point of St.
Helena, and upon default thereof, that they should see their People no more.
Our Canoes on the 26th. in the Evening came to join us, as we lay by to get out
of this Bay, and brought us the Two and Twenty Thousand Pieces of Eight.

Next Night the English Frigate's Prize, They join the English, and fight the
Spanish Armadilla's.
who thought we lay still at Anchor at la Pruna (from whence she met us about
Eight Leagues) came to give us notice, that two Spanish Armadilla's waited our
coming out of the Bay, and that David's Frigate lay by, as they did, to stay
for us: On the 27th. by break of Day we discovered them between the Isle of St.
Clare and the Point of St. Helena, to Windward of us. Captain David^^ Frigate,
upon sight of us, made up presently to us, and having got all together, we
consulted what we were best to do: We put ^ourscore of our Men on board of him,
because he had not number enough of his own to manage his Guns; and as we had
not Men enough to manage our Prizes, we reserved only but two Ships, and a long
Bark, and sent the rest with our Pirogues upon the Flats, where the Spanish
Ships could not come, as drawing more Water than they did. We lay by till^
Noon, to get the Weather-gage, which yet we could not do, because at this time
of the Year the Winds blow from the Sea, and are very fixed, and that besides,
as we came out of the bottom of the Bay we could not well hope to gain it, the
Spaniards being at the Mouth thereof.

About Noon our Enemies came upon us, and so we sought till the Evening with
our Cannon, which the Spaniards call Gallant Fighting, without much hurting of
one another: We cast Anchor upon the approach of Night, as they did also about
a League to Windward of us: We fired a Gun for our Prizes to come up, which
they did, and cast Anchor near us, for their greater Security.

We sent them back about an hour before Daylight to their former Station, and
as soon as ever Light appeared, we made ready, and the Spaniards did the same,
but no sooner were we got under Sail, but we were becalmed: Unhappily it fell
out that we were without our Pirogues to tow us to Windward, because we had
sent them back with our Prizes, to avoid the trouble they might have caused us,
and therefore all we could do now, was to make use of our little Canoes, which
we had still with us; the Spaniards also towed to Windward, to dispute the
matter with us, however, with much ado we got a Cannot-shot to Windward of
them; But as they knew better how to bear close up to the Wind in these Seas
than we, in half an hour's time they recovered the Weather-gage of us. We lay
by till Two in the Afternoon, and seeing we could do no good with them, we put
in to the Cape, to wait for two of our Ships, that were behind. In the mean
time these Armadilla's bore up to us, and when they had got within a good
Cannon-shot, we fought till it was dark Night, they very much shattered us, yet
wounded but one Man; we anchored in the Evening as we had done the day before,
and they did the same also to Windward of us.

We remained at Anchor on the 29th. as well as they, till Three in the
Afternoon, when they weighed to go and attack the biggest of our Prizes,
because she had anchored only on the side of the Shallows, and we made ready to
defend her: We came to such a close Fight with them, that our Small Arms, as
well as Great Guns, came into play on both sides; yet we lost not one Man, though
they on their side had a great many killed, which we knew by the Blood that ran
out of their Skupperholes, and at our parting they cried, A la manana la
partida; that is, To Morrow to it again.

On the 30th. both they and we prepared to put out of the Bay, and the
Spaniards, who were still to Windward, did all they could to hinder us to get
the Weathergage. We came to an Anchor toward Noon, to disarm one of our
Prizes, that sailed very badly, and to fit up another in the room of her, which
Captain David gave us, as well as the Twenty Frenchmen that made part of his
Crew, and were minded to leave him. We wrought all Night to unrigg her, and
when we had so done, we sent her into the Bottom. We put our selves under Sail
on the 31st. and about Two in the Afternoon came to an Anchor, because of the
Tyde's being against us: Presently after, the two Armadilla's came up with us,
which made us weigh, and then to put in at the Cape, to wait for one of our
Prizes, that was far from us, which not being able to join us as soon as the
Enemy, her Crew left her, and went into her Pirogue, wherein they came to throw
themselves on board one of our Men of War: They had left four Spaniards in that
same Prize, who, by the favor of a good Wind, put back into the River of
Queaquilla, where they made their Escape, and, what was worst of all, took
along with them almost all our Provisions that was in her.

When we were got within half Cannon-shot of our Enemies Ships, we fired upon
one another, and that without intermission, till an hour within Night: We
received several Cannon-shot in our Sides, during this Engagement, had almost
all our Tackle spoiled, and our Sails sifted, because the Spaniards did all
that ever they could to bring our Masts by the board, and indeed the Foremast
of the Frigate received five Cannot-shot, and the Mainmast three, but they
came only slanting, and, as good luck would have it, we had not one Man killed
nor wounded.

We saw the Enemy on the first of June by break of Day, a League's distance
from us; we were not slow to do all we could to put out: About Ten they
lengthened their Boltspring-Sails, and returned upon us, but as we saw them
bear up toward our Frigate, we thought they intended to board her, and this
made us presently put into her the Crew of our long Bark, by way of
Reinforcement. As soon as ever the Spaniards were come up, they put out their
Burgundian Colors, having till then put out none: When we were come pretty
near, they gave us a Volley of Musket Shot, together with a discharge of their
Cannon, laden with Cartouches, but we got clear of them, so that they could not
come to grapple with us.

After we had left them to make all the Fire they could, we gave them a
Discharge of all our Cannon, and a full Volley with our small Arms in our turn,
and then we were ready to board them; but they finding themselves much damaged,
very readily got aloof to hinder us.

They took up an hour's time to refit, then bore up to us again, renewing the
Fight, which lasted till Night; but they had been so well banged; that they had
no mind to feel us this time so near, and that day we had three Men wounded.

On the second by break of Day they were still to Windward of us at about two
Leagues distance, and bore up to us; We having a fresh Gale, put into the Cape,
and when they were come within a good Cannot-shot of us, they plied us very
tightly with their Great Guns, and then approached within Musket Shot of us,
as believing we were now out of Condition to make any longer Resistance: But as
we had a better Advantage of using our Fusils, we made so great a fire upon
them, that they were forced to close up their Port-holes, and bear up to the
Wind. We received Sixty Cannon shot this day in our Sides, whereof two Thirds
were between Wind and Water; besides which, all our Rigging was torn, and we
had two Men wounded, whereof my self was one.

About two hours within Night they made a show of coming to board us, but
finding we were as well prepared to receive them by Night as by Day, they bore
upon the Wind: We spent some part of this Night at Anchor to stop up our
Cannons Mouths, which otherwise might have sent us into the Deep.

We were astonished next Morning at break of Day that we could not set sight of
the two Armadilla's, with whom we had made our selves ready to renew the Fight,
and in all appearance they grew weary of it before us, though they had so great
an Advantage as that of the Wind, which yet, as we heard since, could not
secure them from losing a great many Men, and having their Ships at least as
much shattered as ours: So that supposing well with our selves that they had
steered their Course to Port Calla^, we steered ours for the Isle of Plaita,
where we anchored in the Evening, and continued there two Days to caulker our
Ships.

We had, during th^se several Engagements, brought up upon our Decks, the
Governor of Queaquilla, and the other chief ^ Officers that were our
Prisoners, that they might be Witnesses of the Vigor with which ou^ Men
fought, and the Cowardice of their own People, who durst not enter our Ships,
tho they came Board and Board with us twice.

We weighed on the sixth, and sailed along the Coast, that we might find a
convenient Place to take in Water* This Coast is very level, safe, and very
good to Land upon, which is the reason that the same is throughout, as far as
Barbacoa, inhabited by the Spaniards: We Anchored between Cape Pastoa and that
of St. Francisco. On the Tenth, we put our Prisoners ashore, and gave them
their Liberty, being not able ^o go to the Point St. Helena, to see whether
their Ransom was come, which I suppose would have been to little purpose, for
those two Armadilla's had been sent to pay us with Cannon-Ball.

On the 11th. They divided their Booty.
we went about dividing the Gold, precious Stones and Pearls we had found in
Queaquilla; but as these things could not be divided, nor easily valued, the
Gold not being Coined, and the Stones of different value, we put up all by way
of Auction, that those who had Silver might bid for them, and so every Man have
his part according as he bad; and as there were several among us who having got
considerable sums of Money at Play, were sure, that if it pleased God they
should once get safe out of these Seas, their way must be no other than over
Land, where the weight of their Silver must hinder or retard their going; they
bid for those lewels that kept but little Room, and weighed not much, so
excessive a Price, that the Gold alone that was Coined was worth Eighty and an
hundred Pieces of Eight an Ounce, and each Pistol Fifteen of the said Pieces:
But though these things were sold so dear, we made no more a Division of the
Booty of that Town than what came to Four hundred Pieces of Eight a Man, the
whole might amount to about Five hundred thousand Pieces of Eight, or Fifteen
hundred thousand Livers; which Money, as we were out of hopes to carry along
with us, served us to play for on Board our Ships for our Diversion: So that in
the Descents we made, we sought now for nothing but Gold and precious Stones,
which we did not find so plentiful as Silver; of which, I must be plain, we
made so little account, that we thought it not worth our while to take along
with us a great quantity of Plate and other things, whereof the Town of
Queaquilla was full: We also neglected to send a Canoe after the hundred Caons
of Coined Silver, each consisting of Eleven thousand Pieces of Eight, which the
Spaniards had sent away to the other side of the River, when we were engaged
with them, and which were yet in sight of us when the Fight was over. There is
such a vast quantity of that rich Metal in this Country, that most of those
things we make in France out of Steel, Copper, and Iron, are made by them in
Silver: This indifference in us gave some of their People many times occasion
to intermix with us, to Pillage from their own fellow Citizens what we
neglected, and of which they were not so squeamish as we, or rather so put to
it for the Carriage of them, they being in their own Country, and we far from
ours.

On the 12th. Captain Davids's Frigate left us, Captain David sails for the
North Sea.
he designing to go and Careen at the Isles of Galapas, and then to sail away
for the Straight of Magellan, in order to return for the North Sea; But as for
us, our Vessels were so small, and withal so bad, that it was impossible we
should get up higher than the Coast of Peru; neither could they also, contain
such a quantity of Water as we had occasion for, which is very hard to come by
on that Coast, where you must go two or three Leagues up the Country before you
can meet with any. These Difficulties made us resolve to return to the Western
Coast, that so we might endeavor to find out a way also to return to the North
Sea, but that must be no other than over Land.

Before I leave this Coast, An Acount of Peru.
I cannot but take Notice, that Peru is one of the richest Countries in the
World, not only in respect to the great quantity of Gold and Silver which the
Spaniards dig out of the Mines they possess there, but also upon account of the
great Fertility of the Earth, that produces to the Tillers of it three Crops
every Year, as well of Corn as Wine; and that besides those Fruits that are
peculiar to all America, you have also many of those here which grow in France,
in so much that this great Diversity of Species's is the occasion that you have
continual Supplies of fresh Fruits in all the Seasons of the Year.

The Inhabitants of this Country reckon but two Seasons, which divide the whole
Year into a Summer of Nine Months, and a Winter of three, during which, it
freezes oftentimes very hard on the Mountains, though the same is hardly
discernable in the Plains: Amongst their other Cattle they breed Sheep, that
weigh two hundred and fifty, or three hundred Pound-weight: These Animals are
of great use to them, having the very same Instinct as Camels. They make them
carry Jarrs of Water, Oil, or Wine, which are a sort of Earthen-ware made like
Sugar-pans, two of which holds about five and thirty Quarts, and when empty,
weigh as much as the Liquor that fills them: When they are minded to fill them,
these Sheep will kneel down, and as soon as they are full, get up very gently;
when they are come to the place whither they are to carry them, they lay them
down in the same manner, and so continue till they are discharged of their
Burden.

We weighed on the 13th. and on the 15th. Anchored twenty Leagues to Windward
of Point Mangla, we put ashore in a Canoe, where we surprised a Watch of
fifteen Spanish Soldiers, who were set upon the side of a curious River; the
Entertainment we gave them, forced them to own unto us that they were to guard
the River, which they called Elmeralda, because of the many Rocks, or great
pieces of Emeralds which their Countrymen take up there, and that we might in
the space of Eight Hours go very easily from the Mouth of it in our Canoes, to
surprise the Town of Quitto, but not so by Land, because then we must fetch a
Compass of Fourscore Leagues through a Country full of Inhabitants, who would
not fail to oppose us; and for these Reasons it was that they endeavored all
they could to keep from Strangers the Knowledge of these Advantages: This Town
of Quitto is well Peopled, and was formerly the Capital of the Kingdom that
bears its Name, but now it depends upon the Government of the Viceroy of ^ima.

On the 17th. we got ready and sailed away for the (...) del Gallo, which
stands at the Mouth of the little Bay of Barbacoa, an hundred Leagues to
Leeward of Queaquilla. On the 19th. we discov^^ed by break of Day, a Ship, whom
we chased, and toward Ten in the Forenoon took her; she was a Bark come from
Panama ^o go and buy Negroes, which the English in Iamaica (...) them by the
way of Puerto Bello, and which they were going to Trade with at Paitas; they
get very considerably by these Blacks, for the English sell them to the
Spaniards for four and five hundred Pieces of Eight, a Man and are worth three
and four hundred with them. We Anchored on the 20th. at the Isle of Gallapo,
where we examined the Prisoners we had taken in the said Bark, who told us,
that the Galley of Panama was gone into the Bay of Mapallo in quest of the
French Men that were gone ashore upon those Islands, which I have already said,
are there, and that in her return she was to carry the President of Guatimala
and his Wife to Panama.

On the 25th. we weighed and sailed for the Isle of C^cas, which stands North
and South of Realeg^o, an hundred Leagues distance: We had a South-west Wind,
and sailed West, North-west: On the 30th. we discovered Land, we pinched upon
the Wind, that we might know what place it was; we found toward Evening, 'twas
the Isle of Malpalla that stands forty Leagues Southwards of that of St.
John's, and from thence we sailed to the Bay of Mapalla instead of going to the
Isle of Cocas, from whence the Wind blew, and consequently was contrary to us.

From this day forward to the 11th. of July we had the same Southwest Wind,
which allayed not but when it blew from the East and South: On the 13th we took
our Latitude, and found we were thirty Leagues out at Sea from Realeg^o, and
steared North to get to Land: On the 16th. at Noon we discovered the Mountains,
and put into the Cape for fear of being discovered: On the ^7th. we sent two of
our Canoes to endeavor to take some one Prisoner, that so we might know how
things were before we brought our Ships into the Bay.

In the Evening our Canoes having discovered what Coast it was, returned, and
told it was St. Michael's Bay, whether the Currents had driven us in making the
Cape, and which we took for that of Mapalla, whither we would have gone, and
which stands fourteen Leagues to Windward of the former, which might the more
(...) have been mistak^n from the Sea, in that the Mountain^^ of these two
Bay^^ are very like one another. We lay by to Windward of i^ in the Night, and
on the 18th. (...) out our Canoes, and continuing at the Cape till the 20^^ we
made use of them to go and join our Friends at (...) of the Islands: As we
entered in on the 23d. we (...) taken with a breeze of Wind that separated us
from (...) another, and of five Sail, whereof our Fleet consisted, we had no
more than two of the least and weakest of our Ships left together, but we did
not lose sight of the other three, though they were got very far to Leeward, and
overtaken with a Calm. In the mean time we Ancho^ed at the Isle of Tigers,
which is the nearest to the Mouth of it.

On the 24th. about Eight in the Morning we discovered three Sail of Ships that
doubled the Point of Harina, which is to Windward of that Bay, and Ten Leagues
to Leeward of Realeguo; we presently fired a Paterero to call in our Canoes who
were ashore to take in Water* As soon as they were come on Board, we made ready
and bore up to those Ships with a full Wind, though we had then but very little
of it.

Those three Vessels, which were a Galley and two Pirogues, The Free-booter's
Fight with some Spanish Vessels.
bore also toward us, though they saw us (...) but as soon as we were got out
and discovered by them, they doubled the Cape upon us with their Sails and
Oa^^* and the two Pirogues that sailed better than the Galley, got behind us,
and fired fifteen Cannon-shot upon us* but as our Arms could reach them, these
Pirogues were forced to fall a Stern, and to wait for their Galley: When she
had joined them, they held a Council, and then put out to Attack us, our Ships
not being able to give us any Relief, put to the Cape to wait for us; we fought
them all along till we had rejoyned our Vessels, which we did about two in the
Afternoon, when the Spaniards left us, to go bury their Dead upon the Island
where we had been to take in Water when we first discovered them; they did us
some Damage in our main Mast and Rigging, and wounded few of our Men: Toward
Evening a Wind arose from the Sea, and we sailed in quest of them, but they
kept to the Shore.

On the 25th. we passed round the Island in search for our Canoes, which the
Enemy's Galley sought for also, rightly imagining they were ashore, as not
having seen (...) with us during the Action: About two in the A^^^noon they
discovered us, and coming out from under their Covert, gave us the Signal,
which we on our part answered; they had hid themselves there for four Hours,
expecting our coming, and had a full sight of the Engagement, but could not
possibly any more than the (...) of our Ships, come in to our Assistance. The
Spani^^ds who saw us take them with us, durst not hinder it, though they were
at Anchor very near them, then we attempted with one of our Ships to Board the
Enemy's Galley, but she saved her self upon the Flats, where our Ships could
not come near her. On the 26th. we Anchored at an Island in the Bay, where we
put two of our Vessels to Careen, while the other three guarded them. On the
28th. we saw a Canoe under white Colors, crossing from the main Land to the
Islands, where one of ours met and took her: It was a Spanish Captain, who
believing us to be his own People, came to congratulate the Commander upon the
Victory, which he from the Shore thought they had got over us. We put him upon
the Wrack, to know whether he came not by some wile or other to draw us into a
Snare laid for us by the Galley, (...) the Greek Captain had formerly done; But
he solemnly protested it was not so, and informed us, that there (...) a
Pirogue with thirty Men in the same Bay where we were, who were gone ashore
some time since, and (...) fought in the raze of Savannas against six hundred
Spaniards, whose Captain, called don Albarado, who was accounted the bravest
and most valiant Man in the Province, they had killed, and that when we had met
with their Galley and two Pirogues, there had Eight ^^ndred Armed Men come, not
with a design to look after us, but to fight those thirty French Men, who could
not be conquered by his six hundred Countrymen; in admirable instance of the
Valor of the Spaniards in those (...).

The Day of Mapalla is a very curious place, and full of (...) great Islands, A
Description of the Bay of Mapalla.
not inferior in Beauty to those of (...); they were formerly Inhabited, and
there are still (...) Buroughs there which the People have forsaken, by (...)
of the Descents of the Free-booters: As for Anchorage, it is very good here, but
no good shelter to be found in this place from any corner of the Wind, great
Blasts whereof come over those great Mountains that are at the bottom of it, so
that there are very few Cables that are proof against them.

On the 6th. of August, Other Adventures.
one of our Men, who was Hunting upon the Island where we were Careening, found
two Men who had been there for the space of Eight Days to observe our Motions,
and who taking us to be Spaniards, durst not come near us: They were two French
Men belonging to the Pirogue of which the forementioned Officer spoke to us,
and who had defended themselves so valiantly against the six hundred Spaniards;
we found them to be of the number of Fourscore and five, who had separated
themselves under Captain Grogniet, to go to Callinfornia; they presently gave
Notice to the other Eight and twenty, who came and joined us, and of whom we
learnt that they had saved themselves upon this Island, after they had been
chased a whole Night by the Spanish Galley, that did not sail so well as their
Pirogue. They told us also they had gone down a matter of forty Leagues to
Windward of Acapulto, without being able any more than once to go ashore, and
that then they ran a great risque, so boisterous is the Sea in those Parts,
wherewith they were so discouraged, that they had forsaken fifty five of their
Companions, in order to come and find us out, and left them to continue their
Course for Callinfornia.

Having made an end of our Careening, on the 10th. we made every thing ready
for our Departure, after we had given those thirty Men room in our Ships: We
sailed from the Coast of Acapulto with a design to find out the other fifty
five Men spoken of, who were to make a Descent there, and to rid them from a
miserable state whereunto, in all appearance, they had gone to plunge
themselves, without any hopes of Retrieve, being too small a Company to find
out Provisions (whereof they stood in great need) in the best Peopled Country
upon the Continent, where also it could not be believed they should arrive,
having but a little sorry Bark under them, that could not carry them far
without splitting in two.

We had at our Departure an Easterly breeze, wherewith we were favored till we
came to the height of Sansonnat; from the Fifteenth to the One and twentieth we
were be calmed all along in the Daytime, and the Winds were so high in the
Nights, that we could not carry our Sails; on the 22d. we had a pretty good
Gale from the South-East; and on the 27th. we drew near Land, to know where we
were: We found our selves to Windward of the Bay of Tecoantepequa, and put out
our Canoes to go in thither, while at the same time we appointed our Ships to
Rendezvous in the Port of Vatulco, which is twenty Leagues to Leeward: We came
very near Land in the Evening, but the Sea runs so high along that Coast, that
it was impossible to go ashore.

On the 29th, we found an Embarking-place, where there was a very strong
Entrenchment guarded by a considerable number of Spaniards, and supposing it
would cost us dear to go ashore in that place, we sailed two Leagues to
Leeward, where the Sea was somewhat more paci^ick, but found here also about
three hundred Men upon an Eminence waiting for us: We detached fifty of ours to
go and meet them, but the Spaniards after having made a foolish Discharge fled;
However, we took two of their Number, and asked them, whither that way led,
upon which we were; they told us it would bring us to the Town of
Tecoantepequa, according to whose Name that Bay was called, and that we had but
four Leagues to it: We lay next Night upon the Road, under the Canopy of
Heaven, according to our usual Custom; next day, which was the thirtieth, we
resolved to go to the said Town, and directed our Course that way, in such a
manner, that about two in the Afternoon we had a sight of the place from an
Ascent, which is about half a League off.

As it is encompassed and beset every way with Eight Suburbs, Their Adventures
i^ their march to Tecoantepequa, which they take.
it seemed to be so large, that we were a long time deliberating with our
selves whether so small a number as we were ought to go thither, as being no
more than an hundred and fourscore Men, whereas there was three thousand of the
Enemy in the place: In the mean time the extreme necessity we were reduced to
for want of Provisions, pressed us to advance, and would not let us deliberate
long upon the Danger that lay before us, so that all our Apprehensions being
reduced to the fear we had of starving to Death, we pursued our March to go and
confront our Enemies.

When we had marched about half an hour, we found our selves near the Town, and
upon the brink of a great and very rapid River, which separates it from four of
the Suburbs that adjoyn to it; this River we crossed over, being up in the Water
to the middle, in spite of the Spaniards who were entrenched on the other
side, to dispute the Passage with us, which they were forced to leave open for
us, after a good hours sharp Dispute: As soon as we were Masters of the
Intrenchment, we entered the Town, where after we had fought hand in hand with
the Enemy, like Men enraged with Hunger, we became Masters of the place of Arms
about four in the Afternoon: But our Work was not yet done, for the Enemy
having again entrenched themselves in a very fine Abbey, built in the manner of
a Platform that commanded the Town; we went to the number of Fourscore Men to
dislodge them, which was so readily executed, that having chased them thence,
we made our Court of Guard of it, and then every one endeavored to satisfy
that Hunger wherewith we were extremely pinched.

When we were got into this Town, A Description of Tecoantepequa.
we found it yet much more spacious and larger than it appeared to be unto us,
from the forementioned Ascent; its Houses are well built, the Streets very
strait, and the Churches exceeding stately and Ornamental: The Abbey of St.
Francis, from whence we drove the Enemy, appeared more like unto a Fort than a
Religious Convent, and it was built to serve for that use in case of need.

On the 31st. we sent to require them to Ransom their Town, or else we would
burn it; we had no Answer returned, which made us conjecture they had a mind to
come and Attack us, for which they had so much the more Advantage, in that the
River which began from the time that we passed it, to overflow, was about to
(...) us in; wherefore we decamped and lay in one of the Suburbs that stands on
the other side, where we continued to the third of September; when we departed
to return to our Canoes, without reaping any Advantage by the taking of this
Town: We reimbarked on the fifth, and went to join our Ships in the Port of
Vatulco, where we arrived the Ninth: On the 15th. we went off again in our
Canoes without a Guide, and having landed, marched ten or a dozen Leagues up
the Country, where we took diverse Villages, and in one of them the old
Governor of Merida with his Family, who was retired to this place, and who
promised us a quantity of Provision for his Ransom, in expectation whereof we
carried him on Shipboard, where we arrived on the 25th. The same day about Ten
in the Morning we discovered a Ship, and put out with our Canoes to know what
she was; she bare to the Cape, and put up Spanish Colors, but as the Sea ran
very high, and that our Canoe could not well weather it, we returned again into
Port. Now this Ship believed 'twas her Colors that hindered us to come on Board
her, wherefore she took the same down, and put up a white Flag in the room of
them; we (...) the same time fitted up our Galley to go and hale her, but she
could never get out of the Port, whereupon she failed away, and as our Ships
were much out of order, we could not follow her. She was, undoubtedly, a
Friga^e built in the North-Sea, but it was impossible for us to know what
Nation she belonged to.

The Sea being calm on the 26th. we went with our Galley about twenty Leagues
to Windward of Acapulto, to see if the abovementioned Ship were not put in to
Port, we judging by her Rigging she wanted to put in some-where to Land; But we
returned without any News of her: We waited till the fourth of November for the
Ransom of the Governor, which we did not overmuch press for, as finding in
this Port and Parts adjacent, plenty of Victuals, particularly of Tortoises,
which we had there in great Numbers, and Hatto's, that are to be met with (...)
and down frequently here, furnished us with all other Necessaries; besides that
we had here a place of Security from the Insults of the Spaniards.

It Is impossible to go ashore from Sansonat to Acapulto, (...) it be in the
Ports, or Bays; and though that which they call the Salt Pits be difficult of
Access, because of the smallness of it, and that the Sea there runs very high,
yet they esteem it a Bay for all that: It Is the next you meet with after
Sansonnat, and stands twenty Leagues to Windward of that of Tecoantepequa,
which the Spaniards set down also for a Bay in their Charts, tho, it be so far
from being deep, that it can scarce be distinguished from the rest of the
Coast: There is a Lake at the bottom of this last place bearing the same Name,
with which it had formerly a Communication, but whose Mouth at present is
stopped up by a Bank of Sand which the Waves have drove thither: This Lake hems
in (...) Islands that are not far distant from one another, and all of them
very near the Mouth thereof: Some years since the Hourqua of Acapulco that went
to the East Indies, in its return entered into this Lake through the Bay, and
we understood that Some Spaniards had entered by the other end of it into the
River of Vastaqua, that discharges it self into a Bay of New Spain, and
consequently to the North-Sea.

When this Hourqua returns from the Phillipine Islands, An Account of the
Hourqua.
where the Spaniards drive a great Traffic, it is one of the richest Vessels
that sails upon the Ocean; it is of a prodigious bigness, and built so strong,
that she is afraid of nothing but Land and Fire, she is provided with forty of
pieces Cannons, whereof one half is of no use to her, for her Lading makes her
sink so deep in the Water, that her Battery between the two Decks is rendered
useless: She goes out yearly from the Port of Acapulco, convoyed with a Patach
of Twenty-eight Guns, and laden with several sorts of Merchandises that she
carries to the Inhabitants of those Islands, who by way of barter for the same,
give a great deal of those curious China, and Iapan-ware we see in Europe, and
what is yet more valuable, Pearls, Gold-Dust, and precious Stones.

This Ship had great Advantage in making this Voyage, that is, that in making
choice of a proper Season, she goes, and returns in a Twelve-Months time,
comprehending the while they stay in that Country, without being put to the
trouble of veering about, and sifting the Sails: and it is beyond dispute, that
she cannot be met with by any that wait for her, before the Port of Acapulco at
a certain season of the year, which I shall take no notice of here, for Reason
I have spoken of in the beginning of this Journal.

I shall not forget also to remark in this place, that (...) will be so much
the more easy to take her, in that when she returns from those parts with the
Patach, all her Crew are in so sickly, and dying a Condition, that (...) four
hundred Men that make up the Compliment, the^^ is not one fourth of them in a
Condition to defend it and this Distemper which they call Scorbut, never (...)
them in their return from the Phillipines, insomuch, (...) a Ship which goes
from the North-Sea with a design (...) look after this Hourqua, might in less
than Eighteen Months time, bating the Perils and Accidents she might be liable
to at Sea, return with immense Riches.

About twenty Leagues to Leeward of the Bay of Tecoantepequa stands the Port of
Vatulco, A Description of the Port of Vatulco.
so small, that it cannot contain above ten or a dozen Ships, but yet they must
have an Anchor fore and aft, for if they had no more than an Anchor out at the
Forecastle, they would fall foul upon one another, in endeavoring to avoid it
upon the change of Wind or Tide.

At the entrance into the Port, which is very narrow, there is a Whirlpool to
Leeward, which the Spaniards call Bofadera, whereinto the Water enters in so
violent a manner, that it makes a noise that may be heard above four Leagues
off.

Four Leagues lower there is another Port where you cannot Anchor with safety,
because of the Rocks, whereof the bottom of it is full: In the passage to it
stands a great Rock, called the Fourillon, which is all over as well as
continually so covered with those sports of Birds which we had before seen in
the River of Villia, that there remains nothing of the Surface of it to be
seen; and a little further is an Island, called Sacrifice.

About Eight Leagues lower, there are three small Ports of a Leagues distance
one from another, whereof that called the Angels is the best; it is no difficult
matter to find the passage to it, provided you ^ail along the Shore, but it is
impossible to perceive it from the Main; there is a Rock stands at the Mouth of
it that has an hole therein resembling a large Gate: From this Port to
Acapulco, which is sixty Leagues off, we have no Harbor.

The Country which extends it self from the Bay of Salt Pits as far as
Acapulco, is that upon the South Sea that is best Peopled, and where there are
moreover several famous and very rich Towns; more Gold Mines are also found
there than in Peru, though the Metal is not so fine; and those of Tinsigal
alone, are more valued by the Spaniards than the Mines of Potosi, and therefore
(...) not without reason that this Western Coast is called by the Name of
Costa-Rica, though in our Geographical Maps they bestow this Name only upon a
small part of this vast Tract of Land.

On the 7th. The Free-booters take the Town of Muemeluna.
we went to make a Descent upon a little Town, called Muemeluna, which is Eight
Leagues to Windward of Vatulco, and Six up the Country, about four Leagues from
the Sea side, and two from the Town; we found a very strong Entrenchment made
upon a Rock that stands upon the River, but the Spaniards therein made no great
Resistance, no more than in the Town where we completed our Victualling: The
Prisoners we took, told us, that about a Month before they had seen a Frigate
pass by, that sent a small Canoe with seven or eight Men in it to their
Embarking-place, where they found some Spaniards, who made them Embark again
with so much Precipitation, that one of their Men was drowned, and whom,
indeed, we found dead upon the Shore, whither the Sea had thrown him, with his
(...) lying some paces from him, which should not have (...) so long there, no
more than the dead Carcass, if the Spaniards had espied it: For they believe
themselves revenged, when they cut into pieces, or burn the dead Body of an
Enemy; and we were assured, that when we buried any of our Men in their
Country, they dig them up when we were gone, if they knew the place, for to
exercise their Cruelty upon those Carcasses, which when alive they could not
make us feel.

We returned on the 16th. aboard our Ships, and on the 20th. being not able all
along the Coast to hear any News of the Five and Fifty Men we were in quest of
we weighed Anchor, and directed our Course for the Bay of Mapalla, where we
were minded to agree upon the place by which we were to repass to the
North-Sea: On the 21st. we had a North Wind that carried us to (...) Latitude
where the West Winds Reign, and this continued to the 23d. when we were
becalmed: On the first of December at Night we had a Storm which separated us
one from another, and thus we continued alone* and without any Water, for all
our Casks were run out, whereby we were reduced to the greatest Extremeity ^
though we were but two Leagues from the Shore: But (...) was impossible for us
to go ashore, for it is a Bank of Sand that reaches from the Bar of St. Mark as
far a^ Sansonnat, for the space of about Fourscore Leagues where the Sea breaks
with great violence: Believing ourselves on the Sixth to be to Windward of this
Bank, Arm^d our Pirogue to go near the Shore, and look ou^ for a place where
the Sea was Calmer; next day one of our Men being more in patient than the
rest, and egged on with Drought that tormented him four days, swam to Land, but
thinking to return in the same manner, he was drowned without our being able to
succor him, notwithstanding all the cry he made unto us to save him: On the
9th. in the beginning of the Night we thought to have seen a little Bay, before
which we Anchored, that we might know in the Morning what it was, during which
time we heard the firing of about six hundred Mosquets on the Land. As soon as
Day^light appeared, on the 10th. we saw that what we took for a Bay was a kind
of a Covert that stands Fifteen^Leagues to Leeward of Sansonnat, where we could
see no likelihood of entering in. In the mean time we saw a very pretty Ship
upon the Stocks in that place, which made us conclude there must of necessity
be a Passage for her to come out; we Anchored pretty near the Rock, to wait for
a Tide, during which time, a Wind blew from the Sea, and we adventured with the
help of our Sails and Oars to get in, where we were saluted with three Waves
that half filled our Pirogue in the very sight of the Spaniards, who watched
our entering in.

We put up to one side of the said Covert, and fired for the space of half an
hour upon their Magazines, built by the side thereof, without their returning
us one single shot; But at last we being tormented with violent Drought, which
we were desirous to allay what ever it cost us, we hois'd up our Sail, and run
up our Pirogue before them, who believing we were going to their Town, that was
but half a League off, they went off. But as we were no more than two and
twenty Men, instead of running after them, we improved their Flight, in filling
our Casks with Water, and to furnish our selves with what Provision we found in
the Magazines, and some of that Ship's Rigging which were more necessary for
ours; but not daring all at once to lade our Pirogue with them, for fear of
sinking in her Passage out; we spent the Night on the other side of those
Magazines, that we might be under Covert from the Surprises of our Enemies, for
we computed very well by the six hundred Musket shot we had heard, that there
was a great many Armed Men in that place.

On the 11th. we departed from under the Covert, to go and ^oyn our Ship, which
we found on the 12th. in the Morning lying at Anchor Eight Leagues to Windword
of (...), where she had found the Sea somewhat more favorable: We spent that
day to take in Water, and sent twenty Men to take a Village that was about half
a League from the Seaside, from whence we returned the sanie day with some
Refreshments, that put (...) into our Ship's Crew, now much weakened with the
Thirst they endured, as well as we who were in the Pirogue, as also with
Hunger, which failed not to wast us away, though we had Victuals to satisfy
the same; but we durst not eat for fear of being made dry: We weigh^d Anchor in
the Evening with a West Wind, and on the Fifteenth arrived in the Bay of
Mapalla, They arrive at Mapalla.
where we found the rest of our Vessels at Anchor near one of those Islands
that lie within it.

I am to observe, that as long as we were going up this Coast, that continually
in the Nightime there blew Winds from the Land, Some account of the Winds in
these parts.
which were very favorable to Sailors, provided they were not far out at Sea,
for Ten Leagues off there could be but very little of it felt, and there are
certain Seasons when it blows so violently, that they are obliged to lower
their Sails, and even to furle: On the 17th. Consultation about returning to
the North-Sea.
we had a Consultation together about what Passage, according to the Prisoner's
Relations, was less dangerous for us, to return to the North-Sea over Land; it
was thought our best way was by Segovid, seeing we had no more than sixty
Leagues to go before we came to the head of a River, upon which they told us,
we might go down to the North-Sea whereunto it discharged it self; and that in
the way we were to take by Land, we could have no more than five or six
thousand Men to deal with, and that the way was very good to carry our wounded
and sick Men along with us: But we were not fully convinced of the sincerity of
this Advice, we sent two of our Canoes to Shear to take some other Prisoners,
that so we might see whether they should confirm, or contradict this
Information, and thereby be the more fully instructed concerning those things
that might be an Obstruction to our Passage, and others that might facilitate
the same.

We went a Shore on the 18th. to the number of Seventy Men, and marched all day
long without meeting one Soul, as we did also the next day till Noon, without
any more discovery than in the preceding one, wherewith we were so fatigued,
that we resolved to return back again; And here we may add, that the greatest
part of our Men were not overcontent to repass by Land to the North-Sea,
because of the five or six thousand Men wherewith we were threatened, wherefore
we left those that were minded, to return to their Canoes, and Eighteen of us,
who found our selves less weary than the rest, staid behind: We followed a
great Road which we met with soon after they had left us, and had not walked
above an hour, when we took three Horsemen, whom, when we had asked where we
were, they told us, that about a quarter of a League off there was a little
Town, called Chiloteca, wherein there were four hundred white Men, besides
Negroes, Mulaters, and Indians, and assured us, we had not been yet discovered:
We had a mind to run after our Men, to acquaint them with this Account, A
handful of Free-booters take Chiloteca,
and engage them to go back with us to the Town; but the Apprehensions we were
under of being discovered, and thereby giving the Inhabitants time to put
themselves into a posture of Defense, hindered us to do so, and made us
undertake perhaps the boldest, most resolute, and if you will, the rashest
Action that could be thought of; which was, that being no more of us than
Eighteen Men, as I have said before, we should adventurously enter that Town,
where we surpised and frightened the Spaniards to that Degree, that we took
the Tenient and other Officers, to the number in all of fifty Persons,
including the Women, Prisoners: They were seized with such a pannick fear,
supposing us to be far more numerous than we were, that all the rest would
doubtless have been taken and bound by us, had it not been for their Horses,
which are always at hand, which they mounted to ride away upon. And so it was
as we would have it, for if they had had the Courage to stay behind, they might
have cut out Work for us, whereof we had already but too much, which was to
watch our Prisoners.

We asked the Tenient where the Galley of Panama was, Being attackt by the
Spaniards, they kill their Prisoners
who made Answer, she lay at Anchor in the Embarking-place of Carthage, which
is Caldaira, where she waited for us, as hoping we would pass that way to go to
the Nort-Sea, and that the King of Spain's Ship the St. Lorenzo was in the Port
of Realeg^o, mounted with thirty pieces of Cannon, and four hundred Men on
Board, to hinder us to come near that place which they began to settle in
again: As we had a desire to lie in th^^ little Town where we now were; we
farther asked him what number of Men we should have occasion for to guard us,
if we should stay there, he told us, there would be six hundred Men next day
there, but that they had no more Firearms than for two hundred. The Spaniards,
who, during this time, were a little recovered of their Astonishment, being got
together, entered into the Town again, and after we have several times
conflicted with them, we entrenched our selves in the Church, where we had put
our Prisoners, who seeing us go in with Precipitation, believed their People
pursued us close, and were just upon falling on us; which made them so bold, as
to run to the Swords, and other Arms we had got together, wherewith they
wounded us one Man. We presently got to the Doors, and from thence fired upon
them so long, till there were no more than four Men and their Wives left alive
of them: At the same time we mounted the Horses which we had taken, and with
our four Prisoners of each Sex, went away with as little noise as we could,
which the other Spaniards observing, they sent one to treat with us, but we
refused, and fired upon him, for fear, if he came too near us, he should come
to know how few we went. Next day, which was the 20th. we rejoyned our other
People, who had rested themselves at an Hatto they had met with in their
return, and who gave us Assistance. against six hundred of those Spaniards who
followed in the Rear of us; Then we gave the Women Prisone^ their liberty: On
the 21st. we went on Board our Canoes, and next day reach^d our Ships, where we
interr^^gated our four new Prisoners concerning the Passage w^ had projected;
but they laid so many Difficulties before us, that we grew almost out of
conceit with it: But yet, when we considered, we must either make our way
through, or end our days miserably in an horrible want of all convenient
Necessaries, They resolve to return to the North Sea by Land.
and in an Enem^^ Country where we grew weaker every day by the loss (...) our
Men, we resolved to hazard all to get out of it* insomuch, that being no
longer daunted at the dangers we were to run in this Passage, and being
persuaded it would be better for us to die with our Swords in our Hands, than
to pine away with Hunger; We made all things ready for this Journey, and to the
end we might cut off from the most Timorous, any desires they might have to
return to their Ships, if their Minds should alter, in reference to their going
along with us, we ran our Vessels ashore, except our Galley and Pirogues, which
we reserved to carry us off the Island where we were to the Continent.

On the 25th. we formed four Companies consisting of seventy Men each, making
altogether two hundred and fourscore; and as for the forlorn Hope, we agreed
for to draw out ten Men out of each, and to relieve them every Morning: We also
made a Contract among our selves, that those who should be lamed in the
Encounters we might have with the Enemy in our way, should have the same
Recompense as formerly, that is, ^ thousand pieces of Eight a Man, that the
Horses we should take, should be divided between the Companies for the ease of
all our Men, and for those that were incommoded above any of the rest: That
those that stragled and should be lamed, should have no Recompense made them,
and that Violence, Cowardice, and Drunkenness should also be punished as
formerly.

Before I leave these Seas, The reason of their Necessities.
I Will spare the Reader the trouble of asking how we came to endure so much
Hunger, Miseries, and Fatigues in these parts, since I have said upon several
occasions, that the Country is so good and pleasant as well as fruitful in the
Production of all tings necessary for the support and confort of human Life: As
to this, there needs no more than observing that since our separation from the
English at the Isle of St. John, we were all along so illy accommodated with
Shipping, that we were forced to keep continually to the Coast, and by
consequence in sight of the Spaniards, who discovering even the least Motions
we made, had almost always time to remove all their Effects out of the way,
before we made our Descent, and left us nothing but what they could not carry
away, which was many times but very inconsiderable, whereas, had we had but one
good Ship to put out far to Sea, they could not have discovered us, and we
should have surprised them continually in our Descents, where we could have
wanted nothing, not only that was necessary, but also pleasurable, besides the
Wealth we must have carried away in a short time.

This want of Shipping, under which we labored, we so advantageous to our
Enemies, and the consequence thereof they knew so well, that the People of
(...) sent no more Ships to the Western Coast where we were for fear some of
them might fall into our Hands and Traded with one another no otherwise than by
Land.

The same Reason also hindered us to go up to (...) Coast of Peru, where we
could not have failed of having Ships, seeing they sailed up and down there
every day, and drove a great Trade with one another, as knowing we were not so
near unto their Country; So that it is easy from what I have remarked to
conjecture, that for want of these helps which were of so much importance to us
in these Seas; we must also very often stand in need of all those things which
we could not but with the greatest difficulty have without them, wherefore to
make any thing of it in these Climates, and to raise a considerable Fortune,
without much danger and sufferings; there needs no more than to be provided
with a good Ship, and for the better convenience, Victualled for some time,
that so there may be no necessity of going ashore to seek it.

On the 27th. we discovered a Ship passing along between the Islands, which
made us send our Galley and Pirogue to see what she was (...), but as soon as
we came (...) ^hot of her, she took down the white Flag, and put out Spanish
Colour^, and withal, gave us ten or a dozen Guns; we returned to the Shore to
give our People notice of it; not doubting, but if that Ship came to an Anchor
in the same place, she would destroy our Pirogues: We sent them with our
Baggage and Prisoners up to the Flats that are behind the Island where we were.

This Vessel about Noon came in with the Tide, and Anchored within half a
Cannon-shot of ours that were run ashore, under the Covert of which we fought
against them with two pieces of Cannon till it was night, but as the Enemy had
no other aim then to ruin our Ships, they put them this first day out of a
condition to sail, (which was what our selves had a mind to) and then put
farther off form the Shore.

On the 28th. in the Morning they drew nearer again, and began to fight us,
which made us shelter our selves behind the Points of the Rocks that run out
into the Sea, from whence our Arms carried aboard them; upon this they were
forced to send their shallop under the favor of their Cannon, to take away an
Anchor that was nearer to Shore than their Ship, but being prevented therein,
they cut off the Cable that held it, and put off again; At last, concluding
with our selves that this Ship would not leave us so hastily, we sent an
hundred Men in the Evening to the Continent before us, that they might
endeavor to take some Horses, on which we might lay our disabled Men, with
orders afterward to return and wait for us upon the Seaside in the same place
where they went ashore, (which was a kind of a Port we had assigned them) in
case they had returned before our Arrival there. And for fear the Spanish Ship
should suspect, from the running of ours a ground, the design we had to go to
the North-Sea, and that the Men on Board her would send to the Continent to
give the People notice to put themselves in a readiness to hinder us; we
counterfeited all night long the caulking of our Ships, that so we might fully
possess them with a belief, that we were careening them, which wrought so
effectually upon them, that in the Morning they failed not to come up to
destroy with their Cannon, the Work they fancied we had been doing during the
night.

On the 29th. their Ship took Fire, which made them put farther off, A notable
amusement to facilitate their ^cape.
where they extinguished it: On the 30th. we made use of a new Stratagem to
amuse our Enemies, and take away all manner of suspicion from them, that we
designed to be gone, which was to charge our Guns, Grenades, and four pieces
of Cannon, whereunto we tied lighted Matches of different lengths, that so
having their effect in our Absence one after another, the Spanish Ship's Crew
might still believe we were upon the Island, from whence we parted in the
Twilight, as secretly as ever we could, with all our Prisoners, whom we
reserved for no other use than to carry our Chirurgeon's Medicines, Carpenter's
Tools, and the wounded Men we might have in this Passage.

On the Is It. of January, They Provide for their Journey.
in the year 1688, we arrived on the Continent, and on the Evening of the same
day, the Party which we had sent before to look for Horses, came thither
likewise: They had taken Sixty Eight with several Prisoners, who, without any
Violence offered them, told us, they did not think it advisable we should
Travel through Segovia, because the Spaniards had Intelligence we had made
choice of that Province to (...) through: But as we had already resolved upon
the Matter, and that our Ships could be of no longer use unto us all that they
could say to the contrary, did not hinder us to persevere therein. All our
People at the same time packed up every Man his Charge, and put their Silver
into Bags, which they thought they could carry with their Ammunition: Those who
had too much of the former, gave it to those who had lost theirs at Play, for
to carry, conditioning with them, that they should return the one half back to
the Owner, in case it should please God to bring them safe to the North-Sea.

As for my self, The Author's Device to save his Treasure.
I must say, I was none of the worst provided, and though my Charge was lighter
than others, yet it was not for all that less considerable for the value,
seeing I had converted thirty thousand pieces of Eight into Gold, Pearls, and
precious Stones. But as the best part of this was the Product of Luck I had at
Pl^^* some of those who had been losers as well in playing against me as
others, being much discontented at the^ Losses, plotted together to the number
of Seventeen or Eighteen, to murder those that were the Richest amongst us. I
was so happy as to be timely advertised of it by some Friends, which did not a
little disquiet my Mind, for it was a very difficult Task, for a Man, during so
long a Journey, to be able to secure himself from being surprised by those who
were continually in the same Company, and with whom he must eat, drink, and
sleep, and who could cut off whom they pleased of them, in the Conflicts they
might have with the Spaniards, by shooting us during the Hurry, which yet they
executed in another manner, as may be seen in d^e place: The apprehensions I
had of this Conspiracy did not hinder me to retain so much Judgment and
presen^e of Mind, as to fall presently upon such Methods as I thought most
rational and secure for the preservation of my Life, and which effectually
saved it, which was to deposite some of what I possessed in the hands of dive^
persons, and that in the presence of all the rest, upon condition they should
restore unto me such a proportion as I agreed with them for, when we were come
upon the Coast of Domingo. By this means I rid my self of the care I should
continually have had of keeping upon my Guard, without exposing them much
neither, who carried my Effects, the which being divided diversely, and to
different Persons, they had to do with too many People to compass their ends.
It Is true, I paid dear for this Precaution; but what will not a Man do to save
his Life?

CHAP. VI.
The return of the Freebooters from the South to the North-Sea, over the
Continent, by another way than that by which they got thither.
ON the Second day of January, in the Morning, after we had said our Prayers,
and sunk our Pirogues, least the Spaniards should have any benefit of them, we
set out, and lay that Night by the Seaside; we stopped next day about Noon at
an Hatto to Bait: On the 4th. we lay upon a Platform that extends it self upon
the tops of several very high Mountains where the Spaniards, notwithstanding
all the precautions we had taken, were advertised of our departure, and failed
not to let us have their Company, keeping themselves always in our Flanks and
Rear.

On the 8th. we lay at another Hatto belonging to the Tenient of Chiloteca,
about which place the Enemy began to Barricade the Ways: We rested on the Sixth
for an hour and better at an Estancia to Bait, and upon a Bed in an Hall there,
we found the following Letter directed unto us in these Words:

WE are very glad that you have made choice of our Province for your Passage
through, A Letter writ to the Freebooters.
homewards; but we are sorry you are no better laden with Silver; however, if
you have occasion for Mules to carry your Baggage, we will send them to you, we
hope to have the French General Grogniet very quickly in our Power, and we will
leave you to consider what is like to become of the Soldiers.

We saw clearly by this Letter, that they knew nothing of the Death of
Grogniet, since they believed he was still our Commander, and that they had no
knowledge of him, but by the Account that had been given them by the three Men
that had run away from him to them, when they failed of getting the Gold of the
Mines of Tinsigal.

On the 7th. we met with an Ambuscade of the Enemy, The Spaniards burn the Road.
whom our Vanguard forced to retire, and lay in the Evening at an Hatto: The
Spaniards, who left no means unattempted to destroy us, burnt all the Provision
that was in our way, and also when we entered into any Savannas where the Grass
was very dry, they went to Windward o^ us to set it on fire, whereby we were
very much incommoded, and our Horses were even stifled with the Smoke: As we
were sometimes obliged to stay till the Fire had burnt up all, to go forwards,
this very much retarded our March, and this was the chief thing the Spaniards
aimed at, that their Men might have leisure to finish a Retrenchment, whereof I
shall quickly have occasion to speak, which they erected unknown to us at some
distance off upon our Road, to which also the Work they cut out for us to
remove the Barricadoes of Trees, wherewith they had encumbered the way,
contributed very much; Insomuch, that not being able to penetrate into their
Designs, we persuaded our selves that they did all this with no other intent
than to chagreen us only, as being not able to do worse unto us; or I should
have rather said, having not the Courage for it.

On the 8th. we passed on to a very fine Sugar-Plantation, and as we were very
desirous to take some Prisoners who might inform us of what was done, all our
Company filed off, and twenty of us staid behind in an House, after they had
set it on Fire, to oblige the Spaniards to come and put it out, when they saw
our Men at a distance from them, and this they failed not to do: But our
Impatience being the means of discovering of us too soon, they thereupon fled;
yet we firing upon them, wounded one, and took him, by whom we understood that
all their Reinforcements were coming together to dispute our Passage, and that
we were going to meet them that came from Tinsigal, who consisted of three
hundred Men.

When we had done with this wounded Man, we re^oyned our main Body, who had
halted to wait for us, and then jogged on till we came to a great Borough,
where we found those three hundred Men, who afterward were our continual
Guard, for they gave us Morning and Evening the Diversion of their Trumpets,
but 'twas like the Music of the Enchanted Palace of Psicha, who heard it
without seeing the Musicians, for ours marched on each side of us in places so
covered with Pine-Trees, that it was impossible to perceive them.

We lay this Evening about a quarter of a League from the said Borough, upon
an Ascent according to our usual manner, who never encamped but upon high
ground, or in the Race of Savannas, for fear of being hemmed in. We decamped on
the 9th. in the Morning, after we had reinforced our advanced Guard with forty
Men more, who were appointed to fire their Muskets at the Entries, or Avenues
of the Woods, that we might have a sight of the Spaniards, in case they laid
any Ambuscades for us: in the mean time, about ten in the Morning we passed on
to a place that was so thin set with Wood, that we might see a considerable
distance from us, and seeing no Enemy appear, we did not fire at all: But we
did not dream that we were seeking for that far before us, which we had at the
sides of us, for the Spaniards who were ranged to the Right and Left of our
way, lying on their Bellies, made their Discharges with so much Precipitation,
that there was no more than one half of our advanced Guard who had time to
answer their firing. They killed us two Men presently, who were turned out of
the way, to pass undiscovered of the Enemy; after which we went to refresh our
selves in a little Town that was in our way, and lay half a League beyond it.

We met with another Ambuscade on the 10th. wherein we were beforehand with
our Enemies, and made them leave us their Horses, then went to bait at another
Borough, and lay a little farther.

On the 11th. The Freebooters enter Segovia.
as we drew near unto the Town of Segovia, we met with a new Ambuscade a little
on this side it, and when we had forced them with our Fusils to retire, we went
into the said Town, being resolved, and disposed to Fight stoutly, as believing
if the Spaniards were minded to try us, they would use their greatest Effort in
the place, but they contented themselves with firing only a few Musket Shot at
us from under the Covert of some Pine-Trees that grow upon the Ascents which
encompass the Town whither they were retired: We found nothing there to eat,
because they had burnt all the Provision in the place.

By good luck we took a Prisoner to conduct us to the River we sought for, and
which was still twenty Leagues off; for as much as those who had been our
Guides as far as Segovia knew not the way any farther.

This Town lies in a bottom, and is so surrounded with Mountains, Segovia
described.
that she looks as if she were laid up in Prison; the Churches here are but
very indifferently built, and the place of Arms is both very considerable, and
very fine; it is an Inland place forty Leagues off from the South Sea. The way
that leads to it from the place where we were, is very difficult, being all
Mountains of a prodigious height, to the tops whereof we must creep with great
danger, and the Valleys consequently are so very narrow here, that for a League
of even Ground you pass over, you have six Leagues of Mountains to go: When we
had past these Mountains we felt a very sharp Cold, and were taken with so
thick a Fog, that even when day appeared, we could not know one another no
otherwise than by our Voices; but that lasted not till above ten in the
Morning, when the Weither cleared up, and the Fog went entirely off; and the
Heat which succeeds the Cold, becomes there very great, as well as in the
Plains, where none of this Cold is felt, till you come directly to the Foot of
the Mountains* Thus were we forced to endure such contrary Seasons, as well
when we Traveled, as when we reposed our selves, that they exposed us to very
great Inconveniences: But the hopes of getting once into our Native Country,
made us patiently to endure all these Toy^^, and served as so many Wings to
carry us.

On the 12th. They continue their Journey.
we departed from this Town, and went up other Mountains, where we had
incredible trouble to clear the ways of those works the Spaniards had prepared
to Barricade them up with; we went to lodge in an Hatto, where they fired very
much in the Night into our Camp.

On the 13th. an hour before Sunrising, we mounted along an Eminence, that
seemed to us to be an advantageous place to Encamp on; from thence we sa^ upon
the edge of a Mountain from which we were separated but by a narrow Valley,
twelve or fifteen Horse^* which we took for some time for Cattle that fed
there, whereat we much rejoiced, as being in hopes we should next Morning have
good Cheer at the cost of those Animals; and that we might be the more assured
of the matter, we sent forty Men thither, who told us (...) their return, that
what we took for Beefs, were all (...) Horses, and that they had observed three
Retrenchments in the same place, about Pistol-shot one from another, which
raising by degrees toward the middle of the same side of the Mountain, The
Spaniards entrenched in a most advantageous Post to obstruct their Passage.
fully barricaded the (...) through which we were to pass next day, and
commanded a small Stream that ran along the said Valley, into which we must
necessarily descend first, there being no other way, nor any likelihood of our
going on one (...) thereof. They saw also a Man, who, as soon as he (...) them,
severely threatened them with his Cutlass, which he held naked in his Hand.

These sad Tidings was a mighty allay to our Joy, (...) the transformation of
those pretended Beefs, on whom our pineing Appetite had depended so much,
affected us to a great degree; but these Thoughts were at (...) to be laid
aside, to make room for to consider (...) we should disentangle our selves from
that place, (...) that without delay, because the Spdniards, who were ^^^ering
together from all the adjacent Provinces, would ^^ckly fall upon our small
Company, who must of necessity be overborn by them, if we staid for them: The
^^ans to effect this were not easily found, and perhaps it ^^uld have appeared
an impossible thing to any other (...) such as we were, who till then had been
successful (...) in all our Undertakings; and to be plain in the (...), we
found our selves now hard put to it: For as I (...) to the rest of our People,
ten thousand Men should not be able to force their way through that
In^^^^chment, without being cut to pieces, as well because of the advantage of
the place, as the number of Spaniards that defended it, which we might compute
by that (...) their Horses; and seeing a single Man could hardly pass ^^one
side of it, there was no likelihood we should be (...) to do it with our Horses
and Baggage, so rough was (...) Country: And indeed, saving the Road it self,
all the (...) was no other than a thick Forest without either ^ays or Paths,
full of sharp Rocks in some places, of Quagmires in others, and embarassed with
a great many Trees that had dropped down to the Ground with Age: And though after
all, we should have found out a way to escape across so many Obstacles, there
was still an indispensible necessity that we should fight with the Spaniards,
that we might be at quiet for the rest of our Journey. This they all agreed to;
but, as they objected unto me, that it was to no purpose to represent these
Difficulties, which of themselves were but too apparent, without proposing some
Method to surmount them, nor to give Counsel without facilitating the execution
thereof: The Author's Advice about forcing them.
I told them, that for my part, I could not see what else we could do, but go
cross those Woods, Precipices, Mountains, and Rocks, how unaccessible soever
they appeared to be, and endeavor to surprise the Enemy in the Rear, and to
gain the Advantage of the Ground from them, by getting above them, where surely
we were not expected; and that I would answer for the Success of the same at
the Peril of my Life, if they would undertake it: That as for our Prisoners,
Horses, and Baggage, wherewith we were encumbered, we ought not to leave them
defenseless, to the Discretion of those Three Hundred Men, who always kept
close to us in our March, and encamped every Evening about a Musket Shot off;
That we ought to leave Fourscore Men to Guard them with all necessary
Precaution, as you will hear by and by, and that such a Number was enough to
fight with so many Spaniards four times told.

We took some time to deliberate hereupon, and a^ length these Expedients, how
hazardous soever they were, being found the most suitable to the Condition we
were in, and I may say, the only ones we had left us, we resolved to lay hold
of them, and put the same in execution.

Sc^rce had we projected the Design, and considered the Ascent where we were,
the Situation of the opposite Mountain, where the Spaniards had made their
Retrenchments, but that above the highest of them we saw a Road, which we took
to be the Continuation of that which they had shut up against us, and turning
to the Right, went winding about the side of the same Mountain, which yet we
could not discover but with difficulty, and by Lights peeping in between the
Trees, which would allow us to see but some traces at a distance from one
another.

As we had not hitherto resolved upon which side to pitch, in order to get
behind those Intrenchments, whether the right or left, this way decided that
point, being well satisfied, that if we could but once cross it, it would (...)
us directly upon the Enemy: But yet that we might not engage our selves
inconsiderately in this Enterprise, where all things went for us, we sent
Twenty (...), while we had any Daylight left, to a Place that was somewhat
higher than that where we were, to cover another Party, whom we had known by
Experience to (...) been very ingenious and expert upon several Occasions, that
so they might pitch upon those Places, by which we might, in the Night, the
more easily get up (...) far as that Road, thereby to go and charge the Enemy
(...) the Rear by break of Day.

As soon as our Men were returned, and gave us an ^ccount of what they had
observed, we made all things (...) for our departure, but we first made that
Station (...) were leaving, a Place of Arms, where we left our Baggage, all the
Prisoners we had, and Fourscore Men (...) them, and this, that the Three
Hundred Spaniards, who continually followed us, as well as those who were
posted behind the Retrenchments, might be (...) we had not left our Camp; and
we gave the (...) that commanded Order to make every Sentinel (...) set, or
relieved in the Nightime, to fire his Fusil, (...) that he should beat the
Drum at the usual hour: (...) told him moreover, that if God gave us the
Victory, (...) should send a Party to bring him off, and that if ^^out an hour
after he heard the Firing at an end, he (...) not see any Body from us, he
should provide for (...) own safety as well as he could.

Things being thus disposed, we said our Prayers as low we could, that the
Spaniards might not hear us, from (...) we were separated but by the Valley we
have (...) of: At the same time we set forward, to the ^umber of. Two Hundred
Men, by Moonlight, it be^^^ now an hour within Night, and about one more (...)
our departure, we heard the Spaniards also at their ^^yers, who knowing we were
encamped very near (...), fired about Six Hundred Muskets into the Air to
(...) us. Besides which, they also made a Discharge at all the Responses of the
Litany of the Saints which they sung. We still pursued our March, and spent the
whole Night (in going down, and then getting up) to advance half a quarter of a
League, which was the distance between them and us, through a Country, as I
have already said, so full of Rocks, Mountains, (...), and frightful
Precipices, that our Posteriors (...) were of more use to us than our Legs, it
being impossible for us to Travel thither otherwise.

On the Fourteenth by break of Day, They (...) over (...) difficult ways to
fall on their Rear.
as we were got (...) the most dangerous parts of this Passage, and had already
seized upon a considerable Ascent of the Mountain, by clambering up to it in
great silence, and leaving the Spaniards Retrenchments on our left, we saw
their Party that went the Rounds; who, thanks to the Foggs that are very rife
in this Country (as I have already said) till Ten a Clock, did not discover us.
As soon as they were gone by, we went directly to the Place where we saw them,
and found it to be exactly the Road we were minded to seize on: When we had
made an Halt for about half an hour to take breath, and that we had a little
Daylight to facilitate our March, we followed this Road by the Voice of the
Spaniards, who were at their Morning Prayers, and we were but just beginning
our March, when unfortunately we met with two Out-Sentinels, on whom we were
forced to Fire, and this gave the Spaniards notice, who thought of nothing less
than to see us come down from above them upon their Retrenchment, since they
expected us no other way than from below: So that those who had the Guard
thereof, and were in Number about Five Hundred Men, finding themselves on the
outside, when they thought they had been within, and consequently open without
any Covert, took the Alarm so hot, that falling all on upon them at the same
time, we made them quit the Place in a moment, and make their Escape by the
favor of the Fogg.

This so much unexpected Morning Music disturbed the whole Economy of their
Designs, They prevail against the Spaniards.
and so thwarted their whole Contrivance, that those of the other two
Retrenchments drew all without the lowermost, where they prepared to defend
themselves; We fought with them a whole hour from under the Covert of the first
Retrenchment, which we had got of them, and which exactly commanded them,
because of its elevated Situation upon the Mountain: But as they gave no
Ground, we began to think that the Shot we discharged, did not reach them,
because of the Fogg which hindered us to discover them, and that we could not
Fire but according to the Discharges that came from them; so that being
resolved to lose our Aim no longer, we advanced, and fell directly upon the
Place from whence they fired: There we fought them stoutly, and they did not
quit the Place, 'till such time as they saw the butts of our Muskets, and that
near them, the sight whereof the Mist had till then taken from them; But then
being much terrified, they left us all, and ran that way which was before their
Retrenchments, which proved very incommodious for them; because that being the
only Place by which they thought we could come at them, they had cut down all
the Trees that grew there, and in the adjacent Parts, as well because they
might obstruct their sight in this Bottom, as hinder us to come on under the
covert of them: And thus the Precaution which they had taken against us, by a
quire contrary Effect was turned upon themselves, insomuch that we had so clear
a view of them from the Retrenchments we had taken, that we did Execution
almost with every Piece we shot. We pursued them after that for some time,
still beating them, but at length being weary, both of running and killing, we
returned to the Retrenchments where the Five Hundred Men, whom we had put to
flight at first, being come back, endeavored to break in upon those whom we
had left to Guard them, but we made them like the rest quickly run away. We
were also fatigued mightily in pursuing of them, for besides that the Ground
was so extraordinary bad, and hard to pass, they had also augmented the
Difficulties, by making use of the Trees which they had felled down, to
barricade and stop up even the least Avenue that was near the Place round about.

We found these Spaniards had so little Mind to give us Quarter, The strange
(...) of the Spaniards.
if they should have the upper hand of us, that even when we took any of them,
they would not as much as ask it at our hands, and to some of them we gave
Quarter in spite of their Teeth, though they did otherwise all that ever they
could to save themselves out of our hands: But at this no man ought to wonder,
for it is a Maxim amongst them in these Parts, and whereof we have had
Experience upon several Occasions, whether it proceed from Pride, or natural
Fierceness of Temper, or because of an Oath they take before their Commander,
before they go to Fight, that they will never submit to ask Quarter of those,
to whom, they have swore they would give none: But we in the mean time being
affected with Compassion upon sight of the great quantity of Blood we saw
running down into the Rivulet, spared the rest, and went a second time into our
Intrenchments, having lost all this while but one Man, and two only wounded.
The Spaniards, among others, lost their General, who was an old Walloon
Officer, who had given them the Plan of this Retrenchment, that would
infallibly have prevailed against us, had we attacked them by the way they
expected. In the mean time another old Captain had advised him to secure their
Rear, but he saw so little likelihood of danger on that side, that he answered,
we must be either Men or Devils; that if we were Men, he defied us to get over
any way in Eight days time; but if we were Devils, tho he should take never so
much care of himself, he must still be taken.

However, at the solicitation of the said Officer, he sent a Party that way to
go the Rounds, and to Post the two Sentinels we spoke of, as they thought most
convenient. The General being searched, there were several Letters found in his
Pockets, which had been writ to him by the Governors of the Province, that set
forth particularly the Number of Men they had sent him; and one, among others,
from the General of Costa Rica, who expressed himself as follows.

A Letter written by the General of the Province of Costa Rica, to the
Commander in Chief in the Retrenchments, Dated January 6th. 1688.
SIR,
I Thought I had made a good Choice, The General of Costa Rica his Letter to
the Chief Officer.
when I committed to you the Conduct of an Affair which ought to re-establish
our Reputation, if you have the better of the Enemy, as you induce me to
believe you will; I was preparing to send you Eight Thousand Men, if you had
not sent me word that Fifteen Hundred was enough. I do not doubt but a Person
that has served so long as you have done, will take care of your Men,
especially since you have to do with a People, from whom there will no Honor
redound to you by over-doing them.

According to the Relation you have given me of your Retrenchments, it is
impossible but those People, with the help of God, must be destroyed: I Advise
you to put a Thousand Men into them, and Two Hundred near unto the River, by
which they hope to get unto the North Sea. In case any of them save themselves
cross the Mountains, Don Rodrigo Sarmado, the new Governor of Tuisigal, ought
to be at the Head of Three Hundred Men, to fall upon the Rear, as soon as ever
they are engaged, for certainly their Baggage must be there. Take good
Measures, for those Devils have a Cunning and Subtilty that is not in use
amongst us.

When you find them advance within the shot of your Harquebusses, let not your
Men fire but by Twenties, to the end your firing may not be in vain, and when
you find them weakened, raise a Shout to frighten them, and fall in with your
Swords; while Don Rodrigo Attacks them in the Rear. I hope God will favor our
Designs, since they are no other than for his Glory, and the Destruction of
these new sort of Turks; Hearten up your Men, though they may have enough of that
according to your Example; They shall be rewarded in Heaven, and if they get
the better, they will have Gold and Silver enough, wherewith these Thieves are
laden.


After we had sung Te Deum upon the Field of Battle, by way of Thanks unto God
for this Victory, we mounted Sixty Men on Horseback to go and give notice to
our other People of the Success the Almighty was pleased to give us. We found
them ready to begin another Engagement against the Three Hundred Spaniards,
whereof we have spoken, who, as soon as they heard that Action at the
Retrenchments begin, and saw how few Men we had left behind in our Camp, were
easily induced to believe we had made our Attack by that disadvantageous way I
have spoke of, as supposing it impossible for us to do it in any other Place*
and that therefore our Ruin must be inevitable; Insomuch, that instead of
entering directly into the Place, which, considering their Number, they could
have carried in a moment, they had so little Courage, that they contented
themselves to send an Officer to our Men that guarded the Baggage, to Parley
with them, whom they stopped for a time, in expectation of some News from us,
that so they might return an Answer conformable to the Intelligence they
received. And thus the Platform I had laid whereon to ground the sufficiency of
Fourscore of our Men for that Work, or rather the Cowardice of the Enemy, was
fully confirmed.

They told us, that as soon as we had begun the Fight, those Three Hundred
Spaniards advanced a little, and having got upon an Emmence that commanded our
Camp, they alighted, and sent them the said Officer to make the following
Harangue to them.

I come hither from my General; A Spanish Officer's Sp^^ch to a part of the
Free booters.
you say, you do not question but you have Force enough, and that you are Men
of Courage, which you have let us know whenever you have been minded to make
your selves Masters of our Country; yet you are not to doubt but the great
numbers of Men we have got together, will overpower you. We are to let you
understand, there are a Thousand Men in that Retrenchment against whom they are
gone to fight, where they are worsted; that we are Three Hundred Men in this
Place, and that Two Hundred are posted near to the River you go and seek, to
wait for those of you who escape out of the Fight: Wherefore if you will give
your selves up Prisoners of War into the Power of our General, who is a Man of
Honor, we will be Friends, and we will let you pass to your own Country: But
as to those of your Men whom ours have taken alive, their Almoner, yesterday
after Prayers, begged Quarter for them, for the Honor of the Holy Sacrament,
and Glorious Virgin, which has been promised unto them.

Our Men hearing him talk at this rate, were already somewhat alarmed, as
fearing what he said was true* but as soon as they saw us come at a distance,
they took Courage, and returned him as fierce an Answer, like Men who had no
fear upon them, to this purpose.

Though you had had Force enough to destroy two thirds of our Number, Their
bold Answer.
we should not fail still to fight with the remaining part; yea, tho there were
but one Man of us left, he should fight still against you all.

When we put ashore, and left the South Sea, we all resolved to pass through
your Country, or die in the Attempt; and though there were as many Spaniards of
you as there is Grass in this Savanna, we should not be afraid, but look upon
you always in our Opinion Cowards, and we will pass on, and go where we will in
spite of your Teeth.

The Officer being dismissed upon our arrival, mounted his Horse to return from
whence he came, and observing we were booted, and mounted upon his Companions
Horses who guarded the Retrenchments, he shrunk up his shoulders, by way of
amazement, and rode as fast as he could to carry the News to his own Party. As
soon as he was got to them, who were not above a Musquetshot off, we advanced,
and fell upon them, to put them out of Condition all at once to follow us any
more: We received their first Firing, to which we made no return otherwise than
with our Pistols and Cutlasses, They defeat the Spaniards.
and that unhappily for them who had not yet got upon their Horses, for we cut
a great many of them to pieces, insomuch that God crowning all the Advantages
we had had in the rest of our Engagements, by the Success we had in this last,
we let the rest go, detaining only their Horses; (...) when we had broken all
their Arms, we with our Baggage rejoyned our main Body, who staid still upon
the Place to Guard the Retrenchments. We had no more than one Man killed in
this Engagement (as 'twas in the other) and two maimed.

We asked some of the Prisoners, whom we had taken, several Questions, and they
told us, among other things, that we should still meet with another
Retrenchment upon the Road, about six Leagues distant from those we quitted,
which made us fear, with very great reason, lest the Fugitives should go and
possess themselves of it, with a design to dispute our Passage once more: And
indeed we saw Fire upon the top of a great Mountain, which they had made for a
Signal to gather their scattered Troops together, and those who out of the fear
they were in, might perhaps hide themselves for Eight Days together, had it not
been for this, as believing us still at their heels: But we prevented their
Design, so we lay two Leagues from thence to cut off their Passage* there being
no other way than this by which they might get thither, and whose sides were
still less accessible the farther you went on, than they were behither the same
We had cut the Hams of Nine Hundred of their Horse before, that so they might
be made unfit to pursue us; we took much about the same Number of them with us
to ease our Journey, till we came at the River we were in quest of, and to kill
and salt them upon our arrival, that so they might serve us for Food in that
long Passage.

On the 15th. we passed by the forementioned Retrenchment, They get to a River,
and build Piperies.
which was not yet finished, without any Resistance, this proceeding in all
appearance from the Teror which the noise of our Victory had struck into the
People, and lay at an Hatto three Leagues beyond it. On the 16th. we lay at
another six Leagues farther; and at last, on the 17th. which was the sixteenth
day sin^^ our setting out, we came to the so much desired River, and presently
entered into the Woods that grow upon the Banks thereof, where every one fell to
work in good earnest to cut down Trees to build Piperies, wherein we might go
down the same.

Some perhaps may think that these were some commodious Vessels, wherein to
carry us with ease down the River, but there was nothing less than that in it.
What we called Piperies, were four or five Stocks of one kind of Tree, which
they called Mahot; it is a light floating sort of Wood, which, after we have
taken off the Bark, we join and tie together, instead of Cords, with a sort of
Lines that grow in these Woods, and cling like Ivy unto every thing that is
near them, and especially to Trees, to the height whereof they mount; and when
these Pieces are set together, they put two or three Men upon them, according
to the bigness of the Pipery, and this is all the Equipment we make thereof.

The surest posture we can find our selves to be in, is to stand upright
thereon, though they sink two or three Foot under Water; and you may judge by
what follows, whether the continual apprehensions of Danger we were in, were
well or ill grounded.

We built ours no bigger than to hold two Men, that so they might the more
easily pass between those very harrow Rocks we foresaw, by those that already
presented themselves to our view, we must meet with before we got unto the
Seaside. When this pretty Flota was in a condition to put out, we dragged it
to the Riverside, after we had furnished our selves with long Poles, to keep
up from being driven too violently upon the Rocks, where we were apprehensive
we should be carried by the violence of the Stream, as it came also frequently
to pass.

This River springs in the Mountains of Segovia, and discharges it self into
the North Sea at Cape Gracias a Dios, after having run a very long way in a
most rapid manner cross a vast number of Rocks of a prodigious bigness, and by
the most frightful Precipices that can be thought of, besides a great many
Falls of Water, to the Number of at least an Hundred of all sorts, which it is
impossible for a Man to look on without trembling, and making the Head of the
most fearless to turn round, when he sees and hears the Water fall from such an
^eight into those tremendous Whirlpools. In short, the whole is so formidable,
that there are none but those who have some Experience, can have right
conceptions of it: But for me, who have passed these Places, and who, as long
as I live, shall have my Mind filled with those Risques I have run, it is
impossible I should give such an Idea hereof but what will come far short of
what I have really known of them.

'Twas therefore upon this dangerous River that we went down, A strange way of
floating down the River.
suffering our selves to be carried along at the will of the Stream, in these
pitiful Machines, whereof the greatest part was under Water, as has been said
before, two or three Foot, insomuch that we were almost always up to the middle
therein: But this was nothing in comparison of the rapidity of it, which many
times ^urried us, in spite of all the resistance we could make, into the
bublings of foaming Water, where we now and then found our selves buried with
our pieces of Wood, which made many of our Men tie themselves thereon, as being
in hopes, the Wood, that floated, would bear them up still upon the Water, but
in this some of them were mistaken.

But as for those great Falls, they had, to our good Fortunes, at their
entrance and goings out, a great Basin of still Water, which gave us the
Opportunity to get upon the Banks of the River, and draw our Piperies ashore,
to take off those things we had laid on them, which, as wet as we were, we
carried with us, leaping from Rock to Rock, till we came to the end of the
Fall, from whence one of us afterward returned to put our Pipery into the
Water, and let her swim along to him who waited for her below: But if he failed
to catch hold (by swimming) of those pieces of Wood, before they got out of the
Basin below, the violence of the Stream would carry them away to rights, and
the Men must then be necessitated to go and pick out Trees to make another.

We thought at our setting out to go down the Water all together, to the end,
that in case of any Accident* one might give Assistance to the other; But at
the end of three days, when I knew the danger we exposed our selves to in this
way of Swimming together, which had already been the occasion of our losing
many Piperies, I set my self against the design of our continuing thus
together, by demonstrating to all our Men; That now we had no Spaniards in
these Parts to conflict with, but only the Difficulties of this dangerous
River, it was convenient on the contrary to allow every Crew of us to advance a
little before the other, and to keep as it were in a Line successively, that so
in case the first were ca^ryed (as indeed it came to pass) by the violence of
(...) Stream upon the Rocks on the brink of the Water, whereof the River is
full in an infinity of places; they might have time at least to get off before
the arrival of the next Pipery, which had already wrought so much Disorder by
the Wrecks that had been occasioned by their falling foul on one another, that
all of us were in manifest danger of perishing.

I afterward found, as well as several others of our People, who had made
Trial hereof, that this foresight was not useless to us; for my Pipery
happening to be cast upon such a Place, I was forced to untye the pieces of
Wood, and to straddle upon one piece, while my Companion did the same upon
another, and so leave our selves to be carried down in this manner at the
pleasure of the Stream, till it pleased God that we should meet with a Place,
as we did indeed, that was not so ripid, where we could go upon the Bank of the
River, which we could not have done if others had immediately followed us. I
also advised, that those who went down first, should take care to set up in the
most dangerous Places a Flag or Banner at the top of a long Pole, that so we
might discern it afar off, not so much to give notice to those who were
hindermost, that there was a Fall in such a Place, for these would make
themselves to be heard almost a League off, but to signify to them what side
they were to put to land, which should be that where the Flag stood. These
Methods being put in practice, saved the Lives of a great many Men, though for
all these Precautions, several were also lost.

The many Bananiers which we found along the Banks of this River, Their Food.
was almost the only Food that kept us from starving; for our Arms being
continually wet, and our Powder all spoiled, we could not possibly go a
Hunting, though there is very good Game there; For as to the Horseflesh which we
had salted, we were forced to throw it away in two days time, for it would not
keep in the Water any longer.

These Bananiers have partly been planted by the Indians, who dwell along the
sides of this River, and partly by the overflowing of the Waters, which having
dragged them along, and then left them dry, they took Root again, and so have
multiplied.

Some days after we found, Of the Indians in these Parts.
when we began to go down the River, some Carbets of an Indian Nation, called
Albaouins, whom we chased to get their Victuals; there are a multitude of
others, who dwell farther from the brink thereof on the opposite side to the
former, and those of the one Bank have neither War nor Commerce with those of
the other.

It was in this Place that those of our Men who had lost their Money by Gaming,
The Freebooters Murder one another for their Money.
put their cruel Design in Execution, and where I came to know that the warning
formerly given me, was too true: For these Wretches being gone before, went and
hid themselves behind the Rocks that are upon the brink of this River, by which
we must necessarily pass. As every Man endeavored to save himself as well as
he could, and that for the Reasons already given, we went down the River at a
distance one from another, and without any mistrust, they had but too much Time
and Convenience to pick out and Murder five Englishmen, whom they knew to be
some of the best furnished with Booty, of which these Assassines entirely
deprived them. My Companion and I found their Bodies upon the Rivers side; and
I must freely confess, that such a Spectacle would have struck no small Terror
into me, if I had been still the bearer of my winnings; I bless God with all my
Heart, that inspired me with a Design to quit my Treasure, being then exposed,
in going down the River as I was last after the English, to the Treachery of
those Villains, where I must infallibly have run the same risque as they had
done. None of our People knew any thing of this Murder, but when we were got
all together farther down, I told them what I had seen, which was fully
confirmed, as well by the absence of the dead Men, as by that of the
Assassines, who durst not come and rejoyn us, and whom we never saw from
thence-forward.

On the 20th. of February we found the River large^, and more spacious than
before, and met with no more Falls therein; But the same was so encumbered with
Trees and Bamboes, which the Floods carried thither, that our wretched Machines
could not be kept from overturning; but the depth of the Water in these Parts
being a means to moderate the rapidness of it, there were not many drowned.

At last, The River proving good, they build Canoes.
when we were gone down some Leagues farther, we found the River very good, the
Stream very gentle, and no likelihood of our meeting any more Rocks nor Trees,
though we had still above Sixty Leagues to the Seaside. Wherefore now finding
our selves freed from those Perils and Dangers which we had been exposed to in
such terrible Places, where Death in the most frightful shape presented it self
continually to our view, every one began to resume fresh Courage, and conceive
good hopes of the remainder of the Voyage; insomuch that being now all of us
assembled together in the same Place where those who had gone before staid for
them that came after, and that we had now before us how we should go quite
through with the rest of our Voyage, we agreed to divide our selves into
several Companies, each consisting of Sixty Men, to build Canoes out of Mapou
Wood, which sort of Trees grow in great numbers upon the Banks of the said
River.

Having with wonderful Diligence finished four Canoes by the first of March,
for the use of an Hundred and Twenty Men that were of us in one Canton, we put
them into the Water, and embarked thereon, without staying for an Hundred and
Forty more, who were finishing theirs; the ardent desire we had to be as soon
is possibly satisfied, whether we should really be able to reach the North Sea,
egged us mightily to put on; for according to the Idea we had conceived of our
Passage, we were apprehensive of being carried back into that of the South, as
not being able to think we could be so Happy as to recover the sight of a Sea
by which we might be carried home to our Native Countries, and which we had for
so considerable a time longed for.

The English, The English get first to the Seaside.
who would not make any Canoes, had got in their Piperies before us to the
Seaside: Here they met with an English Boat from Iamaica at Anchor, whom they
were very forward to press to go and ask Leave of the Governor of that Island
for their safe coming thither, because they had gone out without any
Commission; but that Vessel ^ being unwilling to go thither, without they laid
down Six Thousand Pounds Sterling by way of Advance, and they being not in a
condition to run the hazard of such a Sum, because many of them had lost their
Money, as several amongst us had done, which they would have carried with them,
by the oversetting of the Piperies, they staid with the Moustick Indians, that
dwell some Leagues to Windward of the Mouth of this River, and who are very
kind to them, because of the Trinkets they bring them from Ia^^^a.

Thus that Boat proving to be of no use to these English, they politickly
bethought themselves to send us word hereof, as hoping we, in acknowledgment of
this Kindness, would obtain leave of the Governor of St. Domingo for them to
retire, and be proteceted in that Island. This News we received by two Moustick
Indians, whom in a Boat they sent to meet us Forty Leagues up the River, and
who told us, that there should no more than Forty Men only come down, because
that ^hip could contain no more, by reason of the smalness of it, and its
scantiness of Provision: But for all this, the Hundred and Twenty that made up
one of our Companies, went down together, for every one pretended to be of the
number of the said Forty.

Though this River we are now leaving, is by some Spanish Maps made to run
directly fourscore Leagues, The length of the River.
and then to fall into the North Sea, yet we have computed the same to run
above Three Hundred, being almost always carried to the South-East for to go to
the North.

We happily arrived on the 9th. at the Mouth of the River at Cape Gracia de
Dios, and entered into the Sea, which with much Satisfaction we knew to be that
of the North, where we were obliged to wait for the English Ship that was at
the Isles of Pearls, which are a dozen Leagues distant from that Cape to the
East: Here we staid till the 14th. with the Mulasters that live in these Parts,
and who fed us for some days with Fish.

This Cape, which stands on the Continent, has been inhabited for a long time
by these Mulasters and Negroes, A Description of Cape Gracia de Dios.
both Men and Women, who have greatly multiplied there, since a Spanish Ship,
bound from Guinea, freighted with their Fathers, was lost by coming too near
the Shore, which is very dangerous in these Party: Now, those who had escaped
the Shipwreck were courteously received by the Moustick Indians living about
this Canton, who were well pleased with the loss of that Ship, and of the
Spaniards their Enemies that were in it.

Those Indians assigned their new Guests a place to grub up, Of the Indians of
these Parts, and their manner of Living.
where they built themselves Cottages in the finest Country of Savanna's, that
reach along the River from the Mouth of it for five or six Leagues upwards.
Here for their Sustenance they Plant Maes, Bananiers, and Magniots, which the
Indians gave them; They also taught them to make a most Nourishing sort of
Drink, which they call Hoon; they prepare the same of a Fruit that is produced
on the top of a kind of a Palm Tree, which grows naturally in these Woods, and
never exceeds ten Foot in height: Each of these Trees bears no more than one
Bunch or Grape, but most of them are a full Load for one Man: Its Grain is of
the same form and thickness as an Olive; some of them are yellowish, others
reddish, and containing in a very hard stone an exceeding oily Kernel: They
pound the Fruit, Stone, and Kernel all together, boiling the same afterward in
Water, and this makes up all the Composition: When the same is grown cold, or
but lukewarm, they put what quantity they are minded to drink into a Calabass
pierced through with small holes like unto a Skimmer; this Drink, besides that
it is very Nourishing, and fattens very much, is also a pleasanter Liquor than
any that is to be met with among the other Indians the same being only peculiar
to this Nation.

The Mulasters are all a very tall People, and go altogether naked, saving
their Privy-Parts, which they cover, Nature having provided for them upon the
Account a kind of greyish stuff, which they pull from a Tree, called the
Bastard-Palm, the top of whose Stock is wrapped up in some Fathoms of it, from
the first rising of its Branches some feet downwards, according to the
thickness of each of these Trees: This stuff is also a great help to them to
make Coverlets, wherewith to cover them in the Night; and some of those People
who live more at ease, wear Shirts and Drawers, which the English bring them
from Iamaica. They are the boldest People in the World for exposing themselves
to the Perils of the Sea, and undoubtedly the most expert in the Art of
Fishing: They Will commit themselves to the Waves in these little Boats, or such
like, which an able Seaman will scarce venture to do, and here they will stay
for three or four days together, being no more concerned, let the Weather be
what it will, than if they were made of the same piece as their Boat; and
provided they can but once set sight of the Fish, though swimming never so low in
the Water, they will not fail to take him, so dextrous are they at this Work.

They many times do our Freebooters a Kindness, when they take them on Board
with them, upon Condition of letting them have a share of what Booty is got,
which must be exactly performed unto them: For if you once deceive them, you
must no longer expect their Assistance; and this Temper is peculiar almost to
all the Indian Nations in these Parts, that they will never go again, when once
you have broke your Word with them.

The Ancient Mousticks, who gave these Men I have spoken of, Entertainment,
live about ten or a dozen Leagues to Windward of Cape Gracia a Dios, in those
Places they call Sambay and Sanibey: They are very slothful, and neither Plant
nor Sow but very little, a^^ lie all day on their Amacks, which are a kind of
movi^^ Beds, in their Ajoupas or Baracks, while their Wives w^^ upon them in
every thing as far as they can serve them and when they are pres'd with Hunger,
they go a Fishing in their Boats, at which they are also very skilfu^ and when
they have taken any, they eat them, and g^^ not out any more till Hunger
returns upon them again.

As for their Clothing, it is neither larger, nor mo^^ sumptuous than that of
the Mulasters at the Cap^^ There are but a few amongst them that have a fixe^
abode, most of them being Vagabonds, and wandering along the Riverside, and
having no other House to shelter themselves in but a Latanier-leaf, which they
manage so, that when the Wind drives the Rain on the one side, they turn their
Leaf against it, behind which they lie, and this Skreens them against the
Weather When they are inclined to sleep, they dig a hole in the Sand, where
they lie, and then cover themselves therewith; and this they do to keep
themselves from the stinging of the Mousticks, wherewith the Air is generally
very full: They are little Flies, that are sooner (...) than seen, and have so
sharp and venomous a sting, (...) where they alight, they seem to have fiery
Darts wherewith to prick Men.

These poor People are so tormented with those mischievous Insects, when they
see them not, that their Bodies appear like Lepers, and I can assure it for
Truth, as knowing the same on my own Knowledge, that it (...) no small pain to
be attacked with them; For besides th^^ they caused us to lose our Rest in the
Night, it was the^ that we were forced to go naked for want of Shirts when the
troublesomness of these Animals made us (...) into despair and such a Rage, as
set us besides our selves.

When these Indians go a Journey, though never so sh^^, they take their Wives,
Children, Dogs, and Fawns* which they breed (...), all along with them: It Is a
Custom I have observed to be ^^eld among all the Indi^^ Nations on the Terra
Firma of America, and those speak of live as brutishly as any of the rest, yet
the^ are not so Cruel and Savage, because of the Society they have with the
English, who have no other aim than to endeavor to bring them under, and
Mailer their Country, where they have a great many Habitations^ already.

On the 14th. Fifty of the Freebooters get on Board the English Vessel.
the Vessel which I said was gone to the Isles of Pearls, arrived at the Place
where we were, and came scarce to an Anchor, but we all crowded to go on Board,
because we were to draw Lots who should embark: But about Fifty of us, for all
that, being more vigilant than the rest, made a shift to enter her, who
thinking it unadviseable to go ashore again, to commit to Chance a thing we
were already in Possession of, and for to prevent a greater Number from entering
in, we being already piled as it were on the top of one another, we weighed
Anchor, and departed.

The Master would have carried us to Iamaica, but we not knowing how matters
stood between France and England, whether it were Peace or War, engaged him to
carry us to St. Domingo, for Forty Pieces of Eight a Head: We went to take in
Water at the Isle of Pearls, and on the 16th. left the same.

On the 17th. we doubled the Island of Catalina or Providence, as the English
call it, where the Spaniards had formerly a very fine Fort and small Town,
which were taken by the French and English, under the Colors of the last. On
the 18th. we went to cross the Channel, ^ho' it blew a strong Easterly Breeze.
On the 24th. we ^ame to Land at Los Iardinos, which are a great many small
Islands near unto that of Cuba: And on the 29th. we took in Water at Port
Portilla (in the Isle of Cuba) which is not inhabited.

On the 30th. we anchored to the South South-East of the Borough of Baracoa,
in the same Island, where we surprised the Hunters belonging to that Place,
whom we obliged to sell us the Victuals they had took, by giving them their own
Price for it: But this our Liberality toward them proceeded from another
cause, and that was, that we were uncertain whether our Nation was at Peace or
War with the Spaniards, since we had no Intelligence here (...) from any French
Country how things went with them.

On the 6th. of April we touched at Nippas, which is (...) small Borough on
the Coast, Seven Leagues distant from Petit Guavis, that so we might hear some
News of our own Country while we rode at Anchor there. There were some of our
People, so infatuated with the long Miseries we had suffered, that they thought
of nothing ^^se but the Spaniards, insomuch that when from the Deck they saw
some Horsemen riding along the Seaside, they flew to their Arms to fire upon
them, as imagining they were Enemies, though we assured them we were now come
amongst those of our own Nation.

We left this Port on the 4th. and went to Anchor in the Port of Petit Guavis,
Their arrival at Petit Guavis.
from whence we had departed almost four Years before, and before we came near
the Fort, I went to Monsieur Dumas the King's Lieutenant, to require him to
grant us Protection and Idemnity in the Governor Monsieur de Cassy's absence,
by Virtue of an Amnesty the King had been pleased to send to those that made
War upon the Spaniards since the Peace, which being concluded on since our
departure, it was impossible we should come to know it in such remote Places,
and where we were thought to have been entirely destroyed.

Lastly, When we were got all ashore to a People that spoke French, we could
not forbear shedding Tears for Joy, that after we had run so many Hazards,
Dangers, and Perils, it had pleased the Almighty Maker of the Earth and Seas,
to grant a Deliverance, and bring us back to those of our own Nation, that at
length we may return without any more ado to our own Country; Whereunto I
cannot but farther add, that for my own part, I had so little hopes of ever
getting back, that I could not, for the space of Fifteen Days, take my Return
for any other than an Illusion, and it proceeded so far with me, that I shunned
sleep, for fear when I awaked, I should find my self again in those Countries,
out of which I was now safely delivered.

A Relation of a VOYAGE MADE BY THE Sieur DE MONTAUBAN, Captain of the
FREEBOOTERS on the Coast of Guiney, in the Year 1695.
With a Description of the Kingdom of Cape Lopez, the Manners, Customs, and
Religion of the Country.
A Letter to Monsieur --
SIR,
A Relation of the Voyage made by Captain Montauband, commonly called
Montauban, is at last come to my hands, and I have sent you the same in print:
There is no doubt but you will admire, as well as I, how much his Prudence and
Courage have been instrumental to deliver him from many unhappy Accidents,
where another must infallibly have perished. You will remember as soon as you
begin to read, to have seen some of his Men at Bourdeaux, in the Year One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Four; from thence it was he departed the
following Year to undertake the Voyage you are here presented with: He gave
chase to several Ships he met with in his way; he fought with a Frigate
carrying Thirty sour Guns, at Cape Verde; he met with an English Ship of Twenty
Guns, at Cape St. John, which he took after a short Fight; after which, he took
a Brandenburgh Caper, and sailed away for Angola; near the Shore he met with
the English Guardship, being a Frigate carrying Fifty four Pieces of Cannon,
this Ship he fought for Five or Six Hours, and both of them very ^ravely
boarded one another, and as he was about to make himself Master of the said
Ship, the English Captain set fire to his Powder, and so both the Ships blew up
into the Air with a terrible crack.

You will have the pleasure to contemplate, in the Perusal of this Book, (as if
you stood upon the Seaside,) this tremendous Shipwreck; as also, see how the
Sieur de Montauban, together with Fifteen or Sixteen of his Men were saved. He
suffered Hunger for above Three Days together, and at last arrived at Cape
Lopez, from whence he went to visit the King of that Country, of whose Court
and Kingdom he has given us here a Description: He speaks also of his
Reception, and advances a Project how to settle the Roman Catholic Faith in
those Parts: He stood for Surety at the baptizing of a Son of Prince Thomas,
the foresaid King's Son. He went on board a Portuguese Ship, in order to his
Passage to Europe; An English Man that was his Friend, took him aboard his
Vessel, and carried him to Barbados, where he was confined to his Chamber by
Colonel Russel who was Governor of those Islands: He was freed from thence,
and went to Martinico, where he saw Monsieur de Frontenas, General of the
French Islands. From thence he got into France, being very uncertain whether he
shall return to Sea again. But, Sir, all these Adventures are set forth in so
natural and easy a Style, that you cannot but infallibly observe the Sincerity
and Generosityo^ the Author. It Is true, our Seafaring Men are not so polite as
those that live ashore, and that proceeds for want of Society and Conversation;
but to make amends for that, they are an hundred fold more sincere than the
other. And thus, Sir, do not think a Seafaring Man will impose upon you; for my
self, I have several times heard Montauban in Person give a Relation of this
same Voyage, but I could never observe that he varied in any one thing at any
time; and the free and generous Air wherewith he delivered those brave Actions
he has performed in Fight, would persuade you of the Truth of what he has
related. It Is not for any Ostentation that he has written this Account; he has
in the very beginning thereof declared openly enough, that he had no other End
in doing it, than to give a Minister of State an Account (as he calls it) of
his Campaign. In short, if you are dubious in respect to the Fight where the
Sieur de Montauban was Shipwracked, you may recollect your self, and find you
have read the same in the Gazettes of September and October this present Year.
I am,

SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, B --


A Relation of a Voyage made by the Sieur de Montauban, Captain of the
Freebooters, on the Coast of Guiney, in the Year 1695.
SINCE I have so often felt the malignant Influences of those Stars that
preside over the Seas, and by an adverse Fortune lost all that Wealth which
with so much Care and Trouble I had amassed together, I should take no manner
of pleasure in this place to call to mind the Misfortunes that befell me before
the Conclusion of the last Campaign, had not a desire of serving still both the
public and particular Persons, as well as to let His Majesty know the
Affection and Weddedness I have always had for his Service, made me take Pen in
hand to give Monsieur de Phelipeaux an Account of such Observations as I have
made; wherein he may also find with what eagerness I have penetrated to the
remotest Colonies of our Enemies, in order to destroy them and ruin their
Trade.

I was not willing to swell up this Relation with an Account of all the Voyages
I have made, and all the particular Adventures that have befallen me on the
Coasts of New Spain, Cartagena, Mexico, Florida, and Cape Verd, which last
Place I had been at Twenty Years ago, having begun to use the Seas at the Age
of Sixteen.

I could also have added hereunto the Campaign I have made in One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety and One, when being Commander of the Ship called the Machine, I
ravaged the Coasts of Guiney, entered into the great River Serelion, and took a
Fort from the English, where they had Four and twenty Pieces of Cannon; which I
caused to be split, that they might be of no farther use unto them.

But I am desirous to confine my self to give an Account of my last Voyage,
because it is the nearest, and that which is yet fresh in the Memory of the
Public, Notice and some Information having been given thereof by the Noise
made in France and elsewhere, of the burning of my Ship, and the terrible Crack
it made in the Air.

In the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninty Four, after I had ravaged the
Coast of Caraqua, I went up to Windward toward St. Croix, where I understood
that there were some Merchant Ships, with a Convoy, to come from Barbados and
Nevis, and bound for England; and upon the same Information I resolved to sail
up to the height of the Bermudos, hoping to take this small Fleet, and so to
make a good Booty of it. I was scarce got thither, but that I saw them appear,
and sailing directly toward me, without any Apprehensions of Danger upon them:
But I presently attacked their Convoy, called the Wolf, and took her, with Two
more of the Merchant Ships laden with Sugar, the rest having made their Escape
during the Fight. As I was carrying my Prize into France, I met with another
English Ship of Sixteen Guns, coming from Spain, and bound also for England,
that after a short Fight struck, and which I carried to Rochel, where the
Admiralty adjudged the same to be good Prize. When I had sold this Ship, I
carried my Three other Vessels to Bourdeaux, where I arrived in September, One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Four; and these last also being condemned as
good Prizes, I made it my Business presently to find out Merchants that would
buy them.

In the mean time, my Freebooters, who had not seen France in a long time,
finding themselves now in a great City, where Pleasure and Plenty reigned, were
not backward to refresh themselves after the Fatigues they had endured while so
long absent from their native Country. They spent a world of Money here, and
proved horribly Extravagant. The Merchants, and their Hosts, made no Scruple to
advance them Money, or lend them as much as they pleased, upon the Reputation
of their Wealth, and the Noise there was throughout the City of the valuable
Prizes whereof they had a share: All the Nights they spent in such
Divertisements as pleased them best, and the Days in running up and down the
Town in Masquerade, causing themselves to be carried in Chairs, with lighted
Flambeaux's at Noon Day; of which Debauches some died, while Four of my Crew
fairly deserted me: So that now seeing I lost my Men, notwithstanding all the
Care I had taken, and strict Injunctions I had laid upon them, I thought it
advisable for me to be gone from thence as soon as I could, that I might keep
the rest together.

In the first place I supplied the room of those whom I had lost, with as many
Bourdeaux young Men, who in a short time became as expert as the old ones; for
you are to observe, I made it my continual Care and Business to teach my Men to
shoot, and my so frequent exercising of them, rendered them in a short time as
capable of Shooting and handling their Arms as the oldest Sea Freebooters, or
the best Fowlers by Land.

When I had revictualled my Ship, that carried no more than Thirty four Pieces
of Cannon, I left Bourdeaux, in the Month of February, in the Year One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety and Five, with an Intention to go and cruise on the Coast of
Guiney in Africa. I got up to the Azores, which are Thirty seven Degrees North
Latitude, and cruised thereabouts for the space of Eight Days, without any
Purchase: From thence I passed to the Canary Islands, which are in Twenty five
Degrees North Latitude: We discovered the Peak of Tenariff a great way off,
which they say is the highest Mountain in the World. They report these
Mountains had their Names from Dogs, which the ^^tins call Canis, and which the
Portugu se found here in great Numbers upon their first Arrival. I cruised
round about them for Fourteen Days, in expectation of meeting with some Dutch
Ships which I was informed were to come that way; and it proved to be really
so: For the said Ships came thither, but they got into Port before I could
reach them; and this made me sail away for the White Cape, and the Isles of
Cape Verd, that are between Fourteen and Eighteen Degrees North Latitude. Upon
my Arrival there, I found Two. English Ships lying at Anchor in the Road of the
Isle of May, which made me put out my Shallop to know what they were, and the
same informed me that they were Two Interlope^^ carrying about Thirty Guns
each. I resolved to board and take them; to this end I lay by to come nearer
them, but as we bore upon one of the Points of this Island, these Ships did not
think fit to tarry for my coming up; but smelling my Design, they made all
ready, and left their Cables and Anchors in the Road at which their Shallops
lay.

I pursued them all Day, but Night coming on, I lost sight of them, and
returned to the Road from whence they were gone, in order to take away the
Cables and Anchors, and to sink the Shallops fastened by them. When I had so
done, I sailed away for the Isle of St. Vincent, to caulker my Vessel in that
Place, and to take in Water and Wood. This Island also is one of those of Cape
Verd. Here I stayed for the space of Eight Days, at the end whereof,
understanding by a Portuguese Bark, that there were Two English Ships, carrying
from Twenty to Thirty Guns, at the Isle of Fugo, one of which was resitting
there, because of a Fight she had been engaged in with some other Ships, I
presently weighed Anchor, and sailed away for the said Island, which is not far
distant from that of St. Vincent, being in hopes to meet with the Enemy in that
Place: But upon my Arrival, I understood by a Portuguese, that they were gone
away, Four or Five Days before, in the Night, without saying any thing of the
Place whither they were bound, from the said Island of Fugo, or Fire-Island. I
thereupon steered my course for the Coast of Guiney, and first discovered the
Cap^ of Three Points, where I met with the Guardship, which was a Dutch
Frigate, carrying Thirty four Guns, and cruised out at Sea. She quickly
discovered me, and made directly toward me, in order to know what I was: As I
had also on my part perceived her, and was in hopes to come close and fight
her, I hung up Dutch Colors, that I might not frighten her away, but give her
an Opportunity to come up within Cannon-shot of me. When I saw her near enough,
I put up French Colors, and gave her a Signal to strike, but instead thereof,
she, without any more ado, very bravely gave me a Broadside, and at the same
time received one from me. We continued to fight one another, in this manner,
from Morning till Four in the Afternoon, without my being able to get the
Weathergage, nor come up near enough unto her, to make use, to any purpose, of
my Fusils, which are the chief Arms in such Ships as ours be; nor to hinder her
by the Favor of the Wind which she had of me, to go and Anchor under the Fort
of the Cape of Three Points, where there were Two Dutch Ships more fitted out
for Men of War, one whereof carried Fourteen and the other Twenty eight Pieces
of Cannon. I presently thought these Three Ships had joined together, in order
to come out to fight me, which made me lie by thereabouts, for a whole Day, in
expectation of them. I anchored also within a League of the Shore, hoping at
length, that they, being spighted at my insulting of them in this manner, would
be eager for Revenge: But all this to no purpose; and in all Appearance, the
Guardship had already found her self so ill treated, that she had no occasion
for a second Fight. A small Portuguese Ship that passed by soon after, told me
these Ships were the same that had forced the Sieur Rey, Captain of the King's
Flute, called the Deep, to leave that Coast; which also was confirmed
afterward unto me by the Sieur Rey himself, at the Prince's Island, where I
met him.

Seeing therefore that the Enemy would not fight, and considering with my self
it was not advisable for me to attack them under the Cannon of the Fort, I
resolved to go to Cape Lopez, and to Prince and St. Thomas Isles: In my Passage
I discovered Cape St. John that stands on the Continent of Guiney, as well as
the Cape of Three Points, and I happened to meet with an English Ship of Twenty
Guns, that had Three hundred and Fifty Negro's, Elephants Teeth, and Wax on
board it, which did not cost me much pains to take her. The Captain told me he
was come from Ardra, where he had taken Five hundred and fifty Negro's on
board, but that they had slain some of them, because they had mutined against
his Ship's Crew, and that some more of them had made their Escape to Land in
his Shallop which they secretly stole from him. Ardra is one of the principal
Town* in Guiney, standing upon the Seaside, and the usual Residence of a
Prince who governs a great Country in this Part of the World.

From thence I went to Prince's Isle, in sight whereof I took a small
Brandenburgh Caper, mounted with Eight Pieces of Cannon, and carrying Sixty
Men. She cruised about this Latitude, and took all the Barks she could light
on, without distinction of Nation or Colors. When I had done this, I went into
the Port, in order to clean my Ship, which was foul enough, and that I might
clear my self of the English Prize I had taken, I sent her away to St. Domingo,
in America, to have the same condemned, under the Command of the Sieur de Nave,
and a sufficient Number of Men in her, whom I picked out of my own Crew. But
some time after, I understood she was retaken by some English Men of War that
were before Little Goara.

In the mean time, that my Men might not be idle, I gave my Officers Orders to
see my Ship careened, while I my self with the Brandenburgh Caper which I had
taken, and Ninety Men whom I put on board her, went out to cruise, and
continued at it for Six Weeks, upon the Coast of Guiney, or about the Prince's
and St. Omer's Islands, without meeting any Enemy. Whereupon I retu^n'd back
into the Road of the first of these Isles, where I revictualled my Ship as soon
as possibly I could; and when all things were ready, I weighed Anchor, and
sailed directly for the Isle of St. Thomas, there either to sell, or truck the
Caper I had taken, which last I chose to do for some Provisions, because I had
not enough to go and cruise long upon the Coasts of Angola, whither I had
resolved to go and spend Five or Six Months, in order to avoid the English
Ships they were fitting out at the same Town of Guiney, which consisted of
Three Men of War, and a Fireship, and were designed to go in quest of me,
cruising about St. Thomas, where they thought I should continue.

As I left St. Thomas, I saw a Ship at Anchor, sailed toward her, and gave her
chase a long time; but I could not prevent her getting to land at the Isle of
St. Omer, and staving to pieces in striving to take her; I lose an Hundred and
fifty Pounds of Gold Dust which this Dutch Interloper had got in trading on
this Coast.

This being over, I sailed for the Coasts of Angola, which is Two hundred and
fifty Leagues on the other side of the Line: There I arrived on the Twenty
second of September, and understood, when I came within Three Leagues of the
Port of Cabinda, that there were Two English Ships with Negro's on board in
that place. As I was to Leeward of that Port, I bore out to Sea, in hopes next
Day to have a South-West Wind that usually blows from the Seaward, to help to
recover the Port. When Day appeared, I saw a Ship under English Colors bearing
upon me, whom I did not presently take to be a Man of War. But some time after,
I discovered she carried no less than Four and fifty Guns. I used all the Art I
could to amuse her, and for that end, I hung out Dutch Colors, that I might
also the more easily come near her, while she on her part was not backward to
amuse me, and by the Guns she fired from time to time to assure me of her
Friendship, endeavored to come up with me. When I perceived my Enemy's Design,
I took upon me to make a show of waiting for him, and sailed but very slowly,
that I might make him believe my Ship was heavy laden, or that I was encumbered
for want of Sails and Hands. We kept in this manner, from Break of Day till Ten
in the Forenoon. He gave me a Gun, from time to time, without Ball, to assure
me what he was, and as he supposed my Friend; but finding at last I did not
answer him, on my part, in the same manner, and that we were now within
Cannon-shot of one another, he gave me one again with Ball, which made me
presently put up French Colors, and answer him with another* Hereupon the
English Captain, without any more ado, gave me Two Broadsides, which I received
without returning him one again, though he had killed me Seven Men; for I was in
hopes, if I could have got somewhat nearer to him, to put him out of Condition
ever to get away from me: I endeavored to come within a Fusil-shot of him, and
was desirous to give him an Opportunity to show his Courage, in boarding me,
since I could not so well do the same by him, as being to Leeward. At last,
being come by degrees nearer, and found him within the reach of my Fusils,
which for that end I kept concealed upon the Deck from his sight, they were
discharged upon him, and my Men continued to make so great a Fire with them,
that the Enemy on their part began quickly to flag.

In the mean time, as their Ship's Crew consisted of above Three hundred Men,
and that they saw their Cannon could not do their Work for them, they resolved
to board us; which they did, with a great Shout, and terrible Threatenings of
giving no Quarter, if we did not surrender. Their grappling Irons failing to
catch the Stern of my Ship, made theirs run in such a manner, that their Stern
run upon my Boltsprit, and broke it. Having observed my Enemy thus encumbered,
my Men plied them briskly with their Small-shot, and made so terrible a Fire
upon them, for an Hour and an half, that being unable to resist any longer, and
having lost a great many Men, they left the Sport, and ran down between Decks,
and I saw them presently after make Signals with their Hats of crying out for
Quarter. I caused my Men thereupon to give over their firing, and commanded the
English to embark in their Shallops, and come on board of me, while I made some
of my Crew at the same time leap into the Enemies Ship, and sieze her, and so
prevent any Surprise from them. I already rejoiced within my self for the
taking of such a considerable Prize, and so much the more, in that I hoped,
that after having taken this Vessel that was the Guardship of Angola, and the
largest the English had in those Seas, I should find my self in a Condition
still to take better Prizes, and attack any Man of War I should meet with. My
Ship's Crew were also as joyful as my self and did the Work they were engaged
in with a great deal of pleasure; but the Enemy's Powder suddenly taking fire,
by the means of a Match the Captain had left burning of purpose* as hoping he
might escape with his Two Shallops, blew both the Ships into the Air, and made
the most terrible Crack that was ever heard. It Is impossible to set forth this
horrid Spectacle to the Life; the Spectators were themselves the Actors of this
bloody Scene, not knowing whether they saw or saw it not, and not being able to
judge of that which themselves felt. Wherefore leaving the Reader to imagine
the Horror which the blowing up of two Ships above Two hundred Fathom into the
Air must work in us, where there was formed as it were a Mountain of Water,
Fire, wrack of the Ships, Cordages, Cannon, Men, with a most terrible Clap
made, what with the Cannon that went off in the Air, and the Waves of the Sea
that were tossed up thither; to which we may add the cracking of Masts and
Boards, the rending of the Sails and Ropes, the Cries of Men, and the Breaking
of Bones: I say, leaving these things to the Imagination of the Reader, I shall
only take notice of what befell my self, and by what good Fortune it was that I
escaped.

When the Fire first began, I was upon the fore Deck of my own Ship, where I
gave the necessary Orders; now I was carried up upon part of the said Deck so
high, that I fancy it was the height alone that prevented my being involved in
the Wreck of the Ships, where I must have infallibly perished, and being cut
into a Thousand pieces, I fell back into the Sea (you may be sure) giddy headed
enough, and continued a long time under Water without being able to get up to
the Surface of it. At last, falling into a Debate with the Water, as a Person
who was afraid of being drowned, I got upon the face of it, and laid hold of a
broken piece of a Mast that I found near me. I called to some of my Men who I
saw swimming round about me, and exhorted them to take Courage, hoping we might
yet save our Lives if we could alight upon any one of our Shallops. But what
yet afflicted me more than my very Misfortune, was, to see Two half Bodies who
had still somewhat of Life remaining in them, from time to time mount up to the
face of the Water, and leave the place where they appeared all dyed with Blood.
It was also much the same thing, to see round about me a vast number of Members
and scattered Parts of Men's Bodies, and most of them spitted upon Splinters of
Wood. At last, one of my Men having met with a whole Shallop among all that
Wreck that swam up and down upon the Water, came to tell me that we must
endeavor to stop some Holes therein, and to take out the Canoe that lay on
board her: We got to the number of Fifteen or Sixteen of us who had escaped,
near unto this Shallop, every Man upon his piece of Wood, and took the pains to
loosen our Canoe, which at length we effected. We went all on board her, and
after we had got in, saved our chief Gunner who in the Fight had had his Leg
broke. We took up Three or Four Oars, or pieces of Boards which served us for
that purpose; and when we had done that, we sought out for somewhat to make us
a Sail, and a little Mast; and having sitted up all things as well as possibly
we could, we committed our selves to the Divine Providence who alone could give
us Life and Deliverance.

As soon as I had done working, I found my self all over besmeared with Blood,
that ran from a Wound I had received in my Head at the time of my fall; we made
some Lint out of my Handkerchief, and a Fillet to bind it withal out of my
Shirt, after I had first washed the Wound with Urine: The same thing was done
to the rest that had been wounded, and our Shallop in the mean while sailed
along, without making Land, or our knowing where we were going: And what was
still more sad, was, that we had no Victuals, and we had already spent three
days without either eating or drinking. One of our Men being greatly afflicted
both with Hunger and Thirst at the same time, drunk so much Salt Water, that he
died of it: Most of our Men vomited continually, whether it were that they were
incommoded with the Water that got into them when they fell into the Sea, as it
will happen if they drink of it out of mere Necessity. As for my self, I was
incommoded for a long time: I afterward swelled up mightily, and my Excrements
came from me in the form of small Buttons; and I attribute to a Quartan Ague,
that seized on me soon after, the Cure of my Dropsy, and Recovery of my
Health, that by degrees returned to me: I make no enumeration of the other
Inconveniences which so dangerous a Fall brought upon me, such being
unavoidable to a Man that fell into so great a Fire: All my Hair, Face, and one
side of me were burnt with the Powder; and the same Fate attended me, as
usually does Bombardiers at Sea, and that was, to bleed at the Nose, Ears, and
Mouth. I do not know whether this be the e^^ect of the Powder or no, by
swelling up those Vessels which contain the Blood in our Bodies, to such an
extraordinary degree, that the ends of the Veins open and let it out; or that
the great noise, and violent motion that is wrought in those Organs, makes the
same happen. But let it come which way it will, since there is no room here for
a Consultation of Physicians, as long as we were dying of Hunger, nor to
enquire what became of the English, when we had so much difficulty, and hardly
could save our selves, we continued our Course up the Current with the help of
our Oars, because we knew the same came from the Port of Cabinda: But as the
Wind was against us, we could never get thither, and were forced to be
satisfied to get to the Cape of Corsa if we could, which stands a dozen Leagues
from that of Cathersna, where we could not Land because of a Bar, that renders
the Coast unaccessible. That was our Design, but Hunger hindered us to put the
same in Execution, and we were forced even to overcome the Obstacles which
Nature laid in our way, by running ashore in spite of the Bar: This we
performed at last (after much difficulty) being in hopes to find there some
Negroes that might furnish us with Victuals. One of our Company presently
landed, in order to go and seek out somewhat to satisfy our Hunger; and by
good Fortune found in a Pond sticking to the Branches of Trees, some Oysters,
whereof he came presently to give us notice. We went all up to the very Pond
along a Channel of the Sea, where we were no sooner come, but we eat lustily of
the Oysters with a very good Appetite: We opened them with the few Knives we
found in our Pockets, lending the same from one to another very charitably and
readily. When we had spent two days in that Place, I divided my Men into three
small Companies, and sent them up into the Country to seek for Victuals and
Houses, with Orders to return again in the Evening to the Shalloop: I went out
my self also as the rest did; but we could find neither any House, nor the
least sign of any Men in those Parts. All that we could see were great Herds of
Bufflers, as large as Oxen, who fled so fast from us, that we could not
possibly come near them: Wherefore having spent all the Day in this manner, and
got nothing, we returned to our Shalloop to eat Oysters again, and resolved
next day to leave this Place, and go to Cape Corsa, to Leeward of which there
is a large Port, where Ships that sail that way put in to furnish themselves
with Water and Wood. The Negroes that live in the Country having notice of the
coming in of Ships by the firing of Cannon, come thither also with Provisions,
and Barter the same for Brandy, Knives, and Hatchets. They are forced to live
remote from the Sea, because all that Coast is very Marshy. As soon as we were
got to the said Cape, we heard a great noise, made (...) the Negroes, who came
thither to sell Wood to the ^hips that lay at Anchor in the Port: I looked
amongst them, to see if I could find any one whom I knew, for (...) they had
often brought me some Wood, and other Refreshments in the course of my former
Voyages, I was in hopes to find some or other that would know me again: But
though I knew several of them, it was impossible for me to persuade any of them
that I was Captain Montauban, so much was I disfigured with my late Misfortune;
and all of them took me for a Man that would impose the belief of it upon them:
I thought fit to tell them in their own Language, whereof I understood a
little, that I was ready to die with Famine, and prayed them to give me
somewhat to eat, but it signified nothing; so I desired them to carry me to
Prince Thomas, who is Son to the King of that Country, as hoping he might call
to mind the favors I had formerly showed him.

I carried all my Company with me to that Prince; we were first brought to the
Dwellings of those Negroes, where they began to be a little more tractable, and
gave us some Bananiers to eat, which are a sort of Figs longer than a Man's
Hand. Next day we got to the Princes Habitation, but I was in so pitiful a
Condition, that I could never by the signs I gave, make him know me, though I
spoke to him in his own Language, as also in the Portuguese Tongue, which he
understood very well. It fortuned one day that going together to bath our
selves, he saw a Scar upon my Thigh, that was the effect of a Wound I had
received with a Musquet-ball; he told me that he must immediately know, whether
I was Captain Montauban or no; and that if I were not the Man, he would cut off
my Head: He asked if ever^ I had a Scar with a Musket Shot in my Thigh, which
when I had showed him, he presently embraced me, and said, he was exceeding
sorry to see me in that Condition, and immediately caused Victuals to be
distributed among my Men, and divided them into several Habitations, with
strict Orders to the Negroes, with whom they were quartered, to take the
greatest care they could of them. As for me, he kept me with himself, and made
me always eat at his own Table: When I was a little brought into Order, he
said, he would carry me to see the King his Father, who lived five or six
Leagues off, that is, about ten or a dozen from the Seaside. I let him know
how great the Favor and Honor was he did me, and prayed him at the same time
that I might have the Liberty to let my Freebooters go along with me, and grant
us some Pieces of Stuffs, to put our selves in as good Equipage as we could, in
order to appear before so great a Prince; all which he allowed me, and three
days after, we went all together in a great Canoe, and passed up the River of
Cape Lopez, because the Country is so full of Marshes, that you cannot go by
Land.

Being arrived at the King's Habitation, which is a Village consisting of Three
Hundred Booths, covered with Palm-leaves, wherein the King keeps his Wives,
Family, Relations, and some other Negro Families, whom he loves best; I was
lodged in Prince Thomas his House, and all my Men were distributed into other
Habitations. We found all the People in great Lamentation, because the Chief of
their Religion, whom they call Papa, had died that day, when they were to begin
the Funeral Obsequies, which were usually to last for seven days for Priests of
that Quality. This same Person was had in great Esteem and Veneration by all
the People, they looking upon him to be an Holy Man. As the King is in
Mourning, and sees no body all the While that this Funeral Ceremony lasts;
Prince Thomas bid me have patience, and not to go out of my Lodgings for to see
the King, because that was the Custom of his Nation.

However, I could not forbear going to see the Funeral Solemnity, where I saw
nothing else but a great Concourse of People standing round the dead Corpse. I
was in the mean time very well fed by Prince Thomas his Orders, who was gone to
see his Father: They did not let me want Bananiers, Elephants Flesh, and River
Fish, though all of it came without either Bread or Wine, as you may well
suppose. My Men were treated in the same manner in their respective Quarters
all the time we ^^aid there.

At the Eight Days end, Prince Thomas came, in order to carry us before the
King: He is a large Negro, well enough made, and about Fifty Years old, who, to
do ^^e the greater Honor, according to the Relation given of me to him by his
Son, came out of his House to re^^eive me, and advanced some steps to meet me.
He was ^pported by four or five Women, which gave him a kind of an Air of
Grandeur in a very cumbersom and ^antastick manner: He was guarded by several
Negroes, who were armed with Lances and Fusils, which they discharged from time
to time with no great Order: There were several Trumpets and Drums marched
before him, at the Head of which Company there were also several Standards
carried, alike in color to those used in Holland. He had no other Clothes than
a piece of Cotton Stuff, streaked with white and blue, wherewith part of his
Body was covered, the same being several times folded round about him.

He gave me many Demonstrations of his Friendship, he also stretched out his
Hand to me, saying, it was the first time he had ever done so to any Man before
me. Being come to his House, he sat at his Door, and made me take Place on the
one side of him, as his Son did on the other. He asked me several Questions
concerning the Greatness and Power of the King my Master; and when I had told
him, that he alone waged War against the English and Dutch, whom himself knew,
as having seen them often at the Cape of Lopez, that he also warred against the
Germans and Spaniards, who were more Potent Nations than the English and Dutch;
He told me, he was pleased with my Account, and that he would drink the King of
France's Health. Presently they brought him some Palm-Wine, which is not
unpleasant to drink, and his Wives served him in a great Crystal Glass. As soon
as he began to take the Glass, the Negro Men and Women lifted up the Right Arm,
and held the same in that posture very silently till he had done drinking: But
when it was over, they made a great noise with their Trumpets and Drums, and
discharged all their Muskets, or I should have rather said, Fusils.

Prince Thomas then asked me what the King of France's Name was, and having
told him, Lewis le Grand, he said he had a mind I should hold (...) Child of
his, of about Seven or Eight Months old, (...) Baptism, and that I should give
him the Name of Lewis le Grand, which made me smile a little at the Humor. He
told me also, that the first Voyage I should make into his Country, he would
give the Child to carry to France for a Present for the King, to whose Service
(...) devoted him, being very desirous he should be broug^^ up according to the
Custom of the Country, and Cou^^ of so great a Prince. I also promised on my
part, the the first time I came to the Coast of Guiney, I shou^^ not fail to
come and put him in mind of his Promise, that so, upon my Return into France, I
might be capable of making the greatest Present that could be unto the King, in
presenting him with the Son of Prince Thomas. And assure him, said the same
Prince, that I am his Friend, and that if he has occasion for my Services, I Will
go my self into France with all the Lances and Fusils belonging to the King my
Father, which was as much as to say, with all the Force of the Kingdom. The
King presently pursued the Discourse, and assured me he would go thither in
Person, if there was need for it; and with that, all the Negro Men and Women
raised such a Shout as much surprised me; and this was scarce over, when the
Fusileers made a general Discharge of their Arms, the Trumpets and Drums went
to it again, and those who carried the Lances set themselves a running from one
side to another with such horrible Outcries as frighted me. I was really
ignorant of the meaning of all this, and could not be satisfied till I saw the
King drink the French King's Health a second time, with the same Ceremonies as
at first. Prince Thomas drank it also, and all of us were commanded to do the
same. This being over, the King ordered Two Wax Cakes to be brought, whereof he
made me a Present, desiring me to accept of them as a Token of his Friendship,
and then he went into his House.

The Audience being thus over, Prince Thomas carried me along with him into all
the Parts of the Village whither he went to visit his Friends, and we went the
succeeding Days to see several other Villages that are scattered up and down
the Country at about Five Leagues distance from each other.

These People, the greatest part of whom had never been at the Seaside, and
consequently had not seen any White People, ran from all Quarters to see us,
and brought us more Fruit, with Bufflers and Elephants Flesh, than we could
eat. As for the Elephants of this Country, they are not altogether like unto
those in the East Indies, whereof they are a different Species, as are also
those of Cafala, near Zanguebar, on the Eastern Coasts of Aethiopia: The
Negro's eat of their Flesh with a good Appetite, and like the same better than
any other; hereof they provide their best Feasts, and those who were minded to
honor us most; brought it unto us instead of that of Bufflers which I prefer
much before it.

As they were not able to comprehend the Difference there was between the
Color of their Faces and ours, they would frequently put their Hands upon our
Faces to see if the white Color would go off; and it was the Fortune of many
of us, to meet with Hands scrubbed with Knifes, so as that many times we were
hurt with them, which yet we durst not complain of. Prince Thomas, when he saw
that, commanded all his Attendance that they should suffer none to come to rub
and scrape us with their Fingers in that manner, and spoke aloud to all the
People that came to see us, that all Strangers were White as we were; and that
if the Negro's went into another Country, they would seem to be as odd colored
there as we were in Guiney. He laughed also from time to time to see the People
run in that Fashion after us, as if we had been some unknown Animal; And I am
not certain whether he were sorry to see us thus incommoded with the
Importunities of those Negro's, or that he took some pleasure to see the Folly
of his Country Men, as I have done many a time, to behold all their extravagant
Humors.

At last, after a Journey and Diversion together of Three Days, the Prince
brought me back by another way to take my Leave of his Father: The King
caressed me a thousand times, after a most obliging manner, according to the
Custom of his Country, and made me promise I should give him a Visit the first
time I returned into Guiney. Then we embarked in our Canoes, and next Day came
to Prince Thomas his Village, where he continued to treat us after the manner
he had been used to do. Here he spoke to me again, that he would have me stand
Witness for his Son at his Baptism, which I did with so much the more pleasure
in that I was helpful to make a Christian, and sanctify a Soul.

But as I was dubious whether the Priest of the Town knew how to baptize the
Child, or that he could remember the Words he ought to say at the
Administration of that Sacrament, I desired the Prince to send for a Priest out
of one of the Portuguese Ships, which he presently did, to Cape Lopez: So that
one came from thence in Two Days time. The Portuguese were the People that
brought the Christian Religion first into these Countries. It Is true, they have
not kept the same up there as they ought to have done; but the Difficulties
that obstruct that good Establishment, proceeds, without doubt, from hence,
that Men must dwell in a Country that is no better than Savage, where the Air
and their Victuals are ^ot so agreeable to Strangers. To give Religion a sure
footing in these Regions, it is necessary that the Europeans have fixed
Habitations, or build Towns there; that they instruct the Negro's in the Truths
of the Christian Faith, and that they send out Missionaries from time to time
among these poor Wretches. This might very easily be done, because these People
are very docible, and readily apprehend the Truths which you would teach them,
as having lived without any Faith at all or any Idea of another Religion, for a
long time. These Negro's being once become Christians, you might make Priests
amongst them of their own Nation, who might be furnished with Books for the
Ceremonies of the Church, and a Catechism for the Rule of their Faith, until
they were capable to read the New Testament. It is necessary also, that a
Bishop were constituted in this Town, who should take care to send Priests to
the Dwellings of the Negro's, up and down the Countries, and to build Oratories
in the most populous Places. The Christian Religion might in this manner be
settled in Guiney, and so become less subject to be ruined by the Wars which
Strangers make there. The Christians also who dwell in the Kingdoms of Fess and
Marocco might be reformed, and a Correspondence settled between the Priests of
that Nation and those of Guiney, that so they might be assisting to one
another, for the keeping up of Religion on all the Coasts of Africa. It was in
a manner not unlike unto this, that Christianity established it self among the
Gentiles, who were an hundred fold more averse to our Faith than the Negro's of
Guiney. The Priests of this Country are for the most part no Priests at all, as
having never been Ordained by any Bishop, and constituted themselves in the
room of those that were deceased in their Country. And thus it is that they
have nothing in a manner that savours of Christianity, though they have
Ceremonies enough, and some appearance of a Sacrifice.

But to return to our Baptism: The Portuguese Priest being come, Prince Thomas
his Son was baptized, and named Lewis le Grand, in pursuance to the Intention
of his Father: A Negro Woman, and one of his Relations, served as Godmother,
and I for Godfather. I was told this Lady was called Antonia, and that she had
been thus named by the Wife of a Portuguese Captain at her Baptism.

Two or Three Days after this Ceremony was over, which was performed with all
the Magnificence the Negro's were capable of, Prince Thomas his Guards which he
kept at Cape de Lopez to give him notice of the Arrival of any Ships, came to
tell him there was an English Ship come thither. I desired him to let me go on
board her, that I might return to my own Country, to free my self from those
many Inconveniences I still labored under. But he would not have me commit my
self into the hands of mine Enemies, and desired me to have a little Patience
till the Arrival of some Portuguese Ships with which he would let me go. In the
mean time the Prince went to Cape Lopez, there to exchange Elephants Teeth,
Beeswax, and Negro's, for Iron, Arms, and Brandy, and returned from thence in
Ten or Twelve Days.

He told me, when he came back, that there was a Portuguese Ship come to Anchor
at Cape de Lopez, and that I should go down in his Canoe in order to go on
board her; that he had recommended me to the Captain, and that I should want
nothing that was necessary for my Voyage into Europe.

I presently gathered my Men together, except Two whom I did not think fit to
wait for; for they were gone up into the Country Five or Six Days before, and I
knew not where to find them. We therefore embarked on board this Prince's
Canoes, after I had taken my leave of him; and upon our Arrival at Cape Lopez,
I found the Portuguese Commander to be one of my Friends, with whom I had
contracted Acquaintance at the Isle of St. Thomas. I went on board him, and
three days after, we anchored at the said Island, the Governor whereof showed
me and my Men a Thousand Civilities during a Month's space that we were forced
to tarry in that Port. At the expiration of that time came in an English Ship,
that had been out upon the Gold-Coast: I made Acquaintance with the Captain,
and we grew to be such Friends, that I thought my self obliged in Honor to
accept of the Offers he made me: He prayed me to go on board his Ship, and
assured me I should find all the help imaginable at Barbados, whither he was
bound, because there were very good Jewish Physicians in that Island of his
Acquaintance. I embarked therefore on his Ship, with all my Men,
notwithstanding all the Reasons given me by the Governor of the Island, to
make me suspicious of the Englishman, who was undoubtedly as honest a Man as
any of his Country: He was so civil as to give me his own Cabin, with all the
Pleasure and Diversion he could think of, for the solacing of my Spirits, under
the Afflictions I had from time to time endured.

Ten days after our departure from St. Thomas, a blast of Wind unhappily made
us lose our Rudder, in the room whereof we were forced to set up a spare
Topmast, and this proved very detrimental to our Voyage, which lasted no less
than three Months.

Provisions began to be scarce before our Arrival at Barbados, so that when we
came there, we had no more than what would have served us for three days
longer, insomuch that the Captain being concerned that he had taken our Men on
Board, ordered our Allowance to be lessened three fourths of what it should be.
When we were got to Port, the Captain went to wait upon Colonel Russel, who is
General there, related to him my whole Adventure with the Guardship of Angola,
and was much blamed for bringing me to Barbados. When the Captain returned on
board his Ship, he told me what the Governor had said, who had forbid him upon
pain of Death, to let me go ashore: However, he said nothing to me of this
Prohibition, but contented himself with only desiring me not go ashore, that it
might create no Suspicion in the Governor; which I promised exactly to
perform, having no great Concern upon me of seeing a Place again, that I had
known so long ago, and being unwilling to create my Captain any Trouble.

Next day, several Jews, that had been driven away from Martinico, having heard
of my Arrival, came to see me, and finding I was very crazy, and much out of
Order, they sent some Physicians of their Nation to me, who said, I could not
be cured, if I were not carried ashore, and thereupon offered to solicit the
Governor on my behalf, for giving me leave to go lie in an House in the Town.
I drew up a Petition to him, praying him to grant me that Liberty, and
promising I would not stir out of the Chamber where I was placed, till I were
to reimbark to go for Martinico.

The Physicians themselves were obliged to be my Securities, and I was at
length carried to Mr. Jacob Lewis his House, where I was very well looked after
all the time I staid there. Three days after I was brought thither, the
Major General came to see me from Colonel Russel the Governor; he very civilly
offered me his Protection, and all those things that could be conducive for the
recovery of my Health: The same Major, as also the Captain of the Garrison,
came also to Visit me from time to time, though I apprehended they came not so
much to inspect into the state of my health, as to see if I were in a Condition
to be transported out of that Island. Colonel Russel also himself, about ten or
twelve days after my Arrival, came to see if I was so bad as they said I was:
He came again about seven or eight days after in the Evening, and caused me to
be carried out of the Iew's House, where I was, to an English Merchant's. He
told me, I should be better accommodated there than at Jacob Lewis's; but I
thought it was to the intent I might be watched more narrowly, and not converse
with so many People. He came to see me next day, and asked, how I liked my new
Lodging? I rendered him many Thanks for the Civilities and Kindnesses he showed
me, and that he might have no occasion to suspect my Men, I prayed him to shut
them up in the Citadel, that they might not run about the Island, and to
prevent their making of their Escape.

He said, he would take care of it, but that I was to understand they were
Prisoners of War as well as my self. I made answer, I knew that, and that I
thought my self an happy Man, to have fallen into his hands: But that the
English Captain, who had brought me to Barbados, had given me his Word, I
should not be detained, nor any of my Men; That it was upon his Faith given me,
and the tenders of Service he made me, that I had embarked, as firmly relying
upon those Testimonies of his Friendship he had given me. Then I desired him to
grant me and my Men our Liberty, promising I should ever be mindful of the
Favor done me, whether it were by restoring of the Prisoners I might take
belonging to the Islands, or paying him such a Ransom as he required.

No, said the Governor, I will have neither your Ransom, nor your Prisoners,
and you are too brave a Man, for me to have no Compassion upon your many
Misfortunes: I desire, on the contrary, that you would accept of these Forty
Pistoles, which I present you with, to supply your present occasion: He gave
them me in a Purse, which he had doubtless brought along with him for that
purpose; and when he left me, he said, he went to give Orders for to bring my
Men together. Next day he sent me two of them, who said, they knew not what was
become of the rest, and that they had Orders from the Governor to stay with
me. I had the Liberty to send them abroad to get me Necessaries; and at last,
finding my self somewhat recovered by the care my Landlord took of me, I told
the Officer that came daily to see me, that I desired the Governor to let me
go on board the first Vessel that was bound to Martinico.

Three days after, came a Bark, which the Count de Blenac, General of the
French Islands, had sent thither about the exchange of Prisoners: Colonel
Russel sent me word she was come, and that I should prepare to be gone. Then it
was I had the Liberty to go to his House, to render him Thanks for all the
Civilities he had showed me: He told me, he was sorry that by the Laws of War
he was bound to allow me no more Liberty than I had, and that he prayed me to
use the English kindly, then should happen to fall into my Hands. This being
done, I went on board the French Bark, which was commanded by the Sieur
Courpon, formerly an Inhabitant of St. Christophers, and I could never find any
more of my Freebooters than those two I have spoken of, whom the Governor sent
me.

We went ashore at Port Royal in Martinico, and I went with my Men to the Town
to wait upon Monsieur de Blenac, who was then sick of that Distemper he died
of. I gave him a Relation of all my Adventures, and I am sure he was surprised
to hear the Particulars of so many Misfortunes: As he would have me stay at his
House all the time I tarryed in Martinico, he made me every day repeat unto him
the manner of my Fight with the English Man of War, and at last finding an
Opportunity of getting me transported into France, he sent for the Captain of
the Ship who was bound thither, and recommended me to him. He would also have
writ Letters by me to Monsieur Phelipeaux, to recommend me to some Employ, but
the day before my departure he was taken so very ill, that he could not write,
and that day, which was the Tenth of June, in the Evening he died: I was
mightily troubled at his Death for several Reasons. He was a Person that took
delight in serving every body, who had great Compassion on such as had been
persecuted by an Evil Fate, as was my Case, who went forwards with what he
knew, who of himself made an offer of those Favors he was minded to bestow,
before they were asked of him, and who, in short, was brave as to his Person,
Skilful in Maritine Affairs, a good Seaman, knew all the Coasts and heights of
Lands in America, was in great Esteem with the King for his Integrity, Wisdom,
Justice, and for all his great Services he had done the Government in the way
of Commerce, and Discovery of Islands. The day after his Death I embarked on
board the Virgin, a Ship belonging to Bourdeaux, and which had been built
there, in which Port, after a Passage of ^ot many days, I arrived at last with
many different Thoughts, and contrary Sentiments within me. I do not know
whether I have bid the Sea adieu, so much has my last Misfortune terrified me;
or whether I shall go out again to be revenged on the English, who have done me
so much Mischief; or go and traverse the Seas with a Design to get me a little
Wealth, or rest quiet, and eat up what my Relations have left me. There is a
strange Inclination in Men to undertake Voyages, as there is to Gaming;
whatever Misfortunes befall them, they do not believe they will be always
unhappy, and therefore they will play on. Thus it is as to the Sea, whatever
Accidents befall us, we are in hopes to find a favorable Opportunity to make us
amends for all our Losses. I believe whoever reads this Account, will find it
an hard Task to give me Counsel thereupon, or to take the same himself.

FINIS.

