A COLLECTION OF English WORDS. Not Generally used, with their Significations
and Original, in two Alphabetical Catalogues, The one of such as are proper to
the Northern, the other to the Southern Counties. With Catalogues of English
Birds and Fishes: And an Account of the preparing and refining such Metals and
Minerals as are gotten in England. By JOHN RAY Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by H. Bruges for Tho. Burrell at the Golden-Ball under St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, 1674.

TO HIS Honored Friend PETER COURTHOPE OF Danny in Sussex Esquire.
SIR,
THough I need no other Motive to induce me to present you with this Collection
of English Words, but that I might take occasion publicly to own my
Obligations to you, as well for your long continued Friendship, as for the
Assistance you have sometime afforded me in those Studies to which I am I think
naturally inclined, yet one Circumstance did more especially lead me to make
choice of you for its Patron; and that is, that you were the first that
Contributed to it, and indeed the Person that put me upon it; and so it being
in good measure your own, I have reason to hope that you will Favorably accept
it. I confess the Work is so inconsiderable, that I am somewhat ashamed to
prefix your name before it, but having nothing else left of my own, which I
design to trouble the World with, as not knowing whether I may live so long as
to perfect my intended Method and History of Plants; I choose rather to present
you with this, then lose the Honor of being known to have such a Friend, or
neglect the duty of making acknowledgments where they are due, especially
having already made Presents of this Nature to others of my Friends, which is
enough to excuse this Dedication intended to no other purposes by

Sir, Your very humble Servant, JO. RAY.

TO THE READER.
IN my travels through several parts of England, besides other things, which I
principally minded and pursued, I could not but take notice of the difference
of Dialect, and variety of Local words (for so I will take leave to call such
as are not of general use) in diverse Counties, by Reason whereof in many
places, especially of the North, the Language of the common people, is to a
stranger very difficult to be understood. Whereupon I thought it might be worth
the while to make a Collection of such words for my own use, and began first to
set down those that occurred to me in common discourse. But making short stays
in particular places, and conversing but with few persons, I found that what I
could take notice of my self would be but an inconsiderable part of what were
in use among the vulgar. Therefore I desired my friends and acquaintance living
in several Countries to communicate to me what they had observed each of their
own Country words, or should afterward gather up out of the mouths of the
people; which diverse of them accordingly did. To whose contributions I must
acknowledge my self to owe the greatest part of the words, I now present the
Reader with, in these Catalogues. The considerations which induced me to make
them public were. First, because I knew not of anything that has been already
done in this kind. 2. Because I conceive, they may be of some use to them who
shall have occasion to travel the Northern Counties, in helping them to
understand the common language there. 3. Because they may also afford some
diversion to the curious, and give them occasion of making many considerable
remarks.

As for the sense and import of these words, I am confident I am not therein
mistaken, having received it from persons that well understand the force and
meaning of them in the places where they are used. But of their original or
Etymology, for want of sufficient skill in the Saxon, Dutch and Danish
Languages, I have not been able to give so good an account as I desired, and by
those helps might have done. For what I have performed in this kind, I
acknowledge my self to have been for the most part beholden to Dr. Skinner's
Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae, and Mr. Somners Saxon Dictionary, by turning
over which last work I find a great part of these words to be pure Saxon, or
manifestly derived thence; and I doubt not but many of the rest, which occur
not in that Dictionary (which being collected out of but a few Books and
fragments that remain of that Language, cannot be conceived to comprehend near
all the words in common use) are of like Original.

I am sensible that this Collection is far from Perfect, not containing
perchance more then one moiety of the Local words used in all the several
Counties of England. But it is as full as I can at present easily make it, and
may give occasion to the curious in each Country to supply what are wanting,
and so make the work complete.

I have added hereto, 1. a Catalogue of English Birds, as well such as
continually abide and breed with us; as those they call Birds of passage, that
come and go at certain seasons, admitting also some which frequent our coasts
only upon occasion of hard Winte^s or other accidents, all which either my Self
or Mr. Francis Willughby have both seen and described. Since this Catalogue was
sent away to the Press, among some Pictures of Birds which I have received from
the Learned and deservedly Famous Sr. Thomas Brown of Norwich, I find two or
three English Birds by me omitted, as whereof I was not then certain, 1.
Oedicnemus Bellonii, by him also first observed in England. Upon the Picture of
it sent me by Sr. Tho. I find inscribed, A stone Curlew, from about Thetford,
whereabout they breed. It has a Remarkable eye and note somewhat like a green
plover, 2. A shear-water inscribed, Larus niger, pectore albido, rostro adunco,
3. The Barker, a marsh Bird with a long bill, to which there was no Latin name
added, 4. Mergulos melanoleucos rostro acuto brevi, 5. A little Bird of a
tawney color on the back, and a blew head, yellow bill, black legs, shot in an
Osiar yard, called by Sir Tho. for distinction sake Silerella.

2. Two Catalogues of fishes, one of all our English fresh water fishes; the
other of such seafish as are taken about Pensans in Carnwal.

3. Several relations of the manner of smelting, refining and preparing such
metals and minerals as are found in England, according to the best information
I could get in the places where they are wrought.

A Collection OF LOCAL WORDS PROPER To the North and South COUNTRIES.
North Country Words.
A
TO Adle or Addle; to Earn, from the ancient Saxon word Ed-lean, a reward,
recompense or requital.

Agate; Ches. Just going, as I am Agate. Gate in the Northern Dialect signifies
a way, so that a Agate is at or upon the way.

A mell; Among, betwixt, contracted from a middle; Some pronounce it ameld.

Anauntrins; If so be. I know not what the Original of this should be, unless
it be from An, for if, and Auntrins contracted from Peradventure.

Anent; Over against, concerning, A word of frequent use among the Scots. Some
deduce it from the Greek (...) Oppositum. Nec male sane (inquit Skinnerus in
Etymologico Linguae Anglicanae) si vel soni vel sensus convementiam respicias.
Sed quo commercio Graeci Scotis totius Europae longitudine dissi^is vocabula
impertiri potuerurit? Mallem igitur deducere ab AS Nean Prope, addita particula
initiali otiosa AS.

An Arain: a Spider a Lat. Aranea, it is used only for the larger kind of
Spiders. Nottinghamshire.

An Ark; A large Chest to put corn or fruit in like the Bing of a Buttery; from
the Latin word Arca.

Arles or Earls; Earnest, An Arles-penny, An Earnest penny, from the Latin
word archa.

An Asker; a Newt, or Eft, Salamandra aquatica.

2. Astite; Anon, shortly, or As soon. i. e. As Tide, Tide in the North
signifies soon, and tider or titter sooner. The tider (that is the sooner) you
come the tider you will go; from the Saxon Tid signifying time, which is still
in use, as in Shrove-tide, Whitsun-tide, etc.

1. As Asly; As willingly.

An Attercob; A Spiders Web. Cumberl.

Average; The breaking of corn fields; Eddish, Roughings. Average in Law
signifies either the beasts which tenants and vassals were to provide their
Lords for certain services, or that money that was laid out by Merchants to
repair the losses suffered by Shipwreck; and so it is deduced from the old word
Aver [Averium] signifying a laboring beast: or Averia signifying Goods or
Chattels, from the French Avoir to have or possess. But in the sense we have
used it, it may possibly come from Haver signifying Oats; or from Averia,
beasts, being as much as feeding for cattal, pasturage.

An Aumbry or Ambry or Aumery. A Pantry or Cupboard to set victuals in: Skinner
makes it to Signify a Cupboards head, or side-table: super quam vasa mensaria
and tota argentea supellex ad usum conviviorum exponitur: a Fr. G. Aumoire,
Armaire and Armoire, It. Armaro idem signantibus, q. d. Latin Armarium. Prove.
No sooner up, but the head in the Aumbry, and nose in the cup; in which
sentence it must needs signify a Cup-board for Victuals.

Aunters: Peradventure, or, in case, if it chance. I guess it to be contracted
from Adventure, which was first mollified into Auventure, and then easily
contracted into Aunter.

The Aunder, or as they pronounce it in Cheshire Oneder; The afternoon.

B.
BAin; Willing, Forward: opposed to Lither.

The Balk or Bawk: The Summer-beam. Balks, Bawks: Poles laid over a stable or
other building for the roof, a Belgico and Teuton. Balk, Trabs, tignum.

A Balk staff: A Quarter-staffe, A great staff like a Pole or Beam.

A Bannock, An Oat-cake kneaded with water only and baked in the Embers. In
Lancashire, and other parts of the North, they make several sorts of Oaten
bread, which they call by several names: as 1. Tharcakes, the same with
Bannocks, viz. Cakes made of Oat-meal as it comes from the mill and fair water,
without Yeast or leaven, and so baked. 2. Clap-bread: Thin hard Oat-cakes. 3.
Kitchiness-bread: Thin soft Oat-cakes made of thin batter. 4. Riddle-cakes:
thick Sour-cakes, from which differs little that which they call Hand-hoven
Bread, having but little leaven, and being kneaded stiffer. 5. Jannock, Oaten
bread made up in loaves.

A Bargh, A Horseway up a steep hill. Yorkshire.

A Barn or Bearn: A Child: it is an ancient Saxon word. In the ancient
Teutonick Barn signifies a son, derived perchance from the Syriack Bar, I'ilius.

Bearn-teams, Broods of Children, as they expounded it to me. I find that
Bearn-team in the Saxon, signifies Issue, offspring, Children, from team,
soboles, and Bearn.

Beating with Child: Breeding, gravid. Yorkshire.

A Beck: a small brook: a word common to the ancient Saxon, High and low Dutch
and Danish.

Beer or Birre q. Bear: Force, might. With aw my beer. Chesh. i. e. with all
my force.

Beight of the Elbow: Bending of the Elbow. Chesh. Asubstantive from the
preterperfect tense of Bend, as Bought of the like signification, from Bow.

Belive: Anon, by and by, or toward night. By the Eve.

To Bensel: To bang or beat. Vox rustica Ebor.

To Berry: to Thresh.

Biggening: I wish you a good biggening: i. e. A good getting up again after
lying in. Votum pro puerpera.

Bizen'd: Skinner writes it Beesen or Beezen or Bison: Blinded. From by
signifying besides, and the Dutch word Sin signifying Sense. q. d. Sensu omnium
nobilissimo orbatus: says he.

Cow-blakes: Casings, Cow Dung dried, used for Fuel.

Bleit or Blate: Bashful. A toom purse makes a bleit Merchant. Scot. Prove. That
is, an empty purse makes a shamefac't Merchant. Fortass q. bleak or blank.

Bloten: Fond, as Children are of their nurses. Chesh.

To Bluffe: To blindfold.

A Bondy: A Simpleton. York-sh.

To Book at one: to Point at one. Chesh. i. e. to Poke at one.

To Book, to Nauseate, to be ready to vomit, also to Belch. Vox agro
Lincolniensi familiaris (inquit Skinnerus) Alludit saltem Hispan. Bessar
vomere, Boquear oscitare seu Pandiculari; vel possit deflecti a Latino evocare,
vel melius a Belg. Boocken, Boken pulsare, vel Fuycken Trudere, protrudere.
Vomitus enim est rerum vomitu rejectarum quaedam protrusio seu extrusio.

The Boor: The Parlour, Bedchamber or inner room. Cumb.

A Boose: an Ox, or Cow-stall. ab AS. Bosih. v. Ox-boose.

To Boun and unboun; to dress and undress. Forte ^ Belgico Bouwen, to build or
manure. which word also substantively signifies a woman's garment.

To Bourd; to Jest, used most in Scotland. Bourd [Jest] neither with me nor
with my honor, Prove. Scot.

Bout: Without. Chesh. To be bout as Barrow was, i. e. to be without as, etc.
Prove.

Braken: Brakes, Fern. [var. Dial.] Brakes is a word of General use all England
over.

Bragget, A sort of compound drink made up with honey, Spices, etc. in
Cheshire, Lancashire, etc. Minshew derives it from the Welsh Bragod signifying
the same. forte q. d. Potus Galliae braccatae. The Author of the English
Dictionary set forth in the Year, 1658. Deduces it from the Welsh word Brag
signifying Malt, and Gots a Honey Comb.

A Brandrith; a Trevet or other iron to set any vessel on, over the fire, from
the Saxon Brandred, a Brand iron,

Bratt; Vox agro Lincolniensi usitata, sic autem appellatur Semicinctium ex
panno vilissimo ab AS Bratt panniculus; hoc a verbo Brittan. Gebritian,
frangere, q. d. Panni fragmenta. Skinner.

Braughwham; A dish made of Cheese, Eggs, Clap-bread and Butter boiled
together, Lancash.

To Bread; i. e. to make broad, to spread. ab AS. Braedan.

To Bree; to Frighten.

To Breid or brade of; to be like in conditions, from breeding, because those
that are bred of others are for the most part like them. Ye breid of the
Millers dog, ye lick your mouth or the poke be open. Prove. Scot.

Brichoe; Brittle. Var. Dial. Chesh.

Broach; a Spit, it is a French word: From its similitude whereto a
Spire-steeple is called a Broach-steeple, as an Obelisk is denominated from,
(...) a spit. It signifies also a Butchers-prick.

Hat Bruarts; Hat brims. Cheshire, Var. Dial.

A Buer; a Gnat.

Bulle^; Hempstalks pilled.

Bulkar; Vox agro Lincoln. usitatissima, proculdubio a Dan. Bielcker, n. pl.
trabes, Bielck, Tignum, Trabs. Skinner.

C.
CAnt; strong, lusty, very cant, God yield you, i. e. Very strong and lu^^y,
God reward you, Chesh.

To Cant; to Recover or Mend. A health to the good wives canting, i. e. her
recovering after lying in,

Canting; Auctio.

A Capo; a working horse. Chesh.

A Carl-cat; a Bore or He-cat, from the old Saxon Carle a male, and Cat.

A Carre; a hollow place where water stands.

The Carr-sick; The Kennel; a word used in Sheffield, York-sh.

To Carve or Kerve; to grow sour, spoken of cream, Chesh.

Casings: Dried cowes dung used for fuel, from the Dutch Koth, fimus, caenum,
q. d. Cothings, Skinner.

A Char: a particular business or task, from the word charge. That Char is
chard, etc. That business is dispatched. I have a little Char for you, etc. A
Char is also the name of a Fish of the trout-kind found in Winander-mere in
Westmerland, and in a lake in Carnarvanshire by the back of Snowdon.

To Chare: to stop: as char the cow, i. e. Stop or turn her.

A Chaundler: A Candlestick, Sheffield.

To Chieve: to succeed: as, It chieves naught with him: So, Fair chieve you, I
wish you good luck, good speed or success, from Atchieve per Aphaeresin: or
perchance from the French word Chevir, to obtain.

To Cleam: a word of frequent use in Lincolnshire, signifying to glue together,
to fasten with glue. Ab AS. Claemian, beclaemian. Oblinere, unde nostrum
clammy. AS. clam, Plasma, emplastrum: Danic. Kliiner, Glutino. Nescio autem an
verbum claemian and Nom. Clam orta sint a Lat. Limus, Limus enim propter
lentorem admotis corporibus adhaeret, Skinner.

Clem'd or clam'd: Starved, because by famine the guts and bowels are as it
were clammed or stuck together. Sometimes it signifies thirsty, and we know in
thirst the mouth is very often clammy.

Clough: a valley between two steep hills. it is an ancient Saxon word, derived
(as Skinner says) from the verb to cleave.

Clumps: Jdle, lazy, unhandy, ineptus, a word of common use in Lincolnshire, a
vet. Fr. G. Cloppe, claudus, vel a Belg. Klonte, Klonter, vel potius Klompe,
Teut. Klamp, Massa, q. d. Carnis massa, spiritus and ingenij expers, vel a
Belg. Lompsch, Stupidus, piger, hoc fort. a Lompe, Clompe massa ob rationem jam
dictam: vel forte clumps contr. and corr. a nostro clownish, Skinner.

A Clussum'd hand, a clumsy hand, Chesh. per metathesin literarum.

Cobby: Stout, Hearty, Brisk.

Cocket: Brisk, malapert. Dicimus autem (verba sunt Skinneri) He is very
cocket, de homine valetudinario qui jam melius^ule se habet and convalescere
incipit. q. d. Est instar Galli alacer, non ut prius languidus. vel a Fr. G.
Coqueter, Glocitare instar Galli galgallinas suas vocantis, vel superbe
incedere iustar galli in suo sterquilinio.

A Cod; a Pillow: a Pin-cod, a Pin-cushion.

Coke: Pit-coal or Sea-cole charred: it is now become a word of general use, a
Lat. coquere, q. d. Carbo coctus.

Cole or Keal: Potage: Colewort: Potage-herb, Potage was so denominated from
the herb Colewort, because it was usually thereof made, and Colewort from the
Latin word Caulis (...), signifying Brasica.

A Collock: A great piggin.

To Cope a wall: to cover it, the Coping: the top or roof of the wall. Ab AS.
Coppe, Apex, Culmen, fastigium hoc, a Cop, Caput. This is a word of general
use, and not proper to the North Country only.

Counterfeits and trinkets: Porringers and Sausers, Chesh.

A Cranny lad: Chesh. A jovial, brisk, lusty Lad.

A Crassantly lad: a coward. Chesh. in Lancashire they say Craddanly.

To Cream: to mantle, spoken of drink: it is a metaphor taken from milk.

Creem it into my hand: Put it in slily or secretly, Chesh.

Crowse: Brisk, budge, lively, jolly. As crowse as a new washen louse, Prove.

D.
To DAcker: to waver, stagger or totter, a word used in Lincolnshire, parum
deflexo sensu a Belg. Dacckeren, motare, motitare, volitare, hoc a nomine
Daeck, Nebula: Vapores enim nebulosi huc illuc vel minimo venti flatu
impelluntur. Skinner.

To Daffe: to Daunt.

A Daffock: a Dawkin.

Daft: Stupid, blockish, daunted, a verbo Daffe.

Dare: Harm or pain. Dare in the Ancient Saxon signifies Hurt, harm, loss. It
does me no dare: i. e. no harm. So in Essex we say, It dares me, i. e. it pains
me.

To Daw or Dow: to thrive. He neither dees nor daws, i. e. He neither dies nor
mends. He Will never dow, i. e. He will never be good. a Teut. Dauwen, Verdauwen,
concoquere, vel potius a Deyen, Gedeyen, Augescere, increscere, proficere, AS.
Dean, Proficere, vigere, Skinner.

A Dawgos or Dawkin: a dirty, slattering woman.

A Days man: An Arbitrator.

Dazed bread: Dough-baked.

I's dazed: I am very cold.

Deafely: Lonely, solitary, far from neighbors.

Dearn: signifies the same.

To Degrees: v. Leck.

To Didder: to quiver with cold, a Belg. Sitteren, Teut. Zittern: omnia a
stridulo sono, quem frigore horrentes and trementes dentibus edimus, Skinner.

Dight: Dressed: ill dight, ill dressed, from the Saxon Dihtan, parare,
instruere.

To Dight: Cheshire, to foul or dirty one.

To Ding: to Beat: forte a Teut. Dringen, urgere premere, elisa litera r.

A Dingle: A small clough or valley between two steep hills.

To Dize: to put tow on a distaffe.

Dizen'd: Dressed.

A Donnaught or Donnat: [i. e. Doenaught:] Naught, good for nothing: idle
Persons being commonly such, Yorkshire.

A Dole or Dool: A long narrow green in a plowed field left unplowed.

2. Doundrins: Derb: Afternoons drinkings: Aunder there signifying the
Afternoon.

1. A Dosome beast: Chesh. That will be content with nothing, also thriving,
that comes on well.

A Drape: a farrow cow, or cow whose milk is dried up. Drape-Sheep, Oves
reijculae, credo ab AS. Drefe, Expulsio, Skinner.

Dree: Long, seeming tedious beyond expectation, spoken of a way. A hard
bargainer, spoken of a person. I suppose it is Originally no more then dry,
though there be hardly any word of more frequent use in the North Country, in
the sense mentioned.

Drozen: Fond, (...).

A Dub: a Pool of water.

E.
EAm, mine Eam: My Uncle, also generally my Gossip, my Compere, my friend. Ab
AS. Eam, Teut, Ohm, Belg. Oom, Avunculus. Omnia a Latino Amita, fort. and ant.
Amitus, Hin Dan. and Teut. Amme, Nutrix: Materterae enim seu Amitae nepotes
suos nutrire solent and fovere, Skinner.

To Earn: to run as cheese does. Earning, cheese-rennet or rening. Var. Dialect.

The Easter: The back of the chimney, or chimney-stock.

To Eckle or Ettle: to Aim, intend, design.

Eddish: Roughings, ab. AS (...) Gramen serotinum and hoc a Praep. loquelari
AS. Ed. rursus, denuo. q. d. Gramen quod denuo crescit.

To Eem, Chesh. as I cannot Eem, I have no leisure, I cannot spare time.

Eever: Chesh. Corner or quarter. The wind is in a cold eever. i. e. a cold
corner or quarter.

An El mother, Cumb. A step mother.

The Elder: the Udder: it signifies the same thing in the Low Dutch.

Elden: Fuel for fire ab AS. Aeled, ignis, Aelan, accendere.

An Eshin: a Pail or Kit.

Skeer the Esse: Chesh. Separate the dead ashes from the Embers.

F.
FAin; Glad. Fair words make fools fain Prove. From the Saxon Faegan, Laetus
hilaris, Faegnian, gaudere.

Fantome corn; Lank or light corn: Fantome flesh: when it hangs loose on the
bones. The French call a spirit appearing by night or a Ghost, a Fantosme, from
Phantasma, spectrum. So then Phantosme corn is corn that has as little bulk or
solidity in it as a Spirit or Spectre.

Farantly: handsome. Fair and farantly: Fair and handsome.

To Feal: to Hide. He that feales can find. Prove. i. e. He that hides, etc.

Feg: Fair, handsome, clean, from the Saxon Faeger by Apocope: to Feg, to flag
or tire.

To Fend: to Shift for, from defend, per aphaeresin.

To Fettle: to set or go about any thing, to dress, or prepare.

To Few, to change.

To Fey or Feigh it: to do any thing notably: to Fey meadows is to cleanse
them: to Fey a pond, to empty it.

A Flacket; a Bottle made in fashion of a barrel.

A Fleack: a Gate to set up in a gap.

Fluish: q. Fluid, washy, tender, weak, perchance from the Low Dutch Flaun,
faint, feeble.

To Flizze: to Fly off, from the Low Dutch Flitsen to Fly and Flitse an Arrow
or Shaft.

A Flizzing: a Splinter, of the same original, they seem to be made from the
sound per (...).

To Flite: to Scold or brawle, from the Saxon Flitan, to contend, strive or
brawle.

Fogge: Long Grass remaining in pastures till winter.

To Format or Formel: to bespeak any thing: from Fore and mal (as I suppose)
signifying in the ancient Danish a word, sermo Formael or Formal in the Saxon
signifies a Bargain, a Treaty, an Agreement, a covenant.

Forthen and Forthy: therefore.

Fow: Chesh. Foul. var. Dial.

Freelege: Sheffield. Privilege, Immunitas.

Frem'd or Fremt; Far off, not related to, or strange, at enmity. From the
Saxon and Dutch Fremb'd, advena, exterus, alienigena, a stranger or alien from
the Preposition Fram Fra From.

Frim: Handsome, rank, well liking, in good case, as a Frim tree or beast, i.
e. a thriving tree or beast: a Wallico Frum: vel fort. ab AS. Fremian: valere
prodesse.

To Frist: to trust for a time. Fristen in Dutch is to give respit, to make a
truce. ab AS. Fyrstan: ejusdem significationis.

A Fudder: a Load. It relates properly to Lead, and signifies a certain weight,
viz. 8 pigs or 1600 l. from the high Dutch Fuder signifying a Cart-Load. Hoc
forte (inquit Skinner) a Teut. Fuehren, vehere, ducere, and tandem omnia credo
a Lat. vehere.

Fukes: Chesh. Locks of hair.

Where Fured you? Cumb. Whither went you?

Fuzzen or Fuzen: Nourishment, the same with Fizon or Foifon used in Suffolk,
signifying there the natural juice or moisture of any thing, the heart and
strength of it. Elsewhere it signifies plenty, abundance, and is a pure French
word. v. Skinner.

G.
The GAil or Guile-dish; The Tundish.

Gail-clear; a Tub sor wort.

Gain: Not. applied to things is convenient, to persons active, expert, to a
way near short. The word is used in many parts of England.

To Gang; to go or walk, from the Low Dutch Gangen, both originally from the
Saxon Began, signifying to go.

To Garre; to make, cause or force: from the Danish word Gior, to make.

A Garth: a Yard or Backside, a croft: from the Saxon Geard a Yard.

A Gate: a way or path: in Low Dutch Gat. In Danish Gade, from the Saxon Began,
to go.

A Gaul: Lanc. a Leaver, ab AS Geafle, Palanga, Vectis.

A Gawn or Goan, Chesh. a Gallon, by contraction of the word.

To Ghybe or Gibe: to Scold.

A Gibbon: a Nut-hook.

A Gib-staffe: a Quarter-staffe.

Giddy: mad with anger. The word Giddy is common all England over, to signify
Dizzy or by a metaphor unconstant, Giddy-headed: but not to signify furious or
intoxicated with anger, in which sense the word Mad is elsewhere used.

A Gimmer-lamb: an Ew-lamb: fort. q. a Gammer-lamb: Gammer is a contraction of
Godmother, and is the usual compellation of the common sort of Women.

Gin, gif: In the old Saxon is Gif, from whence the word If is made per
aphaeresin literae G. Gif from the verb Gifan dare, and is as much as Dato.

To Glaffer or Glaver; Chesh. To Flatter.

Glatton: Welsh-flannel.

Glob'd: Chesh. Wedded to, fond of.

Glotten'd: Chesher. Surprised, startled.

To be Glum: to look sadly or sowrly, to frown, contracted from Gloomy. A word
common to the Vulgar both in the North and South.

To Gly: Lincoln. to look a-squint. Limis seu distortis oculis instar Strabonis
contueri, forte ab AS. Gleyan, Belg. Gloeyen, Teut. Gluen, ignescere,
candescere, q. d. incensis and prae ira flammantibus oculis conspicere. Skinner.

To Goam: to Grasp or clasp: in Yorksh. to mind or look at.

A Gool: a Ditch, Lincolns: lacuna, fort. a Belg. Gouw, Agger, Aquagium, vel a
Fr. G. Jaule, Gaiole, Latin Caveola, quoniam ubi in fossam, scrobem seu
lacunam hujusmodi incidimus, ea tanquam cavea aut carcere detinemur, etc. Skin.

Greathly: Handsomely, towardly. In Greath: Well.

Grees or Griece: Stairs: From the French Grez and both from the Latin Gradus.
in Norfolk they call them Grissens.

To Greit or Greet: to weep or cry: it seems to come from the Italian Gridare,
to cry or weep. Vox Scotis usitatissima. To Greet and Yowl, Cumberland, to weep
and cry.

A Grip, or Gripe: a little ditch or trench, fossula, ab AS. Graep, fossula,
Cuniculus, This word is of general use all over England.

A Grove, Lincolns: a Belg. Groeve Fossa. to Grove: to Grave a Belg. Graven,
Fodere.

Grout: Wort of the last running. Skinner makes it to signify Condimentum
cerevisiae, mustum cerevisiae, ab AS. Grut. Ale before it be fully brewed or
sod, new Ale. It signifies also millet.

I Grow: I am troubled.

To Growze: to be chill before the beginning of an ague-fit.

To Guill, to Dazzle: spoken of the eyes* Chesh.

A Gun: a great Flagon of Ale sold for 3d. or 4d.

H.
A HAck, Lincolns, forte. ab AS. Hegge, Haeg, Sepes, Septum, vel Haeca, Belg.
Heck. Pessulus, repagulum, vel Locus repagulis seu cancellis clausus: nobis
autem parum deflexo senfu Faeni conditorium, seu Praesepe cancellatum fignat; a
Rack Skinner.

It Haggles: It hails, Var. Dial. ab AS. Haegale, haegle, Grando.

Haghes, Haws: Var. Dial. ab AS. Hagan, Haws.

Hanty: Wanton, unruly: spoken of a Horse or the like when provender pricks him.

To Hap: to cover for warmth, from Heap as I suppose, to heap clothes on one.

Happa: Hap ye: Think you?

To Harden: as, the Market Hardens, i. e. Things grow dear.

Harns, Cumb. Brains.

A Sea Harr: Lincoln. Tempestas a mari ingruens. fort. ab AS. Haern, Flustrum,
aestus. Skin.

A Haspat or Haspenald lad: Between a Man and a Boy.

Hattle: Chesh. Wild, skittish, harmful. Tie the hattle Ky by the horn. i. the
skittish Cow.

A Hattock: a shock containing 12 sheaves of corn.

Haver: Cumb. Oats, it is a Low Dutch word.

The Hause or Hose: the throat: ab AS. Hals, collum.

An Haust or Host: a Dry cough, to Host: to cough from the Low Dutch word
Hoesten to cough, and Hoest a cough: ab AS. Hwostan, tussire, to cough.

To Hose: to Hug or carry in the arms.

To Heald: as when you power out of a pot.

A Bed- Healing: Derb. a coverlet: it is also called absolutely a Hylling in
many places, to Heal signifies to cover in the South v. Suss: from the Saxon
word Helan, to hide, cover or heal.

An Heck: a Rack for cattle to feed at. v. Hack.

Heldar: Rather, before.

Heloe or Helaw: Bashful, a word of common use. Helo in the old Saxon signifies
Health, safety.

Heppen or Heply: Neat, handsome. Yorkshire, Skinner expounds it dexter,
agilis, and says it is used in Lincolnshire, fort. ab AS. Haeplic, compar: vel
potius Belg. Hebbelick, habilis, decens, aptus: vel q. d. Helply i. e. helpful.

Hetter: Eager, earnest, keen.

Hight; called; ab AS. Haten, gehaten, Vocatus a verbo Hatan dicere, jubere,
Teut* Heissen, nominari, cluere.

To Hight; Cumb. To Promise, or vow; as also the Saxon verb Hatan sometimes
signifies, test Somnero in Dictionario Saxonico-Latino-Anglico, so it seems to
be used in the English Meeter of the 14th. Verse of Psalm 116. I to the Lord
will pay my vows, which I to him behight.

Hind-berries; Raspberries: ab AS. Hind berian. Forte sic dicta, quia inter
hinnulos and cervos, i. e. in Sylvis and altibus crescunt.

Hine, Hence Cumb. Var. Dial.

The Hob;. The back of the Chimney.

Hoo, he; in the Northwest parts of England most frequently used for she: ab
AS. Heo, Hio, a Lat. Ea fortasse.

A Hoop; A measure containing a Peck or quarter of a Strike, York-sh.

A Horpet; A little Handbasket. Nescio an a Corbet, says Skinner, addita term.
dim. and asperam caninam literam r propter euphoniam elidendo, and quod satis
frequens est C initiali in Spiritum and B in P murando.

The House: the Room called the Hall.

A Gill-houter: Chesh. an Owl.

Hure: Hair: Var. Dial.

To Hylpe at one: to pull the mouth awry, to do one a mischief or displeasure.

I.
JAnnock: Oaten bread made into great loaves.

An Ing: A Common pasture, a Meadow, a word borrowed from the Danes, Ing in
that language signifying a Meadow.

Ingie: Cumb. Fire, a blaze or flame, a Lat. Ignis.

To Incense; to inform, a pretty word used about Sheffieild in York-sh.

K.
KAle or Cale: turn, vicem, Cheshire.

Kazzardly: Cattle subject to die, hazardous, subject to casualties.

A Keale: Lincoln, a Cold, tussis a frigore contracta, ab AS, Celan, Frigescere.

To Keeve a cart, Chesh. to overthrow it, or to turn out the dung.

Kenspecked: marked, or branded, nota insignitus; q. d. maculatus seu maculis
distinctus ut cognoscatur: ab AS. Kennam scire, and Specce macula, Skinner.

To Keppen: to Hoodwinck.

A Kid: A small faggot of underwood or brushwood: forte a caedendo, q. d.
safciculus ligni caedui, Skinner.

A Kidcrow: A place for a sucking Calf to lie in, Chesh.

A Kimmel or Kemlin: a Poudring Tub.

A Kit: a milking pail like a Churn with two ears and a cover, a Belg. Kitte.

A Kite: a Belly: Cumb.

To Klick up; Lincoln, to catch up, celeriter corripere: nescio an a Belg.
Klacken, Klutsen, Quatere, vel a Latino clepere, hoc a Graeco (...), Skinner.

A Knightle man: an an active or skilful man.

A Knoll: a little round hill, ab AS. Cnolle. The top or cop of a hill or
mountain.

Kye: Kine, Var. Dial.

L.
TO LAke: to Play, a word common to all the North Country, vel (inquit
Skinnerus) ab AS, Plaegan, ludere, rejecto P. ae Dipthong. in simpl a and g in
c vel k mutatis, vel a Teuton. and Belg. Lachen ridere vel quod caeteris long
verisimilius est a Dan. Leeger Ludo. Ideo autem haec vox in Septentrionali
Angliae regione, non in aliis invaluit, quia Dani illam partem primam
invaserunt and penitus occuparunt, uno vel altero seculo priusquam reliquam
Angliam subjugrrunt.

The Langot of the Shoe; The latchet of the shoe from Languet Lingula, a
little tongue or slip.

Land; Urine, Piss, it is an ancient Saxon word, used to this day in
Lancashire, Somner.

Lat: q. late, slow, tedious, Lat weather; wet or otherwise unseasonable
weather.

Latching: catching, infecting.

To Late, Cumb. to seek.

A Lathe: a Barn, fort, a verbo Lade, quia frugibus oneratur, Skinner, fort.

Lathe: Ease or rest, ab AS Latian, differ, tardare, cunctari.

Lathing: Entreaty or invitation. You need no Latching: You need no invitation
or urging: ab AS. Gelahdian, to bid, invite, desire to come.

The Lave: all the rest, Cumb.

A Lawn: a place in the midst of a wood free from wood, a Laund in a Park, a
Fr. G. Land, Hisp. Landa: inculta planities.

Lazy: Naught, bad.

A Leaden or Lidden; a noise or din: ab AS. Hyldan, clamare, garrire,
tumultuari, to make a noise or outcry, to babble, to chatter, to be tumultuous;
Hyld, tumult, noise.

To Lean nothing: to conceal nothing q. leave nothing, or from the old Saxon
word Leanne, to shun, avoid, decline.

To Lear: to Learn, Var. Dial.

Leatn: ceasing, intermission: as no Leath of pain, from the word leave, no
leaving of pain.

Leck on; power on more, Liquor, v. g.

Leeten you: Chesh. Make your self, pretend to be. You are not so mad as you
leeten you.

Leethwake: Limber, pliable.

Lestal: saleable that weighs well in the hand, that is heavy in lifting, from
the verb lift, as I suppose.

To Lig: to lie, Var. Dial. it is near the Saxon Licgan to lie.

To Lippen: to Rely on or trust to, Scot.

Lither: Lazy, idle, slothful. A word of general use, ab AS. Lidh, Liedh,
Lenis. Alludit Gr (...) Laevis, glaber, and (...), simplex, tenuis, Skinner.

Lithing: Chesh. Thickening, spoken of a pot of broth, as Lithe the pot, i. e.
put Oatmeal into it.

A Lite: a few, a little per Apocopen.

To Lite on: to Rely on.

Liten: a Garden.

A Lo: a little round hill, a great heap of stones: ab AS Haewe, Agger,
acervus, cumulus, tumulus, a Law, Low, Loo or high ground, not suddenly rising
as an hill, but by little and little tillable also, and without wood. Hence
that name given to many hillocks and heaps of earth, to be found in all parts
of England, being no other but so much congested Earth, brought in a way of
burial used of the Ancients, thrown upon the bodies of the dead. Somner in
Distinction. Saxon.

A Loom: an Instrument or tool in general, Chesh.

Loert: q. Lord, Gaffer, Lady, Gammer, used in the Peak of Derbysh.

To Lope, Lincoln, to leap, Var. Dial.

A Lop: a Flea, ab AS, Loppe, from leaping.

Low: Flame, and to Low; to flame from the high Dutch Love.

To Lowk: i. e. to weed corn, to look out weeds: so in other Countries, to look
ones head, i. e. to look out fleas or lice there.

The Luf^: the open hand.

M.
MAke: match, makeless, matchless, ab AS. Maca, a Peer, an equal, a companion,
consort, mate.

A Marrow: a Companion or fellow. A pair of gloves or shoes are not marrows,
i. e. fellows. Vox generalis.

A Maund: a handbasket with two lids, ab AS. Mand. Er. G. Mande. Ital. Madia,
corbis ansatus, utrumque a Lat. Manus quia propter ansas manucommode
circumferri potest, Skinner.

Mead; Vox agro Lincoln. usitatissima, ut ubi dicimus, I give thee the mead
of the buying, i. e. tibi optionem and plenariam potestatem pretii seu
emptionis facio, ab AS. Maedh, Maeht, Maedgh, Maegen, Potentia, potestas; hoc a
verbo Magan posse, Skinner.

My Muaugh: My Wives brother or Sisters husband.

Meedless: Unruly.

Meet or Mete: Measure* Vox general. Meet now, just now.

Meeterly, Meetherly, Meederly: handsomely, modestly; As bow meeterly, from
meet, fit.

Meny; a Family: As we be six or seven a meny, i. e. six or seven in Family,
from the ancient French Mesnie signifying a Family, v. Skinner.

Menseful: comely, graceful, crediting a man, York-sh.

Merry banks: a cold Posset, Derb.

A Met: a strike or four pecks, ab AS Midi modius.

A Midding: a Dunghill, it is an ancient Saxon word; a nomine mud forte.

A Midge:. a Gnat, ab As. Mycg, Mycge, Belg. Mugge, Teut. Muck, Dan. Myg, Omnia
a Lat. Musca.

Mill-holms: Watery places about a Mill damme.

Milwyn: Lancash. Greenfish, fort. a Mllvo q. piscis milvinus.

To Mint at a thing: to aim at it, to have a mind to it.

To Ming at one, to mention, ab As. Mynegung an admonition, warning or minding;
so it is usually said I had a minging, suppose of an Ague or the like disease,
that is not a perfect fit, but so much as to put me in mind of it.

Minginater: One that makes Fretwork; it is a rustic word used in some prat of
Yorkshire, corrupted perchance from engine.

Miscreed: descryed, This I suppose is also only a rustic word, and nothing
else but the word descried corrupted.

A Mizzy: a Quagmire.

Molter: the toll of a mill, a Latino Mola.

Mores: i. e. Hills: hence the hilly part of Staffordshire is called the
Morelands: Hence also the County of Westmorland had its name, q. The land or
Country of the Western mores or hills: and many hills in the North are called
mores, as Stanemores etc. from the old Saxon word Mor a hill or Mountain.

Welly moyder'd: almost distracted. Cheshire.

Muck: Lincolns. moist, wet, a Belg. Muyck, Mollis, lenis, mitis. Mollities
enim humiditatem sequitur.

Mullock: Dirt or rubbish.

Murk: Dark, Murklins: in the dark, a Dan. Morck, Fuscus, Morcker: infusco:
item tenebrae. Occurrit and Ant. Lat. Murcidus, Murcus, quae Festo idem sonant
quod ignavus, iners. This word is also used in the South but more rarely.

A Murth of corn: abundance of corn. forte. a More.

N.
A NApkin; a Pocket Hand-Kerchief, so called about Sheffield in Yorkshire.

Nash or Nesh: Washy, tender, weak, puling. Skinner makes it proper to
Worcestershire, and to be the same in sense and original with Nice. But I am
sure it is used in many other Counties, I believe all over the North-West part
of England, and also in the midland, as in Warwickshire. As for the Etymology
of it, it is doubtless no other then the Ancient Saxon word Nesc, signifying
soft, tender, delicate, effeminate, tame, gentle, mild. Hence our Nescook in
the same sense, i. e. a tenderling, Summer.

Nearre, Lincoln. in use for nether. ab AS. Nerran, posterior.

A Neive or Neiffe: a Fist.

A Neckabout: any woman's neck linen. Sheffield.

To Nigh a thing: to touch it. I did not nigh it: i. e. I came not nigh it.

Nitle: Handy, neat, handsome. fort. ab AS. Nytlic, profitable, commodious.

Nything: much valuing, sparing of, as Nithing of his pains: i. e. Sparing of
his pains.

A Noggin: a little Piggin holding about a pint, a Teut: Nossel.

Nor: Then more Nor I, i. e. more then I.

To Note: to push, strike or goar with the horn as a Bull or Ram. ab AS. Hnitan
ejusdam signification. Lancash, Somner.

O.
O My; mellow, spoken of Land.

Oneder, v. Aunder.

Orndorn: Cumberland. Afternoons drinking.

To Osse: to Offer to do, to aim at or intend to do, ossing comes to bossing.
Prove. Chesh. I did not osse to meddle with it. i. e. I did not dare, etc. forte
ab Audeo, Ausus.

An Ox-boose: an Ox-stall, or Cow-stall where they stand all night in the
Winter, ab AS. Bosih, Praesepe, a stall.

An Oxter: an Armpit, Axilla.

P.
PArtlets; Ruffes or Bands for women. Chesh. Vetus vox (inquit Skinnerus) pro
Sudario, praesertim quod cirea collum gestatur. Minshew dictum putat quasi
Portelet, quod circumfertur, vel, ut melius divinat Cowel, a verbo to part,
quia facile separatur a corpore, Skinner.

A Mad Pash; a mad-brain. Chesh.

Peale the pot; cool the pot.

Peed: Blind of one eye: He pees: He looks with one eye.

Peevish: Witty, subtle.

A Penbauk: a Beggars can.

A Piggin; a little pail or tub with an erect handle.

It Is Pine q. pein to tell; it is difficult to tell, ab AS. Pin.

A Pingle; a small croft or Picle.

A Pleck; a Place York-sh. Lanc. ab AS. Plaece, a street, a Place.

Poops; Gulps in drinking.

To Pote the clothes off; to kick all off; to push or put out, from the French
Pousser or Poser, pulsare, or ponere, to put.

Prattily; sof^ly.

Prich: Thin drink.

A Princock: a pert, forward fellow. Minshew deflectit a Praecox, q. d.
Adolescens praecocis ingenij: quod licet non absurdum sit, tamen quia sono
minus discrepat, puto potius dictum quasi jam primum Gallus, quia sci, non ita
pridem pubertatem attigit, and recens Veneris stimulos percepit, Skinner.

R.
To RAck or Reck: to care, never Rack you; i. e. Take you no thought or care.
From the Ancient Saxon word Recc, care, and Reccan to care for. Chaucer has
recketh, for cares. Hence Retchless and Retchlessness, for Careless and
Carelessness; as in the Saxon.

Radlings; Windings of the wall.

To Rame; to Reach; perchance from Rome.

To Reem; to Cry: Lancashire, ab AS. Hraeman, Plorare, clamare, ejulare, to
weep with crying and bewayling, Hream, ejulatus.

To Rejumble: Lincoln. as it rejumbles upon my stomach Fr. G. Il regimbe sur
mon estomac, i. e. calcitrat. Sic autem dicimus ubi cibus in ventriculo
fluctuat and nauseam parit. Verb, aut Fr. G. a Praep. Re, and Fr. G. Jambe, It.
Gamba ortum ducit. Skinner.

To Remble: Lincoln. to move or remove, q. d. Remobiliare, a Reward or good
Reward; a good color or ruddiness in the face, used about Sheffield in Yorksh.

To Rine: to touch: ab AS. Hrinan, to touch or feel.

To Ripple flax: to wipe off the seed-vessels.

A Roop: a Hoarsness.

To Rowt or Rawt: to low like an Ox or Cow. The old Saxon word Hrutan,
signifies to snort, snore or rout in sleeping.

A Runge: a Flasket.

Runnel: Pollard wood, from running up apace.

He Rutes it: Chesh. spoken of a Child, he cries fiercely, i. e. He rowts it,
he bellows.

Rynt ye: By your leave, stand handsomely. As Rynt you witch, quoth Besse Locket
to her Mother, Proverb, Chesh.

S.
SAckless: innocent, faultless, without crime or accusation; a pure Saxon word,
from the noun Sac, Saca, a Cause, strife, suit, quarrel, etc. and the
Praeposition l^as, without.

Saur-pool: a stinking puddle.

Scarre: the cliff of a Rock, or a naked Rock on the dry land, from the Saxon
Carre, cautes. This word gave denomination to the Town of Scarborough.

Sean: Lincoln. A kind of net, Proculdubio contract. a Latin and Gr. Sagena,
Skinner.

Sell: self.

Selt: Chesh. Chance it is but a selt whether, it is but a chance whether.

Senfy: Not. sign, likyhood, appearance.

Sensine: Cumb. since then, Var. Dial.

A Shafman, Shafmet, or Shaftment, the measure of the fist with the thumb set
up, ab As. Scaeft mund, Semipes.

Shan: Lincoln. Shamefacedness, ab As. Scande, confusio, verecundia; item
abominatio, ignominia.

To Shear corn: to reap corn.

No Shed: No difference between things, to shead Lanc. to distinguish, ab As.
Sceadan to distinguish, disjoyn, divide or sever. Belgis Scheyden, Scheeden.

Shed: Riners with a Whaver: Chesh. Winning any cast that was very good, i. e.
strike off one that touches, etc. v. Ryne.

A Shippen: a Cow-house ab As. Scypeme, Stabulum, Bovile, stable, an Ox-stall.

A Shirt-band: Yorksh. a Band.

Sib'd: a kin, no sole sib'd, nothing akin: No more sib'd then sieve and
riddle, that grew both in a wood together. Prove. Chesh. Syb or Sybbe is an
ancient Saxon word signifying Kindred, alliance, affinity.

Sickerly: surely, a Lat. Secure.

Side: Long. My Coat is very side, i. e. very long: item Proud, steep, from the
Saxon Side, sid, or the Danish side signifying long.

A Sike: a little Rivulet, ab As. Sich, Sulcus, a furrow, vel potius sulcus,
aquarius, Lacuna, lira, stria, elix, a Waterfurrow, a Gutter, Somner.

To Sile down: Lincoln. to fall to the bottom, or subside: fort, ab As. Syl,
Basis, limen, q. d. ad fundum delabi, Skinner.

Skathe: Loss harm, wrong, prejudice, one does the skath, and another has the
scorn. Prove, ab As. Scaedan, Sceadhian, Belg. Schaeden, Teut. Schaden, Dan.
Skader, nocere.

A Skeel: a Collock.

Slape-ale: Lincoln. Plain ale as opposed to Ale medicated with Wormwood or
Scurvy Grass, or mixed with any other liquor: forte an licet sensus non parum
variet ab alt. Slape quod agro Lincoln. lubricum and mollem significat, i. e.
smooth ale, hoc a verbo to slip, Skinner.

To Slat on, to Leck on, to cast on, or dash against. Vox (...).

To Sleak out the tongue, to put it out by way of scorn, Chesh.

Sleck: Small Pit-coal.

To Sleck, i. e. slack, to quench or put out the fire, v. g. or ones thirst.

To Sleech: to dip or take up water.

To Slete a dog, is to set him at any thing, as swine, sheep, etc.

Slim: Lincoln. a Belg. slim, Teut. Schlim, vilis, perversus, pravus, dolosus,
obliquus, distortus, Skinner.

To Slive, Lincoln. a Dan. Slaever. Serpo, Teut. Schleiffen, humi trahere: hinc
and Lincoln. a sliverly fellow, Vir subdolus, vafer, dissimulator, veterator.

The Slote of a ladder or gate; the flat step or bar.

To Slot a door, Lincoln. i. e, to shut it, a Belg. sluyten. Teut. schiiessen,
claudere, occludere, obserare, Belg. slot, vera, claustrum, ferreum

To Smartle away, to wast away.

To Smittle: to infect, from the old Saxon smittan and Dutch smetten, to spot
or infect, whence our word smut.

Smopple: Pie-crust, i. e. short and fat.

A Snever-spawt: a slender stripling.

Snock the door, latch the door. The sneck or snecket of a door (according to
Skinner) is the string which draws up the latch to open the door: nescio an a
Belg. snappen, Corripere, quia sci. cum janua aperienda est, semper arripiter.

To Snee or snie, to abound or swarm. He snies with Lice, he swarms with them.

To Snite, to wipe. Snite your nose, i. e. wipe your nose, a schneutzen, Belg.
snutten, snotten, Nares emungere, Dan. snyder emungo, a Snot.

A Snithe wind: Vox elegantissima, agro Lincoln. usitatissima, significat autem
ventum valde frigidum and penetrabilem, ab As. snidan, Belg. sneiden; Teut.
schneiden, scindere, ut nos dicimus, a cutting wind, Skinner.

To Soil milk, to cleanse it, potius to sile it, to cause it to subside, to
strain it, v. sile.

Sool or soul, any thing eaten with bread.

To Sowl one by the ears, Lincoln. i. e. Aures summa vi vellere; credo a sow,
i. e. Aures arripere and vellere, ut suibus canes solent, Skinner.

Soon: the Evening; A soon, at Even.

A Spackt: lad or wench: Apt to learn, ingenious,

A Spancel: a rope to tie a Cows hinder legs.

To Spane a Child, to wean it.

To Sparre or speir or spur; to ask, enquire, cry at the Market, ab As.
spyrian, to search out by the track or trace, to enquire or make diligent
search.

To Spar the door, to bolt, bar, pin or shut it, ab AS. Sparran, Obdere,
claudere. This word is also used in Norfolk, where they say spar the door an
emis he come, i. e. shut the door lest he come in.

The Speer: Chesh. the Chimney post. Reared against the speer.

A Spell or speal, a Splinter.

Spice: Raisins, plums, figs and such like fruit. York-sh. Spice a species.

A Stang: a wooden bar; ab As. staeng, sudes, vectis Teut. stang, pertica,
contus, sparus, vectis. Datur and Camb. Br. Ystang Pertica, sed nostro font
haustum. This word is still used in some Colleges in the University of
Cambridge; to stang Scholars in Christmas, being to cause them to ride on a
colt-staff or pole, for missing of Chapel.

A Start: a long handle of any thing, a tail, as it signifies in low Dutch, so
a Redstart is a Bird with a red tail.

Stark: stiff, weary, ab As. sterc, strace, Rigidus, durus, Belg. and Dan.
sterck, Teut. starck, validus, robustus, firmus, v. Skinner.

Staw'd: set, from the Saxon Stow, a place, originally from statio and statuo.

A Stee: a ladder, in the Saxon stegher is a stair, gradus scalae, perchance
from stee.

To Steak or steke the dure; to shut the door, a Teut and Belg. stecken,
steken, to thrust, or put, to stake.

To Steem: to bespeak a thing.

To Stein or steven; idem.

A Stife queen; a lusty queen; stife in the old Saxon is obstinate, stiff,
inflexible.

Stithe: strong, stiff, ab As. stidh, stiff, hard, severe, violent, great,
strong, stithe Cheese, i. e. strong cheese.

A Stithy: an Anvil, a praedict. As stidh, rigidus, durus. Quid enim in cude
durius?

A Stot: a young bullock or steer, a young horse in Chaucer: ab As. stod or
steda, a stallion, also a War horse, a steed.

A Stound q. Stand; an Wooden Vessel to put small beer in.

A Stowk q. stalk; the handle of a pail, also a shock of twelve sheaves.

A Stowre: a round of a ladder: a hedgestake.

A Strike of Corn, a bushel, four pecks, a Teut. Kornstreiche, Hostorium, vel
radius; slreichen, Hostorio mensuram radere, coaequare, complanare.

Strunt: the tail or rump, ab As, steort, stert, Belg. stert, steert, Teut,
stertz, cauda: vel a Belg. stront, Fr. G. Estron, It. stronzo stercus, per
Metonym. adjuncti, Skinner.

3. Stunt: Lincoln. stubborn, fierce, angry; ab As stunta stunt, stultus,
fatuus, forte quia stulti praeferoces sunt; vel a verbo to stand; ut Resty a
restando, Metaphora ab equas contumacibus sumpta, Skinner.

1. A Strom: the instrument to keep the malt in the Fat.

2. Strushins: Orts, from destruction I suppose.

Sturk: a young bullock or heaifer, ab As. styrk, Buculus -- a.

Swale; windy, cold, bleak.

To Swale or sweal: to singe or burn, to waste or blaze away, ab As. swaelan,
to kindle, to set on fire, to burn.

A Swarth: Cumb: the Ghost of a dying man, fort. ab As, sweart. Black, dark,
pale, wan.

Swathe; Calm:

Sweamish; i. e. squeamish, used for modest.

To Sweb: to swoon.

A Swill: a keeler to wash in, standing on three feet.

To Swilker ore: to dash over. Vox (...).

A Swinhull or swine-crue: a Hogs-stye.

Swipper: nimble, quick, ab As. swippre, crafty, subtle, cunning, sly, wily.

T.
The TAb of a shoe; the Latchet of a shoe.

A Tabern: a Cellar, a Lat. Taberna.

A Tarn; a lake or Meer-pool, a usual word in the North.

To Taste: i. e. to smell in the North: indeed there is a very great affinity
between these two senses.

To Tave: Lincoln. to Rage, a Belg. Tobben, Toppen, Daven, Teut. Toven, Furere.

To Tawm: to swoon.

To Teem or team: to pour out, to lade out of one vessel into another. Credo a
Danico Tommer, Haurio, exhaurio, vacuo, tommer a* oritur a Tom vacuus, v.
Skinner.

Teamful: Brim-ful, having as much as can be teemed in, in the ancient Saxon it
signifies fruitful, abundant, plentiful, from Toam, Soboles, faetus and full.

Teen; Angry, ab As. Tynan, to provoke, stir, anger or enrage. Good or fow
teen, Chesh. Good or foul taking.

A Temse: a fine sierce, a small sieve, Belg. Teems, Tems, Fr. G. Tamis, It.
Tamisio, Tamiso, cribrum; whence comes our Temse bread.

To Tent; to tend or look to. Var Dial. Chesh. I Will tent the, quoth Wood. If I
cannot rule my daughter I Will rule my good. Prove. Chesh.

Tharm; Lincoln. Guts prepared, cleansed and blown up for to receive puddings:
ab AS. Dearm. Belg. Darm, Derm, Teut. Darm, Dearm, simpl. intestinum.

Thew'd; Towardly.

To Thirl; to bore a hole, Lincoln. ab AS. Dhyrl, Dhyrel, foramen. Dhirlian,
Belg. Drille^, Perforare. Skinner.

A Thible or Thivel; a Stick to stir a Pot.

To Thole; D^rb. to brook or endure; Thole a while, i. e. stay a while. Chaucer
has Tholed, for suffered, ab As. Tholian, ejusdem signification.

The One, thong; mea sententia q. thawn; Damp, moist. Skinner a Teut. Tuncken,
macerare, intingere, deducit.

A Thrave; a shock of corn containing 24. sheaves. ab As. Threaf, manipulus, a
Handful, a bundle, a Bottle.

To Thrave; Lincoln. to Urge, ab As. Thravian, Urgere.

To Threap, Threapen; to blame, rebuke, reprove, chide: ab As. Threapan,
Threapian ejusdem signification. to Threap kindness upon one is used in another
sense.

I Will Thrippa thee; Chesh. I Will beat or cudgel thee.

Thrutch for thrust, Chesh. Maxfield measure. Heap and thrutch. Prove.

To Throw; to Turn as Turners do; ab As. Thrawan, quae inter alia to wheel,
turn or wind, significat.

To Thropple: to Throttle or strangle, Var Dial. York-sh.

The Thropple; the Windpipe, York-sh. Dial.

To Thwite, to whittle, cut, make white by cutting. He has thwitten a
mill-post into a pudding-prick, Prove.

Tider or Tidder or Titter, soon, quickly, sooner.

To Tine, to shut, fence. Tine the door! shut the door. ab As. Tynan, to
enclose, fence, hedge or teen.

Too too Used absolutely for very well or good.

Toom or Tume, Empty, a toom purse makes a bleit, [i. e. bashfull] Merchant.
Prove. manifest a Danico Tom, vacuus, inanis.

To Toorcan; to wonder or muse what one means to do.

A Towgher; a Dower or Dowry, Dial. Cumb.

Treenware; Earthen vessels.

To Twitter; to tremble, a Teut. Tittern, Tremere, utrumque a sono fictum. This
is a word of General use. My heart Twitters.

A Tye-top, a Garland.

U.
U- Bach, U-block, etc. v. Yu-bach, etc.

Vmstrid; astride, astridlands.

Vinerous; Hard to please.

VV.
A Walker; a Fuller; a Walk-mill; a Fulling-mill; a Belg. Walcker Fullo; hoc a
verb. Belg. Walcken, It. Gualcare, Pannos premere, calcare. Teut. Walcken,
pannum polire, Omnia credo a Lat Calcare, Skinner.

To Walt; to totter or lean one way, to overthrow, from the old Saxon Waeltan,
to tumble or roll, or rather from the Saxon Wealtian, to Reel or stagger.

The Wang-tooth; the Jaw-tooth, ab As. Wang, Wong, mandibula. Wone todh seu
potius Wong-todh, Dens caninus.

Wankle; Limber, flaccid, ticklish, fickle, wavering.

A Want; a mole, ab As. Wand. Talpa.

War; Worse; war and war: worse and worse, Var Dial.

To Warch or wark; to ache, to work; ab As. Wark, Dolor. Vtrumque a work.

To Wary; Lancash. to curse, ab As. Warian, Werigan, Execrari, Diris devovere.
To wary, i. e. Lay an Egg.

To Ware ones Money; to bestow it well, to lay it out in ware.

Warisht; That has conquered any disease or difficulty and is secure against
the future; also well stored or furnished.

A Warth; a Water-ford, I find that Warth in the old Saxon signifies the shore.

Way-bread; Plantain; ab As. Waegbraede, so called because growing every where
in streets and ways.

2 To Weat the head; to look it. v. g. for lice.

1 To Wear the pot; to cool it.

Wea-worth you, Woe betide you.

Weel, Lanca. a whirlpool, ab As. Wael, vortex aquarum.

Weet or Wite; Nimble, swift.

Weir or Waar; Northumb. Sea-wrack, Alga marina, from the old Saxon Waar, alga
marina, Fucus marinus. The Thanet me^ (says Somner) call it wore or woore.

Wellaneer; alas.

To Wend; to go.

Westy; Dizzy, giddy.

Wharre* Crabs, as sour as wharre, Chesh

Wheam or Wheem: near, close, so as n^ wind can enter it: also very handsome
an^ convenient for one: as, It lies wheem for me Chesh. ab As. Gecweme,
grateful, acceptable pleasant, fit.

Wheamow: Nimble, I am very wheamow quoth the old woman when she stepped into the
milk-bowl, Prove.

A Wheen-Cat: a Queen-Cat: Catus faemina. That Queen was used by the Saxons to
signify the Female sex appears in that QVEEN Fugol was used for a Henfowle.

A Wheint lad q. queint: a fine lad: ironice dictum. Chesh. Var. Dial.

Whirkened: Choked, strangled.

A Whisket: a Basket a skuttle or shallow Ped.

To White: to Requite: as God white you: God requite you, Chesh. Var. Dial.
white pro. quite, quite per aphaeresin pro requite.

To White: to Blame: You lean all the white off your sell, i. e. You remove all
the blame from your self. v. Wite.

To Wite; to blame, ab As. Paena, mulcta, supplicium. Chaucer uses the word
for blame.

To Whoave; Chesh. to cover or whelm over. We will not kill but whoave. Prove.
Chesh. ab As. Hwolf, Hwalf, a covering or canopy; Verb. Hwalfian camerare,
fornicare.

A Who Whiskin; a whole great drinking pot. Who being the Cheshire Dialect for
whole, and a Whiskin signifying a Black-Pot.

Whook't every joint; Shook every joint, Chesh.

A Wiegh, or Waagh; a Leaver, a wedge, ab As. Waege, Pondus, massa, libra.

Willern Peevish, willful, a Saxon, Willer, willing.

A Wilk or Whilk; a Periwinkle or Seasnail, ab As. Wealk, cochlea marina, Limax
marinus: Higgin. (...), Turbo, cochlea marina, qua olim ad buccinandum
utebantur. Hoc a verbo Wealcan volvere, revolvere, quia sci. ejus testa in
orbem, spirae in modum contorquetur, Skinner.

A Wind-berry; a Bill-berry, or Whortleberry.

A Wisket, v. Whisket.

Winly, Quietly.

Woat. --

A Wogh; a Wall Lanc. ab As. Wag, Paries, elsewhere in the North Wogh is used
for wool, by a change of the Dialect.

To Won or Wun: to Dwell: as where won you? where dwell you? ab As. Wunian,
Gewunian, Habitare, manner, Belg. Woonen, Teut. Wonen, Wohnen: habitare,
morari. Haec ab As. Wunian, Gewunian. Assuescere, q. d. Ubi soles aut
frequentas.

Wood-wants: Holes in a post or piece of timber, q. d. Places wanting wood.

Worch-bracco, Chesh. i. e. Work-brittle, very diligent, earnes^ or intent upon
ones work. Var. Dial.

To be Worried: to be choked. Worran in the ancient Saxon signifies to destroy.

To Wit, i. e. blame, v. Wite.

Y.
YAre: Coveteous, Desirous, a Teut. Geaher, Geah, Fervidus, promptus, praeceps,
impatiens. Geahe Praecipitia, Jearen, Fervere, effervescere: vel parum deflexo
sensu ab As. Gearo, Gearre, Chaucero etiam Yare, Paratus, promptus, etc. v.
Skinner cui prae reliquis omnibus arridet Etymon, ab As. Georn, studiosus.
sedulus, diligens, intentus.

The Yeender or Eender: the Forenoon, Derbysh.

A Yate: a Gate.

Yeander: Yonder, Var. Dial.

Yewd or Yod: Went, Yewing: Going, ab As. Eode; ivit, iter fecit, concessit, he
went. Chaucero Yed, Yeden, Yode eodem sensu. Spencer also in his Fairie Queen,
lib. 1. c. 10.

He that the blood-red billows like a wall,
On either side Disparted with his rod.
Till all his Army dry-foot through them Yod,
Speaking of Moses.

Yu-batch: Christmas batch. Yu-block or Yule-block: Christmas block. Yu-gams or
Yule-gams; Christmas games: ab As. G^hul: Dan. Jule-dag natalis Christi: Hoc
forte a Latino. Hebraeo Jubilum, Skinner.

Yuck: Linc. a Belg. Jeucken, Joocken, Teut. Jeucken, prurire: Jucken, Fricare,
Scabere.

SOUTH and EAST Country WORDS.
A.
A ALp or Nope: a Bulfinch. I first took notice of this word in Suffolk, but
find since that it is used in other Countries, almost generally all over
England.

An Amper: a fault or flaw in linen or woollen cloth, Suss. Skinner makes it
to be a word much used by the common or Countrey-people in Essex to signify a
tumor, rising or pustule, vel ab As. Ampre, Ompre, varix: vel a Teut. Empor,
sursum, empor heben, emporen, elevare, q. d. cutis elevatio.

Anewst: nigh, almost, near hand, about, circiter. Suss. and other places of
the West, ab As. On-neaweste, prope, juxta, secus, near high: a Praep. On, and
neaweste vicinia.

Arders: Fallowings or plowings of ground.

Atter: matter, Pus, sanies: a Teut. and Belg. Eyter ejusdem significati, vel
ab ejus parente, As. Ater, virus.

Auk and awkward, untoward, unhandy, ineptus, ab As. Aewerd, perversus,
aversus; hoc ab Ae Praep. loquelari negativa privativa and Weard versus, quasi
dicas, qui ad nullam rem vel artem a natura comparatus est; i^ ata Minerva
natus. Huic autem Awkward omnino tum sensu tum Etymo opponitur Toward.

B.
A BArth: a warm place or pasture for calves or lambs.

A Barken or (as they use it in Sussex) Barton: a yard of a house, a backside,
vel a verbo, to Bar, vel a Germ. Bergen, Abscondere, As. Beorgan munire q. d.
Locus clausus, respectu sci. agrorum.

Baven: Brush faggots, with the brush-wood at length, or in general brush-wood.
Nes^io an q. d. Feuine Gallice a Feu, focus. Vir Rev. deflectii a Belg. Bauwen,
Teut. Bawen, Aedificare, cum fiat ex reliquiis arborum pro aedificiis
succisarum, Skinner. Utrumque Etymon me judice ineptum.

Bain: Lithe, limber-joynted, that can bend easily, Suffolk.

Behither: On this side, it answers to beyound, Suss.

A Bishop: The little spotted beetle commonly called the Lady cow, or
Lady-bird. I have heard this insect in other places called a Golden-Knop; and
doubtless in other Countries it has other names.

A Big; a Pappe or teat, Ess.

A Billard: a Bastard capon, Suss.

The Bird of the eye, the sight or Pupil, Suff.

Blighted corn, blasted corn, Suss. Blight eidem quod milldew, i. e. mel
roscidum, vel roscida quaedam melligo quae fruges corrumpit: nescio an a Teut
Bleych, pallidus, a color scilicet, Skinner.

A Bostal: a way up a hill, Suss.

Bouds: i. e. Weevils, an insect breeding in malt, Norf. Suff.

Bown: i. e. swelled, Norf.

Brank: Buck-wheat: Ess. Suff. in some Countries of England they call it crap.

A Break: i. e. Land plowed the first year after it has lain fallow in the
sheep-walks, Norf.

To Bricken: to bridle up the head. A Rustic word corrupted from bridle.

A Sow goes to Brimme: i. e. to Boar.

Brime it hither, i, e. bring it hither, Suff. Var. dial.

To Brite: spoken of hops when they be over-ripe, and shatter.

To Brutte: to Browse Suss. Dial.

The Buck: the breast Suss. it is used for the body or the trunck of the body;
in Dutch and old Saxon it signifies the belly, the buck of a cart, i. e. the
body of a cart.

Buck some: Blithe, jolly, frolic, chearly, some write it Buxome; ab As.
Bocsum, Obediens, tractabilis, hoc a verbo Bugan flectere, q. d. flexibilis:
quod eo confirmatur, quod apud Chaucerum Buxumness exponitur lowliness, Skinner.

A Bud: a weaned calf of the first year, Suss. because the horns are then in
the bud.

Bullimong: Oats, Pease, and Vetches mixed, Ess.

C.
A CAddow: a Jack-daw, Norf. in Cornwall they call the Guilliam a Kiddaw.
Carpet-way: i. e. Green-way.

A Carre: a wood of alder or other trees in a moist boggy place.

Catch-land: Land which is not certainly known to what Parish it belongs; and
the Minister that first gets the tithes of it enjoys it for that year; Norf.

A Chavish: a chatting or prattling noise among a great many, Suss.

A Chizzell: bran; a Teut. Kiesell, Siliqua, Gluma. Suss. Kent.

The Church-litten: the Churchyard. Suss. Wilt. fort. ab As. Laedan, Teut.
Leyten, ducere, q. d. via ducens ad templum, Skinner.

A Chuck: a great Chip, Suss. in other Countries they call it a chunk.

Cledgy: i. e. stiff. Kent.

Clever: Neat, smooth, cleanly wrought, dextrous, a Fr. G. Ledger, cleaverly, q.
d. Legerly, Skinner.

A Cobweb morning: i. e. a Misty morning, Norf.

A Comb: Devon. Corn. ab As. Comb, Comp. a C. Br. eoque antiquo Gallico Kum,
Cwmm, unde defluxit Gallicum recens Comb, Vallis utrinque collibus obsita,
Skinner.

A Coomb or Coumb of Corn: Half a Quarter, a Fr. G. Comble utr. a Lat. Cumulus.

A Cob-iron: an Andiron, Ess.

To Cope: i. e. To chop or exchange, used by the Coasters of Norfol. Suffol.
etc.

A Cosset lamb or colt, etc. i. e. a cade lamb, a lamb or colt brought up by
the hand, Norf. Suff.

A Cottrel; Cornw. Devonsh. a trammel to hang the Pot on over the fire.

A Cove: a little harbor for boats, West Country.

To Coure: to ruck down, ut mulieres solen^ ad mingendum, ab. It Covare: Fr. G.
Couver, incubare, hoc a Lat. cubare.

A Cowl: a Tub, Ess.

Crank: Brisk, merry, jocund, Ess. Sanus, integer: Sunt qui derivant a Belg.
and Teut. Kranck, quod prorsus contrarium scraegrum significat. Ab istis autem
antiphrasibus totus abhorreo. Mallem igitur deducere ab Un vel Onkranck, non
aeger, omissa per injuriam temporis initiali syllaba, Skinner.

Crap: Darnel, Suss. in Worcestershire and other Countries they call Buck-wheat
Crap.

A Crock: a Earthen pot to put butter or the like in, ab As. Crocca, Teut.
Krug, Belg. Krogh, Kroegh, C. Br. Crochan, Dan. Kruck, Olla fictilis, vas
fictile, Urceus, Skinner.

To Crock: Ess. to black one with soot or black of a pot or kettle or
chimney-stock, this black or soot is also substantively called, Crock

Crones: old Ewes.

A Cratch or Critch: a Rack. ni fallor a Lat. Cratica, Craticula, Crates.

Crawly mawly: indifferently well, Norfolk.

A Culver: a Pigeon or Dove, ab As. Culfer, Columba.

D.
It DAres me: it pains or grieves me. Ess. ab As. Dare, signifying hurt, harm,
loss.

A Dilling: a Darling or best-beloved child.

A Dibble: an instrument to make holes in the ground with for setting beans,
pease or the like.

Dish-meat: Spoon-meat. Kent.

To Ding: to sling, Ess. in the North it signifies to beat.

A Dodman: a shell-snail or Hodmandod, Norf.

A Doke: a deep Dint or furrow, Ess. Suff.

A Dool: a long narrow green in a plowed field with plowed Land on each side
it: a broad balk. forte a Dale, a valley because when the standing corn grows
on both side it, it appears like a valley.

E.
ELlinge: Solitary, lonely, melancholy, far from neighbors: q. elongatus.
Suss. a Gallico Esloigner. Ellende in the Ancient Saxon signifies procul, far
off, far from.

Ernful: i. e. Lamentable.

Ersh: The same that Edish, the stubble after the corn is cut, Suss. Edisc is
an old Saxon word signifying sometimes Roughings, Aftermathes.

F.
FAiry-sparks or Shel-fire: Kent. often seen on clothes in the night.

Feabes or Feaberries: Goose-berries Suff. Thebes in Norf.

Fenny: i. e. Moldy: Fenny cheese moldy cheese, Kent. ab As. Fennig, mucidus.

Fimble Hemp: Early ripe Hemp.

Flags: The Surface of the earth which they pare off to burn: the upper turfe,
Norf.

Foison: or Fizon: The natural juice or moisture of the Grass or other herbs.
The heart and strength of it, Suff. a Gallico Foissonner: abundare, vel forte,
a Teut. Feist, pinguis.

Footing time, Norf. is the same with upsetting time in Yorksh. when the
Puerpera gets up.

A Fostal: forte. Forestal: A way leading from the high way to a great House,
Suss.

A Frower: an Edge-tool used in cleaving lath.

To Trase: to break, Norf. it is likely from the Latin word frangere.

Frobly mobly: indifferently well.

G.
To GAster: to scare or affright suddenly. Gastred, Perterre factus: ab As.
Gast, Spiritus, Umbra, Spectrum, q. d. Spectri alicujus visu territus, vel q.
d. Gastrid vel ridden, i. e. a spectro aliquo vel Ephialte invasus and quasi
inequitatus, Skinner. It is a word of common use in Essex.

A Gattle head: Cambr. a forgetful person: ab As. Ofer-geotol obliviousus,
immemor.

Geazon: Scarce, hard to come by, Ess.

A Gill: a Rivulet, a beck, Suss.

A Goffe: a Mow of Hay or Corn. Essex.

Gods good: Yeast, Barm. Kent, Norf. Suff.

To Goyster: to be frolic and ramp, to laugh aloud, Suss.

Gowts, Somersets. Canales, cloacae, seu sentinae subterraneae, procu^dubio a
Fr. G. Gouttes, gutae, and inde verb. Esgouter, guttatim transfluere. Omnia
manifest a Lat. Gutta, Skinner.

A Gratton: an Ersh or Eddish. Suss. stubble, Kent.

H.
A HAgester: a Magpie, Kent.

A Hale: Suff. i. e. a trammel in the Essex dialect, v. Tramel.

A Haw: Kent. a close: ab As. Haga seu Haeg, Agellulus seu Cors juxta domum,
thoc ab As. Hegian sepire.

To Heal: to Cover, Suss. as to heal the fire, to heal a house: to heal a
person in bed, i. e. to cover them, ab As. Helan, to hide, cover or heal, hence
in the West he that covers a House with slates is called a Healer or Hellier.

Haulm or Helm: stubble gathered after the corn is inned: ab As. Healm, Hielm,
Stipula, Culmus. Omnia a Lat. Calamus ve^ culmus.

Hogs; Young sheep, Northamptonshire.

Hoddy: Well pleasant, in good tune or humor.

A How: pronounced as mow and throw: a narrow iron rake without teeth, to
cleanse Gardens from weeds, Rastrum Gallicum.

A Hornicle: a Hornet, Suss. Dial.

To Hotagoe: to move nimbly, spoken of the tongue, Suss. You hotagoe your
tongue.

A Holt: a Wood, an Ancient Saxon word.

Hover ground: i. e. light ground.

I.
THe Door stands a Jarre: i. e. The Door stands half open, Norf.

A Jugglemear: a Quagmire, Devonshire.

An Ice-bone: i. e. a Rump of Beef, Norf.

K.
KEdge; Brisk, Budge, Lively. Suffolk.

A Keeve: Devon. a Fat wherein they work their beer up before they tun it.

Kelter or Kilter; Frame, order, Proculdubio ( inquit Skinnerus) a Dan.
Opkilter succingo, Kilter, cingo; vel forte a voce cultura. Non absurd etiam
deflecti posset a Teut. Kelter, torcular, Skinnerus quem adisis.

The Kerfe; the furrow made by the saw, Suss.

A Kerle of veal, mutton, etc. a Loin of those meats. Devon.

Knolles; Turnips, Kent.

L.
A LAwn in a Park: Plain untilled ground.

A Leap or Lib; Suss. Half a bushel: in Essex a Seed-Leap or Lib is a vessel or
basket to carry corn in, on the arm to sow. ab As. Saed-leap, a Seed-basket.

To Lease and Leasing; to glean and gleaning, spoken of corn Suss. Kent.

Lee or Lew: Calm, under the wind. Suss.

A Lift: i. e. a Style that may be opened like a gate, Norf.

Litten: v. Church-litten. Lie-tune Saxonice coemiterium.

Lizen'd corn q. Lessened, i. e. lank or shrank corn, Suss.

2. Lourdy, Sluggish, Suss. From the French Lourd, focors, ignavus, Lourdant,
Lourdin Bardus.

1. Long it hither: Reach it hither, Suffolk.

A Lynchett: a green balk to divide lands.

M.
A MAd; an Earth worm, Ess. from the High Dutch Maden.

Mazzards: Black Cherries. West Country.

A Meag or Meak; a Pease-hook, Ess.

Mere: i. e. Lynchet.

Misagaft: Mistaken, misgiven, Suss.

Mittens: Gloves made of linen or woollen, whether knit or stitched: sometimes
also they call so gloves made of leather without fingers.

A Mixon; Dung laid on a heap or bed to rot and ripen, Suss. Kent. I find that
this word is of general use all over England. ab As. Mixen, Sterquilinium: utr.
a Meox, fimus: hoc forte a misceo and miscela: quia est miscela omnium
alimentorum.

A Modher or Modder, Mothther; a girl or young wench: used all over the
Eastern part of England, v. g. Essex, Suff. Norf. Cambr. From the ancient
Danish word More, quomodo (says Sir. H. Spelman in Glossario) a Danis oriundi
Norfolcienses puellam hodie vocant, quod interea rident Angli caeteri, vocis
nescientes probitatem. Cupio patrio meo suffragari idiomati. Intelligendum
igitur est Norfolciam hanc nostram (quae inter alios aliquot Angliae Comitatus
in Danorum transyt ditionem, An. Dom. 876) Danis maxim habitatam fuisse,
eorumque legibus, lingua atque moribus imbutum claras illi virgins and puellas
(ut Arctoae gentes aliae) Moer appellabant. Inde quae canendo heroum lauds and
poemata palmam retulere (test Olao Wormio) Scaldmoer i. e. Virgins
cantatrices quae in praelys gloriam ex fortitudine sunt adeptae Sciold Moer hoc
est Scutiferas virgins nuncuparunt. Eodem nomine ipsa, Amazones. etc. En
quantum in spreta jam voce antiquae gloriae. Sed corrumpi hanc fate or vulgari
labio, quod Mother matrem significans etiam pro Moer h. e. puella pronunciat.

M^ckson up to the buckson, Devon. Dirty up to the Knucles.

The Mokes of a net; the Mashes or Meishes, Suss.

N.
A NAil of beef, v. g. Suss. i. e. the weight of eight pound.

Newing: yeast or barm. Ess.

Near now: just now, not long since Norf. To Not: and notted: i. e. polled,
shorn. Essex. ab As. Hnot, ejusdem significati.

O.
OLd land: ground that has layn untilled along time and is new plowed up. Suff.

O^et: Fuel: q. d. Ellet, ab As. Aelan, Onaelan, accendere, Dan. Eld. Ignis.

Oost or East: the same that Kiln or Kill, Somersetshire, and elsewhere in the
West.

Orewood: Quaedam Algae species quae Cornubiae agros merifice faecundat, sic
dicta forte, quod ut Aurum in colas locuplet et, and auro emi meretur. Est
autem vox Cornubiae fere propria. Sea-wrack, so called in Cornwall, where they
manure their land with it.

Open land: Ground plowed up every year, ground that is loose or open, Suff.

P.
A PAddock: a Frog. Ess. Minshew deflectit a Belg. Padde Bufo. A Paddock or
Puddock is also alittle Park or enclosure.

Pease-bolt: i. e. Pease-straw, Ess.

Pipperidges: Barberries, Ess. Suff.

To Ply; spoken of a pot, kettle or other vessel ull of liquor, i. e. to boil:
playing hot; boylin Norfolk they pronounce it plaw.

A Poud: a Boil or Ulcer, Suss.

Puckets: nests of Caterpillars, Suss.

Q.
QVotted: Suss. Cloyed, glutted.

R.
RAthe: early, Suss. as Rathe in the morning. i. e. early in the morning.
Rath-ripe fruit, i. e. early fruit, fructus praecoces, ab As. Radh, Radhe, cito.

A Riddle: An oblong sort of sieve to separate the seed from the corn: ab As
Hriddel, cribrum; hoc a Hreddan, liberare, quia sc. c^ibrando parts puriores a
crassioirbus liberentur.

A Ripper: a Pedder, Dorser or Badger, Suss.

To Rue: to sift Devonsh.

S.
SAy of it: i. e. taste of it, Suff. say for Assay per Aphaeresin, Assay from
the French essayer, and the Italian assaggiare, to try, or prove, or attempt;
all from the Latin word sapio, which signifies also to taste.

A Seame of corn of any sort: a Quarter, 8 bushels, Ess. ab As. seam; a load, a
burden; a Horse-load, it seems also to have signified the quantity of eight
bussels, being often taken in that sense in Matthew. Paris. Somner.

A Seam of wood: an Horse-load, Suss. ejusdem originis.

Seel or seal; time or season. It is a fair feel for you to come at, i. e. a
fair season or time; spoken ironically to them that come late, Ess. ab As Sael.
time. What Seel of day? What time of day.

To go Sew: i. e. to go dry, Suss. spoken of a cow.

A Shaw: a wood that encompasses a close, Suss. ab As. scuwa umbra, a shadow.

A Shawle: a shovel to winnow withal, Suss. videtur contractum a shovel.

A Sheat: a young Hog, Suff. in Essex they call it a shote, both from shoot.

Shie or shy, apt to startle and flee from you, or that keeps off and will not
come near. It Schifo, a Belg. schouwen, schuwen, Teut. schewen, vitare, Skinner.

Sheld: Flecked: party-colored, Suff. inde Sheldrake and sheld foul, Suss.

To Shimper: to shimmer or shine, Suss. Dial.

To Shun: to shove, Suss. Dial.

Sibberidge: or sibbered: the Banes of Matrimony, Suff. ab As. syb, sybbe,
Kindred, alliance, affinity.

A Shuck: an husk or shell; as Beanshucks, Bean-shells, per Anagramatismum
(...) Husk forte.

Sizzing: yeast or barm, Suss. from the sound Beer or Ale make in working,

Sidy: surly, moody, Suss.

Sile: filth.

Simpson: Groundsell, senecio, Ess. Suff.

Skaddle: scathie, Ravenous, mischievous, Suss. ab As. skade, harm, hurt,
damage, mischief: or scaedan, laedere, nocere.

Skrow: surly, dogged, used most adverbially, as to look shrow, i. e. to look
sowrly, Suss.

Skeeling: an Isle or bay of a barn, Suss.

To Skid a wheel: Rotam sufflaminare, with an iron hook fastened to the Axis to
keep it from turning round upon the descent of a steep hill, Kent.

A Slappel: a piece, part, or portion, Suss.

A Snagge: a snail, Suss. Dial.

A Snur^e: a Pose or Cold in the head, Coryza, Suff.

To Summerland a ground; to lay it fallow a year, Suff.

Soller or solar, an upper Chamber or loft, a Latino solarium.

To Squat: to bruise or make flat by letting fall: active, Suss.

The Steal of any thing, i. e. manubrium the Handle, on Pediculus, the
footstalk: a Belg. steel, stele. Teut. stiel Petiolus.

A Seen or spene: a cows pappe, Kent. ab As. spana, mammae, ubera.

A Stew: a pool to preserve fish for the table to be drawn and filled again at
pleasure.

A Stoly house, i. e. a clutter'd dirty house, Suff.

A Strand: one of the twists of a line, be it of horse-hair or ought else, Suss.

A Stound: a little while, Suff. q. a stand.

The Strig: the footstalk of any fruit; Petiolus, Suss.

Stamwood: the roots of trees stubbed up, Suss.

A Stuckling: an apple-pasty, Suss.

Stusnet: a posnet or skillet, Suss.

A Stull: a luncheon, a great piece of bread, cheese or other Victuals, Ess.

A Stut: a Gnat: Somerset, ab As. stut, Culex.

Stover: Fodder for cattle, as hay, straw or the like, Ess. from the French
estouver fovere, according to Cowel. Spelman reduces it from the French estoffe
materia, and estoffer, necessaria iuppeditare.

To Sweale: to singe or burn, Suss. a sweal'd pig, a singed pig: ab As.
swaelan, to kindle, to set on fire or burn.

To Sworle: to snarle as a dog does Suss.

T.
A TAgge: a sheep of the first year Suss.

Temse-bread, i. e. sifted bread.

Very Tarky; very dark, Suff.

A Theave: an Ewe of the first year, Ess.

Tiching: Devon. Cornw. setting up turves that so they may be dried by the Sun
and fit to burn upon land.

To Tine or tin a candle; to light it: ab As. Tynam, accendere; hinc Tinder.

A Tovet or Tofet: Half a bushel: Kent. a nostro Two, As. Tu, Duo, and Fat
mensuram unius pecci signante, a peck.

A Trammel: an iron instrument hanging in the chimney, whereon to hang pots or
kettles over the fire, Ess.

Trewets or Truets: Pattens for Women, Suff.

A Trip of sheep, i. e. a few sheep, Norf.

A Trug: a tray for milk or the like, Suss. Dial.

To Trull: to trundle; per contractionem, Suss.

V.
To VAng: to answer for at the font as Godfather. He vangd to me at the Vant,
Somerset. in Baptisterio pro me suscepit: ab As. Fengan, to receive, also to
undertake, verso f in v pro more loci.

Velling: Plowing up the turf or upper surface of the ground, to lay on heaps
to burn. West-countrey.

A Voor: a furrow, Suss.

A Vollow: a Fallow, Suss. Generally in the West-Country they use v, instead of
f. and z. instead of s.

Vrith: Eththerings or windings of hedges, teneri rami Coryli, quibus inflexis
sepes colligant and stabiliunt: ab As. Wrydhan, torquere, distorquere,
contratorquere: Wridha, lorum, Wridelf, Fascia, quia sci. hi rami contorti
instar lori and Fasciae sepes colligant, Skinner.

W.
VVAttles: made of split wood in fashion of gates, wherein they use to fold
sheep, as elsewhere in hurples, Suss. ab As. watelas, crates, hurdles.

A Wem: a small fault, hole, decay or blemish, especially in cloth, Ess. ab As.
wem, a blot, spot or blemish.

A Were or wair: a pond or pool of water, ab As. waer a fish pond, a place or
engine for catching and keeping of fish.

A Whapple way, i. e. where a cart and horses cannot pass, but horses only.

A Wheden: a simple person, west.

Whicket for whacket: or quittee for quattee; i. e. Quid pro quo, Kent.

A Whittle: a doubled blanket, which Women wear over their shoulders in the
West Country, as else where short cloaks, ab As. Hwitel, Sagum, Saga, l^na, a
kind of garment, a cassock, an Irish mantle, etc. v. Somner.

Widows bench: a share of the Husbands Estate which Widows in Sussex enjoy
beside their joyntures.

To Wimme: Suss. Dial.

Woadmell: A bairy course stuff made of Island wool, and brought thence by our
Seamen to Norf. Suff. etc.

Woodcock soil, Ground that has a soil under the turf that looks of a Woodcock
color and is not good.

Y.
YAre: nimble, sprightly, smart, Suffolk.

A Yaspen or Yeepsen: in Essex signifies as much as can be taken up in both
hands joy n'd together. Gouldman renders it vola seu manipulus, fortean a
nostro. Grasping, elisa propter euphoniam litera canina r, and g, in y
facillim^ sane and vulgatissima nostrae linguae mutatione transeunte: q. d.
quantum quis vola comprehendere potest, Skinner.

In Sussex for hasp, clasp, wasp, they pronounce hapse, clapse, wapse, etc. for
neck nick, for throat throtte, for choke, chock. Set'n down, let'n stand, come
again and fe^'n anon. C'have cat so much c'ham quit a quot, Devon. i. e. I ean
eat no more, I have eat so much that I am cloyed.

A CATALOGUE: OF ENGLISH BIRDS As well such as constantly abide and breed in
England, as those that come and go at certain Seasons.
Rapacious Diurnal Birds.
AQuila: The Eagle; What sort I cannot certainly determine. But that there have
been several seen, and some bred in England I am well assured. Particularly
Anno 1668. in the Woodlands near Derwent in the Peak of Derbyshire was found an
Eagles nest, made of great sticks resting the one end upon the ledge of a Rock,
the other upon two Birch trees; above the sticks was a layer of rushes upon the
Rushes a layer of Heath, and upon he Heath Rushes again; upon which lay one
young one and an addle Egg, and by them a lamb and a hare, and three
heath-poults. The nest was about two yards square, and had no hollow in it: The
young Eagle was as black as a Hobby, of the shape of a Gos-hawk, of almost the
weight of a Goose, feathered down to the foot, and having a ring of white about
the tail, an Pygargus Aldr. and it is said that there are Eagles build yearly
on the Rocks of Snowdon in Carnarvanshire in Wales.

The Sparrow-hawk: Accipiter fringillarius, Recentioribus, Nisus.

The Bald Buzzard: Balbusardus Anglorum, Haliaetus, Aldrov.

The common Buzzard: Buteo, Triorches.

The Honey-Buzzard: Buteo apivorus.

The Ringtail: Pygargus: the cock of this kind is called the Hen harrow.

The Kite or Glead: Milvus.

Milvus aeruginosus: Aldrov. I know not any English name of this Bird.

The Hobby: Subbuteo.

The Kestrell or Stannel; in some places the Windover. Tinnunculus seu Cenchris
Aldrov.

The great Butcher-bird called in the Peak of Derbyshire Wirrangle. Lanius
cinereus major.

The lesser Butcher-bird, called in Yorkshire. Flusher Lanius tertius Aldrov.
Turner calls this Bird the Shrike.

The Cuckoo: Cuculus.

Rapacious nocturnal Birds.
The Horn-Owl: Otus sive Noctua aurita.

The common gray or Ivy-Owl. Strix Aldrov.

The common Barn-Owl, or White Owl: Aluco minor Aldrov.

The Churn-owl, Fern Owl or Goat sucker, Capr imulgus.

The Crow-kind or Semirapacious Birds.
The Raven: Corvus.

The common Crow: Cornix.

The Rook: Cornix frugilega.

The Roiston Crow: Cornix cinerea frugilega.

The Jacdaw: Monedula sive Lupus Aldrov.

The Magpie or Pianet: Pica varia caudata.

The Cornish Chough: Coracias, Pyrrhocorax.

The Jay: Pica glandaria.

The VVoodpecker-kind.
The green Woodpecker or Woodspite: called by some Heyhoe. Picus viridis.

The greater spotted Wood-pecker or Hickwall; Picus varius major.

The lesser spotted Wood-pecker or Witwal: Picus varius minor.

The Wryneck: Jynx sive Torquilla.

The Nut hatch: Picus cinereus.

The Creeper or Ox-eye Creeper. Certhia.

The Poultry kind. Genus gallinaceum
The common Cock and Hen: Gallus gallin aceus and Gallina.

The Pheasant: Phasianus.

The common Partridge: Perdix cinerea.

The Quail: Coturnix.

The common Heath cock, Black game or Grous; Tetrao sive Urogallus minor.

The Redgame: Grygallus minor, an Longolii Gallina Betula? Aldrov.

The Bustard: Otis, Tarda avis Aldrov.

The Pigeon-kind.
The common Pigeon or house-Dove: Columba domestica, seu vulgaris.

The Turtle-Dove: Turtur.

The Ring-Dove or Queest: Palumbus torquatus.

The Stock-dove or Wood-pigeon: Oenas sive Vinago.

The Thrush-kind.
The Missel-bird or Shrite; Turdus viscivorus major.

The Mavis, Song-thrush or Throstle; Turdus viscivorus minor.

These two are Birds of pafsage, that were never known to breed in England The
Fieldfare: Turdus pilaris. The Redwing or Swine-pipe: Turdus Iliacus.


The blackbird; Merula vulgaris.

The Ring Ouzell; Merula torquata.

The Water-ouzoll: Merula aquatica.

The Stare or Sterling: Sturnus.

Small Birds with slender Bills.
The common Lark; Alau da vulgaris.

The Wood-lark.

The Tit-lark: Alauda pratorum.

The common House-swallow; Hirundo domestica.

Tbe Martin: Hirundo agrestis sive rustica Plin.

The black Martin or Swift; Hirundo apus.

The Land-martin or Shore-bird: Hirundo riparia.

The Hedge-sparrow: Curruca Eliotae.

Pettichaps: Ficedula Septima Aldrov.

Moucherolle: Bellonii forte. These two Birds have not any English names
generally known; neither can I certainly say that they are described.

The Redstart: Ruticilla.

The Robin-red-breast or Ruddock: Rubecula.

The Nightingale. Luscinia, Philomela,

Atricapilla: Aldrov.

The Fallow-smich or Wheat-ear; or White-tail; Oenanthe sive Vitiflora Aldrov.

Oenanthe alia, duabus maculis albis in singulis alis insignita.

The Stone-smich or Stone-chatter; an Muscicapa tertia Alarov?

The Goldfinch. Germanis dicta. avicula, quamvis cum Fringilis nihil habeat
commune, in the mountains of the Peak of Derbyshire.

The White-throat: an Spipola prima Aldrov?

The White Water-wagtail: Motacilla alba.

The Yellow Water-wagtail: Motacilla flava.

The copped Wren: Regulus cristatus.

Regulus non cristatus Aldrov. an Asilus, an Luteola Turneri?

The Wren: Passer troglodytes.

The great Titmouse: Parus major, seu Fringillago.

The black-headed Titmouse; Parus ater, Gesn.

The Marsh Titmouse: Parus palustris;

The blew Titmouse: Parus caeruleus.

Tbe long-tail'd Titmouse: Paru caudatus.

Small Birds with thick and short Bills.
The Haw-finch. Coccothraustes.

The Green-finch: Chloris.

The Bull-finch, Alpe or Nope: Rubicilla seu Pyrrhula Aldrov.

The Shell-apple or Cross-bill: Loxia.

The House-sparrow: Passer domesticus.

The Chaffe-finch: Fringilla.

The Bramble or brambling: or Mountain-finch: Fringilla montana.

The Gold-finch: Carduelis, Acanthis.

The common Linnet: Linaria vulgaris.

The greater red-headed Linnet; Linaria rubra major.

The lesser red-headed Linnet: Linaria rubra minor.

The Siskin: Spinus sive Ligurinus.

Birds having a hard protuberancy in the upper chap.
The Bunting: Emberiza alba, Gesn.

The Yellow-hammer, or amber: Emberiza flava, Gesn.

The Reed-sparrow: Passer arundinaceus.

Water Fovvl: Such as have their toes divided, and that only wade in the
Water, or frequent watery places.
The Greater kind.
THe Crane: Grus.

The common Heron or Heron-shaw: Ardea cinerea major.

The Bittern: Ardea stellaris.

The middle and lesser kind's.
Such as have slender and very long bills:

The Woodcock: Scolopax.

The Snipe: Gallinago minor.

The Gid or Jack-snipe: Gallinago minima.

The Godwit or Stone-plover: an Fedoa Gesn.

The Stone-Curlew: These Birds are like one to the other, and have bills longer
then the Woodcock.

The Curlew: Arquata, Numenius.

The Sea-pie: Haematopus Bellonii.

The Redshank: Such as have slender bills of a middle length. An Callidrys
Bellonii? Gallinula crythropus major, Gesn.

-- Tringa major.

Sand-piper: Tringa minor.

The Knot: Canuti avis; Cinclus Bellonii.

The Ruff and Re eve: Avis pugnax Aldrov.

The Sanderling or Curwillct; so called about Pensans, it is about the bigness
of the lesser Tringa or Sand-piper, and wants the back claw, by which note it
may easily be known from all others of its kind.

The S^int.

To these I may add (though he has very short legs, and wades not.)

The King-fisher. Ispida.

Such as have short Bills.
The Lapwing: Capella sive Vanellus.

The Green-plover: Pluvialis viridi.

The Grey-plover: Pluvialis cinerea.

The Sea-Lark: Charadrius sive Hiaticuia: This also wants the back claw.

The Turn-stone: an Cinclus Turneri. This bird we observed on the coast of
Cornwall: it is lesser then a Plover, and somewhat bigger then a Blackbird.

Of such as Swim in the WATER.
Such whose toes are divided, which I may call Fin-toed.
Colymbus christatus: The crested Diver.

The Didapper or Dob-chich: Colymbus minor.

The common Weter-hen or More-hen: Gallinula chloropus.

The Velvet Runner: Gallinula Serica.

The Coot: Fulica Mr. Johnson of Brigna near Crota bridge York-sh. showed me a
bird of the Coot kind scollop-toed not much bigged then a Blackbird.

Whole or VVeb-footed.
Such as have all four toes webbed together.
The Soland-Goose: Anser Bassanus.

The Cormorant: Corvus aquaticus.

The Shagge: Graculus palmipes.

Such as want the Back-toe.
The Pope, called in some places Puffins: Anas Arctica Clus.

The Rasor-bill: Auk or Murre: Alka Hoieri and Womii.

The Guilliam, Cuillem or Kiddaw: Lomwia insula^ Ferrae:

Such as have slender bills sharp-pointed.
The greatest Diver: Colymbus maximus, an Lum?

The Herring-gull or greatest ash-colored Mew: Larus cinereus maximus.

The lesser ash-colored Sea-cobor Mew: Larus cinereus minor.

The great Gray Gull: an Wagel Cornubi-ensium?

Of this Bird the Cornish men about Pensans report, that he pursues and strikes
at the small Gull so long, till out of fear it mutes; The Wagell presently
follows and greedily devours the excrement, catching it sometimes before it be
fallen to the water. This several Seamen affirmed themselves to have oftentimes
seen.

The great black and white Gull: Larus maximus ex albo and nigro varius.

The Gannet, An Catarractes. We saw about St. Ives in Cornwall many of these
birds flying. It has long wings, and a long neck, and flies strongly, it prys
upon Pilchards; the Scoles whereof great numbers of this fowl constantly
frequent and pursue. It casts it self down with great violence upon its prey,
insomuch that they say one way to catch it is by fastening a Pilchard to a deal
board a little under water, upon which it will precipitate it self with such
vehemence, that it will dash out its own brains against the board.

The Coddy moddy or lesser gray Gull: an Larus major Aldrov?

The Pewit or Sea-crow: Larus albus minor.

The Tarrock: Cornub: Larus cinereus Bellonii.

The Sea-swallow: Hirundo marina.

The small black Cu^l: Larus niger, vel Larus piscator.

The Puffin or Curviere: Puffinus Anglorum.

This bird builds on a little Island called the calf of Man at the South end of
the Isle of Man, and also upon the Silly Islands, but is nothing such a thing
as is described in Aldrovandus: for that is feathered and can fly swiftly.

Avosetta Italorum: Recurvirostra.

Such as have toothed-bills.
The Gossander or Bergander: Merganse^ Aldr.

The lesser tooth-bill'd Diver: Mergus cinereus fuscus.

Albellus alter Aldrov. Mergus glacialis Gesneri.

This has no English name known to me, unless it be that which Dr. Merret in
his Pinax calls by the name of Nun: The Germans call it the White Nun. The cock
and hen in this and the Gossander differ so much in color, that Authors have
made four distinct species of them.

Broad-billed Birds.
The Swan: Cygnus.

The Elk, Hooper, or wild Swan: Cygnus ferus, this bird is specifically
distinct ^om the tame Swan; as is manifest from that one note alone, that in
this the winde-pipe enters into the breast bone, and is therein reflected,
which it does not in the tame Swan.

The Goose: Anser.

The Wild-Goose: Anser ferus.

The road-Goose, or small Wild Goose.

The Bernacle: Bernicla:

The common Wild Duck: Boschas major.

The tame Duck: Anas domestica.

The Shelldrake: Tadorna Belonii.

The Gadwall or Gray: Boschas minor orquata.

The Sea Pheasant: Anas caudacuta.

The Wigeon: Penelope Aldrov. Anas fistularis.

The Pochard: Anas fera fusca. Rothals, Gesn.

Mergus cirratus minor, Gesn.

Caporosso Venetiis dicta.

The Teal: Querquedula.

Quattro occhis Venetiis: Clangula.

The Shoveler: Anas platyrynchos, sive clypeata Germanica Aldr.

The Scoter: Anas niger.

Anatis nigrae aliam speciem nobis oftendit D. Johnson Eboracensis.

The Cuthbert Duck: Anas S. Cuthberti, building only on the Farn Islands upon
the coast of Northumberland.

A. CATALOGUE OF FISHES Taken about Pensans and St. Ives in Cornwall given us
by one of the Ancientest and most experienced fishermen, the most whereof we
saw during our stay there.
Of the Cetaceous Kind.
1. THe Whale, Cetus, Balaena: of what sort he could not tell us. Vulgus enim
non distinguit.

2. The Porpesse: Phocaena Rondel.

These Fishes have lungs and breathe like quadrupeds, are also viviparous and
give suck to their young.

Of the Cartilagineous kind, Long.
3. Blew Sharks; Glaucus.

4. White Sharks.

5. Topes; An Mustelus laevis secundus seu Canosa Salviani?

6. Picked Dogs; Catulus spinax.

7. Rough Hounds; Mustelus, an laevis primus Salviani?

8. Morgay; Catulus major Salviani.

Broad or Flat.
9. Thornback; Raia clavata.

10. Flair or Ray; Raia laevis.

11. Monk-fish: which either is or ought to be called Skate, if we follow the
Etymology of the word; Squatina. The Italians call it Pesce Angelo, The
Angel-Fish.

12. The Piper, Raio-squatina Rondel. I am not ignorant that the Cornish men
call another Fish, viz. A sort of Cuculus or Gurnard by the name of Piper:
wherefore this Homonymy is to be carefully noted to avoid confusion.

13. Pesc mollan; the Frog-fish, or Sea-Divel: Rana piscatrix.

Spinous or Bony Fishes.
Flat-Fishes that swim sideways and lie most part grovelling at the bottom.
14. Holibut or Halibut; the biggest of all this kind, an Hippoglossus Rondel?

15. Turbot Rhombus. These names of Turbot and Halibut are confounded in
several Countries. What in the North they call the Halibut in the North they
call the Turbot; and the Turbot the Bret, nay in some parts of the West of
England they call the Turbot Bret and the Halibut Turbot.

16. The Plaise; Passer maculosus.

17. Flukes or Flounders, called in some places Buts, Passer laevis vulgaris.

18. The Dab: Passer asper, seu squamosus Rondel.

19. Lanterns: Lug aleth Cornubiensibus.

20. Queens: a Fish thinner than a Plaise. Of these two last we know nothing
but the names, having never seen the Fishes.

21. Soles: Solea, Lingulaca.

Of Fishes that swim upright, which at present we will distinguish into 1 Long
and narrow. 2. Broad or deep.
Of long Fishes.
Such as have three fins upon the Ridge of their Backs which I call properly
the Codkind.
22. The Common Cod-fish: Asellus vulgaris, Cabiliau.

23. The Whiting-Pollack.

24. The Raewlin-Pollack.

25. The Haddock: Asinus Antiquorum.

26. The Bib or Blinds.

27. The Bulcard.

28. The Whiting: Asellus mollis.

Of these fishes we saw and described all, save the Bulcard: several of them we
judge not yet described by any Author extant in print: indeed the writers of
natural History of Animals living far from the Ocean, and so having never had
opportunity of seeing these kinds of Fishes, which are proper to the Ocean and
not found in the Mediterranean Sea, write very confusedly and obscurely
concerning them.

To these may be referred two other Fishes, which have not three fins on the
back, because their flesh is like that of the precedent, and they are usually
salted and dried in like manner, viz.

29. Ling: by some called Asellus longus, and by some Asellus Islandicus.

30. Hake: Asellus alter, sive Merlucius, Aldrov.

Of the Gurnard kind, having as it were fingers before the fins on their
Bellies.
31. Gray Gurnard or Snowd: Cuculus.

32. Red Gurnard.

33. Tub-fish or Piper. Lyra prior Rondel.

Of the Herring-kind.
34. Herrings: Harengus.

35. Pilchard: Harengus minor. This Fish, though not so great as the Herring,
yet seemed to us of a more Delicate taste.

36. A lose: called in other places Shads, which are of the Anadromi, coming up
Rivers, commonly taken in the Rivers of Thames and Severn, called in Latin
Clupeae and Alosae. They are the biggest of this kind, growing to be far
greater then a Herring.

Of the Mackrel-kind.
37. Tunny, called there Spanish Mackrel, of which we saw a large one taken at
Pensans.

38. Scad; Trachurus.

39. Mackrel; Scomber.

Miscellaneous long Fishes of several Kinds.
40. Mullet; Mugil.

41. Basse.

42. Old-wives; which I saw not but by the description made of it I guess to be
a kind of Turdus.

43. Wrasse; another sort of Turdus: in Careys description of Cornwall this is
called a Wroth.

44. Sur-Mullet; Mullus Antiquorum.

45. Cuckow-Fish; That sort of Turdus called by Salvianus Pavo.

46. Girrock: Acus major, called elsewhere Horn-Fish and Needle-Fish.

47. Skipper; Acus minor.

48. Conger or Sea-Eel: Congrus.

49. Calken; i. e. Weaver or Wiver, Draco sive Araneus.

50. Salmon; Salmo.

51. Smelt; Violacea.

52. Sand-Eels or Lances; Ammodytes Gesneri, so called because they dig them
out of the Sand when the Tide is out.

53. Whistle-Fish; Mustelus.

54. Mulgronock; Alauda marina.

55. Father-Lasher Cornubiensibus pueris dictus: Scorpaena Bellony.

56. Butter-Fish:

57. Sea-Adder; These two last are very small Fishes, and not described or
mentioned by any Author I know of.

58. Rock-Fish; Gobius marinus.

59. A Gid; A scaly Fish lesser then a Pilchard: this we saw not.

Broad or Deep-Fishes.
60. Gilt-Heads; Aurata, Chrysophrys.

61. Sea-Bream, Chad; Pagrus Aldrov.

62. Dory; Faber piscis.

63. Sun-Fish; Mola Salviani.

Shellfish.
Crustaceous.
64. Black Crabfish.

65. White Crab: Pagurus.

66. Scottish Crab:

67. Spanish Crab: Tragezawt: Cancer maias. Besides all these we observed two
other sorts of small Crabs.

68. Lobster: Astacus.

69. Long Oyster, Sea-gar, Red Crab: Locusta marina. The name long Oyster is no
doubt a Corruption of Locusta.

70. Shrimp, Beeban booban Cornub. Squilla.

Testaceous.
71. Cockle: Pectunculus.

72. Muscle: Mitylus.

73. Oyster: Ostrea.

74. Limpet: Patella.

75. Shorts: Echini marini.

76. Wrinkles or Periwinkles: Cochleae marinae: Of which there are found
several species.

Fish called in Latin Exanguia aquatica mollia.
77. Cuttle Fish: Lolligo.

78. Call: Sepia.

79. Mulgouly: a sort of Urtica soluts or Blubber, round and finely colored
with rays on one side, from the center to the circumference.

80. Star-Fishes of several sorts, Stellae marinae.

On the Rocks near the Lands end they often find the Phocae (which they call
Soils) sleeping. Sometimes they kill them by striking them cross the snout with
a pole, otherwhiles they shoot them. Some of these Soils (they say) grow to the
bigness of a heifer of two years old, and they are of diverse Colors. They
defend themselves by casting stones backward with their feet upon those that
come near them. Being shot dead the male they say sinks down presently to the
bottom of the water, but the female flotes or swims: which is not to be
credited.

They distinguish between Soils and Sielos: the Siele they affirm to be a Fish
and no Amphibium, much less then the soil, and not taken upon our Coasts.

A CATALOGUE OF Fresh water Fish found IN England.
Anadromi: Sea fish that come up Rivers at certain Seasons.
THe Sturgeon: Sturio, Acipenser.

The Salmon: Salmo.

The Shad or Alose: Clupea* Alosa.

The Smelt: Violacea, Eperlanus Roudel.

Lacustres: such as are found only in Lakes or Meres.
The Charre of Winander-mere in Westmorland: This I take to be the same with
the Welsh Torgoch, taken in the lake of Llanberis near Snowdon-hill, and in
other pools in Carnarvanshire. The same I saw and described at Zug in
Switzerland, by the name of Reutell: which the fisher men, there, said was
proper to their lake. Of this fish there are two sorts taken in Winander-mere.
The greater having a red belly they call the red Charre: and the lesser having
a white belly, which they call the Gilt or Gelt Charre.

The Guiniad: found in the lake of Bala in Merionethshire in Wales. This is the
same with the Farra of the lake of Geneva, discribed in Aldrovandus, and the
Alberlin of the lake of Zurich in Switzerland. It is found also in a lake in
Cumberland five miles from Pereth called Huls water: where they call it the
Schelley.

Fluviatiles: River Fishes, and such as live in standing pools and ponds of
Water.
Squamosi; Scaly.
THe Trout; Trutta. Of these there are said to be several sorts: as the
Lincolnshire Shard, the Salmon-trout: The Bull-trout: Grey-trout, or Skurf.
But to me these differences are not well known.

The Samlet: a small Fish of the trout-kind taken in Hereford River.

The Grayling: Thymalus. I take this to be the same Fish, which in some places
of the North they call the Vmber.

The Pike, Pickrell or Jack: for these are but several names of the same Fish
according to its age or bigness, Lucius.

The Carp: Cyprinus. This Fish, though now there is none more common with us,
was but lately brought over into England. Leonard. Mascall in his book of
Fishing says that himself was the first that brought in Carps and Pippins.

The Bream: Cyprnius latus, Abramis.

The Perch: Perca, this Fish at Huls Water before mentioned they called the
Basse.

The Ruff: Perca aurata.

The Tench: Tinca.

The Barble: Barbus.

The Chub or Chevin: Capito, Cephalus fluv.

The Dace or Dare: Leuciscus.

The Bleak or Bley: Alburnus.

The Roche: Rubellio.

The Gudgeon: Gobio fluviatilis.

Fluviatiles laeves; River Fish without scales.
The Eel: Anguilla.

The Eel-pout or Burbot: Mustela.

The Lampern: Lampetra minor.

The Minow, Minim or Pink: Varius sive Phoximus laevis.

The Loche: Cobites barbatula.

The Stickle-Back or Banstickle: Pungitius piscis. Of this there are two kinds:
One that has only three prickles on the ridge of the back: another that has
six or more.

The Bull-head or Millers thumb: Gobio capitatus, Cottus Rondel.

FINIS.
THE Smelting and Refining OF SILVER, AT The Silver Mills in CARDIGANSHIRE.
THe Oar beaten into small Pieces is brought from the mine to the Smelting
House, and there melted with black and white Coal; i. e. With Charcoale and
wood slit into small pieces and dried in a kiln, for that purpose. The reason
why they mix black and white Coal is, because black alone makes too vehement a
Fire, and the white too gentle, but mixed together they make a just temper of
hear. After the fire is made the mine is cast on the coals; and so
interchangeably mine and Coals. The mine when melted runs down into the Sump,
i. e. a round pit of stone covered over with clay within. Thence it is laded
out and cast into long square bars with smaller ends fit to lift and carry them
by.

These bars they bring to the refining Furnace, which is covered with a thick
cap of stone bound about with Iron and moveable, that so they may lift it up,
and make the test at the bottom anew ( which they do every refining) In the
middle of the cap there is a hole in which the bar of metal hangs in Iron
slings above the Furnace, that so it may be let down by degrees as it melts
off. Besides this they have another hole in the side of the Furnace parallel to
the Horizon, and bottomed with Iron. At this hole they thrust in another bar.
The rest is of an oval Figure, and occupies all the bottom of the Furnace. The
fire is put in by the side of the bellows. When the Furnace is come to a true
temper of heat, the lead converted into Litharge is cast off by the blowing of
the bellows, the Silver subsiding into the bottom of the test. The blast blows
the lead converted into Litharge off the Silver after the manner that Cream is
blown off Milk.

As soon as all the glut of Litharge (for so they call it) is cast off, the
Silver in the bottom of the Cuple grows cold, and the same degree of heat will
not keep it melted as before. The Cake of Silver after it grows cold springs or
rises up into branches.

The test is made of marrow-bones burnt to small pieces, afterward stamped to
powder, and with water tempered into a past. The test is about a foot thick
laid in Iron. After the cake of silver is taken out, that part of the test
which is discolored they mingle with the Oar to be melted; the rest they
stamp and use again for test.

The Litharge is brought to a reducing Furnace, and there with Charcoale only
melted into Lead. The Litharge is cast upon the Charcoale in the bing of the
Furnace, and as the Charcoale burns away and the Litharge melts, more Charcoale
thrown on and Litharge put upon it as at first smelting.

Another Furnace they have, which they call an Almond Furnace, in which they
melt the slags or refuse of the Litharge (not stamped) with Charcoale only.

The slags or cinders of the first smelting they beat small with great stamps
lifted up by a wheel moved with water, and falling by their own weight. First
they are stamped with dry stamps, then sifted with an Iron sieve in water. That
which lies at the bottom of the sieve is returned to the smelting Furnace
without more ado. That which swims over the sieve is beaten with wet stamp.

That which passes through the sieve, as also that which after it has been
beaten with the wet stamps passes through a fine grate or strainer of Iron,
goes to the Buddle, which is a vessel made like to a shallow tumbrel, standing
a little shelving.

Thereon the matter is laid, and water running constantly over it, moved to and
fro with an Iron rake or how, and so the water carries away the earth and
dross, the metal remaining behind. That which is thus Budled they lue with a
thick hair sieve close wrought in a tub of water, rolling the sieve about and
enclining it this way and that way with their hands. The light which swims over
the sieve is returned again to the Buddle. That which subsides is fit for the
smelting Furnace.

They have besides an Assay-Furnace, wherewith they try the value of the metal,
i. e. what proportion the lead bears to the Silver, cutting a piece off every
bar and melting it in a small Cupel. First they weigh the piece cut off, then
after the lead is separated the Silver. A tun of metal will yield 10, sometimes
15, and if it be rich 20 l. weight of Silver. All lead oar dig'd in England
has a proportion of silver mixed with it, but some so little, that it will not
quit cost to refine it.

At the first smelting they mingle several sorts of oar, some richer, some
poorer, else they will not melt so kindly.

The Silver made here is exceeding fine and good.

These six mountains in Cardiganshire not far distant from each other afford
Silver oar, Talabont, Geginnon, Comsomlack, Gedarren, Bromefloid and Cummer.

At our being there they dig'd only at Talabont.

They sink a perpendicular square hole or shaft, the sides whereof they
strengthen round from top to bottom with wood that the earth fall not in.

The transverse pieces of wood, they call stemples and upon these catching hold
with their Hands and Feet they descend without using any rope. They dig the Oar
thus, one holds a little picque or punch of Iron, having a long handle of wood,
which they call a Gad; another with a great Iron hammer or sledge drives it
into the vein.

The vein of metal runs East and West, it rises North and flopes or dips to
the South. There is a white Fluor about the vein, which they call Spar, and a
black which they call blinds. This last covers the vein of Oar, and when it
appears they are sure to find Oar.

They sell the Oar for 3 l. or 4 l. the tun, more or less as it is in
goodness, or as it is more rare or plentiful.

This information and account we had from Major Hill, 1662. Who was then master
of the silver mills.

The History of these Silver-works may be seen in Dr. Fullers Worthies of Wales
General, p. 3.

The smelting of Lead is the same with the smelting of Silver Oar, and
therefore no need that any thing be said of it.

The preparing and smelting, or blowing of Tin in Cornwall.
THe tinners find the Mine by the Shoad (or as they call it Squad) which is
loose stones of tin mixed with the Earth, of which they give you this account.

The load or vein of tin before the flood came up to the Superficies of the
Earth. The flood washing the upper part of it as of the whole earth, brake it
off from the load, and confounded or mixed it with the earth to such a depth.
They observe that the deeper the shoad lies, the nearer is the main load, and
the shallower the further off. Sometimes it comes up to the exterior
Superficies of the earth. The main load begins at the East and runs Westward,
shelving still deeper and deeper; and sometimes descending almost
perpendicularly. Besides the main load, they have little branches that run from
it North and South, and to other points which they call Country. The vein or
load is sometimes less, sometimes greater, sometimes not a foot thick,
sometimes three foot or more. When they have dug a good way they sink an
air-shaft, else they cannot breathe nor keep their candles light. The shoad
commonly descends a hill side. There is a kind of fluor which they call Spar
next the vein, and which sometimes encompasseth it. In this are often found the
Cornish Diamonds. Above the Spar lies another kind of substance like a white
soft stone, which they call Kellus. They get out the Mine with a Pick-ax, but
when it is hard they use a Gad [a tool like a Smiths punch] which they drive in
with one end of their Pick-ax made like a hammer. When they have gotten out of
the Mine, they break it with a hammer into small pieces, the biggest not
exceeding half a pound or a pound, and then bring it to the stamps. [The stamps
are only two at one place, lifted up by a wheel moved with water as the Silver
Mills] There it is put into a square open box into which a spout of water
continually runs and therein the stamps beat it to powder. One side of the box
mentioned is made of an iron-plate perforated with small holes like a grate, by
which the water runs out, and carries away with it the Mine that is pounded
small enough to pass the holes, dross and all together, in a long gutter or
trough made of wood. The dross and earth (as being lighter) is carried all
along the trough to a pit or vessel into which the trough delivers it, called a
loob: the tin as being heavier, subsides and stays behind in the trough: and
besides at a good distance from the stamps they put a turf in the trough to
stop the tin that itrun not further.

The tin remaining in the trough they take out and carry to the buddle [a
Vessel described in the Silver work] where the sand and earth is washed from it
by the water running over it, the tinners stirring and working it both with a
shovel, and with their feet. In the buddle the rough tin (as they call it)
falls behind; the head tin lies uppermost or foremost. The head tin passes to
the wreck, where they work it with a wooden rake in Vessels almost like the
buddling Vessels, water running also over it. In the wreck the head tin lies
again foremost, and that is finished and fit for the blowing house, and is
called black tin, being black of color, and as fine as sand. The rough tin
lies next, that as also that in the buddle they sift to separate the course,
and dross, and stones from it, which is teturned to the stamps to be new
beaten. The fine is lewed in a fine sierce moved and waved to and fro in the
water, as is described in the Silver work; the oar subfiding to the bottom, the
sand, earth and other dross flows over the rimme of the sierce with the water:
that which remains in the sierce they sift through a fine sieve, and what
passes through they call black tin. In like manner they order the wast tin that
falls hindmost in the Buddle and wreck, which they call the tail, as also that
which falls into the loob, pit or sump, viz. washing and sifting of it, which
they call stripping of it, returning the rough and course to the stamps, and
the finer to the wreck.

With the rough tin that is returned to the stamps they migle new ore, else it
will not work, but fur up the stamps. The tin in the loob they let lie a while,
and the longer the better, for, say they, it grows and increases by lying.

The black tin is smelted at the blowing house with Charcoal only, first
throwing on Charcoal, then upon that black tin, and so interchangeably into a
very deep bing (which they call the house) broader at the top and narrower at
the bottom. They make the fire very vehement, blowing the coals continually
with a pair of great bellows moved by water, as in the smelting of other
metals. The melting tin together with the dross or slag runs out at a hole at
the bottom of the bing into a large trough made of stone. The cinder or slag
swims on the top of it like scum, and hardens presently.

This they take off with a shovel and lay it by.

When they have got a sufficient heap of it they sell it to be stamped, budled
and lued. They get a good quantity of tin out of it. Formerly it was thrown
away to mend high ways, as nothing worth. When they have a sufficient quantity
of the melted metal they cast it into oblong square pieces in a mould made of
Moore-stone. The lesser pieces they call slabs, the greater blocks. Two pound
of black tin ordinarily yields a pound of white or more.

The tin after it is melted is coined, i. e. marked by the Kings Officer with
the Lion Rampant. The Kings custom is four shillings on every hundred pound
weight. Other particulars concerning the tin-works I omit, because they may be
seen in Carewy's survey of Cornwall. But the manner of preparing the tin for
blowing or smelting is now much different from what it was in his time.

Tin-oar is so different in color and appearance from tin, that one would
wonder that the one should come out of the other: and somewhat strange it is
that tin being so like to lead, tin-oar should be so unlike to Lead-oar being
very like to the lead that is melted out of it.

The manner of the Iron-work at the Furnace.
THe Iron-mine lies sometimes deeper, sometimes shallower in the Earth from 4
foot to 40. and upward. There are several sorts of mine, some hard, some
gentle, some rich, some courser. The Iron-masters always mix different sorts of
mine together, otherwise they will not melt to advantage.

When the mine is brought in, they take small cole and lay a row of small cole
and upon it a row of mine, and so alternately, S. S. S. one above another, and
setting the coals on fire therewith burn the mine.

The use of this burning is to mollify it, that so it may be broke in small
pieces: otherwise if it should be put into the furnace as it comes out of the
Earth, it would not melt but come away whole.

Care also must be taken that it be not too much burned, for then it will loop,
i. e. melt and run together in a mass. After it is burnt, they beat it into
small pieces with an Iron sledge, and then put it into the Furnace (which is
before charged with coals) casting it upon the top of the coals, where it melts
and falls into the hearth in the space of about twelve hours more or less, and
then it is run into a Sow.

The hearth or bottom of the furnace is made of a Sand-stone, and the sides
round to the height of a Yard or thereabout, the rest of the Furnace is lined
up to the top with Brick.

When they begin upon a new furnace; They put fire for a day or two before they
begin to blow.

Then they blow gently and increase by degrees till they come to the height in
ten weeks or more.

Every six days they call a Founday, in which space they make 8 tun of Iron, if
you divide the whole sum of Iron made by the Foundays: for at first they make
less in a Founday, at last more.

The hearth by the force of the fire continually blown grows wider and wider,
so that if at first it contains so much as will make a Sow of 600 or 700 pound
weight, at last it will contain so much as will make a Sow of 2000 l. The
lesser pieces of 1000 pound or under they call Pigs.

Of 24 loads of coals they expect 8 tun of Sows to every load of coals, which
consists of 11 quarters they put a load of mine which contains 18 bushels.

A Hearth ordinarily if made of good stone will last 40 Foundays, that is 40
weeks, during which time the fire is never let go out. They never blow twice
upon one hearth though they go upon it not above five or six Foundays.

The cinder like scum swims upon the melted metal in the hearth, and is let out
once or twice before a Sow is cast.

The manner of working the Iron at the Forge or Hammer.
IN every forge or hammer there are two fires at least, the one they call the
Finery, the other the Chafery.

At the Finery by the working of the hammer they bring it into Blooms and
Anconies, thus.

The sow at first they roll into the fire, and melt off a piece of about three
fourths of a hundred weight, which, so soon as it is broken off, is called a
Loop.

This Loop they take out with their shingling tongs, and beat it with Iron
sledges upon an Iron plate near the fire, that so it may not fall in pieces but
be in a capacity to be carried under the hammer. Under which they then removing
it, and drawing a little water, beat it with the hammer very gently, which
forces cinder and dross out of the matter, afterward by degrees drawing more
water they beat it thicker and stronger till they bring it to a Bloom, which is
a apiece mass of about two foot long. This operation they call shingling
the Loop.

This done they immediately return it to the Finery again, and after two or
three heats and working they bring it to an Ancony, the figure whereof is in
the middle, a bar about 3 feet long of that shape they intend the whole bar
to be made of it: at both ends a square piece left rough to be wrought at the
Chafery.

Note, At the Finery 3 load of the biggest coals go to make one tun of Iron.

At the Chafery they only draw out the 2 ends suitable to what was drawn out at
the Finery in the middle, and so finish the bar.

Note, 1. One load of the smaller coals will draw out one tun of Iron at the
Chafery.

2. They expect that one man and a boy at the Finery should make 2 tuns of Iron
in a week: two men at the Chafery should take up, i. e. make or work five or
six tun in a week.

3. If into the hearth where they work the Iron-sowes (whether the Chafery or
the Finery) you cast upon the Iron a piece of Brass it will hinder the metal
from working, causing it to spatter about, so that it cannot be brought into a
Solid piece.

This account of the whole process of the Iron-work I had from one of the chief
Iron-masters in Sussex, my honored friend Walter Burrell of Cuck-field Esquire
deceased. And now that I have had occasion to mention this worthy Gentleman
give me leave by the by to insert a few observations referring to Husbandry
communicated by him in occasional discourse on those Subjects.

1. In removing and transplanting young Oaks you must be sure not to cut off
or wound that part of the root, which descends downright (which in some
Countries they call the tap-root) but dig it up to the bottom, and prepare
your hole deep enough to set it: else if you persuade it to live you hinder the
growth of it half in half.

2. Corn or any other grain, the longer it continues in the ground, or the
earlier it is sown, caeteris paribus, the better laden it is, and the berry
more plump, full and weighty and of stronger nourishment, as for example,
winter Oats better then summer Oats, Beans set in February then those set in
March, etc.

3. The most effectual way to prevent smutting or burning of any corn is to
lime it before you sow it, as is found by daily experience in Sussex, where,
since this practice of liming, they have no burnt corn, whereas before they had
abundance. They lime it thus, first they wet the corn a little to make it stick
and then sift or sprinkle poudered lime upon it.

4. He uses to plow with his Oxen endwayes or all in one file, and not to Yoke
them by pairs, whereby he finds a double advantage. 1. He by this means loses
no part of the strength of any Ox, whereas breastwise, it is very hard so
evenly to match them, as that a great part of the strength of some of them be
not rendered useless. 2. In this way a wet and clay ground is not so much
poached by the feet of the Oxen.

5. He has practiced to burn the ends of all the posts which he sets into the
ground to a coal on the outside, whereby they continue a long time without
rotting, which otherwise would suddenly decay.

This observation I also find mentioned in an Extract of a Letter, written by
David von-der beck a German Philosopher and Physician at Minden to Dr.
Langelot, etc. Registered in the Philosophic: Transact. Numb. 92. Page 5185. In
these words, Hence also they slightly burn the ends of timber to be set in the
ground, that so by the fusion made by fire, the volatile Salts, which by the
accession of the moisture of the earth would easily be consumed to the
corruption of the timber may catch and fix one another.

6. He first introduced the use of Fern for burning of lime, which serves that
purpose as well as wood, (the flame thereof being very vehement) and is far
cheaper.

7. Bucks if gelded when they have cast their head, their horns never grow
again, if when their horns are grown they never cast them, in brief their horns
never grow after they are gelded.

This Observation, expressed in almost the same words, I find in the Summary of
a Book of Francesco Rodi the Italian, called Esperienze intorno a diverse cose
naturali, etc. Delivered in the Philosophical Transactions Numb. 92. Page 6005.

8. Rooks, if they infest your corn, are more terrified if in their sight you
take a Rook and plucking it limb from limb, cast the several limbs about
your Field, then if you hang up half a dozen dead Rooks in it.

9. Rooks when they make their nests, one of the pair always sits by to watch
it, while the other goes to fetch materials to build it. Else if both go and
leave it unfinished, their Fellow-Rooks, ere they return again will have
carried away toward their several nests all the sticks and materials they had
got together. Hence perhaps the word Rooking for cheating and abusing.

The manner of the VVire-work at Tintern in Monmoth-shire.
THey take little square bars, made like bars of steel, which they call
Osborn-Iron, wrought on purpose for this manufacture; and strain i. e. draw
them at a Furnace with a hammer moved by water (like those at the Iron Forges
but lesser) into square rods of about the bigness of ones little finger, or
less, and bow them round. When that is done they put them into a furnace, and
neal them with a pretty strong fire for about 12 hours: after they are nealed
they lay them in water for a month or two (the longer the better) then the
Rippers take them and draw them into wire through two or three holes.

Then they neal them again for six hours or more, and water them the second
time about a week, then they are carried to the Rlippers who draw them to a
two-bond wire as big as a great packthread.

Then again they are nealed the third time and watered about a week as before,
and delivered to the small wire drawers, whom there they call Overhouse-men, I
suppose only because they work in an upper room.

In the mill, where the Rippers work, the wheel moves several Engines like
little barrels, which they also call Barrels hoopt with Iron. The Barrel has
two hooks on the upper side, upon each whereof hang two links standing across,
and fastened to the two ends of the tongs, which catch hold of the wire and draw
it through the hole. The Axis on which the barrel moves runs not through the
center, but is placed toward one side, viz. that on which the hooks are.
Underneath is fastened to the barrel a spoke of wood, which they call a Swingle,
which is drawn back a good way by the calms or cogs in the Axis of the wheel,
and draws back the barrel, which falls to again by its own weight. The tongs,
hanging on the hooks of the barrel, are by the workmen fastened on the wire, and
by the force of the wheel the hooks being drawn back draw the wire through the
holes.

They anoint the wire with train-oil, to make it run the easier. The plate,
wherein the holes are, is on the outside Iron, on the inside steel.

The holes are bigger on the Iron side, because the wire finds more resistance
from the steel and is streigthned by degrees.

There is another mill where the small wire is drawn which with one wheel moves
three Axes that run the length of the house on 3 floors one above another.

The Description whereof would be tedious and difficult to understand without a
a Scheme, and therefore I shall omit it.

Modus faciendi Vitriolum coctile in Anglia. Worm. Mus. Sect. 2. Cap. 13. p. 89.
LApides ex quibus Vitriolum excoquitur ad litus Orientale insulae Shepey
reperiuntur. Ubi ingentem horum copiam collegerunt per spatiosam areterrae
mistos spargunt, donec imbrium illuvie, accedente Solis aestu and calore in
terram seu pulverem redigantur subtilissimum, nitrosum, sulphureum odore
praetereuntes offendentem. Interea aqua per hanc terram percolata in Subjecta
vasa per tubulos and canales derivata in vase plumbeo amplo sex vel septem
dierum spatio coquitur ad justam consistentiam, tum in aliud vas plumbeum
effunditur immissis asseribus aliquot, quibus adhaerens concrescat vitriolum
omnibus refrigeratis. Nullo alio vase coqui aut contineri hoc lixivium potest
quam plumbeo; cui ut facilius ebulliat ferri injiciunt particulas, quae a
lixivio plane consumuntur.

We saw the manner of making Vitriol or Copperas at Bricklesey in Essex. They
lay the stones upon a large bed or floor prepared in the open air, underneath
which there are gutters or troughs disposed to receive and carry away the
liquor impregnate with the mineral to a Cistern where it is Reserved. [For the
air and weather dissolving the stones, the Rain falling upon them carries away
with it the Vitrioline juice or salt dissolved,]

This liquor they boil in large leaden pans putting in a good quantity of Old
Iron. When it is sufficiently evaporated they pour it cut into large troughs
wherein it coals, the Vitriol crystallizing to the sides of the troughs and to
cross bars put into them.

The liquor that remains after the Vitriol is Crystallized they call the
mother, and reserve it to be again evaporated by boiling.

They gather of these stones in several places besides the coast of the Island
of Shepey. I have observed people gathering them on the Seashore near to
Bright Helmston in Sussex.

The manner of making Vitriol in Italy is something different from ours in
England, which take in Matthiolus his words.

Minerae glebas in acerves mediocres conjectos igne suppsito accendunt. Sponte
autem urunt semel accensae, donec in calcem seu cineres maxima ex part
reducantur. Mineram cubustam in piscinas aquae plenas obruunt, agitando,
miscendoque eam, ut aqua imbuatur substantia Vitrioli. Aquam hanc Vitriolatam a
sedimento claram hauriunt; and in caldaria plumbea transfundunt, quam igne
supposito decoquunt. Verum dum ebullit, in medio cocturae vel parum supra vel
infra addunt modicum ferri veteris vel glebae aeris juxta intentionem
operantis. Aquam Vitriolatam decoctam in vasa lignea transfundunt in quibus
frigescens congelatur in vitriolum.

The making of Minium or Red Lead.
FIrst they take Lead and waste it in an Oven or Furnace: that is bring it to a
Substance almost like a Litharge, by stirring it with an iron rake or how. This
they grind with two pair of stones which deliver it from one to another: the
first grind it courser, the the second finer [There is a mill so contrived as
that it moves at once six pair of these stones] Thus reduced to powder and
washed it is put into an Oven or reverberating Furnace, and, by continual
stirring with the iron rake or how, it is brought to the right color in two or
three days. The fire must not be extreme all this while, else it will clod
together and change color. The iron rake wherewith it is stirred is hung or
poised on an iron hook, else it is so heavy that it could not be moved by one
man.

The Allom Work at Whitby in Yorkshire.
THe process of making Allom, as we partly saw, and partly received from the
Workmen, was as follows.

First they take the Mine picked from the D^sse or Rock, and laying it on great
heaps burn it with whins and wood till it be white. When it is sufficiently
burned, they barrow it into a pit made on purpose some ten feet long, six foot
broad, and seven fourths of a yard deep, where it is steeped in water for the
space of eight or ten hours. Then they draw out the Liquor, (which is but a
Lixivium impregnated with the Allom-mine) into troughs by which it is conveyed
to the Allom-house, into a deep Cistern of about twenty yards circumference,
and three yards and half deep. After this first water is drawn off the Mine in
the pits, they do not presently cast away the mine, but pour fresh water on it
the second time, and after the second water is drawn off (which is much weaker
then the first) they cast out the Mine and put in new, and pour on fresh water
as before.

Out of the Cistern they convey the Lixivium by troughs into the pans, where it
is boiled for the space of twenty four hours ordinarily. Then they take off the
Liquor out of the pans, and examine it by weight, to know how much Lee made of
kelp it will require, which is for the most part six inches of the pans depth.

Which being put in so soon as the Liquor boils or flows up by the putting in
of an iron cole-rake, or other iron Instrument, they draw it off into a
settler, and there let it stand about an hour, that so the Sulphur and other
dregs may settle to the bottom, which being done it is drawn off into coolers,
where it continues about for days and nights. The cooler being drawn about half
full, they pour into it a quantity of Urine, viz. about eight gallons into a
cooler that contains about two half tuns.

Having thus stood four days and nights, it is quite cool, and the Allom
crystallized to the sides of the cooler. Then they scope out the Liquor (which
they call the Mother) into a Cistern, and put it into the pans again with new
Lixivium to be evaporated by boiling, etc. The Allom that is shotten and
crystallized on the sides of the cooler they scrape off and wash with fair
Spring water; then throw it into a bing, where the water drains from it. Thence
it is taken and cast into a pan, which they call the rocking pan, and there
melted, it is scoped out and conveyed by troughs into tuns, in which it stands
about ten days until it be perfectly cool and condensed. Then they unhoop and
stave the tuns, and taking out the Allom, chip it and carry it into the
Storehouse.

We failed to enquire exactly what proportion of kelp they put in. For though
they told us six inches of the pans depth, yet they told us not how deep the
pans are made.

The making of Salt at Namptwych in Cheshire.
THe Salt-spring or (as they call it) the Brine-pit is near the River, and is
so plentiful that were all the water boiled out that it would afford (as they
told us) it would yield Salt enough for all England. The Lords of the pit
appoint how much shall be boiled as they see occasion, that the Trade be not
clogged.

Diverse persons have interest in the Brine-pit, so that it belongs not all to
one Lord; Some have one Lead-walling, some two, some three, some four or more.
[N. B. A Lead-walling is the Brine of twenty four hours boiling for one house.]

Two hundred and sixteen Lead-wallings or thereabout belong to all the Owners
of the pit. No Tradesman, Bachelor or Widow can Rent more then eighteen
Lead-wallings.

They have four sworn Officers chosen yearly, which they call Occupiers of
Walling, whose duty it is to see equal dealing between Lord and Tenant, and all
persons concerned. They appoint how many Houses shall Work at a time, and that
is twelve at the most. When there is occasion for Salt to be made, they cause a
Crier to make Proclamation, that so all Parties concerned may put to their
fires at the same time; and so when they shall cease at a determinate hour, at
which they must give over; else they cause their Salt to be marred by casting
dirt into it, or the like.

There are in the Town about fifty houses, and every house has four pans,
which the Rulers are to see be exactly of the same measure.

Salt Water taken out of the Brine-pit in two hours and a quarter boiling, will
be evaporated and boiled up into Salt. When the Liquor is more then lukewarm,
they take strong Ale, bullocks blood and whites of Eggs mixed together with
Brine in this proportion; of blood one Egg-shell full, the white of one Egg and
a pint of Ale, and put it into a pan of twenty four gallons or thereabouts. The
whites of the Eggs and the blood serve to clarify the Brine by raising the
scum, which they take off just upon the boiling of the pans, otherwise it will
boil in, and spoil the Salt. The older the blood is, the better it is; caeteris
paribus. They do not always put in blood, viz. when there is danger of the
Liquors boiling too fast. If the Liquor happens to boil too fast, they take to
allay it Brine that had been boiled and drained from the Salt: Crude Brine,
they say, will diminish their Salt. The Ale serves (they said) to harden the
Corn of the Salt.

After one hour boiling the Brine will begin to Corn: then they take a small
quantity of clear Ale, and sprinkle thereof into the pan about one Egg-shell
full [N. if you put in too much it will make the broth boil over the pan.] Ale
the while before they put in the last Ale they cause the pan to boil as fast as
they can; Afterward very gently till the Salt be almost dry. They do not
evaporate ad siccitatem, but leave about a pottle or gallon of Brine in the
pan, lest the Salt should burn and stick to the sides of the pan.

The Brine thus sufficiently boiled and evaporated, they take out the Salt and
put it into Conical Baskets, (which they call barrows) and in them let the
water drain from it an hour, more or less, and then set it to dry in the
Hot-house behind the Furnace.

A barrow containing six pecks is sold therefore 1s. 4d.

Out of two pans of forty eight gallons they expect seven pecks of Salt,
Winchester-measure.

N. The house in which the Salt is boiled is called the Wych-house, whence may
be guessed what Wych signifies, and why all those Towns where there are
Salt-Springs and Salt made are called by the name of Wych, viz. Namptwych,
Northwych, Middlewych, Droitwych. The Vessel whereinto the Brine is by troughs
conveyed from the Brine-pit is called the ship. It is raised up out of the pit
by a pump. Between the Furnace and the Chimney tunnels which convey up the
smoke is the Hothouse where they set their Salt to dry, along the floor whereof
run two Funnels from the Furnaces almost parallel to the Horizon, and then
arise perpendicularly; in these the flame and smoke running along from the
Furnaces heat the Room by the way.

At Droitwych in Worcestershire the Salt is boiled in shallow leaden pans. They
first put in Salt Water out of the Brinepit.

After one hours boiling they fill up the pan with water that drains from the
Salt set to dry in barrows: after a second hours boiling they fill up the pan
again with the same.

In five hours space the pan boils dry, and they take out the Salt.

In twenty four hours they boil out five pans: and then draw out the ashes:
After the ashes are drawn out, they put in the white of an Egg, to cause the
scum to arise [viz. the dust and ash that fell into the pans while the ashes
were drawing out] which they take off with a scummer. After four hours they
begin to take out the Salt; and once in twenty four hours they take out a (ache
which sticks to the bottom of the pan ^which they call ^lod Salt) otherwise the
pan would melt. They told us that they use neither Blood nor Ale. The Salt made
here is extraordinary white and fine.

The manner of making Salt of Seasand in Lancashire.
IN Summer time in dry weather they Skimme or pare off the upper part of the
Sand in the flats and washes that are covered at full Sea, and bare when the
Tide is out, and lay it up on great heaps.

Of this Sand they take and put in troughs bored with holes at the bottom, and
thereon pour Water, as Laundresses do upon Ashes to make a Lixivium, which
Water draining through the Sand, carries the Salt therein contained down with
it into Vessels placed underneath to receive it. So long as this liquor is
strong enough to bear an Egg they pour on more Water; as soon as the Egg begins
to sink they cast the sand out of the troughs, and put in new.

This water thus impregnate with Salt they boil in leaden pans, wherein the
water evaporating the Salt remains behind.

There is also at Newcastle, Preston pans in Scotland, Whithaven in Cumberland
and elsewhere great plenty of Salt made of Seawater by boiling and evaporating
in like manner, wherein they make use of Oxes Blood.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. line 16. r. A. 24 arrha, 11. 20. dele gal. 19. 27. Foison. 25. 5.
Helder. 27. ^1. Kennan. 19. Kinnel 26. 6. dele fort. 10. lathing. 30. 4.
lestal. 32. 21. bauks. 39. 21. scarr. 43. 25. sneck. 48 21. ^bony. 58. 6. nigh.
59. 24. idem. 60 9. Brine. 66. 17. to Frase. 72. 6. Huckson. 74. 10. play. 75.
13. scrow. 27. a soller. 76 4. speen, 77. 7. T^arky 79. ult. to Winnow. 82 28.
Windhover. 93. 7. Sea. c^b 94. 23, that it. 99. 17. West.


