THE CASE Of the COMPANY of GROCERS STATED.

And their Condition in their Present Circumstances Truly Represented.

Together with a short Account of their ORIGINAL; How Eminent they have been in
this CITY, And also of some of their Ancient PRIVILEGES and USAGES.

Designed for INFORMATION and SATISFACTION of the MEMBERS, And VINDICATION of
the COMPANY,

LONDON, Printed for the Company of Grocers, An. Dom. 1^^^.

TO The Right HONORABLE, Right WORSHIPFUL, and the rest of the Worthy MEMBERS
of the SOCIETY of the MYSTERY of GROCERY, LONDON.
William Ravenhill their Clerk, humbly offers and prays their Acceptance and
perusal of these following Papers; As a Testimony of his Hearty Desires, and
Sincere Endeavors to Vindicate the Reputation, and improve the Interest of
this Society.
AS soon as by the good Providence of God I obtained the favor, and had the
Happiness to be Chosen your Clerk, I resolved with my utmost Diligence, to
pursue and perform my Duty in this place, and thereby gratefully answer the
expectation of my Friends, who promoted by Election; and also lay hold of so
fair an opportunity to ingratiate my self into the Favor and Esteem of Good
Men: Being Convinced, that if I should neglect my Duty, it would render my
Follies and Ingratitude more conspicuous to the World. Therefore that I might
in doing the one avoid the other, I endeavored in the first place to inform my
self of the true State and Condition of the Company; upon Inquest whereof, I
found it plain and manifest, That for want of Knowledge of the Truth ther^of,
not only many Worthy Benefactors withheld their Assistance toward discharge
of their Debts and Charities, But also many Reproaches and Reflections were
cast upon this Society; Both from Strangers (with whom they have been no way
concerned) And also their Creditors who rendered them obnoxions in Courts of Law
and Equity, And before the Commissioners for Charitable Uses; As if they had
been a Company that possessed a great Revenue, sufficient to pay all their
Debts, Yet were so averse from doing that, that they wasted and Consumed their
Estate in Feasting themselves, refusing to pay, unless they were Compelled by
Chargeable Suits; which not only aggravated their Creditors, but alienated the
Affections of many good Persons, As well Members as others; and caused many
Chargeable Suits and Vexatious Prosecutions against them, Notwithstanding the
Care and Endeavors of some Worthy and Good Members, who used all possible
means to avoid the same. For I cannot deny, but that so long as I was ignorant
of the Truth of their Case (though I was an unworthy Member) Yet I was
persuaded to believe many things reported of the Grocers, which I now find to
be far otherwise. Therefore I made it my great design to acquaint my self with
all their Affairs, and past transactions, that I might be able to make a true
representation of the Companies Condition as to all Substantial matters, Both
what it was before they Contracted their Debts, and how they became indebted,
what they have already done toward it, and what means and methods they may
best use, and prosecute to discharge themselves, to the end those great
Reproaches and Prejudices (which through mis-apprehensions and false Reports
have been cast on this Company) may be removed. And every true hearted Member
that bears a Christian respect to the Pious Memory of our Ancestors (who were
Worthy Benefactors) and would in discharge of his Duty Commend himself, after
their Example, to Posterity, may willingly and cheerfully lay to his helping
hand. And as a further Testimony of my hearty desires to serve the Members,
having so briefly stated the Companies Case, I shall endeavor to give you a
short Account of the Antiquity and first Creation and Continuance of the
Grocers, as far and clear as I can make Conjecture or have received any
probable Account. As to that part of my Duty which relates to the Regulating
and Digesting the Companies Books into an orderly Method, as also their
Evidences to clear their Titles to their several Rents, Lands and Houses, and
the several Schools under their Government; And also the several Ecclesiastical
Livings in the disposition of this Society, with the names of their Founders,
and how they became Vested in their Right; And also other Privileges peculiar
to this Society, I have already made such Progress and doubt not speedily to
Complete it, so as it may appear obvious and plain to be understood by every
individual Member, Of which it will not be proper here to give an Account, But
I refer to the Books and Records themselves, more fit to be inspected at this
Hall by such as have right to know them, than to be exposed to view of others
whom it no way Concerns.

The COMPANIES CASE briefly stated.
MOst part of the said Companies Revenues is charged with yearly Charities to
several Parishes, Places, and Uses amounting to near the yearly profits they
receive. Most part whereof consisted of Houses in London, which were all
consumed by the late dreadful Fire, when they expected to have advanced great
Sums of Money by way of Fine, on Renewing of Leases toward payment of their
Debts.

They had also heretofore many and great Sums of Money paid into their hands as
a Fund for the Uses following, (viz.)

To pay yearly Sums in Coals, Faggots, and Money to several Parishes and Wards
about London, and elsewhere.

To several Prisons for Redemption and Release of Prisoners.

To the poor Members of the Company.

To be lent to Young Men that had served their Times to Members of this Company
on Security, with little or no Interest, to set up, and to be returned again.

To buy Impropriations for maintenance of Ministers where Livings are small,
And To maintain several Schools and Almshouses.

They complied punctually with all their Trusts, continuing in very great
Credit and Reputation, until the sad effects of War and Fire rendered them
incapable to discharge their yearly Charities where they have no fund left. And,

The remaining part of their great Debts which they Contracted, as follows,
viz.

Anno 1640. To Accommodate the late King in his Exigencies, on Security of some
of his Peers. 4500 l. Anno 1642. To Subdue the Rebellion in Ireland, and
Relieve the Protestants there. 9000 l. Anno 1643. To lend the City, for which,
they had their Seal. 4500

All which they took up on their Common Seal, nor were Singular therein, but
necessitated thereto in compliance with all other Companies, and indeed with
the whole City.

Upon their taking up this Money, they made a By-Law to levy the same on
themselves, if their Stock fell short; and so they continued payment of their
Interest. And as one Creditor called for his Money in, they took up of others,
and paid them off; Depending upon getting in their said Principal. All which
failed them, till at last their sole hope was of advancing Money by Renewing of
Leases. Many whereof were nigh expired. But the Fire in 1666 Consumed their
whole Revenue in London; They having already paid for Interest of Money between
1640, and 1666. -- 30000 l.

As their Debts exceeded any other Companies, so their loss herein was
exceeding great, so that now they were incapable any longer to pay Debts or
Charities.

They applied themselves to the Parliament then sitting on their By-Law, But
were rejected as binding to no more then were parties to it, most of whom were
dead.

They had then no means to raise Money, but by letting their Ground to Builders
for Fines on Long Leases; great part whereof they were compelled to, by decree
of the Judges at Cliffords-Inn.

And by voluntary Subscriptions, both which were set on foot soon after the
Fire: And to Encourage Subscriptions, Sir John Cutler Erected the first
Building in the Garden.

They raised Considerable Sums, and propounded to pay their Creditors their
principal part thereof down, and the rest at two payments.

And after many meetings most of their Creditors inclined to accept such
proposal, finding how it must be advanced. But some of their Members being
backward, and some Creditors ill advised, Sued the Company, and Seized their
Hall in Ruins which put a stop to all; though those Creditors themselves
repent this: Afterward loosing their Charges, and glad to comply on lower
terms than at first offered.

Afterward the Company raise Money what they could of kind Members themselves,
and take up the residue on their Assignment of the Sequestration and Conveyance
of all their Estate to pay off the Creditors that Sequestered. And some other
remaining proportions to Creditors who had not yet received any. And to supply
what was wanting, they let their Land in Ireland on Fine, sinking the Rent to
10 l. per Annum. But the Hall continuing in Ruins, the Company was thereby
rendered Reproachful.

The Apprentices bound at other Halls, and turned over. The Freemen take their
Freedoms of other Companies. And all Benefactors decline as despairing of any
good to Posterity.
So that the Members every year dying and failing, and many removing into the
Country, and none to succeed in their places.

It must needs follow that the Company in few years must dissolve for want of a
Succession of Members:

Which would most reproachfully have rendered the Members then living, who were
numerous and equal, if not more eminent than any other Company. Not only most
ungrateful to their Predecessors who have been so liberal Benefactors, and have
left such Grounds (though the Buildings were so consumed by the Fire) yet now
built on, gives a great hope to posterity) but also obnoxious to posterity.

The Consideration whereof alone, moved the Right Honorable Sir John Moore,
the present Lord Mayor, to repair the Hall, and also upon further
Consideration, the rest of the Aldermen and other kind Members to enlarge it
with Commodious Buildings for the Seat of a chief Magistrate. That it might not
only encourage the Freemen, Apprentices and Benefactors to preserve the Company
a Nursery of Charity, and Seminary of good Citizens. But also answer the Charge
of the Building, in proving the yearly Revenue of the Company: And is indeed
(if rightly considered) in the Companies present Circumstances, of greater
advantage to the Company, than any one thing that has been done for them. For,

1. It has already encouraged the Apprentices and Freemen, so that whereas
there used to be bound 1, 2, or 3 Apprentices in a Month, and 1, or 2 made
free before, and those but poor Artificers; they are generally now increased to
a far greater Number, As well of Freemen, as Apprentices, and many of them of
good Quality.

II. It has given great satisfaction to several Eminent Members, who have
declared themselves very inclinable to Contribute largely toward discharge of
the Companies Debts and Charities, if they see but any Encouragement from the
rest of the Members.

III. This Building, though it amounts to much more then what it was at first
designed, Yet a great part thereof has been freely laid down on purpose for
this work. And whatever is further laid down toward it, (which its hoped the
whole will be raised by kind Members to answer these goods ends) would never
have been so given but for this very purpose.

So that in all probability, the Hall (if the Company please) may be every year
disposed of for 200 l. per Annum at the least (which being no way clogged (as
the rest is, with Charities) Is more than twofold, better than all the rest of
the Companies Revenue they now receive besides.

And that the Building and Beautifying the Hall may not be a bait to Creditors
again to seize it. So again to discourage the Members.

The Hall, and all the Companies Revenue is by advice of Counsel conveyed to
Feoffees in trust.

I. Subject to secure the Money so taken up to discharge the Sequestrations,
etc. And when those and what Moneys they should be so necessitated to take up
to complete the Buildings shall be discharged.

II. Then to secure the yearly Charities wherewith the Company is Chargeable.
By many Benefactors who so heretofore left Moneys in their Hands, as a Fund to
secure the same. No part whereof now remains, As being a trust they are liable
in the first place, As a Duty incumbent on them both to avoid a Curse, and in
order to obtain a Blessing from God upon their endeavors: As also to avoid
prosecution of the Commissioners upon the Statute for Charitable Uses, who have
yearly put the Company to vast expenses already upon that Account.

And these things having been made known to the Creditors, The Company have
been free from Suits and Prosecutions which they never before were since their
troubles first began.

Which inclines their Creditors to comply upon any reasonable terms, and as
some have already accepted, and are discharged: So many others are importunate
to do the like: And now so fair an opportunity being offered to deliver the
Company, and to give Encouragement to Benefactors. It is hoped there is no
Member but will cheerfully embrace it, whereby they shall not only draw others
on by their Example to preserve this Society, still a Nursery of Charity, and
Seminary of good Citizens; But also encourage Benefactors for the future; some
in their Lives, and others at their death liberally to extend their kindness
toward this Company, And without all doubt, such works as these are acceptable
to God in times of greatest trouble and danger.

A short Account of the Original of the GROCERS, and their first Incorporation;
And their Condition in their present Circumstances truly Represented.
Grocers (inquit Minshew) ab initio ut ex legibus nostris probat, nihil minutim
sed omnia al grosso, by the great. Magnis s^. ponderibus divendere soliti sunt.
In libro statutorum nostrorum significat Mercatores, Qui aliquod mercium genus
totum coemunt. Skin. Etymologicon linguae Anglicanae.
THE word Grocers was a Term at first distinguishing Merchants of this Society
in opposition to Inferior Retailers, For that they usually sold in gross
Quantities by great Weights. And in some of our old Books the Word signifies
Merchants that in their Merchandising dealt for the whole of any kind: But in
after times the word Grocery became so extensive that it can now hardly be
restrained to the certain kinds of Merchandises, they have formerly dealt in.
For they have been the most Universal Merchants that traded abroad, And what
they brought home many Artists of this Society found out ways afterward to
Change and alter the Species by mixture, Confections, and Compositions of
simple ingredients; By which means many and various ways of dealing and trading
passed under the Denomination of Groceries. And indeed this City and Nation do
in a great measure owe the Improvement of Navigation to these Merchants,
originally exercising this Mystery, as trading into all foreign parts, From
whence we have received either Spices, Druggs, Fruits, Gums, or other rich
Aromatic Commodities, It is well known this Company has bred the most Eminent
Merchants in this City, and this Society has been so prolifick that many other
Societies have been branched out from hence, as will be owned by the most
worthy of them; The Merchants Trading to the Levant Seas, and other Societies
have originally been the offspring of this Society, as appears by ancient
Records of Indentures of Apprentices to Members of this Company; And it is not
inconsistent, and may be within compass of Belief, That there was amongst the
Romans a Society agreeable to this of the Grocers, who were also Merchants
trading into those Seas, as may be Collected from Persius a Poet who wrote in
Rome in the time of Augustus describing the various Inclinations of men in
their Course of Life, He instances them in these words, (viz.)

Mercibus hic Italis mutat sub sole recenti
Rugosum piper, and pallentis Grana Cymini:
Sat. 5. With Merchandising this with Care does run
Unto the East under the rising Sun
To fetch rough Pepper and pale Cummin Seeds
For Roman Wares, etc.
Where Pepper, being the most Royal and preservative Spice, is only mentioned
by way of Eminency for all the rest; And so we may well conclude that this was
the Reason why the Society of the Grocers (whose Original first here exercised,
may modestly be supposed to spring from the Romans) were long before they were
Incorporated, distinguished by the name of Pepperers, although they traded
before in all other the former Merchandises, as well as that. It is impossible
to give any other Account of the Original of this Society, here in this City so
long at first exercised under the Denomination of Pepperers; For that, the City
of London it self, at first under the Britains, and successively after under
the Romans and Saxons, and at last was overrun by the Danes. No History now
remains to give a certain Account of the first Methods of Government therein,
further than what may be Collected from some late Writers of our own now
extant, who have transmitted to us, what they could then discover by their
Enquiry and Search in Antiquity, whereby we may plainly understand that the
first Model of Government settled in this City, was from the Example of Rome it
self, as Mr. Stow instances in the very words of an ancient writer, who wrote
in the Reign of King Stephen, (viz.) This City (says he, even as Rome) is
divided into Wards, it has yearly Sheriffs instead of Consuls, it has the
Dignity of Senators, it has under Officers, and according to the Qualities of
Laws it has several Courts and general Assemblies upon appointed days. And
their Chief Ministers of Law were styled Portgraves (which is the same as
Sheriff) long before they went under the name of Sheriff. Soon after the City
obtained their Chief Magistrate to be under the Denomination of Mayor, which
was about the first year of King Richard the first. And the first man we find
advanced to that Dignity was Henry Fitz-Alwin, who continued therein 24 years
successively; And afterward for many years the Chief Magistrate was sometimes
styled Custos, and sometimes Mayor. And soon after (to wit) in the 17th. year
of King Henry the third, it appears Andrew Bokerell a Pepperer was Chosen
Mayor, and so eminent were the Pepperers in this Infancy of the Mayoralty that
before the 36 year of that Kings Reign a Pepperer had the Chair 9 several
years, and very frequently afterward we find the Pepperers advanced to that
Dignity. Which Society of the Pepperers increasing and spreading so Universal
in Merchandising, that it appears they were distinguished as well by the name
of Grocers (being a more comprehensive name) as Pepperers. Insomuch that before
they were incorporated by the Name of Grocers (to wit) in the 3d. year of King
Edward the 3d, Anno 1329. John Grantham was Chosen and held Mayor by the Title
of Grocer. And the first Charter I find of the Corporation of the Grocers was
granted by King Edward the 3d. in the 20th year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 1345,
which appears to be long before the Mercers were Incorporated, though they are
now the only Company have precedence of the Grocers; Yet for the Reasons
abovementioned, it may be very well presumed, That as the Grocers were long
before them the most Eminent Society, so in after times renewing their Charter
by a more Comprehensive Term they might Post-pone themselves.

But though they thus march as a forlorn Regiment in the Front, (might the
hopes and endeavors of many good Members prevail to have the Spirit of our
Ancestors revived in the present Generation) This could no more Eclipse the
Grocers who have all the Noble Army of the rest of the Corporations following
them, than the Morning Star ushering in Day before it, can eclipse the Glory of
the Rising Sun.

Afterward the Charter of this Company was several times renewed, as also it
was in the 7th year of King Henry the 6th. and they then made a Body Politic,
by the name of Custodes and Communitas Mysterij Grocerij Londini; The Wardens
and Commonalty of the Mystery of the Grocery of London. And in the beginning of
that Kings Reign they purchased the ground where the Grocers Hall now stands,
with the ground belonging to it, of Walter Lord Fitz-water, bounding the same
between the Old-Jury and VValbrook. And so Considerable in the City were the
Grocers long before that time, that they were the only men entrusted with the
management of the King's Beam, peculiar to them, as principally using the same;
and had the naming of the Weighmaster, and the naming, placing, removing and
governing of the four Porters, all to be Elected out of their own Company, a
privilege allowed them as their undoubted and inseperate right, as ancient as
that Office it self used in the City, and now at this day upon Settlement and
Improvement thereof may become of much more advantage to the Members of this
Company.

Also amongst other Privileges and ancient Usages of this Company, I find
Recorded even as high as Edward the 4th's days, this Company had Power of
inspection and Correction of Abuses and Irregularities of all Persons (though
free of this or any other Company) in the City or Suburbs, any way using or
exercising any kind of Grocery; and also to assay the Weights they bought or
sold by: And to take notice of all their Defaults, and return them to be Fined
at the Discretion of this Fellowship, and to take 4 d, of every person for
their Labor therein, as well of such as were offending, as such as were not.
Which Usage was always continued, and in the Charter renewed to this Company
in the 15th. year of the late King Charles the first; this Privilege is
Confirmed and expressed to extend three miles from the City as well within
Liberties as without, and has only been omitted for some years past when the
Company began to be first interrupted in their Affairs.

But to return to the purchase of the Hall in the time of King Henry the 6th.
After which the Company flourished with many Eminent and Worthy Members, who
became very liberal Benefactors, and had so great a share all along in the
Senators of this famous City, that they never wanted an Alderman of their
Members yearly to succeed Master Warden of this Company; and so faithfully did
they acquit themselves of those Charities they wete entrusted withal, that it
gave them the greatest Reputation of any Company in London; Insomuch that many
well disposed Persons did Covet to make this Corporation as it were the Corban
of their Charities, which in process of time became their Snare, as in this
Discourse will immediately appear, wherein I shall endeavor by giving a true
Account of the Nature of those Charities, to remove the reproach that has been
cast on this Company as if they had mis-employed them; And make it plainly
appear that the Company of Grocers have in the Judgment of every impartial man
(who shall well weigh their Circumstances from the first to the last acquitted
themselves in all the Trust and Affairs of this Company as becomes Worthy
Citizens, and beyond what the worst of their Detractors might have justly
expected from them. Especially considering how small a part of their yearly
Revenue Remains to the Company, when the Yearly Payments Issuing thereout,
pursuant to the Disposition of the Donors are deducted.

FOR most part of all the Land and Houses given to the Grocers Company were by
the Donors charged with yearly Charities issuing thereout to certain uses, well
nigh amounting to as much as the rent reserved upon long Leases in being,
before they Contracted any of their Debts, as is hereafter mentioned; All or
most part of which lay in the City of London, and the same Leases many of them
were nigh expiring about the time of the late dreadful Fire.

Those other Charities which were Sums of Money, given by several Benefactors
into this Company (there to remain as a fund) were charged with yearly payments
issuing thereout to certain Parishes, Places, and Uses by the Donors, well nigh
as much as the full Interest thereof amounted to, or very small advantage to
the Company over and above the same, so that the Company were necessitated to
dispose of those Sums of Money at Interest on the best Securities they could
get, to enable them to make good those yearly Charities. Many of which
Securities might in all probability become very backwards in payment, and
sometimes quite Desperate, so that the Company having daily Money pressed upon
them, were enforced to accept the same at Interest, and thereout continued
Constant payment of those yearly Sums. And also to accommodate Young Men of
their Members with Money on Security, to set up pursuant to the Wills, of
several Donors of that kind (whereof they had not a few Benefactors) so that in
time by occasion of many Losses and Casualties of this Nature, it cannot be
imagined but the Company must sustain much damage, notwithstanding all their
Care and Endeavors, though they were not in the least sensible thereof till
they had long after under greater pressure tried their Securities, Their Credit
being very high and in great Reputation.

But their Great Debts they Contracted as follows, Viz.
ABout the year 1640 his late Majesty, King Charles the first, having Occasion
for Money in his Exigencies, and making his Condition and Desires known to this
Company, as well as others, they did take up Money upon their Common Seal, and
to supply him did on Security of some of his Peers, accommodate his said
Majesty with 4500 l. which (the unhappy War Succeeding) is yet unpaid.

Afterward about the year 1642, this Company in Compliance with other
Corporations, and indeed with the whole City, were again required to raise 9000
l. for the defense of the Kingdom of Ireland, and releif of the Protestants
there, which they likewise took up upon Security of their Common Seal which was
never repaid.

And afterward in the year 1643, in Compliance with other Companies, they were
induced to lend the City of London, 4500 l. which they in like manner advanced,
and had the Common Seal of the City for Security thereof, some small part
whereof they afterward received, the residue is yet unpaid.

These great Loans were the only Means that brought this Company at last into
such extremity; Yet did they appear to be so just in their intentions amongst
themselves, that having so taken these great Sums of Money upon their Common
Seal of several Persons at Interest, they made a By-Law in their Court of
Assistants to levy the same by Assessement upon themselves and their Members in
case their Stock and Estate fell short to pay it.

And afterward from year to year as their Creditors called for their
Principal, (constantly paying the Interest as it became due) they took up other
Moneys (which was daily offered to the Company) and paid them off.

About the year 1661, The Company having sustained many losses, and their Debts
naturally every year increasing (they receiving no Interest of any to whom they
themselves had so lent, and despairing of the Principal, and upon Audit of the
Wardens Accounts, finding such Prodigious Sums every year swallowed up in
discharge of Interest) several of the Members taking the Companies. Condition
into Consideration, moved the Court of Assistants, and a Committee was
appointed to inspect the same, And to consider of some way how to obviate the
further increase of the Companies Debts, by discharging them Gradually. But
(other matters intervening) no progress was made therein till afterward, about
the Month of August 1663, upon the like occasion they were reminded thereof,
and the Committee revived, and the further Consideration resumed; but having
spent some time in considering which way to advance Money, The fair Prospect
they had of advancing Money within a few years by renewing Leases of their
Estates in London to discharge the greatest part of their Debts: And having
Moneys daily pressed on them to supply their occasions on Security of their
Common Seal, they were not hasty to propose the renewing of their Leases, Many
of them judging it for the Companies advantage to defer that for some time
longer, And to endeavor to get in their own Debts. In which Circumstances they
continued, till soon after, before they had renewed any Leases, It pleased God
the late dreadful Fire happened, whereby not only their Hall, but their whole
Revenue in London (so highly improveable upon expiring Leases) was consumed;
And the several Members then at the Helm, who most of them greatly suffered in
their own private Capacities, were separated, and so taken up with Care of
disposing of themselves and Families, that very few could attend the Affairs of
the Company. And so that dreadful Calamity rendered this Company (which
sustained so great damage therein) utterly incapable to comply with payment of
their Debts an^ Charities, which plainly appears by the Wardens Books to have
been all along before that time punctually paid and discharged as they grew due
and were from time to time called for and demanded.

But as soon after the Fire as the Members could have freedom from their own
distracting Affairs, they took the Companies deplorable Condition into their
consideration, And found they had no refuge now left but to propound their
ground to Builders for long Leases, and advance what Moneys they could by way
of Fines. And (that they might leave nothing unattempted) their Stock and
Estate by these providence falling short to pay those great Debts so
contracted) they applied themselves (on their said By-Law) to the Parliament
then sitting, stating their Case how great Debts they owed, and how they became
so indebted, to advance those great sums which they could never hope to
receive, and that although they had received no Interest, yet they had before
that time paid for Interest of the moneys (they had so taken up) nigh 30000 l.
And therefore prayed an Act of Parliament to put their said By-Law in Execution
by Assessement on their Members. But that was rejected as Impracticable, that
it should bind any more than those who were Parties to the making of it, who
were then most of them dead. Whereupon as the only means they had then left,
they endeavored to raise money by letting their Ground; and what should fall
short therein, they propounded to make up among themselves by a Voluntary
Subscription of their Members; for whose Encouragement Sir John Cutler, at his
own proper Charges, Erected the stately Fabric out of its Ashes which is now
their Parlour, and Entertaining Room over it in the Garden, hoping thereby to
incite other Members to follow; showing himself Zealous beyond all expression
to raise and restore this Company out of its Ruins and Calamity.

To whose Memory the Company (as soon as they had afterward Rebuilt and
Enlarged their Hall) in pursuance of several Orders of the Court of Assistants,
caused his Lively Statue in Effigy in white Marble to be erected on the right
hand at the Upper end of the Parlour. And that the same may survive the Casual
Accidents of Fire, and Canker of Envy (as the Poet in a higher strain
intimated,) Marmora Maeonii Vincunt Monumenta libelli. The Memory of Caesar in
his Book should survive his Marble statue in the Senate House. So my Desire is
hereby to Record so Worthy a Benefactor, to the End his Name may be fresh and
flourishing amongst the Generations to come, who shall in after Ages succeed
happy Members of this Society.

And in order to Carry on so good a Work, a general Summons was ordered of the
Members, and a Committee appointed, and several meetings had amongst themselves
to obtain Subscriptions (wherein a good progress was made) and their ground
propounded to Builders for what Fines they could get under the old rents,
(which they could not much lessen in regard of their Charities issuing
thereout, wherewith their Donors charged them) in order to advance Money; which
accordingly was done, and several Meetings had with their Creditors. To whom
they Propounded to pay their Principal Money, part down, and the residue by two
Payments, at 5 and 10 years, to be secured by their Common Seal. Most of their
Creditors complying with this fair proposal, considering that the money so to
be raised, must be advanced even great part of it by a free Contribution, and
Voluntary Gift of the Members, who many of them Liberally contributed; And
great Sums were raised and paid. But whilst some of the Members were pursuing
this good Design, and the Company in a hopeful way of wholly discharging
themselves, the unkindness of some and backwardness of other Members, who
should have followed so good Examples, gave such interruption as occasioned
some of their Creditors (instigated by inconsiderate and self-seeking Agents)
unadvisedly to sue the Company, and the very Ruins of their Hall to be
sequestered and seized, Although those Creditors, afterward repented
themselves thereof, as sensible they had not only put themselves to great
Charge (which they could never be re-imbursed) but had thereby injured the rest
of the Creditors in discouraging so good a design, and obstructing the gifts of
many Worthy Members, of whom several afterward died, before their help could
be again seasonably sought for; which wholly Eclipsed the Reputation of the
Company, rendering them for the present incapable of further paying; till some
time after several Worthy Members Continuing their endeavors (to carry on so
good a Work begun) procured Money to be raised to pay off part, and more to be
lent to discharge the rest of the Sequestrations, by persons, to whom their
Creditors assigned the same by direction of the Company; And by letting their
Lands in Ireland sinking the Rent to 10 l. per annum, and thereby, as also by
Casual Profits, Benevolences and Gifts of their Members, paid of a good part of
their Debts, And to supply what they could not otherwise for the present
advance they took up Money upon Security of the Equity of Redemption of their
whole Estate. Whereby, It plainly appears they used all ways and means they
were Capable of to raise Money, reserving nothing but the growing hope of their
ground rent, which they are in Justice bound to preserve as a Seed for their
Posterity, they having already paid, of their own Benevolence, and what they
have so borrowed on Security of the remaining part of their Estate (which they
have taken up for 7 years at 4 l. per Cent.) far above the real value (to be
sold) of what they receive thereout, over and above the yearly Charities,
wherewith the same are Charged by the Donors: However (clouded with these
Circumstances) the work went but slowly on; the Generality of the Members that
should now have contributed their Assistance to discharge the whole being
unsatisfied, as looking on the Gifts of some particular Persons, to signify
little toward so great a work, unless some better encouragement might be given
to procure a subscription of the whole Body of the Members; being of opinion,
That so long as the Hall lay thus Ruinous, it wholly discouraged all. And under
these sad Circumstances the Company continued, until it pleased God to move Sir
John Moore, a Worthy Member of this Society, who taking into his consideration
its deplorable Condition every year lessening in Reputation by reason of the
Hall thus in Ruins, which not only discouraged men to take their Freedoms, and
Apprentices to be bound there; And Benefactors both in their lifetime and by
their Wills from their Liberality; But also rendered the Society almost
Contemptible: Out of his kindness and good Will toward this his own Company,
was very inclineable at his own Charge to repair the Great Hall; hoping thereby
to Encourage other Members by his Example to Contribute their Assistance either
in re-Edifying or Augmenting the residue of their ancient Seat. As the only
means left to promote an Universal compliance of all the other Members,
according to their several Degrees, and Abilities in liberal Contributions
toward discharge of the great Arrears of their Debts and Charities, which
being made known to a Court of Assistants, Sir James Edwards, Master of the
Company then present, was pleased in the name of the whole Court to declare
unto Sir John Moore, then also present, That the first mention of such his good
intention toward them, had so grateful a Resentment, that it had a kind
influence upon all present; And therefore made it the Request of the Court to
him, on behalf of the Company, to pursue the same; Acquainting him, That he
doubted not but it should be followed with so happy success, that the Grocers
Hall, which may justly Claim precedence of all Halls and public Places within
this City of London, for Situation, and many other Conveniences might in a
short time be made the most Commodious Habitation for a Lord Mayor. Whereupon
Sir John Moore was pleased to declare, he would give five hundred pounds to
repair and beautify the great Hall, That he might thereby incite other
Members to follow in so good a Work; Provided, Care might be taken so to settle
the same, That what should be thus laid down might be so secured as to answer
the good ends thereby designed. Upon which so Worthy a Declaration, Mr. Beale
and Mr. Bourne, two of the Wardens then present, by Agreement of the whole
Court, undertook and promised forthwith to set about the work; And with all
faithfulness to take Care the same should be laid out to the best advantage
accordingly, so as to have it finished that Summer. And in order to Carry on so
good a work (encouraged therein by several other Worthy Members then present)
It was referred to the Wardens, together with some other Members, calling to
their Assistance such Workmen and others as they should think fit, to Consider
off, and propound a Model of such additional Building, in such place as might
make the Hall every way Commodious for Habitation of the Chief Magistrate of
this City, both for Ornament and Use; And also by advice of Council, to settle
the Hall and all the rest of the Companies Revenue, (subject to the said former
securities) so as it might answer these good ends, and secure (to the extent of
it) the many yearly Charities payable by the Company, where there is no fund
now left. Upon Report of which Committee, soon after Sir John Frederick, Sir
James Edwards, Sir Henry Tulse, and several other Aldermen and Worthy Members
agreed to Contribute liberally toward the same Additional Building; For which
a Preamble was ordered, and accordingly drawn and engrossed whereby those that
were subscribers, declaring how sensible they were that if the Hall should long
Continue under these Circumstances, Not only all that had been done would be
wholly fruitless, but all that Remain, (for which they were Trustees to the
Generations to come) would soon waste into nothing, which would reproachfully
render the present Members most ungrateful to their Ancestors, whose Names
still Blossom in what remains of those Pious Monuments of their Charities, and
obnoxious to those who should succeed happy Members of this Society.

And therefore concluded the reparation of the Hall to be the only leading
means left to preserve the Society. And that, as Sir John Cutler had so long
since for those very ends, at his own Charges erected that stately Fabric
which is the Parlour and Entertaining Room over it in the Garden; And Sir John
Moore had now undertaken to repair and Beautify the great Hall: So they held
themselves highly obliged to promote and carry on so excellent a work. And
having caused the Site and Fabric of the Hall to be surveyed, and finding,
that with some more additional Building (then already propounded to be
erected,) it might be made a more commodious and convenient Habitation for the
Chief Magistrate of this City, than any other within the City of London.
Therefore encouraged by so good Examples, that it might answer all the good
ends propounded, and might with all possible speed be carried on and finished,
in order to invite and encourage a general Subscription of all the Members
toward payment of the Companies Debts and Charities, they Liberally Subscribed
and promised to pay toward the raising and finishing of such additional
Building, the several Sums of Money there under, at their several names set
down, and appearing, and declaring themselves (if occasion should be
afterward) to be further liberally assisting to Complete so good a work; Not
doubting but their Brethren, the rest of the Members, would every one follow
according to their Degrees and Qualities. And that the Beautifying and
repairing their Hall might not prove a Bait to such Creditors (if any should
be) as formerly seized the Ruins of the same to endeavor again a
Sequestration against it; But might answer those good ends so by them designed,
the Company for Encouragment of their Members in their Liberal Subscriptions
toward this great Work by advice of learned Council Conveyed the same, and all
their Revenue, and the Equity of Redemption thereof (subject to the said former
Securities) to Trustees to secure (as far as the same will extend) the yearly
payment of those Charities for which they are Chargeable to several Parishes,
Prisons, and Uses by their Benefactors, who heretofore paid into their hands
several great Sums of Money for those Uses (for which now no fund remains) that
they might also thereby not only discharge their Consciences toward God, and
the Memory of such Pious Benefactors, But also avoid the Chargeable
Prosecutions of the Commissioners upon the Statute for Charitable Uses who have
of late put this Company every year to exceeding great Charges and Expenses.

Thus have I endeavored, to lay down the true State of the Company of Grocers,
as it relates to themselves, and their Creditors in their present Condition.
The substance whereof, having been lately declared before my Lord Chancellor,
by way of Answer to a Creditors Bill (who is the only Person that now
prosecutes any suit against them) seemed to give great satisfaction unto many
Council; and other Persons unconcerned, who before, were ignorant of the true
State of the Companies Condition. And may (happily) be a means to divert
others, from prosecuting any such Chargeable suit against the Company, in the
event whereof, they cannot promise themselves so much benefit, as they may now
hope to receive without it. And since that, the Bishop of London, and the rest
of the Commissioners for Charitable Uses, having been likewise informed of the
Companies Condition, and what they had so designed, and were in Prosecution of
to preserve their Reputation (beyond what they could either by Law, or Equity,
be compelled to) were so well satisfied therein, that they advised the
Prosecutors for the Charities, rather to apply themselves to the Wardens, in a
kind, and friendly Manner, and encourage the Members to go on in so good a
work, than in vain (wasting the Parish Stock) again to disturb them with
Suites, to discourage the Members; and thereby, not only to hazard the loss of
their own, but to wrong all others concerned with them. And also several of
their Creditors, who before were instigated by some unadvised Persons, to give
the Company disturbance, as soon as they were informed of their Case, better
considered their own Interest, and wholly forbore; which not only afforded
great Freedom, and Liberty to the Members in the Court of Assistants, to follow
this undertaking, but also gave Wonderful Encouragement to the late Master, and
Wardens, to begin; And to Sir Henry Tulse, Mr. Box, Mr. Winch and Mr. Reeve,
the succeeding Master, and Wardens, for this present year, (to whom Mr. Beal,
and Mr. Bourn, (two of the late Wardens) at the request of the Court of
Assistants, willingly joined themselves to facilitate the work) to go on, who
have (all as one man) been very Zealous, and Active, in this great work, of
finishing the Hall in so short a time, as is almost incredible; Especially
considering, that the same was many ways (upon further Consideration had)
enlarged, and made more Convenient, than at first was intended, with many
Accommodations (not at first thought of) to render it so exactly (as indeed it
is) far excelling any Hall that now is, or (probably) ever was in London, so
that the whole Charge of completing the same (I believe with as good husbandry
as was possibly to be managed) yet swells to double the Sum, which was at first
propounded to be disbursed, and therefore called for further Assistance, of
more Members, than at first was designed, to Contribute to the same.

And now the Hall being Completely finished, as the only means propounded for
Encouragement of all the Members, A Court of Assistants was called, in order to
consult, and advise of the most speedy, and effectual way, and method, to
promote, and gain their Subscriptions. And being met, the Court very seriously
took into their Consideration, the State of the Company, under their
Circumstances and their present Necessities for Money, to carry on this great
Work, of paying the Debts, and raising and restoring, the declining Reputation
of the Company, designed by the new Building and Repairing the Hall, which,
though the Charge amounts to a far greater Sum, than was at first propounded,
to make it more Commodious, yet it manifestly appeared to have been the only
means left; and, that without it, all others, would have been ineffectual, to
keep the Company of Grocers upon a Foundation, which, otherwise, must in a
short time have naturally dissolved of it self. For that the Apprentices, and
Freemen, of any Estate, or Value, who before wholly declined, have now daily
increased, as having a prospect, by what is visible, of a prosperous carrying
on the whole work, answerable thereto; And that, though this Charge of the
Building, amounted to a great Sum, yet when they considered that the Company
may probably receive yearly (if they please) as much as the interest of the
Moneys therein disbursed amounts to; And that so great a part thereof, as was
already paid would not have been given, upon any other Account; And that the
work now completed, is in it self of far greater value than all the other part
of the Companies Revenue (over and above the Charities issuing thereout) And
that those several sums, so subscribed, were thus freely given by several
Worthy Members, on purpose for this great Work, that it might encourage the
whole Members, freely, and liberally, to Contribute toward the residue of this
Work, and the Debts. And that it is hoped, the whole harge will be so advanced,
by kind Members, incited by the same motives; They unanimously resolved, not
only liberally to follow themselves, but from those great Examples, to
recommend the carrying on the whole work, to a select Committee, consisting of
such Members in every of the four Divisions, then already made, whose
opportunity, and inclinations, they had great hopes, would engage them to
improve their interest with their Brethren by the best Arguments they could use
to stir them up to a liberal Contribution toward so acceptable a Work. The
Court appointing the Wardens for the time being, and all such kind Members as
would be assisting herein, or any two, or more of them (on whom the Clerk is
from time to time ordered to attend with the Papers appointed for the
Subscription in every division) to be a Committee for this work, who are by the
Court, on behalf of the Company, desired upon all occasions, and with what
speed they could, or might possible, to show themselves good examples. And from
thence press and stir up all other their Brethren to Contribute toward
discharging of the remainder of the said Building, and the Companies Debts,
That so great and good a Work, wherein so many thousands are and may be
concerned, might be cheerfully carried on; and so might all (as Fellow-helpers)
have the honor to be Recorded amongst the Generations to come, The happy
Repairers and Restorers of the Company of Grocers.

Thus far, by the good Providence of God provision is made, and encouragement
given to all kind Members to join in Carrying on this great Work. And as those
at the Helm have endeavored every way to promote the advantage of the Company,
so their desires are to lessen the Burden of their Brethren. In order whereto,
they have restrained the renewing of any Lease of the Companies Estate; And by
Order upon Order, barred access to treat touching the same, whilst there is 21
years in being. And also have sunk the Charge of coming upon the Clothing, and
other Charge gradually ascending to that degree; That they may undergo their
Duty in this Society, every way in their Turns, with more Ease and
Cheerfulness. And such endeavors are using for the good of this Company, as I
doubt not but in time will give greater Satisfaction, and Encouragement to the
Members, than possibly they might have expected.

And to avoid one great Evil frequently practiced, by the Members of this
Company, in Voluntarily, or designedly suffering their Apprentices to be bound
at other Halls, to Members of other Companies, and so turned over to serve
their times to them; (than which nothing can be more destructive to this
Society) the Court of Assistants taking the same into their Consideration, have
by advise of learned Council pursuant to their power given them by their
Charter, and the Statute in that Case provided, made a By-law to restrain the
same for the time to come enjoining every Member of this Society (so far as may
fairly lie in their own power) to forbear it for the future. And though
(through misapprehension, and for want of knowledge of the true state of the
Companies Condition) they have already done it, Yet when they have so much
encouragement, to join their Assistance in this good Work begun; And shall
consider their Oaths both as Apprentices and Freemen (which is Motive enough
to every Sincere, and just man, to pursue the same, unless such as seek curious
Evasions to elude so sacred a Tie) It is not to be doubted, but they will not
only observe this, and all other Lawful Ordinances made for the good of the
Fellowship according to their Oaths: But will in and by all other ways, and
means, to (their Power) promote the Interest, and advantage of this Company, as
good Citizens, and Brethren.

HAving thus Stated the Condition of the Company, as it long flourished in
Splendor, and gradually through Various Providence, and the sad effects of
War, and Fire, how it groaned under so great pressure in her sadder
Circumstances; And having set before you the happy Encouragement already now
given, and the Methods propounded again to raise, and restore this Company to
its former Splendour; I now turn to the Honorable, and Worthy Members, of whom
it Consists; And you my Noble, and good Masters, under whom I hold my Station
in this place, Bear, I humbly pray you, with my Zeal, and Freedom, and the
boldness I assume, to move you, to set to your helping hands in this work, so
excellent, and acceptable to God, and every Good Man:

I. By remembering you of those Eminent Charities, For which those Worthy
Members, who went before you in former times, and are to this day Celebrated;
And have left us such grounds (as being now built) gives us the prospect of a
great Revenue when the Leases are out, which though far distant, are and will
be every year (like useful Timber,) a more growing hope to Posterity.

II. That you would not only think it enough to praise them, but be provoked by
a generous Emulation, to follow their Example, liberally and bountifully to
afford your Assistance, Not only to secure but also to increase this growing
hope, that our Burden and reproach, being removed, Our Benefactors may be
encouraged, and this Society still preserved a Seminary of good Merchants, and
a Treasury of Charity; That so the succeeding Generations may bless and honor
you, as much as you do those Worthy Members in former times, when your Names
shall be Recorded as Raisers, and Restorers of the Company of Grocers.

III. That what you do you would do speedily, whereby you will draw on others,
that need quickening and encouragement by your Example; And in so doing, you
will not only have the Comfort of what you do your selves, but be the happy
promoters in others, of what the Company will have Cause to bless God, and give
you thanks for it.

IV. That you will Consider how great a Deliverance you had to escape the late
Dreadful Fire with your Lives; And how Gracious God has been to you, still to
entrust you with his Talents lent for Improvement, as Stewards in his work. And
that this Company which suffered so much in that Calamity, has no other hands
but yours, to repair her breaches.

V. That you can have no such true Comfort in the World as to be Conscious of
doing of good Works of this Nature, when as faithful Stewards of that which is
not Consigned to you into property, but into trust, you have (as good and
faithful Servants,) but well disposed of a parcel of your great Lord's Estate,
according to his own Will.

For though good works in themselves (as flowing back from the Fountain from
whence they spring) can be no way meritorious, Yet they have been always, so
acceptable to God, that we find in every Age, Estates continue longest in the
Name, and Family, of such as have been most diffusive, in Works of this Nature;
That if it were modest, to render a reason, why so many great Estates, are
sooner wasted by a loose Heir, than gotten by his frugal Parent, it may well be
presumed, because so little of it was bestowed to such Uses: When men return so
little to God, to whom they owe all they have. And most assuredly, no Article
in your Account, at the great Audit, will sooner be allowed, to Cover many
other Errors, then what is thus disposed; And now, as Spice is a great
ingredient in this Mystery, and is a part of your Arms; so I pray consider, how
Alms in Scripture are called, an Odor of a sweet smelling Savor. And it is
these perfumes, that will prove acceptible to God, and have a good Savor
amongst men. So I Conclude, with my Prayers to Almighty God, to incline all
your hearts, according to your several Degrees and Qualities, in this great
work, to acquit your selves, as good Citizens, and Grocers; And that I may be
happy, in discharge of my Duty, which alone moved me to make this Address to
you. And shall be my Endeavors to perform, As,

Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, And the rest of the Worthy Members, Your
most faithful and most humble Servant, W. Ravenhill, Clerk of the Society of
the Mystery of the Grocers.
Grocers-Hall, March 12, 1682.

