OBSERVATIONS TOPOGRAPHICAL, MORAL, and PHYSIOLOGICAL; Made in a JOURNEY
Through part of the LOW COUNTRIES, Germany, Italy, and France: WITH A Catalogue
of PLANTS not Native of England, found Spontaneously growing in those Parts,
and their Virtues.

By JOHN RAY, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Whereunto is added A brief Account of Francis Willughby Esquire his Voyage through
a great part of Spain.

LONDON: Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

To his Honored Friend Philip Skippon, Esquire
SIR,
AFter the deplorable Death of that Reverend and Worthy Prelate, John Lord
Bishop of Chester, to whom the Dedication of this Work was intended, several
weighty considerations induced me to recommend it to your Patronage. As first,
that I might thereby take occasion publicly to own my Obligations to you, and
profess my gratitude. 2. Because having been much assisted in the Compiling
thereof by your Notes and Communications; you have so great interest in it,
that it is but equal I should present you with it. 3. Having traveled
constantly in your Company, during my continuance beyond the Seas, you are well
acquainted with most of the particulars therein delivered, and can attest the
truth of them if any one should question or deny it. As for the Work it self,
my first design was only a Catalogue of outlandish Plants of my own
discovering, such as grew wild beyond Sea, and were not common to us in
England. The English Observations are but an accession to the Catalogue, and
intended only to help deliver the Press of that. Wherefore being hudled up in
some haste, upon a deliberate perusal of them I find the Phrase and Language in
many places less ornate, and in some scarce congruous. But my main aim having
been to render all things perspicuous and intelligible (which I hope I have in
some measure effected) I was less attentive to Grammatical and Euphonical
niceties. The Catalogue I have had already some years by me, deferring the
publication thereof, because I still entertained some thoughts of making
another Voyage beyond the Seas; and then I doubt not but I should have
augmented it by the addition of many Plants, with their Virtues and uses. But
now the Death of Friends and other Adversities that have lately befallen me
besides my Age having cut off my hopes, and well qualified, not to say quite
extinguished my desires of further Traveling, I have ventured it abroad as it
is, and submit it to the censure of the Judicious and Candid Reader. If either
Catalogue or Observations prove any ways useful to the Public, by affording
matter of Information, or if nothing else innocent Diversion to those that
abound with leisure, and might perhaps bestow their time worse, I have what I
desire, and as much as I can reasonably expect.

But to detein you no longer, I am not so ignorant of my own Abilities, or so
well conceited of any Composition or Performance of mine, as to think I shall
do you any Honor by this Dedication; I rather hope your Name prefixed will
gain Reputation to my Book and procure it acceptance in the World. Be pleased
therefore to behold and receive it, according to my intention before intimated,
as a token and expression only of the respect and gratitude of

SIR, Your much Obliged Servant JOHN RAY.

THE PREFACE.
WHen I had Traveled over the greatest part of England in search of Plants,
and sufficiently informed my self what sorts my own Country naturally
produced; I grew desirous to see what Varieties Foreign Countries of a
different Soil and Temperature of Air might afford. For which reason I was
easily induced to accompany Francis Willughby Esquire, Philip Skippon Esquire
and Nathanael Bacon Gent. in a Voyage beyond the Seas. The success whereof, as
to the number of Plants found, exceeding my expectation (notwithstanding the
shortness of our stay in most places gave me not leave to make an exact
scrutiny) I thought it might not be amiss for the satisfaction of the curious,
and direction of those who may hereafter travel the same places with like
design, to publish a Catalogue of all not native of England that I had
observed. But considering the paucity of those who delight in studies and
enquiries of this nature, to advantage the Catalogue I have added thereto a
brief Narrative of our whole Voyage, with some Observations Topographical,
Moral and Natural, made by my self and the forementioned Gentlemen. I shall say
nothing to recommend them, but only that what I write as of mine own knowledge
is punctually and in all circumstances true, at least according to my
apprehension and judgment, I not giving my self that liberty which many
Travelers are wont to take, and the common Proverb seems to allow them. And
for what I write from the Relation of others, though I will not warrant it for
certain, yet to me it seemed most likely and probable. What Birds, Beasts,
Fishes and Insects I observed abroad, whether common to us in England, or
peculiar to other Countries, I have forborne to set down, because the taking
notice and describing of them was the particular design and business of that
excellent person Mr. Francis Willughby lately deceased; and he having prepared
store of materials for a History of Animals, and likewise digested them into a
convenient method, that work (if God grant leisure and ability to bring it to
due perfection) is intended to be made public, and the Reader may there find
what is here omitted.

I might have been more large concerning France but that we were frustrated in
our design of making Grand tour (as they there call it) being driven out thence
by the Fr. Kings Declaration, commanding all the English to withdraw themselves
and their effects out of his Dominions within two months time. And yet that
Country being near us, much traveled by and well known to those of our Nation,
and there being many Itineraries and Descriptions of it extant in Print, I
thought it less needful to write much concerning it.

As for Spain, it being a Country out of the ordinary road of Travelers, and
those that have viewed it gi^^ng others little encouragement to follow their
example, but rather condemning themselves for their curiosity, as having found
nothing there which might answer their trouble and expense, that the Reader may
know something of it without the hazard and charge of traveling it, I have
added by way of Appendix a short account of Mr. Francis Willughby's Voyage
through a great part of it, collected out of his notes; which had he himself
published he would doubtless have enriched with more Observations, and clothed
with better Language.

Now whereas in the Narrative, discoursing concerning the petrification of
Shells, Fish-bones, etc. I have delivered as my opinion or conjecture, that
those bodies, which are commonly known in England by the names of Star-Stones
and S. Cutberts Beads, were nothing else but the spines and tail-bones of some
Fishes, I must own my self to have been therein mistaken. For my learned and
ingenious Friend Mr. Martin Lister has lately advised me, that he has found
of them ramose and branched like trees: which does sufficiently evince they
were not of that original I supposed. Wherefore unless we will grant them to be
primary and immediate productions of Nature, as they are in the form of stones;
we must embrace Mr. Hook's opinion, that they were the roots of some Plants;
though I confess I never as yet saw any Roots or Branches shaped and joynted in
that manner. Possibly there may be or have been such kind of submarine Plants
or Roots which have hitherto escaped my knowledge. For that the parts not only
of Trees but also of Herbs themselves may sometimes petrifie, the stalks of
Equisetum which we gathered up on the banks of the River Tanaro in Piemont do
abundantly convince and satisfy me. And this is all that I thought needful to
acquaint the Reader with by way of Preface.

ERRATA.
In the Observations.
PAge 210, line 31 lege, extraordinariam, p. 214 l. 32. mutis, p. 215. l. 26.
Abano, l. 20 Abano, p. 218. l. 17. temperandum, p. 220. l. 35. far, p. 222. l.
13. Montferrat, p. 223. l. 22. add us, p. 235. l. 8. ripis Rheni Bononiensis,
l. 25. prope, p. 244. l. 35. Castella^^, p. 249. l. 22. Counties, p. 256. l.
37. Globularia, p. 257. l. 23. disjoined, p. 263. l. 7. the word [being] is
omitttd, p. 267. l. 24. Neopolitans, p. 276. l. 22. dele upon, p. 277. l. 1.
Neopolitana, l. 33. Neopolitano, p. 280. l. 24. vulgari, p. 282. l. 33. Messan,
p. 285. l. 10. dele are, p. 287. l. 34. Medica, p. 303. l. 20. Seniour, p. 315.
l. 34. inn, p. 316. l. 27. one, p. 318. l. 25. wild, p. 343. l. 35. Bols, p.
414. l. 6. di Dio, p. 415. l. 20. has, p. 416. l. 2. vessels, p. 418. l. 30.
to is omitted, p. 422. l. 16. Friburg, p. 432. l. 11. Versoy, p. 439. l. 30.
laevi, p. 446. l. 25. Sanicula, p. 450. l. 2. Characias, ib. l. 21.
Frontignana, p. 454. l. 16. 30. p. 480. l. 4. bad, p. 484. l. 37. devotissimus,
p. 486, l. 33. las, p. 489. l. 5. the.

In Catalogo.
PAge 1. line 37. leptophyllos, p. 3. l 27. fontaine que brusle, ib. l. 32.
Ocymi, p. 10, l. 8. sterilioribus, p. 18. l. 4. maritima, p. 30. l. 14.
racemosum, p. 32. l. 40. accensusque, p. 46. l. 33. Dioscoridis, p. 47. l. 33.
purpurea, p. 56. l. 8. pro ejus scribe radicis, p. 83. l. 39. dele garis, p.
85. l. 13. ossiculis, p. 86. l. 19. nigricans, p. 8^. l. 35. Pulmonaria, p. 97.
l. 17. Zanclaeum, p. 101. l. 23. dele tris. Errata leviora in punctis and
literulis quae nec sensum pervertunt, obscurumve, aut ancipitem reddunt, nec in
errores orthographicos aliosve, lectores minus peritos inducere apta sunt,
verum unicuique non prorsus (...) manifesta, Lectori benevelo vel condonanda
vel emendanda permissimus.

OBSERVATIONS Topographical, Moral and Physiological, Made in a JOURNEY Through
Part of the Low Countries, etc.
April 18, 1663. We passed over in the Packet-Boat from Dover to Calais, Calais.
a Town formerly held by the English about 210 years, viz. from the 21. of King
Edward the Third, when it was taken, till the last year of Queen Mary, when it
was lost. Since that time, Anno 1596. it was taken by the Spaniards under
Archduke Albert in three days time, only the Castle held out seven or eight.
And last of all, Anno 1598. it was restored to the French upon the Treaty at
Vervin, who now hold it. It is advantageously situate for Defense, and now very
strongly fortified after the modern fashion with an impenetrable Wall and
Bastions of Earth, a deep Trench full of Water to the landward, and a large
Citadel. The new Wall and Citadel were built about 44 years since. The old
Stone-Wall and Ditch are still remaining, but enclosed within the new. The Town
for bigness exceeds Dover, and seemed to us frequent and full of People. It
has a large square Piazza (...) Marketplace, wherein are two great Markets
GATES FOR A LOCK TO KEEP UP THE WATER OF ANY RIVER FOR THE USE OF NAVIGATION
ETC.

the convenience of its Harbor, which is of good Capacity, safe from Winds,
well defended, and deep enough to receive Ships of great Burden. The Buildings
of the Town are not tall, but handsome and uniform; the Streets regular, well
paved, exactly level and straight. And it is no wonder they should be so, the
present Town having been contrived and set out all at once. For when it was
surrendered up to Archduke Albert after that famous Siege of three years, the
Spaniards found nothing there but great Heaps of Earth and Rubbish, scarce, one
House of the old Building remaining. This Town is most regularly and exactly
fortified, so that it seemed to us one of the strongest Pieces in all the
Low Countries.

The fourth by some esteemed the fifth Port Town of Flanders which has the
largest and most capacious Harbor of all the rest, Sluys.
viz. Sluys, subject to the States of the United Provinces, we saw not.

April 24. We took places in the Passage-Boat for Bruges, and at a League and
halfs end came to a Lock or Sluice, where we shifted our Boat. These Locks or
Sostegni (as the Italians significantly call them) are usually placed at a
great Declivity of any Cha^el or Fall of water, and serve to sustain or keep up
the Water, (as the Italian Name imports) to make a River navigable which either
wants Water or has too s^eep a Descent. There are of them in England (as we
have been informed) upon Guildford River in Surrey, and have been formerly upon
the Trent. They are usually thus contrived, First, there are placed a pair of
Folding-doors or Floodgates cross the Chanel to stop the water descending:
Then, a competent space being left to receive Boats and Lighters, etc. another
single Gate: In each of these Gates, toward the bottom, is made a Hole or
Window sitted with a convenient Shut or Wicket ( Portello the Italians call it)
to open and shut as occasion requires. When a Vessel comes down stream to the
Sostegno, first they open the Portello of the foremost Gates and let the Water
into the enclosed space, which will necessarily rise there till it come to be
equal with the Level of that above the Gates; then they shut the Portello, and
the Stream making no resistance, easily draw back the Gates, and receive in the
Boat. Which done, they open the Portello of the lower Gates, whereupon the
Stream above presently drives to and keeps fast the foremost Gates, and the
Water in the enclosed space sinks till it be even with that in the Chanel
below; and then they open the Gate itself and let the Boat out. When a Boat
goes up Stream, they first open the lowermost Gate, and receive it into the
middle or enclosed space, then withdraw or set open the Portello in the
uppermost Gates, letting in the water till it come to be equal with the level
of that above the Gates, and lastly draw back the Gates themselves and let out
the Boat. N. B. That both upper and lower Gates open against the Stream, and
are driven to and kept shut by it, and that the Leaves of the upper Gates lie
not in the same plain when shut, but make an obtuse Angle, the better to resist
the force of the Water.

Bruges, Bruges.
so called from the multitude of Bridges therein, is four Leagues distant from
Ostend, a large City and well built, many of the Houses being four or five, and
some six Stories high. It is of a round figure, well walled and entrenched has
been formerly one of the chief Mart-Towns in Europe, and though it be at
present less than what it was for Trade, Riches and number of People, yet is it
no mean, poor or inconsiderable place, but in so good condition, that it may
well challenge place among the Cities of the second rate in Europe. It is now
an Episcopal See, and has been noted for handsome Women. THE FIGVRE OF THE
GATES AS WELL OF THE INSIDE OF THEM AS THE OVT.

An Engine to raise water a chain of Buckets, taken out of Kirchers MVNDVS
SVBTERRANEVS

Here we first observed the Custom mentioned by Erasmus in his Colloquies, of
fasning a small piece of white Linen to the Ring of Rapper of the Door of that
House where a Woman lies in. A. Forte p^ieteriens has aedes vidi cornicem
obductam candido (...) demirabar quid esset causa. Fa. Adeone hosper es in hac
Repub. ut ignores hoc esse symbolum puerperi^ i^ aedibus? Erasm. Colloqu.
Puerpera. We saw the manner of raising up Water for the use of the Citizens by
a Chain whereon are fastened Cylindrical Iron Buckets. This Chain is round in
form of a Bracelet, Neck-lace or Wheel-band, and put over a large Axis deeply
furrowed, from which it hangs down into a Well of Water, and being turned about
by the Axis, the descending Buckets have their mouths downward, and take up
Water as they pass through the Well; which (ascending with their mouths upward,
but a little inclining from the Chain outward) they bring up to the Axis, to
which so soon as they are come, by reason of their Position they must needs
turn it out into a Trough placed under the Axis, by which it is conveyed to a
Cistern, and thence by Pipes to private Houses. This kind of Machin is
generally used in Italy, Spain and France for raising up Water, to water their
Gardens in Summer time. The deep Furrows in the Axis are to catch hold of the
Buckets, that the Chain slip not back by reason of the weight of the ascending
Buckets. In this City are no more than seven Parish Churches, but of
Monasteries or Religious Houses (as they call them) good store, 60 according to
Golnitz. In the Church of Nostre-dame or S. Mary lies the Body of Charles the
Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, and Lord of most of the Netherlands, under a stately
Monument with a French Inscription upon it, which tells us, that he was slain
in the Battle of Nancy, 1476. and his Body brought from Nancy hither by his
great Grandchild Charles the Fifth, Emperor, and that K. Philip the Second
erected to him that Monument. We saw in this Town one John Tates, a Man of a
Gigantick Stature, born at Schoonhoven in Holland: one of a middle Stature
might well stand under his arm-pit, from his middle fingers end to his elbow
was 25 inches and a half, the length of his hand to his wrist 11 inches, his
middle finger 7 inches. He was well shaped, and all his Limbs proportionable to
his height. He was afterward (as we heard) brought over into England to be
shown.

Near this City (as Boethius de Boot, who was Native thereof relates) digging
ten or twenty Else deep in the Earth, they find whole Woods of Trees, in which
the Trunks, Boughs and Leaves do so exactly appear, that one may easily
distinguish the several kinds of them, and very plainly discern the Series of
Leaves which have fallen yearly. These subterraneous Woods are found in those
places which 500 years ago were Sea, and afterward either left and thrown up
by the Sea, or gained from it, the Tides being kept off by Walls and Fences.
But before the forementioned term of 500 years, there is no memory that these
places were part of the Continent. And yet seeing the tops of these Trees do
for the most part lie Eastward, because (as is probable) they were thrown down
by Western Winds, which on this Coast are most boisterous and violent, it will
necessarily follow that in the most ancient times and before all memory of man,
these places were Firm Land, and without the limits of the Sea.

The Describer of Amsterdam tells us, that in Friesfland and Groningland, there
are great numbers of these underground Trees found and dug up in Mosses and
fenny Grounds where they dig for Turves. In E^gland also there are found of
them plentifully in many places, the Wood whereof they usually call Moss-Wood,
because it is for the most part dug up in the Mosses or moorish boggy Fens
and Levels where they get Turves; though sometimes it be found in firmer
Grounds, and sometimes in the sides of Mountains. The Question is, How these
Trees came to be buried so deep under ground? To which we may probably answer,
that many Ages ago before all Records of Antiquity, yea before primitive Fame
or Tradition itself, these places were part of the firm Land, and covered with
Wood; afterward being undermined and overwhelmed by the violence of the Sea,
they continued so long under water, till the Rivers brought down Earth and Mud
enough to cover the Trees, fill up these Shallows, and restore them to the firm
Land again. In like manner upon the Coast of Suffolk about Dunwich, the Sea
does now and has for many years past very much encroached upon the Land,
undermining and overwhelming by degrees a great deal of high ground; insomuch
that ancient Writings make mention of a Wood a mile and half to the East of
Dunwich, which is at present so far within the Sea. Now if in succeeding Ages
(as likely enough it is) the Sea shall by degrees be filled up, either by its
own working, or by Earth brought down by Land-Floods still subsiding to the
bottom, and growing up over the tops of these Trees, and so this space again
added to the firm Land; the men that shall then live in those parts (if the
World so long last) will, it is likely, dig up these Trees, and as much wonder
how they came there, as we do at the present Moss-Wood.

And now that I am speaking of filling up and atterrating (to borrow that word
of the Italians) the Skirts and Borders of the Sea, I shall take leave to add
by the by, that to me it seems very probable, that all the Low Countries have
been in this manner gained from the Sea. For Varenius in his Geography tells
us, That sinking Well in Amsterdam, at near an hundred foot depth they met with
a Bed or Floor of Sand and Cockle-shells, whence it is evident that of old time
the bottom of the Sea lay so deep, and that that hundred foot thickness of
Faith above the Sand arose from the Sediments of the Waters of those great
Rivers, which there emptied themselves into the Sea, and in times of Floods
brought down with them abundance of Earth from the upper Grounds: Which yet is
a strange thing, considering the novity of the World, the Age whereof according
to the usual Account is not yet 5600 years. That the Rain does continually wash
down Earth from the Mountains, and atterrate or add part of the Sea to the firm
Land, is manifest from the Lagune or Flats about Venice; the C^amdrg or Isle of
the River Rhosue about Aix in Provence, in which we were told that the
Watchtower had in the memory of some men been removed forward three times, so
much had been there gained from the Sea; and many places in our own Land: only
it is a received Tradition, and may perhaps be true, that what the Sea loses in
one place, it gets in another. That the height of the Mountains, at least those
which consist not of firm rocks, does continually diminish, is I think very
likely, not to say certain. I have been credibly informed, that whereas the
Steeple of Craich in the Peak of Derbyshire in the memory of some old men yet
living could not have been seen from a certain Hill lying between Hopton and
Wirksworth, now not only the Steeple, but a great part of the Body of the
Church may from thence be seen: Which without doubt comes to pass by the
sinking of a Hill between the Church and place of View. Hence it would follow,
that in process, of time (but it would be many thousands of years first) all
the Hills and Mountains (except the rocky) would by Floods and Shots of Rain be
quite washed away and the whole Earth levelled.

But to return to the Trees: One material Exception against our Solution still
remains, and that is, that a great many of these subterraneous Trees dig'd up
in England are thought to be Firs, whereas that kind of Tree does not at
present, and consequently we have reason to believe never did, grow wild in
this Kingdom. To which I answer, that this Exception would indeed much puzzle
me, were it certain and manifest, that this is Fir-Wood, which is so generally
reputed from its Grain, Inflammability and other Qualities. But since it does
not clearly appear to me so to be, I shall respite my Answer, till I be fully
satisfied concerning it.

From Bruges, April 27. We went be Boat to Gau^t, Gaunt.
the greatest City of Flanders; whence the Emperor Charles V. who was born
here, was wont to boast, that he could put Paris into his Gane; in which word
there is an Equivoque, Gane in French signifying a Glove. Yet is the Wall too
great for the Buildings, enclosing much void ground. In this City as in Bruges,
are 7 Parish Churches, and according to Golu^^x, about 55 Religious Houses. We
ascended the Tower called Bellefort about four hundred Steps high, and saw the
famous Bell called Roland, not so great as we imagined. This City is well
built, well walled and trench'd about, and the Inhabitants to us seemed very
bus^e and industrious.

From Gaunt, April 30. we traveled to Brussels, about thirty English Miles
distant, passing through Aolst, Aolst^
a fortified Town of some note.

Brussels is the capital City of Brabant, Brussels.
where the Spanish Governor of these Provinces, who was then the Marquess of
Caracene, usually resides. It is well built, large and populous. The Streets
are broad; the Stadt-house a fair and uniform Building. The Common People here,
and also at Antwerp, Lovain, Mechlin, and other Cities of Brabant, (as has
been noted by others) make use of Dogs to draw little Carts and Wheel-Barrows
laden with Commodities about the Streets. But for the Advantage they make of
them, setting aside the maintaining of an old Custom, I think they might as
well employ their own Arms and Shoulders. In the Gallery by the Riding -place,
is an Echo, which reflects the Voice fifteen times as we were assured: We
observed about ten distinct Reflections, the Wind hindering us as to the rest.
At this time it happened Ludovicus de Bills to be in Town, whom we visited and
saw five Bodies which he had with him, embalmed and preserved after his newly
invented manner, entire with all their Entrails and Bowels. He was then going
to the University of Lovain, with whom he had made an agreement for Discovery
of his Art and reading public Anatomy Lectures.

Our next remove ( May 2.) was to Lovain, Lovain.
a large City, but neither well built nor well kept, only the Stadt-house is a
stately Structure, and makes a fair show at a distance. The Wall is of great
extent, more in Circuit than that of Gannt by three Rods, taking in much void
ground. The Colleges are in number 43, the Names whereof together with their
Founders are exhibited in the ensuing Catalogue which we there found published
in Print.

Almae Vniversitatis Lovaniensis Collegia ac Paedagogia Anno Salutis M.D-C.LIVE.
enumerata.
Magnum sive Majus Theologicum, in via quam Minus dicitur, Anno 1562. divisum
fuerit.

-- Humili, eorum faelicibus, ortu,
Creverit auspiciis Academia magna LovanI.
Juris Utriusque vulgo Baccalaureorum, S. Ivoni dieatum,

S. Donatiani, in via Felina, Anno 1484. Juris utriusque

Standonicum, in via Proetoria, a Joanne Stancdonck, and Mechliniae condidit)
in magnum Ecclesiae bonum, Anno 1490. pauperibus fundatum.

Atrebatense, in via Praepositi, a Nicolao Rutherio, patria Luxemburgensi, and
Atrebotiorum Episcopo, magnifica domo atque opima dote, Anno 1505. in honorem
S. Nicol^i inchoa^um.

Winkelianum, in via cava, auctorem agnoscit ab Anno 1505. Joannem Winkelium,
Conservatoris. Academici Notarium: itemque Joannim hujus fill. Doctorem Medicum,
qui sua, sororisque bona, circa An. 1554. ex voto patris, (si uterque, ut
accidit, sine legitima prole decederet) in usum Collegii studiosorum J. V.
impendit.

Houterlaeum, in via Vaccaria, Anno 1511. per Henricum de Houterle,
Hooghstratonum, D. Petri hic Scholarcham a^ Militem Hierosolymitanum, Anno
1643. renovatum.

Buslidianum, vulgariter Trilinguae, quod Linguae Hebraica, Graeca, Latina in
eo doceantur: juxta forum pis^arium, auctorem habet Hieronymum Buslidium,
Luxemburgi, e sui cognominis pago oriundum, Proepositum Ariensem ac Francisci
Archiepisc. ^isuntini ^tatrem, Anno 1517.

Pontificium, in via Praetoriat erexi Adrianus VI. Vltrajectinus, Pont. Max.
ante Adrianus Flore^itinus dictus, qui illud, cum hic in D. Petri Decanus
esset, Theologis sub tutela S. Augustini destinavit, and postea Pontifex
confirmavit Anno 1522.

Sabaudiae, in via Nummaria, Anno 1548. ab Eustachio Chapuys, Sabaudo,
Annessiacensi J. V. Doctore ac Carolo V. a Consiliis etc. in gratiam suorum
popularium, ut and aliud in patria in honorem S. Eustachii, magnifice extructum
and dotatum.

S. Annae, in via Praepositi, Nicolaus Goblet, Boviniensis, Dionantensis
Praepositius, Anno 1553, fundavit.

Druitianum, in angulo vulgo Cucullino, a Michaele Druitio, oriundo ex
Vollerinchove territorii Casletensis, J. V. Doctore, Prof. and hic ad D. Petrum
Dece^^, qui obiit Anno 1559.

Van-dale, in via Praepositi, structure magnificentia,

Viglianum, quod eitam Frisonum, in via S. Quintini,

Praemonstratense, in via Praepositi, primordia sua

Cranendonck, ad viam Judaicam incoepit Anno

Divaei in monte Capelloe, ut vocant, Auctor, est Greg.

Brugelianum, unicum Medicorum, in via nova, a

Seminarium Regium, in via Praepositi, a Philippo II.

Pelssanum, in via Praedicatorum, minificentia Joannis

Montense, in via nova, de Bievene, Montensis,

Seminarium Leodiense, in via monetali, S. Lamberto Bavaria, Episcopi
Leodiensis, and An. 1605. Opus and dote and structura Auctore suo dignum.

S. Willebrordi quod vulgo Sylvaeducense, in via nova, jam ab annis plus minus
20. initium habuit, confirmatum ost 1625. morte Fundatoris sui Nicolai Zoesii
Amorsforiii Episc. Sylvaduc.

Bayanum sive Bayorum, in via cava, exordia prima accepit a magno Theologo
Michaele du Bay, Hannone, Melinensi, D. Petri hic Decano, qui illud erigere
coeperat ad Ledam D. Augustino dicatum: transtulit deinde ad eum ubi nunc
visitur locum precipuus ejus Fundator Jacobus du-Bay e fratre nepos,
similiterque S. Th. Doctor and Decanus D. Petri: hujus denique nepos AEgidius
S. Th. Doctor and Professor, Anno 1614. solemniter aperuit, aedificiis and dote
magnifice auxit.

Divae Pulcheriae, in foro Boario, fundatum bonis auspiciis Lovanii, Anno 1616.
per divisionem cujusdam Fundationis universitatis Coloniensis, magna quotidie
incrementa sumit pia multorum liberalitate.

Ordinis Teutonici, ad vism lapideam exordiebatur Edmondus Huyn ab Anstemraeds
Ord. Tent. Eques and Commendator Provincialis Balivioe Juncesanioe, etc. Anno
1617.

Canonicorum Regularium S. Augustini, in via lapidea juxta S. Jacobum, 1618.
procurantibus Antonio van Berghim Priore in Viride-Valle, and Joanne Petersem
Bethlehemi^^co juxta Lovanium.

Mylianum vulgo Luxemburgense, in via vaccaria, Auctore Joanne Mylio
Luxemburgensi J. V. Doctore, qui ingentem pecuniae summam moriens in hunc finem
reliquerat, tandem stabilitum Lovanii vigesimo tertio a morto Fundatoris anne,
scilicet Dom. 1619.

Hibernicum, in via quae Bakelanica vocatur, Auctoritate Apostolica per sacram
de propag. Fidei Congregationem studio and dote Eugenii Matthoei Archiepise.
Dublinensis, An. 1623. inchoatum.

Alnense, in via quintiniana, per Edmundum Jonvent Chymacensem, Alnae Ord.
Cisterc. Abbatem, pro Monachis ejusdem Coenobii Anno 1626. faelicibus auspiciis
aedjificatum.

Floreffiense, in Bakelanica, Anno 1626. exordia

Joan. Malderi, in via Martiniana, Episcopi Antuerpiensis,

Franc. Hovii, Londerzelii, S. T. L. Pastoris ad Patrimonium Christi. Obiit An.
1633. Ibid. Decembris.

Minimorum, pro Religiosis Ord. S. Francisci de

Beggardorum, pro Religiosis sui Ordinis, Anno

Collegium S. Michaelis fundatum per R. and Eruditissimum

Sequuntur quatuor Paedagogia, ut vocant, in quibus Arts liberales,
Philsophiaque docetur, Academiarum omnium famosissimae Scholae, de quibus hoc
vulgar Tetrastichon:

Quatuor hic inter sese Collegia certant De Sophiae studiis, and vincere
quodque laborat. Porcus alit doctos: volitat super omnia Falco: Castrum bella
gerit: florescunt Lilia primis.

Lilium, in via pagana, cui nomen ab insigni adhaesit, carolus Virulus,
Casletensis, suae aetatis Philosophus faminissimus, postquam annos 6. and 50.
remit officio and vita functus, An. 1493.

Falco, in via, cava a Falcono insigni domus, Regentem and fautorem inter
primos babuit Gasparem Kinschotium Turnhoutanum, qui obitt An. 1488. Pedagogium
hoc fuit ex alio loco, qui hodieque vetus Falco dicitur, translatum a variis
tandem and ipsa Focultate Artium cumulato auctum: sub intela est magnorum
Philosophorum DD. Dionysii Areopagitae and Catharinoe. Industria and
liberalitate D. Claudii Losson, Havraei, S. T. ibidem Regentis ac Professoris,
hac, quae modo visitvr, splendida aedificii structura decoratum, Anno 1636.

Castrum, in via Castrensi, prium vocavit regentem Godefridum van Gompel,
Dessellensem, qui ibidem ante conditam Vniversitatem literas humoniores docuit:
electis Patronis Beatiss Maria, turri fortissima and S. Cornelio Papa Martyr
invincibili.

Porcus, in via Praetoria, structura and frequentia primum, cui hoc nomon
mansit (cum alias Paedagogium Stanedonck audire malit) a domo in via
Praepositi, qua etiamnum ho^ infigue Porci prnefert, cui Pedagogium hoc quondam
oppositum fuit, inchoatum, Auctore Joanne Widoe; ejusque primus Rector suit
Henricus Loen Lovaniensis, vitae sanctitate clarus. Martini Caverenne Regentis
industria splendidis aedificiis adornatum. DD. Antonio and Anne hoc sacrum est,
in quo adhuc humaniores docentur literae: ut etiam in

Vaulxiano, communiter Gandense, in via LongoBrulia dicta, quod initium voto
Francisci Ni^uland Gandensis habuit: dotem a Joanise del-Vaulx, Anno 1593. Item



Felixque augmentum precatur J. O.

The several Faculties are distinguished by their Habits: Divinity-Students
wear constantly Gowns and square Caps; those of other Faculties wear none,
except at their public Exercises in the Schools. The principal Colleges,
called Pedagogies, are four. In these only is Philosophy taught by two
Professors, the one called Primarius, the other Secundarius. Those Students
that are Gentlemen sit in a higher Form, called Scamnum Nobilium; and give each
of them six Gilders quarterly to the Primarius Professor, and two Patacoons to
the Secundarius. Those of inseriour rank who sit in the lower Forms give half
so much to each. The Primarius reads in the morning from half an hour after six
of the clock till half an hour after seven, then they go to Mass till eight,
and after that to their private Studies till ten, then the Professor reads
again till eleven. In the afternoon the Secundarius Professor reads from half
an hour after one, till half an hour after two. He begins again half an hour
after four and reads till half an hour after five. All Students must write
after the Professors in a large Note-Book, and in the intervals of Lectures
peruse and study what they wrote. The Professors Readings are divided into
Dictata, which are Theses or Propositions, and Annotata which are Solutions of
Objections. The first thing they require of Students when they come to this
University is to be matriculated, and swear their Belief of all the Doctrines
of the Romish Church. The Close or End of the Oath is the same with that of our
Universities, Ita me Deus adjuvet and haec sancta Dei Evangelia.

Young Students give their Names to the President of their College or Pedagogy,
and for every time they are absent from Lectures are punished a Stiver, which
is somewhat more than a Penny English. For every time they miss a public
Exercise in Law or Physic they pay three Stivers; if they be to exercise
themselves and miss, they are mulcted twenty Stivers. The Students are not
allowed to wear Swords about the Streets.

The Professors of each Pedagogy choose yearly 12 of the best Scholars who are
of two years standing. These 48 are publicly examined, and out of them about
12 usually chosen to Burses or Exhibitions. The Burses signify their Diet,
Chamber and a greater or less Stipend according as the Burses are. It is very
creditable to be chosen to a Burse. He that is the first of the chosen has a
Bell rung for him in his College 48 hours together without intermission. When
they are thus chosen, they may go into what College they will and study what
they please. They are commonly preferred to Professorships and afterward to
Canons Places. The Degrees here conferred are Batchelour, Licentiate and
Doctor. In Divinity after two years standing they may be Baccalaurei ourrentes,
after another year Baccalaurei formati. Seven years after this they may be
Licentiates in Divinity. They are seldom created Doctors till they attain to 50
years of Age, unless they be very eminent for Learning. Every Bachelor is
called Doctissimus: A Licentiate in Medicine Peritissimus, in Law
Consultissimus, in Divinity Eximius: Doctors of Medicine and Law are
Clarissimi, of Divinity Eximii Domini and Magistri nostri. When any one goes
out Licentiate, there is a Treatment made, to which all the Doctors and the
Opponents are invited, and have Gloves given them. The Graduate is attended
from the Schools with Drums and Trumpets. At his Lodging a Bell is hung up and
rung for 24 hours together. He has liberty to choose a Coat of Arms, and is
immediately reputed a Gentleman.

The men of most note for Learning in this University at present [1663.] are
Gutischovius, Medicinae and Matheseos Professor. Vopiscus Fortunatus Plempius,
Medicinae Professor primarius, called Fortunatus because he was cut out of his
Mothers Womb, as we were informed. Dorlix, Med. Doctor. Sinnichius, Theologiae
Doctor, an Irishman. Pontanus, Theologiae Doctor, Dean of S. Peter's, and
Censor Librorum. Bradhy, an Irishman, Juris Canonici Doctor. Loyens, Juris
Canonici Doctor. Gulinx was Professor of Philosophy here, but is now turned
Protestant, and lives at Leyden: Van Verve, Theol. Professor Prim trius. The
public Schools are old, mean and homely.

May 4. we walked out of Lovain about half a mile to see the D. of Areschot's
Palace, and the Celestines Cloister adjoining. We found among the Corn by the
way-sides as we went, plentifully growing Caryophyllus arvensis umbelliferus J.
B. and Alsine foliis hederaceis Rutae modo divisis Lob. Plauts about Lovain.
both in flower. At this City we first observed Storks, Women-Porters and
Soldiers begging on Horseback.

From Lovain, May 5. we traveled to Mechlin, Malines the French call it,
Mechlin.
a very elegant and well built City, exceeding our expectation both for Beauty
and Greatness. It is the Seat of an Archbishop, and with a small Territory of
nine Villages about it makes one of the seventeen Provinces, called the
Lordship of Mechlin^ The Cathedral Church is dedicated to S. Rumbald. Many
Manufactures exercised here of the most gainful sort, as making of Linen Cloth,
casting of great Artillery and Bells; and which we especially took notice of,
Tanning, there being two or three whole Streets of Tanners.

Hence May 5. we boated to Antwerp, Antwerp
a City for Strength and Beauty comparable to any of its bigness in Europe. For
the latter in my opinion, it much excels Florence, with which it is wont to be
put in competition. And for the former, it is encompassed with a Wall of Earth
faced with Freestone, of that thickness that there are several Rows of Trees
and broad Walks upon it; and with a Ditch of water of a very great depth and
breadth, excepting on that side the River Scheld washes it. So that,
considering also the advantage of its Situation in a low and level Country, it
seemed to me the strongest City in all the Netherlands. The Citadel first built
by the Duke of Alva, and afterward repaired by the Prince of Parma, of a
Pentagonal Figure, serves as well to bridle as defend the Town. The Houses of
Antwerp are for the most part of Brick, some few wooden ones of the ancient
Building here and there remaining, which the Owners are not suffered to repair.
The Chapel of the Jesuits College is very rich and sumptuous. The Steeple of
S. Mary's Church is so curiously built and carved, that the Emperor Charles V.
(as we were told) was wont to say, that it deserved to be kept in a case and
shown only upon Holy Days. The Exchange or Burse was the Pattern after which
our old Royal Exchange was built, but in all respects inferior to it, the Copy
excelling the Original. The Stadthouse is a magnificent Structure. Several
other public Buildings there are that deserve to be viewed, most of which are
represented in the adjoined Map. Plantius Printing House, mentioned by Golnitz
and others, is for a thing of that nature the best we have any where seen. This
City for Trading and Wealth is much decayed since the Low Country Wars. In the
Garden of one Franciscus van Steerbeck a Priest, we saw many rare Plants: Among
others we took more especial notice of Lentiscus, Pistacia, Spiraea
Theophrasti, Barba Jovis frutex, Cerasus nana, Amygdalus nana, Althaea montis
Olbii in Gallo-provincia, Morus fructu albo, Jasminum hederaceum, Lycium, Rosa
sine spinis, Capp^ris leguminosa sive Fabago, Convolvulus heptaphyllus,
Acanthus aculeatus, Esula rara Venetorum, Petroselinum Macedonicum, Daucus
Creticus verus, Convolunlus Althaeae folio, Thapsia latifolia, Ephemerum
Matthioli, Pistolochia Virginiana, Pyrethrum verum, Auricula ursi folio and
flore Boraginis, Sandalida Cretica, Sahdariffae species, Telephium legitimum
Antiquorum, Gnaphalium Americanum flore luteo pleno, Spartum marinum, Laurus
Alexandrina, Absinthium arborescens, Lilium Allobrogum majus, Geranium
tuberosum Hellebori albi tres species seu potius varieetates, Centaurium majus
Helenii folio and Scolymi folio, Coralloides, Vrtica fat^a Virginiana,
Campanula Damascena lactescens flore purpureo and albo.

May 15. we took Boat for Middleburgh; at Lillo a Fort upon the Scheld, Lillo.
three Leagues below Antwerp, belonging to the States of Holland, our Boat was
searched, as are all Vessels going to and from Antwerp. The Wind and Tide
favoring us, we reached Middleburgh before Sunset, having made in all this
day about 54 English miles. Upon the Flats we passed over, at a good distance
from us, we saw several Sea-Calves upon the Sands.

Middleburgh is the capital City of Zealand, large, Middleburgh.
well built, having spacious Streets, populous, full of wealthy Merchants, and
well fortified, as are generally all Cities and Towns of any account in the
United Netherlands. It is situate near the middle of the Isle Walachria, whence
no doubt it took it is Name, and not from Metellus, quasi Metelli Burgum, as
some have fondly imagined. From that side the Island respecting Antwerp is an
artificial Chanel cut up to the Town, capable of Ships of good burden, which
come into the Town, the said Chanel passing through and making Havens in three
or four of the Streets. There are (as we were informed) about twenty Churches
of all sorts in this City, the Lutherans, French, Anabaptists and Jews being
here tolerated and allowed places of public Worship. At the Stadthouse we
observed two Eagles kept, which we were told the Citizens were obliged to by
their Charter, by which they have great Immunities granted them by the
Emperor, as Freedom from Arrests any where but in their own City, etc.

May 16. Flushing.
we walked out to Flushing about two miles and an half distant from
Middleburgh; a Town once cautionary to the English, though not so large nor so
well built as Middleburgh, and having narrow Streets, yet very considerable for
its Strength and Riches, the opportunity of its Situation and convenience of
its Harbor, Ships of good burden coming up into several Streets of the Town
in artificial Channels, and lying there secure from Wind and Weather.

May 19. Vere.
we took another Walk to Vere, called by the Dutch Ter-Vere or Camp-Vere, some
three miles distant from Middleburgh to the Northward; a Town for bigness
inferior to Flushing, well fortified, having two fair Harbors for Ships with
broad Wharfs or Keys within the Walls. We returned back through Armuyden, a
small Town consisting of one Street, yet entrenched about. Here has been
formerly a good Trade driven. By the way we observed the Sea-banks to be faced
with a kind of matting of Rushes or Flags staked down as high as the Tide
usually arises, to defend them from being washed away by the Water.

May 20. Bergen op Zome.
we went by Boat from Middleburgh to Bergen op Zome, passing by Rammekens, a
strong Fort at the Entrance of the Chanel leading to Middleburgh. Bergen is a
place of very great Strength, besides the Wall and Trench, being fortified with
Half Moons, Horn-Works, etc. famous for the notable Resistance it made first to
the Duke of Parma, and afterward to the Marquess Spinola besieging of it, Anno
1622, At our being there it was held with a strong Garrison, consisting of
twelve Companies of Foot, two whereof were English, and two Troops of Horse,
beside four Companies of Townsmen.

May 21. we traveled to Breda, Breda.
eight hours distant from Bergen, for so they reckon or measure their way in
these Countries, by the time they spend in passing it. This Town is
considerable for its bigness, well built and populous; of great Strength, being
encompassed with very thick Walls and Mounts of Earth and two Trenches full of
Water, the one broad and deep: At our Entrance in we passed through two Ports,
and over five Draw-Bridges. It belongs to the Prince of Orange, who has a
Castle and a fair Palace in the Town. Here are maintained in Garrison for
defense of this important Strength thirteen Companies of Foot, two whereof were
English at our being there, and four Troops of Horse. Ever since the Surprise
of this Town by the Truf-Boat, it is the Custom to search all Boats laden with
Commodities that enter here by stabbing them through in sundry places with a
Spit.

May 22. we traveled from Breda first to S. Gertrudenberg, S. Gertrudenberg.
belonging to the States, no great Town, but well fortified and entrencht,
garrisoned by three Companies of Foot, one whereof was English, and a Troop of
Horse: and from Gertrudenberg the same day by water to Dordrecht or Dort, Dort.
a large City, very rich and populous, well built with tall Houses of Brick,
not inferior to those of Antwerp. The Streets elegantly paved, in the middle
with Stone, and on each side next the houses with Brick set edgeways, so clean
that a man may walk them in Slippers without wetting his foot in the midst of
Winter. Thus paved and thus cleanly kept are the Streets of all the Cities and
great Towns in Holland. The English Merchants have great Privileges, and keep
their Court in this Town. Here are two English Churches and one French. From
the Tower of the principal Church we had a fair Prospect of the City and
Country adjacent, the Steeple of Breda coming into view. In one of the upper
Rooms of the Gunners Doel or Guild sat the Synod assembled here, Anno 1611.
The Seats round about are still remaining.

May 23. we took places in one of the Passage-Boats that go off several times
daily to Roterdam, Roterdam.
some three Leagues distant from Dort, which brought us thither in five hours.
Roterdam is of a triangular Figure, and much larger than I thought it to have
been. It equals if not exceeds any City in Holland except Amsterdam and perhaps
Leyden. It has been lately much augmented by the addition of many Streets of
new buildings. Near the principal Church dedicated to S. Laurence is a little
House where Erasmus was born, over the door of which is placed his Picture, and
on one side of that this Distich written, Aedibus his ortus mundum decoravit
Erasmus
Artibus ingenuis, relligione, fide.
Under it in Spanish this, En esta casa es nacido Erasmo Theologo celebrado,
Par doctrina sennalado, la pura fee nos a revelado.
And in Latin this, Fatalis series nobis invidit Erasmum,
At Desiderium tollere non potuit.


In a large Piazza stands a stately Brass Statue erected to his Memory, with
the Figure of a Book of the same Metal in its hand, and in the posture of
turning over a Leaf, of which in drollery the People say, that every time it
hears the Clock strike, it turns over a Leaf. The Citizens of Roterdam
exercise no Handicraft or Manufacture to trade withal, but all their Riches
proceed from their Sea-Trade and Merchandise. They have a very good Port, Ships
of great Burden coming up in deep Channels into the very Town: where they lie
secure from all danger, and lade and unlade their Commodities at the Merchants
doors. The Government is by a President, four Burgomasters, and twenty four
Magistrates or Senators, which they call the Vroetschap. These choose all
public Officers out of their own number. Themselves continue in place during
life, and when any one dies, the rest choose out of the Citizens another into
his room. So that the People have no interest or share at all in the
Government. The form of Government is most what the same in all the other
Cities and Towns of Holland, only the number of Counselors or the Vroetschap
is in some more, in some less.

Every hour of the day at the ringing of a Bell goes off a Passage-Boat, Delft.
somewhat like our Pleasure-Barges on the Thames, to Delft. We took places in
one of these, May 25. which in two hours time brought us to Delft, three Dutch
miles. This is also a large City, fair and well built, water runs through many
of the Streets. The Stadthouse is a very handsome Structure. Here are two large
Churches, the one called the old, the other the new Kirk. In the middle of the
Quire of the new Kirk is a stately Monument erected to the Memory of Grave
William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange (who was assassinated here) with this
Inscription: D. O. M.

In the Quire of the old Kirk is a Monument to Van Trump with this Inscription:
Aeternae Memoriae. Martinus Harperti Quo nomine plures continentur lauds quam
hic lapis capit sane angustior, Et cui Schola Oriens and Occidens, mare materia
triumphorum, universus Orbis theatrum gloriae fuit: praedonum certa pernicies,
commercii felix assertor, familiaritate utilis non vilis, postquam nautas ac
milites durum genus paterno and cum efficacia benigno rexit imperio, post L
praelia quorum Dux fuit aut pars magna, post insignes supra fidem victorias,
post summos infra meritum honores, tandem bello Anglico tan^um non victor,
certe invictus, X. Aug. Anno Aerie Christianae MDVCLIII. Aet. LVI. vivere ac
vincere desiit. Foederati Belgii Patres Heroi optime merito M. P.

Over his Arms this written, i. e. Delphi.
Vrbs Phoebi cineres jactat, sed currus Phoebinimirum seu Solis.
honores

One Jean vander Mere an Apothecary in this Town has a Musaeum well stored
with natural and artificial Rarities, which we viewed, and therein observed
among many bother things the following particulars. Zibetta or the Civet Cat.
Dens Hippopotami, as he pretended, though it be a Question whether or no there
be any such Animal as the Hippopotamus, Dentes Phocoe, Cornu Gazellae, of these
we have since that seen in several Cabinets, Costa Sirenis dicta, Cornua hirci
Bezoardici, Cornua and pedes Alcis; This Animal in English we call an Elk, I
take it to be the same which in New England and Virginia they call a Moose, it
is of the Deer-kind, the biggest and tallest of that genus. The Horns have no
Brow-Antlets, but only a broad palm with several Snags upon it. I have seen one
of these Horns at Mr. Holney's an Apothecary in Lewis that weighed 25 pounds:
The Skin of an Elk stuffed we saw in the Great Duke's Gallery at Florence.
Cornucervi Americani. The Rattle-Snakes Skin. An Elephants Tail, a very small
thing considering the bigness of the Animal. Lacertus Indicus squamosus. Acus
piscis 4 species. A piece of a Rhinocerot's Skin. At the Anatomical Theater we
saw the whole Skin of a young Rhinocerot stuffed. The Head of a Dolphin. A Giants
tooth, si credere fas sit. The Head of a horned Hare. A Chamaeleon. A
Soland-Goose out of Groenland. A Tatou or Armadillo. Os petrosum Balaenae. A
young Whale. A Morse or Sea-horses Head. Guaina, a Fish from the Island
Mauritius. Petim-buaba or the Tobacco-pipe Fish. Orbis echinatus. Cancer
Moluccanus ex novo Belgio, which some call the Sea-Spider. Corallium nigrum
sive Antipathes. Spongia infundibuli specie. Mustela Africana. Indian Habits,
an Indian Saddle, several sorts of Indian Bread, Indian Dice, several ancient
Idols. The Cup Prince William of Nassaw last drank out of. Penecillum Sinense.
A Japan Letter written to the Dutch Governor, odly painted. Passer
Brasiliensis. Several sorts of Tominio's or humming Birds. A Feather-Garment
from the Streights of Mageliane. Siliqua arboris sacciferae. Nidus avis ex
Surat. Cancer Americanus. Many sorts of Indian Tobacco-Pipes from New Belgium.
A Dart from Fretum Davis, wherewith the Natives kill Fish. A Locust of that
sort that S. J. Baptist ate in the Wilderness. Onocrotali caput. Rostrum
Rhinocerotis avis sive Corvi Indici cornuti of Bontius, which is worth twelve
Florens at Amsterdam. A Cassawaries or Emeus Egg. A Pelecans Skin and Bill.
Many sorts of Indian Weapons from Brasil. Eggs of an Indian Goose. Cor Veneris
[a Shell like a Nerites.] Star-Stones from Compostella. Several Indian and
exotic Fruits and Seeds. Putorius Africanus with Hairs spotted like the Quills
of a Porcupine.

In this City is a Chirurgical and Anatomical Theater, where Lectures are read
every Wednesday, and several Rarities preserved, as the Skin of a young
Rhinocerot stuffed, beforementioned. Lacertus squamosus of a different kind from
what we had before seen. Manucodiatae seu avis Paradisi nova species. A flying
Squirrel. The Sceleton of a Dolphin. The Tail of an Indian Peacock. The Head of
an Elephant. The Horns of a Hare. The Head of a Babiroussa; it has two long
Tushes on the lower Jaw, and on the upper two Horns that come out a little
above the Teeth and turn up toward the Eyes. In the Entry below hangs a
Groenland man in his Boat, of which we have seen in several places,
particularly in the Trinity-House at Hull.

This Town is noted for good earthen Ware, as Stone-Jugs, Pots, etc. of which
great Plenty is made here. The Government is by a Praetor, two Burgomasters,
seven Eschevins, and forty Senators, which they call here as in other Towns of
Holland, the Vroetschap.

May 28. we went by Boat in an hours time from Delf to the Hague, Hague.
which though not walled about is rather a great City than a Village. It has
fair Streets, stately and beautiful Houses, especially about the Palace where
the States sit. Near this Town is a large Grove full of pleasant Walks; where
we first observed Monophyllum growing wild in great plenty. At Scheveling a
Village by the Seaside, a mile from the Hague, we found a sort of Spartum
maritimum much taller and larger than our English kind.

From the Hague we made an excursion to a Village called Lausdun, Lausdun.
distant about an hour and halfs riding, famous for the Burial of the Countess
of Zealand and her 365 Children. The two Brass Basins in which they are
reported to have been baptized hang up still in this Church, an over them this
Inscription, which contains the History.

En tibi monstrosum nimis and memorabile factum,

Margarita Hermanni Comitis. Hennenbergiae Vxor Quarti Florenti Comitis
Hollandiae and Zelandiae Filia, Gulielmi Regis Romanorum ac postea Caesaris seu
gubernatoris Imperii atque Aletheiae Comitis Hannoniae Soror; cujus Patruus
Episcopus Trajectensis, Avun^uli autem filius Dux Brabantiae, and Comes
Thuringiae, etc. Haec autem illustrissima Comitissa, annos quadraginta circiter
nata, ipso die Parasceues, nonam circiter horam, Anno 1276. 365 enixa est
pueros, qui prius a Guidone Suffraganeo Trajectensi omnes in duabus ex aere
pelvibus baptizali sunt, quorum masculi quotquot erant Joannes, puellae autem
omnes Elizabethae vocatae sunt, qui simul omnes cum matre uno eodemque die
fatis concesserunt, atque in hoc Lat^sdunensi templo sepulti jacent. Quod
quidem accidit ob^ pouperculam quandam foeminam, quae ex uno partu gemellos in
ulnis gestabat pueros, quam rem ipsa Comitissa admirata dicebat, id per unum
virum fieri non posse, ipsamque contumeliose rejecit; unde hae^ paupercula
animo perturbata atque perculsa, mox tantum prolium numerum ex uno partu ipsi
imprecabatur, quot vel totius anni dies numerentur. Quod quidem praeter naturae
cursunt obstupenda quadam ratione ita factum est, sicut in hac tabula in
perpetuam hujus rei memoriam, ex vetustis tam manuscriptis quam typis excusis
Chronicis breviter positum and enarratum est. Deus ille ter maximus hac de re
suspiciendus, honorandus ac laudibus extollendus in sempiterna secula. Amen.

May 31. we took places in one of the Passage Boats from the Hague to Leyden,
Leyden.
which brought us thither in three hours. These Boats are drawn to and fro by
Horses. Leyden is next to Amsterdam I think the greatest City in Holland; and
well built. In the great Church dedicated to S. Peter, are many Monuments set
up to the Memory of persons eminent for Learning, as Heurnius the famous
Physician, Bontius, Tho. Erpenius, Rembertus Dodonaeus, Antonius Thysius,
Festus Hommius, Everardus Bronckhorst, and others, their Inscriptions you may
find in Hegenitius his Itinerarium Hollandiae. In the French Church lie buried
Joseph Scaliger, Carolus Clusius, Willebrordus Snellius and Joannes Polyander a
Kerckhove.

The Schools are Pile of Building of Brick, three Stories high, containing two
Rooms on a Floor. The lower two are the Divinity and Physic Schools. The
middle the Law and Philosophy Schools. The uppermost or Garrets are the
Officina Elzeviriana. The following Series Lectionum (of which sort there is
one yearly printed and affixed to the School-gates) will give an account, what
were the Names of the Professors in each Faculty at the time of our being
there, and what Books and at what hours they read.

Rector and Senatus Academiae Lugduno-Bat.
Lectori Salutem.
CVmin constitutione Academiarum nihil magis spectetur, quam Lectionum series,
quae in omni Facultate hybernis and aestivis temporibus habentur: visum nobis
fuit, ut de his non nostris tantum, sed and exteris constaret, brevem indicem
earum, and tabellam quasi dare: ut qui Academiae hujus nostrae celebritatem
apud alios commemorari audiunt, quid in ea doceatur, intelligant, priusquam ad
eam accedant: aut potius ut accedant, cultumque animi in ea percipiant.

Ordo LECTIONUM Aestivarum in Academia Batava Leidensi. Anno 1663.
MANE.
HORA OCTAVA.
D. Joannes van Horn, Anat. and Chir. Profess. ord. in Institutionibus
Medicinae praelegit Methodum Medendi.
HORA NONA.
D. Joannes Cocceius, SS. Theol. Doct. and Professor, Epistolam Pauli ad
Philippenses succincte explicat. D. Albertus Rusius, J. V. D. and Prof.
Institutiones Juris interpretatur. D. Jacobus Golius, Prof. Matheseos, Element^
Astronomica exponit.
HORA DECIMA.
D. Abrahamus Heidanus, SS. Theol. Doct. and Professor, locos communes
profitetur. D. Daniel Colonius, J. V. D. and Professor, Academiae a Secretis,
Codicem interpretatur. D. Adolfus Vorstius, Med. Doct. and Professor primarius,
interpretatur Aphorismos Hippocratis. D. Henricus Bornius, Philosophiae
Professor, Studiorum Celsissimi Arausionensium Principis Ephorus; Ethicam
profitetur. D. David Stuartus, L. A. M. SS. Theol. Doctor and Philosophiae
Professor Logices Praecepta and Quaestiones illustres Metaphysicas, alternis
interpretarur.
HORA UNDECIMA.
D. Joh. Antonides vander Linden, Doct. and Professor Medicinae Practicae
primus, Morbos particulares cognoscendi and curandi methodum juxta Rationalis
Medicinoe praecepta tradit. D. Antonius Thysius, J. V. D. and Eloquentiae
Professor, Illustriss. and Praepot. D. D. Ordinum Holland. and West Fris.
Historicus, and Bibliothecoe publicae proefectus, ad Pomponium Melam
memorabilia totius terrarum orbis exponit. Diebus autem Mercurii and Saturni
Jus publicum interpretatur.
A MERIDIE.
HORA PRIMA.
D. Jacobus Golius, in Arabicis Alcoranum interpretatur, and ubi opus est
refutat. D. Johannes Fredericus Gronovius, J. V. D. and Linguae Graecae
Groecarumque Historiarum Professor, alteruis Herodianum and Historiam Romanam
recitabit.
HORA SECUNDA.
D. Johannes Hoornbeek, SS. Theol. Doctor and Professor, librum Mosis explicat,
Leviticum. D. Adrianus Beeckerts a Thierien, J. V. D. and Professor, Acad. in
praesens Rector, Pandectas interpretatur. D. Franciscus de le Boe, Sylvius,
Medicinoe practic^ Professor, Affectus graviorts, frequenti^sve in Praxi Mediea
obvenienies tractat.
HORA TERTIA.
D. Allardus Uchtmannus, Hebr. Ling. Professor, Pentateuchi capita selecta and
difficiliora interpretabitur in Genesi, and Hebraeam Grammaticam. D. Georgius
Hornius, Historiarum Prof. alternatim C. Tacitum and Historiam Vniversalem
interpretatur.
HORA QUARTA.
D. Stephanus Merchant, J. V. D. and Prof. Institutiones Juris interpretatur.
D. Joannes de Raei, L. A. M. Medicinoe Doctor and Philosophiae Professor
ordinar. profitetur Physicam. D. Adolfus Vorstius, Medicinae and Botanices
Professor primarius, Plantas in Horto Acad. demonstrat. D. Petrus a Schooten,
Math. Prof. Belgicus, Fortificationem exponit, deinde Perspectivam, tum
communem, tum curiosam, ejusque in Cosmographia and Gnomonicis usum scientifice
est explicaturus: Hora undecima loco solito.
D. Johannes Antonides vander Linden, Med. practicae Professor primus, alternis
trimestribus in publico Nosocomio Studiosos Medicinae singulis septimanis
aliquoties in aegrotorum visitationibus, and morborum, qui sese offerunt,
cognoscendi atque curandi ratione instruit, causasque mortis in cadaveribus
dissectis ad oculatam, quantum fieri potest, fidem demonstrat.

D. Franciscus de le Boe, Sylvius, Medicinae Practicae Professor in Nosocomio
publico trimestribus alternis, diebus singulis, exceptis Dominicis, Studiosos
Medicinae in Morborum dignotione per sua signa, cognitione per suas causas, and
curatione per sua indicata exercet, atque sic ad praxin manuducit. Quicquid
autem de partibus vere affectis and eausis affectuum latentibus capi sensibus
potert, id omne in demortuorum sectione rimatur and patefacit.

Exercitia Anatomica publica fient mensibus Hybernis a D. Joanne van Horn,
Anatomes and Chirurgiae Professore Ordinario.

D. Antonius Thysius, Eloquentiae Professor, Collegium Oratorium publicum
instituit.

D. Henricus Bornius, Philosophiae Professor, Studiorum Celsissimi
Arausionensium Principis Ephorus, in omni Philosophiae part Collegia habet and
Disputationes, ac in illustr. V. H. Grotii lib. de Jure Belli ac Pacis
Exercitationes instituit.

D. Johannes Fredericus Gronovius Graecae Linguae and Gr^^carum Historiarum
Professor, Graecos and Latinos auctores antiquos, quos studiosi desiderabunt,
privatis Collegiis interpretabitur.

Ex Authoritate publica, diebus Mercurii and Saturni, Georgio Hornio Collegii
Oratorii publici Praeside, in omnis generis and illustris argumenti
Orationibus, ut and disputationibus Politicis habendis, public exercere se
possunt, quotquot illis studlis operam suam addixerunt.

D. David Stuartus Philosophiae Professor Collegia Explicatoria, Examinatoria
and Disputatoria per totam Philosophiam auspicatur ter in anno, mense videl.
Sept. Jan. April. eaque trimestri constanter absolvit; ut Academica juventus
Philosophiae stadium saepius decurrat a^^ispatio. Disputationes etiam publicas
de illustribus materiis habet, cum praesto sunt Respondentes, singulis
septimanis.

Adjoining to the School-Yard is the PhysickGarden, a Square of less than an
Acre of Ground, but well stored with Plants, of which there have been at sundry
times several Catalogues printed. Here are no Colleges for Students to live in,
as in our Universities, (excepting two of the nature of Hospitals for the
maintenance only of poor Scholar^) but the Students live in private Lodgings in
the Town, where they can best provide themselves. No Scholastical Habits as
Gowns or Caps worn by any of the Students, but they walk up and down, come to
the Schools, and perform their Exercises in Cloaks. The Professors when they
read Lectures or preside at Disputations wear Gowns. No capping Professors or
University-Officers in the public Schools, but all the Students are covered
both at Lectures and Disputations, not only in the University, but in all the
Universities we have been at beyond the Seas. If an desire to be admitted of
the University, they go to the Rector magnificus, who gives them each a Seal,
and then they are freed from paying Exeise. The Students usually list
themselves under some Professor, who reads to them in private, running through
a whole Faculty, which they call Collegium instituere, and for this they give a
Gratuity to the Professor. In conferring Degrees here is no Respect had to
Standing. When any one intends to commence in any Faculty, he makes Theses upon
the Subject he intends to answer, which Theses are printed, and these he is
obliged to defend against all Opponents. The Respondent has his Seat under the
Prosessors, as in our Schools: for the Opponents there is no particular Seat,
but in any part of the Schools where they happen to be, they arise and there
stand and oppose, first asking leave of the Professor that presides at the Act.
Any one that pleases may oppose with the Professors leave. Liberalium Artium
Magister and Doctor are the only Degrees conferred here. Each of the Professors
have 200 or 300 l. per an. stipend allowed them by the States.

The chief Trade of this City is Clothing. The Roofs of the Houses are more
steep than ordinary, made so on purpose to cast the Rainwater into a Chanel or
Trough, which conveys it into a large Cistern, where it is kept for the uses of
the House. Great Channels of Water pass through many of the Streets. On the
Tower of the Stadthouse stands a Watchman, who blows a Trumpet every hour, and
if any Fire happens he sounds an Alarm. Below stands a Guard of thirty armed
Soldiers, and at each Port ten. Every hour of the night a man goes about the
Streets, and making a noise with a Rapper, tells with a loud voice what of the
Clock it is. In the Anatomical Theater are preserved many Sceletons of Men and
Beasts, Skins of Beasts, parts of exotic Animals, and other Rarities. We noted
a horned Beetle from the East Indies; an Armadillo; petrified Mushromes; Lapis
ceraunias; Caput porci fluviatilis e Brasilia Ala Hirundinis marinae ex Oceano
Orientali; Gammari Aethiopici; Thus fossile Moravicum; Capsula Chinensis cum
capite animalis partim cervinam, partim porcinam naturam repraesentante ex
insula Celebes Indiae Orientalis; Niduli crustacei ex cautibus regni Jehovae,
quae a Chinensibus in deliciis habentur, these we saw afterward in Kircher's
Musaeum at Rome and elsewhere; Folium Betle sive Siri, it resembles the great
Satyrion Leaf: Of these Leaves and the Fruit of the Tree Arek mingled with a
little Chalk is made the Indian Betle which is very stomachical and a great
Regale at visits. Faba Aegyptia sive Bonamicia; Elephants Skulls; Guandur
formicas vorans or the Ant-Bear, Myrenceter, bigger than an Otter, having a
very long Snout, long crooked Claws, coarse bristly Hair, and a long brush
Tail; Grallae sive Calopodia Norvegica; a Fish with two Feet; Capriscus
Rondeletii, Tigris capta in Jacatra regno. In the public Library are preserved
the Manuscripts of Joseph Scaliger, and Libri Orientales quos Vir Cl. Jacobus
Golius impensis publicis ex Orient huc advexit. This Town is well walled and
trencht about, encompassed with pleasant Walks of Lime-Trees. He that desires
more particular Information concerning the University and public Buildings of
the City, etc. may consult Meursius his Athenae Batavae and Hegenitius his
Itinerarium Hollandiae.

Before we left Leyden we made a by-Journey to Sevenhuys, Sevenhuys.
a Village about four leagues distant, to see a remarkable Grove, where in time
of year several sorts of Wild-Fowl build and breed. We observed there in great
numbers (1.) Scholfers i. e. Gracculi palmipedes, in England we call them
Shags, they are very like to Cormorants, only less. We were much surprised to
see them, being a whole-footed Bird, alight and build upon Trees. (2.)
Lepelaers, called by Gesner Plateoe sive Pelecani, by Aldrovandus Albardeolae,
we may term them in English Spoon-Bills. (3.) Quacks or Ardeae cinereae
minores, the Germans call this Bird the Night-raven, because it makes a noise
in the Night, Nocte clamat voce absona and tanquam vomiturientis. Gesner. (4.)
Reyers or Herons. Each sort of Fowl has its several Quarter. When the young
are ripe, they who farm the Grove with an Iron Hook fastened to the end of a
long Pole lay hold on the Bough on which the Nest is built, and shake the young
ones out, and sometimes Nest and all down to the ground. Besides the
forementioned Birds there build also in this Wood Ravens, Wood-Pigeons and
Turtle-Doves. This place is rented for 3000 Gilders per Annum of the Baron of
Pelemberg, who lives at Lovain, only for the Birds and Grass. By the way to
this Place we observed in the Ditches Lysimachia lutea flore globoso, and Arum
sive Dracunculus aquaticus. All the Country about Sevenhuys toward Leyden is
a flat or fenny Level, full of shallow Pools of Water; there we observed their
manner of making Turf. They rake or fish up Mud from the bottom of the Water
with a Net like a Hoop-Net fastened to the end of a Pole, and fill therewith a
flat-bottomed Boat. Out of the Boat they throw this Mud with a long Shovel or
Scoop on an even piece of ground, making of it a Bed of an equal thickness so
near as they can; there it lies to drain and dry: After a while they tread it
with broad Boards fastened under their feet to make it close and smooth. When it
is moderately dry, they cut the whole Bed with a kind of Spade into pieces of
the bigness of a Brick. These they pile up in small conical Stacks or long
Ranks, laying the Turves so, that a man may see through the Stacks, and the
Wind blow through them, to be further dried. At last they house them in Barns
that are thatcht, the sides not walled up close, but made of wooden Bars set at
a little distance one from another.

June 6. we took Boat for Haerlem, Haerlem.
where we arrived at four hours end. This is a large, populous and pleasant
City, strongly walled and entrenched. Water is brought through many of the
Streets. Without the Walls toward Leyden are pleasant Groves. In the
Summer House in the Garden of the Princes Court here, is a Picture of
Laurentius Costerus, in a furred Gown, holding the Letter A in his Hand, and
this Inscription over it, M. S. Viro Consulari, Laurentio Costero Harlemensi
alteri Cadmo, and Artis Typographicae circa Annum Domini MCCCCXXXX Inventori
primo.

His Statue and the Inscription on his House in the Marketplace, mentioned by
Hegenitius, we could not find, being as we were told, lately bought and removed
thence. The Butchery of this Town is a handsome Building and covered with Lead,
which we thought not unworthy the notice-taking, it having been the first
public Building that we saw so rooft since we left England. The Citizens here
drive a great Trade of Weaving as well Silks, v. g. Damask, Velvet, Satin,
Taffaty, etc. as Linen Cloth, Tiffany, Holland, etc. On the Seacoast near
Haerlem and all along North-Holland, are great sandy Hills or Downs, which are
a great defense to the Country hereabout against the Encroachments of the Sea.

June 8. From Haerlem we boated to Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
two hours distant.^ About the midway we passed by two great Mears where we
changed our Boat. At the Port of Amsterdam stand two armed Soldiers, one
within, the other without. This is the greatest City in all the Low Countries,
and one of the richest and best traded Empories of the whole World. At our
being there we judged it to be about the bigness of Venice, and lesser than one
half of London; but they had then taken in and enclosed with a substantial Wall
and Trench, a great space of Ground, wherein they had designed and set out
Streets, with intention to make their City for bigness also comparable with the
best of Europe, London and Paris not excepted. I hear since, that this void
Ground is filled with Rows of stately and beautiful Houses. The public
Buildings we especially took notice of were, (1.) The New Stadthouse lately
erected, the old one having been burnt down to the Ground in three hours space
(as we were told) June 7, 1651. but (as I find it in the Printed Description of
Amsterdam) in July 1652. This is a magnificent Pile of Building, of a square
figure, large and tall. The Outside or Facing of the Walls round about is of
Freestone, the body of the Walls of Brick. It is reported, that the Foundation
of this Structure under ground cost as much as the Superficies above ground,
viz. 100000 l. sterling. The Describer of Amsterdam says, that it stands
upon 13659 great Masts or Piles driven into the ground. (2.) The Burse or
Exchange, like our old Royal Exchange at London, but not a perfect Square,
being longer than it is broad. The first Stone of this Building wad laid May
29, 1608. and the first meeting of the Merchants there August 1, 1613.
Merchants of all Nations resort thither, but of all Strangers the Jews are the
most numerous, who fill one Walk. (3.) The Admiralty-House, a handsome Building
with fair Rooms. (4.) The Magazine, and (5.) the several Hospitals and Houses
of Correction. In this City is an Athenaeum or Schola illustris, in which are
maintained six Professors, who read public Lectures in several Faculties in
Summertime. Here is also a public Physick-Garden. The Jews are here allowed
the free and open Exercise of their Religious Worship. They live together in
one Quarter of the City, and are said to be in number about 20000 souls. They
are in better condition and richer than in most places where they are
tolerated. They are for the most part of a dark or tawny Complexion and have
black hair. Not only the Jewish but all other Religions, the Romish not
excepted, are here tolerated. But if any beside those of the State-Religion
build Churches, they are prohibited to erect Steeples, or make use of Bells for
the assembling of the Pople. In the new Church is a handsome Monument to John
van Galen, with this Inscription: Generosissimo Heroi die post Victoriam, annos
natus XLVIII obiit, ut in secula per gloriam viveret.

Illustriss. and Praepotent. Foederati Belgii



In this Church is a stately Pulpit said to have cost 1000 l. sterling the
building. We were told that in this City there were 24 Ministers pensioned by
the States.

The Government is by a Scout or Praetor, The Government of Amsterdam.
four Burgomasters, nine and Scabins, and 36 Counselors, or Senators, which
they call the Vroetschap. The Scout is Stadtholder of Holland, ad has the
first place in the Bench of Scabins. He is chosen to this Office by the
Burgomasters with the consent and approbation of the Vroetschap for three
years: though he may continue in Office six or more, if they see good. He must
have been a Freeman at least seven years fore he be chosen. His Office is with
the Burgomasters and Scabins to make Laws and Constitutions: to apprehend and
imprison all Malefactors within the Liberties of the City. He, as chief Judge
in civil as well as criminal Causes, hears the Pleadings, and with consent of
the Burgomasters Scabins pronounces Sentence, condemning the guilty to Death,
if the Cause require, and taking care that the Sentence be executed. In other
Cities the Praetor has to do only in criminal Causes, being no more than the
Commonwealths Solicitor or public Accuser and Prosecutor of Malefactors.

The number of Burgomasters is twelve, whereof four are regent yearly. They
must not be under forty years of age. Every year by the major Vote of all the
Burgomasters that have ever been Scabins, three out of the twelve are chosen to
be Regents, which three newly elect take to themselves a fourth out of the
three chosen the year before, who gives the three new ones their Oaths, and
has the Presidency the three first Months. Out of the other eight are other
Officers chosen, as Treasurers, Masters of Hospitals; one for the Convention of
the States at the Hague; one for the Council of the Admiralty in Amsterdam,
etc. The Burgomasters Office is to govern the City, to arbitrate differences
between man and man, to take care of the Streets, Walls, Houses and public
Buildings, etc. When one of the twelve dies, another is chosen into his room by
the Vroetschap. As for the Scabins, the Vroetschap choose fourteen persons, out
of which the Burgomasters take seven; but so that none of them be near of kin
to the Scout or the Regent Burgomasters. To these seven the new and old
Burgomasters with the new chosen Scabins do by most voices add two out of the
seven that were chosen the last year; the which two for that year are the first
and second Presidents. The Scabins are Judges in all Causes civil and criminal.

The Council of 36 or Vroe^schap continue in place during Life, and when one
dies the rest choose another into his room, but none under 25 years of age. This
Council chooses the fourteen Scabins, and is assembled upon important occasions
by the Burgomasters for their Advice and Direction in the weighty Affairs and
Concerns of the City. The Supreme Power seems chiefly to rest in these.

Formerly none was capable of being Burgomaster except his Father had been a
Freeman a year and six weeks before he was born; but of late they have made a
Constitution, that he who will pay five hundred Gilders, may be made free of
the City, and capable of being Burgomaster after seven years. Any one may be
made a Freeman for fifty Gilders, but then he shall never be capable of being
chosen Burgomaster.

The Describer of Amsterdam says that there were in that City 18 years ago
54000 Houses, whereas in Paris there were then but 46000, which is a thing by
no means to be credited.

The Militia of Amsterdam consists of 54 Companies divided into five Regiments,
each containing eleven Companies, and every Company consisting of 150 men, so
that the whole amounts to 8250. Two Companies watch every night for the guard
of the City.

June 16. we took Boat for Vtrecht, Vtrecht.
where we arrived at six hours end. This is a great Town and the head of a
Province, environed with a thick and high Wall and a deep Trench. The Streets
and Buildings far short of the Elegancy, Beauty and Cleanliness of those in
Holland; much like the Houses and Streets of our English Towns. Water runs
through many of the Streets in deep Channels. The Domo or Cathedral Church has
a great tall Tower, ascended by 460 Steps, from whence we had a fair Prospect
of the City and Country round about. Here is an University erected by the
States of the United Provinces in the year 1636. Who were the Professors in
each Faculty at the time of our being here, the following Series Lectionum will
acquaint the Reader.

Series Lectionum in Acad. Ultrajectina, Anno Christi M.DC.LXIII. Priore
Semestri.
MANE, HORA OCTAVA.
D. Antonius Matthaeus, J. V. D. and Professor, diebus Lunae and Martis
Institutiones, Jovis autem and Veneris Selectiores Pandectarum titulos
interpretabitur.

D. Regnerus a Mansvelt, Philosophiae Doctor, Logices and Metaphysices
Professor, diebus Lunae and Martis Logic^m cum quaestionibus Metaphysicis;
Jovis vero and Veneris, Naturalem Theologiam docebit.

HORA NONA.
D. Cyprianus Regnerus ab Oosterga, J. V. D. and Professor, Codicem Academica
and Forensi explicatione explanabit.

D. Henricus Regius, Eques Auratus and Medicinae Professor Primarius, suos
Medicinoe Medicationumque libros interpretabitur; and di^bus Veneris Stirpium
demonstrationes in Horto Publico instituet.

D. Daniel Berckringer, L. A. M. and Philosophiae practicoe atque Eloquentioe
Professor, diebus Lunae and Martis Institutiones suas Ethicas, Jovis vero and
Veneris Politicas, cursorie interpretabitur.

HORA DECIMA.
D. Gisbertus Voctius, SS. Theologiae Doctor and Professor, diebus Jovis and
Veneris perget in explicatione Politicae Ecclesiasticoe; diebus vero Lunae and
Martis, in Explicatione prioris partis Locorum Communium.

D. Isbrandus de Diemerbroeck, Med. Doct. ac Medicinae Practieae and Anatomes
Professor, diebus Lunae and Veneris in Academia explicabit Historias morborum
capitis, quibus absolutis, perget ad Historias morborum thoracis, diebus Martis
and Jovis in Nosocomio decumbentes aegrotos inviset, eorumque examen and
medicationem docebit, ac praxeos specimina exhibebit. Demonstrationes vero
anatomicas in theatro publico instituet, quum subjecti humani copia dabitur.

HORA UNDECIMA.
D. Andreas Essenius, S. Theologiae ac Philosophiae Doctor, illius Professor,
diebus, Lunae, Martis, and Jovis Controversias tractabit ad selecta loca V. T.
Veneris quoque Historiam Ecclesiasticam saeculi Christiani duodecimi, enarrabit.

D Johannes Georgius Graevius, Philosophiae Doctor, Historiarum and Eloquentiae
Professor, diebus Lunae, Martis and Jovis explicabit C. Taciti Annals, die
vero Veneris Ciceronis orationem pro Milone.

A MERIDIE, HORA PRIMA.
D. Paulus Voet, J. V. D. and Professor, Juris Pandectas continuata serie,
interpretabitur.

D. Johannes Leusden, L. A. M. and Linguae Sanctae Professor, diebus Lunoe,
Martis and Jovis explicabit Psalmos Hebraioos; diebus vero Veneris
interpretabitur Rabbinum aliquem, vel selectos and difficiliores 564 versus
Psalterii, in quibus omnes ejus voces and pleraeque radices V. T. continentur.
Post explicationem textualem semper addet quaestiones Philologicas,
concernontes Phi^ologiam Hebraicam, Controversias and Ritus Judaeorum and
quidem eo ordine, quo eoe post invicem describuntur in Spicilegio Philologico.

HORA SECUNDA.
D. Franciscus Burmannus, SS. Theologiae Doctor and Professor, diebus Lunae and
Martis Euangelistam Matthaeum cum necessariis quoestionibus and
observationiobus, qua poteri^ brevitate, enarrabit; diebus vero Jovis and
Veneris Oeconomiam salutis humanae sub Foedere Vet. ac Novo tractabit.

D. Johannes de Bruyn, L. A. M. Physicae and Matheseos Professor, and p. t.
Academiae Rector, diebus Lunae and Martis in Pbysicis lectionibus perget; Jovis
vero and Veneris continuabit explicationem fundamentorum Mechanicorum.

De Here Hugo Ruys, sal Woensdaeghs en Saterdaeghs van Elftot Twaelf uyren inde
Fortificatie continueren.

The Garrison consisted of eight Companies of Soldiers, whereof one was
English. The Government is by an upper and under Scout, and four Burgomasters,
whereof two new chosen yearly.

June 18. we went by Boat to Vianen, Vianen.
passing over a Branch of the River Rhene called the Lech. This is a privileged
Town, walled and trench'd about, subject to the Lord of Brederode. Here we
noted an Engine or wheel for the weaving of Inkle and Tape, which moves many
Shuttles at once. The same day we traveled on to Leerdam, Leerdam
three hours distant from Vianen, a small inconsiderable Town, belonging to the
Prince of Orange.

June 19. we passed through Asperen Asperen.
a small walled Town, and further on ferried over the River Wale (Vahalis in
Latin) to a pretty pleasant walled Town called Bommel standing in an Island.
Bommel.


Here lay in Garrison four Companies of Soldiers, whereof one of Scotchmen.

Not far from hence we ferried over the Mose, and passed by a strong Fort nigh
the Water called Crevecoeur, Crevecoeur.
and not much further another called Engelen, and after four hours came to the
Bosch, The Bosch.
Hertogenbosch the Dutch call it, and the French Bois le duc, i. e. Sylva
Ducis. Before we entered the Town, we passed through a Water and over two Draw
Bridges. This Place is situate on a Hill in the midst of a low fenny Level of a
great extent, the greatest part whereof is (at least now was) covered with
Water, so that the only Avenues to the Town are upon artificial Causways. It is
encompassed with a strong Wall and a deep Trench. At one end stands a Citadel
strongly fortified, which commands the Town. By reason of its Situation and
Fortifications, one would judge this Place impregnable, yet has it been taken
in the late Wars. At our being there were kept in Garrison for the Defense of
this important Strength 21 Companies of Foot and four Troops of Horse. In the
Quire of S. John's Church are painted the Arms of many of the Knights of the
Golden Fleece and over the upper Stalls or Seats this written in French, Le
treshaut and tres puissant Philip, dit le bon, etc. which because it contains
the History of the Authors first Institution and Model of this Order, I thought
fit to translate into English, and here set down. The most High and Mighty
prince Philip called the Good, by the Grace of God Duke of Burgundy, Lorain and
Brabant, in the year 1429. in the City of Bruges, did in imitation of Gedeon
create and institute to the Honor of God and the virgin Mary, and for the sake
of S. Andrew Protector and Patron of Burgundy, a Company or Society of
Honorable Knights, into which might be received Emperors, Kings, Dukes,
Marquesses and other Personages, as well of his own Subjects as of foreign
Countries, provided they were of Noble blood and good fame: and called these
great Persons, Knights of the Golden Fleece, to whom he gave for perpetual
Chief, him that should be lawful Duke of Burgundy, and have the Seigneury or
Lordship of the Low Countries; limiting their number to 24, comprehending also
the Chief. And for occurrences and use of the Order he created four Honorable
Officers, viz. A Chancellor, a Treasurer, a Secretary, and a King of Arms. And
for the Establishment and well regulating of this Order he made notable
Statutes and Ordinances. The Houses of this Town are of a different make from
those of Holland, the outside being covered with Boards, like those of
Edinburgh in Scotland. We observed great store of wild Fowl to frequent the
Waters hereabout; and found growing wild Herniaria hirsuta on the sandy and
gravelly Banks.

June 20. We took a Wagon drawn by three Horses abreast, as is usual in these
Countries, which in six hours time brought us to Eindhoven, Eindhoven.
a small walled Town; and thence in four hours more to Haumont. Haumont.
a pitiful walled Town belonging to the Bishop of Liege. June 21. Three hours
Riding brought us to another little walled Town called Bry; Bry.
the Houses whereof were old and decaying. Between Haumont and this place, we
rode over Heaths of great extent, called the Champagne. We then left the level
Country and ascended some Hills, from whence we had a pleasant Prospect of the
Mose and Maestricht, Maestricht.
where we arrived this Evening, though it be accounted seven hours distant from
Bry. This City is fortified with good Outworks, besides a strong Wall and
Trench, garrisoned with 31 Companies of Foot, and six Troops of Horse, it being
a great Town and a Frontier. Half of the Magistrates are Protestants and half
of the Romish Religion. The greater part of the Citizens Romanists. There are
in Town near 20 Cloisters or Monasteries of both Sexes; and they have the free
and public Exercise of their Religious Worship. For the Protestants there are
three Dutch Churches, and one English and French, which those Nations use
alternately. The old Buildings of his City are like those of the Bosch; but
since the States have been Masters of it, it is become a rich and thriving
place, and they are building fair new brickt Houses space. They were also
setting up a large Stone Stadthouse, of a square Figure, resembling that at
Amesterdam. The River Meuse divides the City into two parts, which are joined
together by a broad Stone Bridge of nine Arches. The lesser part over the Water
is called, Wick. The Garrison-Soldiers are all Protestants.

The Common People of Holland, The Manners and particular Customs of the
Low Dutch.
especially Innkeepers, Wagoners (Foremen they call them) Boatmen and Porters
are surly and uncivil. The Wagoners bait themselves and their Horses four or
five times in a days Journey. Generally the Dutch men and women are almost
always eating as they travel, whether it be by Boat, Coach or Wagon. The men
are for the most part big-boned are gross-bodied. The first Dish at Ordinaries
and Entertainments is usually a Salade, Sla they call it, of which they eat
abundance in Holland. Their Meat they commonly stew and make Hotchpots of it.
Puddings neither here nor in any place we have traveled beyond Sea do they eat
any, either not knowing the goodness of the Dish, or not having the Skill to
make them: Puddings and Brawm are Dishes proper to England. Boiled Spinach
minced and buttered (sometimes also with Currants added) is a great Dish all
over these Countries. The Common People feed much upon Cabiliau (that is
Cod-fish) and pickled Herrings, which they know how to cure or prepare better
than we do in England. You shall seldom fail of hung Beef in any Inn you come
into, which they cut into thin slices and eat with Bread and Butter, laying the
slices upon the Butter. They have four or five sorts of Cheese, three they
usually bring forth and set before you. (1.) Those great round Cheeses,
colored red on the outside, commonly in England called Holland-Cheeses. (2.)
Cummin-seed Cheese. (3.) Green Cheese, said to be so colored with the juice of
Sheeps Dung. This they scrape upon Bread buttered, and so eat. (4.) Sometimes
Angelot's. (5.) Cheese like to our common Country Cheese. Milk is the cheapest
of all Belly-Provisions. Their strong Beer, (thick Beer they call it, and well
they may) is sold for three Stivers the Quart, which is more than three pence
English. All manner of Victuals both Meat and Drink are very dear, not for the
Scarcity of such Commodities, but partly by reason of the great Excise and
Impost wherewith they are charged, partly by reason of the abundance of Money
that is stirring here. By the way we may note, that the dearness of this sort
of Provisions is an argument of the Riches of a Town or Country, these things
being always cheapest in the poorest places. Land is also here sold at 30 or 40
years Purchase, and yet both Houses and Land set at very high annual Rents: So
that were not the poor Workmen and Laborers well paid for their pains, they
could not possibly live. Their Beds are for the most part like Cabbins,
inconveniently short and narrow, and yet such as they are, you pay in some
places ten Stivers a night the man for them, and in most six. There is no way
for a Stranger to deal with Innkeepers, Wagoners, Porters and Boatmen, but by
bargaining with them beforehand. Their Houses in Holland are kept clean with
extraordinary ordinary niceness; and the Entrance before the Door curiously
paved with Stone. All things both within and without, Floor, Posts, Walls,
Glass, Household Stuff marvellously clean, bright, and handsomely kept: nay some
are so extraordinarily curious as to take down the very Tiles of their
Penthouses and cleanse them. Yet about the preparing and dressing of their
Victuals our English Houswives are, I think, more cleanly and curious than
they. So that no wonder Englishmen were formerly noted for excessive eating,
they having greater temptation to eat, both from the goodness of their Meat,
and the curiosity of the dressing it, than other nations.

In the principal Churches of Holland are Organs, which usually play for some
time after the Sermon is done. The Collections for the Poor are made in
Sermon-time, a Purse with a Bell hanging at the bottom of it and fastened to the
end of a Pole being by the Collector reached to every one. The Psalm to be sung
is marked upon Slates, which are hung up and down the Churches. The People of
these Countries buy and sell small Commodities, and travel by Wagon or Boat
upon the Lords Days. Their traveling Wagons are some covered and some open:
few travel on Horseback. No Beggars to be seen in all Holland, care being taken
to set on work all that are able, and Provision made for the aged and impotent.
There are in this one Province of Holland three or four and twenty walled Towns
and Cities, and six of these at least, beside Amsterdam, bigger than any we
have in England except London; and Amsterdam by this time well approaches to
the Bigness of London.

To these I shall add some Observations concerning the Low Countries, made by
my much honored Friend Francis Barnham Esquire deceased, at his being there in the
Retinue of my Lord Ambassador Holles.

In all the Cities and Towns of Note throughout the United Netherlands there is
a continual Watch kept night and day upon the highest Steeple, for the more
ready and speedy discovery of Fires, or other things of a surprising nature,
which we have already noted in our Description of the City of Leyden.

All Differences arising between Skippers and Foremen, etc. are decided by
casting the Die: this we often observed them to do, when several of them strove
who should carry us.

The Rain that falls upon the Houses is by Pipes and Gutters conveyed into a
Cistern, and there reserved for the uses of the House, as at Venice in Italy.
This particular we have also before taken notice of in the Description of
Leyden.

The generality of the Dutch from the better sort to the meanest, do much dread
their Superiors: I think the cause is, because upon Complaint made, there is
speedy care taken to do Justice.

The generality of the People of all sorts are strangely given to the humor of
running up and down to see any new or strange thing. The Common sort have any
thing that is rich or gay in great admiration, insomuch that when my Lord
Holles made his Entry into Breda, the Coronets that were on the top of his
Coach were talked of with wonder all the Country over.

The People universally are great lovers of Money, very covetous and greedy of
Gain, yet in their Bargains punctual and just. The Knowledge of most of them
extends no further than the Arts of getting Money, and an ability to talk of
State Affairs, wherein you shall meet with mean persons very well seen: I think
the Reason may be, because the lowest of them is not without hopes of coming to
be a Burger, and at last one of the States.

I cannot allow the Low Dutch to be of a valiant and courageous temper
generally, notwithstanding they fight so well at Sea; For the Constitution of
their Bodies which is Phlegmatic, and the temperature of the Air which is
moist, and their Diet which is gross and foggy, forbid it.

Yet are there few or none in these Countries that die of Consumptions.

There is Liberty of all Religions and Professions, but abundance of Spies to
watch them, that they disturb not the public Peace.

I think it harder to be a Traitor under the Government of Holland than under
any other Kingdom or State, because they seem to be more watchful and
suspicious.

The People say and print what they please, and call it Liberty.

The better, much more the worse, sort have little sense of Honor, governing
themselves more by the Rules of Profit and Advantage, than of Generosity and
Decorum.

Murder is not prosecuted with so much diligence and concern as Felony or Theft.

The times of the day for Marriages and Burials are limited, but with
difference is respect of places; for at Breda they must bury their dead before
12 of the clock, and at Amsterdam not till the Afternoon.

When any famous Deed or Exploit is done by any of their Nation, it is
represented to the People with all insinuating circumstances, to make them
proud of the Honor of being Subjects in a State where such mighty deeds are
done. Besides, for encouragement there is for the most part a Monument or
Statue erected to the memory of them who do great things.

Their Solemnizations of Victoirs, as they call them, seems to me of great use,
like Triumphs among the Romans. For those Bonfires and other expressions of Joy
do make glad the People, and give them better thoughts of their Governors, and
dispose them to their service.

In the service of God the People seem more delighted and concerned in that
part of Worship which consists in singing than any other, and they provide more
for it. For in their Churches there are few other Books among them than
Psalters bound up with the Church-Catechism.

The common sort of Women (not to say all) seem more fond of and delighted with
lascivious and obscene Talk than either the English or the French.

The Women are said not much to regard Chastity while unmarried, but when once
married none more chaste and true to their Husbands.

The Women even of the better sort do upon little Acquaintance easily admit
saluting with a Kiss: and it is familiarly used among themselves either in
Frolicks or upon Departures and Returns though never so short.

The Women are in a sense Privy-Counsellors to their Husbands^ for they are for
the most part privy to all their Actions: and the Men seldom do any thing
without their Advice and Consent. Yet does not this Indulgence enamour them of
their own Nation; for it is said, that if a Woman can get an English Husband,
she will never marry a Dutch.

The Dutch when they see their Friends at the point of Death, and past all hope
of Recovery, out of Pity and Tenderness desirous to rid them out of their Pain,
will sometimes hasten their end by withdrawing the Pillow or the like. Thus far
Mr. Barnham.

In most of the Cities and Towns in the Netherlands there are a great number of
chiming little Bells which seldom rest, but were to us troublesome with their
frequent Jangling. But for Rings of great Bells all Europe cannot show so many
as England alone, so that it might well be called the Ringing Island.

A multitude of Storks frequent these Countries, building upon their Chimnies
in the Towns and Cities as well as Villages; but not in the Territories of
Commonwealths only (as some imagine) but of Kings and Princes also, as at
Lovain and elsewhere in the King of Spain's Country, and in Germany in several
Princes Dominions.

June 22. we traveled from Maestricht to Liege four Leagues distant. In the
side of a Hill we ascended at some distance from Maestricht, we saw an arched
Passage into a Vault (as we were informed) some two hours in length. A good way
within under ground they dig Stone which here they bring out in Carts. It being
a wet season we made no stay to go into this Vault, therefore I have added here
the Description of it out of the Philosophical Transactions Numb. 67. page 2051.

There is an excellent Quarry within Cannon-shot of Maestricht upon the very
brink of the River Mase, lying in a Hill, where there are about 25 Fathoms of
Rock and Earth over head; the length of the Hill being of some miles extending
along the River toward Liege, situate on the same River; and toward
Maestricht having in breadth some half or quarter of a mile, but somewhat more
further off. This Quarry has one Entry toward the River, where Carts can pass
with great case, and unload the Stones upon the brink of the River, the Quarry
within lying parallel to the Horizon or Level, (which is a great advantage) and
elevated but very little above the River. This same Quarry which has well nigh
undermined the whole Hill, affords one of the most surprising Prospects, when
well lighted with many Torches, that one can imagine. For there are thousands
of square Pillars in large level Walks, and those almost every where above
twenty, and in some places many more foot high, and all wrought with so much
neatness and regularity, that one would think it had been made rather with
curious Workmanship for an underground Palace, than that those Pillars and
Galleries were made by Quarriers that did it only for getting Stone to build
above ground. This Quarry serves the People that live thereabouts for a kind
of impregnable Retreat when Armies march that way. For being acquainted with
all the ways in it, they carry into it whatsoever they would have safe, as well
their Horse and Cattle as their moveable Furniture, till the danger be over,
there being so vast a deal of room, that 40000 people may shelter themselves in
it. And he that should attempt to seek them out in this vast Wilderness of
Walks and Pillars, without an expert Guide, would not only be in hazard of
losing his way, but of being knocked on the head at the corner of every Pillar,
where People lurking in the dark with their Carbines and Fowling-Pieces would
have fair opportunity of shooting at them by the Light of their own Torches,
etc. vide.

Further upon the Downs we saw three or four more of these Passages, and from
hence had again a very pleasant Prospect of Maestricht and the Country about
the River Mose.

Liege or Luyck is a large City, Liege.
but not comparable to the Holland Towns for Beauty or Riches; built for the
most part of Timber; some of the Houses being covered with boards after the
Scotch fashion, and some with Slate [the Walls I mean,] the rest uncovered and
of Clay. The Streets are neither broad not clean-kept. The River Mose here
divides itself, and runs through the Town in two or three Branches, over which
are several Bridges. Here is a convenient Key, and upon the River we observed
Boats of an extraordinary length, the like whereto we had before seen at
Vtrecht and Dort. This City is pleasantly situate and environed almost round
with Hills. On the Brow of a Hill which hangs over it, stands a Fort or Castle
which commands it. Upon the sides of these Hills are abundance of Orchards and
Cherry-Gardens: On those near the City we first saw Vineyards; though there are
near Lovain, which we saw not. All Belly-Provisions are cheap here. A great
many of Poor and Beggars you meet with at every corner, but they are not
importunate if denied. The Country People are civil, well-manner'd and kind to
Strangers. The Women are of a dusky Complexion, and generally not so handsome as
the Hollanders. They do a great deal of Drudgery, the poorer sort carrying
Coals and other Burdens on their backs in Baskets of a Conical Figure, to the
end or bottom of which they apply a stiff Baston, and so rest themselves
without setting down their Burdens. Near this City are gotten Coals in great
plenty, but they lie very deep under ground; some of us went down into a Pit
150 yards deep. The Coal are like our Stone-Coal. The arts they use to get Air
enough to serve them in the bottom of these Delfs see in the Philosoph.
Transact.

At Luyck they use also for Fuel a sort of round Balls made of Clay mixed with
a certain proportion of Coal, beaten small, tempered together, and dried in the
Sun, which they call Hotshots. These we never saw used any where but here,
though the making of them is described in many Books. They serve to slake the
Heat of the Fire, and keep the Coals from burning out too fast. Here and at
Namur (as we were told) are made Stone-Pots and Jugs. The Cathedral Church is
dedicated to S. Lambert, to which belong 60 Canonici majores, who must be all
of Noble Blood, except some few Scholars which they may choose in. By these the
Bishop and Prince of Liege is elected. Besides these there are twelve Canonici
mediocres and twelve minores sive parvae mensae. On weighty occasions the
Prince assembles the States of the Country for their Advice. The Clergy,
Gentry and Commons send their several Deputies to these Conventions. No Law can
be made nor any great Tax imposed without their consents. In this City are an
incredible number of Monasteries or Religious Houses as they call them. In the
Garden of the English Jesuits College we saw many ingenious Dials invented by
Franciscus Linus. In the Church of the Gulielmites Cloister without the Walls
we saw Sir John Mondeville's Tombstone.

In the Vestry are kept his Saddle, Spurs and Bridle-bit, as also two great
Knives, which the Monks, who showed us these things, told us were given him by
the Emperor of the Turks, being such as himself used. Upon his Tombstone was
this Inscription: HIC JACE^ VIR NOBILIS DNS JOES DE MANDEV^LLE AL' DICTUS AD
BARBAM MILES DNS DE CAPDI NATUS DE ANGLIA, MEDICINE PROFESSOR, DEVOTISSIMUS
ORATOR ET BONORUM LARGISSIMUS PAUPERIBUS EROGATOR, QUI TOTO QUASI ORB
LUSTRATO, LEODII DIEM VITE SUE CLAUSIT EXTREMUM ANNO DNI Mo CCCo LXXIo MENSIS
NOVEMBRIS DIE XVII.

Thereon was also engraven the Figure of an armed man, treading on a Lion,
having a forked Beard, his Hand lift up to his Head in a blessing Posture, and
these words going out of his Mouth, VOS KI PASEIS SOR MI POVR L' AMOVR DEIX
PROIES POR MI. Which is old French, signifying You that pass over me for the
love of God pray for me.

June 26. Spaw.
we traveled hilly and stony way from Liege to the Spaw, seven hours distant.
We had in prospect on the left hand as we rode, Franchimont Castle, and soon
after came to the view of a deep Valley, in the bottom of which lay the Spaw.
It is a pleasant little walled Town, though called a Village, indifferently
well built for a place so remote from Commerce. The Inhabitants reap no small
benefit from the frequency of Strangers, which in the Summertime repair
thither in great numbers to drink the Medicinal Waters. There is one Well
called Pouhont, within the Town, in the Marketplace, which tastes strong of
Vitriol, the Virtues whereof are contained in this Distich written over it
Obstructum reserat, durum terit, humida siccat, Debile fortificat, si tamen
art bibis.


The other Wells are at a good d^^^nce from the Town. (1.) Sauvenir, to the
Eastward, about an hours walk remote, (2.) Geronster, as far to the Southward,
and (3.) Tonnelet, about the midway between Pouhont and Sauvenir. These Waters
seemed to me more brisk and sprightly, and better sated with Mineral Juices
than any I have tasted in England, and doubtless are more nimble and vigorous
in their Operations. But of their several Natures and Virtues Henricus ab Heers
has written a particular Treatise, entitled Spadacrene, to which I refer the
Reader that is desirous to know more of them. In the Woods and upon the Rocks
near this Town we found many rare Plants, which we had not before met with, I
mean spontaneously growing in their natural places, viz. Asclepias flore albo,
Polygonatum minus, Cyanus major, Rapunculus spicatus, Campanula persicifolia,
Sideritis flore pallido similis Ladano segetum, etc.

June 28. From the Spaw we traveled to Aken, Limbourg.
passing through Limbourg three hours distant, a Town considerable for its
Strength, being situate on the side of a Hill, and encompassed with a strong
Wall and Trench; not for its Bigness, it consisting only of one short broad
Street, nor for its Beauty, the Buildings being all of Wood. The Garrison at
our being there was about 300 Soldiers. Before we entered the Town we were met
upon the way by some of these Soldiers, who very insolently stopped our Horses,
demanding Money of us, which we were forced to give according to their
discretion, before they would let us pass, which though it were no considerable
Sum, yet was more than we were willing should be violently extorted from us.
When we were past the Town, we met also with many of these Straglers, by whom
(it was told us) many Robberies are committed hereabout.

Aken, Aken.
called by the French Aix la Chappelle, to distinguish it, I suppose, from Aix
in Provence, is a free City of the Empire, very considerable for its Strength
and Greatness, being encompassed with a double Wall, and having in it 30
Churches. About now some 15 years ago here happened a lamentable Fire which
almost ruined the Town, burning down to the ground 4500 Houses, from which
Calamity it was not half recovered at the time of our being there. In the great
Piazza or Marketplace is a handsome Fountain, with this Inscription about the
edges of the Basin: Hic aquis per Granum Principem quendam Romanum, Neronis and
Agrippae fratrem inventis, calidorum fontium thermae a principio constructae,
postea vero per D. Carolum Magnum Imp. constituto ut locus hic sit caput and
regni seeds trans Alps, renovatae sunt: quibus thermis hic gelidus fons
influxit olint, quem nunc demum hoc aeneo vase illustravit S. P. Q.
Aquisgranensis, Anno Domini 1620. The Iron Crown wherewith the Emperor is
crowned, and the Sword of Charlemaigne, which he holds when he is crowned; and
is obliged to wear by his side three days together, and wherewith he creates
Noblemen; as also the Gospels, said to be written by the Evangelists own hands,
are here kept, and every Coronation sent to Frankfurt. The Chair wherein the
Emperor sits when he is crowned here, has its Sides of Ivory, and its Bottom
as they fondly imagine of the Wood of Noah's Ark.

This City (according to the best information we could get there,) is governed
by a Mayor, two Consuls or Burgomasters, fourteen Scabins and about 120
Senators or Counselors. The Mayor is President of the Scabins and executes
their Sentences; he is put in by the Duke of Gulick and continues during Life,
modo been se gesserit. The Consuls are chosen by the Suffrage of the several
Companies of the City, and continue two years modo been se gesserint; every
year there is one chosen. One that is no Senator may be chosen Consul or
Burgomaster, and yet these have the chief power. The Scabins are Judges and
continue during Life; when one of them dies, the rest choose another in his
place. The Senators are chosen by the several Companies, of which there are
about fourteen or fifteen in this City. Every Company chooses eight. Half the
Senate are yearly chosen. The Territory of this City is large, containing about
200 Villages, and is for the most part encompassed with Mountains. We saw here
the manner of making Brass of Copper, by mingling and melting therewith Lapis
Calaminaris, which changes the color thereof from red to yellow, and
increases the weight by thirty in the Hundred. But that for which this Place
is most remarkable, and from which it took its Name, are the Hot Baths, of
which there are several within the Walls and others without, at Borcet a great
Village less than an English mile distant. The Waters of Borcet at the Sources
where they issue out of the Earth are much hotter than those of the Bath in
England, and the Springs more plentiful. The People there told us, and I can
easily believe them, that they will serve to boil Eggs in. Their Taste seemed to
us saltish. They are used outwardly for Bathing, and taken inwardly for many
Diseases. As we walked to Borcet we could not but take notice of a Pool whose
Waters were almost tepid by reason of a little Stream from the Hot Baths
running through it, wherein we were assured were bred and fed good store of
Fish, which are put into cold Water for a month or two before they eat them.
But of the Nature, Kinds, Ingredients and Uses of the several hot Waters, as
well those of the City, as of Borcet, the following abstract of an Epistolary
Discourse concerning them written in French, and published by Francis Bloudel
M. D. will give the Reader more particular Information.

Observations concerning the Baths of Aken, collected out of an Epistolary
Discourse Published in French by Francis Blondel, M. D.
NOt to trouble the Reader with the various Opinions of Ancient and Modern
Philosophers concerning the Cause of the actual Heat of natural Baths, our
Authors account thereof in reference to these of Aken is in brief as follows.

These Waters (says he) passing through a certain argillaceous Earth, pregnant
with a kind of nitrous Salt, almost of the same taste with the Waters of the
Baths (which is to be found in good quantity in the lands about this City)
charge themselves therewith, and so become a menstruum capable of dissolving
such Minerals and Metals as are contained in the Veins of the Earth through
which they run. This Solution he conceives is made by piercing and corroding
the Minerals after the same manner as Spirit of Nitre and other Aquae Stygiae
are wont to do, which usually causes a great Ebullition and Heat. So then the
actual Heat of these Springs proceeds from the Mixture and Encounter of their
Waters (impregnate as is before intimated) with the Mineral and Metallic
Substances, Juices and Spirits contained in the Veins of the Earth through
which they have their Course. The nitrous Salt forementioned may perhaps be
the Hermetic Salt of Monsieur Rochas, or the esurine Salt of Helmont. Now the
Water once heated, being contained in the Vaults of the Mountains as in a
Stove, continues hot a long time, the Eruption thereof being, it is likely, at
a good distance from the place where it did at first conceive its Heat.

At the long continuance and duration of the Heat of these Waters for so many
ages past no man need wonder: For (1.) It is generally taken for granted that
all sorts of Mines do grow and increase by addition, converting the more
refined, subtle part of the Earth, and which has a seminal disposition of
such a change, into their own nature. (2.) The nitrous Salts, the first
Ingredients of these Waters, are also restored in their Matrices, after the
same manner as we see it happens in the Caput mortuum of Vitriol, which though
the Vitriol has been once or twice extracted from it, will by being exposed to
the Air again recover more; whether it be by conversion of its Matrix into its
own nature by a kind of Aggeneration and Transmutation, or by imbibing and
retaining those subtle and volatile saline Exhalations, which continually
ascend out of the Earth or wander up and down the Air.

As for the Ingredients of these hot Waters in general he says, That besides a
threefold Salt-Nitre fixed, volatile and mingled or Armoniack, they partake of
a fixed and volatile Sulphur, a Manna of Alum, some Vitriol, diverse Metals, as
Copper and Iron, a very little volatile Earth, a certain Argilla, Sand and
Calaminary Flowers. That they participate of Copper he proves in that the
Territory of Aken abounds in diverse places with Lapis Calaminaris, which is as
it were the Aliment of Copper: For being mingled in the Furnaces with red
Copper it augments it by the addition of 30 pound weight per Cent. and gives it
a yellow or golden Tincture. As for Iron, the many ferrugineous Springs that
are found within and without this City are an evident testimony that there are
plenty of Iron Mines hereabout; and therefore most likely it is, if not
certain, that these hot Waters charge themselves with that Metal. That they
contain a threefold nitrous Salt, he proves from their natural Evaporations.
(1.) The fixed is found in the Wells of Borcet and the Emperor, crystallized
into small shining square grains, mingled with a little Flower of Sulphur,
sticking to the Covers of those Wells, which have not been of a long time
opened. It may be also found in the Chemical examination of these Waters by
Evaporation or Destillation. (2.) The Volatile is carried up by the volatile
Sulphur, as is hereafter showed in the Description of the first sort of these
Baths. (3.) The mingled or Ammoniac is daily seen in all the Waters of the City
and of Borcet, swimming in little Cylinders on the surface of the Water, and
this is that Cream or Scum which is ordinarily found upon the Waters in the
Basins. That they contain the rest of the forementioned Ingredients shall be
shown in the Description of the particular Baths: the Waters whereof our Author
reduces to four sorts.

1. Nitro-sulphureous, such are those of the Emperors Bath, the Little Bath,
and S. Quirin's Bath. 2. Sulphureo-nitrous, such are those of Compus or the
Poor-mens Bath, the Rose-Bath and S Cornelius his Bath. 3.
Sulphureo-nitro-vitriolic, such is another Bath of the same S. Cornelius. 4.
Salso-aluminonitrous, viz. those of Borcet a Village adjoining to Aken.

I. As for the Nitro-sulphureous kind, those of the Emperors Bath and the
Little Bath are but one Water coming from the same Source, and collected in one
and the same Well. That part reserved in the Emperors Bath is divided into five
great Basins or Receptacles: that in the Little Bath into three. All which
might be renewed daily, if time would permit, the Spring is so copious. But by
reason of the excessive Heat of the Waters, it is necessary oft-times that they
stand in the Basin 16 or 18 hours to cool, before they be fit for the Patients
use. Notwithstanding when they are come to a just temper, one may bath in them
and endure them a long time, as those of Borcet, without any Inconvenience.
This Source has that of peculiar to itself, that in its Well one may find
distinctly a quantity of Nitre coagulated, and good plenty of Flowers of
Sulphur very light, purely fine and well sented. The Nitre sticks to the sides
of the Well, and so do the Flowers of Sulphur above that: The which sometimes
whether by the extraordinary boiling up of the Fountain, or by the impetuosity
of the ascending Vapors, or by their own weight are broken off, and fall back
into the Source; from whence being no more dissolved by the Water, they come
forth entire into the Basins. If you take of this Water, and let it stand in a
Vessel certain days, it will precipitate of these yellow Flowers of Sulphur to
the bottom of the Vessel. Besides these volatile Flowers, these Waters contein
also fixed Flowers of Sulphur, a competent quantity of Nitre and volatile, fixed
and mixed or Ammoniac, a little Alum, less Vitriol, the Spirits and Principles
of Copper and Iron, a very little volatile Earth, Argilla and Sand: no Bitumen,
for let them stand as long as you please, you shall find no fatty substance
swimming upon them as upon the Spaw Waters. The volatile Sulphur evaporates so
strongly that it carries up with it a quantity of Nitre, as one may see after
the solution of the Vapors congeled and frozen in Wintertime, when it remains
incorporated upon the Walls in the places where the Iceicles were. These Waters
are in weight equal to those of the Spaw; coming fresh out of the Source they
appear whitish or bluish, but having stood a while and grown cold, greenish.
They are very pure and leave no kind of Mud or Lutum thermale behind them; in
cooling they yield a small Scum or Cream of Nitre. Far from their Source, being
wrought upon by the Air, they let fall a little whitish Sediment, as those of
Bor^et do a blackish one. They preserve the color of Roses put into them and
cause them not to wither, as does common Water. The Vapors ascending from them
make Silver Plate black, as those of Boreet make it white. The other Source of
S. Quirin's Bath differs from these in no other respect, save that the Water
thereof is cooler. It is reserved in three Basins. In this Well you find
neither Sulphur nor Saltpeter sticking to the sides, probably because it is
open or uncovered.

II. The second or Sulphureo-nitrous sort of Compus, etc. though they spring up
in several places and have different Wells, yet is the Nature of them all,
their Composition and Mineral Ingredients the same. The Poor men's Bath has one
great Basin or Receptacle, the Rose Bath four, whereof two only are used, and
S. Cornelius's Bath of this Mine two. These Waters are fit for use at all
seasons, being of a temperate Heat, more efficacious and of greater force in
their Operations than the first sort; they weigh two per Cent. more than they,
and are of a stronger Sent. In these is never found any Sulphur condensed, no
not in their Wells though they be covered: but when they are emptied and new
Water let in (as in the Rose-Bath) the Water running down along the Walls and
Seats into the bottom of the Basins or Conservatories, the external Air
prevailing upon it so spread and in such little quantity arrests, fixes and
condenses its Sulphur all along the said Walls and Seats, refreshing the eyes
of the Spectators with its Beauty and Luster. But the Water arising in the
forementioned Basins, and covering the Seats and Walls, the Sulphur again
unites and incorporates with its Dissolvent, and disappears and hides itself
therein. The Water of these Sources conteins great quantity of Sulphur very
fine and sweet, less nitrous Salt, a little Vitriol and less Alum, more of the
other Minerals and Metals than the first sort or those of Borcet. So that they
are more compounded, oleous and bituminous than any of the other Sources; and
though they come out of the Earth very temperate as to actual Heat, yet can
sick persons hardly endure them for any long time, for the most part scarce
half an hour.

III. The third sort which I call Sulphureo-nitro-vitriolic, and is also of S.
Cornclius, differs from the precedent in that the Taste is a little more acid,
the Smell sweeter and liker that of Spirit of Vitriol, and the Touch less oily.
It is of less Efficacy in use than the second sort, and of more than the first.
Of this Source there are three Basins, which with the two others of S.
Cornelius beforementioned make five in this House. These Waters do agree much
what in their Composition with the precedent. They are very pure and clear,
especially in their Wells; and though they seem troubled in their Basins, yet
taken in a Glass they appear clear.

IV. The fourth or Salso-alumino-nitrous kind are those of the Neighborhood or
Borcet. Borcet Baths.
These come out of the Earth extreme hot, and in great abundance, are all of
the same Medicinal Quality, have several Wells, and are reserved in ten or
twelve Houses, each whereof has two Basins or Receptacles, besides which there
is a common Bath exposed to the Air, for the use of poor people. These Waters
cast off a copious Excrement or Tartar, which yet is not Stone, but only a Sand
mingled with and united to the nitrous and aluminous Salt of the Water,
coagulated by the beating of the cold Air on its Superficies, to which also
concurs the cold of the Walls exposed to the same Air. These Excrescencies are
found in the subterrancous Conduits, not only of these but the other Baths in
the City; being held to the Fire they soon become friable, and are nothing but
a pure round Sand like the common. The higher Houses and Basins have the more
of this Tartar, yet is it so little that it is not to be seen or perceived in
the Water. These Waters are of a different Species, Virtue and Operation from
those of the City; are very easy to suffer, and serve often for Divertisement
and Recreation to persons that are in health. The content of them is a great
quantity of Sea Salt and Alum, less nitrous Salt, a very little Sulphur and not
much of Metallic Substances.

Concerning the Virtues and Effects of these Waters inwardly taken, he
discourses to this purpose:

These Waters taken inwardly are very available against the Phthisic, Asthma or
Difficulty of Breathing occasioned by tough Phlegm lodging in the branches of
the Windpipe; against the Weakness of the Stomach, Indigestion, Crudities,
Flatulencies, Vomitings, Hiccoughs and inveterate Colics. They dissipate and
dry up all manner of Catarrhs and serous De^luxions; and are very proper to be
drunk by those that are troubled with the Palsy, before the use of the Baths.
They quicken the Appetite, cleanse the Blood and open the obstructions of the
Mesentery. They are of excellent use against Hypochondriacal Maladies,
especially in such as have weak and cold Stomachs. They mollify the hardness
of the Liver, Spleen and Mesentery. They dissolve and bring away the Gravel of
the Reins and the lesser Stones: And here he produces many Examples of such as
avoided Stones upon the drinking these Waters, and among the rest of some that
had drank the Spaw Waters, and came from thence without reciving any Benefit.
They cleanse the Ulcers of the Bladder, dissolving not only the gross,
phlegmatic and viscous Humors which coagulate the Stone, but even the Stone
itself whilst it is yet tender. They have sometimes cured intermittent Fevers
of long continuance, and scrophulous Tumors. They dry up and heal the Itch,
Leprosy and other Affections of the Skin. They stop the immoderate Flowing of
the Menses in Women and cure the Jaundise, the Paleness and Discoloring of the
Skin in Virgins: and finally they give ease and relief in the Gout. Of all
these Faculties he brings Instances and Examples in Persons that have been
cured. Particularly that these Waters drunk may have a power of dissolving the
Stone, he proves by this Experiment: Taking a Stone voided by a man about two
years before, and infusing it in Water hot from the Fountain for the space of
three days, we found it (says he) mollified and reduced into a soft Phlegm.
Which Virtue of the Waters was further confirmed to us by a late Accident: for
opening the Vault of a Well there was found a certain Glue or Mucilage, which
it is to me probable, came from the solution of the Mortar of Lime and Sand in
long time, by the volatile and dissolvent Spirits of the Waters; especially
there being found no other Cement between the Stones, and in that this same
Glue or Mucilage mingled itself entirely with the Waters of the Fountains
without any appearance of Scum or Fat swimming on the top, so as Gum of Cherry
or the like is wont to do in Water, and being cast into the Fire burnt not, but
dried up. These Experiments and Observations were made upon occasion of a
Burgomaster of Riga (who being afflicted with the Stone drank these Waters) his
passing his Urine through a Linen Cloth, and finding therein a certain thick
Phlegm left behind, which being kept a while upon Paper hardened into a stony
Substance.

From Aken, Altenhoven. Gulick.
June 29. we traveled through a small walled place called Altenhoven to
Gulick, five hours distant. This is an elegant little Town, built of Brick,
though the Houses be but low, having straight Streets and a square Piazza. It
is well fortified with a strong Wall and Trench, but most considerable for its
Citadel, which for Greatness, Strength and Beauty gives place to few that we
have seen. Within it is a stately Palace of the Princes, who for the Defense
and Security of this City maintains here a Garrison of 1000 Soldiers. About ten
or twelve years since this Place was possessed by the Spaniards. When the Peace
was concluded between them and the Hollanders, it was agreed, that the Duke of
Newbergh should have Gulick and Berg; and the Marquess of Brandenburgh Mark and
Cleve. The main Trade and Employment of this Town is making of Malt.

June 30. we proceeded on to Collen some seven hours distant from Gulick, by
the way passing through a little walled Place called Berchem. Berchem.
A great part of this days Journey was through pleasant Woods. We observed by
the way-side and in the Woods and Hedges as we went Mezereon Germanicum,
Mollugo montana latifolia ramosa, Pulmonaria maculosa, Galeopsis sive Vrtica
iners flore purpurascente majore, folio non maculato, and among the Corn,
Vaccaria Ger.

Collen, Collen.
though it gives Title to an Archbishop who is one of the Electors, is a free
City of the Empire, and one of the greatest in Germany. The middle part of it
is well built of Stone, wherein are two fair and large Piazza's, the Skirts
meaner and of Wood. The Walls of the City are of Stone, very tall, but not
proportionably thick, and covered with a Tectum. Round the Walls without is a
pleasant Walk of Trees, two deep Trenches, and at convenient Intervals strong
Bulwarks. Within the Wall are enclosed 300 Acres of void ground (not built upon
I mean) planted with Vines; of the Grapes whereof we were told many hundred
Tuns of Wine are yearly made. In the Domo or Church of S. Peter are preserved
in a golden Chest the Bodies (as they would have us believe) of the three Wise
men of the East that came to worship our Savior, commonly called the three
Kings of Collen; Melchior, Gaspar and Balthazar. To this Church belong 54
Canons Nobles, and 8 Canons Presbyters. By these 62 with the Dean of the
Cathedral, who has two Votes in the Election, and the two Consuls regent of
the City who have four, is the Archbishop chosen, who is not allowed to
continue in the City at any time for above three days together. The Government
of the City is by six Consuls or Burgomasters, who continue in Office during
life, yet but two only in power yearly; seven Scabins and 150 Senators. When a
Burgomaster dies, the Senate chooses another into his Place. The Senators are
chosen by the several Companies of the City, and continue during life; only
fifty are in power yearly; so the Power revolves to the same every third year.
The Scabins are put in by the Prince, and continue during life. The main body
of the Citizens is of the Roman Religion; yet are there a good number both of
Lutherans and Reformed or Calvinists. The Lutherans are allowed a Church within
the Walls; the Reformed are forced to go cross the Water a mile out of town to
Church. In one of the Churches of this Town are preserved the Bones of those
11000 Virgins which accompanied S. Vrsula to Rome, and in their return here
suffered Martyrdom.

From Collen we went up the Rhene in a Boat drawn by Men, which brought us the
first day to a small Village called Vidich. By the way we found growing among
the Corn in great plenty, Delphinium suaplici flore purpuro-caeruleo vulgar,
and Nigella ^rvensis: in some barren Grounds near the River' Stoechas citrina
Germanica latiore folio J. B. Next morning we passed Bonna, a pretty walled
Town with a handsome Piazza. Here the Elector of Collen has his Palace and
usual Residence. This night we lodged at a pitiful poor walled Town called
Brisaca, where we first began to have Feather-Beds laid upon us instead of
Blankets and Coverlets.

July 6. Andernach.
we passed by Rineck Castle on our right hand, and about a mile from Brisaca
came to Andernach a walled Town of some note, subject to the Archbishop of
Collen. Over against this Town is Hammerstein Castle belonging to the
Archbishop of Triers. Then we passed by two Castles of the Earl of Weets, one
on the right hand on a high Rock, well built, with a Cloister in it.

Two leagues from Andernach we passed by Engers, and this night lodged at
Coblentz, Coblentz
a considerable City belonging to the Archbishop of Triers, called in Latin
Confluentes, because situate at the Confluence of the Rivers Moselle and Rhene.
Here is a fair Stone Bridge of 13 Arches over the Moselle, which
notwithstanding its diminutive Name, is no small River. Here is also a Bridge
of Boats over the Rhene to a strong Castle called Hermanstein, situate on a
high Rock; under which near the River is a beautiful Palace of the Archbishop
of Triers, whose Name is Carolus Caspar. Not far hence is Helfenstein Castle,
near which springs an acid Water. Another Well of this nature there is at
Antonistein, three or four hours distant from Andernach, belonging to a
Cloister of Carmelites, who sell the Water sealed up in Bottles; A third of
greatest note at Zwolbach, four miles off Frankfurt. All these Waters are sold
to the Towns and Country about, and commonly drunk mixed with Wine, to which
they give a pleasant taste and purging quality. I cannot say, as Blondel affirms
of them, that upon mixture with Wine I saw them smoke, or found them actually
hot: Indeed I was not careful to observe these particulars.

July 7. we passed by Lodesheim Town and Castle on the left hand, and Capelle,
a Castle of the Bishop of Triers on the right, then a large Island in the
middle of the Rhene; next Rens a small walled place belonging to the Archbishop
of Collen, on the right hand and a little further Browbach and a Castle above
it: Bopport.
About four hours from Coblentz, Boppaert a walled Town of some note on the
right hand, and not far thence a Castle called Bornholm on the left. We rested
this night at a Village called Hertznach

July 8. in the morning we came to a pretty pleasant walled Town called S.
Gower, S. Gower.
a mile distant from Hertznach, under the Lantgrave of Hessen, who lives in a
fair Castle, built on a Rock above the Town. On one of the Towers of the Wall
by the Rivers side is fastened a brass Ring, given by the Emperor Charles V.
which is put upon Strangers Necks, and then they are obliged to drink Wine,
else they are sprinkled with Water. The Magistrates and greatest part of the
Inhabitants of this Town are of the Reformed Religion, yet have both Lutherans
and Papists their Churches. Just without the Walls over against S. Gower is a
Town and Castle called Wellnich. Somewhat further on the right hand is Wesel
Town and Castle of the Archbishop of Triers, Cub.
and higher up on the left hand Cub, a considerable walled Town with a Castle
upon a Rock, belonging to the Prince Elector Palatine. Here we observed a Flote
of Timber going down the River, which was directed by many men who moved two
long Oars at each end thereof, which served in stead of Rudders. In the Rocks
hereabout is Slate gotten. Baccharach.
Next we came to Baccharach a walled Town on the right hand, having many
Towers, subject to the Prince Elector Palatine, famous for the goodness of its
Wine, as is also Rhincow, a Town not far from Mentz. At this and many other
Towns between Collen and Mentz our Boatmen paid Toll. A little distance from
hence we had in view a small walled Town on the left hand, and on the right we
left a pitiful Village, yet walled about, called Heinbach, and came to a second
of no better note, called Dreckhausen, where we lodged. Both these are under
the Archbishop of Mentz. Over against Heinbach is Lewry a small walled Town of
little account.

July 9. Mouse-Tower.
we passed by Aspithouse Castle, then by Mouse-Tower, standing in a little
Island, famous for the Story of the Bishop devoured by Mice and Rats. Over
against this Tower stands a Castle, and a little further up the River on the
right hand Bing, Bing.
a handsome walled Town belonging to the Elector of Mentz: At some distance
hence on the left hand Rodes, then Gison and Elveldt a walled Town, and lastly
Wallop, where we observed Storks Nests upon the Chimnies. This night we arrived
at Mentz.

From Collen to Widdich the River is of a great breadth, but above that till
you come to Mouse-Tower, much narrower, being straightened by high Hills and
Rocks on each side, The sides of these Hills are in some places covered with
Wood, in some planted with Vines, and below the Vine-yards near the River are
large Orchards of Fruit Trees. The Vines are tied to Stakes or Poles of about a
man's highth, so that were not the Poles much shorter, their Vineyards would
nearly resemble our Hop-Gardens. All this way the River flows with so swift a
Current, that I conceive it impossible to get up Stream with Oars and Sails.

In this Journey in the Cornfieldsd, Meadows, Rocks, Woods and Sands by the
Rivers side, etc. (which the slowness of our Boats progress gave us leisure to
search) we observed many Plants which we had not elsewhere or but rarely before
found growing wild, Plants observed as we traveled between Collen and Mentz.
viz. Gentiana cruciata, Chamaedrys spuria angustifolia, Chondrilla juncea,
Chamaedrys laciniatis foliis, Lychnis sylvestris calyculis striatis, Persicaria
siliquosa, Genistella montana Germanica Park. Genistella aculeata, Buphthalmum
vulgar, Fraxinella, Cardamine impatiens, Iberis, Millefolium nobile, Digitalis
lutea magno flore, Eryngium arvense foliis serrae similibus, Caucalis albis
floribus, Saxifraga Venetorum, Chondrilla caerulea, Tithymalus magnus
multicaulis sive Esula major, Helleboraster maximus in great plenty, Tithymalus
pineus and sundry others. Near the City of Mentz we found the Sea-gilly-flower
or Thrift called by C. Bauhine Caryophyllus montanus major flore globoso,
Caryophyllus gramineo folio minimus, Caryophyllus arvensis umbelliferus,
Cynoglossum minus, Thlaspi minus, aliis Alysson minus J. B. Thlaspi capsulis
sublongis incanum, Heliotropium majus, Camphoratae congener, Prunella flore
majore and Prunella foliis dissectis.

Mentz is a large City and well fortified: Mentz.
The Buildings generally old and but mean, the Streets narrow and not well
paved, yet are there many great Houses of Noblemen scattered up and down. The
Princes Palace is moted about. The present Prince or Archbishops Name is.
Joannes Philippus a Schaenborn, he was besides Bishop of Wurtzburgh, and a few
weeks since chosen also Bishop of Worms. The Canons of S. Martin's Church here,
who are in number 24, all Barons or Noblemen, choose the Archbishop out of their
own number; and when any one of themselves dies or is removed, a Canon into his
room out of the Domicillares. The Arms of the Archbishopric is a Wheel,
derived from the first Archbishop, who was a Wheelwrights Son, his Name
Willigesus, a Saxon; He was wont to say, Willigese, Willigese, recogita unde
veneris. Jews are allowed in this City. Here is a Bridge of Boats over the
Rhene.

July 13. we took Boat for Frankfurt, going up the River Maonus which near
Mentz runs into the Rhene. By the way we took notice (1.) of Rusetheim, a
handsome Fort on our right hand, belonging to the Lantgrave of Darmstadt. (2.) A
little further up on our left hand a small Village called Etersheim, Hocht.
and (3.) Hocht, a walled Town on the same hand, garrisoned by the Elector of
Mentz. Here we may note, that the Dominions of the Princes of Germany that
border on the Rhene are strangely mingled one with another.

Frankfurt is about five Miles or Leagues distant from Mentz, Frankfurt.
though the Houses thereof are for the most part built of Timber, yet is it
fair, populous and rich, very strongly fortified and encompassed with a deep
Trench of water; the Walls and Bullwarks are kept very trim and in good repair.
The River Main divides it into two parts, the lesser on the South side is
called Saxenhausen. They are joined by a fair Stone Bridge of about fourteen
Arches. In the great Piazza are three handsome Fountains. The Emperor is now
adays usually chosen here in the Curia or Senate House; and crowned in the
Collegiate Church of S. Bartholomew. There have been about 25 or 26 Emperors
here chosen. By the favor of one of the Consuls or Burgomasters we saw the
Original Imperial Grant or Constitution, whereby the College of Electors is
appointed, called Bullae aurea. It had in place of the Seal a great Medal of
Gold hanging at it, on which was stamped or engraven, on one side the Figure of
the Emperor Charles IV. with this Inscription round, Carolus quartus, divina
favente clementia, Romanorum Imperator semp. Aug. On the reverse the Figure of
the City Rome, and thereon written Aurea Roma, and round about this rhythming
Verse, Roma caput mundi regit orbis fraena rotundi.

This City is governed by 42 Senators, two Burgomasters, a Praetor and 14
Scabins. The Senators are divided into three Scamna or Benches: The highest is
Scabinorum, the second or middlemost Literatorum, and the lowest Opificum. When
one of the Scabins dies or is removed, they choose into his room one out of the
Scamnum Literatorum. Those of the Scamnum Opificum can rise no higher. These
Senators choose yearly the two Consuls or Burgomasters out of their own number.
The People have no part or interest in the Government of the City or choice of
the Senate. Many Jews live here who have their Ghet^ or particular Quarter,
wherein they are locked up every night. Their Trade is only Brokage, and most
of them are very poor. They are forced to wear a piece of yellow Cloth
somewhere about them to distinguish them from other people.

All the Magistrates and the greatest part of the Citizens are Lutherans, who
have five Churches. The Roman Catbolics are allowed the free Exercise of their
Religion, and have within the City two Cloisters of Men, and one of Women. The
Reformed had formerly a Church within the Walls, afterward, that being taken
from them, they had one just without, which being burnt down, whether by
Accident or Malice, their Church is now a good distance from the Town. The
English Church, used in Q. Mary's days, goes to decay. The English House is
made a Granary or Storehouse. The Country hereabout is pleasant, and the
Ground rich. We found growing wild Gramen amoris dictum and Ischaemon vulgar,
Portulaca sylvestris, and in some Hedges Alsine baccifera, which it was not my
fortune in all this Voyage to meet with any where else.

July 17. we left Frankfurt, taking the Post-Coach for Frankenthal. After one
half-hours riding we entered into Pine-Woods, the first we met withal: They
reached almost to our Lodging, this night, which was at a Village called
Geirsheim three German miles from Frankfurt.

July 18. Kernsheim. Worms.
at a little walled Town called Kernsheim we ferried over the Rhene, and at six
miles end came to Worms, a great old City, but meanly built and in a decaying
condition. It seems formerly to have been richer and more populous. The Bishop
is chosen by the Canons of the great Church being 20 in number. All the
Magistrates are Lutherans. After we had passed Worms one hours riding brought
us to Frankenthal or (as we usually pronounce it) Frankendale, Frankendale.
a Town belonging to the Prince Elector Palatine, situate in a Level by the
Rhene, more considerable for its Strength than Greatness. The Houses are low
built, the Streets broad and straight. The Wall, Mounts and Outworks neatly
kept in good repair. The Garrison consists of five Companies, whereof two are
Citizens. There are in it three Churches, one Almagne, one Low Dutch, and one
French.

July 20. we traveled from Frankendale beside the Rhene, through Oberskeim a
small walled Town to Spier, Spier.
two miles and an half distant. Spier though it has a Bishop, yet is it a free
City of the Empire, and governed by its own Magistrates, of considerable
Strength and Greatness. The Houses are most oldbuilt of Timber, rather vast
than handsome or convenient. We could not learn that there was any considerable
Trade driven here, so that were it not for the Imperial Chamber (which draws
much Company hither) we believe it would soon grow poor and infrequent enough.
The Romish Religion prevails most, yet have the Lutherans their Church. In the
Cathedral Church are the Monuments of several Emperors and Bishops who lie
interred there. The Imperial Chamber consists of 36 Assessors and a chief
President appointed by the Emperor, Imperial Chamber.
besides whom there are other three Presidents chosen by the Emperor out of the
Delegates. Every Elector of the Empire, and each of the ten Circles send two
Delegates or Assessors. There is another Chamber of like power at Vienna. These
Courts determine all Controversies arising between the several Princes and
States of the Empire by majority of Vote. The Subjects also of many of the
Princes may appeal from their own Princes to this Court; but it is not prudent
nor safe for them so to do, unless they first withdraw themselves out of their
Territory. Some Princes, as the Count Palatine, have Jus non appellandi.

July 21. we returned a little backwards and crossed over the Rh^ne to Manheim,
Manheim.
a Town belonging to the Prince Elector Palatine, situate just in the Angle
made by the Neccar and Rhene meeting, and strongly fortified. The Houses in the
late Wars were most of them beaten down, but now they are rebuilding them
apace, the Prince having given the Town great Privileges, to invite Strangers
to come and inhabit there. At the time of our being there, his Highness was
building a new Citadel, which was like to prove a strong Piece. It wanted not
much then of being finished. Who it was that first advanced this place to the
dignity of a City and fortified it with Walls, Ditches and Bulwarks, this
Inscription over the Gate toward the Neccar will acquaint the Reader. Quod
felix faxit Jehova, Justa spatiorum dimensione MDCX.

July 22. From Manheim we rode to Heidelberg, Heidelberg.
just before we entered the Town passing a wooden Bridge over the Neccar covered
over with a tectum, as are also many of the great Bridges in Switzerland, to
preserve the Timber, as I conceive, from the injuri^s of the Weather.
Heidelberg, though none of the greatest Cities, yet is the chief of the
Palatinate, and for its bigness populous; which is much considering the
Devastations made by the late Wars in this Country. The Houses are most of
Timber, yet handsome and in good repair; which argues the Inhabitants to be
industrious and in a thriving condition. It is situate on the right bank of the
River Neccar, under Hills of considerable highth; by reason of which it cannot
be made strong, though it be encompassed with a double Wall and Trench.

In this City are five Jurisdictions, (1.) Aulica, under which are all the
Princes or Noblemen: of this Jurisdiction the Marshal of the House is
President. (2.) Cancellaria, under which are all the Councils and other
Officers as Advocates, Doctors of Law, etc. (3.) Bellica, or the Soldiery: the
General is their President. (4.) Academica, in which the Rector magnificus
presides, and (5.) Civica. The Members of each Jurisdiction may refuse to be
judged by any but their own Judge, before whom the Plaintiff must implead them,
according to the Maxim in Law, Actor sequitur forum rei. The City is divided
into four Quarters, and governed by Praetor and Burgomasters. It can raise two
Companies of Foot and one of Horse. The Lutherans are permitted the Exercise of
their Religion here, and have lately built them a Church: There are also Roman
Catholics who have a Church without the Walls.

About the middle of the ascent of the Hill called Koningsthall stands the
Castle where the Prince keeps his Court, a stately Pile and of great capacity,
encompassed with a strong Wall and a deep Trench hewn out of the Rock, which
upon occasion may be filled with Water. Over the Gate leading into the Palace
is a Dutch Inscription, signifying the building of it by Ludovicus V. in the
year 1519. It is not all of one Piece, but since the first Foundation several
Buildings have been added by several Princes. One part is called the English
Building.

Under one of the Towers stood the great Tun, which almost filled a Room. It
held 132 Fudders, a Fudder (as we were informed) being equal to 4 English
Hogsheads. The old Tun is taken in pieces, and there is a new one in building
by the Princes Order, which is to contain 150 Fudders or 600 Hogsheads. Being
invited by the Princes order we dined in the Palace, where we observed all
things carried with little noise and great decency. After dinner his Highness
was pleased to call us into his Closet, and show us many Curiosities, among
others (1.) a Purse made of Alumen plumosum, which we saw put into a Pan of
burning Charcoal till it was thoroughly ignite, and yet when taken out and cool,
we could not perceive that it had received any harm at all from the Fire. (2.)
Two Unicorns horns each eight or ten foot long, wreathed and hollow to the top.
By the way we may note, that these are the Horns of a Fish of the cetaceous
kind, (two distinct species whereof you may find described and figured in the
History and Description of the Antilles or Caribee Islands written in French by
R. F. of Tertre, and the Head of one in Wormius his Musaeum) not the Horns of a
Quadruped as is vulgarly but erroneously thought. Whatever the Ancients have
delivered, modern Voiages and Enquiries have discovered no other terrestrial
Unicorn besides the Rhinocerot, which, its most likely, is signified by the
word (...) used in Scripture, which the Septuagint render (...). (3.) The
Imperial Crown and Globe of Rupertus Imp. who was of this Family, richly
adorned with precious Stones. (4.) An excellent and well-digested Collection of
ancient and modern Coins and Medals of all sorts, in which the Prince himself
is very knowing. Among the rest we could not but take notice of a Swedish
Doller of Copper, about the bigness and of the figure of a square Trencher,
stamped at the four Corners with the Kings Image and Arms, of that weight, that
if a man be to receive ten or twenty pound in such Coin, he must come with a
Cart and Team of Horse, to carry it home. The Prince Palatines Name and Titles
are Carolus Ludovicus, Comes Palatinus Rheni, sacri Romani Imperii Elector,
utriusque Bavariae Dux. He speaks six Languages perfectly well, viz.
High Dutch, Low Dutch, English, French, Italian and Latin, is greatly beloved
of his Subjects of whom he has a paternal Care, and whose Interest he makes
his own.

In the great Church where the famous Library was kept, we observed many fair
Monuments of Princes of this Family, some with Dutch, most with Latin Epitaphs
or Inscriptions: Others in the Franciscans Church. In S. Peter's Church also a
great number of Monuments of learned men of the University; which is of good
account and one of the best in Germany. Three or four Colleges there are built
and endowed chieflly for the maintenance and accommodation of poor Students.

The Government of this University is by a Senate, which consists only of 16
Professors. The number of Professors is limited, and their Stipends fixed by the
Statutes of the University given them by their Founder Rupertus Count Palatine
Anno 1346. and confirmed by the Pope and Emperor. Of these Professors three are
of Divinity; four of Law; three of Medicine, and six of Philosophy. Of the
Philosophy Professors four only are admitted into the Senate, lest they should
make too great a party. Besides the Senate chooses anew the Philosophy
Professors every year, and may change them if they please: the other Professors
are chosen for term of life. When one dies the Senate chooses two and presents
them to the Prince, of which he takes one to succeed in the vacant place. This
Senate chooses every year a Rector magnificentissimus, which is only an Honorary
Title conferred upon some Prince or great person, for he has no power at all
in the University. (2.) A Rector magnifl^us out of their own number by major
Vote, the chief Officer for power and answerable to our Vice Chancellor. (3.)
An Aedilis who takes care of the public Buildings. (4.) A Praefectus rei
vinariae. (5.) A Praefectus rei frumentariae, which Officers answer to our
Taxers. (6.) A Quaestor, who gathers up the University Revenue and Rents.
Further this Senate is a Jurisdiction by themselves, and have absolute power in
criminal Causes extending to Life and Death: only after Sentence given the
Prince may pardon. The Degrees conferred here are in Philosophy Masters, of
which lately there have been but few created; in Law and Medicine Licentiates
and Doctors; in Divinity Batchelors, Licentiates and Doctors, of which last
there have been but few lately. They confer Degrees without any regard of
Standing. The Candidate must undergo a double Examen. (1.) By the Faculty
wherein he is to commence, the Rector magnificus being present, and if he be
found unsufficient he is remitted, and appointed a certain time to study to
prepare himself. (2.) By all the Professors together, the Rector magnificus
being also present. The first they call Examen tentatorium, the second
rigorosum. Having past both Examens he is to dispute publicly s^b Praeside,
then to make a Lecture in the Faculty wherein he is promoted, and lastly a
Speech. The Speech ended, he asks the Vice Chancellor, ut det facultatem
promotori ipsum promovendi. Note that by the Statute the Praepositus Ecclesiae
Wormatiensis is perpetual Chancellor, and substitutes a Vice Chancellor in
his place. But now this is only done pro forma, for the University is not
obnoxious to the Chancellor. The Vice Chancellor granting leave, the
Promoter, who is usually the Note, that the Profess^rs in each Faculty take the
Deanship by turns, though the Senate may appoint any other.
Dean of the Faculty, in the name of the Prince Elector, and by the leave of
the Vice Chancellor, pronounces such an one Doctor, and bids him ascend in
superiorem cathedram, then kisses him, puts a Ring on his Finger, and a Cap on
his Head, and gives him a Book first shut and then open. Then the Graduate
takes an Oath touching with his Finger the two Beadles Staves set leaning one
against the other, and last of all feasts the Professors in the room called the
Prytancum, which is now used as the Divinity-Schools: At which Feast the Prince
himself is present or sends the Marshal of his House. To save Charges two or
three Candidates, if they be of meaner condition, get to be promoted together.

D. T. O. M. A. Cursus Lectionum Publicarum and Privatarum, quas almae
Vniversitatis Archipalatinae DD. Professores hoc Anno M.DC.LXII. Rectore
magnifico Jacobo Israel Med. Doct. and Physiolog. Prof. ordinario, habebunt,
juxta Facultatum seriem distributus.
In FACULTATE THEOLOGICA.
FRidericus Spanhemius* Hora X.
SS. Theologiae Doctor, and Professor Ordinarius Novi Testamenti; Diebus Lunae,
Martis, Jovis and Veneris, altera quidem Septimana persequitur Vindicias
Locorum controversorum, altera vero illustriora ex Paulinis Epistolis loca, ea
methodo exsequitur, ut praemissis Quaestionibus, ad elucidationem cujusque loci
subjungatur, cum Analysis Logica, tum Paraphrasis Rhetorica, tandemque cruantur
ordine usus cum theoretici tum practici.

Collegia privata exegeti^a, disputatoria, examinatoria, prioribus nuper
absolutis, Studiosis offert, Disputationes ordinarii and extraordinarii
argumenti negantur nunquam.

Johannes Ludovicus Fabricius, Hora IX.
SS. Theologiae Doctor and Professor Ordinarius, diebus Lunae, Martis, Jovis
and Veneris Theologiae Systema explanare perget, praeterea absoluto Casuistico
Collegio, Universal explicatorio-examinatorium, aliaque pro Studiosorum
desiderio exercitia tum publica tum privata continuabit atque instituet.

II. In FACVLTATE JVRIDICA.
Henricus David Chuno, Hora IX.
D. and Jurium Professor primarius Academiaeque Procancellarius, Lectiones
Codicis, cujusque tituli principiis and fundamentis propositis, legibusque
peregrinis and fugitivis, id est, non suo titulo collocatis, (ubi spicilegium
facturus est) seorsim explanatis, public continuabit: addendo Jurium
concurrentium ampliationes and restrictiones ex omni Jure.

Idem privatim operam suam pro cap^n and desiderio Studiosorum aeque ponet.

Johannes Fridericus Bockelman, Hora I.
J. V. D. Pandectarum Professor Ordinarius, and Judicii Electoralis Aulici
Assessor, public Pandectas docebit hac methodo, ut (1.) cujusque tituli quae
est, ostendat connexionem. (2.) Jus c^rtum, quod in Legibus eo spectantibus
reperitur, per definitiones, divisiones and Canones compendiose proponat. (3.)
Controversas quaestiones, additis solidioribus rationibus propugnandi and
oppugnandi subjungat. (4.) Siqua lex nostris Viciniorumque moribus antiquata
est, moneat. (5.) Denique textus in quibus singularis materiae alicujus seeds
est, speciatim assignet.

Collegium etiam disputatorium publicum, necnon explicatorium privatum,
utrumque ad Pandectas institutum, continuabit, aliisque exercitiis Auditoribus,
uti hactenus prodesse studebit.

Banier Shuttenius, Hora X.
J. V. D. Institutionum Imperialium Professor Ordinarius, in tradendis
Institutionibus sensum cujusque paragraphi genuinum ubi exposuerit, dubia
occurrentesque circa praesentem materiam controversias breviter resolvet.

In Collegiis privatis, explicandi, dictandi, disputandi operam (quam nec
public denegabit) etiam pollicetur.

III. In FACVLTATE MEDICA.
Johannes Casparus Fausius, Hora IX.
Medicinae Doctor and Professor primarius, necnon Archiater Palatinus;
Practicam Medicinam docet, Ideas morborum succincte tradit. Medicamenta (...),
officinalia and Chymica, eorumque praeparationem enarrat, and formulas
elegantiores cum propriis longoe praxeos experimentis feliciter tradit.
Chymicam quoque officinam ejus rei Studiosis aperuit.

Jacobus Israel, Hora III.
Med. Doct. and Physiologiae Professor Ordinarius, a Nundinis Autumnalibus ad
Vernales Anatomiam and Chirurgiam: a Vernalibus vero ad Autumnales
Institutiones Medicas enodabit.

Ex Collegiis privatis unum Anatomicum dissectorium, quod circa manualem
dissectionem operabitur: alterum de generatione and incrementis pulli in ovo
beneficio furni Chymici and ignis Lampadis habebit.

IV. In FACVLTATE PHILOSOPHICA.
Johannes a Leuneschlos, Hora I.
P. and M. D. Mathematum and Physices Professor Ordinarius, in Physicis public
specialium nostrae telluris Corporum naturam enucleabit, privatim Collegia
aperiet, in quibus res generationi and corruptioni obnoxia docebitur, and ad
interrogata respondebitur. Hora XII
Circa Geographiam theoricam and practicam Auditoribus industriam suam non
solum public docendo probabit, sed and eosdem privatim tum in eadem, tum in
aliis spatiosae Matheseos partibus, ut Arithmetica, Harmonica, Geometria,
Astronomia, Optica, Architectonica Civili and Militari, aliisque vel
necessariis, vel rarioribus Elegantiis, tam theorice in aedibus suis, quam
practice in Observatorio and Campo ad discentium nutum and captum instituere
haud gravabitur.

Johannes Scobaldus Fabricius, Hora IX.
SS. Theologiae Doct. and Ecclesiastes, necnon Linguae Graecae Professor
Ordinarius, Xenophontis (...). pertractabit.

Sebastianus Ramspeck, Hora II.
Politices and Eloquentiae Professor Ordinarius, Synopseos Politicae telam
propediem pertexet, Oeconomicorum Epitomen breviter illustrandam additurus,
idque diebus Lunae, Martis and Jovis: diebus Veneris M. Tullii de Oratore
libros Rhetorice ac Politice illustrabit. Studiosis quinetiam id petituris
publica privataque industria succurret.

Stephanus Gerlachius, Hora X.
Historiae Ecclesiasticae Professor, Historiam Sulpitii Severi eadem qua coepit
methodo hoc Semestri persequetur. Statum nempe ac faciem Veteris Ecclesiae, ab
obitu usque Mosis ob oculos ponens: modum Reip. ritus moresque explanans.
Sententias Judaeorum ac Christianorum, cum veterum tum recentium Impp. breviter
exhibens and conferens, quicquid denique ad ornandam Historiam lucemque ei
foenerandam facere videtur, proponet.

Si insuper nonnulli forsan in caeteris Studiis literariis privatim ipsius
operam expetierint, fide sua istis ac industria non dcerit.

Samuel Pussendorff, Hora III.
Professor Publicus, Jus Naturae and Gentium ad ductum Grotii tradere perget,
and in eo erit, ut hac hyeme opus istud ad finem perducatur. Operam quoque suam
privatam, siqui eam sunt petituri, nemini denegabit.

Joh. Carreus, Hora III.
Verb. Dei Minist. and Collegii Sapientiae Praeceptor, in Metaphysicis, Logicis
and Ethicis Lectiones habet diebus Lunae, Martis and Jovis, die Veneris Theses
disputandas proponit.

Honorum vero Academicorum, Disputationum, Lectionum Cursoriarum, Anatomicarum
demonstrationum and Panegyrici actus creberrimi habentur.

Et ne animus solum Sapientia excolatur, verum and ipsum corpus ingenuis
Exercitiis ad virilem virtutem excitetur, Vir Artis Equestris callentissimus,
cujus fama celeberrima jam plusquam percrebuit, Equestri Gymnasio singulari cum
laud praeest.

Linguarum vero exoticarum Praeceptores, Lanistae, atque aliarum elegantiarum
Artifices, certatim in artibus suis edocendis peritiam ac sedulitatem
demonstrare allaborant.

The Prince Elector is absolute in his own Territory. He can make Laws and
repeal them, treat with foreign Princes, sending Ambassadors to them, and
receiving Ambassadors from them, make War and Peace, impose Tributes
arbitrarily on his Subjects without the consent of the States of the Country.
The Emperor has nothing to do with his Subjects, they swearing Allegiance only
to him. He only can excommunicate, having reserved to himself the Episcopal
Power. The Prince Elector has seven Councils or Courts, (1.) Concilium
Augustum or his Privy Council. (2.) Concilium Status. (3.) Concilium
Ecclesiasticum, consisting of four, whereof two are Lay men, and two Clergy.
(4.) Dicasterium, who judge Causes between man and man. (5.) Concilium feudale.
(6.) Concilium redituum temporalium or rationum. (7.) Concilium redituum
Ecclesiasticorum. The Prince has thought fit to keep these two last distinct,
partly that he may know how to proportion the Ministers Allowance; and partly
that if any of his Successors should happen to change his Religion (as is
ordinary for Princes to do in Germany) they may be able to distinguish clearly
between their own proper Temporal and the Church Revenue.

The Prince in his own Territory is general Bishop and supreme Head in
Ecclesiastical Affairs. Formerly this Country was under the Inspection and
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Spier, but since the Reformation, the Prince has
not only seized the Revenues of the Church into his own hand, but also assumed
to himself entirely the Episcopal Power and Jurisdiction. He also is universal
Patron, and disposes of all vacant Benefices as he pleases; indeed the Council
of four nominate and present two unto him, of which usually he chooses one,
because it may well be presumed that he knows not so well as they what persons
are best qualified and fit to be preferred; but he is not obliged to confer the
Benefice upon either of the persons by them so nominated, but may either put in
another known to himself, or command them to nominate others, if he like not
those presented. The Religion of the Country is the Reformed. The whole
Palatinate is divided into three Praefecturae, and some, viz. the greater of
these subdivided into less. Every Praefectura has its Inspector or Bishop, who
is Pastor of some Church in that Praefectura: He differs not from any other in
any Jurisdiction, but in that commonly he has a larger Stipend. His business
is only to give Information, if he be of a lesser Division, to the Inspector of
the whole Praefectura under which he is, if of a greater, to the Council of
foar. If need be every Praefectura or great Town has a Presbytery. The
Presbytery of Heidelberg consists of the five Ministers of the City, two
Deputies from each Jurisdiction except the Aulica: and two from each Quarter of
the City; so that at this time the number in all is 21. These all have equal
Suffrages the Laymen with the Ministers, only one of the Ministers always
presides in his Course. This Presbytery assembles once every week, at whose
meeting is always present a Delegate from the Prince, to see that nothing be
agitated there which it concerns not the Presbytery to meddle withal. This
Presbytery has no power to excommunicate or inflict any Church Censure; but if
any person be accused to them of any Crime, they send him to the Jurisdiction
to whom he appertains, to enquire into his Offense. The Court having received
this Information from the Presbytery, either neglect it if they please, or if
they see cause enquire into it, and punish the Delinquent according to his
Demerit, and in the close of the Sentence or Warrant for execution add this
Clause, Quod ad Scandalum Ecclesiae datum remittimus te ad Presbyterium. Now at
last, all they can do, is to exact of him a public Confession before the
Church, and a promise of Amendment for the future. As for Ordination, it is
given by the Council of four by Imposition of Hands, after examination of the
person to be ordained, and Testimonials exhibited from the University or other
Persons of known Credit. The Prince receives all Tithes, except such as in some
places for conveniences sake are paid immediately to the Ministers; and other
Church-Revenues, most whereof is paid out again in Stipends to the Ministers,
which the Prince proportions accordieg to their Merit and his own Discretion;
the rest is reserved for Emergencies.

July 25. we hired a Coach for Strasburgh, which brought us thither in three
days. At three miles distance from Heidelberg we passed in sight of
Philipsburg, Philipsburg.
a well fortified place situate in a level near the Rhene: now possessed by the
French. The Castle or Palace yielded a goodly Prospect. A mile further we
passed through Graffe a small Town with a Castle belonging to the Markgrave of
Tourlach, where our Coachman paid Toll. We lodged this first night at a Village
called Linknom under the same Lord, who is a Lutheran.

July 26. at four miles end we baited at a large Village called Raspach; and
two miles on further we passed through Stolchoven a little walled Town,
Stolchoven.
where our Coachman paid another Toll; and after one mile more another walled
Town called Lichtenaw, Lichtenaw.
both under the Marquess of Baden. This second night we took up our quarters at
Sertz, a Village under the Earl of Ha^aw.

July 27. we passed over the Rhene divided into two Branches or Streams by two
great Wooden-Bridges, which instead of Boards are floored with whole Fir-Trees
laid loose across, neither pinned nor nailed down: I conceive that the Bridge
might upon any exigent be more suddenly thrown down and broken. Soon after we
were past the Bridges we entered Strasburgh. In this Journey we observed great
plenty of Maiz or Indian Wheat planted, in some places Lathyrus sativus, and in
others Carthamus or bastard Saffron sown in the fields: Growing wild besides
what we had before observed in other places, Blattaria, Solidago Saracenica,
and in the Meadows near Strasburgh, Carduus. Pratensis Tragi.

Strasburgh is a free City of the Empire, Strasburgh.
large, well built, rich and populous, encompassed with a double Wall and
Trench full of Water, besides the advantage of a good situation in a large
Level, very exactly fortified, and the Walls and Works most regular, elegant,
and scrupulously kept in repair: so that it seems no easy thing by force to
take this City; neither was it I think once attempted in the late German Wars.
It lies as a Block in the Frenchmens way, and is as it were the Rampart of the
Empire in these parts. The Government is by a greater Council of 300, chosen by
the several Companies of Citizens, and a lesser of 71, of which number six are
Burgomasters, six Stetmasters, 15 Patres Patriae and 13 of the Militia. The
Women of this City are well-favoured and of good Complexions. The Inhabitants
are most part Lutherans, who have seven Churches: some Papists, who have one
Church and four Cloisters, two for Men and two for Women; and a few Reformed,
who yet are not allowed a Church in Town, but forced to go some two miles to
Church in the Territory of the Earl of Hanaw. This City is an Episcopal See,
the Bishop whereof is Lord of the lower Alsatia. He has a Palace in the City,
but is not suffered to lodge therein above three days together; in an Inn he is
allowed eight days at a time. Here is the fairest, largest, best furnished, and
handsomeliest kept Armory or Arsenal that we saw in Germany, or in all these
respects any where else. Here are also public Granaries, Wine-Cellars and
Storehouses. The River Elle runs through the Town. The Domo or Cathedral
Church is a fair Building of Stone, having a great pair of Brass Folding-Doors
at the West end. Herein we viewed the famous Clock described by Coryat and
others, a Piece of excellent Workmanship, made, as were told by one Isaac
Habrechtus of Strasburgh. The Steeple of this Church is curiously built of
carved Stone, and incomparably the highest that ever we yet saw. The number of
Steps from the bottom to the top is 662. We ascended 640 Steps to the place
called the Crown, from whence we had a wide Prospect of the Country round
about. In this Steeple two men watch constantly by day and four by night.
Sowrebourn.
Ten hours distant from Strasburgh toward Stutgard is Sowrebourn, from whence
acid Water is brought hither, which they mingle with their Wine and drink as at
other places. By the Inhabitants of this and other Imperial Cities, especially
the Women, are many different sorts of Habits used.

July 31. we left Strasburgh and began our Journey toward Basil, traveling as
far as Tivelsheim a Village under the Bishop of Strasburgh, some two miles and
half* August 1. after three miles riding forward we passed through a small
walled Town belonging to the same Bishop called Marklesheim. Two miles further
we rode in sight of Brisach, Brisach.
a Town seated on a Rock by the Rhene side, a place of great Strength and
Importance, much contended for in the late Wars. It is now in the French hands,
as is all Alsatia almost to the Walls of Basil: and after two other miles we
came to a Village called Lodesheim pleasantly situate in a large Plain where we
lodged.

Aug. 2. we rode but one league and an half ere we arrived at Basil. Basil.
This City is large and fair, the Houses being for the most part built of
Stone, tall and painted on the out side. It is compassed about with a double
Wall and Trench, rich and populous, built upon Hills, so that which way soever
you go you either ascend or descend. The River Rhene divides it into two parts,
which are joined together by a Bridge of 14 Arches. That part on the North side
of the River is called Little Basil. There are said to be 300 Fountains in this
City, scarce a Street or House of note but has one. It is one of the thirteen
Cantons of Switzerland, and has in its Territory about 100 Villages. It gives
Title to a Bishop chosen by Canons, who yet is not suffered to lodge in the
Town one night. He lives at Broudint, keeps the State of a Temporal Prince, and
coins Money, which is not current in Basil.

As to the Civil Government, the Citizens are divided into 15 Tribes or
Companies. Each Company chooses 12 men by major Vote, who are called Sexers,
because six of them only are regent at once, viz. one six one year, and the
other six the next, and so alternately. These twelve Viri or Sexers choose out
of each Tribe two Tfunff-Masters or Tribuni Plebis for their Lives. The Tribuni
Plebis choose two out of each Tribe who are called Senators. Of these 60 and the
four Heads (two whereof are called Burgomasters and chosen by the Senators
properly so called, and two Tribuni Plebis or Tfunft-meisters and chosen by the
Tribuni Plebis) the lesser Council consists. Both Burgomasters and
Tfunft-meisters, Tribunes and Senators rule alternately. The old Senators, or
that half of the lesser Council which was in power the precedent year, do first
debate and agree upon any business of moment before it be propounded to the new
Senate; who afterward confirm or reject as they please. The Great Council
(which is assembled by the ordinary Council upon weighty occasions) consists of
all the Magistrates, viz. The 12 Viri and all the lesser or ordinary Council.
The lesser Council Judges in criminal Causes.

In this City is an University founded by Pope Pius the Second. The
University-Senate consists of the seventeen Professors. The Names of the
present Professors in each Faculty, now Anno 1663. are, In DIVINITY,
Johannes Buxtorfius Professor Veteris Testamenti and Linguae Hebraicae. Joh.
Rudolphus Wetstenius Professor N. Testamenti. Lucas Kamlerus primarius Pastor
and Prof. Controversiarum.
In LAW.
Remigius Fechsius Pandectarum Prof. He has collected many Rarities. Lucas
Burchardus Cod. Prof. magnificus Rector. Jacobus Brandmullerus Institut. Prof.
In MEDICINE.
Emmanuel Stupanus Med. Theor. Prof. Joh. C. Bauhinus pater, Praxeos Prof.
Hieronymus Bauhinus F. Anatomes and Botanices Prof. Of these two the Father is
the Son, and the Son consequently the Grandchild of that famous Herbarist and
Anatomist Caspar Bauhinus.
In PHILOSOPHY and Humane Literature.
Christophorus Fee^sius, frater Remigii, Histor. Prof. Rheinhardus Iselius
Ethic. Prof. Rudolphus Burchardus, cognatus Lucae, Mathem. Prof. Mr. Henricus
Keselbachius, Phys. Prof. Fridericus Burchardus, Henrici patruus, Orat. and
Eloq. Prof. Samuel Burchardus, Logicae Prof. cognatus caterorum. Simon
Bathienus, Rhet. Prof. Joh. Zuingerus, Gr. Linguae Prof.


The Professors are to read every day in the week in Term-time, except
Thursdays and Sundays, their Stipends are small and not a competent maintenance.

Here are no Doctors in Divinity created beside the Professors, and some the
condition of whose places require that Degree. In Law they confer two Degrees,
Doctor and Licentiate; in Medicine only Doctor; in Philosophy, Master and
Batchelour. The Ecclesiastical Government is by the three Professors of the
first Faculty, the four Scholarchae and all the Ministers. When a Benefice
happens to be vacant, the Senate nominates three to it, out of which the
Ministers choose one. The City-Ministers have a certain Stipend in Money; in the
Countrey-Villages the Ministers have part of their Allowance in Tithes, and
part in Money. No Minister before or after Imposition of hands is obliged by
Oath or Promise to continue his Profession so long as he lives, but may leave
his Ministry when he pleases, and betake himself to some other Calling. This
and all other the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland are of the Reformed
Religion.

In this City Erasmus Rot. Erasmus.
lived the latter part of his time, and here he died and lies buried in the
great Church, where there is a fair Marble Monument erected to his Memory,
against a Pillar on the North side of the Communion Table. He founded and
endowed a College in Basil, wherein are maintained 20 persons, eighteen whereof
are to be Students in Divinity, who may live there as long as they please,
provided they follow their Studies and continue unmarried: only the Magistrates
have a power to command them thence to another kind of life. Of the other two
one is a Bedel, and the other a Schoolmaster. Over this College there is a
Regent, without whose leave no Student may lodge out of the House one night.
Ten of the Students are to be Basileans and ten Strangers. At the great Church
is preserved Erasmus his Library, called Bibliotheca Amberbachiana, Bibliotheca
Amberbachiana.
because Erasmus bequeathed it ^o Amberbachius, by his last Will and Testament,
which we saw written with his own hand in half a Sheet of Paper, Dated the 12.
of February, 1536. In this Library are preserved many good Pieces and Designs
of Holbenius a famous Painter born in Basil: A Box full of Diplomata, given to
Erasmus by the Pope, Emperor and several Kings and Princes of Europe. Erasmus
his Seal and Ring: A fair Gold Medal sent to Erasmus by the King of Poland:
Many ancient and modern Coins and Medals: Three Rappers (i. e. small Pieces of
Money of a mixed Metal not so big as a Silver Penny of the value of a Farthing)
turned into Gold by Leon. Turnitius a famous Alchymist of this place, who
turned the Nail at Florence: Several ancient Entaglie: Many Papers of
Amberbachius, concerning the Antiquities of Augusta Rauracorum, formerly a
great City, now a Village called Augst, not far distant from Basil. The great
Church or Cathedral at Basil was built by the Emperor Henry II. who married
Cunigunda the Daughter of an English King. S. Pantalus an English man was the
first Bishop here. The graver sort of Citizens and Magistrates wear Ruffs and
Steeple-Caps. The Professors and Ministers wear the same Caps and Ruffs, and
besides short Gowns, which reach little lower than their Knees. Many of the
Countrey-Boors wear Straw-Hats. The Women wear their Coats very short, and some
of them little round Caps on their Heads, very like the young Scholars Caps in
Cambridge, but less; and a Tin-Girdle about their Wastes. We saw in this City
Dr. Fell. Platerus his Musaeum or Cabinet, wherein there is a good Collection of
Minerals, Stones, Metals, dried Fishes, and other natural and artificial
Rarities, gathered by Tho. Platerus the Father, and Fell. Platerus the Son, and
disposed in a good Method, the Names being set to each one. Here and at Zurich
are Sermons every day in the week at several Churches.

David George that monstrous Fanatic died in this City, at whose Death there
happened a great Tempest of Thunder and Lightning, and a Thunderbolt brake
into his House.

About Basil we found growing wild beside what we had before met withal,
Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta, Passerina Tragi among the Corn. Phalangium
parvo flore ramosius, Blitum minus album J. B. in fimetis. Cymbalaria Italica
hederacea, in muris urbis ad portam quae Argentinam ducit. Stoebe major
calyculis non splendentibus, in marginibus agrorum and muris passim toto
itinere a Frankendalia ad Basileam usque. Polium montanum Lavendulae folio,
Consolida media Genevensis J. B. and Cneorum Matthioli seu Thymelaea minor
Cordi. But if any one desires a more particular account of what Plants grow
wild about Basil, C. Ba^thinus his Catalogus Plantarum circa Basileam
nascentium will give him full satisfaction.

August 10. from Basil we set forward for Zurich. At the end of one Dutch mile
we passed Augst, supposed to have been Augusta Rauracorum. There we viewed the
Ruins of an ancient Building, judged by Amberbachius to have been an
Amphitheater. Next we rode fast by a walled Town on the Rhene subject to the
Archduke of Inspruck. On the Hills hereabout we first saw Fir-trees growing
wild. Then we passed through Bruck a pretty little walled Town having one
handsome Street well built with tall Houses of Stone, and Fountains in the
middle, and lodged at the Baths of Baden six miles distant from Basil. This day
we first took notice of the little green Tree-Frogs. The Baths here are said to
be sixty in number, but small; the Water is very hot. Baden is a walled Town,
seated on the side of a Hill by the River Limagus, about half an English mile
distant from the Baths. Here the Delegates of the thirteen Cantons meet and
sit. The poor People put a Cheat upon Strangers, bringing them to sell (as they
pretend) fossile Dice, which they say, they dig out of the Earth naturally so
figured and marked. But I am well assured, such as they brought us were
artificial Dice, and if they dig'd them out of the Earth, they first buried
them there themselves. From Baden, Aug. 11. we rode along by the Limagus on one
hand, and fair Vineyards on the other to Zurich.

Zurich is pleasantly situate at the end of a Lake called Zurich-Sea, Zurich.
scarce so big as Basil, but I think more populous. The River Limagus which
runs out of the Lake divides it into two almost equal parts, which are joined
together by two Bridges; one very broad for Carts and Horses to pass over.

The Houses are built of Timber with Clay-Walls, handsomely painted, many of
them four or five Stories high. The Streets are narrow but well paved with
Flints and great Pebbles. This City is as well fortified as the Situation of it
will permit, besides the Wall, being encompassed round with good Earthworks and
Trenches after the modern fashion. The River Sele runs by and gives defense to
it on the South side, and a little lower empties itself into the Limagus. The
Citizens are given to Merchandise, all very busy and industrious. They either
are rich or at least so esteemed, and therefore envied by their Neighbors of
the Romish Religion. Here are no Guards of Soldiers at the City-Gates; no
Strangers examined or searched either at coming in or going out. We observed the
color of the Water of the Zurich-Sea to be greenish and well approaching to
that of Seawater. Afterward we found the Water of all the Lakes and Rivers
near the Alps to be of the same color, at which we were not a little
surprised. For we were wont to attribute that color in the Seawater to the
mixture of Salt that is in it, whereas the Water of these Lakes and Rivers
discovers to the Taste nothing of Salt or brackish. But afterward considering
that these Waters did consist for the most part of Snow dissolved; and that
Snow is supposed to contein good store of nitrous Salt, we thought it not
altogether improbable that this Color may be owing to the nitrous Particles
remaining in the Water, though they be not copious enough to affect our Taste;
and it would be worth the while to distill good quantities of this Water, to see
whether it would leave any Salt behind.

That these Lakes and Rivers do consist for the most part of Snow-water it is
manifest, for that upon the Mountains (excepting the lower parts of them) no
Rain falls in Wintertime, but only Snow, with which the higher parts of them
are covered to a great thickness for at least six months in the year; and for
that the Rivers that flow from the Alps run lowest in Winter, and abound most
with Water in the Summertime; so that sometimes they overflow their Banks in
the hottest months of the year, and when no Rain falls* as my self can
testify concerning the River Rhodanus; because the Sun at the season melts the
Snow upon the Mountains. Hence it appears, that their Opinion was not so absurd
who attributed the yearly Increase and Overflowing of the River Nilus to the
dissolution of the Snow upon those Mountains where it has its first Rise.
Though I do not think this to be the true Cause, partly because that part of
the Earth where those Mountains lie is so hot by reason of its Situation under
the direct and sometimes perpendicular Beams of the Sun, that it is not likely
any Snow should fall, much less lie there: chiefly because Travelers generally
agree, that in most parts of that Climate where those Mountains lie, there are
at that time of the year great falls of Rain, to which therefore the
Overflowing of Nilus is more probably attributed.

The Government of this City is by a greater and a lesser Council. The lesser
Council consists of 50, viz. 24 Tribunes or Masters of the Companies chosen by
the twelve Tribes or Companies, into which the City is divided, two by each
Company. These 24 are called Zwelvers because twelve of them only are regent at
once. Twelve Senators, chosen out of the Companies, one out of each Company by
the greater Council according to our Information, according to Simler by the
lesser. Six, elected by the same greater Council as we were informed, but
according to Simler by the lesser, out of the People indifferently where they
please; four Tribuni nobilium chosen by the Gentlemen; two Senatores nobilium;
and two Burgomasters or Consuls chosen by the Council of 200. The Consuls and
half this Council rule by turns, viz. 12 Zwelvers and 12 Senators with one
Consul one half year and the other half the next; and this half that rules is
called Concilium novum. All the 50 meet every week, and if any Decree be to be
made, it is dated in the presence of the Concilium novum and vetus. All the 50
hear Civil Causes, Simler says eight chosen by the 50; and the Concilium novum
judge in Criminals alone. The greater Council consists of 200, viz. 144 elected
out of the Tribes, twelve out of each Tribe; 18 chosen by the Noblemen among
themselves; 24 Zwelvers; 4 Tribuni nobilium; 2 Senatores nobilium; the 6
elected indifferently, and the two Burgomasters. Why the twelve chosen by the
greater Council should be left out, we know not, and therefore suspect our
Information was not good about the making up the great Council; but of the 12
out of each Tribe, and 18 out of the Noblemen we are sure. This great Council
chooses Land^voghts, and assembles upon important occasions that concern the
whole Commonwealth. They elect four Stadthalters or Proconsuls out of the 24
Masters of the Companies; two Sekelmasters or Treasurers either out of the
twelve Senators of the Companies or the twelve Tribunes of the Concilium novum.
Half the lesser Council is chosen every half year at Christmas and Midsummer.
The Concilium vetus goes out, and then the Concilium novum becomes vetus, and
chooses a new Concilium novum, but for the most part the same are chosen again.

Aug. 12. from Zurich we traveled to Schaffhaussen, Schauffhaussen.
passing by a great Cascate or Catarract of the River Rhene called Wasserfall;
near to which we first observed Orobus sylvaticus purpureus vernus and Hepatica
nobilis growing wild. This Journey we also found Vlmaria major sive Barba capri
by a little Bridge not far from Schaffhaussen.

Schaffhaussen is seated upon the River Rhene, over which there is here a
Bridge, part of Wood and part of Stone. All Boats or Flotes that come down the
River must here unload, there being no passing further by reason of great
Stones in the Chanel, and the precipitious Descent of the water at Wasserfall.
This Town is well built, (the Houses being most of Stone) walled about and
intrencht. It has two fair Streets handsomely paved, besides many other small
ones. Here as at Zurich, the Citizens when they walk abroad wear their Swords.
As to the Civil Government, the Citizens are divided into twelve Tribes or
Companies. Each Tribe chooses two Tribuni Plebis, and these 24 make the lesser
or ordinary Council. The great Council consists of these and sixty more, chosen
also by the Companies, each Company choosing five. The Father and Son, or two
Brothers cannot be together of the Council. By the greater Council are chosen
yearly two Consuls or Burgomasters, two Quaestors, one Proconsul, and one
Aedilis, but for the most part they choose the same. All Causes Civil and
Criminal are tried before the lesser Council. Every one of the twenty four has
52 Florens and ^ modii frumenti allowed him yearly.

Aug. 13. we rode to Constance. Constance
By the way we found Horminum luteum glutinosum sive Colus Jovis, and in a Wood
upon a Mountain Pyrolafolio mucronato serrato, Pseudoasphodelus Alpinus,
Anonymus flore Coluteae, and Sonchus caeruleus latifolius. Constance is an
Imperial City pleasantly situate in a fair Level by the Rhene side, Bodenzee
and at the end of the Bodenzee or Lake of Constance, called anciently Lacus
Brigantinus and Lacus Acronius. There is a long Bridge over the River or Lake,
made part of Wood and part of Stone. The Streets of the City are fair, and the
Buildings of Stone. The Council that was held here Anno Dom. 1417. at which
John Hus was condemned has made this place well known. For what end this
Council was assembled and what they did, the following Inscription on the
Council-house will acquaint the Reader: Gaude clara Domus, pacem populo
generasti

This Town is also famous for the Resistance it made to the Suedish Forces
commanded by Horn, besieging of it Anno 1598. vid. Galeazzo.

Yet it seemed to me but slenderly fortified, having toward the Water only a
Wall, and toward the Land an earthen Rampart or Wall and Ditch drawn at a good
distance from the Stone-Wall. It has indeed advantage by its Situation, having
a Lake on one side and a fenny Level on the other.

Aug. 15. we took Boat, and crossed the Bodenzee from Constance over to Lindaw,
Lindaw.
and by the way had a fair Prospect of the strong Town of Oberlingen. Lindaw
stands in the middle of the Lake environed with Water. It is joined to the
Land by a Bridge of 290 paces, one half of it being Stone, and the other (that
is that next the Town) Wood, which may upon occasion easily be taken down and
removed. This City besides its natural Strength by reason of its Situation, is
also artificially fortified with stout Walls and Bulwarks standing in the
Water, that side most which is nearest the Land. On that side toward the Lake
are many Rows of great Stakes driven into the ground, to hinder the approach of
any Boat or Vessel to the Town. So that a man would think this place
impregnable. The Streets and Houses are not so spacious and fair as those of
Constance, yet proper enough: Several Fountains also there are in the Streets.
Toward the Bodenzee are two Walls, and between the Walls a large vacant space
of Land wherein Vineyards are planted, of the Grapes whereof are said to be
made yearly 100 Fudders, that is 300 English Hogsheads of Wine. Eight Villages
belong to this City, their Territory extending about three hours.

For Plants we found not far from Lindaw in the mountainous Woods, Erica
procumbens herbacea, Scahiosa latifolia rubro flore, Gentiana Asclepiadis
folio, and in the moister places Vlmaria major sive Barba capri, and Lactuca
montana purpuro-caerulea major C. B. In the moist Meadows Pneumonanthe
plentifully. On the Banks of a small River running into the Bodenzee near
Lindaw, Myrica sylv. altera Clus. In the moist and fenny places near the Lake
both here and at Constance, Gratiola vulgaris plentifully.

Aug. 17. we rode Post from Constance toward Munchen in Bavaria. The several
Stages where we changed Horses were (1.) Wangen a small Imperial Town, Wangen.
two miles distant from Lindaw. (2.) Laykirk, Laykirk.
another small Imperial Town, two miles further on. (3.) Memmingen, Memmingen.
a free City of the Empire, and one of the chiefest of Suevia both for
Greatness and Strength. The Streets are broad, Water running through them. (4.)
Mundelheim a small Town under the Duke of Bavaria, Mundelheim.
where we lodged. (5.) Lansberg, a pretty Town, Lansberg.
with a handsome Fountain in the Marketplace built in 1663. four German miles
from Mundelheim. From hence we rode through no considerable Town till we came
to Munchen, passing by the Ammerzee, Ammerzee Lake.
a great Lake about three German miles in length, where we had the Alps or some
very high Mountains in Prospect.

All Strangers that enter Munchen Munchen
are first strictly examined at the Gate, their Names sent in to the the
Governor, and they detained till the return of the Messenger with leave for
their Admission. This City is very strongly walled and fortified, and for the
bigness of it is the most splendid and beautiful place we have seen in all
Germany, so that well might Cluverius term it omnium Germanicarum pulcherrimam.
The Streets are broad and straight, adorned with sumptuous Churches and
Cloisters, and stately Houses. Above all the Dukes Palace deserves Respect, not
to say Admiration, it being the most magnificent and sumptuous Edifice for a
House, that we have any where hitherto seen beyond the Seas. In the great
Garden of this Palace we saw many rare Plants, among the rest we especially
took notice of the Aloe-trees (for so I may well call them for the Greatness
and Highth of their Stalks which shoot up in one year) of which there were
more, I verlly think, in this one Garden than in all Europe besides; I mean of
such as came to Stalk and Flower. In this City so far remote from our native
Country it seemed strange to us to find a Cloister of English Nuns. We thought
it worth noting that the Bodies of the Churches here are filled with Pews and
Seats, as ours in England, whereas generally in the Churches of the
Roman-Catholics there are no fixed Seats, or but very few; the People either
standing to hear their Sormons, or sitting on moveable Benches and Stools; that
so when the Sermon is ended the Body of the Church may be again cleared. Having
viewed Munchen, the nearness of Augsburgh invited us thither, where we arrived
August 21. having passed by the way a pleasant little Town belonging to an Abbey
of Bernardines called Pruck; and after that a little walled Town seated on a
Hill, called Fridberg.

Augsburgh is a great City about eight miles in Compass, Augsburgh.
well walled and trenched about, standing upon the River Lech; The Houses for
the most part well built, the Streets adorned with several stately Fountains:
The Armory comparable to that of Strasburgh, consisting of twelve Rooms filled
with Arms and Weapons of all sorts; The Stadthouse next to that of Amsterdam
the fairest and most stately of any we have yet seen; in which there is one
upper Room or Chamber very large and high-rooft, paved with Marble, richly gilt
and painted both Roof and Walls, and in all respects scarce to be paralleled.
The Citizens are divided between Papists and Lutherans, these latter being
esteemed double the number of the former; yet have they seven Cloisters of Men
and five of Women, whereof one English. Very few Reformed here. This is a free
City of the Empire and governed by its own Magistrates. It seems to me at
present for the bigness not very populous, and is, I believe, somewhat decayed,
and short of what it has been, both as to Riches and Multitude of Inhabitants:
which may be attributed to the Losses and Injuries i^ sustained in the late
Wars. In a large Plain not far from Augsburgh, over which you pass going thence
to Munchen, we observed many rare Plants, viz. Tithymalus verrucosus, Trifolium
pratense album a Fuchsio depictum sive mas J. B. Pseudo-asphodelus Alpinus C.
B. Thlaspi clypeatum asperifolium seu biscutatum; Horminum sylv. latifolium
Ger. Phalangium parvo flore non ramosum C. B. Carlina herbariorum Lob.
Ge^tianella Autumnalis flore caruleo quinquefolio, calyce pentagono grandi.
Floris tubus e calyce non eminet, ut in hujus generis aliis; sed folia tantum
expanduntur supra margines calycis, ut in Caryophyllis. Gentianellae species
minima flore unico caeruleo elegantissimo, an minima Bavarica? Linum sylvestre
latifolium caul viscoso flore rubro C. B. forte. Folia habet pilosa,
acuminata, modice lata, nervis quinque per longitudinem decurrentibus,
longitudine foliorum Lini: flos quinquefolius, coloris incarnati, ut vocant,
saturatioribus and velut sanguineis lineolis striatus; Radix lignosa est, and
per plures annos durare videtur. Cirsii seu cardui duae species: Priori flos
Cirsii nostri Anglicani flori simillimus, and in uno caul plerunque unicus;
verum folia pallide sunt viridia, profunde laciniata and spinulis horrida; ad
modum fere Cardui viarum vulgatissimi: Alteri, quae jam defloruerat, folia
viridia, non laciniata, breviora and latiora quam praecedenti, in ambitu
spinosa, and Hyoseris masculi foliis figura sua nonnihil similia. Saxifraga
Venetorum, Daucus montanus Apii foliis, flore luteo; Another sort of
umbelliferous Plant very like to the Figure of Caucalis Peucedani folio; Lotus
siliquosa lutea Monspeliensis J. B. near the River Lech, as also Bellis
caerulea Monspeliaca Ger. Dory^nio congener planta; Thalictrum angustissimo
folio. By the way-side near the City in sandy Ground Rhamnus primus
Diascoridis; and all about in stony places Caryophyllus gramineo folio minimus;
not to mention those that we had elsewhere seen, v. g. Aster Atticus Italorum
flore purpureo; Mezereon Germanicum, Asclepias flore albo, Anonymus flore
Coluteae, etc.

Aug. 28. we departed from Augsburgh, and being loath to leave behind us unseen
so considerable a City as Nurenberg, which Cluver calls Germanicarum
superbissimam, we bestowed three days on a Journey almost directly backwards to
see it. The first day, after the Riding of six German miles we crossed the
Danow over a Wooden Bridge to Donavert, Donavert
a prett^ Town belonging to the Duke of Bavaria, where we lodged. The second
being the 29. of August we passed through two walled Towns, Monhaim.
viz. Monhaim and Papenhaim, Papenhaim.
and lodged at Weissenbergh an Imperial Town of some note, the Inhabitants
whereof are all Lutherans, Weissenbergh.
it is ^ive miles distant from Donavert. Nigh this Town is a strong Fort built
upon a Hill, belonging to the Marquess of Anspach, who is also a Lutheran.

The third day being the thirtieth, we passed through a small walled Town
called Pleinfeldt, Pleinfeldt.
and at three miles distance we rode close beside another walled Town called
Rotte, Rotte.
under the Marquess of Anspach, and after two hours riding more through Woods
of Pine, we arrived at Nurenberg, Nurenberg.
which City we found to answer if not exceed our Expectation; it being the most
stately and best built that we have seen in Germany. The Houses are for the
most part of Freestone, and were they but as uniform as those of the
Low-Countrey-Towns, Nurenberg would not for Beauty give place to any of them.
Besides it is rich, populous, and for bigness I think not inferior to the best
in Germany, though I am not ignorant that in this last respect some give
Collen, some Erfurt the Preeminence. It has under it a large Territory,
comprehending above 100 Towns and Villages. The Country round about is barren
and sandy* and the City far distant from the Sea, and standing upon but a small
River; notwithstanding which Disadvantages, by the Industry of the people, it
is become one of the best traded and most potent Towns in Germany. The
Inhabitants are for the most part Lutherans; they seemed to us in the Ornaments
of their Churches and manner of their Worship more to symbolize with the
Roman-Catholics than any other People of that Profession we had then observed.
The Papists are allowed a small Church within the Walls, but the Reformed none.
The great Piazza, the Stadt-house and other public Buildings deserve
remembrance. This Town wants not for Walls and Ditches, being every way well
fenced and fortified. Finally, it is an Imperial City or Free Commonwealth,
being governed by a Senate and Magistrates of its own: but of the Model or Form
of Government for want of good Acquaintance, we could not get a perfect account.

As for Plants, we found no great variety near the City, but by the way we came
from Augsburgh, we observed in several Woods near Papenhaim, Caryophyllus flore
tenuissime dissecto C. B. Not far from Weissenberg, Draba lutea siliquis
strictissimis C. B. Gentianula lanugine ad singulorum foliorum lacinias donata,
flore quadripartito J. B. Buglossum angustifolium, Cytisus Gesneri cui flores
fere spicati J. B. and a kind of Plant like to our Meadow Saxifrage, but taller
and larger, An Seseli pratense Lob.?

September 3. from Nurenberg we began our Journey to Ratisbone or Regensberg.
This day we proceeded no further than Aldtdorf, a little walled Town and an
University belonging to the Nurenbergers, where there is a pretty
Physic-Garden. This Inscription in a Cloister in the College conteins the
History of the Founding of this University.

Hoc Pietatis and Doctrinarum omnium laudandum Domicilium inclytus Senatus
Noriberg. liberaliter extrui curavit die quae BB. Petro and Paulo sacra;
inauguravit and publicavit, Anno Salutis MDLXXV. imperante D. Maximiliano II.
Caes. Aug. PP. Curatoribus Eccles. and Scholarum Georgio Volcomero, Philippo
Geudero, and Hieronymo Baumgraffnero, Oppidique Praefecto Balthasare
Baumgraffnero. Ades o Deus and piis conatibus volens propitius fave, ut certe
favor exinde numinis eluxit, dum Anno quidem MDLXXVIII. subscribente votis
landatissimi Senatus autoritate and clementia augustissimi and invictissimi
Imperatoris Rudolphi II. Curatoribus Hieronymo Baumgraffnero, Vilibaldo
Schlisselfeldero, Bartholomaeo Poemero and Julio Geudero in culmen Academiae
Gymnasium evexit: tandemque Anno Aerae Christianae MDCXXIII. ejusdem Senatus
desiderium sanctissimum prosperante divinitus amplissima indulgentia
sacratissimi Caesaris Augusti D. Ferdinandi II. Scholarchis Christophoro
Furero, Georgio Christ. Volcomero, Udalrico Grundero and Carolo
Schlifselfeldero Universitatis titulo privilegiisque perbeavit. Fac proprium
hoc nobis bonum, o Fons aeterne boni.

In the College are maintained 36 Students at the Charges of the City of
Nurenberg, which also pays the Professors their Stipends. The Degrees conferred
here are Doctor of Law, Physic and Poetry, Batchelour of Divinity and Master of
Arts. As for Plants there is a double Catalogue put out by Dr. Mauritius
Hofman: one of such as are nursed up and preserved in the Physic-Garden: the
other of such as grow wild near the Town; in the composing of which he seems to
have taken much pains, so that I believe this Catalogue is very full and exact.

Dr. Hofman showed us several Cornua Ammonis, or Serpent-Stones and some
petrified Cochle and Muscle-shells found in the Fields and Hop-Gardens near
Altdorf, of which we our selves the day following as we traveled from thence
to Nieumarkt, in some fields we passed through, observed, and gathered up good
store. Of these kinds of Bodies, I shall here take leave by way of digression
to discourse a little: And first I shall make a particular enumeration of some
of the most remarkable places where they have been found, as well in England as
beyond the Seas, partly of my own Observation, partly out of good Writers.
Secondly, I shall give the Opinions of the best Authors concerning the Original
and Production of them.

England which afford plenty of these petrified Shells are (1.) Whithy or
Whitebay in the North Riding of Yorkshire, where (as Camden relates in his
Description of that Country) Lapides inveniuntur serpentum in spiram
revolutorum effigy, naturae ludentis miraculum. -- Serpents olim fuisse
crederes quos lapideus cortex intexisset. Besides these Serpent-Stones which he
alone mentions, we found there both upon the Shores and in the rocky Cliffs by
the Seaside petrified Muscles and Belemnites in great plenty. (2.)
Huntley-nabb, on the same Coast, not far from Whitby to the Northwards, where
(as the same Camden relates) upon the Shores under the Cliffs lie Stones varia
magnitudine tam affabre sphaerica figura a natura efformati, ut globi artificis
manu in majorum tormentorum usum tornati videantur. In quibus effractis
Inveniuntur Serpents saxei, suis spiris revol^^i, sed qui plerique capitihus
destituti. At this place I never was, but upon the Shore at Whitby, I observed
many of this kind of Balls, that is, Serpent-stones crusted over with or
enclosed in another Stone, as in their Case or Matrix, and leaving therein when
broken, their Impression, but none of that exact sphaerical roundness he
mentions, but rather of a lenticular figure. (3.) Alderley in Glocestershire
mentioned by the same Author in his Description of that Country. Ad fontes Avon
fluvioli (says he) vix vcto mill. pass. a litore in collibus prope Alderley
viculum lapides cochlearum and ostrearum specie enascuntu^, quae sive viva
fuerint aliquando animantia, sive naturae ludicra quoerant Philosophi naturae
venatores. (4.) Kinesham or Cainsham in Somersetshire, not far from Alderley,
so called (says Camden) from Keina a holy British Virgin, quam serpents in
lapides mutasse superioris aevi credulitas multis persuasit, eo quod ejusmodi
Indeulis naturae miracula ibi in latomiis nonnunquam inveniantur, Vidimus enim
lapidem hinc delatum serpentis in spiram revoluti effigy, cujus caput
imperfectius in circumferentia prominuit, extrema cauda centrum occupante. Of
these Serpent-Stones we saw several sorts here, and some of that extraordinary
bigness, that (as I remember) they were about a Foot in Diameter. (5.) Farnham
in Surrey, mentioned by Dr. Merret in his Pinax. (6.) Richmond in Yorkshire
mentioned by Camden. Beside which places my self and Friends have seen and
gathered of them at Lyme in Dorsetshire, Adderbury in Oxfordshire (which
doubtless thence had its name) about five miles distant from Banbury,
Bricksworth in Northamptonshire, and in several places near Daventry, Verulam
in Hartfordshire, Shukborough in Warwickshire. And which is most strange, Mr.
Air of Highlooe in the Peak of Derbyshire showed us a great lump of them
amassed together by a Cement as hard as Marble, found in that mountainous
Country; And Mr. Martin Lister assures us that there are store of them found
in Craven the most mountainous and craggy part of Yorkshire: and in a
Discourse of his concerning them, published in the Philosophical Transactions,
Numb. 76. page 2283. he mentions for them Adderton in Yorkshire, thence
denominated, Wansford Bridge in Northamptonshire, and Gunthrop and Beauvoir.
Castle in Lincoln and Nottingham-shires.

Besides these petrified Shells there are found in several places of England
other congenerous Bodies, viz. Star stones, by some called Astroites; by
Boethius de Boot, Asterias vera seu Lapis stellaris; by Gesner, Sphragis
Asteros; by Fer. Imperat. Stella Judaica. (2.) S. Cuthhert's Beads or Trochites
and (3.) Cap-Stones or Echinites, called by Naturalists Lapides brontioe. Of
the Glossopetrae I have not yet heard that there have been any found in
England, which I do not a little wonder at, there being Sharks frequently taken
upon our Coasts.

1. Of those they call Star-Stones (because they run out into five Angles like
so many Rays as they use to picture Stars with) there are found at Shukborough
in Warwickshire and Cassington near Gloucester, where we also have gathered of
them. Camden mentions a third place, that is Beauvoir-Castle in Lincolnshire,
sub quo (says he) inveniuntur Astroites lapides, qui stellas invicem connexas
repraesentant, in quibus radii eminent singulis angulis quini, and singulis
radiis cavitas media subsidet. We have had them also sent us out of Yorkshire,
but remember not where they were gathered.

II. Those they call S. Cuthhert's Beads are found on the Western shore of the
s Holy Island. This last Summer [1671.] Tho. Willisell discovered them in the
Chinks of the Stones in the bottom of the Chanel of the River Tees, which parts
Yorkshire and the Bishopric of Duresine. These are round and not angular like
the Star-Stones. Both (if they be owing to the Sea) seem to be the Spinoe
dorsales or Tail-Bones of Fishes petrified, they consisting for the most part
of several Plates or Pieces sticking together like so many vertebrae, though I
confess the particular Pieces are shorter or thinner than the Vertebres of any
Fish I have as yet observed.

III. The Echinites or Brontiae are found scattered all over England of several
magnitudes and shapes. I have not heard of any Bed of them or great number
found in one place. Beyond the Seas we have (besides the place which gave
occasion to this Discourse) found of them at Brescia in Lombardy on the sides
of a Hill adjoining to the City: upon the Banks of the River Tanaro in Piedmont
four miles below Aste, but most plentifully in the Island of Malta, where we
also saw great store of Glossopetrae or Sharks Teeth petrified of all sorts and
sizes.

For the Glossopetroe, Boethius de Boot lib. 2. cap. 168. says they are found
in the Sands near Daventer in Overyssel, and in the Alum-Mines near Lunenburgh
in Germany. Goropius Becanus in Orig. Antverp. l. 3. says that they are often
dug up in the Ditches about Antwerp; and found in so great plenty in a Hill
near Aken in Germany, that he thinks it a good Argument to prove that they
could not be the Teeth of Sharks: In colle illo qui Aquisgrano imminet tantum
id genus piscium fuisse quis crederet quantum de Glossopetrarum copia
conjectari deberet.

For petrified Cochles and other Sea-Shells, Geo. Agricola says there are
found of them in the Stone-Quarries of Galgeberg and those beyond Mount Maurice
in the Territory of Hildesheim in Saxony; and sometimes in the new part of the
City itself in digging of Cellars and in the Town-Ditch, (2.) At Alfeld in the
same Saxony between the Watchtower and the Town as one goes to Embeck. (3.) At
Hannover in the Lime or Chalk-stone Pits, and near a Village called Lindaw.
(4.) In Misnia in the Village Rabschyts near the Brook Trebitia. (5.) In a
certain place of Prussia called the Rose- Garden. (6.) In Hassi^ near the
Castle of Spangeberg. (7.) In Italy in a Mountain near Verona. (8.) In the
Banks of the River Elsa, and prope oppidum ex Florentinis conditoribus
nominatum. Of these Shells amassed together into great Stones by a petrified
Cement are found (as Pausanias relates) in the Quarries of Megara, which kind
of Stone is therefore called Conchites. They are also found in Thessaly,
Hemionia, Macedonia, the Mountains of Calabria, etc. And Steno in his Prodromus
says, that in those huge Stones which lie scattered in some places about the
Town of Volterra (being the remainders of ancient Walls) there are found all
sorts of Shells, and not long since in the middle of the Marketplace there was
cut out a Stone full of streaked Cochles. Jo. Bauhine says that in the
Slate-stone dug out of the Fountain of Boll, where with the Inhabitants
covered their Houses, there appeared several Figures, whereof some represented
Serpents, some Snails, some Scallops, some Cochles, some Muscles, etc. and that
there were dug up many petrified Shells of Cochles, Muscles, Scallops,
Periwinkles, Cornua Ammonis, etc.

Scaliger Exercitat. 196. Sect. 9. says, In saxis Lanarum (tractus est hic
Agri Vasateusis) ad pagum qui Cohors dicitur, saxeos can^ros multos vidimus,
procul a mari plurimum, a Garumna 30 circiter millia passuum.

Bernardus Palissius names these places in France where petrified Shells are
found; The Suburb of S. Martial near Paris; The Mountains of the Forest of
Arden, especially near Sedan; The Province of Valois; The Mountains near
S^issons; The Province of Xantogae and Champagne.

Joannes de Laet in his second Book de Gemmis, cap. 29. relates how Bartholomew
Morisot wrote to him from Dijon in Burgundy, that in a Rock near that City at
the distance from the Sea, called le Fort aux Feos, were found great numbers of
Stones imitating Sea-shells, his words are, Vbique prostant lapides forma
rotunda ac striata, qui ipsam superinduisse videntur Conchyliorum marin orum
materiem, ues^io quo sale per infirmiora crescentium lapidum penetrante,
paulatimque ita crescente ut ambienti undique lapidi uniformem Conchyliorum
formam faciat, nist quod alia aliis majora sint, ita ut si lapidi lapident
attriveris, e medio utri^sque conchyli^ lapidea ^rumpant, obversa, transversa,
mixta, inaequali quidem p^oportione sed forma una, etc.

The same Joannes de Laet gives us another Relation from Jacobus Salmasius
Uncle to Claudius Salmasius and Lord of Sauvignac, of great store of these
petrified Shells found in the stony Fields about Sauvignac, which I shall here
exhibit to the Reader in his own words; Pagus ille Salviniacum uno milliari
distat ab Avallono, ut nun^ appellatur, vel ut prius vocabatur Aballono, and 3
aut 4 mil. a Vezelio poetria Theodori Bezae. Hujus pagi ager arabilis montosus
est and lapidosus totus, qui tamen est feracissimus. In lapidibus illis
reperiuntur inserta quasi ex differenti lapidis materia omne genus conchylia
aliquando plura, aliquando pauciora prout est ipsius saxi magnitudo. Visuntur
ibi Pectines, Ostrea, Solenes, Cornua Hammonis and alia genera. In toto illo
tractu per spatium trium aut quatuor milliarium haec (...) in agris reperiuntur
usque ad appidum vel castrum Montis Regalis, nomine Mont-real, cujus ditionis
ager consitus est totus hujusmodi lapidibus varias conchyliorum species, partim
interi^s insert^s, partim in superficie etiam extantes praeferentibus.

In Italy besides the places already mentioned, we were told, that there were
found of these Shells in the Territory of Modena in a Mountain called Monte
Nicani, and in the Chanel of a River near Vdine in Friuli thence called Rivus
miraculorum, and doubtless in many other places. And for the Lon-Countries,
Goropius l'ecanus says, Apud vicinos nostros Limburgos, Leodios, Chondrusios,
Namurcos, Hannones, Atrebates, Tornacenses, and alios multos, a quibus vel
Marmora nobis vel alia lapidum genera advehuntur, non parva est concharum copia
and varietas. Vidi in silice durissimo Bethunis advecto, quo viae apud nos
sternuntur, tot conchulas totas lapideas, and conclusis valvulis integras,
magna ut curd and art ex illis fuisse caemento aliquo compactus judicaretur.

Besides all which places and others mentioned by Writers I doubt not but in
Italy, Germany, France, England and the Low Countries there are many not taken
notice of where these Bodies might be found, were diligent Search and
Observation made. That they have not been discovered or taken notice of in
other parts of Europe and in Asia and Africa is certainly to be attributed to
the Negligence and Redeness of the People who mind nothing that is curious, or
to the want of learned Writers who should communicate the Histories of them to
the World.



The first and to me most probable Opinion is that they were originally the
Shells or Bones of living Fishes and other Animals bred in the Sea. This was
the general Opinion of the Ancients, insomuch that Steno says, It was never
made a Question among them, whether such Bodies came from any place else but
the Sea. It has of late times and is now received and embraced by diverse
learned and ingenious Philosophers, as in the precedent age by Fracastorius,
and in the present by Nicolaus Steno and Mr. Robert Hook, after whom I need
name no more to give it countenance and authority in the World. In his
Micrographia, Observe. 17. He thus discourses concerning these Bodies. Examining
some of these very curiously figured Bodies (found about Keinsham, which are
commonly thought to be Stones formed by some extraordinary plastic Virtue
latent in the Earth itself) I took notice of these particulars.

First, that these figured Bodies were of very differing Substances as to
hardness: some of Clay, some Marl, some soft Stone, almost of the hardness of
those Stones, which Masons call Fire-Stone, others as hard as Portland Stone,
others as hard as Marble, and some as hard as a Flint or Crystal.

Next, they were of very differing Substances as to Transparency and Color;
some white, some almost black, some brown, some metalline or like Marcasites,
some transparent like white Marble, others like flaw'd Crystal, some gray, some
of diverse colors; some radiated like those long petrified drops, which are
commonly found at the Peak and in other subterraneous Caverns, which have a
kind of Pith in the middle.

Thirdly, that they were very different as to the manner of their outward
Figuration: for some of them seemed to have been the Substance that had filled
the Shell of some kind of Shellfish; others to have been the Substance that
had contained or enwrapped one of these Shells, on both which the perfect
impression either of the inside or outside of such Shells seemed to be left, but
for the most part those impressions seemed to be made by an imperfect or broken
Shell, the great end or mouth of the Shell being always wanting and oftentimes
the little end and sometimes half, and in some there were Impressions, just as
if there had been Holes broken in the figurating, imprinting or moulding Shell:
some of them seemed to be made by such a Shell very much bruised or flaw'd,
insomuch that one would verily have thought, that very figured Stone had been
broken or bruised whilst a Gelly as 'twere, and so hardened, but within the
Grain of the Stone there appeared not any sign of any such bruise or breaking,
but only on the very uttermost Superficies.

Fourthly, they were very different as to their outward covering, some having
the perfect Shell both in Figure, Color and Substance sticking on its surface,
and adhering to it, but might very easily be separated from it, and like other
common Cochle or Scallop-shells, which some of them most accurately resembled,
were very dissoluble in common Vinegar: others of them, especially those
serpentine or helical Stones, were covered with or retained the shining or
pearl-coloured Substance of the inside of the Shell, which Substance on some
parts of them was exceeding thin, and might very easily be rubbed off; on other
parts it was pretty thick, and retained a white Coat or flaky Substance on the
top, just like the sides of such Shells: some of them had large pieces of the
Shell very plainly sticking on to them, which were easily to be broken or
flaked off by degrees: they likewise some of them retained all along the
surface of them very pretty kind of Sutures, such as are observed in the Skulls
of several kinds of living Creatures, which Sutures were most curiously shaped
in the manner of Leaves, and every one of them in the same Shell exactly one
like another; which I was able to discover plainly enough with my naked eye,
but more perfectly and distinctly with my Microscope: All these Sutures I found
by breaking some of the Stones to be the Termini or boundings of certain
Diaphragms or partitions, which seemed to divide the Cavity of the Shell into a
multitude of very proportionate and regular Cells or Caverns: these Diaphragms
in many of them I found very perfect and complete, of a very distinct Substance
from that which filled the Cavities, and exactly of the same kind with that
which covered the outside, being for the most part whitish or mother of-Pearl
colored.

As for the Cavities between those Diaphragms, I found some of them filled with
Marl, and others with several kinds of Stones, others for the most part hollow,
only the whole Cavity was usually covered over with a kind of Tartareous
petrified Substance, which stuck about the Sides, and was there shot into very
curious regular Figures, just as Tartar or other dissolved Salts are observed
to stick and crystallize about the sides of the containing Vessels; or like
those little Diamants, which I before observed to have covered the vaulted
Cavity of a Flint; others had these Cavities all lined with a metalline or
Marcasite-like substance, which I could with a Microscope as plainly see most
curiously and regularly figured, as I had done those in a Flint.

From all which and several other particulars which I observed, I cannot but
think, that all these, and most other kinds of stony bodies which are found
thus strangely figured, do ow their Formation and Figuration not to any kind of
Plastic Virtue inherent in the Earth, but to the Shells of certain
Shell-fishes, which either by some Deluge, Inundation, Earthquake or some such
other means came to be thrown to that place, and there to be filled with some
kind of Mud or Clay, or petrifying Water or some other Substance, which in
tract of time has been settled together and hardened in those shelly Moulds into
those shaped Substances we now find them; That the great and thin end of these
Shells, by that Earthquake, or whatever other extraordinary cause it was that
brought them thither, was broken off; and that many others were otherwise
broken, bruised and disfigured; that these Shells which are thus spirallied and
separated with Diaphragms, were some kind of Nautili or Porcelane-Shells; and
that others were Shells of Muscles, Cochles, Periwinkles, Scallops, etc. of
various sorts; that these Shells in many from the particular nature of the
containing or enclosed earth or some other cause, have in tract of time rotted
and mouldred away, and only left their Impressions both on the containing and
contained Substances; and so left them pretty loose one within another, so that
they may easily be separated by a knock or two of a hammer. That others of
these Shell-fishes according to the nature of the Substances have by a long
continuance in that posture, been petrified and turned into the nature of
Stone. That oftentimes the Shell may be found with one kind of Substance within
and quite another without, having perhaps been filled in one place and
afterward translated to another, which I have very frequently observed in
Cochle, Muscle, Periwincle, and other Shells, which I have found by the
Seaside. Nay further, that some parts of the same Shell may be filled in one
place, and some other Caverns in another, and others in a third or a fourth or
a fifth place, for so many differing Substances have I found in one of the
petrified Shells, and perhaps all these differing from the encompassing Earth
or Stone: The means how all which varieties may be caused, I think will not be
difficult to conceive, to any one that has taken notice of those Shells, which
are commonly found on the Seashore: And he that shall thoroughly examine,
several kinds of such curiously formed Stones, will (I am very apt to think)
find reason to suppose their generation or formation to be ascribable to some
such Accidents as I have mentioned, and not to any Plastic Virtue. For it seems
to me quite contrary to the infinite prudence of Nature, which is observable in
all its works and productions, to design every thing to a determinate end, and
for the atteining that end makes use of such ways as are (as far as the
knowledge of man has yet been able to reach) altogether consonant and most
agreeable to man's reason, and of no way or means that does contradict or is
contrary to human ratiocination; whence it has a long time been a general
Observation and Maxim, that Nature does nothing in vain: it seems I say
contrary to that great wisdom of Nature, that these prettily shaped Bodies
should have all those curious figures and contrivances (which many of them are
adorned and contrived with) generated or wrought by a Plastic Virtue, for no
higher end than only to exhibit such a form; which he that shall thoroughly
consider all the circumstances of such kind of figured Bodies, will I think
have great reason to believe, though I confess one cannot be able presently to
find out what Natures designs are. Thus far Mr. Hook. And Steno agrees exactly
with him, and is far more positive and confident; For (says he) that these
Shells were once the parts of Animals living in a fluid, though there never had
been any testaceous marine Creatures, the very view of the Shell itself
evinceth, as may be evident by the instance of bivalve Cochle-shells.
Concerning (...) these Shells his Observations and Discourses are very
consonant with Mr. Hook's. One or two particulars not yet mentioned, which may
further confirm this Opinion, I find in him, viz. (1.) That there was found a
Pearl-bearing Shell in Tuscany, a Pearl yet sticking to the Shell. (2.) A piece
of the greater Sea-nacre [ Piuna marina] in which the silk-like substance
within the Shell being consumed, the color of that substance did remain in
that earthy matter which had filled the Shell. (3.) That about the City of
Volterra there are many beds of earth not stony, which do abound with true
Cochle-shells that have suffered no change at all, and yet they must needs have
lain there above 3000 years; whence it is evident, that part of Tuscany was of
old time covered with the Sea, and why then might not as well all those other
places where these petrified Shells are found.

Against this Opinion lie two very considerable and material Objections, which
I shall here propound.

First, it will hence follow that all the Earth was once covered by the Sea,
and that for a considerable time: for there being found of these Shells in the
middle of Germany, at least 200 miles distant from any Sea, as my self can
witness, nay, upon the highest Mountains of Europe, even the Alps themselves,
(as may be proved by sufficient Authority) the Sea must needs have covered
them, and consequently, the water keeping its level, all Europe and the World
besides. Now that ever the Water should have covered the Earth to that highth
as to exceed the tops of the highest Mountains, and for a considerable time
abode there, is hard to believe, nor can such an Opinion be easily reconciled
with the Scripture. If it be said that these Shells were brought in by the
universal Deluge in the time of Noah, when the Mountains were covered. I
answer, that that Deluge proceeded from Rain, which was more likely to carry
Shells down to the Sea, than to bring any upwards from it. But because some may
argue from what the Scripture says, [ The fountains of the great deep were
broken up,] that the Deluge proceeded partly from a breaking forth and
overflowing of the Sea, and consequently might bring in these Shells: To that I
answer, that had it been so, such a Flood would have been more likely to
scatter such Shells as it brought in indifferently all over the surface of the
Earth, than to lay them in great beds in particular places: such beds seem to
have been the effect of those Animals breeding there for some considerable
time. If it be said, that those Mountains where such Shells are found might at
first have been low places, and afterward raised up by Earthquakes, that seems
not likely, because they are found upon so many Mountains, unless it be said,
that all Mountains were at first so raised, and then the former difficulty will
recurr, and it will follow, that before the raising of the first Mountains, the
whole Earth was covered by the Sea. Besides, this Hypothesis seems to me in
itself improbable, for that though there be mention made in Histories of some
such Mountains raised by Earthquakes, yet they are but very few and of no
considerable highth or greatness, compared with those chains of high and vast
Mountains, the Alps, Pyrenees, Appennine, Taurus, Caucasus, Imaus, Haemus,
Atlas, etc. In general since the most ancient times recorded in History, the
face of the Earth has suffered little change, the same Mountains, Islands,
Promontories, Lakes, Rivers still remaining, and very few added, lost or
removed. Whence it will follow, that if the Mountains were not from the
beginning, either the World is a great deal older than is imagined or believed,
there being an incredible space of time required to work such changes as
raising all the Mountains, according to the leisurely proceedings of Nature in
mutations of that kind since the first Records of History: or that in the
primitive times and soon after the Creation the earth suffered far more
concussions and mutations in its superficial part than afterward.

II. Among these petrified Shells are many sorts, which are not at this day
that we know of any where to be found; nay some proceed so far as to affirm,
that there is not the like to any one of these supposed petrified Shells to be
found among our present Shell-fishes. If it be said, that these Species be lost
out of the World: that is a supposition which Philosophers hitherto have been
unwilling to admit, esteeming the destruction of any one Species to be a
dismembring the Universe and rendering it imperfect, whereas they think the
Divine Providence is especially concerned to preserve and secure all the Works
of the Creation. Yet granting that some few Species might be lost, it is very
unlikely that so many should, and still more unlikely that such as were so
diffused all over Europe and found in so many places; but most of all that a
whole Genus, of which there were so many several Species, and those scattered
in so many distinct and from each other remote places, should be so utterly
extinct and gone, at least out of our Seas, that there should not one in an age
be found. Such are for example the Serpentine Stones or Cornua Ammonis supposed
originally to have been Nautili, of which I my self have seen five or six
distinct Species, and doubtless there are yet many more. Add heerunto the
greatness of some of these Shells, viz. the Cornua Ammonis, whereof there are
found of about a foot Diameter, far exceeding the bulk of any Shellfish now
breeding or living in our Seas.

The second Opinion is of those who imagine these bodies to have been the
effects and products of some Plastic power in the Earth; and to have been
formed after the manner of Diamants and other precious Stones, or the Crystals
of coagulated Salts, by shooting into such figures. Of these bodies my very
ingenious and learned Friend Mr. Martin Lister discourses in a Letter of his
inserted in the Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 76. to this purpose, upon occasion
of Mr. Steno's Prodromus. We will easily believe, that in some Countries, and
particularly along the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, there may all manner of
Shell-fishes be found promiscuously included in rocks or earth, and at good
distances too from the Sea. But for our English inland Quarries, which also
abound with infinite numbers and great varieties of Shells, I am apt to think
there is no such matter as petrifying of Shells in the business (or as Steno
explains himself, Page 84. in the English version and alibi, that the substance
of these Shells formerly belonging to Animals, has been dissolved or wasted by
the penetrating force of Juices, and that a stony substance is come in the
place thereof) but that these Cochlelike Stones ever were as they are at
present, Lapides sui generis, and never any part of an Animal. That they are so
at present is in effect confessed by Steno in the above cited page; and it is
most certain, that our English Quarry-shells (to continue that abusive name)
have no parts of a different texture from the Rock or Quarry they are taken,
that is, that there is no such thing as Shell in these resemblances of Shells,
but that Iron-stone Cochles are all Iron-stone, Lime or Marble all Limestone
and Marble, Spar or Crystalline Shells all Spar, etc. and that they never were
any part of an Animal. My Reason is, that Quarries of different Stone yield us
quite different sorts or Species of Shells, not only one from another (as those
Cochle-stones of the Iron-stone Quarries of Adderton in Yorkshire differ from
those found in the Lead-Mines of the neighboring Mountains, and both these
from that Cochle-Quarry of Wansford-Bridge in Northamptonshire, and all thee
from those to be found in the Quarries about Gunthorp and Beauvo^r-Castle,
etc.) but I dare boldly say from any thing in Nature besides, that either the
Land, salt or fresh Waters do yield us. It Is true that I have picked out of
that one Quarry of Wansford very resemblances of Murices, Tellinae, Turbines,
Cochleae, etc. and yet I am not convinced, when I particularly examined some of
our English Shores for Shells, as also the fresh Waters and the Fields, that I
did ever meet with any one of those Species of Shells any where else but in
their respective Quarries, whence I conclude them Lapides sui generis, and that
they were not cast in any Animal mould whose Species or race is yet to be found
in being at this day. Thus far Mr. Lister. The like Argument also Goropius
Becanus uses to prove that these Bodies are not petrified Shells.
Scallop-shells (says he) are so rare upon the shores of Flanders, that they
are brought thither by Pilgrims from the coast of Gallicia in Spain, and shown
for strange things; and yet in the ditches about Antwerp there is such plenty
of them, that in digging there they throw up heaps of them like little
mountains, so that he that would gather of them need not take the pains to
travel to Gallicia, or so much as to the Sea-shores. To these he adds another
Argument which yet to me seems of little force. In some places about Antwerp
digging for water, they meet with in the earth a crust or Layer of two foot
thickness and in some parts thinner, wholly made up of Sea-shells, whereas
there was never found such a Mass of Shells upon any of the Sea-shores; so that
no man can reasonably assert that they were thrown up by the Sea and there
left, the waters receding and forsaking them; for then without question we
should hear of the like heaps or beds of them found on the coasts of Holland,
Zealand and Flanders But to this I answer that the reason why at this day there
are not such beds of them to be found upon the shores, may be, because they are
gathered up and carried away by men, partly out of curiosity, partly to burn
for lime or other ways to make use of. Besides we know that in the bottom of
the Sea, these Shell-fishes many times lie in great beds, and there breed in
great abundance, and it is not altogether unlikely, that the Sea might on
occasion suddenly recede and desert such beds, and they afterward come to be
buried in the Earth.

But to argue further in defense of this Opinion. There are found in the earth
many such like figured Stones which we know not whither to refer, as resembling
neither any part of an Animal, nor of a Plant: Such are those that Naturalists
call Lapides Ly^curii, Belemnites, Lapides Judaivi, Trochites, As^eriae and
others, to which if there be at present any Shells, Bones, Fruits, Roots, etc.
like, I am as yet wholly to seek for them. And if there are now no such things
in being, they that defend the contrary Opinion must have recourse to that
gratuitous supposition that such Species are lost out of the World.

Besides I have been told by a person of good credit of a Stone of this nature
resembling a Cochle-shell found in the stomach of a Beef; where in all
likelihood it must be bred and shoot into that figure; which if true, there can
be no reason to doubt, but those in the Stone-Quarries and other places are so
generated.

A third Opinion there is, that some of these bodies are really Shells
petrified, or the cases of such bodies or their contents: and that others of
them are stones of their own kind resembling such Shells, so shaped and figured
by some Plastic power. That Shells may be and are sometimes petrified (as are
also Bones and Wood) cannot be denied, and I my self have gathered such upon
the Seashore; and on the other hand, he that asserts that there are bodies
naturally growing in the earth, which do imitate Sea-shells, delivers himself
from the trouble of answering the Arguments which urge the contrary opinion.
But yet methinks this is but a shift and refuge to avoid trouble, there not
being sufficient ground to found such a distinction. For my own part I confess
I propend to the first Opinion, as being more consonant to the nature of the
thing, and could wish that all external arguments and objections against it
were rationally and solidly answered.

The Names of the Professors in each Faculty, and what Books they read,
together with their Exercises, the following Series Lectionum will acquaint the
Reader.

Catalogus Lectionum atque Exercitationum Academicarum quas inclutae
Norimbergensium Universitatis Altdorffinae Professores, cum Deo, post ferias,
Caniculares hujus Anni MDLXII. coeptas usque ad proxime futuram Panegyrin
Petro-Paulinam public privatimque continuabunt.
Rectore Mauritio Hoffmanno, M. D. Anat. Chir. and Botan. Prof. publ. Sub
faelicibus auspiciis virorum nobilissimorum, perstrenuorum atque
prudentisstmorum Dn. Leonhardi Grundherri III. Viri, Dn. Jodoci Christophori,
Kress a Kressenstein in Rekelsdorff and Durrenmungenaw, Dn. Georgii Sigismundi
Furers ab Heimendorff and Steinbuhl, Dn. Gabrielis Nuzelii ab and in
Sundersbuhl, Illustris Reipub. Norimb. Senatorum and Curatorum Academiae
benemeritissimorum.
SS. THEOLOGIAE PROFESSORES.
JOhannes Weinmann D. Evangelii S. Johannis (...) ea, qua hactenus usus est,
methodo, ad finem usque, divina opitulante gratia, continuabit, and praeter
publicas disputationes, etiam privata exercitia, cum lectoria, tum
disputatoria, ex libris Biblicis and locis Theologicis partim instituta, partim
instituenda, frequentabit.

M. Lucas Fridericus Reinhartus Controversias ad textus Evangelicos Dominicales
agitari solitas; tum Exegeticas, tum Dogmaticas and Morales monstrat, and
optimam sententiam, quapote, confirmat.

M. Joh. Conradus Durr Introductionem aphoristicam in libros Symbolicos
Ecclesiae Noribergensis intra vertentem hunc annum ad inem perducere
allaborabit. Gnomologiam Aristotelicam simul cum interpretatione librorum
Nieomachiorum pertexet.

JVRIS PROFESSORES.
Wilhelmus Ludwell D. a Tit. lib. 4. C. de Oblig. and Action. usque ad tit. de
Vsur. insigniores and difficiliores leges, adeoque materiam obligationis,
probationis and compensationis explicare, and si Deus vitam and valetudinem
concesserit, intra annum absolvere conabitur. Adjectis etiam iis, quae ex Jure
Canonico and Feudali huc pertinere videbuntur.

Idem coepta Collegia continuabit, and petentibus nova aperiet.

Nicolaus Rittershusius D. Explicationes nobiliorum Legum libri xxviii. ff. and
sequentium, public continuabit, privatim vero Collegia habebit, unum
Institutionum Juris, alterum Historicum.

Ernestus Cregel D. Absolutis libri IV. Institut. Impp. titulis XII. ultimis,
de integro earum interpretationem aggrediar, and cum studiose, ea praeprimis,
quae ad Theoriam spectant, in illis obscura adhuc illustraverim, titulos
deinceps in Praxi frequentiores intrae sesquiannum, cum Deo, enodabo.

Ad Publicum Jus quod attinet, meae in eo sunt defixae cogitationes, ut illud
juxta seriem Juris Civilis, Personarum scil. Rerum and Actionum ubi libro VII.
ac VIII. Jurisprudentiae Publicae Georgii Braudlacht finis est impositus,
(...), tractetur. Privatim quemadmodum explicando ac disputando accuratas
Excellentissimi JCti and fidelissimi olim mei Doctoris D. Joachimi Schnobelii,
etc. in Digesta Disputationes impraesentiarum evolvo: ita pro virili, in aliis
tam privatis Collegiis, quam publicis circularibusque Exercitiis qua
disputaturis, qua audituris non deero.

MEDICINAE PROFESSORES.
Mauritius Hoffman D. Quoad per negotia Magistratus Academici licebit, post
absolutas demonstrationes Botanicas, in praelectionibus Anatomicis h. 9. matut.
historiam partium corporis foeminini nuperrime dissecti physiopathologice
explicabit. In Chirurgicis tractatum de Fracturis proponet. Privatim vero
Aphorismorum Hippocr. ex natura sanguinis interpretationem and singulis
inensibus disputationes familiares continuabit.

Jacobus Pancratius Bruno D. diebus Lunae and Martis h. 3. pomer. Institutiones
Medicas perspicua brevitate explicabit. Diebus vero Jovis and Veneris morborum
particularium cognitu and curatu difficiliorum tractationem suscipiet, operaque
sua nova studia Auditorum privatim quoque pro viribus dispatando promovebit.

PHILOSOPHIAE PROFESSORES.
M. Abdias True in Mathematicis Elementa Euclidis in Syllogismos resoluta
repetet. Subjunctis post denas circiter propositiones Problematibus ex Mathes^
speciali, ut ita Studiosi simul and fundamentorum Mathematicorum rationem, and
eorundem usum perspiciant.

In Physicis decisionem brevem potiorum and usum prae reliquis habentium
controversiarum, nuper inchoatam pertexet.

M. Joh. Paul. Felwinger Compendium Logicae absolvet: In Metaphysicis tractabit
doctrinam Affectionum Entis: In Politicis, in tractatu de Magistratu, perget.
Collegia Logica, Metaphysica and Politica aperiet; and Disputationes
Metaphysicas in Aristotelem, si qui futuri sixth Respondentes, continuabit.

Georgius Matthias Konig proxime Syntagma de Viris literatis (...)
auspicabitur. In Epistola ad Galatas etiam perget, eaque finita, ad Epistolam
ad Ephesios se conferet.

M. Joh. Leonhardus Schwaeger explanabit Cioeronis Brutum de claris Oratoribus,
ejusque Oratorem, seu de perfecto Oratore ad M. Brutum: Characteres vero, quos
hactenus sub explicatione textus Virgiliani sparsim oftendit, ac porro
ostendet, in unum ctiam simul collectos, uberiusque diductos, priorum exemplo
excepturis, ad calamum dictabit. Vtrumque per vices ab ipso fiet hora
pomeridiana tertia, atque insuper ejus opera ad Exercitia Oratoria, tam publica
quam privata, in prosa pariter ac ligata petituris parata erit.

M. Christophorus Molitor diebus Lunae and Martis specimen Philologematum
Sacrorum, juxta ductum Schickardiani horologii vel Atrii Dilherriani dictabit,
diebus autem Jovis and Veneris, quae in Arabicis restant, continuabit.
Privatim, si futurus est justus Auditorum numerus, Collegium tam Rabbinicum,
quam Ebraicum aperiet, in Rabb. explicabit and continuabit Theologiam
Talmudicam Dn. Hackspanii b. m. In Ebraico vero linguae fundamenta docebit, and
uti hact^nus sic nunquam omittet circulum Oratorium.

Habebuntur praeterea, ex Superiorum munificentia, sine Studiosorum sumptibus,
quavis hebdomade disputationes, quas vocant, circulares in Theologica,
Juridica, Medica and Philosophica Facultate, necnon singulis mensibus Exercitia
Oratoria.

Sept. 4. we proceeded on our journey to Ratisbone, and passed through
Nieumarkt, a little walled town belonging to the Duke of Bavaria.

5. We passed through Heinmaw a small walled town subject to the Duke of
Neuburg, and at night, passing the River Danow, by a fair Stone Bridge, we
entered Ratisbone or Regensberg so called from the River Regen, which here falls
into the Danow.

This City is large and well built (the houses being for the most part of
stone) adorned with many fair palaces of noble men, Regensberg or Ratisbon
well walled about and fortified. The streets are but narrow. The roofs of the
houses are not built so steep as at Augsburgh, Nurenburgh, etc. or as ours in
England, but flattish after the Italian made. The Diet of the Empire is usually
held here, it being an Imperial City, and governed by its own magistrates,
though in the D. of Bavaria's country. This city has a Bishop, who is of the
Romish Religion, but he has little to do, all the magistrates and the greatest
part of the Inhabitants being Lutherans. Yet some cloisters there are of Monks
and Nuns, and a college of Jesuits.

Upon the rocks not far from Ratisbone a little below the town on the other
side the river we found, besides many of the rarer sort of our English plants,
Asclepias flore albo. Daucus montanus Apii folio major C. B. Apium montanum
nigrum J. B. Caucalis Peucedani folio Ger. as I take it: It has a fine leaf, a
small root (which I believe yearly perishes) reddish stalks, an umbel of white
flowers, to which succeed small round seeds with purple apices: An Daucus
montanus Apii folio, flore luteo C. B? It has winged leaves like to Bipennella
but larger, the several wings of each leaf being as large as and like unto the
entire leaf of the said Bipennella; a great root, but not hot; in taste as the
Burnet-Saxifrages are; the stalk rises up to the highth of a man almost; the
seeds are round, striate, covered with a hoary down, reddish toward the top,
and of a hot spicy taste. Tithymalus verrucosus J. B. Stoebe major calyculis non
splendantibus C. B. Hepaticum trifolium Lob. Flammula Jovis; Cerinthe major
flore luteo; Fraxinella; Cytisus supinus sylvest. Ratisponensis flor. lut. ad
exortum foliorum prodeuntibus Cat. Aldtdorf. Cytisus Gesneri cui flores fere
spicati J. B. Euphrasia pratensis lutea C. B. which we first found not far from
Heinmaw; Phalangium ramosum; Chamaedrys vulgaris and Cham. foliis laciniatis;
Aster montanus luteus hirsuto salicis folio; Aster Austriacus 4 Clus. i. e.
Linaria aurea Tragi; Aster Atticus Italorum flore purpureo Park. Oxyacantha
sive Berberis; Bugula caerulea Alpina; Orobanche minor purpureis floribus, sive
ramosa, in the Cornfieldsd. Chondrilla carulea J. B. Folia huic valde
laciniata, glabra, glauca. Flores longis insident pediculis, dilute caerulei
and ad ruborem inclinantes. Securidaca dumetorum major flore vario, siliquis
articulatis C. B. which is common all over Germany. Veronica supina facie
Teucrii pratensis no less common; Lepidium annuum growing among Radishes; and
Foenum Graecum which I suppos, was sown there.

September. 10. we hired a Boat for Vienna: First, on our left hand as we went
down the river, we passed by a little village and a castle standing on a hill,
called Thonastan. About three miles and half below Regensberg we passed in
sight of Were, a castle belonging to the Bishop of Ratisbone, seated on a hill
by a river called Wisent, which here runs into the Danow. Straubing.
This night we lodged at Straubing, a very handsome, pleasant, walled Town,
belonging to the Duke of Bavaria, five miles below Ratisbone.

Sept. 12. in the morning we past Pogen where is a Church standing on a high
hill. Four miles below Straubing we rowed under a wooden bridge which there
crosses the Danow. Here on the left hand as one goes down, stands Dreckendorf,
a walled town belonging to the Duke of Bavaria. A little further off we passed
by the mouth of the river Iser. Then we had a prospect of Osterhoven on our
left hand, and not far thence a small village called Hofkirchen, and on the
same side still a little castle called Hilkersberg, where the shores along the
river began to be rocky. This night we lodged at a pretty little walled town
built of stone, Vilshoven.
called Vilshoven, belonging to Bavaria.

Sept. 13. Passaw.
At four miles distance from Vilshoven we came to Passaw, a considerable city
for its strength and greatness, formerly well built with many fair stone
houses. But about three quarters of a year before our being there, a most
dreadful Fire burnt down, ruined and destroyed almost the whole Town, Churches,
public buildings and all. It is situate just at the confluence of the rivers In
and Danow, and subject to the Archduke of Inspruck, who, we were told, gave
50000 dollars toward the rebuilding of it. Here is a bridge over the river In
to a town called Instat. Hitherto the river Danow flowed gently down, but below
Passaw, it began to be straightened by hills on both sides and to run with a
swifter stream. Seven miles from Passaw we passed by Nayhonse castle, and this
third night lodged at a pretty little village belonging to the Emperor called
Asch, standing on the right side of the river.

Sept. 14. we had an open country again, no hills being near the river. At
four miles end we landed at Lintz, Lintz.
and viewed the city, which we found to be a very elegant place, well built
with stone houses flat rooft after the Italian fashion; having a large square
Piazza with two fountains in it, and on the highest part a fair palace of the
Emperor, whence there is a pleasant prospect of the Danow and Country
adjacent. About three miles below Lintz we passed a pretty village on our left
hand, called Malhausen. Then we had a prospect of a town on our right hand
situate upon the river Ens called Intz. Seven miles below Lintz are hills again
on both sides the river. Heerabouts is a village called Greine, where the Earl
of Lichtenstein has a house situate on a hill. Below Greine on the left hand
is a little village, where we past a dangerous place in the river called Strom,
where the stream being straightened by hills on each hand runs very swiftly, and
besides is full of rocks: a little further below a rock, which jets a good way
out into the river, we passed a violent whirtl-pool called the Werble. At some
distance further on the left hand stands a small village under a high hill,
half whereof fell down about two years before our being there, which made so
great a noise that it was heard two German miles off, at Ips, a little town we
passed by on the right hand. We lodged this fourth night at a small village
called Morpach, 11 miles from Lintz.

Sept. 15. in the morning we went by a rich cloister called Melk on our right.
At six miles distance from our lodging we passed a fair house of the Earl of
Dernstein's on our left hand, and heerabout had a prospect of Ketwein a rich
Abbey strongly situate on a hill, attempted by the Swedes without succchess.
About nine miles from Marbach we passed under a wooden bridge by a little
walled town called Stein, where the Swedes (they told us) were notably beaten
and driven out again after they had entered the town; which repulse they
afterward revenged, when they took the place, by plundering and spoiling it.
Not far hence we landed to view Krembs, Krembs.
a considerable city seated on the side of a hill, well built, walled about and
trenched toward the river. From hence we came into an open country, and the
river being at liberty, the chanel grew much wider. Six miles below Krembs we
passed by a small walled Town oh the right hand called Deuln; then we had the
prospect of Greitenstein, a castle situate on a hill at some distance from the
river on the left hand; next we had a sight of Cornberg, a walled town in a
plain not far from the Danow; taken by the Swedes in the late wars and by them
notably defended against the Emperor. Here and afterward at several other
places we observed mills built upon two boats, the wheel lying between the
boats, which are fixed at a convenient distance one from another, and so the
stream coming between the boats, and by reason it is straightened by degrees,
running more swiftly, turns the wheel. One of the boats is by strong cables or
chains at each end fastened to the bank, and so the boats, mill and all rise and
fall with the water. About a mile and half before we reached Vienna we went by
a fair rich Abbey called Claisternaiberg, with a little walled town of the same
name; and at the end of 19 German miles, which the swiftness of the current
assisting us, we made this day, we arrived at Vienna, Vienna.
the chief city of Austria, and at present the imperial seat, so called from
the river Wien which runs into the Danow no the East side of the Town. It is
for the bigness of it the most frequent and full of people that we have yet
seen beyond the seas. The wall is not above four or five English miles in
circuit, but there are large Suburbs at a little distance from the town, those
houses that were very near being lately pulled down to clear the wall and works
for fear of a Siege: The Tures at the time of our being there having taken
Neuhausel, and news coming that they were marching with their whole army
toward Presburg in Hungary, not above 40 English miles distant from Vienna.
This City is regularly and strongly fortified with a high and impenetrable wall
of earth faced with brick, a broad and deep trench, into which they can (as
they told us) when they please draw the water; Bastions, half-moons and
horn-words, etc. that it is justly reputed one of the strongest holds of
Christendom. The inner wall, which was said to be built with the ransom of
Richard. I. King of England, is of little strength or consideration in
comparison with the new and outer one. The houses are sufficiently tall and
well built of stone, the roofs flattish after the Italian mode: The streets
rather narrow than broad; the markets well stored with all necessaries. Here we
first met with tortoises to be sold, at the rate of six pence apiece: they are
found in muddy ditches in these parts. Here also we first took notice of the
fruit of Sorbus legitima; and first saw in the fish-markets the Silurus or
Sheat-fish, the greatest of all freshwater fish that we have seen, some of them
weighing above 100 pound. The Emperors palace, the Cathedral church and other
public buildings deserve remembrance were it my design minutely to describe
places. The Emperor is of a mean stature and dark complexion, thin-visaged, his
hair black, his underlip thick and hanging down a little, much like his
effigies on his coin. Plants observed about Vienna.
As for plants we found heerabout, Onobrychis spicata flore purpureo, Psyllium
vulgar; Kalispinosum, at this distance from the Sea. Scabiosa foliis
dissectis, flore albo vel (...) Clus. Dorycnio congener in great plenty.
Marrubium album angustifolium peregrinum C. B. as it seemed to me. In the
Island of Danubius near Vienna, Aristolochia Clematitis and Solanum vesicarium
sive Alkekengi plentifully.

We hired a coach for Venice and began our journey thitherward, Sept. 24.
and this night lodged at a great Village called Trayskerk four miles distant
from Vienna: by the way-side we found store of Absinthium Austriacum
^enuifolium Clus.

At four miles end we came to Neustat (Neapolis Austriaca they call it) well
walled and trencht about, 25. Neustat.
of a square figure, mean bigness, handsomely built, having straight streets and
a fair square marketplace. At three of the corners are mounts or bastions, and
at the fourth a Castle. In the lays near this town I first found Asperula
caerulea. Two miles beyond Neustat we began to leave the open country and to
come among hills. We lodged this night at a village called Gluknitz four miles
distant from Neustat. The houses in these villages are for the most part
covered with shingles of wood: the hills clothed with woods of Pine.

After two miles riding we came to a village called Schadwyen or Shadwin, 26.
seated between the mountains and enclosed with a gate at each end. Here we
alighted and our Coachman hired ten oxen (which stood there ready for that
purpose) to draw his Coach up a steep ascent to the top of the hills which part
Austria and Stiria. On the sides and top of this hill we found these plants,
Plants found on the hills at Shadwin.
Libanotis Theophrasti minor Park. Cyclamen autumnale of two sorts. Tussilago
Alpina folio rotundo. A sort of small Trachelium that I have not elsewhere
seen. A small sort of Muscus clavatus, with leaves like Juniper. Larix
abundantly. Lysimachia lutea in alis) foliorum florens. A kind of Glaux with a
rough cod. Gentiana folio Asclepiadis abundantly, and many others that we had
before met with. In this journey we also found Muscus denticulatus major in the
shady lanes in many places: and in watery and springy places Alsine muscosa J.
B. further on we came to a little walled place near the river Muercz, called
Mertzuschlag. Heerabout are many mills; and sithes and sickles made here; then
we passed through a village called Langenwang, where stands a castle on a hill:
after that another called Kriegla, where we crossed the river. This afternoon we
passed through a pleasant valley among woody mountains, and at night took up
our loding at Kimberg a large village six long miles distant from Glocknitz.

We traveled along the same valley, 27.
and passed through a great village called Kapsuberg; besides many other
villages, castles and Gentlemen's houses on the sides of the hills, which we
rode near to; and at three miles end came to Pruck an der Mure, Pruck an der
Mure.
i. e. Bons Muroe a fair town for this Country, and walled about, having a
large marketplace with a fountain in it. Proaeding on in the same valley some
two leagues further, Lewben.
we passed Lewben, a very neat, pleasant and well built walled town, better
than we expected to have found any in this mountainous Country. It has a fair
marketplace with fountains. And we observed much Iron lying in the streets,
which is here made, and wherewith the inhabitants drive a great trade. Here we
crossed the Mura twice, and soon after we were past Lewben we rode over a hill,
and following the course of the said river among the mountains, at evening we
came to a village called S. Michael, where, we lodged. We saw in these parts
many men and women with large swellings under their chins or on their throats,
called in Latin or rather in Greec, Bronchocelt, and by some in English,
Bavarian, P^^kes. Some of them were single, others double and treble. This is a
disease which these Alpine Nations have of old been subject to Quis tumidum
guttur miretur in Al^plbvs? Yet among the Grisons, who live on the highest
parts of the Alps, I do not remember to have seen any of these ^I dare say
there are not half so many thereabouts as in these Countries. What should be
the Cause of this evil, whether the drinking of Snow-water, or water infected
with the vi^ose steams and particles of Mercury, or other minerals and metals,
wherewith in all probability those mountains abound, is no easy matter to
determine. For on the one hand, in some mountainous countries, where the snow
lies as long as it doth-heer, and consequently their waters are little else
then snow dissolved, we shall find very few infected with this disease: and on
the other hand, as few in Hungary, Transylvania and other countries abounding
with mercury and other minerals. We must therefore suspend, till some ingenious
Physician of these Countries, by long and diligent observing what causes or
occasions these Tumors, and likewise what prevents and cures them, instructs
us better.

We also observed in these Countries more Idiots and delirous persons than any
where else; which we imputed sometime to the snow-water, sometime to the
inordinate eating of Cabbage, of which in all the market towns we saw monstrous
heaps lying to be sold. But upon further consideration I think with Palmarius,
it ought rather to be attributed to the mineral steams that infect their
waters, especially Mercurial. For we see the vapor of Quicksilver does
principally affect the brain and nervose parts, begetting palsies and deliriums
in Painters, Gilders. Miners and those that are much conversant about it.

We traveled on by the river Mures side to Knittlefield, 28. Knittlefield.
a walled town three miles from S. Michael, and then proceeding along the same
valley, we passed by some Noblemens houses and castles, and lodged at a village
upon the Mure called S. Georgio, four miles from Knittefield.

We traveled on in the same valley by the river Mure till we came to Newmarkt,
29. Newmarkt.
a little walled place, four miles from S. Georgio. Then we followed the course
of another little river which runs into the Dravus about Volckmarck, in a
narrow valley between high hills, and a mile from Newmarkt we came to a
considerable walled town called Freisach, Freisach
in which are four cloisters. A mile further we came to Heirt in Carinthia
where we lay this night.

We rode rocky ways through valleys to S. Veit or Vit, a walled town of some
note, 30. S. Vit.
three miles distant from Heirt. The Emperor has a Mint-house for coining
money here. Proceeding on three miles further we arrived at Vilkircken, which
had been a Market Town of note, but about three years since a lamentable Fire
burnt it down to the ground.

We rode very rugged way among the mountains and rocks, October. 1.
passing the whole length of a Lake called Oostsukersey, and at the further end
of it observed a strong castle seated on a high hill belonging to the Earl of
Dietrichstein, a Prince of the Empire, Dietrichstein.
who coins money. Then we came down into a pleasant valley, and so over the
river Dravus. which is here navigable, and runs by the walls of Villach,
Villach.
a wellbuilt town and one of the chief of this Country, three miles distant
from Vilkerck. A good distance from Villach we passed the Guile, a considerable
river falling into the Dravus; and had very rocky way among high mountains till
we came to Orlesteina, a village where we lodged.

We traveled among high mountains very bad way to a village called Klein
Tarvis two miles, 2.
and proceeding on still among the mountains we came to the river Timent, which
runs into the Adriatic Sea; Pontieba.
and lodged this night at Pontieba, the last town we passed in the Emperors
country, part of it is subject to the Emperor called Pontieba Imperiale, and
part to the Venetians, called Pontieba Veneta, where we took a bill of health
for Venice. Between Klein Tarvis and Pontieba, we saw a herd of Goats following
the Goat-herd like so many dogs: in other places we have seen sheep in that
manner following their shepherd, which no doubt was usual in Judaea; for our
Savior John 10. 4. comparing himself to a shepherd and his disciples and
servants to sheep, says, And he goes before his sheep, and they follow him,
for Which would have seemed strange to the hearers had the shepherds been wont
only to drive their sheep, as with us they do.

We past over the river Timent by a bridge that parts Carinthia from Friuli. 3.
About a German mile off we came to a little fort in a village called Clausen,
where are two draw-bridges, which we were not permitted to pass, till we had
delivered our bill of health. Hence we traveled along by the river, and
observed timber trees floted down the stream, and when the rocks stopped them,
men with hooks put them off and directed them into the force of the current.
This is the manner all over the Alps and other high mountains, they fell trees
and get them to any little current of water and expect a good shot of rain, and
then flote them down to the greater rivers. This day we passed Vensonga,
Vensongo. Hospitaletto.
a pretty little walled town, and lodged at Hospitaletto a large village, where
we got quit of the mountains, and came into the plain Country of Friuli.

We passed by Limonia a walled town situate on the rising of a hill at the foot
of the mountains, 4. Limonia. S. Daniele.
Some miles further we passed S. Danicle; then we forded the river Timent in
several places. The river heerabouts in a time of rain or when the snow melts
on the mountains, spreads itself to a very great breadth, as appears by the
empty chanel. Soon after we had passed the river, we ascended a cliff and
entered the walls of a little town called Spilimberg, where were rows or
cloisters on each side the street under the houses, Spilimberg.
which we after found in many of the towns of Lombardy; ten Italian miles
further riding brought us to S. Avogio, a village where we rested this night.

We rode along the plains and at ten miles end came to Saribe a walled town, 5.
Saribe.
where the river Livenza divides itself and encompasseth the wall. From hence
we drove on about two Dutoh miles and lodged at Conegliano, Conegliano.
a walled Town seated on the ridge of a hill a place of good account, as is
also Saribe.

All the way we traveled in Italy hitherto we had little other bread than what
was made of Sorghum, a grain the blade whereof arises to seven or eight foot
highth and is as great as ones finger, bearing a large panicle on the top, the
berry or seed being bigger than that of wheat, and of a dusky color.

We rode a Dutch mile and then ferried over the river Anaxus or Piave, 6.
and at ten Italiam miles further come to Treaviso a large Town, Treviso.
the head of a Province called Marea Trevisana, an important place for
strength, but too near and too obnoxious to Venice to be rich. From Treviso we
rode through a very fertile and well cultivated country to Mestre, a little
Town by the Lagnne,(so they call the Flats about Venice, which are all covered
with water when the Tide is in) where we took boat for Venice.

Upon the mountains we passed over this voyage, we found a great number of
plants we had not before met with, as Quinquifolium alb^m majus caulesc^^^ C.
B. Quinquefolium album majus alterum C. B. Teucrium Alpinum Cisti flore,
Epimcdium vilgae; Linaria purpurea parva J. B. And not far from Pontieba on
Italy side upon the rocks, Ledum Alpinum hirsutum C. B. Ledum Alpinum hirsutum
minus, An Cistus Austriacus myrtifolius? Auricula ursi^ Sedum serra tum alterum
foliis longis angustis; Sedum Alpinum minimum, foliis cinereis, flore candido
J. B. Siler montanum and many others. Helleborus niger verus plentifully all
over the highest mountains. Scabiosa argentea angustifolia, in the channels of
the torrents in Friuli: and Galega by the rivers and ditches every where in
Italy. In Marea Trevisana, some part of Friuli, and the greatest part of
Lombardy, we observed the Cornfieldsd to be so thick set with rows of trees,
that if a man from an hill or high tower should look down upon the Country at
a distance, he would take it to be a Wood. Against every Tree is planted a
Vine, which runs up the tree, and the branches of the neighbour-vines they draw
from tree to tree and tie together: So that their Cornfieldsd are also Woods
and Vine-yards, the same land sufficing for all these productions, and not
being exhausted with so much spending (as one would be apt to imagine) by
reason of the depth and richness of its soil. Neither in this hot Country does
the Corn receive any prejudice from the shade or dropping of the Trees, (which
in our colder Climate would quite mar it) but rather advantage, there falling
little rain in Summertime, and the Trees keeping off the scorching Sunbeams,
which else might dry up and wither it; the heat notwithstanding sufficing to
bring the Grain to perfect maturity. Whereas with us all the Sun we can give it
is little enough, and the very grass which grows under the trees is sour and
crude: for that usually we have too little heat for our moisture, and they too
much. This part of Italy has been deservedly celebrated for fertility, and may
justly in my opinion be styled the Garden of Europe.

OF VENICE.
VEnice is built upon certain little Islands in the middle of the Sea, or
rather in the middle of certain Flats or Shallows, covered all over with water
at full Sea, but about the City when the Tide is out in many places bare,
called by the Italians Lagune. These Lagune are enclosed and separated from the
main Gulf or Adriatic Sea by a bank of earth ( il Lito or Lido they call it)
extending according to Contarini about 60 miles, according to Leander Albertus
and others (who come nearer the truth) but 35, and resemble the space contained
in a bent Bow, the bow being the shore of the firm land, and the Lido the
string. The City stands at an equal distance from the firm land of Italy and
from the Lito, viz. five miles from each. This Lido serves as a good fence or
rampart to secure the City and other included Islands against the raging waves
of the Sea in stormy weather. It is discontinued by seven, say some, say others
by five breaks or apertures, and those not very wide ones, which they call
Ports or Havens, and by which the Lagune communicate with the Gulf. Of these
Inlets two only are deep enough to admit any vessels of considerable bulk or
burden, viz. those of Malamocco and Lio. Into or not far from the Lagune most
of the great rivers of Italy empty themselves, v. g. Padus now called Po,
Athesis now Adige, Meduacus major now Brenta, Meduacus minor now Bacchilione,
Tiliaventum now Taiamento, Liquentia now Livenza, Silis now Sile, Anassus now
Piave; which, especially in time of floods, bring down with them from the
mountains a great deal of earth and silt, which will, its probable, in process
of time fill up the Lagune and make dry land of them. For I believe at the
first building of Venice no part of them lay bare at low water as now there
does. Gianotti says, that anciently the City was ten miles distant from the
firm land, the Lagune extending as far as Oriago, which, as some think, was so
called quasi Ora lacus; and and that all that space between Oriago and Fusina
(where they now imbark that go from Padua to Venice) had been added to the firm
land notwithstanding all the endeavors the Venetians could use.

This City was first founded, according to the best Authors, about the time
that Attila with his Hunnes invaded Italy, burning and destroying all before
him; by some families who seeing no end of these irruptions of barbarous
nations, sought refuge for themselves in these desolate Islands, in the year
456 or thereabouts. Others make the first beginning of it to have been before
that time in the year 421 or 423. But though in the times of former irruptions
many of the neighboring people fled hither to shelter themselves from the
present storm, yet I believe they did not think of settling themselves here or
making these Islands their fixed habitation, and uniting themselves into one
City till the expedition of Attila. Whenever it began, it has continued a
Virgin-City, (having never been ravished nor attempted by any Enemy) since its
first foundation for at least 1200 years, which is more than any other City of
that antiquity, so far as I have read or heard, can boast of. Yet is it not at
present nor ever was it fortified or so much as walled about; neither indeed
does it need it, being sufficiently strong by its ^ituation alone, which is
such, that it is not likely for the future ever to be taken, unless the Sea
quite leave it, and the Lagune become dry land conjoined with the Continent.
For by Sea great ships can come no nearer than the haven of Malamocco, and
those apertures in the Lido, where boats and lesser Vessels may enter, are
defended by strong Forts and Castles: besides that every tide the Chanel does
so vary, that without the guidance of an expert Pilot they will not be able to
find the way in, but be in danger of being stranded upon the flats.

This City is in circuit, taking in the Giudecha, eight Italian miles. Viewing
it from S. Mark's tower we judged it to be about the bigness Amsterdam was then
of. It is divided into two parts by the Grand Canale, which passes through the
middle of it in the form of the letter S. It is also divided into six parts or
regions, called thence Sestieri; three on one side the Canale, viz. Castello,
S. Marco and Canareio; and three on the other side, viz, San Paolo, Santa Croce
and Dorso duro. It conteins 70 Parishes, though some make them 72; 67
Monasteries, whereof 33 of Freres and 34 of Nuns, according to a survey taken
in the year 1581. since which time, I believe, the number has been increased.
According to the same survey there were then in the City, of Noble Men 1843
Women 1659 Boys 1420 Girls 1230
Citizens, Men 2117 Women 1936 Boys 1708 Girls 1418
Servants 3732 Maids 5753 Artisans, Women 31617 Men 32887 Boys 22765 Girls 18227
Beggars, Men 75 Women 112
Monks 945 Nuns 2508 Priests 516 Poor of the Hospital 1290 Jews 1043


The Sum total is 134871. Sansovinus reckons the number of souls in his time to
have been 180000, but, I suppose, he takes in Muran and the other Islands,
which in this survey are left out. I am not ignorant that several late writers
make the present number of Inhabitants to be at least 300000, but I believe
they speak at random, and by conjecture, upon no good grounds; (as I have been
often told, that there are in Paris a million and half of people, whereas it is
well if there be half ^ million) there being no reason to think that the Cit^
is much increased since Sansovinus his time. I find the Sum total of the number
of males to exceed the total of the number of females in this survey by above
3500, which comes near to the account of the excess of males in England, given
us by Capt. Grant in his Observations upon the weekly Bills of Mortality in
London. And I doubt not but if exact, observations were made in other places,
there would be found the like proportion between the number of males and
females born into the world in hot countries as in cold. So that from this
Topic the Asiatics have no greater plea for multiplicity of wives than the
Europeans. Little channels of water cross and divide the city into many Islets,
and may rather be called the Streets of it, than those narrow Lanes or Alleys (
Call they call them) through which you pass on foot from one place to another.
By these channels you may convey your self and goods from any one place of the
city to any other, by boat; which is the only way of carriage, except men's
shoulders, there being neither coach nor litter, cart nor wain, horse nor ass*
used or so much as to be seen ^eer. For passage on foot there are built about
450 bridges cross the channels, most of them of stone and of one arch, among
which the most famous is that over the Canal grande, called Ponte di Rialto:
and for passage by water there are a great number of Gondalo's and other boats;
some say eight, some ten, some twelve, nay, some fifteen thousand, but I
believe all is conjecture; and they were never numbered.

The Buildings are generally tall and fair: the Palaces of Noblemen thick set
all over the City, but especially upon the Canal grande, which though not vast,
are handsome and well built. The foundations of the houses are great piles or
masts driven into the ground as at Amsterdam.

The Arsenal is said to be three miles in circuit, they that speak modestly
allow it but two; well stored with arms, ammunition and all provisions for war.
Here the Galleys are made and laid up, of which the Republic has (they say) at
least 200. Here also lies the famous Vessel called the Bucentoro, in which upon
Ascension day yearly the Duke accompanied with the Senators, and attended by
some thousands of Gondalo's bravely set out and adorned, goes forth as it were
in solemn procession some two or three miles to Sea, and casting thereinto a
ring, says, I espouse thee in token of perpetual dominion. Here are said to be
kept 20000 pieces of Ordnance great and small, and arms for above 250000 men. A
great number [1550] of Artificers, as Shipwrights, Carpenters, Smiths,
Founders, etc. are constantly kept at work at the public charge.

Of the other public places and buildings of the City, as the Piazza of S.
Mark, the Church of S. Mark, with the Treasury; the Tower of S. Mark; the
Palace of the Duke; the Chamber of the great Council; the private Armory, the
Theaters for acting the Opera, with the contrivances for moving the Scenes; the
Ponte di Rialto; the Schools or Halls for the Fraternities; the Mint-house,
Pillars, Statues, and other Ornaments of this City, I shall forbear to say any
thing, but refer the Reader to Sansovinus, Lassels and others, who have
minutely described those things.

Venice, according to the old Epithet Venetia laricca, has been esteemed the
richest City, not of Italy only but of all Europe: and doubtless was so before
the passage to the East Indies by the Cape of good hope was discovered: when
besides a large share of Lombardy the best Country of Italy, Friuli, Istria
and Dalmatia, the Islands of Cyprus and Candia, Zant, Cephalonia and Corfu,
with others in the Archipelago subject to them, they were chief if not sole
masters of the East India Trade, furnishing the greatest part of Europe with
the commodities coming from thence, which were then brought by Merchants to
Alexandria in Egypt, and there by them bought up. So that then it was a Proverb
in Italy, Il bianco e'l negro han fatto ricca la Venetia. White and black, i.
e. Cotton and Pepper have made Venice rich. Since the loss of that trade, and
by the vast expenses of long wars with the Tures, wherein they came off losers
at last, having parted with first Cyprus and lately Candia to them, their
treasures, I believe, are well exhausted. Yet the riches of private persons
must needs be great, the City having never been sacked nor having ever undergone
any such change of Government as that one considerable party of the people has
been oppressed and their goods confiscate. And though the public be not so rich
as it has been, yet will it soon recover itself and grow wealthy again upon
the enjoyment of Peace and free Commerce. Though the wings of this
Commonwealth have been a little clipped, yet has it enough still remaining
under its dominion to denominate it a potent State: viz. In Italy (1.) The
Dogado, of which the City of Venice itself is the head. (2.) The City and
Territory of Padua called Padoano. (3.) Of Vicenza called Vicentino. (4.) Of
Verona called Veronese. (5.) Of Brescia called Bresciano. (6.) Of Bergamo
called Bergamasco. (7.) Of Crema called Cremasco. (8.) Marca Trevisana under
which are compehended Feltrino and Bellunese the territories of the Cities
Feltre and Belluno. [Leander Albertus reckons the territories of Verona,
Vicenza and Padua in Marca Trevisana; and of Brescia, Berganio and Crema in
Lombardy.] (p.) Friuli. (10.) Istria, (11.) The territory of Rouigo called Il
Polesine de Rouigo, formerly belonging to the Dukedom of Ferrara, the whole in
length being extended 250 miles, and above half so much in breadth. Out of
Italy they have a good part of Dalmatia, the Islands of Zant, Cephalonia and
Corfu, besides others of less account.

The ordinary annual revenues of this Republic, according to our information
amount, to about five millions and three hundred and twenty thousand Venetian
Ducates yearly. A Ducat is somewhat less than a French Crown. Of which Venice
it self yields 1400000 Brescia 1000000 Padoa 140000 Vicenza 200000 Verona
230000 Bergamo 140000 Crema 100000 Il Polesine 70000 Istria 150000 Il Friuli
100000 La Marca Trevisana 190000 Gli stati di mare 450000 La Zecca 150000


This City is well served with all provisions of Victuals, especially fish and
wild-fowl. Fresh water they have none but what is brought from land; and rain
water which they preserve in cisterns, and which serves well enough for the
ordinary uses of the house. The Air is very sharp in Wintertime by reason of
its vicinity to the Alps. Venice is noted for the best Treacle; the best both
drinking and looking-Glasses, made at Muran a large Burgo or Town, about three
miles in circuit, and divided in the middle by a broad chanel like Venice, in
an Island about a mile distant from the City, so that it may pass for a Suburb
of it: for Paper, for Turpentine, for Needle Work Laces called Points; and if
that be worth the mentioning, for Courtezans. Here is also made Soap not
inferior for goodness to that of Castile.

The Gentlemen's and Citizens Wives are kept close, seldom walking abroad unless
it be to Church, and then with an old woman at their heels to guard them. Most
of the Gentlemen and Citizens of quality put their daughters so soon as they
come to seven or eight years of age, into some Cloister of Nuns, to be there
educated; whence they are not taken out till they be married. The Suitor seldom
sees his Mistress before they go to be married, or if he does see her, it is
only at the grate of the Cloister without speaking to her, all things being
transacted by the Parents on each side, or by the mediation of an old Woman.

The Government is Aristocratical, but among the Gentlemen themselves were
there no Citizens or Subjects it would be purely Democratical. As for the Doge
or Duke, though they call him Prince, yet they do but mock him, for he has
only the Title and show, nothing of the power or Authority of a Prince. The
form of Government as it is exactly and particularly described by Contarini,
Gianotti and Sansovinus out of him, because it is much talked of, I shall here
briefly set down.

The Government then of the Commonwealth is chiefly in the Great Council; the
Senate or Council of Pregadi; the College; the Council of ten; and the Siguoria.

Of the GREAT COUNCIL.
The Great Council is as it were the basis of the Commonwealth, in which the
supreme power resides, and from which as well the Senate as all the Magistrates
derive their Authority. It is made up of all the Gentlemen of the City who have
passed the 25. year of their age; the number of which is about 2500 in all. But
yet before they can be admitted to give their suffrages in Council they must
before the The Auvogadori di Commune are those who bring in all Causes to the
40 Criminal Judges, called the Quarantia Criminale, to whom appeals are made in
Criminal Causes from the sentences of inferior Judges as well wihtin the City
as without. Those then that would appeal must first have recourse to the
Auvogadors; who are all diligently to examine the Cause, and consider whether it
ought to be brought in, and if they all agree that it ought not, then he that
would appeal has no remedy, but to expect another set of Auvogadors; but if
but one of them accepts it, it is enough to bring it in.
Auvogadori di Commune, by the oath of their fathers or mothers, or if they be
dead, of their nearest kinsmen, prove that they have atteined that age; and by
the testimony of two witnesses, that they are the legitimate sons of such
Gentlemen as they profess or pretend themselves to be. But to satisfy the
longing of such young men as desire to taste the sweetness of Government sooner,
there is a way fo some of those who are but twenty years of age complete to get
into the Council, viz. Before the fourth of December being S. Barbara's day,
all such young men must in the manner we have already mentioned, before the
Auvogadori prove themselves to be full twenty years old, and the legitimate
sons of Gentlemen. Which done the Secretary of the Auvogadori gives to each a
Schedule sealed by the three Auvogadori, signifying so much. These Schedules
they carry to the Secretary of the Quarantia criminale, who writes the names of
them who brought the Schedules, each in a scroll by itself; and on the 4. of
December carries all these scrolls before the Duke and Counselors, in whose
presence they are all put into one Urn, and into another are put so many golden
balls as are equal to the fifth part of the number of scrolls, if it be less
than 30; if it be more than 30, there are yet put in but 30 balls, and so many
silver: ones as with the golden shall be equal to the number of the young men
competitors. These being shaken together, the Duke out of the first urn draws a
scroll and reads the name, then out of the other takes a ball, which if it
proves to be a golden one; such an one whose name was written in the scroll is
understood to be admitted into the Council. And so he proceeds, drawing out
first a scroll and then a ball, till all the golden balls are drawn out; and so
without more ado those thirty whose lot it is to have the golden balls may go
into the Council and ballot: The rest must stay till another year and then take
their chance, if they are not before come to the age of 25. In troublesome times
when the Commonwealth wants money, they have also conferred this honor upon
such as are under 25 years for assisting the Public with the gift or loan of a
certain sum of money.

At one end of the Great Council chamber (or Hall as they call it, though it be
an upper room) sits the Duke on a tribunal elevated above the level of the
chamber, with three of the Counselors and one of the heads or chiefs of the
Court called Quarantia criminale (Capi de Quaranta) sitting on his righthand;
and the other three Counselors, and below them the other two chiefs of the
Quarantia on his left; and on benches on each side the tribunal, which make
right angles with the end, sit the Great Chancellor and Secretaries. The
fashion of the Hall and Benches on which the Gentlemen sit, and the places of
the chief Officers and Magistrates, I shall omit, as being hardly intelligible
to such as have not seen the place, and not very material to be understood.

The Council is assembled every Sunday, and sometimes oftener, by the tolling of
a bell, which begins at noon and ceases not till one of the clock; and elects
the Magistrates and Officers in this manner: First of all the Electors or
Nominators are drawn by lot. After that those that are nominated by such
Electors are balloted in the Council, and those that have above half the
suffrages of the Gentlemen present are understood to be elected.

Now because there must be at least nine Magigrates created at every meeting of
the Council, therefore it is necessary to make at least nine Electors: and
because some Magistrates places may have but two Competitors and some four, and
in some days are created of one sort, in some of another, and in some of both
together; when there are only such created as can have but two Competitors
(which seldom happens) then there need be but two Sets or Companies of Electors
made: but when any such are to be created as must have four Competitors, then
there are four Sets of Electors made, of nine in each Set. While the bell
tolls, all the Gentlemen that can with convenience are to repair to the
Council, which being once assembled, the doors locked up and the Keys brought
and laid down at the Dukes feet, none can afterward be admitted to enter,
except he be a Counselor, an Auvogador, one of the heads or chiefs of the
Council of ten (called Capi de Dieci) or a Censor.

NB. (1.) For the creation of Magistrates there is no Quorum or determinate
number of Gentlemen required to be present to make a Council; though it seldom
happens the Council Chamger not to be full. For other business as the
establishing new Laws, determining any Sentence, etc. the Quorum is 600,
without which number nothing can be done. (2.) Unless there be four of the
Counselors present, there can be neither Officers created nor any other
business agitated in the Great Council.

The Duke; the chief Magistrates and Officers, and all the Gentlemen being set
down in their places; before the Tribunal on which the Duke sits, in the plain
of the Council Chamger, are placed on a three urns called Capelli, upon stands
so high above the floor that no man can look into them, and yet for greater
security they are also covered, only the two outermost have two holes in their
covers to put in the hand to draw out the balls. The middlemost that stands
over against the Duke has but one hole. In each of the two outermost urns are
put about 800 balls made of copper and gilded over with silver (which I shall
take leave to call silver balls, as those that are gilded with gold, golden
balls) so that the whole number in both amounts to about 1500 or 1600, for so
many Gentlemen are commonly present at each meeting of the Great Council.
Besides in these urns together with the silver are mingled 60 golden balls, 30
in each urn. In the middlemost urn are put 60 balls, whereof 36 are golden and
24 silver. Then the Great Chancellor (who is always a Citizen and no Gentleman)
goes to his place appointed for that purpose, and reads what Magistrates are
to be created that day, which done, he returns to the tribunal, and calling the
Auvogadors, the Capi de Dieci, the Censors and the old and new Auditors, he
administers to them an oath to observe the laws of the Council, in which is
contained, that all shall sit* that none shall change his bench at prohibited
times; that none shall seek any Magistracy by dishonest means, or favor and
abet any other in so doing, etc. When they are sworn, they return to their
places, and the three junior Counselors rising up, the eldest of them goes and
sets him down over against the middlemost urn, the next before that on the
right hand of the Duke, and the youngest over against that on the left. Then
there are lots drawn what bench shall come first up to the Capello, (the whole
Council being divided into five benches of Gentlemen) and what end of that
bench, and what side of that end (for all the benches are double) in this
manner. There are put into an urn ten silver balls, five of them marked with
the five first figures or the characters of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and by
each number is written such an end and such a side. The other five balls are
marked with the same figures, but on each of them is written the contrary end
and contrary side. So that if under the figure 1 in the first five be written,
the end toward the Broil and the side toward S. Georges; under the figure 1
in the other five is written, the end toward Castello and the side next S.
Mark's. Then they draw out of the urn one of these balls, the figure and
inscription whereof shows what bench and what end and side of that bench is to
come first up to the Capello. Then they look into the urn and take out that
ball which is marked with the same figure and the contrary end and side. After
the same manner they draw out by lot another ball, and so a third, fourth and
fifth, calling up the benches in order, till all the Electors are made. Of the
bench that is called first, each one in order comes up to one of the exterior
urns, and draws thereout a ball, which if it be silver, he puts it into another
urn set on the floor at the foot of that out of which he drew it, and returns
to his place, having obtained nothing; but if it be a golden one, he delivers
it into the hand of that Counselor who sits by that urn, and goes presently to
the middle urn, and thence also draws out a ball; which if it be silver, having
presented it to the Counselor who sits before the urn, he returns to his
place: but if it be gold, he delivers it likewise to the Counselor, and is
understood to be one of the Electors of the first set; and sits down on the
bench on which the said Counselor sits (which stands across the Dukes
tribunal) with his face toward the Duke, that none in the Hall may by any nod
or other sign recommend themselves to him. Then a Secretary pronounces his name
aloud, that all of his family or near to him by affinity may take notice of it.
There he continues sitting till all the other eight of the first set of
Electors be in like manner by lot created. And if by chance two of one family
are drawn in the first set, the second of them is reserved for the second set
or company, and he that is first taken for the second set comes in his room
into the first. And then for that day none of that family nor any that are of
near affinity to him can come any more to the Capello, because it is provided
by the Laws, that in all the four sets of Electors which make up 36, there
shall be no more than two of the same family; and that those two shall not be
in the same set, so that the nine that are of the same set must be of nine
several families. To the youngest of the nine of this first set is by one of
the Secretaries delivered a Schedule sealed by the public Seal, wherein are
written in order all the Magistrates that are to be that day created. Then all
the nine take an oath, to choose those whom they shall judge most fit to serve
the Commonwealth, and go forth the Council Chamger into a private room
appointed for them. In like manner are the other three sets of Electors made,
who being sworn do likewise take their Schedules, and withdraw into their
respective rooms. When all the four sets of Electors are chosen and withdrawn,
then any of the Gentlemen in the Council Chamger may change his bench as he
pleases. [ NB. When there are only such Magistracies to be disposed of as can
have but two Competitors, there are but two sets of Electors made.] When the
first set is withdrawn, they sit down, taking place according to their age.
Then a Secretary appointed for that purpose reads to them the laws and
constitutions which they are obliged to observe in the choice of Magistrates:
after which he puts into an urn nine balls, marked with the nine numeral
characters or figures, and each Elector according to his age draws out one till
they be all drawn out. He that draws the ball marked 1, is understood to have
the nomination of the Competitor for the first Magistrates place set down in
the Schedule, and he who draws that marked 2, to have the nomination of the
second, and so in order of the rest. When there are eleven Magistrates to be
made in a day, he that has the nomination of the first, nominates also the
tenth, and he that has the second the eleventh. [ NB. One of these Electors
may nominate himself to any Office: they may also change their Votes among
themselves, as for example, he that has the nomination of the Competitor for
the first place may change with him who has the nomination for the second or
third, etc. and so of any other.] He then who has by lot obtained the
nomination of a Competitor for the first Magistrate, names one whom he pleases,
who is balloted among the nine, and if he has two thirds of the suffrages, he
is understood to be elected; if not, he names a second and so a third, till he
comes to propound one that gets two thirds. His name that is so approved is by
the Secretary set down in the Schedule under the name of that place to which he
is nominated, with the name of him who propounded him, and the set of Electors
he was of; because if the nominated be to a place wherein he is entrusted with
the management of public moneys, he that nominates is surety for him, and is to
make good what he defrauds the Commonwealth of. Then he that has the second
voice names his man, who is balloted and approved in like manner, etc. The same
order of nomination and approbation is observed in the other three sets of
Electors. Only in the third and fourth sets when there are some of those places
to be disposed of which can have but two Competitors, its necessary that some
of the Electors, to whose lot the nomination to such places falls, nominate not
at all; because the Competitors to such places are already nominated and
approved in the two first sets. Yet is not their being Electors altogether
useless and insignificant, because they have power to ballot those that are
nominated by the other Electors. If any difficulty arises among the Electors
about any person nominated, v. g. whether he may be balloted or the like, one
of the Auvogadors and one of the Capi de Dieci go into the room where those
Electors are and determine it.

The Competitors being in this manner chosen, none of the Electors returns any
more into the Council Chamger, unless he be one of the Counselors, or one of
the Capi di Dieci, or of the Auvogadors, or of the Censors. The Secretaries
then of the several companies of Electors present to the Great Chancellor the
Schedules in which are written the Magistrates to be elected, and under every
one the Competitors, for it. Now it may happen that one and the same Gentleman
may be chosen Competitor for a Magistracy by two or three or all four of the
sets of Electors, and then though he has no Competitor he may be balloted,
because he is understood to be Competitor to himself. But if for one place
there be chosen in each of the sets a Competitor, then they look first whether
he be not incapable of such a place, either by reason he has had some
Magistracy lately, and the time not yet expired that is required by the law
before he be capable of another, or because some of his kindred is in an
incompatible place; or bacause he is indebted to the public or the like. Now if
of four Competitors three are found incapable, the fourth remaining without a
Competitor cannot be balloted. But if one be elected in two sets and his two
Competitors incapable of standing, yet may he be balloted, for the reason
before alleged.

The Great Chancellor having received the Schedules, reads aloud the names of
all the Magistrates places with their Competitors; and then beginning from the
first he propounds the Competitors for that, and first him that was nominated
by the first set, and if he were nominated by any other of the sets, he
mentions that also. And when he has read the names of all the Competitors for
one place, they all that are nominated and all of their family and near
affinity go out of the Council Chamger into a private room, where they stay
till they have been all balloted, and the second place propounded with its
Competitors; and then they return again and ballot. As soon as they are
withdrawn, the Great Chancellor with a loud voice -puts all in mind, that both
by the Divine and humane law every one is obliged to favor him whom he judges
to be best of all and fittest to serve the Commonwealth in such place as they
shall choose him to. Then he nominates the first Competitor, and little boys
appointed for that purpose (having first delivered to every Gentleman a ball)
run about the chamber with balloting boxes in their hands to gather the
suffrages. The balls are made of linen that they may make no noise when they
fall into the boxes. The boxes are made double, the one painted white, the
other green. The white is marked with Si, i. e. Yea, into which they that
accept put their balls; and the green with No, into which they that refuse the
party propounded put theirs. The boxes are made in that manner with a hole in
the side to thrust in the hand, that no man can see into which box you let fall
the ball.

These little boys as they go along gathering the balls, repete still aloud the
name of the person that is then balloted. When they have gathered up the balls,
they carry them to the Dukes tribunal, and put the Yea's in a white vessel
there standing, and the No's in a green. The Affirmative or Yea's are told over
by the Counselors sitting on the right hand of the Duke, and the Negative or
No's by them sitting on the left; and if the Si's are less than half the whole
number of suffrages, such a person has lost it; but if they be more he may
obtein it; and therefore the number by which it exceeds the half is set down.
In the mean time the other Competitors are named and balloted in like manner,
and at last he whose affirmative suffrages or Si's exceed the half by the
greater number, is understood to be chosen to that place. The like method of
proceeding is observed in the choice of the second, third and all the rest of
the Magistrates for that day. When the balloting and counting is done, the
Great Chancellor gives notice who are elected, commanding them to present
themselves before the Censors, who take an oath of them that they have not done
any thing contrary to the laws to obtein those places; which done the Council
is dismissed. NB. If none of the Competitors for any place have above half the
number of suffrages, there is none as yet understood to be chosen to that
place. And because by an ancient Law the Great Council is to break up before
Sunset, if it happens any of the Competitors are not before that time come to
the ballot, the names of such Magistrates and Officers as are chosen are read,
and they that remain to be balloted lose the benefit of their nomination,
because the next Council-day all is begun anew and there are other Competitors
made. It is permitted to any stranger to be present at the meetings of the
Great Council (as we were several times) to see the manner of proceeding there,
and there is a particular bench appointed for them to sit on.

Of the PREGADI.
In the Council of the Pregadi are debated and determined all the great and
weighty affairs of the Commonwealth. This Council in former times consisted of
no more than 60. Afterward they began to add thereto sometimes 25, sometimes
20, insomuch that it was at last concluded, that there should be made an
addition to it ( Aggiunta they call it) of as many more. The cause of such
additions was, I suppose, the greatness and importance of the affairs then to
be considered and treated of, that so a greater number of Gentlemen being
present at such consultations and debates, matters might be better disputed,
and more thoroughly scanned and examined. In the number of the 60 Pregadi there
can be but three of one and the same family, and if there be three in the
Pregadi there can be but two in the Giunta; if there but two in the Pregadi
there may then be three in the Giunta. Besides the 120 we have mentioned, this
Council takes in also many other Councils and Magistrates, whereof some have
suffrages and some have not, only to add reputation to them, they are permitted
to be present, to hear the debates and understand the affairs of the
Commonwealth. Those which enter into this Council with power of balloting are,
The Duke; the six Counselors; the Council of ten; the Auvogadors; all the
Procurators of S. Mark, which in Sansovinus his time were 24; the forty Judges
in Criminal causes; the three Counselors that sit with them, called the
Consiglieri da Basso; the two Censors, who after they have finished their
Magistracy have power to enter into the Council and ballot, the three that are
over the acts of the Sopracastaldi, who after they have ended their office have
power for a time limited to enter into the Council and ballot; the three
Signori all biave, that is, those who are to take care of bread-corn and of
mills, to make provision thereof for the City, if need require, etc. the four
Signori al sale, who take care of the making of salt, and farm out the excise
of it; the three Camerlinghi di commune, who receive and disburse all the
public Revenue, we might English them Treasurers; the three Signori all
Ragioni vecchie, who are to disburse what is necessary for the entertainment of
foreign Princes and Ambassadors coming to the City, and what else is appointed
them by the Commonwealth; the three all Ragioni nuove, who are to exact what
is due to the Commonwealth of those who have farmed the public custom and
excise, and to punish them that are slack and run behind hand; the three
Proveditori di commune, who take care that Ships be made of just bigness, and
not freighted beyond their measure, oversee the highways and bridges, as also
all the Arts of the City and the small Schools or Fraternities, for the Capi de
Dieci are set over the great ones; the three that are over the Arsenal; the
three Proveditori sopra le Camere, who take account of the general Collectors
of the revenues of all the Cities subject to the Commonwealth; the three
Proveditors a dieci Officii, who exact and gather up such moneys of the public
customs or excise as are not fully and absolutely sifted and examined by the
Custom-Officers, the three Cataueri, who have also to do with part of the
public revenue, as Escheats to the Commonwealth, in case a man dies intestate
and without heirs; mulcts of such as are cast in a Suit: they judge also
concerning treasures found either at sea or land.

Those that enter into the Council and have no suffrages are the College or
Company of the Savi; The Proveditors sopra le Acque, who are to take care of
the Lagune and scouring the channels, etc. The Dieci Savii, who see that tithes
be duly set out and paid; give possession, register Bargains and Sales, etc.
The three Officers of Health, who take care that the City be kept clean, and
nothing noisome or offensive left in the Streets, nothing that is corrupted, or
that may cause sickness and infection bought and sold either by land or water;
from these Mountebanks and Physicians take licenses, and they keep account of
the number of Whores who are licensed, and in time of any Epidemical Disease
they have absolute power of life and death. The three over the Datii, or public
Customs and Excise; the Proveditors over the of Alexandria; the twelve over
that of Damascus, and the twelve over that of London.

The Pregadi were so called, as some think, because anciently they were
assembled by public Ministers, and by them as it were prayed and entreated that
they would come and consult of the affairs of the Commonwealth. The Pregadi
properly so called are chosen by the Gr. Council, as the other Magistrates are,
in the manner before related. They begin so soon to choose them that all of them
may be elected by the beginning of October, at which time they enter upon their
Office. The Giunta or other 60 are chosen both by the Council of the old
Pregadi and the Great Council in this manner. Upon Michaelmas day the Council
of the old Pregadi is assembled, wherein each one of those that have suffrages
nominates the person whom he would have to be of the Giunta. All the nominated
are written down. The next day the Great Council is convened, and the names of
all the persons nominated by the Pregadi having been first read, are put into
an urn, and thence one by one drawn out be one of the Secretaries, and balloted
by the Council; and he that obtains above half of the suffrages is reckoned to
be one of the Giunta. The other Magistrates comprehended in this Council, it
matters not at what time they be created; because when the Pregadi enter upon
their administration, those who at present exercise such offices are numbered
among them as members of the Council; and if their offices determine before the
Pregadi's, their successors enter in their places. Besides those who assist
the Commonwealth in a time of need with their estates, lending such a sum of
money as the Law determines, have liberty granted them to be present in this
Council, and to understand the management of public affairs (yet without power
of balloting) till such time as their moneys be repaid, and sometimes longer.
For the Law prescribes them such a time to enjoy this honor, though their money
be repaid them before. By this constitution the Commonwealth reaps a double
benefit. First, it seldom wants money upon any exigent, many being willing to
lend, that they may enjoy this privilege. Secondly, it trains up young men to
the knowledge of State Affairs, and qualifies and enables them to manage public
business when they shall be thereto called.

The Pregadi are assembled as often as it pleases the College. A Council is
also granted to the Magistrates when they would confirm any Law, and to the
Auvogadors, when they have any difficult case to bring in to be determined. The
time of their meeting is signified by the tolling of a Bell; it is also a
custom to send to give notice and invite them by public Sergeants or Ministers.
They cannot enter into any consultation about public business, unless there be
present four of the Counselors, and 60 at least of such as have suffrages. In
this Council are consultations had, and resolutions taken about Peace and War,
truces and agreements, and ways of providing money for the necessities and uses
of the Commonwealth. How these affairs are treated of will appear when we shall
come to speak of the College. Laws are also confirmed in this Council, which
are first considered by those Magistrates, who are over that business to which
such Laws appertain, Such Magistrates come first to the College, and there show
either the necessity or the benefit and utility of such Laws as they would
introduce; and if the College approves of them, then they are permitted to
bring them into the Council of Pregadi; and if they pass there, then are they
valid, and published by public bando or Proclamation; after which every one is
obliged to take notice of them and observe them: and the Magistrate that
introduced them is to see that they be put in execution. They use also
sometimes to get their laws confirmed, not only in the Council of Pregadi, but
also in the Great Council. The which thing (says my Author) is I suppose
principally in the power of him who brings in the Law to do, and is usually
done to gain more reputation, and add strength to the Law. Besides in the
Council of Pregadi is chosen a Captain of the Armata, in case the Commonwealth
has occasion to make war by Sea; and a Proveditor of the Camp when they make
war by Land: those three kinds of Magistrates, which they call, i. e. Savi
grandi, Savi di Terra ferma and Savi di mare: which elections are made after
this manner. Each one of the Pregadi nominates one whom he pleases. All that
are so nominated are balloted, and he that obtains more then half the number of
suffrages is understood to be chosen to that office or dignity. But because it
may often happen that he who is judged fittest for such or such an office may
be known to be unwilling to accept it, and no man for fear of displeasing him
may dare publicly to nominate him; therefore to avoid that inconvenience, each
of the Pregadi writes down in a paper the name of him whom he would choose to
such a place; which Scrolls are all together put into an urn, and drawn out by
the Great Chancellor one by one; and the names written therein being openly
read, they are put to the ballot, and on him who has more then half the
suffrages is such Office or Dignity conferred. But when there is a Captain of
the Armata to be made, he that is in this manner chosen in the Council of
Pregadi must be afterward ballotted in the Great Council, and have Competitors
given him by the four sets of Electors in manner before related, and he who
has most suffrages above the half is understood to be elected. The
Counselors also, and the Censors are elected partly by the Council of
Pregadi, and partly by the Great Council.

Of the COLLEGE.
The College is the third member of the Commonwealth, and of great reputation.
It is made up principally of three sets or kinds of Magistrates. First those
they call Savi grande. 2. Those they call Savi di terra ferma. And 3. those
they call Savi di mare. The number of the Savi grandi is six; of each of the
other, five; in all sixteen. And besides these of the Signoria, that is the
Duke, the six Counselors, and the three heads or chiefs of the 40 Criminal
Judges, called Capi di Quaranta. The Savi of the Sea, who are otherwise called
Savi a gli ordini, take care of all maritime affairs, as well such as concern
peace and war as other matters. The Savi of the Land manage and govern Land
affairs, such as appertain to peace and war, and their especial charge is to
keep account of all Soldiers that are in the Commonwealths pay. The Savi
grandi over-see and take care of both, as well at home as abroad. And their
particular charge is to make provision both for Peace and war, to write to and
answer Princes Letters, and finally to counsel and govern the whole
Commonwealth. It is to be noted that anciently the Savi grandi did include the
authority and administration of the Savi of the Land, whence the Savi grandi
might intermeddle with the affairs belonging to the Land, though not excluding
the Savi of the Land. In the same manner the Savi of the land included those of
the Sea, but were not included by them, and therefore with the Savi of the Sea
could take into their consideration Sea-affa^rs. So that the Savi grandi
included both the Savi of the Land, and the Savi of the Sea; the Savi of the
Land only those of the Sea. But in our times, and not many years since the way
of managing such affairs is a little altered. For that by Law it is determined,
that the Authority and administration of the Savi of the land shall be equal to
that of the Grand Savi; only that of the Savi of the Sea remains in the same
terms it was. In old time there were no other then the Grand Savi; afterward
the naval power and command at Sea being increased, it was found necessary to
create a Council for Sea affairs or Savi di mare. The like happened afterward
when the Republic began to grow great on the Land, the Senate being constrained
to create Savi di terra ferma, which was presently after that Treviso came
under their dominion. Anciently the Savi di mare were of greater reputation
then those of the terra ferma, but after that the Dominion of the Commonwealth
began to increase upon the Land, they bent their counsels and endeavors that
way, and so the Savi di mare lost their reputation, and those of the Terra
ferma gained it. These three kinds of Magistrates are chosen by the Council of
Pregadi in the same manner as the Proveditor of the Camp. None can be made
Savio grande unless he be of mature age, and reputed of the greatest abilities.
The Savi of the Land are always men of reputation for prudence, but not so
great as the Savi grandi; the Savi of the Sea are still of less esteem then
they. And at present this Magistracy serves rather to give young men occasion
to exercise themselves in State-business, then for any other purpose, because
in matters of moment the Savi grandi, and Savi di terra ferma are always
employed. Each of these companies of Magistrates choose one of themselves
Praepositus, or Prevost, who is chief of that Magistracy for one week; he
propounds matters in the College and Records those things which are to be
executed which appertain to his Magistracy. The manner of proceeding and
transacting public affairs in the College is this. Every morning two hours
after Sunrising the College is convened. [ N. B. whenever we speak of the
College we understand the three Societies of Magistrates beforementioned,
together with the Duke, the Counselors, and the three Capi de Quaranta, that
is with the Signoria, who have their places not only in this College, but also
in the Grand Council, the Council of Pregadi and the Council of ten: So that
nothing is debated without their presence and intervention.] The College being
assembled, all those Letters are read that were received since their last
meeting: Audience is given to public Orators and Ambassadors, if any require
it; and each of the three Societies of Savi dispatch such business as
appertains to them, and was propounded and recorded by their Provost. If
therefore there be any business to be debated appertaining to the Grand Savi,
the Savi of the Land, and of the Sea may be excluded: but if it be not of very
great importance, they do not use to prohibit them to be present at such
deliberations, but their part is only to hear and hold their peace: or if they
do deliver their opinions, yet are they not noted down to be brought into the
Council of Pregadi, but only the opinions of the Grand Savi, the Counselors,
the Capi de Quaranta, and the Duke. And to the end that the whole method and
order of this administration may be the better understood by an example, let us
suppose there is a consultation to be had about some affairs appertaining to
the Savi of the Sea, they cannot exclude the Savi of the Land, and the Grand
Savi, if they please to interpose and meddle with that affair. After
consultation had thereupon, not only the Savi of the Sea, but they of the Land,
and the Grand Savi, the Duke also and the Counselors and Capi de Quaranta, may
deliver their opinions if they please, and according as they are of one or more
different opinions, make one or several parties [by parties we mean nothing but
propositions or sentences.] For that each Savio and Counselor, much more the
Duke, when they do not agree to the opinions of others, may each bring in a
party (that is, propound his sentence or judgment about a business) alone. All
these parties are noted by a Secretary, each one with the name of that Savio or
other person that was the Author of it. And because no matter belonging to the
public administration can be determined without the approbation and consent of
the Council of Pregadi; therefore that Council being assembled, the aforesaid
Magistrates come with their parties or propositions noted, and propound them in
order. If the parties be more then one (as suppose four) they are all
propounded together, but that is first read the Author whereof is the more
honorable Magistrate, and therefore those of the Duke and Counselors ought to
precede the rest, those of the Savi grandi, them of the Savi of the Land; and
theirs those of the Savi di mare. And if any of the three Societies of Savi in
matters appertaining to their charge have taken several parties, that party
ought first to be propounded, of which he is Author, who in that Society is
most honorable. The parties being propounded, if any of the Savi will speak
against them, he ought to precede the rest of the Pregadi, and among them first
that Savio who is of greatest Authority. After that any of the Pregadi has
liberty to do the same. After sufficient debate upon all the parties, they are
all balloted together in this manner. Suppose the parties to be four, then
there are four Secretaries come in, having each a white box in his hand: after
them another Secretary follows with a green box, and after him still another
with a red box. The first of the four goes from person to person, repeating the
name of him that was author of the party first propounded: the second, third,
and fourth in like manner repeating the names of the second, third, and fourth,
and each one of the Pregadi puts his ballot into what box he pleases. So that
if he approves not the first party, he puts his ballot in his box that gathers
the suffrages for that party that pleases him. If he approves none of the four,
then he puts his ballot in the green box: but if the matter be not yet clear to
him, and he be not fully satisfied about it, he puts his ballot into the red
box that comes last, and is called the box of the Non sinceri, i. e. such as
neither approve or reject. The Suffrages being thus gathered, the ballots of
each party are told over, and that which exceeds the half by most suffrages is
understood to be confirmed and ratified; but if none come up to the half, then
that which has the least number of suffrages being laid aside, the other three
are balloted after the same manner, with three boxes, and after them a green
and a red one. If none of the three get half the number of suffrages, then that
which has fewest being again laid aside, the remaining two are balloted in
like manner; and if neither of these passes the half, then that which has the
most suffrages is balloted alone: and if the suffrages for that exceed not the
half, none of the parties balloted is understood to be confirmed: in which case
new parties must be brought in, if the matter treated of be necessary, which
may be done the same day, because the Duke, any one of the Counselors, Capi di
Quaranta, or Savi may bring in new parties. Such a business may also be
referred to another day. But it seldom happens that of so many parties no one
is approved. When none of them is confirmed, and the matter requires further
debate, we shall declare what order is taken when we come to treat of the
Council of Ten. But it is to be noted, that the first time all the parties are
balloted together, it may happen that there are more then half the suffrages in
the box of the Non-sinceri, i. e. such as suspend, being not clear in the
point; and in such case none of the parties can be balloted, but the matter
requiring new debate, new parties are to be brought in. And because it may
happen that some one of the Council of Pregadi may have upon some matter under
consideration a proposition to make, which may be for the benefit and advantage
of the Commonwealth, which came not into the minds of the Savi or others who
have power of propounding their judgments or opinions in Council, that such
advantage be not lost, it is ordained that such opinion or sentiment be
communicated to one of those who have power to propound, and by him propounded
to the Council. But that none but the Savi and others beforementioned should
have liberty to bring in parties, is ordained to avoid prolixity and confusion;
it being also unlikely that what comes not into the thoughts and consideration
of the College, in which are the wisest persons of the City, should be imagined
or found out by other men. But granting this might sometimes happen, yet it
would be so seldom, that no great account ought to be made of it; and so much
the rather, because in every constitution the lesser convenience ought to give
place to the greater. To every of these three Societies of Savi, the same time
of six months determines their office: but yet are not all the persons in each
chosen at the same time. For the grand Savi are chosen at two several times,
three at once; and from the choice of the first to the choice of the second
intercedes three months time. The Savi of the Land, and the Savi of the Sea are
also chosen at two times, three the first time, and two the second; with the
same interval between. To the grand Savi there is sometimes, great affairs
requiring it, added an Aggiunta of three more, and these we call Savi
straor^dinarii. One may be chosen into the Council of Pregadi successively two
or more years one after another.

Of the DVKE.
Of the Antiquity of this Magistrate, and what great power and authority he had
in ancient times, and how afterward it came to be moderated and diminished, I
shall say nothing, only show in what manner he is elected, and what Authority
he has in our times. So soon as the former Duke is dead, the six Counselors
enter into the Palace with the three Capi de Quaranta, of whom we shall speak
hereafter. The senior Counselor is understood to be Vice-Duke, and therefore
he performs some business which belongs to the office of the Duke, as the
sealing of bollettines for them that are to undertake any new office, etc. The
Letters which the Signoria writes to Magistrates and Commanders abroad go in
the name of the Governatori. The Counselors once entered the Palace, go not out
thence till the new Duke be created. The Palace-gates are also kept locked up,
and only the wickets left open to enter in and go out at: and besides there is
a Guard, more for ancient usage then any necessity; for that there is no more
alteration in the City upon the death of the Duke, then upon the death of any
private Gentleman, that is none at all. Nic. Crassus says, that it is now by
law ordained that besides the Auvogadors some other Magistrates shall also sit
and administer Justice. Annot. 27. in Gianot.
Its true indeed the Magistrates do not proceed in the administration of their
offices, before there be a new Duke created* but that is, because its supposed
they are all busied about the Election. The body of the deceased Duke being
adorned with the Ducal Vestments, is brought down, and placed in a low room
called the Sala de Pioveghi, where it remains DOMINICAS CONTARENO DEI GRATIA
DVX VENETIARVM.
portrait three days; and there are twenty Gentlemen appointed, who being
clothed with Scarlet, accompany it when it is carried down, and sit round about
it till night, returning again the next morning, and this they continue to do
for three days. Then is the Funeral celebrated with all the Pomp and
Magnificence which the Dignity of such a Magistrate requires. The next day
after the Funeral the Great Council is convened, and given to understand by the
Great Chancellor, that being to give beginning to the Election of a new Duke,
they are first to make choice of five Correctors and three Inquisitors. The
Vice-Duke then standing up, makes a Speech to the Council, and having commended
the Life, Behavior, and Government of the Duke deceased, exhorts and stirs up
every one to make choice of a person to succeed him, that may be useful and
honorable to the Commonwealth. Then does he cause the Laws to be read, which
prescribe the manner and order of electing the new Duke: and last of all the
Council proceed to elect the said five Correctors and three Inquisitors after
the same manner they use in the choice of other Magistrates. The office of the
Inquisitors is diligently to examine the life and actions of the deceased
Prince, and if they find that he has in any thing erred or done amiss, they
are obliged to accuse him; and look what punishment he has deserved is
inflicted on his heirs. But such punishments are never corporal, but only
pecuniary mulcts. And such a Cause, by reason it is a business of great
importance, is not finally determined by the Inquisitors, but agitated in the
Great Council, and may also be examined in the Quarantia criminale. These
Inquisitors have a years time to finish their Inquisition in. The office of the
Correctors is to see and consider well if any new Law to be observed by the
succeeding Prince is needful to be introduced: and if there have been any error
discovered in the administration of the Precedent Duke that ought to be
corrected. For the doing of which so soon as they are created they are brought
into a certain Chamber, where they meet so often till they be agreed upon what
to them seems needful to be amended, or sit to be newly introduced; and this
commonly takes up three or four days. When they have finished their
considerations, they therewith acquaint the Signoria, who cause the Great
Council to be convened, in the accustomed place and manner; whither the said
Correctors come, and there cause all such Laws and Corrections as they judge
fit to be made, to be publicly recited; which being balloted one by one in the
great Council, are either confirmed or rejected. This done, the Great Council
the day following is again called, to which meeting none can come but such as
have passed the 30 year of their age. The doors being shut at the appointed
time, all that are present in Council are numbered over, and in an urn or
Capello of that sort which have but one hole in their cover, are put 30 golden
balls, marked with a certain note, and as many silver ones as together with the
golden are equal to the number of the Gentlemen present. After this the junior
Counselor goes out into St. Marks Church, which is fast by, and having made
his reverence to the Altar, takes a little boy which he finds there, and brings
him along with him into the Council; who is to draw the ballots out of the urn
for the Gentlemen who they come up to the Capello, they not being permitted to
draw them out themselves, to avoid fraud. This boy is called the Ballotino, and
is he that in processions goes before the Duke, who is bound so soon as the boy
comes to be of convenient age to make him one of the Secretaries. The Ballotine
being brought in before the Signoria, one Counselor and one Capo de Quaranta
chosen by lot, go and set themselves down before the Capello, Then they draw
lots which Bench is to come up first. [ N. B. Because there is but one Capello,
the Benches do not come up by two and two, as in the creation of Magistrates,
but one by one; and therefore there are put in ten lots into the urn and drawn
out as before, and the benches come up accordingly.] If one of those five
benches on the side toward St. Georges be drawn, they are to begin to come up
at that end that is toward the Broil; and if one of those five that are toward
S. Marks be drawn, they are to begin to come up at the end toward Castello. The
lots being drawn, that Gentleman that sits first at that end of the bench which
is to begin, arises and goes up to the Capello. Then the Ballotine in his name
draws out a ball, which if it be a silver one, he puts it in another Capello
standing at the foot of that out of which he drew it, and he for whom it was
drawn goes presently out of the Council Chamger. But if it be gilded and
marked, he delivers it to the Counselor sitting by, and the Great Chancellor
pronounces aloud the name of him for whom it was drawn: who presently between
two Secretaries is carried into a room out of the Council Chamber. Then all
those who are of his Family, his Uncles, Cousins, Father-in-law, and they that
are of near affinity to him are called, and being come up to the Tribunal,
numbered by one of the Secretaries, and so many silver balls taken out of the
Capello as are equal to the sum of them, and so they depart the
Council Chamger. In the same order all the rest of the benches are called by
lot, till all the golden balls are drawn out of the Capello. And after those
who have obtained them are withdrawn into the forementioned room the Council
is dismissed: and the 30 come all before the Signoria, and sit down on two
benches there standing, half on the one, and half on the other. Then in a
certain Capello there placed are put 21 silver Balls and 9 golden; and these 30
persons being called according to the order they were chosen in, come up one by
one to the Capello, and the Ballotine draws out a ballot for each one, till all
the golden balls are drawn. Those then for whom the silver balls were drawn
depart, and those nine who obtained the golden withdraw into the forementioned
room; where when they are all come together they are by the Signoria conducted
into another room, where are set ready all necessary accommodations for them:
and having given oath to make a good election, they continue there locked up
together till they have chosen 40 of 40 different Families: in which election
they thus proceed. So soon as they are shut up they draw lots among themselves,
who shall nominate first, who second, who third, etc. and accordingly in that
order nominate. Those nominated are balloted among the nine, and if they have
seven suffrages they are understood to be of the 40. The election being
finished, they signify so much to the Signoria. The which the same day, or if
it be too late the day following, cause the Great Council to be called; which
when it is assembled, the Great Chancellor with two Secretaries goes to the
nine for the Schedule in which the 40 Electors are written; and returning
therewith into the Council by the command of the Signoria reads over the names
of them that are chosen; who one by one coming before the Tribunal are sent out
of the Council into a certain Chamber; and if any one of the 40 happens not to
be present in Council, one of the Counselors and one Capo de Quaranta go to
search him out, and without giving him leave to speak to any body, bring him
into the Council Chamger, and afterward into the room where his companions are
withdrawn. When the 40 are all met together the Council is dismissed, and then
after the manner of the former 30, these 40 come before the Signoria, and being
set upon the two benches in the middle, they are likewise by lot called up to
the Capello, wherein are put 28 silver balls, and 12 golden. Those for whom the
silver balls are drawn depart the Hall; and those for whom the golden are
brought by the Signoria either into the Chamber where the former nine were, or
into another as they please; where having taken oath to make a good election,
they are locked up, and by way of suffrage choose 25 of 25 several Families, in
the same manner as the nine chose the 40; to which Election 9 suffrages of the
12 are necessary. The Election being made, they acquaint the Signoria
therewith; which if the time permits, causes the great Council to be assembled
the same day; if not, the day following, and after the same manner the Great
Chancellor reads the names of the 25: and those that are chosen when they hear
their names read, come up to the Tribnnal, and are sent out of the Council into
a room by themselves as were the 40: and if any one be not present, he is
searched out and brought in like wise. When all the 25 are met, the Council is
broken up, and the 25 come before the Signoria, and sitting down, are called by
lot, and come up to the Capello, into which are put 16 silver balls, and nine
golden. Those for whom the Ballotine draws the silver balls depart; those that
get the golden remain; and being locked up together, they do in the same manner
as the former 12, by 7 suffrages choose 45 of 45 several Families; who
afterward being called by the Signoria into the Great Council, the present and
absent being all come together, as we said before, the Council is dismissed.
And the 45 being set before the Signoria in form aforesaid, and called by lot,
come up to the Capello; into which are put 34 silver balls, and 11 golden.
Those for whom the silver balls are drawn go at their pleasure, those for whom
the golden, remain; and having given oath to make a good Election, they are
shut up as the former, and by way of suffrage choose 41 of so many several
Families, of whom each must have 9 ballots, and these are the Electors of the
Duke. After these 41 are thus elected, and in the Great Council pronounced, and
also all met in the room appointed, in manner aforesaid; first of all the Mass
of the Holy Ghost is celebrated, then every one of the Electors promises by
solemn oath to lay aside all humane passions, and to choose for Duke him whom to
choose in his conscience he shall judge to be most for the interest and honor
of the Commonwealth, as like to do it most credit and best service; and that
with the profoundest silence he will keep secret whatever is said or done among
them. After this they are locked up together alone, without any other Ministers
or Secretaries, so close that no person can be admitted to see them: and first
of all among themselves of the ancientest they choose three heads or chiefs
which they call Priors; and also of the youngest among them they choose two who
perform the office of Secretaries. The Priors sit down, having before them a
table upon which are placed two balloting boxes of that sort that are used in
the Great Council; in one of which are put 40 balls, marked with a certain
mark, that no deceit may be used. The rest of the 41 sit also down, each where
he pleases. The two Secretaries make 41 Schedules, and having folded them up
give to each person one, they take also the ballots and distribute them to all.
Then they are called one by one before the three Priors, and each one writes in
his Schedule the name of him whom he would have to be Duke, and leaves it upon
the table. The two Secretaries note the names of them that are written in the
Schedules, and by how many each one is named. [The names in all the Schedules
seldom pass 6 or 8, because there are never more who can be judged sit to be
promoted to such a Dignity.] After which all the names so noted are put into an
urn, and thence by lot drawn out. And he that is first drawn, if he be one of
the Electors is presently sent out into the Chamber of the Quarantia, and there
shut up; and liberty is then given to any one of the Electors to speak any
thing he has to object against him, why he is not fit for so great a place.
And if any thing be by any one objected, it is set down by the Secretaries: and
he being called in, all that has been spoken against him is read to him, and
if he will stand upon his defense he may make his answer; which when he has
done he returns into the same Chamber again. The same order is used till there
be none left who will object any thing against him, or till he will defend
himself no longer; after which he is presently balloted, and as soon as that is
done all the Electors go up before the Priors, the eldest of which with a
little staff numbers over those that are in the affirmative box, and also those
that are in the negative; and if the affirmative amount to 25, the person
balloted is understood to be chosen Duke; and there can be no other balloted.
This order has been since changed, and notwithstanding the first or any other
have come to 25 suffrages, yet have the rest been balloted; and he that has
obtained most suffrages has been made Duke. But if the affirmative suffrages
do not amount to 25, there is taken by lot another out of the urn, in which the
names set down each with the number of its nominators were put, and the same
order of proceeding observed till they come to one who gets 25 ballots. It may
happen that none comes up to that number, in which case the Electors continue
shut up, and name and ballot the nominated so often, till one comes to get the
foresaid number of suffrages. The Duke being on this wise created, many
Ceremonies are wont to be performed. First of all the 41 by the Great
Chancellor send word to the Signoria who it is that is created Duke, who first
of all go to congratulate him, and give him joy; and if it be in the day time,
cause all the Bells to be rung. Then his Kindred and Friends come to visit him,
and at the same time there is money coined with his name upon it. After which
the 41 Electors with the Duke go into St. Mark's Church, and having done
reverence to God, all mount up a Scaffold, and the ancientest of them tells the
people (who by this time have filled the Church) that they have chosen a Duke
in the room of the deceased; and commending the Election, shows him to the
People, who in token of confirmation and joy give him loud acclamations. The
Duke then speaks to the People, and encourages them to hope well of his
Government; which done, they go down the Scaffold, and bring the Duke before
the Altar; where by the Procurators of the Church an Oath is tendered him to
observe the Laws and a Standard put into his hand by the Vicar of the
Primicerius of St. Marks. After this, having made an offering at the Altar, he
comes to the door of the Choire, where he is placed upon a little low moveable
Scaffold ( Pergoletta they call it) accompanied by one that carries the
Standard, and by another of his near Friends or Relations, who carries a cup
full of gold and silver money stamped with his name; and by the mariners of the
Arsenal he is drawn out of St. Marks, and carried round about the Piazza, he
that carries the cup scattering money among the people as he goes along. When
he has rounded the Piazza, he enters in by the principal gate into the Palace;
where being arrived at the foot of the stairs he goes off the Pergolette to go
up. In the midst of the stairs he finds the Counselors and Capi de Quaranta
who there wait for him. When he is got up to the top of the stairs, the eldest
Counselor puts upon his head the Ducal Cap; and thence he is lead into the To
put him in mind of his mortality, because that is the place where the Corpse of
the deceased Dukes lie in state.
Sala de Pioveghi, and after he has sitten a while there in a seat appointed
for that purpose, he is conducted by them to his Lodgings; and the Palace being
resigned to him, they all go to their own homes. His habit much differing from
the common renders him venerable. On his head he wears a Ducal Cap, called il
Corno, because it has an Apex or horn arising above the top of it on the
hinder part, and under that a white coif, with little strings, which from the
ears hang down backward upon his neck. On his back a loose vest or mantle
without sleeves so long that it draws upon the ground, of velvet, Damask,
Scarlet, or any other rich cloth. When he goes abroad the Bells of St. Marks
are rung: there are certain Banners carried before him, and Trumpets of an
extraordinary greatness sounded: then follows the Cushion or Pillow, and the
seat of Gold, and after that the Duke himself under an Vmbrella, between two of
the principal foreign Ambassadors or Agents then in town, and the others behind
him. After him follow about 30 couple of the chief Gentlemen, all in cloth of
Scarlet; and he that has the right hand in the first couple carries a Sword
upright in his hand.

The COVNSELLORS.
The Duke cannot determine, nor so much as excute any the least besiness alone
without the presence of the Counselors, who are in number six, one for each
Sestiero. They are always chosen of the most honorable Gentlemen of the City;
the greatness and dignity of their office requiring it. They are not all six
chosen at the same time, but by three and three; those for the three Sestieri
on one side the Great chanel at one time, and those for the Sestieri on the
other side at another. They are chosen by the Great Council, and are of the
number of those Magistrates that require four Competitors: but the Council of
Pregadi for each of these makes one Competitor; who is afterward balloted in
the Great Council. So then when there is an Election to be made of three
Counselors, the Great Council is assembled, and after that the four sets of
Electors are made, and withdrawn into their several rooms, to make their
Elections after the order before set down, one of the Secretaries gives notice
to all who have votes in the Council of Pregadi, that they withdraw into the
Chamber adjoining to the Great Council Chamger, where the Council of Pregadi,
uses to meet. Where when they are all met, the Duke with the Counselors and
Capi de Quaranta goes in to them; and it being by lot determined for what
Sestiero a Counselor shall be first chosen, every one names him whom he would
have to be Counselor. All the persons nominated are written down, and
afterward balloted; and he that has more then half the number of suffrages is
cohsen Competitor: and this manner of choosing in the Council of Pregadi is
called Scrutinio. The Council of Pregadi and the Duke being returned into the
Great Council, and the Competitors made, they are all balloted after the manner
forementioned, and he that has most above half the number of suffrages is
understood to be chosen Counselor. It may happen that in the Great Council one
only may come to be nominated Competitor, and sometimes the same that is chosen
by the Pregadi, in which case he ought to be balloted; notwithstanding that by
the Law none can be balloted without a Competitor: because being nominated in
diverse Councils, he is understood to be Competitor with himself, as has been
before intimated; and if he has more then half the suffrages he is chosen, [
NB. Where there are more Competitors then one balloted for any place for which
the Pregadi choose a Competitor, it happens for the most part that he is chosen
who was made Competitor by the Pregadi, because of the Dignity and Reputation
of that Council.] The six Counselors sit with the Duke, and with him
administer all affairs, and dispatch especially all private business: as for
example, give Audience, read public Letters, grant Privileges, and the like;
which things cannot be done by the Duke, if there be not four Counselors
present; and yet the Counselors may dispatch any the like business, though the
Duke be not with them. They have power of propounding in the Great Council, the
Council of Pregadi, and Council of Ten; which he Savi who have power of
propounding matters in the Council of Pregadi, and the Capi di Dieci who have
privilege of propounding in the Council of Ten, have not; so that the the
Authority of the Counselors is greater then that of the Savi, or Capi di
Dieci. [ NB. That any one Counselor, though no other concur with him, may
propound in the Council of Pregadi, but not in the Council of Ten, unless three
more concur with him in the same opinion.] This Magistracy continues for a
whole year, but is exercised but 8 months; the other four months being spent in
the Quarantia criminale, wherein three Counselors continually sit, who during
that time are called Consiglieri da basso, i. e. lower Counselors. They may
sit in this Court either the first 4 months, or the last 4, or the two first
and two last, And therefore it is necessary that there be always nine
Counselors, six who sit constantly with the Duke, and the three now mentioned:
and when these are to go sit with the Duke, or go out of their office, three of
those which sit with the Duke come down to sit in the Quaranatia or finish
their office, and there are three new ones created. Moreover it is to be
understood, that with the Duke and six Counselors do also sit three of the
Quarantia criminale, i. e. the 40 Judges in criminal causes, whom they call
Capi de Quaranta, who hold this Dignity two months: so that by the Signoria is
understood the Duke, the six Counselors, and the three Capi di Quaranta.
Anciently the Duke with his Counselors was wont to be present at the judgments
of the Quarantia; but Marcus Cornarus who was made Duke in the year 1365. by
reason of the multitude of business which daily increased in the Commonwealth,
left that care to those Counselors we have been speaking of. The three Capi de
Quaranta sit with the Duke and Counselors, that as the Quarantia participates
with the Signory, having three Counselors joined with them; so the Signory may
partake of the Quarantia, the three Capi de Quaranta sitting with them. And so
the Signory comes to intermeddle with the business of the Quarantia, and the
Quarantia with the affairs of the Signory. And now to acquaint the Reader with
all the Dukes management. First, he with the Counselors intervenes in, and is
part of the College, the Council of Pregadi, and the Great Council, as we have
already signified. He is also present in the Council of Ten, and has power of
propounding in all these Councils; so that no affairs can be cannot treated of
without his presence, though alone he cannot dispatch any business. Public
Letters are written in his name, as also all Privileges and public Writings,
as though he were the Author of them. All Letters that come from Foreign Princes
and Ambassadors, and Agents sent abroad by the Commonwealth, are directed to
him. When the Savi of the Land or Sea, or other Magistrates write Letters to
their Proveditors, they subscribe them with the Dukes name thus, Dominicus
Contarenus Dux Venetiarum. And this mode is observed in all other sorts or
public Writings, as Patents, Privileges, Obligations, Laws, etc. The Council of
Ten varies this form and subscribes in two manners, for either the whole
Council writes and then they subscribe Dominicus Contarenus Dux Venetiarum,
etc. cum nostro Concilio December; and those that answer superscribe accordingly.
Or only the Heads or Chiefs of the Council of Ten, called Capi di Dieci, write;
and then the Subscription is, Dominicus Contarenus Dux Venetiarum, etc. cum
Copitibus Concilii December. And those that return answer superscribe accordingly.
Every eighth day, that is on Wednesday weekly, the Duke is wont to go down and
visit the Courts of Justice, making a tour round the two Corridores, where the
Magistrates sit, stopping a while at each Court, and stirring up and
encouraging the Judge or Magistrate that presides there to administer Justice
impartially. And if there be any one that thinks he has not right done him, he
recommends himself to the Duke, acquainting him with his cause; and if the Duke
judges that he is injured by false judgment, he presently commands that
Magistrate or Judge to do him right; but if the contrary appears to him, he
reproves him that thought himself agrieved, and goes on in his Visitation. Some
Dukes have changed this order, not visiting always on the same day, that they
might come upon the Mgistrates unexpected. Multitude of business sometimes
constrains the Duke to intermit this usage for a week or two. All the money of
the Commonwealth is also stamped with the Dukes name, but not with his face or
image. That he may be the better enabled (says my Author) to maintain his
port, and live with that magnificence such a place requires, he has an
allowance from the Public of 3500 Ducats per annum; a sorry Revenue for one
that has the show and Title of a Prince, being less than so many French
Crowns. And yet he is obliged to keep a Family that may be honorable and
suitable to such a Dignity; and moreover to make 4 Feasts yearly at 4 several
times, viz. upon St. Stephen's day, St. Mark's day, Ascension day, and St.
Vit's day: to which Feasts it is the custom to^ invite all the Gentlemen
according to their ages. To the first, besides the Counselors, the Capi de
Quaranta, the Auvogadors, and the Capi de Dieci, are invited those that are of
greatest age and gravity: to the second those that are younger; and so to the
third and fourth still those that are younger and younger: besides which
Feasts, he is bound also to send to every Gentleman that comes to the Great
Council a Present, which was formely 5 wild Ducks: but now adays there is a
sort of money coined for that purpose; upon one side whereof is the figure of
St. Mark reaching out a Standard to the Duke, on the other side the name of the
Duke, and the year current of his Dukeship, on this manner, Dominici Contareni
Venetiarum Principis munus, Anno IV.

The Council of TEN.
The Council of Ten, though it be a member of great importance, yet is it
rather accessory or adjunctive then principal, and seems to me much to resemble
the Dictator, that was wont to be created by the Romans in times of great and
imminent danger; only differs in that the Commonwealth is never without this
Magistracy. The Authority thereof is equal to that of the Council of Pregadi,
and the whole City; and therefore it may meddle with and transact any
State Affairs as it pleases, without appeal, or being accountable to any
Superior Power. Though this power be not used by it, except only in cases of
greatest importance, and which cannot otherwise be remedied or provided for: as
for example, to consider about making War, concluding a Peace, or other
negotiation secretly, to send a Proveditor into the Camp speedily: which things
if they should be first treated of in the College, and afterward debated in
the Council of Pregadi, they could not be managed and transacted with that
secrecy, expedition, and other cirumstances as the time and conjuncture of
affairs requires. When the College then intends to manage any business
secretly; as suppose to conclude an agreement with any Prince or State, to
attempt any thing on their enemies, or begin any new enterprise or design,
which ought to be kept secret till the time of execution, then they cuase
Letters to be written to such Agents or other persons as are to be employed in
that business, with this Inscription, Dominicus Contarenus Dux Venetiarum, etc.
cum Concilio nostro December: and they superscribe their answers in like manner:
and their Letters are received by the Capi de Dieci, who bring them to the
College; at which time the three Capi de Quaranta, and the Savi di mare are
excluded: and then they treat of the business, and debate it as long as is
needful; yet not they alone, for the Capi de Dieci call the rest of the Council
of Ten. Besides at such consultations are present not only the Duke, the
Counselors, and all the Council of Ten, but the Grand Savi, and the Savi of
the Land, the Giunta which consists of fifteen, the Auvogadors and nine of the
Procurators. N. Crassus says, That at present there are none of any sort added
to the Council of X, but this Council consists only of the Duke, the six
Counselors, and the Decemviri; and that this Council does not now meddle at
all with Peace and War, and the public Treasury, but only punish enormous
Offense, and especially Rebellion and Treason.
But all these have not power of giving suffrages but only those ten of the
Council of X, the Giunta, the Duke, and the six Counselors. The Aggregate of
all these united with the Council of X is called the Council of X with the
Giunta; which is not convened but on weighty occasions, to debate and manage
great affairs and such as appertain to the state of the whole City; which
affairs might be treated of and dispatched by the Council of Pregadi, but for
the respects aforesaid are undertaken by this Council. The Council of X was
erected some say after the death of Vitale Michaeli, to punish such as had
plotted treason against the Commonwealth. Others say it had its beginning in
the time of Pietro Gradenigo. At first its Authority was but small, but by
little and little its reputation increased. It punishes besides such as
practice Treason or conspire against the Commonwealth, those that coin
counterfeit monys, those that commit sins against Nature, as Sodomy and
bestiality. It also disposes of certain moneys which are assigned to it by the
Chamberlains and other Officers: it has the command of certain Galleys in the
Arsenal, marked with these two letters, C and X, signifying that such Vessels
are in the power of the Capi de Dieci. It also takes care of the Artillery.
When any of these things are to be considered of, then only those Ten that are
of the Council of X with the Duke and Counselors are assembled; and this is
called absolutely and simply the Council of X. The ten of this Council are
chosen in the Great Council like the other Magistrates for one year; out of
which are taken by lot every month three, who are called the Heads or Chiefs of
the ten [ Capi de Dieci] and of these one presides every week, which is he who
in the Great Council Chamger takes place over against the Duke. The office of
these is to convoke the Council of X, and propound their opinions therein; yet
not singly but all three together, or at least two; and they are obliged to
call the Council every 8 days, and oftener if occasion require. Anciently there
was no determinate time for assembling this Council, but because every time it
was convened the whole City was moved and troubled, as judging that it was not
without some great reason; therefore to avoid and prevent such disturbance and
disquiet of men's minds there was a time determined for its meeting. When they
are to pass sentence upon any offender that is in their hands for the
forementioned crimes, he cannot either by himself or any other person plead his
cause or defend himself but appears before the Council and is examined, and
there are notes taken of all he says. And when the Capi di Dieci bring in such
a cause into the Council, either one of them must undertake his defense and
plead for him, or else he cannot be defended at all. From the Sentence of this
Council there is no appeal, neither can it be reversed or changed but by
themselves or successors, if the matter be such as is capable of change. Those
of this Council so soon as they go out of their office may presently enter upon
another. For all these places, the Grand Savi, the Savi of the Land and Savi of
the Sea, the Counselors, the ten of this Council, the Auvogadors and Censors
give no impediment one to another; but so soon as a Gentleman has finished one
of these Offices, he may enter upon another. If it happens that any one while
he is exercising a lesser Magistracy be chosen to a greater, he may if he
pleases relinquish the less, and take the greater.

The Procurators of St. MARK.
The Office of Procurator is of great reputation in this City. Though it be not
of the number of those which have to do with the administration and government
of the Commonwealth: yet is it honorable, because, as that of the Duke, it
continues for life; and is besides ancient, and has maintained its Reputation
to the present times. There was never any Gentleman of great esteem in the
City, but he was adorned with this Dignity: so that very few have been Dukes
since this Magistracy was ordained but they have before been Procurators.
Anciently there was but one Procurator made, to take care of the Church of St.
Mark and its treasure; but after the death of Sebastian Ciani, he having left a
great Legacy to St. Marks, the Revenues whereof were to be distributed by the
Procurator; one person not sufficing for so much business, it was found
necessary to create another; whose charge it should be to superintend and
manage the Legacy of Sebastian Ciani. Afterward Legacies being multiplied, in
the year 1270. in the time of Rinieri Zeno, a third was thought fit to be
created; and they did so divide the business among them, that one took care of
the Church, another of the Legacies bequeathed by them that dwelt on this side
the great Chanel; and the third of their Legacies who dwelt on the other side
of the great Chanel. In the same Dukes time there was a fourth created to be
Colleague with him that governed the Church and its Treasures. For the same
reason two more were added when John Soranzo was Duke. Afterward in the year
1423. when Francis Foscaro was made Duke there were three more created anew; so
that then the whole number was nine; three of whom took care of the Church and
its Treasures; three of the Legacies of the three Sestieri on one side the
great Chanel; and three of the Legacies of the three Sestieri on the other
side. In the year 1509. when the Republics Armies were broken and routed at
Addua by Lewis XII, King of France, they were constrained to create six for
money, conferring that honor upon such as would lend the Commonwealth such a
certain sum. These Procurators have power to compel Heirs to perform the Wills
of the Testators. They wear Ducal habits, and carry servants about with them;
and have the precedence of all other Magistrates. In processons the Counselors
and three Capi de Quaranta take place of them. They have either an habitation
assigned them, or 60 Ducats per annum allowed. They all enter into the Council
of Pregadi, but not all into the Council of Ten, but only nine chosen by the
said Council, three for a Procuracy. They are not capable of any other
Magistracy, except that of Savio grande and the Giunta of the Council of X.
When there is a Captain of the Armata, or a Proveditor of the Camp to be
chosen, there is a Law made in the Pregadi, that any one that is Procurator may
obtain that Dignity. They cannot go to the Great Council, but only in the
Election of the Duke; which license is then granted them by an especial Law.
They were wont anciently upon all those days the Great Council met, during all
the time the Council sat, to continue in the Court of the Palace, and never to
depart thence till the Great Council was risen; that if any unexpected or
sudden accident should happen they might be ready to remedy or assist. And
this perchance was the reason that it was forbidden them to go to the Great
Council. But in our time this usance is not observed, because of that quiet and
tranquillity the Commonwealth enjoys: Which is such, that no man thinks there
can any accident happen in the City which shall require the presence of the
Procurators more is one place than in another. There is no Magistracy or
Dignity in the City of much desired by the Gentlemen as this of Procurator: Yet
I think that it has lost much of its ancient reputation. For whereas formerly
it was not wont to be granted to any but ancient men, and great repute; in our
times we have seen many adorned therewith, who were neither of mature age, nor
great esteem and credit.

Of the other Officers and Magistrates (whereof this Republic has good store)
I shall say nothing, they belonging rather to the administration of Justice and
particular civil affairs, then the Government of the Commonwealth. Only it is
worth the notice taking, that they have so many Offices divided among the
Gentlemen, to busy and employ the greater number of them, that so having
something to entertain their time with, they may not be at leisure to think
upon innovating in the Government, or any way design and practice against the
constitution of the Commonwealth, to the disturbance of the peace.

The Gentlemen while they are in the City wear black Gowns with narrow sleeves,
and caps; without which habit they never appear in the streets, or any public
place. In the Piazza of S. Mark, that side next the Great Council Chamger is
appropriated to them to walk in, where no others mingle with them. This walk,
or rather the company of Gentlemen walking together there; they call the Broil
[ Broglio.] The principal diversion of the Gentlemen, Citizens, and Strangers
is to walk in this Piazza.

The present Citizens of what quality or estate soever have no share or
interest at all in the Govrernment of the Commonwealth. Probable it is, that
when the Creat Council was shut up (as they phrase it) that is, determined to
such a number of Families excluding all the rest, that all the Citizens of any
quality were therein comprehended; because before that time the Government
having been common to all, it is not likely the present establishment would
have taken place without commotion and disturbance, if there had been a
considerable number of Citizens of fashion and interest left out. Formerly this
honor has been given to many Citizens of eminent merit. Lately since the Wars
with the Turks in Candy for 100000 Ducats any Citizen might be created
Nobleman* By which means the State raised millions of Ducats there having been
more then fourscore Families advanced to that Dignity.

They put not weapons into the Citizens hands, but choose rather to make use of
mercenary Soldiers in their Wars.

There is no Law that prohibits any Citizen to be chosen to any place or Office
by the Great Council, nor does there need it: For that they are as sure not to
be cosen as though there were such a Law, the interest of the Nobility being as
strong a bar to such a choice as Law would be. And yet Gianotti says, that
some have attained to be nominated and balloted in the Great Council.

The air, notwithstanding the situation of the City, is held to be very good
and healthful, and (which is more) agreeable to people of all countries and
tempers. We never enjoyed our health better, nor had better stomachs to our
meat in any place beyond the Seas then we had here.

Here we first saw the Ludicrum, called by some Diabolus in carc^re, from a
little hollow glass-image made like the Picture of the Devil (though a
glass-bubble would serve the purpose as well or better) which being put into a
cylindrical glass-tube full of water they could make ascend, descend or rest in
any part of the tube at pleasure. The manner thus, They prepare an icuncula or
glass-bubble hollow and having in the heavier end of it a little hole of such a
poise as just to ascend and swim in water, and having put it into a glass-tube
stopped close or sealed at one end, and almost full of water, they clap their
hand on the mouth of the tube, and press down the air upon the superficies of
the water. The water being thus pressed, presses upon the air in the icuncula or
bubble; which giving place, part of the water thrusts into it by the little
hole. The bubble thereupon becoming heavier sinks in the water. Then taking up
the hand and removing the force, the air in the icuncula or bubble by its
elastic power expands it self, and expelling the water again, the icuncula or
bubble ascends; and so by proportioning the force they can make it not only
ascend and descend from top to bottom, but rest at what point of height or
depth they please. Of this and other ludicrous experiments concerning the
motion of these bubbles, I shall not think much here to set down what Doctor
Cornelius of Naples has delivered in his Progymnasmata Physica, Epist. de
Circumpulsione Platonica I was (says he) informed by Lud. Casalius of an
experiment invented at Florence, viz. Two glass-bubbles being put into a vessel
of water were so alternately moved, that in cold water the one sank to the
bottom, the other swam on the top; but putting in a little hot water they
changed places, that at the bottom ascending up to the top, and that on the top
sinking down to the bottom. Being taken with the novity of the thing, I applied
my mind to consider what might be the Physical reason of it, and soon found out
how it might be effected, to wit, one of these Glass-bubbles was perforated
with a little hole on the heavier side, and blown so light as to swim in water:
then some of the air being sucked out, there was so much water let in in the
room thereof, as to make the bubble sink in cold water, which upon filling the
Vessel with hot water would mount up to the top. For the air in the bubble
being rarefied or dilated by the heat of the water presently expells the water
contained in the bubble, and so the bubble becoming lighter ascends, The other
glass-bubble is imperforate and made of that poise as to swim in cold water and
sink in hot. He goes on.

Sed cum in ejusmodi ludicris inventis occuparemur, rumor ad aures nostras
perfertur, versari in manibus viri cujusdam ingeniosi admirabile artificium,
nempe vitreum tubum aqua plenum, in quae plures orbiculi vitrei sursum
deorsumque ferebantur ad nutum ejus qui tubi ostium digito obturabat. Tum eo
cogita^ionem intendi, ut qua rationeid fieri posset assequerer: neque diu
haesitaveram, cum intellexi orbiculos illos esse aliquanto levioures aqua, and
foramina habere, per qua digiti pressu aqua intruderetur; aere intus contento
in minus spatium coacto; ut proinde orbiculi graviores facti fundum peterent:
at mox digito laxato dum aer sese iterum ad debitam expansionem redigeret,
aquam per foramen extrudi; atque idcirco orbiculos levioures factos iterum
sursum adsurgere.

Quibus animadversis memoria mihi suggesit ea, quae alias meditatus eram de
impulsu aquae in cavum orbis infra illam demersi, cujus supra facta est mentio,
Quamobrem existimavi posse orbiculos perforatos sursum vel deorsum ferri, and
in medio libratos detineri, absque ulla caloris aut frigoris vi: Item sine ullo
digiti manusve pressu; sed tantum impulsu ipsius aquae, quae modo majorem modo
minorem altitudinem supra dictos orbiculos assequeretur, hoc scilicet modo.

In tubum vitreum retortum ABCD aquae plenum immittantur orbiculi perforati B,
C, D, quae ita aquae tubo inclusae innatent, ut minimi ponderis access^one
fundum petant; tum digito comprimente vel spiritu adacto, cogantur dicti
orbiculi ad fundum descendere, tubusque ita invertatur, ut illi versus D
ferantur. Quibus positis observabimus dictos orbiculos per tubulum BCD
ascendere and descendere pro ratione inclinationis ipsius tubi. Etenim cum
recta AB horizonti perpendiculariter insistit, globuli ex D descendunt versus
B; at contra came tubus ita aptatur ut recta AB ad horizontem inclinetur, tunc
iidem orbiculi ex B ascendent versus D.

At vero positis globulis, ut fere semper contingit, aliquo gravitatis excessu
sese superantibus, tunc poterimus multiformi ter illos movere; namque alter
pessum ibit dum reliqui sursum feruntur; item alius quovis in loco quasi
libratus pendebit; si scilicet organum tantundem inclinemus, quantum ad opus
requiri experientia didicerimus.

Ratio cur haec ita contingant manifesta est ex iis, quae jam exposuimus de
aqua, quae in orbiculos eo ^ opiosius intruditur, quo fuerit altior, ut accidit
cum tubus AB ad horizontis planum erectum fuerit, nam ex inclinatione ipsius
tubi aquae altitudo decrescit ac proinde ejus vis seu conatus fit minor.

Structuram vitrei tubi usus docebit: Id curandum est petissimum, ut ejusdem
crura AB, DB quodammodo parallela sint; altitudo autem BA altitudini BD tripla
vel quadrupla. Tubus aequalem ubique habeat amplitudinem, vel in crure BA, sit
aliquanto amplior quam in crure BD.

Orbiculi ea part quae pertusa est praeponderent, ut dum in aqua librantur
foramina deorsum vergant, etc.

A Nobleman of this City showed us a Boy, who had a faculty of charging his
belly with wind, and discharging it again backward at pleasure; which we saw
him perform. When he charged himself he lay upon his hands and knees, and put
his head on the ground almost between his legs.

The same Nobleman showed us the experiment, and gave us the receipt of a
fulminating powder, which will do almost as well as that chargeable one made of
gold. Take of salt of Tartar one part, of common Brimstone two parts, of Nitre
or Saltpeter three parts; put these three all at once into a Mortar, beat them
fine and mingle them well together. Take of this powder and put it on a plate
of iron, or in a firepan or other vessel, and hold it over a flame of fire or a
pan of charcoal: When the powder begins to melt, it will explode with a very
smart crack like to Aurum fulminans. The same or the like fulminating powder
has been since shown us by Mr. Fisher of Sheffield. It is not unlikely that
there may be several sorts of powder made, which shall explode and fulminate
after this fashion.

The same Gentleman also showed us the whole process of making Venice-Sope,
which is very like and nothing inferior to Castile-Sope. It is made of the
best Oil Olive, and a lixivium or Lie. The lixivium is thus made. They take of
the ashes of Kali, made in Spain, and in England known by the name of Beriglia,
two thirds, of Kelp, i. e. the ashes of the ordinary Sea-wrack one third. These
they break into small pieces with a mallet or hammer, and mingle well together.
This done they put them into a mill, such as we grind apples in to make Cider,
and grind them to powder, and then sift them. This powder they mingle with a
little slaked lime, and make it up into pellets, which they put into letches or
troughs, and pouring water upon them make the Lixivium. The Cauldrons wherein
they boil their Soap are very large. The bottom of them is a copper vessel, but
the sides are made up of stone close cemented together, bound about with iron
hoops, and enclosed in a case of Wood. Into these Cauldrons they put a great
quantity of Oil, it may be one third part of the measure, or more or less as
they please: then they fill them up with the lixivium, and putting fire under
it, cause it to boil continually; as the lixivium boils away still filling it
up with new, till all the oil be consumed or boiled out of it. For the oil
uniting it self with the salt of the lixivium rises continually up to the top
in the form of a scum or froth, which by degrees grows thicker and thicker, and
by reason of the cold of the air condenses into that body we call Soap. This
scum continues to rise so long as there is any oil remaining in the vessels;
the cremor or coat of Soap growing still thicker. Those that are practiced can
tell by the smell when all the oil is boiled away. The lixivium they account
strong enough so long as it will bear an egg. This lixivium they make of Sea
water, but they told us they might as well make it of fresh water. To expedite
the making the lixivium, they take some of the boiling lixivium out of the
Cauldrons; to which purpose there is a pipe comes out of the Cauldron in the
region of the lixivium, whereby they let out the boiling lixivium into a
trough; and this together with cold water they pour upon the ashes to promote
the separation of the salt. When the oil is boiled away they let all cool, and
taking the cremor or crust of Soap off the superficies of the liquor, spread it
upon a floor, and smooth it, and so let it dry in a bed of more then a bricks
thickness. When it is dried they cut it long ways and cross ways into oblong
parallelograms, or the figure of oblong bricks, there being nicks in the
borders of the beds on purpose to direct the instruments to cut it. This done
they pare these pieces from any impurities that may adhere to them from the
bottom of the bed, (For the beds are all strowed with Lime-dust to hinder the
sticking of the Soap to the floor) and run them over a plane, to smooth them.
These large pieces they subdivide into lesser, and seal them with a Seal.

The reason why they mix Kelp with the Beriglia, is because Beriglia alone
would make the Soap too soft, and Kelp alone too brittle.

To color the Soap green they take the juice of Beet, a good quantity, and put
it into the Cauldron with the lixivium and oil. The Germans will have it thus
colored, and perhaps the Nitre which is in this juice may add some vigor to
the Soap.

The fire is continually kept burning, and so the liquor boiling till the
operation be finished.

OF PADUA.
PAdua [Patavium] watered by the Rivers Brenta and Bacchilio, is an ancient
City, supposed to be built by Antenor after the taking of Troy by the Grecians.
That Antenor came into these parts Livy (who was native of this City)
witnesses in the very beginning of his History, in these words, Jam primum
omnium satis constat, Troja capta in caeteros saevitum esse Trojanos, duobus
Aenea Antanoreque, and vetusti jure hospitii, and quia pacis reddendaeque
Helenae semper auctores fuerant, omne jus belli Achivos abstinuisse. Casibus
deinde variis Antenorem cum multitudine Henetum, qui seditione ex Paphlagonia
pulsi and seeds and Ducem, Rege Pylaemene ad Trojam amisso, quaerebant, venisse
in intimum maris Adriatici sinum, Euganeisque, qui inter mare Alpesque
incolebant, pulsis, Henetos Trojanosque eas tenuisse terras. And that he
founded Padua Virgil says expressly, Aen. 1.

Antenor potuit mediis elapsus Achivis
Illyricos penetrare sinus, atque intima tutus
Regna Liburnorum and fontem superare Timavi;
Vnde perora novem vasto cum murmr montis
It mare praeruptum, and pelago premit arva sonanti.
Hic tamen ille urbem Patavi, sedesque locavit
Te^crorum, and genti nomen dedit, armaque fixit.
And Martial uses this compellation to Valerius Flaccus the Poet, a Paduan,
Antenoreispes and alumne laris. And yet some there be who will have Altinum to
be the City of Antenor, and Padua to have been built by one Patavius, a King of
the Veneti.

It was celebrated of old time for the chastity of its women, according to that
of Maritial, Vda puella legas sis Patavina licet. After the decay of the Roman
Empire it was ruined and destroyed by Attila; restored again by Narses; then
sacked and burnt by the Lombards; and after various successes, in the time of
the Emperor Otho I. it obtained its liberty, and was governed as a Commonwealth
by its own Magistrates; till first Ezzellinus the tyrant, and not long after
him the Carraresi made themselves Lords of it; from whom the Venetians extorted
it in the year 1405. though they pretend that the Padunas voluntarlly delivered
themselves up to them. It is enclosed with two walls: the interior (called
Antenors wall, though of a far later make) is about three miles in circuit. The
exterior of great strength with bastions and other fortifications and deep
trench before it for the most part filled with water, about 6 miles in compass,
built by the Venetians when Leonardo Loredano was Duke, in the time of the
League of Cambray, when the Pope, the Emperor, the Kings of France and Spain,
the Dukes of Mantua and Ferrara joined themselves together against the
Venetians; as appears by this Inscription over the Gate of All Saints.

Hanc antiquissimam urbem literarum omnium Asylum, cujus agrum fertilitatis
sumen natura esse voluit, Aute^or condidit: Senatus autem Venetus his belli
propugnaculis ornavit, Leonardo Lauredano Duce Venetorum invictissimo, enjus
Principatus varias fortunae vices excepiens quam gloriose superavit. It was
stoutly defended by the Venetians against the Emperor Maximilian besieging of
it with an Army of 80000 men, Anno 1610. Though it be large in compass, yet is
it neither rich nor populous; the number of the inhabitants, according to the
largest reckoning, amounting to no more then 38000 souls, which I believe
exceeds the just sum at least 10000.

The territory of this City is a large plain or level and the Soil very rich
and fertile; so that it is come to be a Proverb; i. e. Bononia the fat, but
Padua surpasses it, and Venice wastes it.
Bononia la grassa, ma Padoa la passa, and Venetia la guasta. Their bread is
esteemed as good as it is cheap, according to that other Proverb, Pan Padoano,
Vin Vicentino, Trippe Trevisane and Putana Venetiana. Bread of Padua, Wine of
Vicenza, Tripes of Treviso, and Courtesans of Venice are the best in their
kinds. No Wood is permitted to be planted for the space of one mile from the
wall round about; that in case it should be besieged in a time of War, the
Enemy might find no shelter among the trees: and this is called the Wast, and
is reserved only for corn. There are very few Medows or Pastures near the Town,
which is the reason that Milk is dear here. They make bread for the poor of
Mayz or Indian Wheat (which they call formentone) and Sorgum, whereof they
plant good store heerabout. The most considerable buildings in the City are 1.
The Town Hall, 256 feet long, and 86 feet wide, according to Schottus; by some
thought to be the largest room in Europe, but we judged it to be less then
Westminster Hall; underneath it are Shops, so that you ascend many steps to go
into it; it is called Palazzo della Ragione, because the Courts of Justice are
held there. 2. The public Schools. 3. The Chruch of St. Antony, called the
Santo 4. The Chruch of S. Justina with the Benedictine Cloister. 5. The Palace
of the Arena or Amphitheater 6. The Castle of the Magazines of Corn and
Ammunition. 7. The Bridge called Ponte molino, where there are about 30 water
mills together, upon the River Brenta. 8. The Palace called the Court of the
Capitaneo. 9. Antenor's Tomb, as they would have us believe. The particular
descriptions of all which places may be seen in Schottus and others. Near the
Domo we observed a fair building called Mons pietatis, where there is a great
bank or stock of money, some say 40000 crowns, for the use of poor men, who
bringing a pawn and depositing it here may have money to the value of it,
without any interest if it be a small sum, if a considerable sum, then they are
to pay for it five per cent. which serves to defray the charges of Clerks and
other Ministers and Attendants, etc. and if there be any surplusage, it is
divided yearly among the Poor, the stock still remaining entire. The like
charitable foundations we observed in many other Cities of Italy, and I could
wish there were of them among us in England.

This City is most famous for its University, founded by the Emperor Frederic
the II. Anno 1220. for a full History whereof I refer the Reader to Thomasinus
his Gymnasium Patavinum. I shall only add the Series Lectionum, whereby may be
seen what Professors there were in each faculty at the time of our being there,
and what Books they were to read.

In Nomine Domini nostri Jesu Christi Amen.
GEnerale, ac novum principium Interpretationum nobilissimae, ac florentissimae
Academiae DD. Artistarum Patavini Gymnasii, anni praesentis 1663. and 1664.
feliciter incipiet die 3 Novembris, sub felicibus auspiciis Illustrissimorum,
and Excellentissimor. DD. Michaelis Mauroceni pro Sereniss. Repub. Veneta
Praetoris, and Simeonis Contareni Praefecti Patavii, necnon Illustriss. ac
Generosissimi D. Joannis Georgii Noesleri Nob. Norisbergensis Pro-Rectoris, and
Syndici dignissimi.

Aggredientur Infrascripti DD. Explicando Infrascripta.
Ad Theologiam in Via S. Thomae.
R. P. D. M. Michael Archangelus Rivetta Casalensis Leg. Tertium Lib. Mag
Sententiarum hora tertia matutina.
Ad Theologiam in Via Scoti.
R. P. D. M. Matthaeus Ferchius Vegliensis.
Ad Lecturam Sacrae Scripturae.
R. P. D. Leo Matina Monachus Cassinensis.
Ad Metaphysicam in Via S Thomae.
R. P. D. M. Jo. Dominicus Pusterla Mediolanensis Leg. Septimum Metaphysicorum
hora secunda matutina.
Ad Metaphysicam in Via Scoti.
R. P. D. M. Antonius Cotonius Nicosiensis.
Ad Theoricam ordinariam Medicinae.
Exc. D. Antonius Molinettus Venetus in primo loco. Exc. D. Prosper Todeschius
a Castiglione Florentino in secundo loco Leg. Aphorismos Hippocratis hora prima
matutina.
Ad Practicam ordinariam Medicinae.
Exe. D. Raymundus Jo. Fortis Veronensis in primo loco. Exc. D. Jo. Franciscus
Bonardus Patavinus in secundo loco Leg. de Febribus hora prima Promeridiana.
Ad Philosophiam ordinariam.
Primus locus vacat. R. and Ex. D. Anastasius Galdiolus Vic. Abb. Cassin. ac
Praes. Gener. in 2 loco Leg. Octavum Lib. Physicorum hora secunda Pomeridiana.
Ad Anatomen ordinariam.
Exc. D. Antonius Molinettus Venetus in primo loco. Exc. D. Petrus de
Marchettis Patavinus Eq. D. Marci in secundo loco Administrabunt Anatomen die,
ac tempore debito hora 3 matutina.
Ad Theoricam extraordinariam Medicinae.
Exc. D. Hieronymus Sanctasophia Patavinus in primo loco. Exc. D. Ermencgildus
Pera Forojuliensis ex Portu Buffoletto in 2 loco. Exc. D. Hercules Saxonia
Patavinus in tertio loco Leg. Primam Fen Avicennae in pulsatione Campanae hora
prpomerid.
Ad Practicam extraordinariam Medicinae.
Exc. D. Hieronymus Frigimelica Patavinus Comes in primo loco. De Pulsibus, and
Vrinis in Xenodochio diebus vacantibus. Ex. D. Angelus Montagnana Patavinus in
secundo loco. Exc. D. Hilarious Spinellus Patavinus in tertio loco Leg. de
Morbis particularibus a cord infra hora secunda matutina.
Ad Philosophiam extraordinarium.
Exc. D. Petrus Franzanus Vicentinus in primo loco. R. and Exc. D. Valerianus
Bonvicinus Ver. Canonicus Estensis in 2 loco. R. P. D. M. Adrianus a Sancta
Juliana Patavinus in tertio loco Leg. primum, and secundum Libr. Physic. hora
prima Vespertina.
Ad Lecturam Philosophiae Moralis.
R. P. D. Joseph Meraviglia Clericus Regularis Mediolanensis Leg. tertium and
quartum Ethicor. hora prima Pomeridiana dieb. vac. Ad Lecturam Meteorian, and
Parvorum Naturalium Arist. Locus vacat.
Ad Lecturam Chirurgiae ordinariam.
Exc. D. Dominicus de Marchettis Patavinus in primo loco. Exc. D. Franciscus
Bosellus Venetus in secundo loco Leg. de Tumoribus praeter naturam hota tertia
matutina.
Ad Lecturam Simplicium.
Exc. D. Georgius a Turre Patavinus Interpretabitur Lib. VI. Dioscoridis, Ubi
de Venenis, and Venenor. Curat. in horto incipiet docere die 2 Maii hora 22.
Idem ad ostensionem Simplicium.
Ad Theoricam extraordinariam diebus vacantibus.
Exc. D. Alexander Borromeus Patavinus Leg. Artem parvam hora 2. Vespertina
diebus vacantibus.
Ad Lecturam Tertii Libri Avicennae.
Exc. D. Sebastianus Scarabiccius Patavinus in primo loco. Exc D. Jo. Pompilius
Scotus in secundo loco Leg. de Morbis particularib. a capite usque ad cor hora
prima mat. dieb. vac.
Ad Logicam.
Primus Locus vacat. Exc. D. Jacobus Cadenedus Scotus in secundo loco. Exc. D.
Albanius Albanesius Patavinus in tertio loco Leg. secundum Posteriorum hora
prima matutina.
Ad Mathematicam.
R. P. D. Stephanus de Angelis Venetus Leg. tertium Libr. Euclidis Elementorum.
Ad Humanitatem Graecam and Latinam.
R. and Exc. D. Octavius Ferrarius Mediolanansis Leg. Virgilium, and
Theophrasti Characteres.
Landus Moneghina Bidellus Generalis.

In Christi Nomine Amen.
ROtulus Excellentissimorum DD. Legentium in Publico Gymnasio Patavino, ad
infrascriptas Lecturas, quas aggred. Die 3 Novembris anni instantis 1663. and
1664. sub felicibus auspiciis* Illustrissimorum, and Excellentissimorum DD.
Michaelis Mauroceni pro Serenissimo Dominio Veneto Praetoris, and Simeonis
Contareni Praefecti Patavii; necnon Illustrissimi, and Generosissimi D. Comitis
Pauli Bennassuti Vicentini, Almae Universitatis DD. Juristarum Pro-Rectoris,
and Syndici Meritissimi.

Ad Lecturam Juris Canonici demane.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Jacobus de Sala Canonicus Pat. and Abbas in primo loco. Exc.
I. V. D. D. Jo. Antonius de Bonis Canon. Estensis in secundo loco. Exc. I. V.
D. D. Ubertinus Discaltius Patavinus in tertio loco Explicabunt Librum primum
Decretalium incipiendo a titulo de constitutionibus.
Ad Lecturam Juris Canonici de sero.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Antonius Paulutius Ven. Abbas, and Can. Pat. in primo loco.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Vincentius Francisconus Canonicus Patavinus in 2 loco. Rev.
and Exc. D. Placidus Frascata Monacus Cassinensis in tertio loco Exponent
Librum quartum Decretal. a tit. primo de Sponsalib. and Matrim.
Ad Lecturam Juris Caesarei de mane.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Jo. Michael Pieruccius Florentinus in primo loco. Exc. I. V.
D. D. Paulus Dottus de Castro Franco in secundo loco Legent primam ff. Veteris
Partem.
Ad Lecturam Juris Caesarei de sero.
Mag. and Exc. I. V. D. D. and Co. D. Jacobus Caimus Utinensis in primo loco.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Antonius Aloysius Aldrighettus Pat. in paritae primi loci.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Jo. Franciscus Savonarola Patavinus in tertio loco Legent
primam ff. Novi Partem.
Ad Lecturam Criminalium.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Joannes Galvanus Patavinus Exponet Rub. ff. ad. L. Jul. de
adult. and subinde alios titulos.
Ad Lecturam Pandectarum.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Achilles Bonfiglius Patavinus Prosequetur explicationem libri
primi ff. Veteris, and incipiet a titulo de Adoptionibus.
Ad Lecturam Codicis.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Joannes Capivaccaeus Patavinus Incipiet a titulo de pactis,
inde ad alios titul. procedet.
Ad Lecturam Institutionum.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Joseph Marchius Appulus in primo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D.
Nicolaus Gagliardus Tridentinus in secundo loco. Exc. I. V. D. D. Ludovicus
Justachinus Patavinus in tertio lcco Explicabunt materiam ultimae voluntatis,
and incipient a tit. de testamentis ordinandis.
Ad Lecturam Feudorum.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Scipio Gonnemius Cyprius Tractabit hoc anno de feudi origin,
nomine, causis, seu forma, and constitutione ad varios feudal. libr. tit.
Ad Lecturam Authenticorum.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Toldus Bellini Constini Patavinus Explicabit authenticum sive
Novellam 39. de Restitutionibus, and ea q. parit in 11. Mense post Mortem Viri,
Juncto Authentico 108. de Restitutionibus, and 159. de Restitutione Fidei
commiss. etc.
Ad Lecturam de Regulis Juris.
Vacat.
Ad Lecturam Artis Notariae.
Exc. I. V. D. D. Aloysius Angeli Patavinus Legatorum tractatum prosequetur.
Stephnus Giachelius
Bidell. Gener.
The Citizens and Strangers here dare not stir abroad in the dark for fear of
the Scholars and others, who walk up and down the Streets most part of the
night, armed with Pistols and Carbines. If any one comes within hearing, they
cry Che va li? i. e. Who goes there? and if they answer, they bid them turn
back; which if they do not suddenly do, they shoot at them. When two parties of
these Scholars meet, each man standing behind a pillar (for the streets have
Portico's or Cloisters on each side) they shoot one at another. These
Martenalia noctur^a as some call them, or Che va li's are thought to have had
their original from the acidental meeting and quarrelling of some Scholars who
went to the same Mistresses or Whores. A wonder it is to me that the Venetians
will suffer such mis-rule.

Here is a public Physic Garden, well stored with Simples, but more noted for
its Prefects, men eminent for their skill in Botanics, viz. Aloysius Mundella,
Aloysius Anguillara, Melchior Guilandinus, Jacobus Antonius Cor^usus, Prosper
Alpinus, Joannes Veslingius. The Epitaph of which last, being so considerable a
person, I shall here exhibit to the Reader, as I found it on his monument in
the Church of S. Antony.

Joanni Veslingio Mindano, Equiti.
Naturae verique scrutatori solertissimo, qui sapientiae
Atque exoticarum stirpium studio Aegypto peragrata.
Ab Venet Senatu rei herbariae
Et corporum Sectioni praefectus, eum Latinitatis
Et Graecae eruditionis cultum multis artibus circumfudi^,
Vt illic naturae ludentis pampam aemularetur;
Hic spectaculi diritatem oratione deliniret,
Vt quantum oculi paterentur tantum sibi placerent aures:
Ad. extremum laboribus fractus,
Dum miserae plebi gratuitam operam commodat,
Noxio contactu publicae saluti vitam impendit.
XXX Mensis Aug. An. Chr. MDCXLIX.
Aet. LI. In the Dormitory of the Cloister of the Dominican Freres we saw the
Cell of Alberius Magnus, over the door of which were inscribed these Monkish
Verses.

Quam legis Alberto Domus haec fuit bospita magno,
Parva quidem, haud parvo sed tamen ampla viro.
Parvus erat subiit parvae eum limina portae,
Magnus at exiguo sub lare factus erat.
Senserat hoc dixitque superba Ratisbona magnum
Hospitem in hospitio dispare Padua colis:
Archisacerdotis mitram magnosque penates
Accipe Magne ratis, sic bona navis erit.
Post mojora Deus reserans palatia, Magne
Dixit, habe magni magna theatra poli.
Audiit and magni propylaea petivit Olympi,
Nam majore capi limine magnus habet.
Deo ter maximo numini:
Alberto ter magno lumini.
Padua is governed by a Padesta or Mayor, who is chief in civil matters; and a
Capitaneo or Governor who is over the Military; both elected and sent by the
Venetians.

From Padua we made a by-journey to Albano, anciently Apo^a, some 5 miles
distant, where we viewed the hot baths. The Springs arise in a rocky hillock,
consisting of a porous stone, and are so plentiful that one of them drives an
overshot mill. The water is so hot, that in one of the sources, the
Countrey-people usually scald their hogs to get off the hair. It contains a
copious white salt which shoots upon the earth where the water runs. This the
common people heerabout gather, and use with their meat, which yet has not the
true taste of common falt, but somewhat approaching to Nitre or Salt-armon^ac.
Besides it is so impregnate with stone, (which by reason of the salt it
contains actuated by the heat, it dissolves and imbibes in the stone quarries
it passes through) that it suddenly precipitates it on the bottoms and sides
of the Channels wherein it runs, which become thereby as it were so many stone
troughs; and on the mill-wheel it drives, which it so encrusts with a stone of
a dark gray color, that every other month they are fain to peck it off. That
the waters which petrifie Such as are those of Pool-hole in Derbyshire,
Wokey-hole in Sommersetshire and other subterraneous grots as well in England
as beyond the Seas. Febr. 3.
do by running through stone-quarries wash off small ramenta or particles, and
being in motion support them, and when they stand or settle in any place let
them fall again, is more than probable, by what we see in daily experience, the
hardest stones being worn and hollowed by a constant dropping of water upon
them: much more will water be able to do this, when impregnate with salt, and
that salt actuated by heat. The waters of Albano are not made use of to drink,
but only to bathe in, as at Aken, Baden, etc. though Schottus says that they
usually drink of one of the sources.

We traveled to Vicenza, a City less in circuit than Padua, as being but 4
miles round, but more populous, containing between 30 and 40 thousand souls. It
is encompassed with a Brick-wall, but of no great strength. It stands upon the
River Bacchilio, and is also watered by the Rero or Eretenus, beside two little
Brooks called Astichello and Seriola. It is full of Nobility and Gentry, being
said to have 200 Families worth 1500 crowns per annum each, and better. So that
there is a Proverb in Italy, Quanti ha Venetia de Ponti and Gondalieri, Tanti
ha Vicenza de Conti and Cavalieri.

Of the several changes of Government which this City has undergone I shall
say nothing, but for that refer the Reader to Schottus and Leander-Albertus:
Only it is worth the notice taking, that when they were set at liberty, and
absolved of their Oaths of Allegiance by Catharine relict of Galeazzo Visconte
first Duke of Milan, they did of their own accord deliver up themselves to the
State of Venice, for which reason they enjoy great privileges and immunities.
The Theater of the Academy called the Olympici is a pretty building and
deserves to be remembered. The Inhabitants of this City drive a great trade in
breeding and feeding of Silkworms, and in winding, twisting, and dying of
silk. The Wines of this Territory are very rich and gustful, especially that
sort called Dolce and piccante.

Hence we made an excursion of about 6 miles, to see the famous Cave of
Custoza, said by some to be seven miles in length; but more truly by Jo.
Georgius Trissinus (who himself measured it, and gives an account of it in a
Letter to Leander Albertus) no more then 650 perches, which make about 4000
feet in length, 490 perches or 3000 foot in breadth, and about three miles in
circuit. We took it to be nothing else but a Cave left from the digging of
stone; as the same Trissinus by sufficient arguments proves it to be. 1.
Because the ancient buildings of Padua and Vicenza are of the same kind of
stone. 2. Because to support the roof they have every where at distances
sometimes greater, sometimes less, left huge pilasters of the quarry, of 3
perches square apiece; of which pilasters in the whole cave there are thought
to be about 1000. 3. There are some great square pieces of stone cut round
about, in order to taking them up and carrying them away. 4. There remain
manifest prints and tracks of cart-wheels; whereas no man living can remember
that ever cart went in there.

We observed many Bats clinging to the roof and walls of this Cave; and in some
standing waters a kind of fish or rather insect, which they called Squillae
Venetianae i. e. Venice-shrimps, but they are of that sort which naturalists
call Pulices marini or aquatici, i. e. Sea-fleas or water-fleas.

At this Village we saw the so much talked of Ventiduct belonging to one
Tridentus a Nobleman of Vicenza, serving to cool the rooms of his Palace in
Summer time. From a large high-rooft subterraneous grot or cave there are
Channels cut out of the rock to the Palace. When they would have a cool air in
any of the rooms, they shut up a gate in the cave, and open a door at the end
of the Chanel, which lets in the fresco, every room having a hole in the wall
or pavement to admit it. On a stone there is this inscription, Franciscus
Tridenteus Vicentius JCtus Hierosolymitani equitis filius gelidi venti flatum
in caverna Cubola vocata spirantem in aedes proprias per hanc erypto-porticum
deduxit, ad temporandum ardentes and aestivos calores, tum cohibendo tum
relaxando, novo atque mirabili artificio per cubicula quaeque ducendo, quae pro
libitu suo refrigerare and ealefacere valet: ita ut ejus Villa ingenio,
diligentia, impensa ac aemulatione ornatior effecta, inter regia ornamenta
connumerari possit: Anno MDLX, Aetatis suae XXII.

From Vicenza we journeyed to Verona, a fair, large, populous City, pleasantly
situate upon the River Athesis, which is here of a great breadth, over which
there is one very fair stone bridge esteemed the handsomest Bridge in Europe,
besides 3 others of less account. The City is 7 miles in circuit, excluding the
Suburbs, which are very large too; and thought to contain 70000 souls. It is
strong by situation, and extraordinarily fortified with walls, bastions,
towers, bulwarks, and deep ditches full of water drawn from the River Athesis
round about, and strengthened with 3 Castles; that of St. Peter, that of St.
Felix, and so that it is looked upon as impregnable. Here we saw several
Cabinets or Collections of natural and artificial rarities. 1. That of Seignior
Mapheus Cusanus an Apothecary, wherein where shown us many ancient Egyptian
Idols, taken out of the Mummies, diverse sorts of petrified shells, petrified
cheese, cinnamon, sponge and Mushromes. A Jasper stone and an Agate having
crystal within them. Stones having upon them the perfect impression or
signature of the ribs and whole spines of fishes. A Catapulta of brass found
1656. about Trent. Several curious Entaglia's or stones engraved with figures
of heads, etc. An ancient Roman gold Ring. A good collection of ancient Roman
Coins and Medals, as well Consulary as Imperial, besides modern medals. A stone
called Oculus mundi, n. d. which when dry shows cloudy and opake, but when put
into water, grows clear and transparent. An account of this stone may be seen
in the History of the Royal Society, brought in by Dr. Goddard. Among his
Medals we observed a Maximinian and a Dioclesian, with this on the reverse
inscribed, Verona Amphitheatrum.

2. That of Seignior Muscardo, a Gentleman of Verona, a civil and obliging
person. He also has a very good collection of ancient Roman medals, among
which he showed us an Otho of Gold, and told us that those of brass were all
counterfeit, there having never been any found of that metal. Many sorts of
lachrymal Urns and Lamps, great variety of Shells and some fruits and parts of
plants petrified. Several exotic fruits and seeds: the ores of metals and
minerals: Gems and precious stones in their matrices as they grew: Lapis
obsidianus and a kind of stone called Adar^e. But because there is a
description of this Museum published in Italian, I shall not descend to more
particulars, but refer the Reader thither.

3. The Museum of Seignior Mario Sala an Apothecary, containing only some
relics of Calceolarius his Museum, printed many years ago.

The Amphitheater of Verona, called now the Arena, is a very stately and
capacious one, and seemed to me when it was entire not to have been much
inferior either for beauty or greatness to that of Titus at Rome. The outward
wall or circle is all gone save a little piece, from whence we may make an
estimate of the height and beauty of the whole. The remainder setting aside
this exterior circle is kept in good repair by the Veronese; the Arena of it
is 34 The length of a pertica or perch of this measure is somewhat more than 6
foot.
pertiche long and 22 broad, and compassed about by 42 rows of stone benches
one above another, after the manner of stairs, upon which 23000 persons may sit
commodiously. As it is imperfect it seemed to us one of the most pleasant and
goodly spectacles for a structure of that nature that ever we beheld. He that
desires a more full and particular description of it may consult Schottus, and
the Antiquities of Verona written by Torellus Saraina a Veronese, as also
Lipsius his Book de Amphitheatris.

As for government and subjection this City underwent almost the same changes
with Padua and Vicenza, and did also voluntarily, deliver it self up to the
Venetian Government. Here are very good white Wines, especially that sort they
call Garganico. The air is clear and healthful, but must needs be sharp in
Winter time, being so near the high mountains: among which Baldus is famous for
the great variety of choice simples growing thereon, of which Joan. Pona an
Apothecary of Verona has written a particular Catalogue and description. Which
Book and thereupon the Paduan herbarists making simpling voyages yearly thither
has gotten Baldus its reputation, for I am very confident that many hills
about the Alps produce as great variety and as choice plants as that.

Not for from Verona is the Lago di Garda anciently called Lacus Benacus, which
furnishes the City with plenty of excellent Fish, especially trouts, Sardinie,
and a sort of Fish of the Trout kind, called Carpione, peculiar to this lake.
Those we saw were not a foot long, of the fashion of Trout.

We traveled from Verona to Mantua 24 miles, Febr. 9.
by the way passing through some large Villages, but no considerable Town.
Mantua.
Six miles short of Mantua, at a place called Marmirola, we viewed an elegant
palace of the Dukes, richly furnished and adorned with pictures and statues.
The City of Mantua is of great antiquity, strong by situation, as standing in
the middle of a lake, and well fortified. Schottus says that it is 4 miles in
circuit, has 8 gates, and about 50000 souls. It seemed to us a great City, but
not answerably populous, having not yet recovered it self of the losses it
sustained when it was miserably sacked by the Emperor Ferdinand II. his Army in
the year 1630. A little out of the City stands a pretty house of the Dukes
called Palazzo del Te, wherein there is a square room having the roof arched
round in form of Cupola, called the Giants-hall, so contrived, that if two
stand in the opposite corners, one laying his ear to the wall may hear what the
other whispers with his face to the corner, which he that stands in the middle
of the room or in the corner on the same side shall not. The like room we were
told there is in the Duke of Parma's Palace at Caprarola. Our whispering place
in the Cathedral Church of Gloucester is of somewhat a different make. In a
Village near Mantua called Ande, now Petula, was born the Prince of Latin
Poets, P. Virgilius Maro. In this City are two Societies of Virtuosi (Academies
they call them) the one style themselves Accesi, the other Timidi.

This City has according to the fate of her neighbors undergone several
changes of Government. In the year 1328. Lewis Gonzaga by the favor of the
people made himself Lord of it, from whom the present Duke is descended. In the
year 1433. John-Francis Gonzaga was created Marquess of Manina, by the Emperor
Sigismund IV. In the year 1530. Frederic Gonzaga was created Duke of Mantua by
the Emperor Charles V.

The Dukes yearly revenue is said to be 400000 crowns, according to the account
we had of it in particulars somewhat less, viz. the mills pay 4000 crowns per
annum. The Jews (who are about 6000 in number, and wear no badge of
distinction) give 20000 crowns per annum. The rest of the Citizens of Mantua
70000 crowns. The Country yields 60000 pistols; and Montserrat 13000, in all
386000 crowns the year. Yet is the present Prince, through ill husbandry not
proportioning his expenses to his income, become very poor, being indebted to
the Venetians (as Leti says) four millions of crowris. To advance his Revenue
at the time of our being there he was put to that pitiful shift of debasing his
coin, so that none of his money would pass further then his own Territory. His
name was Carolus Gonzaga II. since dead, and his Son Caroulus Ferdinandus
succeeds him in his estates. There are besides of this Family 4 or 5 small
Princes, feudatory of the Empire, but Sovereign Lords having Jura Regalia in
their petty States, viz. The Princes of 1. Novellara. 2. Bozolo. 3. Gustalla.
4. Sabionetta, in which the male line is failed. 5. Castiglione. We were told
that these Princelets were obliged to attend the Duke of Mantua's Court three
months in the year. The Dukes Council of State or Privy Council consists only
of six of the chief Nobility.

In these parts all the children of the common people have equal shares of
their Parents Estates, at least their movables. The wife when her husband dies
carries her dowry back with her: if she dies first, then her children (if she
leaves any) divide her dower equally among them. If she die childless her dower
is divided, half goes to her husband, and half to her next kindred. If a woman
has had children by one husband and he dying she marries again and has
children by her second husband, her estate is divided into equal parts, one
moiety goes to her first husbands children, and the other to her second's.

We took boat for Ferrara, which brought us first into the lake, then into the
chanel of the River Mincius, [which runs out of the Lago di Garda (called in
Latin Lacus Benacus) at a strong Fort of the Venetians called Peschiera, and
coming to Mantua spreads it self into a lake of 5 miles long.] At 16 miles end
we came to a Bridge and Sluice at a place called Governo, where we entered the
River Po; going down stream we passed by Ostia 10 miles distant from Governo;
and 10 miles further down Massa, both on our left hand; and 7 miles below Massa
came to Stellata, a large Village on our right hand, under the Pope. Here the
Territory of Mantua ended. Eight miles beyond this place we left the River Po
at a Village called Il Ponte, and struck up an artificial Chanel of 4 miles
long, which brought straight to the Gates of Ferrara.

This City is very considerable as well for its greatness as its strength. It
is said to be about 7 miles in compass, and besides the advantage of its
siruation in a fenny level it is strongly fortified with walls an bulwarks, and
surrounded with a broad and deep trench full of water; so that I look upon it
for a City of that bigness as the strongest in all Italy. It had formerly a
Prince of its own, but is now, with all its territory, subject to the Pope.
From Ferrara we went with the Procaccio or Courrier to Bologna, shifting our
boat at a place called Mal-Albergo, some 17 miles from Ferrara, where we went
up into a higher chanel, viz. the Rhenus Bononiensis, and passing through 9
locks or sostegni, we arrived at Bologna, distant by water from Ferrara 45
miles. A great part of the Country we passed through between Ferrara and
Bologna. is a perfect level, and fenny ground, much like to the Isle of Ely in
England.

Bononia is a large City, Bologna
of a round figure, and yet 7 or 8 miles in circuit. The houses not tall, fair
portico's on each side the streets, convenient to walk in, as well in Summer to
defend one from the scorching beams of the Sun, as in Winter to shelter form
the rain. Many Gentlemen's houses (palaces they call them) which make no great
show outwardly in the street, but within are very handsome and very convenient,
having more in the recess then they promise in the front. The number of
Inhabitants is about 80000 souls. The Bologna sausages, washballs, and little
dogs are much esteemed and talked of in all Italy and elsewhere. Here is also a
great silk trade driven, and the best Engines for winding and twisting of it
that we have any where seen. The University of Bologna is one of the most
ancient and famous in Europe, especially for the study of the Law. There is
such a multitude of professors in all faculties, that I am afraid few Readers
will have the patience to run over the list of them, which for the satisfaction
of the curious I here exhibit.

The Series Lectionum of the University of the Jurists.
Classes Matutinae.
Prima hora in pulsu Campanae.
Ad Lecturam Decret. extraord.
Illustrissimus D. Rector. Vact.
Ad Lecturam Decret. ordin. Legant de Constitut. usque ad Tit. de off. Delegat.
D. Franciscus Mathesilanus. Rus. D. Prosper Pollinus Metrop. Praepos. D. Jo.
Baptista Dulfus. D. Jo. Bapt. Panzacchius Abbas. D. Petrus de Sandris. D.
Raphael Bertucerus S. Petr^nii Canonicus. D. Constantius Scasellius. A.
Alexander de Domnis. D. Julius Argolus Metropol, Canonicus. D. Abbas Cititus
Maria Guidonus Metrop.
Secunda Hora.
Ad Lecturam off. Veteris ordin. Leg. tit. ff. De off. ejus cui mandata est
jurisdiction.
D. Franciscus Barbadorius emeritus. D. Alfonsus Arnoldus S. Petronii Canon. D.
Matthaeus Griffonius S. Petronii Canon. D. Nicolaus All. D. Jac. de Gottis. D.
Hippolytus Farnasa^ius Abbas. D. Odoardus Guidonus. D. Antonius Francavatia.
Tertia Hora.
Ad Lecturam Summae Rolandinae.
D. Carolus Dulphus.
Ad Lecturam Sexti and Clementinarum.
D. Co. Franciscus Ursius. D. Carolus Gaggius. D. Augustinus de Balthassaris.
D. Leonardus Bacchionus Caccaneus. D. Christoph. Gulinellus. D. Franciscus
Guidonus.
Ad Lecturam de Maleficiis, Legant Legem unicam de Raptu Virginum.
D. Gasper Elephantucius. D. Joseph Coltellinus. D. Petrus Pomp. Vincentius
Mantachetus.
Quarta Hora.
Ad Lecturam de Verb. signific.
D. Christoph. Lucatellus. D. Jo. Antonius Fantellus. D. Hieronymus de S. Petro
Metrop. Canon. abs. cum res.
Ad Lecturam repetit. part. Legant primo omnes Populi ff. de just. and jure,
deinde legant de minoribus 25 annis.
D. Jo. Baptista de Astis. D. Calabrebius Pistorinus. D. Hippol Franc. Vinea
abs. cum res. D. Dominicus Medices. D. Hippol. Maria de Conventis. D.
Laurentius Simonius.
Ad Practicam Judiciario.
D. Paulus Zanius. D. Joannes Calvus.
Ad Lecturam Pandectar.
D. Alexander Sanutus Pellicanus.
Classes Pomeridianae.
Prima Hora in pulsu Companae.
Ad Lecturam Instit. Legant tit. de usu fructu, deinde transeant ad tit. de
usucapionibus.
D. Joannes Mazzantus. D. Clemens Leonius abs. cum reserv. D. Franciscus Maria
Burdocchius. D. Horatius Battalia. D. Anton. Franc. Siverius. D. Jacobus Maria
Ugolottus. D. Gasper Vincens Berna. D. Camillus Bernardinus Albaus. D. Joan.
Antonius Ruinus. D. Laurentius Placentus. D. Prosper Cattalanus. D. Onuphrius
Rabastens Col. major. S. Clem. Hisp.
Secunda Hora.
Ad Lecturam ff. legant tit. de novi operis nunciat. deinde tit. de acquirend.
Possess.
Excellentissimus D. Cornelius Canalius emeritus. D. Franciscus Munarius aetate
ff. Metrop. Canon. S. P. D. Joan. Baptista Farnasarius. D. Carolus Antonius de
Blasiis. D. Joseph Franchinus.
Tertia Hora.
Ad Lecturam Decret. Legant in causis incipiendo a Prima.
D. Hippolytus Nanius Elephatuccius. D. Co. Annibal de Blanchis Metrop.
Canonicus. D. Felicianus Mollinus Coll. Maj. S. Clem. Hisp.
Ad Lecturam C. lib. X.
D. Carolus de Landis. D. Paulus Forada, Coll. maj. S. Clem. Hisp.
Ad Lecturam Decretal. Legant de Regularibus and transeuntibus ad Religionem.
D. Alexander Barberius. D. Co. Hieronimus Boschettus.
Ad Lecturam de regulis Juris.
D. Petrus de Masiis. D. Franciscus Maria Cuccus.
Quarta Hora.
Ad Lecturam de fe^dis.
D. Jo. Baptista Giovagonius abs. cum reserv. D. Julius Carcellerius.
Ad Lecturam Institut. Legant tit. de usu fructu, deinde transeant ad tit. de
usu capionib.
D. Co. Ludovicus Marsilius abs. cum reser. D. Jo. Baptista Sannutus
Pellicanus. D. Jacobus Daniolus. D. Albertus de Planis. P. Abbas Petrus
Hercules Abergettus abs. cum reserv. D. Rochus Franc. Bonfiolus. D. Gaspar
Linder. D. Fabius Bordacchius. D. Hercules Maria Matthiolus.
Lecturae Vniversitatis.
Ad Lecturam Decretorum.
D. --
Ad Lecturam Sexti and Clementinarum.
D. --
Ad Lecturam Decret. extraord.
D. --
Ad Lecturam Decret. sive Infortiati ordinar.
D. --
Ad Lecturam Voluminis.
D. --
Ad Lecturam ff. novi seu G. extraordinar.
D. --
The Series Lectionum of the University of the Artists.
Classes Matutinae.
Prima Hora in pulsu Campanae.
Ad Lecturam Medicinae extraordinariam.
Illustrissimus Dominus Rector. vacat.
Ad Lecturam Chirurgiae legant de Vlceribus.
D. Jo. August. Cuccus emeritus, Q. S. A. D. Albertus de Fabris. D. Alexander
Guicciardinus.
Ad Anatomen.
D. Jo. August. Cuccus emeritus, Q. S. A. D. Albertus de Fabris. D. Jo.
Baptista Capponius. D. Carolus Galeratus. D. Joan. de Larentiis.
Ad Lecturam Simplicium Medicinalium.
D. Hyacinthus Ambrosius.
Ad Lecturam humanarum literarum.
D. Cosmus Gualdandus.
Ad Lecturam Logicae, Legant secundum librum Posteriorum.
D. Dominicus Maria Burgus. D. Dominicus Clericus. D. Aloysius Magnus.
Secunda hora.
Ad Theoricam Medicinae ordinariam, legant Aphorismos Hippocratis.
D. Petrus Jacobus Florenus. D. Carolus Galleratus. D. Joan. de Laurentiis. D.
Joan. Antonius Castarius.
Ad Lecturam Logicae, Legant secundum lib. Posteriorum.
D. Secinius Orettus. D. Carolus Ant. Siverius. D. Andreas Banderia. D. Marius
Marianus.
Tertia Hora.
Ad Practicam Medicinae extraord. Legant 4 partem primi Avicen^ae.
D. Jacobus Accurtius. D. Jo. Baptista Lingarus. D. Jo. Car. Matthosillanus. D.
Vincentius Franchinus. D. Florianus Bertellus. D. Barthol. Raymundus.
Ad Philosophiam ordinariam, Legant Parva naturalia.
D. Fulvius Magnanus. D. --
Ad Lecturam Metaphysicae, Legant primum librum.
P. Mr. Laurentius de Fabris, Franciscus.
Ad Lecturam humanarum literarum.
D. Laurentius Grimaldus. abs. cum reserv.
Quarta Hora.
Ad Philosophiam moralem, Legant de amicitia.
D. Ovidius Montalbanus. D. Jacobus Servanus, S. Petronii Canonicus.
Ad Lecturam Logicae, Legant secundum lib. Posteriorum.
D. Raymundus Abelus. D. Bartholomaeus Ferrarius.
Ad Lecturam Humanarum liter.
D. Michael B.
Ad Mechanicas.
D. Petrus Mengolus.
Ad Particulas Graecas Domi.
D. --
Ad Arithmeticam Domi.
D. Simon Mengolus.
Ad Grammaticam Domi.
D. Nicolaus Banderia. D. Bonaventura Rubens.
Classes Pomeridianae.
Prima Hora in pulsu Companae.
Ad Theoricam Medicinoe extraord. Legant primam partem Avicennae.
D. Jo. Carol. Lancius Paltronus. D. Angelus Antonius Livizanus. D. Ludovicus
Lodius. D. Berlingerius de Solitis Syracusanus.
Ad Lecturam Sarae Scripturae Legant ad Beneplacitum.
P. M. Ericus Marchettus Servita.
Secunda Hora.
Ad Practicam Medicinae ordin. Legant de Febribus.
D. Jo. Baptista Capponius. D. Rubertus Muratorius. D. Marcellus Malpighius
abs. cum reser. D. Carolus Fracassatus. D. Raymundus M. Pistorinus.
Ad Philosophiam extraord. Legant de Anima.
D. Caesar Zoppius. P. M. Vitalis Ferra-rubeus Mon. Cassinus. D. Petrus Maria
Cianus. P. M. Marc. Ant. Fabiaus de Caritate.
Tertia Hora.
Ad Lecturam Metaophysicae, Legant duodecimum librum.
P. Abb. Fabianus de Landis. Can. Lat. abs. cum reserv. D. Flavius Zinus.
Ad Philosophiam ordin. Legant de Caelo and mundo.
D. Franciscus Natalis. D. Alexander Magnus. D. Franciscus Gherardus. D.
Carolus Saxius.
Quarta Hora.
Ad Practicam Medicinae extraord. Legant ad beneplacit.
P. Pompeius Bolognettus emeritus. D. Carolus Riarius. D. Franciscus Sacentus.
Ad Lecturam S. Theologiae Scholasticae. Leg. primum lib. Sentent.
P. M. Ant. Mar. Gherardus Francisc. D. Gregorius Fallonus Hibernus. P. M. Sac.
Philip. Pollinus Dominicanus.
Ad Lecturam Casuum Conscientiae.
P. Car. Anton. Jeachimus.
Ad Mathematicam, Legant Astronomiam Ptolemaei.
P. M Joannes Riccius Carmelita. D. Jo. Dominicus Cassinus Januens.
Ad Artem Scribendi.
D. Franciscus Guidicellus. D. Jo. Andreas de Abantis.
Lecturae Vniversitatis.
Ad Lecturam Medicinae.
D. --
Ad Lecturam Philosophioe.
D. --
Ad Lecturam Astronomiae.
D. --
Ad Lecturam Rhetoricae.
D. --
At Bononia we saw the formerly famous exercise of Justing or Tilting, which is
there still used in Carneval time. The combatants being mounted on horseback,
armed cap-a-pee, and adorned with huge Plumes of Feathers and Scarfs, with
Lances in their hands, run one at another a full gallop, one on one side and
another on the other side of a low rail. They aim at one particular part (I
think it is the eye) and he that comes nearest is the best Juster. We saw
several Lances broken but no person dismounted, nor any hurt done.

Here by the favor of Dr. Ovidio Montalbano one of the Professors, we had a
sight of the Museum of aldrovandus, which by his last Will he left as a Legacy
to the City. It is kept in the Cardinal Legates Palace commonly called Palazzo
del Confaloniero. Among many natural and artificial Rarities therein preserved
we took more especial notice of 10 Volumes of the pictures of Plants, and 6 of
Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, drawn exactly in colors by the hand.

The same Dr. Montalbanus very civilly brought. us to the house of Jcaobus
Zenoni, an Apothecary, a skilful herbarist and a collector of Rarities, who
among other things showed us three pieces of rock-Crystal, with drops of water
enclosed in the middle of them, which we could plainly perceive when the
crystal was moved to and fro. He has a Garden well stored with Simples,
wherein we noted Arundo nastos sive farcta, in rivis Rheni Boniensis: Solanum
Americanum fructu molli. Eyst. Geranium triste Cornuti: Scammonea Syriaca;
Polytrichum Alpinum inciso folio, costa viridi; Convolvulus Althaeae folio non
inciso; Pentaphyllum lucidum folio hirsuto, ab ipso inventum prope Rhenum
Bononiensem; Malva Alpina folio laciniato; Jacobaea folio Betonicae, n. d.
Abrotanum foemina inodorum; Bardana de Congo; Helleborus niger trifolius
spinosus; Cyclamen Baldense folio rotundo, flore odorato; Thlaspi folio
Sampsuchi; item folio sedi; Dau us Creticus verus; Stachys Cretica salviae
folio; Clematis Smilaci Asperae similis, verum non aspera; Clematis tetraphylla
Americana; Malva folio Betonicae, ab ipso inventa; Labrum Veneris Indicum
altissimum; Eruce Tanaceti folio; Genista Alpine sive Spartium. Col. Adianthum
nigrum ramosum Canadense Cornut. Chamaedryos spuriae species, ab ipso inventa
proprie Rheum fl. Bononiensem; besides many others which had not yet put forth,
it being early in the Spring.

The same day we visited Seignior Gioseppi Bucemi a Chemist, The Lapis
Phosphorus or shining stone.
who prepares the Bononian stone, or Lapis Phosphorus, which id exposed a while
to the illuminated air will imbibe the light, so that withdrawn into a dark
room, and there looked upon it will appear like a burning coal; but in a short
time gradually loses its shining till again exposed to the light. The crude
stone is like a kind of sparre or fluor; it acquires this quality by being
calcined (ad he told us) in any small furnace, laying the pieces of stone upon
an iron grate over a fire of wood. But we believe there is somewhat more of
mystery in it; for some of us calcining part of the stone we purchased of him
according to his direction, it sorted not to make it shine. The prepared stone
in time loses its virtue and ceases to shine, as we found by experience in
those pieces we bought and brought along with us. Heerabout and all along as we
rode in Lombardy we saw now in flower Aconitum hyemale, called by same Anemone
Bononiensium

We left Bologna, Feb. 22.
and traveled to Modena, by the way about 15 miles from Bol pssing by
Castel-Franco, Castle France.
a strong Fort near a Village called Villa Franca, built by Pope Urban the
VIII. on the Frontier of Modena. Modena.
Modena is 20 miles distant from Bononia, no great City, but for the bigness
populous, being the place of the Dukes usual residence; which must needs draw
company and business. It is encompassed about with a thick wall and broad
ditch, and tolerably well fortified with bastions and outworks. Here as at
Bononia, Padua, and several other Cities in Lombardy and Friuli, are Portico's
or Cloisters, (Rows they call them at Chester) on each side the streets to walk
in. The houses are most built of brick, and but of mean height, as we observed
them to be in all those Cities where the streets cloystered on both sides,
which we conjecture was the manner of building of the Goths or Lombards that
invaded Italy, and settled themselves in these parts.

Here we saw the Dukes Palace, which though it be not vast, nor makes any great
show outwardly; yet are the rooms within very elegant and richly adorned with
gilding, hangings, and Pictures of the best Masters. What we most minded was
the Cabinet or museum, furnished with choice of natural Rarities, Jewels,
ancient ad modern Coins and Medals, ancient and modern Entaglia's, curious
turned Works, dried Plants pasted upon smooth boards whitened with ceruss,
which may be put in frames and hung about a room like pictures; and a great
collection of designs of the best Painters. Among other things we took notice
of a humane head petrified; a hens egg having on one side the signature of the
Sun, which I the rather noted, because some years before Sir Thomas Brown of
Norwich sent me the picture of one having the perfect signature of a Duck
swimming upon it, which he assured me was natural. Moss included in a piece of
Crystal, silver in another. A fly plainly discernable in a piece of Amber. A
Chinese Calendar written on wooden leaves. Almericus Father to the present Duke
(who at our being there was a child of about 3 years old) made this Collection,
and was treating with Manfredus Septalius Canon at Millain for his Cabinet, so
much talked of all over Italy; for which they told us he was to give 1000
pistols: But before the bargain was concluded the Duke died in the 28 year of
his age.

The Revenues of this Prince are said to be 350000 Crowns per ann. his ordinary
expenses not to exceed 180000.

In a Mountain in this Territory called Zibbo nigh Paiuli Castle some 28 miles
distant from Modena is a Fountain where Petroleum issues out of the earth. In
another Mountain called Monte Nicani are found petri^ied cockles and others
shells.

We began our Journey to Parma, Feb. 24.
and at 7 miles end forded the River Serchio, passing by strong little Town on
our left hand called Rubiera, and after 8 miles more entered Reggio. a city
almost as big as Modena, Reggio
and of equal strength, subject to the same Prince, who is called Duke of
Modena, and Reggio. It is more extended in length, and makes a fairer show,
having one broad and long street. Here there are many Sculptors who make pretty
carved works in Ivory, and wood, for which this Town is noted. Ten miles onward
we passed a long Bridge over the River Lenzo, and entered the Duke of Parma's
Country; and five miles more brought us to Parma, a larger City then Modena,
of a round figure, well built of brick, though the houses be not tall. The
streets broad and well paved, but no porticos under the houses. In short, it is
a very pleasant and handsome Town, but not so well fortified as many other
Cities in Italy.

We traveled to Piacenza. Feb. 26.
At 6 miles distance from Parma we ferried over the River Taro. Piacenza
Nine miles further we came to a large Burgo called St. Donin. Eight miles
beyond St. Donin we passed through a pretty little Town called Fiorenzuola,
Fiorenzuola.
and just without the Town crossed the River Arta; and proceeding on still 12
miles, we came to Piacenza, a City for bigness not inferior to Parma, and for
strength Superior (being well walled and trench's about, and having a strong
Citadel) but not so handsome and well built. The Revenues of the Duke of Parma
are said by some to be 500000, by some but 400000 crowns per ann. He keeps 3000
foot, and 1000 horse in costant pay; and can upon occasion raise 20000 foot,
and 1000 horse more. Besides Parma and Piacenza he holds in the State of the
Church the Dukedom of Castro and the County of Ronciglione, the first of which
was pawned to the Pope, and for want of payment of the money forfeited to the
Church, concerning the restitution whereof there has been such a stir of late,
He holds also five Cities in Abruzzo. The present Dukes name is Ranutius
Farnesius.

We rode to Crema, 27.
13 miles foom Piacenza, passing through Castigno, a large Burgo in the State
of Milan, two miles thence ferrying over the River Adda, and 2 miles further
the River Serio, which runs into the Adda. Here we entered the Venetian
Territory, and at the end of other five miles arrived at Crema, Crema.
no great City, but strongly fenced and fortified, and for the bigness
populous; held with a good Garrison of about 500 Soldiers by the Venetians, as
being a frontier place. It is situate in a fair and spacious plain, near the
River Serio, and has a large territory about it, called Cremasco. This City is
famous for fine thread made by the Nuns, and little brushes made of the roots
of a king of grass called Capriole, which I take to be Gramen Scoparium
ischaemi paniculis of Lobel.

We hired horses for Brescia, 29.
30 miles distant from Crema. Brescia
By the way we rode through 1. a little Town called Osanengo, about 3 miles
from Crema. 2. Romanengo a great Burgo with a small Castle, belonging to the
King of Spain, some 3 miles from Osanengo: and about 4 miles further onward 3.
Soncin, Soncin.
a considerable walled Town in the Duchy of Milan, which Schottus takes notice
of as a very civil place to strangers, and mentions panem ex Amygdalis dulcibus
and lucernas praestantissimas ex orichalco made there. Near this Town we
ferried over the River Oy or Ollius, and entered again into the Venetian
Territory. Two miles off this place we rode close by L'orzi nuovi, L'orzi nuovi.
a small Town, but one of the best fortified places we have seen, carefully
guarded by a good Garrison which the Venetians maintain there. Two miles from
this Fortress we passed a great Village called L'orzi vecchii, then several
Villages the most considerable whereof was Lo grado. Heerabout and at L'orzi
nuovi, is great store of flax planted, and fine linen cloth made. The Country
we rode through this day was full of Villages and well peopled, divided into
small Fields, and those enclosed with hedges like our enclosed Countries in
England.

The City of Brescia is less then Verona, Brescia.
but considering the bigness more populous, well built, having broad and
straight streets, paved with stone in the middle, and with bricks set edge
ways on each side, after the manner of the Holland Cities; as are also the
streets of Parma, Piacenza, and Crema. It is encompassed with two walls, the
interior of old building more slight and weak, the exterior of good strength,
and thickness, with a broad trench before it. The inhabitants are very busy
and industrious, driving a great trade of making Guns and other iron ware. The
Brescian Guns are much esteemed not only in Italy, but all over Europe, as well
for the goodness of the iron and temper, as the excellency and neatness of the
workmanship. The Markets are well stored with all things necessary for humane
life. The territory of this City is in length from Moso near Mantua to Dialengo
in the upper end of Val Camonica 100 miles, in breadth from Limone upon the
Lago di Garda to L'orzi nuovi 50; fruitful of corn and wine. The hills clothed
with Woods, and the valleys abundant in good pastures; so that there is
excellent cheese made here, and sent abroad to Venice and other parts of Italy.
In the Mountains are iron and copper mines, which yield great profit to the
owners, and enrich the whole Country. Few Cities in Italy have so large and so
rich a territory, so populous and full of Towns and great Villages. The City it
self has often changed Lords and Governments, and was for a long time
miserably torn in pieces, and wasted by intestine quarrels and fightings
between the Factions of the Guelfs and Ghibellines. The Visconti of Milan made
themselves masters of it and held it for many years. In the time of Phillippus
Maria, the Citizens being much oppressed and aggrieved, and having often in
vain sent Embssadors to him for redress, they finally delivered themselves up
to the Venetians in the year 1426. who now keep in Garrison for the security of
this City 800 Soldiers, and 300 more in the Castle, which stands on a rocky
hill and commands the whole Town. On the sides of this hill we found Serpent
Stones or Cornua Ammonis, besides other petrified shells.

We traveled to Bergamo passing through 1. Hospitaletta, March 2.
a Village 7 miles distant from Brescia 2. Cokai, a large Village 5 miles
further. Palazzuolo.
3. Palazzulolo a great Village standing on a steep bank on each side the River
Ollio We had a full view of the Alps all along as we rode. Bergamo.
Bergamo is seated upon the side of a hill, and is a City of good account for
greatness and strength, encompassed about with high strong walls, and a broad
dry ditch or trench. The streets are narrow, but the houses fair. Upon the top
of the hill above the City stands the Castle, which though it be but a small
place is strongly situate, and commands the Town. They told us that there was a
Vault under ground from the Castle to the Palace of the Capitaneo. Without the
Walls of the City are five large Borgo's or Suburbs. 1. That of St. Leonardo
below the hill, which has fair streets, and is inhabited by rich Merchants. 2.
That of St. Antonio. 3. Of Sancta Catharina. 4. S. Thomaso or Borsa di pignole.
These three stand at some little distance one from another, and some of them
are walled about. 5. Borgo Canale or di S. Gotardo. This City seemed to us a
busy and thriving place. In the Church of the Augustines Cloister lies buried
Ambrosius Calepinus, a Monk of that Order, Author of the known Dictionary,
without any monument or Inscription: In the Priors Cell they showed us his
Picture with this subsribed.

F. Ambrosius, dictus Calepinus, Comitis Trussardi Calepii primi vallis
Calepiae feudatarii filius praealaro suo Dictionario nusquam antea ab aliquo
excogitato (vulgo Calepinum nominant) cum Heremitanum ho^ S. Augustini
Monasterium, and Bergomum patriam suam egregie illustrasset, omnibus literarum
studiosis utilissimus quievit in Domino Anno salutis MDXI. aetatis suae 71.
This City has undergone almost the same changes of Lords and Government with
Brescia, and did likewise voluntarily deliver it self up to the Venetians in
the year 1428. under whose Government it continued till the year 1509, when the
Venetian Army was routed, broken and utterly defeated by Lewis XII King of
France, in the Ghiara of the River Adda, and then it submitted to him and
remained at his Devotion so long as he held the Duchy of Milan. In the Year
1512, the French being expelled Italy, it became subject to Maximilian Sforza
Duke of Milan. By reason of some grievances it revolted from him and returned
under the Venetians; but being besieged by Raimundus Cardona a Spaniard,
Viceroy of Naples, and Captain of the League, with a great army, it was forced
to surrender to the will of Maximilian, and to avoid pillaging to pay 40000
Ducats of Gold, whereas before it would not pay 10000, Anno 1514. In fine, Anno
1516, it again returned under the Government of the Venetians, who continue to
this day Lords of it, and send thither a i. e. A Mayor, a Governor, a
Chamberlain, and a Governor of the Castle.
Podesta, a Capitaneo, a Camerlengo and a Castellano. The Italians have a
Proverb of this City, Se Bergamo fosse in pian Sarebbe piu bell che non e Milan.
If Bergamo stood in a plain it would be a fairer City than Milan.

NB. After the forementioned rout and disomfiture of the Venetian Army, not
only Bergamo, but also Brescia, Verona, Vicenza, Padua, and the rest of the
Cities subject to them, save only Treviso, readily submitted to the Emperor
and King of France; notwithstanding they were well fortified and had strength
enough to resist: So that the Venetians utterly despaired of and wholly gave up
for lost all they had on the firm land of Italy; but yet in a short time they
recovered it all again.

From Bergamo we rode to Calonica, a Village in the State of Milan, seated upon
the River Adda, where we took water for the City of Milan.

OF MILAN.
MILAN is one of the four principal Cities of Italy; the other three being
Rome, Venice and Naples. It is called la grande, and well may it be so, being
ten Italian miles in circuit: and yet (which is more) the figure of it
approaches to a circle. It conteins 11 Collegiate Churches, 71 Parishes, 30
Covents of Freres, 8 of Regular Canons, and 36 of Nuns. The number of
Inhabitants of all sorts is said to be 300000, but I believe they who report it
speak by guess and at random. All provisions for the belly are very plentiful
and cheap here: so that it is a proverbial saying, Solo in Milano si mangia,
They eat well only at Milan. The Domo or Cathedral Church is next to S. Peter's
at Rome the greatest, most sumptuous ad stately pile of building in Italy. It
is 250 cubits long, and 130 broad, according to Schottus, and of an answerable
highth. A more particular description whereof may be seen in Schottus. The
great Hospital is the largest and most magnificent, I think, in Europe, more
like a stately Cloister or Princes Palace than an Hospital. There is one great
square Court, surrounded with a double portico, the one below, the other obove
flairs; besides four or five other smaller Courts. The Revenues of this house
amount to more then 50000 crowns yearly; and there are maintained in it about
4000 poor, infirm and sick persons. In this City are many fair and large
Monasteries, and a great number of Churches [of all sorts 238] beautified with
exquisite pictures and statues of the best Masters, and furnished with rich
Altar^ pieces, Relics, Vests, and other Ornaments: The particulars may be
seen in Schottus and others. The Library called Bibliotheca Ambrosiana is a
handsome building furnished with store of Good Books, and free for all persons,
as well strangers as Citizens, to enter into and make use of. It was founded by
Cardinal Carolus Borromens, of whom they have made a Saint. The College called
Hermathenaeum is a stately building, having a handsome Court, encompassed with
a double Portico or Cloister, one above the other. The pillars of both
Porticoes are double, the lowermost of the Ionic, the upper of the Tuscan Order.

The Castle of Milan is esteemed one of the principal Fortresses of Europe, as
well for its strength (having never been taken by force) as for its greatness
and beauty. This Castle since its first building has been twice enlarged; for
the ancient Castle, built by the Visconti(which is now the Palace of the
Governor, and before which is Court having a round stone-tower at each
corner;) the French taking in a great space of ground, enclosed with a square
wall of a very great highth and thickness, and a deep ditch. Upon the top of
this wall one may walk under cover round about, and from thence have a fair
prospect of the Country, and the new Fortifications of the Castle, or the new
line added by the Spaniard, being of a pentagonal figure, and having at each
angle a Bastion or Mount, and between every two Bastions an half Moon. It is
well furnished round about with great Guns ready mounted. Within the Castle is
a water-mill, which they told us was driven by water which springs up within
the Castle-walls. Schottus says that the circuit of the whole Fortress besides
the trenches is 1600 paces. The Garrison at our being there consisted of about
600 Soldiers, and the Castellana or Governors name was Don Balthazar Markadel.

We saw the Museum or Gallery of Seignior Manfredus Septalius son to Ludovicus
Septalius the famous Physician; March 6.
wherein we took notice of a box with a multitude of Looking-glasses so
disposed as by mutual reflection to multiply the object many times, so that one
could see no end of them: the best in this king that I have any where seen. A
plain plate of glass with so many spherical protuberances wrought upon it, that
if you looked through it upon any object you saw it so many times multiplied as
there were protuberancies or segments of spheres upon the plain of the glass.
Likewise a Speculum of the same fashion, by looking upon which through the
former you see your face so many times multiplied as to be equal to the product
of the sum of the protuberancies of the one glass multiplied into the sum of
the protuberancies of the other. Several concave burning Specula of metal; and
we saw the experiment of burning by reflection. Several Engines counterfeiting a
perpetual motion, of which afterward we understood the intrigue. Several
automata and clocks of diverse fashions, among the rest two of a cylindrical
figure which moved without weight or spring, only by being placed upon an
enclining plain, their own weight was the spring of their motion. Pieces of
Amber with Flies, Grasshoppers, Bees enclosed in them. Pieces of Crystal with
Grass, Moss, Leaves, Insects, etc. enclosed in them. A large piece of Crystal
with a drop of water in it, and in that water a bubble of air, which as you
turned the stone moved upwards. A little Cornelian with a great quantity of
water enclosed in it. Pictures made of feathers by the Indians. A great
collection as well of ancient as modern coins and medals. Several Entaglie,
Camei and Nicoli. The Pietra imboscata of Imperatus, having the lively
signatures of herbs and trees upon it. Of this sort is found plenty about
Florence, where they polish them and make Cabinets of them. Perfumed knives.
Persian, Arabic, Chinese, and Japonic manuscripts; and a China Calendar in
wood, Great variety of shells. Telescopes and Microscopes of his own making. A
large piece of the minera or matrix of Emeralds, with the stones growing in it.
Many musical instruments and diverse sorts of pipes of his own invention.
Ancient Rings. Indian Scepters and Bills made of stone. Several things
petrified. Chemical Oils extracted by himself without fire. The Skeleton of a
Morsses head. Diverse and very large Rhinocerots horns, Gazells horns, and an
Unicorns horn. Curious pieces of turned work of Ivory very fine and subtle.
Several pieces of past and colored glass. Several pieces of most transparent
Crystal-glass, excelling that of Venice, made and invented by himself.
Factitious China or Porcellane of his own invention and making, hardly to be
distinguished from the true. But there being a printed Catalogue of this
Cabinet set out by the owner himself, I refer the Reader thither for further
satisfaction. In this City they work much in Crystal, making drinking-glasses
and other vessels, cases for tweezers, seals, and an hundred pretty knacks of
it: they also engrave figures upon it. They grind and polish it with a brass
wheel, upon which they put the powder of Smiris mingled with water; and after
to smooth it they use the power of i. e. Dead stone.
Sasse-mort, which is a stone they find in the River fast by. This stone by
lying in the water by degrees dies, from a heavy pebble first becoming light
like a pumice, and afterward if it lie longer in the water crumbling to dust.
Most ordinary stones by lying in this water, or where the water sometimes
comes, will (as they told us) die in this manner, excepting the clear pellucid
pebbles, which are immortal.

We left Milan and began our journey to Turin. March 10.
We rode all along upon the bank of the River Navilio, passing several small
Villages, leaving Biagrassa, a Town of some note, Biagrassa
a little on our left hand, and lodged at Bufalora 22 miles distant from Milan.
Here in the hedges we found Fumaria bulbosa flore purpureo and albo now in
flower: as also Aristolochia rotunda in flower.

We passed through Novara a strong Town belonging to the Spaniard 10 miles
distant from Bufalora; 11.
and rode on 10 miles further to Vercelli belonging to the Duke of Savoy;
Novara. Vercelli.
a large Town, but neither strong nor well peopled. This Town was delivered up
by the Spaniard to the Duke, when Trin was restored to the Spaniard by the
French. We were told that the Citizens pay ten times more to the Duke then they
did to the Spaniard, and for that cause such as are able leave the City and
remove to other places.

We traveled as far as a Village called Sian, 12.
18 miles passing by a large borgo called S. German.

Being stopped by the waters we were constrained to stay all night at Chivas, 13.
no more then 8 miles forward.

We got safe to Turino, 14.
passing by the way many waters, two we ferried over, viz Orco and Stura.

Turin, Turin.
anciently Augusta Taurinorum, seated upon the River Padus or Po, is no large
City, but by reason the Duke of Savoy usually keeps his Court there, frequent
and populous. The ancient buildings are not better than those of our English
Towns: but there is one long street of new buildings tall and uniform; and
about the midst of it a large square Piazza, having on each side a fair
Cloister, very handsome and sightly. At one end of this street is another
Piazza before the Dukes Palace, a fair building but not yet finished. Here is a
Citadel with 5 bastions serving as well to bridle as defend the Town. Here we
met with some of the Protestants of the Valleys of Lucern and Angrona, who told
us that by the intercession of the Cantons of Zurich and Bern, the Duke has at
present made an accord with them, permitting them still to enjoy the liberty of
their Religion. They dwell in 14 pagi or Villages, have no Town, are in number
about 15000 souls, and of them about 2000 fighting men. These are divided into
14 Companies under so many Captains, among whom Jean Janneville is noted for a
valiant man and a good Soldier. The Papists call these men Barbetti and
Genevrini. They are the only Protestants in Italy, and have maintained the
purity of their Religion all along these 1200 years. They run over the
mountains like chamois, never shooting (if themselves may be believed) but they
hit. They boasted to us that in the late War they had not lost above 40 or 50
men, and had killed 500 of the Dukes; nevertheless the Duke has built a strong
fortress at a place called La torre in the middle of them.

The City of Turin has an University, and boasts to have been the first that
brought the use of Printing into Italy. All provisions are plentiful and cheap
there, the Country round about being very rich and fertile. Indeed the whole
Principality of Piemont is esteemed inferior to no part of Italy for
pleasantness, and plenty of Corn, Cattle, Wine, Fruit, Hemp, Flax, Metals, and
almost every thing necessary for humane life: and withal it is so populous,
that the Italians use to say, that the Duke of Savoy has only one City in
Italy of 300 miles in compass. It has 8 Episcopal Cities and 150 Towns. The
Inhabitants are more given to Husbandry than Merchandise, so that the land is
no where better cultivated then in Piemont. They are also very affectionate to
their Prince, and for his honor and safety ready upon all occasions to venture
their lives and fortunes. Leti says that they are good Soldiers, expert in
warlike exercises, and so valiant that they will rather die than turn their
backs. Of the riches of this Country we may (says he) take an estimate by the
late Wars which continued for 23 years, during which time were maintained by
the Duke in Garrison, and in the field between 25 and 30 thousand Soldiers,
for the most part without any assistance or supplies of money or men from any
other place but Piemont; which besides all this contributed to the Duke in 15
years 11 millions. The same Author says, it is not in Piemont as in other
Countries, wherein there are some persons excessive rich, but the generality of
the people extremely poor: but on the contrary the Piemontese are generally
well to live, and there are very few among them of extraordinary estates.

As for the Duke he by all men's confession keeps a splendid and regal Court,
answerable to his Title of Royal Highness. His annual Revenue is said to be a
million of gold: according to Leti 1800000 crowns; of which Piemont alone
yields 1400000. He is able to bring into the Field 30000 Foot, and 5000 Horse,
and yet leave enough at home to guard the Country. The States which the Duke
possesses in Italy are, The Principality of Piemont, The Marquesates of
Saluzzes(which he had of the French in exchange for la Bresse) and of Asti; the
Duchy of Aosta; the Countries or Earldoms of Nizza, and of Vercelli.

The present Dukes name is Carolus Emmanuel, son of Victor Amideus: he was at
the time of our being there about thirty years of age; and was then in mourning
for his Duchess Francesca Borbona, and his Mother Christiana di Francia whom
they call Madam Royal, who were lately dead. He has two or three handsome
Palaces near the City, adorned with rich Hangings, good Pictures and other
Furniture. 1. That called the Venery, or hunting Palace lately built. 2.
Millefiore. 3. Valentine.

The making of oil'd cloth for Hoods, Hat-cases, and Coats to fence off the
rain, was first invented at Turin by one Giacomo Marigi, and is still held as a
secret by them, though now it be done in other places as well as there.

We took horses and a guide at Turin for Genua, Mar. 17.
which we reached at three days end. About a mile below Turin we past the River
Po(which here begins to be navigable) by a Bridge, and after we had rode about
a mile further, by the Rivers side, we mounted the hills under which the River
heerabout runs, which are very steep and difficult to ascend. Not far from the
foot of these Mountains, in the Woods wherewith they are covered, and in the
ditches by the way side, I observed growing wild, i. e. Dogs tooth Violet;
common Bulbous Violet; the greater Toothwort; common Leopards bane; the lesser
Grape-Hyacinth, and Hepatica or Noble Liverwort. Chier.
Dens caninus flore purpureo Ger. Leucoium bulbosum vulgar C. B. Dentaria
aphyllos Clus. sive Anblatum Cordi. Doronicum vulgar J. B. Hepaticum Trifolium
Lob. Hyacinthus botryodes 2 Clus. This grow plentifully on the banks and
borders of the Cornfieldsd, and by the way sides all along as we rode from
Turin to Genua. At 5 miles distance from Turin we passed through a pretty large
Town called Chier, where we took notice of a triumphant Arch erected to Victor
Amadeus Father to the present Duke of Savoy. About 4 miles further we passed by
a walled Town called Villa nova; Aste.
and this first night lodged at Aste, a large Town, but that seemed to us to be
poor and decaying, 20 miles distant from Turin.

We proceeded on our journey as far as Nove, 18.
a pretty large Town under the Genoese, 27 Piemont miles distant from Aste; I
think they may well pass for 35 English. About 4 miles from Aste upon the bank
of the River Tanar (which is there very high) and on the sands under the bank
we found great variety of petrified shells, as Oysters, Scallops, Cochles, etc.
as also tubuli striati, called by some Antales, which Seignior Rosaccio a
Mountebank in Venice first showed us: Belemnites and other rare sorts of
stones. In the Cornfieldsd we passed through we observed i. e. Yellow star of
Bethlehem; Mr. Johnson Minister of Brignel near Greta-bridge in the North
Riding of Yorkshire has found this growing plentifully in the skirts of the
Woods thereabouts, and flowring together with the Wood-Anemony.
Ornithogalum luteum C. B. in great plenty now in flower. This day we passed by
a large Village called Non, and another which had formerly been walled, called
Felizan: then Alexandria, an large Town upon the River Tanar, of more strength
than beauty; the buildings both public and private being generally but mean. It
was so called in honor of Pope Alexander III; because in his time it was
peopled by the Milanese, whose City was then almost quite destroyed ad made
desolate by the Emperor Frederic Barbarossa, for siding with the Pope against
him. The River (which seemed to me as large as the Po at Turin) divides the
City in two parts, which are joined together by a fair brick-bridge. In our
passage through the Town we took notice of a triumphal Arch erected to Philip
IV. King of Spain upon his marriage.

We rode from Nove to Genna 30 miles all over mountains. 19.
About 6 miles from Nove we passed through a handsome little walled Town, called
Gavi, Gavi.
where there is a strong castle on a hill over the Town; and about 6 miles
further onward, another elegant and well built Town called Voltagio. Voltagio.
From hence we ascended continually for about 7 or 8 miles till we came to the
top of a very high hill, from whence we had a prospect of Genua and the Sea.
Then we descended constantly till we came to the City. In all this way we met
with and overtook Mules and Asses going to and returning from Genua, to the
number of 500 or 600 or more. Between Gavi and Voltagio we observed Dens
caninus with a white flower; and all along on the mountains from Gavi to Genoa,
stoechas citrina altera tenuifolia sive Italica J. B. as also Psyllium majus
semper virens, and sedi minoris species flore albo quadrifolio, now in flower.
Petasites flore albo on the side of a mountain about 6 miles from Voltagio in
the way to Genoa. Erica arborescens Monspeliensis flore purpurascente ramulis
ternis J. B. by way sides abundantly from Gavi to Genoa. It is a stately plant,
the tallest of this kind, arising to the stature and bigness of broom
heerabout; near Monpellier it is less.

We viewed Genua, Mar. 20. Genua.
which for the building of it is certainly the most stately and, according to
its Epithete, superb City in all Italy. The houses are generally tall, scarce a
mean house to be seen in Town. The New-street answers the fame that goes of
it. It is but short, consisting only of 8 or 10 Palaces, built of marble, very
sumptuous and magnific, the meanest of them) as Cluverius says) being able to
receive and lodge the greatest Prince and his Retinue. The only deformity of
this City is the narrowness of the streets unanswerable to the tallness of the
houses; and yet they are made so on purpose, partly to save ground, which here
is precious; and partly to keep off the scorching beams of the Sun in Summer
time, for the convenience of walking cool; for which reason I have observed
many of the ancient Towns of Italy and Gallia Narbonensis to have their streets
made very narrow. This City lies under the mountains exposed to the South, so
that it must needs be very hot in Summer, as witness the Orange and Olive trees
which grow so plentifully here, that they can afford those fruits at easy
rates, and drive therewith a great trade, furnishing with Oranges Florence and
a good part of Tuscany, and sometimes sending them into England. It is built in
form of a Theater, or Crescent, encompassed with a double wall toward the land.
The exterior or new wall of a great highth and thickness passes over the top of
mountains, and takes in a great deal of void ground.

The famous new mole, which now makes this a secure Harbor, is said to have
cost as much as the new wall: for a work of that nature I believe it is not to
be paralleled in the whole world. The manners of the Inhabitants are not
answerable to the beauty of their houses; they being noted among their own
Contrymen the Italians for proud, unfaithful, revengeful, uncivil to
Strangers, and horribly exacting. There goes a proverbial saying of Genoa,
that it has, montagne senza alberi, mare senza pesce, huomini senza feed and
done senza vergogna, that is, Mountains without trees, a Sea without fish, Men
without faith, and Women without shame. The number of the Inhabitants must
needs be great, they having lost in the last great Plague (as we were credibly
informed) to the number of 80000 souls. The chief Trade of the Town is Silks
and Velvets; they make also pretty turned works of Coral.

The Government of it according to the new laws made by the Popes Legate, and
the Emperors and King of Spains Ambassadors, not long after the time of Andreas
Doria, is on this wise. There is 1. a Duke, who continues in office 2 years. 2.
Two Collegia; one of Governatori(as they term them) the other of Procuratori.
The Governatori 12, the Procuratori 8, all elected, besides those that of
course come in for their lives. 3. A greater Council of 400. 4. A lesser
Council of 100. 5. A Seminary for the 2 Collegia of 120. The 2 Collegia of
Governatori and Procuratori, are as it were the chief Senate or Privy Council
or House of Lords; and are chosen twice a year, viz. about the middle of June
and about the middle of December, after this manner. All the Seminarium of 120
have their names together with their surnames and fathers names written in
little scrolls of parchment, an put into an iron box, which is kept very
securely under many locks. When the time of election comes this box is brought
forth before the Duke, the 2 Collegia, and the lesser Council. Then a boy, who
must be under ten years of age, puts his hand into the box, and draws out 5
scrolls, which are read, and the 3 first, if they be capable, are Governatori,
the 2 last Procuratori. If a man be 100 miles off the City he is incapable of
being elected for that time. Likewise two of the same family cannot be
Procuratori or Governatori together. Therefore if the two first that are drawn
out or the two second be of the same family, the first is Governator, and the
second Procurator: if the two last be of the same family, the first drawn out
is a Procurator, and the second is returned into the box again, and the boy
draws out another. So that every six months five are chosen into the Collegia,
and five go out, and every one stays in office two years. In the Collegium
Procuratorum, besides the 8, are all those who have been Dukes, and are gone
out of office, who ( modo been se gesserint) continue Procuratori during their
lives.

To supply or make up the Seminarium 120, every year in the stead of those who
are dead, made incapable, or chosen into the 2 Collegia, the lesser Council
chooses a double number, all which must have 3 suffrages of 5. And out of these
the greater Council choose half by the major vote.

For choosing the Councils both greater and lesser, the lesser Council in
presence of the Duke and 2 Collegia choose 30 Electors,(all which must be of the
Nobility) by 3 suffrages of 5. These 30 choose both the greater and lesser
Council, but the lesser out of the number of the greater, by a like proportion
of suffrages. The greater Council is assembled upon important occasions, and
with the Duke and 2 Collegia makes the supreme power: The lesser Council takes
care of the lesser and ordinary concerns of the City and Commonwealth. Those
who are capable of being chosen into the greater Council must be 25 years of
age; only the 30 Electors may, if they please or see it expedient, choose to the
number of 60 who are but 22 years old. Of the lesser Council the one half must
be 30 years of age, the others at least 27, excepting Doctors of Law and
Physic, who if they be well qualified may be chosen two years younger. Those
who are capable of being chosen into the Seminarium must be 40 years of age.

The choice of the Duke is in this manner. The great Council being assembled
there are put into an Urn 10 golden balls marked with 10 several letters.

One of these being drawn out is shown to the Conservators of the Laws, who
thereupon put into another Urn standing by the Dukes throne 50 golden balls
marked with the same letter This is done to prevent fraud, for if the golden
balls were either not marked at all, or with any sign or letter known
beforehand, any one of the Council might bring such a ball with him, and taking
it in his hand make show as if he drew it out of the Urn.
, and 50 silver balls. These being shaken together, the lesser Council of 100,
excluding the 2 Collegia, draw out each man a ball. He that draws out a golden
ball shows it to the Censors, who sit by, and presently writes in a scroll of
paper the name of him whom he thinks fit to nominate for Duke and goes out of
the Council. When all the golden balls are drawn out, the two Collegia bring
them into order, and count them over, and if the number of the nominated amount
to 20 then they are propounded to the greater Council, who out of them by major
vote choose 15. Out of these 15 the lesser Council choose 6 by 3 suffrages of 5.
Out of these 6 again by major vote the greater Council choose the Duke. These
suffrages are all occult, that is, given by putting of balls into balloting
boxes. If in the greater Council for any person the negative and affirmative
suffrages are equal, then 5 by lot are to be put out of the Council, and the
rest to ballot again. Many other provisions there are in case of equality or
disagreement, etc. Nothing can be propounded in Council but by the Duke, who
during the time of his regency lives in the Palace, and has (according to
Sansovinus) a guard of 500 Suitzers.

The Office of S. George is (as far as I understand it) nothing but a company
of Bankers, which lend money to the Commonwealth, for which they are allowed
so much per cent. and have assigned to them the public gabells and other
revenues, and for their further security have also the Island of Corsica
engaged to them. This company choose yearly out of their own number 8
protectors, who are to take care of and manage the affairs of all the
Creditors. Into this bank strangers usually put in money and so become of the
Company, for which they receive yearly interest, proportionable to the
improvement made of the whole stock of moneys then in bank.

The public Revenue of this State is said by some to be 120000 crowns per
annum, and yet scarce sufficient to defray the public expenses.

There are many private Citizens here very rich. The Republic is thought to be
able to raise an Army, of 30000 men, and to set out to Sea 12 Galleys and 20
Ships of War. They hold good correspondence with all Christian Princes and
States excepting the Duke of Savoy by reason of his pretense to the City of
Savona.

Upon the Cliffs about the Pharos or watch tower and near it we found these
plants: Trifolium bituminosum Ger. Jacobaea marina Ger. Conyza major
Monspeliensis odorata J. B. Alaternus; Carduus galactites J. B. Thymum vulgar
rigidius folio cinereo J. B. Geranium folio Anthaeae C. B. Thlaspi Alysson
dictum maritimum C. B. Lotus Libyca Dalechampii; Lotus pentaphyllos siliquosus
villosus C. B. Smilax aspera; Adianthum sive Capillus veneris J. B. Hyoscyamus
albus Park. Haec species quam in muris and rupibus circa Genuam frequentem
vidimus, folia habet breviora, viridiora, rotundiora, minus laciniata quam
vulgaris niger; florem minorem, in nonnullis totum luteum, in aliis plantis
fundo obscure purpureo. On the walls we observed Stock-July-flowers growing
plentifully, whether springing spontaneously, or of seed casually scattered out
of Gardens we cannot determine; likewise Globula Monspeliensum, and Genista
Hispanica on the rocks eastward of the City. Upon the shores we found cast up
in great plenty of the ballae marinae Sea-balls, which are little round lumps,
(some of them as big as Tennis-balls) of Festucae amassed together, which we
supposed to be cast out of Fishes stomachs.

We went in a Feluca from Genoa to Porto Venere, April 2: Luca.
and thence cross the bay of Spezzia to Lerici, where we took post horses, and
rode that night to Massa, passing through Sarzana, a strong Town belonging to
the Genoese and a Frontier. Massa.
Massa is but a small City, yet has it a Prince of its own, who is Lord also
of Carrara, whose chief Revenues arise from the marble quarries. The Prince is
by birth a Genoese, of the family of Cybo. Over the Town gate we observed this
inscription, Albericus Cybo Malaspina Sacri Romani imperii, civitatisque Massae
princeps.

We rode on to Luca in a Valley by the foot of hills over a great deal of
moorish and boggy ground, 3.
through a Country not well inhabited. We passed through Pietra Santa, Pietra
Santa.
a Town belonging to the Duke of Florence, but utterly disjoynted from the rest
of his state by the interposition of the Territory of Luca. In this journey I
observed the following plants. Scrophularia Vrticae folio C. B. which I found
also plentifully upon the walls of Pisa. Orchis macrophylla. Col. between Massa
and Sarzana. Moly parvum caul triangulo ibid. Narcissus medioluteus polyanthos
Ger. among the corn plentifully all along as we rode, now in flower. On the
sides of the Mountains between Massa and Luca, Antirrhinum luteo flore C. B.
Tithymalus dendroides J. B. Lentiscus; Anagyris sive Laburnum; Colutea
vesicaria, Colutea scorpioides, Ruta sylvestris maj J. B. Laurus vulgaris;
Teucrium; On ditch banks and in shadow places by the way side Arisarum
latifolium Clus. and Aristolochia longa. A sort of Dentaria aphyllos with a
purple flower, covering the ground with a thick tuft almost after the manner of
Housleek, having scarce any stalk.

Lychnis surrecta folio angustissimo, floro rubello, among flax. Ornithogalum
vulgar Ger. among the corn plentifully. Cyclamen vernum, good store among
shrubs upon the hills sides, now in flower. Myrtus minor vulgaris; Philyrrea
angustifolia; Philyrrea 3 Clus. Genista Hispanica Ger. Upon the descent of the
mountains 4 miles distant from Luca, Hesperis sylvestris latifolia flore albo
parvo Park. A kind of Alsine hirsuta myosotis with a very large flower. A shrub
like to Guaiacum Patavinum, if not the same. A king of Thlaspi monospermos with
a white flower; Sedum minus semine stellato; an Sedum echinatum flare luteo J.
B. in rupibus and aggeribus sepium. Alsine foliis hederac^is Rutae modo divisis
Lob. Anemone tuberosa radice Ger. now in flower. Near Porto Venere, Alsine
folio crasso.

Luca is no great City, Sansovinus says 2 miles round, (but I take it to be
three or more) yet is it very populous, containing within its walls in
Sansovinus his time about 34000 persons; which number I believe is now much
increased by reason of the freedom and ease the subjects enjoy under this
Government above their neighbors of Tuscany. It is situate in a pleasant
Valley, well fortified, the walls and bulwarks both very strong and in good
repair; the mounts and platforms stored with great Guns; several half Moons of
earth without the walls: The walls themselves planted with rows of trees, and
we permitted to walk them without scruple or question. The buildings of the
City good; the Churches though not great, yet as well kept and handsomely
adorned within side as a man shall see any: The streets cleanly and well paved;
in a word all things both within and without the City very trim and polite.
Both Citizens and Countrymen are very courteous and well manner'd, and seem
both by their habit and address, and the cheerfulness of their looks, to live
more freely and in better condition, and to have more spirit and courage then
the other people of Italy. That they live more freely and in better
circumstances then their neighbors, themselves are sensible, and thereupon so
well affected to their Governors, and studious to maintain their liberty, that
upon giving them a token by making a fire upon one of the towers all the
Countrymen run presently to the City, so that in 2 or 3 hours time they can
have ready 30000 men in Arms: And withal they are so courageous and stout, that
they seem to have no fear at all of the Duke of Tuscany their potent neighbor,
but told us, that if their Governors would lead them, they would not fear to
march up to the very Gates of Florence.

That liberty does naturally beget courage and valor, and on the contrary
slavery and oppression break and debase men's spirits, is so clear in
experience, that I need not go about to prove it. And yet were it not so, it is
no wonder that men who find themselves well at ease, and have something to lose
or are at least in a capacity of growing rich if not already so, should be very
loath to change their condition for a worse, and stoutly defend themselves
against any that should endeavor to bring them under the yoke; whereas those
that are oppressed and aggrieved having nothing to lose, and being already in
as bad a condition as they are like to be under any other Government, must
needs have little heart to fight for their Princes, and be indifferent which
way things go.

The women are not so strictly guarded and confined as in other Cities of
Italy, but walk up and down more freely. They are many of them handsome and
well-favoured, and notwithstanding their liberty I think more modest then their
neighbors: in their habit and attire they imitate somewhat the French fashions.

This City is very vigilant and careful to preserve its liberty: Though they
have 3 Gates they permit strangers to enter in and go out only at one, that so
they may more easily know what number are in the City, for fear of a surprise.
They permit none to walk about the streets so much as with a Sword, unless he
have license from the Antiani.

The Government is by a great Council of 160 annually chosen out of the
Nobility, (the commons having no interest or share therein) who must be all at
least 25 years old, nine Antiani and a Gonfaloniere. The Antiani and
Gonfaloniere are chosen anew every two months. These are called the Signoria,
and must live in the Palace during the time of their office and authority. They
have a guard of Switzers in the Palace of about 80. The Gonfaloniere is the
supreme officer, yet has little advantage above the rest more then his title
and precedence; and we were told that during his office he is exempted from all
taxes and gabels, which the Noblemen pay equally with the Commons. The City is
divided into 3 parts called Terzieri, each Terziero has its Arms or Banner
called Gonfalone; whence the name Gonfaloniere. At the corners of each street
are painted both the Arms and name of the Terziero, and the Bulwark they are to
defend. Out of each Terziero are chosen by the Council three Antiani.

The public revenue is thought to be 100000 crowns per ann. The Olives that
grow in this territory are reputed the best in all Italy.

OF PISA.
PISA was formerly, so long as it continued a Free State or Commonwealth, a
rich, populous, potent and flourishing City; but since it has come under the
Florentine yoke it is become poor, weak, and almost desolate, notwithstanding
all the endeavors the Dukes of Tuscany have used to invite and draw people
thither, by founding an University, setting up an order of Knighthood, and
building an Exchange for Merchants there. It is situate upon the River Arnus in
a fenny level; so that the air must needs be bad and unwholesome for such as
are not born there. The most remarkable things we took notice of in this City
were 1. The Church of the Knights of S. Stephen, an Order founded by Cosmus the
first great Duke of Tuscany. 2. The house of Bart^lus now made a College for
Students in Law and Philosophy, and thereon this Inscription, Ferdinandus
Medices magnus Dux Etr. III. bas aedes quas olim Bartolus Juris interpres
celeberr. incoluit nune renovatas and instructas adolescentibus qui ad
Philosophorum and Juris consultorum Scholas missi publico urbium atque
oppidorum suorum sumptu separatim alebantur, publicae utilitati consulens
addixit, legesque quibus in victu, vestitu vitaque simul degenda uterentur
tulit, Anno salutis MDLXXXXV. 3. The Domo or Cathedral Church, a sumptuous
building or Marble, having all the doors of brass curiously engraven; a double
isle on each side the Nave, and two rows of Marble pillars, adorned with
stately Altars and rare Pictures; the walls are hung round about with red
Velvet; the roof richly gilded. On each side the high Altar is a Picture, and
under it an inscription explaining the history of it; which because they
contain two of the notablest adventures and successes of this City, I thought
it might not be amiss here to insert.

I.
Templum hoc ut auctae potontiae ac religionis insigne monumentum posteris
extaret, Pisanis ex Saracenorum spoliis capta Panormo aedificatum an Sanctorum
reliquiis e Palaestina usque advectis auctum Gelasius II. P. M. solenni pompa
consecravit, A. D. MCXIX.

II.
Pascale II. P. M. autore, Pisani class 300 triremium Petro Arch. Pis. duce
Baleares insulas profligatis Saracenis in ditionem redigunt, Christianoque
nomini adjungunt, captaque regia conjuge ac filio praeclaram victoriam illustri
pioque triumpho exornarunt. A. D. 1115.

4. The Baptisterium, having in the middle a large marble Font like the Cistern
of a Fountain, with water continually running into it. There is also a marble
pulpit curiously carved. 5. The burying place called the Campo Santo, because
made of earth brought out of the holy Land. The earth is said to consume a body
in 48 hours: it is an oblong square, encompassed with a broad Portico, paved
with Grave-stones, and the walls painted. 6. The Campanile or Steeple, a large
round tower of a considerable highth, so very much enclining or seeming to
incline or lean to one side, that one would think it could not long stand
upright, but must needs fall that way. I suppose it was on purpose built so at
first, one side being made perpendicular and the other enclining, to deceive
the sight, though some say it sank after it was built, and does really incline.
7. The Aqueduct of above 5000 arches, begun by Cosmus, and finished by
Ferdinand I. great Dukes of Tuscany, bringing water to the City from the
mountains about 5 miles distant. This water is so good that it is carried in
flasks as far as Ligorn to sell. 8. The Physic-garden, at our there but meanly
stored with simples.

From Pisa we went by boat to Ligorn, Ligorn.
[Livorno] called anciently Portus Liburnus, some 10 or 12 miles distant. This
Town is not large, and but low built, yet very pleasant and uniform, having
straight streets, and a spacious Piazza in the middle. It stands in an open
level, without mountain or hillock within 5 miles of it on any side. It is
well-fortified with walls and bastions, and a deep trench round except on the
Seaside; and secured with a good Garrison, being one of the most considerable
and important places in all Tuscany. Since the Great Duke made it a free port
it has increased mightily in trading and riches, great numbers, of Merchants
from all Nations resorting hither, and most of the bargains for the commodities
of the whole Levant being here driven. The greatest part of the Inhabitants are
Strangers and Jews, which last are esteemed one third of the whole number of
people, and thought to amount to 5000 persons and upward. Before these
privileges granted to Ligorn, when it was thin of Inhabitants, it was accounted
a very bad air and an unhealthful place, by reason of the fens and marshes
adjoining; but now since it is become populous, the multitude of fires (as is
supposed) has so corrected the air, that people enjoy their health as well and
live as long here as in any other Town or City of Italy.

Near the Haven is a very magnificent statue of Ferdinand I. Great Duke, about
the pedestal whereof are 4 brass Statues of slaves chained of a gigantick bulk
and stature. The haven within the mole is but small, but here is good riding
for Ships without. The Great Duke in Lent time uses to make his residence in
this Town; here being great variety of good fish taken in the Sea near hand,
and to be sold at reasonable rates; all other provisions being dear enough. In
Ligorn we saw workmen filing of marking-stones, called in Latin Lapis
galactites and morochthus, in Italian Pictra lattaria; which they told us were
found at Monte negro and thereabout some 5 miles distant from Ligorn, and from
hence transported into France, Spain, England, the Low Countries, etc. Of the
dust and filings of this stone they make the body of power for hair, as the
workmen informed us.

Of Plants we observed about Ligorn, Plants observed about Ligorn.
Kali geniculatum majus, in the marshes by the Seaside: Absinthium Seriphium
Gallicum; Polium montanum album C. B. Medica doliata spinosa; Medica cochleata
Spinosa; Med. marina, on the Sands; Caltha arvensis C. B. Hyacinthus palustris
vernus, flosculis fimbriatis albis; Hyacinthus comosus Ger. Lathyrus flore
coccineo; Vicia luteo flore sylvestris; Ochrus sive ervilia Dod. these three
last among the Corn; as also Gla. diolus Narbonensis Lob. Telephium scorpioides
Anguill. in arenosts; Phyteuma Monspeliensium; Cichorium pratense vesicarium
Col. Medica Scutellata J. B. Iris humilis violacea latifolia, and eadem flore
albo, in rupibus ad mare: Herniaria hirsuta; Allii species, an Ampeloprassum?
Ferrum equinum Lob. Orchis macrophyll^s Columnae; Trifolium fragiferum sive
vesicarium, floribus nitidis rubellis, flosculis velut in umbella parva
dispositis; Chrysanthemum Bellidis folio Hort. Pat. inter segetes: Buphthalmum
Cotulae folio C. B. an Chrysanthem. Valentinum Clusii? Anthyllis leguminosa
flo. purpureo. Cruciata minima muralis Col. Peplus minor J. B, Ageratum sive
Balsamita mas: A sort of Draba with a white flower; Hieracium perfoliatum;
besides many which we had found in other places, as that sort of Dorycnium
which J. Bauhinus calls Trifolium album rectum hirsutum valde; Carduus
Chrysanthemus Narbonensis, which Lobel calls Eryngium luteum Monspeliensium;
Heliotropium majus; Carduus solstitialis Ger. Cichoreum pratense verrucarium,
in arvis passim; Blattaria flore luteo; Convolvulus minimus spicifolius Lob.
Melissa sylvest. hirsutior, minus odorata; Dorycnio congener planta: Rapistrum
monospermon; Ammi vulgar; Passerina Tragi; Sideritis vulgaris; Aster luteus
foliis ad florem rigidis; Stoebe major caliculis non splendentibus. Between
Pisa and Ligorn we noted Leucoium bulbosum majus polyanthemum Ger. in the
marshes near Pisa plentifully; Aristolochia clematitis; Aster conyzoides nobis
dictus; Asparagus altilis: Gramen supinum aculeatum J. B. Besides these we
observed some which grow wild in England, but more rarely, as Leucoium marinum
majus folio sinuato; Orchis fuciflora galea and alis herbidis; Hyacinthus
stellaris vernus minor; Eranthemum sive flos Adonis; Trifolium pumilum supinum
flosculis longis albis P. B. Ferrum equinum Germanicum siliquis in summitate C.
B.

At Ligorn finding a good Dutch Vessel ready to set sail for Naples, we put our
selves aboard her: The wind not favoring us we spent five days in this passage
before we reached our Port. The Captain of the Ship told us that heerabouts
usually in the forenoon the wind blows from the Land, and in the afternoon from
the Sea; so that it is Easterly in the forenoon, and Westerly in the afternoon.
We also observed in this Voyage, that about Sunset the wind fell; so that soon
after Sunset there was little or no wind stirring: and likewise several days
about Sunrising we had but little wind. In our return backwards from Messina
to Naples, and from Naples to Ligorn, we observed that the wind for the most
part sat contrary to us. And the Sea men told us that this was general in
Summer time. So that you have a much quicker passage from Ligorn to Naples, and
thence to Messina, than backwards. We observed also that the wind follows the
Sun, so that every morning we could make some use of the wind to sail with, but
in the afternoon none at all; which agrees exactly with our Captains
observation, the land lying Eastward, and the Sea West. Our Captain also told
us that when they made a Voyage from Holland to the West Indies, they sailed
down the Coast of Africa as far Southward, as the place in the West Indies
whither they intended to go lay, and then steered directly Westward; both the
wind blowing constantly from the East, and the Sea also running the same way.
Which relation of his concurring with the general vogue of Mariners (if true)
does much confirm the opinion of the diurnal motion of the earth. When they
return backwards from thence into Holland, they go round about the Bay of
Mexico, and up a good way northward, and then strike over to Europe, the water
being reflected (as he said) that way, and the wind also often blowing that way.

Naples lies by the Sea side under hills, Naples.
in form of a Theater; for its figure and situation much like to Genua, but
somewhat bigger, and much more populous; so that before the last great Plague
(which swept away as we were credibly informed at least 120000 souls) one might
well reckon the number of Inhabitants to have been about three hundred
thousand. The circuit of the walls is not above seven Italian miles, but it
has large Suburbs. The Town is well built of stone; the houses tall and massy;
for the most part flat rooft, and covered with a kind of plaster, which fences
out the rain, and endures the weather well. Notwithstanding this City lies so
far South, and under hills, yet is not the heat extreme, but such as may well
be endured even in the middle of Summer, they having for the most part about
noontide a brize of wind, which cools and refreshes much. Two or three hot
days we had, but the rest temperate enough. They told us that there uses to be
very little rain there in Summer time, howbeit at our being there (which was in
the latter end of June and beginning of July) it rained every other day, and
sometimes so plentifully, that the water ran down like a river in the streets.
When they have no rain, to cool the streets in the afternoon they draw about a
tun filled with cold water, and bored with several holes, whence the water
gushes out as it goes along. The Dialect of the common people is much different
from the Tuscane, and not to be understood but by one who has a long time
conversed with them. This City is well served with all provisions, especially
fruit which is very cheap here. In this place we took first notice of the
Cucurbita anguina, Cucumis anguinus, Mala insana, and Limoncelle, to be sold in
market. Macarones and Vermicelle (which are nothing but a kind of paste cut
into the figure of worms or thongs) boiled in broth or water, are a great dish
here as well as at Messina, and as much esteemed by the vulgar, as Frumenty by
the Country people in England. All the Neopolitans and Sicilians, and
genenrally the Italians drink their Wine and water snowed; and you shall see
many stalls in the streets where there is snowed water to be sold: many also
you shall meet, with a barrel at their backs and glasses in their hands, crying
i e. Snowed water oriced water.
Acqua ghiacciata, or Acqua nevata. We were credibly informed that before the
last great Plague the very gabel upon snow was farmed at 25000 crowns per annum.

NB. To cool the water or wine they do not put the snow into it, but round
about the vessel wherein it is contained: so they have a vessel containing the
snow or ice, and into that they set the vessel containing the wine or water.

There are in this City an incredible number of Monasteries or Religious houses
(as they call them.) Beltrano Descript. Neap. gives us a Catalogue of 160 of
all sorts, whereof 121 of men and 39 of women; the number of the persons
contained in them being 1242.

Four Castles there are to secure and bridle the City withal, 1. Castle d'Ovo,
built on a rock in the Sea, having an artificial Caussey or mole leading to it
from the shore. 2. Castle S. Elmo or S. Hermo standing on a hill above the
City. 3. Castle Novo by the water side, near the Haven where the Galleys lie.
4. Torrione di Carmine, made use of by Massaniello and Anese in the time of the
Rebellion. This is only a tower belonging to the Carmelites Cloister.

The Churches in this Town are generally very handsome within side; many of
them richly gilt and sumptuously adorned; some of them not only paved with
marble of diverse colors, but their walls encrusted all over with marble
inlaid. Of all the Cloisters I have any where seen that of the Carthusians,
close adjoining to the Castle S. Elmo, is the most splendid and magnific, where
there is a large square Court compassed about with the fairest peristylium or
Cloister that I ever saw: All the pillars and all the pavement (of the Portico
I mean) being of marble of several colors well wrought, polished and laid, and
so cleanly and elegantly kept, that one cannot see a more pleasant spectacle of
this nature. For my own part I was much taken with the sight of it. Here is a
fair Arsenal to build Galleys in, now made but little use of. The public
Granary deserves notice taking, it being the greatest and best furnished of any
we have seen. They told us there was Corn enough always in store to serve the
whole City some years upon any exigency. There are great Vaults made
underground to keep it in in Winter time, and large rooms above to keep it in
Summer. A great number of men they hire to turn all the beds of Corn every day.
The Bakers of the Town are obliged to take every month 25000 A tomolo is a
measure bigger then an English Bushel.
tomoli out of this Granary, that so there may be a succession of new Corn
yearly. This they paying a good rate for, is the reason why bread is dearer in
Naples than otherwise it would be.

In the City of Naples are 5 Seggi, that is Benches or Companies of Noblemen,
viz. that of 1. Capua. 2. Nido. 3. Montagna. 4. Porta. 5. Porta nova. In the
whole Kingdom of Naples there are 148 Cities, of which 21 [20] are
Archbishopricks, and 127 [128] Bishoprics: to about 30 of which the King of
Spain nominates: 87 Princes; 122 Dukes; 159 Marquesses, and 7 Earls. The
Kingdom is divided into 12 Provinces, viz. 1. TERRA DILAVORO anciently called
Campania felix, in which are 14 Cities, viz. 1. Aversa 2. Capua. 3. Caserta. 4.
Gaeta. 5. Ischia. 6. Massa-Lubrense. 7. Nola. 8. Pozzuoli. 9. Sessa. 10.
Sorrento. 11. Teano. 12. Traetto. 13. Venafro. 14. Vico Equense. 2. PRINCIPATO
CITRA, in which are 18 Cities, 1. Amalfi. 2. Campagna. 3. Capri in the Island
Capreae near Naples famous for the retirement of Tiberius Caesar. The greatest
part of the Revenue of the Bishop of this Island they told us arises from the
Quails taken therein. 4. Casella. 5. Contursi. 6. Eboli. 7. Cappaccia. 8.
Gragnano. 9. Lettere. 10. Laurino. 11. Nocera. 12. Salerno. 13. San-severino.
14. Saponara. 15. Sarno. 16. Scala. 17. Tramonti. 18. Ravello. 3. PRINCIPATO
ULTRA, in which are 14, viz. 1. Beneveno. 2. Solofra. 3. Consa. 4. Ariano. 5.
Avellino. 6. Bisaccio. 7. S. Angclo de Lombardi. 8. Cedogna. 9. Monte marano.
10. Nusco. 11. Voltorara. 12. Vico. 13. Vico della Baronia. 14. S. Agatha delli
grotti. 4. BASILICATA, which has 11 Cities, viz. 1. Lavello. 2. Amalfi. 3.
Policastro. 4. Venosa. 5. Acirenea. 6. Muro. 7. Monte peloso. 8. Potenza. 9.
Rapolla. 10. Tricarico. 11. Tursi. 5. CALABRIA CITRA, in which are 12, viz. 1.
Mantea. 2. Cosenza. 3. Paola. 4. Montalto. 5. Rossano. 6. Bisignano. 7.
Cariari. 8. Cassano. 9. Martirano. 10. Strongoli. 11. S. Marco. 12. Ubriatico.
6. CALABRIA ULTRA, 16, viz. 1. Catanzara. 2. Crotone. 3. Squillaci. 4. Taverna.
5. Tropia. 6. Rhezo or Reggio, anciently Rhegium. 7. Belicastro. 8. Bova. 9. S.
Severina. 10. Gieraci. 11. L'isola. 12. Montilene. 13. Melito. 14. Nicastro.
15. Nicoterra. 16. Oppido. 7. TERRA D'OTRANTO 14, viz. 1. Gallipoli. 2. Lecce.
3. Brindisi. 4. Matera. 5. Ostuni. 6. Tarento. 7. Otranto, Hydruntum. 8.
Alessano. 9. Castellaneta. 10. Castro. 11. Motola. 12. Nardo. 13. Oria. 14.
Ugento. 8. TERRA DI BARI, 16. 1. Andria. 2. Bari. 3. Barletta, a very strong
hold. 4. Bitonto. 5. Terra di Mola. 6. Molfetta. 7. Monopoli. 8. Trani. 9.
Giovenazzo. 10. Biseglia. 11. Bitetto. 12. Conversano. 13. Gravina. 14.
Monoruino. 15. Polignano or Putignano. 16. Ruvo. 9. ABRUZZO CITRA 5. viz. 1.
Chieti. 2. Sulmona. 2. Benevento. 4. Borrelle. 5. Ortona. 10. ABRUZZO ULTRA 5.
1. Aquila. 2. Atri. 3. Campli. 4. Civita di Penna. 5. Teramo. 11. CONTADO DI
MOLISI 4. 1. Boiano guardia. 2. Alferes. 3. Isernia. 4. Trivento. 12.
CAPITANATA 13. viz. 1. Monte S. Angelo. 2. Ascoli. 3. Bovino. 4. Ferensuola. 5.
Larino. 6. Lucera. 7. Lesina. 8. Salpe. 9. Vieste. 10. Volturara. 11. Termole.
12. Sancto Severo. 13. Manfredonia: in all about 151. But many of these are
pitiful poor desolate places, inferior to the better sort of our English
Villages.

Every hearth (fires they call them) in this Kingdom of Naples pays 15
Carolines the year to the King, which is about six and six pence or seven
shillings English. The number of fires in the whole Kingdom is 475727, besides
5804 which are exempt from payment. In which number are not comprehended the
fires of the Albanese and Illyrians commonly called Sclavonians who pay no more
then 11 Carolines the year, are numbered every year, and are permitted to remove
from place to place in the Kingdom. The number of these extraordinary fires is
4451. So then the whole sum of the Hearthmony is 719095 Ducats 4 Carolines,
from which deducting what is to be abated for places privileged and exempt from
payment, that which comes clear into the Kings treasury will be 654873 Ducats,
and six Carolines.

The Adogo or tax which feudatories pay to the King in lieu of personal service
amounts in the whole Kingdom to 120568 Ducats: They also pay Reliefs after
Deaths one half of a years Revenue. Besides these there are abundance more
taxes and gabels paid by the Subject; an account of all which in particular may
be seen in Scipio Mazzella his Description of the Kingdom of Naples, written in
Italian and printed 1601. So that one would think it were impossible for poor
Pesants to pick up so much money as they pay to the King only: and yet I
believe the gabels and payments are since that time much increased. The
wholesum of all the Kings Entrata or Revenue yearly accruing from this Kingdom
then was 2996937 Ducats, 3 Carolines and 14 grains.

While we staid in this City we were present at the meeting of the Virtuosi or
Philosophic Academy, which is held weekly on Wednesdays in the Palace of that
most civil and obliging, noble and virtuous person the Marquess D' Arena. There
were of the Academy but 15 or 16 admitted, but at the meeting were present at
least threescore. First there was showed the experiment of the waters ascending
above its level in slender tubes, upon which when they had discoursed a while,
three of the Society recited discourses they had studied and composed about
particular subjects, which were appointed them to consider the week before: and
after some objections against what was delivered and reasonings to and fro
about it, the company was dismissed. A man could scarce hope to find such a knot
of ingenious persons and of that latitude and freedom of judgment in so remote
a part of Europe, and in the communion of such a Church. They are well
acquainted with writings of all the learned and ingenious men of the
immediately preceding age, as Galileo, Carts, Gassendus, Harvey, Verulam; and
of the present yet surviving, as Mr. Boil, Sir George Ent, Dr. Glisson, Dr.
Willis, Dr. Wharton, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Hook, Monsieur Pecquet, etc. We were very
much pleased and satisfied with the conversation and discourse of some of them.
Amongst the rest Dr. Thomas Cornelius has made himself known to the world by
his Writings.

We went by water to Pozzuolo anciently Puteoli; April 24 Pozzuolo
there so soon as we were come into our Inn many Seamen and Country people
came about us, some bringing Shells, others Hippocampi dried, others ancient
medals and Entaglie, others pieces of colored glass raked out of the Sea, (as
they told us) about Argenteria. Near this Town are several arches of stone [13
peers] reaching a great way into the Sea. Some are of opinion that this was the
beginning of Caligula's Bridge over this Bay, and that from the end of this
pile as far as Baiae the rest of the Bridge was made of vessels locked together
and fastened with Anchors on each side. But more probable it is that this was
intended for a mole or peer to secure the Harbor, and for Ships to lie behind,
because upon every peer a great stone perforated stands jetting out of tie
vessels unto. That it was an ancient Roman work the manner of the Arches, the
figure of the bricks, and the stateliness of it do sufficiently argue.

From Pozzuolo we passed over the Gulf to Baiae, where are so many Antiquities,
that to discourse fully of them would require a volume alone. And others having
written at large of them both in English and Latin, I shall not so much as
mention any thing save only the sweating vault being one of the grots called
the i. e. The Baths of T^itoli.
Bagne de Tritoli. It is a long and narrow passage like the entry into some
room, the upper part whereof is so hot, that a man cannot endure to walk
upright, being then in danger to be stifled by the hot and suffocating vapor
with which the upper part of the Vault is filled: the lower part though not
cold is yet tolerable. Indeed one would not think there could be so great a
difference in so small a distance. He therefore that goes in there is
necessitated to stoop low; for if you do but hold up your hand it sweats
suddenly. We observed that of the lower part of this vault where it was cool
the sides were a firm stone, but of the upper part where it was hot, a soft,
friable, yet unctuous yellow clay. It seemed to us to have a mixture of sulphur
and fixed salt deliquated in it, but we made no trial of it by fire or
otherwise. Where this stratum or region of clay begins there precisely does the
heat begin; so that where the region of clay goes lower there you must stoop
lower to avoid the heat. In this hot steam there is a watery vapor contained,
as appears by the drops notwithstanding all the heat condensed on the sides of
the vault as on an Alembic head. As we returned we viewed the new Mountain,
called by some i. e. The Mountain of ashes or cinders.
Monte di cenere, raised by an Earthquake September. 29. 1538, of about an
hundred foot perpendicular altitude; though others make it much higher,
according to Stephanus Pighius it is a mile ascent to the top, and 4 miles
round at the foot. We judged it nothing near so great. The people say it bears
nothing; nothing of any use of profit I suppose they mean, else I am sure there
grows Heath, Myrtle, Mastich-tree, and other shrubs upon it. It is a spungy
kind of earth, and makes a great sound under a man's feet that stamps upon it.
The same Earthquake threw up so much earth stones, and ashes as quite filled up
the Lacus Lucrinus, so that there is nothing now left of it but a fenny meadow.
In our return from Pozzuolo we viewed the mountain called Solfatara, anciently
Campi Phlegraei, which continually burns. On the top of the mountain is a large
excavated oval place like an Amphitheater, in length 1500 foot, in breadth
1000; where the burning is. There are several holes or vents where the smoke
issues out, as out of a furnace. We gathered perfect flowers of sulphur to
appearance, and salt-Armoniac sticking to the mouths of these vents. If you
thrust a Sword or any iron instrument into one of the holes where the smoke
comes out, and suddenly draw it back again, you shall see it all over bedewed
or thick set with drops of water. Whence it is manifest that this smoke is not
only a dry exhalation, but has also good quantity of the vapor of water mixed
with it. We observed that these flores of Sulphur would not burn, nor easily
melt over the fire, by reason of the admixture of some heterogeneous body with
them. The stones and earth of this mountain are crusted over with these flowers
of Brimstone, which they gather and distill Brimstone out of. As one walks here
the earth makes a noise, as if it were hollow underneath, and one may perfectly
hear as it were the hissing and boiling of some melted mineral, metal or other
liquor just under ones feet. One that should see this smoke, hear this noise
and feel the heat would wonder that the mountain should not suddenly break out
into a flame. This great hollow above was I suppose excavated partly by force
of the burning, the earth sinking down, and partly by paring away the top to
distill for Brimstone.

Five miles distant from Naples is the mountain Vesuvius, Vesuvius.
so famous in all ages for its burning. The ground all about the sides of it we
found covered with cinders and pumice stones, which had been cast out in the
time of the burnings. We observed also great channels, like gulls made by
sudden torrents and land-floods, which they told us were made by water thrown
out at the top of the mountain in the conflagrations. Toward the top grew very
few plants. Acetosa ovilla where nothing else was to be seen: A little lower
grew Colutea Scorpioides and some shrubs of Poplar. Near the top the ascent was
steep, and very toilsome to get up. Upon the very top is a great pit or hollow
in form of an Amphitheater, of about a mile round, caused by the fires blowing
up the upper part of the mountain several times with great violence. There are
still about the bottom of this great cavity some small spiracula of smoke, but
inconsiderable and which seemed not to threaten any future eruption. We viewed
the cave called Grotta di cane near the Lago Agnano. The Grotta di cane.
This Grot is narrow and short. Whatever others have written or said to the
contrary, a man may without any great prejudice go into and continue in it a
long time, even in the further end of it, as some of us did above an hours
space. The venenose vapor (whether it be purely sulphurous or also Arsenical)
ascends not a foot from the ground, but so high as it ascends one feels his
feet and legs hot. If you hold your head down near the ground where the vapor
is, you shall presently find a fierce sulphurous twinge in your nose, just as
if you held your head over burning brimstone, or more violent, which makes a
man stagger at first stroke, and stifles before one be aware. We carried with
us a dog, which by holding his nose down we almost killed suddenly; and then
throwing him into the lake to try whether that would recover him (as is
generally believed) the dog being not lively enough to swim was there drowned.
I believe if we had left him in the air he would have recovered. We then put in
a pullet, which was mortified immediately; next a frog, which held not out
long; and last of all a serpent, which lived about half an hour. The steam, if
you hold a candle where it comes, presently puts it out. I believe this vapor
arises not only in this grot precisely, but also all heerabout, as I am
confident would be found were there other grots dug out of the hill near it.

Going to this grot; The Grot or Hole through Mount Pausilypus
we passed through the vault or artificial highway wherewith the mountain
Pausilypus is perforated, made by one Cocceius in 15 days. It is said to be a
mile in length, but we judged it not above half an English mile. It is highest
at each end, and lowest in the middle, and yet there about 12 foot high; broad
enough for two carts meeting to pass one another. About the middle of the Vault
it is so dark (no light now coming in but at the ends) that those who meet
cannot see one another; and therefore lest they should justle or fall foul one
upon upon another, they that go toward the Sea cry Alla marina, and they which
go into the Country cry Alla montagna, so each take their left hand, and pass
commodiously. The ports may be seen from end to end, and any where in the
midway; but in cloudy weather it is so dark in the middle that a man can
scarce see his hands held up to the light. This road is much frequented; though
the bottom be stone yet is it very dusty. Near the end toward Naples we saw a
window at the top. They that write of this grot mention two windows made by
Alphonsus the first King of Naples; but we saw only this, which does yield but
little light.

The Plants we took more especial notice of about Naples were these, Plants
observed about Naples.
Trifolium corniculatum incanum maritimum majus; Lotus siliquis Ornithopodii;
Medica orbiculata minor; Medica doliata spinosa; Jacea purpurea maritima
capitulo spinoso Neopolitana; Rhamnus primus Clus. Stoechas citrina altera
tenuifolia sive Italica J. B. Linaria odorata Monspessulana; Medica marina; In
litoribus arenosis passim. On the Rocks about Baiae, Puteoli, etc. Cytisus
incanus, siliquis falcatis; Acantbus sativus; Laurus Tinus caerulea bacca;
Acacia altera trifolia Ger. Gnaphalium maritimum; Sonchus Creticus foliis
laciniatis C. B. Chrysanthemi Cretici duae aut tres differentiae; Faba Veterum
serratis foliis Park. Moly parvum caul triangulo; Centaurium luteum novum Col.
Cerinthe minor flore luteo; Lychnis sylvestris hirta Lob. Lychnis montana
viscosa alba latifolia C. B. Gramen tremulum maximum; Lagopus maximus Ger. On
the mountain Vesuius or near to it, Helianthemum flore maculoso Col. Trifolium
stellatum C. B. Vicia seu Lathyrus gramineo folio, flore coccineo; Colutea
scorpioides; Lotus arbor; Arbutus; Linariae graminea floribus congestis
purpureis; Linaria purpurea magna J. B. Genista Hispanica. As you go up from
the City to the Cloister of the Camaldulenses, Martagon Chymistarum Lob.
Aristolochiarotunda; Orobus sylvaticus Viciae foliis C. B. Laurus;
Chrysanthemum Bellidis folio; Digitalis lutea vel pallida parvo flore C. B.
Hemionitis multifida; Horminum luteum glutinosum sive Colus Jovis; Trifolium
bituminosum, quo nihil frequentius per totam Italiam, and Siciliam; Cytisus
hirsutus J. B. Whole woods of Chestnut; Genista Hispanica; Colutea tum vesicaria
tum scorpioides; Ferula Lob. Genista tinctoria Hispanica; Vicia floribus
pallide luteis amplissimis; After montanus lutens Salicis glabro folio;
Millefolium odoratum; Hesperis sylvestris latifolia flo. albo parvo Park.
Androsaemum foetidum sive Tragium, Speculum veneris majus; Pancratium Lob. In
litore Neopolitano, Lotus corniculata siliquis singularibus vel binis, tenuis
J. B. Tribulus terrestris copiosissime; Hyoscyamus albus; Juncus cyperoides
Maritimus Ad. Lob. In arenosis maritimis Italiae and Siciliae frequens. Mala
insana; Italis Melongena, Neapoli in foro olitorio venalia; Cucumis flexuosus
anguinus Lob. ibidem. Cucumeres Italis dicuntur Citrulli; Melones aquatici
cucumere. Cucurbita anguina Lob. Malus Limonia fructu parvo, Limoncelles dicto,
Neapoli and Messinae. Fructus nucleis caret, hoc est raros nucleos habet.

In the night time we saw many Fisher-boats out at Sea with a light at one end
of them, to invite the Fish to follow the Boat, where stands a fellow with an
instrument in his hand like a mole-spear ready to strike them.

In the same Vessel which brought us to Naples we began our voyage to Messina
in Sicily, April 29 Messina.
where we arrived May 2. We sailed in sight of the Aeolides or Vulcaniae
insulae, two of which, viz. Stromboli and Vulcano, do still burn; and Stromboli
with that rage sometimes that no man dares live upon it. As we passed by in the
nightime we saw it flame. It is difficult to enter in at the mouth of the
strait by the Faro of Messina, because of the current, which runs here
violently sometimes toward Calabria, sometimes toward Sicily: so that Mariners
who have not often sailed this strait are forced to hire a Pilot of Messina to
conduct them in; who for the most part when they see any Vessel coming go out
in boats to meet it, and offer their service to guide it into the Harbor, for
which they will be well paid; our Captain being forced to give ten pieces of
Eight. The Haven of Messina is very commodious and secure, compassed almost
round with the City on one side and a narrow languet or neck of land on the
other, resembling a large Fishpond. The City makes a goodly show as one comes
to it by Sea, the houses all along the shore being built of Freestone, tall
and uniform, and having a fair broad Key before them. But the streets within
are narrow, not well paved, nor the houses near so fair. So that it is a
Proverb, A Mess^na Assai polvere, pulce and putane. At Messina you have dust,
fleas, and whores store. This City pretends to be the principal and metropolis
of Sicily, [ Regni caput] and will be no means give place to Palermo. The
Viceroy is obliged to reside 18 months here, and 18 at Palermo. They stand
much upon their privileges granted them by Charles the fifth Emperor; and one
privilege they have, not to show their privileges. They contend earnestly to
have the staple or monopoly of Silk here, and had lately obtained a grant
thereof from Spain: but the Palermitans seeing how much this would redound to
their prejudice, have got it reversed. It seems formerly all the Silk made in
Sicily was vended at Messina, but by degrees Palermo has got part of this
trade to its self, and now pleads prescription for it. There is a great
emulation and enmity between the Palermitans and Messanese, which involves the
whole Island; some Cities taking part with one, and some with the other. The
titles the Messanese give their City in their public instruments and writings
are the Noble and Exemplary City of Messina. The Inhabitants are none of the
most civil, but extraordinarily proud, and ready to expel the Viceroy if he
displeases them. The King of Spain has 4 Castles in and about this City, and
the Citizens as many in their hands. The Government of Messina
The City Gates stand open all night, so that its free for any man to enter in
and go out at pleasure. Their government among themselves is by six Jurats,
four of the Gentry, and two of the Citizens. They are chosen after this manner.
Every year there is a certain number who do ambire magistratum, or (as they
phrase it) concur to come in cap; sometimes more, sometimes fewer. The
Gentlemen choose by themselves, and the Citizens by themselves. The names of all
the Gentlemen of above 25 years of age, and likewise of all the Artisans and
Tradesmen, are written in little scrolls of paper, and those rolled up and cast
upon a table. Then comes in the Kings delegate and takes up of each heap of
these scrolls to the number of 36, and those are the Electors. These Electors
are brought into a room where are boxes set according to the number of
Competitors, and have balls given them blue and white; the blue affirmative,
and the white negative; and they give to every one of the Candidates their
suffrages as they please. Those eight of the Noblemen and four of the Citizens
which have most suffrages are elected, and come in cap. Now on the first of May
these 12 have their names written in little scrolls of paper put in a cap; and
a little boy puts his hand in, and takes out one by one to the number of six;
and those six are the Jurats for that year. The Jurats for the Nobility though
they be the greater number, yet can they do nothing without the consent of one
of the Jurats for the Citizens. After all this stir these Jurats have but
little power, nothing to do either in civil or criminal causes of any moment.

Of Plants we found here on the baich or languet of land between the Haven of
Messina and the Fretum Siculum. Plants growing about Messina.
Peucedanum majus Italicum; Linaria angustifolia flore luteo, vulgapersimilis;
Sideritis verticillis spinosis J. B. Faenugraeco sylvestri Tragi in quibusdam
accedens planta J. B. Some call this plant Vicia Sesamacea Apula; I think it
might be fitly titled Glaux peregrina annua; Vicia maritima multiflora alba,
Messanensis nobis dicta; Spina Solstitialis flore connivente, capitulis
sessilibus; An Solstitialis mitior Apula Col? Thlaspi clypeatum hieracifolium
majus Park. Trifolium stellatum C. B. Polygonum niveum; Securidaca siliquis
planis dentatis Ger. Trifolium capitulis globosis sine pediculis caulibus
adnexis; In Anglia hanc speciem nupet invenimus. Gramen tremulum maximum;
Melilotus Messanensis procumbens, folliculis flavicantibus, per maturitatem,
rugosis, sublongis, spica florum breviore, verum seminibus grandioribus quam
Meliloti vulgaris: Aegilops Narbonensis Lob. Graminis Alopecuroidis nova
species: Ornithopodium majus; Ammi vulgar; Cyminum sylvestre alterum
Dioscoridis Italorum Lob. Sysirynchium majus Ger.

In other places, especially on the hills above the City, Ricinus sive Palma
Christi in the hedges plentifully, both here and in other places of Sicily.
Tordylium sive Seseli Creticum minus Park. Convolvulus Althaeae folio; Alsine
folio oblongo serrato, flore caeruleo J. B. Valeriana Mexicana; Arbutus;
Sonchus lanatus Dalechampii; Geranium cicutae folio, acu longissima C. B.
Lupinus sylvestris flore caeruleo; Lupinus flore luteo; Senecionis an
Chrysanthemi species folio Bellidis; Calix Senecionis calicem exact refert,
verum Flos circulum habet foliorum in margin ad modum Jacobaeae; Plantula
tenera est, radicem habens fibrosam, folia Bellidis. Lychnis parva, folio
angusto, flore rubello. Ab aliis facile distinguitur, quod calyx floris longus
sit and gracilis, ipsaque florum petala ad unguem prope fissa velut Alsines.
Trifolium halicacabu^^ sive vesicarium J. B. Hedysarum clypeatum Ger. flore
purpureo and albo; Trifolium bituminosum, ubique; Lotus siliqua quadrata Ger.
Gladiolus Narbonensis Lob. Medica orbiculata lAevis major and minor. Medica
fructu ovali echinato; Scorpioides Bupleuri folio Ger. Anagyris foetida;
Crataegonon seu Euphrasia erecta flore luteo magno; Radix huic non simplex sed
surculosa, annua. Caulis erectus cubitalis aut etiam altior, quadratus,
nonnihil lanuginosus. Foli^ plerunque ex adverso bina, longa, angusta, rarius
dentata, and omnino foliis Crataegoni Euphrosynes facie similia. Spica florum
in summo congesta, quadrata, lanuginosa and nonnihil etiam viscida. Flores
lutei, ampli, cucullati, figura florum Ladani segetum.

Crataeogonon erectum flore vario ex albo and purpureo; Priori simillimum est,
and in eo praecipue dissert, quod non sit adeo procerum, quod caules and
aliquando etiam margines foliorum rubeant, quod flores minores sint and coloris
diversi; cuculli v. g. rubent, Labia medio albent, ad margines rubore
diluuntur. Possent hae plantae ad Cristas galli reduci; nos in catalogo ad
Melampyra retulimus. Holosteum Plantagini simile J. B. Gramen dactylon gemina
spica Asphodelus major ramofus flore albo J. B. After luteus foliis ad florem
rigidis C. B. Trachelium parvum, folio Bellidis subrotundo, Radix ei alba,
simplex, lignosa, annua. Caulis erectus, striatus. Folia alternatim posita,
subrotunda, sine pediculis caulibus adnexa. Flores Trachelii. Trifolium album
rectum hirsutum valde J. B. Dorycnii species; Medica orbiculata fructu circa
margines dentato, an Medica coronata Cherleri J. B. Lychnis ad Pseudomelanthium
accedens, glabra fere. Radico nititur alba, lignosa, unde and planta annua esse
videtur. Caulis nunc simplex ab eadem radice exurgit, nunc multiplex, vel
saltem ab imo statim ramosus, pro ratione soli in quo nascitur, geniculatus.
Folia ad genicula ex adverso bina, viridia, longa, angusta, Graminis
leucanthemi foliis nonnihil similia, raris pilis hirsuta. Flores in
summitatibus caulis and ramorum pediculis longis insident, quinquefolii pallide
purpurei, vice staminum in medio habentes calycem equinque foliolis in summo
bifidis compositum, ut Lychnidis sylvestris flores. Perianthium seu calix
floris striatus velut Pseudomelanthii. Semina nondum maturuerant. Absinthium
arborescens; Paronychia sive Alsinefolia incana J. B. Androsaemum faetidum
Park, i. e. Tragium; Acanth^s; sativus; Sedum medium flore albo, apicibus
staminum luteis; Ferula Lob. Thapsia latifolia Hispanica Park. latifolia P.
Castello in Catal. Messanensi. Hyssopus sylvat. Halimus Lob. prope Pharon
Messan abundat, item in arenosis ad maris litus, versus meridiem, Agnus castus
ibidem; Oleander, ad aquarum rivulos frequens; Sorbus vulgaris domestica;
Myrtus angustifolia; Thymelaea Ger. Hieracium calyce barbato Col. Chondrilla
saxatilis viscosa, caul (...) Col. Acetosa Ocymi folio Neapolitana (...) Col.
ubique in Sicilia; Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta; Linaria altera botryodes
montana Col. frequens in montosis; Asteris species, an Baccharis Col? Daucus 3
Dioscoridis Col. Carduus Chrysanthemus Narbonensis Ger. Carduus chrysanthemus
Dod. Carlina sylvestris vulgaris Clus. Psyllium vulgar; Kali majus semine
cochleato; Lotus arbor; Cotinus Chamaemespilo similis; Valeriana rubra Dod.
Delphinium sylvestre; Antirrhinum luteum Ger. Colutea scorpioides; Chrysocome
capitulis conglobatis Ger. Alsine folio crasso P. Castle. Lanaria sive
Struthium Dioscoridis Imp^rato J. B. upon the Rocks. Botrys vulgaris; Marrubium
album fatuum P. Castle. Acarna flore purpuro-rubente patulo C. B. Millefolium
odoratum; Sedum echinatum vel stellatum flore albo J. B. Hyacinthus comosus
Ger. Anagallis caeruleo flore, in Sicilia and meridionali part Italiae non
minus frequens est quam flore phoeniceo. Asparagus petraeus sive Corruda Ger.
Smilax aspera; Antirrhinum minus slo. carneo seu pallido, rictu striato;
Atractylis, in Italy and Sicily most common. Heliotropium majus; In barren
Fields and among rubbish every where. Blitum rubrum minus; Buglossum
angustifolium; Carduus galactites J. B. i. e. leucographus tenuifolius
M^ssanensis P. Castle. Cerinthe flo. pallide luteo; Chondrilla viminea Lob.
Cicer sativum; Plurimae Astragali, Lathyri and Viciae species, quas tempore
exclusi non satis accurate distinximus; Cymbalaria Italica; Cucumis asininus;
qui and hic and pluribus Italiae, Melitae, Siciliaeque locis ruderatis frequens
occurrit. Hyoscyamus albus major and minor, which sort only we found in Italy
and Sicily; Juncus acutus maritimus capitulis rotundis C. B. Stoebe Salamantica
prima Clusiii Park. Caucalis maritima supina echinato magno fructu; Ad maris
litus ubique tam in Sicilia quam in Italia, Nigella arvensis; Oxys lutea; Ger.
Reseda major flore albo; Rhamnus salicis folio; i. e. Oleaster Germanicus
Cordi, ut vult P. Castle. Satureia S. Juliani Ger. Scrophularia urticae folio;
Linaria pusilla, procumbens latifolia, flore albo, rictu luteo. Radix huic
simplex quidem, verum multis fibris majusculis stipata, sublutea, annua.
Cauliculi exinde emergunt plures infirmi, rotundi, glauci. Folia Polygoni
foliorum figura sed minora, glauca, nunc bina ex adverso nunc terna and
interdum etiam quaterna simul ad eundem exortum, and proinde ramuli nunc
singuli, nunc bini, nunc terni simul. Flores longis pedicellis subnixi, albi,
rictu luteo, calcaribus tenuibus longissimis; pars illa floris quae erigitur,
in medio ^^ssa in duas velut auriculas dividitur. Florem quinque circunstant
foliola viridia pro calice. Postquam flos evanuit pediculus ejus deorsum
incurvatur. Vasculum seminale rotundum apparet, Anagallidis vasculo simile;
Verum si curiose spectetur, duos habet lobos seminibus repletos pusillis,
ruffis. Frequens est Messanae in vineis and hortis. Quam primum semen
maturescit vasculum seminale dehiscit, adeo ut difficile sit ejus semina
colligere. Hyssopoides major flore grandiore; Melissae quaedam species non
descr. Tithymalus arboreus; Tithymalus folio longo glauco, caul rubro,
seminibus ver^ueosis; Teucrium arborescens lucidum; Iberis Cardamantica;
Alaternus; Elatine flore caeruleo; Cyperus paniculis squamosis; which I take to
have been Trasi, but we regarded not the root of it. Anthyllis leguminosa flore
rubro; Erica ramulis per intervall^ ternis; Chamaecistus annuus flore luteo,
Vrtica Romana, passim; Securidaca minor Ad. Lagopus altera angustifolia Lob.
Coronopus foliis acutis in margin dentatis.

And now that I have named so many Strangers, let no man imagine that there are
no Plants common to Sicily and England; for that is so far from being true,
that I believe there be but few Plants growing in England but may somewhere or
other be found in Sicily. There is in this respect great difference between
Northern and Southern Countries, the Southern having a vast number of species
which the Northern miss, whereas the Northern have but few which are wanting in
the Southern. And the reason is obvious, because there are places in Southern
Countries which agree with the Northern in the temperature of the air; as for
example, the sides and tops of mountains: but no places in the Northern which
have like temperature of air with the Southern. Form this experiment I have
made in comparing England with Sicily I am induced to believe, that there are
are scarce any two Countries in this Continent so far remote the one from the
other, but they have some common plants, however it be thought there be none
common to America and this Continent; which I cannot but wonder at, and wish it
were more diligently enquired into.

We hired a Feluca to carry us to Malta and back again. May 5.
The first day being May 6. we had a brisk gale of wind, Catania.
which brought us into Catania, 60 miles distant from Messina, by 3 of the
clock afternoon. Here as in Spain we were fain to go into the Market to buy all
our provision of bread, meat, and drink our selves. This is but a mean Town,
only some good Cloisters there are in it. We heard much of S. Agatha their
peculiar protecteress. May 7. We proceeded as far as Syracusa, 40 miles by the
way we had in prospect Augusta, Augusta.
famous for the goodness of the wine there made, and sent abroad to Messina,
Malta, and other places.

Syracusa that now is stands in a Peninsula, Syracusa
and is only that part of the ancient Syracusae called (...) It is at present
but a small City, indifferently well built and thinly inhabited. It is
fortified with very strong walls and bastions, especially toward the land.
These works they told us were made by the Knights Hospitallers, when they were
driven out of Rhodes by the Turks. They then intended to have settled
themselves here, but the Emperor Charles V. not liking their company in Sicily,
gave them Malta. About a mile and half from the present City we saw some ruins
of the ancient Syracusae, among other things the rudera of an Amphitheater. We
saw also what is commonly showed to all Strangers, The Grot called Dionysius
his ear.
the Grot at present called orecchio di Dionysio or Dionysius his ear, becuase
it is hewn out of the Rock in fashion of a man's ear. They fancy that Dionysius
had a Chamber above this Cave or Grot, wherein he sat and overheard whatever
was spoken or but whispered in the Grot below, where he used to put suspected
persons together in prison. The Grot is cut out of the side of a high Cliff or
Rock, and is it self very high, and goes a little winding, but is not long. In
our return from Malta we entered into and viewed one of the ancient (...) or
burying places, The ancient (...) now called Catacumbe.
which they all Catacumbe, and of which there are several both here and in
Malta. That we entered into was of S. Antonio's Church. Heerin were many vaulted
or arched walks hewn out of the Rock, and on each hand all along other vaults
at right angles with them, the floor or bottom of which lateral vaults was some
foot and half higher then the floor of the main walk, and all hewn into troughs
or loculi, wherein they deposited their dead bodies; in some of these were 20
loculi, in some more, in some less. In this coemeterium at intervals are round
rooms or halls cupoloed, where several of the forementioned walks meet: for the
whole is a kind of maze or labyrinth, and very difficult to thread, being of a
huge extent: so that I believe there were many thousands of bodies laid up
here. These cuniculi or vaulted walks are in many places eathed and stopped up
by stones and rubbish fallen from the roof. They told us that the Vault of S.
Lucia reached as far as Catania under ground, which though it be a monstrous
untruth, yet we may thence gather, Multum esse quod vero supersit.

The wind being contrary we were forced to make May 8.
use of our oars, Capo Passaro.
and rowed as far as Capo Passaro, anciently called Promontorium Pachynum, 40
miles distant from Syracuse. Upon the utmost point of land stands a little
Castle held by a Garrison of about 20 men. This Castle stands now in a little
Island, made so by the force of the Sea, which not long since brake it off from
the land. The wind being contrary and blowing a stiff gale made the Sea so
rough, that we dared not venture out, but were forced to rest here 2 nights.
Howbeit we entertained our time pleasantly enough in searching out and
describing of plants, which this little Island afforded great variety of.
Plants observed in the Island of Capo Passaro.
v. g. Lotus siliqua quadrata Ger. Lotus siliquis Ornithopodii; Lotus edulis
Creticus Park. forte Lotopisum Belli, which we found also about Naples, though
it be not there mentioned. Lentiscus; Chamaerrhiphes sive Palma minor; Limonium
folio sinuato Ger. Chrysanthemum Cretioum Ger. Aster luteus foliis ad florem
rigidis C. B. Medica magna turbinata J. B. Auricula muris Cameraii, Medica
doliata spinosa; Gnaphalium roseum Park. Hedysarum clypeatum minus flore
purpureo; Onobrychis fructu echinato minor C. B. Fiores huic parvi purpurei,
semen grande; Trifolium halicacabum sive vesicarium; Asphodelus major ramosus
flore albo; Asph. luteus, sive Hasta regia; Asp. minor Clus. Echium procumbens
flore parvo caeruleo; ornithogalum spicatum Ger. Jacea lutea capite spinoso;
Carduns lacteus peregrinus Came. an potius Silybum majus annuum Park? Carduns
galactites J. B. Teucrinm Baeticum Ger. Tragopogon perenne foliis angustis
incanis, floribus dilute caeruleis, an potius Scorzonera dicenda? Sanamunda
tertia Clus. Anonis viscosa, spinis carens lutea major C. B. Convolvulus
coeruleus minor, folio oblongo Ger. Ammi vulgar and foliis mag incisis Meda
orbiculata major J. B. Tordylium majus; Scorpioides Bupleuri folio; Crithmum
spinosum sive Pastinaca marina; Passerina Lob. Aparine semine Coriandri
Saccharato; Trifolium stellatum C. B. Cerinthe flore luteo; Melissa peregrina
flore albo, Cortex ramulorum antiquiorum (caules enim perennant) cinereus,
juniorum ruber. Caules quadrati. Folia bina ex adverso, quam Melissae minora,
pediculis satis longis subnixa. Flores cucullati albi, cum aliqua tamen ruboris
mixtura. Vascula seminalia qualia Moluccae laevis fere, excepto quod in 5
lacinias dividantur, duabus inferius, tribus superius sitis. Semina itidem
qualia Moluccae. Odor plantae gravis. Nigella arvensis; Sysirynchinum majus;
Limonium parvum Narbonense oleaefolium; Cichorea spinosa Cretica Ponae; Daucus
lucidus; Asparagus petraeus sive Corruda; Tragos sive Vva marina major
herbariorum Lob. Beta Cretica spinosa Park. Trifolium capitulis glomeratis,
glomerulis spinosis; Linum sylvestre caeruleum; Caltha arvensis; Atractylis;
Cruciata minima muralis Col. Coronopus folils acutis in margin dentatis, i. e.
Plantagini affinis Bibinella Siciliae herbula, J. B. Malva flo. carneo minore;
Ex radice alba simplici plures emittit caules humi procumbentes, hirsutos,
superna part rubentes. Folia ima subrotunda, longis pediculis annexa; quae in
caulibus sunt in tres aut quinque lacinias dissecta, hirsuta and circa margines
crenata. Flores parvi, quinquefolii, carnei. Semina qualia malvae vulgaris;
Alaternus; Phillyrea latifolia seu serrata secunda Clus. Glaux peregrina annua;
Iva moschata Monspeliensium; Asparagus sylvest. spinosus Clus. Sedum minus
luteum ramulis reflexis; Geranium procumbens Althaeoe folio.

We put to Sea again, May 10.
but the wind still continuing contrary, and the Sea very rough, when we were
gotten about half over the channel, we were forced to return back again to the
primo terreno of Sicily, viz. the Castle of Puzallu. The greatness of the waves
not permitting us to come ashore there, we rowed 6 miles further South, and put
in at a little Cove called the Harbor of Punto Cerciolo. Punto Cerciolo.
The weather continuing foul we were detained here 3 days, having no other
shelter then a pitiful small hut o^ two, which the two Sentinels (who stand
constantly at this point to watch and give notice to the Country of the coming
of Corsairs) had set up for themselves to creep into in stormy weather. We
should have been glad of fresh straw to lie in, having nothing in our kennel
but old short straw, so full of fleas that we were not able to sleep in it. Our
diet was the blood and flesh of Sea-tortoises, that our Seamen took by the
way, and bread we brought along with us. Wine we got at house about half a mile
off our lodging, but when our bread failed we were fain to send 8 miles for
more: Fish or flesh we could get none. This stop gave us leisure enough to
search the shores and neighboring Country for plants; Plants found about
Punto Cerc^ol
of which we found, Panax Herculeum majus Ger. Cinara sylvestris Ger. Ruta
sylvestris; Limonium elegans Raumolfii; Beta Cretica spinosa Park. Medica
orbiculata fructu minore; Med. orbiculata elegans, fructu circum oras rugoso;
Hypericum foliis parvis crispis seu sinuatis; Perfoliata angustifolia montana
Col. Siliqua arbor seu Panis S. Joannis; Medica marina; Anonis lutea parva
procumbens. In arenosis nascitur radice alba, longa, simplici, fibris nunc
paucioribus nunc pluribus and majoribus donata Folia ei parva, tripartito
divisa, pediculis nullis, verum duae inferiores parts cauli adjacent ut in
Lotis fit, ac proinde haec planta eodem modo trifolia est quo Loti
quinquefoliae. Quinetiam folia sature viridia sunt, in margin eleganter
dentata, alternatim posita. Flores lutei Anonidis vulgaris. Siliquae breves,
tumidae, subrotundae, duobus intus ordinibus seminum figura lienis praeditorum.
In arenosis maris litoribus circa Siciliam frequens, v. g. prope Cataniam,
circa Promontorium Pachynum and hoc in loco. Cistus mas 4 folio oblongo, albido
J. B. Lotus flore luteo, corniculis articulatis. Radix ei simplex alba, in
nonnullis tamen plantis ima part in fibras spargitur. Cauliculi plures in
terram procumbentes. Folia glauca, pentaphylla si auriculas ad caulem hinc inde
appositas adnumeres. Flores parvi, lutei, Trifolii corniculati sed minores, ad
nodos nunc singuli nunc bini, and interdum etiam terni. Siliquae graciles,
longae, contortae in spiram seu corniculatae, articulatae, semina oblonga in
singulis internodiis continentes. Caucalis maritima J. B. Smyrnium Creticum;
Gladiolus Narbonensis; Polium montanum album; Saxifragia Venetorum Ad. Psyllium
vulgar; Acanthium Illyricum; Telephium scorpioides Anguillarae: Tragos sive
uva marina major J. B. Opuntia marina, in litus rejecta, and many others before
observed in other places.

The wind ceasing we put to Sea again, May 13.
and had a very good passage over to Malta. The manner of taking Tortoises.
By the way we saw our Seamen take several Tortoises on this manner. When they
espy a Tortoise floting on the top of the water (as they can easily do at a
good distance) with as little noise as they can possibly they bring their boat
up close to him; then they either catch him with their hands and draw him up
into the boat, or if they cannot get near enough to do so, one leaps out of the
boat into the Sea, and turns the Tortoise on his back, and then with ease
drives him before him up to the boat; the Tortoise being not able to turn
himself or swim away on his back. They say (and it is not unlikely) that the
Tortoise while he flotes thus upon the water sleeps; which is the reason why
they are so still and make so little noise in bringing their boat up to him.
Bernacleshells growing upon the back of a Tortoise.
One of these Tortoises which they caught had two great bunches of those they
call Bernacle-shells sticking or growing to his back, and some of them the
largest and fairest of that kind which we have seen. As for that opinion of a
bird breeding in them (which some have affirmed with much confidence, (and of
which Michael Meyerus has written a whole Book) it is without all doubt false
and frivolous. The Bernacles which are said to be bred in them being hatched of
eggs of their own laying like other birds; the Hollanders in their third Voyage
to discover the Northeast passage to Cathaia and China, in 80 degrees, 11
minutes of Northern latitude, having found two Islands, in one of which they
observed a great number of these Geese sitting on their eggs, etc. as Dr.
Johnson relates out of Pontanus. As for these shells, they are a kind of
Balanus marinus, as Fabius Columna proves, never coming to be other then what
they are, but only growing in bigness as other shells do. All the ground of
this fancy (as I conceive) is because this fish has a bunch of cirri, somewhat
resembling a tuft of Feathers, or the tail a Bird, which it sometimes puts out
into the water, and draws back again. We were much surprised to find of this
shellfish in these Seas so southernly and far from the scene of the
Bernaclefable.

I shall now set down what plants we found about Catania and Syracusa. About
Catania, Plants observed about Catania and Syracuse.
Scammonea Monspeliacoe affinis Park. Plumbago Plinii; Aganus castus; which two
we observed also in many other places. Cruciata marina, Anonis marina
procumbens flore luteo, jam descripta; Sedum minimum non acre totum rubrum,
flore hexaphyllo purpureo. Upon Mount Aetua we found Tragacantha C. B. Toward
the top of the Mountain we observed Barberry-trees growing plentifully, which
is a rare shrub in hot Countries, and which we found no where else in Italy or
Sicily. At Messina they showed us for a rare plant the common Goose-berry bush.
About Syracusa, Thymum Creticum Ger. Origanum flore albo, capitulis squammatis
rotundis; Verbascum 4 Matthioli. The same kind of Melissa we found about
Messina, and have already described; Teucrium Baeticum; Jacea lutea capitulis
spinosis; Lagopus quaedam procumbens spica longiore; Anonis purpurea minima
supina non spinosa. Many others we might doubtless have found had it been safe
for us to have searched the Rocks near this City.

OF MALTA.
THE Island of Malta is 20 miles long, 12 miles broad, and 60 miles in circuit;
distant from the primo terreno or nearest part of Sicily 60 miles; from the
Cape of Calipia anciently called Promontorium Mercurii, the nearest point of
the Continent of Africa, 200 miles, (as diverse of the most skilful and
experienced Pilots did affirm to Abela for an undoubted truth) from the Cape of
Spartivento in Italy but 190. So that upon account of vicinity it is rather to
be attributed to Europe than Africa; especially if we allow Sicily to have been
of old time united to and so part of the Continent. The reason why others make
it a member of Africa is because the present Inhabitants of the Country speak
a kind of Moresco or Arabic.

The old City, called Citta notabile, situate about the middle of the Island,
has 35 degrees, 15 minutes of Northern latitude, and the longest day there is
of 14 hours, 52 minutes.

I am not ignorant that Heylin and others, who reckon this among the Isles of
Africa, place it nearer the Coast of Barbary, assign it less latitude, and
allow the longest day no more then 14 hours; but I do in these and other
particulars follow the more accurate observations of Johannes Franciscus Abela,
a learned man and native of this Island, in his Malta illustrata, written in
Italian and published in Malta, Anno 1646. in folio.

The whole Island from the shallowness of its soil, there being in few places
above two foot depth of of earth before you come to firm stone; and from the
lowness of its situation, not much elevated above the level of the water and
having no considerable hill in it, seems to have been in the most ancient times
nothing else but a great Rock, wholly overwhelmed and covered with the Sea;
especially if we consider the multitude of Sea shells of all sorts, Sharks
teeth, vertebres of Thornbacks and other fish bones petrified found all over
the Island even in the highest parts of it, and most remote from the shore. For
that these were formed by some plastic power in the stone-quarries, being
nothing else but the effects or productions of nature sporting her self in
imitation of the parts and shells of these animals, I can hardly be induced to
believe; nature (which indeed is nothing else but the ordinary power of God)
not being so wanton and toyish as to form such elegant figures without further
end of design than her own pastime and diversion. But a very likely thing it
is, that the Sea being shallow above this Rock for some ages before it came to
be uncovered, there should great beds of Shellfish harbor and breed in so
convenient a place, and the water leaving them their shells remain and
petrifie. I confess its hard to imagine, how the carcasses of so many Sharks
should come to be lodged here as by the multitude of teeth that have been for
so many years past, and are still daily dug up, we must needs grant; unless
perchance they remain of the heads of such Sharks as were caught and eaten by
the Fishermen, who it is likely after the discovery of this Rock frequented
here and made it a station for fishing before it came to be inhabited.

To this difficulty Mr. Steno returns answer in these particulars, 1. That such
Sharks or Sea dogs have each of them 60 teeth and more, and that all the time
they live they breed new teeth. 2. That the Sea agitated by the winds is wont
of protrude thosebobodies it meets with toward some one place, and there heap
them together. 3. That Sharks swim in great troops or sholes, and consequently
that the teeth of many of them may have been left in one place. 4. That in the
Malta earth besides these Sharks teeth are found also sundry Cochle-shells; so
that if the number of teeth should incline a man to ascribe their production to
the earth, on the other hand, the make of the same teeth, and the abundance of
them in every animal, and the earth like the bottom of the Sea, and other
marine bodies found in the same place do favor the contrary opinion.

The soil, The nature of the Soil.
notwithstanding the rockiness and shallowness of it, has been by the Ancients
celebrated for fertility; Fertilis est Melite sterili vicina Cosyroe Insula.
Ovid. Fast. But undeservedly if we understand it of Corn; for there is not much
Wheat sown here, and that we saw upon the grounds was but thin and slight. And
though Barley be their chief crop, and of which the Country people make their
bread; yet have they not near enough of that to serve the ordinary uses of the
Inhabitants; so that they are forced to fetch most of their Bread-corn out of
Sicily

The main commodities which the Island yields, The Commodities of Malia.
wherewith the Inhabitants drive a good trade and enrich themselves, are 1.
Cumin-seed, which they call Cumino agro or sharp Cumin; of which are gathered
about 3000 Cantares yearly; one Cantare being equal to 116 pound weight
English. 2. Annise-seed, which they call Sweet-cumin, of which are gathered and
transmitted into Foreign parts 1000 Cantares yearly. These seeds are sold at 7,
8, or 9 crowns the Cantare: and we were told that the year before our being
there [ Ann. 1663.] were vended 7000 Cantares of both sorts. 3. Cotton-wool,
called in Latin Xylon or Gossipium, of which they send abroad yearly 14000
Cantares in the husk.

They have of late begun to plant Indigo, which my Author says agrees with the
soil, and likes and thrives there very well. He also mentions a sort of
excrescence or moss or scurf, which the Rocks about S. Maria el Aalia and other
places on the North side of the Island naturally put forth, called by the
Country people Vercella, which they scrape off with an iron instrument, and
having washed it with a certain liquor, and mingled it with other Ingredients
[He tells us not what that liquor or those ingredients are] they expose it to
the Sun, and use it to dye wool of a carnation color. This kind of moss,
called in Wales Kenkerig, and in England Cork or Arcel, is gathered and used
for the same purpose in Wales and the North of England.

Malta has been famous of old for a breed of little Dogs called Catuli
Melitaei, the race whereof is quite extinct: and now their Cats are as much
esteemed. The Roses of Malta contend for sweetness with those of Paestum; and
the Honey with that of Hybla or Hymettus: So that some suppose this Island had
its name Melita from (...) signifying honey.

The air is clear and healthful, and the people long lived. Not much rain falls
here, yet sufficient to supply water to feed their springs; of which there are
several in the high grounds, or small hills about the middle of the Island. The
original of Springs.
That these Springs proceed from rainwater only my Author does very well
prove, because they are found only at the foot of little hills, consisting of a
certain porous stone which the Maltese call Giorgiolena, or a chalky earth
which easily imbibes the rain. And to speak in general, that all springs and
running waters owe their rise and continuance to rain, seems to me more than
probable; 1. Because I never yet saw any springing or running waters breaking
out, either on the top of a hill or so near the top, but that there was earth
enough above them to feed such Springs, considering the condition of high
mountains, which are almost constantly moistened with clouds, and on which the
Sunbeams have but little force: and yet I have made it part of my business in
viewing the highest hills in England and Wales to examine this particular. Nor
have I yet ever observed such springing and running waters in any plain, unless
there were hills so near, that one might reasonably conclude they were fed by
them. 2. Many springs quite fail in dry Summers, and generally all abate
considerably of their waters. I am not ignorant that some make a distinction
between failing springs and enduring springs, and would have the former to
proceed from rain, and the latter from the Sea, but I see no sufficient
foundation for such a distinction, and do think that both the one and the other
are to be attributed to rain; the failing and enduring being to be referred
either to the different quantity and thickness of earth that feeds them; or to
the different quality, the one more quickly the other more slowly transmitting
the water, or some such like accident. 3. In clay grounds, into which the water
sinks with difficulty, one shall seldom find any springs, but in sandy,
gravelly, rocky, stony or other grounds into which the rain can easily make its
way; one seldom fails of them. 4. They who would have fountains to arise from
and to be fed by the Sea have not as yet given a satisfactory account of the
ascent of water to the tops of mountains and its efflux there. For though water
will creep up a filtre above its level, yet I question whether to so great an
excess above its aequilibrium with the air, whereas in pumps we see it will not
rise above two or three and thirty foot; or if it should, whether it would
there run out at the top of the filtre, we not having as yet heard of any
experiment that will countenance such a thing. For the ascent and efflux of sap
in trees I suspect may be owing to a higher principle then purely mechanical.
As for the Sabulum Quellem or Arena bulliens of Helmont, I look upon it as an
extravagant conceit of his; and yet some ground there is to believe, that there
is a kind of earth lying up and down in veins, which does like a filtre retain
the water and carry or derive it along as it lies from place to place, till it
brings it to the supersicies of the earth, where it runs out. In other places
there are subterraneous channels like the veins in animals, whereinto the water
soaking into the earth is gathered, and wherein it runs as above ground out of
smaller rivulets into greater streams: and where one of these veins opens in
the superficies of the earth there is a spring greater or lesser according to
the magnitude of the vein. Nor need we wonder that springs should endure the
length of a dry Summer, for in many sorts of earth the water makes its way but
slowly; since we see that in those troughs or leches, wherein Landresses put
ashes, and thereupon water to make a lixivium, the water will be often many
hours before it gets all through the ash, and the Lech ceases to drop; and in
many Chemical preparations which are filtred, its long before the liquor can
free it self and wholly drain away from the earthy and feculent part.

Some attribute the original of fountains to watery vapors elevated by
subterraneous fires, or at least by that generally diffused heat which Miners
find in the earth when they come to 50 or 60 fathoms under ground; and
condensed by the tops and sides of the mountains as by an Alembick head, and so
distilling down and breaking out where they find issue. And in reason one would
think, that generally the deeper one digs in the earth the colder one should
find it, since the Urinators affirm that the deeper they dive in the Sea the
colder still they find the water. And yet were there such subterraneous heats,
they are not so great as that it is likely they should elevate vapors so high,
through so thick a coat of earth, which it must be an intense heat indeed will
carry them through, which heat none say is found near the superficies of the
earth.

Mr. Hook's account, viz. that salt water being heavier than fresh, by reason
of its preponderancy it may drive up the fresh as high above the surface of the
Sea as are the tops of mountains before it comes to an aequilibrium with it, is
very ingenious, and would be most likely, were there continued close channels
from the bottom of the Sea to the tops of mountains, not admitting the air,
which I believe will not be found in many places. Ebbing and flowing Well^
What is said about ebbing and flowing wells in confirmation of it, adds no
strength; for none of those ebbing and flowing wells that I have yet seen do at
all observe the motion of the Sea, but reciprocate two or three times or oftener
every hour, excepting one on the Coast of South Wales in a sandy ground by the
Seaside not of a mile from the water, which observes the Tides; but it is no
running water, nor does it I believe arise above the level of the Sea. I do
therefore shrewdly suspect for fabulous whatever has been written of Wells
remote from the Sea, which in their ebbing and flowing observe its motions. But
for a reason of the ebbing and flowing of these Wells I must confess I am
hitherto at a great loss. Whereas some say that rain sinks not above a foot or
two deep into the earth, if they understand it of all earths it is manifestly
false, for that we see in Coal delfs, and other mines in wet weather the Miners
are many times drowned out (as they phrase it) though no water run down into
the mouths of their pits and shafts; and in sandy and heathy grounds in the
greatest rains little water runs off the land, as on Newmarket-heath,
Gogmagog^hills, Salisbury-plain, etc. and therefore it must needs sink in: and
out of the mouth of Pool-hole near Buxton in the Peak of Derby and other Caves
in the sides of mountains in rainy seasons streams of water many times run out,
where in dry weather and Summer time there are none.

Neither is this opinion we defend any more repugnant to the Scripture then the
other. For whereas it is said, Eccles. 1. 7. All the rivers run into the sea,
yet the sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers come thither
they return again; we grant it to be most true; nay we think such a circulation
absolutely necessary to the being of springs, only we assert it to be performed
not under ground but above: that is, the clouds take up water out of the Sea,
and pour it down again upon the earth; and from part thereof falling upon and
soaking into the higher grounds arise the springs.

But to return to Malta, The Haven.
the Haven is very commodious and secure, divided into two by a little
promontory or neck of land some 1500 canes long, and 380 broad, upon which the
new City is built. Of these two that on the West side the City is called simply
and per Antonomasian Marsa, that is the Haven, and is in length 1800 canes or
poles, of ten palms the cane Roman measure, and is sub-divided into other
crecks or sinus's. That on the East Side called Marsa moscetto is as large as
the other; in a little Island within which is the Lazaretto; near it Ships that
come from infected places keep their Quarentain. The new City called Valetta is
divided into 20 streets, The new City called Valetta.
8 in length and 12 in breadth, all straight. Though they be not paved, yet
they need it not, the Town being built upon a solid rock. They want no
uniformity but being level, which the place being uneven, uphill and down-hill,
will not admit. The houses are all of stone, flat-rooft and covered with
plaster, which is sufficient here, there falling but little rain; though they
be not tall yet are they neat and pleasant. Upon the roofs of their houses in
Summer time the people set their beds, as at Aleppo, and sleep in the open air.
The number of the Inhabitants of all ages, according to a survey taken in the
year 1632, was 10744, the number of houses 1891, which sum is I believe since
that time much increased. Over the gate of this City leading to the land,
called Porta reale, you have this Inscription, giving an account of the first
founding and building of it.

Fr. Jo. de Valetta sacrae Domus Hospitalis Hierosol. M. Magister, periculorum
annosuperiore a suis militibus populoque Melitoeo in obsidione Turcica
perpessorum memor, de condenda nova urbe, eaque moeniis, arcibus and
propugnaculis ad sustinendam vim omnem propulsandosque inimici Turcae impetus
aut saltem reprimendos munienda, inito cum Proceribus consilio, Die Jovis 28
Martii 1566; Deum omnipotentem Deipar^mque virginem and numen tutelare D.
Joannem Baptistam Divosque caeteros multa precatus, ut faustum felixque
Religioni Christianae fieret, ac Ordini suo quod inceptabat been cederet, prima
urbis fundamenta in monte ab incolis Sceberras vocato jecit, eamque de suo
nomine Valettam, (dato pro insignibus in Parma miniata aureo leone) appellari
voluit.

Fr. Antonius de Paula M. Mag. invictiss. Conditoris tantaeque rei monimentum
P. C. Anno ab Vrbe Fundata 68.

It is fortified with impregnable Walls and Bulwarks, especially toward the
land, where one would think there are too many, and yet they are still adding
more. Within the outmost wall or between the two walls and outworks they have
enclosed a great space of void ground, whether with design to enlarge the City,
filling that space with houses, or to receive the Country People in case the
enemy should land upon the Island, I know not. All the walls and bulwarks are
mined or vaulted underneath, that so in case the besiegers should get upon them
they might be blown up and rendered useless. The charge of all these Walls,
Castles, and Fortifications would be intolerable had they not stone at hand and
slaves to work. This City is well served with all provisions, there being every
morning a Market plentifully furnished with bread, flesh, fish, poultry,
fruits, herbs, etc. of the best in their several kinds and to be bought at
easy rates.

St, John Baptists Church.
The Church of St. John Baptist patron of the Order, wherein are many Chapels
and Altar-pieces richly gilded and adorned. Here lie buried the Grand Masters
that have been since the Order was translated hither in a vault under ground;
several of them having in the Church Monuments with inscriptions. This Church
is not yet quite finished.

Elmo, The Castle of St. Elmo.
which stood here before this City was built, on the utmost point of the
Promontory: A strong place but of no great capacity. Here we observed the like
winding ascent to the top without any steps or stairs, as in the tower of S.
Mark at Venice. Upon the top of this Castle is constant watch and ward kept.
When they descry any Vessel coming toward the Island be it great or small they
set up a Flag suitable to the bigness of the Vessel; if two Vessels two, if
three three, and so on according to their number; signifying also by the place
where they set these Flags from what quarter, East, West, North or South such
Vessel or Vessels come: So that the City is presently advised what Vessels and
how many are near the Port. In this Castle are imprisoned such Knights as have
committed any misdemeanour, and held in restraint longer or less time, or
further proceeded against according to the merit of their fault.

Before this Castle are the Granaries, where the The Granaries and Stores.
These are nothing but Caves hewn out of the rock in the form of a Cupola, or
ordinary Bee-hive, having each a narrow mouth above. They are constantly stored
with Corn enough beforehand to serve the whole City for a year. They have also
magazines or stores of wine, oil and all other necessaries.

The Alberghi or Halls of the eight several Nations Lingue they call them) of
the Order. The Alberghs or Halls.
The Nations are French, Italian, German, English, Provencal, Au^ergnois,
Castilian and Aragonian. These Albergs are most of them fair buildings like
Colleges; and in each of them is a public hall, wherein the Knights of each
Nation dine and sup as many as please; the others have their parts or demensum
sent to their lodgings, or dispose otherwise of it as they see good. The
Seignior of each Nation is superior of the Alberg, Grand Prior of his Nation,
of the Great Cross, ( Gran Croce they term it) and one of the Privy Council to
the Great Master. These are distinguished from the rest by a great white Cross
upon their breasts, made of silk sown into their garments. Here is an Alberg
for the English Nation, or rather a piece of ground enclosed, with the
foundation of an Alberg, the walls being scarcely reared up. This ground we
were told some of the Citizens would have bought and built upon, but the Grand
Master and Council refused to sell it, not despairing it seems that one day our
Nation may be reduced again to the obedience of the Romish Church.

The Armory [ Salad Armi] within the Palace of Great Master, The Armory.
consisting of two rooms; the one (which they call the Hall) the fairest and
largest room employed for such an use that we have any where seen; the other
much lesser. In both together are kept arms for 30000 men, so entire, clean,
bright and fit for use, that we were much taken with the sight of them. Here
are some of those little Drakes that may be charged behind, a leather gun, and
other curiosities, the like whereto we have seen in several Armories.

Hospital [ Infermaria] a fair building, The Hospital Nosodochium.
which they are now enlarging. The sick persons are served by the Knights, viz.
such a number of Knights are appointed to carry them their meat daily with cap
in hand; which thing we saw them do in this manner. The meat was all brought
into the middle of a great room where many of the sick lay. Then one of the
Knights (the Steward I suppose he was) read the names of the sick one by one
out of the Physicians bill, wherein was prescribed each sick persons diet. As
he read a name the Cook took his part whose name was read, and dishing it up
delivered it to one of the Knights, who carried it to his bedside, where stood
a stool covered with a napkin having bread and salt upon it. This duty their
very name intimates to belong to them; viz. Knights, i. e. Servants of the
Hospital, and therefore we may be excused if we have been more particular and
circumstantial in describing the manner of it. If any of the Order falls sick,
he is not to stay in a private house but must presently repair hither, where he
is most carefully tended, one or two Knights being appointed to be always by
him.

Palace of the Great Master, The Gr. Masters Palace.
where he has several Apartments for Winter and Summer. There is also a stable
of good horses, in which besides coach-horses and ordinary saddle-horses, are
kept 40 or 50 great horses. A thing worth the nothing in this Island, where
there is so great scarcity of horses, that Knights and persons of quality ride
upon no better then asses.

The Slaves prison, The slaves prison.
a fair square building, where Corso. At the ringing of the Ave-Mary bell,
which is just at Sunset, they are to repair thither. When the Galleys are at
home those that belong to private persons are permitted to lodge in their
Masters houses. The number of Slaves now in Town was about 2000 belonging to
the Order, and 300 to private persons, besides those that were abroad in the
Galleys.

Besides this new City there are 3 considerable Towns distant from it only by
the breadth of the haven. The Isola.
1. The Isola (as they commonly call it) or Town of Senglea, with the Fort of
S. Michael, seated in a Peninsula made by 2 creeks running out of the principal
haven. It contains 994 houses and 4050 souls. For the stout resistance it made
to the Turks in 1565 it obtained the name The invincible City.
Citta invitta. 2. The Borgo (as they call it) i. e. The Borgho.
Burgo del Castello a mare, built likewise on a little Lingua or neck of land
between two creeks of the same haven, on the utmost cape whereof stands the
Castle of St. Angelo divided for greater strength from the Town by a ditch of
water cut cross the lingua. This Burgh contains 782 houses and 3063 souls. For
its valor and fidelity in holding out so resolutely against the Ottoman Army
besieging it, Anno 1565, it is deservedly honored with the title of The
victorious City.
Citta vittoriosa. Between these two Burghs is a secure Harbor where the
Galleys and most of the other Vessels of the City lie; which in time of danger
is shut up with a great iron chain. 3. Birmula, rather a suburb of Senglea then
a distinct Town: it contains 642 fires and 2778 souls.

We rode out to see some part of the Country; May 25. The old City.
passing two great Villages ( Casales they name them) we came to the old City
called anciently Melita after the name of the Island, now Citta notabile, a
small place at present but well fortified, containing no more then 565 houses
and 2620 souls. It has been formerly much greater, and incomparably more
populous. The new City, as being more conveniently situate, daily draining away
and withdrawing its inhabitants. Here they showed us the Pillar of S. Paul (as
they call it) where when he stood preaching (as they fondly believe or at least
would persuade us) his voice was heard distinctly all over the Island. 2. The
Gr^t of St. Paul. Here out of a small cave is taken that white earth, Terra di
S. Paolo, or Sigillata M^litensis.
called Terra di S. Paolo and by some terra sigillata Melitensis, which they
seal and sell to strangers, attributing thereto great virtues against all
poison and infection. This cavern though there be continually great quantities
of earth taken out of it, according to their conceited tradition, retains still
the same dimensions, becoming no greater then it was at first. That S. Paul
suffered shipwreck on the coast of this island, and wintered here, and not on
that other Melita in the Adriatic Sea on the coast of Dalmatia, now called
Meleda, I think it sufficiently proved and made clear by Cluverius, Abela and
others: but that upon occasion of a Viper fastening on his arm he changed all
the Serpents of the Island into stones, and endued the earth with an
Alexipharmical quality to resist and expel poison, is a superstitious and
ungrounded fancy.

From the old City we rode on to the Great Masters Boschetto, The Gr. Masters
Boschetto.
where he has a pretty little Palace in form of a Castle, from the top whereof
we had a good prospect of the Island. Here are a great number of Gardens and
Orchards well furnished with all sorts of fruits and flowers; good waterworks
and a grove of trees: indeed this Palace wants nothing for convenience or
delight. The Palace is situate upon a little hill, and the gardens lie under it
in a hollow or bottom, almost compassed about with rocks.

But to speak of the Island in general, The several Inhabitants and Conquests
of Malta.
Malta has been inhabited by several Nations and often changed masters. The
most ancient Inhabitants are by Cluverius taken to have been the Phaeaces
mentioned by Homer, who were expelled by the Phaenicians. The Phaenicians were
most of them driven out by the Grecians. After this is changed Masters rather
than Inhabitants, being first subdued and held by the Carthaginians; then for a
long time by the Romans: after that the Goths came hither, who were driven out
by the Eastern Emperors. Next the Saracens possessed themselves of it. The
Normans expelled them and got the dominion. Then the Germans or Suevi became
Lords of it; then the French; then the Aragonians, and Spaniards; and now last
of all the order of the Knights Hospitallers. The History of all which changes
if any man desire to be fully and particularly acquainted with, let him consult
Abela. In all these changes it followed for the most part the fortune of
Sicily, as having little strength to resist any foreign power invading. It is
now so well fortified and manned that it would prove a very difficult matter
for the greatest Prince or Potentate in the world to take it by force; having
when it was in far worse condition then now it is resisted and baffled the Arms
of one of the greatest Emperors the Turks ever had.

It is very populous, The number of the villages and people.
containing betwee 30 and 40 great Casales or Villages, some of them of above
500 houses, more like to great Towns than Villages, and 26 Parish Churches,
beside those of Gozo. The number of fighting men was said to be about a 5000,
but I believe there are scarce so many, for according to a survey taken in the
year 1632 the whole number of souls upon the Island besides the Knights was but
50112; of which we cannot reckon much above one fifth part to be fighting men.
And though since that time the number of Inhabitants be much increased, yet I
think scarce doubled.

The language of the Natives is a corrupt Arabic or Moresco, The language.
introduced by the Saracens, the ancient language before their coming in
probably having been Greek, with a mixture of Punick: whence I think one may
reasonably conjecture that the Saracens did either destroy or drive out the
former Inhabitants. Howbeit the people can generally speak Italian, there being
no other language but that and Latin used in any of the Courts of Malta.

The Great Master of the Order is now Prince and supreme Governor of the whole
Island, The Gr. Master Prince of the Island.
which with Gozo and the adjacent islets, after the loss of Rhodes was granted
to this Order by the Emperor Charles V. in the year 1530. The Government is
managed with that prudence and justice, that the Island is now in a very
flourishing condition, the Inhabitants enjoying a great deal of freedom and
security; being also in their carriage and conversation among themselves and to
Strangers since the coming in of the Order very civil and courteous, however
formerly they have been branded for the contrary: so that few subjects live
more happily then they do.

The Great Master when he goes abroad it attended by many of the Knights, and
2 or 3 Pages, of which he keeps (as we were told) about 24. The Knights of the
Order are always uncovered in the presence of the Great Master, excepting those
16 which are of the Gran Croce: they take place, of what birth or quality
soever they are, according to their seniority from the time of their admission;
so that there is never any difficulty or question about precedence. All the
Knights are of noble or gentile extraction, none being capable of admission but
such as can prove their Gentility for three or four descents. The Great Master
wears a black short Gown with hanging sleeves, the rest of the Knights are
habited as they please at home, but when they go in Curso (as they call it)
upon the Galleys they wear the proper habit belonging to their Order. The
number of Knights was said to be between 2000 and 3000, of which for the most
part reside in the City the major part, except when the Galleys are abroad. The
name of the Great Master at our being there was Nicolaus Cottoner of Majorca,
and I suppose he is still living, not having since heard of his death.

The names of the Great Masters that have been since the Order removed to Malta
are as follows.

43. Frater Philippus de Villiers Listeadam, a French man, who brought the
Religion into Malta, Anno 1530, being the 43 Great Master from the first
institution of the Order. He died 21 August 1534.

44. Fr. Petrinus del Ponte, an Italian, the first that was chosen Great Master
in Malta 26 Aug. 1534. He died 17 November. 1535.

45. Fr. Desiderius di Tolono Santaialla, of Daulphiny, chosen in his absence
22 November. 1535. He died 26 Sept. 1536, being on his way coming toward Malta,
at Montpellier.

46. Fr. Joannes D'omedes, an Aragonian, elected 20 October. 1536, died 6 Sept.
1553.

47. Fr. Claudius della Sengle, a Frenchman, chosen while he was Ambassador
for the Order at Rome, 11 Sept 1553. He died 18 Aug. 1557.

48. Fr. Joannes Di Valetta, a Gascoigner, elected 21 Aug. 1557. died 21 Aug.
1568. In his time Malta was invaded, and the City besieged by the Turks, who
were notably repulsed.

49. Fr. Petrus de Monte, an Italian, elected 23 Aug. 1568. died. 27 Jan. 1572.

50. Fr. Joannes L'evesque de la Cassiere, an Auvergnian, elected 30 Jan. 1572.
died in Rome 21 December 1581.

51. Fr. Hugo Loubenx Verdalle, a Gascoigner, afterward made Cardinal, elected
12 Jan. 1581. died 4 May 1595.

52. Fr. Martinus Garzes, an Aragonian, elected 8 May 1595, died 7 Feb. 1601.

53. Fr. Aloysius de Wignacourt, a Frenchman, elected 10 Febr. 1601. died 14
Sept. 1622.

54. Fr. Lewis Mendez de Vasconcelos, a Portuguese, chosen 17 Sept. 1622. died
7 March 1623.

55. Fr. Antonius de Paula, a Gascoigner, chosen 10 March 1623. died 9 June
1636.

56. Fr. Joannes Paulus Lasoaris de Castellar of Nizza, elected 11 June 1636.
He was living in the year 1647, when Malta illustrata was published; and to him
succeeded

57. Fr. Martinus de Redin, a Spaniard, in the year 1657.

58. Fr. Gassant de Clermont of Daulphiny, in the year 1659. and died in the
same year.

59. Raphael Cotoner of Majorca, who died in the year 1663. he was Brother to
the present Grand Master.

About 5 miles distant from Malta Westward lies the Island Gozo, Gozo.
called by the ancients Gaulos, 12 miles long; 6 broad, and about 30 in
circuit. The soil like that of Sicily very deep and fruitful of Wheat and other
grain. This Island is mountainous, yet all cultivated, furnished with store of
fresh sorings. It maintains upon it 3000 persons, the number of houses being
about 500. It was much more populous before the Turkish Armata most inhumanely
wasted it in the year 1565, carrying away prisoners 6000 persons.

In the straight betwixt Malta and Gozo lies a little Island called Comina,
anciently, according to Cluverius, Hephaestia, about 5 miles in compass and
well cultivated; for the defense whereof the Gr. Master Wignacourt caused a
Fort to be built opposite to that on the other side the straight in Gozo, to
secure the straight and hinder any vessels passing between the Islands without
leave.

That there is great plenty of shells and fish-bones petrified found in Malta,
I have already intimated. I shall now therefore only name those which are not
at all or but rarely found with us in England.

1. Glossopetrae, The petrified shells in Malta, etc.
which are nothing else but Sharks teeth, of several shapes and sizes. These
the Maltese call Serpents Tongues. 2. The Vertebres of Thornbacks and other
cartilagineous fishes. 3. Cats heads (as they call them from their likeness to
a little skull.) 4. Serpents eyes of several figures and colors. The most of
them red and like to those they call Toadstones; the exterior superficies
being a segment of a sphaerical, and shining as if it were polished, so that
they are commonly set in rings. I have seen great lumps or masses of these
cemented together. That the Toadstone is nothing else but the jaw-tooth of a
fish called Lupus marinus by Schonfeldius, What the Toadstone so called is.
Dr. Merret in his Pinax has first published to the world; and I doubt not but
these have the same or like original. 5. Serpents teeth, which are small,
oblong, striate stones of a polite superficies, but no certain figure. Whither
to refer these as yet I know not, as neither 6. Those they call Serpents eggs,
which are somewhat like the former but not striate with lines. 7. Bastons of S.
Paul [ Baculi S. Pauli] having the resemblance of small snagged sticks. 8.
Petrified Lentils, because for color, figure and magnitude somewhat like to
that pulse. Besides, I found among the stones I bought there some exactly
figured like the fore teeth of a man, and doubtless many other sorts by
diligent search might be found, which have not as yet been named or taken
notice of.

As for Plants I found here very few sorts but what I had before observed in
Italy and Sicily, viz. Cucumis asininus; Hypericum tomentosum; Consolida
regalis peregrina parvo flore J. B. Carduus lactens peregrinus Came. There are
but few trees growing upon the Island, the greatest want they have being of
fuel, to supply which defect they have of late begun to make use of Sea-wrack
to burn in their ovens, prepared after a certain manner invented by a pesant of
Malta, for which he is highly commended by Abela as a great benefactor to his
Country.

Here I first noted the custom of slitting up the notrils of Asses; because
they being naturally straight or small, suffice not to admit air enough to
serve them when they travel or labor hard in these hot Countries. For the
hotter the Country is, the more air is necessary for respiration and
refreshment of the body; there being less of that menstruum which serves to
nourish or continue fire and consequently ^he vital heat of Animals (which has
great likeness thereto) in hot air then in cold; whence we see that fire burns
furiously in cold weather and but faintly in hot. Whether it be because the air
is thinner in hot weather and hot Countries, or because the reflected Sunbeams
spend and consume a good part of the forementioned menstruum, or from both
these causes. That the air is thinner and consequently the menstruum also more
diffused in hot weather is clear in experience. I need mention no other
experiment to demonstrate it then the air enclosed in the shank of an ordinary
weather-glass, which in hot weather dilates its self, and in cold contracts
very considerably. So then to give an account of the raging of fire in the
coldest weather, we need not have recourse to the insignificant term of
Antiperistasis; the true reason thereof being the density of the ambient and
contiguous air containing plenty of that menstruum which nourishes the fire.

I omitted to mention the ancient Coemeteria, or subterraneous burying-places
called Catacumbe, of which there be many in Malta, because of these we have
already had occasion to discourse in our description of Syracuse in Sicily.

That this Island produces or nourishes no Serpent or other venomous creature,
the common people affirm; but because I find no mention heerof in Abela, I give
little credit to their report: should it be true, it would be to me a great
argument that this was not the Island upon which St. Paul was cast when he
suffered Shipwreck, but rather that Melita before mentioned upon the Coast of
Dalmatia, for which there is also some ground in the Scripture, which says
Acts 27. 26.

For that St. Paul upon the Vipers fastening on his hand did by his Prayers
obtain of God, that all the Serpents in Malta should be turned into stones, and
the Island for the future wholly free from all venomous beasts, is a Monkish
fancy, grounded upon the forementioned petrified fish-bones, which they fondly
imagined were sometime parts of Serpents: whereas in other places where plenty
of such stones are found there is no lack of Serpents. I confess it is
difficult to imagine how Serpents should come at first to breed here, if the
whole Island were once (as we conceive) a submarine Rock covered with the Sea;
and there be no spontaneous generation of animals, as well also believe: because
it can scarce be imagined that any man should on purpose bring over Serpents
hither; unless perchance to show them for a curiosity. Whether there be
venomous beasts or no I am sure there are venomous insects here, the very
biting ox stinging of the Gnats (with which the City is much infested) being
more virulent then in other places. For my part I do not remember that in
England the biting of a gnat did ever cause a swelling, or leave a mark behind
it in the skin of my face (though I know in some it does) but there it both
raised a swelling, and left a mark behind it that was not out for a month
after. The Maltese easily defend themselves from the annoyance and bitings of
this insect, keeping them out of their beds by large linen curtains lapping
over one another. At first we were not aware of the trouble these Animals were
like to give us, and left our curtains open.

From Malta we returned the same way to Messina; staying a day at Catania;
where we hired horses and took a Soldier to guide us up Mount Aetna, Mount
Aetna.
now called Mon-Ghibello. The top of which at Catania was told us to be 30
miles distant. We ascended for the most part all along from Catania, and we
found the ground rich, and well cultivated, and the Country well inhabited;
for the slag and cinders cast out of the mountain, being in process of time
dissolved by the weather, does mightily fatten and enrich the soil. We rode up
so high till we came to the conservatories of snow; and seeing the mountain
above us all covered with snow; we did not, nor indeed could we ascend any
higher. The trees heerabout had at this time scarce put out their leaves. As we
went up we found in one place the ground covered for a quarter of a mile broad,
and 4 or 5 miles in length, with cinders, which had been thrown forth by the
mountain, and was cartainly the relic of a huge stream of melted coals, iron,
stones and sulphur poured out in the time of the last eruption, nothing as yet
growing among these stones and cinders. This mountain hash in former times
thrown forth stones and slag as far as Catania it self, as we could manifestly
see; but of all the eruptions that ever were I believe this last which happened
[ Anno 1669.] since our being there was the greatest and most horrid; for a
full description and exact account whereof I refer the Reader to Borellus his
learned Treatise De incendiis Aetnae. This mountain is of a very great height,
and we were told by credible persons, that one might see it at Sea over the
whole Island any way one came thither. We could clearly discern the top of it
as far as the Island of Malta, which in a right line must needs be at least 100
miles distant. One thing we could not but wonder at, that there should be a
ring of snow about the top of Aetnas, but the highest top it self bare, without
any snow upon it.

The Inhabitants of Sicily are noted for churlish and uncivil to Strangers,
Observations about the Inhabitants and Customs of Sicily.
and I think not undeservedly. The Italians have a Proverb, Omnes insulani
mali, Siciliani autem pessimi. All Islanders are bad, but the Sicilians worst
of all. This Island is confessedly a very ill place to travel in, by reason of
the Robbers and Banditi wherewith it is infested, thanks to the good
Government, which takes no more care to cleanse it of such vermin. These
Bandits will not be content with your money, but will also seize your person
and detain you prisoner in the mountains till you give them a good ransom for
your deliverance.

We took notice of some Laws and Customs proper to Sicily during our stay here.

1. It is unlawful to carry out of this Island in money more then ten crowns a
person; if any one carries out more and be taken, all is forfeited. But the
searchers are not so strict, but that if you give them a little money they will
let you pass, especially if you be a stranger and traveller, without any
searching at all.

2. It is unlawful to kill any Calves in this Island, so that no Veal can be
procured here. And yet at Malta they have Veal enough, transported hence by
stealth.

3. It is unlawful to take above one ounce of silver without weighing of it; so
that if you buy any thing which comes to more, though your money be never so
good, you shall see them pro forma put it in their scales.

4. No person under age [ imberbis Iuvenis] may be received in any time in
Sicily, unless he has a patent and license to travel.

5. It is prohibited under pain of death to any man to carry pistols about him;
but long guns they may and do all carry. The reason is because a pistol may
easily be hid, and so men murdered unawares.

6. All the money current in Sicily is coined at Messina.

After our return to Messina, May 27. we passed by boat over the Fretum to see
Rhegio or Rhezo, Rhegium, now Rhezo.
anciently Regium, an old City, but now Very mean and poor. All they have to
boast of at present is their Gardens well stored with all sorts of the best
fruits; their Silk, of which plenty is made here and (if we may believe
themselves) the best in Italy or sicily: And S. Paul's. pillar which burned, of
which they have but a small fragment remaining. They told us many stories and
legends of it, which we gave little heed to.

We took boat and went as far as Scylla, May 29. The manner of catching the
Swordfish.
to see the fishing of the Pesce Spada or Sword-fish. The manner whereof is
thus. On the top of the Cliffs by the Seaside stand Speculatores (Huers our
Fishermen call them) to espy the Fish, who so soon as they see them, either by
voice if they be near, or by known signs if at distance, give notice to the
Fishing-boats whereabouts the fish are. The boat presently makes toward the
place; then one gets up to the top of a little mast in the boat, made with
steps on purpose, and there stands to observe the motion of the fish and direct
the rowers, who accordingly ply their oars. When they are come very near him,
he upon the mast comes down, and taking the harping iron in his hand, if he can
strikes it into him. The fish being wounded, plays up and down and wearies
himself, and when he is faint and spent they draw him up into the boat: This is
much like the Whale-fishing. The harping iron is put on a staff or pole of
wood. The point of it is sharp and has beards on each side like a barbed
arrow, so joynted that if you hold the point upward they clap close to the
shaft, if downward they fall off from it on each side, so that they resist not
the going in of the iron but only the drawing out. This fish is held a great
dainty by the Messanese, as much longed for and as greedily bought up by them
as Soland goose by the Scots; sold in Messina at first coming in for six pence
English the pound. In May and beginning of June it is taken on the coast of
Calabria; about the latter end of June it comes over to the Sicilian side and
is taken about the Faro till August. There because there be no rocks or cliffs
hanging over the Sea, they prepare a large boat or brigandine, and pitch up in
it a tall mast with shrowds like the mast of a ship, on the top of which the
Speculator or Huer stands.

In the beginning of June yearly is celebrated at Messina a great Festival
called The Feast of our Lady of the Letter: it continues near a weeks time with
great solemnity. During this time all the housekeepers hang out in all the
streets a multitude of lamps, candles, and tapers, and set their windows as
full of lights in paper-lanthorns as they can hold, which burn all night, so
that the streets are as lightsome almost by night as by day. Nay the light was
so great, that at a good distance from the Town as we came thither late at
night, the reflection thereof from the clouds and atmosphere appeared to us
like the Aurora or Crepuseulum, though we saw not the lights themselves, and it
was no dark night, the moon as I remember shining. They call it the Feast of
our Lady of the Letter, because it is held in memory of a Letter written to
them (as they say) by the Virgin Mary; which how sorry and ungrounded a fiction
it is the pretended Letter it self (of which also they confess themselves not
to have the Greek original, but only a Latin copy) will best demonstrate to
any not grossly stupid Reader. It runs thus, Maria virgo Joachim filia Dei
humillima, Christi Jesit crucifixi matter, ex tribu Juda, stirpe David
Messanensibus omnibus salutem and Dei patris omnipotentis benedictionem.

Vos omnes fide magna legatos ac nuncios per publicum documentum ad nos misisse
constat: Filium nostrum Dei genitum Deum and hominem esse fatemini; and in
coelum post suam resurrectionem ascendisse, Pauli Apostoli electi praedicatione
mediante viam veritatis agnoscentes. Ob quod vos and ipsam civitatem
benedicimus, cujus perpetuam protectricem nos esse volumus. Anno Filii nostri
XII. Indict, I, III Nonas Junii, Luna XXVII, Feria V. Ex Hierosolymis Maria
virgo quae supra hoc chirographum approbavit.

We departed from Messina, June 6. Tropia.
takin a Feluca for Naples. The first night we lodged at Tropia, a small Town
in Calabria about 60 miles distant from Messma. Here we observed growing on the
Rocks near the Town Ziziphus sive Jujuba sylvest. Park. Conyza minor vera Ger.
Androsaemum foetidum Park. i. e. Tragium; besides many others which we had
before found in Sicily.

The second night we lay at S. Lucido, 7. S. Lucido
where we also observed the mild Jujube.

The third night we lay at Porto Nicolo, 8. Scalea.
a little creek or cove, not far from Scalea, where there is a small Castle.
Here and at Scalea we observed the common Cypress tree; Lamium Pergrinum sive
Scutellaria C. B. Rosmarinum vulgar, quod in toto hoc litore in rupibus
copiose provent: Sabina baccifera, called also Cedrus Lycia retusa Bellonii;
Chondrilla rara purpurea, Crupina Belgarum dicta Park. Meum alterum italicum
quibusdam J. B. Caryophyllus maximus rubber; the largest and fairest-flower'd
wild Pink or July flower, which I have any where seen, on the rocks at Scalea;
Caryophyllus gramineo solio minimus; a sort of small Scorzonera or Goats-beard;
Jacea incana, teuuiter laciniata, capitulis Jace^ nigrae vulgaris; Valeriana
quaedam supina serpyllifolia, n. d. This was afterward showed us dried by Joan.
Maria Ferro an Apothecary in Venice, to whom it was sent by the name of
Periclymenum: Myrtus communis Italica C. B. Auricula ursi; which we wondered to
find here upon the rocks, being an Alpine plant, and which delights in colder
places. Casia poetica Lob. Not to mention Ferrum equinum siliqua singulari C.
B. Acanthium Illyricum; Polium montanum album C. B. and some sorts of
Securidaca, common elsewhere in Italy. Here also I first sound that species of
Campanula, which I have denominated minor, folio rotundo, flore caeruleo
pentagono grandi. It has a leaf like to the common Campanula minor
rotundifolia, sometimes rough and hairy, sometimes smooth. Agnus castus in toto
hoc litore in arenosis frequentissimus est.

The fourth night at a little place called Chiupo. 9.


We lodged at Salerno where we quitted our boat, 10. Salerno.
and stayed one day. Salerno though the Sea of an Archbishop is at present but
a mean City, having narrow streets. Whatever there has been formerly, there is
now neither University nor Schola illustris in it, that we could hear of:
scarce any footsteps of the old School remaining. In the Cathedral Church
dedicated to S. Matthew we observed the Monuments of the famous Hildebrand,
Helbrand the Germans call him, the great introducer of the Celibate of Priests,
and opposer of the Emperor, called Pope Gregory the VII. In the Porch before
the Church lie many ancient Roman Grave-stones, which inscriptions. Plants
observed about Salerno.
As for Plants we here noted, Barba Jovis frutex, on the rocks plentifully;
Saturcia durior J. B. Laurus Tinus caerulea bacca Lob. Cytisus glaber siliqua
lata J. B. on the rocks, which plant is was not my hap to meet withal growing
wild any where else beyond the Seas: Colutea minima sive Coronilla Ger. Melissa
^sylvestris birsutior and minus odorata; Echium majus and asperius flore albo
C. B. Thlaspi Candiae Ger. Lamium peregrinum sive Scuttellaria; Sorbus
domestica Lob. Peucedani facie pusilla planta Lob. Lotus arbor;
Staphylodendron; Colus Jovis; Besides these many before set down, found in
Sicily and other parts of Italy, viz. Antirrhinum majus purpureum; Lentiscus;
Alaternus; Conyza major Monspeliensis odorata J. B. Ricinus sive Palma Christi;
Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta; Stoechas citrina angustifolia; Genista
Hispanica; Tithymalus arboreus Park. Valeriana rubra Dod. Ilex arborea J. B.
Copparis; Scorpioides Bupleuri folio; chrysanthemum Bellidis folio Hort. Pat.
Teucrium majus vulgar Park. Colutea scorpioides; Chrysocome capitulis
conglobatis Ger. Caprificus; Trifolium bituminosum; Meum alterum Italicum;
Cyclamen hederae folio; Periclymenum perfoliatum ^^lidarum regionum Lob.
Anagyris foetida; Smilax aspera; Asparagus sylvestris sive Corruda; Acantbus
sativus; Dorycnium Monspessulanum fruticosum J. B. Trifolium album rectum
hirsutum valde J. B. Telephium scorpioides Ang. Lob. Martagon Chymistarum Lob.
Geranium Romanum versicolor sive striatum Park. Monte Angelo a Mountain near
this Town is a place noted for variety of plants, but we had not time to search
it.

From Salerno we traveled by land to Naples, 12.
passing through La Cava a pretty Town having Porticos on each side the
streets, and Nocera, both Episcopal Seas; Scafata; Torre d' Annunciata, Torre
di Greco, considerable Burghs.

We returned back from Naples to Ligorn by water, 30.
baulking Rome for the present, being deterred from going thither by the
general vogue in Italy, that in the Summer months, and till the rains fall, it
is very dangerous for him that is in Rome to go out thence, or him that is out
to enter in there. The first night we reached no further then Nisita, a little
Island in the mouth of the bay of Pozzuolo^, about 5 miles distant from Naples.
The second day we proceeded as far as Sperlonga, a little short of Terracina
anciently Anxur, about 60 miles. The third day we passed by Monte Circello or
the Promontorium Circeium, where the famous enchantress Circe is reported to
have dwelt. This Promontory stands out a great way into the Sea, so that at a
distance we took it for an Island. As we were just over against the utmost
point of it, we observed a great number of insects very like to Cicadae and
which we have not elsewhere seen, flying about in the air. Our boatmen called
them Gronge. Diverse of them we caught in our boat; and yet we were at least two
leagues distant from land. Possibly they might fly out a great way further to
Sea; for what reason we cannot easily imagine; perhaps only to sport themselves
in the Sun. Howbeit we do not remember to have seen any other land-insect
fallying out so far from land. Cicada.
And now that we have made mention of the Cicada, it may not be amiss by the
way to take notice of a common error committed in our English Schools in
translating or rendering this word Cicada in English by Grasshopper, whereas a
Cicada is a much different insect, of a rounder and shorter body, that sits
commonly upon trees, and makes a noise five times louder then a Grasshopper,
whose true name in Latin is Locusta, and not Cicada. Of these Cicadae there
are great numbers in the hot Countries, but none on this side then Alps and
Sevenes. This night we lodged at Astura, where yet remain some ruins of an
ancient Town and the foundations of some buildings in the water.

Not far hence the fourth day we passed the new Town of Antio, Antium.
and about a mile distant great ruins of the old Town, and of a great mole for
the Haven; and this night lodged at a little tower called S. Michael near the
mouth of the River Tiber not far from Ostia.

The 5th. day we head a favorable gale of wind, which brought us to a little
place called S. Stefano, not far from Orbetello. This day we passed in sight of
Civita Vecehia and Porto Hercole, compassing Monte Argentaro.

The 6th. day there happened a great Borasco (as they term it) that is a storm
of thunder, lightning and rain accompanied with a violent wind, which continued
all the sorenoon; in the afternoon we rowed about 18 or 20 miles, and put in to
a little Cove or harbor under a tower called Calo di Furno. On the Seashore
heerabout we found those opercula concharum, which some naturalists make to be
stones and call Vmbilici marini. The Italians call them S. Lucies eyes.

The 7th. day we proceeded as far as the Island Troia, when the wind being
contrary we were forced to take up at a little harbor under the shelter of a
small tower called Lo Molino.

The 8th. day we passed Piombino, a walled Town which has a Prince of its own,
Populonia P. Barreto, S. Vincentio, Castagneto, and Vada, and lodged at a tower
called Castiglione.

The 9th. day it having blown hard all night, notwithstanding there was no wind
stirring in the morning, we found the Sea very rough, yet through the good
providence of God we got safe into Ligorn about noon.

The Plants we took more especial notice of in this voyage were, Rosmarinum
vulgar; cedrus Lycia folio retuso Bellonii; Barba Jovis frutex, on the rocks
and cliffs by the Sea side in many places: Cruciata marina, on the sands at
Astura plentifully: Thlaspi capsulis sublougis incanum J. B. ibid. Cichorium
verrucarium sive Zacyntha, at the mouth of Tiber and about S. Stefano
plentifully; Lotus siliquosa lutea Monspeliensis J. B. besides another sort of
Lotus with a longer and flenderer cod: Aristolochia clematitis; A semper-virent
shrub with a leaf like Oleander; Terebinthus; Paliurus; Thlaspi biscutatum;
Ambrosia vulgaris; which it was not our hap to meet with elsewhere in all our
travels; Cirsii quoedam species quae jam defloruerat, at S. Stefano:
Chamaerrhiphes sive Palma humilis about Orbetello and elsewhere on the cliffs
of Hetruria: Draba quaedam filiquosa foliis longis angustis incanis; Euphrasia
pratensis lutea; Phillyrea angustifolia, in montosis prope maris litus in toto
hoc tractu frequentissima; Phillyrea serrata 2 Clus. Colutea minima sive
Coronilla Ger. In rupibus maritimis prope turrim Castiglione.

OF FLORENCE.
FRom Ligorn we traveled through Pisa to Florence, Florence.
a City which answers its name and epithete Fiorenza la bella, Florence the
fair. Yet for beauty in my opinion it must give place to Antwerp and some other
Cities in the Low Countries, only it excells them in multitude of large
stone-palaces, scattered up and down the streets, sch as are those of the Grand
Duke both the old and the new called the Palazzo de Pitti, because purchased of
them; of the Strozzi, the Salviati, etc. Many of the streets are straight,
which adds no little to the beauty of them. They are all paved with great broad
stones, like Luca or Collen in Germany: yet but narrow as in many other Towns
of Italy and Gallia Narbonensis to keep off the scorching beams of the Sun in
summer time, which reflected from these broad stones would else make them more
than sufficiently hot. The Paper-windows and they too for the most part broken
and tattered, do very much disgrace the fair stone-houses. The River Arno
divides this City into two parts, which are joined together by 4 fair
stonebridges; one of which, called Ponte vecchio or the old bridge, has on
each side it a row of Goldsmiths-shops. All of them, but especially the two
middlemost, are remarkable for the breadth and flatness of their arches. The
circuit of the walls is said to be 6 Italian miles: but therein is comprehended
a great deal of wast ground, [I mean not filled up with buildings] the gardens
and walks of the Great Dukes Palace being at least a mile in compass; besides
on the other side the River are some hundreds of acres of land taken up in
vineyards and gardens belonging to private persons. The number of Parishes
taking in the 12 Priorates is 44, the number of Inhabitants according to
Schottus 85000 souls, and I believe he exceeds in his account, though some make
them 90000, and other 100000. There are an incredible number of Nunneries:
Schottus says 54; we were told 56, whereas there are but 24 Monasteries of
Freres. But that which is most strange is the multitude of Hospitals and Alms
houses, of which there are said to be 37: one of which, viz. the
Orphanotrophium maintains 900 persos, and has 70000 crowns yearly revenue.

This City is of no great strength, being encompassed only with an
old-fashioned wall: but the Great Duke has 3 Castles or Cittadels in it, I
think rather to bridle then defend it; one on the Southside, held by a good
Garrison, neatly kept and diligently watched, wherein are laid up Arms for 30000
men. Another is a small Fortress in lthe Gr. Dukes garden, to which he may
retire in case of any sudden danger or exigent: here they say his treasure or
a good part of it is kept. The third we viewed not.

The Churches in Florence though they be not so richly gilded as some we have
seen, Churches in Florence. The Domo or Cathedral.
yet for their Architecture they excel most, especially the Domo, or Church of
S. Maria Florida, which is some men's opinion is the compleatest structure that
ever was set upon the earth. The pilasters the support the nave or body of the
Church stand at so great a distance, and are withal so very slender, that they
do not obscure the Isles, but at one view you enjoy the whole Church. Besides
the Cupola, though the first and pattern of all the rest, is the largest and
tallest of any in Italy, excepting that of S. Peter's in Rome: under which is
the Quire, of an octagonal figure. The walls of this Church are crusted over on
the outside with marble of several colors, cut into small pieces and
variously checkered; which though the Italians now despise and count but a
toy, yet makes a pretty gaudy show. Within this Church beyond the Quire are 4
inscriptions; one concerns the building to the Church, and is as follows.

Anno a Christiorts 1280 Florentini magnis divitiis partis, Inscriptions.
and rebus domi forisque commode constitutis VI. Id. Septembris. The second
concerns the Dedication or Consecration of this Church by Pope Eugenius IV, and
runs thus.

etc. The third concerns the union of the Greek and Roman Churches in these
words.

Eugenio Papa IV cum Latinis Episcopis and Praelatis, and Imperatore
Constantinopolitano cum Episcopis and Praelatis and Proceribus Graecorum in
copioso numero, sublatisque erroribus in unam eandemque rectam fidem quam
Romana tenet Ecclesia consenserunt. The fourth concerns the translation or
removal of Zenobius from the Church of S. Laurence hither by Archbishop
Andreas his successor.

Some Monuments also I observed in this Church; the Inscriptions whereof they
being of considerable persons it may not be amiss here to set down. Of Marsilus
Ficinus, En hospes! hic est Marsilius Sophiae pater:
Platonicum qui dogma culpa temporum
Situ obrutum illustrans, and Atticum decus
Servans, Latio dedit; fores primus sacras
Divinae aperiens mentis, actus numine.
Vixit beatus ante Cosmi munere
Laurique Medicis, nunc revixit publico.
S. P. Q. F. MDXXI.


Of Jottus a good Architect, and the first reviver of Painting in Italy; though
Vassari in his Lives of Painters makes Cimabue to have been the first reviver,
and to have taught Giotto and others. The verses of his Epitaph were made by
Ang. Politian, and are as follows.

Ille ego sum per quem Pictura extincta revixit;
Cui quam recta manus tam fuit and facilis.
Naturae deerat nostrae quod defuit arti;
Plus nulli licuit pingere nec melius.
Miraris turrim egregiam sacro aere sonantem:
Haec quoque de modulo crevit ad astra meo.
Denique sum Jottus, quid opus fuitista refer?
Hoc nomen longi carminis instar erit.
Obiit Anno 1336. Concives posuere B. M. 1490.

Of Philippo Brunelleschi, a famous Architect, who designed the Cupola of this
Church, and also that of S. Laurence's, D. S.

Quantum Philippus Architectus art Daedalea valuerit cum hujus celeberrimi
templi mira testudo, tum plures machinae divino ingenio ab eo adinventae
documento esse possunt. Quapropter ob eximias animi sui dotes singularesque
virtutes XV. Kal. Maias 1446. ejus B. M. corpus in hac humo supposita grata
Patria sepeliri jussit. In this Church on the North wall is the picture of and
English Knight on horseback; Joannes Acutus they write him, and therefore some
think that his name was Sir John Sharp; I incline rather to their opinion who
suppose his name to have been Sir John Hawkwood, especially seeing Guicciardine
writes him Aucutus and not Acutus. Whatever his name were he was a valiant man
and an eminent Captain.

Here is also a painted Table hung up in memory of Dante, the famous Italian
Poet, who was native of this City, but lived in exile and was buried at
Ravenna. On the frame of this Table are these verses inscribed, Qui coelum
cecinit mediumque imumque tribunal,
Lustravitque animo cuncta poeta suo,
Doctus adest Dantes, sua quem Florentia saepe
Sensit consiliis ac pietate patrem.
Nil potuit tanto mors saeva nocere poetae,
Quem vivum virtus, carmen, imago facit.


In the Church of Santa Croce is the Monument of Michael Angelo Buonarota, The
Church of St. Croce.
the famous Architect, Sculptor and Painter. Above stands his Effigies; under
that is a Coffin, and under the Coffin three Statues sitting of rare
workmanship, worth their weight in silver, which signify Painting, Sculpture,
and Architecture. Below this Inscription, Michaeli Angelo Bonarotio,
E vetusta Simoniorum familia,
Sculptori, Pictori and Architecto,
Fama omnibus notissimo.


Leonardus patruo amantissimo and de se optime merito translatis Roma ejus
ossibus, atque in hoc templo Major. suor. Sepulchro conditis, cohortante
Sereniss. Cosmo Med. Magno Etruriae Duce P. C. Anno Sal. MDLXX. In the Church
of the Annunciata besides several others is the Monument of John Bologna, The
Church of the Annunciata.
a man well known in Italy. It stands in a Chapel behind the Quire built by
himself, and is thus infcribed, Johannes Bologna Belga, Mediceorum PPum nobilis
alumnus, Pictura, Sculptura and Architectura clarus, virtute notus, moribus and
Pietate insignis Sacellum Deo, Sep. sibi cunctisque Belgis earundem artium
cultoribus P. An. Dom. MDIC

In the Church of S. Mark is a small monument for a great person, The Church of
St. Mark.
viz. Joannes Picus Mirandulanus, with this Inscription, Johannes jacet hic
Mirandula, caetera norunt
Et Tagus and Ganges, forsan and Antipodes.


Ob. An. Sal. MCCCCLXXXXIIII, vixit An. XXXII.

Hieronymus Benivenius, n^ disjunctus post mortem locus ossa separet quorum
animos in vita conjunxit amor, hac humo supposita poni curavit. Ob. An.
MDXXXXII. vixit An. LXXXIX. Men. VI. In the Cloister of S. Laurence by the
Church door is the Monument of Paulus Jovius thus inscribed, Paulo Jovio
Novocomensi Episc. Nucerino
Historiarum sui temporis Seriptori
Sepulchrum quod sibi testameto decreverat
Posteri ejus integra fide posuerunt;
Indulgentia maximorum optimorumque Cosmi
Et Francisci Etruriae Ducum.
Anno MDLXXIIII.


In the Baptisterium or Church of S. John, supposed to have been anciently a
temple of Mars; of an octagonal figure, and having three pair of brass doors
artificially cast or engraven with curious figures in mezo relievo, is a fair
monument of Pope John 23, who was deposed In the Council of Constance, with
this Inscription.

Joannes quondam Papa XXIIIus obiit Florentiae Anno Domini MCCCCXVIIII. XI
Kalendas Januarii. in the Church of S. Laurence are interred several of the
Great Dukes family. S. Laurence his Church. The Chapel of St. Laurence.
And to this Church belongs the famous Chapel of S. Lorenzo; built by the
Great Dukes, which when finished is like to be for its bigness the most
sumptuous, rich and magnific structure in the world. This Chapel is of an
octagonal figure, and the roof of it a large Cupola. The inside of it is
encrusted over with several sorts of precious stones I may call them, for they
are all above the rate of marble, viz. Jasper of several kinds and colors,
Agate, Lapis Lazuli, Touchstone, etc. all polisht and respleudent, inlaid and
wrought into various figures. Of this octagon one side is left void for the
high Altar, for which there is a sumptuous tabernacle preparing, that now
stands in the Great Dukes Gallery. The side opposite to the Altar is for the
door. On the rest of the sides are to be placed Statues and Monuments for such
as have been Great Dukes. The first, beginning on the left hand as you enter
in, intended (as we conjectured) for Alexander who was only Duke of Florence,
is not yet made up. The rest have on the top the names, and underneath in a
nich the Effigies of the Great Dukes, some in stone and some in brass, under
that a Coffin or Cushion with a Ducal Crown lying upon it, and nethermost an
Inscription in this order, Franciscus Mag. Dux Etruriae II, vixit
ann. XLVI. ob XIX October. MDLXXXVII.
Cosmus Mag. Dux Etr. I, vixit ann. LV.
ob. XI Kal. Maii MDLXXIIIV.
Ferdinandus Mag. Dux Etr. III. vixit ann.
LX. ob VII Id. Febr. MDCIX.
Cosmus Magn. Dux Etr. IV. vixit. ann.
XXX. obiit XXVIII Febr. MDCXX.


So there is one side more remaining for Ferdinand II, the V. Great Duke, who
is dead since our being there; the present Great Dukes name being Cosmus III.

Between the Monuments of Duke and Duke are the arms of two of the Cities
subject to the Great Duke, the names whereof are these, Monte Pulciano, Borgo
San Sepolchro, Cortona, Volterra, Arezzo, Pistoia, Pisa, Florence, Fiesole,
Siena, Grossetto, Massa, Montalce, Suana, Chiusa, Pientia, all Episcopal Seas:
besides which in Tuscany are many considerable Towns, Castles, and Fortresses.

I shall enlarge no further concerning the Churches, Towers, Pillars,
Fountains, Statues of brass and stone, and pictures, of which there are a great
number in this City and of excellent workmanship: only I cannot omit to mention
two Statuae equestres in brass, much greater than the life; one of Cosmus I,
upon the great Piazza: the other of Ferdinand I, in the Piazza of the
Annunciata, erected by Ferdinand II.

The Great Dukes Gallery is in the old Palace, The Gallery of the Gr. Duke.
a handsome pile of building. Under ground as it were in Cellars are the
Stables: above them fair Portico's or Cloisters to walk in. Above the Portico's
are shops for all manner of Artificers to work in for the Great Duke. The
uppermost story is the Gallery properly so called; where in an open walk free
for any man to come into stand many ancient and some also modern Statues. Round
about on each side this walk hang the pictures of many Princes and other
persons, who have been famous in the world for learning or valor. Among the
rest we noted the Pictures of Queen Elizabeth, King James, Oliver Cromwell and
Joannes Acutus before remembered.

The chief Rarities are locked up in Closets of which we saw four. The things
which in our transient view we took more especial notice of were, a huge
terrestrial globe and a Sphaera armillaris, bigger then that. A brancht
Candlestick including many little figures of ivory or white wax appearing
through the transparent Amber: An Engine counterfeiting a perpetual motion,
like those of Septalius at Milan. Seveal stone-tables so curiously inlaid with
small pieces of precious stones of diverse colors, as to compose figures of
plants, fruits and flowers, birds, beasts, and insects, so natural and to the
life, that scarce any picture drawn by the hand can excel them. One of these,
the best and richest that we have any where seen, both for the excellency of
the workmanship, and costliness of the materials, being set with many Rubines
and Pearl, they valued at 100000 Florence Scudi, which is more than so many
English crowns, Several rich Cabinets. That of the greatest value, which they
rated at 500000 Scudi, was thick set with Gems of the first magnitude; a pearl
of an enormous greatness, but not perfectly round; several Topazes almost as
big as Walnuts, large Rubines and Emeralds, besides other stones of inferior
note, studs of Amethyst, etc. Here we also saw the nail pretended to be one
continued body, half iron, half gold, part of the iron having been turned into
gold by one Thurnhausserus an Alchymist of Basil before mentioned. To us it
seemed counterfeit and not neatly neither, the iron and the gold being but
bunglingly joined together. A large topaz as big as a pullets egg. An entire
image made of one Turchois stone: Many ancient Roman idols of brass; old Roamn
lamps found in Sepulchers of several fashions: A press full of turned work of
ivory very fine and subtle: Rhinocerots horns, etc. I omit several pictures and
statues wherewith the rooms were adorned, made by the best Masters, and much
esteemed by those that have judgment in such things.

In the Armory we saw several remarkables, The Armory.
as the Armor of many great persons of Europe, among others of Henry IV King
of France and ( harles V Emperor: Hannibal's headpiece (as they called it) It
had engraven on it many ancient Morcsco characters: A suit of Persian Armor
for a man on horseback; made of little scales of iron. A Loadstone having its
poles at the greatest distance I ever saw any: Several Indian Royal Vests, made
of Feathers. Five great Swords such as the Pope uses to bless on Christmas day,
and send to Princes. A King of China's Armor made of Fish-bones, and a wooden
Sword. This sure they mistook for an Indian King's, the Chinese having of a
long time had the use both of iron and guns: Japan Arms and Swords without
point and broad at the top. Diverse Turkish scymitars; Scanderbeg's Sword: The
hair of a horses mane 7 yards in length; the skin of this horse stuffed up, sent
by the Duke of Lorain: several conceited guns: Pistols on whose muzzles were
screwed heads of Halberds, or Pole-axes. Nine Pistol-barrels so laid on a
frame, that by letting down one cock they were all discharged, making 18 shot,
for each is double charged, and a train of powder leads from the touchhole of
the middlemost to the touchholes of all the rest in channels made for that
purpose. An Engine made like a hat; with several pistols in the crown; this
they called the bona notte, being to be discharged upon your enemy when you
complement him and bid him goodnight: A long gun and also a pistol whose
barrels are of beaten gold. Several round bucklers, one with Medusa's head
painted upon it by Michael Angelo, an highly esteemed piece. Italian Jocks for
suspected wives: Ancient Balistae (as they called them) which are no other then
great Cross-bows. A thong cut out of the hide of a Buffle, 250 yards long. A
press full of rich prizes of Arms taken from the Turks.

In the Argenteria or Wardrobe we saw several presses or Cup-boards [12 in
number] full of rich plate. The Argenteria or Wardrobe.
In one all manner of vessels of beaten gold. In another a sumptuous Altar of
the same metal (as they told us) set with Diamonds and other precious stones of
the highest value. On it was inscribed in great Capitals (the letters all made
up of Rubines) Cosmus II, Dei gratia magnus Dux Etruriae ex voto.

In some by-rooms we saw the skin of a Morsse or Seahorse stuffed; the skin of
an Elk s the skin and Sceleton of an Elephant, which was shown in Florence some
8 or 10 years ago, and died there.

I might spend many words in describing the Gr. Dukes new Palace, and Gardens
stored with great variety of trees and shrubs valuable for shade, beauty, fruit
or sent; adorned with a multitude of Statues thick set up and down the walks
and knots: pleasant fountains and waterworks; stately and delicious walks both
close and open; goodly flowers and choice plants. We took notice of Dictamnus
Creticus, Quamoclit Indorum; Tragoriganum; Stramonium peregrinum Ger. i. e.
pomo spinoso rotundo; Pisum cordatum, Balsamina cucumerina, Chamaerrhiphes,
etc. Here in an enclosed place were kept two male Ostriches and one female.

In the Dukes Theriotrophium we observed these sorts of wild beasts, Lion,
Tiger, Leopard, Bear, Wolf, Porcupine, Wild Boar. The snout of this was longer
in proportion than that of tame or domestic Swine: the ears rounder and shorter
and of a black color, as were also the feet and tail. These wild Swine are
constantly of the same color, which is a grisly or iron-grey. Its worth the
observation that most wild Animals keep to the same color both Beasts and
Birds; but those that are kept tame vary infinitely, which is (I suppose) to be
attributed partly to the variety of their food, and partly to the highness of
their feeding; to which the difference of the Climate and Soil may contribute
something. So we see that upon the Alps and other high mountains covered for
the most part with snow, several animals, as Bears, Foxes, Hares, Partridges,
etc. change their natural colors, and become white, whether by reason of the
coldness of those mountains, or of the constant intuition of snow.

In Florence many of the Palaces are made of great, rough-hewn stones, not laid
smooth, but each protuberating above the supersicies of the wall: which fashion
of building the Italians call maniera rustica.

This City at present is rather in a decaying than thriving condition, there
having not been (as we were credibly-informed) a new house built there these 40
years: the Citizens generally being but poor. This comes to pass partly by the
great decay of their trade; for whereas formerly they served France with Silks,
now the French themselves work them as well or better than they; partly by
reason of the great exactions of the Great Duke, who lays immoderate gabels
upon all commodities that are bought and sold. The greatest Foreign trade they
have at present is with our nation; and that is not much, we having most of our
Silk from Messina, Aleppo, and other places in the Levant and working it at
home. This City is well situate in a good air, only somewhat sharp in winter
time; the Inhabitants are ingenious and quick-witted. It has bred more
excellent Painters, Sculptors and Architects then any one City in Italy
besides: and for Scholars and great wits it may vie with most.

It Is the fashion here for Gentlemen to sell their own wine by retail. Yet no
body goes into the palace to drink; but there is a hole made in the Cellar or
Buttery-wall, to give in and take out flasks or other vessels; and there is a
servant attending for the most part so long as there is wine to sell. At the
palace gate or wall they usually hang up the hackles of old flasks to give
notice that there is wine to be sold there.

The Gentlemen think it a disparagement to them to practice Physic; so that
none of them bring up their children to the study of medicine; but they think
it no disparagement to exercise merchandise; and for this they have the example
of the Great Duke himself, who is the greatest Merchant in Europe; nay Leti
says, That it is reported, he trades for more then all the Merchants in Genoa.

The Great Duke is both here and in all his dominions supreme and absolute
Lord, and may pro arbitrio impose what taxes and gabels he pleases; and therein
he is not sparing. Every house pays to him the tenth of its yearly rent. No
house or land sold but a good part of the price (at least one tenth) goes to
him. No woman married but he has 8 per cent. of her portion. Every one that
goes to Law pays 2 per cent. of what he fues for. Every young Heifer that is
sold pays a crown; Not so much as a basket of eggs comes to market but it pays
somewhat for toll. So that his Revenue must needs be great: some say a million
and half, others two millions of crowns yearly. His expenses amount not to one
million; and consequently, considering also the income of his trading, he must
needs have an immense treasure; by Leti's reckoning more then 60 millions of
crowns: but its well if it amounts to half that sum. And though some at
Florence would have persuaded us that the world was mistaken in this opinion of
his great riches, yet we sew good reason to continue in that belief; he using
all ways of thrift and sparing as well as getting; keeping no house but
allowing his servants board-wages, and being at a set rate with his Cook, and
his Baker, who for the monopoly of fine bread ( Pane di bocca they call it)
furnishes his private table, and pays 1000 Scudi per annum besides. Moreover it
was a maxim with him, that a good treasure of money is the greatest strength
and security of a Prince, and he would often say of our late King Charles I,
that want of money ruined him, and therefore it may well be presumed himself
would take care to fill his Coffers with that.

Besides the territories of Florence and Pisa, called the old State, of which
he is absolute Lord and Sovereign; and the territory of Siena, called the new
State, for which he is feudatary of the King of Spain, He is also possessed of
part of the isle of Elba, which he holds of Spain, part of Graffignana, bought
of the Marquesses Malaspina; the Earldom of S. Fiora, purchased of the Strozzi;
the Marquisate of Scanzano, and the Earldom of Pitigliano and Sorano formerly
belonging to the Vrsini, and some other small places, for all which he is
feudatary of the Emperor. Radicofani in Tuscany and Borgo san Sepolchro in
Vmbria, for which he is feudatary of the Pope.

His Citadels and Fortresses, especially those on the borders, are thought to
be the best fortified and provided with Ammunition and victual of any in
Europe; for the guard of which he keeps four or five thousand Souldies in
constant pay. The 3 principal offices of trust are the Governors of Siena, of
Ligorn and Petigliano. He has always about his person a guard of German
Soldiers. He is able to send into the Field 40000 footmen and 3000 horsemen.
Leti says, that he has 40000 footmen enrolled, who are obliged to stand ready
at every call; and 1000 horsemen listed and divided into 12 Companies, and
these last have the privilege not to be imprisoned for debt. He can also put
forth to Sea upon oceasion 12 galleys, 2 galeasses and 20 ships of war.

He entertains and diverts the Citizens of Florence in Summertime with sports
and shows, especially races for prizes ( Pallio's they call them) sometimes
Barbary horses, sometimes ordinary horses running through one of the streets of
the Town (which thence they call the Curso) without any riders. To make them go
they fasten little flaps of leather stuck with prickles upon their backs.

The Great Duke holds good correspondence and amity with all Christian Princes
and States; except the Pope [upon account of Borgo San Sepolchro, to which the
Pope pretends; the Marquisate of Monte feltre, to which the Duke has some
pretensions in right of his Wife, who was heiress to the late Duke of Vrbin;
and the business of Castro:] and the Duke of Savoy, between whom and him there
has been an ancient emulation about precedence.

The Duke has the nomination of the Bishops and Governors of all the Cities
in his Dominions.

The Ecclesiastical Revenues of the Dukes whole State, according to a Survey
taken in the year 1645, were found to be 765000 Scudi or crowns per an. For
this Leti is my Author.

The Family of the Medici have had two Dukes besides those of Tuscany, viz.
William Duke of Nevers and Laurence Duke of Vrbin; two Arch-Duchesses married
to them, viz. Joan daughter of the Emperor Ferdinand I, wife of Francis I; and
Mary daughter of Ferdinand II, wife of Cosmus II: four Popes, viz. Leo X.
Clement VII, Pius IV, and Leo XI: two Queens of France, viz Katharine wife of
Henry II and Mary wife of Henry IV, mother to our late Queen Mother, who died
in Collen 1640. Their greatness began to exceed the measure of other Families
(says my Author) by the death of Pope John XXIII, deposed in the Council of
Constance in the year 1414, who died in the house of John Medices, and made him
his heir.

The Gentlemen and Citizens of quality keep not their daughters at home after
they be 8 or 10 years of age, but put them into Nunneries, where they are bred
and taught all manner of women's work. Out thence they come not till they be
married. He that makes love to any of them may with the parents consent see and
speak with them at the grate of the Nunnery. This is not only a secure but also
a cheap way to bring up their daughters. For they pay not to the house above 16
pounds a year for diet and all.

About Florence we observed very few plants but what we had before met withal
in other places. Plants observed about Florence.
Those we noted were Carduus chrysanthemus Narbonensis Ger. Acarna flore
purpuro-rubente patulo C. B. Echium majus and asperius flore albo C. B. Carduus
solstitialis Ger. Atractylis; Conyza major Monspeliensis odorata J. B. Galega;
Scrophularia, Ruta canina dicta; Lotus pentaphyllos siliquosus, villosus C. B.
Aster luteus foltis ad florem rigidis C. B. Iberis J. B. Juncus acutus
maritimus capitulis rotundis C. B. Ageratum vulgar; Stoechas citrina
angustifolia; Sideritis vulgaris Ger. Nigella arvensis Park. Satureia aestiva
hortensis Ger. Scorpioides Telephium Ang. Lob Passerina Tragi J. B. Globularia
Monspeliensium; Melilotus major flore albo; Chrysanthemum Bellidis folio Hort.
Pat. Medica orbiculata J. B. Solanum vulgar fructu lutco; Melissa vulgaris;
Chondrilla juncea Ger. Chamaesyce; Stoebe calyculis argentcis C. B. Ischaemon
vulgar; Gramen dactyloides radice repent Ger. Buphthalmum vulgar Ger.
Buglossum angustifolium Lob. Botrys; Psyllium vulgar; Cichorium verrucarium
sive Zacyntha; Scordium; Xeranthemum; Kali spinosum, so far from the Sea.
Gramen supinum aculeatum J. B. Gramen amoris dictum; duae varietates. Iris
floribus albis, in muris urbis copiosissime, unde Florentina denominatur. In
collibus urbi vicinis, Arbutus; Laurus; Lotus arbor; Cyclamen folia anguloso J.
B. Phillyrea serrata 2 Clus. Erica arboreseens Monspeliensis, flore
purpurascente, ramulis ternis J. B. Satureia S. Juliani J. B. Cistus foemina
Ger. Lychuis minima rigida Cherleri J. B. Pyracantha, in sylvosis juxta Arnum;
Arislolochia Saraceneca Ger. ibid. Gratiola; Colutea vesicaria; Rhamnus 1
Chusii flo. albo Ger. Digitalis lutecavel pallida parvo flore C. B.

The red Florence wine is most commened for a table wine of any in Italy; and
doubtless it is most wholesome, and to them who are used to it also most
gustful and pleasant. It is of a deeper color than ordinary Claret, which is
caused by letting it stand longer upon the husks or vinacea before it be
pressed. For it is the skin only which gives the tincture, the interior pulp
of the grape being white.

We began our journey to Rome. Sept. 1.
First we passed through Castiano a pretty little Town 8 miles distant from
Florence; and when we had proceeded 4 miles further, we left the ordinary road
to Siena by Poggi bonzi, (which is the plainer but longer) and rode to S. Buco,
a good large Village, and from thence to S. Donato, a poor walled Town 16 miles
from Florence, and 14 from Siena. From S. Donato we rode on to Castellina di
Campi 5 miles further, from whence to Siena we had 9 miles more; the first four
mountainous and stony way, the last five good. All this Country we rode
through, and generally all Tus^any, is mountainous and barren. Yet are not the
mountains very high. About 5 miles from Florence we took notice of the Certosa
or Carthusian Cloister, seated on a pleasant hill by the way side. We had the
prospect of Siena about 10 miles before we came at it. Siena.
Siena is a fair City, some 4 miles in compass. The Piazza or Marketplace is
compassed about with good buildings, and for the figure of it not unfitly
resembled to a cochle or scallop-shell. This fancy had they who paved it, for
on one side, viz. that next the Palace, they have placed the figure of the heel
of a cochle-shell made in stone, and from thence have drawn rays or ribs of
stone (answering to the ridges or striae of a cochle-shell) to the edges round.
The Domo or Cathedral Chruch is a stately edifice of marble, having a beautiful
front; adorned withinside with the heads of all the Popes, placed in the wall,
round about the body of the Chruch. Part of this Church is paved with Marble
inlaid, or a more elegant sort of M^saic work, containing part of the History
of the Bible, done by Micherino Sanese. This pavement is covered with a
moveable floor of boards to preserve it. Had it been finished as intended, all
Europe could not have shown the like; but there is not a fourth part done. The
painting of the Library walls in this Chruch, containing the History of Alneas
Sylvius afterward Pope Pius II, half by the hand of Petrus Peruginus, and half
by Raphael Vrbin, is in my judgment the most excellent painting that ever I
beheld, and so fresh and lively as if it had been done but yesterday. Here are
also other good Churches and handsome Palaces. We ascended the Tower called
Torre di mangio, from whence we had a fair prospect of the whole City, which
runs out into 3 angles. The walls enclose much void ground, which is made use
of for Gardens and Vineyards. All the streets and Piazza are paved with brick
set edgeways, after the manner of Venice, and the sides of the streets of the
Holland Towns. The whole Town is well built and situate upon a hill, and by
that means always clean. They here make no use of snow or ice to cool or
refresh their Wines, their cellars keeping it cool enough. In the Palace of the
Podesta we saw a room, the walls and roof whereof were painted by Micherino
Sanese, valued at more then the whole Palace besides. We took notice also of
the Theater for Comedies, a fair brick building; and the Studium, called the
Sapienza, where are the public Schools, a mean building much like that of Pisa.
This City is counted a very good place to sojourn in for a Stranger that would
learn Italian, as well because the Citizens here speak the purest language, as
for that they are very civil and courteous to Foreigners. Besides by reason of
its situation the air is temperate even in Summer time; Provisions also are
reasonable.

We traveled to Radicofani 34 miles, Sept. 3.
passing through 1. Lucignano a post-village, and in sight of Cuna a Village on
a hill; also a little walled Town called Fuon-convento, then Tornieri a
post-village, and lastly S. Quiricho, i. e. S. Cyriaci oppidum. S. Quiricho.
Which so soon as we had passed I found great plenty of Lavender-cotton, which
grew all along by the wayside. There grew also all this days journey in great
plenty Absinthium Romanum Caes. Between S. Quiricho and Radicofani Cinara sylv.
and two other species of thistle, one I guessed to be Carduus tomentosus Lob.
the other I knew not; Acarna flore purpurorubente Patulo; Veronica spicata
coerulea; Winter Savory; After luteus Linariae folio; Colchicum covered all the
pastures. Between S. Quiricho and Radicofani we passed no considerable Town or
Village. All the Country we rode through this day is mountainous and barren,
very little wood growing on the ground. Radicofani.
Radicofani being a frontier is strongly fortified and held with a Garrison of
300 Soldiers by the Great Duke. This Radicofani is situate upon a high hill,
so that one may see it going or coming 12 or 14 miles.

We traveled from Radicofani to Viterbo 38 miles. Sept. 4.
About 10 miles from Radicofani we passed over a small River called at a place
called Ponte Argentino, which divides the State of the Gr. Duke and of the
Pope. It is to be noted that in all this Country the Towns and Villages are
generally set upon the tops of hills, for coolness I suppose. We observed also
that the Country subject to the Great Duke, at least that part we traveled
this Voyage, was craggy and bare of trees, and seemed to us to be but dry
parcht and barren land. But so soon as we came into the Ecclesiastical State
the world was well amended; for the hills were for the most part covered with
trees, and the valleys very fruitful. Fourteen miles from Radicofani we passed
Aquapendente a large old Town, Aquapendente.
ex re nomen habens, for it stands upon the brow of a hill from which the water
falls perpendicularly. Then we passed S. Lorenzo, a little Town on the edge of
the lake of Volsinii now called Bolsena, and rode along the brink of the lake 5
miles to Bolsena. From Bolse we mounted up to Monte Fiascone, Monte Fiascone.
Vilerbo.
where we tasted the so much celebrated wine, and after 8 miles further riding
over a spacious and fruitful plain arrived at Viterbo, a large and well situate
Town, but not very fairly built. All that we took notice of there was 2 or 3
handsome Fountains, and the monument of Pope John XXI in the Domo. There are
Sulphure-wells and hot springs about the Town, but we had not time to examine
or so much as view them.

We rode to Baccano 22 miles from Viterbo, Sept. 5.
passing through Ronciglione a pretty Town belonging to the State of Castro. In
the woods we traveled through this day upon the mountains near Viterbo, we
found many rare plants, v. g. Carduus globosus Ger. Viola matronalis; Casia
poetica Lob. Cerrus minore glande Ger. Orobus sylvaticus viciae foliis C. B.
Cyclaminus folio anguloso J. B. plentifully in all the Woods between Viterbo
and Rome: Mespilus vulgaris; Hesperis sylvestris latifolia, flore parvo albo
Park. Thlaspi Candiae Ger. Lamium scntellaria dictum; Sorbus; Linaria major
purpurea; Blattaria lutea; Cytisus cortice cinereo aut albido, siliquis
hirsutis. We cannot yet certainly determine what this plant is called by
Botanic writers. Plumbago Plinii at Bolsena and about Rome plentifully by the
way sides; Polygonum vel Linifolia per terram sparsa flore Scorpioidis J. B.
Helleborus niger hortensis flore viridi J. B. in vepretis montosis passim.

We traveled from Baccano to Rome 16 miles. 6.
From a mountain we passed over not far from Baccano we had a wide prospect of
the Campania of Rome, which being covered over with a thick mist, appeared to
us (looking down upon it from the clear sky above) like a huge lake of water,
nor could we have persuaded our selves otherwise had we not before observed the
like Phenomenon in some places of England. About 3 miles short of Rome we
passed by an ancient monument like to those we had observed at Modena, which
they call the Sepulcher of Nero; and somewhat more than a mile before we entered
the City, Ponte Molle.
we passed over the Tiber by the Ponte Molle, anciently Pons Milvius; and came
upon the Via Flaminia, a straight paved way having Ville and Gardens on either
side it, which brought us to the Gate called Porta del Popolo, whereat we
entered the City.

OF ROME.
OF Rome both ancient and modern, though more might be said than of any City in
the world, yet because so much has been written by others both in Latin and
English, I shall be very brief, it being needless to trouble the world with
what has been already published in other books.

The most remarkable Antiquities to be seen in Rome are some ruins and
remainders of Heathenish Temples, Theaters and Amphitheatres, Circi, Baths,
Aquaeducts, Obelisks, Triumphal Arches, Pillars, Fora, Ma^solaea, Statues,
Altar stones, Grave-stones and other stones with inscriptions, Medals, Entaglie
or Gems engraven with figures, sacrificing vessels and instruments, Sepulchral
urns, Lachrymal urns, ancient Lamps, Weights, Rings, Fibulae and abundance of
other implements.

First for ancient Temples the most remarkable that I observed yet remaining,
Ancient Temples.
either entire or some parts or ruins of were

1. The Pantheon, The Pantheon or Rotonda.
now dedicated to the Virgin Mary and All Saints, and commonly called the
Rotunda from its figure. Its highth was 144 feet, and its breadth as much. The
roof was vaulted in form of a cupola, and all the light it received was by a
large round hole of 3 yards diameter just in the top. It had a porch of 16 tall
and massive pillars of speckled marble called Oriental granite; each pillar
being of one entire stone; of which there are at present only 13 remaining.
Upon the Architrave of the Portico is inscribed in large letters. M. AGRIPPA L.
F. COS. TERTIUM FECIT.

And underneath that in lesser Letters this, IMP. CAES. L. SEPTIMIUS. SEVERUS.
PIUS. PERTINAX. ARABICUS. ADIABENICUS. PARTHICUS. MAXIMUS. PONTIF. MAX. TRIB.
POT. XI. COS. III. P. P. PROCOS. ET. IMP. CAES. M. AURELIUS. ANTONINUS. PIUS.
FOELIX AUG. TRIB. POTEST. V. COS. PROCOS. PANTHEUM. VETUSTATE. CORRUPTTM. CUM.
OMNI. CULTU. RESTITUERUNT.

This Temple was covered with copper plates or tiles, taken away by Pope Urban
VIII; whence that Pasquinate, Quod non fecere barbari fecere Barberini. He
thereupon (as was thought) to silence and appease the clamor of the people,
caused thereof to be made the 4 famous wreathed pillars and Canopy of the high
Altar in S. Peter's Church. Of the very nails [ clavi trabales] which fastened
the tiles of the Portico was cast a great gun of the weight of 2800 pounds now
to be seen in Castle S. Angelo with the figure of one of the nails, and an
inscription upon it signifying whereof it was made, viz. Ex clavis trabalibus
Porticus Agrippae. This Temple remains still entire, only despoiled of its
ancient statues and ornaments. For here besides many others was that famous
Minerva of Phidias. When it was first built it had an ascent of 7 steps which
encompassed it round, now you descend 11 steps to go into it: so much is the
rubbish and earth grown up above it. Indeed a great part of old Rome lies
buried under ground in its ruins. One remarkable thing in this Temple they
bade us take notice of, which I find not in books, that is, that the lintel and
side-posts of the great door of this Church (which is of a huge highth and
breadth for a door) are all of one entire stone; which we were content to
believe rather than put our selves to the trouble of examining. In this Church
is the monument of Raphael Vrbin, whose Epitaph (he being so eminent a person
and one that carried on painting to its highest perfection) I shall here insert.

Raphaeli Sanctio Joan. F. Vrbinat.
Pictori eminentiss. Veterumque aemulo,
Cujus spirantes prope imagines si
Contemplere, naturae atque artis foedus
Facile inspexeris.
Julii II and Leonis X Pontt. maxx. picturae
Et Architect. operibus gloriam auxit.
V. A. XXXVII integer integros.
Quo dic natus est co esse desiit,
VII. Id. Aprilis MDXX.
Hic situs est Raphael, timuit quo sospite vinci
Rerum magna parens, and moriente mori.
2. Templum Fortunae virilis, according to some; according to others Templum
Lunae, but more probably of the Sun and Jupiter. It stands by the River side
not far from the broken bridge; is now called S. Maria Aegyptiaca, and therein
the Armenians have their service.

3. Templum Solis; according to some Templum Vestae; and to others Templum
Herculis Victoris. It stands near the precedent, and is now called La Madonna
del Sole, or S. Stefano allc carrozze. It is but small, of a round figure,
having a portico or gallery of striate pillars round about it. The Walls are of
stone, and it has no windows, but receives all its light from a round hole in
the top, like the Rotonda. This and the former remain still almost entire.

4. Templum Dianae Aventinae, now the Church of S. Sabino. It is large; the
walls of brick and the nave divided from the Isles by 12 striate pillars on
each side.

5. Templum Herculis Aventini; now the Church of S. Alexius and Bonifacius;
situate on the top of the Aventine mount, not far from the former.

6. Templum Jani quadrifrontis, in the Cow-market. This seems rather to have
been an Arch than a Temple.

7. Templum Concordiae, at the foot of Mons Capitolinus, of which there remains
only the portico, heving eight great pillars of marble, most of them of one
stone.

8. Templum Saturni, anciently the treasury, now S. Adrian's Church: at the
foot of the Capital, near Severus his Arch. The frontispiece of this Church is
a remainder of the old Temple.

9. Templum Antonini and Faustinae; now S. Lorenzo in Miranda. The portico of
this remains (...) entire with its ancient inscription, and a great part of the
walls made of massy square stones. The marble pillars of the porch suffer much
by the weather, being of that sort of stone, which has a grain lying one way,
and so riving or cleaving like wood.

10. Templum Romuli and Remi, now of S. Cosmo and Damiano; little of the old
Temple remaining: the stones it seems being carried away by Ignatius Loyola for
his foundation. There is a concurrent Echo, in a cupola you pass under to go
into the body of this Church.

11. Templum Isidis and Scrapidis sive Solis and Lunae, now S. Maria nuova,
near Titus his arch. The present Church is no part of the old Temple, nor built
exactly upon the place where it stood: but behind the Cloister are some part of
the ruins of the old Temple still remaining.

12. Templum Pacis. This was the largest of all the ancient Temples in Rome,
built by Vespasian. There are yet standing part of 3 vaults or arches; and the
plant of the whole may easily be discerned. The great striate pillar set up
before the Church of S. Maria maggiore was taken hence, and was one of eight
which supported the nave or body of this Temple. It is the greatest pillar of
one entire stone now remaining in Rome.

13. Templum Jovis Statoris. Of this the 3 pillars remaining in the Campo
vaccino near the Palatine mountain are supposed to have been part.

14. Templum Jovis tonantis. Of this the 3 pillars almost buried in the earth,
on the architrave whereof are these letters ESTITUER, standing on the left hand
the clivus as you go up from Severus his arch to the Capitol are supposed to
have been part.

15. Templum Fauni, now S. Stefano rotundo, a large round fabric, having two
circles of pillars con^^^ical; the outermost of lesser pillars; the innermost
of larger: in the outermost are 44 pillars, in the inner the just half of that
number. Besides the pillars of the inner circle stand exactly at the same
distance one from another as do those of the outer.

16. Templum Herculis Callaici, now Galluzzo. It stands in the vineyards near
S. Bibiana; a very tall building of brick not exactly round but decagonal. The
roof of it is a vault or cupola not so great as that of the Rotonda and yet not
much less. It had two doors diametrically opposite, and in the other sides were
8 niches for statues.

17. Templum Bacchi extra portam Piam, one mile without the City walls: now the
Church of S. Costanza. This also is a round structure. The walls are of brick
and of a great thickness: within it has a lesser round or concentrical circle
of 12 large pillars There stands an ancient monument of Porphyry of the fashion
of a huge chest or trough, having a stone to cover it. This is curiously
engraven with several figures of branches of trees, boys treading of grapes, of
birds, etc. They call it the monument of Bacchus. In several places of the roof
are to be seen very fresh the pictures of bunches of grapes and several things
belonging to the vintage. The freshness of the colors and rudeness of the
figures makes me doubt whether this was ancient Roman painting or no.

18. Templum Solis. Of this there was lately a piece standing in the Garden of
the Columnae upon monte cavallo, called Frontispicium Neronis and Torredi
Nerone by the vulgar. It is now quite thrown down; only there remain in the
Garden vast marble stones, the greatest that ever I saw, and some of them
curiously carved which came from the top of this building.

19. Templum Romuli and Remi sub monte Palatino, now dedicated to S. Theodore.
This is a round brick building, into which you descend by many steps as into
the Rotonda.

Secondly, For Amphitheaters and Theaters there are Titus now called the
Coliseo, round without, and of an oval figure within; capable of 85000 men to
sit and see. There are also some footsteps of the Amphitheater of Statilius
Taurus, near to the Church of S. Croce in Gierusalemme; and lastly a good part
of the walls of the Theater of Marcellus, upon which the Savelli's Palace is
built.

Thirdly, Of Circi there is 1. a good part of that Antoninus Caracalla, a mile
out of the City. 2. Of the Circus maximus there is little remaining, only the
fashion of it may be plainly discerned. 3. The Circus Agonalis stood where now
is the Piazza Navova. 4. Of the Circus of Nero in Campo Vaticano nothing
remains now to be seen; as neither of 5. the Circus Flaminius.

Fourthly, For Baths there are great ruins of those of 1. Diocletian, wherein
there were seats for 3200 persons to bathe themselves without seeing or
hindering one another; in the building of which he is said to have employed
40000 Christians for 15 years together. 2. Antoninus Caracalla, in which were
1600 seats or closets of polished marble. These were those Thermae in modum
Provinciarum extructae. Besides there are some ruins remaining of 3. The
Thermae of Titus. 4. Of Agrippa, near the Rotonda, called Ciambella. 5. Of
Constantine near S. Sylvesters. 6. Of Nero near the Church of S. Eustachius. 7.
Of Paulus Aemilius at the foot of Monte cavallo, called Magnanapoli. Many
others there were anciently of which now scarce any footsteps to be seen.

Fifthly, Of Aquaeducts the Author of Roma antica and moderna mentions 4, of
which something remains, viz. that of 1. the Aqua Martia brought 37 miles, 2.
the Aqua Claudia, brought 35. Upon the gates called Porta di S. Lorenzo and
Porta maggiore there are ancient inscriptions signifying what Emperors
reparied and built these Aquaeducts. 3. The Appia, brought 8 miles. 4. The Aqua
Virginis brought also 8 miles, which was repaired by Pope Nicholas V, and is
yet made use of, being called Font di Trivio. Of new Aquaeducts there are two
very stately ones built by late Popes, of which the two following inscriptions
will give the Reader an account.

I.
Sixtus V. This work is said to have cost above 200 thousand crowns.
Pont. max. Picenus

II.
Paulus V Pontifex maximus aquam in agro Braccianensi saluberrimis e fontibus
collectam, veteribus aquoe Alseatinae ductibus restitutis novisque additis XXXV
ab Vrbe milliario duxit, Anno Domini MDCXII. Pontificatus sui septimo.

Sixthly, Obelisks we took notice of nine, 1. That Porta del Popolo. It stood
anciently in the Circus maximus, but being fallen down and broken in several
pieces was by the appointment and at the charge of Sixtus V taken out thence,
and the several pieces being handsomely set together again, erected here upon a
fair pedestal; on each side of which it has an inscription; two ancient ones
on the opposite sides in the same words, viz. Imp. Caesar Divi F. two modern
ones on the other two sides: on one this, Sixtus V Pont. max. On the other
this, Ante Sacram It is engraven on each side with 3 rows of Hieroglyphics.

2. That in the Piazza before Saint Peter's Church, the only one that still
remains entire and unbroken. It was taken out of the Circus of Caligula and
Nero, and set up by Dominicus Fontana, by the other, and at the charge of Pope
Sixtus V, as were also those of S. Maria maggiore and S. Job. Lateran This
obelisk has no Hieroglyphics upon it, is 72 foot high besides the pedestal, in
all 108, said to weigh (according to Lassels) 956148 pounds. Of the manner of
taking up and rearing this stone, and the engines employed about it, there is a
particular book written. The 4 modern Inscriptions on the 4 faces of the
pedestal, and the ancient one on the obelisk it self may be seen in Roma antica
and moderna.

3. That of S. Joan. Lateran having 3 rows or files of Hieroglyphics on each
side it. This is the greatest of all the obelisks in Rome, being 112 foot long
besides the base, an at the base 9 1/2 feet thick one way and 8 foot the other.
Who brought it to Rome and where it was set up, this Inscription upon it will
acquaint the Reader.

Fl. Constantius Aug. Constantini Aug. F. obeliscum a patre loco suo motum,
diuque Alexandriae jacentem trecentorum remigum impositum navi mirandae
vastitatis per mare, Tiberimque magnis molibus Roman convectum in circo maximo
ponendum curavit S. P. Q. R. D. D. It was broken into several pieces but is
well mended and set together again, and the wanting Hieroglyphics supplied.

4. That of S. Maria maggiore, lesser then any of the forementioned, having on
it no hieroglyphics. It was taken out of the Mausoleum of Augustus.

5. That of the Piazza Navona, erected by Pope Innocent X. It was taken out of
the Circus of Caracalla, is the least of all the forementioned by much, having
but one row of hieroglyphics. Of this Athan. Kircher has written a book in
folio, which he calls Obeliscus Pamphylius, from the Popes name to whom he
dedicates it.

6. That of S. Mahuto fast by the Jesuits Church. It seems to be but a small
piece of the top of an obelisk broken off; it is engraven with hieroglyphics,
and set up negligently on 4 rude stones.

7. That in the Garden of the Medici: it is full of hieroglyphics, and set upon
a base without any inscription. It is but a small thing, and seems to have been
only the top of a broken one.

8. That in the Garden of the Mattei, given them by the Senate and people of
Rome. This also is a small one, and broken in two pieces, whereof the uppermost
has toward the top some hieroglyphics, the lower piece has none.

9. In the Court of the Palace of the Prince of Paloestrina of the family of
the Barberini lies an obelisk broken in 3 pieces, engraven with hieroglyphics,
which its like was longer.

10. Roma antica mentions another standing at the foot of the stairs in the
Palace of the Vrsini in the Campo di fiore: but this we saw not.

11. We were told of an obelisk lying in the Campus Martius under a row of
houses, as big if not bigger then any of those already erected, and supposed to
continue entire and unbroken.

These obelisks, all that are engraven with hieroglyphics, are of one and the
same kind of stone, viz. a marble of a mingled color red and white, which some
call very hard, and which has not in so many ages suffered the least by the
weather. As for the figure of them they are made taper-wise, lessening from the
basis to the vertex by little and little, so that indeed they are not much
unlike a spit, from whence they took their name. Yet are they not continued
till they terminate in a point; but when they are become too small to engrave
more hieroglyphics upon, the tops are cut into the form of an obtuse pyramid.
It is said, and I think truly, that the hieroglyphics engraven upon these
obelisks are from the bottom to the top greater and greater by degrees; so that
the lowermost and the rest all along to the uppermost appear to the spectator
of equal bigness.

Triumphal Arches.
Of triumphal Arches there are yet remaining that of Septimius Severus; that of
Titus Vespasian; that of Constantine the Great; that in the Cow-market called
the Goldsmiths Arch erected to Septimius Severus his son Antoninus: that of
G^llienus and Salonina commonly called the Arch of S. Vito. As for the Arch
called Arco di Portogallo in the Via Flaminia, mentioned in Roma antica, it is
I suppose demolished, for we could find nothing of it. The inscriptions upon
these arches, and the places where they stand may be seen in the book entitled
Roma antica and moderna.

Pillars.
Of pillars beside such as belonged to temples there are 4 remaining. 1. The
Columna milliaria, which stood in the Forum Romanum, as it were in the center
of the City, from whence they began to reckon the distance from Rome to all
parts. This pillar is marked toward the top with this numeral letter I, of a
great bigness, signifying one or the first stone, and upon every public way at
a miles end was set up a second stone marked II, and so in order at every miles
end a stone marked with the number of the miles of its distance from Rome: So
that ad secundum lapidem signified at one miles distance from this pillar; ad
tertium two, and so on.

This pillar is not considerable for its greatness but only for the use of it,
and the ancient inscriptions upon it. It is now set up on one side of the Area
of the Capitol.

2. The Columna rostrata, erected in the Forum Romanum to C. Duilius, who
obtained a victory over the Carthaginians in a Sea Fight. There is upon it a
long inscription in old Latin, full of lacunae, and hardly intelligible; which
as it is supplied and made out may be seen in Roma antica.

3. The Columna Trajana or pillar of Trajan of white marble, still standing
ever since its first erection. It is 128 foot high beside the base, which is of
12 feet. Within it is hollow and has a pair of winding stairs of 192 steps,
whereby one may ascend to the top, and there are in it 44 little windows to
give light. It is made up of 24 stones, and every stone has in it 8 steps. On
it are carved in an helical area, compassing the pillar after the manner of a
screw from top to bottom, the exploits and achievements of Trajan in his Dacic
expedition, etc. The pedestel of this pillar was all buried under ground, and
not to be seen, till they dug about it and laid it open by the order of Pope
Paul the III. Upon it are inscribed these words.

S. P. Q. R. Imp. Caesari Divi Nervae F. Nervae Trajano Aug. Germ. Dacico,
Pont. maximo, Trib. Potest XVI. Imp. VI. Cos. VI. PP. ad declarandum quantae
^ltitudinis mons and locus tantis operibus sit egestus. 4. The pillar of
Antoninus, much like the former, 175 foot high, ascended by 206 steps and
having 56 little windows. This pillar was broken and miserably defaced; but by
Pope Sixtus V mended and restored to its pristine form. Vide Roma antica.

Mausolaea.
Of Mausolaea, there are only that of Augustus and the moles of Adrian, now
called Castle S. Angela.

Statues.
Of Statues there are an infinite number in the palaces and gardens about Town,
both ancient and modern: I believe more then in all Europe besides. Some of the
most famous and esteemed are, the Equestris Statua in brass of M. Aurelius
Antoninus Pius, now standing in the area of the Capitol. The statues of the two
horses with men by them in stone, now standing upon the Mous Quirinalis which
is thence called Monte Cavallo. The statues of Laocoon, the trunk of Hercules,
and Cleopatra, in the Popes garden called Belvedere. The famous statue of the
Bull in the D. of Parma's palace, called, II Toro di Farnesi. The incomparable
statue of Venus in the Duke of Tuscany's villa, made by Apollodorus the
Athenian. Venus verecunda ib. Marsyas hung up by the hands, ib. The Wrestlers,
ib. The Countryman who discovered Catiline's conspiracy in a sitting posture
with a wood-knife in his hand, ib. The statue of Meleager in the palace of the
Pichini. The statue of Pasquin, whereon the Libels use to be fastened. The
statue of the fellow plucking a thorn out of his foot in the Capitol. The
statue of the sheewoolf giving suck to Romulus and Remus in brass, esteemed the
ancientest in Rome. The Gladiator in white marble worth its weight in gold, in
the Villa Borghese. A copy of this in brass stands in S. James's Park, London.
Two statues resembling friendship, in the Villa Ludovisia.

Of Altar-stones, grave-stones and other stones

Of ancient Medals and Entaglie there are daily Ancient Medals and Entaglie.
and no wonder it is, this having been the seat of the Empire so long. They are
to be sold in many shops, and I have frequently seen of them lying upon the
stalls in the marketplaces. Diverse also of the Virtuosi have collected whole
series of imperial medals.

Of sepulchral urns of several fashions and magnitudes, Sepulchral urns.
some of stone, there are abundance to be seen in the ville, gardens and
palaces of the great persons, and in the Cabinets of the Virtuosi.

As for sacrificing vessels and instruments, lachrymal fibulae, and other
implements, tesserae hospitalitatis, weights, etc. several antiquaries there
are in town, who have likewise made collections of them; as Leonardus
Augustinus the then Popes Antiquary, and John Petro Bellori, a very ingenious
person and skilful in Antiquities, who showed us a great number of these things
and very well conserved. That worthy and ingenious Gentleman Cavalier Carlo
Antonio dal Pozzo showed us some 20 volumes in folio, wherein were the figures
of most of the Antiquities in and about Rome, drawn exactly by the hand. In one
of these were all the vessels and instruments used about sacrificing. In others
of them we noted the Crepundia antiqua, which were little images made of earth
like children, hares, apes, etc. found in urns. The Sistrum of Cavalier Gualdi
figured in Roma Antica: Ancient Staterae; ancient weights. Of these ancient
weights we saw in the museum of Leonardus Augustinus some made of a dark red
stone handsomely polished, of the figure of Holland cheeses, and of several
magnitudes, marked on one side with the number of ounces or pounds which they
weighed. Of these weights I have seen two in the Church of S. Maria in
Cosmedin, called Schola Graeca, and two in the Church of S. Maria in Trastevere
of the bigness of good large Holland cheeses, which they have a tradition and
have inscribed on the wall where they were hung up, that they were stones that
the heathens hung at the feet of Christian Martyrs when they suffered, to
stretch and torment them. A medal with the figure of a talus on one side and on
the other this inscription, Qui ludit arrham det quod satis sit The ancient
Fritillus or dice-box, like those now in use. The ancient Strigiles: A medal of
that sort that was used to be hung about slaves necks, having on the one side
the figure of the wolf with Romulus and Remus hanging at her paps; on the other
in 3 concentrical circles these words, Tene me ne fugiam and revoca me in foro
Trajani purpuretica ad Pascasium Dominum meum. A drinking glass made like a
Priapus, which explains that of the Poet, Vitreo bibit ille Priapo. The ancient
timbrel, like those we have seen used now a days. It is made in fashion of a
sieve, the bottom of it on which they strike, of vellum, the rim of wood,
having several long holes or crannies in it, wherein are hung round pieces of
brass like great medals upon their centers; besides there is a string cross the
instrument hung full of bells.

Rome is a large City, but seemed to us not so populous as either Venice, Milan
or Naples: they reckon the number of inhabitants to be about 120000 souls
besides strangers, of which there are a great number always here. The extent of
the walls is greater than of any City in Europe, viz. 13 miles; but they take
in a great deal of wast ground. The City is now crept down from the hills (upon
which the chief of it formerly stood) into a valley by the rivers side
surrounded with hills. It is generally well built; many of the streets straight
and adorned with a great number of stately palaces scattered up and down all
over the town; full of Monasteries and Churches, of which they say of all sorts
there are above 300. It is well served with all provisions for the belly: yet
are not things generally so cheap there as either at Naples or Florence. Their
beef (as I intimated before) is very good, not much inferior to ours in
England. Before they kill their beasts they put them in a great heat and chafe,
for the same reason I suppose that we hunt Deer and bait Bulls in England, viz.
to make the flesh eat more tender and short, which yet spoils the color of the
meat, and in some men's judgment the taste too, disposing it to putrefaction.
Their sucking veal, which they call vitella mungana, they imagine all Europe
cannot parallel for goodness and delicacy. Their kid or Caprette is also
accounted very good meat; and so is their Swines-flesh. Their Mutton is the
least commendable, as being for the most part tough and dry. Tame fowl they
have as good and savory as in any place, v. g. Hens, Capons, Turkeys, tame
Pigeons. Geese are seldom here to be sold* Plenty also there is of wild foul of
the best sorts, and cheap enough, as Partridge of two kinds, the common and red
legged Partridge, Wood-cocks, Snipes, Duck and Mallard, Wigeon, Teal, Gray,
green and bastard Plover, Curlews, Quails. Of small birds the greatest plenty
that I have any where seen, as Thrushes in winter time an incredible number,
Blackbirds store, Larks infinite. One would think that in a short time they
should destroy all the birds of these kinds in the Country. For besides that
you never fail of great numbers of them in all the Poulterers shops, there is
every afternoon a market of small birds wherein they are sold by the Country
people. Besides the forementioned there are sometimes to be sold Cranes, wild
Geese, Shell-drakes, Avosettae, Water Hens, Berganders and several other sorts
of wild fowl. I have seen lying frequently in the Poulterers shops, and
therefore I presume some people eat them, such Birds as in England no man
touches, viz. Kites, Buzzards, Spar-hawks, Kestrels, Jayes, Magpies and
Wood-peckers. Nothing more commonly sold and eaten here and in all Italy, than
Coots and Stares. They spare not the least and most innocent birds, which we
account scarce worth the dressing, much less powder and shot, v. g.
Robin-red-breasts, Finches of all kinds, Titmise, Wagtails, Wrens, etc.

No want of fish either of fresh or salt water, though it be sold commonly
dearer than flesh, as being brought a great way. Scarce any fish to be found
any where on the coast of Italy but some time or other it may be met withal
here. Those that are the most frequent in the markets are, of River or
Fresh Water fish, Pike, Carp, Tench, Trout, Eel, Barble, Chevin, Dace. I do not
remember that I ever saw a Perch to be sold in Rome. Of Seafish, Mullus
antiquorum, which they call Triglia, of which they have a Proverb, La Triglia
non mangia chi la piglia. He that takes the Triglia eats it not. This fish the
French call Rouge from its color; and we in Cornwall (where I have seen of them
taken) Surmullet. Spiegole, in Latin Lupus marinus, of which kind I have not
seen any in England; Orate, Giltheads; Cephali, which we in English call
Mullet, the ancients called it Mugil; Sarde, a kind of Sprat; Conger; Lamprey;
Sole; Plaise and others of the flat kind; Merluzzos, which we call Hake;
sometimes small sturgeons; Dog-fish of several sorts; Tuny and Sword-fish is
also to be sold here.

Wild Boar and venison of wild Deer you shall seldom fa^l of, to be sold in the
Poulterers shops. Their wild Deer they call Capreole, it is for the most part
very lean* Porcupine also is sometimes to be sold in the markets.

Oranges and Lemons are cheap in Rome; Pears and Apples, if they be good and
large fruit, dear, they sell them by weight here, as they do generally all over
Italy.

Their bread is very good and light notwithstanding they use no yeast to raise
it, and cheaper than ours in England. And here by the way it may not be amiss
to take notice, that the use of yeast for the raising and fermenting of bread
in these Northern Countries has been very ancient. I find mention of it in
Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 6. who thereupon gives their bread the preeminence for
lightness. Galliae, says he, and Hispaniae frumento in potum resoluto, quibus
diximus generibus, spuma ita concreta pro fermento utuntur. Qua de causa levior
illis quam caeteris panis est.

Here is great variety of Wines: more sorts commonly sold than in any other
City of Italy: as Greco, Lagrime or Naples, Languedoc wine, wine of Syragusa
and Augusta in Sicily, Orvietano, Jensano, Monte Pulciano, di Monte fiascone,
Castelii, Romano, and which is most commonly drunk, Albano. Most of the wines
are sweet and full-bodied, and will bear half water. Sweet wines they call
abboccati and rough wines asciuti. They have little wine so harsh and rough
upon the palate as our French Claret and Florence red wine, though those also
are to be had here. Their Olives are small, but good and sweet. They have
plenty of Wall-nuts and Hazel-nuts, and other fruits the same that we have. For
Apples and Pears no Country has better, I had almost said so good as we in
England. For Apricocks I tasted none beyond the Seas comparable to ours.

Rome is noted for several commodities and manufactures, as Viol and
Lute-strings the best in Europe; perfumed gloves; combs made of Buffles horns,
women's fans, Vitriol, Essences.

Commonly all strangers that travel thither buy of those things not for their
use only, but to make presents of to their friends.

Here is doubtless the best music in the world, especially voices, there being
many Eunuchs and Nuns, a great part of whose employment it is to sing in the
Quire.

For pictures of the best masters Rome excells all places, there being more
here than I think in all Italy besides, so that Rome is become the school of
Painters, who come from all parts of Europe hither to study and practice. At
present Cavalier Bernini is the most noted and indeed only excellent Sculptor,
and Pietro de ^ortona the most eminent painter.

The ville (as they now call them) of the Princes and prime Nobility of Rome,
for gardens of flowers, groves and thickets of trees, cut hedges of Cypress,
Alaternus* Laurel, Bay, Phillyrea, Laurus tinus and other semper-virent plants,
close and open walks of great length, orchards of fruit trees, Labyrinths,
fountains and ingenious waterworks, Bird-cages, statues and other ornaments,
especially their greatness (some being in compass 3 or 4 miles) excel the
orchards, gardens and walks of any Prince in Christendom that I have seen. Of
these there are a great number, but the chief of all are 1. The Villa Borghese,
of which family was Pope Paul V. This is esteemed the best of all the villae
and gardens about Rome, though it be not so vast as 2. the villa Pamphylia, of
which family was Pope innocent X. This is on the Janiculum without S. Pancras's
gate and is said to be 4 miles in compass. 3. The Villa Ludovisia belonging to
the Prince Ludovisio; of which family was Gregory XV. 4. The Popes garden at
the Vatican called Belvedere. 5. The Popes garden at monte cavallo. 6. The
garden of the Grand Duke or the villa de Medici. 7. The garden of Montalto^. 8.
The garden of the Mattei. In all which there are little palaces furnished and
adorned with excellent statues, bassi rilievi, pictures and other curiosities,
which I forbear to enumerate and describe at large, that I may not spend time,
and waste paper in writing what few will think worth their while or pains to
read; and which has already been published by Mr. Lassels in his voyage of
Italy, to which I refer the curious for further satisfaction.

Of the palaces and public buildings I shall say nothing, only I cannot forbear
a word or two of S. Peter's Church, which is in my opinion the most stately,
sumptuous and magnificent structure that now does, or perhaps ever did stand
upon the face of the earth. This was the only building that surprised me and
exceeded my expectation, being for a work of man the most pleasant and goodly,
not to say ravishing object that ever I beheld. The whole pile of that majestic
bulk and greatness that it exceeds in all dimensions the most famous Temples
mentioned by the ancients: being in length 520 foot (as Mr. Lassels tells us)
and 385 in breadth: and in some, the greatest Christian Churches; for though it
be not so long as S. Paul's London, yet is it much broader, and in that respect
much handsomer; the breadth being more proportionate to the length. The cupola
of that mavelous highth and compass (the diameter thereof being equal to that
of the Pantheon) and sustaining on the top a huge stonelanthorn, with great
pillars of stone about it, that it may well be accounted the boldest piece of
Architecture (as he says) that I think the world has seen. The Roof arched or
vaulted, and the vault divided into great squares or panes like wainscot after
the old Roman fashion; the ribs and transverse borders which terminate those
squares or pannels being channelled and richly gilded, and the area of each
square almost filled up with a gilt rose. The oval Portico encompassing a large
area before the Church, consisting of 4 rows of great stone pillars standing so
thick that they show like a grove of great trees: The stately porch to which
you ascend out of this area by 24 steps; not to mention the incrustation of
some part of the walls with polished marble; the excellent statues, stately
Altars, rare pictures and other ornaments, render this Church truly admirable,
and in all respects I will not say comparable to but excelling the best in the
world.

During our stay at Rome we rode forth to see 1. Frescati 12 Italian miles
distant, anciently called Tusculum, where Cicero had a villa or Countreyhouse,
of which as yet they show some remains. Here are at present 3 noted ville, 1.
That of the Borghesi with the palace called Mondragone, and two others. 2. The
Villa Aldobrandina or Belvedere belonging to Prince Pamphylio. 3. The Villa
Ludovisia; all of them for walks, groves, Labyrinths, gardens and other
ornaments not inferior to the best about Rome, and for cascates or falls of
water, wetting sports and other ingenious waterworks, beyond them. What we
took more especial notice of, as having not before seen, was the imitation of a
tempest or storm of thunder and rain. This artificial thunder they call
Girandola.

2. Tivoli, anciently Tibur, 18 Italian miles off Rome. Of this City Horace was
much enamoured, praying that it might be the seat and retirement of his old
age. Tibur Argeo positum colono, Sit meae seeds utinam senectae, Sit modus
lasso maris and viarum militiaeque. It stands like Frescati on the brow of a
hill and overlooks the Campagna of Rome. Here are some remains of ancient
temples and other buildings, and a remarkable cascate of the river Aniene or
Teverone. The villa of Este for gardens and orchards, walks and groves, the
Girandola and other water works is nothing inferior to those at Frescati.
About 5 miles distant from Tivoli we passed over the Sulphur-river, the water
whereof is warm, of a bluish color and noisome smell, much like to that of the
Sulphur-well at Knareburgh in Yorkshire. It encrusts the channel it runs in
with a whitish kind of friable stone, which in many places in the bottom and
sides of the channel congeals in the figure of confects or sugar-plums which
they call Confetti de Tivoli. Of these you have boxes full to be sold at Rome,
so exactly resembling confects both for figure and color that no man can
distinguish them; but they are not naturally found so figured, as they would
make strangers believe, but artificially made so by casting in moulds. About
Frescati we found great store of Styrax arbor growing wild in the hedges, which
we found no where else beyond the Seas.

The Campagna of Rome seems to be good land, but is esteemed a very bad air and
unhealthful Country to live in, which is the reason it is so desolate and thin
of inhabitants.

I had almost forgot one natural Phenomenon we observed at Rome, which did a
little surprise us. In sharp ^rosty weather in the middle of Winter, the water
which the servants brought up to wash with in the morning was hot to that
excess that we did verily believe they had heated it over the fire; nor could
we be persuaded of the contrary till we went down to the fountain, and found it
there of equal temper with what was brought up. It was formerly taken for
granted by the Peripatetic Schools, that fountains of springing water are
hotter in cold weather or winter and colder in hot or summer than at other
times; the reason whereof they assigned to be an Antiperistasis, satisfying
themselves with that, and seeking no further. Later Philosophers who could not
content themselves with the notion of Antiperistasis, chose rather to deny the
truth of the experiment, and affirmed that fountain water was not really
warmest in the coldest weather, or coldest in the hottest, but only seemed so
to our sense; the temper of which is much altered according to the difference
of the weather: So that what is much colder than our temper in hot weather, is
not much colder in cold weather, and so seems not so cold, and on the contrary.
Or thus, We judging of the heat and cold of other things by the proportion they
bear to the temper of the air about us, when the air is very cold, though the
water has the same degree of cold it had before, yet it may be hotter then the
air, and consequently seem to us actually hot, and vice versa. But for my part
whatever the reason be, I must needs assert the truth of the experiment, being
very confident that the water, at least of some sources, does not only seem to
be but really is much hotter in cold frosty weather than at other times; else
this water could not possibly have seemed to us, as it did, more than lukewarm.

Great store of rain falls here in winter time to make amends for the
extraordinary heat and drought of the summer.

Rome is a place not only well worth the seeing, but very convenient to sojourn
in, there being wherewithal to entertain and divert men of all sorts of humors
and tempers.

The present Romans seemed to me in their houses and furniture, particularly
their beds and lodging, in their diet, in their manners and customs and in
their very pronunciation (so liquid, plain and distinct) more to symbolize and
agree with us English then any other people of Italy, whether it were that we
learned of them or they of us or both mutually of each other, when there was
that great commerce and intercourse between us and that City for so many years
together.

To describe at large the Court of Rome with all its Officers and Ministers;
the Ecclesiastical government of the Romish Church in general; their Ceremonies
and shows; the civil government of the territories subject to the Pope and
particularly of the City of Rome; the interest of the Pope and the terms he
stands in with other Princes, would require a volume alone; and therefore I
shall choose rather wholly to omit those particulars for the present, and pass
on to the description of our succeeding voyage.

January 24. 1664. We departed from Rome and began our journey to Venice;
riding along the Via Flaminia, and passing the Tiber again by the Ponte Molle
or Pons Milvius. At 7 miles distance from Rome we passed a small village called
Prima porta. Prima Parta.
Some suppose that anciently the City extended thus far: which conjecture I
conceive is grounded upon the name of this place. Eight miles further riding
brought us to a small town called Castle novo, where we lodged. All this
afternoon we rode near the Tiber, upon the Via Flaminia, which reaches as far
as Rimini. It is paved with broad flints, and pebbles, and has on each side a
border of stone, and in that border at every second or third pace a stone
standing up higher than the level of the border. We observed in the fields we
passed through this day great store of vernal crocuses now in flower.

We proceeded on to Arignano or Ariano, 25. Ariano.
a little town and a post-stage 8 miles. Here we left the Via Flaminia, and
rode round a high hill (which stands single, Civita Castellana.
and may be seen 20 miles forward) to Civita Castellana a little town standing
on a hill and a post-stage, 9 miles. Not far from hence we had the prospect of
Caprarola and the Duke of Parma's Palace, Caprarola.
[where we were told is a whispering room like that in the Palace of Te at-
Mantua] which seemed not to be more than two or three miles distant in a right
line, but we were assured that as the way lay it was ten or twelve miles
thither.

Four miles further we came to a poor small town called Borgetto; Borghetto
a little below which we passed the Tiber by a bridge called Ponte Felice,
Ponte Felice.
begun by Sixtus V and finished by Urban VIII, for the benefit of Travelers
and Pilgrims, as appears by an inscription upon it. Not far from the river on
our right hand we passed under a little town, standing on the top of a hill,
Magliano.
called Magliano, and rode on about 6 miles near the bank of the river, (having
in prospect at a good distance on our left hand a town called Horta) till we
came to Vtricoli, Horta.
which town at present stands upon a hill, Vtricoli.
but by the ruins that remain, the ancient Ocricoli seems to have lain near
the river, at least part of it.

From Vtricoli we had stony way over the mountains for five miles. For about a
mile before we entered Narni we rode upon the brink of a horrid precipice by the
river Nera's side. Narni.
Narni anciently called Nequinum, and afterward Narnia from the river Nar
which runs beneath that steep rocky mountain upon the ridge whereof this City
stands, was formerly a Roman colony and a place of some account, but is now
very mean, poor, and inconsiderable. Leander Albertus says it was ruined and
left almost quite desolate by the Venetian Soldiers who were quartered there
in the time that the Emperor Charles V besieged Pope Clement VII in the Castle
S. Angelo. Gattamelata the famous Captain for the Venetians, to whom they have
erected a brass statue on horseback near S. Antonies Church in the City of
Padua, was native of this town. Near Narni are seen the remainders of vast
arches of stone, which some say were of a bridge, others more probably of an
Aqueduct, over the river from one mountain to another.

We rode from Narni over a pleasant and fruitful valley, 26.
encompassed with mountains, and cultivated after the manner of Lombardy, to
Terni, anciently Interamna from its situation, a handsome little City, having a
pretty piazza, on which stands a Church that seems to have been an ancient
temple. About 4 miles from this town is that famous Cascate or fall of water
from the lake di Pie di Luco. At the further end of this valley beyond Terni
and upon the hills were the greatest olive-yards or rather forests of huge
olive trees that I have any where seen in Italy, and at this time of the year
we found the people very busy in brushing down and gathering of olives.

From Terni we had mountainous way to a little place called Tritura, another
Post-stage, and from thence we descended to Spoleto, Spoleto.
the chief town of Vmbria thence called Ducato Spoletano. The walls of this
City are of a large extent, and the houses indifferently fair, and there are to
be seen many ruins of ancient buildings in it.

From Spoleto we rode through a very pleasant and fruitful valley of a great
extent, surrounded with mountains, much resembling the Arena of an
Amphitheater, planted with rows of trees and vines after the manner of
Lombardy. The hills round about yield a pleasant prospect, being sprinkled
every where with little towns and houses set thick upon them. About 4 miles
short of Foligno we rode under an indifferent great town, standing on a round
hill, called Trevi. Trevi.


Foligno [Fulginium] is a pleasant and handsome little town, Foligno.
noted for confections and sweetmeats. At the end of the valley of Spoleto
beyond Fuligno we observed the like woods of olive trees as in the valley of
Terni.

Leaving Foligno we ascended again in a way cut out of the side of a mountain,
Jan. 27.
having on our left hand a huge precipice, and below a valley between very high
and steep hills, into which at the upper end falls down a little river called
Dale, which drives some paper-mills; a pleasant place to behold. About 4 or 5
miles from Foligno we got up to the top of the Apponnine, where the mountains
all about us were covered with snow. On the top of these mountains is a little
plain, and upon it a small lake or pool of water, and a village called Col
fiorito, a very pleasant place in Summertime, as its name imports. When we had
passed over this plain we began again to descend, and the next considerable
village we came to was Serravalle, ex re nomen habens, it being situate in the
jaws of a narrow valley, 14 miles distant from Foligno. From Serravalle we rode
among the mountains by the side of a little river, passing several small
villages, viz. La Muccia or Mutia and Pulverina, etc. and lodged at Valcimarra.

We rode through Tolentino a pretty little town, having a handsome piazza, 28.
Tolentine.
distant 9 miles from Valcimarra. This was the Birthplace of Franciscus
Philelphus a learned man, and a great Critic in the Greek tongue. He it was
that invented the word stapes for a stirrup, which before had no name in
Latin. Macerata.
From Tolentino we had 10 miles to Macerata, a large, well built and populous
town, having a handsome piazza. It is the Capital city of Marca Anconitana,
where the Cardinal-Legate or governor of the Province usually resides. From
Maccrata we rode to Loreto passing through Recanati, Recanati.
in Latin Ricinetum, a very pretty town, situate on the ridge of a hill, and
but 3 miles short of Loreto. Loreto
It arose from the ruins of Helvia Ricina, destroyed by the Goths. Here we
took notice of a table with a brass statue of the Virgin Mary in basso relievo
upon it, and an inscription, giving thanks to her that she was pleased to fix
her house in the territory of this City.

Loreto stands likewise upon a hill, a pretty small place, consisting only of
one little street within the walls, and a Burgo or Suburb without likewise of
one street, as big as the City within. The Church and College of the Canons
stands at one end of the street. Before the Church is a little piazza having a
cloister or Portico on one side where the Canons lodgings are. In the midst of
this piazza is a handsome fountain, and before the Church door a brass statue
of Sixtus V in a sitting posture, with an inscription signifying that he had
advanced Loreto to the dignity of a city, giving it a Bishop. The doors of the
Church are of brass cast and graven with several histories. The Church is built
like our Cathedrals in form of a Cross, having a Cupola in the middle, directly
under which stands the Santa Casa or holy house (as they call it) enclosed in a
case of white Parian marble, curiously engraven with several figures in b. r.
representing several histories, by the best sculptors then living. The house it
self is sufficiently described in the history of it written by Tursellinus. The
walls (which are now only remaining, the roof being removed) are made of a kind
of red stone (as they would have us believe) not only of the color but also of
the figure of bricks, indeed so like bricks that I can hardly persuade my self
they were any other. This kind of stone, they say, at this present is found
about Nazareth and no where else, which if true is one of the best arguments
they have to prove that this house came from thence. That the Reader may see
what weak proofs and little evidence they have of the miraculous transporation
of this house from Judea hither, I shall here insert the whole Relation of it
made by themselves, which is translated into 13 several languages and hung up
in tables here in the Church: and in English runs thus, Ave Domina Angelorum.

The miraculous Origin and Translation of the Church of our Lady of Loretto.
The Church of Loreto was a Chamber of the B. Virgin nigh Jerusalem, in which
she was born and bred, and saluted by the Angel, and therein conceived and
brought up her Son Jesus to the age of 12 years. This chamber after the
Ascension of our Savior was by the Apostles consecrated into a Church in
honor of the B. Lady: and S. Luke made a picture to her, likewise extant
therein to be seen at this very day. It was frequented with great devotion by
the people of the Country where it stood whilst they were Catholics. But when
leaving the Faith of Christ they followed the Sect of Mahomet, the Angels took
it and carried it into Sclavonia and placed it by a town called Flumen, where
not being had in due reverence, they again transported it over the Sea to a
wood in the territory of Recanati, belonging to a Noble woman called Loretta,
from whence it took the name of our Lady of Loreto; and thence again they
carried it, by reason of the many robberies committed, to a mountain of two
brothers in the said territory: and from thence finally, in respect of their
disagreement about the gifts and offerings, to the common highway not far
distant, where it now remains without foundations, famous for many signs,
graces and miracles; whereat the inhabitants of Recanati, who often came to see
it, much wondering, environed it with a strong and and thick wall, yet could no
man tell whence it came originally, till in the year 1296. the B. V. appeared
in sleep to a holy devout man, to whom she revealed it, and he divulged it to
others of Authority in this Province, who determining forthwith to try the
truth of the vision, resolved to choose xvi men of credit, who to that effect
should go all together to the City of Nazareth, as they did, carrying with them
the measures of this Church, and comparing therewith the foundatious remnant,
they found them wholly agreeable; and in a wall there by engraven, that it
stood there, and had left the place. Which done they presently returning back,
published the premises to be true: and from that time forward it has been
certainly known, that this Church was the Chamber of the Virgin Mary: to which
Christians began then, and have ever since had great: devotion, for that in it
daily she has done and does many and many miracles. One Friar Paul de Sylva an
Eremite of great sanctity, who lived in a cotage nigh unto this Church, whither
daily he went to Mattins, said that for ten years space on the 8th. of
September, two hours before day he saw a light descend from heaven upon it,
which he said was the B. V. who there showed her self on the Feast of her
Nativity. In confirmation of all which two virtuous men of the city of Recanati
diverse times declared unto the Prefect of Terreman and Governor of the
forementioned Church is follows, The one called Paul Renalduci avouched, that
his Grandfather saw when the Angels brought it over the Sea, placed it in the
forementioned wood, and had often visited it there: the other called Francis
Prior in like sort affirmed, that his Grandfathers Grandfather, being 120 years
old, had also much frequented it in the same place, and for further proof that
it had been there, he reported that his Grandfathers Grandfather had a house
nigh unto it, wherein he dwelt; and that in his time it was carried by the
Angels from thence to the mountain of the two Brothers, where they placed it as
abovesaid.

By order of the right reverend Monsignor Vincent Cassal of Bolognia, Governor
of this holy place, under protection of the most reverend Cardinal Moroni. I
Robert Corbington Priest of the Society of Jesus in the year 1634. have
faithfully translated the premises out of the Latin original hanging in the
said Church. To the honor of the ever-glorious Virgin.
The Treasury of this Church is very rich, full of Jewels, precious stones,
gold and silver vessels, and tabulae votivae, embroidered Altar-clothes, copes,
vests, etc. of great value, besides other ornaments and curiosities, which have
been presented by several Prinves and great persons. The most considerable
particulars those that are curious may find set down in Lassels his Voyage of
Italy, as also of the vessels and plate in the house it self. The earthen pots
in the Apothecaries shop, most part of them painted by the hand of Raphael de
Vrbino, and the great wine cellar, are things that use to be shown to
travelers.

We traveled from Loreto to Ancona 15 miles of foul way. 30. Ancona.
This is a considerable city, well peopled and frequented by Merchants, by
reason of the commodiousness of the harbor, which was formerly the verybest in
all the gulf, but is now run much to decay. The chief remarkables we took
notice of were [1.] The Remainders of the stones securing the ancient port,
where stands that famous triumphal arch of white Parian marble, by order of the
Senate erected to Trajan: composed of huge stones and thus inscribed.

Imp. Caesari. Divi. Nervae. F. Nevae. Trajano. Optimo. Aug. Germanic. Daci.
Co. Pont. Max. Tr. Pot. XIX. Imp. IX. Cos. VI. PP. providentissi mo. Principi.
Senatus. P. Q. R. Quod. accessum. Italiae. hoc. etiam. addito. ex. pecunia.
sua. portu. tutiorem. navigantibus reddiderit.

On the right side is inscribed, Plotinae. Aug. Conjug. Aug. and on the left
side Divae. Marcianae. Sorori. Aug.

On the top of this Arch formerly stood a Statua equestris of Trajan, which is
now taken down and set over the gate of the Merchants Hall or Exchange, which
was [2.] the second remarkable. [3.] The Theater for Comedies. [4.] The Domo or
Church of S. Cyriacus. [5.] The Citadel. [6.] The shellfish called Pholades
in Latin, because they live in holes within a soft kind of stone, or hard
clay, which being exposed to the air in process of time becomes a perfect stone
for hardness. The Italians call these stones Balle di Sasso, and the fish
Ballare or Dattylide mare. They find the stones (as they told us) but at Sea in
great plenty, and taking them up being them into the harbor where they keep
them. We had a dish of them dressed which were no unpleasant meat, inferior for
taste to no shell fish except an oyster.

We traveled along the Seacoast 20 miles to Sinigaglia, 31. Sinigaglia.
anciently Sena Gallica, a handsome little city well walled about and
fortified. Here is a small harbor for boats and barges. From Sinigaglia we
still followed the Seashore to Fano, 15 miles distant; by the way, Fano.
passing over two long bridges. Fano, anciently Fanum Fortunae, is a much
larger city then I had imagined, well walled and fortified. There is an old
triumphal Arch erected to Augustus, which because it had been somewhat broken
and defaced in the wars with Malatesta, they have in the wall by set a model of
it as it was when entire, whereon is inscribed, Effigies arcus ab Augusto
erecti, posteaque ex parie diruti bello Pii II. contra Fanenses; Anno
MCCCCLXIII.

DIVO AUGUSTO PIO CONSTANTINO PATRI DOMINOPUM.

IMP. CAES. DIVI F. AUGUSTUS PONTIFEX MAXIMUS COS. XIII TRIBUNITIA POTEST XXXI
IMP. XXVI PATER PATRIAE MURUM DEDIT.

CURANTE L. TURCIO SECUNDO APRONIANI PRAEF. URB. FILL. ASTERIO V. C. CORR. FLAM.
ET PICENI.

Here we saw the ancient temple of Fortuno now the Augustine Freres Church: And
the brass statue of Fortune which was adored, taken out thence, now standing in
the palace. In this City is a Senate of 70 Gentlemen changed every third or
fourth year, who out of their own number elect every two months 2 Priors and a
Gonfalonier, but the Governor or Monsignor placed here by the Pope is the
Dominus fac totum. Malatesta tyrant of Rimini (as they call him) seized also
upon this place, but was driven out by Pope Pius II, assisted by the Duke of
Vrbin, Carignano of Ancona and one Cassaro. These two Gentlemen had each of
them a ladder for his arms, the one red, and the other white. The city out of
gratitude took these two ladders for their Arms, leaving their former, which
was a gate or Arch with this motto under it, In hac porta stat hic Leo fortis.
This City is by some esteemed one of the best situated in Italy.

We still held along the shore till we came to Pesaro, Feb. 1. 1664. Pesaro.
anciently Pisaurum, 7 miles. This is a very elegant and pleasant City, having
a handsome piazza, encompassed with fair buildings; therein stand many ancient
stones with inscriptions. We passed through a long well built street, and had a
prospect of the Cupola of the Domo. The haven is almost choked up. It is
walled about and fortified wi^h bastions and a castle. We saw this town only in
transitu, but it merited a little demurr. From hence we crossed the Country to
a village called Catolica 10 miles. We left Gradara on our left hand but came
not in sight of it. From Catolica we rode along the Seashore for the most part
till we came within 2 or 3 miles of Rimini, and then left the shore and took
the Via Flaminia. From Catolica to Rimini they reckon 15 miles, yet may Rimini
easily be seen from thence. Rimini.
Rimini is a pretty proper City, having straight streets like Pesaro and Fano,
yet are the buildings but low. Within the walls of this town we passed under a
high stone-arch erected to Tiberius (Schottus says Augustus) Caesar, but the
inscription was somewhat defaced. In the piazza we viewed the stone on which J.
Caesar is said to have stood when he made a Speech to his Soldiers, animating
them to accompany him to Rome and invade the Cities liberty. On it are these
modern inscriptions, C. Caesar Dict. Rubicone superato civili bell. commilit.
suos hic in foro Ar. adlocut.

Suggestum hunc vetustate collapsum Coss. Ariminensium Novembris and Decembr.
MDV. Restit.



In another Piazza we saw a brass statue of Paulus V. Being Carneval time we
found the Gentlemen here tilting. They ran not at one another but at a Puppet
or man of straw, Bamboccio they call it.

We made a digression to S. Marino, 2. S. Marino.
a little town standing on the top of a very high hill, some 10 miles or more
distant from Rimini. This place has maintained it self in the condition of a
free State or Commonwealth, as the Inhabitants boast, for above 1000 years, but
its well if half so long. The territory of this Republic is but one mountain
about 3 miles in length, and some 9 or ten miles round. In this small territory
they have 4 Castelli or villages, viz. Serravalle, Fietano, Monte Giardino, and
Fiorentino: 8 corn mills upon the little river Canova, which bounds this
territory toward the North, and a powder-mills: the number of souls is about
4000 or 5000, of Soldiers or fighting men 1500. The Arms of this Republic are
3 towers upon a mountain, and under it this Motto, Libertas perpetua. The
Borgho of S. Marin stands at the foot of the hill upon which the town is built,
and is like some of our North Wales towns. In this Borgh^ weekly on Wednesdays
is held a market, where are bought and sold a great number of Swine, especially
in Carneval time, 3, 4, or 5 thousand on a market day. The reason of this great
concourse to buy and sell here is because they pay so little toll, viz. about
six pence for a drove be they more or less. From the Borgho up to the town are
two ascents, the one more easy and winding about to the furthermost gate, by
which coaches may make a shift to get up, the other steep to the nearer gate.
On one side the town is walled about, on the other side it needs it not, for it
stands on the brow of a precipitious rock of a very great height, whereon they
have placed 3 towers in a row. On the side where the wall goes the hill is very
steep and almost impossible to climb but by the made ways. There is no hill
near it that can any way offend it, and those that are next far lower than that
whereon the town is built. The streets of the town are narrow, and the houses
but mean. Here live about 60 Jews. Two cloisters they have within the walls,
one of discalceate Franciscans or Succolanti, the other of Nuns of the Order of
Santa Clara; without the walls in the Borgho is a Monastery of Capucines, and
about a mile from the town a fair Convent of the Servitae. They have 25 small
pieces or Drakes and 2 Culverines. This place is a Bishops Sea and the Bishop
of it is Bishop also of S. Leo, Monte Feltre, and La Penna. This Republic is
surrounded by the territory of the Pope; they stamp no money; they have neither
friendship nor enmity with any of the States or Princes of Italy; and in the
several wars of Italy they have enjoyed peace. On occasion they send
Ambassadors to the neighboring Princes and States. At Rome they have their
Protector, who at present is Cardinal Carlo Barberini, to whom they sometimes
send presents, viz. 100 little Cheeses or a Butt of Muscatella. They
acknowledge no Superior under God, but have absolute power in civil and
criminal causes. If a person banished from other places retires hither, they
sometimet give him protection, but it is done by the major vote of the Council.
If one man kill another, though in his own defense, he is sentenced by the
Commissary or Judge to pay 100 Scudi, but he petitioning the Council, they
usually bring it down to 25. If one murders another and flies, he is banished
for ever and all his goods confiscate. This Republic maintains a Physician and
a Surgeon at the public charge. The Muscatella's of this place are much
esteemed, and the Gentry heerabout in Summertime come ordinarily hither to
drink them, and enjoy the fresco. Cows they have none, but sheep and goats good
store; of whose milk they make little cheeses that eat well. From the hill we
had a prospect of Monte Leone, a strong fortress formerly belonging to this
Republic, but taken from them by the Duke of Vrbin. They have 4 great Fairs
every year, the chiefest of all is on S. Bartholomew's day, at which time there
is a general muster of all their Forces. At these Fairs there is great
abundance of young cattle sold. Many veals driven as far as Florence. These
fairs and markets disgust the neighboring Princes, as being a great diminution
of their tolls.

The Government of S. Marino is by a Council of 45, which they call Corpo di
Prencipe. Of these 15 are Gentlemen (for there are about 20 families of
Gentlemen in this State) 15 Artisans or tradesmen and 15 farmers or count
reymen. They continue for their lives, and when one dies another is chosen by
two third parts of the votes, when a Gentleman a Gentleman, and so of the rest.
These Counselors choose out of their own number from 6 months to 6 months ^
Capitanie, (which have the like power as ^^nsuls, or Mayor, with us) after this
manner. When the old Captains go out of office they nominate 12; the names of
these are written in 6 scrolls of Paper, viz. two names in a scroll. These
scrolls are put into a hat or box, and a boy puts in his hand and draws out 3.
These 3 the elder Captain takes and carries to the Church of the Sacrament, and
Te Deum being sung, a Priest puts the 3 scrolls into a hat, and a young child
puts in his hand and draws out one, and they whose names are therein written
are Capitanei for the next 6 months. These Capitanei cannot be eleced again for
two years following. Besides, the Great Council elect out of themselves by
major vote a lesser Council of 12, viz. 4 out of each order. And to this
Council civil and criminal causes and quarrels of right and wrong are referred.
This Commonwealth has a Commissary or Judge, who must be a Doctor of Law, and
always a foreigner. He is elected by the Council and contitinues 18 months. His
stipend is ten crowns the month. His sentence is confirmed, or may be repealed
or mitigated by the Council. The Chancellor is elected in like manner. He is a
notary and his allowance is 60 scudi or crowns per annum. They have also a
Captain of the Militia, who continues in office as long as the Council pleases.
But enough and more then needs will most Readers think of this petty
Commonwealth; concerning which I should not have been so large, but that no
body that I know of before me has made any particular description of its State
and Government, as accounting it not worth their while to enquire into it, or
their pains to set it down.

We traveled from Rimini to Ravenna. 3. We passed the famous bridge over the
river Rimino, begun by Augustus and finished by Tiberius. The people say that
the stones are joined together without any cement. Indeed the sides or walls of
it are of vast stones, each as high as the border and or breadth
proportionable, immediately contiguous without any mortar or cement between
that I could discern. There is upon it an inscription in large letters
signifying when and by whom it was built. At 15 miles distance from Rimini we
passed through a little town called Cesenatic^; then Cervia about 5 miles
further, Cesenatico. Cervia.
a place enveroned with fens. It is a Bisho^s Sea and therefore has the title
of a City, yet is it ^^t a mean and pitiful town. All the way between Cervia
and Ravenna till we came withn 2 or 3 miles of the town, we had a wood of
Pine-trees on our right hand called Pigneda, bearing fruit enough (as Schottus
says) to serve all Italy.

Ravenna stands between two rivers [ Bedesis and Montone] one running on one
side, Ravenna
and the other on the other. It is a large town but ragged and not well built,
the houses are all very low. It has 5 gates, an ole castle of brick; 3 very
fair Covents, one called the Class, belonging to the Monachi Classenses, the
Church whereof is dedicated to S. Romualdo. A second called the Porto, because
it is dedicated to S. Maria Portuenses. It belongs to the Canonici reguulares
Lateranenses. A third of Benedictine Monks dedicated to S. Vitale. The Church
of this Covent is a double octagon, the one concentrical to and included in the
other, built as they told us by Justinian. The Monks showed us here 2 marble
pillars, for which they said the Venetians offered them their weight in silver;
but we have seen the like elsewhere, viz. in the Library at Zurich, and at
Verona in our Ladies Chapel in the Garden of Seignior Horatio Giusti. Their
generation at first was of a mass or heap of small flints and pebbles united
into one body by a cement petrified as hard as themselves and capable of
politure. Probably this cement was separated by degrees from a fluid wherein
these stones lay. To these Monks belongs the Rotonda, a little round Church
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, about of a mile without the walls: the entire
roof whereof is of one single stone, notwithstanding that the Diameter of the
Church is 14 of my ordinary paces, which are near so many yards. In the midst
of this stone is a round hole to let in the light. Upon the top of it formerly
stood a porphyry monument of Theodoricus a Gotthick King who is supposed to
have built it. This monument is now taken down and set in the wall of the
Covent of the Succolanti, by the way-side with this inscription, Vas hoc
Porphyriacum ol. Theodorici Gottor. imp. cineres in Rotundae apice recondens,
huc Petro Donato Caesio Narnien. praesule favente translatum ad perennem
memoriam Sapientes Reip. Rav. PP. C. MDLXIII.

The Monastery of the Succolanti is one of the fairest we have seen belonging
to that order, and the Church dedicated to S. Apollinaris deserves notice
taking, as well for the double row of marble pillars brought from
Constantinople by Theodoricus, as for the ancient figures of Mosaic work in the
walls. In the Domo we noted the figures of the Archbishops of Ravenna in Mosaic
work. Eleven of them had a Dove standing upon their heads, which they say were
chosen by a Dove alighting and sitting upon their heads, the legend whereof may
be seen more at large in Schottus. Near the Franciscans Cloister is the
monument of Dante the famous Poet, which is an arch erected to his memory by
Bernardus Bembus the Venetian Podesta in Ravenna; under which is his effigies,
and two inscriptions in Latin verse,

I.
Exigua tumuli Dantes hic sort jacebas,
Squallenti nulli cognite pene situ;
At nunc marmoreo subnixus conderis arcu,
Omnibus and cultu splendidiore nites.
Nimirum Bembus musis incensus Etruscis
Hoc tibi quem inprimis hae coluere dedit.
II.
Jura monarchiae, superos, Phlegetonta lacusque
Lustrando cecini voluerunt fata quousque:
Sed quia pars c^ssit melioribus hospita castris,
Auctoremque suum petiit felicior astris,
Hic claudor Dantes patriis extorris ab oris,
Quem genuit parvi Florentia matter amoris.
These verses are said to have been made by Dante himself, sed Musis parum
faventibus, and if he had not composed better in Italian he had not deserved
the reputation of so great a Poet. This City may boast of its antiquity and
what it has been, not what it is, and yet the Cardinal Legate Governor of
Romandiola usually resides here. It is very ill served with fish,
notwithstanding it is so near the Sea: there is scarce a good Inn in Town, it
lying out of the way of travelers, and strangers, and being no throughfare.
What was true of old is true still here; Its harder to get good water than good
wine, Sit cisternae mihi quam vinea malo Ravennae, the water being all
brackish: Neither yet was the wine we met withal any of the best. I wonder this
City should not be more populous and rich; the Country on the Northside all
along to Faenza, seeming to be fat and fertile land, and being planted after
the manner of Lombardy. It lies indeed very low, yet I believe now adays is
never overflown.

We observed in this journey from Rome to Venice a great difference between the
temperature of the air on this side and on the other side the Appennine
mountains, on the other side it being very temperate and warm, but on this side
as cold and raw as it is at any time in winter with us, or indeed can well be
in open weather; and that this cold did not proceed from a general change of
weather since our coming on this side we are well assured; for we heard of no
such change, and we found snow lying here in the low grounds in many places,
which on the other side was all melted and gone even upon the hills before our
coming over. The reason of this is obvious, because this ridge of hills being
higher than the lower region of the air, or place where the Sunbeams are
reflected, hinders the commixture of the warm Southerly and Western air with
the cold Northerly and Eastern, but especially stopping on one hand the South
and West winds which else would drive the temperate air and tepid vapors into
these parts; and on the other hand the cold Northern and Eastern blasts, which
else would temper and much abate the warmth of those beyond the mountains.
Hence I do not think incredible nor much wonder at what is related by some
Travelers of a mountain in the East Indies, on the one side whereof it is
Summer when on the other it is Winter.

We left Ravenna and rode along the bank of the River Montone till we came
within 4 or 5 miles of Faenza. Feb. 5.
The Country on each side this river was much like to Lombardy. The river ran
very swiftly notwithstanding to the eye the Country seemed to be an exact
level. From Ravenna to Faenza we had 20 long miles.

Faenza is a pretty little City, Faenza.
encompassed with a strong brick wall, at present neglected and out of repair;
famous for earthen ware made here, esteemed the best in Italy. Before we entered
the Town we passed a little Suburb, and then the bridge, in the midst of which
stands a tower. Upon S. Thomas his day yearly all the Gentlemen of Faenza meet
and choose Magistrates for all the year, viz. 8 Antiani or Senators and a Chief
who is called Prior for every month, so that for every year there are 12
several Senates.

From Faenza we traveled on to Imola 10 miles. Imola.
The way was very straight, I suppose part of the Via Aemilia. About the midway
between Faenza and Imola we passed through a little walled Town called Castle
Bolognese. Half a mile short of Imola we ferried over the river Senio.

Imola anciently Forum Cornelii is a lesser Town then Faenza, has a fair
square piazza with a cloister or Portico on one side it.

We traveled to Bologna upon the Via Aemilia. 6. Bologna.
In this side of Italy they have a custom to boil their wines to make them keep
better. The boiled wine, which they call Vin Cotto, seemed to us much stronger
than the wine unboil'd, which they call Vin Crudo.

We took the Florentine Procaccios boat to Venice. 7.
Passing through 9 Sostegni we came to Mal Albergo, where we shifted our boat
going down from a higher to a lower channel, which brought us to Ferrara, which
they reckon to be 45 miles distant from Bologna. From Ferrara we were towed by
a horse up a straight artificial channel to a place called Ponte, Ferrara.
where we changed our boat again, coming into the river Po: In the Po we were
rowed down stream about 27 miles to Corbola; where we shifted our boat the
fourth time, not for any necessity of the place as before, but because we then
came into the Venetian territory and so must take a Venetian boat. We went but
2 or 3 miles further down the Po, and then struck into a channel on our left
hand, passing a sluice to a little Town called Loreo, and proceeding on about 15
miles further we passed near to Chioza a large Town built among the lagune,
Chiozza.
and Pelestrina a village standing upon the Argine or Lido, we entered into the
lagune at the haven of Malamocco, and soon after arrived at Venice Feb. 9. of
which City we have already written as much as suffices for our purpose.

We began our journey from Venice to Geneva by the way of Rhoetia and
Swizzerland. March 13.
Passing by boat to Mestre 7 miles, and from Mestre to Treviso by coach 12
miles. At Treviso we took horses and a Vitturine for Trent: Treviso.
in which journey we spent two days and an half, it being almost 80 miles
riding. The first day we passed through C. Franco 12 miles, Castle Franco.
Bassano.
and then over a fair champian Country to Bassano, a very handsome and
pleasant walled Town upon the river Brenta, over which there is a good bridge
of wood. This Town drives a great trade of weaving silks.

As soon as we were past Bassano we entered among the mountains, going up beside
the river Brenta 14 miles, and lodged at Pont Sigismund. The second day we rode
still up beside the river, and about 2 miles from Ponte we passed through a
gate where we paid Datii to the Archduke of Inspruck. At this pass is hewn out
of the rock a box or little castle called Ca^olo a great height above the road,
Ca^olo.
to which there is no avenue at all, but both the Soldiers that keep it and
all their provisions must be drawn up by rope and pully, only there is a
fountain of fresh water in it. Notwithstanding that this fortress belongs to
the Archduke, yet the Venetian territory extends 4 or 5 miles further to a
place called Sixteen miles riding brought us to a pretty little Town called
Bergo, Perzine.
and 13 miles more to Perzine a rich and populous Borgh, 5 miles short of
Trent. Near this Town is a good valley, but at our being there the snow was not
melted. Between Bassano. and Ponte the Country on the left hand the river
Brenta as we went up belongs to the Set Commune, and on the right hand to
Bassano; Upon the river were several saw-mills, and a great quantity of timber
floted down the stream to Padua. As soon as we got among the mountains we every
where found stoves in the houses instead of Chimneys. The plants we observed in
this journey were Erica Pannonica 4. Clus. now in flower upon the sides of the
mountains and the Rocks plentifully: Fumaria bulbosa; Leucoium bulbosum vulgar
C. B. and Leuc. bulbosum minus triphyllon J. B.

We got early to Trent, 16. Trent
a pretty little City, seated upon the river Athesis at the foot of the
mountains, which do encompass it almost round, save the valley where the river
runs. The inhabitants speak altogether Italian; and the Venetian money passes
current among them, notwithstanding their present Prince is Archduke of
Inspruck. Beside the North door of the Domo we found the monument of Matthiolus
having on it these inscriptions.

Above, Herbarum vires nec rectius edidit alter,
Nec mage te clarus hac super art fuit.
Si men's ut corpus depingi posset, imago
Vna Dioscordis Matthiolique foret.


Under his Effigies this, D. O. M.
Petro Andreae Matthiolo Senensi III Caesarum
Ferdinandi, Maximiliani and Rudolphi Consiliario
Et Archiatro,
Et Hieronymae Comitissae ex a^tiqua and illustri
Castellanorum seu Comitum Varmi familia,
Ferdinandus Matthiolus Caesari Ferdinando Austriae Archiduci, and Joanni
Georgio Saxoniae Electori a consiliis and cubiculis medicus;
Apostolica and Imperiali auctoritatibus Sacri Pala tii Lateranen. Aulaeque
Caesareae comes,
Et armatae militiae eques auratus,
Vna cum Maximiliano fratre
Anniversariis precibus institutis
Parentibus been merentissimis PP. Ann. MDCXVII.
Vixit ille an. LXXVII.
Ann. Christi MDLXXVII. obiit Tridenti.
Vixit illa an. XXXII.
Obiit ibidem An. Dom. MDLXIX.


Below this Distich, Saxa quidem absumit tempus, sed tempore nunquam
Interitura tua est gloria Matthiole.


On the front of the Quire is this following inscription concerning the Council
held in this City.

Sacrosanctum postremum Oecumenicum generale Concilium fuit in hac celeberrima
civitate celebratum; and quidem sub Papa Paulo III, Anno MDXLV, XIII Decembris
pro felice inchoatione fuit facta Processio generalis per totam Urbem, ab
Ecclesia Sanctissimae Trinitatis ad hanc Ecclesiam Cathedralem; qua finita
primus Cardinalis Praesidens, qui postea fuit Papa Julius III, [prout etiam
alter Card. Praesidens fuit Papa Marcellus II nominatus] in hoc loco
eminentiore, tunc magis amplo, ad celebrandum Concilium and Sessiones faciendas
deputato, ad altar S. and Gloriosissimi martyris Vigilii hujus Ecclesiae
patroni celebravit missam de Spiritu S. Ac reliquis caeremoniis peractis
fuerunt sub D. Paulo III celebratae octo publicae Sessiones cum decretis, and
aliae tres ob vastam pestem in hac Urbe grassantem Bononiae, ubi nihil fuit
decretum, Anno MDXLVII. Postea cessante peste and bellis fuit reductum hoc
Concilium, and in hoc eodem loco fuerunt sub Papa Julio III celebratae aliae
publicae sex Sessiones cum Decretis Annis 1551, 1552, quibus interfuerunt tres
Seren issimi Principes Ecclesiastici, S. R. I. Electores Archiepiscopi,
Moguntinus, Trevirensis, Coloniensis, 1 Die September. 1551. hanc Urbem ingressi;
prout etiam Serenissimus Elector Brandenburgensis duos oratores huc ablegavit.
Demum sub Papa Pio IV Anno 1561 and 1563 fuerunt celebratae ultimae novem
publicae Sessiones cum Decretis in Ecclesia S. Mariae majoris hujus urbis,
istius Ecclesiae Reverendissimo Capitulo incorporata, sicuti etiam Ecclesia S.
Petri. Et nihilominus ad pedes Sanctissimi Crucifixi tum in hoc loco existentis
and nunc alio translati pro Decretorum corroboratione scmper fuerunt publicata
omnia dicti Concilii Decreta. Interfuerunt sub dictis summis Pontificibus
celebrationi Cardinales Legati 13, inter quos Christophorus Madrucius; non
Legati 4, inter quos Ludovicus Madrucius: Oratores Principum totius Europae 29:
Patriarchae 3: Archiepiscopi 33: inter quos Archiepiscopus Rossaniensis, qui
postea fuit Vrbanus 7 nominatus: Episcopi 233: Abbates 18: Generales ordinum
12: Theologiae Doctores 148; Procuratores 18: Officiales Concilii 3: Cantores
9: Natarii 4: Cursores Papae 2.

Sacrosancto Spiritui S. omnium Conciliorum directori sacratissima Die
Pentecostes, Anno 1639. dicatum.

Here are no remarkable Churches or other buildings. The Bishop is both
spiritual and temporal Prince. Under him there is a Governor who yet can do
nothing without the Council, which consists of 8 persons, viz. The Podesta or
Mayor of the City; the Capitaneo, two Canons of the Church and 4 Gentlemen or
Citizens. All these are nominated and appointed by the Bishop and continue in
power during life modo been se gesserint. There be 14 Canons bell onging to the
Cathedral all Noblemen, and by these the Bishop is chosen. The Bishops name
then was Sigismundus E. of Tirol, commonly called Archduke of Inspruck.

Of the natural Abilities, Temper and Inclinations, Manners and Customs,
Virtues and Vices of the Italians.
THE Italians are, by the general confession of all that write of them,
ingenious, apprehensive of any thing and quick-witted. Icon. anim.
Barclay (who is not too favorable to them in the Character he gives of them)
says, they have animum rerum omnium capacem; and again that there is nothing
so difficult ad quod Italici acuminis praestantia non tollatur.

They are patient and assiduous in any thing they set about or desire to learn,
never giving over till they master it and attain the perfection of it.

They are a still, quiet people, as being naturally melancholy; of a middle
temper between the fastuous gravity of the Spaniard and unquiet levity of the
French, agreeing very well with the English, as the Scots are observed to do
with the French, and Spaniards with the Irish.

They are very faithful and loving to their friends, mindful of a courtesy
received, and if it lies in their way or power for one good turn will do you
two. This I had from a very intelligent person who has lived and conversed
long enough among them to know them thoroughly. Barclay himself confesses, that
where they do truly love omnia discrimina habent infra tam humani foederis
sanctitatem. Understand it of the better so^t; for Shopkeepers and Tradesmen
are false and fraudulent enough; and Innkeepers, Carriers, Watermen and
Porters as in other places horribly exacting if you make not an explicit
bargain with them beforehand: insomuch that in many places the State has
thought it necessary by public Bando and decree to determine how much
Innkeepers shall receive of travelers for their dinner and for their supper
and lodging.

They are not easily provoked, but will bear long with one another; and more
with strangers than their own Countrymen. They are also very careful to avoid
all occasions of quarrel; not to say or do any thing that may offend any
person, especially not to abuse any one by jesting or drollery; which they do
not like nor can easily bear.

No people in Europe are more scrupulous and exact in observing all the
punctilio's of civility and good breeding ( bella creanza they call it) only
methinks the Epithets they bestow upon mean persons are somewhat extravagant,
not to say ridiculous, as when they style a mechanic or common tradesman Signor
molto magnifico and the like.

When they are in company together they do not only give every man his turn of
speaking, but also attend till he has done, accounting it a piece of very ill
breeding to interrupt any man in his discourse, as hating to be interrupted
themselves. Contrary to the manner of the French and Dutch, who make no scruple
of interrupting one another, and sometimes talk all together. As careful are
they, not to whisper privately one to another when in company, or to talk in an
unknown language which all the company understands not. They do also show their
civility to strangers in not so much as asking them what Religion they are of,
avoiding all unnecessary disputes about that subject, which are apt to engender
quarrels: which thing we could not but take notice of, because in France you
shall searce exchange three words with any man, before he ask you that question.

It is not easy for a stranger to get acquaintance and familiarity with the
Italians, they not much delighting to converse with strangers, as not knowing
their humors and customs. Yet is their conversation when gotten pleasant and
agreeable, their discourse profitable and carriage obliging.

Most of them, even of the ordinary sort of people, will discourse
intelligently about Politic affairs and the government and interest of their
own Country; being much addicted to and delighted in Politic studies and
discourses.

Most of them are very covetous of liberty, especially such Cities as have been
formerly Commonwealths, discourses or treatises of that subject making deep
impressions on their minds: So that in some places not only books but also
discourses about former revolutions are prohibited. Barclay also says, that
they are gloriosae libertatis cupidi, cujus adhuc imaginem vident. Hence the
Princes of Italy build store of Castles and cittadels in their territories, not
so much to defend themselves against their enemies as to bridle their Subjects,
and secure themselves against tumults and insurrections. A strange thing it is,
that of all the people of Italy the Neapolitans, who never tasted the sweetness
of liberty, nor mended their condition by their commotions, but always (as we
say) leapt out of the drying pan into the fire, should be the most tumultuous
and given to rebel against their Princes. Leti tells us of one of those petty
subordinate Princes in this Kingdom of Naples called Thomaso Ferrari, who
governed his subjects not like vassals, but with that sweetness and gentleness,
as if they had been his own children; yet some of these fellows taking arms
come into their Princes presence, and say to him, Sir Prince, we are come to
drive you out of your Palace and burn all your movables. Why (answers the
Prince) can you find fault with my government? Are you aggrieved in any thing
and it shall be redressed: No (replied they) but because we understand that
many of our Countrymen have revolted from their Lords, we also to show that we
love revolutions, are resolved to rebel against you.

The Italians are greatly delighted in Pictures, statues and music from the
highest to the lowest of them, and so intemperately fond of these things that
they will give any rate for a choice picture or statue. Though all of them
cannot paint or play on the music, yet do they all affect skill and judgment in
both: And this knowledge is enough to denominate a man a virtuoso. Many of them
are also curious in collecting ancient coyns and medals.

They are great admirers of their own language, and so wholly given to
cultivate, polish and enrich that, that they do in a great measure neglect the
Latin, few of them now adays speaking or writing well therein; but mingling so
many Italian idiotisms with it, that you have much ado to understand what they
speak or write. As for the Greek, few or none have any tolerable skill in it,
the study thereof being generally neglected and laid aside.

They are very temperate in their diet, eating a great deal of sallet and but
little flesh. Their wine they drink well diluted with water, and seldom to any
excess. We saw only one Italian drunk by the space of a year and half that we
sojourned in Italy. Whether it be that in hot Countries men have not so good
stomachs as in cold; or whether meat as being better concocted nourishes more
there; or that the Italians are out of principle, temper or custom more sober
and temperate than other nations. Their herbs seemed to me more savory and
better concocted than ours. Their water also was not so crude. But for flesh
ours in my judgment much excels theirs, being much more succulent and sapid.
Yet in Rome have I eaten beef not inferior to ours: but I suppose it might be
of German oxen; of which (as we were informed) there are many driven thither:
and for sucking veal the Romans (as we have already noted) think theirs
preferrable to any in the world.

The Italians, especially those of inferior quality, are in all things very
sparing and frugal: Whether it be because they are so educated and accustomed,
or because the gabels and taxes which they pay to their governors are so great
that they cannot afford to spend much on themselves; or because naturally
loving their case they had rather live nearly then take much pains.

The Nobility and great persons choose rather to spend their revenues in
building fair palaces and adorning them with Pictures and statues, in making
stately and spacious orachards, gardens and walks, in keeping coaches and
horses and a great retinue of servants and staffiers, than in keeping great
houses and plentiful tables; giving board-wages to their servants and
attendants, which in my opinion is the better way of spending estates, these
things finding poor people employment, so that the money comes to be
distributed among them according to their industry; whereas the other way
maintains in idleness such persons for the most part as least deserve relief:
those that are modest and deserving choosing rather (if possibly they can) to
maintain themselves and their families by the labor of their hands, than hang
about great houses for a meals meat. Besides that great housekeeping is very
often, not to say always, the occasion of great disorder and intemperance. Were
I therefore Gods steward for a great estate (for such all rich men are or ought
to be) I should think it more charity to employ poor people and give them money
for their work, than to distribute my estate among them freely and suffer them
to live in idleness, I mean such as are able to labor.

The inferior Gentry affect to appear in public with as much splendor as they
can, and will deny themselves many satisfactions at home that they may be able
to keep a coach, and therein make the tour a la mode about the streets of their
City every evening.

The Italians when they call, speak to, or of one another, use only the
Christian name, as Signor Giacomo, Signor Giovanni, etc. unless it be for
distinctions sake, so that you may converse among them perchance some months
before you hear any man's surname mentioned.

The Italian Gentry live for the most part in the Cities, whence it is that the
Cities are so splendid and well built, so populous and rich; and the Country
so poor and thinly inhabited. Yet are the Noblemens Palaces rather great and
stately, than commodious for habitation. In many Cities the paper windows
(which are for the most part tattered and broken) disgrace the buildings, being
unsuitable to their magnificence.

The houses are generally built of stone, thick walled and high rooft, which
makes them warm in Winter and cool in Summer: but they contrive them rather for
coolness than warmth, and therefore make the windows large to give them air
enough.

Of the Gentry in Italy, especially in Venice, if there be many brothers of one
house only one usually marries, and that the eldest if he pleases; if he be not
disposed then any other, as they can agree among themselves. The rest do what
they can to greaten him that is married, to uphold the Family. The brothers
that marry not keep concubines or whores; which though it be sin, yet their
Confessors can easily absolve them of it.

In most of the Cities and Towns of Italy there are Academies or Societies of
Virtuosi, who have at set times their meetings and exercises, which are for the
most part prolusions of wit and Rhetoric, or discourses about moral subjects,
curious questions and Problems, or Paradoxes, sometimes extemporany, sometimes
premeditated. These have their head whom they call Prince, and a certain number
of Academists, who are chosen by balloting, but they seldom refuse any that
offer themselves to election. Many of these Academies assume to themselves
conceited or fanciful names, and take a suitable imprese or coat of arms; as
for example the Academists of Bergamo call themselves Eccitati, and their
imprese is the picture of the morning. In Mantua the Academists called Accesi
have taken for their Emblem a Looking-glass reflecting the Sunbeams; those
called Timidi a hare. As for the other Cities of Italy, in Rome there are 3
Academies, the Humoristi, the Lyncei and the Fantastici: in Padua 3, the
Ricoverati, Infiammati and Incogniti: in Bologna 3, Ardenti, Indomiti, and one
innominate: in Venice 2, Discordanti and Gussoni: in Naples 2, Ardenti and
Intronati: in Luca 2, Oscuri and Freddi: in Florence la Crusca: in Siena
Intronati: in Genoa Addormentati: in Vicenza Olympici: in Parma Innominati: in
Pavia Affidati: in Milan Nascosti: in Ferrara Elevati: in Rimini Adagiati: in
Cesena Offuscati: in Ancona Caliginosi: in Fabriano Disuniti: in Perugia
Insensati: in Viterbo Ostinati: in Brescia Occulti: in Faenza Philoponi: in
Treviso Perseveranti: in Fermo Raffrontati: in Verona Philarmonici: in Macerata
Catenati: in Alessandria Immobili: in Vrbin Assorditi.

Most of the Italians of any fashion wear black or dark colored cloths, and
for the fashion of them follow the French (but not too hastily) excepting those
Countries which are subject to the King of Spain; which use the Spanish habit.

As for their vices, they are chiefly taxed for three.

1. Revenge; they thinking it an ignoble and unmanly thing to put up or pass by
any injury or affront. Many times also they dissemble or conceal their
displeasure and hatred under a pretense of friendship, that they may more
easily revenge themselves of whom they hate by poisoning, assassinating or any
other way; for nothing will satisfy them but the death of those who have
injured them: and there be Bravo's and cutthroats ready to murder any man for
a small piece of money. Besides, which is worst of all, they are implacable, and
by no means to be trusted when they say they pardon. Hence they have a Proverb
among them, Amicitie reconciliate and menestre riscaldate non furono may grate.
The women also provoke their children to revenge the death of their fathers by
showing them the weapons wherewith they were murdered, or cloths dipped in their
blood or the like, by which means feuds between families are maintained and
entailed from generation to generation. These are the qualities for which we
usually say, An English man Italianate is a Devil incarnate.

2. Lust, to which the inhabitants of hot Countries are by the temper of their
bodies inclined. Hence it is that all Cities and great Towns do so swarm with
Courtezans and Harlots; and to avoid worse evils the State is necessitated to
give them public toleration and protection. As for masculine venery and other
works of darkness, I shall not charge the Italians with them, as not having
sufficient ground so to do; and because (as Barclay says) Haec scelera
tenebris damnata and negari facilius a consciis possunt, and ab aemulis fingi.

3. Jealousy, which strangely possesses this people; so that for every little
suspicion they will shut up their wives in a chamber, and carry the key with
them, not suffering them to stir abroad unless themselves accompany them. To
salute an Italians wife with a kiss is a stabbing matter; and to call a man
cornuto or Cuckold in good earnest is the greatest affront or disgrace you can
put upon him. The married women in Italy by this means have but bad lives,
being for the most part confined to their houses except when they go to Church,
and then they have an old woman attending them: the doors of their houses shut
up at dinner and supper; all visits and familiar discourses with men denied
them; neither can they speak or smile without suspicion: one reason of this
among others may be, because the husbands knowing themselves to be so dishonest
and false to their wives, they presume that had they opportunity they would not
be more true to them. And yet for all this guarding and circumspection are not
the Italian Dames more incorrupt than the matrons of other Nations, but find
means to deceive their husbands, and be dishonest in spite of jealousy.

To these I might add Swearing, which is so ordinary among all sorts, the
Priests and Monks themselves scarce abstaining from oaths, that I believe they
account it no sin.

It is a general custom all over Italy to sleep an hour or two after dinner in
Summer time; so that from two of the clock till four in the afternoon you shall
scarce see any body stirring about the streets of the Cities. Indeed if one
sits still it is very hard to keep his eyes open at that time. Either this
custom did not prevail when the School of Salerno wrote their Physic precepts,
or that direction, Sit brevis ant nullus tibi somnus meridianus, was calculated
for England, to whose King that Book was dedicated. And yet the Italian
Physicians still advise people either not to sleep at all after dinner, or if
they must sleep, to strip off their cloths and go to bed, or only to take a nod
in a chair sitting.

In many Cities of Italy are Hospitals where Pilgrims and poor travelers are
entertained, and have their diet and lodging for three days (if they have
reason to stay so long) gratis, besides a piece of money when they go away.

There are also Hospitals to receive exposed children, if I may so term them;
that is, any without exception that shall be brought and put in at a grate on
purpose, whither upon ringing of a bell an Officer comes presently and receives
the child, and asking the party that brought it, whether it has been baptized?
carries it to a nurse to give it suck; and there it is maintained till it be
grown up. The place where it is put in is so strait as to admit only children
new born or very young. This I look upon as a good institution in great Cities,
taking away from women the temptation of murdering their newborn children, or
destroying their conceptions in the womb, to hide their shame. I know what may
be objected against it, viz. that it emboldens them to play the wantons, having
so fair a way of concealing it: Sed ex malis minimum.

In Rome, Venice and some other Cities of Italy they have a way of exercising
charity little used among us. Several Confraternities of well-disposed persons
raise sums of money by a free contribution among themselves, which they bestow
yearly in portions for the marrying of poor maids, which else might want
husbands, and be tempted to dishonest practices to maintain themselves. This I
look upon as well-plac'd alms and worthy the imitation; it being very
convenient and in a manner necessary, that new-married people should have
somewhat to furnish their houses and begin the world with; and no less fitting,
that young persons should be encouraged to marry, as well for multiplying of
people, wherein the strength of the Commonwealth chiefly consists, as for the
preventing those evils to which young and single persons are strongly tempted
and inclined.

It is troublesome thing to travel with firearms in Italy, you being forced in
most Cities to leave them at the gate with the Guard, who give you a tally or
token; and when you Leave the City you bring your tally and receive your arms.
This is done to prevent assaults and murders, which are so frequent in many
Cities of Italy. For this the G. Duke of Tuscany is much to be commended, there
being no such muthers and outrages committed in any of the Cities under his
dominion as in other places: so diliegent is he in searching out, and severe in
punishing Bravo's, Cutthroats, Assassins and such kind of malefactors. As much
might be said for the Pope in the City of Rome, but in other Cities in his
Territories there is killing enough.

When you depart from any City you must be sure to take a bill of health out of
the Office that is kept every where for that purpose: without which you can
hardly get to be admitted into another City, especially if it be in the
Territory of another Prince or State. If any one comes from an infected or
suspected place he is forced to keep his Quarantain (as they call it) that is,
be shut up in the Lazaretto or Pesthouse 40 days before he be permitted to
come into the City. So scrupulously careful are they to prevent Contagion.

In Rome and other Cities of Italy we have often observed many laborers that
wanted work standing in the market places to be hired; whither people that want
help usually go and bargain with them. Which custom illustrates that Parable of
our Savior recorded in the beginning of the 20th. Chapter of S. Matthew's
Gospel, wherein the householder is said to go out about the third hour, and see
others standing in the marketplace, ver. 3. and in ver. 6. he is said to find
others about the eleventh hour, and to say to them, why stand ye here all the
day idle; and ver. 7. they answer, because no man has hired us.

In Italy and other hot Countries so soon as they have cut down their corn they
thresh and winnow it usually, or at least a great part of it, on a floor made
in the open air, before they bring it into the house. Hence in the Scripture we
read of threshing floors as open places without roof or cover. Such I suppose
was that where Boaz winnowed barley, Ruth 3. 3. Neither is it any wonder that
he should lie there all night: for at Aleppo and even in Malta in Summer time
they set their beds upon the roofs of their houses, and sleep sub Dio, in the
open air.

One custom we have in England, which (as far as I could observe) is no where
used beyond the Seas, and that is for children to beg their Parents and
Godfathers blessing upon the knee.

One custom which prevails generally in foreign Countries is but little used in
England, that is to salute those that sneez by vailing the bonnet, and praying
God to bless, assist or defend them, etc.

There is a kind of sport or game much used this day by the Italians, called
Gioco di mora, which seems to have been used by the ancients and called micare
digitis. It is for the most part between two, who put out just at the same time
each of them as many fingers as they please and also name each of them what
number he thinks fit, and if either of them happens to be the number of the
fingers which both of them together threw out, then he that names that number
wins one.

Several sorts of Meats, Fruits, Sallets, etc. used in Italy, and other
Observations about Diet.
1. IN Lombardy and other parts of Italy, Tartufale (as they call them) i. e.
Tubera Terrae, a kind of subterraneous Mushrome, which our Herbarists English
Trubs, or after the French name Trufles, are accounted a choice dish, held by
naturalists to be incentive of lust. The best of all are gotten in Sicily, and
thence sent over into Malta, where they are sold dear. The way to get them is
to turn swine into a field where they grow, who find them by the smell, and
root them up out of the ground, and set one to follow the swine, and gather
them up.

2. Snails boiled and served up with oil and pepper put into their shells are
also accounted a good dish: I am sure they are sold dear at Venice and
elsewhere, especially the great whitish or ash-colored. shell-snails, which we
had not then seen in England, but have since found plentifully upon the Downs
near Darking in Surrey, whither (as we were informed by the honorable Charles
Howard Esquire) they were brought from beyond Seas by. Mr. Martin Lister has found
them on the banks of that hollow lane, leading from Puckeridge to Ware. These
snails before winter stop up the mouth or aperture of their shells with a thick
hard white paste like a good lute or plaster, and are kept all Winter in
barrels or other vessels, and sold by the Poulterers. The first place where we
met them to be sold in the market was Vienna in Austria, where they imitate the
Italians as well in their diet as in the manner of their buildings.

3. Frogs are another Italian viand which we in England eat not. These they
usually fry and serve up with oil. At Venice they eat only the loins and
hindlegs, as also at Florence, and that upon fish-days. In some places of
Lombardy they eat their whole bodies, and besides their frogs are of a larger
size than ordinary. Their flesh shows white and lovely as they lie in the
markets skinned and ready prepared to be fried. Howbeit even there in Italy,
Kircher in his book de Peste condemns them as an ambiguous and dangerous meat,
and I think deservedly; wherefore we do well having plenty of better food,
wholly to abstain from them.

4. Land Tortoises are accounted with them a better meat than Sea-tortoises,
and are commonly to be sold in the markets. They are eaten by those Orders of
Freres whose rule obliges them to abstain from flesh, as Carthusians,
Carmelites, etc.

5. They eat also many sorts of Shellfish, which we either have not or meddle
not with, as Purples, Periwinkles of several sorts, Patellae or Limpets,
Sea-urchins, which last are to be found every day in the markets at Naples.
They also eat the Sea-tortoises, of which the blood put into the stomach and
boiled is the best part.

6. Paste made into strings like pack-thread or thongs of whit-leather (which
if greater they call Macaroni, if lesser Vermicelli) they cut in pieces and put
in their pots as we do oat-meal to make their menestra or broth of, much
esteemed by the commonpeople. These boiled and oil'd with a little cheese
scraped upon them they eat as we do buttered wheat or rice. The making of these
is a trade and mystery; and in every great town you shall see several shops of
them.

7. They scrape or grate Cheese upon all their dishes even of flesh; accounting
that it gives the meat a good relish; which to those that are unaccustomed
makes it rather nauseous or loathsome.

8. Chestnuts roasted and the kernels served up with juice of Lemon and sugar
are much esteemed, and by some called the Pistachios of Italy. At Bononia they
grind them and make little cakes of the flower of them, which though eaten by
the poor are no desirable dainty to a delicate palate. Roasted Chestnuts are a
great part of the diet of the poor Pesants in Italy; as we have elsewhere noted.

9. They eat all manner of small birds as well as the Germans, viz. Wrens,
Stares, Titmise, Butcher-birds, etc. and several great ones which we touch not
in England, as Mag-pies, Jayes, Wood-peckers, Jack-daws, etc. nay we have
frequently seen Kites and Hawks lying on the Peulterers stalls; as we have
already noted in our description of Rome.

10. They use several herbs for Sallets, which are not yet, or have been but
lately used in England: v. g. Selleri, which is nothing else but sweet
smallage, the young shoots whereof with a little of the head of the root cut
off, they eat raw with oil and pepper: In like manner they eat Fennel:
Artichoke also they eat raw with the same sauce; [the same part of it that is
eaten boild.] In Sicily at the highest village upon that side Mount Aetna that
we ascended, they gave us to eat for a Sallet the stalks of a tall prickly
thistle, bearing a yellow flower, I suppose it was the Carduus Chrysanthemus
Dod. which the rankness of the soil had caused to mount up to that stature.
Besides in most of their sallets they mingle Rocket, ( Rachetta they call it)
which to me gives them an odious taste. Curled Endive blancht is much used
beyond Seas; and for a raw sallet seemed to excel Lettuce it self: Besides it
has this advantage that it may be kept all Winter.

11. Many fruits they eat which we either have not or eat not in England, v. g.
Jujubes, sold by the Hucksters while they are yet green: L'azarole, the fruit
of the Mespilus Aronia, of a pleasant acid taste: both fruit and tree exactly
like the common Hawthorn, but bigger. Services or Sorbes the true, as big as
little Pears; those that grow with us are the fruit of the Sorbus torminalis:
Green figs both white and blew in great plenty; a most delicate fruit when
fully ripe, comparable for the taste to the best marmalade, and which may be
eaten freely without danger of surfeiting: The husks or cods of Carobs, called
in Latin Siliqua dulcis, in Greek (...), the word used Luke 15. 16. and
therefore by some supposed to be the husks the Prodigal is said to have desired
to fill his belly with. Indeed we thought them fitter meat from swine than men;
for though they had a sweet taste, yet afterward they troubled our stomachs
and purged us: but they have not upon all men the like effect; for the Italians
and Spaniards eat them ordinarily without any such trouble: Love-apples:
Mad-apples both raw and pickled: Water-melons; which they use to eat to cool
and refresh them, and some Physicians allow sick persons to eat them in
Fevers. They are almost as as big as Pompions, have a green rind and a reddish
pulp with blackish seed when ripe. The Italians call these Cucumeri, whereas
Cucumers they call Citrulli. Several sorts of Gourds, as Cucurbita lagenaria,
and Cucurbita flexuosasive anguina; which eats very well boild in pottage:
Cucumis anguinus, which is more esteemed and indeed better tasted then the
Cucumber. The common people both in Italy and Sicily eat green Chich-pease raw,
as our people do common pease.

12. In their Desserts and second courses they commonly serve up pine-kernels,
and in time of year green Almonds: also a kind of sweet-meat or Confection made
up of mustard and sugar, which they call Italian mustard.

13. To cool and refresh their wines they use generally snow, where it may
easily be had, else ice, which they keep in conservatories all Summer. Without
snow they that are used to it do not willingly drink, no not in winter.

14. In the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily they make a sort of cheese which they
call Caseo di cavallo, i. e. Horse-cheese, for what reason I could not learn.
These cheeses they make up in several forms; some in the fashion of a blown
bladder, some in the fashion of a cylinder and some in other figures. They are
neither fat nor strong, yet well-tasted and accepable to such as have eaten of
them a while. The pulp or body of them lies in flakes and has as it were a
grain one way like wood. They told us that they were made of Buffles milk, but
we believed them not, because we observed not many Buffles in those Countries,
where there is more of this cheese made than of other sorts.

15. In Italy and other hot Countries their meat is not only naturally more
lean and dry then ours, but they roast it also till it be ready to fall from
the bones, and there be little juice left in it. Besides when they roast their
meat they draw coals under the spit, and let the fat drop on them, the nidor
whereof perfumes the meat, but not our gust who are not used to it, and what
they lose in dripping they save in fuel. Their roasting differs not much from
our broiling or carbonadoing. I speak this of ordinary Inns and mean peoples
houses, in great houses and Inns it is otherwise.

The Italians count not their hours as we do, from twelve to twelve, beginning
at midday and midnight; but from one to four and twenty, beginning their count
at Sunset, which is a much more troublesome way; the setting of the Sun being
a moveable point or term, and they being therefore necessitated to alter and
new-set their clocks every day: whereas midday and midnight being fixed points,
the clocks need no setting anew. As for Italy in general, though the Italians
imagine it to be the best Country in the world, and have a Proverb among them
that Italy is the garden of the world: yet setting aside Lombardy, Campania and
some few other places, the rest is mountainous and barren enough: the earth so
parcht by the Sunbeams that it bears no grass, and (as Barclay faith) seldom
yields grain enough for three year successively to supply the necessities and
uses of its inhabitants, whatever they may boast of the Itala gleba. The reason
why the Italians are so conceited of their own Country is, because they seldom
travel abroad, and so see not the beauty and fertility of others.

I might have taken notice of the vast and incredible number of Religious
houses there are in Italy. I have sometimes thought they might in all of both
sexes amount to eight or ten thousand. Of these the Gentlemen make advantage.
For such of their daughters as either they cannot get husbands for, or are not
able to give portions to, suitable to their birth and quality, they can in one
of these houses for a small matter honorably dispose of and settle for their
lives. The institution of such houses as these, whither young women of quality,
who for want of sufficient fortunes or personal endowments cannot easily
provide themselves suitable matches, might retire and find honorable
provision, might perchance be tolerable, yea commendable, were they purged from
all superstition the women not admitted too young, and under no vow of
perpetual chastity, only to leave the house in case they married. But because
of the danger of introducing Monkery, I think it more safe for a Christian
State not to permit any such foundations.

Bussles are a common beast in Italy, and they make use of them to draw their
wains as we do of oxen: only because they are somewhat fierce and unruly, they
are forced to lead them by an iron-ring put in their noses, as our Bear-wards
do their Bears.

For insects the most remarkable sorts which we want in England, are,

1. The Cicadae before mentioned.

2. The flying Glowworms, which are there every where to be seen in Summer
time. These flying or winged Glowworms are nothing else but the males of the
common creeping or unwinged Glowworm Fabius Columna relates, that Carolus
Vintimiglia of Palermo in Sicily having out of curiosity kept many unwinged
Glowworms in a glass did put in among them a flying one, which presently in
his sight did couple with them one by one after the manner of silkworms; and
that the next day the unwinged ones or females began to lay their eggs. That
the males are also flying insects in England, though they do but rarely or not
at all shine with us, we are assured by an eyewitness, who saw them in
conjunction with the common shining unwinged Glowworms. Here by the way it may
not be amiss to impart to the Reader a discovery made by a certain Gentleman
and communicated to me by Francis Jessop Esquire which is, that those reputed
Meteors called in Latin Ignes fatui, and known in England by the conceited
names of Jack with a Lanthorn, and Will with a Wisp, are nothing else but
swarms of these flying Glowworms. Which if true, we may give an easy account
of those strange phenomenon of these supposed fires, viz. their sudden motion
from place to place and leading travelers that follow them into bogs and
precipices.

3. Scorpions, which in Italy sting not, or at least their stings are not
venenose, as the learned Franciscus Redi affirms; though by experience he found
the stinging of the African Scorpions to be mortal, or at least very noxious.

4. Tarantula's so called because found about Tarentum, (though we have seen of
them at Rome) which are nothing else but a large sort of Spiders; the biting
whereof is esteemed venomous, and thought to put people into Phrenetic fits,
enforcing them to dance to certain tunes of the Music, by which means they are
cured, long and violent exercise causing a great evacution by sweat. These fits
they say do also yearly return at the same season the Patient was bitten. But
Dr. Thomas Cornelius of Cosenza before mentioned, a learned Physician and
Virtuoso in Naples, diligently enquiring into this generally received and
heertofore unquestioned story, that he might satisfy himself and others
whether it were really true in experience.

5. Cimiei as the Italians call them, as the French Punaise. We English them
Chinches or Wall-lice, which are very noisome and troublesome by their bitings
in the night time, raising a great heat and redness in the skin. They harbor
in the straw of the bolsters and mattresses and in the wood of the bedsteds,
and therefore in some Nosocomia or Hospitals for sick persons, as for example
at Genua, the bedsteds are all of iron. This insect if it be crushed or bruised
emits a most horrid and loathsome scent, so that those that are bitten by them
are often in a doubt whether it be better to endure the trouble of their
bitings, or kill them and suffer their most odious and abminable stink. We have
of these insects in some places of England, but not many, neither are they
troublesome to us.

We departed from Trent intending for Coira or Chur in the Grisons Country
called in Latin curia Rhaetorum. March 18.
We rode up the valley wherein the river Athesis runs, called Val Venosta,
every 5 miles passing through a large village, and one handsome little town
called Burgo, and lodged at a small place called Brunsole.

We rode through Bolzan considerable Town and for bigness comparable to Trent,
19. Bolzan. Maran.
and 10 miles further Maran a large Town, and lodged at a village called
Raveland.

We passed through Latourn, 20.
Slach, Schlanders, Maltz, all villages and Towns of note, and last of all
Cleurn a pretty great walled Town, and then struck up on the left hand among
the mountains to a village called Tavers where we lodged.

We rode on through the snow to Monastero, 21.
where the Grisons Country begins, and S. Maria a small terra, and stopped at
Gherf a village at the foot of the high mountains. In this Country the people
use a peculiar language of their own, which they call Romansch, that is Lingua
Romana. It seems to be nearer Spanish than Italian, though distinct from both.
Besides their own language they generally speak both Italian and Dutch: so that
after we had lost Italian in the valleys we wondered to find it here again
among the hills. Their wines they bring all out of the Valtelline, from Tirano,
about 2 days journey distant. The Country at this time was all over covered
with snow, so that they are fain to keep their cattle within doors for six
months! yet the people said that heerabouts the snow did not lie all Summer, no
not on the tops of the highest mountains. Here we observed that to draw their
sleds over the snow, instead of Oxen they make use of Bulls, one Bull drawing a
little sled. About Tavers we observed them sowing of dust upon the snow, which
they told us was to make the snow melt sooner: I suppose it was rather for
manure. They use stoves in all places, and good reason they have the Country
being so cold, A great number of Chamois or Gemps [Rupicaprae] are taken all
over these Countries upon the high hills, as, though the people had not told
us, we must needs have gathered from the multitude of horns we saw stuck up in
the houses where we lodged. Bears there are and Wolves among the high mountains
but not many. The men generally wear ruffs and long bushy beards. All the
people (as far as we had experience or could judge of them in the short stay we
made among them) we found to be honest, hearty and civil, and the common sort
very mannerly. Their houses are built of stone, and covered with shingles of
wood, the walls thick and the windows very small to fence against the cold.
They have no strong holds or fortified places among them; nor will they permit
any to be erected; having so much confidence in their own valor, that they
think they need no other defense: indeed their Country is such as one would
think none of their neighboring Princes should covet unless for the security
of his own Territories.

We passed the Mountain of Bufalora in 7 or 8 hours. 22.
In the top of the Mountain, in the mid way between Cherf and Zernetz, is an
Inn called Furno. From Zernetz we rode in the Valley of the higher Engadine
through Zuotz a great terra, and two other Villages, and lodged at a little
place called Ponte.

OF THE GRISONS.
THe Grisons are divided into 3 Leagues, and each League subdivided into
Communes: each commune contains several Villages; not all an equal number, but
some more some fewer. The Lega Grisa (according to Simler) has 19 Communes.
The Lega della casa Dio has 21 Communes, which are sometimes contracted into
11. Cleurn, Tavers and Maltz have sately revolted from this League, and put
themselves under the Archduke of Inspruck. The Dieci Dritture have ten, as the
name imports. Each Commune has its annual chief Magistrate, whom in some
places they call Maestrale, and a certain number of Assessors or Judges, which
in their language are called Truoeder. Each terra or Village chooses its Judges
by majority of votes. [Sometimes the People choose only a certain number of
Delegates, which Delegates are to make choice of the Judges.] All the People,
as well rich as poor, as well Servants as Masters, have their Suffrages so soon
as they come to the age of 16 years. The time of their Election is St. Matthias
day. The Commune of Engadina alta has 10 great Villages ( terre they call
them) 16 Judges called Truoeder, one Maestrale, one Chancellor or Notary. The
Maestrale, the Chancellor, and 4 Truoeder are always of Zuotz. The other terre
have some one, some two, according to their bigness. [In other Communities the
several terre have the Maestrale and other Officers by turns.] These
Magistrates are changed every two years, but confirmed every year, and may be
put out by the People if they please. The Maestrale (called in some places
Landamman) is the chief, and assembles the Truoeder together, makes Processes,
and in sum has the executive power. When they have occasion to meet to decide
any business, or judge in any criminal cause, he that is cast or condemned, if
he has goods bears the charges, if he has none then the Commune bears the
charges; So that every Commune is a Commonwealth by its self, and its
government purely Democratical. Every two years they have two Diets or general
Councils: The first Diet (when the Officers which they send to their several
Praefecturae are elected) is at Michaelmas, the second (when they take an
account of their Officers) is on St. John Baptists day. To these Diets each
Commune sends its Delegates, Messi they call them, or Commissioners, some one
and some two. These Delegates must act according to the instructions given them
by their several Communities. Each League hate its Head or Chief. The
Burgomaster of Coira is always Head of the League della casa di Dio. In the
Lega Grisa there are four Communities that by ancient custom have the Head (who
is here called Landtreichter) by turns. In the Dieci Dritture six Communities
have the choice of the Chief, who is called Landamman. Those six Communes send
each its Delegate to Tavas, and the Delegates by the major vote choose the new
Landamman. These sometimes with some assistants meet as a lesser Council, but
have no absolute or decisive sentence. There lies an Appeal from the general
Diet to the Communities, and what the major part of those concludes or agrees
upon is valid. The Grisons pay no sort of Datii, Gabels or Taxes. In Italy the
County of Chiavenna and the Valtelline are subject to the Grisons. To the
County of Chiavena they sent formerly two Podesta's or Bailifls, one to Plurs,
which Town was miserably destroyed by the falling of a Mountain upon it, and
one to Chiavena, who is called Commissario. Near Plurs are made Pots and Vesof
stone turned after the manner of wood, which will endure the fire. The
Valtelline according to Simler is divided into six Praefecturae, whether the
Grisons send Podesta's or Governors. Those are Bormio, which some make a County
by it self, Tirano, Tellio, Sondrio, Morbegno and Travona. They named to us two
more, viz. Ponte and Chiur. These Podesta's are changed every two years, the
principal or head of them is the Prefect of Sondrio, who is not called Podesta,
but Governatore as we were told, as Simler says Capitaneo. In the choosing of
Praefects the order both of the Leagues and of the Communities is observed. So
that for example, if the Lega Grisa chooses the Governor of Sondrio for this two
years, the Lega della casa di Dio shall have the choice of him the next two,
and the Dieci Dritture the following. The like order is observed in the several
Communities of each League. The People of Valtelline, the Country of Bormio,
and the County of Chiavenna pay no Taxes or Gabels more than for the
maintenance of their Governors or Podesta's.

We left Ponte, Mar. 24.
and passed over another high Mountain called in a very bad season, for that it
snowed exceeding fast all the while we were abroad, which in many places so
filled up the track that we could see no way at all, only we could presently
find when were out, for then our horses were almost up to the belly in snow:
besides a brisk gale of most bitter cutting wind blew just in our faces, which
did so affect my eyes that I could not open tem without great pain for three
days, nor easily endure to look upon snow for a great while after. The reason
why my eyes were more affected than others I conceive was, because I was not
careful to wipe the snow off my face, but suffered it to freez to the hair of
my eyebrows and eyelids: the cold whereof being contiguous to them, stupefied,
and would in time have quite mortified my eyes. And here by the way we may take
notice, that the People living in this mountainous cold Country look more
swarthy and dusky, at least their their faces and parts exposed to the air, and
have not so good complexions as those that live below in a milder and more
temperatre Region. It is an observation of Bodin in his Method of History, That
the Inhabitants of the temperate Zone, as you go further and further from the
Tropic are still whiter and whiter, till you come to a certain degree of
latitude, and then they grow dusky and dark-colored again; 3 witness the
Greenlanders, Laplanders; etc. extremity of cold parching and tanning the skin
as well as excess of heat. And we found this true by our own experience; for
our faces were so hackt and burnt (if I may take so to use that word) by the
cold in our passage over these Mountains, that for some time after we looked
like so many Gypsics. This night we lodged in a terra called Bergun.

We went on to Coira the capital City of the Grisons, 25. Coira or Chur.
a pretty little Town standing on a small River that falls into the Rhene,
about half a mile below, environed almost with Mountains, save only on that
side the River Rhene runs; where there is a pleasant Valley, having very good
Meadow and Pasture grounds. The Inhabitants of Coira are all Protestants,
excepting the Bishop (who coyns money that is current here) and 24 Canons. The
Bishop has nothing at all to do in the Government of the Town. The form of
Government is much like that of Zurich and Basel, viz. the Citizens are divided
into sive Tribes or Companies, each of which chooses 14 Senators, which make up
the great Council of 70. These are called Ratsheren, and are chosen by the
people anew every year on S. Martins day; anew I say, for the same are usually
chosen again so long as they live. Out of this greater Council are chosen
yearly of each Tribe sive into the lesser Council, to which are added the 5
Masters of the Companies for the last year, who make up the number of 30. Half
these are called Senators, and govern the Commonwealth. The chief Officers who
preside in the Senate are the two Burgomasters who rule alternately, one one
year, the other the next. The Council of 30, with the regent Burgomaster, who
is called Stativo^ht, judge in criminal causes, Besides there is a Bench of
Judges made up of the five Masters of the Companies, and ten out of the Council
of 30, wherein the Praetor of the City called Stattrichter presides, which
determines civil controversies and actions of debt. But from them there lies an
Appeal to the Council of 30.

In the mountanous Pastures about this Town we observed growing plentifully
Crocus vernus flore albo, Plants observed about Coira.
and flo. Caeruleo, and flo. ex albo. and caerulco variegato; Hepatica nobilis
ubique; Leucoium bulbosum Tab. and Ornithogalum flore luteo. Besides Coira the
Grisons have two little Towns which they call Cities, Mayfield and Eylandts.
For their Religion the Grisons are divided; some Communities being Romanists,
some Protestants; but most Protestants, of whom they told us there were in all
the Country about 17000 fighting men.

We traveled from Coira to Walenstat, Mar. 29. 1665. Walenstat.
situate beside a small Lake, thence called Walenstatter-Sea: passing by the
way through Mayfield, Ragats, and Sargans. Both Sargans and Walenstat are
Voghtia's or Praefecturae belonging the seven Cantons.

We ferried over the Lake to Wesen, 30 Glaris.
and from Wesen rode to Glaris, one of the 13 Cantons of Switzerland. Here we
saw the horns of the Ibex, The Steinbuck or Ibex.
(which they call Steinbuck.) They are somewhat like to Goats horns, but
larger. They told us that there were none of these beasts found heerabouts, but
that in Wallisland, and in the Archbishopric of Saltzburgh in Germany there
were of them. But of the Rupicaprae or Gimpses, Chamois or Gemps.
and Mures Alpini majores, called Marmottoes, Marmottoes.
they have good store. Of birds they have in plenty Merulae torquatae, which
they call Ringer-Amzel; Merulae aquaticae, which they call Wasser-amzel;
Vrogallus, or Cock of the wood, Lagopus, a milk white bird somewhat bigger than
a Partridge, feathered down to the very toes and claws, of the Heath-cock kind,
but more of these in the Grisons Country, where they brought them us to sell.
The people of this Canton of Glaris, as also Appenzel, are mixed, two third
parts Protestants and one third Roman-Catholics. They both make use of the same
Church for their several Services: first the Priest comes and does Mass, then
the Minister and preaches.

The Governments of the several Cantos of Switzerland may be reduced to three
forms or heads. The first is of those Cantons which have no Cities, whose chief
Officer is called Landamman; and in these the supreme power is in all the
People, by whose counsel all businesses of moment are decided. Of this sort are
Vri, Suits, Vnderwalden, Zug, Glaris and Appenzel. The second, of those which
have Cities that were either built by, or sometime subject to Princes, whose
chief Officer is called Scultetus or Scout: This form is most Aristocratical of
all others; and of this sort are Bern, Lucern, Friburg, and Solothurn. The
third, of those which have Cities divided into several Tribes or Companies, by
whose suffrages the Magistrates are yearly chosen; of this Order are Zurich,
Basel, and Schaffhausse.

GLARIS
Is divided (according to Similer) into 15 parts, but as we were told there
into 12 Parishes, of which some have five Counselors, some six; some more some
less, according to their bigness. These make up the Senate or Council, which
consists of 60, whereof two parts are of the reformed Religion and one of the
Romish, besides the Landamman and other chief Officers, who have the privilege
of sitting in Council when their term is expired. The chief and supreme power
is in the whole people. Upon the last Sunday in April yearly there is a general
Convention of all the males above 16 years of age, together with the
Magistrates at a place called Schuandan. This general Meeting or Convention is
called Landtskmein: and by these by majority of Sussrages the Magistrates and
Officers are chosen; and first the Landamman, who continues in Office sometimes
two, sometimes three years. Into this Office they may choose out of all the
people whom they please without any regard of place. 2. The Statthalter who is
the Landammans Lieutenant. These Offices in the Canton are thus divided between
the Protestants and Papists. Three years the Landamman is a Protestant, and the
Statthalter a Papist; then the two following the Landamman is a Papist and the
Statthalter a Protestant. 3. The Seckelmeister or Treasurer. 4. Pannerheer or
Standard Bearer. 5. Landshauptman or chief Captain, and under him in time of
war Lieutenant. 6. Landtsfendricht or Ensign. These three last continue for
life. 7. Three Landtschrieben, i. e. Secretaries or Chancellours, who are
present in Council, but have no suffrages. 8. Landtweible or Apparitour; he
gathers the votes in the general Convention, summons the Council by
Proclamation in the Church, etc. The Landscmein chooses also the Landtvogts or
Prefects, and either confirms or abrogates public Edicts and Constitutions. The
60 Senators usually continue in office during life modo been se gesserint, yet
are they yearly chosen anew or confirmed at the general Convention, not by the
whole Convention, but each one by that part of Parish to which he belongs, and
by which he was chosen; who also when any one dies choose another into his
place. The Landamman when his office is expired is called old Landamman, and
may still sit in council, which is a favor allowed him in regard of his former
dignity. The aforementioned Officers do also sit in council. The Landamman puts
men in prison by his Authority, propounds business to the Council, appoints the
days of the Councils meeting, and to that end appoints the Officer to give them
notice in the Church. In this Canton, to avoid the ambition and inordinate
expenses of Candidates for Offices, who were wont to court and feast the
people, they have lately introduced Lottery in the choice of Officers and
Governors. All the Candidates are first put to the vote, and those eight (if
there be so many for any one place) who have most surages are set in the
middle. Then the Landtschrieb or Secretary takes eight balls, one of which is
gilt, and wraps them up in single papers, and puts them into a hat which he
holds under his arm, whilst a little child puts in his hand and takes out the
balls one by one, and gives them to the eight. He who happens to have the gilt
ball is the Officer. Besides these Councils there are also two Consistories of
Judges; one consisting of nine, chosen by the Landtskmein out of the Council or
Ratsheeren, to whom the Landamman is added as President, who determine all
causes of injuries, and all business of inheritances, and where money is gained
with hazard of life: the other consisting of five who determine actions of
debt. These Consistories (says Simler) sit only in May and September. Private
quarrels by consent of the parties are usually referred to a Counselor of the
Parish. To the general Died at Baden the Reformed send the Landamman when he is
a Protestant, and the Roman Catholics the Statthalter, and so vice versa.

The Territory of Glaris is about eight hours long, that is allowing 3 English
miles to an hour, 24 miles: The number of Freemen of both Religions about 2500.
This Canton has one Vogtia or Bayliewick proper to it self, that is
Werdenburg, to which every three years they send a new Landtvogt or Prefect,
who is Protestant.

In the Cantons of Basel, Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Schaffhausse, Triburg and
Soloturn, the Citizens only are Freemen, and the Territory or Country round
about will all the Towns therein are Subjects, and divided into several
Bayliwicks or Praefecturae, ( Vogties they call them) to every of which the
Cities send a Bailiff or Landtvogt, who is Governor there, whom they change in
some Cantons every second, in some every third, in some every sixth year. In
the other Cantons where there are no Cities, all the Countrymen inhabiting the
Canton, properly so called, are freemen; I say the Canton properly so called;
for these also have their Subjects, whom they govern likewise by their Prefects
or Landtvogts. Besides the proper there are also common Praefectures or
Vogties, some to two, some to three, some to seven, some to twelve, and some to
all the Cantons: to which the Cantons concerned by course send their
Landtvogts. To the 12 Cantons ( Appenzel is the excluded) belong the 4 Italian
Praefecturae, which they obtained by the donation of Maximilian Sforze Duke of
Milan, An. 1513. viz. Lugano, Logarno, Mendriz and Val Madia. To the 7 Cantons,
that is Zurich, Lucern, Suitz, Vri, Vnderwald, Glaris and Zug, belong Baden,
Liberae Provinciae, and Sargans: to these 7 and Bern belongs Turgow; to these 7
and Appenzel belongs Rhineck or Rheinthall. To the 3 Cantons, i. e. Vri, Suitz,
and Vnderwald belongs Bellinzona in Italy, whose Territory is divided into
three Bayliwicks, to which those three Cantons send Landvogts by course, viz.
Bellinzona, Val Palensa and Riviera. To the two Cantons of Suitz and Glaris
belong Vznach and Wesent, or Castra Rhoetica.

At Glaris they told us, that in their own Country those of the Canton of
Suitz were good Soldiers, but living most upon milk and white meats, they could
not last and endure abroad. That those of Vri, Appenzel, and the lower part of
Glaris made the best Soldiers of all.

We traveled from Glaris through Nafels a little Village, April 1.
and several other Villages near the Lake of Rappersville or the Zurich-sea,
especially Lachen, where they usually take boat for Zurich, and after an hours
riding by the Lakes side, and in sight of Rappersvill, and the long Bridge
cross the Lake, we climbed up a very high Mountain on our left hand, to the top
of which when we were ascended we rode throogh a Country all covered with snow,
which in the Summer time seems to be a very pleasant place. Here we found
Eynsidle, Eynsidle.
where is a famous Monastery of Benedictine Freres, in whose Church is an Image
of our Lady, which works great miracles, si credere fus sit. This is a place of
great devotion, visited by Strangers and Pilgrims after the manner of Loreto.
And as there is the Holy house, so here is a Chapel divinely consecrated, set
in the body of the Church, and enclosed in a case of Marble, given by an
Archbishop of Saltzburg. Near the door of this Church is an Alley of Shops of
Beads and Medals, as at Loreto; and here as there an incredible number of
Beggars continually waiting. The Canton of Switz is Protector of his Abbey. If
any one desire to know more of this place he may consult the History of it,
entitled (as I remember) Sanctae Virginis Eynsiddlensis.

We rode again over the snow for about three hours, 3. Schwytz.
and then descending by degrees we passed through three Villages, and at last
arrived at Swyts, a fair Village (for its counted no other, though it be
comparable to the best of our Market Towns) having a large Piazza handsomely
paved.

The government of this Canton is much what the same with that of Glaris. The
Government of the Canton of Suitz.
The whole Canton is divided into 6 parts or quarters. Each division has 10
Counselors; so that the Council or Senate consists of 60, which they call
Ratsheeren. When a Senator dies, that quarter to which he belonged chooses
another by the major vote of all the people. Every quarter has its head, who
is called Siebener: because they are seven in all, the Landamman making one of
the number; which make a lesser Council to manage and take care of the public
revenue. The Senators are obliged in important causes to take each his man to
be his assistant, and in the most weighty of all (as concerning peace and war)
each two men; so that then the Council is tripled. The last Sunday of April (as
at Glaris) is the Convention of the whole Canton called the Landtskmein, when
all the males above 16 years of age meet and elect by major vote the Landamman
and other Officers and Landvogts. To this meeting all the people that can
conveniently are obliged to come; and every one to swear fidelity to their
Country, to maintain their Liberties, etc. The Officers are the same as at
Glaris. This Canton and every one of the rest send two Messi to the general
Diet at Baden, of which the Landamman is usually one. This Canton has also the
like two little Councils or Consistories as Glaris.

We rode about 3 miles to a place called Brunen, beside the lake of Lucern, 3.
Altorff.
and there embarkt for Altorf, spending in our passage upon the water about 3
hours, and then we had but a mile to the town. From Swytz to Altorf there is no
traveling by land (as they told us) unless we would go some scores of miles
about. Altorf has no piazza, yet is it a larger town than Schwytz, and has a
pretty Church and a Monastery of Capucines. Here we heard at large related to
us the story of William Tell and the Lantvogt, which he that is desirous to
know may consult Simler. On the top of a pillar over one of their fountains in
the street is set the statue of this Tell, with his cross-bow on his shoulder,
and leading his son by the hand. At some distance stands a tower on which are
painted the several passages of the Story.

The Government is almost the same with that of Schwytz. The number of
Senators, manner of their election the same. The Officer and Magistrates the
same, only they mentioned a Suk-heer, who has the charge of the Ammunition,
whom they told us not of in other Cantons, and 6 Fiersprachts, i. e. Proctors
or Counselors, but not of the Council. The Senators being to judge in
criminal causes take to them another man, so that then the Council is doubled.
They have also a lesser Council of 15 called the Landtram, which decides civil
causes. These are taken out of the great Council, and go round in a rota. They
meet the first Monday every month. A third Council also they have called the
Poderade, which sits weekly about actions of debt where the sum exceeds not 60
livers. The Senators (as they told us) have no Salary or allowance at all. When
one of the Council is chosen Landtvogt he is put out of the Council. Vri is the
first Canton that set it self at liberty.

We returned to the lake of Lucern, April 4. Vnderwalden.
and taking boat we went by water within one hour of Stantz, the principal
village of Vnderwald, where we lodged. As we sailed upon this lake we happened
to see a great fall of snow from the tops of some mountains hanging over the
lake, which made a rattling and report not unlike thunder, as Monsieur de Carts
in his Meteors notes. At Stantz they have a very fair Church, and two Convents,
one of Capucine Freres, and one of Muns. Here and at Altorf, Switz, Lucern,
etc. we observed in the Churchyards crosses set upon the graves, some of wood,
some of iron, and on some of them hanging a little copper kettle with holy
water in it. Some women we saw coming with a bunch of herbs in their hands,
which they dipped in the kettle, and sprinkled the water therewith upon the
graves. These I suppose were Widows or Mothers who sprinkled the water upon the
graves of their dead Husbands or Children.

This Canton is divided into two parts, Oberwald or the upper, whose capital
village is Stanner, and the lower or Vnderwald, the head whereof is Stantz. In
the lower are 60 Senators chosen by 11 Communes, some whereof have more, and
some fewer, according to their bigness. The Officers are the same, and chosen
in like manner as in Schwytz and Vri, only the Landamman and Statthalter
continue in office but one year.

The Lantweible or Apparitor and 7 Judges, chosen one out of a Commune, judge
in civil causes. From these there is an appeal to another Tribunal of 11,
consisting of the Landamman, and one elected out of each Commune save tat the
Landamman is of. These 11 are chosen out of the Council, the seven
indifferently. In capital causes the Council of 60 Judges, and besides any one
of the Country may be present and give his suffrage if he pleases, though
ordinarily none do but the Senators, who are all there to by oath obliged. The
Senators and Officers of this Canton have all salaries. Here and in Vri all the
males of all conditions that are 14 years old and upward have their suffrages
at the Landtskmeind. Oberwald has likewise a Council, Landamman and other
Officers by themselves, indeed nothing common with Vnderwald. They nominate
Landvogts and Ambassadors by turns. They might be esteemed two Cantons were it
not for that they have but two Delegates at the Diet at Baden, as the other
Cantons have.

These three Cantons, Vti, Switz, and Vnderwald, consist chiefly, not to say
wholly, of pasture ground: No cornfields or vineyards here. Their wine is
imported from Italy, their corn from several parts. They boast that by this
means their ground is not so subject to the casualties of weather, or injuries
of bad seasons as either plowed fields or vineyards, and yields to the owners a
more certain profit. It Is well if one reason why they maintain all their ground
pasture, be not because they are unwilling to take pains in husbandry. Wine is
dear here. At Altorf and Stantz they have it from Logarno. At Switz they have
both Valtelline and Logarno-wine. The people are very honest and good natured,
keep their houses neat and cleanly, and withal very polite and in good repair.
The men are given much to drinking. The meat stands before them three or four
hours, and they now and then cat a bit, but the main business is drinking.

We traveled to Lucern, April. 5. Lucern.
crossing over a part of the lake. This is a very neat city and pleasantly
situate upon the lake: divided into parts by a river which runs out of the
lake; over which there are three bridges, one for carts and horses, the other
two handsome foot bridges covered over with a roof or penthouse, one near a
quarter of a mile long. Besides there is a fourth bridge which leads toward
the Church covered like this last, and longer than it. The great Church stands
without the city wall, a very handsome tall, and lightsome structure. Over the
Western door is the greatest Organ that ever I saw: A man might very well creep
into the hollow of the greater pipes of it. The account of the Government that
was given us here was much different from Simlers. They told us that the Great
Council consisted of 136, whereas he writes that it consists of no more that
100: but these may be reconciled; for that, I suppose, he excludes the lesser
Council, which they included. They continue in office during life; and when one
dies, the rest of the Council choose another into his place, out of the Citizens
whom they think fit. Simler says that the lesser Council of the last half year
choose the new Senators. This Council has two Presidents whom they call
Sculteti, who preside alternis annis, and continue in office during life.
Simler says they are chosen yearly by the Suffrages of both the Councils. The
manner of choosing Officers and Senators is this. Behind a curtain according to
the number of Competitors are placed two, three, or more boxes. Every Senator
has given him a little medal or piece of money for that purpose; and so the
Senators go one by one behind the curtain, and put the medal into what box they
please, and he that has most of these pieces is understood to be chosen. Out
of the great Council is chosen a lesser of the most ancient and wise, who also
continue during life, and judge in civil causes, and take care of the ordinary
concerns of the City; and for that purpose they sit daily. They are divided
into two equal parts, 18 for the Summer, and 18 for the Winter. If one of the
Winter dies, those of the Summer elect one into his place out of the 100, and
vice versa. The great Council of 136 judge in criminal causes. Those of the
lesser Council have five Batz [about 10 d. or 1 s. English] and those of the
great Council two Batz per diem for every day they sit in Council. All the
people of the territory of this city are Subjects, and divided into 19 or 20
Proefecturoe: the number of fighting men about 18000. The Subjects in time of
peace pay no more tribute than 5 Batz or a hen the man per annum to the
Lanivogt.

From Lucern we traveled to Zugh called in Latin Tugium, April. 6. Zugh.
about 15 miles. The Government of the Canton of Zug.
This City is by one half less than Lucern; it stands by the side of a little
lake. The Government of this Canton is popular like those of Vri, Switz and
Vnderwalden. Besides the City there are 3 Communes which have an interest in
the government, viz. Eyry, Mensinguen and Baar. They have a Council of 40 (as
they told us there) but according to Simler of 45; 9 out of each Commune and 18
out of the City. The 3 Communes have the Landamman 6 years and the City 3. So
that when the Landamman is of a Commune he continues in Office but two years,
when of the City three years. When one of the Council dies another is chosen
into his place by major vote of all the males above 18 years of age of the City
or that Community to which he that died belonged. The Magistrates are the same
and elected in like manner as in Vri and Switz, etc. All the Praefecturae,
(which are in number eight) belong to the City only. The City together with its
subjects can arm 4000 Soldiers: the 3 Communities not 2000. Yet are they
obliged by ancient Convention to bear two third parts of the charge in case
there be nay war. In criminal causes they have 12 Judges taken out of the
Council, 3 of the City and 3 of each Community. In civil the Senators judge in
their several Communities. To the general Diet at Baden the City sends one and
the three Communities another. The nomination of the common Lantvogts the City
has once and the Communities twice. When the Landamman is of the Communities
he is obliged during his Office to reside in the City.

The lake of Zugh has great variety of fish, more then any other lake of
Switzerland, if the people there may be believed. They named to us Eels, Carps,
Perches, Trouts, Salmons, which is very strange, there being no way for them to
get thither but up the Rhene, and so they must have a course of above 500
miles; and besides there being at Wasserfal a huge Catarract of the whole
river, which one would think it were impossible to pass. Esch called by the
Italians Temelo, and in English Grayling, Trisea or Trasine, in English
Eelpout, Pikes (of which we saw one taken that weighed 30 pound) Weiss-fish or
Alberlin, called at Geneva Farra. This fish is taken in the lake of Bala in
Merionethshire in Wales, and there called Guiniad from the whiteness of it: and
in Huls-water near Pereth in Cumberland and there called Schelley: Hassler,
which I take to be the Charre of Winandermere in Westmerland, and the Torgoch
of Northwales: Balla: Nase, called by Naturalists Nasus, Breams, Crevises; and
a great many sorts more to the number of at least 50. In many of the shadowy
lanes we passed through about Stantz, Zug and elsewhere we observed growing
plentifully Aublatum Cordi or Dentaria aphyllos.

We traveled from Zug to Zurich which is 5 good hours riding. April 7. Zurich.
But of that City we have already written.

From Zurich we rode to Mellingen a free Town not far from Baden, 13 Mellingen.
4 good leagues; and then through a little walled Town belonging to the Bernese
called Lensburgh, Lensburg. Arauw.
and lodged at Arauw a considerable Town upon the river Aar, subject also to
the Bernese, 4 short leagues.

We traveled a straight rode passing no considerable Town till we arrived at
Soloturn 14. Soloturn.
9 leagues distant from Arauw. This though it be the head of a Canton is no
large Town, nor very considerable for its strength.

We diverted out of the common rode to Geneva to see Bern, 15. Bern.
6 hours distant from Soloturn. This is a handsome City, built all of stone,
though the houses be not tall. It has one fair long street with narrow
portico's or Cloisters on each side. It lies stretched out in length upon a
hill which I may call a Peninsula, it is so almost begirt about with the river.
On that side where it is not compassed with the river it is strongly fortified
with good bastions and outworks. The Founder of this City as also of Friburg in
Switzerland, and Friburg in Brisgoia was Berchtoldus Duke of Zerin; as appears
by the inscription upon their moneys. To him they have erected a monument in
the great Church. This Church is one of the handsomest stone-fabrics in all
Switzerland.

The territory of this City is more then on third part of the Country of the
Suisses, and is divided into 60 Praefecturae or Bailyages, besides 4 which are
common to them with Friburg. For this reason there must needs be many rich men
in the City, though they have but little trade. The Landtvogts or Bailiffs
continue in office 6 years, during which time they enrich themselves well; yet
do not their subjects complain, but acknowledge themselves well used by their
Governors. Here they keep 5 or 6 Bears in a pit. These Bears I observed to
climb the firr-trees growing in the pit, and delighting to sit on the tops of
them like birds on a perch. The Arms of the Town is also a Bear, which they
took I suppose alluding to their name Bern: And they first coined the money
called Batzes from the figure of a bear stamped upon it: which afterward all
the Cantons imitated, calling it also by the same name.

From Bern we rode to Friburg a handsome Town 17. Friburg.
and the head of a Canton, built upon a hill almost begirt with a river after
the manner of Bern and by the same Founder, on all sides environed with hills,
save where it is continuous to the land. Their territory is surrounded with and
enclosed in the territory of Bern.

From Friburg we traveled through Maulton to Lausanna, 18. Lausanna. Morges.
a great Town and an University, and from Lausanna April 19. through Morges a
large Town, Roll and Nion considerable Towns by the lake of Geneva's side and
Verfoy a little Town on the lake near Geneva, belonging to the French, and came
to our lodging at Geneva, where we rested and sojourned near 3 months.

The Governments of Soloturn. Bern and Friburg are much like that of Lucern. In
Soloturn the number of the lesser Council is 35, and of the greater 115. When
one of the 35 dies, the 34 remaining choose one into his place out of the 115.
When one of the 115 dies or is advanced the rest choose one into his place out
of the number of the Citizens. In Bern the greater Council consists of 200, and
the lesser (as we were told there) of 42, though Simler makes them but 26.
These Councils are chosen by 20 Electors and the Sculthess, viz. the four
Signiferi of the City and 16 whom they pick out of the whole body of the
Citizens and join with themselves. In Friburg the lesser Council is of 24 and
the greater of 200. When one of the lesser Council dies they choose one into his
place out of the greater: and when one of the greater dies or is removed the
lesser (as I understood them) choose one into his place out of the number of the
Citizens. All these Cities have 2 Sculteti or Consuls who rule alternis annis.
He that desires a more full and particular account of the government of these
Cities may consult Simler de Repub. Helvetiorum. Each of the Cantons have some
Saint or other to be their Patron and protector, whose image the popish Cantons
set on the reverse of their moneys, v. g. S. Oswald a King of England Protector
of Zug. In their Church they have his relics, and have set up his image on
horseback. The Protestant Cantons are Zurich, Bern Basel, Sehafhausse, part of
Glaris and part of Appenzel. That which most frequently breeds differences a
quarrels among the Suitzers is the business of the common vogties or
Bailywicks. For most of these [I mean the Dutch ones] being of the reformed
religion are oppressed and injured by the Popish Lantvogts, the Protestant
Cantons not knowing how either to help and relieve them or retaliate. For the
Popish Cantons being more in number than the Protestants, they send Lantvogts
to these places twice to the Protestants once. This one of the Ministers of
Zurich told me wad fundi sui calamitas, and occasioned the two late breaches
among them. The Switzers on each side are very stiff in their Religion; the
Papists not permitting or tolerating one Protestant, nor the Protestants one
Papist in their proper territories. Though the Cantons adhering to the Church
of Rome are more in number, yet the reformed are much the greater, besides that
their land is better, very like to ours in England. The Romanists are accounted
the better Soldiers, and good reason they have, being more exercised in War,
serving the Spanish and French Kings, as being of the same Religion. Besides,
the Zurichers who anciently had the reputation for valor, are now much given
to merchandise and to accumulate riches, and so taken off from martial studies
and exercises. The Bernese though they have far the greatest and best territory
of all (so that it is said they can arm as many men as the Duchy of Milan; send
into the field 100000 Soldiers and yet leave enough at home to till the land)
yet have they no reputation for Soldiers; they lost their credit quite in the
late skirmish with the Lucernese, who account them rather Savoyards than
Switzers. All the Cantons of Switzerland coin money except Appenzel, Vnderwald
and Glaris, of which Glaris formerly has coined though now it does not. All
the Swizzers in general are very honest people, king and civil to strangers.
One may travel their Country securely with a bag of gold in his hand. When we
came to out Inns they would be troubled if we distrusted them so far as to take
our Portmanteau's into our lodging-chambers and not leave them in the common
dining rooms. They keep their houses very clean and polite like our good
housewives in England. For plants, going from Zurich to Mellingen we observed
common Gooseberry in the hedges and by the way-sides very plentifully, and in
some places Barberries. Sigillum Solomonis and Herba Paris are the most common
plants that grow in this Country in the woods and hedges every where: Anonymus
flore Coluteae on the mountains near Zurich. From Arauw to Soloturn
Helleboraster maximus out he hills sides, as also Christophoriana, not to
mention Fumaria Bulbosa every where growing in the shady lanes.

Geneva is pleasantly seated at the lower end of the Lacus Lemanus, Geneva.
now called Genffer-zee or the lake of Geneva, upon a hill side respecting the
lake; so that from the lake you have a fair prospect of the whole Town. It is
divided by the river Rhodanus or Rhosne into two parts, which are joined
together by two wooden bridges, one of which has on each side a row of houses
after the manner of Londonbridge, only they are low. The two principal and
indeed only considerable streets in the Town are the low street [ Rue bas]
which runs along by the river and lakes side: and the high street or great
street [ Rue grand] which runs up the hill. The City is indifferently strong,
and they have lately been at great expenses to fortific it alla moderna with
ramparts and bastions of earth. Though it be but small yet is it very populous,
being supposed to contain 30000 souls, St. Peter's Church, formerly the
Cathedral, is handsome and well built, and in it is a stately monument for the
Duke of Rohan. The Citizens are very busy and industrious, subsisting chiefly
by trading: the whole territory of this Republic being not so great as some one
Noblemans estate in England for extent of land. All provisions of victuals are
very plentiful and cheap at Geneva, especially milk-meats, the neighboring
mountains feeding abundance of cattle.

The tops of Jura, Saleve and other high mountains of Savoy, Daulphiny and the
Alps, where they are bare of wood, put forth very good grass so soon as the
snow is melted off them, which usually is about or before mid-May. And then the
Country people drive up their cattle to pasture, and feed them there for three
months time. Upon these hill tops they have here and there low sheds or dairy
houses, which serve the men to live in and to make their butter and cheese in,
so long as they keep their beasts above. The men I say, for they only ascend up
thither and do all the dairy work, leaving their wives to keep house below; it
being too toilsome for them to clamber up such high and steep hills. By reason
of these cotes it is very convenient simpling upon the mountains, for if a man
be hungry or thirsty he may soon find relief at one of them. We always found
the people very kind and willing to give us such as they had, viz. brown bread,
milk, whey, butter, curds, etc. for which we could sca^ce fasten any money uon
them.

For the temper of the air in respect of heat and cold Geneva I think is very
like England, there being no great excess of either extreme. The City is well
governed, vice discountenanced, and the people either really better or at least
more restrained then in other places: Though they do take liberty to shoot and
use other sports and exercises upon the Lords day, yet most of their Ministers
disallow it and preach against it.

Our long stay here at Geneva, Plants observed about Geneva.
and that in the proper season for simpling, gave us leisure to search for and
advantage of finding many species of plants in the neighboring fields and
mountains, of which I shall here present the Reader with a catalogue: Such as
are native of England are in the Roman letter.

In Colle la Bastie dicto and Sylvis clivosis ad Rhodani ripas.
Colutea scorpioides: Melissophyllon Fuchsio flore albo atque etiam vario:
Lilium flore nutante ferrugineo majus J. B. Monophyllon Ger. Orobus Pannonicus
1 Clus. Hepaticum trifolium Lob. Frangula; Chamaedrys falsa maxima, etc. J. B.
Bellis sylvatica J. B. Trifolium purpureum majus folio and spica longiore J. B.
Orobus sylvaticus viciae foliis C. B. Tithymalus cyparissias J. B. Tithymalus
non acris flore rubro J. B. Horminum luteum sive Colus Jovis; Aquilegia
vulgaris.

In monte Saleve dicto una circiter leuca a Geneva distante.
Cotoneaster Gesneri J. B. Diospyros J. B. Bellis caerulea Monspeliaca Ger.
Scabiosa 10 sive repens Clus Alsine muscosa quibusdam J. B. Ad rivulos prope
Saleve. Ageratum purpureum Dalechampii J. B. ad radices montis. Sanieula Alpina
guttata, In summitate prope fontes. Pes cati flo. albo and suaverubente ibid
and copiosissime. Gentiana major Ger In pascuis prope summitatem montis abunde.
Gentianula quae Hippion J. B. ibid. Caalia quibusdam J. B. in sylvosis suprema
montis part. Polygonatum angustifolium, ibid. polygonatum floribus ex
singularibus pediculis J. B. In rupibus and saxosis ad latera montis. Draba
alba siliquosa repens, juxta fontes prope montis summitatem. Hesperis
sylvestris latifolia flore albo parvo Park. Ribes Alpinus dulcis J. B. In
sylvosis summo montis cacumine. Anagyris sive Laburnum, In sylvosis ad latera
montis. Ferrum equinum Gallicum siliquis in summitate C. B. Periclymenum rectum
fructu rubro Ger. Doronicum vulgar J. B. Dentaria heptaphyllos C. B. In
sylvosis ad latera montis. Barba capri J. B. ibid. Lilium convallium, ibid.
Christophoriana, ibid. Lilium floribus reflexis montanum C. B. Aria
Theqpharsti; Melissophyllum Fuchsii; Polygonatum vulgar; Polemonium petraeum
Gesn. Colutea scorpioides; Thlaspi oleraceum Tab. Fraxinus bubula; Alchimilla
vulgaris, in pascuis in suprema montis part abunde Pyrola vulgaris; Pyrola
fol. mucronato serrato C. B. utraque in sylvosis. Filix ramosa minor J. B.
Libanotis Theophrasti minor Park. In saxosis ad latera montis. Siler montan um
Officinarum J. B. Carum: Lactua sylvatica purpurea J. B. Cyclaminus folio
anguloso J. B. Filix Saxatilis non ramosa minima; Caryophyllus gramineo folio
minimus; Aconitum lycoctonum luteum C. B. Vicia maxima dumetorum J. B. in
sylvis in ascensu montis. Sedum Alpinum hirsutum luteum C. B. E saxorum rimis
emergit. Peucedani facie pusilla planta Lob. E rupium fissuris. Sedum serratum
J. B Vva ursi; Colus Jovis; Gramini Luzulae affine flore albo J. B. In sylvosis
and dumetis prope imam montis partem. Thlaspi Alpinum minus capitulo rotundo C.
B. In rupibus humidioribus. Rubia caerulea elatior J. B. inter segetes.
Phalangium pulchrius non ramosum J. B. Androsaemum Campoclarense Col.
Helianthemum Alpinum folio Pilosellae minoris Fuchsii J. B. Helleborine ex
albido sublutea J. B. In ^ylvosis ad radices montis. Astragalus Monspeliano
candidior and Onobrychis qu^mundam J. B. In saxosis. Helleborine flore albo, In
sylvis suprema montis part. Astrantia nigra, In pratis montosis. Cicutaria
latifolia hirsuta J. B. ibid. Pentaphylloides erectum J. B. Prope arcem
antiquam jam dirutam. Chamaenerium vulgar: Pilosellae majoris sive Pulmonariae
luteae laciniatae species minor J. B. Hieracium parvum hirtum caul aphyllo
crispum ubi siccatum J. B. ad radices montis. Orchis strateumatica minor J. B.
Pseudo-asphodelus quibusdam J. B. In paludosis ad radices montis. Orchis parva
autumnalis lutea J. B. ibidem. Diospyros J. B. In sylvosis ad latera montis.
Thymelaea quaedam incana. Ad pedalem and sesquipedalem altitudinem assurgit,
and in plures ramos dividitur hic frutex. Lignum ejus supra modum fragile,
Cortex cinereus; Folia Mezerei Germanici sed minora, acuminata, utrinque
hirsuta, glauca. Flores in summitatibus ramulorum 4 aut 5, Out etiam plures
simul conferti, pediculis nullis, nullo calice, e tubo longiusculo in 4 foliola
alba acuminata expanduntur, Staminula crocea intus continentes. Floribus
succedunt baccae longiusculae quae nondum matumerant. Floret initio Maii; in
sylvosis ad latera montis. Dentaria Pentaphyllos; Damasonium purpureum dilutum
sive Helleborine 4 Clus. J. B. In sylvosis ad latera montis. Calceolus Mariae,
ibid. Carduus Cirsium dictus folio laciniato nigrius J. B. Pentaphyllum recutm
J. B. e rupium fissuris. Campanula repens flore minore caeruleo J. B. Digitalis
flore minore subluteo, angustiore folio J. B. Alsine maxima Hist. Lugd.
Valeriana Alpina J. B. Hanc Patavini Valerianam Trachelii folio denominant,
apta sane appellatione: Sunt enim ei folia Traehelii majoris. Radix valde
aromatica est and odorata. Valeriana Alpina altera foliis integris, inodora:
Radices longae, repentes, fibris donatae subinde germina protrudunt. Folia
valerianae minoris sylv. ex rotundo oblonga pediculis longis insident, non
laciniata, ne illa quidem que in caul consistunt, ad margines obiter
nonnunquam dentata, violae foliis quodammodo similia. Radix nec saporm nec
odorem (quem quidem ego sentire potui) aromaticum habuit. Caulis pedalis,
rotundus, striatus, concavus, duplici plerunque foliorum pari, quae sine
pediculis illos amplectuntur, praediti. Flores albi, Valerianae sylvestris
simillimi, uti sunt and semina. Scabiosa maxima dumetorum folio non laciniato
J. B. Herba Doria, Prope Carthusianorum coenobium. Ranumculus magnus valde
hirsutus flore luteo J. B. ibid. Sedum an potius Draba minima siliquosa flore
albo. Radice nititur simplici, fibrosa, alba: Folia juxta terram plura
Senecionis aut Bellidis majoris sed minora and pro magnitudine breviora, per
oras rarioribus incisuris dentata, extremitatibus subrotundis, atrovirentia,
rarioribus pilis iis tamen rigidiusculis aspera. E medio foliorum emergunt
caules rotundi, rubentes, rarioribus pilis hirsuti, foliis nudi praeterquam ad
florum pediculos. Flores in summitatibus caulium singulorum 5 vel etiam 6 and
nonnunquam plures, albi, quadrifolii, e calice longiusculo, herbaceo,
quadrifolio exeunt. In summitate montis sub initium Maii florere incipit.

In monte Jura circa vertices Thuiri and la Dolaz rariores.
Helleborus albus in pascuis montosis copiosissime. Tussilago Alpina minor
folio rotundo J. B. in summis verticibus. Soldanella Alpina quibusdam J. B.
ibid. Scabiosa montana maxima Park. In vertice Thuiri Ranuneulus albus simplici
flore J. B. In sylvosis prope summitates montis. Ranunculus montanus albus
birsutus J. B. ibid. Thalictrum majus folliculis angulosis, caul levi J. B.
ibid. Oxalis maxima sylvatica. J. B. Oxalis folio rotundiore repens J. B. ibid.
Lonchitis altera cum folio denticulato, sive Lonchitis altera Matthioli J. B.
In ipso montis vertice in rupibus. Sedum majus vulgar ibid. Sedum tridacty
lites Alpinum, ibid. Chamaoedrys Alpina flore Fragariae albo J. B. Auricula
muris pulchro folre, folio tenuissimo J. B Accedit haec planta ad Saxifragam
nostram palustrem Anglicam. Antithora flore luteo Aconiti J. B. in summis
montis jugis. Linaria purpurea parva J. B. Dentaria quinquefolia J. B. in
sylvosis ad latera montis. Coralloides altera sive septifolia J. B. ibid.
Cacalia quibusdam J. B. ibid Pentaphyllum sive potius Heptaphyllum argenteum
flore muscoso J. B. Carum; Phyllon thelygonon Dalechampii; Sigillum Solomonis
angustifolium. Echium Alpinum luteum C. B. Libanotis Theophrasti minor Park.
Astrantia nigra; Sanicula Alpina guttata; Helianthemum Alpinum folio Pilosellae
minoris Fuchsii J. B. Crocus vernus latifolius flore purpureo minore J. B.
Helianthemum tenuifolium glabrum luteo flore J. B. ad radices montis. Pes cati;
Ribes Alpinus dulcis J. B. Lactuca sylvatica purpurea J. B. Valeriana Alpina;
Cyanus major; Polygonatum floribus ex singularibus pediculis J. B. Digitalis
lutea magno flore J. B. Ad radices montis. Thora folio Cyclamini J. B. i. e.
Phthora Valdensium; in summitate montis copiose. Diospyros J. B. In sylvosis ad
latera montis. Plantago angustifolia Alpina J. B. Nerium Alpinum quibusdam,
aliis Ledum glabrum J. B. Chamae mespilus J. B. Acini pulchra species J. B.
Veronica saxatilis J. B. Chamaedryi vulgari falsae aliquatenus assinis Alpina,
an Clinopodium Alpinum Ponae? J. B. Gentiana Alpina magno flore J. B. in
altis^imo vertice Thuiri. Bistorta minima J. B. an Bistorta Alpina media c. B?
Orchis palmata flore viridi C. B. in pascuis montosis. Orchis rotunda
Dalechampii J. B. Lunaria Botrytis J. B. Ranunculus flore globoso, quibasdam
Trollius flos J. B. ^Piloscll^ sive Pulmonaria lutea angustiore foli^ J. B. E
rupium fissuris exoritur. Nasturtiolum Alpinum tenuissime divisum J. B. Aster
purpureus montanus J. B. Viola martia lutea J. B. Sideritis Valerandi Dourez
brevi spica J. B. Geranium phae^ sive pullo sore Clusii J. B. Daucus Creticus
semine hirsuto J. B. Apium montanum nigrum J. B. Ad radices montis. Circa
verticem La Dolaz dictum.

Sonchus caeruleus latifolius J. B. Tussilago Alpina folio longo J. B.
Rapunculi genus folio serrato rotundiore J. B. Orchis palmata minor
odoratissima purpurea sive nigra J. B. Iu pascuis montosis. Pentaphyllum
Alpinum splendens aureo flore J. B. Gnaphalium Alpinum pulchrum, In summo
montis cacumine. Asarum, In sylvis non long ab Abbatia de Beaumont.
Helleborine flore atro-rubente, Chamae-iasme Alpina J. B. in Append. in
altissimo vertice la Dolaz. Hieracium Alpinum flo. singulari magno cauli
cubitali insidente, ibid.

Iterum in monte Thuiri.
Pilosella minore flore, hirsutior and elatior non repens J. B. Astragalus
quidam montanus vel Onobryobis aliis J. B. Caryophylli sylvestris quaedam
species, flore purpureo odorato, foliis glaucis. Caryrphyllus flore tenuissime
dissecto C. B. Solidago Sarcenica; Siler montanum; Pulssatilla alba J. B.
Lunaria major siliqua longiore J B. Hieracium latifolium montanum Genevense
folio Conyzae majoris Monspessulanae J. B. Ad latera montis Caryophyllus
montanus tenuifolius Lini flore. Radix ei lignosa, vivax: Cauliculi ex eadem
radice plurimi ut in caryophyllis, lignosi, cortice cinereo tecti, [vetustiores
intelligo] geniculis crebris intercepti. Ad singula genicula ramulorum
hornotinorum folia ex adverso bina Tunicae minimae vel Spergulae purpureae,
angusta, graminea. Cauliculi in ramulos divisi, inferius fere glabri, superne
hirsuti, in summitatibus suis flores gestant amplos in pediculis longis
hirsutis, albos, pentapetalos, striatos, Lini floribus similes; foliis quippe
compositos subrotundis, and minime bifidis cujusmodi solent esse Alsines and
Lychnidum, non tamen caducos ut in Lino, stamina continentes plurima herbacea
seu luteola. Vasculum seminale longiusculum, crassum. Floret circa finem Junii
and Julii initio Psendostachys Alpina C. B. Ranunculus tenuifolius montanus
lutcus J. B. Bellis Alpina major rigido folio C. B. Salix pumila latifolia
folio utrinque glabro, superne autem splendente. Ramos per terram spargit
minimi digiti crassitudine, annosos cortice glauco, juniores virente praeditos,
in plurimos surculos divisos, adeo ut terram cooperiant. Folia in ramulis
crebra alternatim posita, pediculis brevibus fulta, parva, ex rotunditate
acuminata, utrinque glabra, superne saturo virore splendentia, nervosa, unciam
plerunque rarius sescunciam longa. Julos profert creberrimos, breviusculos, e
pluribus vasculis seminalibus in acutum apicem ex latiori base paulatim
fastigiatis compositos. In altissimis jugis montis Jurae. Veronica Saxatilis
parva caulibus nudis. Eodem modo repit and in varios dividitur caespites quo
Cotyledon Matthioli, aut Sedum serratum. Folia ei Veronicae parva, subrotunda,
hirsuta; ad margines serrata. Caules eodem modo exurgunt quo in Phyllo
Dalechampii thelygono, duorum triumve digitorum altitudine, rotundi, foliis
destituti. Flores in summo 5, 6 aut etiam plures Chamaedryos spuriae aut
Veronicae, caerulei, quadrifolii. Vascula seminalia magna Thlaspeos aut
Veronicae vulgaris repentis. Sedum minimum montanum non acre flore
purpurascente parvo. Radix ci alba, tenuis, nec ultra annum (ut mihi visum est)
vivax, pluribus fibris capillata. Caulis nunc simplex, nunc plures,
semipalmares, crecti, rotundi, rubentes, foliis vestiti creberrimis,
circumcirca nullo ordine positis, crassis, teretibus fere, apicibus obtusis,
rubentibus. Flores in summis caulibus velut in umbellas digesti, exigui,
pentapetali, vix se pandentes. Florum petala acuta, purpurascentia, linea per
medium saturatioris purpurae decurrente. Vascula seminalia quinquepartita,
stellata.

In pratis, pascuis, sa^is, collibus, dumetis, aggeribus, alveis, muris, viis
publicis, and alibi circa urbem.
Thlaspi oleraceum Tab. Campanula Persicifolia, in dumetis. Chamaedrys foliis
laciniatis; Mezereon Germanicum; Christophoriana; Eryngium campestre; Sigillum
Solomonis; Lilium convallium; Chamaepitys; Vva ursi; Rhamnus secundus Clus. In
arenosis ad Rhodanum. Aria Theophrasti; Berberis; Thlaspi minus quibusdam,
allis Alysson minus J. B. passim. Rapunculus Spicatus C. B. in dumetis.
Pulmonaria maculosa Lob. ibid. Sinapi Genevense sylvestre J. B. In muris ad
pontem Arvae flu. Pentaphyllum parvum hirsutum J. B. Saponaria minor quibusdam
J. B. Tanacetum inodorum clus. Typha minor J. B. in saliceto non long a ponte
Arvoe flu. Trifolium pratense album a Fuchsio depictum sive mas J. B.
Tithymalus cyparissias J. B. In agris siccioribus ad aggeres ubique. Tithymalus
platy phyllos Fuchsii J. B. Psyllium majus erectum. in arenosis prope fluvium
Arve. Lysimachia silicusa speciosa angustifolia J. B. In alveo flu. Arvae.
Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta, ibidem and copiose. Chamaedrys vulgaris;
Abrotanum campestre; Phyteuma Monspeliensium, J. B. Pereclymenum rectum fructu
rubro and nigro J. B. sepibus anddumetis. Betonica coronaria sive Caryophyllus
sylvestris vulgatissimus J. B. in pratis. Gallitrichum sylvestre vulgo, sive
sylvestris Sclaraea flore purpureo caeruleove magno J. B. Orchis galea and alis
fere cinereis J. B. Orchis myodes; Orchis fuciflora galea and alis herbidis; In
aggeribus sylvosis utraque and copiose. Asclepias flore albo; Tamarix
Germanica, sive minore fruticosa J. B. Ad Arve fluvium. Polemonium petraeum
Gesneri; Ad Rbodani ripas, inque ipsis urbis muris. Crista galli utraque mas
and foemina J. B. in pratis. Lotus siliquosa lutea Monspeliesis J. B.
Chamaemelum vulgar amarum J. B. inter segetes. Chamaebalanus leguminosa sive
Terroe glandes; in vineis and seget: extra portam S. Gervasii. Lathyrus flore
vario ex coccineo and albo, inter segetes: Rosa rubello flore simplici non
spinosa J. B. in collibus. Gramen cyperoides exiguum seminibus bullatis;
Melampyrum multis sive Triticum vaccinum, J. B. inter segetes. Melampyrum
cristatum J. B. Asphodelus bulbosus Dodonaei, sive Ornithogalum spicatum flo.
virente J. B. inter segetes. Orchis magne latis foliis, galea fusca vel
nigricante J. B. Ad latus sylvosi cujusdam collis prope montem saleve. Thlaspi
umbellatum arvense amarum J. B. In arvis non procul a Thuiri copiose. Allium
umbelliferum pratense J. B. Rapistrum monospermon, in aggeribus fossarum,
Campanula rotundifolia minima J. B. in glareosis ad fluv. Arve. Rosasylvestris
rubella parvo frutice J. B. in collibus and dumetis copiosissime. ^ Medica
major erectior floribus purpurascentibus J. B. seritur aliquibus in licis ad
pabulum jumentorum. Rubia crecta quadrifolia J. B. Melilotus quinta Tragi J. B.
i. e. Securidaca flo. vario siliquis articulatis: Blattaria flo. albo and
luteo, ad vias. Chamaedrys spuria augustifolia J. B. in dumetis. Pilosella
minor folio angustiore, minus piloso, repens J. B. Hyacinthus maximus
botryodes, coma caerulea J. B. inter segetes passim. Thlaspi minus, juxta S.
Gervasii, in muris. Sedum parvum folio circina to, flore albo J. B. in muris.
Heliotropium majus, Ad ripas fl. Arve. Stachys Fuchsii; ad vias. Cynoglossum
minus J. B. in ruderatis and ad vias. Cardiaca, ibid. Lathyrus siliqua hirsuta
J. B. inter segetes circa Champe. Atractylis, juxta vias prope urbem Saxifragia
Venetorum, in collibus ad Arvam fl. Anonis lutea non spinosa, Dalechampio
Natrix J. B. juxta fl. Arve. Armeria prolifera Ger. Ad v^as passim. Orobus sive
Ervum multis, inter segetes non long ab oppido Jay. Latbyrus anguloso semine
J. B. Hujus duae varietates circa Genevam seruntur, alia flore albo, alia flore
dilute caeruleo and striato. Conyza media Monspeliensis, quibusdam Asteris
Atticigenus folio glabro rigido J. B. Tragorohis minor flore fuliginoso J. B.
In pascuis quibusdam trans Rhodanum. Sedum echinatum vel steliatum flore albo
J. B. in muscosis sepium aggeribus. Allium spaerocepahalum purpurascens. Bulbus
ei simplex albus velut parvae cepae. Folia fistulosa, glauca tria quatuorve.
Caulis dodrantalis, in cacumine flores gestans in orbiculare fere capitulum
conglobatos, e membrana ceo purpurascente involucro, striato, in duas carinas
dehiscente erumpentes. Flosculi singulares brevibus pediculis nixi, sex
foliolis constant longiusculis, acuminatis, pallide purpureis, saturatiore
linea purpurea per medium decurrente, stamina sex brevia cum apiculis purpureis
occultantes. Floret initio Julii: in arenosis ad Rhodanum fluv. Gramen cum
panicula molli rubente J. B. Besides these which we found out J. Bauhine
observed some few others, which we had not the hap to meet withal, viz. Carduus
pratensis Tragi, in monte Thuiri: Eryngium Alpinum latis foliis, magno capite
oblongo caeruleo, ibid. Ledum Alpinum minus hirsutum, ibid. Galega montana
Dalechampii, ibid. Lapathum folio acuto Alpinum ibid.

From Geneva we traveled to Lions, Lions.
the second City in France for greatness, handsome building, trade, riches, and
multitude of people; If any, setting aside Paris, may compare with it for any
one of these, for altogether I am sure none can. But because; we were hurried
out of France by the Kings Declaration before we had finished one third part of
our intended travels there: and because this Relation is already swelled to a
greater volume than I at first intended, I shall only set down the names of the
chief places we saw, and plants we found in that part of France, where we spent
our time till we returned home to England. In our journey from Geneva to Lions
we took notice only of two plants which were strangers to us, viz Valeriana
rubra angustifolia J. B. about Nantua a considerable town in Savoy and Anchusa
lutea, in some barren fields we passed through about a days journey short of
Lion.

From Lions we traveled to Grenoble, July 25. Grenoble Legrand Chartruse.
and thence to the grand Chartruse. By the way thither, but ecpecially upon the
mountains about this Cloister, we found a great many plant which we had not met
with any where before, to wit, Linariae aliquatenus sumilis folio Bellidis J.
B. In some fields about 5 or 6 leagues from Lion in the way to Grenoble:
Catanance Dalechampii folio Cyani, flore Coronopi J. B. On the sides of the
mountains about half a league above Grenoble in the way to the grand Chartruse.
Melampyro affinis Parietaria caerulea quorundam J. B. ibid. in sylvosis. In the
mountains about the Cloister, Sambucus racemosa; Circaea minima Col. Helleborus
niger Lob. Trachelium majus Belgarum; Radix Rhodia, copiosissime Gentianella
Alpina verna mogno flore; Pulsatilla alba J. B. Solidago Saracenica;
Periclymenum rectum fructu nigro Park. Xylosteum Allobrogicum i. e.
Periclymenum rectum fructo rubro Ger. Chamaemespilus Gesneri; Imperatoria
vulgaris; Sonchus caeruleus latifolius J. B. Nerium Alpinum quibusdam, aliis
Ledum glabrum J. B. Auricula ursi; Victorialis longa; Trifolium Alpinum
argenteum Park. Helleborus niger Caniculae folio minor. Park. Pedicularis sive
Crista galli montana; Radix ei simplex, alba, paucis fibris donata, magnitudine
and figura radicis Tragopogi, nisi quod longior sit, sapore non ingrato nucis
Avellanae paulo amariore. Folia ad radicem pauca [unum aut duo] alata, ex
pluribus pinnarum conjugationibus Filicis fere in modum composita, inferius
hirsuta, in actum desinentia, pallide viridia. Singulae pinnae ad margines
serratae Cristae galli vulgaris folia been imitantur. Caulis ab eadem radice
singularis, dodrantalis aut pedalis, rotundus, firmus, nonnihil hirsutus, intus
concavus, in summitate gestans spicam palmarem florum dense stipatorum, pallide
luteorum, Cristae galli similium, nisi quod vix sese aperiant, e calice
ventricoso pentagono emergentium, pediculis nullis. In calice latet vasculum
seminale turbinatum seminibus minutis rotundis repletum. Unum habet haec planta
in caul folium infra Spicam: in ipsa Spica ad singulos flores singula folia.

Horminum seu Pseudo-stachys quaedam Alpina. Radice nititur oblique acta,
multis fibris praedita. Folia longis pediculis hirsutis insident hirsuta and
ipsa, rugosa, urticae similia, circa margines serrata vel dentata denticulis
majoribus. Caules pedales hirsuti, medulla farcti, striati and quodammodo
quadrati, plerunque duobus, interdum uno duntaxat foliorum pari vestiti: Folia
quae in caul iis quae ad radicem similia, sed minora, and brevioribus
pediculis (ut in hoc genus plantis solenne est) fulta. In summitate caulium
spicae breves compactae, Betonicae aemulae. Flosculi galeati, lutei, e
calicibus in 5 molliores spinulas terminatis exeunt. Julii 17 jam pene
defloruerat.

Asteri montano purpureo similis J. B. Radix ei satis crassa, obliqua, intus
nonnihil lutea, sapore acriusculo, fibris aliquot donata. Folia ad radicem
plura, longa, angusta, figura fere Polemonii petraei Gesneri, saturo virore
splendentia, ad latera nonnihil pilosa, neque dentata neque serrata. Caules
semipedales aut dodrantales, surrecti, foliis vestiti alternatim positis, iis
quae ad radicem similibus, ramosi, singulis ramulis florem sustinentibus
Bellidis minoris, nisi quod limbus seu corona foliorum radiatorum in margin
minoribus brevioribusque foliolis constet color purpurascente praeditis,
interiores aflosculi qui fundum floris componunt inter viridem quasi and luteum
colorem ambigunt. In ascensu montium Julii 17 florentem inveni, and Bellidem
Alpinam ramosam flore purpurascente denominavi.

Ptarmica folio alato. Radix ei alba, obliqua, repens, fibris longis cr^bris
firmata. Caules erigit cubitales, rotundos, inanes, brevi and vix perceptibili
lanugine praeditos, foliis crebris alternatim positis vestitos. Folia alata 4
aut 5 pinuarum coniugationibus constant; singulae pinnae circa margines
dentatae, and subinde etiam altius incisae. Flores in summitate caulis velut in
umbella, albi and Ptarmicae vulgaris vel potius Absinthii albi umbelliferi
floribus omnino similes. Nullus in hac planta vel odor vel sapor insignis:
initio gustanti subamara videtur. In sylvis montosis Junio floret Bellis
caerulea could nudo C. B. Haec a Globularia vulgari Monspel* omnino specie
diversa est.

Pentaphyllum argenteum Alpinum flore albo Radicem non observavi. Folia
quinquepartita reliquorum hujus generis more, exigua, lanugine molli argenteau
utrinque canentia, in extremitatibus duntaxat crenata. Caules ex eadem radice
plures, pariter villosi, infirmi, foliis duobus tribusve triparti^o ut plurimum
divisis vestiti; quae appendicibus duabus caulem amplectuntur, flores in
summitate sustinentes duos vel tres pentapetalos, albos, cum numerosis intus
staminulis purpureis apicibus ornatis. Vice styli congeries and velut
fasciculus quidam filamentorum. Calyx (ut in reliquis hujus generis) 10
foliolis hirsutis constat, quinque nimirum latioribus, quinque angustioribus
alternatim positis: Est hoc Pentaphyllum foliis inferne, and superne incanis J.
B.

Muscus Alpinus flore insigni dilute rubente J. B. Haec planta rectius meo
judicio Caryophyllus aut Lyolnis inscriberetur.

Cerinthe quorundam major, versicolore floro J. B. Perennis esse videtur haec
planta; foliis est maculosis, floribus purpurascentibus pentagonis; seminibus
reliquis sui generis minoribus, cum planta ipsa omnium maxima sit.

Alsine minima Alpina fl^re albo majore.

Hypericum nummulariae folio C. B.

Planta quaedam umbellifera Pimpinellae simillae, quam describere nescio
quomodo omisi.

From Grenoble we traveled to Orange, Orange.
in which journey we observed Echinopus minor J. B. which grows plentifully all
over Gallia Narbonensis, Jac^a cum spinosis capitulis purpurea tennifolia J. B.
which is as common; Thymum vulgar rigidius folio cinereo J. B. This also is
found every where in the stony grounds in this Country; Pulegium cervinum by
the Rhosne side at Pont S. Esprit; Lavendula major five vulgaris Park. As
common every where as Thyme; Dentellaria Rondeletii; Acanthium Illyricum;
Chondrilla viseosa ^aule (...) Col. Echii sive Anchusae quaedam species flore
carneo, An Lycopsis?

From Orange we proceeded to Avignon, Avignon.
whereabout we observed whole fields sown with Foenum Burgundiacum: and besides
what we found about Orange, Paliurus; Cistus Ledon Monspeliensium; Cistus
faemina folio Salviae; Malus granata; quae per totam Galliam Narbonensem
frequentissima est. Catanance Dalechampii flore cyani folio Coronopi J. B. per
Galliam Narbonensem passim. Helianthemum tenuifolium glabrum flore luteo J. B.
Helianthemum flore albo, folio angusto hirsuto J. B. Faeniculum tortu^sum J. B.
Millefolium odoratum; Millefolium tomontosum luteum J. B. quod non adeo vulgar
circa Monspelium; Staechas citrina tenuifolia Narbonensis J. B. Capparis; Ile^
coccifera; Genista Hispanica, Botrys; Cucumis sininus; Aspalathus 2.
Monspeliensit J. B. and many others which grow also about Montpellier.

Our next Stage was Nismes, Nismes*
where besides those mentioned about Avignon, most of which are also found
here, we noted Thlaspi biscutatum asperum hie. racifolium and majus C. B.
Psyllium semper virens, Camphorata Monspeliensium, Trifolium bituminosum; Ruta
sylvestris, Peganium Narbonensium; Tithymalus serratus; Lotus arbor;
Convolvulus spicaefolius, Plum^ag^ bago Plinii; Scabiosa montana colidarum
regionum Lob Tithymalus characius Amygdaloides, Papaver corniculatum luteum;
Clem^tis sive Flammula repens C. B. Phyteuma Monspeliensium; Siderius
veritcillis spinosis; Alkekengi; Clematis daphnoides major; Lepidium vulgar
Chondrilla viscosa caul (...), Col. Et quod nusqum alibi hactenus invenerim,
Abrotanum faemina folis Ericae sive Vnguentaria Lutetianorum.

From Nismes we traveled to Montpellier, Montpellier.
where we abode all the Autumn and part of the Winter, during which time,
though the season of the year for simpling was past, we observed the following
plants.

Absinthium Seriphium Narbonense Park. Ad mare. Acarna flore purpura rubente
patulo C. B. in aggeribus. Acarna major caul folioso C. B. In arvis non procul
a Miravalle: Juxta vias eundo a Monspelio ad Pedenatium. Alsine oblongo folio
serrato, flore caeruleo J. B. in muris. Althaea frutescens fo^^o rotundiore
incano C. B. In scopulis non long a specu Frontignano. Alypum montis Ceti,
etc. Lob, In Promontorlo Ce^i, vidimus etiam in montibus prope oppidum S.
Chamas in Galloprovincia. Anchusa angustifolia C. B. in collibus juxta
Castelneuf and aux Garigues. Anchusa Monspeliaca C. B. in colle arenoso non
long a Castelneuf versus Grammontium lucum. Androsace Matthew. in f^ndo stagni
Volcarum Estang dicto copiosissime. Aristolochia Pistolochia dicta; in arvis
quibusdam aux Garigues copiose. Anonis pusilla fruticans Cherleri J. B. in
collibus siccioribus. Aphyllantes Monspeliensibus J. B. in collibus prope
Castelneuf aliisque oppido vicinis. Aristolochia Scracenica Ger. in vineis,
foliis and aggeribus frequens. Aspalathus 2 Monspelienfis J. B. in collibus
petrosis abunde. Aster conyzoides odoratus luteus hort. Eyst. Ad viarum aggeres
veriis in rocis. Bellis caerulea Monspeliaca. Bupleurum folio rigido C. B. In
sylva Grammontia and sylva prope Selneuf. Bupleurum angustifolium; in locis
saxosis non long a Boutonet. Caltha simplici flore, in agris frequens. Carduus
bulbosus Manspeliensis, sive Acanthus sylvestris quibusdam foliis laciniatis J.
B. In pratis circa Monspelium passim. Carduus chrysanthemus Hispanicus Clus.
Via inter S. Lupian and Pedenatium, and alibi prope urbem. Carduus lanceolatus
ferocior J. B. Prope montem Lupi. Card^us solstitialis, ubique fere. Chamelaea
tricoccos; Chamaepitys sive Iva moschata Monspelionsium J. B. in collibus
saxosis. Chondrilla lutea J. B. in aggeribus ipsius urbis. Cistus mas 4 folio
oblongo albido J. B. Cistus Ledon Monspeliensium J. B. Cistus faemina Ger.
Omnes hae species in collibus and sylvis frequentes. Clematis sive Flammula
repens C. B. in saxosis collibus and arvis arenosis Convolvulus spicifolius
Park. Conyza maritime caerulea an Jacobaea quaedam? Circa Peroul. Coris
caerulaea maritima C. B. in arenosis ad mare praesertim. Cyanus pulchro semine
Centaurii majoris J. B. i. e. Crupina Belgarum Lob. in collibus prope flu.
Ladum juxta Castelneuf. Cyperus panicula sparsa speciosa J. B. in pratis prope
Boutonetum and Castrum novum. Dory^nium Monspeliense J. B. in aggeribus sepium
frequens. Echinopus minor J. B. i. e. Carduus caeruleus sphaerocephalus minor
C. B. in collibus and ad vias passun. Erica arborescens Monspeliensis, flore
purpurascente, ramulis ternis J. B. in luco Grammontio. Erica arborescens
floribus luteolis vel herbaceis minimis J. B. ibid. Ferula Lob. Foeniculum
tortuosum. passim. Geranium folio Althaeae C. B. juxta munitiones arcis, non
procul a nivis reconditorio. Geranium cicutae folio, acu longissima C. B. Ad
agrorum margines and in aggeribus. Gingidium umbella, longa, in prato quodam
juxta viam quae Frontignanam ducit copiose. Gnaphalium ad Stoechadem citrinam
accedens, juxta fluv. Ladum. Gramen minimum Dalechampii J. B. in vineis, vere
primo floret. Gramen parvum pulchrum panicula compressa nigricante J. B. in
aquosis. Hedypnois Monspessulana sive Dens leonis Monspessulanus J. B. in
aggeribus terrenis passim. Helianthemum tenuifolium glabrum flore luteo J. B.
in collibus aridioribus passim. Helianthemum flore albo folio angusto hirsuto
J. B. in collibus Castro novo vicinis and alibi. Herba Doria Lob. Ad Ladum
amnem copiose. Herniaria glabra, in prato quodam juxta lucum Grammont.
Hieracium parvum hirtum caul aphyllo J. B. in arenosis collibus prope Sellam
novam and alibi passim. Holosteum Plantagini simile J. B. in aggere quodam
inter urbem and Ladum amnem. Hypericum tomentosum J. B. in humidioribus circa
Selneuf and alibi. Ilex coc^ifera, in collibus saxosis. Jacea cum spinosis
capitulis pururea tenuifolia J. B. passim. Jocea montana capite magno Strobili
J. B. in collibus juxta Costelneuf, Selneuf, etc. Jacea luitea capite spinoso
C. B. satis frequens in pascuis and collibus. Kali majus semine cochleato Ger.
In litoribus maris and salsis palustribus. Lathyrus major Narbonensis
angustif^lius J. B. in collibus quos Garigues vocant. Leuc^^um maritimum
angustifolium, in lingua illa inter stagnum Volcarum Estang dictum and mare,
Linum marinu^ luteum Ad. in pratis circa Sellam novam, Castrum novum, itemque
ad mare. Linaria luteo parva annua J. B. in summitate montis Lupi. Lotus
siliquosa lutea Mouspeliensis J. B. in collibus and pascuis. Marrubium nigrum
longifolium i. e. Herba venti Monspliensium, in aggeribus and ad vias. Moly
moschatum capillaceo folin C. B. prope sylvam non long a Selneuf, and in
collibus quos Garigues vocant. Orobus receptus berbariorum Lob. in agris passim
Peucedanum vulgar, prope sylvam Grammontium. Phyllon arrhonogonon and
thelygonon J. B. in aggeribus fossarum and praecipue secus fluvios. Phyteuma,
passim. Polemonium sive Trifolum fruticans Ger. in sepibus vulgatiss. Prunella
angustifolia J. B. Pulegium cervinum angustifolium J. B. in locis ubi per
hyemem aquae stagnarant. Polygoni quaedam species erecta, an Arenaria J. B.? Ad
agrorum margines. Rhus folio Vlmi C. B. in collibus prope Castelneuf copiose.
Rhus myrtifolia Monspeliaca. Ad sepes, praecipue vero ad ripas Ladi amnis.
Rubia maritima, in lingua illa inter Estang and mare. Scammonea Monspeliaca
foliis rotundioribus C. B. Ad mare prope Peraux, villam novam, etc. Scorpioides
siliqua campoide hispida, in aggeribus munitionum. Securidacae genus triphyllon
J. B. in collibus prope Castelne^f. Sideritis Monspessulana J. B. Prope
patihulum, aux Garigues, etc. Sideritidis genus verticillis spinosil J. B. in
agris copiose. Sinapi echinatum J. B. inter segetes. Smilax aspera J. B. Ad
sepes passim. Sonchus lanatus Dalechampii J. B. Sonchis affinis Terracrepola,
in pascuis. Stoechas Arabica, in Grammontia sylva copiose and in sylva prope
Selneuf. Stoechas ^^^rina tenuifolia Narbonensis J. B. passim. Stoechadi
citrinae affinis capitulis parvis raris squamosis, in pappos evanescentibus J.
B. in fissuris rupium juxta Castelneuf and alibi. Tamarix major sive arborea
Narbonensis J. B. Ad mare copiose. Telephium scorpioides J. B. circa
Castelneuf. Thlaspi clypeatum serpylli folio C. B. Thlaspi fruticosum spinosum
C. B. in rupibus in summa part montis Lupi. Thlaspi umbellatum tenuiter diviso
folio amarum Narbonense J. B. in arvis prope patibulum and alibi. Thymum
vulgar rigidius folio cinereo J. B. in aridioribus passim. Tragos sive Vva
marina minor, ad mare copiose. Tribulus terrestis, in agris passim. Trifolium
argentatum floribus luteh J. B. in collibus prope Castelneuf and alibi in agro
Monspeliaco. Trifolium haemorrhoidale seu Lotus Libyea Dalechampii, ad ripas
Ladi amnis. Trifolium stellatam purpureum, circa patibulum and alibi. Valeriana
rubra angustifolia C. B. in rupibus montis Lupi. Verbascum sylaestre
Monspeliense flore luteo hiante J. B. in collibus saxosis. Vinca pervinca
major. Ad sepes.

OF MONTPELLIER.
MOntpellier is a round Town, standing upon a hill in the midst of a stony
Country; somewhat bigger than Geneva but not so populous. The number of
Inhabitants at present being about 25000, of which two third parts are Papists
and one Protestants. The Protestants have 2 Churches (Temples they call them)
in Town. The streets of this City are very narrow, short and crooked, without
any uniformity or beauty at all, so intricate that its half a years work to
understand them all, and learn the way from place to place. The houses are many
of them well built of free stone, which were they set well together in order
would make 3 or 4 handsome streets. No large Piazza or marketplace in Town.
The number of Apothecaries in this little City is scarce credible, there being
130 shops, and yet all find something to do: Their Cypres powder, sweet bags,
Cassolets, Treacle, Confectio. Alkermes and Hyacinthi having a name all France
over. The Queen of Hungaries water (as they call it) made here is likewise much
bought up. It is nothing but common Spirit of Wine in which Rosemary flowers
have been macerated, distilled from the said flowers. The wines heerabout are
very strong and bear water well. Their vineyards are of dwarf vines without any
support, the standards when the branches are pruned off being like the
standards of our Osiergardens.

At Montpellier the best Verdet or Verd^greece ( Viride aeris) is made. The
manner of making Verde:
They told us that so good could not be made elsewhere though they used the
same method and the same materials, whether it be to be attributed to the just
temper of heat, or the nature of the wine they use, or some other unknown
quality. The manner thus,

first they take Grape-stalks: well cleansed from the raisins and from all
filth, and putting in the bottom of a pot a quantity of the best red wine, they
set sticks cross a little above the wine, and upon them lay a quantity of
Grape-stalks first also drenched in wine, and let them a lone about 15 days
more or less according to the season, till they come to make (as they call it)
a rose, that is the out-lides become to appearance dry, and the middle only
wet. These grape stalks being thus prepared, they put in the bottom of a large
earthen pot of the best red wine that begins to be sower, but is not yet come
to be vinegar, to the quantity of about two or three inches depth, somewhat
above the wine they set sticks cross the pot, and having reatly many little
plates of Copper, they lay upon the dross sticks first a layer of the prepared
Grape-stalks, then a layer of copper plates, and so alternately S S S till the
pot be full. In the middle of the pot they usually leave a hole all along for
the vapor of the wine to ascend; neither are the copper plates laid near
together for the same reason. When they have filled up the pot they cover it,
and set it in a cellar, and after some 5 or 6 days turn the copper plates,
letting the pot remain in the cellar 3 or 4 days more. In 8 or 10 days
according to the season the Verdet will be come. Then they take out the plates
and laying them 6 or 7 on a heap put them in a trough and sprinkle the edges of
them with the same wine for 3 or 4 days; next they press them with heavy
weights for 4 or 5 days, and last of all scrape off the Verdet with knives, and
moulding it with a little wine, dry it and sell it. The same plates are again
put into pots and used as before. So then the Verdet is nothing but the rust or
s^urf of the copper calcined by the vapor of the wine.

Here also we saw the manner and process of blanching of Bees wax. The manner
of blanching wax.


First they melt the wax in a great copper Cauldron, then they have ready a
mould or form of wood of the figure of a Sugar Loaf or the block of a
steeple-crown'd hat, which having besmeared over with slime of snails they dip
into the wax thus melted. This takes up a skin or film of wax as candles upon
dipping do. This they smooth with their hands and dip in water, and when it is
cold take it off the form, from which by reason of the noin^ing the form with
the forementioned mucilage it will readily slip in the form of a cone or
long-crucible. These cones (so let me call them) are set in a garden in ranks
singly one by one, supported with canes or reeds crossing one another on this
fashion,

Round about they set pots with water, wherewith they sprinkle the wax often to
keep it from melting. In Summer time, when the Sun lies hot upon it some 6 or 7
times a day, otherwhiles but 3 or 4 times. In 14 or 15 days the upper end of
there cones will grow white, and then they turn them to whiten the other end.
In a months time more or less according to the weather they will become white
all over. Then they melt the wax again in earthen pans like Metae or scuttles,
and run it so melted through the neb of a ^m pot into water, and as it runs
down into the water a man either breaks it with his hand into grains, or works
it into round figures like spiral wreaths or corollae, and these they expose
again to the weather in the garden and order as before, till they become purely
white; and then melt into great pieces to fell. The mucilage where with they be
smear the forms is made of snails taken alive shells and all, and pounded in a
mortar till they become a perfect pan or viscus. The form once besmeared well
over with this pap will last dipping many times. Wax whitened is almost twice
as dear as yellow wax. Yellow wax is solutive and used where there is an
inflammation and the sore not ripe, white wax on the contrary very astringent.
They say Montpiellier is a place proper for, the whitening of wax^ and that the
same workmen coming over into England found the air of a different temper and
not convenient for this trade.

At Montpillier is made the best Confectio Alkermes, Confectio Alkermes.
as reason there is it should, the grain which gives it its denomination being
in no Country of Europe found so plentifully as here. The manner of the
preparation of this grain for the making the Confection you may find setdown in
the Philosoph. Transactions, Numb. 20. page 362. and I shall therefore here
omit. These grains have formerly been thought to have been proper to the dwarf
or shrub- Ilex, called therefore ^lex o^ccifera, and a by-fruit or excrescency
of the twigs of that plant. But my learned and ingenious friend Mr. Martin
Lister, who has been very happy in making discoveries in natural History, has
found the like grains here in England upon the twigs of cherry and other trees,
and judged them to be the work of an insect, and by her affixed to the twigs
for nests to breed and harbor her young; and indeed to me they appeared to be
so, easily receding and falling off from the wood when the young are hatched and
gone. As for the grains themselves they are so like the Kermes grains, that
they are scarce to be distinguished and grow to the twigs just in the same
places and manner. But for a more full and complete History of them I refer the
Reader to Mr. Listers Letters published in the Philosophical Transactions.

At Montpellier I observed the manner of making oil-olive: The manner of making
Oil olive.
First they take olives, whether fresh gathered or laid a while on a heap it
matters not (as they told me) and bruise or grind them to a paste, ^as we do
apples to make cider, with a perpendicular millstone running round in a
trough. This paste or the olives thus bruised they put in round thin baskets
made of Spartum like frails, having a round hole in the top; but both top and
bottom clapping together, so that when pressed they look like a thin round
cake. Half a score or more of these baskets filled with olive pouce they lay on
a heap in the press and letting down the press-beam, squeeze them at first
without any mixture. Then winding up the beam they take out the baskets, and
into each one put a good quantity of scalding water, (which they have always
ready) and shaking the basket mingle it with the pouce and then piling them one
upon another as before, press them down a second time. This second operation
they repeat again, and then taking out the pouce put in new and proceed as
before. The oil together with the water runs out into vessels set to receive
it. The water with the Amurca sinks to the bottom, and the oil swims above it,
which they take off with a copper dish like a fleeting dish, as good housewives
ski^ the cream from their milk. The water mixed with the red juice of the
olives becomes red and thick, not at all mingling with the oil, so that it
cannot easily the least drop of it be taken up without perceiving it. Its said
that in Provence they spread their olives on a floor after they are gathered,
and there let them rest 30 days to dry, and for that reason their oil is better
than that of Languedoc. Others lay them on a heap a while to let them sweat, as
they call it. It is worth the noting that though the olives be very bitter and
of a fiery ungrateful taste, yet the on which is drawn from them is sweet; the
like is observed in bitter Almonds, and it is very likely might be in all other
bitter fruits; which is a sufficient proof that the taste of such fruits does
not inhere in the oil, at least which is made by expression; and it deserves
examination, whether the chemical oil may not also be divested of the taste of
the vegetable from which it is extracted.

Olives when they come to maturity change color and become black as some other
plums do, but it is very late in the year first. They are then notwithstanding
of a horrid and ungrateful taste, firing the throat and palate of one that eats
them. They afford most oil when fully ripe, but best (as they told us) when
gathered and pressed green. Sometimes they pickle ripe olives, but they will
not last; therefore those which they pickle to send abroad are gathered green.
The pickle they use is nothing else but a brine of salt and water.

Near Peroul about a league from Montpellier we saw a boiling fountain (as they
call it) that is the water did heave up and bubble as if it boiled. The boiling
fountain.
This phenomenon in the water was caused by a vapor ascending out of the
earth through the water, as was manifest, for that if one did but dig any where
near the place and pour water upon the place new dug, one should observe in
it the like bubbling, the vapor arising not only in that place where the
fountain was but all thereabout. The like vapor ascending out of the earth and
causing such ebullition in water it passes through has been observed in Mr.
Hawkley's ground about a mile from the Town of Wigan in Lancashire, which
vapor by the application of a lighted candle, paper or the like, catches fire
and flames vigorously. Whether or no this vapor at Peroul would in like manner
catch fire and burn I cannot say, it coming not in our minds to make the
experiment.

From Montpellier we took a journey of pleasure to see the adjacent Country,
and first we rode to Frontignan, a little walled Town by the Estang side, 3
miles distant, which gives name to the so famous muscate wine. The Country
about this Town toward the Sea southward lies open to the Sun, but toward the
land northward it is encompassed with a ridge of hills in form of a bow,
touching the Sea at each end; so that the whole is like a Theater: in the Arena
and on the sides of the hills grows the muscate grape of which this wine is
made. In this space are contained two other little Towns, the one called
Miraval, the other Vich. This last gives name to a mineral water, springing
near it, much used heerabout. It has an acide Vitriolic taste, but nothing so
strong as our Spaw-waters, and therefore I guess the operation of it is much
weaker.

At Frontignan and other places we saw the manner of making raisins [uvae
passae] They take the fairest bunches, The manner of drying grapes to make
raisins.
and with a pair of scissers ship off all the faulty grapes, and tie two
bunches together with a string. Then they dip them in a boiling lie [lixivium]
into which they put a little oil, till they are very plump and ready to crack.
Jo. Bauhinus says that they let them continue so long in the boiling lixivium,
quoad flaccescant tantum and corrugentur. But we observed no such thing, for
they did not continue the bunches half a minute, but presently took them out
again and washed them in a vessel of fair cold water, then they put them upon
wooden poles for two or three days in the shade to dry, and after that exposed
them to the Sun, taking them in in the nightime or rainy weather. Cyprianus
Eichov^ns describes the manner of making rai^ins in Spain thus. There are
(says he) two sorts of Vvae passoe or raisins; the one of those they call
Raisins of the Sun, of a blew color, the other of the Vvae passae Lixae, which
they call Frail or basket-Raisins. In preparing the first sort they thus
proceed. When the bunch they design for that purpose begins to grow tipe, they
cut the foot-stalk of it half asunder, that so the radical juice or moisture
may be at least in a great measure detained and not pass to the grapes; and so
they leave it hanging on the vine. Then by the heat of the Sun the grapes are
by degrees dried. When they are sufficiently dry they gather them and put them
up in vessels.

The second sort they make on this fashion. When they prune their vines, they
bind up the cuttings in faggots and reserve them till the vintage time. Then
they burn them and of their ashes make a lie or lixivi^m, which they boil in
great vessels, and there in ^immerse the bunches of grapes one by one.
Afterward to dry them they spread them upon a paved floor clean swept, made
for that purpose in the vineyard, that so they may be the more speedily dried
by the Sun-b^ams. When they are sufficiently concocted and dried they put them
up in frails or baskets. After the same manner they prepare figs for to dry, by
dipping them in a lixivium made of the ashes of the dried branches of the
figtre^ cut off in pruning. But however they superstitiously observe to make
their lixivium for raisins of the ashes of branches pruned off of the vine,
etc. I doubt not but the ashes of any wood indifferently taken would serve as
well for that purpose.

From Frontignan we rode to Balleruch* Baths at Balleruch.
to see the hot waters which are used as well inwardly as outwardly. At our
being there, which was in the beginning of September, the water was scarce
lukewarm; they told us that in the Winter it was very hot. The Bath is not
above two flight-shots distant from the Estang, and the water thereof tastes
very salt and brackish; whether by reason of the Seas being so near it, or
because the water comes from some salt mine I know not, yet the latter seems
the more probable, because should it come from the Sea, the water straining
through so much sand would probably lose its salt by the way, as we have found
by experiment in England.

At Gabian about a days journey from Montpellier in the way to Beziers is a
fountain of Petroleum. A fountain of Petroleum
It burns like oil, is of a strong pungent scent, and a blackish color. It
distills out of several places of the rock all the year long, but most in Summer
time. They gather it up with ladies and put it in a barrel set on one end,
which has a spiggot just at the bottom, when they have put in a good quantity
they open the spiggot to let out the water, and when the oil begins to come
presently stop it. They pay for the farm of this fountain about 50 crowns per.
ann. We were told by one Monsieur Beaushoste a Chemist in Montpellier, that
Petroleum was the very same with the oil of Jet, and not to be distinguished
from it by color, taste, smell, consistency, virtues, or any other accident,
as he had by experience found.

Upon the coast of the Mediterranean Sea in several places, as at Berre, Making
of salt by evaporating Seawater by the Sunbeams.
near Martegue in Provence, at Messina in Sioily, etc. they make salt of the
Seawater drawn into shallow pools and evaporated by the Sunbeams in Summer
time. First they let the water into a large shallow plain like the cooler in a
Brew House and there being well heated they run (...) into several shallow beds
like the beds of a garden, when the Sun has dried up all the water they let in
more, and so again 3 or 4 times till the salt remaining at the bottom of these
receptacles come to be 3 fingers thick, and then they take it up with shovels,
and heap it on little hills: but the whole process of this operation being
exactly described in the Philosophical Transact. Numb; 51. page 1025. I shall
forbear to enlarge any further concerning it.

Now that I have mentioned Martegue, The prevaration ^ B^tar^
I shall add the manner of making Botargo, out of Mr. F. Willughbye's notes. At
Martegue they take abundance of Mullets [ Mugiles not mulli as one would be apt
to think by the English name] in their Burdigos, which are places in the
shallows, enclosed with hedges of reeds. The male Mullets are called
Allettants, because they shed the milt [ Lac piscium.] The females Botar, of
the rows or spawn of which Botargo is made. They first take out the spawn
entire, and cover it round with salt for 4 or 5 hours: then they press it a
little between two boards or stones; then they wash it, and at last dry it in
the Sun for 13 or 14 days taking it in at nights.

December. 7. 1665. from Montpellier we made an excursive voyage into Provence.
The principal Cities and Towns that we saw were 1. Lunel. Arles.
Lunel about 4 leagues distant from Montpellier. 2. Arles a considerable City
once the head of a Kingdom, called anciently Arelate, standing upon the river
Rhosne, which a good way above this City divides it self into two branches, and
makes an Isalnd called the Camarg. All this Island is full of Vermicularis
frutex growing by the ditch sides all along. Beyond this City in the way to
Marseilles we passed over a large plain or level all over covered with stones,
called now the Craux or les Champs pierreux, anciently Campi lapidei, to 3. S.
Chamas.
S. Chamas a large burgh standing upon the ridge and on each side a narrow
hill, which is perforated like Pausilypus. Upon the rocks near this town I
found Seseli Aethiopicum frutex growing in great plenty, as also Alypum montis
Ceti, Coris Monspessulana; Ruta sylvestris minor; Colutea caul Genistae
fungoso J. B. We observed also this day all along as we rode upon the hills and
by the way sides our common Furze or Genista spinosa.

4. Marseilles, Marseilles.
an ancient City not great but well built with tall stone-houses for the most
part, and very populous. We were told that the number of souls was about
120000. The streets are narrow as in most of the ancient Towns in this Country
to keep off the scorching beams of the Sun in Summer time. The haven is the
most secure and commodious that I have seen: the entrance into it so strait and
narrow that a man may easily cast a stone cross it, but the haven within large
enough to contain 500 vessels or more: of an oval figure. On one side of this
haven the Town is built which compasses it more than half round, having before
it a handsome kay well paved, which serves the Citizens for a walk or
Promenade. This haven is not capable of ships of above 600 tun. On the rocks
near this Town I found growing plentifully the same Colutea I observed at S.
Chamas: Valeriana rubra Dod. Carduus galactites J. B. By the Sea side
Tragacantha Massiliensium plentifully. After luteus supinus J. B. Tithymalus
myrsinites angustifolius; Coronopus Massiliensis Lob. 5. Bausset. Bausset.
Olliole. Toulon.
6. Olliole, two little Towns. 7. Toulon, no great Town, but well fortified and
the best haven the King of France has on the Mediterranean Sea, having large
bay capable of the greatest vessels, where there is good riding for ships. At
Toulon they make holes in their stone-walls at three or four foot distance,
near the ground, and there plant capers, the fruit whereof they prepare and
pickle after this fashion. They gather the buds or blossoms of the flowers
before they be explicated, and spreading them thin, lay them in the shade to
wither for three or four hours, to prevent the opening of the flower. Then they
put them in a vessel, and pour vinegar upon them, covering the vessel with a
board, and so let them stand for nine days; at the end whereof they take them
out and press them gently, and put them in fresh vinegar, letting them stand as
long as before: this done the third time, they put them up in barrels with
vinegar. Some mingle salt with their vinegar, which is the best way, and
preserves the Cipers for three years both for color and taste as good as at
the first. I observed near Bausset great plenty of Myrtle in the hedges; near
Olliole Acanthus: sativus; Althaeai^rutestens folio rotundiore incano C. B.
Fumaria minor sive tenuifolia surrecta J. B. Acacia trifolia; Tencrium vulgar;
Arisarum latifolium; Chrysocome Ger. S. Maximin.
8. S. Maximine, near which is the famous Gro^ of Mary Magdalen, called S.
Baulme. 9. Aix, S. Baulme. Aix.
anciently Aquae Sextiae from the hot baths that are there. This is a very
elegant and pleasant City, well built with fair stone houses, having broad
streets and handsome piazzas.

10. Selogne, Selogne.
Salonia. In the Cordeliers Church lies buried Nostradamus the famous French
Prophet, whose verses the Franch-men esteem as oracles. In the Church wall is
placed a stone with this inscription to his memory.

D. M. Clariss. ossa. M. Nostradami unius omnium mortalium judicio digni, cujus
pene divino calamo totius orbis ex astrorum influxu futuri eventus
conscriberentur. Vixit. an. 62. m. 6. d. 10. Obiit Salo: MDLXVI. Quietem
posteri ne invidete. Anna Pontia Gemella Salonia conjugi optimo V. F. 11.
Aiguemortes, a small Town but of great strength, near the Sea in a fenny place
some 6 leagues distant from Montpellier.

From Montpellier we returned to Lions, from Lions we traveled with the
Messenger to Paris, from Paris again to Calais and so cross the Strait to
Dover: whence we at first set out and began our Journey.

A Relation of a Voyage made through a great part of Spain by Francis Willughby
Esquire containing the chief Observables he met with there, collected out of his
Notes.
AVgust 31. 1664. we left Bagnols in the County of Roussillon, being the last
or furthest Town belonging to the French, and at about of a leagues distance
came to a great stone erected here for a boundary between France and Spain; and
passing very bad way among desolate mountains after many hours riding we came
to Lansa the first Town of the King of Spains Country. All along these
mountains grew Rosemary, common Furze or Gorsse and Agnus castus of two sorts,
the one with a carneous, the other with a blew flower. From Lansa we went on
the same day as far as Cau de Creux, 5 leagues or 20 English miles from
Bagnols. Among these mountains we met with no brooks and scarce any water.

September 1. We intended to have seen the Coral-fishing here, but the windy
weather hindered us. The Sea must be very calm and smooth, else it is impossible
for them to fish for it. It grows downward (as the urinators told us) under the
hollow rocks, and not upwards as trees. I believe rather that it grows
indifferently either upwards or downwards according to the situation of the
rocks.

The engine they use to get it is a great cross of wood ABCD, that at the
middle E has a huge weight of lead made fast to it and at each end A, B, C, D,
a round net. To the lead at E is fastened a long rope. They go out in little
boats and let down this cross; and when they have found a rock at the bottom of
the Sea, he that manages the rope thrusts it into the hollows, getting in one
or two of the legs, and if there be any coral it entangles in the nets at the
end of the cross, by which it is torn off and brought up. The natural color of
the coral while it is alive and growing to the rocks is a pale carneous; but
when the scurf (which answers to the bark in trees) is rubbed off, it is red.
The Coral that dies or is broken off from the rocks loses that carneous scurf
or bark in the Sea and becomes red, though sometimes it gets a greenish white
rust. They say it is 50 years before it comes to its full growth: but that I
conceive is an ungrounded conjecture. They sometimes but very rarely find
branches of three or four pounds weight. It rots, dies, grows light, worm-eaten
and full of holes like wood. They all affirmed it to be hard and not soft as it
grows under water, contrary to the current tradition of the Ancients, Moliis
fuit herba sub undis. I believe the outward scurf or bark may be soft, it
easily crumbling off afterward, which might give occasion to the fable. They
told us that a piece of Coral (having the carneous scurf upon it) wetted is
just the same as when it is first taken out of the Sea. The best Coral rude as
it is found is worth a Pistol the pound, or two or three pieces of eight:
Polished and wrought into beads, bracelets, etc. at Marseilles it is sold for
30, 40 and sometimes 60 sols ( i. e. so many pence) the ounce. They find here
white coral also but very rarely.

Near C. de Creux upon the mountains they find a kind of Selenitis, which may
be cut or flit into very thin plates, like the common Muscovy-glass.

Upon the shore are thrown up conchae venerea of several sorts and magnitudes,
and other small shells of affinity to them, which they call Porcellane* These
they put in the juice of lemons or citrons and set them out in an open bottle
all night. The dew mingling with the acid juice dissolves the Porcellane. This
liquor they use for a Cosmetic.

They catch fish about C. de Creux as at Naples b^ hanging a firebrand or
other light at the end of the boat, which entices the fish into the nets.

This day we passed by Rosas a strong Garrison Castillon, Villa sacra and lay
at Figera.

Sept. 2. We passed Crispia, Basalon, Argelague^ S. Ja^^ and lay at
Castel-foulet, 5 league^ All the way we observed abundance of Pomegrana^ trees.
C. Foulet is a small Garrison.

3. We passed by Aulot, where we saw a Bufalore, of which there are diverse in
that Town. It is a hole or cave out of which continually issues a cool air.
They keep bottles of wine, fruit, etc. in a little house built over the cave.
The wine here kept drinks as cool as if it were kept in ice or snow. They say
that it is the water running and falling down under the ground that makes these
Spiracula, which is not unlikely. They are all on the left side of the river as
you go to Vict, and none on the right. This day also we passed Rhoda and lay at
Vict, 7 leagues.

4. We went to the hill where the Amethysts or Violet stones are found distant
two leagues from Vict, called S. Sigminont. On the top of the hill is an
hermitage and place of devotion, where S. Sigminont a Burgundian King did
penance. The Amethysts are found lower in the side of the hill, Viscount Jacque
is lord of the Soil, and whoever opens a mine pays him a pistol and an half per
mensem. They find the stones by following a vein of reddish or black earth, or
a vein in the rock so colored. They are all hexangular and pointed like
crystal. There are of three sorts, the best are the blackest or deepest violet.
2. Others are almost quite white. 3. Some, but very rarely, are found tinctured
with yellow, They sometimes stick a great many together to the rock like the
Bristow-diamonds; but those are never good: the best are found loose in the
chinks of the rock in a fat yellowish or reddish earth. They scrape out this
earth with long narrow knives that enter into the chinks, and then crumble it
in pieces with their fingers to feel for the stones. They are afterward ground
and polished upon leaden moulds after the same manner as crystal is. First they
use the dust of Smiril or Emery, and at last of Tripoli. All along the way to
this hill we saw abundance of Arbutus and Rbus coriariorum called Rhondo. In
this Country they use not bark of Oak to tan their leather, as we do, but the
leaves and branches of this shrub, which they first bruise with a perpendicular
stone, and then mingle with water, and heating the water lukewarm, steep the
skins in it 3 or 4 days. In these mountains are also found Emeralds, Gold and
other sorts of minerals and stones, but it does not turn to account to search
for them. Topazes are found in a lake called the lake of Silles, not far from
S. Colonna near Girona. They find them upon the shore of the lake.

At Vict there is a great Marketplace, Sept. 5.
and a Church at a Covent, said to have been built by Charlemagne when he had
discomfited the Saracens and driven them out of Catalonia. This night we lodged
at Moia having traveled only 3 leagues.

We rode within sight of Montserret, 6.
broken at the top into rocks standing like the teeth of a Saw, from whence it
took its name. There is a Chapel of our Lady, a place of great devotion. This
night we lodged at Casa della pobla, a single Inn, 5 leagues.

We came to Cardona 2 leagues. 7.
All the way as we rode the rocks and stones were full of round holes, just
like those in the stones at Ancona in which the Pholades harbor; and there is
no question but these holes have been made by some animal before the stones
were hardened.

We viewed the mountain of salt, 8.
where were three Officers, one to weigh the salt, another to receive money,
and the third to keep accounts. The Revenue of this Salt amounts yearly to
about 30000 pieces of eight. For every Quintal, that is 104 pounds, they pay
ten reals of two sous to a real. The salt is hard and transparent like crystal,
and when powdered fine as white as snow. They hew it out with axes and mattocks;
and make chaplets, boxes, etc. of it. They say there is no end of it, but that
it reaches to the center of the earth. Near the place where they work there are
two caves within the rock of salt, to the end of one of which they never durst
venture to go.

Not far from this there is another mountain of salt, where the salt sticks to
the rocks, and is most of it tinctured with red. Of this red salt they make
broad plates like tiles, which they call Ruggiolas; these they heat before the
fire, but never put them into it, and use them to take away aches, strengthen
the stomach, keep the feet warm, etc. Well heated on both sides they will keep
warm for 24 hours. Amongst this red salt there is a kind of Selenitis, (which
some call Ising-glass, and the Italians Gesso, from the Latin wo^^ Gypsum,
signifying chalk, because when burnt it is turned into a white calx) which
naturally roches into Parallelipipedums of the figure of a Lozenge. Of which
sorts of stones are found in several places of our nation. About these
mountains of salt grows great plenty of Halimus and Limonium.

Cardona is a Dukedom containing 3 or 4 villages besides the town. The Duke
thereof is one of the richest Grandees of Spain, having 3 Dukedoms, 4
Marquisates, 2 Earldoms etc. The name of his family is Folk. He lives for the
most part at Madrid, but sends every three years a Governor. The King of Spain
has nothing at all to do with this city: and the Duke never imposes any taxes,
but has only all the tithes of the corn, wine, etc. There is a Council of 36
changed every year, and he that has been of the Council must wait three years
before he can be chosen again. The last thing the Council does is to choose a
new Council for the year following. This new Council is divided into four
Ranks, not equally, but as the old Council shall think fit; and their names are
put into 4 boxes, out of every box a child takes out one to be Consul. He that
is drawn out of the first box is the first Consul, and so in order. Near the
town is a castle, and in the castle a tower said to be built by Charlemagne.
Every Duke has an oath given him by the Consuls, wherein is an Article that he
must reside in the castle, which is never kept.

We passed through Kalah, Sept. 9.
and lay at a single Inn a league and an half further, four leagues and an half
distant from Cardona.

We passed through S. Columba, 10.
Roccafort, and lay at Sirreall five leagues and an half.

We passed by Pobla a famous ancient Monastery, 11.
about two leagues distant from Sirreall. In the Church there are a great many
monuments. They told us that 13 Queens and 7 Kings lay interred there. Then we
passed Praves, and lay that night at Coulnouvil 5 leagues. All over Catalonia
they reckon a league two hours, and make account that 4 Catalonian leagues are
equal to 6 French. We heard that there were Amethysts also found about Praves.

We passed by Falsot two leagues from Coulnouville, 12.
where are a great many Lead-mines. The oar is very rich, and they melt it just
as it is taken out of the mine, without beating it to powder. They fell the oar
for 40 Reals of Ardit the Quintal, a Quintal being 122 pounds: Five Quintals of
oar usually yield four Quintals of lead. This town and the mines about it
belong to the Duke of Cardona. They told us that the vein of metal lay always
East and West. The best and finest of this oar they grind to powder, and
thereof make varnish to lead earthen pots and vessels with, sprinkling the
powder upon the pots. This night we lay at Tivisa, four leagues.

We passed Venu-falet, Tivians, 13
and lodged at Tortosa, 6 leagues. All along the way we saw a great deal of
Palma humilis. Hispanica non spinosa. The fruit grew up in bunches out of the
ground like the berries of Arum, and was not much bigger. Those that were ripe
were of a reddish color, of an oblong figure, and divided into 4 quarters:
those that were less ripe were yellowish. The skin and pulp very thin, and did
but just serve to cover the stone. It has the smell and taste of Dates. The
stones being broken are not at all hollow, but have a hard white kernel or
pearl within them. We observed also abundance of Garossus (as they call it) i.
e. Caroba sive Siliqua dulcis, the cods whereof they give their mules instead
of provender. The Spanish Soldiers at the siege of Barcellona had nothing but
these Siliquae and water to live upon. All over Catalonia the people are
generally poor. They use neither glass nor paper in their windows, but only
shuts of wood.

Tortosa is a very poor and desolate town. There is a bridge of boats over the
river Iberus, now called Ebro, in sight of which we rode all along from Tivisa
hither. At Tortosa they were wont to make salt-sellars, mortars, bouls, beads,
etc. of a kind of marble of a mingled color, red and yellow, sound near the
town, which they call Jasper, and of another greenish marble spotted with
black, brought from Genoa.

We went to the Jasper mine about 2 miles from the town, 15.
with one of the chief workmen. We saw there vast pillars hewn out and wrought
for a Church in Palermo. He told us that all the veins of marble, jasper, etc.
went from East to West. That they sawed these stones to make tables, etc. with
only water and sand. That when there was not enough red in the stone they made
little holes and set in red stones. That the cement they used for all stones in
Mosaic works was made of one half mastich, and one half Greek pitch. That in
building they joined the stones together with ordinary lime, but on the outside
they filled up the chinks with a cement made of the powder of the Jasper
mingled with sulphur and Mangra; to make it more white they put in more
sulphur, to make it more red they put in more Mangra. The Jasper was hewed out
with chizzels and hammers, just as stone in our stone-pits. It is afterward
polished with Armoril, i. e. the powder they use to polish armor with and to
give it a luster, so that one may see his face in it with the powder of the
cinders of the best Tin.

This day we set out toward Valence passing the Ebro by the bridge of boats,
and lodged at Galera a small village 2 leagues distant from Tortosa.

We passed by Tregera, Sept. 16.
whereabouts seemed to be the ruins of an old Roman way; Mattheau,
Salsandail, and lay at Lescouvas, 7 leagues. Near Lescouvas we found store of
Oleander with a red flower.

We passed Cabanos, 17.
Pobletta, Buriol, villa real, Annules, 7 leagues. This journey we saw a great
many rivers quite dried up, and for above a month together had scarce any rain.
That little that was always came just from the sea.

We passed Chinoes, 18.
Almenaro, Moulvedere (an Saguntus?) Massa-magril, Albalade, and arrived at
Valence, 7 leagues. Near Valence the Country is very populous and well
cultivated. Abundance of Mulberry-trees are planted in rows all the fields
over. As we passed through the Marketplace at Valence all the people houted at
us, and threw parings of melons, etc. on our cloaks. It seems they are not used
to see strangers and travelers there. This was the first place; in Spain where
we were searched. In this city is an University. I heard a Professor read
Logic. The scholars are sufficiently insolent and very disputacious: One of
them asked me, Quid est Ens universale? and whether I was of Thomas Aquinas his
opinion: another, Quid est Genus? None of them understood any thing of the new
Philosophy, or had so much as heard of it. None of the new books to be found in
any of their Booksellers shops: In a word the University of Valence is just
where our Universities were 100 years ago.

In the Kingdom of Valence the King of Spain is not absolute; but to impose
taxes, raise soldiers, etc. he must have the consent of the three Estates, i.
e. 1. The Clergy. 2. The Nobility. 3. The Cities and Villages: and if one of
these refuse to consent nothing can be done. These three Estates have 6
Deputies, 2 for each, who are changed every third year. Of the two for the
Cities one is for the City of Valentia, and the other for all the rest. Each
City choosing a Syndic, one is taken by lot to be a Deputy. The six Deputies
have the care and government of the Militia. Upon any urgent occasion the
Deputies must assemble the 3 Estates, i. e. the chief of the Clergy, the
Nobility, and the Syndics of the Cities.

The City of Valence is governed by six Jurats or Consuls. They are taken by
lot out of 6 Urns or Burses, two out of each: In the first Urn are the names of
all the better sort of Nobility that have the title of Dons: in the second Urn
the names of all the lower rank of Nobility, that have not the title of Don: in
the third the names of all rich Citizens that are not Gentlemen; they must have
al least 400 crowns yearly rent besides what their wives bring. Besides these
there is a Rationel and two Syndics changed every third year; six Advocates for
their lives, and 40 Plebeians changed yearly. The City being divided into 15
Trades or Companies; each Company chooses two, which make 30; the other ten are
chosen, two by the Rationel, and eight by the six Jurats and two Syndics, each
choosing one. Of all these Officers and the 40 Plebeians consists the Senate.
But nothing can be done unless there be 29 of the Plebeians present at least.
There is also 1. a Judge for criminal causes, taken by turns out of the 3 Urns,
and changed yearly. He has an Advocate to assist him, who is changed yearly,
but so that all the Advocates in the City have the place by turns: and a
Lieutenant criminel, taken by lot out of the 40 Plebeians. 2. A Mustafa who has
the care of all kind of victuals, corn, weights, measures, etc. He is taken by
lot out of the 3 burses as the criminal Judge is, and has also a Lieutenant
out of the 40. Moreover there is a Judge for civil causes taken out of the 3
Burses, who has an Advocate like the criminal Judge; but he cannot decide
causes of above fifteen crowns.

The University is governed by the Town, who every third year choose a Rector
that must be a Canon. The other Officers are a Bedel, a Sergeant and a
Puntadore, who is to take notice when any Professor fails to read. There are
eight Praepositi in this University, four for Divinity, two for the Canon Law,
and two for the Civil Law; who have each 500 crowns yearly. There are also four
Readers for Philosophy, seven for Physic, one for the Greek tongue, one for the
Hebrew, and two for the Mathematics. These have but small stipends, but all
their scholars that come to hear their lectures pay somewhat yearly. If a
Professor promote 3 rich scholars, that are able to pay the fees, to any
degree, he may promote a fourth that is poor for nothing. The degrees are the
same with those in our Universities, viz. 1. Batchelour after they have
finished a course in Philosophy; which degree costs about 12 crowns. 2. Master
of Arts, which costs 80. 3. Batchelour in Divinity, Law or Physic, which costs
16. 4. Doctor, which costs 150. They may be Masters of Arts presently after
they are Batchelours if they will, and in like manner Doctors. In the Market at
Valence and all Spain over they divide hens and chickens into pieces and sell
them by quarters: They make great vessels of Goats skins to put wine and oil
in, and lesser bottles which they call boto's. The women paint, laying it on so
thick as if one daubed minium upon a wall. No Garrison nor soldiers here.

We set out from Valence, and passing by Masanasse, Sept. 24.
Catareggi and Seille lodged at Mussafes, 3 leagues. Coming out of Valence we
were fain to give money at 3 places to avoid searching.

We passed Cullera, 25.
where we ferried over a great river called Xucar, and lay at Gandia. There is
a College and an University, as appears by this inscription upon the wall of
the Col. Sanctus Franciscus a Borgia, Dux Gandiae 4, Praepositus generalis
Societatis Jesu 3 hoc Collegium and hanc Vniversitatem a fundamentis erexit A.
D. 1546. At Cullera the wine first began to be sweet, and 3 leagues off at
Gandia the Plantations of Sugarcanes began. Q. Whether the nature of the soil
that was fit to nourish the Sugarcanes did not also contribute to the
sweetness of the Grapes? At Gandia we first found raisins of the sun (as they
are called in England) in Spain they call this kind Pansas, and they seem to be
the Duracinae of the Ancients. They are all white, round, and have a tougher
skin than other Grapes. They gather them when fully ripe, and dip them in a
boiling Lixivium of water and ashes, just dipping them in, and taking them out
again; and then dry them upon boards in the sun, taking them in by night or in
foul weather. The name Raisin comes from Racemus. Figs are dried just as they
are gathered, not being dipped into any lixivium.

I went to Olives, 26.
where and at Gandia are the Engines for Sugar-works, the best are at Olives.
By the way we saw the Sugarcanes growing in several places. They are planted
in low wet grounds, well mucked and dressed, divided into beds or hillocks are
furrows. They cut the canes close to the roots in November and December, and
cutting of the slender tops, which afford no good juice, keep them under ground
till March, and then prick them into these hillocks or beds; out of every talea
or cut shoot 4, 5, or 6 canes, which will be ripe the next December. The knots
or joints of the cane at the bottom are very close together, scarce an inch
asunder, but upwards the distance is more as the cane grows slenderer. Within
is a white pulp or pith, full of sap, sweet as honey. They sell them at Gandia
to eat, and cutting them into pieces just in the middle between two knots, suck
the pieces at both ends. To make sugar, after the canes are cleansed from the
tops and leaves, and cut into pieces, they are first bruised either with a
perpendicular stone running round, as apples to make cider, or olives to make
oil; or between two axes strongly capped with iron horizontally placed and
turned contrary ways; and then pressed as grapes or olives are. The juice thus
pressed out is boiled in three several Cauldrons, one after another. In the
third Cauldron it becomes thick and black, and is then put into conical pots
which at the bottom have a little hole stopped only with course and foul sugar;
Mr. Ligon says with Plantain leaves. These pots are covered when full with a
cake of past, made of a kind of earth called in Spanish Gritto, and found near
Olives, which is good to take spots out of clothes, which cap or cover sinks as
the sugar sinks. [Mr. Swift told me that the clay they use with us is
tobacco-pipe clay, or very like it, and that the water in the clay served to
wash down and carry away the Molossos, at least the clay helps the separation
and precipitation of it] These conical pots are put into other pots, into which
by the hole at the vertex the juice dreins down through the course sugar at the
bottom. It dreins so for 5 or 6 months, in which time the sugar in the conical
pots grows hard and white, all the juice being either drunk up by the lute, or
run out by the hole at the vertex. This juice is boiled again so long as it is
good for any thing, but at last it makes only a foul red sugar that will never
be better. The conical loaves of sugar after they are taken out are set to
drein over the same pots for 14 or 15 days. To make the sugar more white they
must boil it again, but about one sixth is lost every time. A pound, of sugar
of 12 ounces is sold at Olives for three sous and a half; refined for 5 or 6
sous. The sugar-juice is strained through strainers of linen, as it is put out
of one Cauldron into another. They take it out of the first and second
Cauldrons so soon as it begins to boil: but in the third Cauldron they let it
boil till the scum rises, and then take off only the scum with a scummer, and
put it into a long trough to cool, and when it is cool put it into the conical
pots. One scum rises after another in the third Cauldron. The scum when it is
taken off is white, but turns to a black liquor in the trough. They never
refine the sugar more than 3 or four times. They use for the refining of it
whites of eggs putting in 2 or 3 dozen into a Cauldron. They use but one
Cauldron for refining. When it is refined it grows white and hard in 9 or 10
days. The juice boiled up is eaten with bread tosted as honey: The juice of the
refined sugar is much better than the first juice. The Duke of Gandia sends
presents of this refined juice to the Queen of Spain. When they refine it they
put in a little water into the cauldrons to dissolve it the better. But for a
more exact description of the whole process of the Sugar-works, I refer to Piso
in his natural history of Brasil, and Ligon in his Description of the Barbados.
The Sugar of Olives is better than the Sugar of Gandia. At Meuttria in Granada
they also make a great deal of Sugar.

About Valence, Gandia, etc. the earth is always wrought, and never lies
fallow or idle. They reckon 5 Raccolta's or crops in one year. 1. Of Mulberry
leaves for silk. 2. Wheat and other European grain. 3. Darsi, i. e. Maiz or
Indian Wheat. 4. Grapes. 5. Olives; and 6. at Gandia Sugarcanes. After the
wheat is cut they presently sow the Indian Wheat. They complained that lately
for a great many years together they had very vad Raccolta's for want of rain,
which had almost ruined Spain.

We passed Benegana and lay at Chativer six leagues and a half. Sept. 27.
Chativer is an ancient Town of the Moors, and was once head of one of their
little Kingdoms. About a league from the Town began a very remarkable Aquaeduct
made by the Moors. It was just over a river along the side of a hill, in most
places not above a yard or two under ground, and had a great many funnels just
like the tops of chimneys to give vent, and let out the water when there should
be too much. The tops of these funnels were made of a red clay and pebble
stones. The water came almost to the top in all of them, but run over but in
one.

We passed in sight of Montesa a castle belonging to the Knights of Montesa
that wear a red cross; 28.
Ortenente, and lodged at Beobert, 6 leagues.

Near Alicant among the mountains there is a very good breed of Falcons. 29.
In the plains near Alicant grows abundance of Gramen spartum Plinii sive
sportularum Officinarum J. B. i. e. Matweed* of which the frails wherein they
put raisins and other fruit are made. This is Spain they call Spar, at
Marseilles Auffe. The women heerabout gather abundance of this, and steep it in
seawater till it be well softened. Then they dry it and carry it by sea to
Marseilles, where they sell it at 8 escus the Milliere: Every Milliere consists
of 10 Packieres; every Packiere of 100 Manados or handfuls. Of this they make
cables for ships, baskets, etc. In this day journey we saw a great many
fountains covered with long arches* to hinder them from being dried up. We
passed Elda; Novelda, Aspe, Clavillente, Albitella, and lay at Orivola, 11
leagues.

We came to Murcia, Sept. 30.
4 leagues. Near Orivola (which City is an Episcopal Sea) we observed many
Turpentine-trees, some in flower, and some with ripe berries. Near Elda they
dig up a sort of Selenite, which they burn and put into wine to clarify it.
About a league from Orivola began the Kingdom of Murcia; two leagues from
Orivola we were fain to give money to avoid searching. Murcia, which gives
denomination to this Kingdom is a pitiful desolate Town. The Fish-market here
is shut up in cage or grate as at Genoa, the people crowding about it, and
thrusting in their baskets as there.

We traveled through a miserable desolate Country to Mula, October. 1.
7 leagues.

We passed through Caravacca, 2.
where they drive a great trade of making little crosses of silver, brass,
wood, etc. After that Pilgrims, Travelers, etc. have bought them, they carry
them to the Castle to touch them by a famous Cross, which according to their
fabulous Legend descended miraculously from heaven, which forsooth infuses a
wonderful virtue into them. We lay this night at an odd house four leagues off
Caravacca, having traveled in all ten leagues.

We passed by Venta nova, 3.
and came to Huesca, 8 leagues. At Huesca we first saw a yellowish white wine
like sack. The Kingdom of Granada began about 4 leagues before we came to
Huesca. The town of Huesca belongs to the Duke of Alva.

We passed by Basa and rested at Venta, 4.
8 leagues.

We traveled to Guadix, 5.
an Episcopal Sea, and ancient Roman Colony. Upon the gates we took notice of
this inscription. Recepit Colonia Accitana Gemeliensis provinciae caput prima
omnium Hispanicarum fidem Christi Jesu, rejectis idolis, evangelizantibus
sanctis Torcato and sociis, Anno salutis 70, Pontificatus S. Petri 37, imperii
Neronis 13. Vrbs Accis patrono suo sanctissimo D. D. 1593.

Honorati sunt Amici tui Deus. Colonia Accitana.

We traveled to Granada 6 leagues distant from Desinos, 6.
where we lodged the night before. Here we saw the Castle called La Lhambra,
the seat of the Kings of Granada. Within the walls of the Castle live abundance
of people which dare not live in the City for debt or other causes. There is a
fair Palace begun by Charles V and yet unfinished: the outside of it is square,
but it is round within, having two rows of Cloisters one above another round
about the Court. Adjoining to this is the ancient Palace of the Kings of
Granada: within there is all the same kind of Moresco-work wrought in mortar
and stone with gold and painting. The Cloisters are supported by long slender
pillars. In this Palace is an octagonal Chamber vaulted at the top, with 8
doors, one in every side. If one stand in one angle and whisper to another that
stands in the angle diametrically opposite, the voice is conveyed as in the the
whispering place at Gloucester: but if you stand in an angle that is not
diametrically opposite you hear nothing. The reason of the conveying the voice
is the vault above, and the corners being straightened into a very sharp angle
or channel. In Granada are two great Marketplaces, one called Plassa nova, the
other de villa Rambla. In the great Church are two Monuments, one for Ferdinand
and Isabella, with this inscription, Mahometicae sectae prostratores,
Haereticae pervicaciae extinctores, Fernandus Aragonum and Helisabetha
Castellae, vir and axor unanimes, Catholici appellati marmoreo clauduntur hoc
tumulo. The other is of Philippus I, and Joanna, daughter and heir of Ferdinand
and Isabella without an inscription. In the river Daro that runs by Granada
they find gold among the sand. In the mountains of Sierra neveda near Granada
are said to be diverse sorts of minerals, which are not at all looked after.
Near Motril at the Cap^ di Gatto there is a Mine of Granates covered with the
sea. They are pointed as Amethysts and Crystal, but the best come from Africa.
We saw that day Montesacro, a place within half a league of the Town, of great
devotion. In Castile, Granada, etc. the greater Cities have a Corregidore, and
the lesser an Alcayde, who administer justice, and are appointed and sent by
the King to govern the Towns. All over the Kingdom of Castile they eat flesh
upon Saturdays, and observe only Fridays.

We left Granada, 12.
and passing by Santa Feed, traveled to Lotta, 8 leagues.

At Lotta we were troubled with soldiers that came from the frontiers of
Portugal to take up their winter Quarters. 13.
There had been of this party 2600, but this summer at Alcantara they were
reduced to 900, the rest being slain, or dead of diseases. We passed this day
by Archidona, Lalameda, Larouda, and lay at Pedrera, 10 leagues.

We passed by Ossuna, 14.
La Pobla, and lay at Elazabal, 10 leagues. This Country was the best we saw
since we came into Spain, the land being for the most part well planted and
cultivated.

We passed by Gandula, 15.
and arrived at Sevil, 7 leagues. Between Gandula and Sevil there are abundance
of Olive Trees. Here we first saw the greater sort of Olives, which are usually
eaten in England for a sallet, called the great Spanish Olive; all that we had
seen in Italy or in Spain before being of the lesser sort. Here is a brave
Aqueduct of brick, which conveys water from Carmona, six leagues distant: under
the Arches there are Stalactites, as at the Aqueduct of Pisa. The Gallions
bring nothing home from the West Indies but Plate, the Merchants ships are
laden with leather, Cacao, Sugar, Lana di Vigonna, etc. Of the Cacao Nut they
make Chocolate thus; First they tossed the berries to get off the husk, then
pound the kernels to powder, and to every Miliao, i. e. 3 pound and a half of
powder they add and mingle two pound of Sugar, 12 Vanillas, a little Pimentone
or Guiny Pepper, (which is used by the Spaniards only) and a little Acchiote to
give a color; but these two last may be omitted. They melt the Sugar, and then
mingle all well together, and work it up either in rolls or loaves.

Sevil has of late decayed very much, and does continually decay more and
more, the trading being most removed to Cales; the reason whereof is because
they pay about 27 per cent. for all merchandises at Sevil, and but 4 or 5 per
cent. at Cales. The chief places to be seen in Sevil are 1. The great Church.
2. The Kings or Assistants Palace. 3. The Archbishops Palace. 4. The Steeple of
the great Church, like Saint Marks Tower at Venice, which you ascend almost to
the top without stairs, by gently inclining plains. 5. The Franciscan Covent.
6. The Longha, where the Merchants meet about the affairs of the flote. 7. The
Convent of Nostredame del peuple. 8. The Bridge of boats over the Guadalquivir
i. e. the river Baetis. The Town on the other side this river is called Triana.
9. The Inquisition or Castle of Triana just over the Bridge. 10. An old Tower,
called Torre d'oro, where St. Ferdinand that recovered Sevil kept money made of
leather. 11. The Aqueduct. 12. The old Palace and Garden of the Moors. Near the
Bridge along the river side they come every night with their Coaches to take
the fresco. In the great Church between two Altars are three Monuments for St.
Ferdinand the wise, his wife Beatrice and his son Alphonsus. The same Epitaph
in Hebrew, Arabic, Greek, and Latin. Hic jacet illustrissimus Rex Fernandus
Castelliae and Toleti, Legionis, Galliciae, Sibillae, Cordubae, Murciae, and
Jaheni, qui totam Hispaniam conquisivit, fidelissimus, veracissimus,
constantissimus, justissimus, strenuissimus, detentissimus, liberalissimus,
patientissimus, piissimus, humillimus, in timore and servitio Dei
efficacissimus; qui contrivit and exterminavit penitus hostium suorum
proterviam; qui sublimavit and exaltavit omnes amicos suos, qui civitatem
Hispalem quae caput est and metropolis totius Hispaniae de manibus cripuit
paganorum, and cultui restituit Christiano; ubi solvens naturae debitum ad
Dominum transmigravit ultima die Maii, Anno ab incarnatione Domini 1252. In the
same Church is Fernandus Columbus Christopher Columbus his Son buried, with
this Epitaph. A qui jace el mucho magnifico signor Don Hernando Colon. el quel
expleo y gasto toda su vida y facenda en aumento di los Lettras y en juntar y
perpetuar en esta cividad todos los libros di todas las sciencias qui in su
tempo hallo y en ridurlos a quatro libros segun estan a qui s^n ilados.
Fallescio en esta cividad a 12 di Julio 1532. An. de. su edad 50 an. 10 meses
and 14 dies. Fue Hyio del valoroso and memorabile Signor Don Christophoro
Colon. primicro Admirante qui descubio las Indias y nuevo mondo, en vida di los
Catholicos Reys Don Fernando y Donna Isabella di gloriosa memoria, a onze de
Ottobre die mill quatrocentos y noventa, y dos annos, y partio del puerto de
Palos a descubrirlas con tres Carabelas y noventa personas a tres de
Agosto....... iuntes....... y bolbio a Castilla con la vittoria a quattro di
Marzo del anno siguente, y torno despues otras dos vezes a poblar lequale
scubri^, y al sin fallescio a Valladolid a vente de Maio de mill y quincentos y
seys annos, Rogad al Sennor por ellos.

Chocolate is sold at Sevil for something more than a piece of eight the pound.
Vanillas which they mingle with the Cacao to make Chocolate for a Real di
Plato. Acchiote, which they mingle with the other ingredients to give a color
is made of a kind of red earth brought from New Spain, wrought up into cakes it
is sold for a Real di plato the ounce. All the oil and wine they have in the
West Indies goes from Spain, they not being permitted to plant Vines or
Olive Trees, that they may always have a dependence upon Spain. At and near
Sevil we paid two Reals de quarto a bed; bread, wine flesh, and all other
Commodities excessive dear, excepting only Olives and Pomegranates, which were
better here than in any other part of Spain. There had lately been a great
plague in Sevil, which had very much depopulated and impoverished, indeed
almost rained, the City.

I set out from Sevil toward Madrid: October. 23.
the first day we traveled to Carmona, where the Aqueduct forementioned
begins, 6 leagues, in all which way we saw no houses; but a great many
Aloe-trees.

We passed Les fontes and lay at Euia, 24.
a great Town of above 20000 inhabitants. Between Carmona and Euia is a very
good Country, abundance of corn and olive trees. Ossiuna is within 4 leagues
of Euia, where the Duke of Ossuna hoth a palace. We traveled this day 9
leagues.

We passed over the river Xenil that runs into Guadalquivir, 25.
baited at Arrasith and lodged at Cordova, 8 leagues, About a league from
Cordova we passed another little river that runs into Guadalquivir. Before we
entered Cordova we rode over a great stone bridge that here crosses the
Guadalquivir. In the middle of the bridge stands a statue erected to the Angel
Raphael with this inscription.

Beatissimo Raphaeli Angelorum proceri, custodi suo vigilantissimo, qui ante
annos 300 sub Paschali antistite, populum peste depopulante se medicum tantae
cladis futurum praedixit, qui subinde Anno 1578, venerabili Presbytero Andreae
de Cas Roelas S. S. M. M. exuvias evulgavit, and tandem patefecit Cordubensium
tutelam sibi a Deo demum datam. Quare ut justa gratitudo diu staret S. P. Q.
Cordubensis hanc lapideam statuam cautus and pius erexit, multa procuratione
Domini Josephi de Valdeanas and Herera and Domini Gundesalvi de Cea and Rios
Senatorum, Pontifice Innocente X, Hispan. rege Philippo IV, Episcopo Domino
Fratre Petro de Tapia, Praetore Domino Alphonso de flores and monte negro: Anno
1651. The most considerable places in Cordova are 1. The Bishops Palace. 2. The
Cavallerisca, where the King keeps a great many horses. 3. The ruins of
Almansor's Palace, the last King of the Moors. 4. Plassa di Corridera: 5. The
Church of the Augustine Freres. 6. The great Church, which was anciently a
Mosque. It is large but very low, supported by a great many rows of pillars in
a quadrate order, 16 rows one way and 30 another. Upon many of the pillars are
Moors heads carved in the stone, and one or two with turbants on. In the middle
of this Church is the great Chapel where are several Bishops interred. In one
of the Chapels that is now dedicated to S. Peter in the Moors time was kept a
thigh of Mahomet: Round about the cornish of this Chapel and that part of the
Church next it is an Arabic inscription. The People complain grievously that
Cordova is quite ruined and undone by Gabels and taxes.

We left Cordova and after a league or two riding entered the Sierra Morena, 27.
a miserable desolate mountainous Country, and lodged at a little village
called Adamus; 6 leagues.

We traveled all day through the Sierra Morena, 28.
and lay at a village called La conquista; 9 leagues.

In this days journey we saw abundance of galls upon the Ilices, which were of
like bigness, figure, color, consistency and other accidents with those that
grow upon Oaks. This day we first met with red wine again which they call Vino
tinto. We got safe out of Sierra Morena, and came to Almedovar del campo, a
great Lougar, 9 leagues. About the middle of Sierra Morena are the bounds of
Castilia nova and Andaluzia.

We passed by Caraquol, October. 30
Cividad real and lay at Malagon, 10 leagues. Between Malagon and Cividad real
we passed over the river Anas now called Guadiana, which was there but a little
brook. In this days journey we met with a great many great flocks of sheep and
goats going toward the Sierra Morena out of Castile: it being the custom all
Summer to feed their sheep upon the mountains of Castile, and in Winter in the
Sierra Morena.

We passed by the ruins of an Aqueduct about 4 leagues from Malagon, 31.
then Yvenas a good big lougar, and lay at Orgas; 10 leagues.

We passed through Toledo and lay at Esquinas 11 leagues. Nov. 1.
As soon as ever we were passed the Sierra Morena we felt a great change of
weather, the warm air that comes from Afric and the Mediterranean Sea being
stopped by the interposition of the mountains This day there was here a hard
frost and pretty thick ice. The most considerable things in Toledo are 1. The
bridge over Tagus consisting of but two arches, one great one and one little
one. 2. The shambles, where notwithstanding the coldness of the day I saw
abundance of flies, which confutes the story that there is but one great fly
there all the year. 3. The great Church, where there are many monuments of
Bishops, but without inscriptions; in the Capella maggior lie interred two
Kings, and in the Capella de los Res four Kings. 4. The Kings palace. 5. The
ruins of a famous Engine to raise up water to the Kings Palace. There is so
little of it remaining that it is impossible thence to find out all the
contrivance and intrigue of it.

Between Toledo and Madrid the Country is very populous and the soil very
good. All along the road from Sevil to Madrid the common fare is Rabbets,
red-leg'd Partridges and Eggs: which are sufficiently dear.

We arrived at Madrid; 2.
6 leagues near the Town we passed over the river Xarante. Madrid is very
populous, well built with good brick houses, many having glass windows, which
is worth the noting, because you shall scarce see any in all Spain besides. The
streets are very foul and nasty. There is one very fair piazza or market place,
encompassed round with tall an uniform houses, having 5 rows of Balconies one
above another, and underneath porticos or cloisters quite round. The chief
things to be seen in Madrid are, 1. The Prison. 2. The Piazza just now
mentioned. 3. The Kings Chapel. 4. Palaces of several Noblemen, as that of the
Duke of Alva, that of the Duke of Medina de los Torres, etc. 5. The Kings
palace, where there is the Kings Cavallerisca and the Queens Cavallerisca. 6. A
great piazza before the palace, where are abundance of coaches always
attending. 7. The English College of Theatines. 8. Il retiro. Out of the Town
the Escurial, and El Pardo.

I set out from Madrid for Port S. Sebastian. 5.
We passed within sight of the Escurial and El Pardo, and lay that night at S.
Augustine; 6 leagues.

We passed Butrago and lay at Samoserra, 6.
all the way a barren, miserable, mountainous Country; 11 leagues.

We passed Frecedille and lay at Aranda having crossed the river Durius or
Duero; 7.
11 leagues.

We passed Bahalon and Lerma, 8.
where is a Convent of Dominican Freres and a palace of the Duke or Lerma's,
and came that night to Burgos; 12 leagues. The most considerable things in
Burgos are 1. The bridge over the river Relarzon. 2. The gate at the end of the
bridge, where are the statues of Charles V; of Janus Calvus; of Diego
Porcellero: of Fernandez Gonsales: of Nunio Pasures, of Don Carlotte, all
famous men of Burgos. 3. The marketplace. 4. The great Church in which are a
great many monuments of Bishops and Canons, two great monuments, of Pedro
Fernando di Velasco, Constable of Castile, and his Wife Mencia di Mendoza
Countess of Haro. This night we lodged at Quintora-vides; 5 leagues.

We passed by Pancorva, 10.
a place very famous for good water, Miranda a great Town, where there is a
good bridge over the river Iberus, and after that we passed over two other
rivers Baias and Sadurra, and lay at Erminian; 11 leagues At Miranda there is a
great market for wheat.

We traveled to Vittoria. 11.
Over one of the gates is the statue of King Bamba, and inscribed in gold
letters, Haec est victoria quae vincit; 4 leagues. Vittoria is the chief City
of a little Country called Alaba. We passed this day by Salines the first Town
of Guipuscoa and lay at Aescurias; 9 leagues. In Guipuscoa they pay no taxes or
other duties to the King without the consent of the Country. The whole
Province is more commonly called Provincia than Guipuscoa; it is cantoned out
into a great many Corporations and Villages, every one of which send 1, 2 or 3
Representatives to the general meeting when there is any public business. All
offices are annual, and chosen diversely according to the differing customs of
the Towns. The chief Officer in each town to determine all civil and criminal
causes is the Alcalda; but from him they may appeal to the Governor of the
Province, sent by the King every third year; and from the Governor to the
Kings Council at Valladolid. Next to the Alcalda are 2 Regidores to look after
the prices of all commodities; a Bolser for the treasury; a Medino for the
prison, Argozils or Sergeants, etc. They boast that they are the walls of
Spain, and therefore have many privileges. Guipuscoa is under the Bishop of
Pampelona. In Guipuscoa and Biscay they have a peculiar language of their own,
and therefore send their children to School to learn Spanish, (which they call
Romance) as we do ours to learn Latin. The Searchers having hindered us we were
forced to travel great way in the night. We were lighted by Tias or Teas, which
burnt as well and gave as good a light as torches. When they went out they
tossed them up and down in their hands, which kindled them again. These Teas
(so called doubtless from the Latin word taeda) are very commonly used in this
Country, and are nothing else but bastons of wood hacked and cleft, (but so as
the pieces hang together) and afterward soundly dried in an Oven or Chimney.
Along the middle they use to cleave them almost quite asunder. They are made of
several sorts of wood, of Robla, i. e. Oak, Aiga, i. e. but the best of
Avellana, i. e. Hazel. I wonder much at this, unless they have some way of
preparing the wood, by steeping it in oil or other inflammable matter. The
taedae of the Ancients were made only of the trunks of old and sappy pines.

We passed by Mondragone, 12.
where there is a fabrica of Arms for the King, Oniate, Legaspa, Villa real,
and lay at Villa franca; 7 leagues. We left S. Adrian, which is the ordinary
road, a little on our left hand. This Country is very populous and well
wooded, all the hills being covered with oaks. They use no ploughs but turn
over the ground with tridents of iron; 4 or 5 of them working together, and
thrusting in their tridents all together, turn up a yard or two of earth at a
time, which they afterward dress and level like beds in a garden. The people
are something better conditioned than the Spaniards; richer and far more
populous. 1. Because there is a better government and greater liberty. 2. There
is abundance of wood and iron. 3. More rain than in the other parts of Spain.

We passed Tolosa, 13.
and arrived this night at S. Sebastian, having traveled 8 leagues. The most
observable things in S. Sebastian are 1. The walls and guns. 2. A great Convent
of Dominican Freres in which there is a famous pair of stone-stairs, each step
being of one entire stone and supported only on one side. 3. The haven The
Government of S. Sebastian consists of a great Council of all that have one or
more houses and are married, but none can bear office unless he have two
houses, of these there is not above 150 or 200, though the town be very
populous containing about 24000 souls. Once in a year all the names of this 150
or 200 are put into an urn, and a child takes out 8 to be Electors. Every one
of this 8 chooses his man. the old Magistrates that are just then going out
divide these 8 that the Electors have chosen into 4 pairs, fitting them as well
as they can, v. g. an old man and a young together, etc. These 4 pairs are put
into an urn. The first pair that are drawn out are the two Alcaldas for that
year; the second pair the two Deputy Alcaldas; the third pair the two Regidores
the fourth pair the two Deputy Regidores. In much the same manner they choose
two Jurats, one Syndic or Attorney general, one Treasurer, etc. all these
Officers make a lesser Senate; but in businesses of importance the whose number
meets. There is no distinction of Nobiles and Plebeii; but all that are
descended from Guipuscoans, that are married and have one house are in capacity
to be Electors; all that have two houses to be Magistrates. The Jurats places
are most desired, there being a great many Ecclesiastical preferments belonging
to the Town, the disposition whereof when they come to be vacant is in them,
who usually bestow them upon their Relations and Friends.

Every Winter there are several whales caught upon this coast, they coming
hither in Winter and frequenting here, as they do upon the coast of Groenland
in Summer. They catch them by striking them with a harping iron, after the same
manner as they do Sword-fish upon the coast of Calabria, and Sicily. Abundance
of Cider made about S. Sebastian and Bayonne.

From S. Sebastian I traveled through Orogna, Irun, on the left hand of which
is Fontarabia a strong Fort just on the Frontiers of Spain. About 1 league from
Irun is the river that parts France and Spain. In the middle of this river is
an Island where the Kings of France and Spain met, when Lewis XIV the present
King married Philip the IV his daughter. The island was divided just in the
middle, and a house built so that at the table where they sat to eat, the King
of France sat in France, and the King of Spain in Spain.

Spain is in many places, not to say most, very thin of people, and almost
desolate. The causes are 1. A bad Religion. 2. The tyrannical Inquisition. 3.
The multitude of Whores. 4. The barrenness of the Soil. 5. The wretched
laziness of the people, very like the Welsh and Irish, walking slowly and
always cumbred with a great Cloak and long Sword. 6. The expulsion of the Jews
and Moors, the first of which were planted there by the Emperor Adrian, and
the latter by the Caliphs after the Conquest of Spain. 7. Wars and Plantations.
In all the Towns especially in the South and West parts of Spain a great many
ruins of houses to be seen. Within a quarter of a league of a Town you begin
to see ground ploughed, else all a wild Country, and nothing but Rosemary,
Cistus, Juniper, Lavender, Broom, Lentiscus, etc. growing in the fields, and on
the hills. Little or no hay any where in Spain, they feeding their mules and
horses with straw. At least one half of Spain is mountainous.

The Spaniards are not so abstinent as most people take them to be, eating the
best they can get, and freely enough if it be at another man's cost: and in Inns
never refusing Partridges, Quails, etc. for the dearness if they have but
money. Laziness and sloth makes them poor, and poverty makes them pinch their
bellies and fare hardly. They seldom mingle water with their wine, it being a
common saying among them Vino poco and puro, though all over Spain the wine is
very hot and strong. They delight much in Pimentone, i. e. Guiny pepper and
mingle it with all their sauces. In roasting of meat they never use dripping
pans but draw the coals just under the meat, which though it be not so cleanly
yet is the quicker and more thrifty way for saving of fuel. They tear Rabbets
in sunder with their hands when they are almost roasted, and stew them in a pot
with water and Pimentone. To toast bread they throw it upon the coals. They
long and ask for every thing they see, to avoid which a Merchant that traveled
with me was wont to put in some thing into his victuals which they did not
love. They take Tobacco much in snuff, and if one take out a box of snuff he
must give some to all the company. The best person in the company at table cuts
and tears the meat in pieces, and gives to every one his share.

They are most impertinently inquisitive, whence you come? whither you go? what
business you have, etc. most horribly rude, insolent and imperious, uncivil to
strangers, asking them, What do you come into our Country for? we do not go
into yours. [This is to be understood of the middle and inferior sort of
people, many of the Gentry being very civil and well-bred.] Their children are
the most unmannerly and ill-bred of any in the world. The sons of French
fathers and Spanish women when they are grown up often turn their fathers out
of doors, having many privileges above them for being born in Spain. They are
extremely given to lying. Almuzzos and such kind of fellows not to be believed
or trusted in any thing they promise.

They ride altogether upon mules, and carry their Portmanteau's before them,
for fear they should be lost or stolen from behind them; they lie between a
high pummel of the saddle and an iron hook. Instead of stirrops persons of
quality use great clogs of wood of the shape of shoes without heels. They cut
away the mules hair close to the skin under the Saddles, and Portmanteau's to
avoid galling. Of this bastard breed of Animals the males are usually bigger
than the females. Q. Whether the reason be that they are always bred of a mare
and an he ass? 2. They piss very often. Q. Whether the reason be the sharpness
of their urine or the smallness of their bladder? 3. They piss almost always
when they go through water. 4. They shoe them with shoes a great deal broader
than their feet, to prevent I suppose the breaking of their hoo^s. Under the
mouths of their mules of burden they usually hang a net with provender in it.
These beasts are better at climbing of mountains than horses, have a greater
courage to endure long and hard travel, and besides are maintained with less
charge.

The Spaniards seldom ride alone, but stay for a troppas as they do for a
Caravan in Arabia. The common phrases or forms of salutation when they meet or
pass by one another, are, Garda Dios vostes, i. e. vous autres [God defend you]
A Dios [adieu] Vaga con Dios [God go along with you.] When they are angry
Cornuto, i. e. Cuckold, is the first word, and sometimes Cornutissimo. When
they speak to their mules or boys they send of errands, they say, Anda Cornuto,
[Go Cuckold.] When they refuse a courtesy, or complement to drink first, go
first or the like, they say, Non per vita mea, [no by my life.] At any thing
strange or ridiculous they cry out, Cuerpo di Dios or di Cristo [Body of God or
body of Christ.] When they call to one to make him hear, instead of Escoutes in
French, or Senti in Italian, they cry O-yes just as our Criers do in England.
When they put off a beggar not giving him an Alms, they say, Vostes perdonne.
[Good friend pardon or excuse me.]

As for their Religion the Spaniards are the most orthodox and rigid Romanists
in the world, it being a saying among them Faltando in uno punto a Dios. [If
you leave the Church in one punctilio, God be with you, you must needs be
damned.] All over Spain there are abundance of pitiful wooden Crosses set up in
the middle of heaps of stone. Under all the pictures of the Virgin Mary is
written i. e. Conceived without original sin.
Concebida sin^peccado originale. At the Ave-Mary bell they all fall down upon
their knees; whereas in other Countries they are contented only to pluck off
their hats. When they have done their Devotions, as also after their meals when
they take away, and when they go to bed they say Sia lodato il santissimo
Sacramento, [Praised be the most holy Sacrament.]

For fornication and impurity they are the worst of all Nations, at least in
Europe; almost all the Inns in Andaluzia, Castile, Granada, Murcia, etc. having
Whores who dress the meat and do all the business. They are to be hired at a
very cheap rate. It were a shame to mention their impudence, lewdness and
immodest be behaviors and practices. In Catalonia, Guipuscoa and some other
places they are not so bad.

They are so lazy that in their shops they will say they have not a commodity
rather than take pains to look for it: not to be hired to carry a Portmantean,
go of an errand, etc. but at an excessive rate. Mercers never tie up any thing
they sell, and if they allow paper, they only rudely mumble up the commodities
in it. Of their fantastical and ridiculous pride, and that too in the extremest
poverty all the world rings. If there be any employment that you would set them
about which they think themselves too good for, they presently say send for a
Frenchman. Indeed the French do almost all the work in Spain. All these best
shops are kept by Frenchmen, the best workmen in every kind are French, and I
believe near or part of the people in Spain are of that Nation. I have heard
some travelers say, that should the King of France recall all his Subjects out
of Spain, the Spaniards would hazard to be all starved to death.

Bread is very scarce and very dear in many places or Spain, because of the
barrenness of the soil and want of rain, but chiefly because of the sloth of
the people in letting a great deal of ground lie untilled, and in not taking
the pains to fetch corn and bread from those places where there is plenty. So
that in a days journey the price of bread will be trebled, and in another days
journey fall as much again. This Summer there was a tumult at Madrid: the poor
people gathering about the Kings palace cried out, Let the King live, but let
the ill government die; let exactors die, etc. just as they did at Nuples in
the rebellion under Masaniello. Upon which the King sent to all the Towns about
for bread-corn, and in two or three days bread was very plentiful and cheap.
All over Catalonia bread was very cheap. The Spanish bread is commended for the
best of the world, and well it may be, if as we have heard, they pick their
wheat grain by grain.

At my being at Madrid there was an Engineer there sent by the Emperor, that
had invented a ^low, called by the Spaniards, a Sembrador, to sow corn at equal
distances, and one grain in a hole; the description whereof has been since
published in the Philosophical Transactions.

In all kind of good learning the Spaniards are behind the rest of Europe,
understanding nothing at all but a little of the old wrangling Philosophy and
School Divinity.

The people are much discontented all over Spain, complaining of Taxes, evil
Counselors, etc. but they have a good opinion of and age generally
well-affected to their King, whose intentions they say are very good.

As for their habit and dress in that they are to be commended that they are
constant to the same fashions, though they be not the most convenient that
might be devised. To change for the better I think it rather commendable than
blameworthy; but to change out of mere levity or an apish imitation of others
is foolish and unreasonable. They wear great hats with broad crowns and the top
breader than the bottom. Their hair most commonly, but especially when they
travel, they tie up in a knot behind, and sometimes braid like women's. Their
bands lie upon black collars just of the same bigness or a little bigger. They
are joined to the collar and they put on collar and band together. They wear
very much Cambrick half-shirts, and have their sleeves open before and behind
both Winter and Summer; they have great skirts upon their doublets. Their
breeches are very straight and close to their thighs, and buttoned down on each
side, and reach a little lower than the knee. They wear very slight-wrought
black silk-stockins, that the white linnen-stockings which they wear underneath
may be seen through them. Their shoes just fit for their feet, very light and
thin, with low heels. Over their doublets they wear a close coat or jerkin with
open sleeves like the doublet, and for the most part with hanging sleeves like
childrens, yet never reaching lower than their skirts: a very long sword, and a
short dagger hanging just behind them, and at last over all a cloak with a
great cape. The women wear great Vardingales, standing so far out an each side,
that to enter in at an ordinary door they are fain to go side-ways: when they
go abroad are covered with a vail of black having only a hole left for one eye.
The poor people wear shoes made of packthread.

The most noble sport in Spain is the Jeu de Taureau, or Bull-fighting,
practiced at Valentia, Madrid, etc. At Madrid 3 times in the year, where in the
Marketplace a brave Don on horseback, and a great many pages on foot fight
with a wild Bull: When one Bull is killed or much wounded they turn in another.
Seldom but some of the pages are killed. And with these cruel and bloody
spectacles the people are much delighted, as were the Romans of old in the time
of Heathenism.

He that desires to know more of the good qualities of the Spaniards, may read
Mr. Galliards Character of Spain.

FINIS.
CATALOGUS STIRPIUM IN Exteris Regionibus A nobis Observatarum, Quae vel non
omnino vel parce admodum IN ANGLIA Sponte proveniunt.



LONDINI: Typis Andreae Clark, Impensis J. Martyn Regalis Societatis
Typographi, apud quem prostant ad insigne Campanae (...) Coemeterio Divi Pauli.
MDCLXXIII.

PRAEFATIO.
OCto plus minus abhinc annis plantarum indagandarum studio in transmarinas
regiones profectus Germaniae utriusque Italiae, Galliae bonam partem peragravi.
Cujus itineris quis fructus fuerit, quem nunc exhibeo Stirpium exoticarum
Catalogus, Amice Lector, te certiorem faciet. An tibi titulos and nomina nuda
perlegere jucundum futurum sit nescio; mihi certe Plantas ipsas liberas and
spontis suae quales eas alma tellus e benigno suo sinu effundit, contemplanti
incredibilis quoedam voluptas oborta est: nec minus gaudebam (ut cum Clusio
loquar) nova aliqua stirpe primum inventa quam si amplissimum thesaurum
offendissem: Cumque plurimas quotidie vel mihi antea incognitas, vel Britanniae
nostrae hospites obvias haberem, magnum me operae pretium peregrinando fecisse
ratus, in Hispaniam quoque profectionem meditabar: verum praetextu belli,
Anglis omnibus publico programmate Regis Galliae e finibus suis excedere
jussis, Hispanicum iter minus tutum fore ratus, in patriam, reversus sum.
Liceat jam mihi pauca quaedam de Plantis in genere a me observata Praefationis
loco Catalogo praemittere.

I. Quo ad meridiem and Solis cursum propius accedas to plures plantarum
species sponte oriri a^imadvertes. Quamvis enim Regiones frigidae and
Septentrionales suas quoque stirpes peculiares obtineant, paucissimae tamen eae
sunt si cum earum multitudine conferantur quae in temperatis and calidioribus
tantum proveniunt. Cui accedit quod juga, vertices aut etiam latera montium in
Regionibus calidis, cum frigidiorum depressis, planis and sylvosis aeris
temperamento quodammodo conveniant, quo ft ut easdem fere stirpes producant,
adeoque ne plantae quidem Septentrionales Meridionalibus desint.

II. Huc etiam facit quod secundo in loco a nobis observatum fuit: Montes
scilicet excelsos quorum vertices maximam anni partem nivibus operiuntur
varietate specierum praecipue abundare. Alps certe quae Italiam a Gallia and
Germania dividunt inexhausto plantarum penu Botanicorum scrutiniis in hunc
usque diem sufficient, magna adhuc nondum proditarum residua multitudine. Quod
tanta soli fertilitas dicam an luxuria nivibus debeatur extra controversiam
est, seu quia velut vest imposita radices foveat and ab injuriis caeli and
frigoris vehementia defendat, sive quod sale nitroso, quo abundare creditur,
terram laetificet and foecundet.

III. Arbores nonnullae in aliis regionibus humiles perpetuo and pusillae
fruti^um mensuram non excedunt; in aliis eximiam magnitudinem and staturam
assequuntur, cum ^trobique spontis sue sint. Hujusmodi sunt Lentiscus, Arbutus,
Juniperus, Buxus, etc. Praeterea sunt quae apud nos satoe and in hortis cultae
tenerae and molles perpetuo manent, adte ut ad herbarum genus pertinere
videantur; quoe tamen ubi sponte exeunt in frutices satis ^rassos and lignosos
adolescunt, quod in Ricino and Tragio obscrvavimus.

IV. Ejusdem generis arbores aut etiam herbae in aliis Regionibus vel succos
fundunt, vel fructus spurios edunt, in aliis minime. Sic Fraxinus v. g. in
Calabria Manna exudat, cum alibi ne in Italia quidem id faciat. Lentiscus in
sola insula Chio Mastichen fundit, ut Bellonius and Hermolaus affirmant: certe
in Italia and Gallia Narbonensi, ubi tamen copiosissima est, vel nullam vel
paucissiman praebet. Idem observatur in Ferula, Panace Heracleo, Aloe aliisque.
Quod ad fructus spurios attinet, Quercus in Italia, Illyrico, Hispania aliisque
temperatioribus Gallas edit, cum in Britannia and frigidioribus nullus unquam
auditus sit Gallarum proventus.

Difficilis quaestio est, an Plantae quaepiam nullo semine raevio sponte e
terra oriantur: (1.) Quod ad imperfectas vulgo dictas, Fungas, Tubera and id
genus attinet, manifestum est eas ex semine non nasci cum nullam gignant. (2.)
Oh eandem rationem submarinae omnes Algae, Fuci, Coralia, Alcyonia, etc. sponte
oriri censendae sunt, cum nullum in iis. semen hactenus animadversum fuerit;
quod tamen imprimis mirum videtur, cum earum innumerae fere species and ingens
ubique proventus sit. (3.) Perfectiores quoque quamvis plerunque Semini ortum
debeant, nonnunquam tamen spontis suae esse magnum nobis argumentum suppeditat
viseus arboribus innatus, etiam in prona seu aversa ramorum part. Vnde omnino
fabulosum esse constat quod de ejus ortu Veteres prodiderunt, quodque Proverbio
illi, Turdus malum ipse sibi cacat, originem dedisse perhibetur.

Nec minus anceps and difficilis quaestio cst, An Plantae aliquae degenerent
and speciem mutent? Cui ut aliqua in part satisfaciam, dico primo pro diversis
speciebus minime habendas esse quaecunque, ex ejusdem plantae semine vulgo
oriuntur, quaeque speciem suam iterum non propagant, quantumvis accidentibus
nonnullis, v. g. floris color, petalorum gemina aut multiplici scrie, aliisve
accidentibus a nobis in Praefatione Catalogi Plantarum Angliae recensitis
differant. Cum enim numerus specierum in natura certus sit and determinatus,
floris autem color, multiplicitate, etc. variantium multitudo novis quotannis
exorientibus infinita, merito eas a specierum gradu and dignitate removemus.
Nam si haec sufficerent ad specificam distinctionem inducendam, certe Aethiops
quoque ab Europaeo, Juvencus niger ab albo, rubro variove specie differret;
quod nemo, ut opinor, sanae mentis unquam concesserit. Hinc Tuliparum,
Anemonarum, Caryophyllorum, Auricularum, etc. inexplicabilis varietas ad tres
quatuorve species facile reducitur, cum reliqua diversitas quae in floris
color, plenitudine, geminatione, etc. consistit, mere accidentalis sit
minimeque specisi^a, coeli aut soli alimentive differentiis imputanda. Quid
quod Plantae hae in eodem loco (ut alibi monuimus) diutius relictae and
neglectae, paulatim degenerent, florum gratia, seu quae in colorum
pulchritudine, seu quoe in petalorum numero spectatur, pereunte, and ad
sylvestrium tandem formam and ingenium redeant.

Ob easdem rations nec figura, color saporve fructus seu pericarpii in Pomis
and Pyris essentialem and specificam differentiam arguunt. Quod scilicet
fructus his accidentibus diversi ex eodem semine oriantur, quodque, constanti
naturae lege speciem suant semine iterum non propagent. Atque hic obiter monere
convenit, varietates seu species novas vulgo creditas Pomorum and Pyrorum ab
insitione (quantumvis magna cum fiducia id affirment arcanorum jactatores)
frustra sperari, cum, Fructum perpetuo surculi naturam sequi, mihi, pro certo
and infallibili in Horti^ultura axiomate semper fuerit, verum quas habemus
differentias s^mini deberi and ex semine novas indies oblineri posse. Quod adeo
verum est, ut varietates etiam in floribus, foliis, caulibus superius
memoratas, (quamvis vel translatione iterata de loco in locum, vel irrigando
aqua color aliquo imbuta nonnunquam effici posse, Laurembergio, in iis quae
ipse expertus est, Authori (...) aliisque affirmantibus fidem non denegaverim)
frequentius tamen faciliusque ex semine in terram pinguem and opulentam aut
alio quovis modo a naturali and solita diversam projecto oriri minime dubium
sit. Quantam autem vim and efficaciam habeat ad haec effecta producenda
alimentorum diversitas in domesticis and mansuetis animalibus pa^ct. Cum enim
fera in plerisque speciebus eosdem colores servent in universum omnia, mansueta
and domestica coloribus infinitum variant, nec coloribus tantum sed and carnis
sapore aliisque, accidentibus. Coeli solique diversitas quid in hoc genere
possit pluribus exemplis facile esset demonstrare. Hinc in Septentrio^alibus
frigidis and montibus altissimis maximam anni partem nivibus obtectis Vrsi;
Vulpes, Lepores, Perdices, Corvi albi non pauci reperiuntur, quae in
temperatioribus rarissime occurrunt and pro monstris fere habentur. Hinc in
Anglia nostra boves Lancastrenses v. g. mirum quantum a Sussexianis cornuum
pulchritudine totaque specie externa, a Wallicis and Scoticis magnitudine
differant. Idem est and de ovibus, quae in montosis and sterilioribus adeo
parum magnitudine proficiunt ut pro quinque solidis singulae veneant; in
pinguibus vero temperatis in eam molem excrescunt, ut duas etiam libras nostrae
monetae valiant. Quod si animalia isthaec mutuo transferas, Septentrionalia
sci. aut montosa in locum Meridionalium campestriumve, and vice versa,
prosapiam suam non diu retinent, verum paulatim degenerant and ad indigenarum
mensuram and indolem accedunt.

Dico secundo, Dari interdum in plantis veram specierum traensmutationem omnino
concedendum esse, ni testibus (...) and gravibus imprimis scriptoribus omnem
fidem derogare velimus. Nam Wormius Musei lib. 2. cap. 7. page 150. asserit se
habere hordeum quod Hermaphroditicum vocat, quia in una spica and hordeum and
secale continet, cujus descriptionem vide sis loco citato. Johnsonus quoque
apud Gerardum lib. 1. cap. 46. page 65. sibi ostensum refert a D. Goodyer
spicam Tritici albi, circa cujus mediam partem tria aut quatuor grana avenacea
undique perfecta enata sunt. Et biennio abhinc affirmavit mihi, cum Oxonii
essem, Jacobus Bobertus filius, e semine Primulae veris majoris sibi exortas
Primulam vulgarem, and Primulam pratensem inodoram luteam. Observandum autem
est, transmutationem hanc dari tantum inter species cognatas and ejusdem
generis participes.

A
ABies foemina, sive (...) J. B. Abies Park. Abies and Abies mas Ger. Nos enim
has non distinguimus, quamvis C. Bauhin^ quoque Bellonium and Dodonaeum secutus
praeter Piceam duas faciat Abietis species, nimirum I, i. e. conis fursum
spectantibus, sive marem, and II, i. e. albam sive foeminam. Hac de re fusius
disserentem vide J. Bauhinum qui nec Bellonium nec Dodonaeum Abietem distinct
novisse demonstrat. The female Fir Tree. In Sueviae and Bavariae sylvis primum
observavimus, postea in Alpibus copiose. Quae de Abiete annotavimus vide in
Cat. Ang.

Abies mas Theophr. Picea Latinorum, sive Abies mas Theophrasti J. B. Picea
Park. Picea major Ger. P. major I, sive Abies rubra C. B. Haec est quam vulgo
in Anglia The Fir Tree vocant, fnque hortis and areis colunt. Cum priore, sed
copiosius multo.

Abrotanum foemina vulgar Park. foem. foliis teretibus C. B. Chamaecy parissus
J. B. Ger. Common Lavender Cotton. Circa oppidum S. Cyriaci in Etruria copiose
atque inde incipiendo ad Statum usque Ecclesiasticum seu territorium Papae,
secus vias.

N. Ventris lumbricos sumptum interimit, quotidiano experimento muliercularum,
tum semen, tum etiam herba. Folia sicca ad sistenda alba foeminarum profluvia
confer scribit Matthiolus.

Abrotanum faemina villosis and incanis foliis C. B. Seriphium Dioscoridis
Abrotani foem. facie Ad. Lob. In Galloprovincia, montis celsi D. Magdalenae
crypta celebris acclivibus Lobelio and nobis observatum. Fragrantius mihi visum
est vulgari Abrotano foem. alioquin ei persimile.

Abrotanum foemina foliis Ericae C. B. Park. Chamaecyparissus unguentaria J. B.
In collibus saxosis circa molendina Nemausi.

Abrotanum inodorum Lob. campestre C. B. Ger. Park. Artemisia tenuifolia sive
leptaphyllos, aliis Abrotanum sylvestre J. B. In Germania, Italia and Gallia
Narbonensi ad vias and in sterilioribus ubique fere. Hanc speciem and in Anglia
nuper observavimus, v. Cat. Ang.

Absinthium arborescens Lob. Park. arborescens Lobelii J B. Abrotanum foem.
arborescens Ger. Abr. latifolium arborescens C. B. Italis and Siculis Herba
bianca. Tree-Wormwood. In Sicilia, Regno Neapolitano, and insularum adjacentium
rupibus maritimis.

Absinthium Ponticum and Romanum quibusdam J. B. Ait Caesalpinus in collibus
argillosis agro Senensi frequens, esse: quod and nos verum comperimus cum
Florentia Romam iremus.

Absinthium Scriphium Narbonense Park. Seriph. tenuifolium maritimum Narbon. J.
B. Seriph. Gallicum C. B. Prope Portum Liburnum in Italia atque etaim juxta
Monspelium ad maris litus and alibi.

Absinthium tenuifolium Austriacum Ger. Park. Auster. tenuifolium J. B.
Ponticum tenuifolium Austriacum C. B. Ad vias non long a Vienna Austriae qua
ad Neapolin Austriacam itur. De Absinthii facultatibus consule Cat. Ang.

Acacia altera trifolia Ger. II, sive trifolia C. B. secunda, seu altera
Dioscoridis Park. altera Dioscoridis notior Europaea* folio Cytisi, facie and
siliquis Genistae-sparti spinosi Lob. Aspalathus secunda t^ifolia, quae Acacia
secunda Matthiolo trifolia J. B. In Sicilia prope Mossanam; Italia circa
Neapolin, and Gallo-provincia circa Tolonam portum.

Acanthus sativus Lob. Ger. Park. sativus vel mollis Virgilii C. B. Carduus
Acanthus, sive Branca ursina J. B. Brank-ursine or Bears-breech. In Italiae
meridionalibus circa Baias and Neapolin, itemque in Sicilia copiose.

N. Est e 5 herbis emollientibus. Usus potissimum externus est in clysteribus
alissque paregoricis quarumcunque formularum and ut plurimum in cataplasmatis.
Schrod. Prodest etiam, auctore Dodonaeo, tabidis, sanguinem spuentibus, ex alto
delapsis, ictu aliquo aut conatu supra vires laesis, non minus quam Symphyti
majoris radices, quas substantia, lento succo, and qualitate proxime resert.

2. Acanthi folia ob figurae ve^ustatem and elegantiam veteres Architecti
columnarum capitulis insculpere solebant. Frondibus Acanthi (inquit Vitruvius,
lib. 4. cap. 1.) Columnas Corinthiacas coronabant.

Acanthium Illyricum Park. Illyric. purpureum Ger. Spina tomentosa altera
spinosor C. B. Carduus quibusdam dictus Acanthium Illyricum, aliis vero
Onopordon J. B. In Italia, Sicilia and Gallia Narbonensi frequens occurrit.

Acarm flore purpuro rubente patulo C. B. Park. Acanthoides parva Apula Col. In
Sicilia prope Messanam, Italia prope Florentiam, and Gallia Narbonensi prope
Monspelium, in arenosis.

Acarna major caul folioso C. B. Park. Acarnae similis flore purpureo,
Chamaeleon Salmanticensis Clusio J B. Prope montem S. Lupi non long ab
oppidulo S. Lupian dicto, itemque juxta vias non long ab oppidulo Vic in valle
Frontigniana.

Acer acutioribus foliis Gesn. hort. III, sive montanum tenuissimis and acutis
foliis C. B. Aceris majoris varietas altera J. B. In montibus Stiriae and in
Alpibus Sabaudicis prope Genevam.

Acer majus Ger. emac. ma. latifolium, Sycomorus falso dictum Park. maj. multis
falso Platanus J. B. I, seu montanum candidum C. B. The Sycomore tree or
greater Maple. In montibus prope Genevam.

Acer majus folio rotundiore minusque, laciniato. An Acer II, i. e. montanum
flavum sive crispum C. B.? Observavimus primo in Hetruriae sylvis non long a
Viterbo, postea etiam in montibus Genevae vicinis.

Acer trifolium C. B. Creticum trifolium Park. Monspessulanum Lugd. J. B. In
sylva Valena prope montem S. Lupi; itemque in collibus juxta Castelneuf pagum
Monspelio propinquum. Invenimus etiam prope Gratianopolin, in rupibus juxta
pontem quem transimus cundo a la fountain que brusli.

N. Ra^lix, prodente Plinio, contusa e vino jecinoris doloribus utilissime
imponitur.

Acetosa montana maxima v. Oxalis maxima.

Acetosa Ocymi facie Neapolitana C. B. Neapolitana Ocymi folio Park. Ocymus
facie Neapolitana (...) Col. In Sicilia and Reg^o Neapolitano, in vineis and
arenosis frequentissima.

Achillea v. Millefolium.

Acini pulchra species J. B. Clinopodium IV, sive montanum C. B. Austriacum
Clus. Park. In ascensu montis Jurae va^iis in locis. Stone-Basil.

Aco^i^um lycoctonum Napello simile Neuberagense, folii^ latioribus, flore
purpureo J. B. An Aconitum Napello simile sed minus, caeruleum, praecocius
ejusdem? Hanc plantam in sepibus non long a Memminga Sueviae urbe observavimus.

Aconitum folio Platani, flore luteo pallescente J. B. II, sive lycoctonum
luteum C. B. lut. Ponticum serotinum Park. luteum Ponticum Ger. Yellow
Wols-bane. In colle La Bastle, aliisque montibus Genevae vicinis copiose.

N. Facultato est hominibus aliisque animalibus exitiali and pernitiosa. Semen
ejus aut radix in pulverem redacta, and oleo temperata ut unguentum inde fiat
illitu pediculos ac furfures enecat and abstergit. Trag.

Aconitum hyemale Ger. Park. hyem. Belgarum Lob. 1, sive unifolium luteum
bulbosum C. B. Ranunculus cum flore in medio folio, radice tuberosa J. B.
Anemone Bononiensium nonnullis dicitur, quoniam circa Bononiam and per totam
etiam Lombardiam copiosissime provenit, mensis Februarii initio florens.

Aconitum pardalianches v. Thora.

Acontitum racemosum v. Christophoriana.

Adianthum (...) sive furcatum Thalii. Filix faxatilis Tragi. J. B. Park.
saxat. V, sive corniculata C. B. In rupium fissuris prope Rhenum Fl. invenimus
etiam in Italia. Tho. Willisellus nuper in Scotia. v. Cat. Ang.

Adianthum sive Capillus Veneris J. B. verum, sive Capillus Veneris verus Park.
I, seu foliis Coriandri C. B. Capillus Veneris verus Ger. Black Maidenhair. In
humidis and umbrosis rupibus and puteis, in Gallia Narbonensi and Italia
vulgaro.

N. Pulmonum renuque vitiis medetur; epatis and lienis obstructiones reserat;
Urinam and menses ciet. Schrod. Verum de ejus virtutibus and usu integrum
libellum scripsit Gallice Petrus Formius M. D. Monspeliensis.

Aegilops Narbonensis Lob. Festuca sive Aeg. Narbonensis Park. Festuca Italica
Ger. Gramen Festucae XIV, sive Festuca altera capitulis duris C. B. In Sicilia,
Italia and Gallia Narbonensi vulgatissima.

Ageratum purpureum Dalechampii J. B. purpureum Park. serratum Alpinum C. B. In
rupibus ad radices montis Salevae and in ascensu montis Jurae prope Genevam;
Utrobique copiose.

Ageratum Septentrionalium Lob. vulgar, sive Costus hortorum minor Park.
foliis serratis C. B. Ager. plerisque, Herba Julia quibusdam J. B. Balsamita
foemina sive Ageratum Ger. Maudlin Tansie. In Etruria circa Liburnum,
Florentiam, etc. itemque circa Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi abunde. Trago
and Matthew. Eupatorium Mesuae dicitur.

N. 1. Substantiae tenuis est, saporis aromatici, attenuat, exterget, putredini
resistit, Epaticum est, laxat alvum quam blandissime. Extrinsecus ciet urinam,
uterumque emollit (suffitu) Schrod.

2. E foliis hujus and Ophioglossi contusis inque oleo olivarum bullitis,
addito cerae, resinae siccae and Terebinthinae tantillo, unguentum sive
emplastrum efficitur sarcoticum praestantissimum, Gerardo saepius probatum.

Agnus castus Offic. Ag. folio non serrato J. B. Vitex foliis angustioribus
Cannabis modo dispositis C. B. Vitex sive Agnus castus Ger. Vitex sive Agnus
castus folio angusto Park. The Chaste tree. In Sicilia and Regno Neapolitano
satis frequens. Agnum castum Officinae inepte appellant, non advertentes castum
nibil aliud esse quam expositionem Agni.

N. 1. Calf. and siccat, insignite^ discutit, menses ciet, appetitus Venereos
cohibet, semen imminuit. Schrod. Plurimas ei virtutes ascribunt Veteres, quos
consulat qui velit.

2. Athenis, Thesmophoriis Cereris sacro mulieres castitatem custodientes
foliis Viticis cubitus sibi sternere solebant, unde ei (...) nomen.

Aizoon v. Sedum.

Alaternus major seu prior Park. Bourgespine Monspoliensium, Alaternus Plinii
Clusio and Anguillarae Lob. Spinae Burgi Monspeliensium J. B. Philyca elatior
C. B. In Italia, praecipue ad mare inferum, necnon circa Monspelium in collibus
saxosis. Foliorum figura and incisuris multum variat.

Alcea pentaphyllea Park. Pentaphylli folio vel cannabina J. B. V, sive
cannabina C. B. fruticosa cannabina Ger. In aggeribus fossaurm circa Monspelium.

Alcea villosa J. B. VIII, sive hirsuta C. B. minor villosa Park. In vinetis
circa Monspelium, and in sepibus non procul Geneva.

Alchimilla minor quinquefolia C. B. v. Pentaphyllum.

Alcyonium 4 Dioscoridis v. Bursa marina.

Alcyonium 5 Dioscoridis, sive Auricula marina Caes. Fungus auricularis
Caesalpini C. B. In rupibus aqua marina tectis prope Portum Liburnum and alibi
juxta italiam and Sicillam.

Alkekengi Lon. Halicacabum sive Alkakengi vulgar Park. Solanum bacciferum II,
sive vesicarium, quod folliculi vesicae inflatae similes; vel ut Plin. l. 21.
c. 31. quoniam vesicae and calculis prosit, C. B. halicacabum Ger. hal. vulgar
J. B. Primo in sylvosis in insula Danubii juxta Viennam Austriae; deinde in
Italia prope Romam in scrobibus invenimus.

N. Hujus baccae nephriticae, diureticae ac lithontripticae insignes sunt. Usus
praecip. in calculo renum and vesicae, in ictero (baccae and folia) in sanguine
coagulato. Schrod. Sumi autem possunt vel vio infusae, vel in sero lactis aut
Zythogalo decoctae, vel in pulverem redactae in quovis liquore.

Allium Alpinum v. Victorialis.

Allium sphaerocephalum purpureum sylvestre J. B. Allium seu Moly montanum
purpureum elegantissimo flore Clus. pan. An Allium IV, sive sphaericeum folio
latiore C. B.? In Germania.

Allium sylv. bicorne purpureum proliferum J. B. ubi accurata ejus habetur and
figura and descriptio. Al. montanum II, sive mont. bicorne anguistifolium flore
purpurascente C. B. Moly montanum 2 Clusii Ger. In Germania inter Lodeshemium
and Basileam.

Allium sylv. bicorne flore obsoleto C. B. bicorne proliferum flore intus
albescente, cum stria purpurascente externe J. B. Genevae inter segetes freq.

Allium sylv. perpusillum v. Moly moschatum.

Aloe vulgaris C. B. J. B. vulg. sve sempervivum marinum Ger. Park. in Sicilia
and Melita insolis, in muris and ^ectis.

N. 1. Succus hujus plantae, Aloe dictus, vim praeter purgantem obtinet and
exiccantem, calefacientemque; proritat haemorrhoidas and menses, roborat
ventriculum, enecat and expellit lumbricos, arcet putredinem, astringit,
consolidat, exterget, adeoque vulnerarium est insigne. Schrod.

2. Aloe pene sola medicamentorum quae alvum solvunt; confirmat etiam
stomachum, adeo non infestat ^i aliqua contraria Plin. Galen. etc.

3. Quod frequens Aloes usus haemorrhoidum venas aperiat, ego (inquit Fuchsius)
millies observavi; and vos ex 100 eorum qui Aloe ad excernendas faeces utuntur
videbitis 90 haemorrhoidarum fluxum pati; omisso vero Aloes usu venas illas
claudi.

4. Caeterum tria Aloes genera in Officinis habentur, (1.) Socotrina, omnium
optima and purissima, ab insula Socotora unde advehitur dicta. (2.) Hepatica,
colore^ hepatis referens, priore impurior. (3.) Caballina, quae est Aloes
crassamentum, seu pars impurior, arenosa and sordibus conspurcata, ideoque
caballis seu equis exhibenda. His addit Schroderus (4.) Lucidam, adeo depuratam
ut transparens sit: Alii non distinguunt Socotrinam ab Hepatica, ut neque
Lucidam a Socotrina; adeoque duo tantum genera faciunt, Hepaticam scilicet and
^aballinam.

Alopecuros Ger. genuina Park. Gramen Alopecuroides spica rotundiore C. B. Gr.
Alopecuros spica Brevi J. B. Fox-tail. In Sicilia, Italia and Gallia
Narbonensi, praesertim in arenosis, ut v. g. prope oppidum Frontinianam, circa
Baias, etc.

Alsine baccifera Ger. scandens baccifera C. B. repens baccifera Park.
Cacubalum quibusdam vel Alsine baccifera J. B. In sepibus, primo non long a
Francosurto ad Moenum, postea in Italia. quoque and Gallia Narbonensi
observavimus.

Alsine folio crasso, an Alsine fqueetida Fabii Columnae Dioscoridea J. B.?
Primo se nobis obtulit in Liguria circa Portum Veneris, deinde alibi etiam tum
in Italia, tum Sicilia.

Alsine foliis hederaceis Rutae modo divisis Lob. recta triphyllos, sive
laciniata Park. IV, sive triphyllos caerulea C. B. folio profunde secto, flore
purpureo seu violaceo J. B. Inter segetes prope Lovanium. Hanc nuper in Anglia
invenit. T. Willisellus, v. Cat. Ang.

Alsine folio oblongo serrato, flore caeruleo J. B. item Erinos Columnae minor
ejusdem. Rapunculus minor foliis incisis C. B. In muris and siccioribus Messane
and Monspelii. Nos cum primum hanc vidimus ad speculum Veneris retulimus.

Alsine maxima Lugd. max. Hist. Lugdunensis J. B. Als. oblongo folio C. B. In
sylvosis ad latera montium Jurae and Salevae prope Genevam.

Alsine muscosa quibusdam J. B. tenuifolia muscosa C. B. Locis humidis ad
fontes and aquarum scaturigines in montibus Stiriae, itemque in Jura and Saleve
mox dictis. Flos hujus tetrapetalos est.

Althaea frutex Clusii Ger. Alth. frutescens folio rotundiore incano C. B.
Alth. arborescens J. B. Haec eadem non est cum Althaea Olbii Ad. licet Lobelius
velit, sed diversa, ut recte Clusius; quamvis and hanc quoque speciem circa
Olbiam Gallo-provinciae observaverimus spontaneam. Foliis est Malvae vulgaris
rotundis, at incanis, flore majore incarnato. In rupibus non long a specu
Frontignana and prope Tolonam.

Alypum montis Ceti, sive Herba terribilis Narbonensium Ad. Al. Monspeliensium
sive Herba terribilis Park. Al. Monspelianum, sive Frutex terribilis J. B.
Thymelaea foliis acutis, capitulo Succisae, sive Alypum Monspeliensium C. B.
Titulus locum designat v. g. Promontorium Ceti prope Frontignanam. Invenimus
etiam non minus copiose in collibus saxosis juxta S. Chamas Gallo-provinciae
oppidum.

Aly ssum minus v. Thlaspi minus.

Amarantus luteus v. Stoechas citrina.

Ambrosia Ger. maritima C. B. hortensis Park. Ambrosia quibusdam J. B. In
maritimis Etruriae arcnosis.

Amelanchier Lob. v. Diospyros.

Ammi vulgar Ger. vulgatius Lob. Park. majus C. B. vulgar majus latioribus
foliis, semine minus odoro J. B. In Sicilia and Italia in hortis, vineis and
pinguioribus arvis interdum nimis frequens. Hujus differentiam observavimus
foliis magis incisis.

N. 1. Semen Ammeos very (quod ab hoc diversum est) partium est tenuium,
incidit, aperit, disc. Hinc convenit in dolor colico and uterino, in mensibus
and urina obstructis, in inflatione ventriculi ususque praecipue interni est,
hinc and externi. Schrod.

2. Mirifice prodest mulierum sterilitati, si in pulverem contritum propinotur
mane drachmae pondere ex vino meraco vel carnium jure, tribus ante cibum horis,
etc. Remedium est praestantiss. and pluries expertum. Matthew.

Amygdalus Ger. Park. Am. dulcis and amara J. B. sativa C. B. The Almond tree.
In Italia and Gallia Narbonensi in agris, non tamen ut puto sponte.

N. 1. Amygdalae dulces multum nutriunt, corpus pinguefaciunt, humorum
acrimoniam leniunt, semen genitale augent, unde tabidis and macilentis
convenient. Adhibentur autem praecique in emulsionibus.

2. Amygdalae (inquit Galenus and experientia confirmat) nihil prorsus habent
facultatis adstringentis; unde non audiendi sunt qui febribus lactis Amygdalini
dicti usum ideo vetant, ne sc. alvum astringat.

3. Sunt qui sibi persuadent non turum esse cremoris Amygdalini usum
febricitantibus and iis qui stomachum biliosum habent, quia ob unctuositatem
suam facile inflammatur, choleram auget and vaproes ad caput mittit. Nos in
cremore unctuositatem illam non observavimus, nec quicquam nocumentorum jam
dictorum, licet in febribus and calidis morbis saepe usi sumus, and utamur ipsi
indies etiamin nostro corpore. J. B. quem adi. Bauhino nostra quoque
experientia suffragatur.

4. Oleum Amygdalarum dulcium pulmoni and pectori utilissimum esse nostra
experientia multorum commodo saepissime exploratum: J. B. and paulo post, Est
sane medicamentum vere (...), and ad multa efficax, blandum, gratum and veluti
quidam typus aliorum oleorum ejusdem generis; seimus quid possit in colico
dolor ab induratis faecibus, ab humore acri, in quibus tuto and maximo
successu multoties exhibuimus. Sed recenter oportet esse expressum. Dos. a iij.
ad lbss. vel per se, vel in jure carnium. In constipata alvo mite, tutum and
probatum medicamentum etiam renum dolor divexatis. Est etiam insigne anodynum
and unicum propemodum infantium medicamen: quibus etiam recens natis exhibetur
ad tormin^ ventris compescenda cum Saccharo penidiato ad ij.

5. Magma reliquum post expressionem olei ad extersionem manuum and faciei, and
cutis laevigationem quovis sapone praestanitus est.

6. Amygdalae amarae calide sunt and siccae, atten. aper. exterg. diureticae
sunt, obstructioni jecoris, lienis, mesenterii, uterique conferunt. Extrirsecus
lentigines tollunt si masticatae illinantur, capitis dolori subveniunt (in
frontalibus.) Schrod.

7. Am. amarae ebrietatem arcere dicuntur. Novimus tamen (inquit J. B.) qui
amuletum illud in usu habentes nihilo secius a Baccho vincuntur, etc.

8. Amygdalas amaras vulpeculis si comedantur lethales esse tradunt. Marcellus
Virgilius in feel pestiferam earum vim expertus est: Jo. Lutzius in gallinis,
quae ex esu magmatis post olei expressionem projecti mortuae sunt. J. B.

Anagyris Lob. foetida C. B. Park. Ger. vera faetida J. B. In montibus prope
Messanam and alibi tum in Italia, tum etiam in Sicilia.

Anagyris Ger. non foetida major vel Alpina C. B. non faetida sive Laburnum
majus Park. Laburnum, arbor trifolia Anagyridi similis J. B. In montibus Jura
and Saleva prope Genevam and alibi in Alpibus Sabaudicis.

N. 1. Folia Anag. foetidae trita and imposita tumores reprimunt; sicca in
passo pota menses and secundas movent, faetum mortuum ejiciunt. Semen
commanducatum vomitus movet. Haec ex Veteribus, nam Officinis nostris in usu
non est. Quod vomitiones faciant tum semen, tum folia omnes consentiunt.

2. Accidit interdum, ut caprae and oves in Creta fame vexatae, hujus folia
depascant, li^^ odoris sit ingratissimi, and postea ex harum lacte caseus
conficiatur: quo si forte ignarus aliquis vescatur, aut lac bibat, statim
excitentur tum vehementissimi vomitus, tum fluxus ventris; and cum hoc
saepissime accidat, multi in discrimen vitae veniunt; quam ob causam frutex hic
omnibus sit exosus. Bellus.

3. Quod Laburni flores apes non attingant, Plinius eumque secuti recentiores
Botanici affirmant. Saepenumero autem Laburnum ob ligni duritiem and nigrorem
pro Ebeno vaenit ex quo pulchrae fiunt pectinum thecae. J. B.

Anchusa angustifolia C. B. lignosior angustifolia Lob. Park. minor lignosior
J. B. Libanotidis species Rondeletio ejusdem: bis enim describit hanc plantam.
In collibus steribus agri Monspeliensis, aux Garigues, prope Castelneuf, etc.

Anchusa lutea J. B. Ger. major floribus luteis C. B. lutea major Park. In
agris sterilioribus non long a Lugduno qua Genevam iter est.

Anchusa Monspeliaca J. B. itemque minor seu Alcibiadion and Onochiles ejusdem.
IV, sive puniceis floribus C. B. Anchusa Alcibiadion Ger. minor purpurea Park.
In colle arenoso inter Gramontiam sylvam and Castrum novum, non long a
Monspelio.

N. Plurimas virtutes Anchusae tribuunt Veteres, quos consule. Radix oleo
soluta rubro color tingit: petroleo infusa and illita praestans est ad vulnera
recentia and puncturas. Park.

Androsace Matthioli Ger. Androsaces Matthioli sive Fungus petraeus marinus,
sive Umbilicus marinus J. B. And Matthew. sive Cotyledon marina, and Umbilicus
marines Park. Androsaces Chamae conchae innascens vel minor C. B. In fundo
stagni marini Volcarum, inter Promontorium Ceti and Balleruch copiosissime and
alibi in eodem stagno.

Androsaemum foetidum Park. capitulis longissimis filamentis donatis C. B. Ruta
hypericoides quibusdam, Sicilianae affinis sive, Tragium J. B. In Sicilia and
Calabria ad aquarum rivos and scaturigines, ubi in satis magnum fruticem
adolescit.

Anemone sylv. alba major C. B. magna alba, plurima part anni slorens J. B.
sylv. latifolia alba, sive tertia Matthioli Park. In Germania superiore.

Anemone tuber^^ (...) Ger. tenuifolia simplici flore tertia, sive (...)
foliis, flore violaceo hexaphyllo C. B. An Italica (...) ^^^enlis spinosis
foliis rum Clusii J. B.? Itinere a L^rieio ad Maslam Liguriae copiosam vidimus,
postea and alibi in Italia.

Anisum Lob. Ger. Park. J. B. An. herbariis C. B. In insula Melitensi magno
proventu seritur.

N. 1. Semen attenuat, discutit, commanducatum halitum eris emerdat; divreticum
est, calculos pellit; lac auget, pulmonicum ac stomachicum, imprimis audit.
Hinc usus praecip. in tussi and orthopnaea; in ructu and inflatione ventriculi,
torminibus intestinorum, etc. Oleum ejus aut Quintessentiam ad phrenesin and
morbum comitialem commendat Parkinsonus.

2. Nos in doloribus ventriculi a flatibus and pituitosis humoribus ortis oleum
Anisi magni faclmus, exhibitum cum jusculo, modo paucae dentur guttulae, tres
sc. aut quatuor, quod tum in nobismet ipsis tum in aliis sumus experti. Colicos
ciuciatus quos non potuit sanare [aliis remediis] oleo Chymico Anisi sanavit
Heurnius. J. B.

3. Infantibus i. exhibitum blande per superiora ac inferiora saburram
ventriculi intestinorumque ejicit. Schrod.

4. Caeteris flatum discutientibus medicamentis gratius est ventriculo, minus
ha^et acrimoniae and plus suavitatis.

5. Pinsunt hoc in panem ex quo Biscoctum parant: quin and spiritibus illis
tenuibus, e quibus generosiores and aquas vitae dictas eliciunt, leviter
contusum ante destillationem infunditur, ad gratum saporem iis iterata
destillatione exaltandis concilandum.

6. Anisum Melitenses Cuminum dulce appellant, unde C. Bauhinus deceptus
Cuminum dulce Melitensium prodistincta specie Cumini habuit.

Anonis viscosa spinis carens lutea major C. B. lutea non spinosa, Dalechampio
natrix J. B. Natrix Plimi sive Anonis non spinosa lutea major Park Primo illam
observavimus in arenofis insulae istius exiguae Promontorio Siciliae Pachyno
dicto nuper impetu maris abruptae; deinde ad fluvium Arve prope Genevam; tandem
circa Monspelium copiose.

Anonis non spinosa parva procumbens lutea. In arenosis maris litoribus prope
Cataniam Siciliae copiose.

Anonis non spinosa purpurea supina minima. In sterilioribus Calabriae juxta
mare. Has duas plantas nondum descriptas putamus.

Anonis pusilla fruticans Cherleri J. B. Trifoliis affinis. In collibus
sterilioribus Narbonensis Galliae inter Ilices, Thymos aliosque frutices multa.

Anonymus flore Coluteae Clus. Chamaebuxus flore Coluteae Ger. C. B.
Chamaebuxus sive Chamaepyxos quibusdam J. B. Pseudo-chamaebuxus Park. Primo
observavimus in sylvis Constantiam inter and Scaphusiam, deinde in planitie
quadam prope Augustam Vindelicerum, tandem non long a Tiguro Helvetiae
plurimam, mense Maio florentem.

Anthyllis leguminosa purpurascente flore Clus. Loto affinis flore subrubente
C. B. In agrorum marginibus circa Liburnum portum and alibi in pascuis Italiae.

Anthyllis altera herbariorum Park. v. Chamaepitys moschata. marina incana,
etc. v. Paronychia. leguminosa Hispanica v. Trifolium Halicacabum, and Auricula
muris.

Antirrhinum luteum Ger. luteo flore C. B. flore luteo grandi Came. flore
subluteo Dod. Circa Messanam in muris: unde Petrus Castellus in Catalogo suo
Messanense illud appellat. Invenimus insuper in rupibus non procul a Petra
sancta Hetruriae oppido.

Antirrhinum purpureum Ger. majus alterum folio longiore C. B. vulgar J. B. In
aggeribus fossarum and ad sepes prope Monspelium abunde.

Antirrhinum minus flore carneo, rictu striato. In Italia and Sicilia.

Antithora flore luteo Aconiti J. B. Anthora Park. Aconitum salutiferum seu
Anthora C. B. Anthora sive Aconitum salutiferum Ger. In monte Jura circa
verticem Thuiri, and alibi in istius montis jugis.

N. 1. Radix insigniter amara est: venenis omnibus adversari dicitur, and
peculiariter radici Thorae. Addit Guainerius magnae etiam esse adversus pestem
efficacix, eui subscribit Matthew. Solerius non modo per inferiorem ventrem, sed
and per superiora largas ait Anthorae radices expurgationes moliri; modum esse
ad quantitatem Phaseoli in jusculo aut vino.

2. Considerenrt lectores (inquit J. B.) an radix purgans conveniat commorsis a
viperis and cane rabido, itemque peste laborantibus. Quis tandem credat radicem
purgantem auxiliari omnibus cordis affectibus?

Aparine semine Coriandri saccharati Park. In insula ad Prom. Pachynum and
alibi in Sicilia.

Aphyllanthes Monspeliensium J. B. Lob. Caryophyllus caeruleus Monspeliensium
C. B. Park. In collibus juxta Castelneuf, aliisque sterilioribus Monspelio
vicinis.

Aphyllanti affinis, etc. v. Scabiosa.

Apium montanum nigrom J. B. VI, sive montanum folio ampliore C. B. ejusdem Ap.
VIII, seu montanum nigrum: ejusdem Daucus VI, seu montanus Apil folio minor, ex
sententia fratris J. Bauhini; adeoque ex una planta tres facit. Apium montanum
vulgatius and Apium montanum Parisiensium Park. Oreoselinum Ger. In Germaniae
montosis and ad latera montis Jurae non procul Geneva.

Apium peregrinum v. Daucus tertius Dioscoridis.

Apocynum latifolium amplexicaule J. B. v. Scammonea Monspeliaca.

Arbor Judae Lob. Ger. Park. Judaica arbor J. B. Siliqua sylv. rotundifolia C.
B. Primo observavimus in collibus Romae vicinus, Tyberi fluvio imminentibus;
deinde in Appenninis montibus.

Arbutus Ger. Park. Arb. Comarus Theophrasli J. B. Arb. sive Unedo Lob. Arb.
folio serrato C. B. In Siciliae, Italiae and Galliae Narbonensis sylvosis
plurima.

N. 1. Arbuti fructus, memaecylum Graecis dictus, ventriculo incommodus est and
capitis dolorem inducit. Mihi sane quoties comedi (inquit J. Bauhinus) ldolorem
causarunt ventriculi hi fructus. Ego sine ulla noxa multos edi. Clus. and
revera sapore sunt non ingrato.

2. Amatus ex Arbuti foliis and floribus aquam vitreis organis elici tradit,
eamque servari tanquam sacratissimum adversus pestem and venena antidotum.
Matthiolus pulverem ossis de cord cervi ei admiscet.

3. Scribit Bellonius in montis Athos, tantopere priseis celebrati, vallibus
Arbutos (qui ut plurimum aliis locis fruticent) in vastae magnitudinis arbores
evadere. Juba author est quinquagenum cubitorum altitudine in Arabia nasci.
Plin.

Arisarum latifolium Park. Ger. latifolium quibusdam J. B. latifolium alterum
C. B. In aggeribus sepium and umbrosis, itiner inter Massam and Lucam copiosum
vidimus: postea etiam in Gallo-provincia non long a Tolona portu, ad montium
latera.

Aristolochia rotunda Lob. Ger. J. B. rotunda vulgatior Park. rotundo flore ex
purpura nigro C. B. In Italia passim ad sepes and in aggeribus fossarum.

Aristolochia polyrrhizos J. B. Arist. Pistolochia dicta C. B. Pistolochia Ger.
Pistolochia vulgatior Park. In arvis prope Sellam novam agri Monspeliensis, sub
oleis.

Aristolochia Saracenica Ger. Ar. clematitis Park. Ar. clematitis recta C. B.
clematitis vulgaris J. B. Circa Monspelium in vineis, fossis and aggeribus plus
satis luxuriat.

N. Aristolochia utraque cephalica, epatica and pulmonica inprimis est;
attenuat, aperit. Hinc prodest ad tartaream mucilag nem resolvendam
expectorandamque; ad menses ciendos, tumores internos rumpendos, venena
discutienda. Insuper longae infusio ad scabiem exiccandam vel vulgo hic
usitatissima est. Extrinsecus adhibetur usu creberrimo ad exiccanda and
mundificanda vulnera. Rotunda tenuiorum est partium quam longa, adeoque
efficacior, and in primis mensibus ac secundinis ciendis celeberrima. Schrod.
Aiunt and radici huic vim purgatricem inesse.

Armeria prolifera Ger. Caryphyllus prolifer Park. sylvestris prolifer C. B.
Betonica coronaria squamosa sylv. J. B. In Italia, Sicilia, Germania, Gallia
satis frequens.

Armeria rubra Ger. Betonica coronaria sive Caryophyllus sylv. vulgatissimus J.
B. Caryophyllus sylv. vulgaris latifolius C. B. Cum priore and magis etiam
vulgaris.

Artemisia tenuisolia v. Abrotanum inodorum.

Arum venis albis C. B. magnum, rotundiore folio Park. majus Veronense Lob.
Primo in insulis circa Venetias nobis conspectum, etiam Novembri mense virens,
foliis vitidibus, vulgaris duplo majoribus, venis albis; vidimus and alibi in
Lombardia.

Asarum Lob. Ger. C. B. J. B. vulgar Park. In sylvis ad latera montis Jurae,
qua ascenditur ad verticem Dole dictum copiose. Vidimus and in Bavaria.

N. Crassam pituitam and utramque bilem per vomitum ac nonnunquam per secessum
violenter expurgat. Diurecticum est and emmenagogum insigne. Epar, lienem,
vesicamque fellis aperit. Hinc utile est in arthritide, hydrope, febribus,
praecipue tertiana ac quartana, ictero, etc. Folia exhibentur n. 6, 7, 8, vel
9, infusa aut cocta and expressa.

Asclepias Lob. flore albo Ger. Park. C. B. Ascl. sive Vincetoxicum multis,
floribus albicantibus J. B. Per Germaniam, Italiam, Galliam Narbonensem in
dumetis and ad sepes ubique fere.

N. Alexipharmaca est ac sudorifera insignis. Usus Praecip. in peste aliisque
venenosis affectibus, in obstructionibus mensium, in torminibus intestinorum,
in palpitatione cordis ac lipothymia, in hydrope. Semen commendatur ad
calculum. Extrinsecus usus tam florum quam radicum and seminis est in ulceribus
sordidis ac malignis purificandis, ad ictus insectorum venenatorum, in
tumoribus mammarum, etc. Schrod. Facultatibus cum Aristolochia longa covenit ex
sententia Tragi. De vi ejus ad hydropem vide J. B. and Trag.

Aspalathus 2 Monspeliensis J. B. alter Monspeliensis Park. Genista-spartium
spinosum majus I, flore luteo C. B. In aridis and sterilibus saxosis collibus
circa Monspelium, Nemausum and alibi in Gallia Narbonensi.

Asparagus marinus J. B. marinus crassiore folio Park. marit. crassiore folio
C. B. palustris Ger. (...) sive palustris Galeno. In palustribus prope marinum
Volcarum stagnum, non long a Monspelio. Haec planta mihi non visa est specie
differ ab Asparago sativo, sicut nec sylvestris ab eo dissert aliter quam
cultura. Quae ad Asparagum annotavimus vide in Cat. Ang.

Asparagus petraeus sive Corruda Ger. petraeus, sive Corruda aculeata Park.
Asparagus foliis acutis C. B. Corruda J. B. In Italia ad sepes and in dumetis
frequens. Provenit quoque. circa Monspelium in Liguadocia.

Asparagus sylv. aculeatus Ger. aculeatus, spinis horridus C. B. spinosus, sive
Corruda spinis horrida Park. In insula Promontorio Pachyno adjacente, and alibi
in maritimis Siciliae.

Asparagus sylv. spinosus Clusii Ger. aculeatus tribus aut quatuor spinis ad
eundem exortum C. B. Ad mare prope Tauromonium in Sicilia. Harum specierum
meminit J. Bauhinus in capite de Corruda.

Asperula flore caeruleo Ger. Park. caerulea arvensis C. B. Rubia caerulea
erectior elatiorve J. B. In monte Saleva inter segetes; itemque prope Neapolin
Austriae and Monspelium.

Asphodelus bulbosus Dodonaei, sive Ornithogalum spicatum flore virente J. B.
Ornithogalum angustiofolium majus, floribus ex albo virescentibus C. B.
Asphodelus bulbosus Ger. Inter segetes una circiter leuca a Geneva versus
Salevam montem. Hanc T. Willisellus in Anglia invenit. vide Cat. Ang.

Asphodelus luteus Ger. J. B. lut. minor Park. luteus and flore and radice C.
B. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum and alibi in Sicilia.

N. 1. Asphodeli Veteribus frequens in medicina usus fuit. Videsis Dioscoridem,
Plinium and Galenum, quiplurimas ei facultates assignant. Recentioribus nunc
dierum fere neglectus est: sunt tamen qui radices ejus ad icterum commendant.

2. Hastulae regiae caulis seu scapus totus Graecis anthericos dicebatur, uti
Latinis, test Plinio, albucus. Sunt and qui eo nomine semen Asphodeli
signisicari voluerint.

Asphodelus major ramosus flore albo J. B. major albus ramosus Park. albus
ramosus mas C. B. ramosus Ger. In montibus Messanae imminentibus, atque etiam
in collibus saxosis agri Monspeliensis.

Asphodelus minor Clus. albus non ramosus C. B. non ramosus Ger. In Sicilia
circa Syracusas and alibi.

Asphodelus minor foliis fistulosis v. Phalangium Cretae Salonensis.

Lancastriae verus Ger. emac. v. Pseudo-asphoedelus.

Aster Atticus Italorum flore purpureo Park. Italorum Lob. Ger. Atticus
caeruleus vulgaris C. B. At. purpureo and albo flore J. B. Inasperis Germaniae
collibus secus Rhenum and alibi copiose.

Aster Atticus Ger. Caes. Atticus luteus verus Park. luteus foliolis ad florem
rigidis C. B. In Italia, Sicilia and Gallia Narbonensi ubique obvius.

Aster montanus luteus Salicis glabro folio C. B. montanus foliis salicis Park.
Ger. Conyza media Monspeliensis, quibusdam Asteris Attici genus, folio glabro
rigido J. B. In collibus juxta Castelncus and alibi in vicinia Monspelii.
Eundem observavimus in Germania juxta Rhenum ex ad verso Manhemii; and in sylis
supra Neapolim Italiae, versus Camaldulensium coenobium.

Aster purpureus montanus J. B. Alpinus caeruleo magno flore Park. Atticus
caeruleus III, sive montanus caeruleus magno flore, foliis oblongis C. B. Aster
7 Clusii Ger. In summis jugis montis Jurae, itemque in montibus maximo
Carthusianorum coenobio imminentibus.

Asteri montano purpureo similis J. B. Videtur J. Bauhinus describerre plantam
quam inveni in montibus sylvosis max. Carthusianorum caenobio vicinis, quamvis
per omnia non respondeat Figura aut Descriptio; and quid mirum? cum sicca jam
delineata and descripta fuerit.

Aster Tripolii flore C. B. minor angustisolius Park. Atticus Monspeliensis
purpureus, angustioribus foliis J. B. minor Narbonensis Tripolii flore,
Linariae folio Lob. In prato juxta molendinum Castri novi, inque sylva Valena
and alibi prope Monspelium.

Aster supinus Park. luteus supinus Clusii Ger. Ast. luteus supinus spinosus J.
B. perperam spinosum appellat. Ast. luteus XII, sive supinus C. B. Circa
Massiliam ad maris litus.

Aster montanus X, sive luteo magno flore C. B. montanus 3 Ger. Britannica
conyzoides, quibusdam Aster Pannonicus Clusio J. B. In Germania ad Rhenum;
inque Italia ad margines sossarum inter Liburnum and Pisas. Semper in aquosis.

Aster luteus lanuginosus Park. hirsutus Ger. luteus V, sive hirsuto Salicis
folio C. B. An Aster luteus XI, sive luteus montanus villosus magno flore C.
B.? Aster montanus flore luteo magno hirsutus, quibusdam Oculus Christi J. B.?
In montosis medio circiter itinere inter Genevam and Lugdunum. Huic non adeo
dissimilis est figura Asteris angustifolii lutei apud J. Bauhinum.

Astragalus Monspelianus J. B. Securidaca II, sive lutea minor corniculis
recurvis C. B.? An potius Astragalus V, seu villosus floribus globosis ejusdem?
Certe Astragalus Monspelianus J. B. diversus est ab Hedysaro seu Securidaca
minore, proinde reprehendit Lobelium, quod non adverterit Astragalum
Monspeliensium diversum esse a Securidaca minore. Verum Monspelienses, cum ibi
essemus Anno 1665. ostenderunt nobis Securidacam minorem pro suo Astragalo:
Astragalum autem Monspessulanum J. B. nondum vidimus.

Astragalus Monspeliano candidior, and Onobrychis quorundam J. B. An Astrag. V,
seu villosus floribus globosis C. B.? qui Astragalum Monspelianum Clusii huc
refert. purpureus Lugd. In rupibus montis Salevae Genevam spectantibus copiose.

Astragalus quidam montanus vel Onobrychis aliis J. B. Onobrychis X, seu
floribus Viciae majoribus caeruleopurpurascentibus, vel foliis Tragacanthae C.
B. In altissimo vertice montis Jurae Thuiri dicto.

Astragalus major Fuchsio v. Orobus sylvaticus.

Astrantia nigra Lob. nigra, sive Veratrum nigrum Dioscroidis Dod. Ger.
Helleborus niger Saniculae folio major Park. C. B. Sanicula foemina quibusdam,
aliis Helleborus niger J. B. In sylvis quibusdam non long a Monachio Bavariae;
necnon in Salevae pratis montosis urbi Genevae vicinis.

N. Hujus radici vim per alvum purgatricem Helleboro albo similem sed mitiorem
multo inesse Gesnerus primum se expertum refert.

Atractylis Lob. Ger. lutea C. B. flore luteo Park. vera flore luteo J. B. In
Italia and Gallia Narbonensi ad vias and in agrorum marginibus ubique fere.

N. Hujus folia succum sanguireum praebent, quemadmodum Theophrastus de
Atracylide refert, qui tamen tusis and expressis non elicitur, sed avulsis dum
adhuc tenera sunt and succo praegnantia, sponte e venis effluit; quo modo etiam
ex Aloes plantae foliis se Aloen purissimam and optimam Neapoli collegisse
scribit F. Columna.

Atriplex marina Ger. maritima J. B. maritima laciniata C. B. marina repens
Park. In litoribus arenosis maris Mediterranei nusquam non occurrit. A nostrati
a maritimo omnino diversa est.

Avicularia Sylvii J. B. v. Speculum Veneris.

Auricula muris Camerarii J. B. Anthyllis leguminosa marina Baetica vel
Cretica, sive Auricula muris Cameraril Park. Loto affinis IV, sive hirsutis
circinatis siliquis C. B. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum, ubi arx praesidio
Hispanico tenetur, and alibi in Sicilia.

Auricula muris pulchro flore, folio tenuissimo J. B. In monte Thuiri non
procul a Geneva.

Auricula Ursi flore purpureo Ger. A. U. sive Primula veris Alpina flore
rubente J. B. Sanicula Alpina purpurea C. B. Primo invenimus in Alpibus non
long a Pontieba vico qui ab ea part Limes est Ditionis Venetianae: postea
etiam in clivis maritimis Regni Neapolitani; tandem in Alpibus, Chambery inter
and max. Carthusianorum coenobium.

Auricula leporis v. Bupleuron.

B
BArba capri J. B. Ger emac. B. caprae floribus oblongis, Melandryon Plinii C.
B. Ulmaria major sive altera Park. Prope Genevam a la Bastie. Invenimus and in
Helvetia non long a Scaphusia.

Balsamita v. Ageratum.

Barba Jovis frutex C. B. Clus. Park. etc. Jovis barba pulchre lucens J. B. In
clivis maritimis Etruriae and Regni Neapolitani copiose.

Bellis sylvatica J. B. media sylvest. Ger. VI, sive sylv. media, caul carens
C. B. In montibus circa Genevam.

Bellis Alpina major folio rigido C. B. Park. In summis jugis montis Jurae
copiose. Bellidis utriusque facultates quaere in Cat. Ang.

Bellis caerulea Monspeliaca Ger. caerulea II, sive caul folioso C. B.
Aphyllantes Anguillarae, sive Globularia Bellidi similis J. B. Globularia
Monspeliensium, Bellis caerulea Park. Circa Monspelium plurimis in locis; quin
and ad radices montium Jurae and Salevae prope Genevam, and alibi tum in
Italia, tum etiam in Germania.

Bellis caerulea caul nudo C. B. In sylvis and montibus max. Carthusianorum,
caenobio vicinis. Haec priore elatior est, foliis angustioribus longioribusque
and omnino specie ad ea diversa, quicquid repugnat J. Bauhinus, cui certe
nunquam conspecta fuit.

Beta Cretica spinosa Park. Cretica semine spinoso J. B. semine aculeato Ger.
minor V, seu Cretica semine aculeato C. B. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum
Siciliae.

Bistorta minima J. B. IV, sive Alpina media C. B. minor Alpina Park. In
supremis herbidis jugis montis Jurae copiose. Puto hanc non esse specie
diversam a nostrate, quamvis C. Bauhinus distinguat.

Blattaria lutea J. B. lutea minor seu vulgaris Park. lutea folio longo
laciniato C. B. flore luteo Ger. Variis in locis hanc observavimus tam in
Germania quam in Italia and Gallia Narbonensi. Solo floris color ab hac
differt Blattaria flore albo, siqnidem ex eodem semine oritur, ut in hortulo
nostro Cantabrigiae aliquando experti sumus.

Blitum rubrum majus C. B. Ger. pulchrum rectum, magnum rubrum J. B. In hortis
oleraceis circa Monspelium.

Blitum rubrum minus J. B. C. B. Ger. minus sylv. rubrum Park. In vineis,
hortis and fimetis circa Monspelium and alibi. Quomodo and an omnino specifice
inter se differant album minus and rubrum minus, mihi non satis constat. Quod
in Germania circa Basileam and alibi tam copiose provenit videtur esse Blitum
minus album J. B.

Bottys Ger. vulgaris Park. ambrosiodes vulgaris C. B. Botrys plerisque
Botanicis J. B. In arenosis circa Rhegium in Calabria, Florentiam in Etruria,
Monspelium and Nemausum in Narbonensi Gallia.

N. 1. Herba in pulverem redacta, melleque in Electuarii formam excepta
praestat contra pulmonum vomicas, quo remedio multos ego curavi qui pus
sereabant. Matthew. Valere dicitur and ad dolores uteri, ad menses ciendos and
emortuos foetus ejiciendos.

2. Nonnulli inter vestes eam reponunt ad tineas abigerdas, and odoris
suavitatem communicandam.

Botrys verticillata J. B. v. Chamaedrys foliis laciniatis.

Branca ursina v. Acanthus sativus.

Briza monococcos Ger. Zea Briza dicta, vel monococcos Germanica C. B. Zea
monococcos, sive simplex, sive Briza Park. Zea monococcos, Briza quibusdam J.
B. In Germania Argentoratum inter and Basileam ejus segetes vidimus.

Buglossum angustifolium Lob. angustifolium minus C. B. vulgar angustifolium
minus J. B. minus sativum Park. Ad vias and agrorum margines in Italia, Gallia,
Germania subinde occurrit. An hoc a sativo aliter quam cultura differat
considerandum. Vulgar latifolium circa Messanam invenimus.

N. Viribus cum Boragine convenit. Flores inter quatuor illos cordiales famosos
recensentur. Omnibus affectibus ex atra bile oriundis conducunt, ut and radix
and folia. In oleribus usurpantur, valentque ad sedandos dolores varios.

Bugula v. Consolida.

Buphthalmum vulgar Ger. Dioscoridis C. B. Matthioli, sive vulgar Millefolii
foliis Park. Chamaemelum chrysanthemum quorundam J. B. Variis Germaniae in
locis, v. g. in muris oppidi Bonnae prope Coloniam, etc. In Italia circa
Florentiam in alveis torrentum.

N. Usus sum hac herba in vino decocta ad versus inveteratam fellis
suffusionem, potu illam decoctionem calidam hoc morbo laborantibus tanquam
concoquens and discutiens remedium exhibui, certoque deprehendi eam extenuandi,
discutiendique and educendi citra dolorem and periculum vi praeditam. Trag.

Buphthalmum Cotulae folio C. B. alterum Contulae folio Park. tenuifolium folio
Millefolii fere J B. In agris circa Liburnum portum. Vel eadem est haec planta,
vel certe simillima Chrysanthemo Valentini Clusii. Chrysanth, tenuifolium
Baeticum Boelii. Ger.

Bupleurum angustifolium; An Bupleurum III, sive arg^stissimo folio C. B.?
Figura Bupleuri angustifolii Monspeliensis Ger. optime conve^it huic plantae
quam circa Monspelium invenimus. Est a. specie distincta a nostrate Auricula
leporis seu minima J. B.

Bupleuron latifolium Monspeliense Ger. I, seu folio rigido C. B. latifolium
Park. Auricula leporis altera sive rigidior J. B. In sylvis and dumetis circa
Monspelium.

Bupleurum folio subrotundo sive vulgatissimum C. B. An B. angustifolium Park.?
Auricula leporis umbella lutea J. B. In Germaniae and Italiae montosis, ad
sepes and in dumetis.

Bursa marina and Alcyonii genus 4 Dioscoridi Caes. Arancio marino Imper. Algae
pomum Monspeliensium J. B. Alcyonium XII, sive Bursa marina Caesalpini C. B.
Apud Scriptores nostros Anglicos nulla hujus mentio, quod sciam. In litoribus
maris arenosis ad Siciliae Punctum Cerciolum dictum reperi.

Bursae pastoriae loculo sublongo affinis pulchra planta J. B. B. p. major
folio non sinuato C. B. Thlaspi Veronicae folio Park. Medio circiter itinere
inter Lucam and Pisas ad sepes. Hanc nuper in Anglia nostra invenimus
spontaneam, v. Cat. Ang.

Bursa pastoris minor foliis Perfoliatae J. B. v. Thlaspi oleraceum.

C
CAcalia quibusdam J. B. III, sive foliis cutaneis acutioribus and glabris C.
B. folio glabro Ger. glabro folio acuminato Park. In sylvosis montium Jurae and
Salevae prope Genevam.

Cacubalum Plinii v. Alsine baccifera.

Calamintha montana praestantior Lob. Ger. Park. montana flore magno, ex calyce
longo J. B. magno flore C. B. In montibus prope maximum Carthusianorum
coenobium. Invenimus and in montosis Etru^iae sylvis.

Caltha arvensis C. B. simplici flore J. B. Calendula simplici flore Ger. Circa
Monspelium, Liburnum, etc. An Caltha minima J. B? Small wild Marigold.

N. Flores cardiaci censentur, hinc and hepatici and Alexipharmaci, sudores
movent, variolas expellunt, ictero medentur, menses cient, partum promovent
(fumus subditus parturienti.) Aqua destillata oculorum rubedini and
inflammatieni medetur. Folia in olere sumpta alvum leniunt.

2. Decoctum florum Calendulae in Zythogalo seu liquore posseti vulgo
praescribitur ad variolas expellendas; ejusque usus a tempore fere inter omnes
increbuit.

3. Planta haec Solsequia and Solis sponsa dicitur, quod flos ejus ortu Solis
aperiatur and occasu claudatur.

Campanula rotundifolia minima C. B. J. B. Park. An Camp. glabra XXII, sive
minor rotundifolia Alpina C. B.? Forte enim hae duae non differunt specie. In
Alpibus Stiriacis and Carinthiacis. Folia hujus ex rotunditate oblonga sunt and
serrata eo fere quo Saniculae Alpinae guttatae.

Campanula minor folio rotundo, flore caeruleo pentagono grandi. In clivis
maritimis Regni Neapolitani. An a quoquam descripta sit nescio.

Campanula Persicifolia Ger. Park. angustifolia caerulea and alba J. B.
Rapunculus glaber X, seu Persicifolius magno flore C. B. Observavimus hanc
prope Spadam urbeculam acidulis celebrem flore albo: in montibus and collibus
Genevae vicinis flore caeruleo.

Campanula repens flore minore caeruleo J. B. An Trachelium sive Campanula
hirsuta VIII, i. e. Urticae foliis oblongis, minus asperis C. B.? Hujus meminit
Clusius in Hist. cap. de Trachelio, quem adi. In arvis inter segetes prope
Genevam and alibi.

Camphorata hirsuta C. B. Monspel. J. B. major Monspeliensium Park.
Monspeliensium, an Chamaepeuce Plinii Lob. Circa Monspelium, Nemausum,
Avenionem and alibi in Gallia Narbonensi.

Camphoratae congener C. B. Camph. Monspeliensium quoad figuram J. B. Anthyllis
altera Italorum Ger. Camphoratae congener, sive Anthyllis altera Italorum Park.
In Germania, Italia and Gallia Narbonensi in arvis and vervactis frequens.

Capparis spinosa folio rotundo Park. rotundiore folio Ger. spinosa fructu
minore folio rotundo C. B. Cap. spinosa J. B. qui species hasce non distinguit.
In muris and ruderibus Romae, Senarum, Florentiae, and alibi in Italia. Circa
Tolonam in Gallo-provincia colitur.

N. Florum gemmae antequam explicantur decerptae and muria conditae ad nos
transportantur, and intinctius fere loco ad carnes and pisces assatos
adhibentur: appetitum augent, hepati and lieni conferunt obstructiones eorum
reserando. Memorabile est (si modo verum) quod scribit Plinius. Ferunt eos
(inquit) qui quotidie Capparin Italicam edunt Paralysi non periclitari, nec
Lienis doloribus. Cortex, radicis inprimis, lienes induratos juvat, tum intus
assumptus, tum for as impositus; menses educit, ulcera exterget and desiccat, ad
dolorem ischi^dicum valere dicitur, and assectus Arthriticos.

Cardamine Alpina v. Nasturtiolum Alpinum.

Cardamine impatiens vulgo. Sium minus impatiens Ger. minimum Alpini: minimum,
Noli me tangere dictum, sive impatiens Nasturtii sylv. folio Park. An Sisymbrii
Cardamines species quaedam insipida J. B.? Certe and icon and descriptio huic
ad amussum quadrant. In Germania juxta Rhenum, locis glareosis ubi aquae
scaturiunt.

Carduus chrysanthemus Narbonensis Ger. Scolymos chrysanthemus C. B. Spina
lutea J. B. Scolymus Theophrasti siva Eryngium luteum Monspeliensium Park. In
Italia Sicilia and Gallia Narbonensi, ad mare praesertim frequentissimus.

Carduus chrysanthemus Dod. Scolymus Theophrasti Hispamicus Clus. Prope
oppidulum S. Lupiani, eundo ad Pedenatium, and alibi circa Monspelium. Haec
planta revera specie differt a praecedente, quicquid contradicit C. Bauhinus.

N. Salmanticenses tenellam adhuc plantam and primum germinantem, cum ipsa
radice elotam crudam aut etiam coctam cum carnibus edunt; ipsius lacteo succo
omne lactis genus coagulant; etiamque ejus flore Crocum adulterant, ut quaedam
nationes Cnici flore. Hujus autem radice Sues non minus libenter vescuntur quam
Eryngii Clus.

Carduus chrysanthemus procerus caul eduli. Ad radices montis Aetnae 8 mil.
supra Cataniam, ubi vulgus cum aceto and pipere caules ipsius crudos acetarii
loco comedit. Haec planta an a praecedente specie diversa sit subdubito,
quamvis duplo altius assurgat. At forte illud solo debetur.

Carduus caeruleus sphaerocephalus minor C. B. Crocodilium Monspeliensium Lugd.
Card. globosus minor Ger. Echinopus minor J. B. In Gallia Narbonensi
vulgatissimus.

Carduus galactites J. B. Apud alios Botanicos hunc non invenio. In Sicila and
Melita insulis, itemque in Italia prope pharum Genuensem, necnon circa
Monspelium in locis ruderatis and incultis.

Carduus lacteus peregrinus Camerarii J. B. albis maculis notatus exoticus C.
B. Silybum minus Baeticum Park. In Melita and Sicilia insulis. Color seminis in
hoc fuscus est and minime albus, ut in peregrino Camerarii, and proinde forte
rectius refertur ad Silybum majus annuum Park.

Carduus lanceolatus ferocior J. B. Primo invenimus eum proxime fontem quem
vocant ardentem, a Gratianopoli duabus circiter leucis remotum, deinde in
itinere ab Aurantia ad Nemausum; tandem prope montem S. Lupi, tribus Monspelio
leucis distantem. Est ei flos albus and major quam Lanceolati vulgaris.

Carduus parvus J. B. In Siciliae agris non long a castello Puzzallu ex
adverso Melitae.

Carduus Cirsium dictus folio laciniato nigrius J. B. In montibus prope
Genevam. Hic an ab aliis descriptus sit video J. Bauhinum dubitare, proinde and
ego (...).

Carduus Pratensis Asphodeli radice latifolius C. B. bulbosus Monspeliensium
Park. bulbosus Monspeliensis, sive Acanthus sylv. quibusdam, foliis laciniatis
J. B. In Pratis Monspelio vicinis.

Carduus pratensis latifolius C. B. Park. pratensis Tragi. mollis Lapathi folio
J. B. In pratis Rheno vicinis circa Argentoratum, Basileam, etc.

N. Hujus folia in cibis ut reliqua olera expetuntur, unde a mulierculis
Brassica pratensis nominatur. J. B. Trag.

Carduus solstitialis Ger. stellatus IV, sive luteus foliis Cyani C. B. Cardui
stellati varietas, Jacea lutea Clusii Lob. Spina solstitialis J. B. In Italia
and Gallia Narbonensi ubique fere.

N. Herba haec in morbo regio efficacissima est expeperientia Fontanoni; valet
and ad cachexiam, hydropem, febres diuturnas, virginum decolorem faciem, etc.
J. B.

Carduus sphaerocephalus latifolius vulgaris C. B. globosus Ger. Echinopus
major J. B. In montosis sylvis prope Viterbum qua inde Romam itur.

Carlina herbariorum Lob. humilis Park. Carlina, sive Chamaeleon albus
Dioscoridis Ger. acaulos magno flore C. B. caulifera and acaulis J. B. nam, hae
duae specie non differunt. In Germaniae pascuis sterilioribus and dumetis
frequens; nec minus in Italia, Gallia Narbonensi, and circa Genevam. De hujus
viribus, v. Cat. Ang.

N. 1. Refert Gesnerus, hujus floris calycem tum recentem, tum etiam siccum
noctu claudi, ad Solemn vero aperiri. Germanis Eberwurtz dicitur, i e. Apri
herba, quia nimirum Apri ejus radices appetunt; non (ut vult Fuchsius) quod
sues in polenta exhibeatur, perimat; hoc enim experientiae repugnat.

2. Hujus capitula carnosa, calyce, floribus ac semine resectis, ox aqua
butyro, sale and pipere suave edulium praebent. Gesn.

3. Chamaeleonem album ideo Ixiam appellatum ait Dioscorides, quod quibusdam in
locis Viscum ad ipsius radices inveniatur, quo etiam pro Mastiche utuntur
mulieres. Haec appellatio ab aliis Chamaeleoni etiam nigro recte tribui
dicitur: quin and plantae cuidam venenatae ab utroque Chamaeleonte distinctae,
cujus meminit Dioscorides lib. 6. competit, autore Guillandino, quem consule
aliosque herbarios, qui plura de hac voce habent.

Carthamus v. Cnicus.

Carlina sylvest. vulgaris Clus. Cnicus sylv. spinosior C. B* An sylv.
spinosior polycephalos ejusdem? Hujus plant ae radix est diuturna, cum vulgaris
nostratis annua fere sit; plures quoque ad eadem radice caules ei exeunt, cum
vulgari unus tantum: Denique floris color in hac falvu est, in nostrate pallide
luteus. v. Cat. Ang.

Caryophyllata montana Park. Ger. montana flore magno luteo J. B. VI, sive
Alpina lutea C. B. In montibus altissimis maximo Carthusianorum coenobio
imminentibus.

Caryophyllus arvensis umbelliferus J. B. ^rvensis umbellatus Park. holosteus
arvensis Ger. holoste^s arvens V, sive arv. umbellatus folio glabro C. B. Inter
segetes prope Lovanium.

Caryophyllus gramineo folio minimus seu saxifraga Caes. Caryoph. saxat. IX,
sive minimus muralis C. B. Betonica coronaria sive Tunica minima J. B. Circa
Genevam, Florentiam, Lansbergum and alibi tam in Italia, quam in Germania
copiosum vidimus.

Caryophyllus sylv. humilis flore unico C. B. etc. Hunc in Anglia variis in
locis sponte natum vidinus. v. Cat. Ang.

Caryophyllus simplex laciniatus I, seu flore tenuissime dissecto C. B.
Betonica coronaria tenuissime dissecta, sive Caryophyllea superba elatior
vulgaris J. B. In montibus Genevae propinquis, minus tamen frequens; invenimus
and Germania, non long a Weissenberg Franconiae oppido.

Caryophyllus montanus major flore globoso C. B. Caryophylleus flos
aphyllocaulos, vel junceus major J. B. Caryophyllus mediterraneus Ger. In
collibus prope Moguntiam. Non alia in re quam magnitudine omnium partium a
vulgari sive maritimo nostrate disterre videtur.

N. Mirum alicui videri possit, plantam hanc, quae nullibi apud nos quam in
maritimis oritur, in regionibus transmarinis tam procul a mari provenire. Verum
nos alias praeter hanc maritimas in mediterraneis nascentes observavimus, v. g.
Tragon Matthioli sive Kali spinosum in arenosis prope Viennam Austriae; Rhamnum
secundum Clusii non long ab Augusta Vindelicorum; Althaeam, vulgarem variis
Germaniae in locis. Quin and Tragus lib. 1. cap. 39. scribit se inve^sse magna
copia in agro Vangionum inter segetes Papaver corniculatum luteum, quod in
Anglia nusquam nisi in arenosis Oceani litoribus provenit.

Caryophyllus holosteus Alpinus tenuifolius Lini flore albo. In ascensu montis
Jurae prope supremum verticem Thuiri.

N. Aqua florum sylvestris Caryophylli destillata singulari experimento ad
pellendum calculum mensura trium aut quatuor cochlearium bibitur. J. B.

Caryophyllus sylv. vulgatissimus and Car. sylv. prolifer v. Armeria.

Casta poetica Lobelii Ger. poetica Monspeliensium Park. Osyris frutescens
baccifera C. B. Cassia lign^a Monspeliensium J. B. In Italia ad mare inferum,
itemque circa Monspelium plurima.

Catanance Dalechampii flore cyani, folio coronopi J. B. Chondrilla caerulea
cyani capitulis C. B. Chondrilla Sesamoides dicta Park. Sesamoides parvum
Matthioli Ger. In aridis and saxosis collibus agri Narbonensis passim obvia,
invenimus etiam prope Gratianopolin eundo ad max, Carthus. coenobium.

Caucalis albis floribus Ger. vulgaris albis floribus Park. IV, sive arvensis
echinata magno flore C. B Lappula canaria flore pulchro magno albo J. B. Inter
segetes in Germania passim, itemque circa Genevam and Monspelium.

Caucalis maritima supina echinata magno fructu. Lappula canaria sive Caucalis
mari^ima J. B. IX, sive pumila maritima C. B. In arenosis Siciliae litoribus
prope Messanam and alibi.

Caucalis minor pulchro semine sive Bellonii J. B. Seseli Creticum minus C. B.
Ger. Tordylium, sive Seseli Creticum minus Park. In Sicilia intra ipsa urbis
Messanae moenia.

Caucalis Peucedani folio Ger. XII, sive folio Peucedani C. B. Park.
Saxifragiae tenuifoliae affinis, quibusdam Caucalis J. B. In planitie quadam
prope Augustam Vindelicorum in Germania.

Cedrus Lycia retusa Bellonio dicta J. B. baccifera I, seu folio Cupressi
major, fructu flavescente C. B. Cedrus Phoenicea folio cupressi Park. Oxycedrus
Lycia Ger. Ad hac non diversam existimamus secundam speciem Cedri bacciferae C.
B. ut neque tertiam, cum ipse asserat eas magnitudine sola differ. Forte
etiam Sabina baccifera dicta ab hac non fuerit diversa: certe haec nobis
Monspelii ostensa fuit pro Sabina baccifera. Et nos quoque in eadem planta
observavimus inferiores and primos in tenellis plantis ramulos foliis
pungentibus and acutis, superiores vero and in adultioribus obtusis and
rotundis vostitos.

Centaurium luteum pusillum C. B. minimum luteum Park. luteum novum Col.
Centaurii lutei varietas Ger. emac. In tecto veteris aedificii Baiani Piscina
mirabilis dicti. Solo floris color a minore purpureo differ videtur.

Centaurium minus spicatum album C. B. Park. In agro Monspeliensi and alibi in
Narbonensi Gallia flore purpureo frequens.

Cerinthe asperior flavo flore Ger. major flavo flore Park. Cer. quorundam
major spinoso folio, flavo flore J. B. flore flavo asperior C. B. In Italia and
Sicilia admodum frequens.

Cerinthe major Ger. major flore luteo and rubro Park. quorundam major,
versicolore flore J. B. Cerinthe, seu Cynoglossum montanum majus C. B. In
montibus sylvosis max. Carthus. coenobio imminentibus. Perennis mihi visa est
haec planta: semina a. ei minora sunt quam vel purpureae vel flavae.

Cerasus sylv. amara Mahaleb putata J. B. Cerasus XV, sive Ceraso affinis C. B.
Macaleb Gesneri Ger. Machaleb Germanicum Park. qui C. Bauhinum reprehendit,
quod confundat Machaleb Matthioli and Gesneri. In sepibus prope Gratianopolin
qua itur a la grand Chartruse. Nuclei hujus fructus calefaciunt and emolliunt,
saponarios globulos ingrediuntur, pilosque horridiores and duriores emolliunt
affrictu crebro Matthew. Ex iis etiam oleum conficitur jucundi odoris, quo ad
illinendas manicas utuntur. Lugd.

Ceratia v. Siliqua.

Cerrus minore glande Ger. Haliphlaeos, sive Cerrus foemina minore glande Park.
Quercus Burgundica calyce hispido J. B. VI, sive calyce hispido, glande minore
C. B. In Etruria ad lacum Volsiniensem. Vidimus Venetiis Cer^i glandium calyces
maximos, quos Vallonia ibi appellant, ad Apollonia Dalmatiae urbe vulgo nunc
Vallonia dicta unde adferuntur. His coriarii utuntur ad coria sua densanda. J.
Bauhinus horum usum esse ad in^iciendos atro color pannos Gallarum vice
scribit.

Chamaebalanus leguminosa J. B. Lathyrus arvensis repens tuberosus C. B.
Lathyrus arvensis, sive Terrae glandes Park. Terrae glandes Dod. Lob. Ger. In
arvis juxta Genevam and alibi.

N. 1. Hujus radices tuberosae sapore sunt subdulci Glandis aut Castaneae,
astringente, slatulentum, suavem tamen succum creant: Sanguinis, uteri, renum,
ventris fluores compescunt. Lob.

2. Ex hujus floribus aquam distillant quidam, qui ita rosaceam ementitur, ut
pro illa nonnunquam vendi solet. Came.

Chamaebuxus flore Coluteae v. Anonymus flore Coluteae.

Chamaecyparissus v. Abrotanum foemina.

Chamaecistus v. Helianthemum.

Chamaecerasus Alpina v. Periclymenum.

Chamaedrys major Park. major latifolia Ger. major repens C. B. Itinere a
Vienna ad Venetias.

Chamaedrys vulgaris Park. minor Ger. minor repens C. B. Chamaedrys vulgo vera
existimata J. B. In Italia and Gallia frequens.

Chamaedrys laciniatis foliis Park. Lob. ob. Chamaepitys foemina Ger. Botrys
chamaedryoides C. B. Bot. verticillata J B. In Germaniae agris sterilioribus
itemque circa Genevam passim.

Chamaedrys falsa maxima, an Teucrium I, seu majus Pannonicum Clusio J. B.
Chamaedrys spuria major altera sive frutescens C. B. Chapter ma. sp. frutescens
Park. Teucrium majus Pannonicum Ger. emac. In sylvosis Germaniae atque etiam
circa Genevam plurimis in locis.

Chamadrys spuria montana Cisti flore Park. Chapter Alpina flore Fragariae albo J.
B. Chapter Alpina Cisti flore C. B. Teucrium Alpinum Cisti flore Ger. In montis
Jurae supremis jugis: invenimus and in Alpibus Carinthiacis. Hanc in Hybernia
invenit D. Heaton v. Cat. Ang.

Chamaedryi vulgari falsae aliquatenus affinis, and Clinopodium Alpinum Ponae
J. B. Clinopodium Alpinum Park. Teucrium Alpinum coma purpuro-caerulea C. B. In
suprema part montis Jurae, and in Alpibus Sabaudicus.

Chamaedrys sputia angustifolia J. B. spuria major angustifolia C B. Veronica
supina Ger. Teucrii facie Park. supina, facie Teucrii pratensis Lob. Circa
Genevam and in Germania in pascuis prope Rhenum frequens.

Chamaegenista v. Genistella minor.

Chamelaea tricoccos J. B. C. B. Park. Arabum tricoccos Ger. Widow-wail. Inter
Monspelium and Frontignanam in collibus saxosis plurimam vidimus.

Chamelaea Germanica v. Mezereon.

Chamaemelum vulgar leucanthemum Dioscordis C. B. vulgar amarum J. B. Inter
segetes circa Genevam.

Chamamelum chrylanthemum v. Buphthalmum vulgar Ger.

Chamaemespilus Ger. v. Cotoneaster.

Chamamespilus J. B. Cotoneaster folio oblongo serrato C. B. Cotonaster Gesneri
Ger. emac. in Append. In summitate montis Jurae.

Chamaenerion Gesneri Lob. alterum angustifolium Ger. Lysimachia Chamaenerion
dicta angustifolia C. B. Lys. siliquosa angustifolia, Chamaenerion Gesnero
dicta Park. Lys. siliq. speciosa angustifolia J. B. In alveis torrentum and
fluviorum in Foro Julii Italiae and alibi variis in locis, v. g. Genevae ad
fluv. Arve and Rhodanum.

Chamaepitys moschata foliis serratis C. B. Cham. sive Iva moschata
Monspeliensium J. B. Iva moschata Monspeliaca Ger. Anthyllis altera herbariorum
Park. In saxosis collibus circa Monspelium and alibi in Gallia Narbonensi;
itemque in insula ad Promont. Pachynum.

Chamaerrhiphes Dod. Lob. Palma minor C. B. Palma humilis spinosa J. B.
Palmites sive Chamaerrhiphes Ger. Palma humilis, sive Chamaerrhiphes, vel
Palmites Park. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum Siciliae, itemque in rupibus
martimis Hetruriae.

N. 1. Species illa quam nos observavimus spinosa fuit, prout rect e eam
describit Matthiolus. diversa ergo a Palma humili Hispanica non spinosa.
Figurae a, apud Parkinsonum transpositae sunt.

2. Pars tuberosa juxta radicem, tenerrima, sapida and ori gratiss^^a
(Encephalum vocant) estur secundis mensis pro bellariis, cardui esculenti modo,
cum pipere and salis momento; adstringenti facultate pollet. Matthew. Ad Venerem
excitandam haud parum praestare creditur. E foliis Hispanicae sportulae,
tegetes and scopae fiunt.

Chamaesyce Dod. Lob. C. B. J. B. Ger. Park. In vineis and agris Italiae,
Siciliae and Galliae Narbonensis.

Chondrille vel Chondrilla caerulea J. B. Chapter caerulea sive purpurea Park.
caerulea Ger. caerulea altera Cic^orei sylv. folio C. B. In Germania superiore
inter (...) and Moguntiam secus Rhenum flumen.

Chondrilla lutea J. B. Coronopi aut Cyani facie, tenuifolia lutea vinearum
Lob. In aggeribus and vineis circa Monspelium and ad muros ipsius urbis. Ad
Sonchum laevem vulgarem proxime accedit.

Chondrilla rara purpurea, Crupina Belgarum dicta Park. rara, purpurante flore,
semine nitido deciduo Lob. Hispanica Ger. foliis laciniatis, serratis,
purpurascente flore C. B. Cyanus pulchro semine Centaurii majoris J. B. Circa
Monspelium in colle Castri novi, necnon prope Scaleam in Regno Neapolitano.

Chondrilla foliis non dissectis, caul nudo J. B. Ad radices montis Salevae,
and in arenosis ad fluv. Arve prope Genevam.

Chondrilla juncea Ger. juncea viscosa arvensis, quae prima Dioscoridis C. B.
viminea J. B. viminalibus virgis Park. In Germania, Italia and Gallia
Narbonensi, in arenosis copiose.

Chondrilla viscosa, caul foliis obducto C. B. viscosa saxatilis caul (...)
Col. In Sicilia circa Messanam, and in Gallia Narbonensi circa Monspel.

Chondrilla bulbosa, conyzae facie, foliis angustioribus C. B. Conyza marina
Lugd. J. B. In planitie quadam non long a monte Lupi. Haec planta Conyza aut
Aster rectius dicitur quam Chondrilla.

Chondrilla caerulea cyani capitulis C. B. v. Catanance.

Christophoriana Lob. Ger. vulgaris Park. Aconitum racemosum, Actaea quibusdam
J. B. Acon, ramosum, an Actaea Plinii? C. B. In sylvis montosis circa Genevam,
and in Germania ad Rhenum copiose. Nuperrime and haec quoque in Anglia sponte
orta nobis ostensa fuit.

Chrysanthemum Bellidis folio hort. Pat. latifolium J. B. Hispanicum
rotundioribus foliis Park. Bellis lutea III, sive foliis subrotundis C. B.
Inter segetes circa Liburnum portum copiose.

Chrysanthemum Creticum Ger. J. B. Park. majus, folio in minores lacinias
diviso C. B. In vineis and hortis oleraceis circa Messanam and alibi.

Chrysanthemum Valentinum Clus. v. Buphthalmum Cotulae folio.

Chrysocome v. Stoechas citrina.

Chrysocome capitulis conglobatis Ger. Helichrysum IX, sive sylvestre
angustifolium capitulis conglobatis C. B. Stoechas citrina altera odora Park.
Stoechadi citrinae alteri inodorae Lobelii affinis capitulis brevioribus J. B.
In muris and rupibus circa Messanam in Sicilia, Tolonam in Gallo-provincia, etc.

Cicer sylvestre Matthew. Ger. sylv. multisolium J. B. sylv. foliis oblongis
hispidis majus C. B. sylv. majus Park. Inter segetes non long ab oppido Jay
Genevam versus. Haec planta (me judice) ad Glycyrrhizam sylv. propius accedit
quam ad Cicer.

Cicer sativum Ger. C. B. arietinum J. B. sativum, sive arietinum rubrum,
nigrum vel album Park. Cicera in Italia, Sicilia and Melita in agris seruntur,
ubi Rustici ea cruda comedunt, viridia scilicet and adhuc immatura.

N. Quod cicera urinam and menses cieant, calculos pellant, ad Venerem
stimulent, status gignant, fere omnes tum Veteres, tum Recentiores consentiunt.
Extrinsecus adhibetur farina in cataplasmatis.

Cichorium spinosum Ger. J. B. C. B. spinosum Creticum Park. In insula saepius
memorata ad Promont. Pachynum in Sicilia.

Cichorium pratense vesicarium Park. Col. prat. hirsutum vesicarium C. B. In
sepibus and agrorum marginibus a Liburno portu non long.

Cichorium verrucarium sive Zacintha Ger. Park. verrucosum, sive Zacyntha
hieraciis adnumerandum J. B. Chondrilla verrucaria foliis intybaceis viridibus
C. B. Ad ostia Tybridis copiose: itemque circa Liburnum portum, and Florentiam.

Cicutaria latifolia hirsuta J. B. palustris alba Park. palustris latifolia
alba C. B. palustris latifolia rubra ejusdem ab hac forte non differt specie.
In pascuis montosis Jurae and Salevae montium prope Genevem, praecipue ad
rivulos.

Cinara sylvestris Ger. sylv. latifolia C. B. Scolymus Dioscoridis Park.
Carduus Scolymus sylvestris J. B. Wild Artichoke. In Sicilia and Italia, necnon
Gallia Narbonensi; ubi floribus ejus coaguli vice ad lac condensandum utuntur.

N. 1. Apponuntur capita [sativae] aqua decocta; eorumque pulpa estur cum
butyro and pipere; nec tantum capita nondum florescentia, sed and caules
teneriores elixatos and cum butyro conditos comedunt Germani and Galli. Itali
raro decoquunt, sed cruda cum sale, oleo and pipere vorant. Venerem in utroque
sexu irritant, ut quod maxim; unde nil mirum si in tanto pretio sint, ut sine
cibo hoc, nisi tempus anni neget, vix ulla opipara sit aut adjicialis caena.
Scolymus quoque urinam ciere praecipue traditur. J. B. Plin.

2. Cinarae [sativae] folia in liquore posseti [e lacte and vino albo] decocta
ad icterum inprimis commendantur, ut medicamentum nulli secundum.

Circaea Lutetiana minor Park. minima Col. Solanifolia Circaea Alpina C. B. In
sylvis montosis max, Carthusianorum coenobio vicinis.

Cirsium v. Carduus Cirsium dictus J. B.

Cirsium foliis non hirsuits, floribus compactis C. B. montanum capitulis
compactis Park. Carduus Cirsium Monspelianum, folio glabro longo Matthioli J.
B. Ad Ladum amnem and alibi prope Monspelium.

Cirsium foliis non laciniatis virore Brassicae J. B. Hujus iconi valde simile
fuit quod invenimus prope Plombinum in Etruria.

Cistus annuus 2 Clusii Ger. annuus flore guttato Park. flore pallido,
puricante macula insignito C. B. annuus 2 Clusio, flore pallido, punicante
macula insignito J. B. Ad radices Vesuvii montis, ubi tamen maculam non habet.
Vide Columnam. Suspicatur. J. Bauhinus plantam hanc eandem esse Cisto annuo
flore guttato Ponae and Tuberariae Myconi; nec sine ratione.

Cistus foemina Ger. foem. Monspeliaca J. B. foem. vulgaris Park. foem. folio
Salviae C. B. Per Siciliam, Italiam and Galliam Narbonensem in sterilioribus
and saxosis collibus and sylvis. Duplex habetur, elatior and humilior, ut recte
notat. C. Bauhinus.

Cistus ladanifera Monspeliensium C. B. ladanifera, sive Ledum Monspeliacum
angusto folio nigricans J. B. Cistus ledon 5 Clusii Ger. An Cistus Ledon IX, i.
e. foliis Oleae sed angustioribus C. B.? In iisdem cum priore locis, and multo
etiam copiosior.

Cistus mas folio oblongo incano C. B. mas 4, folio oblongo albido J. B. mas
cum Hypocistide Ger. mas vulgaris Park. Cum prioribus. Cum Clusius in Hispania
tot Cisti species invenerit, mirum nos neque in Italia, neque in Sicilia, neque
in Gallia Narbonensi, alias observasse species quam tres proxime scriptas.

N. 1. Hujus folia and tenella germina, sed praecipue flores desiccant and
astringunt strenue, unde and dysentericis and solutionibus ventris prosunt, and
ulcera sanant.

2. Cisti radicibus adnascitur Hypocistis dicta, quemadmodum Rapum Genistae;
Haec magis adstrictoria est quam Cisti folia; unde ad omnes fluxiones,
haemorrhagiam; profluvia muliebria, coeliacos, dysentericosque affectus
prodest. Succus ejus in usu est. Caeterum Hypocistin, qua passim utuntur
Officinae, ex Hirci barbae radicibus impostores conficiunt, succum inde
exprimentes, ac ut concrescat insola^tes. Errandi causam dederunt. Arabes, quod
Cistum Hirci barbulam appellent. J. B.

3. E foliis Cisti (Ledon appellati) exudat liquor quidam, Ladanum dictus, in
massas graves ex purpura fuscas coactus, odore valido sed suavi, inflammabilis,
accensaque gratum odorem halans. Tradit Dioscorides succum hunc hircorum barbis
dum fruticem depascuntur adhaerescere, indeque depecti. Quidam etiam (inquit)
funiculos per frutices trahunt, and adhaerentem ipsis pinguedinem ita derasam
efformant. Bellonius hujus colligendi rationem, quam ipse in Creta observavit,
ita describit, Graeci (inquit) colligendo Ladano peculiare instrumentum parant
rastro dentium experti simile, Ergastiri illis dictum. Huic affixae sunt multae
ligulae sive zonae e corio rudi nec praeparato confectae, eas leniter affricant
ladaniferis fruticibus, ut inhaereat liquidus ille humor circa folia concretus,
quid deinde a ligulis per summos ardores solis cultris est abradendus.

3. Ladanum emollit, digerit, maturat, attenuat, aperit, orificia venarum
reserat, inspissat. Usus praecip. in capite humido ac catarrhoso, in
dysenteria, etc. Extrinsecus ejus usus est in emplastris emollientibus,
anodynis, tussim sedantibus, in Alopecia (inunge vel coque in vino and lava) in
odontalgia, and cardialgia doloreque ventriculi (cum modico Bdellii pilulas
faciunt dandas number. 1. and 2. hora 1. ante pastum. Crato.) in suffocatione
uteri (introrsum adhibitum) cicatrices curat. Schrod.

Clematis sive Flammula surrecta alba J. B. Clematitis VI, sive Flammula recta
C. B. Flammula Jovis surrecta Ger. Park. In sepibus ad montes prope Ratisbonam
in Germania.

Clematis sive Flammula repens C. B. Clem. sive Flammula scandens, tenuisolia
alba J. B. Clem. urens Ger. urens flore albo Park. Circa Monspelium in collibus
saxosis.

N. Hujus folia facultatis sunt acris and adurentis, imposita cutem exulcerant:
intra corpus vix tuto assumuntur.

Clematis Daphnoides major C. B. ma. flore caeruleo and albo J. B. Daphnoides
sive Pervinca major Ger. Clematis Daphn, latifolia, sive Vinca Pervinca major
Park. Circa Monspelium variis in locis. Vires Clematidis vide in Cat. Ang.

Clinopodinm v. Acinos. Alpinum v. Chamaedryi vulgari, etc.

Cneorum Matthew. v. Thymelaea minor Cordi.

Cnicus sativus sive Carthamum Officinarum C. B. Cnicus sive Carthamus sativus
Park. Carthamus sive Cnicus J. B. Ger. Bastard Saffron. Ab hortulanis
Argentinensibus and Spirensibus quotannis inter aestivas fruges seritur.

N. 1. Flosculis tusis condimenti vice utuntur nec male, cibos namque croceo
color commendant, and alvum emolliunt: dicuntur and ictero mederi.

2. Praecipuus florum usus est ad sericum aliosque pannos tingendos, [colore
incarnato] quin and eorum admixtione Crocum adulterant.

3. Medulla seminis pituitam viscosam ac aquas vomitu and dejectione purgat:
pectori maxim confert, mire flatus discutit, proinde colicis and anasarcae
conducit. Ventriculo adversatur, ideoque corrigitur stomachicis, anis. galang.
zinzib. etc. Dosis in infuso a iij. ad vj.

4. Ex semine facta compositio diacarthami insigniter confert hydropicis.

4. Seminis succus lac cogere dicitur, and magis ipsum resolvendae alvi
facultate donare.

Coccygria aut Coggygria v. Cotinus.

Colus Jovis v. Horminum luteum.

Colutea Ger. vesicaria C. B. J. B. vesicaria vulgaris Park. In Italia multis
in locis reperitur, and speciatim in ascensu montis Vesuvii plurima, ubi nullae
fere aliae plantae. Habetur etiam circa Monspelium.

Colutea scorpiodies Ger. J. B. Scorp. major Park. siliquosa sive scorpioides
major C. B. In collibus circa Genevam, Monspelium and Salernum.

Colutea minima sive Coronilla Ger. Coluteae* parva species, Polygala Valentina
Clusii J. B. Polygala Valentina Clusii Park. Polygala altera C. B. In clivis
maritimis prope Salernum, atque etiam in Hetruria.

Colutea caul Genistae sungoso J. B. qui titulus optime respondet huic
nostrae. Polygala I, seu major Massiliotica C. B. Polygala Valentina 3 Clus.
Val. marina Clusii Park. sub quinta. In Gallo-provinciae clivis montosis prope
oppidum S. Chamas.

N. Hujus folia, sed praecipue semina, non solum purgant per inferiora, sed and
vomitiones movent, velut semina Genistae; sunt autem ventriculo and visceribus
inimica, ideoque nonnisi robustioribus exhibenda.

Consolida media Genevensis J. B. An Consolida media caerulea Alpina C. B.?
Bugula Alpina caerulea Park. Ad agrorum margines circa Genevam and Basileam
copiose.

Consolida regalis v. Delphinium.

Convolvulus Althaeae folio Park. argenteus Althaeae folio C. B. Ger. emac.
peregrinus pulcher folio Betonicae J. B. Circa Messan^m in lingula inter fretum
Siculum and portum Messanensem procurrente, inter frutices copiose.

Convolvulus caeruleus minor folio oblongo Ger. VII, sive peregrinus caeruleus
folio oblongo C. B. An minor caeruleus Hispanicus Park? In insula ad Promont.
Pachynum. Flos huic pulcher caeruleus.

Convolvulus spicae-folius Park. minimus spicae-folius Ger. Ad. Lob. Linariae
folio C. B. Volvulus terrestris J. B. In Italia, Sicilia and Narbonensi Gallia
vulgatissima.

Conyza mas Theophrasti, major Dioscoridis C. B. major verior Dioscoridis Park.
major Monspeliensis odorata J. B. odorata Ger. In Italia, Sicilia and Gallia
Narbonensi passim.

Conyza minor vera Ger. J. B. minor vera Ponae Park. foemina Theophrasti, minor
Dioscoridis C. B. Circa Monspelium and in Italia ad mare inferum.

Conyza quaedam marina. Prope Peroul non long a Monspelio.

Conyza marina J. B. v. Chondrilla.

Coris caerulea maritima C. B. caerulea Monspeliaca Ger. Monspeliensium Park.
Monspessulana purpurea J. B. In arenosis maris litoribus prope montem Ceti and
alibi.

Cornus mas Ger. sylv. mas. C. B. mas fructu rubro Park. sativa sive domestica
J. B. In sepibus Pedemontanis and Mediolanensibus.

N. Corna refrigerant, exiccant, adstringunt, constipant quomodocunque sumpta.
Hinc convenient praecipue in diarrhoea ae dysenteria: ardorem febrilem and
sitim grata sua aciditate leniunt and restinguunt.

2. Condiuntur muria ut Olivae; fit etiam ex iis sapa quemadmodum ex cerasis;
itemque e pulpa electuarium, ad febres, ad fluxiones biliosas, ad sitim, ad
excitandam appetentiam utilia. In diarrhoea and dysenteria exhibentur fructus
exiccati and pulverisati ad j.

3. Cornum arborem caveri oportet circa alvearia, nam flore ejus degustato alvo
concita moriuntur apes. Plin.

4. Hujus lignum omnibus lignis durius perhibetur, ad radios rotarum
utilissimum; quin and eundem habet effectum in demorsis a cane rabido quem
foemina Cornus.

Coronopus foliis acutis in margin dentatis. Plantagini affinis Bibinella
Siciliae herbula J B. Haec planta optime describitur a Caesalpino sub titulo
Bibinellae. Non esta. Plantago maritima nostras, nec ei multum similis, quamvis
C. Bauhinus eandem faciat. Plantago Apula bulbosa laciniata Col. i. e.
angustifolia VII, sive Plantago pilosa bulbosa C. B. Apula bulbosa Park. huic
nostrae persimilis est, and fortasse eadem, verum an bulbosam habuerit radicem
non animadvertimus. Prope Messanam in lingula quae portum efficit, and alibi in
Sicilia.

Coronopus Massiliensis Lobelii J. B. Coron. sive Serpentina minor Ger.
Holosteum VIII, sive Massiliense C. B. An VI, sive strictissimo folio majus
ejusdem? Verum quicquid de aliis sit, Planta quam volumus ipsissima est quam
Lobelius describit; namque in eodemmet loco eam invenimus Massiliae.

Coronopus maritimus Rainaudeti J. B. Coronopi and Sedi montani media planta
Massiliensium Lob. In arenosis ad mare prope Massiliam.

Corruda v. Asparagus sylvestris.

Cotonaster folio oblongo v. Chamaemespilus.

Cotoneaster Gesneri J. B. Park. Cotonaster folio rotundo non serrato and
Chamaemespilis Cordi C. B. Chamaemespilus Ger. Epimelis Lugd. In montibus prope
Genevam and Rhenum flumen.

Cotinus Matthew. Coccygria sive Cotinus putata J. B. Coggygria Theophrasti vel
Cotinus coriarius Plinii Ger. Coggigria sive Cotinus coriaria Park. Cocconilea
sive Coggygria C B. Prope pontem qua transitus est eundo a Gratianopoli a la
fontaine que brusle.

Cotyledon media foliis oblongis serratis C. B. v. Sedum.

Crithmum 4 Matthew. v. Eryngium.

Crithmum spinosum Ger. maritimum spinosum C. B. marit. spinosum sive Pastinaca
marina Park. Pastinaca marina, quibusdam Secacul, and Crithmum spinosum J. B.
In arenosis Maris Mediterranei litoribus nusquam non obvium.

Crocus vernus latifolius flore purpureo Ger. vernus minor purpurascens C. B.
vernus latifolius flore purpureo minore J. B. In agtis and pascuis Romae
vicinis, inque montosis pascuis circa Curiam Rhaetorum, necnon in summitatibus
montis Jurae.

Cruciata minima muralis Col. minima in maritimis Caes. Rubia echinata
saxatilis Park. Rubeola echinata saxatilis C. B. Rubia quadrifolia verticillato
semine J. B. In arenosis juxta mare prope Liburnum.

Cucumis asininus Ger. agrestis sive asininus Park. sylv. asininus dictus C. B.
sylv. sive asininus J. B. Cucumis Elaterii sylv. Lob. In locis ruderatis and ad
vias in Italia, Sicilia and Gallia Narbonensi frequens.

N. Hujus succus leniter expressus ac inspissatus Elaterium dicitur. Ultra 100
annos efficax manner creditur. Aliis maxim probatur quod lucernae objectum
facile flagrat; aliis quod lucernis admotum lumen extinguat. v. Park. and J. B.
Humores serosos vehementer purgat superne and inferne, menses movet, foetumque
interimit. Verum quia malignitate non caret corrigi debet Lacte, Tragacantho,
Bdellio, and corroborantibus idoneis, ut Cinnam, Spec. Diarrhod. Abbatis, etc.

Cyanus major Lob. Ger. major vulgaris Park. Alpinus radice perpetua J. B.
montanus latifolius, vel Verbasculum cyanoides C. B. Primo invenimus in
montibus juxta Spadam vicum, postea etiam in monte Jura saepius memorata.

Cyanus V, sive repens latifolius C. B. peramarus repens folio Lavendulae J. B.
repens latifolius Lobelii Park. repens latifolius Ger. Circa Monspelium
frequens. Rectius, mea sententia Jaceis annumeraretur.

Cyclaminus folio rotundiore elatior J. B. Cyclamen orbiculato folio, inferne
purpurascente C. B. orbiculato folio Ger. Autumnale vulgar folio rotundo Park.
In montibus circa Genevam Junio and Julio floret; invenimus etiam in Alpibus
Stiriacis.

N. Cyclamini hujus caput interdum in longitudinem excrescit, and in duo velut
cornua dividitur, ut nos cum J. Bauhino observavimus, cum in Alpibus Stiriacis
aliquot ejus radices erueremus. Proinde frustra multiplicat species C.
Bauhinus, cum Cyclaminum longius radicatum Gesn. and Cycl. radice instar
capitis arietini ejusdem species ab hac distinctas facit.

Cyclaminus folio anguloso J. B. hederae folio C. B. Lob! Ger. autumnale folio
hederae Park. In collibus sylvosis circa Romam abundat, mense Septembri florens.

Cyclamen vernum Lob Ger. folio anguloso C. B. In sylvis quas transivimus
itinere a Massa ad Lucam primo vere floruit.

N. Hujus radix potenter incidit, aperit, absterg. errhinum est. Usus praecip,
in obstructis mensibus, impellendo foetu mortuo, in ictero, incalculo
expellendo, strumis ac tuberculis discutiendis. Interne cauto opus est; externo
usui praestat. Adeo vehemens ejus facultas est (inquit Galenus) ut abdomine
illito ventrem subducat and foetum interimat. Icterum sanat experientia certa
prodente Mesua. Ad tinnitum aurium singular est remedium oleum, etc. v. Matthew.

Cymbalaria C. B. Italica hederacea Park. Italica Ger. flosculis
purpurascentibus J. B. Basileae in ipsius urbis muris; At in Italia nihil
frequentius.

Cyminum sylvestre alterum Dioscoridis Italorum Lob. Cuminum corniculatum, sive
Hypecoon Clusii Ger. Hypecoum C. B. Hypecoon siliquosum J. B. Hypecoon
legitimum Clusii Park. In Sicilia, lingula illa Portum Messanensem a freto
Siculo di^imente.

Cyminum sive Cuminum satinum J. B. vulgar Park. sativum Ger. semine longiore
C. B. In insula Melita seritur.

Cyminum sive Cuminum seminibus hirsutis seu villosis. In insula praedicta cum
praecedente succrescit, sed rarius. Hoc nescio an a quoquam hactenus sit
descriptum.

N. Semen resolvit ac flatus discutit, ideoque utile est in colica, tympanite
and vertigine: tussim sedare and thoracem expurgare dicitur. Utiliter pani
incoquitur, and caseis inditur, ita concoctionem juvat and flatus dissipat.

Cynoglossum minus J. B. C. B. minus flore caeruleo Park. Circa Moguntiam and
Genevam se nobis in conspectum dedit.

Cyperus longus Ger. longus odoratus Park. odoratus radice longa, sive Cyperus
Officinarum C. B. panicula sparsa speciosa J. B. In pratis circa Monspelium;
observavimus etiam in Italia and Sicilia.

N. Stomachica est ac uterina. Usus praecip. in urina ac mensibus ciendis,
cruditate ventriculi consumenda, hydrope inchoato praeservando, colica ac
vertigine discutienda; ad ulcera oris and pudendorum exiccanda and sananda
[pulvis inspersus] valere dicitur: masticata emendat oris foetorem. Cocta in
oleo, contusa and imposita renibus ac pectini, urinam proritat. Schrod.

Cytisus glaber siliqua lata J. B. Cytisus Ger. Cyt. glaber foliis subrotundis,
pediculis brevissimis C. B. Pseudocytisus foliis subrotundis Park. In civis
maritimis prope Salernum.

Cytisus incanus siliquis falcatis C. B. Cyt. Maranthae Matthiolo Lob. siliqua
incurva folio candicante J. B. 7 cornutus Ger. Cyt. Galeni creditus Maranthae,
cornutus Park. Ad Baias invenimus.

Cytisus hirsutus J. B. Hispanicus arboreus Park. incanus vel hirsuntus VI,
sive foliis subruffa lanugine hirsutis C. B. Pseudo-cytisus hirsutus Ger. Hic
in magnum fruticem adolescit, estque in Italia and Sicilia vulgatissimus.

Cytisus sylvestris Ratisponensis floribus luteis, ad exortum foliorum
prodeuntibus horti med. Altorffini. In Suevia and Bavaria prope Ratisponam. Hic
an descriptus sit, nondum scimus.

Cytisus Gesneri cui flores fere spicati J. B. glaber III, sive glaber
nigricans C. B. Cytisus Ger. Pseudo-citysus niger Park. In Austria and Stiria
itinere a Vienna ad Venetias copiosum observavimus.

Cytisus Hispanicus^Clusii, folio virescente J. B. minoribus foliis, ramulis
tenellis villosis C. B.? Dubitat J. Bauhinus an Cytisus suus montis Calcaris
sit idem huic primo Clusii necne, and an uterque sit idem Cytiso Lobelii in
Adv. descripto, quem via a Roma ad Florentiam in planitie prope Aquas pendulas
invenit, ubi and nos hunc nostrum. Cortex ei glabra and candicaus.

D
DAmasonium v. ^elleborine.

Daucus Creticus semine hirsuto J. B. Alpinus, Cretico similis Park. Alpinus
multisido longoque folio, sive montanus umbella candida C. B. In summitate
montis Jurae.

Daucus 3 Dioscoridis Col. Apium IX, sive peregrinum foliis subrotundis C. B.
Visnaga minor quorundam, Selinum peregrinum Clusio, semine hirsuto J. B.
Selinum sive Apium peregrinum Clusii Park. In sepibus circa Messanam Siciliae
urbem.

Daucus glauco folio, similis Foeniculo tortuoso J. B. In collibus inter vepres
juxta Castelneuf, Monspelio non long.

Daucus montanus Apii folio, flore luteo C. B. Park. In montosis prope
Ratisponam promo, deinde etiam circa Genevam in monte Jura. Hujus foliorum
divisura accedit ad Pimpinellam saxifragam minorem; eique satis apt congruit
icon Park. and C. B. Aliquando existimavi hanc suisse Umbelliferam Alsaticam
magnam, umbella parva lutea J. B.

Daucus selinoides v. Saxifraga Venetorum.

Delphinium simplici flore purpuro-caeruleo vulgar J. B. Consolida regalis
arvensis C. B. regalis sylvestris Ger. Delphinium sive Consolida regalis
sylvestris Park. In Germania, Italia and Gallia Narbonensi inter segetes.

Delphinium flore caeruleo minore, folio lato. Flos Capuccio 2 Caes. Consolida
regalis latifolia parvo flore C. B. reg. peregrina, parvo flore J. B. In insula
Melita circa urbem novam in ruderibus and muris. Vidimus etiam in Sicilia and
Italia.

N. Visum acuit and roborat tum succus florum expressus, tum eorundem aqua
destillata; imo vel continuus intuitus. In potionibus vulnerariis utile esse
perhibetur, consolidat enim and glutinat, unde and Consolidae nomen indeptum
est. Et ut nihil omittam, tradit Jo. Bauhinus* Herbam in pulverem redactam cum
ejusdem aqua stillatitia potam venenis adversari, cardialgiae confer, calorem
praeter naturam extinguere, bilem reprimere, necnon tussim and stillicidium
Conserva florum commendatur ad tormina ventris infantum, and ad ardorem
stomachi. Schrod. qui Calcatrippam appellat.

Dens caninus flore albo Ger. canis latiore rotundioreque folio C. B. In
Liguriae montibus eundo a Nova oppido ad Genuam.

Dens caninus flore purpureo Ger. Erythronium flore purpureo Lob. Satyrium
quorundam Erythronium bifolium, flore unico radiato albo and purpureo J. B.
Prope Augustam Taurinorum ad latera montis quem ascendimus eundo inde ad Astam,
Hae duae plantae mihi non aliter differ visae sunt quaam solo floris color.

N. Ventris tineas necare; coli dolores mitigare; vires reficere and nutrire;
Venerem excitare; ex aqua pueros Epilepticos juvare dicitur. J. B. e Clusio and
Lob.

Dens leonis bulbosus Ger. D. l. III, sive Asphodeli bulbulis C. B. D. l.
Monspeliensium, siv^ Asphodeli bulbulis Park. Circa Sellam novam vicum
Monspelio vicinum.

Dentaria aphyllos purpurea cespite denso. Ex singulis squamis singulos promit
flores, pediculis semuncialibus insidentes, e calyce amplo in quinque lacinias
diviso, galeatos, magnos, purpurascehtes cum staminulis intus plutimis. Calyx
striatus, turgidulus, In Italia eundo a Lericio ad Lucam in umbrosis vidimus

Dentaria heptaphyllos C. B. Park. heptaphyllos Clusii Ger. Coralloides altera
sive septifolia J. B. In Jura and Saleva montibus copiose.

Dentaria pentaphyllos C. B. Park. pentaphyllos Clusii Ger. quinquefolia J. B.
In sylvosis jugis montis Jurae copiose.

Dentellaria Rondeletii v. Plumbago.

Dictamnus albus Officinarum v. Fraxinella.

Digitalis lutea magno flore C. B. lutea folio latiore, flore majore J. B.
amplo flore Park. In montibus circa Genevam and in Germania.

Digitalis lutea Ger. lutea vel pallida parvo flore C. B. flore minore
subluteo, angustiore folio J. B. Cum priore, itemque circa Salernum and
Neapolin in Italia.

Diospyros J. B. Alni effigy lanato folio minor C B. Vitis Idaea tertia Clusii
Park. Vaccinia alba Ger. Amelanchier Lob. In montibus circa Genevam, and in
lateribus montium Rheno imminentium.

Doronicum vulgar J. B. Park. majus Officinarum Ger. Romanum Lugd. radice
Scorpii C. B. In montibus prope Genevam copiose: ast radix nihil habet cum
Scorpio similitudinis.

N. Disputatur inter Botanicos, an Doronicum sit venenatum necne: Matthiolus
illud affirmat, and experimento caniculae, quam 4 drachmis radicis
strangulavit, probat. Huic contradicit Lobelius, and more suo in Matthiolum
acriter invehitur: nec refert (inquit) quod caniculis perniciosum sit, cum non
pauca reperiantur aliis animantibus noxia and lethifera, quae homini non modo
innocua sed and salutaria sunt. Nam experimento certum habemus, Aloe
saluberrima interfici vulpes, and ex Plutarcho easdem enectas Amygdalis amaris
discimus, etc. Verum ego mallem suffragari Matthiolo, quam in humano corpore
experiri quod canibus aliisve quadrupedibus perniciosum comperi. Gesnerus ut
manifest redargueret Matthiolum, scribit se ij. radicis hujus sumpsisse, and
per 8 quidem horas been habuisse; verum its elapsis ventrem ac stomachum
inslari sensisse, and circa os ventriculi imbecillitatem quandam, and corpus
totum infirmius, ita fere ut alias semel ac iterum ex nimio frigidae potu
perceperat. Quae symptomata cum biduo durarent, nec videbantur sponte cessatura
ingressum fuisse aquae calidae solium and curatum fuisse. Costaeus scribit
Gesnerum esu radicis Doronici obiisse. C. Hoffm. De Medicam. Officin.

Dorycnium Monspessulanum fruticosum J. B. supposititium Monspeliense and
Hispanicum Park. Hispanicum Ger. Trifolium album angustifolium, floribus velut
in capitulum congestis C. B. In saxosis collibus and ad sepes prope Monspelium.

Doryenio congener planta J. B. Doryenio congener Clusii Park. Lotus
pentaphyllos incanus C. B. In palustribus prope mare non long a Monspelio. In
Germania ad ^ Lycum prope Augustam.

Draba alba siliquosa repens C. B. Park. Hesperis Alpina seu muralis minor
repens J. B. Draba altera repens Ger. emac. In montibus Jura and Sal^v^,
praesertim locis humidis ad aquarum scaturigines.

Draba vulgaris Park. Dioscoridis Ger. multis flore albo J. B. Draba umbellata,
vel Draba major capitulis do^ata C. B. Intra muros Antverpiae. Quin and in
Germania, Italia, Gallia non infrequens.

Draba lutea Park. lutea quibusdam J. B. lutea siliquis strictissimis C. B. 4
Ger. In Italia aliquoties vidimus viis humidis ad sepes. In Germania prope
Weissenbergh.

Draba siliquosa Lys^machiae facie, an Myagri species? In alveo torrentis
cujusdam prope Florentiam Etruriae urbem.

Dracunculus aquaticus Ger. J. B. noster aquaticus Park. palustris, sive radice
arundinacea Plinii C. B. In Hollandiae fossis prope Sevenhuys.

E
EChinopus v. Carduus Sphaerocephalus.

Echium Alpinum luteum C. B. Alopecuros Alpinus quibusdam, Echium montanum
Dalechampii J. B. Trachelium spicatum tenuifolium Park. In altissimis jugis
montis Jurae.

Echium majus and asperius flore albo C. B. flore albo majus J. B. In agro
Salernitano and Romano, inque Etruria and Gallia Narbonensi. Hae revera tota
specie distincta est a vulgari Echio, and non floris color tantum.

Echium Candiae, flore pulchre rubente J. B. Creticum latifolium rubrum C. B.
Park. Flos plantae quam intelligimus dilutee rubet. In Galliae Narbonensis
locis plurimis copiose, circa Monspelium tamen rarius occurrit.

Echium procumbens flore parvo caeruleo, In Sicilia circa Messanam.

Elatine folio acuminato, flore caeruleo C. B. flore caeruleo, folioque
acuminato Park. In Sicilia circa Messanam, itemque in Italia and Gallia
Narbonensi inter segetes. Non alia re differt a vulgari quam floris color.

Epimedium Lob. Ger. C. B. Park. etc. quorundam J. B. In Alpibus non long a
Pontieba, qua ad Viennam Austriae Inde iter est.

Erica arboresceus, floribus luteolis vel herbaceis minimis J. B. major
scopatia, foliis deciduis C. B. Scoparia Park. In luco Gramuntio prope
Monspelium, and in ericetis prope Liburnum.

Erica arborescens Monspeliensis flore purpurascente, ramulis ternis J. B. An
Erica ramulis per intervalla ternis Ger. C. B.? Er. coris folio 5 Clusii Park.
Maxima haec est ex omnibus quas hactenus vidimus Ericis. In itinere a Nova ad
Genuam observavimus quae humanam altitudinem long superaret, jam tum Aprilis
initio florere incipientem. Flosculi diluta purpura obiter tinguntur. In sylva
Gram. tantam altitudinem non assequitur.

Erica folio Corios multiflora J. B. maxima purpurascens longioribus foliis C.
B. Juniperifolia dense fruticans Narbonensis Lob. Ericae Corios folio secundae
species altera Clus. Coris folio maxima purpurascens Park. Circa Pedenatium qua
inde Monspelium itur copiose: itemque eundo a Monspelio ad oppidulum S. Lupian
secus vias. Serius and sub finem aestatis, inque multum Autumnum floret. Hanc
speciem non ita pridem invenimus in Cornubia Angliae, v. Cat. Ang.

^Erica Pannonica 4 Clus. parva Pannonica, foliis Corios ternis, flore carneo,
capitulis Thymi J. B. procumbens, ternis foliolis carnea C. B. Er. coris folio
9 Clusii Ger. emac. supina carnea Park. In rupibus eundo a Tridento ad Bolzanum
mense Februario florentem copiosam invenimus.

Erica procumbens herbacea C. B. supina herbacea Park. parva foliis corios
quaternis, flore herbaceo, foliaceis capitulis J. B. In sylvis montosis non
long a Lindavia Germaniae urbe ad lacum Acronium sita, sub finem mensis
Augusti jam tum florere incipientem observavimus. Primae speciei similis est
sed minor.

Erinus Caes. and Col. v. Alsine oblongo serrato folio.

Eruca echinata siliqua C. B. Monspeliaca siliqua quadrangula Park. Sinapi
echinatum J. B. Lugd. Inter segetes non long a Luca, secus viam quae inde ad
Pisas ducit.

Ervilia v. Ochrus.

Eryngium luteum Monspeliense, v. Carduus Chrysanthemus.

Eryngium arvense foliis serrae similibus, C. B. montanum Ger. Crithmum 4
Matthioli umbelliferum J. B. Inter segetes in Germania circa Rhenum frequens.
Hoc Park. cum Sphondylio inepte confundit.

Eryngium caeruleum J. B. montanum Amethystinum C. B. In montibus Stiriae. Solo
summitatum color a vulgari campestri differ videtur.

Erysimum Matthioli alterum Lob. alterum Italicum G^r. verum sive montanum
Park. alterum Matthioli, siliquis parvis, quibusdam Dentaria J. B. Erys.
polyceration sive corniculatum C B. In ipso maris litore ad Rhegium Calabriae
urbem.

Esula v. Tithymalus.

Euphrasia pratensis, lutea C. B. prat, major lutea Park. Coris Monspessulana
lutea J. B. Sideritis pratensis lutea Lugd. Primo came invenimus in Germania non
procul Altdorffio Norimbergensium Academia, deinde in Etruria tandem in
Narbonensi Gallia. Serius post mediam aestatem floret.

F
FAba veterum serratis foliis Park. Ger. in App. Aracus fabaceus serratus J. B.
Inter frutices circa Baias.

Ferrum equinum Lob. Ger. equinum majus Park. Solea equina J. B. Ferrum equinum
siliqua singulari C. B. Circa Liburnum, Neapolin and alibi in Italia.

Ferrum equinum Gallicum Park. Gallicum siliquis in summitate C. B. Polygalon
Cortusi J. B. Ad latera montis Salevae prope Genevam, and in Delphinatu circa
Gratianopolin.

Ferula Lob. Ger. foemina Plinii C. E. tenuiore folio Park. folio Foeniculi,
femine latiore and rotundiore J. B. In montibus Messanae imminentibus copiose,
and alibi in Sicilia and Italia: plurima quinetiam and procera in Narbonensi
Gallia, praesertim illis rupibus praeruptisque saxis prope subterraneas
cryptas, via qua Monspelio Frontignanam itur ad dextram, Lobelio olim, nobis
nuperrime observata.

N. 1. Medulla hujus caulium fungos^ pro fomite ad ignem concipiendum nonnullos
in Sicilia usos observavimus, cum in insula illa peregrinaremur; unde
intelligitur cur Poetae sinxerint Prometheum ignem coelestem cava ferula
exceptum deportasse in terram. (...). Hesiod.

2. Hujus viridis medulla pota sanguinem spuentibus and coeliacis prodest,
sanguinis eruptiones sistit: Semen potum torminibus auxiliatur. Diosc.

3. Hujus succus inspissatus seu Gummi Galbanum dicitur: cujus usus intrinsecus
est in mensibus ae partu pellendis; in tussi inveterata ac asthmate; Adversatur
toxicis. Extrinsecus prodest in partu ac mensibus, suffocatione uteri,
vertigine; in furunculis and lentiginibus. Schrod.

4. E ferulis prima tantum germinatione corculum quoddam pastores eximunt, ovi
luteum induratum referens, quod sub cineribus assatum, prius tamen charta aut
linteo madefactis involutum, mox pipere and sale conspersum, non modo gustui
gratissimus est cibus, sed etiam ad excitandam Venerem valentissimus.

Ficus J. B. Ger. vulgaris Park. communis C. B. The common Fig Tree. In Italia
and Gallia Narbon^nsi frequentissima, non tamen sponte.

Ficus sylvestris Dioscoridi C. B Caprificus Ger. J. B. Park. The wild
Fig Tree. In Italia and Gallia Narbonensi passim provenit.

N. 1. Veteres in descriptione virium hujus arboris admodum sunt prolixi,
videsis Plinium and Dioscoridem. Caricae calefac. and humectant, pulmonariae
sunt and bechiae, arenulis renum and vesicae medentur, venenis resistunt:
praecipui usus sunt in variolis and morbillis ad cutem pellendis; maturant,
molliunt, attrahunt, unde and bubonibus pestilentialibus (innuente S.
Scriptura) conferunt. Mulierculis nostratibus, appropinquante partu, ficuum
tostarum esus ad partum facilitandum est familiarissimus. Quin and familiare
est super ficus spiritum vini accendere, brodiumque ad tussim sedandam
propinare. Schrod.

2. Ficuum frequentem esum pediculos generare praeter Galenum Paulus Aegineta,
Oribasius and recentiorum quamplurimi sibi persuasum habent: quae opinio and
apud vulgus nostratium viget. Cujus rei causam tum demum inquiremus cum de
experimento nobis constiterit^.

3. Ficus recentes modo maturae sint a ventriculo ocyssime and facillime
consiciuntur, imo quovis alio fructu horario celerius coquuntur. Quod vel inde
constat, quod non solum citra noxam copiosius aliis fructibus eas ingerimus,
sed etiam illis praesumptis, si consuetum and parem cibi modum addamus id nihil
incommodat. J. B. Nos certe in Italia ante prandium ficus saepenumero sine ullo
incommodo copiose ingessimus. Galenus, ut salubrem vitam degeret ab omni sugaci
pomo abstinuisse se tradit a 28. anno aetat. ad senectutem usque, exceptis
exact maturis ficubus atque uvis: Quin and amicos qui ejus monitu ab (...)
fructibus abstinuerunt sine morbis fuisse. J. B.

4. Quae de caprificatione Veteres tradunt sic brevibus complexus est J.
Bauhinus, E putrescente Caprifici fructu culices geniti, in urbanae fructus
evolant, eosque morsu aperientes superfluam humiditatem depascuntur, radiosque
una solares intromittunt, adeoque eorundem concoctionem and maturitatem
promovent and accelerant.

5. Literae quae succo seu lacte turionum hujus arboris in charta exarantur
omnino inconspicuae sunt, donec charta igni admota vehementer calefiat; quod
etiam aceto, succo limonum alissque pluribus commune est. Acris est and
causticus hic succus, lac coagulat, etc.

6. Ficus a plerisque botanicis flore carere traditur. Verum (inquit J.
Bauhinus) Fructus cum ad mediam magnitudinem pervenerit, flores intra se
concipit, sigura consertis staminibus similes; color in candido
purpurascentes, undique e carne exeuntes, atque ad mediam fructus cavitatem se
dirigentes: quod Cordus primum observavit.

Filix saxatilis non ramosa minima, an Dryopteris Dalechampii J. B.? An
Dryopteris sive Filix querna repens Adv.? In rupibus squalidis montium Jurae
and Salevae.

Flos Adonis flore rubro Ger. Adoris vulgo, aliis Eranthemum J. B. Adonis
sylvest^is, flore phoeniceo ejusque foliis long^oribus C. B. Circa Liburnum
inter segetes.

Filix saxatilis corniculata v. Adi^nthum.

Flammula Jovis v. Clematis.

Foeniculum tortuosum J. B. Seseli Massiiense Foeniculi folio quod Dioscoridi
censetur C. B. Park. In Sicilia circa Messanam primo, postea circa Monspeliam
copios^limum vidimus, Scrius floret.

Foenum Burgundicum v. Medica.

Fraxinella Ger. Park. Cordi and Officinarum Lob. Dictamnus albus vulgo, sive
Fraxinella C. B. Fraxinella, Officinis Dictamnus J B. In praeruptis montium
Rheno vicinorum non semel vidimus.

N. 1. Radix cordialis est alexipharmaca, uterina, cephalica. Vermes necat,
menses and urinas movet, secundas and foetum mortuum educit, valet ad alvi
torsiones and ejiciendos renum calculos in vino pota. Usus praecip. in peste
and morbis malignis, in Epilepsia, aliisque affectibus capitis.

2. Siliquae and flores contactu pruritum faciunt, and in calidioribus
regionibus cutem exulcerant.

Frumentum Indicum v. Maiz.

Fucus marinis rotundifolius C. B. v. Opuntia marina.

Fumaria bulbosa flore albo C. B. bulbosa, radice cava, flore albo J. B. Radix
cava major alba Ger. Ubique fere ad sepes, inque scrobibus umbroiisque sepibus
Alpium Helveticarum.

Fumaria bulbosa flore purpureo C. B. radice cava, flore purpureo J. B. Radix
cava major purpurea Ger. Cum priore sed magis frequens, nec aliter ab ea
differ videtur quam solo floris color. Invenimus hanc in agro Mediolanensi,
cum vere primo Mediolano Taurinum iter faceremus.

Fungus auricularis Caesalpini v. Alcyonium.

G.
GAleopsis sive Urtica iners flore purpurascente majore, folio non maculato J.
B. Synonyma quaere apud J. Bauhinum. Autores nostri hanc speciem confundunt cum
Lamio purpureo, folio and flore minore, quod solum in Anglia sponte provenit.
Suspicatur Parkinsonus Lamium purpureum minus incognitum fuisse Caesalpino,
Matthiolo and antiquioribus Botanicis, quoniam Lobelius and Dodonaeus primi
veram ejus iconem ediderunt, and proinde Angliae peculiare and exteris
regionibus minus notum conjectatur. At vero utrumque Lamium purpureum
regionibus transmarinis frequens and ubique fere obvium. Speciem majorem in
Anglia nondum spontaneam vidi.

Galeopsis maculata J. B. Lamium alba linea notatum C B. Lam. Plinii montanum
Columnae Park. Milzadella vulgo, Leucas Dioscoridis forte Caes. In Italia and
Gallia Narbonensi frequens occurrit. Nescio an alia re quaquam a minore
purpureo differat quam albo hoc ductu in foliis mediis.

Galega Lob. Ger. J. B. vulgaris C. B. Park. Ruta capraria Gesn. In Italia
nusquam non obvia.

N. 1. Celeberrimum est alexipharmacum ac sudoriferum, venenum inprimis
pestilentiale insigniter discutiens. Usus ejus praecipue in petechiis
expellendis, aliisque morbis pestilentialibus, ipsaque peste curanda; in
morbillis; in Epilepsia infantum (exhibetur succi cochlear. 1.) in ictibus
serpentum; in lumbricis, quos etiam extrinsecus applicata fugat. Estur a. herba
ipsa cruda vel cocta, ad hos usus.

2. Foliorum succus vel etiam folia ipsa tusa and impoposita tumoribus apum aut
vesparum ictibus excitatis, dolorem statim mitigant and tumores discutiunt.

Gallium rubrum Ger. C. B. flore rubro Park. flore rubro Sprengerianum J. B. In
Alpibus dum Vienna Austriae Venetias iter faceremus saepius in conspectum se
dedit.

Gallium flore albo majus v. Mollugo montana.

Genista Hispanica Ger. juncea J. B. Spartum Hispanicum frutex vulgar Park.
Spartum arborescens seminibus Lenti similibus C B. In Italia, Sicilia and
Gallia Narbonensi vulgatissima.

Genista argentea J. B. In planitie non long ab oppido S. Lupiani quam
transimus eundo a Monspelio ad montem Lupi.

Genistella aculeata Ger. Park. aculeata foliosa J. B. spinosa minor Germanica
C. B. In Germania passim. Haec omnino specie differt a Genistella spinosa
nostrate vulgo dicta, ut in Cat. Ang. monuimus.

Genistella montana Germanica Park. lagopodoides major Ger. herbacea, sive
Chamaespartium J B. Chamaegenista sagittalis C. B. In pascuis Germaniae
sterilioribus abunde provenit, itemque circa Genevam.

Genistella tinctoria Hispanica J. B. infectoria Ger. Genista tinctoria
Hispanica Park. Genista tinctoria frutesce^s foliis incanis C. B. In montibus
sylvosis supra Neapolin versus Camaldulensium coenobium.

Gentiana major Ger. major lutea C. B. Park. vulgaris major Hellebori albi
folio J. B. Great Gentian or Fellwort. In montibus circa Genevam copiose.

N. 1. Alexipharmaca est [Radix] aperit, attenuat. Usus praecip. in peste
aliisque venenatis affectibus, in obstructione epatis and lienis, etc. and hinc
in hydrope, tum in suffocatione uteri, in imbecillitate ventriculi, lumbricis,
febribus intermittentibus, morsu eanis rabidi, etc. Extrinsecus adhibetur
creberrime in vulneribus ac fonticulis mundificandis, in morsu canis rabidi
arcendo (cum theriaca imposita) Schrod.

2. Succus inspissatus creberrimi est usus in febribus intermittentibus in
quibus ante paroxysmum a ss. ad j. yel iv. exhibetur felici cum successu.
Schord. Matthew. Aqua destillata maculas cutis deterget. Est a. Gentiana amara
admodum, indeque putredinis hostis infensissimus and veneni mors (ut inquit
Lobelius.)

3. Hepaticis and stomachicis qui cibum sumptum retinere non valent, Gentianae
radicis pulvis e vino exhiberi debet; quod qui fecerit auxilium praeseus
sentiet. Trag.

Gentiana Asclepiadis folio C B. Park. major 2 caeruleo flore Clusii Ger. folio
Asclepiadis vulgo creditae J. B. In montosis prope Lindaviam and alibi in
Germania.

Gentiana cruciata C. B. Park. minor cruciata Ger. minor seu vulgi cruciata J.
B. In Germaniae pascuis montosis passim. Habetur etiam satis frequens in Gallia
and Italia.

Gentianella verna major Ger. Alpina verna major Park. Alp. magno flore J. B.
Alp. angustifolia magno flore C. B. In altissimis verticibus montis Jurae.

Gentianula quae Hippion J. B. Gentianella Alpina verna major C. B. Alpina
verna Ger. minor verna Park. In montibus Genevae vicinis.

Gentianula lanugine ad singulorum foliorum floris lacinias donata, flore
quadripartito J. B. Gentiana angustifolia Autumnalis major, itemque minor
floribus ad latera pilosis C. B. Gentianella Autumnalis simbriato flore Park.
Itinere ab Augusta ad Norimbergam.

Gentianella Autumnalis minima calyce turgido pentagono. In planitie ad fluvium
Lycum non procul Augusta Vindelicorum copiose, exeunte Augusto florens.

Gentianella omnium minima v. Muscus Alpinus.

Geranium Althaeae folio C. B. Althaeodes majus Park. malacoides Ger. malvaceum
J. B. Circa Genuam in stalia, Monspelium and alibi in Gallia Narbonensi.

Geranium Creticum Ger. Park. folio Cicutae vel Myrrhidis VII, sive latifolium
longissima acu C. B. speciosum annuum longissimis rostris Creticum J. B. In
Sicilia prope Messanam.

Geranium cicutae folio, acu longissima C. B. Monspeliacum laciniatum Park. Ad
agrorum margines and in aggeribus circa Monspelium.

Geranium nodosum Park. Anemones folio rotundo XII, sive nodosum C. B. nodosum
Plateau Clus. Ger. magnum folio trifido J. B. Ad sepes, itinere a Gratianopoli
a la fontaine que brusle.

Geranium phaeo sive pullo flore Clusii J. B. pullo flore Park. Ger. Anemones
folio rotundo VIII, sive montanum suscum C. B. batrachoides pullo flore Ger. In
monte Jura prope Thuiri.

Geranium Romanum versicolor sive striatum Park. In sylvis montosis Salernum
inter and Cavam in Regno Neapolitano.

Gingidium v. Visnaga.

Gladiolus sive Xiphion J. B. Gladiolus Narbonensis Lob. Ger. Glad. floribus
uno versu dispositis major C. B. Circa Liburnum inter segetes.

Glastum sylvestre Ger. Park. Isatis sylv. vel angustifolia C. B. In Germania
secus Rhenum. Cultura tantum a sativa differ videtur.

Glaux peregrina annua. Vicia Sesamacea Apula Col. Foenugraeco sylvestri Tragi
in quibusdam accedens planta J. B. Ornithopodio affinis hirsuta semine stellato
C. B. qui Stellam leguminoosam hue refert, cum sint distinctae plantae. In
lingula Fretum Siculum a portu Messanensi dividente.

Globularia Monspeliensium v. Bellis caerulea.

Gnaphalium Alpinum pulchrum J. B. montanum IV, sive Alpinum magno flore, folio
oblongo C. B. Leontopodium Dod. Gnaph. Alpinum Ger. In montis Jurae praealto
vertice La Dolaz dicto.

Gnaphalium roseum Park. roseum sylv. C. B. Umbellatum minimum J. B. In insula
ad Prom. Siciliae Pachynum vulgo Capo Passaro, ubi arx ab Hispanis praesidio
tenetur.

Gnaphalium ad Stoechadem citrinam accedens J. B. In pratis non long a Castro
novo vico Monspelio vicino.

Gossipium sive Xylon Ger. Goss. frutescens annuum Park. frutescens semine albo
C. B. Xylon sive Gossipium herbaceum J. B. In insula Melitensi quotannis magno
proventu seritur.

N. Seminis medulla tussientibus and difficulter spirantibus mirifice
auxiliatur, Venerem stimulat; oleum inde expresum lentigines, varos, alphos,
caeterasque cutis infectiones delet. Lanugo usta sistit sanguinis profluvia.

Gramen dactylon latiore folio C. B. Graminis genus Dens caninus 3, sive Gramen
primum, vel Galli crus J. B. Ab hoc sativum, quod Gramen Mannae vocant, nonnisi
cultura differ videtur, inquit J. B. Ischaemon vulgar Ger. sylvestre latiore
folio Park. In Germania, Italia, Gallia, in agris passim. Hanc speciem in
Anglia non ita pridem invenit T. Willisellus.

Gramen digitatum hirsutum J. B. Gr. dactylon sive Ischaemum V, i. e. Dactylon
angustifolium spicis villosis C. B. Isch aemon sylvestre spicis villosis Park.
Ab hoc non diversum putamus Gramen scoparium Ischaemi paniculis Gallicum, ex
cujus nimirum radiculis scopulae fiunt. Gramen illud e quo Cremae praesertim in
Lombardia scopulae hujusmodi siunt, Capriola ibi appellant: unde Matthiolum
falsum esse suspicamur, qui Gramen Mannae pro Capriola habet, quod annua est
planta, cujusque radices huic usui nec adhibentur, neque idoneae sunt. Forte
Capriola nomen commune est huic generi Graminis digitati; vulgus enim non
distinguit.

Gramen repens cum panicula Graminis Mannae J. B. dactyloides radice repent
Ger. canarium ischaemi paniculis Park. dactylon folio arundinaceo majus C. B.
quod nomen huic nostro, utpote minori and supino, minime convenit. Circa
Genevam and Monspelium in arenosis.

Gramen dactylon Messanense gemina ab eodem exortu spica. An Gramen
distachophoron Col.? Habet a. in eodem caul (ni male memini) plura spicarum
paria. In montibus Meslanae alteri Siciliae metropoli adjacentibus.

Gramen tremulum maximum C. B. J. B. trem. maximum Hispanicum Park. Phalaris
pratensis altera Ger. emac. Pluribus Italiae and Siciliae in locis, speciatim
circa Baias copiose.

Gramen pulchrum parvum panicula lata compressa J. B. cyperoides panicula
sparsa sufflavescente Park. cyp. minus panicula sparsa subslavescente C. B. Cur
a panicula sparsa denominat, cum e contra panicula sit conglomerata? In
humidioribus and ubi per hyemem aquae stagnarant in Germania, Italia, and
Narbonensi Gallia.

Gramen parvum pulchrum panicula compressa nigricante J. B. cyperoides panicula
nigricante Park. cyp minus panicula sparsa nigricante C. B. In palustribus non
procul Monspelio. Quin and in Italia ad ipsos Florentiae urbis muros in
fossulis collegimus.

Gramen Alopecuros spica longa tomentosa candicante J. B. Alopecuros major
spica longiore C. B. Gr. alopecuroides alterum radice repent, sive
Pseudo-schoenanthum Monspeliensium Park. Schoenanthum adulterinum Ger. In
maritimis Monspelio vicinis.

Gramen paniculatnm elegans Ger. Gr. amoris dictum J. B. Gr. paniculis
elegantissimis, sive (...) major C. B. Phalaris pratensis major, sive Gramen
tremulum maximum Park. inepte. Primo nobis occurrit Francofurti ad Moenum;
deinde passim per Germaniam, Italiam and Galliam Narbonensem. Hujus varietatem
circa Monspelium and Florentiam observavimus, quae dici poterit

Gramen amoris alterum paniculis strigosioribus magisque sparsis.

Gramen minimum Dalechampii J. B. minimum paniculis elegantissimis C. B. In
vineis circa Monspelium sub initium veris, imo ipsa adhuc hyeme floret.

Gramen paniceum spica simplici C. B. Panicum sylvestre spica simplici Park.
sylv. Ger. sylv. and Dens canis primus J. B. In Germania, Italia and Gallia
passim.

Gramen paniceum spica divisa C. B. Graminis genus quibusdam, Gallis Dens canis
2, sive Panicum sylvestre spica divulsa J. B. Panicum vulgaro Ger. sylvestre
horbariorum Park. Ad rivulos and in locis ubi per hyemem aquae stagnarant in
Germania, Italia, Gallia.

Gramen paniceum spica aristis longis armata C. B. paniceum Ger. paniceum
aristis longis armatum Park. Est hoc (ut recte monet J. Bauhinus) naturae
duntaxat lusus: in eadem enim planta observavit spicarum utriculos alios
desinentes in aristam, alios eadem destitutos. Advenire autem illud dicit
ratione soli atque aetatis, quod and mihi probatur. Unde merito reprehendendus
videtur C. Bauhinus qui sine necessitate entia multiplicat.

Gramen parvum echinatum J. B. caninum marinum asperum Park. caninum maritimum
spica echinata C. B. In arenosis circa Monspelium copiose; Vidimus etiam in
Arni fluminis alveo Florentiae.

Gramen nemorosum hirsutum minus paniculis albis C. B. nem. hirsutum minimum
Park. praeter rationem minimum appellat, cum satis alte assurgat. Gramini
Luzulae assine flore albo J. B. Ad latera montis Salevae prope Genevam, and in
colle La Bastie.

Gramen supinum aculeatum J. B. aculeatum Italicum Park. echinatum and
aculeatum III, sive album capitulis aculeatis Italicum C. B. Inter Liburnum and
Pisas, necnon circa Monspelium copiose.

Gramen arvense panicula crispa C. B. Park. minimum rubrum sive Xerampelinum
Ger. Gramen cum panicula molli rubente J. B. Genevae inter segetes copiose,
quin and in muris ipsius urbis. Simillimum est hoc gramen montano nostro spica
graminea foliacea dicto.

Gramen alopecuroides spica aspera C. B. alopecuroides spica aspera brevi Park.
Gr. cum cauda leporis aspera, sive spica murina J. B. Circa Monspelium
collegimus.

Gramen arundina ceum ramosum plumosum album C. Bauhini J. B. quod asserit
circa Perault and Magallonam reperiri, ubi and nos illud invenimus, uti etiam
prope litus Calabriae.

Gramen calamogrostis Lobelii J. B. arundinaceum I, sive spica multiplici C. B.
Calamogrostis sive gramen tomentosum Park. at cur tomentosum denot^inat? Gr.
harund inaceum paniculatum Ger. In arenosis maris litoribus circa Magallonam
non long a Monspelio. Figura J. B. optime respondet nostrae plantae: non autem
Parkinsoni, uti nec titulus, nec descriptio Lobelii in Adv. Gramen marinum
cype^oides J. B. cyperoides maritimum C. B. Juncus cyperoides maritimus Lob.
marit. Narbonensis Park. In arenosis litoribus prope Neapolin copiose. Habetur
etiam ad mare Monspelii.

Gratiola J. B. Lob Ger. vulgaris Park. centauroides C. B. In palustribus prope
Constantiam Germaniae urbem uberrime. Provenit etiam in aquosis tum in Italia,
tum in Gallia Narbonensi, ut v. g. prope lucum Gramontium non procul Monspelio.

N. 1. Efficax remedium est in humoribus aquosis, lentis biliosisque specifice
evacuandis, quos vel ex remotissimis partibus trahir, atque tum per secessum,
tum per vomitum expurgat. Hinc magnus ejus usus esse poterit in hydrope, ictero
flavo, etc. Et quia amaritudine insuper dotata est insigni, fugat lumbricos,
eorumque saburram expurgat. Hactenus Schroderus.

2. Prodesse dicitur adversus diutinos coxendicis dolores and inveteratas
febres sive sicca sive recens decocta; verum quoniam nimis violenter nec sine
molestia purgat, corrigenda est.

Grossularia v. Uva crispa.

Guaiacum Patavinum Park. Patav. latifolium Ger. Guaiacana J. B. Lotus Africana
latifolia C. B. In praeruptis collibus non long a Massa qua inde Lucam iter
est, hanc ipsam plantam vel ei simillimam collegimus proinde fortasse deceptus
non fuit Gesnerus, qui eam in montibus circa Veronam nasci scripsit, quod J.
Bauhini pace dixerim.

H
HAlimus Lob. Hal. Clusii J. B. latifolius sive frutescens C. B. latif. sive
Portulaca marina incana major Park. In Sicilia prope Messanam hinc inde ad
maris litus copiose.

Hedypnois Monspessulana, sive Dens leonis Monspessulanus J B. Chondrilla lutea
X, sive foliis Cichorei tomentosis C. B. Chondr. prior Dioscoridis, legitima
Clusii Park. Chondrilla lutea Ger. Circa Messanam and Monspelium copiose. Ab
hac planta omnino diversa est Dens leonis Asphodeli bulbulis dicta, utcunque J.
B. eandem faciat.

Hedysarum clypeatum Ger. clypeatum vulgar Park. Astragalus Romanus, sive
Hedysarum clypeatum siliqua aspera J. B. Onobrychis semine clypeato aspero
major C. B. In montibus Messanae imminentibus, ubi etiam flore albo
observavimus.

Hedysarum clypeatum minus flore purpureo. An Onobrychis semine clypeato aspero
minor C. B.? In insula Promontorio Siciliae Pachyno proxima.

Hedysarum minus Park. v. Securidaca minor. majus siliquis articulatis Ger. v.
Securidaca.

Helianthemum flore albo, folio angusto hirsuto J. B. Chamaecistus foliis Thymi
incanis C. B. An Helianthemum angustifolium Park. Ger.? Prope Monspelium in
collibus Castro novo adjacentibus, atque etiam circa Nemausum. Folia hujus
oblonga sunt, incana, and figura sua ad Rorismarini. folia nonnihil accedunt,
nisi quod breviora sint.

Helianthemum tenuifolium glabrum flore luteo J. B. Chamaecistus Ericae folio
luteus C. B. Chamaec. Ericae foliis Park. Ad radices montis Jurae, inque
collibus saxosis circa Genevam. Ab hoc diversum facit J. Bauhinus

Helianthemum folio Thymi incano, quod putat Lobelium miscere cum Helianthemo
tenuifolio glabro. Has similes esse plantas, differentes tamen diligentius
consideranti asse^ it. Et nos idem cum Bauhino aliquando sensimus, postea tamen
in eadem planta vidimus inferiora folia tenuissima, qualia fere Camphoratae
Monspeliensium: superiora autem long diversa, viridia and Helianthemi proxime
scripti sollis omnino eadem. Invenimus tamen circa Massiliam cujus omnia folia
tenuissima, camphoratae similia and glabra. q. ult.

Helianthemum Alpinum folio Pilosellae minoris Fuchsii J. B. Ad latera and
radices montis Salevae prope Genevam copiose. Hoc an ab aliis descriptum sit
necne mihi nondum constat. Consule J. B.

Heliochrysum v. Stoechas citrina.

Heliotropium majus Lob. Ger. Park. majus flore albo J. B. majus Dioscoridis C.
B. In Italia and Gallia Narbonensi in agris ubique fere: Vidimus and circa
Moguntiam Germaniae.

Helio^ropium tricoccon C. B. J. B. Ger. Park. Circa Monspelium cum priore sed
rarius.

N. 1. Hujus capita sive siliquae pannis affrictae, florido viridi color eos
in^iciunt, qui temporis momento in caeruleum eumque elegantem mutatur.
Hujusmodi panni aquam cui immerguntur vini rubri color imbuunt; eorumque usus
est ad gelatinas aliasque confectiones purpureo color tingendas.

2. Heliotropium dicitur non quod ad Solis diurnum motum convertatur, sed quod
aestivo solstitio floreat, cum Sol longissime ab Aequinoctiali circulo
digressus ad ipsum rursus (...) sive conversionem faciat. Dod.

Helleborine ex albo sublutea J. B. In sylvula monti Salevae vicina. Floret
omnium hujus generis prima.

Helleborine flore albo C. B. Damasonium Alpinum, sive Helleborine floribus
albis J. B. In sylvosis prope summitatem montis Salevae. Floret vere simul cum
priore, aut aliquanto serius. Elleborine minor flore albo Park.

Helloborine montana angustifolia purpurascens C. B. Damasonium purpureum
dilutum, sive Helleborine 6 Clusii J. B. Hell. angustifolia 6 Clusii Ger.
Elleborine flore purpurante Park. Ad radices montis Salevae, versus Genevam sci
copiose.

Inveni insuper Helleborinem flore atro-rubente in ascensu montis Jurae prope
oppidum Jay copiose. Calceolum Mariae dictum in sylvis ad latera montis
Salevae. Verum hae duae species in Anglia habentur.

Helleborus albus Ger. J. B. albus vulgaris Park. albus flore subviridi C. B.
In montosis pascuis in summitate montis Jurae copiosissime.

N. 1. Hellebori albi radix ob violentiam purgationis quam per superiora and
inferiora movet, usum purgandi internum soli fere Helleboro nigro reliquit,
Schrod. Potest tamen (inquit Tragus) per 24 horas vino aut oxymelite macerata
posteaque resiccata ss. pondere cum vino exhiberi furiosis and melancholicis.
Helleborum utrumque dicit Gesnerus [si cum aceto and melle temperetur and
decoquatur ut syrupus fiat] medicamontum innoxium and ad plerosque phlegmaticos
morbos [thoracis and capitis inprimis, ut asthma, dyspnoeam, epilepsiam] (...)
saepe utilissime se expertum esse, etc. vide apud J. B. Optima ejus
praeparatio, (inquit Parkinsonus) est ut succo mali Cydonii insundatur, aut
Cydonio indita in furno aut sub cineribus coquatur. Quin si ab Elleboro sumpto
strangulationis periculum sit, Cydonia comesta eorumve succus aut syrupus
remediosunt.

2. Rad. in aceto decocta, ac in ore aliquandiu retenta dolorem dentium tollit.
J. B. e Trago.

3. In lixivio decocta, si illo postea caput abluas, pediculos and furfures
enecat and abstergit: idem unguento aliquo permista efficiet. Idem. scabies,
impetigines, serpigines sanat: animalia pleraque interimit, mures, lacertas,
aves, etc.

4. Pulvis naribus inditus sternutamenta movet, unde and Anglice Neese-wort
dicitur.

5. De Hispanorum toxico ex ea facto consule Parkinsonum and Jo. Langium Epist.
med. lib. 1. Epist. 68. Helleborus autem uterque in furiosis and insanis
sanandis olim celeberrimus.

Helleborus niger Lob. niger verus Ger. Park. niger flore roseo C. B. niger
flore albo, interdum etiam valde rubente J. B. In Alpibus non long a Pontieba
abunde.

N. Purgat potenter humores melancholicos, utile per consequens medicamenum est
omnibus affectibus inde originem trahentibus, quales mania, insania,
hypochondriaca passio, elephantiasis, herpes, cancer, quartana, vetigo,
epilepsia, apoplexia, scabies, etc. v. Schrod. qui eam [radicem] violenter
purgare ait; alii, si recte usurpetur innoxium esse medicamentum scribunt, ut
tuto pueris, gravidis and debilibus corporibus dari possit. Corrigitur
cardiacis ac stomachicis ut Cinnamomo, Aniso, Foeniculo, etc. Dosis a j. ad ij.
Variis modis ad usum praeparatur.

Helleborus niger Saniculae folio major v. Astrantia nigra.

Helleborus niger Saniculae folio minor Park. C. B. In summis montium jugis
max, Carthusianorum coenobio vicinis.

Helleborum nigrum foetidum sive Enneaphyllon in Germania, lateribus montium
quos eluctatur Rhenus inter Coloniam and Moguntiam, etc. copiosissimum
observavimus. Helleborum nigrum hortensem flore viridi C. B. in monte illo
praecelso cui inaedisicatur S. Marini urbs, 10 circiter milliaribus Arimino
distans. Hae species in usum medicum rarissime veniunt, iisdem tamen cum
Helleboro nigro vero facultatibus dotatae videntur.

Hemionitis multifida C. B. altera Dalechampii silici floridae similis J. B.
Ilvensis Dalechampii, multifido folio Park. Prope Salernum primo, deinde in
viis umbrosis circa Neapolin, qua ascenditur ad Camaldulensium coenobium
copiose.

Hepaticum trifolium Lob. Ger. Trif. hepaticum flore simplici C. B. hepaticum
sive Trioitatis herba flore caeruleo J. B. In montibus circa Taurinum,
Scaphusiam, Genevam copiose.

Herba Doria Lobelii, Ger. H. D. vulgaris Park. Alisma Matthioli, sive Doria J
B. Doria Narbonensium quasi Aurea, quam perperam Doriam vocant, foliis Limonii
aut Rumicis Adv. Virga aurea major vel Doria C. B. Ad Ladum amnem Monspeliacum
copiose.

Herba venti Monspeliensibus J. B. Marrubium nigrum longifolium C. B. Ger.
Park. In aggeribus and ad vias circa Monspelium copiose.

Herniaria hirsuta J. B C. B. In arenosis primo circa Sylvam Ducis in
Brabantia, deinde pe^ Germaniam, Italiam and Galliam Narbonensem copiose.

Hesperis sylvestris latifolia flore albo parvo Park. Hesperidi Alpinae
murariaeve similis surrecta and magna J. B. In monte Saleva copiose, collegimus
etiam in montibus non long a Luca versus Massam.

Hesperis v. Viola matronalis.

Hesperis Alpina v. Draba.

Hieracium Alpinum glabrum, flore singulari magno, cauli cubitali insidente. In
summo montis Jurae doiso La Dole dicto. Hoc an a quoquam descriptum sit
inquirendum.

Hieracium asperum v. Hypochaeris.

Hieracium montanum latifolium Genevense, folio Conyzae majoris Monspessulanae
J. B. In ascensu montis Jurae prope Thuiri.

Hieracium falcata siliqua Lob. C. B. falcatum Lobelii Ger. falcatum sive
stellatum Park. stellatum J. B. An forte Hieracium stellatum Boelii Ger. emac.
in App.? Circa Monspelium non long a Castro novo.

Hieracium capitulum inclinans semine adunco C. B. florem inclinans J. B.
Hieracium folio Hedypnoldis Park. Circa Monspelium and Messanam.

Hieracium calyce barbato Col. falcatum barbarum Park. proliferum falcatum C.
B. Messanae and Monspel^^ passim.

Hieracium parvum hirtum caul aphyllo, crispum ubi siecautm J. B. In agro
Monspessulano non long a Sella nova in arvis.

Holosteum Massillense C. B. v. Coronopus.

Holosteum Plantaglni simile J. B. Salmaticense primum Clus. hirsutum albicans
majus C. B. Salamanticum Ger. Park. Prope Monspelium.

Horminum sylvestre latifolium Ger. sylv. latifolium verticillatum C. B.
Germanicum humile Park. Gallitricho aftinis planta, Horminum sylvestre
latifolium Clusio J. B. In agris and vervactis non long ab Augusta
Vindelicorum, eundo inde ad Monachium Bavariae metropolin.

Horminum lutem glutinosum C. B. Colus Jovis Ger. Lob. Horminum luteum sive
Colus Jovis Park. Galeopsis species luntea, viscida, odorata, nemorensis J. B.
In colle La Bastie, and in montibus circa Genevam. Vidimus etiam ^aepius in
Italia and Germania, locis lutosis ubifontes scaturiunt ad latera montium.

Horminum pratense foliis serratis C. B. Gallitrichum slyvestre vulgo, sive
sylv. Sclaraea flore caeruleo put pureove magno J. B. Hae planta a vulgari
nostrate Oculo Christi floris magnitudine potissimum dissert: unde and nostrum
vulgar Horminum, sylvestre Lavendulae flore Clusio dictum est. Ait enim se
observasse Greenvici ad arcis regiae. Hippodromum hanc speciem. Nos autem pene
certi sumnus non aliam ibi unquam enatam hujus generis plantam.

Hyacinthus caeruleus Ger. racemosus caeruleus minor junclfolius C B. vernus
botryodies minor caeruleus, anguistioribus foliis, odoratus J. B. In agro
Pedemontano ad vias.

Hyacinthus comosus Ger. comosus major purpureus C. B. maximus botryoides coma
caerulea J. B. Inter segetes circa Liburnum and Genevam copiose.

Hyacinthus palustris vernus flosculis fimbriatis albldis. Ad fossarum margines
and in humidioribus inter Liburnum and Pisas. Hanc speciem nondum descriptam
puto.

Hypecoum v. Cuminum sylvestre alterum.

Hypericum foliis parvis crispis seu sinuatis. In Sicilia prope Punto Cerciolo
non long a Castello Puzallu. Nondum, quod sciam, descripta est haec species.

Hypericum Nummulariae folio Park. C. B. Ex ipsis rupium max. Carthusianorum
caenobio imminentium fissuris emergit. Flos ei odoratissimus.

Hypecicum tomentosum Lob. J. E. tomentosum Lobelii Ger. supinum toemntosum
minus Park. sup. tom. minus, vel Monspellacum C. B. In insula Melitensi primum,
deinde circa Monspelium in fossis and humidioribus.

Hyolcyamus amus albus major and minor C. B. albus Park. albus, and albus minor
J. B. Ger. Bgo enim cum Parkinsono unam duntaxat ineciem agnosco. In Italia ad
mare inferum, inque Sicilia, and circa Monspelium copiose. Floris color in hoc
nostro pollide luteus est, and fundum habet purpurem, in quibus cum Cretico
dicto convenit.

Hypochoeris porcellia Ger. Hieracium asperum, Hypochoeris sive Porcellia
dictum Park. Hieracium dentis leonis, folio obtuso V sive minus Dentis iconis
folio subaspero C. B. Hieracii parva species, Hyoseris angustisolia aspera J.
B. In quibusdam Bavariae sylvis.

Hyssopodies major flore grandiore. In palustri planitie prope Syracusas,
itemque non laonge a Meffana Siciliae. Hujus flos quadruplo major est vulgaris
flore. Quin and utramque speciem una crescentem observavimus prope Messanam,
uti eas specie differ ampliis non dubitemus. J. Bauhinus duas habet.
Hyssopifoliae species: verum quam ille minorem inscribit est vulgaris nostras:
quam Hyssopifoliam aquaticam simpliciter vocat planta est de qua agimus.

I
JAcea non spinosa laciniata lutea, An Jacea laciniata lutea C. B.? Jacea
montana minima lutea Park.? In alveis torrentum and fluviorum quorundam, qui
brumali tempore planities late inundant in Foro Julii. Mihi nondum plane
constat plantam hanc descriptam esse, nam diversa videtur a Jacea lutea montana
minima tenuifolia Col.

Jacea Oleae folio v. Xeranthemum.

Jacea purpurea maritima capitulo spinoso Neapolitana. An Jacea cyanoides
ochinato capite C. B.? i. e. Jacea montana purpurea echinato capite Park.? an
Jacea laciniata Sonchi folio Park.? In maris litore arenoso prope Neapolin
Italiae copiosissime.

Jacea lutea capite spinoso C. B. lut. cap spinosis Park. major lutea Ger.
Centaurium collinum, sive Jacea spinosa slore luteo J. B. Circa Monspelium and
Messanam.

Jacea cum spinosis capitulis purpurea tenuifolia J. B. Stoebe IX, sive squamis
asperis C. B. Circa Monspelium and alibi in Gallia Narbonensi. Habetur and in
Etruria.

Jacea incana tenuiter laciniata, capitulis Jaceae nigrae vulgaris. An Jacea
incana laciniata, capitulls Cirsii flore uno aut altero J. B.? Jacea montana
candidissima Stoebes foliis Park. C. B. qui titulus huic nostrae optime
convenit. In rupibus seu clivis maritimis Calabriae.

Jecea montana capite magno Storbili J. B. incana Pini capite C. B. pumila
Narbonesis Park. In collibus saxosis circa Monspelium.

Jacobaea marina Ger. marina, sive Cineraria vulgaris Park. marina, sive
Cineraria J. B. maritima C. B. Ad litora maris inferi ubique.

Jacobaea Senecionis facie. Calix floris Senecionis calicem exact refert,
verum circulum seu coronam aut limbum foliolorum in margin ad modum
chrysanthemi obtinet. Plantula tenora est, radice fibrosa, foliis Bellidis maj.
Prope Messanam.

Jasminum luteum v. Polemonium.

Iberis J. B. Cardamantica Lob. Ger. Nasturtii folio C. B. Park. Sciatica
Cresses. In incultis, ruderatis and secus vias ubique fere tum in Germania, tum
etiam in Italia, Sicilia and Gallia Narbonensi.

N. Tusa cum modica axungia and coxedici imposita 4 horarum spatio, and deinde
ablata dolores ischiadicos and podagricos lenit, etc. vide Plinium alioque
Veteres.

Ilex arboiea J. B. major aculeata and non aculeata Park. IV, sive folio
rotundiore molli modiceque smuato C. B. ^jusdem. I, seu folio oblongo serrato;
Ego enim has non distinguo. In arbusculis junioribus folia sinuata sunt,
aculeata and Aquisolii aemula: in vetustioribus oblonga, neque aculeata,
nequesinuata, and Oleagins similia.

Ilex major glandifera Ger. In Italia and Gallia Narbonensi in sylvis and
sepibus passim.

Ilex coccigera J. B. Ger. aquifolia, sive coccigera Park. aculeata
cocciglandifera C. B. In collibus saxosis circa Monspelium, Nemausum, Avenionem
and alibi in Gallia Narbonensi.

N. Huic arbusculae seu frutici innascitut granum illud tictotium seu coccus
baphica tantopere celebrata, and ticto^ibus expetita, ex quo paratur confectio
illa cardiaca Alkermes Officinis dicta.

2. Arbuscula haec nou ubique coccum gerit. Nam iis solum regionibus quae
Mediterraneo mari vicinae sunt, and magno Solis ardore torrentur, nasci animad
vertebam. Sed neque isthic perpetuo fert; cum enim frutex adeo adolevit ut
glandem alere incipiat, coccum non gignit: ideoque solent incolae quadriennes
aut adultiores frutices urere, ut proximo anno novelli resurgant, qui deinde
singulis annis aliquot subsequentibus coccum ramulis inhaerentem instar
exiguorum pisorum coloris cinerei gignunt. Clus.

Imperatoria J. B. Ger. major C. B. Imper. sive Astrantia vulgaris Park. In
montibus max. Carthusianorum coenobio imminentibus.

N. Saporis est acerrimi, Alexipharmaca ac sudorifera: discutit mirifice
ventriculi, intestinorum, and unteri flatus, unde in colico cruciatu utilis.
Usus praecip. in venenatis morbis ac ictibus; in pulmonum tartaro resolvendo
and expectorando, in foetore anehlius correigendo, in capitis affectibus
phlegmaticis, Paralysi, Apoplexia, etc. Aiunt nonnulli quartana eos sanari qui
pulveris cochlearis dimidium hora una ante accessionem ex mero biberint.
Commendatur and ad hydropem. Ex trinsecus in Odontalgia (gargaris.) in
catarrhis exiccandis (susfitu) in tumoribus ac Arthritide frigida. In scabie
capitis exiccanda (lotione) in serpigine inveterata sananda (cum adipe suillo
illita) in globulis sagittisve corpori extrahendis (imposita) Schord. and
Matthew. Unde non immerito inquit J. B. Imperatoriae nomen sibi ascivit. cum tot
tantisque viribus praestet. Caeterum ut facie externa and odore Angelicam
resert, ita iisdem cum illa facultatibus dotata est.

Iris humilis laiifolia flore violaceo J. B. Chamriris II, sive variegata C. B.
Primo in rupibus quibusdam maritimis non long a Liburno portu eam
observavimus, flore purpureo atque etiam albo: deiude circa Monspelium aux
Garigues, ubi and Lobelius.

Iris Germanica Fuch. vulgaris Germanica sive sylvestris C. B. vulgaris
violacca sive purpurea hortensis and sylvestris J. B. vulgaris Ger. In muris,
tectis, locis redera it is, etc. in Germania.

Iris Florentina Ger. latifolia V, sive Florentina alba C. B. flore albo J. B.
In muris urbis Florentiae magna ejus habetut copia.

N. 1. Plurimae hujus plantae radici virtutes a Veteribus and Neotericis
assignantur. Sic. breviter Schrod. Usus praecip. in mucilagine seu tartaro
pulmonum, tussi, asthmate, obstructione mensium mensium, torminibus ventris
infantum. Extrinsecus abstergit cutis maculas and lentigines (cum Elleboro and
melle mixta.) Creberrimus usus modernis est in pulveribus qui capillis
insperguntur: vulgus vocat pulveres de Cypro. Aiunt and hydropi eam confer
and ictero.

2. Iridis radix in vino aut cerevisia suspensa, li^nc dulcem conservat, illud
jucundo tum odore tum sapore commendat, illius plane aemulo quem mora Rubi
Idaei communicant, ut nos in vino rubro saepius experti sumus. Sed and
pistoribus ad parandum fermentum triticei panis magnopere usitata est. Haec
partim e Tiago, partim nostrae sunt observationis.

Ischaemon v. Gramen dactylon.

Iva moschata Monspeliensium v. Chamaepitys moschata.

Jujube Arabum v. Zizyphus.

Juncus acutus maritimus capitulis rotundis C. B. acutus maritimus alter Lob.
Park. In Sicilia, Italia and Gallia Narbonensi ad maris litus valde frequens.

Juncus cyperoides maritimus Lobelii v. Gramen cyperoides.

Juncaria J. B. Junc. Salmanticensis Ger. Park. Rubia VIII, sive linifolia
aspera C. B. In Germania non long a Ratispona.

Juniperus major bacca rufescente C. B. Oxy cedrus Park. Oxycedrus Phoenicea
Ger. Cerdus Phoenicea Bellonio, sive Oxycedrus, quibusdam Juniperus major bacca
rubra J. B. In collibus circa Monspelium.

K
KAli semper virens grandius perpetuum C. B. Prod. geniculatum majus J. B. C.
B. Salicoria sive kali geniculatum Ger. In palustribus ad Mare Mediterraneum
valde frequens. Multo lignosius est nostrate h. e. minore; per multos annos
durat and in satis magnum fruticem adolescit, inque hortis culturam paritur,
experimento J. Bauhini.

Kali majus semine cohieato C. B. Ger. majus cocheatum Park. vulgar J. B. Ad
mare Mediterraneum sponte provenit plurimis in locis. Seritur Monspelii in
lacubus salsis ad Sal Alcali conficiendum, ^^jus modum v. apud J. Bauhinum.

L
LAburnum v. Anagyris.

Lactuca sylvatica purpurea J. B. montana purpurocaerulea major C. B.
sylvestris purpureo flore Park. Sonchus sylvaticus Ger. emac. In sylvis
montosis Jurae, Salevae etc. frequens.

Lagopus altera angustifolia Lob. major angustifolius Park. Trifolium
angustifolium spicatum J. B. Trifolium montanum angustissimum spicatum C. B. In
montibus supra Messanam; atque etiam circa Monspelium, utrobique copiose Flores
dilute rubent. Ab hac non diversam specie puto Lagopum angustifoliam Hispanicam
Clus.

Lagopus maximus Ger. max. flore rubro Park. Trifolium spica subrotunda rubra
C. B. Trif. albo incarnatum, spicatum, sive Lagopus J. B. Quod circa Neapolin
provenit flores habet pulchre rubentes aut coccineos; quod prope Genevam
albo-incarnatos aut pallidos.

Lagopus major folio pinnato Park. major spica longiore Ger. Trifolium
purpureum majus, folio and spica longiore J. B. montanum spica longissima
rubente C. B. In collibus circa Genevam.

Lamium peregrinum sive Scutellaria C. B. peregrinum, Scutellaria dictum Park.
Cassida Col. In Italia circa Florentiam, Liburnum and alibi. Maguam habet
similitudinem seu convenientiam florum respectu cum Lysimachia galericulata;
unde eam primo aspectu Lysimachiam galericulatam Uriticae folio denominavimus.

Lamium v. Galeopsis.

Lanaria sive Struthium Dioscoridis Imperato J. B. Saponaria Lychnidis folio,
flosculis albis C. B. In preaeruptis montium Messanae proximorum aut ipsum
Imperati Struthium, aut plantam ei simillimam collegimas, needum ineunte Junio
floruerat.

Larix C. B. Ger. Park. folio decidao conifera J. B. The Larch-tree. In Alpibus
Stiriacis and Carinthiacis eundo a Vienna ad Venetias copiose.

N. 1. Hujus Resina est quam Terebinthiuam Venetam Officinae vocant. Matthew.
Park. J. B. Quae de Resinae viribus traduntur, vide sub Pinu. Laricis materies
firmissima est atque solidissima, adeoque Solis ardoribus aerisque injuriis
resistit nec rimas facit.

2. Haec sola arbor ex Resiniferis folio est deciduo; Folia a. monente J.
Bauhino, non decidunt Autumno, nec antequam alia initio Veris succedunt.

3. Hujus trunco seu caudiei innascitur Fungus ille pituitae purgatrix Agaricum
dictus.

4. Quae Plinius aliique Veterum tradunt, non ardere eam, nec carbones facere,
nec alio modo vi ignis consumi quam lapides; omnino falsa este vel inde
constat, quod apud Vallesianos quibusdam in locis non alia ligna in usum foci
adhibeantur, ac alicubi etiam in Alpibus ad ferrarias fodinas carbones ex ea
fiant. J. B. Matthew.

Lathyrus major Narbonensis angustifolius J. B. angustiofolius Park. Circa
Monspelium non long a Sella nova, and alibi.

Lathyrus sativus flore purpureo C. B. angustifolius flore purpureo Ger.
anguloso semine J. B. Circa Genevam copiose: seritur and in Germania.

Lathyrus sativus flore fructuque albo C. B. Circercula sive Lythyrus sativus
flore albo Park. Et hic circa Genevam and in Germania seritur.

Lathyrus siliqua hirsuta J. B. angustifolius siliqua hirsuta C. B. Inter
segetes circa Genevam. Hic etiam in Anglia sponte oritur.

Lathyrus sylvestris flore vario ex albo and coccineo. Et hunc ctiam circa
Genevam inter segetes copiose enatum vidimus, necnon circa Liburnum.

Lavendula major, sive vulgaris Park. Lav. flore caeruleo Ger. Lavandula
latifolia C. B. Pseudonardus, quae vulgo spica J. B. In Gallia Narbonensi
passim and copiosissime. Provenit ibidem and Pseudonardus quae Lavendula vulgo
J. B.

N. Saporis est subacris and subamari, paritum tenuium, cephalica ac nervina.
Usus praecip, in catarrhis, paralysi, spasmo, vertigine; lethargo, and tremore
artuum. In urina, mensibus ac foetu pellendo (unde and parturientibus exhiberi
solet) in torminibus ventris flatulentis. Extrinsecus in lixivils capitis ac
artuum, in masticatoliis pro catarho exiccando ac revellendo ad palatum, ne in
pulmones defluat. Odore suo fugat pediculos. Schord. In usu sunt praecipue
flores. Hi quoque cum linteaminibus and vestimentis in arculas recondi solent
ad odoris suavitatem communicandam.

Laureola solio deciduo v. Mezereon.

Laurus Ger. J. B. vulgaris C. B. major sive latifolia Park. In sylvis and
sepibus Italiae satis familiaris.

N. Baccae pauso calidiores sunt, emolliunt, resolvunt. Usus praecip. in
mensibus and urinis ciendis; in affectibus nervorum, paralysi; in colica, in
dolor post partum, in crudltatibus ventriculi. Extrinsecus conferunt folia ad
ictus vesparum, molliunt tumores, promovent menses (in sussitu and balneo)
leniunt dolores, odontalgiamque mitigant (in gargarism.) Schrod.

Laurus Tinus caerulea bacca Lob. sylv. Corni foeminae foliis, subhirsutus C.
B. Laurus Tinus Ger. Tinus altera J. B. An Laurus sylv. folio monore C. B.? In
Italia circa Roman, Tybur and alibi frequens. Invenimus quoque in sylva Valena
prope montem Lupi nou long a Monspelio.

Ledum Alpinum hirsutum C. B. Ledum Alpinum, sive Rosa Alpina Park. Nerium
Alpinum quibusdam, aliis Ledum hirsutum J. B. In Alpibus prope Ponitebam.

Ledum Alpinum foliis ferrea rubigine nigricantibus C. B. Nerium Alpinum
quibusdam, aliis Ledum glabrum J. B. Chamaerhododdendros Alpigena Ger. Ledum
Alpinum sive Rosa Alpina Park. In summis jugis montis Jurae prope Genevam.

Ledum Alpinum hirsutum minus, An Cistus pumilus montis Baldi forte.
Austricacus myritisolius J. B.? Una cum Ledo Alpino hirsuto; cui quoad folia
satis similis est, multis tamen numeris minor, and flore (quantum memini) luteo.

Leatiscus Lob. Ger. Park J. B. vulgaris C. B. In saxosis collibus Italiae,
Siciliae and Narbonensis Galliae; ubi nunquam. (quod equidem viderim aut
audiverim) justam arboris stauram and magnitudinem assequitur, sed frutex
perdurat; quamvis alibi, test Bellonio and aliis, in arborem satis proceram
adolescat.

N. 1. Partibus suis omnibus (fructu, foliis, cortice) adstrictoria est, unde
utilis est ad fluxiones cujucunque generis, haemorrhagiam, sanguinis
exputitionem, alvi profluvium and dysenteriam, menses immodicos, prociderntiam
uteri and sedis. In summa Acaciae and hypocistidis vices supplet; urinam ciet.

2. Dentiscalpia ex Lentisco parata tum priscis, tum hoc seculo magnatibus ac
delicatioribus in usu quotidiano pro optimis and praestantissimis habentur.

3. Lentiscum in sola insula Chio Mastichen praebore tum Bellonius, tum
Hermolaus Barbarus assirmant. Alii in Italia quoque Mastichen far sed non
copioandam tradunt, ut v. g. Matthiolous, Caesalpinus, Lacuna, Schroderus
refert se habere ex donatione Galseri frustulum Mastiche ditissimum ex
Helveticis Alpibus transmissum. Nos cum in Italia and Gallia Narbonensi
peregrinaremur nunquam Mastichen fundentem vidimus hanc arborem; nec quis fide
dignus nobis unquam retulit se vidisse.

4. Huic arbori vel sponte vel vulneratae exudat Mastiche dicta, quae
(referente Schrodero) subastringit, emollit, ventriculum roborat. Usus praecip.
in vomitu, nausea ac fluxu alvi compescendo. Obtundit ac corrigit purgantium
acrimoniam, reprimit exhalationes ventriculi quae caput alias ferire solent
(grana aliquot post pastum deglutita) roborat caput, nervosumque genus,
expuitioni sanguninis ac tussi medetur: emendat oris halitum, pituitam e
cerebro elicit (masticando.) Extrinsecus ejus usus creberrimus est in
dentifriciis, emplastris ac cataplasmatis stomachicis.

Leonotopodium Dod. v. Gnaphalium Alpinum pulchrum.

Lepidium aunuum Ger. Park. II, sive galstifolium C. B. non repens J. B. In
agris prope Ratisponam; ibidem Foenugraecum aut satum aut sponte provenit.

Lepidium Dentellaria dictum v. Plumbago.

Leucoium bulbosum praecox minus Ger. bulbosum minus triphyllon J. B. In
convallibus Alpium, via qua Bassano Tridentum itur.

Leucoium bulbosum vulgar C. B. bulbosum hexaphyllum cum unico flore, rarius
bino J. B. bulb. serotinum Ger. In umbrosis Helvetiae pascuis pluribus in
locis; quin and in Italia prope Taurinum, sylvis montosis, itemque inter
Bassanum and Tridentum.

Leucoium bulbosum majus polyanthemum Ger. Leuconarcisso-lirion pratense Lob.
Leuc. bulb. polyanthemum tardius florens, floribus monoribus J. B. L. b. majus
sive multiflorum, quod aliqui Acrocorion Plinii statuunt C. B. In palustribus
prope Pisas.

Lecoium maritimum angustifolium C. B. J. B. marinum minus Park. marinum minus
Lobelii and Clusii Ger. In arenosis maris Mediterranei litoribus Prope
Frontignanam.

Leucoium spinosum v. Thalspi spinosum.

Libanotis altera Theophrasti nigra v. Saxifragia Vene torum.

Libanotis Theophrasti minor Park. latifolia altera sive vulgatior. C. B. Lib.
Theoph quorundam, sive Seseli Aethiopicum Matthiolo, Cervaria alba J. B. In
montibus circa Genevam copiose.

Lichen marinus rotundifolius Ger. v. Opuntia marina.

Ligusticum v. Siler montanum.

Lili^m aui eum v. Martagon Chymistarum.

Lilium floribus reflexis montanum C. B. montanum minus Ger. flore nutante
ferrungineo majus J. B. In colle La Bastie and in monte Salvea prope Genevam
copiose.

Limonium folio sinuato Ger. peregrinum Rauwolsii Park. peregrinum foliis
Asplenii C. B. Lim. quibusdam rarum J. B. In insula ad Promontorium Pachynum,
and ad Punto Cerciolo in Sicilia, utrobique copiose.

Limoniuni parvum Narbonese oleae-folium Lob. minus J. B. minus maritimum oleae
folio C. B. parvum Ger. Narbonese parvum Park. Ad mare prope Monspelium
copiose. Invenimus quoque in Etruria circa Liburnum.

Limonium al^ud parvum Narbonese floribus majoribus. An Limonium minimum C. B.
Park.? In iisdem cum priore locis.

Linariae aliquatenus similis folio Bellidis J. B. Lin. crecta latifolia VII.
seu Bellidis folio C. B. Linaria odorata Park. purpurea odorata Ger. In agris
quibusdam Lugdunum inter and Gratianopolin 5 aut 6 leucis Lugduno remotis.

Linaria aurea Tragi Ger. L. folioso capitulo luteo major C. B. Heliochrylos
Tragi, sive Linaria 3 J. B. In montibus prope Ratisponam and alibi in Germania.
Hane plantam ad Virgam auream rectius retuleris quam ad Linariam.

Linaria purpurea magna J. B. L. erecta angustiofolia X, sive purpurea major
odorata C. B. Circa Neaposin and ad radices montis Vesuvii. Maxima est ominium
quas hactenus vidimus; flore parvo, intense prupureo.

Linaria graminea floribus congestis purpureis. Linaria caerulea calcaribus
longis J. B. Ad radices montis Vesuvii copiose. Altitudo ei dodrantalis, folia
graminea; flores in summo caul dense stipati velut in brevispica.

Linatia odorata Monspessulana J. B. erecta angustifolia XI, sive capillaceo
solio odora C. B. Circa Monspelium ubique Hanc speciem in Cornubia invenimus.
Consule Cat. Ang. Folia capillacea huic plantae perperiam attribuit C. Bauhinus.

Linaria purpurea parva J. B. pumila seu repens IV, sive caerulea repens C. B.
purpuro-caerulea repens Ger. caerulea repens Park. In Alpium jugis and monte
Jura. Male inseribitur repens.

Linaria parva purpurea foliis sine ordine dispositis J. B. Lin foliis carnosis
cinereis C. B. In alveis fluviorum Alpestrium and torrentum.

Linaria lutea parva annnua J. B. pumila seu repens II, i. e. pum. foliis
carnosis, flosculis minimis flavis C. B. In cacumine montis Lupi, duobus a
Monspelio leucis distantis. Autumno florentem inveni.

Linaria pumila procumbens latifolia flore pallido, rictu luteo. In vineis
quibusdam Messanae. Vere ^loacute;ret.

Linum luteum Narbonense J. B. marinum luteum Ger. maritimum luteum C. B. sylv.
angustifolium luteum Park. In pratis juxta Monspelium and Sellam novam. Floret
Septembri: Hujus varietatem duplo grandiorem invenimus ad mare, quam tamen
specifice differ neutiquam concedimus. Flores nempe, caules, capitula, semina
utrique eadem. Differentia tantum in magnitudine and statura, quae ratione loci
evenit. Instinctu J. Bauhi^i haec duo studiose inter se contulimus.

Linum sylv. angustis and densioribus foliis, flore minore C. B. Haec species
an eadem sit nostrati Lino tenuifolio, an diversa inquirendum. In sterilioribus
circa montem Lupi Septembri florentem observavimus. Est autem iis in locis
perexigua, foliis angustiss. densis, flore satis grandi, coloris ex purpura
albicantis.

Linum sylv. latifolium Ger. sylv. latifolium caeruleum Park. sylv. latifolium
hirsutum caeruleum C. B. sylv. latifolium hirsutum flore caeruleo J. B. In
planitie quadam prope Augustam Vindelicorum. An potius Linum sylv. latifolium
caul viscoso, flore rubro C. B.? quod circa Ingolstadium reperiri asserit.
Nostri certe flos ruber potius quam caeruleus, quamvis nullius in caulibus
viscositatis meminerimus.

Lithospermum Linari^ folio C. B. v. Passerina.

Lonchitis aspera C B. asp. major Ger. asp. major Matthioli Park. altera cum
folio denticulato, sive Lonchitis altera Matthioli J. B. In sum mis rupibus
montis Jurae.

Lotus arbor Lob. Ger. L. arbor fructu Cerasi J. B. L. fructu Cerasi C. B. In
Italia circa Romam and Gallia Narbonensi circa Monspelium.

Lotus siliqua quadrata Ger. quadripinnatis siliquis Park. ruber siliqua
angulosa C. B. flore fusco tetragonolobus J B. In Sicilia prope Messanam in
olivetis.

Lotus siliquosa lutea Monspeliensis J. B. pratensis siliquosus luteus C. B.
pratens. Moaspeliensium Park. Circa Tybridis fluvii ostia in pratis. Circa
Genevam quoque and Monspelium copiose.

Lotus siliquosa lutea siliquis strictioribus and longioribus. In Italia prope
Tybridis fluvii ostia.

Lotus edulis Cretica Park. L. pentaphyllos siliqua convexa I, sive
pentaphyllos siliqua cornuta C. B. Trifolium sive Lotus Hierazune edulis
siliquosa J. B. Primo observavi in Italia prope Neapolin, postea in Sicilia.

Lotus siliquis Ornithopodii C. B. J. B. Circa Messanam ad latera montium urbi
proximorum.

Lotus flore luteo, corniculis articulatis. An Lotus pentaphyllos siliquis
recurvis, pedes corvinos referentibus C. B.? Coronopus ex codice Caesareo Dod.
Ger.? Ad Punto Cerciolo non long a Castello Puzallu in Sicilia.

Lotus siliquis rectis incana vulgaris major. Neap. in rupibus maritimis.

Lotus asperior fruticosior Park. fruticosus incanus siliquosus C. B. L.
trifolia corniculata Ger. Trif. argentatum floribus luteis J. B. Hanc plantam
C. B. perperam pentaphyllum denominat, cum trifolia sit. In collibus circa
Monspelium.

Lotus corniculata siliquis singularibus vel binis tenuis J. B. corniculatus
minor pilosus Park. Trifolium cor^iculatum minus pilosum C. B. Prod. Prope
Neapolin collegimus.

Lotus Libyca Dalechampii Lugd. L. pentaphyllos siliquis rectis X, sive
siliquosus glaber flore rotundo C. B. Trifolium haemorrhoidale alterum minus,
sive Lotus Libyca Dalechampii Park. Trifolium rectum Monspessulanum J. B. In
locis humidis circa Messanam Siciliae, Tropiam Calabriae, and Monspelium
Galliae Narbonensis.

Lotus incana, sive Oxytriphyllum Scribonii Largi Ger. Lotus pentaphyllos
siliquis rectis IX, sive pentaph. siliquosus villosus C. B. An Lotus
haemorrhoidalis major, sive Trifolium haemorrhoidale majus Park.? Trifolium
album rectum hirsutum valde J. B. Circa Monspelium eundo ad Peroul. Prope
Mes^anam major ^abetur and lignosior. Figura quae a Parkinsono exhibetur pro
Trifolio argentato floribus luteis J. B. a Gerardo pro hoc ponitur, cui quidem
nullo modo convenit.

Lotus pentaphyllos vesicaria C. B. Anthyllis leguminosa vesicaria Hispanica
Park. idonea sane appellatione. Trifolium halicacabum sive vesicarium J. B.
perperam. Circa Messanam and alibi non in Sicilia modo, sed and in Italia.

Loto affinis v. Anthyllis and Auricula muris.

Lunaria radiata Robini J. B. v. Securidaca. peltata v. Thlaspi clypeatum
minus. biscutata v. Thlaspi clypeatum.

Lupinus sativus flore albo C. B. sativus albus Park. vulgaris flore and semine
albo sativus J. B. In Italia prope Liburnum Etruriae portum and alibi satum
vidimus.

Lupinus sylv. flore caeruleo C. B. flore caeruleo Ger. sylv. purpureo flore,
semine rotundo vario J. B. In Sicilia circa Messanam sponte and copiose.

Lupinus flore luteo Ger. Park. sylv. luteo flore, semine compresso vario J. B.
In arenosis ad Fretum Siculum inter Messanam urbem and Pharum Messanensem
copiose.

N. Haec sola planta e leguminosis gustu est amaro. J. B.

Lychnis coronaria vulgo J. B. coronaria sylvestris C. B. coron. vulgaris Park.
cor. rubra Ger. In Italia passim, ubi and flore albo, medio incarnato cernitur.

Lychnis erecta parva flore rubello, folio longo angusto. Inter segetes Lini
vidimus, medio quasi itinere a Massa ad Lucam.

Lychnis minima rigida Cherleri J. B. In collibus p^ope Florentiam. Apud alios
Botanicos nulla hujus me^tio^ quod sciam.

Lychnis sylv. hirta Lob. Ger. sylv. hirta major Park. sylv. lanugine
canescens, flore majusculo rubescente, Clusio 5 J. B. Circa Neapolin primo,
deinde circa Messanam.

Lychnis parvo flore rubello e calyce oblongo angusto. Sunt a, petala in medio
profunde fissa seu bi^ida. Juxta Messanam in primo montium ascensu. Suspicarer
hanc eandem esse cum Ocymoide flore rubro minore ^ret. si florum petala
responderent.

Lychnis sylvestris calyculis striatis Park. call. str. 2 Clusii Ger. sylv.
latifolia calyculis turgidis striatis C. B. Muscipula major, calyce turgido
ventricoso J. B. In Germania agris prope Rhenum copiose.

Lychnis montana viscosa alba lati^olia C. B. An Muscipula altera flore albo
Park.? Polemonium petraeum Gesneri J. B. Genevae in ipsius urbis muris and in
collibus vicinis frequens. In Germaniae quoque meridionalibus nusquam non
obvia. Hanc nuper in Anglia spontaneam observavimus, vide Cat. Ang.

Lychnis montana repens v. Saponaria minor.

Lychnis viscosa purpurea latifolia laevis C. B. Muscipula Lobelii Ger. Park.
Centaurium minus adulterinum, quibusdam Lychnidis viscidae genus J. B. In agris
montosis ad Rheni ripas inter segetes.

Lychnis viscosa erecta annua caryophylloides. In marginibus Grammontiae sylvae
prope Mo^spelium.

Lychnis segetum rubra foliis Perfoliatae C. B. Lychnis seg. Vaccaria rubra
dicta Park. Vaccaria J. B. Ger. Inter segetes in Gallia and Germania passim.

Lysimachia lutea in alis foliorum florens Caes. lutea minor J. B. Ger. Park.
lutea II, sive minor foliis nigris punctis notatis C. B. In Alpibus Stiriacis.

Lysimachia lutea flore globoso Ger. Park. bifolia flore globoso luteo C. B.
altera lutea Lobelii, flore quasi spicato J. B. In fossis palustribus prope
Sevenhuys in Hollandia.

Lysimachia siliquosa speciosa v. Chamaenerium.

M
MAchaleb v. Cerasus sylvestris.

Maiz sive Frumentum Indicum Ger. Maiz, frumentum Indicum vel Turcicum vulgar
Park. Frumenctum Indicum Mays dictum C B. Triticum Indicum J. B. Seritur nunc
dierum non in Italia duntaxat, verum etiam in Germania. Farina ejus subflava
est non alba. Nequicquam multiplicant species Tabernamontanus and Gerardus ob
solum granorum aut florum colorem; cum in eadom spica grana flava and spadicea
observaverimus.

Panis hinc confectus lentur est and gravis, nec fermento intumescit dum
pinsitur aut coquitur, proinde obstruentis naturae sit necesse est, and
difficilis concoctionis, velut panis azymus.

Marrubium album fatuum P. Castelli in Cat. plantarum Messanensium. An
Marrubium album peregrinum brevibus and obtusis foliis C. B.? In glareosis ad
mare non long a Messana. Haec planta a nonnullis credita est Pseudodictamnus
alter Ponae; verum non respondent acetabula, quae Moluccae similia esse dicit.

Marrubium album angustifolium peregrinum C. B. Creticum Ger. Park. album
angustiore folio J. B. Ad vias and agrorum margines prope Viennam Austriae.
Miramur interim Clusium aliam proposuisse ab hac diversam Marrubii speciem
circa Viennam spontaneam, quae nobis ibi non visa.

Marrubium nigrum longifolium C. B. v. Herba venti Monspeliensium.

Martagon Chymistarum Lob. Lilium aureum Ger. purpurocroceum majus C. B. rubens
vel croceum majus J. B. In sylvis supra Neapolin prope Camaldulensium coenobium.

Mar^agon v. Lilium floribus reflexl^s.

Medica major erection floribus purpurascentibus J. B. Trifolium siliqua
cornuta, sive Medica C. B. Trifolium Burgundia^um Ger. Poenum Burgundiacum,
sive Medica legitima Park. Circa Genevam and Monspelium, and alibi. Circa
Avenionem in agris satam vidimus.

Medica sentellata J. B. Trifolium cochleatum Ger. cochleatum fructu latiore C.
B. Ad agrorum margines prope Liburnum Etruriae portum.

Medica orbiculata J. B. Trifolium cochleatum vel scutellatum, fructu latiore,
folio minuto obtuso C. B. In insula ad Prom. Pachynum and alibi in Sicilia.

Medica orbiculata fructu minore. Prope Messanam. Hujus orbiculi dimidio
minores sunt quam praecedentis; and plures simul in eodem ramulo sive communi
pediculo confertim nascuntur.

Medica magna turbinata J. B. Medicae majoris Baeticae spinosae species altera
Ger. emac. p. 1200. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum mox dicta.

Medica coronata Cherleri parva J. B. In Sicilia circa Messanam; itemque circa
Monspelium and Neapolin.

Medica doliata spinosa. In arenosis maris litoribus ad Messanam and alibi tum
in Sicilia, tum etiam in Italia.

Medica doliata lenis. Ubi invenimus jam non recordamur.

Medica orbiculata elegans fructu circum oras rugis veluti crispato. In Sicilia
non long a Puzallu vico and Punto Cerciolo.

Medica fructu compresso circum oras dentato. An Medica lunata quaedam minor J.
B.? Prope Messanam ad margines vinearum.

Medica echinata, fructu ovato, spinulis brevibus, crebris, rigidis. Prope
Messanam Siciliae.

Medica Catalonica elegans vulgo dicta. Hanc ubi collegimus jam non recordamur.
Fructus figurae doliaris est and crebris tuberculis scaber, persimilis ligno
illi quo brachia manusque muniunt Itali ad pilam defendendam* and feriendam
propellendamve in ludo dicto.

Medica ciliaris Guilandini. Hanc in Alpibus invenimus. Fructus orbiculum aut
rotulam imitatur, habetque in circumferentia molles and oblongas spinulas seu
setas, ciliorum aemulas.

Medica marina Park. Medicae marinae spinosae species Ger. Trifolium cochleatum
maritimum spinosum C. B. Trifolium cochleatum marinum, seu Medica marina J. B.
Ad litora Maris Mediterranei frequens. Hae duae species proxime scriptae
perennes suut, reliquae omnes annuae.

Medica echinata fructu parvo oblongo, spinis rarioribus rigidis. Hanc etiam in
Sicilia collegimus.

Melampyrum multis sive Triticum vaccinum J. B. Melampyrum purpurascente coma
C. B. Melampyrum purpureum Ger. Crataeogonon flore vario Park. Melampyrum
ejusdem. Inter segetes per Germaniam and Galliam vulgatissimum.

Melampyrum caerulea coma C. B. caetuleum Ger. Melampyro affinis Parietaria
caerulea quorundam J. B. In sylvis montosis non long a Gratianopoli, qua inde
ad max. Carthusianorum coenobium itur.

Melampyrum erectum flore luteo amplo. Ad latera montium Messanae imminentium.

Melampyrum erectum flore vario ex albo and purpureo. An Antirrhinum album
serrato folio J. B.? Cum priore, a quo etiam fortasse non differt specie.
Possunt hae plantae ad Euphrasias aut Cristas Galli referri.

Melanthium v. Nigella.

Melica sive Sorghum Dod. Ger. Park. Sorghi J. B. Milium arundinaceum
subrotundo semine, Sorgo nominatum C. B. In Foro Julii ad pani^icia seritur:
estque haud dubie Milium illud quod suo tempore ex India in Italiam invectum
scripsit Plinius, nigrum color, amplum grano, harundineum culmo, quodque
adolescit ad pedes altitudine septem praegrandibus culmis. E paniculis hujus a
granis repurgatis scopulas efficient ad mundandas vestes aliosque usus,
cujusmodi Venetiis vonales vidimus.

Melilotus quinta Tragi v. Securidaca.

Melilotus major candida Trag. Germanica Ger. flore albo albo Park. In
Germania, Italia and Gallia Narbonensi frequens. Haec revera specie differt a
vulgari nostra lutea, quamvis C. Bauhinus, qui alias plerunque nimis
multiplicat species, eandem faciat.

Melilotus Messanensis procumbens folliculis rugosis sublongis, spicis florum
brevioribus. In loco humido, in lingula illa inter portum Messanensem and
fretum Siculum.

Melissa sylvestris hirsutior minus odorata. Melissophylli sylvestris genus
Matthiolo. In sepibus prope Liburnum and Salernum copiose. Haec est, puto, quam
J. Bauhinus memorat Hist. lib. 28. cap. 12. Habemus (inquit) nos quandam
Melissam nigriorem and hirsutiorem, a nemine memoratam. Hic Matthiolus a
Botanicis injuste arguitur, qnasi Melissophyllum suum sylvestre a sativo non
esset distinctum.

Melissae similis foliis minoribus, floribus albis, labello punctato. Circa
Messanam, in insula ad Prom. Pachynum in Sicilia.

Menthastrum Ger. hortense, sive Mentha sylvest. Park. Mentha sylvestris folio
longiore C. B. Menthastrum spicatum folio longiore candicante J. B. In agris
and pascuis prope Arnum flumen non long a Florentia.

Mespilus J. B. sativa Ger. vulgaris sive minor Park. Germanica folio laurino
non ferrato C. B. In Etruriae sepibus non procul Viterbo.

Mespilus Aronia Ger. Aronia Veterum J. B. Aronia sive Neapolitana Park. Apii
folio laciniato C. B. Sponte provenire dicitur in montibus Galliae Narbonens^s,
quamvis me non vidisse fateor spontaneam.

Meum alterum Italicum quibusdam J. B. alterum Italicum Ger. spurium Italicum
Park. latisolium adulterinum C. B. In collibus and clivis maritimis Regni
Neapolitani.

Mezereon Germanicum, an Chamaedaphne Dioscoridis Lob.? Laureola folio deciduo,
flore purpureo C. B. Laur. fol. dec. sive Mezereon Germanicum J. B. Chamaelaea
Germanica sive Mezereon Ger. Cham. Ger. sive Mezereon vulgo Park. In montosis
Germaniae passim. Habetur and in collibus and montibus circa Genevam.
Facultatis est causticae and adurentis, nec intra corpus tuto sumitur.

Milium arundinaceum C. B. v. Melica.

Millefolium nobile Trag. Achillea sive Millefolium nobile Ger. Achillea
Sideritis, sive nobilis odorata Park. Achillea millefolia odorata J. B.
Tanacetum minus album odore Camphorae C. B. In Germania ad Rhenum, Gallia
Narbonensi circa Monspelium, and in Italia passim.

Millefolium luteum Ger. Park. tomentosum luteum J. B. C. B. Circa Avenionem,
and juxta viam quae Auriaco Avenionem ducit, ubi and ^lusio observatum Hist.
lib. 3. cap. 37.

Mollugo montana latisolia ramosa C B. Gallium sive Mollugo montana Ger.
Gallium flore albo majus, sive Mollugo montana Park. Rubia sylvatica laevis J
B. In sylvis, agro Luceburgensi and Aquisgranensi.

Moly moschatum capillaceo folio C B. moschatum vel Zibettinum Monspeliense
Park. Allium sylv. perpusillum juncifolium moschatum J. B. In collibus prope
Monspelium and Sellam novam, aux Garigues.

Moly parvum caul triangulo C. B. caul and foliis triangularibus Pa^k. Primo
inter Lericium and Massam; deinde circa Baias copiose.

Monophyllon Ger. Mon. sive Unifolium Park. Mon. recentiorum Lob. Mon. sive
Lilium convallim minus C. B. Unifolium, sive Ophrys unifolia J B. P^imo in luco
quodam juxta Hagam Comitum Hollandiae, deinde in omnibus fere editioribus
Belgii and Germaniae sylvis and dumetis.

Morus alba Ger. Park. J B. fructu albo C. B. The white Mulberry. In Sicilia,
Italia and Gallia Narbonensi copiosissime seritur ad bombyces alendos; sunt
enim folia ejus teneriora and vermiculis hisce gratiora quam nigrae.

Morus nigra Park J. B. fructu nigro C. B. Morus Ger. The black Mulberry-tree.
Cum priore.

N. ^. Fructus nigrae ( mora Celsi officinis dicti) immaturi refrig. sicc.
astringunt valide. Usus praecip. in diarrhoea, dysenteria, fluxu menstruo,
expuitione sanguinis: Extrinsecus in faucium ac oris inflammationibus
ulceribusque Schrod.

2. Mora matura refrigerant, alvum subducunt initio pastus and ante alios cibos
sumpta, nam post alios cibos facile corrumpuntur; sitim sedant, appetitum
excitant, etc. Schrod.

3. Cortex rdicis abstergit, astringit, hepar ac lienem aperit, alvum laxat,
tineas latas necat: Circa messem circumfossa and incisa dat succum qui
concrescit and ad dentium dolores efficax est. Quin and folia vel sola vel cum
cortice cocta odontalgiam sedant. Veteres plura habent, quos consule. Syrupus
mororum ad supradicta omnia valet, and grata sua aciditate febrilem ardorem
restinguit.

4. Morus urbanarum novissima germinat, nec nisi exacto frigore, ob id dicta
sapientissima arborum. Plin.

Muscus Alpinus flore insigni dilute rubente J. B. Gentianella omnium minima C.
B. Park. In altissimis verticibus montium max. Carthusianorum coenobio
imminentium

Muscus denticulatus Ger. denticulatus major C. B. Park. terrestris
denticulatus Lob. pulcher parvus repens J. B. In aggeribus umbrosis in Italia
and part meridionali Germaniae.

Muscus capillaceus longissimus, i. e. Muscus arboreus II, C. B. Hunc
longissimis capillaceis filamentis dense stipatis ex Abie^ibus dependentem in
Germania vidimus and collegimus. Chartas in quibus composita fuit color flavo
ad ruffum tendente infecit.

Myagro affinis herba capitulis rotundis J. B. Myagro similis siliqua rotunda
C. B. Park. Hanc inter plantas nostras siccas habemus, ubi collegiums jam non
recordamur.

Myrica 1 Clus. Tamariscus folio tenuiore Park. Narbonensis Ger. Tamarix altera
folio tenuiore, sive Gallica C. B. major sive arborea Narbonensis J. B. Ad mare
prope Monspelium abunde.

Myrica sylv. altera Clus. Tamariscus folio latiore Park. Germanica Ger.
Tamarix fruticosa folio crassiore, sive Germanica C. B. Germanica, sive minor
fruticosa J. B. Ad ripas fluviorum, v. g. circa Augustam Vindelicourm, Genevam,
etc.

N. 1. Absterg. ac subastringit. Usus praecip. in obstructione ac tumore
lienis. Adeo mirabilem antipathiam contra solum hoc viscerum faciunt (inquit
Plinius) ut affirment, si ex alveis factis bibant sues sine liene inveniri. De
ligno Aegyptii (test Alpino) decoctum parant ad luem Veneream curandam non
secus ac nostri de Guaiaco, quod exhibent leprosis, scabiosis, etc. cum foelici
successu. Idem faciunt in melancholicis, ictericis nigris and hydropicis.
Extrinsecus in tinea capitis and obstructione mensium valet.

2. Doliola e Myricae assulis Francofurti ad Moenum venalia memorat Clusius,
quibus contentus liquor lienosis prodest.

3. Curae Edmundi Grindalli Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis Tamaricem Angli debent,
quam induratam lienis passionem eximie juvare expertus primus in Angliam
transtulit. Camden. Annal. Elizab.

Myrtus communis Italica C. B. An Myrtus fructu albo Ger.? Myrtus vulgaris
nigra and alba, sativa and sylvestris J. B. In Italia and Gallo-provincia
frequentissima, ad mare inferum, itemque in Sicilia.

N. 1. Hujus tum folia, tum baccae (myrtilli Officinarum) refrigerant
temperate, siccant valide astringuntque. Usus internus rarior est, nihilominus
tamen adhibentur in fluxu alvi ac expuitione sanguinis. Extrinsecus usus
utriusque crebrior.

Folia emendant foetorem sub axillis ac inguinibus (pulvis aspersus) sudorem
corporis immodicum sistunt (frictione) membris catarrhosis opitulantur, alvi
fluxui succurrunt, defensivum exhibent in herpetibus, putredinem oris sanant,
haemorrhagiam narium sistunt; polypo medentur (cum melle ac vino.)

Baccae mitigant oculorum inflammationes; juvant luxatos articulos ac ossa
fracta; subveniunt procidentiae uteri ac any; capitis tineas furfuraceaque
excrementa abigunt. Schrod.

Praecipuae eorum vires dependent ab adstrictione and suavitate odoris, ut
singulas examinanti manifestum fiet.

2. Bellonius refert Illyricos Myrti foliis coria perficere, quemadmodum
Macedones Rhoe; Aegyptios Acaciae siliquis; Asiae minoris incolas glandium
Aesculi calycibus; Gallos Quercus libro; Phryges sylvestris Pini corticibus.
Clus. hist. lib. 1. cap. 43.

N
NArcissus medioluteus Lob. Ger. An medioluteus polyanthos Ger.? medioluteus
XI, sive copioso flore, odore gravi C B. Narcissus multos ferens flores,
medioluteus Narbonensis J. B. Itinere a Lericio ad Massam, and a Massa ad Lucam
inter segetes copiose.

Natrix Plinii v. Anonis lutea major.

Nasturtiolum Alpinum tenuissime divisum J. B. C. B. Cardamine Alpina Ger.
Alpina minor Park. In summis jugis montium Jurae and Salevae locis humidioribus.

Nerium Alpinum v. Ledum.

Nerium v. Oleander.

Nigella arvensis Park. arvensis cornuta C. B. Melanthium Sylvestre Lob. Ger.
Sylv. sive arvense J. B. Per Germaniam, Italiam and Galliam Narbonensem inter
segetes passim.

N. 1. Usus semin. praecip. in mucilagine pulmonum resolvenda and expectoranda,
lacte augendo, urina ac mensibus ciendis, morsibus venenatis corrigendis.
Specifice in febribus quartanis and quotidianis. Extrinsecus crebri usus est in
Cephalalgia sedanda, catarrhis exiccandis, in cucuphis epithemat, etc.
applicatum Schrod.

2. Radix sistit proprietate sua haemorrhagiam, si dentibus masticetur,
naribusque imponatur. Idem.

3. Exprimitur ex semine isto oleum, quo imperiti Pharmacopoei plerique pro
oleo nardino non absque gravi utuntur errore. Dod.

O
OCymastrum Valerianthon v. Valeriana.

Ocymoides repens v. Saponaria minor.

Ochrus sive Ervilia Dod. Lob. Ger. Och. sive Erv. flore and fructu albo Park.
Och. folio integro capreolos emittente C. B. Lathyri species quae Ervilia
sylvestris Dodonaeo J. B. Inter segetes prope Liburnum portum.

Olea sativa J. B. Ger. Park. C. B. In territorio Lucae urbis. In
Gallo-provincia, and alibi in Italia and Gallia Narbonensi copiosissime.

N. Oleae vires and usus explicare nimis prolixum foret and perdissicile. Sic
breviter Schroderus. Folia refrigerant, exiccant and astringunt. Usus externus
and praecip. in fluxu alvi, mensium, in herpetibus and sim, Fructus immaturi
exiccant and astringunt, praesertim sylvestres. Olivae conditae excitant
appetitum, movent alvum, humentem ventriculum exiccant and confortant.
Condiuntur a. antequam plane maturuerint.

2. Oleum quod exprimitur ex olivis maturis calfacit and humectat moderate (N.
vetus calidius est recenti) emollit digerit, vulnerararium est, alvum laxat
(cum cerevisia calida assumptum i) ariditatem pectoris corrigit, tormina
ventris mitigat, meatus urinarios laxat, erosos abstergit and consolidat.
Extrinsecus creberrimi usus est in clystersbus, tumoribus calidis, etc. Cum
aqua tepida assumptum movet vomitum.

3. Oleo quidem non Apes tantum sed and omnia insecta exanimantur Plin. lib.
11. cap. 19. quod Cl. Vir M. Malpighius in Bombyce aliisque experiendo verum
invenit. Ratio est, quia oleum meatus Spiritus, seu poros quibus aer attrahitur
and redditur obstruit, ob cujus defectum animalculum illico moritur. Nec enim
minimis hisce insectis respiratio minus necessaria est ad vitam quam majoribus
and perfectioribus animalibus: saltem sine aeris beneficio diu movere and
vivere non possunt.

4. Oleum picem e pannis extrahit, quod aqua non facit. Vulgatum est, (inquit
Sennertus) ut siquis manum pice inquinet, eam aqua non mundet sed oleo aliquo
aut pinguedine, quae picem liquefaciat. Hypomn. 1. cap. 5.

5. Scribit F. Licetus, se vidisse Rechi in horto patrui sui stipitem oleae
sativae aridum fere ac levem, per decennium and ultra a trunco separatum, neque
posthac unquam terrae implantatum, ad alterius ligni fulcrum in terram
demissum, and ligno cui fulcimentum praestabat clavis ferreis affixum,
pullulasse, germinasseque eodem anno, plures olivarum novellas foliis and
fructibus onustas, atque in posterum etiam per plures annos protulisse,
Sennert. Hypomn. 5. cap. 7. Unde abunde confirmatur illud Poetae, Truditur e
sicco radix oleagina ligno.

6. In Hispania oleas admotis scalis manu legunt, and non decutiunt ut in
Gallia Narbonensi; ne sc. sequentis anni spem decussis germinibus praeripiant.
Vehementer enim laborant percussae and detrimentum capiunt. Clus.

7. Olivae quamvis per maturitatem nigrae sunt, sapore quoque acri, amaro and
nescio quid nauseosi admixtum habente; oleum tamen quod inde exprimitur fere
pellucidum est, nonnihil flavicans, sapore dulci and grato, unde patet saporem
hunc and odorem parti aqueae seu amurcae inhaerere. Laudatissimum autem apud
nos habetur oleum, quod coloris omnis and saporis maxim expers est.

Oleander flore rubro Park. Nerium sive Oleander Ger. Nerium sive Rhododendron
J. B. Nerion floribus rubescentibus C. B. In Sicilia ad aquarum rivulos in
ascensu montis Aetnae.

Onobrychis spicata flore purpureo Park. C. B. flo. purpureo Ger. quibusdam,
flore purpureo J. B. In loco quodam glareoso non long a Vienna Austriae.

Onobrychis vulgris minor Park. fructu echinato minor C. B. Ad radices Vesuvii
montis and in insula saepius memorata ad Prom. Pachynum. Flos hujus purpureus
est and minor quam vulgaris; fructus a. echinatus major.

Onobrychis arvensis C. B. v. Speculum Veneris.

Onobrychis semine clypeato aspero v. Hedysarum clypeatum.

Opuntia marina Park. Scutellaria sive Opuntia marina J. B. Lichen marinus
rotundifolius Ger. Fucus folio rotundo C. B. Sertolara Imper. In maris litora
rejectam collegimus ad Punto Cerciolo, non long a Castello Puzallu in Sicilia.

Orchis galea and alis fere cinereis J. B. Cynosorchis latifolia hiante cucullo
minor C. B. Cynosorchis altera Dod. de floribus, ubi bona ejus habetur
descriptio. Cynosorchis major altera Ger. latifolia minor Park. Circa Genevam
ad agrorum margines. Aprili and Maio mensibus floret. Hanc non ita pridem in
Anglia sponte natam observavimus. V. Cat. Ang.

Orchis anthropophora flore fusco. In marginibus agrorum quorundam prope ripas
Rhodani non long a Geneva.

Orchis macrophyllos Columnae Park. Orchis sive Testiculus maximo flore J. B.
Orchis montana Italica flore ferrugineo, lingua oblonga C. B. Per totam fere
Italiam ad mare inferum, vidimus enim Massae, Liburni, Neapoli in pascuis
siccioribus.

Orchis magna, latis foliis, galea susca vel nigricante J. B. Ad latera montis
Salevae prope Genevam. Thyrsus florum speciosus est.

Orchis strateumatica minor Ger. J. B. Cynosorchis militaris minor C. B. Park.
In pascuis ad latera montis Salevae.

Orchis rotunda Dalechampii J. B. Cynosorchis capitulo globoso Park. Cyn.
milit. IX, sive globoso flore C. B. In summitatibus Jurae montis.

Orchis palmata minor odoratissima purpurea sive nigra J. B. palmata XXI, sive
Alpina angustifolia nigro flore C. B. palmat. augustifolia minor odoratissima
Park. In herbidis jugis and pascuis montium Jurae and Salevae copiose.

Orchis foetida III, sive odore hirci minor C. B. Tragorchis foemina Ger. minor
and verior Park. Tragorchis minor flore fuliginoso J. B. In pascuis quibusdam
non long a Geneva.

Oreoselinum v. Apium montanum nigrum.

Ornithogalum luteum C. B. Dod. luteum, sive Caepe agraria Ger. Bulbus
sylvestris Fuchsii flore luteo, sive Ornithogalum luteum J. B. In agro
Pedemontano ad sepes and inter segetes. Invenimus etiam in Helvetia.

Ornithogalum spicatum Ger. spic. flore albo Monspessulanum J. B. majus
spicatum flo. albo C. B. In insula ad Prom. Pachynum, atque etiam Monspelii
inter segetes.

Ornithogalum vulgar Ger. vulgar and verius, majus and minus J. B. umbellatum
medium angustifolium C. B. In Lombardia, Pedemontio, and agro Lucensi inter
segetes.

Ornithogalum spicatum flore virente v. Asphodelus.

Ornithopodio similis hirsuta Scorpioides C. B. Scorpioides leguminosa J. B.
Dod. Ger. Park. Circa Messanam Siciliae and Neapolin ltaliae frequens.

Orobanche ramosa Ger. Park. C. B. minor purpureis floribus, sive ramosa J. B.
In arvis demessa segete primo circa Ratisponam in Germania observavimus, postea
etiam in Italia and Gallia Narbonensi.

Orobus receptus herbariorum Lob. Ger. vulgaris herbariorum Park. siliquis
articulatis, semine majore C. B. Orobus sive ^rvum multis J. B. In agris circa
Monspelium and Genevam.

Orobus sylvaticus purpureus vernus C. B. Pannonicus 1 Clus. sylvaticus
purpureus major Park. sylvat. vernus Ger. emac. Galega nemorensis verna J. B.
In dumetis a la Bastie, and alibi circa Genevam, inque Germaniae and Helvetiae
sylvis srequens.

Orobus sylvaticus Viciae foliis C. B. Pannonicus 2 Clus. Astragaloides Ger.
Astrag. herbariorum Park. Astragalus major Fuchsio J. B. Abundat in colle La
Bastie, ad ripas Rhodani and in montis Salevae sylvosis prope Genevam: in
Germania quoque non admodum rarus est.

Oryza Lob. Ger. Park. J. B. Italica C. B. IN It^^sae palustribus Ferrariam
inter and Bononiam satam vidimus.

N. In cibis admodum est familiaris, gratissimi saporis; multum nutrit and
semen auget: v^^um obstruentis naturae est and alvum len^ter adstringit^
Proinde datur in cibis utiliter dysentericis, coeliacis and diarrhoea affectis:
Oryza nunc dierum vescitur (^ Americanos excipias) humani generis pars maxima,
Turcae, Persae, Iudi, Africani, Sinenses, etc.

Oxalis maxima sylvatica J. B. Acetosa montana maxima C. B. Acetosa max.
Germanica Park. In monte Thuiri prope Genevam.

Oxyacantha Theophrasti Ger. v. Pyracantha.

Oxys lutea Ger. J. B. lutea corniculata repens Lob. luteo flore Park.
Trifolium acerosum II, sive corniculatum C. B. In Italia and Sicilia, umbrosis
praesertim, ubique fere obvium.

Oxycedrus v. Cedrus Lycia retusa J. B. Juniperus.

P
PAliurus Lod. Dod. Ger. Paliurus sive Rhamnus 3 Dioscoridis Park. Rhamnus sive
Paliurus folio Jujubino J. B. Rhamnus folio subrotundo, fructu compresso C. B.
In sepibus circa Veronam, Bergamum, Romam and alibi in Italia, necnon circa
Monspelium.

Palma sive Manus marina J. B. Urtica marina X, sive Manus marina C. B.
Habuimus ex sinu Adriatico, and mari infero circa Romam.

Palma humilis v. Chamaerrhiphes.

Palma Christi v. Ricinus.

Panax Herculeum majus Ger. pastinacae folio, an Syriacum Theophrasti C. B.
Heracleum alterum sive peregrinum Dodonaei Park. Sphondylio, vel potius
Pastinacae Germanicae affinis, Panax, vel Pseudo-costus flore luteo J. B. In
Sicilia non long a castello Puzallu.

N. Ex hujus vulnerato circa radicem caul succus aestivis mensibus manat
aestate fervida, etiam in Belgio. Dod. In Opopanacis grumis reperta semina in
Belgio sata hanc plantam produxere. C. Hoffman.

Pancratium Lob. marinum Ger. Monspessulanum, multis Scylla alba parva J. B.
Narcissus maritimus C. B. In arenoso maris litore prope Neapolin copiose. Post
solstitium aestivum floret.

Panicum sylvestre v. Gramen paniceum.

Paronychia sive Alsinefolia incana J. B. Anthyllis imaritima incana Park.
marit. Alsinefolia C. B. marina incana Alsinefolia Ger. In vineis circa
Messanam and Monspelium.

Passerina Lobelii J. B. P. Linariae folio Lobelii Ger. Lithospermum Linariae
folio Monspeliense Park. IX, sive Linariae folio Monspeliacum C. B. Circa
Monspelium. In insula ad Promont. Pachynum proceriorem observavimus.

Passerina Tragi J. B Pas. altera Ger. Lithospermum Linariae folio C. B.
Lithospermum Germanicum, Passerina Tragi Park. In arvis demessa segeta circa
Basileam, Genevam, Monspelium, etc.

Pastinaca marina Lob. v. Ctithmum.

Pedicularis Alpina lutea. Yellow mountain Louse-wort, Rattle or Cocks-comb. In
altissimis montibus maximum Carthusianorum coenobium cingentibus.

Peganium Narbonensium Lob. v. Ruta sylvestris minima.

Pontaphyllum sive potius Heptaphyllum argenteum flore muscoso J. B. Alchimilla
Alpina quinquefolia C. B. minor quinquefolia Park. In monte Jura and in Alpibus
Sabaudici, copiose. De hac planta v. J. B.

Pentaphyllum v. Quinquefolium.

Peplus minor J. B. In agris prope Ladum Monspelia cum amnem non long a
Castelneuf.

Perfoliatum angustifolium montanum Col. Perfoliata minor angustifolia,
Bupleuri folio C. B. Perf. angustif. Alpina minor Park. Auriculae Leporis
affinis, Odontitis lutea Valerandi ac Dalechampii J. B. In agris quibusdam
Siciliae sterilioribus prope Punto Cerciolo, non procul Puzallu vico.

Perfoliata minor foliis gramineis J. B. P. Alpina gramineo folio, sive
Bupleuron angustifolium Alpinum C. B. An Perfoliata Alpina angustifolia minima
C B.? In summis montibus max. Carthusianorum coenobio vicinis. Icon Ponae, quam
proponit Parkinsonus sub titulo Bupleuri angustifolii Alpini; Gerardus sub tit.
Sedi petraei Bupleuri folio, huic nostrae plantae non been convenit.

Periclymenum perfoliatum Ger. J. B. C. B. perfoliatum calidarum regionum Lob.
perfoliatum sive Italicum Park. In Italia and Gallia Narbonensi.

Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro J. B. Park. rectum Germanicum Ger.
Chamaecerasus dumetorum fructu gemino rubro C. B. In Germania, ad sepes and in
dumetis vulgatissimum.

Periclymenum rectum fructu nigro Park. rect. ^ructu gemino nigro J. B.
Chamaecerasus Alpina fructu nigro gemino C. B. In sylvis juxta Sacellum
Brunonis, a la grand Chartruse.

Periclymenum rectum fructu rubro Ger. fructu rubro singulari majore Park. sed
perperam, nam semper geminum habet. Chamaecerasus Alpina fructu rubro gemino,
duobus punctis notato C. B. Chamaecerasus Gesneri, seu Chamaepericlymenum
quoddam Alpinum J. B. In monte Saleve copiose.

Petasites albus anguloso folio J. B. minor C. B. Park. In declivibus montium
quos transivimus eundo a Gavia ad Genuam.

Peucedanum majus Ger. majus Italicum Lob. J. B. C. B. Park. In lingula illa
Portum Messanensem a Freto Siculo dirimente.

Phalangium pulchrius non ramosum J. B. An Phalangium flore Lilii ejusdem?
Phalangium I, sive magno flore, and forte etiam II, sive parvo flore non
ramosum C. B. Phalangium non ramosum Ger. In monte Sabaudiae Genevae vicino,
Saleve dicto.

Phalangium parvo flore ramosius J. B. III, sive parvo flore ramosum C. B.
ramosum Ger. Park. Circa Francefurtum, Basileam, Genevam, etc. in collibus,
pascuis montosis and ericetis.

Phalangium Cretae Salonensis Lob. Ger. Asphodelus VII, sive foliis fistulosis
C. B. minor foliis fistulosis J. B. In campis lapideis seu Salonensi Creta
vulgo The Craux, inter Arelaten urbem and oppidum Salonam copiosissime.

Phalaris semine nigro Park. major semine nigro J. B. C. B. Circa Messanam in
Sicilia; Baias and Neapolin in Italia; and Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi. Ab
hac non differ suspicor Gramen phalaroides majus sive Italicum C B. Grana
hujus minora sunt quam Phalaridis vulgaris. garis.

Phillyrea serrata 2 Clusii Ger. and Phillyrea latisolia spinosa C. B. seu 1
Clusii. Phillyrea folio Alaterni, and Phillyrea folio Ilicis J. B. Phillyrea
latifolia aculeata, and Ph. folio lato serrato Park. Existimo enim has duas non
differ specie. In Etruria copiosissime. itemque circa Monspelium in
praeruptis clivis non long a specu Frontignana; ad montem Lupi and alibi.

Phillyrea angustifolia J. B. Ger. Lob. angustifolia prima C. B. angustifolia
secunda Park. In Etruria abunde, necnon circa Monspelium.

Phillyrea latiusc^lo folio J. B. latiore folio Ger. angustisolia prima Park.
Phil. 4, sive folio Ligustri C. B. In Etruria inter Massam and Lucam; item in
Provincia Gallica. Haec forte non differt specie a priore, nam in hujus
plantae, ut and Alaterni, foliorum figura, magnitudine, color, incisuris mire
ludit natura.

Phthora v. Thora.

Phyllon marificum and foeminificum Park. arrhenogonon and thelygonon folio
incano Monspessulanum J. B. Phyllon testiculatum, and Phyllon spicatum C. B.
Phyl. arrhenogonon sive marificum, and Phyl. thelygonon sive foeminificum Ger.
In aggeribus fossarum and viis publicis Monspelii, praesertim prope aquas.

Phyteuma Monspeliensium Lob. J. B. Resedae affinis Phyteuma C. B. Res. aff.
Phyteuma Monspeliensium dicta Park. Circa Monspelium passim; in Italia quoque
circa Romam and alibi. Haec planta omnino Resedis annumeranda est.

Picea Latinorum v. Abies mas Theophrasti.

Pilosella minor folio angustipre minus piloso repens J. B. major repens minus
hirsuta C. B. In pascuis and collibus circa Genevam.

Pilosella minore flore hirsutior and elatior non repens J. B. Pil. major
erecta C. B. major Ger. altera erecta Park. Et hanc circa Genevam inveni.

Pilosella sive Pulmonaria lutea angustiori folio, valde pilosa altera J. B. In
monte Saleva Genevae propinquo.

Pilosellae majoris seu Pulmonariae luteae laciniatae species minor J. B. In
praedicto monte Saleva, in rupium fissuris.

Pinaster, sive Pinus sylvestris Hispanicus major Clus J. B. Pinus VI, sive
maritima altera C. B. Ab hoc non differt specie, ipso Clusio monente, Pinaster
Austriacus major albus Clus. J. B. Pinus II, sive sylvest. C. B. Parkinsonus
and Gerardus in hac arbore mihi non satisfaciunt. Habet a. folia longa, in
viriditate nigricantia; conos oblongos, turbinatos, ramorum alas spectantes and
reflexos, nucleis parvis, nec mali vulgaris nucleis multo majoribus, quibus and
figura sua accedunt. Habetur in viridariis nostris in Anglia frequens;
nonnullis The mountain Pine dicta: ubi (ut recte Ciusius) in Pini sat.
altitudinem excrescit. Provenit, autore Clusio, in Aquitania and Pyrenaeis
frequentissime; quod and D. Willughby nobis confirmavit; and plurimam Resinam
fundit; est etiam in Suevia, Bavaria, Austria, etc. passim obvia. Suspicatur J.
Bauhinus non differ hanc a Pinu sua sylvestri and Taeda.

Pinaster alter Hispanicus vel minor Hispanicus Clus. Pinus V, sive maritima
major C. B. sylvestris sterilis elatior Park. sylv. maritima conis firmiter
ramis adhaerentibus J. B. In Alpibus Stiriacis. Hujus folia breviora sunt and
magis glauca quam praecedentis, coni minores. Hortulanis nostris perperam the
Scotch-Firre, i. e. Abies Scotica dicitur.

Pinus sativa C. B. sativa siva domestica Ger. urbana sive domestica Park.
assiculis duris, foliis longis J. B. In Gallia Narbonensi and Italia:
copiosissime autem prope Ravennam.

N. 1. Haec arbor vulnerata Resinam fundit liquidam, quae postea coquendo fit
arida.

2. Pix liquida seu navalis e Pinu vi ignis excoquitur hoc modo. Pinuum
vetustarum stipites pingues and Resina adeo praegnantes ut accensi instar facis
ardeant, (hujusmodi arbores Antiqui taedas appellant) assulatim caesos super
area seu pavimento e luto usto aut lapidibus antea praeparato, and a centro
undique ad circumferentiam paulatim declivi, in strues aut acervos componunt,
iis similes quos extruunt qui carbones faciunt. Strues hasce ramulis faginis
pinessve circumcirca contegunt, and deinde pulvere aut luto superimposito
curiose loricant, ne qua fumus aut flamma exire possit. Ignem postea desuper
accendunt, quemadmodum carbonarii solent, qui liquorem ligni oleosum inferius
subsidere ad ima compellit. Is autem ob pavimenti declivitatem, in canalem,
(qui acervum undique coronae instar cingit) prompte delabitur, indeque per
alios ductus in foveas aut vasa ei recipiendo destinata, derivatur. Ex hoc in
cortinas injecto, and tandiu decocto donec humor omnis absumatur, sit Pix arida
and rasilis, Graecis (...) dicta. Nostrates Picem liquidam Tar vocant; siccam
vero seu aridam Pitch.

3. Pini cujuscunque cortices and folia refrigerant and astringunt, unde in
dysenteria and fluore mensium prosunt. Nuces pineae caliditate temperatae sunt
and humidae, maturant, leniunt, impinguant. Nuclei saporis sunt delicatissimi,
and in Italia mensis secundis adjiciuntur. Usus praecip. in phthisi (quia
nutriunt been) tussi, stranguria ac acrimonia urinae, quam mitigant: Segnem
excitant Venerem, ulcera renum mundificant, etc.

4. Decoctum aut infusum summitatum Pinus in cerevisia aliove idoneo liquore ad
calculum renum and vesicae plurimum valere creditur, necnon ad scorbutum
aliosque thoracis affectus.

N. Resina omnis confert praecipue tussi aliisque pulmonum affectibus (cum
melle) urinae ac alvo ciendae; calculum pellit, arthriticos affectus juvat,
gonorrhoeam sistit. Extrinsecus Chirurgis usitatissima est in emplastris; movet
enim pus, maturat, and scabiei medetur. Sunt qui Terebenthinam vulgarem (est
autem ea laricis resina) in cerevisia infundunt, atque simul defervere sinunt,
pro potu ordinario in praeservatione calculi viscerumque obstructionibus.

Plantago quinquenervia cum globulis albis pilosis J. B. angustifolia VIII,
sive paniculis Lagopi C. B. angustrfolia paniculis Lagopi Park. Circa Messanam.
Habetur quoque Monspelii and Nemausi.

Plantago angustifolia Alpina J. B. Holosteum III, sive hirsutum nigrans C. B.
In summis jugis montis Jurae.

Plumbago Plinii Ger. Dentilaria Rondelerii J. B. Lepidium Dentellaria dictum
C. B. Lep. Monspeliacum, Dentellaria dictum Park. Circa Syracusas in Sicilia,
Romam and alibi in Italia, Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi.

Polemonium sive Trifolium fruticans Ger. Polem. sive Trif. frut. vel Jasminum
luteum vulgar Park. Trifolium fruticans, quibuldam Polemonium, slore luteo J.
B. Jasminum V, sive luteum vulgo dictum, bacciferum C. B. In sepibus circa
Monspelium; vidimus etiam in Regno Neapolitano prope Scaleam.

Polium montanum album C. B. Ger. Monspessulanum J. B. P. Mont. Monspeliacum
Park. In Italia and Gallia Narbonensi. C. Bauhinus male, meo quidem judicio,
distinguit inter Polium montanum album and P. maritinum erectum Monspelia cum,
cum una and eadem planta sint.

Polium montanum Lavendulae folio Park. montanum I, seu Lavendulae folio C. B.
Pol. Lavandulae folio, flore albo Ger. In montosis circa Basileam, Genevam and
alibi.

N. Polium cum acre sit and amarum, urinam and menses ciet, venenatis morsibus
auxiliatur, Hydropicos and ictericos juvat, secundum veteres. Theriacam and
Mithridatium ingreditur.

Polygonatum Lob. Ger. latifolium vulgar C. B. Polyg. vulgo Sigillum Solomonis
J. B. In Belgio, Germania, Gallia and Italia, in saxosis and ad sepes ubique.
Haec planta in Angliae Australibus sponte provenit, v. Cat. Ang.

Polygonarum floribus ex singularibus pediculis J. B. latifolium 2 Clus.
latifolium IV, flore majore odoro C. B. majus flore majore Park. latifolium 2
Clusii Ger. In rupibus montis Saleve. Et haec Angliae indigena est. V. Cat. Ang.

Polygonatum minus Lob. Ger. angustifolium Park. J. B. angustifolium non
ramosum C. B. In sylvis circa Spadam oppidulum acidulis celebre copiosissime.
Vidimus and in sylvosis montis Salevae.

Polygonum montanum niveum Park. montanum Ger. minus candicans C. B. Paronychia
Hispanica Clusii sive Anthyllis nivea J. B. White Mountain Knotgrass. Circa
Messanam copiose.

Polygonum vel Linifolia per terram sparsa, flore Scorpioidis J. B. In Etruria
nun long a Viterbo, cum Romam contenderemus, copiosam observavimus, J.
Bauhinus extra scopum jaculatur, cum hanc refert ad Millegranam minimam
Lobelii, a qua long differt.

Polygonum bacciferum maritinum v. Tragos.

Portulaca sylvestris Lob. Ger. Park. sylv. minor sive spontanea J. B.
angustifolia, sive sylvestris C. B. In Italia, Sicilia, Gallia Narbonensi and
Germania, in vervactis and ad vias, Sativam ab hac culturae tantum ratione
differ existimo, quam vis in magnitudine omnium partium insignis sit
differentia.

N. 1. In acetariis frequens usus est Portulacae, stomachi ardorem lenit and
bilis fervorem, and hinc in febribus putridis ac malignis, ardore urinae, and
Scorbuto prodest; venerem inhibet, venerisque insomnia. Dentium stuporem
commanducata tollit, and mobiles dentes stabilit. Verminantibus pueris cum
successu exhibetur. Verum esus ejus nimius cavendus est quoniam ob frigiditatem
suam and humiditatem in ventriculo putrescere apta est, ejusque and viscerum
reliquorum tonum dissolvere.

2. Solet apud nos condiri ad intinctus eodem modo quo Cappares, Genistae
flores, Lingua avis, etc. condiuntur.

Portulaca marina, v. Halimus.

Prunella angustifolia J. B. hyssopifolia C. B. Circa Monspelium variis in
locis.

Prunella caeruleo magno flore C. B. magno flore purpureo Park. flore magno
folio non laciniato J. B. Primo observavimus hanc Moguntiae, postea circa
Genevam and alibi.

Prunella laciniata flore magno purpureo J. B. Prunella Lobelii Ger. Pru^.
laciniato folio Park. Cum priore.

Pseudo-asphodelus quibusdam J. B. Asphodelus Lancastriae verus Ger. emac.
minimus Norvegicus luteus palustris Scoticus and Lancastriensis Lob.
Pseudo-asphodelus minor folio Iridis angustifoliae Park. Psuedo-asphodelus
palustris Scoticus, and Pseudo-asphodelus Alpinus C. B. qui^ hos duos (ut ^ihi
videtur) unale separat. Ad radices montis Salevae in aquosis. Vidimus quoqu^
nonnusquam in Germania.

Pseudo-molanthium glabrum. In Sicilia inter segetes prope castellum Puzallu,
and in montibus Messanae imminuntibus. Simile est Pseudo-melanthio vulgari,
diversum tamen, and, ut puto, nondum descriptum.

Pseudo-stachys Alpina C. B. Park. In summis jugis montis Jurae.

Psyllium majus supinum C. B. J. B. majus semper virens Park. semper virens
Lobelii Ger. Plinianum forte, radice perenni, supinum Lob. Cirea Monspolium and
in Italia frequens.

Psyllium vulgar Park. maju^ erectum C. B. ^^. B. Psyllium sive Pulicaris
herba Ger. Cirea Monspelium in agris copiose. Psyllium dicitur quia somina ejus
pulicibus similia sunt.

N. Evaeuat bilem flavam, muellagineque sua acrimoniam humorum obtundere aptum
est. Hine convenit maximopere in Dysenteria and corrosione intestinorum. Semen
Psyllii hoc peculiare prae caeteris purgan^ibue habet, quod qualitate
refrigerandi sit praeditum. Verum enimyero non tamen extra reprehensionem,
positum est, quam incurr^t ratione virulentiae suae. Schrod. Nimio usu
stomachum offendit, and animi deliquium inducit.

Pearmica Impernti, v. Xeranthemum.

Paiegi^m angustifolium Ger. C. B. angustifolium sive cervinum I. ob. Park.
cervinum angustifolium J. B. Primo vidimus ad Rhodanum proxime pontem S.
Spiritus dictum, deinde circa Monspelium in humidioribus.

Pulmonoria maculosa Lob. Ger. maculata Park. Symphytum maculosum, sive
Pulmonaria latifolia C. B. Pulmonaria Italorum ad Buglossum accedens J. B. In
sylvis prope Coloniam Agrippinam primo, postea in omnibus fere montosis dumetis
juxta Rhenum and prope Geneyam in conspectum se nobis dedit.

Pulmonaria Gallorum v. Pilosella.

Pulsatilla alba J. B. Park. flore albo C. B. Ger. In summis Jurae montis
jugis. Haec non floris color tamum, sed etiam tota specie distincta est a
vulgari Pulsatilla, quam memini me alieubi vidisse flore albo

Punica malus sylvestris C. B. Ger. Punica sylvestris major, sive Balaustium
majus Park. Malus Pu^ica J. B. The Pomegranate-tree. In Gallia Narbonensi and
Provincia passim.

N. Poma in genere censentur boni succi, ventriculo convenientia sed pauci
nutrimenti.

Dulcia eorumque syrupus a dhibentur in tussi chronica and pleuritide: in
febribus minus commoda sunt, quia Ventriculo inflations causant.

Acida frigida sunt and adstringentia, stomachica. Usus praecip. in febribus
biliosis, in Gonorrhoea, pica gravidarum compescenda, orisque putredine
corrigenda and sim.

Vinosa (acido-dulcia, Granata muzae) mediae sunt naturae inter dulcia and
acida, cardiaca ac cephalica. Usus praecip. in syncope, vertigine, etc. Ex
malis hisc^ ad usus supradictos succus exprimintur and fermentatus depuratusque
vinum dicitur.

Flores, tam Balaustia quam Cytini, ejusdem sunt naturae, terrestris sc. valide
adstringentis; unde creberrimus eorum usus esse solet in omnis generis
fluxionibus v. g. diarrhoea, dysenteria, fluxu uterino, etc. in sanguine
vulnerum cohibendo, gingivarum laxitate emendanda, in hernia curanda, etc. Haec
omnia Schroderus.

Cortex (malicorium, psidium) ejusdem naturae cum floribus est. Utilis etiam ad
coria praeparanda, and ad atramentum vice gallarum. Addit Constantinus,
Malicorium vino decoctum ac potum omnes ventris tineas necare, maxim eas quas
Ascaridas vocant.

Nuclei refrigerant itidem, astringuntque, imprimis qui ex pomis acidis
collecti. Scbrod. Breviter Flores, Cortex, nuclei, [adde and folia] ad ea
conducunt quibuscunque adstrictione opus est.

Ex malis Punicis contusis cum suis corticibus exprimitur succus qui purgat
bilem flavam, ut scribit Caesalpinus.

Pyracantha Lob. Clus. Pyr. quibusdam J. B. Oxyacantha Theophrasti Ger.
Oxyacantha Dioscoridis, sive Spina acida Pyri folio C. B. Circa Florentiam and
alibi in Etruria copiose.

Pyrola folio serrato J. B. folio mucronato serrato C. B. tenerior Park. 2
tenerior Clusii Ger. In montibus Genevae vicinis, inque sylvis montosis non
long a Constantia versus Scaphusiam.

N. In store Pyrolae v^ulgaris insignem observavi varietatem. In una enim
planta inferior floris lacinia sive labellum magis propendet quam in altera:
Stylus etlam in una magis depender and deorsum incurvatur quam in altera. Forte
una infoecunda est, flores duntaxat proserens, illa nimirum cujus labellum and
stylus propendent, cum and caulis exuccus and evanidus videatur, altexa
foecunda, cum and caulis robustior sit and succulentior.

Q
QUinquesolium album majus caulescens C. B. verum descriptio non been convenit
huic nostrae plan^ae: Melius respondet figura J. Bauhini sub titulo Pentaphylli
recti. Vidimus Primo in Alpibus Carinthiacis, deinde in monte Salevae, tandem
ad exteriorem portam max. Carthusianorum coenobii, ubique e rupium fisluris
exiens.

Quinquefolium album majus alterum C. B. sylvaticum majus flore albo Ger.
Pentaphyllon album J. B. majus alterum album Park. In Alpibus Stiriacis inter
oppidulum S. Michaelis and Knittlefield.

Quinquefolium minus repens luteum C. B. An Quinquefolium minus repens
lanuginosum luteum ejusdem? Pentaphyllum incanum Ger. repens minus Park.
Pentaphyllon parvum hirsutum J. B. In Episcopatu Tridentino and Helvetia,
itemque circa Genevam e^ plain palais. Martio and Aprili floret, undo a
Schwenckfeldio recte denominatur, Quinquefolium vernum minus.

Quinquefolium minus repens Alpinum aureum C. B. minus flore aureo Ger. emac.
Alpinum splendens flore aureo J. B. Pentaphyllum incanum repens Alpinum Park.
In montis Jurae summo vertice La Dole dicto.

Quinquefolium rectum luteum minus. An Quinquefolium montanum erectum hirsutum
luteum C. B.? Pentaphyllum montanum erectum Park.? In sylva Valena prope montem
Lupi. Folia longis insident pediculis and circumcirca dentata sunt, denticulis
majoribus, non admodum hirsuta. Caules ex eadem radice plures exount,
dodrantales, qui in summitatibus suis numerosos gestant flores.

Quinquefolium Alpinum argenteum album. In altiss. montibus max. Carthusianorum
coenobio proximis. Persimile est Trifolio Alpino argenteo Ponae.

Quinquefolium fragiferum C. B. Pentaphyllum fragiferum Ger. Park.
Pentaphylloides erectum J. B. In monte Saleva prope arcem antiquam jam fere
collapsam.

Quinquefollo fragifero affinis C. B. Pentaphyllum supinum Potentillae facie
Ger. Park. Pentaphylloides supinum J. B. In Germania prope Rhenum, infra
Moguntiam.

R
RAdix cava v. Fumaria bulbosa.

Rapistrum monospermon J. B. C. B. Park. In Italia non long a Liburno, circa
Genevam etiam and Monspelium.

Rapunculus spicatus C. B. spicatus sive comosus albus and caeruleus J. B.
spicatus alopecuroides Park. Rapuntium majus Ger. Primo eum observavimus circa
Spadam Episcopats is Leodiensis urbeculam acidulis celebrem, in montosis postea
in collibus Genevae vicinis, ut La Bastie, etc.

Rapunculi genus folio serrato rotundiore J. B. In monte Jura. Haec planta an
ab aliis descripta sit necne nondum comperimus.

Ranunculus albus simplici flore J. B. Alpinus albus Ger. montanus albus minor
simplex Park. mont. Aconiti fo^^, flore albo minore C. B. In Jura and Saleva
monti^us copiose. Maio floret.

Ranunculus montanus albus hirsutus J. B. montanus Pennaei Park. mont. hirsutus
purpureus Ger. emac. montanus VI, sive montanus hirsutus purpurascente flore C.
B. In sylvosis Jurae montis prope verticem Thuiri.

Ranunculus tenuifolius montanus luteus J. B. In montis Jurae praealta part
Thuiri J. Bauhino and nobis etiam inventus.

Ranunculus montanus lanuginosus foliis Ranunculi pratensis repentis C. B.
Park. Ran. magnus valde hirsutus, flore luteo J. B. cujus descriptio quae
desumpta est e Phytopinace C. B. nostro Ranunculo (quem in Saleva copiosum
invenimus) adamus^im respondet.

Ranunculus v. Aconitum.

Reseda alba J. B. maxima Ger. C. Bauhini (quem sequitur Parkinsonus) mentem
non capio; nam Resedam suam majorem cum floribus luteis describit. In Italia
satis frequens.

Resedae affinis v. Phyteuma.

Rhamnus* Clusii flore albo Ger. secundus Monspeliensium sive primus Clusii
Park. cujus figura plantae huic non respondet. Rham. spinis oblongis, flore
caudicante C. B. Rh. cortice albo Monspeliensis J. B. Circa Florentiam and
Monspelium.

Rhamnus folio subrotundo v. Paliurus.

Rhododendron v. Oleander.

Rhus folio Ulmi C. B. coriaria Dod. Ger. obsoniorum Lob. Clus. Sumach, sive
Rhus obsoniorum and coriariorum Park. Rhus sive Sumach J. B. In collibus circa
Monspelium prope Castelneuf, aux Garigues, etc.

N. 1. In agro Salmanticensi (referente Clusio) quaestus gratia diligenter
colitur. Caeduntur singulis annis enati surculi cubitales ad radicem usque
deinde desiccantur, in pollinem rediguntur, and ad coria densanda adhibentur.

2. Semen and folia refrigerant and astringunt, unde fluxum quemernque alvi,
uteri, mensiumve, haemorrhoidum compescunt, vomitum sistunt, bilem obtundunt,
seu intus in jusculis and sorbitionibus sumpta, sive extus adhibita. Dentes
denigrant; putredini and Gangraenae resistunt. Gummi dentibus inditum
odontalgiam sedat. Schrod.

Rhus myrtisolia Monspeliaca C. B. myrtifolia Ger. Plinii putata J. B. Plinii
myrtifolia Park. Circa Monspelium copiose, praecipue ad ripas Ladi amnis. Ad
coria ^irmanda cunctae Narbonae notissimam and usitatissimam icit Lobelius.

Ricinus major vulgaris J. B C. B. Ricinus sive Palma Christi Ger. Ricinus sive
Cataputia major vulgatior Park. Circa Messanam Siciliae and Rhegium Calabriae
in sepibus frequens, ubi in fruticem satis grandem, Sambuci aemulum adolescit,
and multos annos durat. Semen Ricino insecto simile, unde plantae nomen.

N. Semen seu nuclei potenter bilem and pituitam (...) (...) pellunt, verum ob
vehementiam rarissimi usus sunt. Ex semine oleum exprimitur ad multa utile, v
g. tumoes and flatus praesertim ventris, coli and ilci dolores, artus
contractos, duritiem alvi and ventris tincas in pueris, tumores and duritias
mammarum, si parts eo illinantur, and duae aut tres guttulae in lacte aut
pingui aliquo jure sumantur. Oleum hoc ficus infernalis oleum vocant. Haec fere
Monardes and Clusius.

Rosa rubella flore parvo, simplici non spinosa J. B. sylv. minor rubello flore
C. B. In montibus circa Genevam.

Rosa sylvestris rubella parvo frutice J. B. In collibus prope Genevam, v. g.
ld Bastie, Champe, etc.

Rosmarinus coronarius fruticosus J. B. spontaneus latiore folio C. B.
Rosmarinus coronaries Ger. Libanotis coronaria, sive Rosmarinum vulgar Park.
In Italia and Gallia Narbonensi in collibus saxosis prope mare affatim.

N. In usu sunt solia, flores (Anthos officinis dicti) semen. Cephalica sunt e
praecipuis ut and uterina. Usus praecip in affectibus capitis ac nervorum,
Apoplexia, Hpilepsia, Paralysi, Vertigine, Caro, etc. visum acuunt, foetorem
halitus emendant; Epatis, Lienis ac Uteri obstructiones resolvunt, ictero ac
fluori albo mulierum medenture, corque confortant. Herba ipsa sussitu and
vapore suo pestis tempore aerem emendat and salubrem reddit.

Rubia angustisolia spicata Park. C. B. Circa Monspelium plurimis in locis, v.
g. collibus juxta Castelneuf: Agris Gramontiae sylvae vicinis, etc.

Rubia marina Ger. Park. marina Narbonensium J. B. maritima C. B. Ad Mare
Mediterraneums, in litoribus arenosis prope Syracusas; Cataniam, Terracinam,
Monspelium collegimus.

Rubia erecta quadrifolia J. B. In pascuis quibusdam prope Genevam trans
Rhodanum fluvium. Hanc non ita pridem in Westmorlandia Angliae Provincia inveni.

Rubia laevis Taurinensium Park. Rubia cruciata laevis Ger. quadrifolia, vel
latifolia laevis C. B. quadrifolia Italica hirsuta J. B. In Italia a D. F.
Willughby inventa.

Rubia echinata Saxatilis v. Cruciata minima.

Rubia sylvatica laevis v. Mollugo.

Ruta capraria v. Galega.

Ruta canina v. Scrophularia.

Ruta pratensis v. Thalictrum.

Ruta sylvestris Lob. sylv. major C. B. J. B. Park. sylv. montana Ger. In
collibus petrosis circa Monspelium and Nemausnm. In Etruria non long ab oppido
Massa eam vidimus sponte natam.

Ruta sylvestris minor C. B. J. B. Park. sylv. minima Ger. Peganiu^
Narbonensium Lob. In agris sterilioribus non circa Monspelium tantum sed per
totam Narbonensem Galliam.

N. Ruta Alexipharmaca est, cephalica ac nervina. Usus praecip. in peste
allisque affectibus malignis praeservandis ac curandis (unde and Theriaca
pauperum nonnullis dicitur) visu acuendo, lascivia reprimenda (Ruta facit
castum Schol. Salern.) pleuritide curanda, imbecillitate ventricull corrigenda,
colica discutlenda, morfu canis rabidi debellando, Schrod. qui plura habet de
usu ejus extrinseco; quem adi ut and Parkinsonum. Summatim Interne sumpta ad
tria praecipue celebratur, viz. 1. pestem praeservandam aut arcendam; 2.
oculorum caliginem discutlendam, andacuendum visum, 3. appetitus venereos
cohibendos.

S
SAbina baccifera v. Cedrus Lycia.

Salix Alpina latifolia pumila glabra, An Salix pumila latifolia prior Clus.?
An Salix pumila folio utrinque glabro J. B.? In supremis jugis montis Jurae
prope Genevam.

Salvia fruticosa lutea v. Verbascum IV Matthew.

Sambucus racemosa rubra C. B. Park. racemosa acinis rubris J. B. racemosa vel
cervina Ger. In Alpibus Carinthiacis, and in sylviss prope max. Carthusianorum
coenobium.

N. Cervum Sambucum racemosam sicut and Solanum lethale magno desiderio
inquirere didici. Ubi namque locorum eas stirpes provenire intellexit eo se
confert. Quodque mirari subit, solent binae hae stirpes plerunque eo^dem situs
occupare, Hisce cervus unice delectatur, folia utriusque non baccas decerpens,
etc. Praeterea (quod non minus admiratione dignum est) observayi cervum solum
follis harum plantarum vesci, non autem cervam, nisi ea praegnans fuerit and
cervum in utero gestaverit, tum enim, etc. Trag. lib. 3. cap. 24. Sane vix
fidem apud me obtinent quae hoc in logo Tragus scripsit, quamvis se experientia
doctum affirmet.

Sanamunda prima Clusii v. Tarton-raire.

Sanamunda tertia Clusii Ger. Park. Sesamoides parvum Dalechampii, Sanamunda 3
Clusii J. B. Thy melaea tomentosa foliis Sedi minoris C. B. In ins^la ad
Promont. Pachynum.

Sanicula guttata Ger. Park. Alpina guttata J. B. montana rotundifolia major C.
B. In Alpibus Helveticis; item in montibus Jura and Saleva.

Sanicula foemina Matthew. v. Astrantia nigra.

Saponaria minor quibusdam J. B. Ocymoides repens Park. repens mont^num C. B.
Lychnis montana repens Ger. In colle la Bastie prope Genevam, inque Etruria non
procul a Massa, via qua inde Lucam itur.

Satureia hortensis Ger. vulgaris Park. durior J. B. montana C. B. In Gallia
Narbonensi circa Monspelium, Nemausum, etc. in collibus. Invenimus etiam in
Hetruria in alveo cujusdam torrentis prope Radicofanum.

Satureia aestiva hortensis Ger. hortensis Park. sativa J, B. hortensis, sive
Cunila sativa Plinii C. B. In agris circa Castelneuf, non long a Monspelio
copiose.

Satureia S. Juliani Ger. spicata C. B. spicata S. Juliani Park. foliis
tenuibus, sive tohuifolia, S. Juliani quorudam J. B. In collibus Messanensis
agri, non minus frequens quam in ipso monte S. Juliani. Vidimus and in ipsis
urbis Florentiae muris.

N. 1. Saporis and odoris est acris and calidi. Usus in affectibus ventric^li,
cruditate, anorexia, etc. pectoris, asthmate; uteri, mensibus obstructis; visum
acuit. Extrinsecus discutit tumores, dolorem ischiadicum lenit* ejusque succus
cum tantillo olei ros. auribus instillatus tinnitum and surditatem aufert.

2. Germanis in usu est ad Brassicas capitatas condiendas, qui fit, ut illae
jucundissimum odorem and saporem gratissimum acquirant; quin and fabis,
aliisque leguminibus incoqui solet, ad eorum flatuositatem corrigendam. J. B.
Schrod.

Saxifragia Venetorum Ad. Daucus selinoides major Park. montanus Apii folio
major C. B. Liban^tis altera quorundam, aliis dicta Cervaria nigra J. B. Lib.
Theophrasti nigra Ger. In pascuis montosis and vineis juxta Rhenum in Germania,
and in collibus Genevae vicinis copiose.

Scabiosa montana max. Park. Ger. Alpina foliis Centaurii majoris C. B. Alpina
maxima Ad. In ascensu montis Jurae non long ab altissimo vertice Thuiri.

Scabiosa argentea angustifolia Park. G. B. graminea argentea J. B. In planis
Fori Julii depressis, quae aquae ox Alpibus ubertim delabentes hyberno tempore
aliquoties late inundant; alyeos torrentum dicere posses nisi latitudo obstaret.

Scabiosa latifolia rubro flore J. B. montana V, sive latifolia rubra non
laciniata secunda C. B. rubra Austriaca Ger. emac. In montibus Genevae
proximis, inque Germanicis montosis sylvis passim luxuriat.

Scabiosa Pannonica flore albo Park. montana calidarum regionum major Lobelio
J. B. montana alba Ger. pratensis and arvensis V, sivo fruticans angustifolia
^lba C. B. In collibus saxosis agti Narbonensis petq^uaam familiaris. Ab hac
non m^ltum diffort Soab^osa^ glabra foliis rigidis uiridibus, ut ipsemet
Lobelius fatotur.

Scabiosa multifido folio, flore albo vel potius (...) J. B. multifido folio,
flore flavescente ^. B. Ho^ pallido Ger. emac. Pannonica flore albo quoad
figuram Park. Circa Viennam Austriae ud sopes and in pascuis. Simillima est
superiori, ideoque non immerito ejus icone pro priote usus est Parkinsonus.

Scabiosa 10, sive repens Clusii J. B. minima Bellidis folio Ger. Scab.
Globulariae Bellidis foliis Park. Belli^ oaerulea IV, sive montana frutescens
G. B. quem just reprehendit Parkinsonus, quod eam frutascere dicat. Ad radices
montis Salevae copiose.

Scammonea Monspeliaca dicta Park. Monspel. flore parvo C. B. Monspeliaca
foliis rotundioribus C. B. Monspeiiensis Ger. Ad mare prope Monspelium.

Scammoneae Monspeliacae affinis Park. Scam. Monspeliacae affinis foliis
acutioribus G. B. Apocynum latifolium amplexicaule J. B. cur a. latifolium
apellat? Juxta Cataniam Siciliae urbem.

Scolymus Theophrasti Park. v. Cinara sylvestris.

Scorpioides Bupleuri folio Ger. G. B. Scor. siliqua campoide hispida J. B.
Scorp. Bupleuri folio minor spluribus corniculis asperis Park. quamvis ille
hane a nemine ante se editam glorietur. Messanae in collibus, and Monspelii in
sossis and aggeribus ipsius arcis.

Scorpioides Telephium Anguillarae Lob. Scorpioides Matthioli Ger. Scorp.
Matthioli, sive Portulacae folio Park. Telephium Scorpioides J. B. Telephium
Dioscofidis, seu Scorpioides ob siliquarum similitudinem G. B. Ciria Liburnum,
Messanam, Monspelium, etc.

Scorpioides leguminosa v. Ornithopodio similis.

Scorpioides leguminosa altera J. B. In vineis and hortis ad latera montium
Messanae imminentium. Hanc plantan^ a nullo alio scriptore proditam censemus.

Scrophularia Ruta canina dicta Park. Scroph. Ruta canina dicta, vulgaris C. B.
Ruta canina Lob. Ger. Scroph. 3 Dodonaei tenuifolia, Ruta canina quibusdam ly^
ca^a J. B. Ad Rheni ripas prope Basileam primo, deinde in Italia, Gallia
Narbonensi etc. circa Goneyam oliservavimus.

Scrophularia folio Urticae C. B. peregrina Park. flore rubro Camerani J. B.
^irca P^sas copiose in muris ipsius urbj^ and ^libi iu Italia.

S^^tellaria J. B. v. Opuntia marina.

Securidaca minor Lob. minor lutea Ger. altera sive minor J. B. lutea minor
cotniculis recurvis C. B. Hedysarum minus Park. In oollibus circa Messanam.

Securidaca major articulata Park. dumetorum major flore vario, siliquis
articulatis C. B. Melilotus 5 Tragi J. B. Ad agrorum margines in Germania
passim.

Securidacae gonus triphyllon J. B An Foenugrae cum sylv. alterum poly ceration
C. B. ^ Foenum Graecum sylvestre Ger. Park. In collibus prope Castelneuf eis
Ladum Monspeliacum amnem.

Securidaea silliquis plani^ dentatis Ger. sliquis planis utrinque dentatio J.
B. per^rgrina Clusii Park. Lunaria radiata Robini J. B. In lingua illa
procurrente inter Portum Zanchaeum and fretum Siculum, and alibi circa Messanam.

Sedum majus vulgar C. B. J. B. Park. Sempervivum majus Ger. In summis Jugis
montis Jurae, inque Alpibus Sabaudicis and Helveticis, etc.

Sedum minus loteum ramulis reflexis C. B. minus luteum, flore se
circumflectente J. B. Aizoon Scorpioides Ger. Vermicularis Scorpioides Park.

Sedum serratnm J. B. Cotyledon media foliis oblongis serratis C. B. Umbillcu^
Veneri^ minor Ger. In montibus Tyrolensibus and Helveticis, itemque in Jura and
Saleva Genevoe vicinis.

Sedum serratum alterum foliis longis angustis. An Sedum Pyrenaeum serratum
longifolium Hort. Blaes? A priore diff^rt longitudine and angustia foliorum.
Invenimus in Alpibus non long a Pontieba: vidimus postea in horto Regio
Paris^ensi.

S^dum Alpinum minimum foliis cinereis, flore candido J. B. Saxatile and
Alpinum II, sive album foliolis compactis C. B. minimum Alpinum Muscoides Park.
in montibus non long a Bolzano Martio mense floruit.

Sedum Alpinum 4 Clusii Ger. emac. minimum Alpinum villosum Park. Alpin III,
sive hirsutem lacteo flore C. B. Chali^^iasme Alpina J. B. in Aspend. tom. 3.
In altissimo cacumine montis Jurae la Doie dicto. Flos candidus aetote rubescie
dum recens odoratissimus est Jasmini instar.

Sedum parvum folio circinato, flore albo J. B. minus folio circinato C. B.
Vermicularis dasyphyllos Park. Circa Monspelium, Genevam, etc. in muris and
rupibus copiose.

Sedum echinatum vel stellatum flore albo J. B. In muscosis sepium aggeribus
non long a Geneva; secus viam quae Inde ad oppidum Jay ducit. Messanae quoque
similibus in locis invenimus. Descriptio J. Bauhini plantae huic nostrae per
omnia exact non congruit.

Sedum echinatum flore luteo J. B. Circa Portum Veneris and alibi in Italia.
Palnta haec and proxime antecedens a F. Columna describuntur. Nostra a. ab
illius nonnihil diversa videtur; folia enim habet ad Alsinem accedentia and ut
memini nonn^hil crenata.

Sedum Alpinum hirsutum luteum C. B. petraeum Ger. petraeum montanum luteum
Park. Phyllon thelygonon Dalechampio J. B. In monte Saleva Genevae vicino.

Sedum montanum siliquosum lore albo, an Hesperidis Alpinae specis? In suprema
part montis Salevae ad aquarum scaturigines.

Sedum montanum minimum non acre flore purpurascente parvo. In altissimis
rupibus Jurae montis.

Sedum minimum non acre totum rubrum flore hexaphyllo purpureo. Cataniae in
muris and tectis copiose.

Sedum medium flore albo staminibus luteos apices gestantibus. In muris
quibusdam prope Messanam Siciliae.

Sempervivum v. Sedum.

Sonecio folio non laciniato J. B. folio non laciniato Myconi Park. VI, sive
folio non laciniato C. B. In sabulosis inter oppidum Rot and Norimbergam
Germaniae urbem. Eundem etiam Messanae in ascensu montium observavi.

Sertolaria Imperati v. Opuntia morina.

Seseli Aethiopicum Salicis folio C. B. Ses. Aethiopicum frutex Park. Ger. Ses.
Aethiopicum fruticosum folio ^ericlymeni J. B. In rupibus oppido S. Chamas in
Galloprovincia vicinis: Aiunt and circa Monspelium sponte provenire; verum nos
ibi non vidimus.

Seseli Creticum minus v. Caucalis minor pulchro semine. Massiliensium v.
Foeniculum tortuosum. Officinarum v. Siler montanum.

Sideritis Monspessulana J. B. Scordioides Ger. Monspeliensis Scordioides Lob.
Monspellensis Lobelii Park. foliis hirsutis profunde crenatis C. B. Monspelii
circa patibulum copiose, and alibi aux Garigues.

Sideritis vulgaris Ger. vulgaris Clusii Park. vulgaris hirsuta J. B. hirsuta
IV, sive vulgaris hirsuta erecta C. B. Per Germaniam, Italiam and Galliam in
agrorum marginibus vulgatissima.

Sideritis genus verticill^ spinosis J. B. In Italia and Gallia Nar bonetisi
prope Monspelium in agris. Icon Sideritidis procumbentis non ramosae Clus. huic
non dissimilis est.

Sideritis Valerandi Dourez brevi spiea J. B. Alpina hyssopifolio Ger. C. B.
montana hyssopifolia Park. In monte Thuiri, Attendantur figure and descriptio
J. B. Nam aliorum neque figurae, neque descriptiqnes per omnia quadrant.

Sideritis pratensis lutea v. Euphrasia pratensis lutea.

Sigillum Solomonis v. Polygonatum.

Siler montanum Officinarum Lob. Ger. Seseli sive Siler montanum vulgar J. B.
Siler montanum, vulgo Siselios Park. Ligustieuni, quod Seseli officinatum C. B.
In Jura and Saleve montibus prope Genevam, snque Alpibus Pontiebae vicinis.

Siliqua arbor sive Ceratia J. B. Sil. edulis C. B. Sil. dulcis sive vulgatior
Park. Ceratia Siliqua sive Ceratonia Ger. In Sicilia non long a Puzallu
oppido, and sponte and copiose provenit. Offioinis Caroba dicitu haec arbor,
Germanis and Belgis Panis S. Johannis.

N. Siliquarum (ut recte Plinius) cortex ipse manditur, estque dulei and melleo
sapore, per siccitatem intellige, nobis tamen nonnihil nauseosus and ventriculo
ingratus. Miror a Veteres scripsisse quod astringat and ventrem sistat, cum
nobis (quotquot de eo contederimus cum essemus Venetlis) alvum solvit non secus
ac Cassia. Non tamen nega verim posse eos qui huio fructui assueverunt eo
innoxie vesci.

Sinapi Genevense sylvostre J. B. In alveo fluvii Arve prope Genevam copiose.
Haec planta an ab alio quoquam descripta sit hesclo.

sinapi echinatum v. Bruca echinata.

Smilax aspera Lob. Ger. J. B. aspera fructu rubente C. B. aspera fructu rub.
Park. In Sicilia, Italia and Gallia Narbonensi in sepibus passim.

N. Succedaneum est Sariaparillae in curanda lue Venerea, inque articulorum and
nervorum doloribus; noxios humores per sudorem and transpirationem evacuat,
cutis vitia expurgar. Datu vel in pulverem redacta vel in aqua aliove liquore
decocta.

Smyrnium Lob. Creticum Ger. Park. Creticum perfoliatum J. B. peregrinum
rotundo folio C. B. In Sicilia circa Pumto Cerciolo.

Solidago Saracenica Dod. Lob. Sarasenica vera Salicis folio Park. Virga aurea
angustifolia serrata C. B. aurea angustifolia serrata, sive Solidago Saracenica
J. B. In fossis prope Argentoratum, inque summis jugis montis Jurae ad
scaturigines aquarum.

N. Vulneraria insignis censetur, nec Saniculae aut Bugulae inferior, usu
interno and externo adhiberi apta.

Solanum halicacabum v. Alkekengi.

Solanum vulgar sive Officinarum acinis Iuteis. Circa Florentiam in Italia,
and Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi in vineis. Hanc baccarum differentiam
Matthiolus etiam olim observavit.

Sonchus lanatus Dalechampii J. B. villosus luteus major C. B. Park. Circa
Messanam and Monspelium.

Sonchus caeruleus latifolius J. B. montanus I, i. e. laevis laciniatus
caeruleus sive Alpinus caeruleus C. B. Alpinus caeruleus Park. In monte Jura,
inque montibus max. Carthusianorum caenobio imminentibus.

Sonchis affinis Terra-crepola J. B. Sonchus laevis angustifolius C. B. Ger.
emac. Park. Herba quae nobis Monspelii pro Terra-crepola oftensa fuit, similior
erat figurae sstius plantae quam J. Bauhinus Chondrillis asfinem aliquam
laciniatam an Trinciatellam nuncupat. Icones Terra-crepolae apud Lobelium,
Gerardum and Parkinsonum ei been respondent. Apud Monspelienses in acetariis
frequens hujus usus est.

Soldanella Alpina quibusdam J. B. Alpina major and minor Park. Ger. emac. III,
sive Alpina rotundifolia C. B. In monte Jura and Alpibus Sabaudicis copiose.

Sorbus J. B. Ger. domestica Lob. legitima Park. sativa C. B. In montibus supra
Messanam spontaneam vidinius. In alsiosis montibus ad Rhenum; neque non sylvis
Mediomatricum ad fluvios Saram and Blisam dictos admodum familiaris, autore
Trago. Nos Viennae Austriae Sorba fructum antea nobis incognitum in foro primum
venalem vidimus.

N. Sorba sed praecipue immatura valde astringunt, unde fluxui cujuscunque
generis convenient, and vomitum etiam sistunt. Pueris qulbus ob dentitionem
alvus fluit commode exhibentur.

Sorghum v. Melica.

Speculum Veneris Ger. majus Park. Avicularia Sylvii quibusdam J. B. Onobrychis
arvensis, sive Campanula arvensis erecta C. B. In Germania, Italia and Gallia
Narbonensi inter segetes passim.

Spartum max. maritimum Hollandicum spica secalina. In arenosis ad vicum
Schevelingam, uno ab Haga Comitum milliari.

Spartium arborescens v. Genista Hispanica.

Staphy lodendron J. B. Nux vesicaria Ger. Park. Pistacia ^ sive sylvestris C.
B. The Bladder-nut Tree. In clivis maritimis Regni Neapolitani prope Salernum.

Stella leguminosa v. Glaux peregrina annua.

Stoebe Salamantica prima Clusii Park. Salmanticensis prior Clusio, sive Jacea
inty bacea J. B. argentea major Ger. major foliis Cichoraceis, moliibus
lanuginosis C. B. Circa Monspelium passim, nec minus frequens in Sicilia and
Italia.

Stoebe calyculis argenteis C. B. argentea minor Ger. Salamantica argentea sive
tertia Clusii Park. Scabiosa squammata argentea J. B. In Italia prope Tropiam
Calabriae urbecuolam.

Stoebe major calyculis non splendentibus C. B. Austriaca elatior Park.
Centaurli majoris species tenuifolia J. B. In Germania, Italia and Gallia
Narbonensi frequens.

Stoechas citrina Germanica latiore folio J. B. Elichryson sive Stoechas
citrina latifolla C. B. Amarantus luteus latifolius Ger. In sterilioribus prope
Rhenum supra Coloniam Agrippinam plurima.

N. Hujus flores vino decocti and poti lumbricos ventris tris expellunt, quod
ego experientia verum esse didici. Trag.

Stoechas citrina tenuifolia Narbonensis J. B. Elichrysum sive Stoechas citrina
angustifolia C. B. Stoechas citrina sive Amarantus luteus Ger. Chrysocome sive
coma aurea and Stoechas citrina vulgaris Park. Circa Monspelium and alibi in
Gallia Narbonensi vulgatissima.

Stoechas citrina altera tenuifolia sive Italica J. B. Elichrysum foliis
oblongis, Staechadi citrinae similis Dod. In montibus Liguriae non procul Gavia
oppido, and alibi in Italia.

Stoechadi citrinae affinis, capitulis parvis, raris, squamosis, in pappos
evanescentibus J. B. Elichryson sylv. angustifolium capitulis conglobatis C. B.
Stoechas citrina altera odora Park. In saxis and rupium fissuris circa
Monspelium variis in locis.

Stoechas citrina altera odora Park. v. Chrysocome.

Stoechas sive Spica hortulana Ger. vulgaris Park. purpurea C. B. St. Arabica
vulgo dicta J. B. In sylva Grammon and alibi circa Monspelium, itemque medio
circiter itinere inter Monspelium and Arelaten.

N. 1. Stoechas Arabica praecipui usus est in affectibus capitis ac nervorum,
sc. in vertigine, Apoplexia, Paralysi ac Lethargo: in morbis pectoris idem
praestat quod Hyssopus. Insuper urinam and menses ciet, venenis resistit,
affectibus hypochondriacis succurrit. Extrinsecus in lotionibus capitis,
suffitu, etc. Schrod.

2. Stoechadis citrinae flores diuretici sunt and vulnerarii, usus praecip. in
obstructione urinae, epatis, lienis, mensium; coagulatum sanguinem resolvunt,
catarrhos exiccant, menses nimios sistunt, lumbricos fugant: Commendantur and
inprimis ad exiccandas deflluxiones acres pulmonum, etc. Extrinsecus faciunt ad
emo^iendam uteri duritiem (in balneo) lendes abigunt (in^lixivio) capitis
defluxiones siccant and discutiunt (susfitu.) Schrod.

Styrax arbor Ger. J. B. St. arbor vulgaris Park. Styrax folio mali cotonei C.
B. Circa Tusculum in sepibus and sylvis copiose: ubi and Caesalpinus eam
observavit.

N. Styrax cephalicus inprimis est and nervinus; medetur tusli, catarrhis,
raucedini, gravedini; vulvae praeclusae duritieve laboranti extra and intra
datus convenit. Immiscetur cardiacis and laetificantibus, alvum leniter mollit
si cum Terebinthina in forma Catapotii assumatur. Miscetur utiliter malagmatis
discutientibus and acopis. Scbrod. e Diosc.

Suber latisolium J. B. Ger. Park. II, sive latifolium perpetuo virens C. B.
The broad-leaved Cork-tree. D. Willughby hane arborem observavit itinere a
Neapoli ad Romam.

N. 1. Cortex tritus ex aqua calida potus sanguinis fluxum sistit. Ejusdem
cinis ad idem valet. Usus ejus est ad anchoralia navium, piscantium tragulas,
cadorum obturamenta, foeminarum calceatum hybernum, alvearia, etc.

2. Detrahendis corticibus haec est ratio. Qua stipes telluri committitur,
circumscinditur ad lignosam usque materiam, pariterque, in summis humeris
antequam in brachia dividat sese: mox a summo ad imum fiditur detrahiturque
cortex. Non explanantur aqua sed igni, nec demuntur cortices nisi tertio mox
anno. Quod si paucis diebus a tonsura largi imbres supervenerint, arbor
interit: quod raro evenit nimirum regione calida and sicca, and temporum
observatione raro sallente. Clus. e Quinquerano.

Sumach v. Rhus.

Symphytum maculosum v. Pulmonaria maculosa.

Sysirynchium majus Ger. Clus. Park. majus flore lutea macula notato C. B.
Iridi bulbosae affine Sysirynchium majus J. B. In lingua illa quae Portum
Messanensem a Freto Siculo dividit, and in insula ad Prom. Pachynum, utrobique
copiose.

T
TAmarix v. Myrica.

Tanacetum inodorum Park. non odorum Ger. montanum inodorum minore flore C. B.
album J. B. In colle la Bastie prope Genevam and ad Rhodani ripas.

N. Haec planta florem habet radiatum Bellidis majoris aemulum, ideoque cum nec
odorem Tanaceti habeat, rectius ad Bellides refertur, and Bellis leucanthemo^
Tanaceti follo a D. Morrisono denominatur.

Tarton-raire Gallo-provinciae Lob. Ger. Massiliensium Park. Massil. Sanamunda
1 Clusii J. B. Thymelaea foliis candicantibus, Serici instar mollibus C. B. In
rupibus maritimis non long a Salerno.

Telephium Scorpioides J. B. v. Scorpioides.

Terrae glandes v. Chamaebalanus leguminosa.

Terebinthus Ger. J. B. vulgaris C. B. angustiore folio vulgatior Park. Circa
Monspelium: invenimus eam and in Etruria.

N. 1. Terebinthi folia, fructus, cortex (tradente Dioscoride) qua pollent
adstringendi vi, ad eadem ad quae Lentiscus convenient. Ejus fructus esculentus
est, at stomacho noxius, urinam vero ciet and excalefacit. Est and ad
excitandam venerem aptissimus: ex vino vero potus contra Phalangiorum morsus
prodest.

2. Species sunt Gallae, magnitudine Avellanae, intus cavae, provenientos ex
excrescentiis foliorum Terebinthorum masculorum. Has colligunt Rustici Thraciae
and Macedoniae, ac care vendunt ad tingenda serica subtilia diversis coloribus
in urbe Bource. Colligunt a vere quo tempore nisi colligerentur, in
longitudinem semipedalem excrescerent ad formam cornu. Bellon.

3. Quae pro Resina terebinthina in officinis habetur vel Laricis resina est
vel abietis, nam vera terebinthina ad nos hodie non adfertur, Botanicorum
unanimi sententia. Resinae autem vires and usus vide sub Pinu.

Teucrium C. B. majus vulgar Park. latifolium Ger. Teucrium multis J. B. In
Sicilia and Italia perquam familiare.

Teucrium Baeticum Ger. Baeticum and Creticum Clusii J. B. Teucrium Creticum
and Teucrium Baeticum Park. nam putamus haec duo non differ specie. Teuct.
peregrinum folio sinuoso C. B. and Teucrium Creticum incanum C. B. Prope
Syracusas, in insula ad Promont. Pachynum, circa Puzallu, and alibi in Sicilia.
Invenit D. Willughby in itinere a Neapoli ad Romam.

N. Ut facie sic viribus cum Chamaedry convenit. Veteres lienem absumendi
validam vim ei attribuunt.

Teucrium majus Pannonicum v. Chamaedrys falsa maxima.

Alpinum cisti flore v. Chamaedrys.

Thalictrum angustissimo folio Park. pratense angustiss. folio C. B. Prodr. A'd
fluvium Lycum prope Augustam Vindelicorum in Germania.

Thalictrum majus Hispanicum Ger. em^c. majus album Hispanicum Park. maj.
folliculis angulosis, caul laevi J. B. 4, sive majus florum staminulis
purpurascentibus C. B. In sylvosis Jurae montis circa Thuiri.

Thapsia latifolia Hispanica Park. latifolia Clusii Ger. Thapsia 1 Clusii
latifolia, flore luteo, semine lato, similis Seseli Peloponnensi Lobelii J. B.
An Thapsia sive Turbith Garganicum semine latissimo ejusdem? Messanae pro
Turbith utuntur hac planta, ut recte notat Imperatus, v. J. B. Messanae in
lingula saepius memorat^.

N. Haec planta violenter admodum purgat, ideoque in ea exhibenda cauto opus
est. Messanenses, ut dictum, pro Turbith ea utuntur, cujus vires notae. v.
Schroderum and alios.

Thlaspi clypeatum hieracifolium majus Park. biscutatum asperum hieracifolium
and majus C. B. clypeatum Lobelii Ger. Lunaria biscutata J. B. In Germania,
Italia, Sicilia and Gallia variis in locis.

Thlaspi minus clypeatum Ger. clyp. minus Serpylli folio Park. clyp. Serpylli
folio C. B. Lunaria peltata minima, quibusdam ad Thlaspi referenda J. B. Circa
Monspelium sed rarius.

Thlaspi Candiae Ger. umbellatum Creticum Iberidis folio C. B. Creticum
quibusdam flore rubente J. B. In sylvis montosis prope Salernum in Regno
Neapolitano, and Viterbum in Etruria.

Thlaspi umbellatum arvense amarum J. B. umbellatum arvense Iberidis folio C.
B. Park. Thl. amarum Ger. Inter segetes in monte Saleva, and c^^ca Thutri
da^bus a Geneva leucis copiose.

Thlaspi umbellatum Nasturtii folio Monspeliacum C. B. Park. umbellatum
Narbonense Ger. umbellatum, tenuiter diviso folio, amarum Narbonense Lobelii J.
B. In agris Castri novi Monspelio vicinis, and alibi circa Monspelium.

Thlaspi spinosum Ger. spinosum fruticosum Park. C. B. Leucoium spinosum, sive
Thlaspi spinosum aliis J. B. In summis rupibus montis Lupi, tribus Monspelio
leucis distantis.

Thlaspi capsulis sublongis incanum J. B. fruticosum incanum Ger. C. B. incanum
Mechliniense Park. In agro Romano abundat, ad hyemem usque florens.

Thlaspi Narbonense Centunculi angusto folio Ad. Narbonense Lobelii Ger.
Nasturtium vel Thlaspi maritimum J. B. Thlaspi. Alysson dictum maritimum C. B.
Ad Mare Mediterraneum ubique fere.

Thlaspi minus quibusdam, aliis Alysson minus J. B. Thl. Alysson dictum
campestre minus C. B. Thlaspi arvense minus luteum Park. Thlaspi Graecum Lob.
Circa Genevam in glareosis passim, atque etiam circa Moguntiam, and Monspel.

Thlaspi oleraceum Tab. rotundisolium Ger. arvense perfoliatum majus C. B.
Park. Bursa pastoris, foliis Perfoliatae J. B. Circa Bresciam in Italia and
Genevam in Gallia.

Thlaspi Alpinum minus capitulo rotundo C. B. Park. petraeum minus Ger. emac.
petraeum myagryodes Ponae. In rupibus humidioribus montium Jurae and Salevae.

Thora Valdensis Ger. Phthora folio Cyclamini J. B. Aconitum pardalianches II,
seu Thora minor C. B. Park. itemque I, seu Thora major eorundem. Non enim
concesserim has duas specie differ. In altissimis jugis montis Jurae prope
Thuiri.

Thymelaea Ger. Park. foliis Lini C. B. Monspeliaca J. B. In Italia and Gallia
Narbonensi, agris depressioribus, inter alios frutices passim.

N. Hujus plantae fructum coccum seu Granum Gnidium vocant herbarii peritiores.
Ast Officinis nostris Mezerei Germanici baccae Cocci Gnidii appellantur,
monente Schrodero. Cocco Gnidio vis ardens est and fauces adurens, Unde mirum
nobis videtur quod scribit Clufius, Fructu Thymelaeae maturo and rubro Perdices
and aviculas avidissime vesci.

Thymelaea minor Cordi J. B. Thymelaeae affinis facie externa C. B. Thymelaea
minor sive Cneorum Matthioli Park. In Germania circa Basileam and alibi.

Thymelaea quaedam incana Genevensis. In sylyosis rupibus ad latera montis
Salevae ex part quae Genevam respicit, e saxorum sissuris.

Thymelaea tomentosa v. Sanamunda. foliis candicantibus v. Tarton-raire.

Thymum Creticum Ger. Creticum sive. Antiquorum J. B. Thymus capitatus, qui
Dioscoridis C. B. Thymum legitimum capitatum Park In saxosis prope Syracusas.

Thymum durius Ger. durius vulgar Park. vulgar rigidius folio cinereo J. B.
vulgar folio tenuiore C. B. In Gallia Narbonensi vix alia communior planta.

N. Usus hujus herbae praecip. in affectibus Tartareis, (1.) Pulmonum, ut
Asthmate, tussi. (2.) Artuum, ut Podagrae; omnia viscera reserat, appetitum
excitat. Extrinsecus in tumoribus frigidis, sugillationibus, inslationibus
ventriculi, doloribus arthriticis. Schrol.

Tithymalus folio longo glauco, caul rubro, seminibus verrucosis. Prope
Meslanam. Elatior and major est multo Tithymalo verrucoso vulgari.

Tithymalus arboreus Park. dendroides J. B. dendroides ex codice Caesareo Ger.
dendroides, Italis Tithymalo arboreo Lob. myrtifolius arboreus C. B. Sed cur
appellat myrtifolium, cum folia ejus magis accedant ad Mezereon Germanicum? In
montosis non long a Massa prope Salernum, and alibi in Italia, ubi in magnum
and lignosum fruticem adolescit.

Tihymalus non acris flore rubro J. B. Esula sive Pityusa III, i e Tithymalus
montanus non acris C. B. qui huc refert Esulam dulcem Tragi, and Pityusam, sive
Esulam minorem alteram floribus rubris Lob. Ger. Park. Planta quam volumus
optime descripta est ^ J. Bauhino: olim nobis missa suit Londino sub titulo
Apios tuberosa radice.

Tithymalus myrsinites Lob. J. B. Park. myrtifolius latifolius Ger. Figura quam
Gerardus exhibet pro Tith. myrtifolio latifolio, Parkinsonus dat pro myrsinite
incano. Tith. myrsinites latifolius C. B. Juxta arcem Rhegii in Calabria.

Tithymalus myrsinites angustifolius C. B. Ger. Parkinsonus hujus iconem ponit
pro Tithymalo myrsinite Lob. Verum hae duae plantae specifice inter se
differunt: haec enim minor est, sed tamen erectior priore: Folia habet
angustiora and crebriora; been etiam respondet figurae Lobeliane. Invenimus
prope Massiliam ubi and Tragacantham, juxta mare.

Tithymalus pineus Ger. foliis Pini, forte Dioscoridis Pityusa C. B. Pityusa,
Tithymalus pineus, sive Esula minor Park. Tithymalo cyparissiae similis,
Pityusa multis J. B. Crepidines sabulosae fluminum and vicini colles
frequentius hunc alunt, inquit J. B. quod and nobis experientia confirmat, nam
in locis similibus secus Rhenum copiosum vidimus.

Tithymalus Amygdaloides sive characias J. B. characias II, sive rubens
peregrinus C. B. characias Monspeliensium Ger. Park. In saxosis circa
Monspelium, quin and in Italia circa Lericium, and alibi saepius nobis
conspectus.

Tithymalus serratus Dalechampii J. B. characias serratus Ger. characias folio
serrato C. B. char. serratus Monspeliensium Park. In Gallia Narbonensi passim
and copiose circa Nemausum, Monspelium, etc.

Thtiymalus verrucosus J. B. verrucosus Dalechampii Park. myrsinites, fructu
verrucae simili C. B. Circa pagum Thuiri duabus a Geneva leucis, quin and in
Germania aliquoties eum invenimus.

Tithymalus magnus multicaulis, sive Esula major J. B. Pityusa sive Esula II,
i. e. Tithymalus palustris fruticosus C. B. Esula major Germanica Ger. Park. In
Germania ad Rhenum copiosissime; circa Genevam quoque and in planis campis agri
Lugdunensis, per quos Geneva Lugdunum iter est.

Tithymalus palustris Pisanus. An Tithym. myrsinites incanus herbariorum?
Frequens in paludibus Pisanis, unde non dubito hanc esse quam intelligit
Caesalpinus per suum Tithymalum palustrem. Folia ejus hirsuta sunt, and ad
Tithymali characiae amygdaloides nostratis folia accedunt.

Tordylium minus v. Caucalis minor pulchro semine.

Trachelium parvum folio Bellidis subrotundo. Radix ei alba, simplex, lignosa,
annua: Caulis erectus, striatus: Folia alternatim posita, subrotunda, sine
pediculis caulibus adnexa. Flores Trachelii majoris. Circa Messanam.

Trachelium Alpinum etc. v. Echium Alpinum luteum.

Tragacantha C. B. vera Park. Massiliensis J. B. Tragacantha, sive Spina hirci
Ger. Ad lat^ra montis Aetnae, 14 supra Cataniam milliaribus, prope nivis
repositoria. Circa Massiliam ad maris litus, Forte tamen Massiliensis ab
Aetnaea specie differt.

N. E radice hujus plantae incisa, vel (ut alii volunt) sponte sua exudat gummi
Tragacantha pariter dictum, cujus usus praecip. ad tussim inveteratam, fauces
exasperatas, retusas voces, caeterasque destillationes (cum melle fit linctus,
subditurve linguae ut liquescat) contra renum dolorem and vesicae rosiones (in
passovel brodio) in dysenteria. Extrinsecus ad dysenteriam in clysteribus, ad
rubedinem and acres destillationes oculorum (soluta in aqua rosacea vel lacte)
ad palpebrarum scabritiem. Dos. j. Schrod.

Tragium v. Androsaemum foetidum.

Tragorchis v. Orchis.

Tragopogon perenne, sive Scorzonera fol. angustis incanis, floribus dilute
purpureis. In insula ad Prom. Pachynum.

Tragos sive Uva marina major herbariorum Lob. Uva marina major Ger. Tragos
sive Uva marina major J. B. Polygonum bacciferum maritimum majus C. B. In
Sicilia prope Punto Cerciolo, ubi humanam altitudinem aequat. Polygonum
bacciferum sive Uva marina major Park.

Tragos sive Uva marina minor J. B. Uva marina minor Ger. Polygonum bacciferum
maritimum minus C. B. Polygonum bacciferum minus, sive Uva marina minor Park.
In arenosis litoribus prope montem Ceti and Frontignanam, atque etiam in
saxosis collibus vicinis.

Tribulus terrestris J. B. Ger. Park. terrest. ciceris folio, fructu aculeato
C. B. In Sicilia, Italia and Gallia Narbonensi passim. Serius and sub Autumnum
floret.

Trifolium bituminosum Ger. Asphaltites sive bituminosum Park. bitumen redolens
C. B. Asphaltites sive bituminosum odoratum J* B. In Italia, Sicilia and Gallia
Narbonensi, in saxosis collibus non procul a mari.

Trifolium Alpinum argenteum Park. Alpinum argenteum, Persici flore C. B. In
praeruptis altissimorum montium max. Carthusianorum coenobio imminentium.

Trifolium capitulis globosis sine pediculis caulibus adnatis. Circa Mestanam
Siciliae metropolin alteram. Hanc speciem nuper invenimus in agro Suffolciensi.

Trifolium cochleatum echinatum, peltatum, orbiculatum, etc. v. Medica.

Trifolium fragiferum sive vesicarium floribus nitidis rubellis. Circa Liburnum
portum and alibi in Italia. Non long absimile est, imo forte idem Trifolio
folliculaceo sive vesicario minori purpureo J. B.

Trifolium fruticans v. Polemonium.

Trifolium pratense album a Fuchsio depictum sive mas J. B. Alii Botanici
speciem hanc cum Trifolio albo vulgari confundunt, a quo tamen diversissima
est. Circa Genevam in pascu^s and ad agrorum margines.

Trifolium stellatum C. B. stellatum Monspeliensium Park. stellatum purpureum
Monspessulanum J. B. Ad radices Vesuvii montis copiose; nec minus circa
Messanam in Sicilia, and Monspelium in Gallia Narbonensi.

Trifolium annuum erectum capitulis e glumis acerosis conflatis. Hanc speciem
in Regno Neapolitano ad maris litus collegi, cum Messana Neapolin redirem.

Tripolium minus J. B. C. B. Park. minus vulgar Ger. Ad mare prope Monspelium.
Omnibus suis partibus nostrate minus est.

Tubera J. B. Park. Tuber C. B. Tubera terrae Ger. Truffles. Tartufali the
Italians call them. Haec quamvis e terra ipsi nunquam eruimus, quia tamen tum
in Lombardia tum alibi in Italia and Gallia ex agris vicinis petita nobis in
cibis apposita sunt, noluimus omittere. Sunt autem tubera magno hodie in pretio
apud gulae proceres, tum saporis gratia, tum maxim quod Veneris incentiva sint.

N. Ratio seu modus quo (ut nobis relatum est) rustici tubera exquirunt, aut si
vis venantur, perridiculus est: Porcellum scilicet funiculo ad alterum pedem
alligato prae se agunt in pascua ubi horum proventum esse norunt, qui ubi ad
locum venit in quo tuber latitat, odore mox id percipit, rostroque e terra
eruit, erutum qui insequuntur surripiunt, and ad alia indaganda porcellum
abigunt.

Tussilago Alpina Ger. emac. Alpina minor folio rotundo J B. II, sive Alpina
rotundifolia glabra C. B. Alpina folio glabro Park. In Alpibus Stiriacis primo,
post in monte Jura eam invenimus.

Tussilago Alpina folio longo J B. Alpina folio oblongo Park. IV, sive Alpina
folio oblongo C. B. In montis Jurae partibus altissimis Thuiri and Dole dictis.
Haec planta Alismati Matthioli sive Plantagini Alpinae dictae persimilis est,
non tamen eadem, and ad Doronica potius quam ad Tussilagines referri debet.

Typha minor J. B. minima Park. palustris minor C. B. Hanc plantam in eodem
loco in quo olim Lobelius, nimirum ad flu. Arve prope Genevam inveni. Cum primo
eam observavi perexigua fuit, clava gracili, unde minime tum dubitavi quin
distincta species esset: postea vero caput cylindraceum clavatum in tantam
intumuit crassitiem, ut merito dubitaverim, annon ipsius parvitas loco potius
(siquidem extra aquam crevit) quam plantae naturae imputanda esset.

V
VAccaria Ger. v. Lychnis segetum rubra.

Vaccinia v. Vitis Idaea.

Valeriana rubra Dodonaei Ger. Park. rubra C. B. latifolia rubra J. B.
Ocymastrum Valerianthon Lob. Messanae in muris antiquis: in Italiae quoque
locis plurimis e muris and saxis erumpit.

Valeriana rubra angustifolia C. B. J. B. Ubi J. Bauhinus eam invenit ibi and
nos quoque, nimirum Nantuae Sabaudorum, in colle extra portam qua itur
Lugdunum, ad dextram. Provenit quoque copiose in rupibus montis Lupi.

Valeriana Mexicana Ger. Indica sive Mexicana Park. peregirna seu Indica J. B.
Valerianella echinata C. B. Circa Messanam Siciliae copiose.

Valeriana Alpina J. B. XI, sive Alpina altera C. B. Alpina major sive
latifolia Park. In monte Saleve supra Carthusianorum coenobium.

Valeriana Alpina altera foliis integris, inodora, An Alpina prima C. B.? In
montibus circa Genevam copiose.

Valeriana pumila supina serpyllifolia. In rupibus maritimis Regni Neapolitani.
Ostensa mihi fuit postea Venetiis a Joanne-Maria Ferro pharmacopoeo botanico
peritissimo, pro Caprifolio n. d. rectius tamen meo judicio ad Valerianas
refertur.

Verbascum latis Salviae foliis C. B. Matthioli Ger. sylv. salvifolium exoticum
folio rotundiore J. B. Salvia fruticosa lutea latifolia, sive Verbascum
sylvestre quartum Matthioli Park. Circa Tauromenium in Sicilia.

Verbasc^m angusto Salviae folio C. B. Ger. Monspeliense flore luteo hiante J.
B. Salvia fruticosa lutea angustifolia, sive Phlomos lychnitis Dioscoridis
Clusio Park. In collibus saxosis circa Monspelium.

Verbascum crispum and sinuatum J. B. laciniatum Park. nigrum VI, sive nigrum
folio Papaveris corniculati: and Came. C. B. In Italia ad vias passim. J.
Bauhino circa Monspelium; nos illud ibi non observavimus.

Vermicularis v. Sedum.

Veronica saxatilis J. B. fruticans serpyllifolia Ger. forte, Alpina frutescens
C. B. male, non enim fruticat haec. minor Alpina Park. qui distinguit Alpinam
suam minorem a Veronica fruticante. Pro Veronica min. Alpina ponit figuram
fruticantis serpyllifoliae Ger. proque fruticante sua aliam exhibet iconem: and
mea quidem sententia, recte separat Veronicam fruticantem Clus^i ab Alpina
minima serpyllifolia Ponae. Nostra haec de qua agimus non omnino fruticat, sed
exigua est and herbacea semper. Attend descriptionem J. B. In summis jugis
montis Jurae circa Thuiri.

Veronica saxatilis parva caulibus nudis. Iu pascuis in summitate montis Jurae.
An planta haec a quoquam descripta sit mihi nondum est compertum.

Vicia sylvatica maxima Piso sylvestri similis. J. B. In sylvosis in ascensu
montis Salevae, ab eo latere quod Genevam spectat.

Vicia seu Lathyrus gramineus flore coccineo. Ad radices montis Vesuvii non
long a mari: necnon circa Genevam inter segetes.

Vicia maritima multiflora alba Messanensis. In Sicilia circa Messanam and
alibi ad maris litus.

Vicia luteo flore sylvestris J. B. Circa Liburnum and alibi in Italia inter
segetes.

Victorialis longa Clus. Allium Alpinum J. B. Alpinum latifolium, seu
Victorialis Ger. anguinum Park. IX, sive montanum latifolium maculatum C. B. In
summis jugis altissimorum montium max Carthusianorum coenobio proximorum and
velut imminentium.

Vinca pervinca v. Clematis daphnoides.

Viola bulbosa v. Leucoium bulbosum.

Viola martia lutea Ger. Park. J. B. martia VII, sive Alpina rotundifolia lutea
C. B. In suprema part montis Jurae circa Thuiri.

Viola lunaris longioribus siliquis Ger. lunaria III, sive major siliqua
oblonga C. B. Lunaria major siliqua longiore J. B. In montibus Saleva and Jura,
sed parcius.

Viola matronalis flore purpureo Ger. matronalis, sive Hesperis hortensis C. B.
Hesperis J. B. Cum a Salerno Neapolin iter facerem, hanc in pratis observavi.

Visnaga J. B. Matthew. Lob. Visnaga, Gingidium appellatum Park. Gingidium
Hispanicum Ger. Gingid. umbella longa C. B. In pratis quibusdam non long a
Miravalle, secus viam quae Monspelio Frontignanam ducit; copiose etiam in
Etruriae agris, and circa Cataniam Siciliae.

N. Pediculi seu umbellarum radii pro dentiscalpiis multis in usum veniunt,
praecipue Hispanis, ob rigiditatem suam and suaveolentiam: unde and nostratibus
Spanish Picktooth appellatur.

Vitex v. Agnus castus.

Vitis Idaea foliis carnosis and velut punctatis, sive Idaea radix Dioscoridis
C. B. Radix Idaea putata, and Uva ursi J. B. Uva ursi Galeni Clusio Park.
Vaccinia ursi, sive Uva ursi apud Clusium Ger. emac. In montibu. Saleve and
Jura Genevae vicinis, itemque in colle La Bastie.

Vitis Idaea v. Diospyros.

Ulmaria major v. Barba caprae.

Unifolium v. Monophyllon.

Uva crispa Ger. Dod. Lob. crispa, sive Grossularia J. B. Grossularia vulgaris
Park. Grossularia simplici acino, vel spinosa sylvestris C. B. Per totam
Helve^tiam in sepibus vulgatissima. In Sicilia studiose in hortis colitur, and
pro planta rara, ostensa nobis fuit. Amat enim frigidos tractus; in
calidioribus minus frequens est.

N. Uvae crispae immaturae refrigerant, unde febricitantibus and cholericis
util^ter exhibentur, ^^tim sedant; astringunt quoque, unde ad omne ventris
profluvium and haemorrhagiam quamcunque conducunt; Urinam insuper ciere, and
calculo aut arennlis laborantibus prodesse dicuntur. Saccharo conditae grata
sua aciditate appetentiam conciliant, and febriles ardores restinguunt.
Concinantur and in placentas cupediarum and scitamentorum vice; vulgo Tartas
vocant.

Uva marina v. Tragos.

Ursi v. Vitis Idaea.

X
XYlon v. Gossipium.

Xeranthemum J. B. Jacea Oleae folio, flore minore C. B. Ptarmica Imperati sive
minor Park. Ptarmica Imperati, An Ptarmicae Austriacae species Clus.? cur.
post. Ger. emac.? Primo eam observavimus in Arni fluminis alveo prope
Florentiam; postea etiam circa Monspelium.

Z
ZAcyntha v. Cichorium verrucarium.

Zea monococcos v. Briza.

Zizipha sylvestria J. B. Ziziphus sive Jujuba sylvestris Park. Jujuba
sylvestris C. B. In rupibus ad Tropiam Calabriae urbecualam copiose.

Explicatio Nominum abbreviatorum.
AD. and Ad. Lob. Adversaria Penae and Lobelli. C. B. Caspari Bauhini Pinax. C.
B. Prod. Caspari Bauhini Prodromus. Caes. Caesalpinus. Came. Camerarius. Cat.
Ang. Catalogus Plantarum Angliae. Clus. and Clus. hist. Caroli Clusii historia.
Col. Fabius Columna. Dod. Dodonaeus. Fuch. Leonardus Fuchsius. Ger. and Ger.
emac. Jo. Gerardi historia emaculata a Tho. Johnson. Gesn. Conradus Gesnerus.
Hort. Pat. Hortus Medicus Patavimus. J. B. Joannes Bauhinus Caspari frater.
Lob. ob. Lobelius in Observationibus. Lob. ico. Idem in iconibus a Plantino
editis. Lon. Adamus Lonicerus. Lugd. Historia Lugdunensis. Matthew. Matthiolus in
Dioscoridem. Park. Jo. Parkinsoni Theatrum Botanicum. Park. parad. Ejusdem
Paradisus terrestris seu Hortus. Schrod. Schroderus in Pharmacopoea
Medico-chymica. Tab. Tabernaemontanus. Thal. Thalius in Harcynia. Trag.
Hieronymi Tragi historia.
Nota haec cuicunque plantae praefigitur indicat illam in Anglia sponte
provenire.

FINIS.



