A Second LETTER to his Honored Friend Mr. M. T. one of the Committee chosen
by the Common Council of London for the Insuring of Houses from Fire.
SIR,
THE Paper which you sent me, published by the Gentlemen of the Insurance
Office behind the Royal Exchange, Entitled, Observations on the Proposals of
the City to Insure Houses in case of Fire, I have received, and carefully
perused; and shall here return you some Reflections upon it, which I doubt not
will be kindly accepted by you, because the design of this Paper is the same
with that of your Counsels, viz. the promoting the Public Advantage of your
City. I have spent some time in enquiring who were the first Inventors of this
design of Insuring Houses, because I find these Gentlemen do with a great deal
of confidence ascribe it to themselves in all those several Pamphlets, which
have been scattered (like their Brains) and so industriously spread abroad by
them; and especially in this, in almost every Paragraph of it, which I have now
under Examination. But herein they have done just as if a man should filch away
a piece of Plate from his Neighbor, and setting his own Mark upon it, should
impudently vouch himself to be the right and lawful owner of it. For I find
this design was first set on foot immediately after his Majesty's Restoration
by several Persons of Quality, and Eminent Citizens of London, and Proposals
about it then printed by them. But tho the Project and the Authors of it were
then recommended to the Common Council of London by his Majesty's Letter, yet
it was not admitted by them, for the very same reason for which these Gentlemen
now are not to be countenanced in it; viz. because they thought it impossible
for private Persons to manage, and unreasonable that they (and not the City)
should reap the Profits of such an undertaking. Hereupon this Design, like some
Rivers that sink down into the Ground, and break not out again, but at a
considerable distance, was no more heard of till the Year 1670. when it was
afresh propounded to the City by Mr. De Laun, tho not prosecuted by them.
However in the Majoralty of Sir W. Hooker it was briskly revived by Mr. Newbold
the Merchant, who proposed the carrying it on by a Joint Stock to be raised
among the Inhabitants and Proprietors of the Houses to be Insured. This he
communicated to the Lord Mayor, and diverse other eminent Citizens. From some of
these, like an Eves-dropper, this Observator caught it; it being then generally
discoursed and approved of, and resolved to be put in practice. Accordingly Sir
Robert Viner being chosen Lord Mayor for the then ensuing Year, Mr. Newbold
retained Mr. Mosyer as his Chief Council in order to present it to the City,
and gave him a Fee of above four pound. But still the hands of the City were so
full of other business, that tho they had a strong Inclination, yet they had no
leisure to carry on this Design. Mr. Newbold therefore waiting for a more
favorable Conjunction, found it not till the Majoralty of Sir Robert Clayton,
to whom on New-years-day, Anno 7 8/9, he presented the Model of it; and
sometime after printed it under the Title of London's Improvement, and the
Builder's Security, etc. and presented it to several Aldermen,
Common-Council-men, and other Eminent Citizens. Sir Robert Clayton approved of
the matter; only advised that instead of a Joint Stock it should be managed by
the Chamber of London. And the same was the Year following by Sir Patience
Ward, then Lord Mayor, tendered to the Common Council. By them it was referred
to a Committee, who after 8 Months time brought in their Report, That the thing
was very well worthy the City's prosecution. And again, on the 15 of October
they brought in another Report confirming the former. Whereupon the
Common Council immediately voted and agreed That the City should undertake it.
The 15 of Nov. following, the Committee brought in their Proposals to the
Common Council, who consented to them, and ordered that the matter should be
speedily put in execution. Thus you see, Sir, this Design was first started
about the Year 1660. renewed An. 1670. revived again by Mr. Newbold in 1674.
and prosecuted by him (tho with but little success for the reason
abovementioned) till 1679; and from that time to this day followed with
greater vigor, and to better purpose. Now after Mr. Newbold had for several
years been pushing forward this Design by proposing a Joint Stock of 50000
Pounds to be raised among the Inhabitants and Proprietors of 4000 Houses of the
New-Brick-Buildings at 5 per Cent. on their value; (each House being reckoned
at 250 Pounds value one with another) Nay, after Sir Robert Clayton had,
instead of this Joint Stock, proposed that the City should manage it by settling
a Fund of their own to that value (which in truth makes no essential
difference, only gives a much better Security to the Insured) After this, I
say, these Private Gentlemen start up and propose the settling of Ground-Rents
and Lands to the value of but 30000 Pounds for the Insuring of 3000 Houses, at
an annual Rent for 31 years only, the profit to themselves; whereas the other
Proposal of Mr. Newbold was intended to be perpetual, and the improvement of
the Joint Stock to be from time to time divided amongst the Insured that raised
it. With what reason or modesty therefore they can pretend to be the first
Inventors of this good Design, let the World judge; especially when they
themselves will confess that two years ago they had no thought at all of
undertaking it. I think it is very plain, that in this matter they have done
like some Beggars, who borrow other men's Children to carry about with them as a
Stratagem to get money by.

But if they cannot make good their Charge of Injustice against you for Robbing
them of their Invention, they will endeavor to have you condemned as guilty of
Imprudence in the managing of it. To which purpose this Observator has
exhibited Four Articles against you.

1. He accuses your taking Subscriptions as a thing vain and needless: For
(says he) there can be no occasion for them, but only to see whether this
Design (being altogether new) would be approved of. But this is plain already,
that it does give general satisfaction. Therefore there was no necessity of
your taking Subscriptions. But to this I answer, that taking Subscriptions was
necessary upon another account, viz. That the Persons that do subscribe may
choose Trustees from among themselves upon whom the Fund provided for their
Security is to be settled.

But (says he) why should men subscribe to you, when probably it may be so
long (if ever) before the City settle their Fund, that their Houses may be
burnt down before they are Insured? To this I answer, The Lands and
Ground-Rents to the value proposed are already agreed upon by the City, and a
Draught of the Conveyance is made, and now before Counsel for their
Approbation; and it is not doubted but the matter will be perfected in a very
short time.

But again (says he) why should men subscribe to you? For they may come and
Insure at our Office, which is already settled, and be released, when they find
the City has made better Provision for them. But I answer, The Question will
be, Who shall be Judge in this case, whether the City have made better
Provision or no? To be sure these Gentlemen will never confess it, be it never
so plain, who pretend so confidently in their Enquiry, Letter, and these
Observations, etc. to demonstrate that the City cannot give so good a Security,
as they have already. They will hardly be so good natured as to let go those
Fishes which they have once caught in their Nets. They are very forward to take
money upon almost any terms, as Spunges suck up Water; but the many Suits that
are every Term between them and their Creditors, who are at so much trouble and
charge to recover their own, plainly show it is very hard to wring and squeeze
it out again.

2. He accuses you for setting your Rates or Praemiums for Insuring of Brick
Houses at 48 shillings per Cent. for 31 years (and double the price for
Timber-Houses) and so in proportion for a longer or a shorter time; because
this is 2 shillings per Cent. cheaper than theirs. And declares in requital,
That they will sink their Prices 2 shillings and 2 pence per Cent. lower than
yours, viz. to 45 shillings 10 pence per Cent. for Brick-Houses for 31 years
(and double the price for Timber) and declares they will always set their
Prices under the City; tho at present they will abate no more unless the City
does.

But I answer (1) They would have cavill'd at the City, let your Prices have
been what they would. Had your Rates been higher than theirs, then they would
have said men might Insure cheaper with them. Had they been Equal, then they
would have made a noise and clamor, that 'twas a following their Pattern. And
now they are lower, they slander it as a contrivance to draw in Customers. (2.)
These Gentlemen would have carved very fairly for themselves, had they
proceeded according to their first Proposals, who still hope for very
considerable Gains by this Design (or else they would never continue to
prosecute it) tho now they will be content with above 4 shillings per Cent.
less than what they at first propounded to themselves. But thus the fiercest
Element by contesting with its contrary, is made far more moderate, than
otherwise it would have been. (3.) Tho now they have set their Rates lower than
yours, yet this will be no inducement at all to any wise man to Insure with
them, because the Security which they give is nothing near so good as that
which the City offers to the Insured.
This I shall demonstrate thus.

They propose to Insure 3000 Houses with a Fund of but 30000 Pound value. Now
such a Fund can be Security for no more than 150 Houses, and all that Insure
with them above this number, have no Security at all; Nay, even those 150
Houses too can be ensured to be rebuilt but once neither, tho they pretend to
rebuild them as often as they shall be burnt in 31 years. For should those 150
Houses be burnt down, the Rebuilding of them (tho but once) if you reckon them
at but 200 pounds per House one with another (which I am sure is low enough)
will amount to the just sum of their Fund, which is 30000 pounds. Now suppose
that 12 Houses be burnt one year, at the rate of 200 pounds for rebuilding each
House, there is 2400 pound gone: Suppose 12 Houses be burnt the next year,
there is 2400 pounds more gone; and so in less than 13 years time their whole
Fund of 30000 pound must be spent to satisfy the Loss: Nay, considering the
Charges they are at in maintaining men for the Quenching of Fires, as they
pretend, (tho being armed Cap a Pe, they look as if they were designed to
encounter another Enemy than the Fire, especially if we consider that none can
be employed in that Service within the City, unless allowed by Authority) and
other matters relating to their Office, which they themselves Calculate at a
1000 pound per Annum; considering this, I say, their Fund will be gone some
years sooner: and then where is the Security for those 150 Houses the remaining
18 years, or for any of the other Houses above 150 all the time? If you Reply,
They will not pay the Losses for the Houses that are burnt, out of the Fund,
but out of a Bank which they will always have lying ready by them. I ask how
Private men, and Persons so much in Debt should come by such a Bank, whenas
they have expressly covenanted to put up the yearly Profits of their Fund in
their own Pockets? And so they had need; for how should they live else? For if
they had any other Estate besides their Fund, it might reasonably be presumed
they would pay their Debts with it, which yet they have not discharged. And if
they had not, yet the yearly Profits of their Fund, if they had settled as large
an one as they at first promised, amounts but to 2000 pounds per Annum, (though
by the way, what they have settled rises but to 1400 pound per Annum, and we may
well think they could reach to no more) which will not rebuild above 10 Houses,
if they should be burnt, reckoning them but at 200 pound each House. If you say
The Praemiums of the 150 Houses shall be laid out to buy more Lands for the
Insuring others, or help make up the Loss. I answer that the Praemiums of 150
Houses insured for 31 years, reckoning each House at 200 pound value, makes but
750 pound, which is an inconsiderable Sum, and will purchase but a few Inches
of Ground. If you say the Praemiums of the other Houses above the 150 that are
Insured, shall be laid out to buy a further Fund, or help make up the Loss: I
answer, (1.) Why should they have the Praemiums of 2850 Houses for which they
can give no other Security but those Praemiums themselves? And (2.) Those
Praemiums are otherwise to be disposed of by them, viz. either to buy
Ground-Rents or Lands (as far as they will go) for the Insuring at the Inns of
Court, Chancery, and Westminstor; the Insuring of which places they pretend
they resolve speedily to undertake. Or else (which is more probable) these
Praemiums will be slipped into their own Pockets, for their own Private
occasions, which are great enough.

Besides, it would be worth enquiring, whether the Lands of a man, liable to a
Statute of Bankrupt 3 years ago, can now be a sufficient Security? or, (as I
intimated in my other Letter) the Lands or Ground-Rents of another, who is
(every day) liable to be called to an Account for Maladministration in a
Public Office, and which if he should be found to be in Arrears to his
Majesty, would be unavoidably seized in his Majesty's behalf. But now if men
Insure with the City, the Case is quite otherwise: For you have a Fund of an
100000 pounds value, which is Security for the Rebuilding of 500 Houses,
reckoning each House as before, at 200 pounds one with another. Then there is
the Praemiums of those 500 Houses, and all the rest which shall be Insured that
will be settled as an Additional Fund. And lastly, there is the Annual Rent
(...) your Original Fund which amounts to 5000 pounds per Annum, and the
Interest of the Praemiums (which will rise very high too) both which will be
laid by in a Bank by the City (you having no need, as Private men have, to
apply them to any other Purposes) Which yearly Revenues will be so great as
always to make good all those Losses by Fire, which in all probability can
happen in any one year; and so neither your Original nor Additional Fund will
be diminisht to make satisfaction. Were this but thoroughly weighed, I believe
there is none would Insure with these Private men; but they would want
Customers as much as they do either Credit or Money.

But further they object, Our Rates are lower than the Cities, because we
Discount by way of Purchase, 5 years paid down for 8 years Insurance; 7 for 12;
9 and a half for 21; and 11 for 31 years. Whereas Your Table is after the Rate
of 13 years Purchase for 31 years, and near 16 years Purchase for 51: Prices
never heard of among Purchasers.

To this I answer, (1.) How low soever their Rates are, yet it can be no
temptation to any man that understands himself or them, to Insure at their
Office, unless their Security were better than I have just now shown it to be.
(2.) Tho this Observator pretends, That your Prices are such as were never
heard of among Purchasers, yet I am sure that near 13 years Purchase paid down
for 31 years, and near 16 for 51 years, are the just Prices at Simple Interest
at 5 l. per Cent. Rebate, as it has been computed by, and attested under the
hands of two of the most exquisite Arithmeticians this day in London.


Again, says the Observator, If we lose by this Design, we lose but our own
and do no injury to any. But if your Committee lose by it, they prejudice the
whole Body of the Citizens by wasting the Public Revenues; which are very low
already, as appears by the Cities borrowing Money upon Interest, when no visible
improvement is made by it; and by your late raising the Fifteens to Repair the
Public works of the City. To all which I reply, (1.) There Is no room for this
Objection, because it is concluded on all hands, that this design will be
Advantageous more or less to the Undertakers. (2.) If it were not, the City is
not so likely to lose by this design as these Private Gentlemen, because the
Annual Rents of your Original Fund (not to insist on the Interest of the
Praemiums) are so great, that they will at present make satisfaction for almost
four times the loss as theirs will, without resorting to the Fund it self, and
the yearly Rents of it being laid by, in a short time will make satisfaction
for many more times the loss than theirs will. (3.) What your Committee do in
this matter, is with the consent and Approbation of the whole Common Council,
who being chosen by the Body of the Citizens, are their true Representatives.
And therefore if the City should be a Loser by this Design, your Committee
cannot justly be taxed for it. (4.) Whereas they say, If they lose, they lose
but their own, I must deny it till they have made Even with their many
Creditors. And till this be done, the ruin of these Gentlemen will be like the
falling of an Old rotten Oak, which in tumbling beats down a multitude of
little Shrubs and Under-woods. (5.) To say, The Revenues belonging to your City
are very low, is a notorious Scandal. And it is sufficiently known, that the
Chamber has frequently refused many Sums of Money of late, though it has been
offered them at Four per Cent. Interest. (6.) As for'your Raising the Fifteens,
I doubt not but it will be sufficiently justified: it having been the Custom of
the City to raise them for such uses time out of mind. And the Reason why they
have not been raised for some Years, till of late, is, because there was no
occasion for it: The Profits arising to the City from the Duty upon Coals, etc.
given by Act of Parliament, having been applied to this purpose from the time
of the great Fire in 66, till the time when the Fifteens were raised.


3. The Observator condemns your City for offering to Insure for Ever; which
(says he) is to spoil the whole Design. The Argument which he produces to
prove this, he tells us, was the great one that was used at the settling their
Office, to show the certainty of their Security, which could no otherwise have
given satisfaction.

If therefore I can but pull down this main Pillar, their whole Insurance
Office like a rotten Building falls about their ears. Therefore, (1.) The
Argument which the Observator uses to prove, that the City cannot well Insure
for Ever, will as strongly prove, that these Gentlemen that offer to Insure for
31 Years, should not be trusted with all the Praemiums for so many Years at
once, but collect them yearly; which they themselves will not approve of. For
thus he argues; and I with him: No Security can be good where all the Profit is
at first received, and the Loss is uncertain, and continues for Ever (says
he); It Is the same for Thirty one Years (say I). For the Loss being uncertain,
the Security cannot be proportioned. And where all the Profit is at first
received, (as it will be if Men Insure with them for 31 Years) there is no
Interest obliged to take care of the Design so, as to pay a Loss and Preserve
the Fund. So that whenever the Loss happens greater than the Annual Rent of the
Security, the Land must be divided and torn in Pieces to satisfy the Loss. So
that this Argument must be quitted, because it is as strong against their
Insuring for Thirty one Years, as against the Cities Insuring for Ever. I know
it may be replied in the Observator's own words, that when Houses are Insured
for no longer than 31 Years, the Praemium that will arise from the Reversion,
will engage these Private Gentlemen to raise Money to pay the Losses and
preserve the Fund entire, though the Losses were greater than 10 Years Rent of
the Fund. But let any man of common Sense judge, whether these Gentlemen will
have any reason to secure the Reversion of such a Project whereby 20000 Pounds
(two Thirds of their Fund) is lost at one clap. (2.) All the Profit is not
received by the City at first; for the Interest of the Praemiums of the Houses
Insured by the City will be an Annual Profit to it. (3.) It Is probable indeed,
that the Loss by one years Fire may be greater than the Annual Rent of these
Gentlemen's Fund, which isbut 1400 Pound; but it is very improbable it should be
greater than the Annual Rent of the Cities Original Fund, which is 5000 Pound,
and that of the Additional Fund of the Praemiums too. (4.) If the Loss should
be greater than the Annual Rent of the Cities Security, yet the City would have
as much reason to take care to pay the Losses and preserve their Fund entire,
as these Gentlemen would have to raise Money to Preserve theirs, if the Loss on
their side should be greater than the Annual Rent of their Security. For why
will the Praemium that will arise from the Reversion engage them to do so, but
because they hope in the next 31 Years to make up their great Loss? And sure
the City may as well hope to make up their Loss in time too; for though when
the City Insures for Ever they have no Reversions, yet the Praemiums for that
Reason are proportionably greater than those of these Private men, and
consequently are equivalent to their present Praemiums, and their Reversion
too; and therefore the City will be as careful to raise Money to preserve their
Fund entire, though the Loss at present should be greater than Ten years Rent
of their Fund.

But further he objects, Should men Insure their Houses for Ever, your
Corporation would have greater occasion for an Act of Restraint, than the
Spiritual Corporations heretofore have had; For though the Church and Colleges
by granting long Leases prejudiced their Successors, they left them the Old
Rent: But your Committee will not be so kind to your Successors; for you would
not only leave them without Reversions, but entail a perpetual Charge and Loss
upon the Corporation. But I answer, If the Committee intended to put the
Praemiums of the Houses to be Insured into their own Private Pockets, as the
Prebends of Churches and Fellows of Colleges do, and these Private Insurancers
intend, this Objection had a great deal of weight in it: But seeing these
Praemiums are to be settled as a further Fund for the Public good, you will
have no need of an Act of Restraint: Neither indeed would they, if they had
bestowed the Profits of those long Leases which they granted for the present
and future Public good of those Churches and Colleges to which they belonged;
for had they done so, this would not have been for the Prejudice, but Advantage
of their Successors. It Is true, you leave your Successors without Reversions,
if you Insure for Ever; but then the Praemiums you receive from the Insured are
set proportionably the higher for it, which will be transmitted entire to those
that come after you; and so you will in all probability entail a perpetual
Profit and Advantage (not a perpetual Charge and Loss) upon the Corporation.

The Fourth and Last Article upon which you are impeached, is, Your going to
Council, to know whether you can settle your Ground-Rents. I foresee this
Objection will not go very far, because it limps so foully at its first setting
out, there being not one syllable of this in any of your Papers; nor can it be
drawn by any just consequence from any of them. For your Tenth Proposal (in
which alone there is mention made of your Advising with Council) runs thus,
That the said Committee, in order to the said Security, do forthwith by Advice
of Council proceed to prepare Settlements of the said Lands and Ground-Rents,
and to draw up Articles and Agreements at large in pursuance of these Heads, to
be proposed to such as shall Insure upon the same: which implies; That the
Committee and Common Council were already satisfied, that they could settle the
Lands, and therefore your Committee were not ordered to attend Council, to know
whether they could settle, or no.

But, says he, You have not discovered to the World, where the Lands and
Grounds you propose do lie? As if any man of Sense or Modesty would question
whether the City had such Lands, or no.

Well, but he has Four Arguments to prove, that though you have them, yet they
cannot be settled for the benefit of Private Persons, so as to satisfy their
Losses. (1.) The Lands of Corporations are generally charged for Public and
Special Uses, such as repairing Bridges, maintaining Aqueducts, and supporting
other Public Works. I answer, That London Bridge does not only maintain it
self out of those Lands that were granted, and are wholly applied to the
Repairing of it, and those Duties which are paid upon that account, but brings
in a considerable Overplus too. And the Aqueducts and other Public Works have
been constantly maintained and supported, time out of mind, by raising the
Fifteens: So that those Ground-Rents and Lands which you set out for a Fund,
are not appropriated and charged with any other Uses at all. Though, if we
consider the condition of these Private Insurancers, there is too much reason to
fear, that there are some dormant Mortgages on those Lands and Ground-Rents
which they have settled for a Fund.

His Second and Third Arguments I shall join together. How (says he) shall
Private men make the City willing, or force them to pay the Losses which may
happen; For when a Dispute arises, the City may be made a Party. Now no Decree
in that case can be made in Chancery, unless they appear; which, if they refuse
to do, they forfeit their Issues, which goes to the King, and so the Party
cannot proceed in his Suit. I Answer, I cannot see how the City should be made
a Party, and so be summoned to appear, when they have conveyed their whole
Interest to the Trustees, for the Security of such as shall Insure: But, if the
City should be made a Party, and refuse to appear, they will not only forfeit
their Issues, but the Sheriffs will be severely Fined too; which Fine will be
laid upon them higher and higher every Refusal, so that the City will quickly
be forced to Appear. But (says he) some Persons formerly lent Money to the
Chamber, and have Bond under the City Seal for their Payment; but yet could
never recover their Debts. And how can it be expected that the Insured shall
have better Justice, when a great Loss happens, than those Persons have had?
And what if those Creditors should recover their Debts of the City, would they
not seize these Ground-Rents that are now proposed for your Fund? To answer
this, I must give you a short account of this matter, which is as follows: An.
1641. Sir Richard Gurny the Lord Mayor was by the Parliament sent to the Tower,
and diverse other Aldermen were Turned out, Imprisoned and Sequestered, because
they favored not the Designs of that Parliament in those Times. Some time
after Persons of another Stamp got into their Places; And then the Common
Council did, by the Order of the House of Commons, engage the City Seal for the
payment of some Moneys advanced upon the Public Faith (as it was then termed)
for the carrying on of the unnatural Civil Wars of those Times. But not one
Penny of those Moneys was ever paid into the Chamber, but Treasurers for that
purpose were Appointed by the House of Commons, and it was all disposed of by
the Order of the said House. And for payment of that Money, that House did
engage the Public Faith, and afterward made an Ordinance, That those that
would double their Sum (before paid) should be compensated out of the
Sequestered Estates, as many of them were. Now they that were not paid, have
Sued the City since his Majesty's Restoration; but were not able to recover
the same. But now this Fund will be settled in a time of Perfect Peace, under
the Established Government of the Kingdom, by the unanimous Consent of a Common
Council (...) chosen (so that there can never be any color to pretend, that
this business is driven on by a particular Powerful Party, as there is, that
the other was; because then the Government was under a Force.) As to what he
says, That it would be honorable and just for the City to sell such Lands as
they can dispose of, to pay those Debts. I reply, Why should they repay that
Money that was procured in so ill a manner. I think it would be very honorable
and just if this Observator would pay those Debts which he has fairly
contracted, and have been applied to his proper Benefit (as the other was not
to the City's:) For then multitudes of Poor men and their Families would be
relieved, who not being paid for their Work which he set them about; have their
Mouths full (not of Bread) but of Complaints, and have little else to Drink,
besides their own Tears.

His Fourth and Last Argument is this, What will become of your Settlement, if
you forfeit your Charter? Whether the Lands of the Corporation do not then
devolve on the Crown? Who then shall satisfy Losses and extinguish Fires? I
Answer, What if the Sky should fall; what a loss would those have, that have
bought Nets for the catching of L^^k? But suppose the Charter should be taken
away (which God forbid) and the Corporation be dissolved, always by Law those
Lands that have been purchased in the Name of the Corporation, do not go to the
Crown, but return to the Persons (or their Heirs) of whom they were at first
purchased. Yet if these Lands are settled beforehand upon Private men, as
Trustees for Insuring, they cannot devolve upon either, or be alienated from
that Use.

Thus, Sir, I think I have fully Answered this Pamphlet, and upon the Review
find nothing more worth the taking notice of, unless it be those scandalous
Suggestions, that Your Committee are guilty of Rashness, and want of Knowledge:
And, that You have a regard more to your own Private Advantage, to procure
certain Places for your selves, than the Public Interest of the City. Were
this later so, they might truly say, that this were an Imitation of their
Pattern: But those that know the largeness of your Understandings or Estates,
will sufficiently acquit you from both of those Reproaches; which indeed
deserve to be Answered rather by an Action of Sta^der, than by the Pen of him,
who is.

HONORED SIR, Your most humble Faithful Servant, L. R.


