Three Physico-Theological DISCOURSES, CONCERNING I The Primitive CHAOS, and
Creation of the World. II. The General DELUGE, its Causes and Effects. III. The
Dissolution of the WORLD, and Future Conflagration.


WHEREIN Are largely Discussed the Production and Use of Mountains; the
Original of Fountains, of Formed Stones, and Sea-Fishes Bones and Shells found
in the Earth; the Effects of particular Floods and Inundations of the Sea; the
Eruptions of Vulcano's; the Nature and Causes of Earthquakes:

With an Historical Account of those Two late Remarkable Ones in Iamaica and
England.

With PRACTICAL INFERENCES.

By JOHN RAY, Fellow of the Royal Society

The Second Edition Corrected, very much Enlarged, and Illustrated with
Copper Plates.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1693.



TO THE Most Reverend FATHER in GOD, JOHN, Ld Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, and Metropolitan.
My LORD,
IT was no Interest or Expectation of mine, that induced me to Dedicate this
Discourse to your Grace. I am not so well conceited of my own Performances, as
to think it merits to be inscribed to so Great a Name, much less that I should
Oblige your Lordship, or indeed a far meaner Person by such Inscription. My
principal motive was, that it would give me opportunity of Congratulating with
the Sober Part of this Nation, your Advancement to the Archiepiscopal Dignity;
and of acknowledging His Majesty's Wisdom in making choice of so fit a Person
to fill that Chair, endued with all Qualifications requisite for so high a
Calling; so able and skilful a Pilot to govern the Church, and so prudent and
faithful a Counselor to serve Himself. But I will not enlarge in your just
Praises, lest I should incur the unjust Censure or Suspicion of Flattery: Give
me leave only to add, what I may without injury of Truth, and I think without
violation of Modesty; that your Grace's Election has the concurrent
Approbation and Applause of all good Men that know you, or have had a true
Character of you; which may serve to strengthen your Hands in the Management
and Administration of so difficult a Province, though you need no such Support,
as being sufficiently involved and armed by your Virtues, and protected by the
Almighty Power and Providence* Those that are Good and Wise are pleased and
satisfied, when Great Men are preferred to Great Places; and think it pity that
Persons of large and public Spirits should be confined to narrow Spheres of
Action, and want Field to exercise and employ those rich Talents and Abilities
wherewith they are endowed, in doing all the Good they are thereby qualified
and inclined to do.

My LORD,
I am sensible that the Present I make you, is neither for Bulk nor Worth
suitable to your Person and Greatness; yet I hope you will favorably accept
it, being the best I have to offer; and my Boldness may pretend some Excuse
from ancient Acquaintance, and from my Forwardness to embrace this Opportunity
of professing my Name among those that Honor you, and of publishing my self,

My LORD, Your Grace's most devoted Servant, and humble Orator, JOHN RAY.

THE PREFACE.
HAving altered the Method of this Treatise, and made considerable Additions to
it, it may justly be expected that I should give some Account thereof to the
Reader. In the Preface to the former Edition, I acquainted him, that I had
taken Notice of five Matters of Ancient Tradition. 1. That the World was formed
out of a Chaos, by the Divine Wisdom and Power. 2. That there was an universal
Flood of Waters, in which all Mankind perished, excepting some few which were
saved in an Ark or Ship. 3. That the World shall one day be destroyed by Fire.
4. That there is a Heaven and a Hell, an Elysium and a Tartarus, the one to
reward good Men, and other to punish wicked, and both eternal. 5. That bloody
Sacrifices were to be offered for the Expiation of Sin. And that of four of
them I had occasion to treat in this Book; of two, that is to say, of the
Dissolution of the World by Fire, and the Eternal State that was to succeed (in
reference to Man) either in Heaven or Hell, more directly: of the other two,
viz. The Primitive Chaos and Creation, and the General Deluge, occasionally and
by way of digression, at the request of some Friends. But now this Treatise
coming to a second Impression, I thought it more convenient to make these
several Discourses upon these Particulars, substantial Parts of my Work, and to
dispose them according to the priority and posteriority of their Subjects, in
order of time, beginning with the Primitive Chaos.

Concerning these Traditions, it may be enquired what the Original of them was,
Whether they were of Divine Revelation, or Humane invention. In answer whereto,

As to the Second, That there was once a General Deluge, whereby this whole
sublunary World was drowned, and all Animals, both Man and Beast destroyed,
excepting only such as were preserved in an Ark; it being matter of Fact, and
seen and felt by Noah, and his Sons, there can be no doubt of the Original of
that.

The First, concerning the Chaos and Creation of the World, if it were not
ancienter (...) Scrip^^re, it is likely it had its Orig^nal from the first
Chapter of Genesis, and the Chaos from the second Verse, And the earth was
without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep. But if it
were more ancient, it must still in all likelihood be Divinely revealed,
because Man being created last, and brought into a World already filled and
furnished: And God being an Omnipotent, and also a Free Agent, who could as
well have created the World in a moment, or altogether, as successively, it was
impossible for Man by reason to determine, which way he made choice of.

The Third, Concerning the future Dissolution and Destruction of the World by a
General Conflagration, there being nothing in Nature that can demonstrate the
necessity of it: and a second Inundation and Submersion by Water, being in the
Course of Nature an hundred times more probable, as I have shown in the ensuing
Discourses: And therefore we see God Almighty to secure Man against the
apprehension and dread of a second Deluge, made a Covenant with him, to give
him a visible Sign in confirmation of it, never to destroy the World so again:
And the Ancients who relate this Tradition, deivering it as an Oracle or Decree
of Fate. Ovid Metamorph. 1. Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempus,
etc. was likewise probable of Divine Revelation.

The Fourth, That there shall be a Future State, wherein Men shall be punished
or rewarded, accordingly as they have done ill or well in this Life, and that
State Eternal: tho the first part may be demonstrated from the Justice and
Goodness of God, because there being an unequal distribution of Good and Evil
in this Life, there must be a time to set things straight in another World; yet
it being so difficult to Human Reason, to reconcile the Eternity of
Punishments, with the Justice and Goodness of God, this second part of the
Tradition had need be well backed by Divine Authority to make it credible and
current among Men.

As for the Last, though I meddle not with it in this Treatise, yet I will take
leave to say so much concerning it, That I think those who held Sacrificing to
have been a positive Command of God, and to have had its Original from Divine
Institution, have the better reason on their side. For that it is no eternal
and indispensable Law of Nature, is clear, in that our Savior abolished it.
And many of the Ancient Fathers look upon Sacrificing as so unreasonable a
Service, that therefore they thought God commanded it not to the Primitive
Patriarchs; and though he did command it to the Jews, yet he did it only in
condescension to their weakness because they had been used to such Services,
and also the Nations round about them, to restrain them from Idolatry, and
Sacrificing to strange Gods, Origin. Homil. 17, in Numer. Deus sicut per alium
Prophetam dicit non mandiscat carnes taurorum, nec sanguinem hircorum potat. Et
etiam, ut alibi scriptum est, Quia non mundavi tibi de Sacrificiis vel victimis
in die qua deduxi te de terra Aegypti. Sed Moses hoec ad diuritiem cordis
eorum, pro consuetudine pessima qua imbuti fuerant in Aegypto, mandavit e^s, ut
qui abstinere se non possent ab immolando, Deo saltem and non Daemoniis
immolarent. Other Quotations to this purpose may be seen in Dr* Outram De
Sacrificiis Indeed it seems absurd to think or believe, that God should take
any pleasure in the slaughter of innocent Beasts, or in the Fume and Nido^ of
burnt Flesh or Fat: Nor does the reason these Fathers allege of the
Institution of Sacrifices or injoyning them to the Jews satisfy, whatever
truth there may be in it: For it is clear, that the main end and design of God
in institutiing of them, was for Types and Adumbrations of that great Sacrifice
of Christ to be offered upon the Cross for the expiation of sin: and
consequently it is probable, that those also that were offered by the Ancient
Patriarchs before the Law, had their Original from some Divine Command or
Revelation, and the like reason of their Institution, in reference to Christ.

But to leave that, I have in this Edition removed one subject of Apology, and
added another, so that there still remain as many things to be excused or
pleaded for. They are,

First, Writing so much; for which some perchance may censure me, I am not
ignorant, that Men as they are mutable, so they love change, and affect variety
of Authors as well as Books. Satiety even of the best things is apt to creep
upon us. He that writes much, let him write never so well, shall experience,
that has last Books, though nothing inferior to his first, will not find equal
acceptance. But for (...) own part, though in general I may be thought to have
written too much, yet is it but little that I have wr^tten relating to
Divinity. It were a good Rule to be observed both by Writer and Reader, Not how
much, but how well* He that cannot write well, had better spa^e his (...) and
not write at all. Neither^^s he to be thought to write well, who though h^ has
some good things thin set and dispersed, yet ^n^^mbers and accloys the Reader
with a deal of useless and impertinent stuff. On the contrary, he that writes
well, cannot (...) too much. For as Pliny the younge^ says well, Vt aliae
bonae res, it a bo^ms L^ber eo melior est quisque quo major: As other good
Things, so a good Book, the bigger it is, the better is it: which holds as well
of the Number as Magnitude of Books.

Secondly, Being too hasty in huddling up, and tumbling out of Books: wherein,
I confess, I cannot wholly acquit my self of blame. I know well, that the
longer a Book lies by me, the perfecter it becomes. Something occurs every day
in Reading or Thinking, either to add, or to correct and alter for the better.
But should I defer the Edition till the Work were absolutely perfect, I might
wait all my Lifetime, and leave it to be published by my Executors. Now my Age
minding me of the approach of Death; and Posthumous Pieces generally proving
inferior to those put out by the Authors in their Lifetime, I need no other
excuse for my have in publishing what I write. Yet I shall further add in
extenuation of the fault, if it be one, that however hasty and precipitate I am
in writing, my Books are but small, so that if they be worthless, the Purchase
is not great, nor the Expense of Time wasted in the perusal of them very
considerable. Yet is not the worth of a Book always answerable to its bulk. But
on the contrary, (...), is usually esteemed, (...); for (...).

Thirdly, The last thing for which I had need to Apologize, is the rendering the
former Edition of this Treatise worthless by making large Additions to this
latter: in excuse whereof I have no more to say than I have already written in
an Advertisement to the Reader, premised to my Discourse concerning the Wisdom
of God, to which therefore I refer those who desire satisfaction in this
particular.

Place this Half-sheet next after p. 132 before the 3 Plates.

REflecting upon the length of this Discourse concerning the Original of these
Bodies, I am suspicious that the vulgar and inconsiderate Reader will be ready
to demand, What needs all this ado? To what purpose so many words about so
trivial a Subject? What reference has the consideration of Shells and Bones of
Fishes petrified to Divinity? Wherefore I shall in a few words show the great
importance of this Disquisition concerning formed Stones, and the Determination
of their Original.

For, 1st, If we adhere to their Opinions who hold them to have been original
Productions of Nature, in imitation only of the Shells and Bones of Fishes: We
put a Weapon into the Atheists hands, affording him a strong Argument to prove
that even Animals themselves are casual Productions, and not the effects of
Counsel or Design. For to what end are these Bodies curiously figured and
adorned? if for no other but to exhibit such a Form, for the Ornament of the
Universe, or to gratify the Curiosity of Man; these are but general ends,
whereas the parts of every Species of Body are formed and fitted to the
particular Uses and Conveniences of that Body. And if Nature would delineate or
imprint Figures upon Bodies, only to be Spectacles to Man, one would think it
should not have made choice of those of the Shells and Bones of Fishes, but
rather of such as were absolutely new and different from any frequently seen or
belonging to Animals; which serve rather to amuse than delight him. But 2ly, we
find in the Earth not only Stones formed in imitation of Shells; but real
Shells, Teeth and Bones of Fishes, or Bodies so like them, that they are not to
be distinguished by Figure, Texture, Color, Weight, or any other Accident. Now
what greater Argument can the Atheist desire to prove, that the Shells of
Fishes were never designed by any provident Efficient for their Defense, or
their Bones for the sustaining of their Bodies, but that the Fish and Shell
containing it, and the Bones sustaining it, did casually concur* than that
there should be real Shells produced without any Fish in them, and that in dry
places where no Fish ever did or could breed, or indeed live, and real
Fish-bones, where there never was nor could be any Fish.

Does it not than concern a Divine to be acquainted with this Objection against
the Bodies of Animals being the effects of Counsel and Design, and provided
with an answer to it. For my part I must needs confess that this Argument
weighs so with me, whether from that innate Prolepsis my self, and I think most
other Men have of the Prudence of Nature in all its Operations, or from mine
own observing that in all other things, it acts for ends, that it is alone
sufficient to preponderate all the Arguments against the contrary Opinions,
though I acknowledge them to be of great force and hard to be answered, and to
incline or rather constrain me to allow that these Bodies were either real
Bones and Shells of Fishes, or owe their Figure to them. I cannot (to use the
Words of F. Columna) prevail with my self to believe, that Nature ever made
Teeth without a Iaw, or Shells without an Animal Inhabitant, or single Bones,
no not in their own proper Element, much less in a strange one, Who even of the
Vulgar beholding any considerable part of an Animal which he sees not the use
of, is not apt presently to ask what it serves for, as by that innate Prolepsis
I mentioned before, presuming it was ^ot made in vain, but for some end and
use. Suppose any of us should find in the Earth the complete Skeleton of a Man,
he must be as credulous as the Atheist, if he could believe that it grew there
of it self, and never had relation to any Man's Body. Why then should we tbink
that the entire Skeletons of Fishes found sometimes in the Earth, had no other
Original? nor ever were any part of living Fishes.

2ly, If we choose and embrace the contrary Opinion, viz. That these Bodies were
the real Shells and Bones of Fishes, or owe their Figures to them, we shall
find that this also is urged with many and almost unsuperable Difficulties, the
principal of which I have already produced, and shall here omit, repeating only
two that refer to Divinity.

1. These Bodies being found dispersed all over the Earth, they of the contrary
Opinion demand how they come there? If it be answered, That they were brought
in by the general Deluge; in contradiction thereto, they argue thus. If these
Stones were found scattered singly and indifferently all the Earth over, there
might be indeed some reason to imagine that they were brought in by the Flood;
but being found in some particular places only, either lying thick in great
Beds of Sand and Gravel, or amassed together in huge Lumps, by a stony Cement*
such Beds must in all likelihood have been the effect of those Animals breeding
there for a considerable time, whereas the Flood continued upon the Earth but
ten Months, during half which time it is not likely that the Mountains were
covered; and yet there are found of these Bodies upon very high Mountains, not
excepting the Appenine and Alps themselves. Whence they conclude, that they
were neither brought in by the Flood, nor bred during the Flood, b^t some other
way produced. For if they were the Shells of Fishes, or their Bones, the Water
must needs have covered the whole Earth, even the Mountains themselves for a
^uch longer time than is consistent with the Scripture-History of the Flood,
and therefore we must seek some other original of these Bodies.

If we stick to the Letter of the Scripture-History of the Creation, that the
Creation of Fishes succeeded the Separation of Land and Sea, and that the six
days wherein the World was created, were six natural Days and no more, it is
very difficult to return a satisfactory Answer to this Objection: I shall
therefore only add a conjecture of my own, and that is, That possibly at the
first Creation, the whole Earth was not all at once uncovered, but only those
parts whereabout Adam and the other Animals were created, and the rest
gradually afterward, perchance not in many Years; during which time these
Shellfish might breed abundantly all the Sea over, the bottom whereof being
elevated and made dry Land, the Beds of Shellfish, must necessarily be raised
together with it.

2. It will hence follow that many Species of Animals have been lost out of the
World, which Philosophers and Divines are unwilling to admit, esteeming the
Destruction of any one Species a dismembring of the Universe, and rendering the
World imperfect. Whereas they think the Divine Providence is especially
concerned and solicitous to secure and preserve the Works of the Creation. And
truly so it is, as appears, in that it was so careful to lodge all Land-Animals
in the Ark at the time of the general Deluge, and in that of all Animals
recorded in Natural Histories, we cannot say that there has been any one
Species lost, no not of the most infirm and most exposed to injury and ravine.
Moreover it is likely, that as there neither is nor can be any new Species of
Animal produced, all proceeding from Seeds at first created; so Providence
without which one individual Sparrow falls not to the Ground, does in that
manner watch over all that are created, that an entire Species shall not be
lost or destroyed by any Accident. Now I say, if these Bodies were sometimes
the Shells and Bones of Fish, it will thence follow, that many Species have
been lost out of the World, as for example, those Ophiomorphous ones, whose
Shells are now called Cornua Ammonis, of which there are many Species, none
whereof at this day, appear in our or other Seas, so far as I have hitherto
seen, heard or read. To which I have nothing to reply, but that there may be
some of them remaining some where or other in the Seas, though as yet they have
not come to my Knowledge. For though they may have perished or by some Accident
been destroyed out of our Seas, yet the Race of them may be preserved and
continued still in others. So though Wolves and Bevers, which we are well
assured were sometimes native of England, have been here utterly destroyed and
extirpated out of this Island, yet there remain plenty of them still in other
Countries.

By what has been said concerning the nature and original of Stones, I hope it
may appear, that this is no idle and unnecessary Discourse, but very momentous
and important; and this Subject, as mean as it seems, worthy the most serious
consideration of Christian Philosophers and Divines; concerning which, though I
have spent many thoughts, yet can I not fully satisfy my self, much less then
am I likely to satisfy others.

But I promise my self and them more full satisfaction shortly from the Labors
of those who are more conversant and better acquainted with these Bodies than
I, who have been more industrious in searching them out, and happy in
discovering them, who have been more curious and diligent in considering and
comparing them, more critical and exact in observing and noting their nature,
texture, figure, parts, places, differences, and other accidents, than my self,
and particularly that learned and ingenious Person before remembered.

The following Tables, containing some Species of the most different Genera of
these Bodies, viz. Shark's Teeth, Wolf-fish's Teeth, Cockles or Concha,
Periwinkles or Turbens, Cornua Ammonis or Serpent stones* Sea-urchins and their
Prickles, Vertebres and other Bones of Fishes, entire Fishes Petrifi'd, and of
those some singly, some represented as they lie in Beds and Quarries under
Ground, for the information of those who are less acquainted with such Body,
were thought fit to be added to this Edition.

TAB. II. Page 162.
FIG. 1, 2. Several Fragments and Lumps of petrified Shells, as they lie in
Quarries and Beds under ground; on many of these Petrifactions there still
remain some Laminae, or Plates of the Original Shells, which prove them not to
be Stones primarily so figured.

Fig 3. The Cornu Ammonis lying in Rocks with other petrified Bodies.

TAB. III. Page 162.
FIG. 1, 2. Two petrified Fishes lying in Stone, with their Seals and Bones.

Fig. 3. A Sea-Urchin petrified with its prickles broken off, which are a sort
of Lapis Iudaicus, or Iew-Stones; their Insertions on the Studs or
Protuberances of the Shell are here shown. See their History and Manner of
Lying in Stone and Beds, in Agostino Scilla. 4. Napoli.

TAB. IV. Page 162.
FIG. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Several petrified Teeth of
Dog-Fishes, Sharks, and other Fishes.

Fig. 15, 16. The same lying in a Tophaceous Bed, and also in a Jaw Bone.

Fig. 17. The petrified Teeth of a Wolf-Fish, in a piece of the Jaw; the Round
Ones, or Grinders, are sold in Maltha for petrified Eyes of Serpents; and by
our Jewellers and Goldsmiths for Toad-stones, commonly put in Rings.

Fig. 18, 19, 20. Other petrified Bones of Fishes, especially Joints, or
Vertebra's of Back-bones, one with two stony Spines, issuing out, f. 20. See
them more at large in the Draughts of that curious Sicilian Painter, Agostino
Scilla.

Place this before Tab. II. p. 162.

The CONTENTS.
DISCOURSE I.
Of the Primitive CHAOS, and Creation of the WORLD.
CHAP. I. Testimonies of the Ancient Heathen Writers, Hesiod, Ovid,
Aristophanes, Lucan, Euripides, concerning the Chaos, and what they meant by
it. Chap. II. That the Creation of the World out of a Chaos, is not repugnant
to the Holy Scripture, if soberly understood, p, 5, 6, 7, 8. Chap. III. Of the
separating the Land and Water, and raising up the Mountains, p. 9, etc. By what
means the Waters were gathered together into one place, and the dry Land made
to appear, p. 10. That subterraneous Fires and Flatus's, might be of power
sufficient to produce such an effect, proved from the force and effects of
Gunpowder, and the raising up of new Mountains, p. 11, 12, 13. The shaking of
the whole known World by an Earthquake, p. 13, 14. That the Mountains, Islands,
and whole Continents were probably at first raised up by subterraneous Fires,
proved by the Authority of Lydiate and Strabo, p. 15, 16, 17. Of subterraneous
Caverns passing under the bottom of the Sea, p. 19, 20, 21, etc. A Discourse
concerning the Equality of the Sea and Land, both as to the extent of each, and
the height of one, to the depth of the other, taken from the Shores, p. 25, 26,
27, 31, 32, 33. That the motion of the Water levels the bottom of the Sea, p.
28, 29, 30. A Discourse concerning the Use of the Mountains, 35, 36, 37, etc.
The Sum of what has been said of the Division and Disposition of the Water and
Earth, p. 44. Chap. IV. Of the Creation of Animals: some Questions concerning
them resolved, p. 46. That God Almighty did at first create either the Seeds of
all Animate Bodies, and dispersed them all the Earth over: or else the first
Set of Animals themselves in their full state and perfection, giving each
Species a power by Generation to propagate their like, p. 46, 47. Whether God
at first created a great number of each Species, or only two, a Male and a
Female, p. 47, 48. Whether all individual Animals which already have been, and
hereafter shall be, were at first actually created by God, or only the first
Set of each Species, the rest proceeding from them by way of Generation, and
being a new produced, p. 49, 50, 51, etc. Objections against the first part
answered: 1. That it seems impossible, that the Ovaries of the first Animals
should actually include the innumerable Myriads of those that may proceed from
them in so many Generations as have been, and shall be to the end of the World:
This shown not to be so incredible from the multitude of parts, into which
Matter may be, and is divided, in many Experiments, p. 51, 52, 53, 54. etc. 2.
If all the Members of Animals already formed do pre exist in the Egg, how can
the Imagination of the Mother change the shape, and that so notoriously
sometimes, as to produce a Calve's-head, or Dog's-face, or the like monstrous
Members. Several Answers to thus Objection offered, p. 57, 58, 59*
DISCOURSE II.
Of the General DELUGE, in the Days of Noah, its Causes and Effects. p. 62.
CHAP. I. Testimonies of Ancient Heathen Writers, and some Ancient Coyns or
Medals, verifying the Scripture-History of the Deluge, p. 63, 64, 65, 66. That
the Ancient Poets and Mythologists, by Deucalion understood Noah, and by
Deucalion's Flood the General Deluge proved, 66, 67, 68, 69. Chap. II. Of the
Causes of the General Deluge, 70: 1. A miraculous transmutation of Air into
Water rejected, 70, 71, 72. That Noah's Flood was not Topical, 73. 2, and 3.
The emotion of the Center of the Earth, or a violent depression of the Surface
of the Ocean, the most probable partial Causes of the Deluge: but the immediate
Causes assigned by the Scripture, are the breaking up of the Fountains of the
Great Deep* and the opening of the Windows of Heaven, 73. That those Causes are
sufficient to produce a Deluge, granting a change of the Center of the Earth,
to prevent the Waters running off, 73, 74, 75. That all the Vapors suspended
in the Air might contribute much toward a Flood, ibid. Concerning the Expense
of the Sea by Vapor, 76, 77, 78, etc. Of the Waters keeping its Level: An
Objection concerning an Under-current at the Propon^is, The Streights of
Gibralter, and the Baltic Sound, proposed and replied to, 81, 82, 83, 84.
Concerning the breaking up of the Fountains of the Great Deep, and how the
Waters might be made to (...), 84, 15. The inferior Circulation, and perpetual
Motion of the Water disapproved, 86, etc. That the Continents and Islands are
so equally dispersed all the World over, as to counterballance one another, so
that the Centers of Motion, Gravity, and Magnitude, concur in one, 87, 88.

An occasional Discourse concerning the Original of Fountains, 89, 90, etc. to
116. That the Preponderancy of the Earth, and the Waters lying on an heap in
the opposite Hemisphere, cannot be the cause of the Waters ascent in Springs,
proved 86, 88, 89. That Rains and Snow may suffice to feed the Springs, and do
feed the ordinary ones, proved 89, 90, 91. That the Rainwater sinks down, and
makes its way into the Earth, more than ten, or twenty, or forty, or even an
hundred Foot, proved by many Arguments and Experiments 92. 93, 94, etc. Mr.
Halley's Opinion, That Springs and Rivers owe their Original to Vapors
condensed on the sides of the Mountains, and not unto Rain, propounded and
approved in great part as to hot Countries, though Rains even there not wholly
excluded, p. 98, 99, etc. but disallowed as to the more temperate and cold
ones, yet even there the Vapors granted to have a good interest in their
production, 101, 102, etc. to 116. Observations communicated by Dr. Tancr.
Robinson, concerning the Original of Fountains, Dropping Trees, etc. in
confirmation in part of Mr. Halley's Opinion 110, 111. An Experiment of mine
own, in confirmation of the Histories of Dropping, or Fountain-trees, 113.

Inferences upon the supposition of the Rivers pouring into the Sea half an
Ocean of Water daily 117, 118, etc. The most probable Causes of the Deluge,
viz. the emotion of the Center of the Earth, or an extraordinary depr^ssion of
the Superficies of the Sea, 121, 122, 123.

Chap. III. Of the Effects of the Deluge in general, p. 125. 126. Chap. IV. Of
formed Stones, Sea-shells, and other Marine, or Marine-like Bodies found at
great distance from the Shores, supposed to have been brought in by the Deluge,
p. 127. Wherein is treated at large concerning the Nature and Original of these
Bodies: and that great Question, Whether they were originally the real Shells
and Bones of Fishes, or Stones cast in such Molds? or, Whether they be
primitive Productions of Nature, in imitation only of such Shells and Bones,
not owing their Figure to them? largely discussed, the Arguments on both sides
produced and weighed, 127, 128, etc. to 162. Chap. V. That there have been
great Changes made in the superficial part of the Earth since the General
Deluge, and by what means, 163, etc. As for instance, The Submersion of the
great Island of Atlantis, 163. The breaking off Sicily from Italy: Ceylon from
India: Sumatra from Malacca, 164: of Britain from France, proved out of
Verstegan, 165: of Barbary from Spain: of Asia from Thrace, 166, 167. The
raising up of new Islands, 167, 168. The atteration of the skirts of the Sea,
instances whereof are, 1. The Dutch Netherlands, proved out of Verstegan, by
sufficient Arguments, to have been anciently covered by the Sea. 2. The great
level of the Fens running through Holland in Lincolnshire, the Isle of Ely in
Cambridgeshire, and Marshland in Norfolk. 3. The Craux in Provence in France.
4. The whole Land of Egypt. 5. Probably all China: with many others briefly
mentioned, 168, 169, etc. to 174.

The Submersion of the Land by the Irruptions and Inundations of the Sea:
Several instances thereof, 175, 176, 177.

Changes by the encroachments of the Sea undermining the Shores, and washing
them away; and again letting the Earth so washed away, to settle not far from
the Shores, and so raise up Islands, 178, 179.

Changes by the depression and sinking of the Mountains, the Earth being washed
down by shots of Rain, Rivers, and subterraneous Waters. These so great and
considerable as to endanger in conclusion the submersion of the whole dry Land,
unless some stop be put, p. 179, 180, 181.

Changes made by Earthquakes: of which many instances out of Strabo, Pliny,
and others are produced, 181, 182, etc. A particular Narrative and Account of
the late terrible Earthquake in Jamaica, with Remarks and Observations Natural
and Moral upon it, 186, 187, etc. to 194. An occasional Discourse concerning
the Nature, Causes, and Differences of Earthquakes, 194, 195, etc. to 206. A
particular Account of the late remarkable, and farextended Earthquake, which
happened here with us in England, and in other parts of Europe, upon September.
8. 1692. 209, 210, etc. to 216.

Of extraordinary Floods caused by long continuing Showers, or violent Storms
and Shots of Rain, 221, 222, etc.

Of boisterous and violent Winds and Hurricans, what Interest they have in the
Changes wrought in the Earth, 225, 226, 227, 228.

That the Earth does not proceed so fast toward ^ general Inundation and
Submersion by Water, as the force and agency of all these Causes seem to
require, 229.


DISCOURSE III.
Of the Future Dissolution of the World, and the General Conslagration.
THE Introduction being a Discourse concerning Prophecy, 231, 232, etc. Chap.
I. The Division of the Words [2 Peter 3. 1.] and the Doctrine contained in
them, with the Heads of the following Discourse, viz. I. Testimonies concerning
the Dissolution. 1. Of the Holy Scriptures. 2. Of ancient Christian Writers. 3.
Of Heathen Philosophers and Sages. II. Seven Questions concerning the
Dissolution of the World proposed. Chap. II. The Testimonies of Scripture
concerning the Dissolution of the World. And Dr. Hammond's Expositions,
referring the most of them to the Destruction of the City and Temple of
Jerusalem, and the Period of the Jewish State and Polity considered, and
pleaded for, 240, 241, etc. to 258. Chap. III. Testimonies of the Ancient
Fathers and Doctors of the Church, concerning the Dissolution of the World,
258, 259, etc. to 264. Chap. IV. The Testimonies of some Heathen Philosophers,
and other Writers, concerning the Dissolution; the Epicureans 264; the Stoics
265, etc. who held certain Periods of In^^olation and Conflagrations 267, 268.
That this Opinion of a (...) Conflagration was of far greater Antiquity then
that Sect proved 272. Chap. V. The first Question concerning the World's
Dissolution; Whether there be any thing in Nature that may probably cause or
argue a Future Dissolution? Four probable means propounded and discussed 277.
Sect. 1. The first is the probability of the Waters naturally returning to
overflow and cover the Earth 277.

The old Argument from the World's Dissolution taken from us daily
consenescency and decay rejected 278.

The necessity of such a prevailing of the Waters daily upon the dry Land, till
at last it proceed to a total submersion of it, in the course of Nature, as
things now stand, unless some stop be put, proved* From the continual
streightning of the Sea, and l^wering the Mountains and high Grounds by Rains,
Floods and Rivers, washing away, and carrying down the Earth, and from the Seas
encroaching upon the Shares 283, to 296.

A large Qu^tation out of Josephus Blancanus, demonst^ating the same thing by
many Arguments 296.

Sect. 2. The second probable Means or Cause of the World's Destruction in a
Natural way, viz. the extinction of the Sun 314. Sect. 3. The third possible
Cause of the World's Destruction* The eruption of the Central Fire 316. That
the being of such a Fire is no way repugnant either to Scripture or Reason 318,
320. Sect. 4. The fourth possible Cause of the World's Dissolution, The Earth's
Dryness and Inflammability in the Torrid Z^ne, and the concurrent eruptions of
V^l^ane^^ 323.

That the inclination of the Ecliptic to the Equator does not diminish 323.
That though there were such a drying and parching of the Earth in the Torrid
Zone, it would not probably infer a Conflagration 324, 325. That there has not
yet been, nor in the ordinary Course of Nature can be any such drying or
parching of the Earth in the Torrid Zone 326. The possibility of the
desic^ation of the Sea by natural means denied 328, 329. The fixedness and
intransmutability of Principles, secures the Universe from Dissolution,
Destruction of any present Species, or by Production of any new, 330.

Chap. VI. Containing an Answer to the second Question, Whether shall this
Dissolution be effected by natural, or extraordinary means, and what they shall
be? 331. Chap. VII. The third Question answered, Whether shall the Dissolution
be gradual and successive, or momentanouns and sudden? 334. Chap. VIII. The
fourth Question resolved, Whether shall there be any Signs or Forerunners of
the Dissolution of the World? 337. Chap. IX. The fifth Question debated, At
what Period of time shall the World be dissolved? and particularly, Whether at
the end of Six thousand Years? 342. Chap. X. How far shall this Dissolution, or
Conflagration extend? Whether to the Aetherial Heavens, and all the Host of
them, Sun, Moon, and Stars, or to the Aerial only? 349. Chap. XI. The seventh
and last Question, Whether shall the whole World be consumed and destroyed or
annihilated, or only refined and purified 353.

The Restitution and Continuance of the World proved by the Testimonies of
Scripture and Antiquity, and also by Reason, 358.

The Arguments for the Abolition and Annihilation answered, 360, 362.

Chap. XII. The Inference the Apostle makes from the precedent Doctrine: Of
future Rewards and Punishments. The Eternity of future Punishments proved from
the Authority of Scripture and Antiquity. How the Eternity of Punishments can
consist with the Justice and Goodness of God, from p. 364. to the end of the
Book.
DISCOURSE I.
Of the Primitive CHAOS and Creation of the World.
IN the former Edition of this Treatise this Discourse concerning the Primitive
Chaos and Creation of the World, and that other concerning the Destruction
thereof by the Waters of the General Deluge, in the days of Noah, were brought
in by way of Digression; because I designed not at first to treat of them, but
only of the Conflagration or Dissolution of the World by Fire; but was
afterward, when I had made a considerable progress in the Dissolution, at the
instance of some Friends, because of their Relation to my Subject, prevailed
upon to say something of them. But now that I am at liberty so to do, I shall
not handle them any more by the by, but make them substantial Parts of my Book,
and dispose them, as is most natural, accordding to their priority and
posteriority in order of time, beginning with the Chaos and Creation.

CHAP. I.
Testimonies of the Ancient Heathen Writers concerning the Chaos, and what they
meant by it.
IT was an ancient Tradition among the Heathen, that the World was created out
of a Chaos.

First of all the ancient Greek Poet Hesiod, who may contend for Antiquity with
Homer himself, makes mention of it in his Theogonia, not far from the
beginning, in these words. (...). First of all there was a Chaos. And a few
Verses after, speaking of the immediate Production or Offspring of the Chaos,
he says, (...). From Chaos proceeded Hell, and Night [or Darkness] which seems
to have its foundation or occasion from the second Verse of the first Chapter
of Genesis; And the Earth was without form and void; and darkness was upon the
face of the deep. Of this testimony of Hesiod, Lactantius takes notice, and
censures it, in the first Book of his Institutions (...) Hesiodus non a Deo
conditore, sumens exordium, sed a Chao, quod est rudis inordinat a que materiae
confusae congeries. Hesiod not taking his beginning from God the Creator of all
things, but from the Chaos, which is a rude and inordinate heap of confused
matter. And so Ovid describes it in the beginning of his Metamorphosis; Quem
dixere Chaos, rudis indigestaque moles,
Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.


That is, One face had Nature, which they Chaos named
An undigested lump, a barren load,
Where jarring Seeds of things ill joined abode.
Others of the Ancients have also made mention of the Chaos, as Aristophanes in
Avibus. (...), etc. And Lucan in the beginning of his first Book Antiquum
repetent iterum Chaos omnia, etc. Of the formation of all the Parts of the
World out of this Chaos, Ovid in the place fore-quoted, gives us a full and
particular description: and Euripides before him a brief one, (...),
(...), etc.
The Heaven and Earth were at first of one form; but after they were separated,
the Earth brought forth Trees, Birds, Beasts, Fishes and Mankind.

The like account also the ancient Philosopher Anaxagoras gives of the Creation
of the World, beginning his Philosophy thus, (...): that is, All things (at
first) were together, or mingled and confused, then Mind supervening disposed
them in a beautiful order.

That which I chiefly dislike in this Opinion of theirs is, that they make no
mention of the Creation of this Chaos, but seem to look upon it as
self-existent and improduced.

CHAP. II.
That the Creation of the World out of a Chaos is not repugnant to the Holy
Scripture.
THis Opinion of a Chaos, if soberly understood, not as self-existent and
improduced, but in the first place created by God, and preceding other Beings,
which were made out of it, is not, so far as I can discern, any way repugnant
to the Holy Scripture, but on the contrary rather consonant and agreeable
thereto. For Moses in the History and Description of the Creation in the first
Chapter of Genesis, says not that God created all things in an instant in
their full state and perfection, but that he proceeded gradually and in order,
from more imperfect to more perfect Beings, first beginning with the Earth,
that is, the Terraqueous Globe, which was made tohu vabohu, without form and
void, the Waters covering the face of the Land, which were afterward separated
from the Land, and gathered together into one place. Then he created out of the
Land and Water first Plants, and then Animals, Fishes, Birds, Beasts, in Order,
and last of all formed the Body of Man of the Dust of the Earth.

And whereas there is no particular mention made of the Creation of Metals,
Minerass and other Fossils, they must be comprehended in the word Earth, as the
Water it self also is in the second Verse of this first Chapter.

It seems therefore to me consonant to the Scripture, That God Almighty did at
first create the Earth or Terraqueous Globe, containing in its self the
Principles of all simple inanimate Bodies, or the minute and naturally
indivisible Particles of which they were compounded, of various but a
determinate number of Figures, and perchance of different magnitudes; and these
variously and confusedly commixed, as though they had been carelessly shaken and
shuffled together; yet not so, but that there was order observed by the most
Wise Creator in the disposition of them. And not only so, but that the same
Omnipotent Deity did create also the Seeds or Seminal Principles of all Animate
Bodies, both Vegetative and Sensitive; and dispersed them, at least the
Vegetative, all over the superficial part of the Earth and Water. And the
Notion of such an Earth as this is, the Primitive Patriarchs of the World
delivered to their Posterity, who, by degrees annexing something of sabulous to
it, imposed upon it the name of Chaos.

The next work of the Divine Power and Wisdom was the separation of the Water
from the dry Land, and raising up of the Mountains, of which I shall treat more
particularly in the next Chapter.

To which follows the giving to both Elements a power of hatching, as I may so
say, or quickening and bringing to perfection the Seeds they contained; first
the more imperfect, as Herbs and Trees; then the more perfect, Fish, Fowl,
Four-footed Beasts, and creeping Things or Infects. Which may be the meaning of
those Commands of God, which were operative and effectual, communicating to the
Earth and Water a power to produce what he commanded them, Genesis 1. 11. Let the
Earth bring forth Grass, etc. and v. 20. Let the waters bring forth abundantly
the moving creature that has life, and fowl that may fly above the Earth, etc.
And v. 24. Let the Earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle
and creeping thing, and beast of the Earth after his kind.

So the Earth was at first clothed with all sorts of Herbs and Trees; and both
Earth and Water furnished with Inhabitants. And this the Ancients understood by
their (...).

But whether out of prae-existing Seeds, as I suppose, or not, certain it is
that God at that time did give an extraordinary and miraculous power to the
Land and Water of producing Vegetables and Animals: and after there were as
many of every kind brought forth as there were Seeds created at first; or as
many as it seemed good to the Divine Creator to produce without Seed; there
remained no further ability in those Elements to bring forth any more; but all
the succeeding owe their original to Seed; God having given to every Species a
power to generate or propagate its like.

CHAP. III.
Of the separating the Land and Water, and raising up the Mountains.
SUpposing that God Almighty did at first create the Terrestrial Globe, partly
of solid and more ponderous, partly of fluid and lighter parts; the solid and
ponderous must needs naturally subside, the fluid and lighter get above. Now
that there were such different parts created, is clear, and therefore it is
reasonable to think that the Waters at first should stand above and cover the
Earth: and that they did so, seems evident to me from the testimony of the
Scripture. For in the History of the Creation in the first Chapter of Genesis,
verse 2. it is said, That the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters,
intimating that the Waters were uppermost. And God said, verse 9. let the
waters under the Heaven be gathered together into one place, and let the dry
land appear. Whence, I think, it is manifest to any unprejudiced Reader, That
before that time the Land was covered with water. Especially if we add the
testimony of the holy Psalmist, Psalm 104. verse. 6. and 9. which is as it were
a comment upon this place of Genesis, where speaking of the Earth at the
Creation, he says, Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment; the
waters stood above the Mountains... and ver. 9. That they turn not again to
cover the Earth. And that this gathering together of waters was not into any
subterraneous Abyss, seems likewise clear from the Text. For it is said, That
God called this Collection of waters Seas, as if it been on purpose to prevent
such a mistake.

Whether this separation of the Land and Water, and gathering the waters
together into one place, were done by the immediate application and agency of
God's Almighty Power, or by the intervention and instrumentality of second
Causes, I cannot determine. It might possibly be effected by the same Causes
that Earthquakes are, viz. subterraneous Fires and Flatuses. We see what
incredible effects the Accension of Gunpowder has: it rends Rocks, and blows
up the most ponderous and solid Walls, Towers and Edifices, so that its force
is almost irresistible. Why then might not such a proportionable quantity of
such Materials set on fire together raise up the Mountains themselves, how
great and ponderous soever they be, yea the whole Superficies of the dry Land
(for it must all be elevated) above the Waters? And truly to me the Psalmist
seems to intimate this Cause, Psalm 104. 7. For after he had said, The waters
stood above the mountains; he adds, At thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of
thy thunder they hasted away. Now we know that an Earthquake is but a
subterraneous Thunder, and then immediately follows, The mountains ascend, the
valleys descend, etc. If there might be a high Hill raised up near the City
Troezen, out of a plain Field, by the force of a subterraneous Fire or Flatus,
as Ovid tells us.

Est prope Pitthaeam tumulus Troezena sine ullis
Arduus arboribus, Ovid Metamorph. lib. 15.
quondam planissima campi
Area, nunc tumulus: nam (res horrenda relatu)
Vis fera ventorum, caecis inclusa cavernis,
Expirare aliqua cupiens, luctataque frustra
Liberiore frui coelo, cum carcere rima
Nulla fuit toto, nec pervia flatibus esset,
Extentam tumefecit humum, ceu spiritus oris
Tendere vesicam solet, aut derepta bicornis
Terga capri; tumor ille loci permansit and alti
Collis habet speciem, longoque induruit aevo.
A Hill by Pitthaean Traezen mounts uncrown'd
With Sylvan Shades, which once was level ground,
For furious Winds (a story to admire)
Pent in blind Caverns, struggling to expire;
And vainly seeking to enjoy the Extent
Of freer Air, the Prison wanting vent,
Puffs up the hollow Earth extended so,
As when with swelling Breath we Bladders blow.
The tumor of the place remained still.
In time grown solid, like a lofty Hill.
A parallel Instance hereto we have of later date, of a Hill not far from
Puzzuolo [Puteoli] beside the Gulf of Baiae, which I my self have viewed and
been upon. It is by the Natives called Monte di cenere, and was raised by an
Earthquake Sept. 29. 1538. of about one hundred foot perpendicular altitude;
though some make it much higher: according to Stephanus Pighius it is a Mile
ascent to the top, and four Miles round at the foot: We indeed judged it not
near so great. The People say it bears nothing; nothing of any use or profit I
suppose they mean: else I am sure there grows Heath, Myrtle, Masticktree, and
other Shrubs upon it. It is a spungy kind of Earth, and makes a great sound
under a Man's feet that stamps upon it. The same Earthquake threw up so much
Earth. Stones and Ashes as quite filled up the lacus Lucrinus, so that there is
nothing left of it now, but a fenny Meadow. If such Hills, I say, as these may
be, and have been elevated by subterraneous Wildfire, Flatus or Earthquakes,
Si parvis liceat componere magna, if we may compare great things with small,
why might not the greatest and highest Mountains in the World be raised up in
like manner by a subterraneous Flatus or Wildfire, of quantity and force
sufficient to work such an effect, that is, that bears as great a proportion to
the superincumbent weight and bulk to be elevated, as those under these smaller
Hills did to theirs?

But we cannot doubt this may be done, when we are well assured that the like
has been done. For the greatest and highest Ridge of Mountains in the World,
the Andes of Peru, have been for some hundreds of Leagues in length violently
shaken, and many alterations made therein by an Earthquake that happened in the
year 1646. mentioned by Kircher in his Arca Noae, from the Letters of the
Jesuits. And Pliny tells us of his own knowledge, that the Alps and Appennine
have often been shaken with Earthquakes: Exploratum est mihi Alps Apenninumque
saepius tremuisse, lib. 2. cap 80. Nay more then all this, we read that in the
time of the Emperor Valentinian the first, there was an Earthquake that shook
all the known World. Whilst this Innovator, [that is Procopius] was yet alive
(says Amm. Marcellinus lib. 26. cap. 14.) Horrendi tremores per omnem orbis
ambitum grassati sunt subito, quales nec fabulae, nec veridicae nobis
antiquitates exponunt. Paulo enim post lucis exortum denfitate praevia fulgurum
acrius vibratorum tremefacta concutitur omnis terreni stabilitas ponderis,
mareque dispulsum retro fluctibus evolutis abscessit, ut retecta voragine
profundodorum species natantium multiformes limo cernerentur haerentes,
valliumque vastitates and montium, ut opinari dabatur, suspicerent radios solis
quos primigenia rerum sub immensis gurgitibus amandavit, etc. that is, Horrid
Earthquakes suddenly raged all the World over, the like whereto neither Fables
nor true Antiquities ever acquaint us with, or make mention of. For soon after
break of day redoubled smart and violent flashes of Lightning preceding, the
stable and ponderous mass of the whole Earth was shaken and made to tremble;
and the Sea with revolved waves was driven backwards, and forced so far to
recede, that the bottom of the great Deeps and Gulfs being discovered,
multiform Species of Fishes forsaken by the water were seen lying on the Mud:
and those vast Valleys and Mountains which the primigenial Nature had sunk deep
and concealed under immense waters (as we had reason to think) saw the Sun
beams. Wherefore many Ships resting upon the dry ground, the Mariners wandering
carelessly up and down through the small relics of the waters, that they might
gather up Fishes and other things with their hands; The Sea-waves, being as it
were grieved with their repulse, rise up again, and making their way backward
through the fervid Shallows, violently dashing against the Islands and extended
Shores of the Continents, threw down and levelled numerable Edifices in Cities
and where else they were found. Where see more of the effects of it. Of this
Earthquake we find mention also in Zosimus and Orosius.

If this story be true, as certainly it is, we have no reason to doubt of the
possibility of the Dry land being thus raised at first by subterraneous Fire.
And with us agrees the learned Thomas Lydyat in his Philosophical Disquisition
concerning the origin of Fountains, etc. being of opinion not only that it
might be so, but that it was so. I shall give you his own words, Vbi aliud
quoque summae admirationis plenum Terrae motus atque Ignis subterranei effectum
notandum venit, montium sci. generatio. And then having mentioned the raising
up Islands in the Sea by subterraneous Fires, he proceeds thus, Quomodo etiam
omnes montes qui uspiam sunt, una cum ipsis terris Continentibus (quae nihil
aliud sunt quam sparsi in Oceano majores montes sive insulae) in mundi
primordiis, (quando nimirum ignis quo de loquimur, in terrae visceribus a
potentissimo mundi Conditore accensus est) extitisse maxim fit verisimile,
mari in cava loca recedente, and terrestribus Animalibus (ejusdem Divini
numinis sapientissimo consilio) habitandi locum relinquente. That is, After
which manner also all the Mountains in the World, together with the Continents
themselves, (which are nothing else but great Mountains or Islands scattered in
the Ocean) in the beginning of the World, when the fire of which we speak was
first kindled in the bowels of the Earth by the Almighty Creator, were (as it
is most highly probable) originally raised up: the Sea receding into the
cavities and depressed places, and by the most wise counsel of the supreme
Deity leaving room for terrestrial Animals to inhabit. Then which nothing can
be said more consonant to what we have written: And I was highly pleased and
satisfied to find such Philosophy in so learned and judicious a Writer.

And in confirmation of this Doctrine, Strabo himself, though he had not, nor
could have any knowledge at all of the prodigious effects of Gunpowder, yet
makes no difficulty to affirm the possibility of raising up as well the
Continents and Mountains as the Islands by Earthquakes and subterraneous Fires;
toward the latter end of the first Book of his Geography discoursing thus:
(...) And a little after, (...). That is, For Earthquakes and Eruptions of
Flatus [Blasts] or sudden tumors of the submarine Earth, or bottom of the Sea,
may swell and elevate the Sea; so that not only small lumps or masses of
matter, but even Islands may be raised up in the midst of it. Neither if small
Islands can be raised, may not great ones too; neither may Islands be heaved
up, and not Continents as well. And Sicily may as well be thought to have been
thrown up out of the Deep by the force of the Aetnaean fire, and sticking
together to have continued above water, as to have been a piece broken off from
Italy. And the like may be said of the Islands of Lipara and Pithecusae.

Of the possibity of doing it we need not doubt, when we have sufficient proof
of the thing done in lesser Islands thus heaved up in the midst of the Sea, by
submarine fires. Strabo lib. 1. (...). That is, Between Thera and Therasia
flames issuing out of the Sea for four days, (so that the whole Sea boiled and
burned) blew up by little and little, as if it had been raised by Machines, and
composed of great lumps or masses, an Island of twelve furlongs circumference.

And Pliny tells us, that the Island Hiera near Italy, in the time of the
Social War, together with the Sea it self, did burn for several days. His words
are, In medio Mari Hiera insula juxta Italiam cum ipso Mari arsit per aliquot
dies.

And Strabo lib. 1. reports, That about Methone in the Bay of Hermione, there
was Earth raised, and as it were blown up to the height of seven Furlongs by a
fiery breath or exhalation, which by day time was unaccessible by reason of
heat and sulphurous slench, but smelling sweet by night, and shining so as to
be seen asar off, likewise casting such a heat, as to cause the Sea to boil for
five Furlongs, and to render it troubled for the space of twenty; raising up
therein a Baich or Bank of Stones as big as Towers.

These Instances I allege principally because they seem to demonstrate a
possibility of the accension of fire in the Earth when it was wholly covered
with Water, and had no intercourse or communion with the superior or external
Air: which is the main and most material Objection against the elevation of the
dry Land at the beginning by subterraneous fires.

You will say, If the Mountains be thus heaved up by subterraneous fires, the
Earth must needs be hollow all underneath them, and there must be vast Dens and
Caverns dispersed throughout them.

I answer, It Is true indeed, so there are; as may undeniably be proved by
instances. For the new Mountain we mentioned at Puteoli, that was thus raised,
being of a Mile steep ascent, and four Miles round at the foot, a
proportionable Cavity must be left in the Earth underneath: And the Mountain
Aetna at the last Eructation alone having disgorged out of its bowels so great
a flood of melted Materials, as if spread at the depth and breadth of three
foot, might reach four times round the whole Circuit of the Terraqueous Globe,
there must likewise an answerable Vault be left within. You will demand, How
then comes it to pass, that they stand so firm, and do not founder and fall in
after so many Ages. I answer, that they may stand, appears by the foresaid
new-raised Mountain. For notwithstanding the Cavity in and under it, it has
stood firm and staunch, without the least sinking or subsidency, for above an
hundred and fifty years: neither is there any great sinking or falling in at
Aetna it self; at least in no degree answerable to its ejected matter. This
assertion is confirmed by the unanimous vote and testimony of all Writers,
Ancient and Modern, who have handled this Subject. But Alphonsus Borellus
supposes them not to have duly considered the matter, and calculated the
quantity of the ejected materials and the bulk of the Mountain, and compared
them together; but to have been carried away by the prejudices and persuasions
of the People, who looking upon the top of the Mountain at a distance, think it
but a small thing in comparison of the ejected Sand and Ashes that covered
whole Countries; and those vast Rivers of liquid stones and other ingredients,
that ran down so many miles, whereas he by a moderate computation found out
that the total of what the Mountain disgorged at the last eruption amounted not
(as I remember) to the fourteen thousandth part of the Solidity of the whole
Mountain. The reason is the strength and firmness of their Vaulture and
Pillars, sufficient to support the superincumbent weight. And yet in some
places there are sinkings and fallings in, which have afterward become Valleys
or Pools of Water. But as for the Cavities that are lower than the Superficies
of the Ocean, the Water, where it could insinuate and make its way, has filled
them up to that height. I say where it could make its way, for that there are
many empty Cavities even under the Sea it self, appears by the shaking and
heating too of the very Water of the Sea in some places in Earthquakes, and
raising up the borders or skirts of it, so as to drive the Water a great way
back; and the raising up new Islands in the middle of the Sea; as Delos and
Rhodes, and Anaphe, and Nea, and Alone, and Hiera, and Thera mentioned by
Pliny, Hist lib. 2. c. 87. and Thia in his own time; and Therasia in the Aegean
in Senaca's time, which was heaved up in the sight of many Mariners then
present and looking on.

I am not ignorant, that the learned Man I lately quoted, I mean Alph.
Borellus, in his Book De Incendiis Aetnae, is of opinion, that the middle part,
or as he calls it, the kernel of that Mountain is firm and solid, without any
great caverns or vacuities, and that all those vaults and cavities in which the
fire rages are near the superficial or cortical part: And derides those who
fancy that Aetna, the Aeolian Islands, Lipara, Strongyle, etc. and Vesuvius do
communicate by subterraneous channels and passages running under the bottom of
the Sea. But saving the respect due to him for his learning and ingenuity,
there is good Authority on their side; and our ratiocinations against the
possibility of such a thing must give place to the clear proof of matter of
fact. Julius Ethnicus an ancient Writer, quoted by Ludovicus Vives in his
Annotations upon S. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, gives us this Relation, Marco
Aemilio, Lucio Aurelio Consulibus, Aetna mons terrae motu ignes super verticem
late diffudit, and ad Insulam Liparam mare efferbuit, and quibusdam adustis
navibus vapore plerosque navaleis exanimavit: Piscium vim magnam exanimem
dispersit, quos Liparenses avidius epulis adpetenteis contaminatione ventris
consumpti sunt, ita ut nova pestilentia vast arentur insulae. That is, Marcus
Aemilius and Lucius Aurelius being Consuls, Mount Aetna being shaken by an
Earthquake, cast forth and scattered fire from its top far and wide. At which
time the Sea at the Island of Lipara was boiling hot, and some Ships being
burnt most of the Seamen were stifled with the vapor: besides it dispersed
abroad a power of dead fish, which the Liparensians greedily ga^^ering up and
eating, were consumed with a contagious disease in their bellies: so that the
Islands were wasted with a new sort of pestii^^ce. And Father Kircher the
Jesuit, in the Preface to his Mundus Subterraneus giving a Relation of an
Earthquake which shook a great part of Calabria, and made notable devastations
there, which himself saw, and was in, Anno 1638. clearly demonstrates that
Aetna, Stromboli, and the Mountains of Calabria, do communicate by vaults and
caverns passing under the bottom of the Sea. I shall insert but one passage out
of him, referring the Reader to the fore-quoted Preface for the rest. Hisce
calamitatibus ( says he) dum jactamur, ego curiosius intuitus Strongylum, 60
fere milliarium intercapedine dissitum, illum insolito modo furere notavi, etc.
i.e. While we were tossed with these calamities, I beholding curiously the Island
Stromboli about 60 miles distant, observed it to rage after an unusual manner,
for it appeared all filled with fire in such plenty, that it seemed to cast
forth mountains of flame: a spectacle horrid to behold and formidable to the
most undaunted Spirit. In the mean time there was a certain sound perceived as
it were of Thunder, but by reason of the great distance from whence it came
somewhat obscure, which by degrees, proceeding forward in the subterraneous
conduits, grew greater and greater, till it came to the place just underneath
us, [ they were at Lopez by the Sea] where it shook the Earth with such a
roaring or murmr and fury, that being not able to stand any longer upon our
Legs, we were forced, to support our selves, to catch hold upon any shrub or
twig that was near us, lest our limbs should be put out of joint by too much
shaking and concussion. At which time happened a thing worthy of immortal and
eternal memory, viz. the subversion of the famous Town of S. Eusemia; which he
goes about to relate. As for Vesuvius, if that be not hollow down to the very
roots and foundations of it, how comes it to pass that at the times of its
deflagrations it should vomit out such stoods of boiling Waters? as if we had
not read of them in Histories, and been told so by our Guide when we ascended
that Mountain, we must needs have perceived our selves by the mighty guls and
channels in the sides thereof, it being of it self near the top so spungy and
dry, that it is more likely to imbibe then to cast off much rain in the Winter
time. And again, what causes the Sea to recede at those times, and that to so
great a distance, that the Galleys have been laid dry in the very Haven of
Naples?

Howbeit, I cannot positively assert the Mountains thus to have been raised.
But yet whether without means, or by whatsoever means it were, a Receptacle for
the Waters was prepared, and the dry Land and Mountains elevated, so as to cast
off the Waters, on the third day, and which is wonderful, the Cavities made to
receive the Waters, and the whole terra firma, or dry Land with its Mountains
were so proportioned one to the other, as that the one was as much depressed
below the Shores, as the other was elevated above them. And, as if the one had
been taken out of the other, the Sea with all its Creeks, and Bays, and Inlets,
and other Appendants was made, and is very near equal to the whole dry Land
with its Promontories and Mountains, if not in Superficies, yet in bulk or
dimensions, though some think in both. Which equality is still constantly
maintained, notwithstanding all Inundations of Land, and Atterations of Sea;
because one of these does always nearly balance the other, according to the
vulgar Proverb we have before mentioned, What the Sea loses in one place, it
gains in another. If any shall demand, How the Sea comes to be gradually
depressed, and deepest about the middle part; whereas the bottom of it was in
all likelihood equal while the Waters covered the whole Earth? I answer, the
same Cause that raised up the Earth, whether a subterraneous fire or status,
raised up also the skirts of the Sea, the ascent gradually decreasing to the
middle part, where, by reason of the solidity of the Earth, or gravity of the
incumbent Water, the bottom was not elevated at all. For the enclosed fire in
those parts where its first accension or greatest strength was, raised up the
Earth first, and cast off the Waters, and thence spreading by degrees, still
elevated the Land, and drove the Waters further and further; till at length the
weight of them was too great to be raised, and then the fire brake forth at the
tops of the Mountains, where it found least resistance, and dispersed it self in
the open Air. The Waters also, where they found the bottom sandy, or yielding,
made their way into all those Cavities the fire had made and left, filling them
up as high as the level of the Ocean. Neither let any man imagine, that the
Earth under the Water, was too soft and muddy to be in this manner raised by
subterraneous fire; for I have shown before, that the bottom of the Sea is so
saddened and hardened by the weight of the incumbent Water, that the Highways,
beaten continually by Horses and Carriages, are not more firm and solid. But
omitting this (which is only a conjecture) I shall discourse a little more
concerning the Equality of Sea and Land.

It has been observed by some, That where there are high Cliffs or Downs along
the Shore, there the Sea adjoining is deep; and where there are low and level
Grounds, it is shallow: the depth of the Sea answering to the Elevation of the
Earth above it: and as the Earth from the Shores is gradually higher and
higher, to the middle and parts most remote from the Sea, as is evident by the
descents of the Rivers, they requiring a constant declivity to carry them down;
so the Sea likewise is proportionably deeper and deeper from the Shores to the
middle. So that the rising of the Earth from the Shores to the Mid-land is
answerable to the descent or declivity of the bottom of the Sea from the same
shores to the Mid-Sea. This rising of the Earth from the Shores gradually to
the Mid-land, is so considerable, that it is very likely the Altitude of the
Earth in those Mid-land parts above the Superficies of the Sea, is greater than
that of the Mountains above the leve of the adjacent Lands. To the height of
the Hills above the common Superficies of the Earth do answer in Brerewood's
Opinion the extraordinary Dephts or Whirl-pools that are found in the Sea,
descending beneath the ordinary bottom of the Sea, as the Hills ascend above
the ordinary face of the Land. But this is but a conjecture of his, and to me
it seems not very probable, because it is not likely there should be in the Sea
extraordinary Depths of that vast length and extension, as those huge Ridges of
Mountains that run almost quite through the Continents. And because I have
observed the Waters of Rivers that slow gently, but especially of the Sea to
level the bottoms of their Channels and Receptacles, as may be seen in those
parts of the Sea whose bottoms are uncovered at Low Water; and in dry Lands
that have been deserted by the Sea, as the Fens in the Isle of Ely, and the
Craux in Provence in France, etc. which appear to be a perfect Level, as far as
one can ken. Though possibly the motion of the Sea may not descend down so low
as those Depths, and so may not level the bottoms of them.

But against what I have said concerning the levelling of the bottom of the
Sea, it may be objected, That Mariners and Diverse find no such thing, but the
quite contrary, viz. That the bottom of the Sea is as unequal as the Land,
sometimes ten or twelve Fathoms on one side of the Ship, and One hundred on the
other, as Mr. Boil tells us in his Relations about the bottom of the Sea,
consonant whereto are the Accounts of Diverse. And I have (says my worthy
Friend Dr. Ta^c. Robinson in one of his Letters to me) read in Voyages, of vast
Rocks of Salt observed in some places under the Sea.

To which I answer, That I should indeed have excepted such places as are
rocky, which bear a very little proportion to the Latitude and Extent of the
Sea, and are for the most part not far off the Land. I my self have seen so
much of the bottom of the Sea, round about the Coasts of England, and a good
part of the Low Countries, of Italy and Sicily, that I think I may boldly
pronounce in general, That where the bottom of the Sea is not rocky, but Earth,
Owze or Sand, (and that is incomparably the greatest part of it) it is by the
motion of the Waters, so far as the reciprocation of the Sea extends to the
bottom, brought to a level; and if it should be now unequal, would in time be
levelled again. By level I do not mean so as to have no declivity (for the
reciprocation preserves that, the flood hindering in good measure the constant
carrying down of the bottom) but only to have an equal, uniform and easy
descent from the Shores to the Deeps. Now all those Reports of Diverse and
Navigators refer for the most part to rocky places. For Mariners seldom sound
but in such places, and in shallows; and Urinators have no reason to dive where
the bottom is level and sandy. And that the motion of the Waters descends to a
good depth, I prove from those Plants that grow deepest in the Sea, because
they all generally grow flat in manner of a Fan, and not with Branches on all
sides like Trees; which is so contrived by the Providence of Nature, because
the edges of them do in that posture with most ease cut the Water flowing to
and fro: And should the flat side be objected to the Stream, it would be turned
edgewise by the force of it; because in that site it does least resist the
motion of the Water: whereas did the Branches of those Plants grow round as in
Trees, they would be thrown down backward and forward every Tide. Nay not only
the herbaceous and woody submarine Plants, but even the Lithophyta themselves
affect this manner of growing, if they be any thing ramose and rise to a
considerable height, as I have observed in various kinds of Corals and Pori.
Hence I suspect those Relations of Trees growing at the bottom of the Sea, and
bringing forth Fruit there. As for the Maldiva Nut, till better information. I
adhere to Garcias his Opinion, That the Trees that bare those Nuts were of old
time, together with the Land on which they grew, overwhelmed by the inundations
of the Sea, and there hardened in the Earth, and afterward cast up by the
working of the Sea again. Which thing is very probable; for to this day some of
those Maldiva Islands are now and then drowned and swallowed up by the Sea.
Further I do believe, that in the great depths of the Sea there grow no Plants
at all, the bottom being too remote from the external Air; which though it may
pierce the Water so low, yet I doubt whether in quantity sufficient for the
vegetation of Plants. Nay, we are told, that in those deep and bottomless Seas
there are no Fish neither: yet not because there are no Plants or Insects to
feed them; for that they can live upon Water alone, Rondeletius his Experiment
about keeping them in a Glass, does undeniably prove; but because their Spawn
would be lost in those Seas, the bottom being too cold for it to quicken there.
This Answer and Discourse, though it be inserted into another Treatise, yet
properly belongs to this place, to which I have therefore restored it, begging
the Readers excuse for this repetition. I now proceed.

That it is consonant to the best Observations of the height of the Earth and
its Mountains above the Superficies of the Sea; and of the depth of the Sea;
that the one is answerable to the other. Varenius in his Geogr. witnesses, p.
152. Caeterum ex observata hactenus in plerisque locis profunditate Oceani
manifestum est, eam fere aequalem altitudini sive elevationi montium and
locorum Mediterraneorum supra littora, nimirum quantum hoec elevantur and
extant supra littorum horizontem, tantum alvei maris infra eum deprimuntur;
sive quantum assurgit terra a littoribus versus mediterranea loca, tuntundem
paulatim magis magisque deprimitur usque ad medii Oceani loca, ubi plerumque
maxima est profunditas. That is, From the depth of the Ocean, as far as has
been hitherto observed in most places, it is manifest that that [profundity] is
near equal to the altitude or elevation of the Mediterraneous places above the
Shores; that is to say, as much as these are elevated, and stand up above the
Horizon of the Shores; so much are the Channels of the Seas depressed below it:
or, as much as the Earth rises from the Shores toward the Mediterraneous
places; so much is it by little and little more and more depressed to the
middle parts of the Ocean, where the greatest depth for the most part is.

And Brerewood in his Enquiries pertinently to our purpose, supposes the depth
of the Sea to be a great deal more than the height of the Hills above the
common surface of the Earth. -- For that in making estimation of the depth of
the Sea, we are not to reckon and consider only the height of the Hills above
the common Superficies of the Earth, but the advantage or height of all the dry
Land above the Superficies of the Sea: Because the whole mass of the Earth,
that now appears above the Waters, being taken, as it were, out of the place
which the Waters now possess, must be equal to the place out of which it was
taken; and consequently it seems, that the height or elevation of the one
should answer to the depth or descending of the other. And therefore, as I
said, in estimating the deepness of the Sea, we are not to consider only the
erection of the Hills above the ordinary Land, but the advantage of all the dry
Land above the Sea. Which latter, I mean the height of the ordinary Main Land,
is in my opinion more in large Continents above the Sea, than that of the Hills
is above the Land. For that the plain and common face of the dry Land, is not
level or equally distant from the Center, but has great declivity and descent
toward the Sea, and acclivity or rising toward the Mid-land part, although it
appear not so to the common view of the Eye, is to reason notwithstanding
manifest. Because, as it is found in that part of the Earth which the Sea
covers, that it descends lower and lower toward the midst of the Sea; (for
the Sea which touching the upper face of it is known to be level by nature, and
evenly distant from the Center, is withal observed to wax deeper and deeper the
further one saileth from the Shore toward the Main) Even so in that part which
is uncovered the coursings and streamings of Rivers on all sides from the
Mid-land parts toward the Sea (whose property we know is to slide from the
higher to the lower) evidently declare so much. De fide Orthod. l. 2. c. 10.
This Author with Damascen supposes, that the unevenness and irregularity,
which is now seen in the Superficies of the Earth, was caused either by taking
some parts out of the upper face of the Earth in sundry places to make it more
hollow, and laying them in other places to make it more unequal: or else (which
in effect is equivalent to that) by raising up some, and depressing others to
make room and receipt for the Sea: that Mutation being wrought by the Power of
that Word, Let the waters be gathered into one place that the dry land may
appear. This proportioning of the Cavities appointed to receive the Seas, to
the protuberancy of the dry Land above the common Superficies of the Ocean, is
to me a sufficient Argument, to prove, that the gathering together of the
Waters into one place, was a work of counsel and design; and if not effected by
the immediate Finger of God, yet at least governed and directed by him. So the
Scripture affirms the place to receive the Sea, to have been prepared by God,
Psalm 104. 8. Now in things of this nature, to the giving an account whereof
whatever Hypothesis we can possibly invent, can be but merely conjectural,
those are to be most approved that come nearest to the Letter of Scripture, and
those that (...) with it to be rejected, how trim or consistent soever with
themselves they may seem to be: this being as much, as when God tells us how he
did make the World, for as to tell him how he should have made it.

But here it may be objected, That the present Earth looks like a heap of
Rubbish and Ruins; And that there are no greater examples of confusion in
Nature than Mountains singly or jointly considered; and that there appear not
the least footsteps of any Art or Counsel either in the Figure and Shape, or
Order and Disposition of Mountains and Rocks. Wherefore it is not likely they
came so out of God's hands; who by the Ancient Philosophers is said (...), and
to make all things in number, weight and measure.

To which I answer, That the present face of the Earth, with all its Mountains
and Hills, its Promontories and Rocks, as rude and deformed as they appear,
seems to me a very beautiful and pleasant object, and with all that variety of
Hills, and Valleys, and Inequalities far more grateful to behold, than a
perfectly level Country without any rising or protuberancy, to terminate the
sight: As any one that has on the one hand seen the Isle of Ely, or any the
like Country exactly level, and extending on all sides further then one can
ken, or that has been far out at Sea, where nothing is to be seen but Sky and
Water: and on the other, from the Downs of Sussex enjoyed that spacious and
ravishing prospect of the Country on one hand, and the Sea on the other,
comparing both objects, must necessarily confess.

2. They are useful to Mankind in affording them convenient places for
habitation, and situations of Houses and Villages; serving as Skreens to keep
off the cold and nipping blasts of the Northern and Easterly Winds, and
reflecting the benign and cherishing Sunbeams, and so rendering their
habitations both more comfortable and chearly in Winter; and promoting the
growth of Herbs and Fruit Trees, and the maturation of their Fruits in Summer.
Besides, casting off the Waters they lay the Gardens, Yards and Avenues to the
Houses dry and clean, and so as well more salutary as more elegant. Whereas
Houses built in Plains, unless shaded with Trees, stand bleak and exposed to
wind and weather; and all Winter are apt to be grievously annoyed with mire and
dirt.

3. A Land so distinguished into Mountains, Valleys and Plains is also most
convenient for the entertainment of the various sorts of Animals, which God
has created, some whereof delight in cold, some in hot, some moist and watery,
some in dry and upland places, and some of them could neither find nor gather
their proper food in different Regions. Some Beasts and Birds we find live upon
the highest tops of the Alps, and that all the Winter too, while they are
constantly covered with Snow, as the Ibex, and Rupicapra or Chamois among
Quadrupeds, and Lagopus among Birds.

4. The Mountains are most proper for the putting forth of Plants; yielding the
greatest variety, and the most luxuriant sorts of Vegetables, for the
maintenance of the Animals proper to those places, and for Medicinal Uses,
partly also for the exercise and delight of such ingenious persons as are
addicted to search out and collect those Rarities, to contemplate and consider
their Forms and Natures, and to admire and celebrate the Wisdom of their
Creator.

5. All manner of Metals, Minerals and Fossils if they could be generated in a
level Earth, of which there is some question, yet should they be dug or mined
for, the Delfs must necessarily be so flown with Water, (which to derive and
rid away no Adits or Soughs could be made, and I much doubt whether Gins would
suffice) that it would be extremely difficult and chargeable, if possible to
work them at all.

6. Neither are the very tops of the highest Mountains barren of Grass for the
feeding and fattening of Beasts. For on the Ridges of the high Mountains of
Iura and Saleve near Geneva, and those of Rhoetia or the Grisons Country,
which are the highest of all the Alps, excepting the Vallesian and Sabaudian,
there are multitudes of Kine fed in Summer time, as I my self can witness,
having in my Simpling Voyages on those of Iura and Saleve observed Herds of
Cattle there, and many Dairy-houses built, where I have been more than once
refreshed by their Milk and Milk-Meats. Nay there are but very few, and those
of the highest Summits of the Alps that keep Snow all Summer: and I was told by
the Inhabitants, that one time or other, in seven or eight years space, for the
most part there came a Summer that melted all the Snow that lay on them too.

7. Another great use and necessity of the Mountains and Hills is for the
Generation and Maintenance of Rivers and Fountains, which (in our Hypothesis,
that all proceed from Rainwater) could not be without them, or but rarely. So
we should have only Torrents, which would fail in Summer time, or any dry
Season, and nothing to trust to, but stagnating Water reserved in Pools and
Cisterns. Which how great an Inconvenience it would be, I need not take pains
to show. I say that Fountains and Rivers would be but rare were there no
Mountains. For upon serious consideration I find that I was too hasty in
Observat. Physical, etc.
conclnding, because I had observed no Fountains springing up in Plains,
therefore there were, or could be absolutely none; and do now grant that there
is reason to believe the Relations made of such. For the whole dry Land being
but one continued Mountain, and ascending all along from the Sea to the
Mid-land, as is undeniably proved by the Descent of Rivers even in plain
Countries; the Water sinking into the Earth, may run under ground, and
according as the Vein leads it, break out in the side of this Mountain, though
the place as to outward appearance be a Plain.

I shall now add, That though it be possible that without Mountains there may
be Springs, if there should be Rains, (which it is somewhat questionable were
there no Mountains, whether there could be or no, at least in hot Countries)
yet is it probable, that most of those Springs we find in Plains or depressed
places distant from Mountains may come along in subterraneous Channels from the
next Mountains, and there break out. Monsieur Blundel related to the Parisian
Academy, what device the inhabitants of the lower Austria, which is encompassed
with the Mountains of Stiria, are wont to use to fill their Wells with Water;
They dig in the Earth to the depth of twenty or five and twenty feet, till they
come to an argilla [clammy earth] then they bore a hole in the midst of a stone
about five or six inches broad, and through it bo^e the argilla so deep till
the Waters breaks forcibly out; which Water it is probable comes from the
neighboring Moun^ains in subterraneous Channels. And Cassinus observed, That
in many places of the Territory of Modena and Bologna in Italy, they make
themselves Wells of springing Water by the like artifice. They dig in the Earth
till they come to the Water (which stagnates in common Wells) which they draw
quite out. Then within this new dug Well they make two cylindrical Walls,
concentrical one to another; the space or interstice between them they fill and
ramm close with well wrought Argilla or Clay, to keep out the ambient Water;
which done, they sink the Well deeper into the ground, and continue the inner
Wall so low till the Earth underneath seems to swell by the force of the Water
rising up: And lastly, they bore this Earth or Soil with a long Wimble;
whereupon the Water breaks forth through the hole with a great force, so that
it does not only fill the Well, but overflows and waters the neighboring
fields with a constant stream: By this means the same Seigneur Cassini made a
Fountain at the Castle of Vrbin, that cast up the water five foot high above
the level of the ground. It is very probable that these waters descend by
subterraneous passages from the Appennine Mountains, which are about ten miles
distant. If such things may be done by Art, why may they not also by Nature?
Nay, that the like are done we find by experience in the Lacus Lugeus, or
Zirchnitzer-Sea in Carniola, which after it is empty of water running out at
holes or pits in the bottom, (which it does yearly in the Summer time, in the
Months of May, June, or July) in the Autumn when it rains moderately, the water
spouts out of some of the forementioned pits two or three fathoms
perpendicularly, but when it rains very hard and long together, especially with
Thunder, then the water breaks forth with great force, not only from the
foresaid pits, but likewise at a thousand other Caves and Holes, spirting
several fathoms high, from some perpendicularly, from others obliquely, so that
there is not a pleasanter sight then this; and in a short time fills the lake.
A full description and an account of all the Phoenomena of this admirable Lake
see in Philosoph Transact. Numb. 191. p. 411. etc. So we see water may be
brought down from the Mountains and raised up naturally in strait Channels with
that force, and to that height, as to exceed all the artificial jets in the
World, if not in the altitude of the spout, yet in the bigness of the stream
abundantly.

This end and use of Mountains I find assigned by Mr. Halley in his Discourse
concerning the original of Springs and Rivers, in these words: This, if we may
allow final causes (and why may we not? what needs this hesitancy and
dubitation in a thing that is clear?) seems to be the design of the Hills that
their ridges being placed through the midst of the Continents, might serve as
it were Alembicks to distill fresh water for the use of Man and Beast, and their
heights to give a descent to those streams to run gently like so many veins of
the Macrocosm, to be the more beneficial to the Creation.

But some may say, Granting there be some use and benefit of moderate Hills and
Risings; what necessity is there of such extended Ridges of vast and towering
Mountains, hiding their Heads among the Clouds, and seeming for Altitude to
contend with the Skies? I answer there is very great use of them for repelling
the Vapors exhaled by the Sunbeams in the hot Regions, and hindering their
Evagations Northward, as we have already shown, and shall not repeat. I might
add hereto,

8. Those long Series and Chains of Mountains are of great use for Boundaries
and Limits to the Territories of Princes or Commonwealths, to secure them on
those parts from sudden Incursions of Enemies. As for the rudeness and
confusion of Mountains, their cragged and broken Rocks and Cliffs, and whatever
other Disorder there may be among them, it may be accounted for, from the
manner of their first Generation, and those other mutations they have been
since obnoxious to, by Earthquakes, Eruptions of Vulcano's, foundering and
falling in of their Props and Foundations, and by time and weather too, by
which not only the Earth is washed away, or blown off from the Stones, but the
very Stones and Rocks themselves corroded and dissolved, as might easily be
proved by Instances, could I spare time to do it.

To sum up all relating to the Division and Disposition of the Water and Earth
in brief.

1. I say, the Water being the lighter Element does naturally occupy the upper
place, and stand above the Earth, and so at first it did. But now we see it
does not so; the Earth being contrary to its nature forcibly elevated above it;
being (as the Psalmist phraseth it) founded above the Seas, and established
above the Floods: and this because it was best it should be so, as I shall
clearly prove and deduce in particulars in another Discourse.

2. The dry Land is not elevated only upon one side of the Globe; for then had
it had high Mountains in the middle of it, with such vast empty Cavities
within, as must be equal to the whole Bulk raised up, the Center of Magnitude
must needs have been considerably distant from the Center of Gravity: which
would have caused a very great and inconvenient inequality in the Motion of the
parts of the Earth: but the Continents and Islands are so equally dispersed all
the Globe over as to counterballance one another, so that the Centers of
Magnitude and Gravity concur in one.

3. The Continents are not of exactly equal and level Superficies or Convexity.
For then the Parts subject to the Course of the Sun, called the Torrid Zone,
would have been, as the Ancients fancied them, unhabitable for Heat and
Drought. But there are huge Ridges and extended Chains of lofty Mountains,
directed for the most part to run East and West; by which means they give free
admittance and passage to the Vapors brought in by the Winds from the
Atlantic and Pacifick Oceans; but stop and inhibit their Excursions to the
North and South, either condensing them upon their sides into water, by a kind
of external Destillation; or by streightening and constipating of them
compelling them to gather into Drops, and descend down in Rain.

These are great things, and worthy the Care, Direction, and Disposal of the
Great and Wise Creator and Governor of all things: And we see they are
accordingly excellently ordered and provided by him.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Creation of Animals; some Questions resolved.
AS to the first Creation of Animals I have already proposed two Opinions, both
consonant or reconcilable to the Scriptures.

1. That God Almighty did at first create the Seeds of all Animals, (that is,
the Animals themselves in little) and dispersed them over the superficial part
of the Land and water, giving power to those Elements to hatch and bring them
forth; which when they had done, and all the Animals of these created Seeds
were produced and perfected, there remained no more ability in them to bring
forth any more; but all the succeeding owe their Original to Generation.

2. Because some will not admit that God at first created any thing imperfect,
we did propose that he might by his Almighty Power, out of the Water and Earth,
make the first set of Animals in their full state and perfection, (as it is
generally believed he did Adam) and give to each Species a power by generation
to propagate their like. For his commanding the Waters and Earth to produce
such and such living Creatures, signifies that he did himself efficaciously
form them out of the Earth and Water; as when he says, Let there be light,
etc. the meaning is not that he did permit or command something else besides
himself to produce light; but that he did by his own Almighty power effectually
create it. Indeed the Scripture does in this manner interpret it self: For
whereas it is said verses 20. and 24. Let the waters bring forth, etc. and Let
the earth bring forth the living creature, etc. in the next verses it follows,
And God created great whales and every living creature that moves, etc. And
God made the beast of teh earth,etc. But now there may a further Question or
two be moved concerning the Creation of Animals.

1. Whether God created at first a great number of every kind of Animal all the
Earth over, in their proper Places and Climates; or only two of each Species, a
Male and a Female, from which all the rest proceeded by generation? This latter
opinion I find embraced by some modern Philosophers, and it may be made
probable by several Arguments.

First from the Analogy to Mankind. There being at first only one Man and one
Woman created, it is very likely, there were no more of any other Creatures,
two being sufficient in a short time to stock the World.

Secondly, Because at the time of the General Deluge there were only two of
each kind (of unclean Beasts) preserved in the Ark; and if two might then
suffice, why not as well at the first Creation? And if there were no need of
creating more, what likelihood that there were more created?

But the first Opinion, That there were many at first created, seems more
consonant to Scripture, which in the mention of the Creation of Aquatic
Creatures uses the word Abundantly, Genesis 1. 20. And God said, Let the waters
bring forth abundantly the moving creature that has life, and fowl that may
fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven. And in the next verse it
is said* That the waters did bring them forth abundantly. So that at least of
Birds and Fishes there were many individuals at first created. As for Plants,
certain it is that they were created dispersedly all the world over; they
having no locomotive power, but being fixed to a place, and the Seeds of many of
them being ponderous, and not portable by winds or any other means, and yet
those of the same Species to be found in far distant places, and on the tops of
high Mountains as remote from each other, as the Helvetick and Austrian Alps.

2. Concerning the Creation of Animals there may yet a further Question be
moved, viz. Whether all Animals that already have been, or hereafter shall be,
were at first actually created by God? or whether has he given to each kind of
Animal such a power of generation, as to prepare matter and produce new
individuals in their own bodies? Some are of opinion that God did himself at
first actually create all the individual Animals that ever were or ever shall
be, and that there is no such thing as any production of new ones. For, say
they, what were that but a creation of such individuals? And what did God at
the first Creation more then, if this be true, we see every day done, that is,
produce a new Animal out of matter, which it self prepares: All the difference
is the doing that in an instant which the Creature must take time to do. For as
for the preparation of matter, that must be made fit, be the Agent never so
Omnipotent.

Besides, the Animal-parent cannot be the Agent or Efficient in the generation
or forming and nourishing of the foetus. Because that is a work of Art and
Reason, which brute Creatures are not endued withal, nor indeed does Man
himself understand any thing of the process of generation in himself, neither
is conscious of what is done in the Womb, so far is he from being the doer of
it.

Again, it is most probable, if not certain, that most Animals have in them
from the beginning the Seeds or Eggs of all the young they shall afterward
bring forth, which when they were spent and exhaust the Creature becomes barren
or e^^ete. So we see all the female foetus of viviparous Quadrupeds are brought
forth with their Testes or Ovaria in them, which are esteemed parts of their
bodies; and all Birds have in them from their first formation their Ovary or
Egg-cluster, containing the Seeds of all the Eggs they shall ever lay. Now had
the Creature a power of producing new ones, what need was there that there
should be so many at first formed in them? and why might they not breed them as
well afterward, as at the beginning?

Hereupon these Philosophers argue thus: Suppose we that God did at first
create two Animals, a Male and a Female: The Female must be created with its
Ovaries or Testes, which (as we said) contained so many Seeds or Eggs as the
Creature should ever bring forth young. So it is clear that not only the first
pair, but the first generation of Animals were actually created. Again, this
first generation from their first appearance had each of them (the Females I
mean) its Ovaria or Clusters of Eggs, every one whereof had in like manner its
Animalcule in it; so that this second generation was also created in the first.
The same may be demonstrated of the third and fourth, and so on of all the
generations that shall be as long as the World lasts.

Against this Doctrine it may be objected, First, That it seems impossible that
the Ovaries of one Female should actually include and contain the innumerable
myriads of Animals that may proceed from it in so many Generations as have been
and shall be during the continuance of the World. Who can conceive such a small
portion of matter to be capable of such division, and to contain such an
infinity of parts?

But to this it may be answered, That our sight does not give us the just
magnitude of things, but only their proportion, and what appears to the Eye as
a Point, may be magnified so, even by Glasses, as to discover an incredible
multitude of parts; nay, some Animals there are so small, that if a grain of
Sand were broken into 8000000 of equal parts, one of these would not exceed the
bigness of one of those Creatures, as Mr. Lewenhoek affirms. And Mr. Hook
proceeds further, and says, that he had discovered some so exceeding small,
that Millions of Millions might be contained in one drop of water. If these
whole Creatures be so incredibly little, what shall we think of their parts
containing and contained, their Entrails and Muscles, their Ovaries and Eggs?
But for a sensible demonstration of the unconceivable, I had almost said
infinite, divisibility of matter, I might refer the Reader to the Honorable
Mr. Boil of famous memory his Discourse concerning the strange subtlety of
e^^luviums. I shall mention one or two Experiments. He dissolved one grain of
filed Copper in Spirit of Saltarmoniack, and upon this Solution he poured so
much distilled water by degrees, as till the fair and deep blew color grew
somewhat pale without being too dilute to be manifest. And then carefully
weighing the Vessel and the Water, and subducting the weight of that out of
this, he found the weight of the Liquor alone, when reduced to grains, to
amount to 28534, so that a grain of Copper communicated a tincture to 28534
times its weight. Now considering that the weight of Copper to the weight of
Water of the same bulk is proxime as 9 to 1, a grain-weight of Copper is in
bigness but the ninth part of as much Water as weighs a grain; and so the
formerly mentioned number of grains of Water must be multiplied by 9, to give
us the proportion between the tinging Body and tinged Liquor; whence it will
follow, that a single grain of Copper gave a blewness to above 256806 parts of
limped Water, each of them as big as it. And to prosecute this Experiment
further, he mixed together equal parts of distilled colorless Water, and of the
said tincted Liquor, and found, that though the color were very faint and
dilute, yet an attentive Eye could easily discern it to be bluish: whereby it
appears that one grain of Copper was able to impart a color to double the
quantity of Water abovementioned, that is to 513612 grains of Water.

Other Experiments there are in the same Discourse made in odorate Bodies:
Having, says he, for curiosity sake suspended in a pair of exact Scales, that
would turn with a very small part of a grain, a piece of Ambergris bigger
then a Walnut, and weighing betwixt an hundred and sixscore grains, I could not
in three days and an half that I had opportunity to make the trial, discover
even upon that balance, any decrement of weight in the Ambergris, though so
rich a Perfume lying in the open Air was like in that time to have parted with
good store of odoriferous steams. And a while after suspending a lump of
Asa^oetida 5 days and a half, I found it not to have sustained any discernible
loss of weight, though, in spite of the unfavourable cold weather it had about
it a neighboring Atmosphere replenished with foetid exha^ations, etc.

But what can be imagined more small and subtle then the minute parts of the
s^eams of Animals? The same Author in (...) Tract tells us, That a good Setting
(...) way of ranging the Fields, and (...) other motions especially of his
head, would not only intimate the kinds of Game, whose scent he chanced to
light upon, but would discover where Partridges had been (though perhaps
without staying in that place) several hours before. He further tells us, That
a very sober Gentleman of his acquaintance, who had often occasion to employ
Bloodhounds, assured him, that if a Man had but passed over the Field, the
s^ent would lie, so as to be perceptible enough to a good Dog of that sort for
several hours after. And an ingenious Hunter likewise assured him, That he had
observed, that the scent of a flying and hunted Deer will sometimes continue
upon the ground from one day to the next following. He proceeds further, And
now we may consider these three things; First, That the substance left upon the
ground by the transient tread of a Partridge, Hare or other Animal, that does
but pass along his way, does probably communicate to the grass or ground but
some of those effluxions that transpire out of his feet, which being small
enough to escape the eye, may probably not amount to one grain in weight, or
perhaps not to the tenth part of it. Next, That the parts of fluid Bodies, as
such, are perpetually in motion, and so are the invisible Particles that swim
in them, as may appear by the dissolution of Salt or Sugar in Water, and the
wandering of aqueous Vapors through the Air, even when the eye perceives them
not. And thirdly, that though the Atmosphere of one of these small parcels of
the exhaling matter we are speaking of may oftentimes be exceeding vast in
comparison of the emittent body, as may be guessed by the distance at which
some Setters or Bloodhounds will find the scent of a Partridge or Deer; yet in
places exposed to the free Air or Wind, it is very likely that these steams are
assiduously carried away from their fountain to maintain the forementioned
Atmosphere for six, eight or more hours, that is as long as the scent has been
observed to lie, there will be requisite a continual recruit of steams
succeeding one another. And that so very small a portion of matter, as that
which we were saying the ^omes of these s^eams may be ^udged to be, being
sens^bly to impregnate an Atmosphere in comparably greater than its self, and
supply it with almost continual recruits, we cannot but think, that the steams
it parts with, must be of extreme and scarce conceivable minuteness. So far the
Author. To which I shall add, That by the steams, I suppose, he means the
minute Particles of which the steams are compounded. Now these minute Particles
themselves must be compound Bodies, because they affect the sense in a
particular manner, so that a sagacious Creature can distinguish by them, not
only Species but Individuals; as a good Dog by the foot will find out his
Master, though not only several other Creatures, but several Men have passed
that way. Unless we will groundlesly affirm, that those Particles are the
minima naturalia, and that the Creature discerns them by their figure, or their
disserent manner of motion.

A second Objection of Brunnerus (as I find him quoted in Peyerus his
Merycologia) is this, Si cuncta Animalium membra jam formata existant in ovo,
etc. If all the Members of Animals already formed do exist in the Egg, though
for their smalness they escape our sight; I cannot conceive, how by the force
of imagination alone in a pregnant Woman, can be produced sometimes Calves
heads or feet, sometimes a Dog's face, or other monstrous Members; these
productions being a certain and experimental proof, that the parts and members
of Animals are formed and delineated originally in the Womb or Egg.

To this Peyerus replies, who then forms, who delineates such monsters? Shall
we accuse God the Creator? But he is just, and does not make enormous things:
or will you blame Nature? That is the constant order and will of God, which
never is deficient. Will you lay the fault upon the Plastic virtue or power
residing in the Womb or Seed, and acting those things? But that is a Chimaera,
it is nothing, it is an Idol. There remain two things to which the cause may
justly be imputed, The imagination of the Mother, which may and does oftentimes
effect wonderful things in the Body of the tender Embryon; and the Devil. If
you refuse to admit the former, you are obliged to accept the latter. And truly
the Devil may, God so permitting, many ways abuse Men, and transfigure the
young in the Womb, to punish the wicked and nefarious actions of degenerate
Mankind indulging themselves in obscene imaginations, or preposterous and
unnatural impurities and pollutions. But do these errors and enormities take
away the order of Nature? by no means, for from what is rare and extraordinary
and seldom happens, there is no consequence to be drawn. For though Monsters
are sometimes born, nothing hinders but that we may still think, that the
Idea's of the seveveral Foetus may be prae-existent and latent in the Eggs; and
the event may teach us, that those Idea's or Embryo's may by a violent cause be
marred and deformed in the Womb; as Wax, though it be already figured, while it
is soft is easily altered, and capable of receiving new impressions.

But against this Answer we may thus plead in defense of Brunnerus; As to what
is said of the Devil, it seems to be but a shift or refuge to have recourse to
when we are at a loss, and pinch't with an Argument; as in the ancient
Stage Plays, when they were put to a plunge, they were forced to bring in some
(...) to help them out. And as for the imagination of the Mother, strange it
is, that that should have any influence at all upon the formation of the
Foetus; the Mother not knowing any thing that is done in the Womb; nor being
conscious to her self of any power to form or act any thing there; the Foetus
being an external thing to her, and no more a part of her, then an Egg is of
the Hen that sits upon it, affording nothing to it but warmth and nourishment.
And we see Eggs may be hatched by the artificial heat of an Oven, without the
incubation of a Hen. But granting that the imagination of the Mother may
transform the Foetus, why may it not as well originally form it out of prepared
matter; and then what need of an Idea or minute Animalcule in the Seed? But
whatever may be said of Men, how come Monsters in Brutes, which according to
Peyerus are mere Machines, and have no imagination or perception at all?

But not to lead the Reader into a Maze or Labyrinth, and leave him there, for
my own part I must confess, that the Argument for the praexistence of the
Faetus's, or their creation from the beginning, taken from the due number of
Eggs that are in every Female from her first formation, and her being eff^te
after they are spent, weighs very much with me, as I know not how to quit my
self of it. And on the other hand, if those stories concerning Dogs and
Serpents, etc. found in the wombs of Women be true (which are well attested) I
acknowledge it very difficult, to give an Account how those Animals came to
(...) or formed there. But I had (...) my ignorance of the manner (...) of such
praeternatural and extraordinary things, then to permit it to have such
influence upon me, as to remove me from so wellgrounded an Opinion concerning
the ordinary production of Animals in a natural way.

The being of a Plastic Nature subordinate to God, notwithstanding Peyerus
makes an Idol of it, and charges those with Idolatry who do believe it, I am
not afraid to admit: my Reasons for which I have given in another Wisdom of God
in the Creation.
Discourse, and shall not here repeat.

The new Opinion of Mr. Lewenhoek, that all Animals proceed from an Insect or
Animalcule in the Male-sperm, among other Reasons, I am less inclinable to,
because of the necessary loss of a multitude, I might say infinity, of them,
which seems not agreeable to the Wisdom and Providence of Nature. For supposing
every Male has in him all the Animalcules that he shall or may eject; they
may, for ought I know, amount to millions of millions, and so the greatest part
of them must needs be lost. Nay, if we take but one Coit, there must, in
uniparous Creatures at least, abundance be lost. But if we suppose the Foetus
to be originally in the Egg, it is not so. For the Eggs of all sorts of
Creatures are so proportioned to the nature of the Animals, the time that they
live, the time and number of their gestations, and the number they bring forth
at all times, that they will much about suffice for the time the Creatures are
fit to breed and nourish their young: so that they may, if need be, be all
brought forth and come to perfection.

The End of the first Discourse.
DISCOURSE II.
Of the general Deluge in the Days of NOAH, its Causes and Effects.
I Proceed now to say something concerning the General Deluge in the days of
Noah; which was also a matter of Ancient Tradition. I shall not enlarge much
upon it, so as to take in all that might be said, but confine my self to Three
Heads. 1. I shall confirm the Truth of the History of the Deluge recorded in
the Scripture, by the Testimonies of some ancient Heathen Writers.

2. I shall consider the Natural Causes or Means whereby it was effected. 3. I
shall enquire concerning the Consequences of it, what considerable effects it
had upon the Earth.

CHAP. I.
Testimonies of Ancient Heathen Writers concerning the Deluge.
FIrst then, I shall produce some Testimonies of Ancient Heathen Writers
concerning the Deluge.

The first shall be that of Berosus, recorded by Josephus, in the fifth Chapter
of his first Book of Jewish Antiquities, (...), etc. That is, Berosus the
Chaldaean relating the Story of the Deluge writes thus. It is reported, that
there is some part of the Vessel [the Ark] still remaining at the Mountain of
the Gordyaeans; and that certain Persons scraping off the Bitumen or Pitch,
carry it away; and that men make use of it for Amulets, to drive away Diseases.

A second Testimony the same Josephus affords us in the same place, and that
is, of Nicolaus Damascenus; who, says he, gives us the History of the [Ark and
Deluge] in these words; About Minyas in Armenia there is a great Mountain
called Baris; to which it is reported, that many flying in the time of the
Deluge were saved, and that a certain person was carried thither in an Ark,
which rested on the top of it; the relics of the Timber whereof were
preserved there a long time. Besides these, Josephus tells us in the same
place, that Hieronymus the Egyptian, who wrote the Phoenician Antiquities, and
Mnaseas, and many others, whose words he alleges not, make mention of the
Flood.

Eusebius superadds two Testimonies more. The one of Melon to this effect.
There departed from Armenia at the time of the Deluge, a certain man, who
together with his Sons had been saved; who being cast out of his House and
Possessions, was driven away by the Natives. This man passing over the
intermediate Region, came into the mountainous part of Syria, that was then
desolate. This Testimony makes the Deluge Topical, and not to have reached
Armenia.

The other is of Abydenus an ancient Writer, set down by Eusebius, Praepar*
Evangel. lib. 9. cap. 4. (...), etc. After whom others reigned, and then
Si^ithrus, (so he calls Noah.) To whom Saturn foretold, that there should be a
great Flood of Waters upon the fifteenth Day of the Month Desius; and commanded
him to hide all Writings [or whatever was committed to writing] in Heliopolis
of the Sypparians. Which so soon as Sisithrus had performed, he presently
sailed away to Armenia, where what God had predicted to him, immediately came
to pass [or came upon him]. The third day, after the Waters ceased, he sent
forth Birds, that he might try whether they could espy any Land uncovered of
Water. But they finding nothing but Sea, and not knowing whither to betake
themselves, returned back to Sisithrus. In like manner, after some days he sent
out others with like success. But being sent out the third time, they returned
with their feet fouled with Mud. Then the Gods caught up Sisithrus from among
Men: but the Ship remained in Armenia, and its Wood afforded the Inhabitants
Am^lets to chase away many Diseases. These Histories accord with the Scripture
as to the main, of the being of a (...) Noah escaping out of it; only (...) the
Truth, by the admixture (...) ^abulous stuff.

(...) first Book against Julian, to (...) Deluge, alleges a passage out of
Alexander Polyhistor* Plato himself (says he) gives us an obscure intimation
of the Deluge, in his Timaeus, bringing in a certain Egyptian Priest, who
related to Solon out of the Sacred Books of the Egyptians, that before the
particular Deluges known and celebrated by the Grecians, there was of old an
exceeding great Inundation of Waters, and devastation of the Earth; which seems
to be no other than Noah's Flood.

Plutarch in his Book De Solertia Animalium^tells us, That those who have
written of Deucalion's Flood, report, that there was a Dove sent out of the Ark
by Deucalion, which returning again into the Ark, was a sign of the continuance
of the Flood, but flying quite away, and not returning any more, was a sign of
Serenity, and that the Earth was drained.

Indeed Ovid and other Mythologists make Deucalion's Flood to have been
universal: and it is clear, by the Description Ovid gives of it, that he* meant
the general Deluge in the days of Noah. And that by Deucalion, the Ancients
together with Ovid, understood Noah; Kircher in his L. 2. c. 6.
Arca Noae does well make out. First, For that the Poet Apollonius makes him
the Son of Prometheus in his third Book, -- (...)
(...).
Where Prometheus the Son of Iapetus begat the Renowned Deucalion. 2. Berosus
affirms Noah to have been a Scythian. And Lucian in his Book De Dea Syria tells
us, that many make Deucalion to have been so too. 3. The Scripture testifies,
that Men were generally very corrupt and wicked in the days of Noah. And Andro
Teius a very ancient Writer testifies, that in Deucalion's time there was a
great abundance of wicked Men, which made it necessary for God to destroy
Mankind. 4. The Scripture says, that Noah was a Just Man, and Perfect in his
Generation. And Ovid says of Deucalion, that Non illo m^lior quisquam, nec
amantior aequi
Vir fuit, aut illa [Pyrrha uxore ejus] reverentior ulla Deorum.
And a little after, Innocuos ambos, cultores numinis ambos.

5. Apollonius says of Deucalion, (...), He first ruled over Men. Which may
very well be attributed to Noah the Father and Restorer of Mankind, whose right
the Kingdom was. 6. The sending out of a Dove, to try whether the Waters were
abated, and the Flood gone off, is (we have seen) by Plutarch attributed to
Deucalion. 7. Lucian in his Timon, and in his Book De Dea Syria, sets forth the
Particulars of Deucalion's, after the Example of Noah's Flood. (...), etc.
Deucalion was the only Man that was left for a second Generation, for his
Prudence and Piety sake: And he was saved in this manner. He made a great Ark,
and got aboard it, with his Wife and Children: And to him came Swine, and
Horses, and Lions, and Serpents, and all other living Creatures, which the
Earth maintains, according to their kinds by pairs; and he received them all,
and they hurt him not; for there was by Divine Instinct a great friendship
among them; and they sailed together in the Ark, so long as the Waters
prevailed. And in his Timon he says, That Noah laid up in the Ark plenty of
all Provisions for their sustenance.

By all this it appears, that the notion of a general Flood was every where
current among the People, especially in those Countries where the Ark rested,
and where Noah afterward lived. And hence it was, that the TAB: I. page: 69

The two ancient Apamian Coyns taken out of Octav. Falconieri de Nummo Apamensi
Deucalionaei Diluvij typum exhibente 8^^. Romae.

By the Greek inscriptions they were stamp under Philippus Marcus Aurelius
Alexander and Septimius Severus

Apameans, whether of Mesopotamia, or Syria, or Bythinia, (for there were three
Cities of that Name) coined Moneys in honor of the Emperors Septimius
Severus, and Philippus Arabs, having on the Reverse the Figure of an Ark, with
a Man and a Woman standing before it; and a Man and a Woman looking out of it;
and two Doves above it, one flying with a Branch of a Tree in its Mouth,
another resting upon it. The Figures whereof, and a learned Discourse thereupon
out of Falconerius, may be seen in Kircher's l. 2. c. 6.
Arca Noae. Which Moneys though they were coined long after our Savior's time,
and the divulgation of the Scriptures; yet being done by Ethnicks, do show that
the Story of the Deluge was known, and famous, and generally credited among
them, as being near the place where Noah lived and conversed after the Flood.

Howbeit I do not deny, that there was such a particular Flood in Thessaly, as
they call Deucalion's, which happened Seven Hundred and Seventy Years or
thereabouts after the general Deluge. I acknowiedge also a more ancient Flood
in Attica in the time of Ogyges, about Two hundred and thirty years before
Deucalion's, by which the Country was so marred, that it lay waste and
uncultivated without Inhabitants for almost Two hundred years.

CHAP. II.
Of the Causes of the Deluge.
WHat were the instrumental Causes or Means of the Flood? Whether was it
effected by natural or supernatural Means only? Whether was God no further
concerned in it, than in so ordering second Causes at first, as of themselves
necessarily to bring it in at such a time?

First, Those that hold this Deluge was altogether miraculous, and that God
Almighty created Waters on purpose to serve this occasion, and when they had
done their work destroyed them again, dispatched the Business, and loose or cut
the Knot in a few words. And yet this Hypothesis is not so absurd and
precarious, as at first sight it may seem to be. For the World being already
full, there needed not, nor indeed could be any Creation of Water out of
nothing, but only a Transmutation of some other Body into Water. Now if we
grant all Natural Bodies, even the Elements themselves, to be mutually
transmutable, as few Men doubt, and some think they can demonstrate; why might
not the Divine Power and Providence bring together at that time such: natural
Agents, as might change the Air or Ether, or both together into Water; and so
supply what was wanting in Rains, and extraordinary Eruptions of Springs. To
them that argue the Improbability of such a change, from the great quantity of
Air requisite to the making of a little Water; it may be answered, That if Air,
and all Bodies commixt with it, were together changed into Water, they must
needs make a bulk of Water of equal quantity with themselves, unless we will
grant a Peripatetical Condensation and Rarefaction; and hold that the same
Matter may have sometimes a greater, sometimes a lesser quantity or extension.

This Cause [the conversion of Air into Water] the Learned Jesuit Athanasius
Kircher, in his Book De Arca Noae, alleges as the undoubted instrumental Cause
or Means of the Deluge in these words, Dico totum illud aereum spatium usque ad
supremam regionem aeris, praepotentis Dei virtute, in aquas, per inexplicabilem
nubium coacervatarum multitudinem, qua replebatur, conversam esse; cujus
ubertas tanta fuit, ut Aer supremus cum inferiori in Oceanum commutatus videri
potuerit, non naturae viribus, sed illius cujus voluntati and imperio cuncta
subsunt. That is, I affirm, That all that Aereal space that reaches up to the
supreme Region of the Air, was, by the power of the Omnipolent God, and
instrumentality of an inexplicable multitude of Clouds amassed together,
wherewith it was filled, changed into Water, so that the upper and lower Air
might seem to be (...) into an Ocean, not by the strength of Na^^^e, but of him
to whose Will and (...) all things are subject. And he is so confident Arcae
Noae l. 2. c. 4
that this Deluge, in which the (...) raised fifteen Cubits above the highest
by Mountains, was not, nor could be effected by natural Causes; but by the
right hand of the most High God only; that he says, No Man can deny it, but he
who does not penetrate how far the power of Nature can extend, and where it is
limited. To conclude, this Hypothesis has the Suffrages of most Learned Men.
But because the Scripture assigning the Causes or Means of the Inundation,
makes no mention of any conversion of Air into Water, but only of the breaking
up the Fountains of the Great Deep, and the opening of the Windows of Heaven, I
suppose those Causes may be sufficient to work the Effect, and that we need not
have recourse to such an Assistance.

As for those that make the Deluge Topical, and restrain it to a narrow compass
of Land; their Opinion is, I think, sufficiently confuted by a late ingenious
Dr. Burnet.
Author, to whom therefore I refer the Reader.

I shall not undertake the Defense or Confutation of those or any other
Hypothesis: only tell you which at present seems to me most probable, and that
is theirs, who for a partial cause of the Deluge, assign either a change of the
Center of the Earth, or a violent depression of the Surface of the Ocean, and a
forcing the Waters up from the subterraneous Abyss through the Channels of the
Fountains that were then broken up and opened.

First then, let us consider what Causes the Scripture assigns of the Flood;
and they are two: 1. The breaking up the Fountains of the great Deep: 2. The
opening of the Windows of Heaven. I shall first treat of this last. By the
opening of the Windows of Heaven, is (I suppose) to be understood the causing
of all the Water that was suspended in the Air to descend down in Rain upon the
Earth; the effect hereof here mentioned being a long continuing Rain of Forty
days. And that these Treasuries of the Air will afford no small quantity of
Water, may be made appear, both by Scripture and Reason. 1. By Scripture, which
opposes the Waters that are above the Heavens or Firmament, to those that are
under them; which if they were not (...), and in some measure equal, it would
never do. Genesis 1. 6. God is said to make a Firmament in the midst of the
Waters, and to divide the Waters which were under the Firmament, from the
Waters which were above the Firmament. And this was the work of a whole day,
and consequently no inconsiderable thing. By the Heavens or Firmament in this
place, is to be understood the inferior Region of the Air, wherein the Fowls
fly: who Genesis 1. 20. are said to fly above the Earth, in the open Firmament of
Heaven; though elsewhere it be taken for the Celestial Regions, wherein the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars are placed.

2. The same may be made appear, by Reason grounded upon Experience. I my self
have observed a Thunder-Cloud in passage, to have in less than two hours space
powered down so much Water upon the Earth, as besides what sunk into the parched
and thirsty ground, and filled all Ditches and Ponds, caused a considerable
Flood in the Rivers, setting all the Meadows on flote. [And Dr. Witty in his
Scarborough Spaw tells us, of great Spouts of Rain that ordinarily fall every
year some time or other in Summer, that set the whole Country in a Flood.] Now
had this Cloud, which might for ought I know, have moved Forty miles forward,
stood still and emptied all its Water upon the same spot of Ground it first
hung over, what a sudden and incredible Deluge would it have made there? and
yet what depth or thickness of Vapors might remain uncondensed in the Air
above this Cloud, who knows? Now it is to be considered, that not only the Air
upon the dry Land, but also all that covers the whole Ocean, is charged with
Vapors, which are nothing else but diffused Water: all which was brought
together by Winds, or what others Means seemed good to God, and caused to
destil down in Rain upon the Earth. And you may easily guess that it was no
small quantity of Water that was supplied this way, in that it sufficed for a
Rain that lasted Forty natural days. And that no ordinary Rain neither, but
Catarracts or Spouts of Water; for so the Septuagint interprets the words,
(...), And the Catarracts or Spouts of Heaven were opened.

I return now to the first Cause or Means of the Deluge assigned by the
Scripture, and that is the breaking up of all the Fountains of the great Deep.
By the great Deep in this place, I suppose, is to be understood the
Subterraneous Waters, which do and must necessarily communicate with the Sea.
For we see that the Caspian and some other Seas, receive into themselves many
great Rivers, and yet have no visible Outlets: and therefore by Subterraneous
Passages, must needs discharge their Waters into the Abyss of Waters under the
Earth, and by its intervention into the Ocean again.

That the Mediterranean Sea does not (as I sometimes thought) communicate with
the Ocean by any subterraneous Passages, nor thereby impart any Water to it, or
receive any from it, may be demonstrated, from that the Superficies of it is
lower than the Superficies of the Ocean, as appears from the Waters running in
at the Streights of Gibraltar; for if there were any such Communications, the
Water keeping its Level, the Mediterranean, being the lowest, must by those
Passages receive Waters from the Ocean; and not the Ocean, which is (as we have
proved) the highest, from the Mediterranean. But that it does not receive any
by Subterraneous Passages is most likely, because it receives so much above
Ground. Hence it necessarily follows, that the Mediterranean spends more in
Vapor than it receives from the Rivers; which is Mr. Halley's Conclusion;
though in some of his Premises or Hypotheses he is, I think, mistaken, as 1. In
that he numbers the Tyber amongst his nine great Rivers, each of which may
yield ten times as much Water as the Thames; whereas I question whether that
yields once so much; and whereas he passes by all the rest of the Rivers as
smaller than it; there are two that I have seen in Italy it self, whereof the
one, viz. the Arnus, on which Florence and Pisa stand, seemed to me not
inferior in bigness to the Tiber; and the other, viz. the Athesis on which
Verona stands, I could not guess to be less than twice as big. 2. In that he
thinks himself too liberal in allowing these nine Rivers to carry down each of
them ten times so much Water as the Thames does. Whereas one of those nine, and
that none of the biggest neither, viz. the River Po, if Ricciolus his
Hypotheses and Calculations be good, affords more Water in an hour, than Mr.
Halley supposes the Thames to do in a day; the hourly Effusions of the Po being
rated at eighteen millions of Cubical Paces by Ricciolus; whereas the daily
ones of the Thames are computed to be no more than twenty five millions three
hundred forty four thousand Cubical yards of Water by Mr. Halley: but a
Geometrical Pace contains five Feet, i. e. 1^^ of a Yard. Now if the Po pours
so much Water hourly into the Sea, what then must the Danow and the Nile do?
each of which cannot (I guess) be less than troble of the Po. Tanais,
Borysthenes and Rhodanus may equal, if not exceed it. Howbeit, I cannot approve
Ricciolus his Hypotheses, judging them to be too excessive, but do believe that
as to the whole Mr. Halley comes nearer the truth. Sure enough it is, that in
the Mediterranean, the Receipts from the Rivers fall short of the Expense in
Vapor: though in part of it, that is, the Euxine, the Receipts exceed, as
appears from that there is a constant Current sets outward from thence through
the Thracian Bosphorus, and Hellespont.

But though the Mediterranean does indeed evaporate more than it receives from
the Rivers, yet I believe, the Case is not the same with the Caspian Sea; the
Superficies whereof seems to me not to bear any greater proportion to the
Waters of the Rivers that run into it, than that of the Euxine does to its:
which we have observed not to spend the whole Receipt in Vapor.

You Will say, Why then do not great Floods raise the Seas? I answer, as to the
Caspian, if it communicates with the Ocean, whether the Rivers bring down more
or less, its all one; if more, then the Water keeping its Level, the Caspian
raises the Ocean; if less, then the Ocean communicates to the Caspian, and
raises that. But as to the Mediterranean, we may say, that when it receives
more on the one side, it receives less on the other, the Floods and Ebbs of the
Nilus and the other Rivers counterbalancing one another; Besides by reason of
the Snows lying upon the Mountains all Winter, the greatest Floods of those
great Rivers in Europe do not happen when the Mediterranean evaporates least in
the Winter time; but in the Spring.

You Will demand further, if the Mediterranean evaporates so much, what becomes of
all this Vapor? I answer, It is cast off upon the Mountains, and on their
sides and tops is condensed into Water, and so returned again by the Rivers
unto the Sea.

If you proceed to ask what becomes of the Surplusage of the Water, which the
Mediterranean receives from the Ocean, and spends in vapor; I answer, It seems
to me that it must be cast further off over the tops of the Mountains, and
supply in part Rain to these Northern Countries: for we know that the
South Wind brings Rain, with us and and all Europe over.

As to the great Ocean, I do not believe that it evaporates so much as the
Mediterranean; both 1. Because the whole Mediterranean, excepting the Euxine,
lies in a hot Climate, and a great part of it as it were in a Valley, Ridges of
high Mountains, Atlas on one side, and the Alps and Apennine, etc. on the other
running along it. And 2. Because the Surface of the whole Ocean bears a greater
proportion to the Waters it receives from the Rivers of at least this
Continent, than that of the Mediterranean does to its. And therefore I think
also that Mr. Halley exceeds in his Estimate of the Heat of the Superficies of
the Seawater. I cannot persuade my self, that were it all commixt, I mean the
hotter part with the cooler all the Surface over to such a thickness, it would
equal the heat of our Air in the hottest time of Summer. But I leave that to
further Trial and Enquiry.

Here give me leave to suggest, that we are not to think, that all the Vapors
that supply our Rains and Dews proceed from the Sea; no, a great part of them,
viz. all that, when condensed, waters the Earth, and serves for the Nutrition
of Plants and Animals, (if not the same individual Water, at least so much) was
exhaled out of the Earth before, and returned again in Showers and Dews upon
it. So that we receive no more from the Sea, than what the Rivers carry back,
and pour into it again. But supposing Mr. Halley's Hypotheses to be good, and
that the Ocean does evaporate, and cast off to the dry Land 112 of an Inch
thickness daily, and this suffices for the Supply of all the Rivers; how
intolerably extravagant must their Hypotheses be, who suppose the Rivers of all
the World together to yield half an Ocean of water daily? Though I must confess
my self to be at a loss as to those vast Rivers of America of ninety Miles
broad; for if they should run with any thing a swift Current, it is indeed
inestimable what a quantity of water they may pour forth. All therefore that I
have to say of them is, That we want a true History and Account of their
Phoenomena from their Fountains to their Out lets.

But in contradiction to what I have said concerning the water keeping its
level, and flowing in only at the Straits mouth, I understand that it is the
concurrent and unanimous Vote and Suffrage of Mariners, Voyagers and
Philosophers, that there is an undercurrent at the Straits of Gibraltar, the
Thracian Bosphorus, and the Baltic Sound. Particularly M. Marsilly affirms,
That the lower water in the Channel of the Thracian Bosphorus is driven
Northward into the Euxine Sea, whilst the upper flows constantly from the
Euxine Southward. And that that which flows from the South is salter and
heavier; which he found by letting down of a Vessel close shut up, fitted with
a Valve to open at pleasure, and let in the lower water, which being brought up
and weighed, was observed to be ten Grains heavier than the upper. That the
upper and lower flow contrary ways, he found by the Fishermens Nets, which
being let down deep from Vessels that were fixed, were always by the
observation of the Fishermen, by the force of the Current driven toward the
Black Sea: and by the letting down of a Plummet; for if it were stopped and
detained at about five or six foot depth, it did always decline toward the
Marmora or Propontis, but if it descended lower, it was driven to the contrary
part, that is, the Euxine. But I think these Experiments are not sufficient to
establish and demonstrate such an under-current, because possibly there might
be some mistake in them: and Mr. Smith mentions no such thing as any
under-current there. But yet the same Mr. Smith endeavors to prove an
under-current by two Experiments: The first is the running Tide and Half-tide
in the Offing between the North-Foreland and South-Foreland. Now where it flows
Tide and Half-tide, though the Tide of Flood runs aloft, yet the Tide of Ebb
runs under-foot, that is, close by the Ground. See Philosophical Transactions,
Numb. 158. p. 564.

The second is, an Experiment made in the Baltic Sound: In one of the King's
Fregats they went with their Pinnace into the middle Stream, and were carried
violently by the Current: soon after they sunk a Bucket with a large Cannon
Bullet to a certain depth of water, which gave check to the Boats motion, and
sinking it still lower and lower, the Boat was driven a head to Windward
against the upper Current, the Current aloft being not above four or five
Fathom deep; and the lower the Bucket was let fall, they found the
under-current the stronger.

To all this I reply; That I do not understand how waters can run backward and
forward in the same Channel at the same time. For there being but one
declivity, this is as much to affirm, as that a heavy Body should ascend. It is
a crossing of Proverbs, (...), making Rivers ascend to their Fountains,
affirming that to be done, which all the World hitherto has looked upon as
absurd and impossible. And therefore the Matter of Fact had need be well
attested: which when to me it shall be, I must then manus dare, yield up the
Bucklers, and study some means to solve the Phenomenon.

Suppose we that the Mediterranean empties it self into the Ocean by an
under-current, there must be a declivity to carry it down, and consequently the
upper-Superficies of this under-current must have its declivity too, and
likewise the contiguous Superficies of the upper-current, and so the upper
current must needs ascend in its course inwards. If you say it is forced in by
the motion of the Ocean, that seems unlikely, because it runs in constantly, as
well Ebb as Flood. And therefore there seems to be no better account of it than
the Superficies of the Ocean being higher than that of the Mediterranean.

By the breaking up of the Fountains of the Great Deep, is I conceive meant,
the making great Issues and Apertures for these Subterraneous waters to rush
out. You will say, how could that be, since the water keeps its level, and
cannot ascend to a greater height above the common Center, than the Superficies
of the Sea is, much less force its way, remove Obstacles, and break open
Passages?

I answer, According to them that hold that all Rivers come from the Sea by
Subterraneous Passages, it is no more than daily happens. For they must needs
grant, that the water in the Subterraneous Channels, is raised as far above the
level of the Ocean, as are the Heads and Fountains of great Rivers. Which
considering the height of their first springs up the Mountains, the length of
their Courses, and the swiftness of their Streams for a great part of the way,
is very considerable, a constant declivity being necessary to their descent.
And therefore I can by no means assent to the Learned Doctor Plot, (if I
understand him aright) Hist. Not. Stafford, p. 79.
That the Valleys are as much below the Surface of the Sea, as Mountains are
above it. For how then could Rivers descend down to the Sea through those
Valleys; the Sea would rather run into them, and make Sinuses; or else, if they
were enclosed, the water would stagnate there, and make Pools.

If this be done by way of Filtration (which seems to be the most likely Means
of raising the water) I do not see, but these Filters may suck up the whole
Ocean; and if Apertures and Outlets large enough were made, pour it out upon
the Earth in no long time. But I cannot be fully reconciled to this Opinion,
though it has great Advocates, especially the forementioned very Learned and
Ingenious Person Dr. Robert Plot. I acknowledge Subterraneous waters: I grant a
Confluence and Communication of Seas by underground Channels and Passages: I
believe that wherever one shall dig as deep as the level of the Sea, he shall
seldom fail of water; the water making its way through Sand and Gravel and
Stones. In like manner as it is observed of the River Seine, that in
Floud-times all the neighboring Wells and Cellars are filled with water, and
when the River decreases and sinks again, those waters also of the Wells and
Cellars diminish, and by degrees fall back into the River, so that there are
scarce any Wells or Fountains in the Plains near the River, but their waters
keep the level of the Rivers, rising and falling with it.

But this inferior constant Circulation and perpetual motion of water, seems
to me not yet sufficiently proved and made out. I think that the Patrons and
Abbettors of this Opinion, have not satisfactorily demonstrated, how it is, or
can be performed. To what is offered concerning the Center of Gravity being
nearer to our Continent, by reason of the Preponderancy of the Earth, and the
Waters lying as it were on an heap in the other Hemisphere, I answer, 1. That
in the present terraqueous Globe, the New World which lies between the two
great Seas, and almost opposite to our Continent, does in ^ome measure
counterpoise the Old, and take off a great part of the advantage, which by
reason of its Preponderancy, it might otherwise have. Moreover, I am of Mr.
Brierwood's Opinion, that there may be, and is a vast Continent toward the
Southern Pole opposite to Europe and Asia, to counterpoise them on that side;
nay, I do verily believe, that the Continents and Islands are so proportionably
scattered and disposed all the World over, as if not perfectly and exactly, yet
very nearly to counter-ballance one another; so that the Globe cannot walter or
reel toward any side: and that the Center of the unequal Superficies of the
Sea, is the true Center of the whole Terrestrial Sphere, both of Motion and of
Gravity. I add also of Magnitude: which is exceedingly convenient, as well for
the facility as the equability of the Earths diurnal Motion. This Hypothesis of
the Continents being dispersed equally on all sides of the Globe, makes these
Centers concur in one point, whatever cause we assign of the raising up the dry
Land at first. Whereas if we should suppose the dry Land to have been raised up
by Earthquakes only on one side of the Globe, and to have cast off the water
to the other, and also that the water could find no way into the Caverns that
were left within; then the watery side must needs Preponderate the Land-side,
and bring the Center of Gravity nearer to its own Superficies, and so raise the
Land still a great deal higher, and make a considerable distance between the
Centers of Magnitude and of Gravity. In our Hypothesis of the equal dispersion
of the Continents and Islands no such thing would happen: but each Continent
taking it with all its internal Caverns, whether lighter or heavier than its
bulk in water; that is, whether the water did make its way into the Caverns
thereof, or did not, (for in the first case it would be heavier, (in the second
lighter) would have its counterpoise on the opposite side; so that the Centers
would still concur. The case would be the same if the dry Land were discovered,
and the Mountains raised by the immediate application of the Divine Power. 2.
The Sea being no where above a German Mile deep (for which we have good
Authority) in most places not half so much, taking then as a middle term half a
Mile. Suppose it every where half a Mile deep, (the Earth below the Sea, we
have no reason to suppose of different Gravity) what proportion has this half
Miles thickness of water to the whole Terraqueous Globe, whose Semidiameter is
by the account of Mathematicians Three thousand four hundred and forty Italian
Miles. What little advantage then can it have of the Earth opposite to it, in
point of Preponderancy? 3. Granting the Center of Gravity should be nearer our
Continent: The Center being the lowest place, and the Water a fluid Body,
unless stopped, (which it might indeed be, if it were encompassed round with
high Shores, as high as the Mountains, without any Breaks or Outlets in them)
where it found declivity, it would descend as near as it could to it, without
any regard of the Earths Preponderancy. And though we should grant, that the
dryness of the Shores might stop it, and cause it to lie on a heap, yet would
it run up the Channels of Rivers, till it came as near as possible to the
Center of Gravity. Indeed the Rivers themselves could not descend, but must run
toward the middle of the Continent. All this I think will follow from this
Hypothesis by as good consequence, as the waters being forced through the
Subterraneous Channels out at the Springs. Again, I do not peremptorily affirm,
that all Fountains do proceed from Rain; only I contend, that Rain may suffice
to feed them, and that probably it does feed ordinary Springs. This the
Ingenious French Author does well demonstrate in the River Seine, and I believe
it is demonstrable in most other Rivers.

The little Brook that runs near my Dweling, and has its Head or Source not
above four or five Miles off, where there is no extraordinary eruption of
water, all along its Course receives small Rivulets on both sides; which though
they make a considerable Stream at five miles distance from the Fountainhead,
yet singly are so small, that they may very well be conceived to drain down
from the higher Grounds that lie about them. And taking the whole together, it
is a very considerable length and breadth of Land, that contributes to the
maintenance of this little River. So that it may easily be believed, that all
its water owes its original to Rain: Especially if it be considered further,
that in Wintertime after the Rains are fallen, the Ground sated, and the
Ditches full, the Stream of this River during the whole Winter following, is
for the most part, unless in Frosts, double of what it was in Summer. Which
Excess can proceed from nothing but Rain and Mists; at least it would be
rashness to assign any other Cause, when there is so obvious and manifest an
one. Moreover, that Rain affords no small quantity of water, is clear also from
great Floods, wherein it might be proved, that in few days there descends more
water than would supply the ordinary Stream for a good part of Summer. Now to
compare great things with small; I have seen many of the biggest Rivers in
Europe, the Danow, Rhine, Rhosne and Po; and when I consider the length of
their Courses, the multitude of considerable Rivers and Brooks they receive;
and all these from their first rise, made up by degrees of little Rivulets and
Gills, like my neighboring Brook; the huge Mountains and vast extent of higher
Grounds they drain. To me it seems (and I have seen all their Streams near
their Out-lets, except the Danows, and it is after four hundred Miles descent)
that they do not bear any greater proportion to the Rivers and Rivulets they
receive, and the immense Tracts of Land that ^eed them, than my Brook does to
its smalls Rills and compass of Ground.

But in this, I confess, I do not descend to the niceness of Measuring and
Calculation, but satisfy my self with rude Conjectures, taking my Measures, as
the Cestrians say, by the Scale of the Eye.

It will here be objected, That the Rain never sinks above ten Foot deep at
most into the Earth, and therefore cannot supply the Springs.

Answ. This indeed, if it were true, would much enervate, nay, quite overthrow
our Opinion: And therefore we must fortify this Point, and effectually
demonstrate beyond all possibility of denial or contradiction, That Rainwater
does sink down, and make its way into the Earth, I do not say Ten, or Twenty,
nor Forty, but an Hundred, nay, Two or three hundred Foot or more.

First then, in Pool-hole in the Peak of Darbyshire, there are in some places
constant droppings and destillations of water from the Roof: under each of
which (to note that by the by) rises up a Stone Pillar, the water precipitating
some of those stony Particles, which it had washed off the Rocks in passing
through their Chinks. These droppings continue all the Summer long. Now it
seems clear to me, that the Rainwater making its way through the Veins and
Chinks of the Rocks above it, and yet but slowly, by reason of the thickness of
the Mountain, and straitness of the Passages, supplies that dropping all the
year round; at least, this is much more rational than any different Hypothesis.
If the water distills down faster in Winter time and wet Weather, than it does
in Summer (which I forgot to ask) the Experiment would infallibly prove our
Assertion. In confirmation of this Argument, Albertus Magnus (as I find him
quoted in Dr. Wittie's Scarborough Spaw) tells us, That at the bottom of a
solid Rock one hundred and thirty Fathoms deep, he saw drops of water
distilling from it in a rainy season.

Secondly, It is well known, and attested to me by the People at Buxton when I
was there, that out of the mouth of the same Pool hole, after great and long
continuing Rains, a great stream of water did usually issue forth. And I am
sure it must make its way through a good thickness of Earth or Rocks, before it
could come in there.

Thirdly, What becomes of all the water that falls on Newmarket-Heath and
Gogmagog Hills, I presume also Salisbury-Plain, and the like Spungy Grounds all
Winter long, where we see very little run off any way? It must needs sink into
the Ground more than Ten Foot deep.

Fourthly, Many Wells, whose Springs lie at least Twenty Foot deep, we find by
experience, do often fail in great Droughts in Summer time.

Fifthly, In Coal Delfs and other Mines, in wet Weather the Miners are many
times drowned out, (as they phrase it) though no water runs down into the
Mouths of their Pits or Sha^ts. Nay, Dr. Witty tells us in his Description of
the Virtues of the Scarborow Spaw, page 105. That after great Inundations of
Rain, the Miners find the water frequently distilling through the solid Earth
upon their Heads; whereas in Summer or dry Seasons, they find no interruption
from thence at all.

Further, to confirm this Particular, I wrote to my Honored Friend Sir Thomas
Willughby Baronet, desiring him to examine his Colliers concerning it, and send
me word what report they make; and from him received this account. If there be
Springs lie before you come at the Coal, they carry the Water away; but if
there be none, it falls into the Works in greater or less quantity according as
the Rains fall. Which Answer is so much the more considerable, in that it gives
me a further clear Proof, that Springs are fed by Rain water, and not by any
communications from the Sea; their original being above the Beds of Coal, they
receiving the Rainwater into their Veins, and deriving it all along to their
Fountains or Eruptions, above the Coals.

I might add out of him, [Dr. Witty] Fifthly, page 85. That the Scarborow Spaw,
notwithstanding it breaks out of Ground within Three or four yards off the foot
of the Cliff, which is near Forty yards high, and within a quarter of a mile
there is another Hill, that is more than as high again as the Cliff, and a
descent all the way to the Cliff, so as the Rainwater cannot lie long upon the
Ground, yet it is observable, that after a long Rain, the water of the Spaw is
altered in its taste, and lessened in its operation; whereas a rainy day or two
will not sensibly hurt it. And now I am transcribing out of this Author, give
me leave to add an Observation or two in confirmation of Rains being the
Original of Springs. The first is (page 97*) this;

In England, in the years 1654, 55. and 56. when our Climate was drier than
ever it had been mentioned to be in any Stories, so as we had very little Rain
in Summer, or Snow in Winter, most of our Springs were dried up, such as in the
memory of the eldest Men living had never wanted water, but were of those
Springs we call Fontes perennes, or at least were esteemed so. He instances
also a Parallel Story out of Heylin' s Geography, in the Description of Cyprus,
where the Author relates; That in the days of Constantine the Great, there was
an exceeding long drought there, so as in Thirty six years they had no Rain,
insomuch as all the Springs and Torrents, or Rivers, were dried up; so that the
Inhabitants were forced to forsake the Island, and to seek for new Habitations
for want of fresh water.

The second is, p. 84. That in the Wolds or Downs of Yorkshire they have many
Springs break out after great Rains, which they call Gypsies, which jet and
spout up a great height.

Neither is this Eruption of Springs after long Rains, proper and peculiar only
to the Wolds of Yorkshire, but common to other Countries also, as Dr. Britannia
Baconica.
Childrey witnesses in these words: Sometimes there breaks out water in the
manner of a sudden Land-flood, out of certain Stones, that are like Rocks
standing aloft in open Fields, near the rising of the River Kynet [in Kent]
which is reputed by the Common People a forerunner of Dearth. That the sudden
eruption of Springs in places where they use not always to run, should be a
sign of Dearth is no wonder. For these unusual Eruptions, (which in Kent we
call Nailbourns) are caused by extreme gluts of Rain, or lasting wet Weather,
and never happen but in wet years; witness the year 1648. when there were many
of them: -- and to our purpose very remarkable it was, that in the year 1654.
several Springs and Rivulets were quite dried up, by reason of the precedent
Drought, which raged most in 1651, 1652, and 1653. As the Head of the Stour,
that rises near Elham in Kent, and runs through Canterbury, was dry for some
Miles space: and the like happened to the Stream that crosses the Road-way
between Sittingburn and Canterbury at Ospring near Feversham, which at other
times ran with a plentiful Current, but then wholly failed. So we see that it
is not infrequent for new Springs to break out in wet years; and for old ones
to fail in great Droughts. And Strabo in his first Book out of Xanthus the
Lydian tells us, That in the time of Artaxerxes there was so great a Drought,
that Rivers, and Lakes, and Wells of water failed, and were dried up.

I cannot here also forbear to add, the probable account he [Dr. Witty] gives
of the Supply of the Spring-well on the Castle-hill at Scarborough; at which, I
confess, I was somewhat puzzled. This Well, says he, though it be upon the top
of the Rock, not many yards deep, and also upon the edge of the Cliff, is
doubtless supplied by secret Channels within the Ground, that convey the Rain
and Showers into it, being placed on a dependent part of the Rock, near unto
which there are also Cellars under an old ruinated Chapel, which after a great
Rain are full of Water, but are dried up in a long Drought.

As for what is said concerning the River Volgas pouring out so much water into
the Caspian Sea, as in a years time would make up a mass of water equal to the
Globe of the Earth; and of the hourly effusions of the River Po in Italy, which
Ricciolus has computed to amount to 18000000 cubical Paces of water. Whence a
late learned Writer has probably inferred, that all the Rivers in the World
together, do daily discharge half an Ocean of waters into the Sea, I must
confess my self to be unsatisfied therewith. I will not question their
Calculations, but I suspect they are out in their Hypotheses.

The Opinion of Mr. Edmund Halley, that Springs and Rivers owe their Original
to Vapors condensed on the sides of Mountains, rather than unto Rains, I
acknowledge to be very ingenious, grounded upon good Observations, and worthy
of its Author; and I will not deny it to be in part true in those hot Countries
in the Torrid Zone, and near it; where, by reason of the great Heats, the
Vapors are more copiously exhaled out of the Earth, and its likely carried up
high in the ^^rm of Vapors. The inferior A^r at least is so charged with
them, and by that means so very moist, that in some places their Knives rust
even in their Pockets; and in the Night, so very fresh and cold, partly also by
reason of the length of the Nights; that exposing the Body to it, causes Colds
and Catarrhs, and is very dangerous: Whence also their Dews are so great, as in
good measure to recompense the want of Rain, and serve for the nourishment of
Plants; as they do even in Spain it self.

I shall first of all propose this Opinion in the Words of the Author, and then
discourse a little upon it. After he had enumerated many of the high Ridges and
Tracts of Mountains in the four Quarters of the World, he thus proceeds: Each
of which far surpass the usual height to which the Aqueous Vapors of
themselves ascend, and on the tops of which the Air is so cold and rarefied, as
to retain but a small part of those Vapors that shall be brought thither by
the Winds. Those Vapors therefore that are raised copiously in the Sea, and by
the Winds are carried over the low Lands to those Ridges of Mountains, are
there compelled by the stream of the Air to mount up with it to the tops of the
Mountains, where the water presently precipitates gleeting down by the Crannies
of the Stone; and part of the Vapor entering into the Cavities of the Hills,
the water thereof gathers, as in an Alembick, into the Basins of Stone it
finds; which being once filled, all the overp^us of water that comes thither,
runs over by the lowest place, and breaking out by the sides of the Hills forms
single Springs. Many of these running down by the Valleys or Guts between the
Ridges of the Hills, and coming to unite, form little Rivulets or Brooks. Many
of these again meeting in one common Valley, and gaining the plain ground,
being grown less rapid, become a River: and many of these being united in one
common Channel, make such Streams, as the Rhine, the Rhosne, and the Danube,
which latter one would hardly think the Collection of Water condensed out of
Vapor, unless we consider how vast a Tract of Ground that River drains, and
that it is the sum of all those Springs, which break out on the South side of
the Carpathian Mountains, and on the North side of the immense Ridge of the
Alps, which is one continued Chain of Mountains from Switzerland to the Black
Sea. And it may almost pass for a Rule, that the magnitude of a River, or the
quantity of water it evacuates, is proportionable to the length and height of
the Ridges, from whence its Fountains arise. Now this Theory of Springs is not
a bare Hypothesis, but founded on Experience, which it was my luck to gain in
my abode at St. Helena; where, in the night time on the tops of the Hills,
about Eight hundred yards above the Sea, there was so strange a condensation,
or rather precipitation of the Vapors, that it was a great impediment to my
Celestial Observations; for in the clear Sky the Dew would ^all ^o ^ait, as to
cover each half quarter of an hour my Glasses with little drops, so that I was
necessitated to wipe them off so often; and my Paper, on which I wrote my
Observations, would immediately be so wet with the Dew, that it would not bear
Ink: by which it may be supposed, how fast the water gathers in those mighty
high Ridges I but now named. -- At last he concludes: And I doubt not but this
Hypothesis is more reasonable, than that of those who derive all Springs from
the Rain waters, which yet are perpetual, and without diminution, even when no
Rain falls for a long space of time.

This may, for ought I as yet see or know, be a good account of the Original of
Springs in those fervid Regions, though even there, I doubt, but partial; but
in Europe, and the more temperate Countries, I believe the Vapors in this
manner condensed, have but little interest in the production of them, though I
will not wholly exclude them. For,

First, The Tops of the Alps above the Fountains of four of the greatest Rivers
in Europe, the Rhine, the Rhosne, the Danow, and the Po, are for about Six
Months in the year constantly covered with Snow, to a great thickness; so that
there are no Vapors all that while that can touch those Mountains, and be by
them condensed into water; there falls nothing there but Snow, and that
continuing all that while on the ground without Dissolution, hinders all access
of Vapors to the Earth; if any rose, or were by Winds carried so high in that
form, as I am confident there are not. And yet for all that, do not those
Springs fail, but continue to run all Winter; and it is likely too, without
diminution; which is a longer time than Droughts usually last; especially if we
consider that this want of supply, is constant and annual; whereas Droughts are
but rare and accidental. So that we need not wonder any more, that Springs
should continue to run, and without diminution too, in times of Drought. True
it is, that those Rivers run low all Winter, so far as the Snow extends, and to
a good distance from their Heads; but that is for want of their accidental
supplies from showers. Nay, I believe, that even in Summer, the Vapors are but
rarely raised so high in a liquid form in the free Air, remote from the
Mountains, but are frozen into Snow, before they arrive at that height. For the
Middle Region of the Air, where the Walk of the Clouds is, at least the
superior part of it, is so cold as to freez the Vapors that ascend so high,
even in Summer time. For we see that in the height and heat of Summer, in great
Thunder storms, for the most part it hails: nay, in such Tempests I have seen
mighty showers of great Hailstones fall, some as big as Nutmegs or Pigeons
Eggs; and in some places such heaps of them, as would load Dung Carts, and have
not been dissolved in a day or two. At the same Seasons I have observed, in
some showers Hailstones fall of irregular Figures, and throughout pellucid,
like great pieces of Ice, with several snags or ^angs issuing out of them:
which how they could be supported in the Air till they amounted to that bulk
and weight, is a thing worthy to be more curiously considered. For either they
must fall from an incredible height, the Vapors, they encountered by the way,
condensing and as it were crystallizing upon them into Ice, and in time
augmenting them to that bulk; or else there must be some strange and unknown
faculty in the Air to sustain them. That the superior Air does support heavy
Bodies better then the inferior, the flight of Birds seems to be a clear
demonstration. For when they are mounted up on high, they fly with less
fatigue, and move forward with greater facility, and are able to continue
longer upon the wing without delassation then in the lower Air they could
possibly do. And therefore when they are to make great flights, they soar aloft
in the Air, at a great height above the Earth. So have I often seen a a ^lock
of Wild-g^^se mounted so high, that though their flight be swift, they seemed
to make but little way in a long time, and to proceed on their journey with
ease and very leisurely by reason of their distance. And yet one would think
this were contrary to ^^ason, that the l^ghter Air, such as is the susperiour,
should better support a weighty Body than the heavier, that is, the inferior.
Some imagine that this comes to pass by ^eason of the Wind which is constantly
moving in the upper Air, which supports any Body that moves contrary to it. So
we see that those Paper-kites which Boys make, are (...) in the Air by running
with them contrary to the Wind: and when they are advanced ^o a great height,
do but stick down (...) end of the Line to which they are (...) into the
ground, they will be continued by (...) Wind at the same height they ^ere, so
long as it lasts and abides in the (...). In like manner the Birds fly^^^
contrary the Wind, it supports and (...) them up. But if this were the only
season, methinks it should not be so easy, (...) very laborious for Birds to
fly (...) the Wind so as to make any considerable progress in the superior
Air, as we see they do. And therefore possibly they may be nearer the right,
who suppose that the Gravity of Bodies decreases proportionably to their
distance from the Earth: and that a Body may be advanced so high as quite to
lose its gravity and inclination or tendency to the Center: of which I do not
see how it is possible to make experiment: for to what is said by some to have
been tried, that a bullet shot perpendicularly upward out of a great Gun, never
descended again, I give no credit at all.

But to leave that, it is certain, that the Vapors after they are mounted up
to a considerable height in the Air, are congealed and turned into the
immediate component Principles of Snow, in which form I conceive they acquire a
lightness, and are apt to ascend higher than they could do, should they retain
the form of a humid Vapor; as, we see, Ice is lighter than Water, out of which
it is frozen. But whether this be the reason of their ascent or not, I am sure
of the matter of Fact, that these Snow-Clouds do ascend far above the highest
Tops of the Alps; For passing over a Mountain in the Grisons Country, on the
very ridge, of them, in the beginning of the Spring, it ^nowed very fast during
my whole passage or six hours; and yet the Clouds seemed to be as far above my
head, as they do here in England; and a great height they must be, for the Snow
to gather into so great flakes, and to continue so long falling; nay, it may be
three times so long. Moreover, we see, that the highest Pikes and Summits of
those Mountains are covered with Snow. And I am assured, that all the Winter
long at intervals, it Snows upon the Tops of the Alps.

2. In the Spring time, when the Snow dissolves, some of these Rivers that flow
down from the Alpine Mountains, run with a full stream, and overflow their
Banks, in clear Sunshine weather, though no Rain falls, as I my self can
witness; and therefore I presume, that all the rest do so too, as the
Inabitants affirmed. But in the Summer time after the Snow has been some time
melted, their Streams decay again, notwithstanding any Vapors condensed upon
them, proportionable to the Droughts; neither are there any Floods, but upon
falls of Rain.

3. That the Snow dissolved and soaking into the Earth, is the Original of the
Alpine Springs; a probable Argument may be taken from the color of the Water
of those Rivers which descend from the Alps, at least on this Northern side,
which I observed to be of a Seagreen, even to a great distance from their
Heads; which whence can it proceed, unless from the Nitrous Particles of the
Snow water, of which they consist? Another also from the Bronchocele, or Swollen
Throats.
gutturine tumor, an Endemial Disease of the Natives of those parts, which
Physicians and Naturalists attribute to the water they drink, not without good
reason; because, say they, it consists of melted Snow, which gives it that
malignant quality. De Subtilit. Exerc. 60. Sect. ^.
Scaliger speaking of this Disease, Says, Id ab aqua fit e nivibus
liquefactis, quae multum terrestris and crudi continet. But because Julius
Palmarius may possibly be in the right, who imputes this Disease to the steams
of the Minerals, especially Mercurial, wherewith these Mountains abound, which
insect the waters, and render them noxious to the nervous parts; I shall not
insist upon this particular.

In confirmation of what I have said concerning the Original of the Alpine
Springs, I shall add the Opinion of the Learned Alphonsus Borellus concerning
the Fountains springing up or issuing out of the sides of Mount Aetna in
Sicily, They are probably (says he) either generated, or at least increased,
from the melting of the Snow, which does perpetually occupy the top of the
Mountain. And this is manifest, in that they are not dimished nor decrease in
Summer, as alsewhere it happens, but often flow more plentifully. Lib. De
incendiis Aetnae.

What Mr. Halley says of Springs, that they are perpetual and without
diminution, even when no Rain falls for a long space of time. If he understands
it generally of all Springs, I add, that are accounted quick ones too, I deny
his assertion: that some there may be of that nature, I grant: a reason whereof
may be given, viz. that the Outlet is too small to empty the water of all the
Veins and Earth that lie above it in a long time. In our Native Country of
England there are living and lasting Springs rising at the feet of our small
Hills and Hillocks, to which I am sure the Vapors contribute very little;
which is so obvious to every man, that I think I need not spend time to prove
it.

Yet must I not dissemble or deny, that in the Summer time the Vapors do
ascend, or are carried up in that form by the sides of the Mountains to their
highest tops, and above them; for there falls no Snow there in the heat of
Summer; and that which lies there, is for the most part dissolved. But that
Rain falls plentifully there, I my self can witness; having been on the two
highest Tops of the Mount Iura, (which keeps the Snow all Winter) on the one
called Thuiri in a Thunder shower; and on the other, called la Dolaz, in a
smart and continuing Rain: So that I will not deny, but in Summer time the
Vapors may contribute somewhat to the Springs; as I have elsewhere intimated:
Clouds almost continually hanging upon the tops of the Mountains, and the Sun
having there but little power.

And now that I am discoursing of these things, give me leave to set down an
Observation I made in the last great Frost, the sharpest that was ever known in
the memory of Man, which I had before met with in Books, but did not give firm
credit to, that is, that notwithstanding the violence of the Frost, all the
Springs about us, brake out and ran more plentifully than usually they did at
any other time: which I knew not what to impute to, unless perchance the close
stopping the Pores of the Earth, and keeping in that part, which at other times
was wont to vapor away; which Account, I neither then could, nor can yet fully
acquiesce in.

To this I will here add an Abstract of a Letter written by my honored Friend
Dr. Tancred Robinson.

YOU may peradventure meet with some opposition against your Hypothesis of
Fountains, though indeed I am more and more confirmed in your Opinion of them,
and the use of the Mountains. Father Tachart in his second Voyage to Siam,
says, when he went up to the top of the Table Mountain at the Cape of Good
Hope, the Rocks and Shrubs were perpetually dropping and feeding the Springs
and Rills below, there being generally Clouds hanging on the sides near the
top. This constant distillation of Vapors from the Ocean on the many high
Ridges of that great Promontory, may peradventure be one cause of the wonderful
fertility and luxury of the Soil which produces more rare Plants and Animals
then any known Spot of Ground in the World; the Discovery whereof is owing to
the Curiosity and Wisdom of the Dutch. The same observation has been
frequently made by our English Merchants in the Madera and Canary Islands, (the
first of which is near in the same Latitude on the North of the Equator, that
the aforementioned Cape is in on the South) especially in their Iourneys up to
the Pike of Tenerist, in which, at such and such heights, they were always wet
to the skin, by the droppings of the great Stones, yet no Rain over head; the
same I have felt in passing over some of the Alps. The Trees, which in the
Islands of Ferro, St. Thomas and in Guiny, are said to furnish the Inhabitants
with most of their water, stand on the sides of vast Mountains: Vossius in his
Notes on Pomponius Mela, affirms them to be Arborescent Ferula's; though
indeed, according to Paludanus his dried Sample sent to the Duke of Wirtenberg
they seem rather to be of the Laurel kind; perhaps there are many different
sorts of them. I believe there is something in the many Relations of Travelers
and Voyagers concerning these Trees; but then I fancy they are all mistaken,
when they say, the water issues out of the Trees: The Vapors stopped by the
Mountains condense and distill down by the Boughs. There being no Mountains in
Egypt, may be one reason why there is little or no Rain in that Country, and
consequently no fresh Springs; therefore in their Caravans they carry all their
water with them in great Borracio's, and they owe the Inundation of their River
Nile to the stationary or periodical Rains on the high parts of Aethiopia. This
may be the cause that the vast Ridge and Chain of Mountains in Peru, are
continually watered, when the great Plains in that Country are all dried up
and parch't. This Hypothesis concerning the Original of Springs from Vapors,
may hold better in those hot Regions within and near the Tropicks (where the
Exhalations from the Sea are most plentiful, most rarified, and Rain scarce)
than in the Temperate and Frigid ones (where it rains and snows generally on
the Vertices of the Mountains) yet even in our European Climates I have often
observed the Firs, Pines, and other Vegetables near the Summits of the Alps and
Appennines, to drop and run with water, when it did not rain above; some Trees
more than others, according to the density and smoothness of their Leaves and
Superficies, whereby the stop and condense the Vapors more or less. The Beams
of the Sun having little force on the high parts of Mountains, the interrupted
Vapors must continually moisten them, and (as in the head of an Alembick)
condense and trickle down; so that we owe part of our Rain, Springs, Rivers,
and Conveniences of Life, to the operation of Distillation and Circulation by
the Sun, the Sea, and the Hills, without even the last of which, the Earth
would scarce be habitable. This present year in Kent they have had no Rain
since March last; therefore most of their Springs are dry at this very day, as
I am assured from good Hands. The high spouting of water even to three Fathoms
perpendicular out of innumerable holes on the Lake Zirknitz in Carniola after
Rains on the adjacent Hills, exceeds the spirting Gips or natural Jet d' Eaus
we have in England.

Nouemb. 12. 1691. Tancred Robinson.


Since the receipt of this Letter, an Experiment (give me leave so to call it)
occurred to me, which much confirmed me in the belief and persuasion of the
Truth of those Histories and Relations which Writers and Travelers have
delivered to us concerning dropping Trees in Ferro, S. Thome, Guiny, etc. of
which before I was somewhat diffident; and likewise in the approbation of the
Hypothesis of my Learned Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson for the solving of that
Phenomenon. The same also induces me to believe, that Vapors may have a
greater interest in the production of Springs even in temperate and cold
Regions, than I had before thought. The Experiment or Observation is this,

About the beginning of December 1691. there happened to be a Mist, and that no
very thick one, which continued all day: the Vapor whereof, notwithstanding
the Trees were wholly divested of Leaves, condensed so fast upon their naked
Branches and Twigs, that they dropped all day at such a rate, that I believe
the water distilling from a large Tree in twenty four hours had it been all
received and reserved in a Vessel, might have amounted to a Hogshead. What then
may we rationally conjecture, would have dropped from such a Tree; had it been
covered with Leaves of a dense Texture, and smooth Superficies, apt to collect
the Particles of the Vapor, and unite them into Drops?

It is clear by this effect, that Trees do distill water apace when Clouds or
Mists hang about them; which they are reported by Benzo constantly to do about
the Fountain Tree in Ferro; except when the Sun shines hot upon it. And others
tell us, that that Tree grows upon a Mountain too: So that it is no wonder,
that it should drop abundance of water. What do I speak of that Tree? all the
Trees of that kind grow on the sides of vast Mountains, as Dr. Robinson has
noted, yet he thinks that now and then many Trees may run and distill in Plains
and Valleys, when the Weather has been fair, but then this Phenomenon happens
very rarely; whereas in the other it is regular and constant. Besides that in
hot Regions Trees may in the Night time distill water, though the Air be clear,
and there be no Mist about them, seems necessarily to follow, from Mr. Halley's
Experiment.

Now if there be in Mists thus much Vapor condensed upon Trees, doubtless also
there is in proportion as much upon the Surface of the Earth and the Grass: And
consequently, upon the Tops and Ridges of high Mountains, which are frequently
covered with Clouds or Mists much more; so much as must needs have a great
interest in the production and supply of Springs, even in temperate Countries.

But that invisible Vapors, when the Sky is clear, do at any time condense so
fast upon the Trees, as to make them drop* I never observed in England or
elsewhere, no not in the Night season; though I do not deny, but upon the
Appennine and Southern side of the Alps, and elsewhere in the hotter parts of
Europe in Summer Nights they may. However, considering the Penetrancy of such
Vapors, that in moist Weather they will insinuate themselves deeply into the
Pores of dry Wood, so that Doors will then hardly shut, and Chinks and Crannies
in Boards and Floors be closed up, I know not but that they may likewise strike
deep into the Ground, and together with Mists contribute to the seeding and
maintenance of Springs, in Wintertime, when the Sun exhales but little; it
being an Observation of the Learned (...).
Fromondus, Quod hyeme nec nivah, nec imbrifera fontes tamen aquam largius quam
aejlate (nisi valde pluvia sit) vomant. That in Winters neither snowy nor
rainy, yet fountains pour forth more water than in Summer, unless it happen to
be a very wet season. Yet are their Contributions inconsiderable, if compared
with the supplies that are a^^orded by Rains. And one reason why in Winter
Fountains flow more plentifully, may be, because then the Sun defrauds them
not, nor exhales any thing out of the Earth, as in Summer time he does.

Therefore whenever in this Work I have assigned Rain to be a sufficient or
only cause of Springs and Rivers, I would not be understood to exclude, but to
comprehend therein Mists and Vapors; which I grant to have some interest in
the production of them, even in temperate and cold Regions; and a very
considerable one in Hot. Though I cannot be persuaded, that even there they are
the sole Cause of Springs, for that there fall such plentiful and long
continuing Rains, both in the East and West Indies in the Summer Months: which
must needs contribute something to their Original.

But to return from whence we digressed, that is, to the consideration of that
Hypothesis or Opinion, That all the Rivers of the Earth discharge into the Sea
half an Ocean of waters daily.

I have read of some Philosophers, who imagined the Earth to be a great Animal,
and that the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea was the respiration of it. And now
methinks, if this Doctrine be true, we have a further Argument to confirm their
Opinion: For this perpetual Motion of the water answers very well to the
Circulation of the Blood; the water moving faster in proportion to its bulk
through the Veins of this round Animal, then the Blood does through those of
other living Creatures. To which we may add further, that to maintain this
constant Circulation there is also probably about the Center of the Earth a
perpetual Fire, answering to the Biolychnium in the heart: but if not about the
Center, yet certainly in profound Caverns, and even under the very bottoms of
the Seas; to which some, and no mean Philosophers, have attributed the Ebbing
and flowing of its waters.

Let us then suppose that the Rivers do daily carry down to the Sea half an
Ocean of water, and that the Rain supplies all that, as our Opinion is, and see
what we can infer from thence: I think it will be granted that ordinarily
(communibus annis) the Rain that falls in a whole year amounts not to above one
quarters continual Rain. Now if this suffices for a daily e^^usion of half an
Ocean, (...), that if it should rain without any (...) all the year round, the
Rivers would (...) out two Oceans into the Sea (...) And so in forty days
continual Rain (...) would distill down upon the Earth (...) of Water. A
prodigious quantity (...) and ^^arce credible, which if the (...) as fast as it
comes on, (...) a quantity of water (...) twice in twenty four (...) then that
so much water (...) upon the ^arth, I argue thus, (...) upon the Earth must
have (...) down to the Sea, and according ^o the small declivity of the (...)
the Mountains pared off and (...) a considerable one too (...) it actually
has, so that the Floods (...) some days after the (...) upon the higher
grounds. And (...) the general Deluge (...) down to the Sea as fast (...) the
Earth would permit, (...) the Fountains of the (...) Clouds (...) could than
they run down (...) the Earth, it deserves (...) whether by the end of (...)
Mountains fifteen Cubits high. And yet the Scripture does not in plain terms
say, that ever the waters of the Flood arose fifteen Cubits above the tops of
the highest Mountains, as Mr. Warren well observes.

Besides, we are further to consider, that this forty days Rain at the time of
the Deluge, was no ordinary one, such as those that usually distill down
leisurely and gently in Winter time, but like our Thunder-storms and violent
Showers, Catarracts, and Spouts, which pour forth more water in an hour then
they do in four and twenty. So that in forty natural days the Clouds would
empty out upon the Earth not eighty Oceans of water, but above twenty times
that quantity. If by the Windows of Heaven are meant Catarracts, as the
Septuagint interpret the word. And so we need not be to seek for water for a
Flood; for the Rain alone falling at that rate we have mentioned, would if the
Opinion of those men (who hold that the Rivers discharge into the Sea half an
Ocean daily) were true, in the space of forty natural days afford water enough,
supposing it run off no faster than usually it does, to cover the Earth,
Mountains and all. Neither yet did the Mountains help, but rather hinder the
descent of the waters down to the Sea, straitning it into Channels, obstructing
its passage, and forcing it to take Circuits, till it got above the Ridges and
Tops of them.

As to this Argumentation and Inference the case is the same if we hold that
the Water circulates through the (...) of the Earth. For supposing the Rivers
pour (...) half an Ocean daily, and granting that in times of Floods their
streams are but double of their usual Currents (though I verily believe they
are more than quadruple) and that the e^fusions of the Fountains be in like
measure augmented, it will follow that the daily discharge of the Rivers will
amount to two Oceans. Now at the time of the general Deluge both these Causes
concurred. For there being a constant Rain of forty days, there must on that
account be a continual Flood, and the Fountains of the great Deep ^eing broken
up, they must in all likelihood afford as much Water as the Rain: which whether
it would not suffice in forty natural days to produce a Flood as big as that of
Noah, notwit^standing the continual descent and going off of the Waters, I
propose to the consideration of the Ingenious. Especially if we allow, as is
not unreasonable (...) suppose, that the Divine Providence (...) at first cause
a contrary Wind to stop (...) ^nhibit the descent of the Waters, as afterward
he raised an assisting one to carry them off.

I have but one thing more to add upon this Subject, that is, that I do not see
how their Opinion can be true, who hold that some Seas are lower than others;
as for Example, the Red Sea than the Mediterranean. For it being true that the
Water keeps its level, that is, holds its Superficies every where equidistant
from the Center of Gravity; or if by accident one part be lower, the rest by
reason of their fluidity will speedily reduce the Superficies again to an
equality. The Waters of all Seas communicating either above, or under ground,
or both ways, one Sea cannot be higher or lower than another: but supposing any
accident should elevate or depress any, by reason of this confluence or
communication it would soon be reduced to a level again, as might
demonstratively be proved.

But I return, to tell the Reader what I think the most probable of all the
Causes I have heard assigned of the Deluge, which is, the Center of the Earth
being at that time changed, and set nearer to the Center or middle of our
Continent, whereupon the Atlantic and Pacifick Oceans must needs press upon
the Subterraneous Abyss, and so by mediation thereof, force the Water upward,
and at last compel it to run out at those wide Mouths and Apertures made by the
Divine Power breaking up the Fountains of the great Deep. And we may suppose
this to have been only a gentle and gradual Emotion, no faster than that the
Waters running out at the bottom of the Sea, might accordingly lowre the
Superficies thereof sufficiently, so that none needed run over the Shores.
These Waters thus poured out from the Orifices of the Fountains upon the Earth,
the declivity being changed by the removal of the Center, could not flow down
to the Sea again, but must needs stagnate upon the Earth, and overflow it; and
afterward the Earth returning to its old Center, return also to their former
Receptacles.

If any shall object against this Hypothesis, because by it the Flood will be
rendered Topical, and restrained only to the Continent we live in: though I
might plead the Unnecessariness of drowning America, it being in all
probability unpeopled at that time; yet because the Scripture uses general
expressions concerning the extent of the Flood, saying, Genesis 1. 19. And all the
high hills that were under the whole Heaven were covered; and again, verse 22.
All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land
died. And because the Americans also are said to have some ancient Memorial
Tradition of a Deluge; and the Ingenious Author of the Theory of the Earth has
by a moderate Computation, demonstrated, that there must be then more People
upon the Earth, than now: I will propose another way of solving this
Phenomenon, and that is, by supposing that the Divine Power might at that
time, by the instrumentality of some natural Agent, to us at present unknown,
so depress the Surface of the Ocean, as to force the Waters of the Abyss
through the forementioned Channels and Apertures, and so make them a partial
and concurrent Cause of the Deluge.

That there are at some times in the course of Nature extraordinary pressures
upon the Surface of the Sea, which force the Water outward upon the Shores to
a great height is evident. We had upon our Coasts the last Year an
extraordinary Tide, wherein the Water rose so high, as to overflow all the
Sea-Banks, drown multitudes of Cattle, and fill the lower Rooms of the Houses
of many Villages that stood near the Sea, so that the Inhabitants, to save
themselves, were ^orced to get up into the upper Rooms and Garrets of their
Houses. Now how this could be effected, but by an unusual pressure upon the
Superficies of the Ocean, I cannot well conceive. In like manner that the
Divine Providence might at the time of the Deluge so order and dispose second
Causes, as to make so strong a pressure upon the face of the Waters, as to
force them up to a height sufficient to overflow the Earth, is no way
unreasonable to believe.

These Hypotheses I propose, as seeming to me at present most facile and
consonant to Scripture, without any concern for either of them; and therefore
am not solicitous to gather together, and heap up Arguments to confirm them, or
to answer Objections that may be made against them, being as ready to
relinquish them upon better information, as I was to admit and entertain them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Effects of the Deluge.
I Come now to the Third Particular proposed, that is, To Enquire concerning
the Consequents of the Deluge, What considerable Effects it had upon the Earth
and and its Inhabitants.

It had doubtless very great, in changing the Superficies of the dry Land: In
some places adding to the Sea; in some taking from it; making Islands of
Peninsulae, and joining others to the Continent; altering the Beds of Rivers,
throwing up lesser Hills, and washing away others, etc. The most remarkable
Effects it is likely were in the skirts of the Continents; because the Motion of
the Water was there most violent. Athanasius Kircher De Arc^ Noae. p. 192
gives us a Map and Description of the World after the Flood, showing what
Changes were made therein by it, or upon occasion of it afterward, as he
fancies or conjectures. But because I do not love to trouble the Reader with
uncertain Conjectures, I shall content my self to have said in general, that it
may rationally be supposed, there were then great Mutations and Alterations
made in the superficial part of the Earth: but what they were, though we may
guess, yet can we have no certain knowledge of: and for Particulars, refer the
Curious to him.

One malignant effect it had upon Mankind, and probably upon other Animals too,
in shortning their Age, or the duration of their lives; which I have touched
before, and shown, that this diminution of Age, is to be attributed either to
the change of the Temperature of the Air, as to Salubrity, or Equality, (sudden
and frequent changes of Weather having a very bad influence upon the Age of Man
in abbreviating of it, as I could easily prove) or else to the deteriority of
the Diet; or to both these Causes. But how the Flood should induce or occasion
such a change in the Air and productions of the Earth, I do not comprehend.

CHAP. IV.
Of formed Stones, Sea-shells, and other Marine-like Bodies found at great
distances from the Shores, supposed to have been brought in by the Deluge.
ANother supposed Effect of the Flood, was a bringing up out of the Sea, and
scattering all the Earth over an innumerable multitude of Shells and
Shellfish; there being of these shell-like Bodies, not only on lower Grounds
and Hillocks, but upon the highest Mountains, the Appennine and Alps
themselves. A supposed Effect, I say, because it is not yet agreed among the
Learned, whether these Bodies, formerly called petrified Shells, but now adays
passing by the name of formed Stones, be original Productions of Nature, formed
in imitation of the Shells of Fishes; or the real Shells themselves, either
remaining still entire and incorrupt, or petrified and turned into Stone, or at
least, Stones cast in some Animal Mold. Both parts have strong Arguments and
Patrons. I shall not balance Authorities, but only consider and weigh Arguments.

Those for the latter part, wherewith I shall begin, are,

First, Because it seems contrary to that great Wisdom of Nature, which is
observable in all its Works and Productions, to design every thing to a
determinate end, and for the attaining that end, make use of such ways, as are
most aggreeable to Man's reason, that these prettily shaped Bodies, should have
all those curious Figures and Contrivances (which many of them are formed and
adorned with) generated or wrought by a Plastic Virtue, for no higher end, than
only to exhibit such a form. This is Mr. Hook's Argumentation. To which Dr.
Plot answers, That the end of such Productions, is, to beautify the World with
those Varieties; and that this is no more repugnant to the Prudence of Nature,
than is the production of most Flowers, Tulips, Anemones, etc. of which we know
as little use of, as of formed Stones. But hereto we may reply, That Flowers
are for the Ornament of a Body, that has some degree of life in it: a
Vegeta^ive Soul, whereby it performs the actions of Nutrition, Auction and
Generation; which it is reasonable should be so beautified. And, Secondly,
Flowers serve to embrace and cherish the Fruit, while it is yet tender; and to
desend it from the injuries of Sun and Weather; especially for the protection
and security of the Apices, which are no idle or useless part, but contain the
Masculine Sperm, and serve to give fecundity to the Seed. Thirdly, Though
formed Stones may be useful to Man in Medicine, yet Flowers afford us
abundantly more uses, both in Meat and Medicine.

Yet I must not dissemble, that there is a Phenomenon in Nature, which does
somewhat puzzle me to reconcile, with the prudence observable in all its works;
and seems strongly to prove, that Nature does sometimes ludere, and delineate
Figures, for no other end, but for the Ornament of some Stones, and to
entertain and gratify our Curiosity, or exercise our Wits. That is, those
elegant Impressions of the Leaves of Plants upon Cole-state, the knowledge
whereof, I must confess my self to owe to my Learned and Ingenious Friend Mr.
Edward Lloyd of Oxford, who observed of it in some Cole-pits in the way from
Wychester in Glocestershire to Bristol; and afterward communicated to me a
Sample of it. That which he found, was marked with the Leaves of two or three
kinds of Ferns and of Hart's-tongue. He told me also, that Mr. Woodward a
Londoner, showed him very good Draughts of the common female Fern, naturally
formed in Cole, which himself found in Mendip Hills; and added, That he had
found in the same Pits, Draughts of the common Cinquefoil, Clover-grass and
Strawberries. But these Figures are more diligently to be observed and
considered.

Secondly, There are found in the Earth at great distance from the Sea, real
Shells unpetrified and uncorrupted, of the exact Figure and Consistency of the
present natural Sea-shells, and in all their parts like them, and that not only
in the lower Grounds and Hillocks near the Sea, but in Mountains of a
considerable height, and distant from the Sea. Christianus Mentzelius in his
Discourse concerning the Bononian Phosphorus, gives us a Relation of many Beds
of them found mingled with Sand in the upper part of a high Mountain not far
from Bologna in Italy. His words are these, Non procul monte Paterno dicto,
lapidis Bononiensis patria, unico forte milliari Italico distanti (loci nomen
excidit memoria) ingens mons imminet praeruptus a violentia torrentium aquarum*
quas imbres frequentes ex vici^is montibus confluentes efficient, atque
insignes terrarum moles ab isto monte prosternunt ac dejiciunt. In hac montis
raina, superiore in part visuntur multae strages seriesve, ex testis
conchyliorum omnis generis, plurima arena interjecta, instar strati super
stratum (ut chymicorum vulgus loquitur.) Est enim inter hasce testarum
conchyliorum strages seriesve arena ad crassitiem ulnae and ultra interposita.
Erant autem testae variorum ^^^chyliorum, omnes ab invicem distinctae, nec
(...) lapidi impactae, adeo ut separatim (...) manibus tractari and dignosci
potuerint. (...) hoc arena pura, nullo limo lutove inter mix^a* quae
conc^hyli^rum testas conservaverat (...) multa secula integras. Interea vero
diuturnitate temporis omn^s istae testae erant in albissim^m calcem facile
resolubiles. Not far from the Mountain called ^aterno, where the Bononian Sto^e
is gotten, about an Italian Mile distant (the name or the place is slipped out of
my memory) is a huge hanging Mountain, broken by the violence of the Torrents,
caused by the confluence of Waters descending from the Neighboring Mountains
after frequent showers, throwing down great heaps of Earth from it. In the
upper part of this broken Mountain are seen many Beds or Floors of all kind of
Sea-shells, much Sand interposing between Bed and Bed, after the manner of
stratum super stratum, or Layer upon Layer, as the Chemists phrase it. The Beds
of Sand interceding between these Rows of Shells were a yard thick or more.
These Shells were all distinct or separate one from another, and not stuck in
any one stone, or cemented together, so that they might be singly and
separately viewed and handled with ones Hands. The Cause whereof was their
being lodged in a pure Sand not intermixed with any Mud or Clay, which kept the
Shells entire for many Ages. Yet were all these Shells, by reason of the length
of time they had lain there, easily resoluble into a purely white* Calx or Ash.
Fabius Columna also observes, that in the tophaceous Hills and Cliffs about
Andria in Apulia, there are found various sorts of Sea-shells, both broken and
whole, incorrupt, and that have undergone no change. And Ovid in Metam. lib.
15. Et procul a pelago Conchae jacuere marinae. I am also informed by my
learned and worthy Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson, That Signior Settali showed him
in his Museum at Milan, many Turbens, Echini, Pearl shells, (one with a Pearl
in it) Pectunculi, and several other perfect shells, which he himself found in
the Mountains near Genoa; and afterward my said Friend took notice also of
several Beds of them himself, as he passed over Mount Cenis, above fifty
Leagues distant from the Sea; he assures me that many of the great Stones about
the Buildings of London are full of shells, and pieces of them. Moreover, my
forementioned Friend Mr. Lloyd sent me perfect Escallop and Sea-Urchin shells,
exactly resembling the like Sea-shells, both for figure, color, weight and
consistency; which he himself gathered up near Oxford. And has lately sent me
word, That he found at a place called Rungewell-Hill in Surrey, at a Village
called Hedley, three Miles South of Epsham, at least Twenty Miles distant from
the Sea, some fossil Oysters, which by the confession of Dr. Lyster himself,
were indeed true Oyster-shells not petrified nor much decayed: Nay, so like
they were to Oysters newly taken out of the Sea, that a certain Person seeing
of them, mistook them for such, and opened one of them, expecting to find a
living fish therein. Now that Nature should form real shells, without any
design of covering an Animal, is indeed so contrary to that innate Prolepsis we
have of the Prudence of Nature, (that is, the Author of Nature) that without
doing some Violence to our Faculties, we can hardly prevail with our selves to
believe it: and gives great countenance to the Atheists Assertion, That things
were made or did exist by chance, without counsel or direction to any end.

Add hereto Thirdly, That there are other Bodies besides shells found in the
Earth, resembling the Teeth and Bones of some Fishes, which are so manifestly
the very things they are thought only to resemble, that it might be esteemed
obstinacy in any Man that has viewed and considered them to deny it. Such are
the Glossopetrae dag up in Malta in such abundance, that you may buy them by
measure, and not by tale: and also the Vertebres of Thornbacks and other
Cartilagineous Fishes there found, and sold for Stones among the Glossopetrae,
which have no greater dissimilitude to the Teeth of a living Shark, and
Vertebres of a Thoruback, then lying so long in the Earth, as they must needs
have done, will necessarily induce. Mr. Doody has in his custody a petrified
lump of Fishes, on some of which the Scales themselves still remain. And if the
very inspection of these Bodies, is not enough to convince any Man, that they
are no Stones, but real Teeth and Bones, Fabius Columna proves it by several
strong Arguments. ^. Those things which have a woody, bony or fleshy nature, by
burning are changed first into a Coal, before they go into a Calx or Ashes: but
those which are of a tophaceous or stony substance, go not first into a Coal,
but burn immediately into a Calx or Lime, unless by some vitreous or metallic
mixture they be melted. Now these Teeth being burnt, pass presently into a
Coal, but the tophous substance adhering to them, does not so; whence it is
clear, that they are of an osseous, and no stony nature.

Next he shows, That they do not shoot into this form after the manner of Salts
or Crystal, which I shall have occasion further to treat of by and by. Then he
proves it from the Axiom, Natura nihil facit frustra; Nature makes nothing in
vain. But these Teeth, were they thus formed in the Earth, would be in vain;
for they could not have any use of Teeth; as neither the Bones of supporting
any Animal. Nature never made Teeth without a Jaw, nor shells without an Animal
Inhabitant, nor single Bones, no not in their own proper Element, much less in
a strange one. Further he argues, from the difficulty or impossibility of the
Generation of Glossopetrae in such places; because, among Tophi and Stones in
those dry places, there could not be found matter sit for to make them of. But
granting that, he queries whether they were generated at first all of a sudden,
or grew by little and little from small to great, as Animals Teeth, whose sorm
they imitate, do. If the first be said, he demands, Whether the Tophus, out of
which they were extracted, were generated before or after the Teeth were
p^riected? If it be said before, he asks, Whether there were a place in it of
the figure and magnitude of the Tooth, or did the Tooth make it ^ell a place?
If the Tophus were concrete before, and without a cavity, the vegetative power
of the Stone now in b^^th, could not by ^orce make it self a place in the hard
and solid Tophus; or if it could and did, the Tophus must needs be rent.
Against the production of these Bodies in a compact Earth or Stone, Nic. Steno
argues thus; Things that grow, expanding themselves l^isurely or slowly, may
indeed lift up great weights, and dilate the ^hinks and veins of Stones, as we
see the Roots of Trees sometimes do; but yet while they do thus make room for
themselves, they cannot but be often hindered by the resistance of some hard
obstacle they meet with, as it happens to the Roots of Plants, which in hard
Earth, being a thousand ways writhen and compressed, recede from the figure,
which otherwise in soft Land they are wont to retain: whereas these Bo^ies,
whereof we are new discoursing, are ^ll like one mother, whether they be dug
out of soft Earth, or cut out of Stones, or plucked off Animals. Wherefore they
seem not to be at this day produced in those places where they are found,
because (as we have said) those things which grow in compact places are found
strangely misshapen and irregular, which these are not: nor was the Earth
compacted when they were there produced for the same reason. Columna proceeds,
If there were a place before ready made in the Tophus, then was not that figure
excavated in the Tophus by the vegetative nature of the Tooth it self; but the
Tophus by its own nature and precedent cavity, gave the form to the Tooth. If
the latter part be chosen, and it be said, that the Stone by its vegetative
power grew by degrees; it may be answered as before, that could not be; because
the hardness of the Tophus could not have yielded to the vegetative force of
the Tooth, but would rather have been rent or divided by it; or rather the
Tophus it self must have vegetated, containing a cavity or uterus of the shape
of the Tooth, into which an osseous humor, penetrating through the Pores, and
filling the cavity of the Vterus, must there have co^gulated, and taken the
form thereof, as is observed in Stones that have their original from a Fluor.
That both Tooth and Case might vegetate together he denies, because in all the
Teeth which he had seen, the Basis or Root was found broken, and that not with
an uniform fracture, but different in every one. Which Argument is not to be
slighted, for that it shows or proves, that there was no vegetation in the
case; because in all other figured Fossils it is observed, that they are never
found mutilous, broken or imperfect. Neither can it reasonably be said or
believed, that these Roots or Teeth were by some chance broken within the
Tophi, but rather, that when they were casually overwhelmed and buried in that
tophous Earth, they were broken off from the Jaws of the Animal in those
volutations, and so in that manner mutilated. Against the generation of these
and the like Bodies in any hard Earth or Stone, N. Steno argues thus, That they
are not at present produced in hard Earth, one may thence conjecture, that in
all the parts of such Earth or Stone throughout, they are all found of the same
consistence, and encompassed round on all sides with that hard matter. For if
there were some of them produced anew at this present day, the containing or
ambient Bodies ought to give way to them while they are growing, which they
cannot; and the Bodies themselves that are now produced, would without doubt
discover something wherein they differed from those that were generated of old.
Another Argument to prove them to be true Teeth and no Stones, he brings from
their various parts and figures, which must else have been so wrought and
formed in vain. The Tooth being not one homogeneous Body, but compounded of
parts of a different constitution, there must in the formation of it be made a
various election of humors, one for the root, one for the inner part, one for
the Superficies of it. Then for the Figures, Magnitude, Situation or Posture,
and sitting of them; some are great, and broad, and almost triangular; others
narrower and smaller, others very small and narrow, of a pyramidal figure, some
straight, some crooked, bending downwards, or toward the neither side; some
inclining toward the left, others toward the right side: some serrate with
small Teeth, others with great Indentures (which is observed in the lesser
triangular ones) some smooth without any Teeth, as the narrow pyramidal ones.
All which things are observed in Shark's Teeth, not only by the Learned
Naturalists, but also by Fishermen and Mariners. The first row of Teeth in
these Animals hanging out of the Mouth, bend forward and downward; the second
row are straight, especially toward the sides of the Mouth, where they are
triangular and broad, the other rows bend downward toward the inner part of the
Mouth. Thus far Dissert. De Glossopetra.
Columna.

Fourthly, If these formed Stones be indeed original Productions of Nature, in
imitations of Shells and Bones, how comes it to pass, that there should be none
found, that resemble any other natural Body, but the Shells and Bones of Fishes
only? Why should not Nature as well imitate the Horns, Hoofs, Teeth, or Bones
of Land Animals, or the Fruits, Nuts, and Seed of Plants? Now my learned Friend
Mr. Edward Lloyd above mentioned, who has been most diligent in collecting,
and curious in observing these Bodies of any Man I know, or ever heard of,
tells me, That he never found himself, or had seen in any Cabinet, or
Collection, any one stone that he could compare to any part of a Land Animal.
As for such that do not resemble any part of a Fish, they are either Rock
Plants, as the Astroites, Asteriae trochites, etc. or do shoot into that form,
after the manner of Salts and Fluors, as the Belemnites and Selenites.

Fifthly, Those that deny these Bodies to have been the Shells and Bones of
Fishes, have given us no satisfactory account of the manner of their
Production. For that they do not shoot into that form after the manner of
Salts, may be proved by many Arguments. First, All Salts that shoot, their
Crystals or Concretions are of one uniform substance, and their Figures are
more simple, and may be owing to the Figure of the Principles whereof they are
compounded. In other Bodies that shoot, as the Pyrites and Belemnites, one may
observe straight Radii or Fibers proceeding from one Center. Secondly, Did
those Bodies shoot into these Figures after the manner of Salts, it seems
strange to me, that two shells should be so adapted together at the heel, as to
shoot out to the same extension round, and the upper and nether Valve be of
different Figure, as in natural shells. Thirdly, Were these Bodies produced in
the manner of saline Concretions, it is strange there should be such varieties
of them, and their shapes so regular, and exactly circumscribed: so great a
diversity of Figures, arguing a greater variety of Salts, or of their
modifications and mixtures, than are likely to be found in Nature; and the
Concretions of Salts never, that I have yet seen, appearing in that regularity
of Figure and due Circumscription, as in these Bodies. This Argument Steno in
his Discourse concerning these Bodies, improves and urges thus; Who can deny,
that the hexaedrical Figure of Crystal, the Cubes of Marcasites, and the
Crystals of Salts in Chemical Operations, and infinite other Bodies coagulating
and crystallizing in a fluid, have Figures much more ordinate than are those of
Scallops, Cockles, and other Bivalves, and also Periwinckles and Turbens? yet
we see in these simple Bodies sometimes the top of a solid Angle cut off;
sometimes many of them without any order sticking one to another; sometimes
their Planes differing among themselves in magnitude and situation; and many
other ways receding from their usual Figure? Which being so, how much greater
and more notable defects must there needs have been in Bodies that have a far
more compound Figure, such as are those which unitate the forms of Animals, if
they were in like manner generated? Seeing therefore in these Bodies, which are
very much compounded, these defects do seldom occur, which in those other most
simple Bodies are very frequent; seeing there are no defects observed in these
compound Bodies, the like whereto are not in like manner seen in the Bodies of
Animals. And seeing that wheresoever they are found they are exceeding like
both among themselves, and to the parts of Animals, it is very unlikely they
should shoot into those Figures after the manor of Salts; but on the contrary,
highly probable that they were originally the parts of Animals; the similitude
of conformation in their Pores, Striae, Hinges, Teeth, Prominences, Threads,
etc. almost necessarily inferring a similitude of Original: which is an
Argument of the Government of some Principle, superior to Matter figured and
moved, in their Formations.

Fourthly, Were these Bodies nothing but Concretions of Salts, or saline
mixtures, it seems no less strange, that so many Liquors impregnated with all
sorts of Salts and Mineral Juices, in all proportions, having been at one time
or other industriously or accidentally exposed to crystallize, and let stand
long in Vessels, there should never have been found in them any such
Concretions. For if any had happened, we should doubtless have heard of them,
and the Observers would have improved such an Experiment to the Production of
the like Bodies at their pleasure. So I have finished what I have to allege in
defense of the latter part, That these formed Stones were sometimes the real
Shells or Bones of Fishes, I mean the figured part of them.

I proceed now to set down, what may be objected against this Opinion, or
offered in assertion of the contrary, viz. That these Bodies are primitive
Productions of Nature, in imitation of the Shells and Bones of Fishes.

Against the former Opinion we have been pleading for, it may be objected, That
there follow such strange and seemingly absurd Consequences from it, as are
hardly reconcilable to Scripture, or indeed to sober Reason: as,

First, That the Waters must have covered the whole Earth, even the highest
Mountains, and that for a long time, there being found of these Shells, not
only in the most mountainous parts of our Country, but in the highest Mountains
in Europe, the Appennine and Alps themselves, and that not only scattered, but
amassed in great lumps, and lying thick in Beds of Sand, as we have before
shown. Now this could hardly be the effect of a short Deluge, which if it had
carried any Shellfish so high, would in all likelihood have scattered them
very thin. These Beds and Lumps of them necessarily inferring, that they must
have bred there, which is a work of time.

Now the general Deluge lasted in the whole, but ten Months; and it is not
likely the Tops of the Mountains were covered half that time. Neither is it
less repugnant to Reason than Scripture; for if the Waters stood so high above
the Earth, for so long a time, they must by reason of their Confluence, be
raised as high above the Sea too. But what is now become of this huge Mass of
Waters, equal to six or seven Oceans? May not the Stoics here set in, and help
us out at a dead lift? The Sun and Moon, say they, might possibly sup it all
up. Yea, but we cannot allow time enough for that; for according to the
moderate Draughts they take now adays, one Ocean would suffice to water them
many Ages, unless perchance when they were young and hot, they might need more
drink. But to be serious, I have no way to answer this Objection, but by
denying, that there are any Beds or great Lumps and Masses of these formed
Stones to be found near the Tops of the Alps, or other high Mountains; but yet
there might be some particular Shells scattered there by the general Deluge.
Unless we should say, that those Mountains where such Shells are found were
anciently depressed places, and afterward raised up by Earthquakes. Another
thing there is as difficult to give an account of, as of the Shells getting up
to the Tops of Mountains: that is, of those several Beds or Floors of Earth and
Sand, etc. one above another, which are observed in broken Mountains. For one
cannot easily imagine whence these Floor or Beds in the manner of strata super
strata (as the Chemists speak) should come, but from the Sediments of great
Floods, which how or whence, they could bring so great a quantity of Earth
down, when there was but little Land above the Sea, I cannot see. And one would
likewise be apt to think, that such a Bed of Sands, with plenty of
Cockle-shells intermixed, as we mentioned before in the Mountain near Bononia in
Italy, must have been sometimes the bottom of the Sea. But before one can give
a right judgment of these things, one must view the Mountains where such Layers
and Beds of Earth and Shells are ^ound: for perchance they may not be elevated
so high above the present Surface of the Sea, as one would judge by the
descriptions of them. It Is true (says my worthy Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson)
that some Shells might have been scattered up and down the Earth by incampments
of Armies, by the inhabitants of Cities and Towns, whereof there are now no
remains. Mounsteur Loubere, the late French Envoy to Siam, affirms that the
Monkeys and Apes at the Cape of Good Hope, are almost continually carrying
Shells and other Marine Bodies from the Seaside up to the Mountains; yet this
will not solve the matter, nor give any satisfactory account, why these perfect
shells are dispersed up and down the Earth, in all Climates and Regions, in the
deep Bowels of vast Mountains where they lie as regularly in Beds as they do at
the bottom of the Sea.

secondly, It would hence follow, That many ^pecies of Shell fis^ are lost out
of the World, (...) Philosophers hitherto have been unwilling to admit,
esteeming the destruction of any one Species a dismembring of the Universe, and
rendering it imperfect: whereas they think the Divine Providence is especially
concerned to secure and preserve the Works of the Creation: and that it is so,
appears, in that it was so careful to lodge all Land-Animals in the Ark at the
time of the general Deluge. The Consequence is proved in that, among these
petrified Shells, there are many sorts observed, which are not at this day,
that we know of, any where to be found. Such are a whole gentis of Cornua
Ammonis, which some have supposed to be Nautili, though to me they do not seem
so to be, but a different Genus by themselves, of which there have not any been
seen either cast ashore, or raked out of the Sea, at any time, that ever I
heard of. Nay, my very Learned and Honored Friend Dr. Lister proceeds further,
and says, That when he particularly examined some of our English shores for
Shells, and also the fresh Waters and the Fields, that he did never meet with
any one of those Species of Shells found at Adderton in Yorkshire,
Wansford-Bridge in Northamptonshire, and about Gunthorp and Beavoir Castle,
etc. any where else, but in their respective Quarries. What can we say to this?
Why it is possible that many sorts of Shellfish may be lodged so deep in the
Seas, or on Rocks so remote from the shores, that they may never come to our
sight.

Thirdly, It follows also, That there have been Shellfish in these cold
Northern Seas of greater bulk and dimensions, than any now living; I do not say
in these, but in the most Southernly and Indian; viz. Cornua Ammonis of two
foot diameter, and of thickness answerable.

To this I answer, That there are no petrified Shells that do in bigness much
exceed those of the natural Shellfish found in our Seas, save the Cornua
Ammonis only, which I suspect to have never been, nor had any relation to any
shells of Fishes: or to imitate or resemble them, at least some of them.
Against this Assertion it may be objected, That there are found in England may
Pectinites bigger than any Shellfish of that kind which our Seas now afford.
And that there are no Nautili, or other testaccous Fishes with us, comparable
in bigness to that Nautilus-sto^e of twenty eight pound found by Mr. Waller at
Keinsham. To which I answer, That there may be Shellfish in our Seas, that do
not at all, or very seldom appear, greater than we are aware of. I my self, in
company with Mr. Willughby, in the Straight between the Isle and Calf of Man,
took up among the tall Fuci growing thick upon the Rocks there, two or three of
those large Echini Marini or Sea-Vrchins, as big as a Man's two fists, the
shells whereof we never found cast up upon the shores of England, nor ever
heard that any Man else did. So that I question not but there are lodged among
the Rocks, and in the deeper places of the Sea, remote from the shores, many
different sorts of Shellfish, and excelling in magnitude those that are
commonly found or known. And like enough it is, that after the Flood there were
many places deserted, and thrown up by the Sea, and become dry Land, which had
been Sea before; which must needs be replete with these Bodies. As for the
Nautili, they are much different from these Cornua Ammonis. For the Nautili, at
least all the Species of them known to us, are (as Dr. Plot well observes)
extravagantly broad at the mouth, and have not more than two other small turns
at the most, whereas the turns of the Ophiomorphites are proportionable one to
another; and in number many times four or five, and sometimes six, if we may
believe Aldrovand. And there are Nautili lapidei, which do as nearly resemble
the Nautilus shells as any other Cochlites do their respective Prototypes, as
Mr. Lloyd assures me he had observed many in Museums. And the Learned and
Ingenious Mr. Richard Waller then Secretary to the Royal Society, in a Letter
to me dated Febr. 4. 87. w^^es, That he had been lately at Keinsham in Somerset
shire, and making a search after the Coruua Ammonis, ^ound one of the true
Nautilus shape, covered in some places with a shelly Incrustation with the
Diaphragms to be seen to the Center of the Volutae, and in each Diaphragm, the
hole by which they communicate one with another, by a string or gut in the
Fish. This was of a very hard Stone and large size, weighing at least twenty
eight pound, though some part was broken off. Another Argument that they have
no relation to the common Nautili, is, that they break into pieces somewhat
resembling Vertebres, as I was first advised by the fore-remembred Mr. Lloyd,
and have since noted my self. I also received from that very Ingenious and
Inquisitive Gentleman, happy in making natural Discoveries, Mr. William Cole of
Bristol, such an account of a sort or two of these Ophiomorphous Bodies, as is
enough to stagger any Man's belief, if not utterly to overthrow his Opinion of
their owing their original to any Sea-shell; which take in his words. Among
others of this kind of Bodies which I have observed, I shall instance in one,
which can be reduced to none but the Ophiomorphites, which I found growing
between the thin Plates of a kind of brittle blew Slate in large Rocks, some a
furlong within the full Sea-mark, and in some where the Water comes not at
highest Tides, only in great Storms, when the Waves break, it is dashed
sometimes against them, being forced up by the Winds; which being broken with a
convenient Tool, will shiver all into very thin Plates; between which I have
found in abundance of those Stones, but as brittle as the Slate in which they
grew, and of the same consistence; but so thin, that the broadest, being about
four Inches, are not so thick as a Half-Crown Piece, some not half an Inch
broad, were as thin as a Groat, and so proportionably up to the largest,
covered with a Superficies as thin, and exactly of the color of Silver foil:
and where the Seawater washes them, and they are exposed to the Sun and Wind
when the Tide is gone, they are tarnished, and appear of a Gold, Purple, Blew
and Red; as any thing on which Silver foil is laid, being exposed a
considerable time to the Sun, Wind and Weather, will do. These have the same
spiral Figures, and as regular as the other Serpent-stones, and being taken off
with a Knife, leave the same Impressions on both sides of the Slate.

In some such Rocks of Slate, but much harder, I found some of those Stones of
another kind, thick in proportion to their breadth, from an Inch to twenty
eight Inches broad; the broadest one was at the great end (on which some
Authors have fabulously reported the Head to grow) six Inches thick: all of
them covered over with a white scale, which will be taken off, one coat under
another, as Pearls or the shells of some Fishes. I saw some impressions as big
as the Fore-wheel of a Chariot, etc. What shall we say to this? Were there ever
any Shellfish in ours, or other Seas, as broad as a Coach-wheel? others as
thin as a Groat? What is become of all this kind of Ophiomorphite Shellfish?
And yet (which is strange) both these kinds by Mr. Cole 's description, seem to
have been covered with shells.

By what I have said concerning these Ophiomorphous stones not to have been
Nautili, I would not be thought to reflect upon, o^ detract from the Veracity
or Exactness of the Observations of Mr. Robert Hook, whom for his Learning and
deep Insight into the Mysteries of Nature, I deservedly honor. I question not,
but he found in the Keinsham Ophiomorphites perfect Diaphragms of a very
distinct substance from that which filled the Cavities, and exactly of that
kind which covered the outside, being for the most part Whitish, or Mother of
Pearl colored. Mr. Waller forementioned, attests the same, writing in his
Letter to me of Febr. 4. 1687. that in the ordinary Snake stones there, the
shelly Diaphragms were very visible. In this respect they do resemble Nautili;
though for their Figure they are much different, and of a distinct Genus. I
never broke any of the Keinsham stones; but of those found about Whitby in
Yorkshire many; but could not observe in them any shell-like Diaphragms, only
they broke into such pieces as I mentioned before. And my dear and much
honored Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson writes me, That he had broken several
Cornua Ammonis, but could never find any Diaphragms or Valves in them, though
he confesses Mr. Woodward showed him one with such in his curious Collection
of Petrifactions. So that these Diaphragms are not to be found in all the sorts
of them. But if they be found in some, it is a strong presumption, that they
were at first in all, however they came to disappear.

In fine, these Ophiomorphous Stones do more puzzle and confound me, than any
other of the formed Stones whatsoever, because by Mr. Hook's Description of
those of Keinsham, they seem to have been, or to owe their original to shells;
and yet there is nothing like them appears at this day in our or any other
Seas, as far as I have seen, heard, or read.

Thirdly, A second Argument to prove these formed Stones never to have been
Shells, Dr. Hist. Not. Oxs p. 117.
Plot affords us, Because that even those Shells, which so exactly represent
some sorts of Shellfish, that there can be no exception upon the account of
Figure, but that they might formerly have been Shells indeed, at some places
are found only with one shell and not the other. Thus in Cowley Common [in
Oxfordshire] we meet only with the gibbous, non the ^lat shell of the petrified
Oyster, and so of the Escallop-stones in the Quarries near Shotover: which if
they had once been the shells of Oysters and Escallops, had scarce been thus
parted. To this I answer, That this Argument is not necessarily conclusive;
because there may possibly be some reason of it, though we know it not, nor can
easily imagine any. The like Answer may be returned to his next Argument.

Thirdly, Because (says the Doctor) I can by no means satisfy my self, how it
should come to pass, that in case these Bodies had once been molded in Shells,
some of the same kind should be found in Beds, as the Conchites at Langley,
Charlton, Adderbury; and others scattered, as at Glympton, and Teynton, and so
the Ostracites at Shotover and Cowley. Nor how it should fall out, that some of
these Bivalves should always be ^ound with their shells separate, as the
Ostracites and Pectines: and others always closed together, as the Conchites in
all places I have yet seen.

Fourthly, Because many of these formed Stones seem now to be in fieri, (which
is the Doctor's next Argument) as the Selenites at Shotover and Hampton-gay,
the Conchites of Glympton and Cornwell, many of which were of a perfect Clay,
and others of Stone, etc. As for the Selenites, I grant them to have been in
fieri, because they are formed after the manner of Salts by shooting or
crystallization; but concerning the Clay Cockles, I say with the Civilians,
ampliandum. Since the publishing of this Treatise, happening to read Dr. Nicol
Steno's Discourse concerning these Bodies, in his Description of a Sharkshead,
I met with a very plausible Solution of this Argument or Objection. First he
gives us the History of these Bodies, or his Observations concerning them; of
which these following are two, 1. That in Argilla, which some english Potters
Earth, and we may render a Fat Clay, he had taken notice that there were plenty
of them on the Superficies of the Earth, but within the Earth but a few. 2.
That in the same Argilla the deeper you descend downward, the more tender those
Bodies are, so that some of them at any the least touch fall into Powder: and
they also that were on the Superficies, almost all of them were without much
ado reduced into a white Powder. Now (says he) seeing in such kind of Earth,
by how much deeper those Bodies lie, by so much the softer they are, and do
less bear the touch, the Earth is so far from producing them, that it does
rather destroy them. Neither is there any reason to think, that they are
therefore softer, because they are not yet arrived at their perfection, or come
to maturity: for those things that are soft upon that account, while they are
in generating, have their parts united to one another as it were by a kind of
Glue (as is seen in the tender shells of Pine-Nuts and Almonds) but these
Bodies, being deprived and destitute of all Glue, easily moulder to Dust. Nor
is it any Objection against our Opinion, that on the surface of the Earth their
number seems to increase, for that is owing to Rains washing away the
intermediate Earth: but rather their consistence when they are on the
Superficies, being tender and easily crumbled into Dust, does demonstrate, that
their destruction begun in the Earth, was interrupted by the intervention of
the Rain. But to give these Arguments their due, though they be not
demonstrative proofs, yet they infer a great degree of probability, and
shrewdly urge and shake the contrary Opinion.

The other Arguments, the Doctor alleges, admit a plausible solution,
excepting such as we have already touched, and given as good an answer to, as
either the matter will admit, or we were able to give.

To the first, That there are found Stones resembling Shellfish that stick to
Rocks: I answer, That many of them might by accident be rubbed off the Rocks
they stick to, or thrust off by Birds insinuating their Bills between the Shell
and Rock, to feed upon their meat; but by what means soever it be, that they
are sometimes broken off, the matter of fact is certain; for we find many
patellae cast upon the shores by the working of the Sea; Why then might they
not be brought up by the Flood?

To the second, Why might not the Bones of Whales, Sea-horses, all squamose
Fishes, the great shells of the Buccina, Murices, Conchae Veneris, and Solenes,
and almost* all the crustaceous kind, as Crabs and Lobsters, etc. as well have
been brought up and left behind by the Flood, and afterward petrified, as any
of the testaceous kind? I answer, Of the great Buccina, Murices and Conchae
Veneris, there are very ^ew or none found in our Seas: It may be there are of
them in the Mountains and Quarries of the Indies, were any Man so curious as to
search them out: Though it is likely but few, because being great things, easy
to be seen, and that part of the World having been fully peopled soon after the
Flood, their beauty might invite the Inhabitants to search them out, and gather
them up. But secondly, Those other kinds may possibly be less durable, and more
apt to be wrought upon, to moulder, decay, and be dissolved in time by the
Weather, Rains and Moisture of the Earth, or were not so susceptive of
petrifying Juices.

The Third Argument is already answered in the precedent Discourse.

To the Fourth Argument as to what concerns the Selenites, Astroites and
Belemnites, we have answered already. That the Species of Brontiae cannot be
the petrified Shells of Echini Spatagi the Arguments the Doctor alleges out of
Aristotle and Rondeletius do not evin^e. For though in some Seas they may be
(...), yet in others are they plentiful enough. In our own Seas at Llandwyn in
the Isse of Anglesey, we may reasonably conjecture, they are more plentiful
than the common Echini any where with us; because we found more of their Shells
cast up there on the shore, than of the Echini in any shore about England: nay,
so common are they there, that even the Vulgar have taken notice of them, and
imposed a Name upon them, calling them Mermayds Heads. And though their
Bristles or Prickles were but small, yet were they not few or thin set, as
Rondeletius says.

How the Snake-stones about Huntly-nab and Whithy in Yorkshire came to be
included in Globular or Lenticular Stones, is not difficult to make out: for
the Cliffs thereabout being Allum-stone or Mine, wherein these Snake-stones
lie; the Sea in Spring-tides and Tempestuous Weather undermines and throws down
part of the Shore or Cliffs, which by the fall break in pieces, and the
Ophiomorphus stone being harder than the rest of the Cli^^, is broken off from
it by the fall, or its volutation in the Sea afterward, with some part of the
Cliff or Allum-stone slicking to each side of it where it is concave, and by
reason of its Figure and Striae, cannot easily part from it.

Lastly, To dissemble nothing, I have my self observed some Cockle-stones to
have seemingly different impressions or Striae upon the same Superficies; which
Phenomenon it is very hard to give an account of. I have also observed a large
Stone almost as hard as Marble, that was so marked every where throughout with
the impressions of Cockles and their Striae, so crossing one another in every
part of it, that if it were nothing but shells amassed together by a stony
Cement; those shells must have before their Concretion been broken into
infinite small pieces or fragments, scarce any remaining entire; which I do not
see how any Floods or Working of the Sea, could possibly effect.

So I have finished what I had to say concerning this supposed Effect of the
Deluge, the bringing in of Shells, and scattering them all over the dry Land.
But yet I must not dismiss this Particular, till I have said something to an
Objection that presently occurs to any one who considers this matter. The
Waters of the Flood having been supplied partly by Rains, partly by the
breaking up of the Fountains of the great Deep, and not by an Irruption or
Inundation of the Sea, how could any Sea-shells at all be brought in by it?

To this I answer, That the great Deep communicates with the Sea; and the
Waters rising up out of the subterraneous Abyss, the Sea must needs succeed,
else would there have been an empty space left in the middle of the Earth; so
that the Shellfish might as well come in this way from the bottom of the Sea,
as by an Inundation: in like manner as the fish in the Lake of Carniola, called
the Zirchnitzer Sea, do descend annually under ground through many great holes
in the bottom, and return again by the same holes. To all this I might add,
that into the Lands near the skirts of the Sea, and lower Hills, these shells
might in part be brought by particular Floods, of which many we read of, and
more possibly than are recorded in any History may have happened since the
general Deluge. Hence the chief Champions of the Opinion of Mock-shells are not
difficult to grant, that in some Countries, and particularly along the shore of
the Mediterranean Sea, there may all manner of shells be found promiscuously
included in the Rocks or Earth, and at good distances too from the Sea. Which
are the words of Dr. Lister, repeated and approved by Dr. Plot. But this will
not serve their turn; for we have before proved, that in the middle part, and
near the Center of our own Country, at a great distance from the Sea, viz. in
Oxfordshire, there are found not only shell-like Stones, but real Shells, or
Mockshells (as some esteem them) for Figure, Color, Weight, Consistency, or
any other Accident not to be distinguished from true shells; and that not such
as have been accidentally scattered there, but dig'd out of the Ground in
plenty, and of Fishes that are rarely found in our Seas: Patterns whereof were
sent me by my Ingenious Friend Mr. Lloyd, who, I hope, will ere long gratify
the Curious, by publishing a general Catalogue of all the formed Stones found
in England, and his Remarks upon them.

And I have likewise proved by good Authority, that beyond the Seas, in high
Mountains, and many Leagues distant from the Sea too, there have been Beds of
real shells. I might have added Sharks-teeth or Glossopetrae, as both Goropius
Becanus and Georgius Agricola testify; if not in Beds, yet plentifully
dispersed in the Earth. There are several Medical Histories extant (as Dr.
Tancred Robinson informs me) of perfect shells found in Animal Bodies, in whose
Glands they were originally formed, which is a considerable Objection, not
easily to be removed.

TAB: II. page 162

TAB: III page 162

TAB: IV Page 162



CHAP. V.
That there have been great Charges made in the Superficial Part of the Earth
since the General Deluge, and by what Means.
I Shall now Discourse a little concerning such Changes as have been made in
the Superficial part of the Earth since the Universal Deluge, and of their
Causes.

That there have been such I think no sober and intelligent Person can deny,
there being so good Authority and Reason to prove it. Plato in his Timaeus
tells us, That the Egyptian Priests related to Solon the Athenian Lawgiver,
who lived about 600 years before our Savior, that there was of old time
without the Straits of Gibraltar a vast Island, bigger then Africa and Asia
together, called Atlantis, which was afterward by a violent Earthquake and
mighty Flood, and Inundation of Water, in one day and night wholly overwhelmed
and drowned in the Sea. Whence it may be conjectured, that the Old and New
World were at first continuous, or by the Intervention of that Island not very
far remote from each other.

That the Island of Sicily was of old broken off from Italy by the irruption or
insinuation of the Sea is generally believed, and there is some memorial
thereof retained in the very name of the City Rhegium, standing upon the Fretum
that separates Italy and Sicily, which signifies breaking off. -- Ovid. Metam.
lib. 15.
Zancle quoque juncta fuisse
Dicitur Italiae, donec confinia pontus
Abstulit, and media tellurem reppulit unda.
In like manner the Island called Euboea now Negroponte, was of old joined to
Greece, and broken off by the working of the Sea.

Moreover, the Inhabitants of Ceylon report that their Island was anciently
joined to the Main-land of India, and separated from it by the force of the Sea.

It is also thought, and there is good ground for it, that the Island of
Sumatra was anciently continuous with Malacca, and called the Golden
Chersonese: for being beheld from afar, it seems to be united to Malacca.

And to come nearer home, Verstegan affirms, and not without good reason, that
our Island of Great Britain, was anciently Continent to Gaul, and so no Island
but a Peninsula, and to have been broken off from the Continent, but by what
means it is in his judgment altogether uncertain: whether by some great
Earthquake, whereby the Sea first breaking through might afterward by little
and little enlarge her passage; or whether it were cut by the labor of Man in
regard of commodity by that passage: or whether the Inhabitants of one side, or
the other, by occasion of War did cut it, thereby to be sequestered and freed
from their Enemies.

His Arguments to prove that it was formerly united to France, are, 1. The
Cliffs on either side the Sea, lying just opposite the one to the other, that
is, those of Dover to those lying between Callice and Bouloin, (for from Dover
to Callice is not the nearest Land) being both of one Substance, that is, of
Chalk and Flint. 2. The sides of both toward the Sea plainly appearing to have
been broken off from some more of the same stuff or matter, that it has
sometime by Nature been fastened to. 3. The length of the said Cliffs along the
Seashore being on one side answerable in effect to the length of the very like
on the other side, that is, about six Miles. And 4. the nearness of Land
between England and France in that place; the distance between both, as some
skilful Sailers report. not exceeding 24. English Miles.

Some of the Ancients, as Strato, quoted by Strabo in the first Book of his
Geography, say, That the Fretum Gaditanum or Strait of Gibraltar, was forcibly
broken open by the Sea. The same they affirm of the Thracian Bosphorus and
Hellespont, that the Rivers filling up the Euxine Sea, forced a passage that
way, where there was none before. And in confirmation hereof, Diodorus Siculus
in his Fifth Book gives us an Ancient Story current among the Samothracians,
viz. That before any other Floods recorded in Histories, there was a very great
Deluge that overflowed a good part of the Coast of Asia, and the lower Grounds
of their Island, when the Euxine Sea first brake open the Thracian Bosphorus
and Hellespont, and drowned all the adjacent Countries.

This Traditional Story I look upon as very considerable for its Antiquity and
Probability, it seeming to contain something of truth. For it is not unlikely
that the Euxine Sea, being overcharged with Waters by extraordinary Floods, or
driven with violent storms of Wind, might make its way through the Bosphorus
and Hellespent. But it will be objected, That the Euxine Sea does empty it self
continually by the Bosphorus and Hellespont into the Mediterranean, and that if
it had not this way of discharge (the Rivers bringing in more than is spent by
vapor) it would soon overflow all its shores, and drown the circumjacent
Countries; and so it must have done soon after the Flood; and therefore it is
not probable that Samothrace should have been inhabited before that irruption,
if any such there were.

To which I answer, 1. That Monsieur Marsilly thinks he has demonstrated an
under-current in the Thracian Bosphorus, by means of which the Euxine may
receive as much Water from the Mediterranean as it pours forth into it. But
because I have already declared my self not to be satisfied of the being and
possibility of these undercurrents, I answer, 2. The Annual receipts from the
Rivers running into the Euxine, not very much exceeding what is spent in
vapor, who knows but that from the time of the General Deluge till the
Irruption whereof we are discoursing, the Euxine might yearly enlarge its
Basin, and encroach upon the Neighboring Countries?

Natural Historians give us an account of new Islands raised up in the Sea:
Plin. Hist. Not. lib. 2. cap. 87. enumerates. Delos and Rhodes Islands of note;
and of less account and later emersion Anaphe beyond Melos, and Nea between
Lemnos and the Hellespont: Alone between Lebedos and Teos, and among the
Cyclades, Thera and Therasia, Olymp. 135. An. 4. [which last, or one of the
same name, Seneca says was raised, himself beholding it, nobis spectantibus
enata:] Among the same after 130 years Hiera, and two Furlongs distant in his
own time, when Iunius Syllanus and L. Balbus were Consuls, Thia. But the most
considerable and remarkable mutations that have been made in the Earth have
been on the Seacoasts, either by carrying on the Land into the Lea, and
atterrating the bottom of the Sea; or by drowning the Lands near the Sea, by
Irruptions and Inundations thereof, or undermining or washing away the shores.

Of the first sort of Change by Atterration, or making the Sea dry Land, we
have an eminent Instance in the Dutch Netherlands, which, I easily consent with
Verstegan, so far as they are even and plain without any Hills, have undoutedly
heretofore in time long past, been Sea; as appears 1. From the lowness of their
situation, some of the more Maritime Parts of them, as Zealand and Holland, and
part of Flanders, being so low, that by breach or cutting of the Sand Banks or
Downs, which the Sea by little and little has cast up, and the labor of Man
here and there supplied, might easily be drowned and converted into Sea again:
and of the great harms that these Parts have heretofore by the Irruption of the
Sea sustained. But now not only those low Places that adjoyn upon the Sea, as
Holland and Zealand, but the greater part of Flanders and Brabant, though they
lie not so low as they, but of such height as no Inundation of the Sea can any
whit annoy them, though the Sand-Banks and Downs on the Seaside were never so
much broken or cut through, yet are they as even and level as even Holland and
Zealand themselves, which is a sufficient demonstration, that they were once
covered with Water. For that Water will thus level Ground, it often runs over,
is clear from Meadows, and from the bottom of the Sea discovered at Low Water;
and we have Experience of no other Cause that does or can effect it. And
therefore Lewis Guicciardine erroneously argues Hubert Thomas Secretary to
Count Frederick Palatine of the Rhine of a Mistake, for saying in his
Description of the Country of Liege, that the Sea has come up even to Tongres
Walls, now well nigh an hundred English Miles from the Sea: among other good
Reasons, alleging for the proof thereof, that the great Iron-rings are there
yet remaining, unto which the Ships that there sometimes arrived were fastened.
I say erroneously, seeing all the Countries between that and the Sea are level,
and of an equal Superficies, without any Hills or Risings. 2. This appears not
only from the great plainness and evenness of the Ground, but in that the Soil
generally both in Flanders and Brabant is sandy; whence it seems naturally to
follow, that those Countries were anciently the Flats, Sands, or shores of the
Sea. 3. In that digging about two Fathom more or less deep in the Earth
innumerable shells of Seafish are found, and that commonly in all places both
of Field and Town; and in many places the great Bones of Fishes.

Further (says Verstegan) it is to be noted, that albeit digging deep in the
Earth in Brabant and Flanders, great abundance of shells and bones of Fishes are
to be found; yet digging in the Earth in Holland and Zealand, none at all are
perceived; howbeit on the Sands on the Seashore there are very many. The
reason whereof may be because those parts have been in time long past part of
the depth of the Sea: and the parts aforesaid of Brabant and Flanders the flats
or shore; and on the flats, and not in the depths, such kind of Shellfish are
naturally nourished. This is a very plausible account. But yet it has been by
experience found, that if you dig deep enough, even in Holland it self, after
many floors of several sorts of Earth, you will at last come to Beds of shells.
For Varenius tells us, that sinking a Well in Amsterdam, after many beds or
layers of Earth, Sand, Turf, etc. at an hundred foot depth they came to a bed
of Seasand mixed with Cockle-shells of four foot thickness, which doubtless was
of old time the bottom of the Sea, and all the other beds above it were brought
down partly by Floods subsiding and settling there, partly by the working of
the Sea spreading beds of Sand upon the layers of the Earth, and so
interchangeably. But from this Experiment it does appear, that however deep the
Sea were thereabouts, yet it was not too deep to breed or harbor shellfish.

Another great instance of Change made in the Superficies of the Earth by
atterration is in our own Country, the great level of the Fens running through
Holland in Lincolnshire, the Isle of Ely in Cambridgeshire, and Marshland in
Norfolk. Which that it was sometime part of the Sea, and atterrated by Land
brought down by Floods from the upper Grounds, seems to me evident, in that it
is near the Sea, and in that there is thereabout a concurrence of many great
Rivers which in Flood-times by the abundance of mud and silt they bring down
there subsiding, have by degrees raised it up: and thirdly in that the whole
Country is exactly level, like the bottom of the Sea; it being (as I have
already said) the nature of the Water flowing over the Earth in time to level
and bring to a plain all places that are soft and yielding, and not rocky, as
is seen in Meadows, and in the bottom of the Sea discovered at Low Water.

A third Instance is the Craux in Provence in France, anciently called Campus
Lapideus, of which Pliny says it was Herculis praeliorum memoria; and Strabo
out of Aeschylus gives us a Poetical Fable, that the stones were rained down by
Jupiter in favor of Hercules when he wanted Darts, that he might cast them at
the Ligurian Army, and thereby break and scatter it. Posidonius thinks it was
once a Lake, which by fluctuation dried up; and so the stones came to be
equally dispersed over the bottom of it. That it was a very ancient thing, is
clear, having its original in the fabulous times before any Memoirs of true
History: it continues to this day such a kind of place as it was in Strabo's
time. It appears so evidently to any one who has viewed and considered it, to
have been once part of the Sea, from its being exactly level, and strowed all
over with stones, as I have observed the bottom of the Sea in many places to
be, that there is not the least reason to doubt of it.

The River Arnus in Tuscany now falls into the Sea six Miles below Pisa:
whereby it appears, (says Dr. Hakewil) that the Land has gained much upon
the Sea in that Coast, for that Strabo in his time reports, it was but twenty
Furlongs (that is, but two Miles and an half) distant from the Sea.

I might to these add many other Instances of Atterrations out of Strabo in his
first Book; as about the Outlets of Ister the places called Stethe and the
Deserts of Scythia: about those of Phasis the Seacoast of Colchis, which is
sandy, and low and soft. About Thermodon and Iris all Themiscyra, the plain of
the Amazons, and the most part of Sidene.

To omit the whole Land of Egypt, which probably was covered originally with
the Sea, and raised up by the mud and silt brought down by the Nile in its
Annual Floods subsiding there, as I shall have occasion to show afterward.

Moreover, Varenius rationally conjectures that all China, or a great part of
it, was originally thus raised up and atterrated, having been anciently covered
with the Sea: for that that great and impetuous River, called the Yellow or
Saffron River, coming out of Tartary, and very often, though not at anniversary
seasons, overflowing the Country of China, is said to contain in it so much
Earth and Sand, as make up a third part of its Waters. The evenness and level
Superficies of this whole Country of China render this Conjecture the more
probable.

In fine, the like Atterrations appear to have been made about the Mouths of
Indus and Ganges in the East Indies, and the River de la Plata in America: and
the Rhodanus in France; and doubtless most other great Rivers throughout the
whole World.

To all which if we add the spacious Plains that are on each side most great
Rivers from their Mouths many Miles up their Channels, as may be observed in
the Thames and Trent in England, which probably were at first Sinuses of the
Sea, landed up by Earth brought down from the Mountains and upper Grounds in
times of Floods; it will appear that in this respect there has been a very
great Change made in the Terraqueous Globe, the dry Land much enlarged, and the
Sea straightened and cut short.

But you will say, Has there been no compensation made for all this: Has not
the Sea other-where gained as much as it has lost about the Mouths of the
Rivers? If not, then the Sea will in time be so far landed up, or straightened
till it be compelled to return again, and overflow the whole Earth.

To which I answer, That where the shores are Earthy or Argillaceous, or
Gravelly, or made of any crumbling and friable matter, the Sea does undermine
and subvert them, and gain upon the Land; which I could prove by many
Instances, some of which I shall afterward touch. But whether the Sea does in
these places gain proportionably to what it loses in the forementioned,
according to the Vulgar Proverb, is to me some what questionable.

To proceed now to discourse a little concerning the Changes that have been
made by the Irruptions and Inundations of the Sea, or by its undermining and
washing away the shores.

That there have been of old great Floods, and much Land laid under Water by
Inundations of the Sea, is clear, many such being recorded in History.

The most ancient of all, next to the general Deluge in the days of Noah, viz.
that of Ogyges King of Boetia, or rather Attica, seems to have been of this
nature: So does that of a great part of Achaia in Peloponnesus, wherein the
Cities of Bura and Helice were overwhelmed and laid under Water.

Cambden out of Gyraldus reports, That anciently a great part of Pembrokeshire
ran out in the form of a Promontory toward Ireland; as appears by that Speech
of King William Rufus, That he could easily with his Ships make a Bridge over
the Sea, so that he might pass on foot from thence to Ireland. This Tract of
Ground being all buried in deep Sands during the Reign of King Henry the
Second, was by the violence of a mighty storm so far uncovered, that many
stumps of great Trees appeared fastened in the Earth: Ictusque securium tanquam
hesterni (says Giraldus) and the strokes of the Axes in them, as if they had
been cut but yesterday; ut non littus jam, sed lucus esse videretur, mirandis
rerum mutationibus; so that now it made show of a Wood rather than of a Strand;
such is the wonderful Change of all things.

In the time of King Henry the First of England there happened a mighty
Inundation in Flanders, whereby a great part of the Country was irrecoverably
lost, and many of the poor distressed People, being bereft of their Habitation,
came into England; where the King in compassion of their Condition, and also
considering that they might be beneficial to his Subjects, by instructing them
in the Art of Clothing, first placed them about Carlisle in the North, and
after removed them into South Wales, where their Posterity has ever since
remained.

In the Year 1446. there perished 10000 People by the breaking in of the Sea at
Dordrecht in Holland, and thereabouts; and about Dullart in Friesland, and in
Zealand, above 100000 were lost, and two or three hundred Villages drowned,
some of their Steeples and Towers, when the Tide is out, still appearing above
water.

Mr. Carew of Antony in his Survey of Cornwall, affirms, That the Sea has
ravened from that Shire the whole County of Lioness. And that such a County
there was he very sufficiently proves by many strong Reasons. Camden in his
Britannia reports out of ancient Records, That upon the Kentish Coast, not far
from Thanet, is a sandy dangerous place, (which the Inhabitants call Goodwyns
Sands) where an Island (being the Patrimony of Earl Goodwyn) was swallowed up
in the Year 1097.

But the greatest Change of this kind that ever was made (if it be true) was
the submersion of the vast Island o^ Atlantis, whereof we have already spoken.

As for the Changes that have been made by undermining and washing away the
shores, they have been partly the diminishing of the Land, and partly the
raising up of several Islands not far from the shores. So the Baltic Sea has
invaded the shores of Pomerania, and destroyed a famous Marttown called Vineta.
So the ancient Borough of Donewich in Suffolk is almost quite eaten away and
ruined by the Encroachments of the Sea. And it is said that the Ocean has cut
off twenty Miles from the North part of the Island of Ceylan in India; so that
it is much less at this day than formerly it was. And many the like Examples
there are. And for the raising up of Islands near the shore, very likely it is
that the Sea continually preying upon the shore, and washing away abundance of
Earth from thence, cannot carry it far to any great distance from the shores,
but lets it fall by little and little in their Neighborhood: which subsiding
or settling continually for some Ages, at last the heaps ascend up to the very
Superficies of the Water, and become Islands. Hence in the middle of the Ocean,
there are no Islands, or but a very few, because those parts are too remote
from the shores for any Earth washed from thence to be carried thither; and if
it were, yet the Sea thereabout is too deep to have any heap raised in it so
high: besides, the motions of the Water in those depths, were there Earth
enough, would overthrow any heap before it could be advanced any thing near the
top. But all Islands in general, a very few excepted, are about the shores, or
not far from the shores of the great Continents. Which thing is especially to
be remarked in all the great heaps or swarms of numerous Islands, they being
all near to the Continents; those of the Aegean Sea to Europe and Asia; the
Hesperides to Africa; and the Maldivae, (which are thought to amount to eleven
thousand) to India: only the Flandricae or Azores seem to be situate in the
middle of the Ocean, between the Old and New World.

Besides these Changes about the Seacoasts, by the prevailing of the Land upon
the Sea, in some places, and the Sea upon the Land in others, the whole
Continents seem to suffer a considerable mutation by the diminution, and
depression or sinking of the Mountains, as I shall have occasion to show
afterward in the third Discourse.

Aelian in his eighth Book, cap. 11. tells us, that not only the Mountain
Aetna, but Parnassus and Olympus did appear to be less and less to such as
sailed at Sea, the height thereof sinking. Of this lowering and diminution of
the Mountains I shall not say much in this place, but taking it for granted at
present; only in brief intimate the Causes of it, assigned by that learned
Mathematician Josephus Bla^canus, which are partly Rainwater, and partly
Rivers, which by continual fretting by little and little, wash away and ^at out
both the tops and sides and feet of Mountains, and fill up the lower places of
the Valleys, making the one to increase, and the other to decrease; whereby it
appears (says Dr. Hakewil) that what the Mountain loses the Valley gains; and
consequently, that in the whole Globe of the Earth nothing is lost, but only
removed from one place to another; so that in process of time the highest
Mountains may be humbled into Valleys: and again (which yet I will not allow
him) the lowest Valleys exa^^ed into Mountains. He proceeds, Anaxagoras (as
Diogenes Laertius reports in his Life) being demanded what he thought, Whether
the Mountains called Lapsaceni would in time be covered with Sea? answered Yes,
unless time it self fail; which answer of his seems to confirm the opinion of
Blancanus De Mundi fabrica, cap. 4. where he maintains, That if the World
should last long enough, by reason of this continual decrease of the Mountains,
and the levelling of the Valleys, the Earth would again be overslown with
Waters, as at first it was.

Beside these more eminent and remarkable Changes, which in process of time,
after a long succession of many Ages, threaten some great effect; indeed no
less then a reduction of the World to its primitive state before the separation
of the Land and Water. There have been many other lesser mutations made either
by Earthquakes and Eructations of burning Mountains, or by great Floods and
Shots of Rain, or by violent or tempestuous Winds and Hurricans, some whereof
are mentioned by Naturalists and Historians, Strabo, Pliny, Seneca, Ovid, and
others.

For Earthquakes, Posidonius, quoted by Strabo, in his first Book, writes, That
there was a City in Phoenicia, situate above Sidon, swallowed up by an
Earthquake, and that almost two thirds of Sidon it self fell therein, though
not suddenly and all at once, so that there was no great destruction or
slaughter of men happened. The same extended almost over all Syria, though not
violently, and reached as far as some of the Cyclades Islands; and Euboea,
where the Fountains of Arethusa in Chalcis were stopped up by it, and after
many days broke forth again at another source: neither did it cease to shake
the Island by parts, till the Earth opening in the Field Lelantus vomited out
of a River of fiery Clay.

The same Strabo tells us, That Democles mentions huge Earthquakes of old in
Lydia and Ionia, extending as far as Troas, by which many Villages were
swallowed up, and Sipylus overthrown when Tantalus reigned, and great Lakes
made of Fens.

And that Duris says, That the Rhagades Islands by Media were so called from
the Lands about the Caspiae Portae being torn and broken by Earthquakes, so
that many Cities and Villages were overthrown, and several Rivers received
alterations.

And Demetrius Calatianus relating the Earthquakes that happened throughout
Greece, writes, That a great part of the Lichades Islands and Cenaeus had been
drowned thereby; and that the hot Baths at Aedepsus and in Thermophylae, having
been stopped for three days, slowed again, and those of Aedepsus from new
Sources. That the Wall of Oreus on the Seaside, and seven hundred Houses, were
thrown down; and a great part of Echinus and Heraclea Trachinia; but the whole
building of Phalarnus was overturned from the very Soil or Plain of it; the
like happened to the Larians and Lariss^aus; and that Scarphia was utterly
demolished and subverted from the very foundations, and not fewer then 1700
Persons overwhelmed and buried; and more then half that number of the Thronii.

Pliny in his first Book, chap. 84. tell us, that in the Reign of Tiberius
Caesar, there happened an Earthquake (the greatest that ever was in the memory
of Man) wherein twelve Cities of Asia were prostrated in one night.

But what is that to what St. Augustine writes [Lib. 2. De Miraculis SS. cap.
3.] if that Book he his, In famoso quodam terroe motu centum Libyae Vrbes
corruisse: That in a famous Earthquake an hundred Cities of Libya were
demolished.

The City of Antioch, where the Disciples of Christ were first called
Christians, with a great part of Asia bordering upon it, was almost wholly
subverted and swallowed up by an Earthquake in Trajan's time, as Dion Cassius
writes; Trajan himself then wintering there.

The same City of Antioch, in the time of Justinian, in the Year of our Lord
528. was again shaken with a terrible Earthquake, wherein were overwhelmed and
buried in the ruins of the Houses above 40000 of the ^itizens.

And lastly, in the 61 Year after the last mentioned Earthquake, being again
shaken by a new one, it lost 60000 of its Inhabitants: Gregory the then Bishop,
being by the Divine Favor, and in a manner miraculously preserved, the House
wherein he abode falling down presently after his going out of it.

Eusebius and Spartianus make mention of an Earthquake in the Emperor Adrian's
time, wherein Nicomedia and Nicaea of Bithynia, and Nicopolis and Caesarea,
Cities of Palaestina were thrown down and ruined.

In the Year 1182. when Saladin set himself to overthrow the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, there happened an Earthquake, in which Antiochia, Laodicea, Alapia,
Caesarea, Emissa, Tripolis, and other famous Cities, were almost wholly thrown
down and destroyed.

To omit many that are recorded in ancient Histories and to come near to our
times;

Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope by the Name of ^ius the Second, in a Letter of
his to the Emperor Frederick, thus pitifully describes an Earthquake that fell
out in his time; Audies ex latore praesentium quam mirabilia and incredibilia
damna fecerit Terraemotus in Reguo Apuliae, nam multa oppida funditus
corruerunt, alia magna ex part collapsa sunt. Neapoli omnes fere Ecclesiae and
maxima Palatia ceciderunt, plusquam triginta millia corpora oppressa ruinis
traduntur, populus omnis habitat in tentoriis: i. e. You shall understand by
the Bearer of these Presents, what wonderful and incredible losses an
Earthquake has wrought in the Kingdom of Apulia; for many Towns are utterly
ruined, others for the greatest part fallen: In Naples almost all their
Churches and sair Palaces are overthrown; more then 30000 Persons are said to
have been slain, all the Inhabitants dwell in Tents.

This Kingdom of Naples, especially Apulia and Calabria, has, I think, been
oftener shaken, and suffered more by Earthquakes than any other part of Europe.
For Cluverius tells us, That in the Year 1629. there were dreadful Earthquakes
in Apulia, by which 17000 Men are said to have perished.

And Athanasius Kircher the Jesuit, in the Preface to his Mundus Subterraneus,
gives us a sad Narrative of a dismal Earthquake in Calabria, in the Year 1638.
wherein himself was, and out of which he hardly escaped with his Life: Nothing
to be ^^en in the whole Country he passed by for two hundred Miles in length,
but the Carcasses of Cities, and the horrible ruins of Villages, the
Inhabitants wandering about in the open Fields being half dead with fear and
expectation of what might follow. But most remarkable was the subversion of the
noted Town of S. Eufemia, which was quite lost out of their sight and absorpt,
and instead thereof, nothing left but a stinking Lake. But for a full account
thereof I refer the Reader to the said Preface.

Not many years ago the famous City of Ragusa was almost wholly subverted and
destroyed by a terrible Earthquake; and Smyrna has lately been demolished by
one. From the West Indies we hear frequently of great Damages done in our
Plantations by Earthquakes. The printed Transactions and Journals are full of
these great Concussions and Subversions.

This present Year 1692. on the Seventh day of June there happened a dreadful
Earthquake in the Island of Iamaica which made great Ruins and Devastations
throughout the whole Country, but especially in the Capital Town of Port Royal,
which was almost swallowed up and overflowed, by the sinking of the Earth, and
irruption of the Sea: a full Account whereof contained in two Letters, sent
from the Minister of the Place, the one dated June the 22d, the other the 28th
of the same Month, 1692. from aboard the Granada in Port Royal Harbor, to a
Friend of his England, and published by Authority, I shall give the Reader,
with some Remarks.

1. He tells us in general, That this Earthquake threw down almost all the
Houses, Churches, Sugar-works, Mills and Bridges throughout the whole Island:
That it tore the Rocks and Mountains [others tell us, that it levelled some
Mountains, and reduced them to Plains] that it destroyed some whole
Plantations, and threw them into the Sea; but that Port Royal had much the
greatest share in this terrible Judgment.

2. Then he acquaints us, what for to save the Reputation of the People, and to
avoid the laying a perpetual blot upon them, I should rather suppress and
conceal, but for the vindication of the Divine Providence and Justice, and to
deter others from the like Enormities, I think necessary to publish, That the
Inhabitants of that Place were a most ungodly and debauched People, and so
desperately wicked, that he was even afraid to continue among them: for that
very day this terrible Earthquake was, as soon as night came on, a company of
lewd Rogues, whom they call Privateers, fell to breaking open Warehouses and
Houses deserted, to rob and ri^^e their Neighbors, whilst the Earth trembled
under them, and some of the Houses ^ell upon them in the Act. [The like Robbers
and Plunderers we were told wandered up and down the Country, even in the very
smoke, during the last great ^urning and eruption of Aetna in Sicily.] And
those audacious Whores that remained still upon the Place, were as impudent and
drunken as ever; and that since the Earthquake, when he was on shore to pray
with the brui^ed and dying People, and to Christen Children, he met with too
many drunk and swearing. And in his second Letter, he says positively, That
there was not a more ^^godly People on the Face of the Earth.

^ The Account he gives of the Motions and (...) of the Earthquake is as
follow^ (...) when this Calamity be^el the (...) very clear, affording (...)
evil. [This (...) Earthquakes, and (...) in England. the (...) being clear and
calm. But (...), about half in (...) Morning, (...) Town in all the English
(...) might he call it so, (...) place of his Letter, (...) the Wharf were
(...) those in (...) and Mart or (...) in Riches and abounding in all good
things, was shaken and shattered to pieces, and covered for the greatest part
by the Sea. The Wharf was entirely ^wallowed by the Sea, and two whole Streets
beyond it. Himself, with the President of the Council, being in a House near
where the Merchants meet, hearing the Church and Tower fall, ran to save
themselves: He having lost the President, made toward Morgan's Fort, because
being a wide open place, he thought to be there ^ecurest from the falling
Houses, but as he was going he saw the Earth open, and swallow up a multitude
of People, and the Sea mounting in upon them over the Fortifications: Moreover
he tells us, That their large and famous Burying place, called the Pallisado's,
was destroyed by the Earthquake; and that the Sea washed away the Carcasses of
those that were buried out of their Graves, their Tombs being dashed to pieces
by the motion and concussion. That the whole Harbor, one of the fairest and
goodliest that ever he saw, was covered with the dead Bodies of People of all
Conditions floating up and down without burial. That in the opening of the
Earth, the Houses and Inhabitants sinking down together, some of these were
driven up again by the Sea which arose in those Breaches, and wonderfully
escaped: Some were swallowed up to the neck, and then the Earth shut upon them,
and squeezed them to death; and in that manner several were left buried with
their Heads above ground, only some Heads the Dogs have eaten, others are
covered with Dust and Earth by the People which yet remain in the place, to
avoid the stench. So that they conjecture, that by the falling of the Houses,
the opening of the Earth, and the inundation of the Waters, there are lost
Fifteen hundred persons, and many of good note, as Attorney General Musgrove,
Provost Marshal Reeves, Lord Secretary Reeves, etc.

Further he tells us, That after he was escaped into a Ship, he could not sleep
all night for the returns of the Earthquake almost every hour, which made all
the Guns in the Ship to jar and rattle. And he supposes that the whole Town of
Port Royal will in a short time be wholly swallowed by the Sea: for few of
those Houses that yet stand are left whole, and that they heard them fall every
day, and that the Sea daily encroached upon them. That they had Accounts from
several parts of those Islands of Misch^e^s done by the Earthquake. From St.
Anns they heard of above 1000 Acres of Woodland changed into Sea, carrying with
it whole Plantations. And lastly, That he was told by some, that they still
heard bellowings and noises in the Mountains, which made them very apprehensive
of an eruption of Fire; which if so, he feared might be more destructive then
the Earthquake. [But I think causlesly, (for I never heard or read of any great
destruction of Men made by any eruptions of Fire, even out of burning
Mountains.]

4. The Account he gives of his own unexpected and strange preservation, take
his own words: After I had been at Church reading Prayers, (which I did every
day since I was Rector of the Place, to keep up some show of Religion) and was
gone to a place hard by the Church, where the Merchants meet, and where the
President of the Council was; who came into my Company, and engaged me to take
a Glass of Wormwood Wine as a whet before dinner; he being my very great
Friend, I staid with him; upon which he lighted a Pipe of Tobacco, which he was
pretty long in taking; and not being willing to leave him before it was out,
this detained me from going to dinner to one Captain Ruden's, whither I was
invited; whose House upon the first concussion sunk first into the Earth, and
then into the Sea, with his Wife and Family, and some that were come to dine
with him: Had I been there I had been lost. But to return to the President, and
his Pipe of Tobacco; before that was out I found the ground rolling and moving
under my feet, upon which I said to him, Lord! Sir, what is this? He replied
very composedly, being a very grave Man, It is an Earthquake, be not afraid, it
will soon be over: but it increased, etc. Then he relates how he went to his
own Lodging, and found all things in order there, nothing stirred out of its
place, and going into his Balcony to view the Street, he saw never a House down
there, nor the ground so much a cracked: And that after he had prayed (...)
People at their earnest request, and (...) them some serious Exhortations to
Rep^ntance, in which Exercises he spent near an hour and half, there came some
Merchants of the place to him, desiring him to go aboard some Ship in the
Harbor and refresh himself, telling him that they had gotten a Boat to carry
him off. Whom he accompan^ed, and passing over the tops of some Houses, which
lay levelled with the Surface of the Water, got first into a Canoe, and then
into a ^ong Boat, which put himon board a Ship.

5. The last thing I shall take notice of in these Letters, shall be the
influence and effect this Judgment had upon the Remainder of the People, to
bring them to a sense of their Sins and Repentance for them, and to resolve
upon and begin a Reformation and Amendment of their Lives. It is a true saying,
Vexatio dat intellectum: In their affliction they will seek me early. The pious
inclination of the People appeared in that they were so glad to see their
Minister in the midst of this Disaster, and so earnest with him to come down
and pray with them when they saw him in the Balcony beforementioned; and that
when he came down into the Street, every one laid hold on his Clothes and
embraced him, so that with their fear and kindness he was almost stifled. And
that not only at the instant of the Distress, but afterward when he went
ashore to bury the Dead, and pray with the Sick, and baptize the Children, and
preach among them, the People were over-joyed to see him, and wept bitterly
when he preached to them. Fear is a more powerful Passion then Love: and
whatever creates terror is a more effectual Curb to restrain and rule Men as
well as Children, then any Favors or Benefits the most powerful Motives of
Love and Affection: For though the Bonds of Love are called the Cords of a Man,
and are indeed very strong ones to rational and ingenuous Persons, yet the
greatest part of Mankind are so far degenerated, that they have broken these
bonds, and cast these cords from them; and upon trial, one shall find little of
Gratitude or Ingenuity among them.

I shall add one or two Remarks upon the precedent Paper.

First, It is very remarkable that the day, when all this befell Port Royal and
the whole Island of Iamaica, was very clear, not affording the least suspicion
of any evil: so that the Inhabitants had no warning at all of it, but were
surprised of a sudden, without time sufficient to escape and save themselves.
For in the short space of three Minutes the Town was shaken and shattered to
pieces, and sunk into, and covered for the greatest part by the Sea. In which
respect this Judgment resembled those on the Old World and on Sodom, which, the
Scripture tells us, were to the People involved in them sudden and unexpected;
as also the second coming of Christ, and future Dissolution of the World by
Fire is predicted to be.

That the Cause of Earthquakes is the same with that of Thunder, I doubt not,
and most learned Men are agreed; that is, Exhalations or Steams set on fire,
the one in the Clouds, the other in the Caverns of the Earth; which is
sufficiently proved from the great deflagrations and ^ruptions of Vulcano's or
burning Mountains; they being always either preceded or attended by
Earthquakes; and Earthquakes, even here in England, being, as far as I can
understand, for the most part accompanied with a noise. But now of what nature
this steam is that is thus inflamed, and what causes the accension, I must
confess my self not to be yet fully satisfied. That it is at least partly
Sulphurous is certain, and well proved by Dr. Philosoph* Transact. N. 15^.
Lister from the Sulphurous stink of waters smelt before, and of the very Air
it self after them: That it conceives fire of its self, and is not kindled
after the manner of Gunpowder by the touch of fire, is as clear, there being no
fire praeexisting in the Clouds; but how it should kindle, unless by a
colluctation of parts after the manner of fermentations, I cannot conceive. And
if so, then the steam must be a dissimilar Body composed of parts of different
Natures; else would there be no colluctation, and consequently no accension,
the parts friendly conspiring and agreeing in the same motion.

I am not ignorant that water, either in the gross body, or in vapor, may and
does so far work upon some solid Bodies, as for example, Quicklime, Hay in a
Mow, the Pyrites or Firestone, etc. as to cause an incalescency and even an
accension; but still this is by the discord or contrariety of the parts of
water or vapor, and those of the forementioned Bodies meeting and struggling
together. So in Tempests of Thunder and Lightning, the fume contained in the
Clouds, which my honored Friend Dr. Martin Lyster supposes and proves to be no
other then the breath of the Pyrites, encountering with the vapor of water,
there may very likely by the concourse and conflict of these two be produced
first a great heat, and afterward an actual fire.

As for Thunder, after the steams enclosed in the Cloud are once inflamed, I
conceive the fire goes not out till the end of the Tempest, but when the
inflamed matter is so much dilated that the cavity of the Cloud cannot contain
it, it rends the Cloud and forces its way through where it is most yielding, so
much of the fire escaping at the breach, till the Cloud overcomes the
resistance of the remainder, and closes it self again; and continues shut, till
there be so much of the Sulphu^eous steam anew inflamed as to have strength
enough to tear it, and break out the second time, which process is repeated,
till the whole steam be burnt and consumed, and the fire go out; or till the
Cloud be quite condensed and fallen down in rain. That this vapor or steam in
the Clouds heats gradually before it comes to accension, I think probable,
because before any considerable Tempest the Air beneath is ^ultry (as we call
it) that is, suffocatingly hot.

So likewise in the Caverns of the Earth it is not unlikely that the steams or
damps that cause Earthquakes before ignition, may be gradually heated by a
colluctation of parts; but their accension seems to be very sudden, and in
manner of explosion, like that of Gunpowder; the succussion coming unexpectedly
without any notice-giving, and being also very transient, and of short
continuance. I mean Earthquakes where there are no eructations of fire, such as
ours in England are.

There is a sort of Damp which some call a Fire-damp or Fulminating-damp, of
which I had the first notice from my honored Friend Francis Iessop Esquire An.
1668. whereof I find a Relation since communicated by him in a Letter to Dr.
Lister, published in the Philosophical Transactions, Numb. 117. and a further
Account from him in Answer to some Queries proposed by the Honorable Mr. Boil
in the Philosophical Transactions, Numb. 119. wherein he writes, That this sort
of Damp presently takes fire at the touch of a lighted Candle, or other flaming
Matter, and flies out of the mouth of the bink or shaft with a crack like a
Gun. He instances in three Persons that had been hurt by it; one in the
Coal-mines in Hasleberg Hills, who had his Arms and Legs broken, and his Body
strangely distorted by it. A second in those at Wingersworth, who going into a
bink, where this kind of Damp was, to fetch some of his Tools, with a Candle in
his hand, found himself on a sudden environed with flames, so that his face,
hands, hair, and a great part of his Clothes were very much burnt. He heard
very little noise, but one who was working at the same time in another bink,
and those that were above ground heard a very great one, like a clap of
Thunder, wherewith the Earth shook; which hearing, they ran in a great
amazement to see what the matter was, with their Candles in their hands, which
were twice extinguished, but held upon the third Lighting. They saw nothing,
but met with an intolerable stench of Brimstone, and an heat as scalding as an
Oven half-heated, which made them glad speedily to quit the place. A third at
the same place met with the same accident: and he forementioned person
happening then to stand at the mouth of the fired bink, was shot forth about
two or three yards, and had his head broken and boyd bruised against the
further side; the same also a third time incurred the like disaster. That it
shot off the Turn at the mouth of the Pit to a considerable height. That they
could perceive no smell before the fire, but afterward a very strong one of
Brimstone. That the Damp hung about the top of the bink, and therefore they
were for^'d to go with their Candles very low, else it would have taken fire.
That the flame would continue in the Vault two or three Minutes, sometimes more
after the crack. That he could never hear of any Damps that kindled of
themselves. That from the breaking of these Fulminating-damps proceeded a black
smoke of the smell and color of that from Gunpower fired.

This sort of Fire-damp Mr. Beaumont tells us, they have also in some
Coal-works bordering on Mendip Hills. See Philosoph. Collect. 1. And Mr. George
Sinclair in a Land called Werdy, west of Leith, which even in the daytime is
sometimes seen in Coal-works in little holes, shining like kindled Sulphur. But
the most strange Fire-damp was that which happened at Mostyn in Flintshire at
the same time with that at Wingersworth [1675.] which as soon as the Colliers
were scanted of Air appeared in the crevisses or slits of the Coal, where water
had been before, in a small bluish flame, flashing and darting like
Sword-blades from side to side of the Pit: and being kindled, had the same and
more violent effects than those of Hasleberg or Wingersworth, leaving a foul
ill-sented smoke behind it. In the last there mentioned [philosoph. (...) Numb.
136.] firing of it by one who can indiscreetly with his Candle over the Eye of
the damp Pit, it flew to and fro over all the hollows of the work with a great
wind and mighty roaring, tore the Men's clothes from their backs, findging and
(...) as also their hair and skins, (...) of them 1^ or 16 yards from (...),
beating them against the (...) Coal and the Posts. As it drew (...), it caught
one that was (...) along with it, and up it comes (...) out of the mouth of the
(...) a terrible crack, not unlike, but (...) then a Cannon, so that it was
(...) fi^teen miles off. The Man's Body, (...) things from the Pit, were seen
in (...) above the tops of the highest Trees (...) grew on the ^row of the Hill
(eighteen yards above the Pit) more then 100 (...) The barrel of an Horse
Engine for (...) up the Rope of above 1000 pound weight, though fastened to the
frame with Locks and Bolts of Iron, together with the Buckets and Rope was
thrown up, and carried a good way from the Pit, and pieces torn off from it
scattered about the Woods. And lastly the whole frame of the Engine moved out
of its place. The whole Relation deserves well to be read.

That which seems to me most strange and Romantic is the motion of the Damp,
that as if it had been a living thing, it should fly up with a long sharp flame
to lighed Candles set over the Eye of the Pit, and put them out: And yet Mr.
Iessop also mentions a like motion in that of Wingersworth; For of, says he,
in the bink where it was, they held their Candles any higher then ordinary,
they could see the Damp, which lay near the Roof, to descend like a black Mist,
and catch bold of the flame, lengthning it to two or three handfuls.

By these Descriptions, this Damp should seem to be but Gunpowder in a vapor,
and to partake the Sulphur, Nitre, and Bitumen, as the Learned Dr. Plot well
proves in his Natural History of Staffordshire, C. 3. 47. to which I refer the
Reader. But for the accension of it, whether it ever takes fire of it self, I
am in some doubt. Mr. Iessop de^ies it of those of Hasleberg and Wingersworth;
and how far those Relators that affirm it are to be credited, I know not.

If in this particular I were satisfied, I should readily accord with the
Doctor, That our Earthquakes in England, and any others that have but one
single Pulse, owe their Original to the kindling and explosion of Firedamps.

You will say, That fire is the cause of Thunder we readily grant, because we
see it plentifully discharged out of the Clouds: but what reason have we to
think so of this sort of Earthquakes, where we see no lightning or eruption of
fire at all? What becomes of the enclosed flame?

In answer hereto, I demand, what becomes of it in the open Air? It diffuses it
self through the Caverns of the Earth, till the deflagration be made, and is
there dissipated and dissolved into Fume and Ashes. It breaks not forth, I
conceive, because by reason of the depth of the Caverns wherein it is lodged,
it is not able to overcome the resistance of the incumbent Earth, but is forced
Qua data porta ruere, to make its way where it finds easiest passage through
the strait Cuniculi of the Earth: as in a Gun the inflamed Powder, though if it
were at liberty, and found equal resistance on every side, it would spread
equally every way; yet by reason of the strength and firmness of the Metal, it
cannot tear the Barrel in pieces, and so break out; but is compelled to fly out
at the muzzel, where it finds an open, though strait passage. For the force of
flame, though very great, is not infinite.

It may be further objected, We hear not of any eruption of fire at Port Royal,
or elsewhere in this Island, and yet the Earth opened, and the roofs of the
Caverns fell in, therefore fire could not be the cause of this Earthquake; for
if it had, at those apertures and rifts of the ground, it must needs have
issued forth and appeared abroad.

To which I answer, That the Vaults and Cavities wherein the inflamed Matter
was imprisoned and the explosion made, lay deep in the Earth, and were covered
with a thick and impenetrable Coat of hard stone, or other solid matter which
the fire could not tear, but that above this coat there were other superficial
hollows in a more loose and crumbling Earth, which being not able to sustain
the shock, and hold out against the impetuous agitations of the Earthquake, the
roofs might yield, open, and subside, as we hear they did, and give way to the
Sea to rush in and surmount them.

You will reply, This may be a tolerable account of our English Earthquakes,
which are finished at one explosion, but what shall we say to those of Iamaica,
which like a Tempest of Thunder and Lightning in the Clouds, have (as we learn
by this Relation) several Paroxysms or Explosions, and yet no discharging of
fire?

To which I answer, That I conceive the Caverns of the Earth wherein the
inflamed Damps are contained, are much larger there then ours in England; and
the force of the fire joined with the elatery of the Air being exceeding great,
may of a sudden heave up the Earth, yet not so far as to rend it in ^under, and
make its way out, but is forced to seek passage where it finds least resistance
through the lateral Cuniculi. So the main Cavern being in a great measure
emptied, and the exterior parts of the extended matter within cooling and
shrinking, the Earth may subside again, and reduce the Cavern to its former
dimensions. Yet possibly there may not be a perfect defiagration and extinction
of the fire, and so new Damps ascending out of the Earth, and by degrees
filling the Cavern, there may succeed a second inflammation and explosion, and
so a third, and fourth, till the steams be quite burnt up and consumed. But in
this, I confess, I do not satisfy my self. They who have a more comprehensive
knowledge of all the Phoenomena, may give a better account.

But as for those Earthquakes that are occasioned by the burnings of Vulcano's,
they are, I conceive, of a different nature. For in them the fire burns
continually, and is never totally extinct, only after the great eruptions, in
which, besides smoke and fire, there is an ejection of abundance of Ashes,
Sand, Earth, Stones, and in some floods of melted Materials, the raging is for
a time qualified; but the fire still continuing, and by degrees increasing in
the combustible matter it finds in the hollows of the Mountains, at last swells
to that excess, that it melts down Metals and Minerals where it meets with
them, causing them to boil with great fury, and extending it self beyond the
dimensions of the Cavities wherein it is contained, causes great succussions
and tremblings of the Earth, and huge eruptions of smoke, and casts out such
quantities of Ashes, Sand and Stones as we just now mentioned: and after much
thunder and roaring by the allision and repercussion of the flame against and
from the sides of the Caverns, and the ebullition and volutation of the melted
Materials, it forces out that boiling matter either at the old mouths, or at
new ones, which it opens where the incumbent Earth is more thin and yielding.
And if any water enters those Caverns, it mightily increases the raging of the
Mountain. For the fire suddenly dissolving the water into vapor, expands it to
a vast dimension, and by the help thereof throws up Earth, Sand, St^nes, and
whatever it meets with. How great the force of water converted into vapor is,
I have sometimes experimented by inadvertently casting a Bullet in a wet mold,
the melted Lead being no sooner poured in, but it was cast out again with
violence by the particles of water adhering to the mold suddenly converted into
vapor by the heat of the Metal.

Secondly, The People of this Plantation being generally so ungodly and
debauched in their lives, this Earthquake may well be esteemed by this
Gentleman, the Minister of Port Royal, a Judgment of God upon them.

For though it may be a servile complaint, and popular mistake, that the former
imes were better than these, and that the World does daily degenerate, and grow
worse and worse. Aet as parentum pejor avis tulit hos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem. For had this been true, Vice would long before this time
have come to the height and greatest possible excess: and this Complaint has
been made as well in the best as worst of times. Though I say this be partly an
error, yet I do verily believe, that there are certain times when Iniquity
does abound, and Wickedness overflow in a Nation or City; and that long Peace
and Prosperity, and great Riches, are apt to create Pride and Luxury, and
introduce a general Corruption of Manners: And that at such times God usually
sends some sweeping Judgment, either utterly destroying such a People who have
filled up the measure of their iniquity, or at least grievously afflicts and
diminishes them. So when in the old World the wickedness of man was great upon
the earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually, Genesis 6. 5. And the earth was corrupt before God, and filled with
violence, all flesh having corrupted their ways, verse. 11. and 12. God brought
in the Flood, and drowned them all. The like vengeance we find executed on the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha after such a monstrous height of wickedness as the
Inhabitants were generally arrived at. And we shall find it noted by
Historians, That before any great public Calamity or utter Excision of a
Nation, the People were become universally vicious and corrupt in their
Manners, and without all fear of God or sense of Goodness. For God does not
stand by as an idle and unconcerned Spectator, and suffer things to run at
random; but his Providence many times interposes, and stops the usual course
and current of Natural Causes: Nay, I believe and affirm, That in all great and
notable Revolutions and Mutations he has the greatest hand and interest;
himself ordering and governing them by his special Superintendence and
influence. So though the Instruments and Materials wherewith this devastation
in Iamaica was made, as a subterraneous fire and inflamable materials, were
before in the Earth, yet that they should at this time break forth and work,
when there was such an inundation of wickedness there, and particularly and
especially at Port Royal, this we may confidently say, was the finger of God,
and effected perchance by the ministry of an Angel.

Moreover, This Relator's being called aside, and stopped from going to a
place, whither if he had then gone he had certainly perished, we have good
reason to think an effect of Providence, designing thereby his preservation; as
Gregory the Bishop of Antioch his going out of the House wherein he abode
immediately before it fell down, was rationally thought to be in respect of him.

But to proceed; I should now have done concerning Earthquakes, it being my
design only to take notice of such as have made considerable mutations in the
superficial part of the Earth, passing by those, which after a short trembling
and succussion have left the Earth as they found it, making no alteration at
all therein. But at the very time this she^t of Earthquakes was Composing,
there happening a notable one, though of this latter kind, in our own Country,
I was partly by the coincidence of it, with the composure beforementioned,
partly at the request of the Bookseller, induced to make some mention of it,
and add what I knew or could learn of its History; which is indeed very little
and inconsiderable, we having as yet but a very lame and imperfect account of
the Accidents of it.

As for the time when it happened, it was the 8th of September 1692. about 4
Minutes past Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, as was observed at London;
hereabouts I can hear of no body that was so critical in noting the time, only
they agree that it was about Two of the Clock. Had we a punctual and exact
notice of the very Minute that it happened in far distant places, we might
thence gather something concerning the motion and progress of it. However it is
remarkable that it happened in the Autumn, one of the Seasons in which
Aristotle tells us such effects are most frequent, the other being the Spring;
and likewise in the Month of September; in the which that about Oxford in the
Year 1683. fell out: and moreover in a wet Season, as that also did; though the
Forenoon of the day was clear and fair, yet in the Afternoon, when the
Earthquake was past it rained hard till Night, the whole precedent Summer (to
this I mean) having been cold and wet: which what influence it can have toward
the production of an Earthquake, unless by stopping the Pores of the Earth, and
hindering the evaporation of those sulphurous steams, which are the efficients
of it, I know not, The same Night succeeded some strokes of Thunder and Flashes
of Lightning both here and at London, and since then we have had great storms
of Wind. I might have taken notice, that for some Mornings before we had smart
Frosts for the time of the Year.

Since this was written and sent away in order to printing, I am advised by
Letter from my honored Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson, that this Earthquake was
not confined to some Counties of England, as Middlesex, Essex, Kent, Sussex,
Hampshire, etc. but spread far into Foreign Parts; an Account whereof I shall
give you in the Doctor's own words. The Concussion or Vibration of our late
Earthquake was felt in most parts of the Dutch and Spanish Netherlands, as also
in Germany and France: It affected places most upon the Seacoasts, and near
the great Rivers as Zealand, Cologn, Mentz, and the Bridge of London. It went
not beyond 52 Degrees and 40 Minutes of Northern Latitude; how far it reached
to the South and East, is not yet certainly known for want of good
Intelligence, we have already traced it beyond Paris to the 48 degree of N.
Latitude, and beyond the Rhine on the East to Francfort; so that we know at
present of 260 Miles square shaken by it. The motions of some Machines were
very sensibly stopped or retarded by the Choc, especially Pendulums; and there
were some alterations in the Air (as to its smell, spring, and gravity) both
before and after. The time of its happening here in England, and beyond the
Seas, seems to vary some Minutes, but that may easily be accounted for by the
difference of Meridians. Thus far the Doctor. Dat. September. 22.

The duration or continuance of it (as I am informed by some curious and
attentive Observers) about London was about Two Minutes; here not so long.

The manner of the motion, as I am assured by my Learned and Ingenious Friend
and Neighbor Mr. Allen, Physician in Braintree, who had it from several
intelligent and observant Persons hereabouts, and that lived in distant places,
was first a manifest heaving upwards, and after that a trembling, or vibration,
or agitation to and fro. So that in the first respect, its motion seemed to
resemble that of the Blood in an Artery stretching the Channel as it passed.

The motion of it was most considerable upon Hills and in Valleys.

The effect it had upon those who were sensible of it was a swimming or
dizziness in their Heads, and this was general upon all. In some it affected
their Stomachs, and created a loathing and inclination to vomit: Some of the
tenderer Sex found in themselves such a disposition as they have had before a
swooning fit. All which must be the effects either of the heaving or tremulous
motion, or both; and yet no motion of Boat or Coach does so suddenly affect and
disturb the Head or Stomach.

Lastly, It was attended with a noise, as our Earthquakes generally in England
are, as is observed by Mr. Pigot in that of Oxford in the Year 1683. and by my
self when I lived in Sutton ^^field, in (...) that happened there in the Winter
time as I remember in the Year 1677 and extended at least 40 Miles in length
into Worcestershire. The noise I heard seemed to be in the Air. This noise
hereabouts was heard but in few places, and by few persons, but yet I am well
assured by some, and those of the Vulgar and Ignorant sort, who reported it of
themselves, having no reason to seign it, and who had never heard that any such
thing accompanied Earthquakes.

From many of the forementioned particulars it may be collected, That the
Caverns in which the inflamed Damp causing this Earthquake was contained, lie
deep in the Earth, else could it not have shook such a vast extent of Ground,
both Hills and Valleys, passing under the Channels of great Rivers, and even
Creeks of the Sea, and not being stopped by them; and if it had not lain deep,
it would in all likelihood some where or other have rent the Earth, and broken
forth. And yet notwithstanding the depth, it should seem it found so much vent
as to affect the external Air, and create a sound: for if the Caverns wherein
the Damp was had been close shut up with such a thick Coat of Earth, I doubt
whether the trembling and vibration of the soft Earth alone would have produced
such a noise abroad in the Air; and the vapor of it also made a shift to
struggle through the Pores of the Earth into the open Air, in such quantity as
to affect the sense; a sulphurous scent having been observed in the Air both
before and after the Concussion.

It is moreover very remarkable, That there were some particular spots which
were not at all stirred in those Countries where the places not far distant
round about were shaken; as Sturbridge-Fair before remembered, and that where my
Dwelling is; neither my self, nor any of my Family, though they were above
stairs, nor any of our near Neighbors being sensible of the least motion or
impression of it, and yet those living within less then half a mile had their
Houses considerably shaken by it.

It is also worth the noting, That both this, and all other Earthquakes I have
heard or read of in England, have been very short, and finished at one
explosion; which is an argument that the Cavities and Cuniculi, wherein the
enflamed matter is contained and moves, are very strait and of small
dimensions. Explosion I call it, because by the quickness of the motion it
seems rather to resemble that of Powder in a Gun, then that of a Squib running
in a Train of Powder. Though others I have read of whose motion was very slow;
as that observed by the Honorable Mr. Boil, and described in the Philosophical
Transactions, Numb. 11. Had we certain knowledge where the greatest force of
this Earthquake was, we might thence learn where its first accension was, and
which way it spread it self. But I have not time to enlarge further concerning
it, or to give an account of all its Phoenomena, lest I injure the Printer by
stopping the Press: neither indeed would it be prudence to attempt it, till we
have a more particular and perfect History of it.

Since this was written and sent away to the Printer, intelligence is come from
beyond the Seas, that Flanders and all Holland, part of France and Germany,
were shaken by this Earthquake, and consequently the interjacent Provinces,
which is a clear demonstration of our Opinion, That the inflamed Damp, which
caused it, was lodged deep in the Earth, the Cuniculi or Caverns which
contained it passing under the very bottom of the Sea. It is also a great
confirmation of what we have delivered concerning the Mountains of Aetna,
Stromboli, and Vesuvius communicating by Submarine passages. Add hereto, that
Gassendus in the Life of Peireskius reports, That at the Mountain Semo in
Aethiopia, there happened a burning at the same time with that of Vesuvius in
Campania, viz. in the Year 1633. So that not only Vesuvius communicates with
Aetna by subterraneous Vaults, but also (as he rationally infers) Aetna with
the Mountains of Syria, the Tunnels running under the depths of the
Mediterranean Sea, and those with the Arabian, and lastly the Arabian with
Mount Semo in Aethiopia.

That an inflamed Damp or subterraneous Fire is the cause of all Earthquakes in
general, and not only such as precede the eruptions of Vulcano's, may be proved
by an eminent instance of an Earthquake happening May 12. 1682. which shook the
greatest part of France and Switzerland, and reached as far as Collen in
Germany: an Account whereof we have in the Iournal des Scavans set forth June
1. 1682. inserted in the Weekly Memorials printed for Mr. Faithorne, Numb. 23.
In which they write, That it was perceived in Lionnois, (which was wont (...)
pass for a place exempt from such Accidents) in P^phiny and Beaujolois, though
very (...), and without any ill consequence. That at Mets in Lorrain the
Watch-place of a Bulwark was thrown down into the (...), with the Soldier that
stood Sentinel (...)

That at Tonnerre the Houses and Churches were so terribly shaken, as if
several Coaches with six Horses had driven along full speed through the
Streets; and that it threw down several Rocks on the side of Bourbirant. They
tell also that it stopped a Fountain at Raviere hard by (which at fifty paces
from its head turns a Mill) for half an hour.

That it was perceived in Provence by the shaking of Windows and Beds, and
opening of Doors, and that it had two several motions or pulses, as ours also
was by some observed to have: and that the Domestic Animals, as Sheep, Cows,
Horses, and Poultry did discover their fear by unusual motions and cries. And
the Sheep at Dijon in Burgundy could not be stopped from getting into their
Stalls at four of the Clock in the Afternoon, which were not then wont to
betake themselves thither till Sunset.

That the Cities of Orleans, Troyes, Sens, Chalons, Ioinville, Reims, Soissons,
Laon, Mascon, Dole, Strasbourg, etc. felt the Effects of it.

But at Remiremont upon the Moselle, where it exerted its greatest force,
throwing down several Houses, insomuch that the Inhabitants were forced to
betake themselves into the Fields for six weeks time; there was a noise heard
like Thunder, and flames frequently broke out of the Earth of a noisome scent,
but not Sulphurous, and which burnt nothing, yet was there no rift or chap in
the ground, save only in one place, the depth whereof was in vain searched, and
which afterward closed up. And before this Earthquake also flames appeared for
4 days upon a Mountain near Geneva.

It is very strange and remarkable that the flames that issued out were of the
nature of an Ignis fatuus, and burnt nothing; and that (as Monsieur Colbert
writes) the Earthquake raged every Night, and never in the Daytime.

Concerning Earthquakes, I shall only add two Observations.

1. That it is not likely that they spend all their strength upon Cities, but
do indifferently shake, break in sunder, and throw down Mountains and Rocks;
and seeing few Cities there are but have been shaken, and many ruined and
subverted by them, and levelled with the Ground; there is good reason to think,
that few Rocks or Mountains have escaped their Fury, but have suffered the like
Concussions and Alterations.

2. That the Changes that have hitherto happened in the Earth by Earthquakes
have not been so considerable as to threaten a dissolution of the present
System of the Terraqueous Globe, should there be a like succession of them to
Eternity. Unless we will except that unparall'd universal one, which happened
in the days of Valentinian the first (which we have already mentioned) by which
the whole known World, both Land and Sea, and its like the then unknown too,
were violently shaken; which might seem to be a Prelude to the future
Conslagration or Destruction of the whole by such a confusion and dashing in
pieces of all the parts of it one against another, as the Stoics speak of.

Of the Effects of burning Mountains or Vulcanos, I have already said
something, and shall afterward, have occasion to say more. In brief, 1. They
cast forth out of their Mouths, and scatter all over the Country, sometimes to
a very great distance, abundance of Sand and Ashes. Dion Cassius reports, that
in that noted deflagration of Vesuvius in the time of Titus the Emperor, there
was so much Cinders and Ashes vomited out of its flaming Tunnel, and with that
Fury and Violence, that they were transported over Sea into Africa, Syria and
Egypt; and on the other side were carried as far as Rome, where they darkened
the very Air, and intercepted the Sunbeams. At which time, by the fury of this
burning and tempest, the whole Mountain and Earth thereabouts was so shaken,
that two adjoining Cities Herculanium and Pompeii, were destroyed with the
People sitting in the Theater. And the famous Natural Historian Pliny the
Elder, then Admiral of the Roman Navy, out of a curiosity of searching out the
Causes and Nature of the Deflagration approaching too near the Mountain, and
staying too long there, was suffocated with the sulphurous smoke and stench
thereof.

Of another eruption of the same Vesuvius we read, in the time of Leo the
Emperor, wherein the Ashes thereof transported in the Air obscured all Europe,
being carried as far as Constantinople; and that the Constant inopolitans being
wonderfully affrighted therewith (insomuch as the Emperor forsook the City) in
memory of the same, did yearly celebrate the Twelfth of November.

2. They also pour out huge Floods of melted Minerals, Stones, and other
Materials, running down like Rivers for many Miles together; as did the
Mountain Aetna in that last and most famous Eructation, disgorging such mighty
streams of fiery running matter, as flowed down to Catana, above twenty Miles
distant, and advanced a considerable way into the very Sea it self.

Secondly, The next thing I shall mention is the extraordinary Floods caused by
long continuing showers, or violent and tempestuous storms and shots of rain.

The most ancient and memorable of this kind is that of Deucalion, of which we
have already discoursed sufficiently. S. Hierome in the Life of Hilarion (as I
find him quoted by Dr. Hakewill) speaks of a Flood and Inundation after the
Death of Julian, in which Naves ad praerupta montium delatae pependerunt, the
Ships being landed upon the tops of the Mountains, there stuck. Which whether
it proceeded from Rain, or from an Irruption of the Sea, or from both Causes
together, he does not say: but if it were literally true, and not
hyperbolically exaggerated, then may some credit be given to what Sabin in his
Commentaries upon Ovid's Metamorphosis, reports, Ex Annalium monumentis constat
Anno 1460. in Alpibus inventam esse Navim cum anchoris in cu^iculo per quem
metalla effodiuntur: It appears by the Monuments of History, that in the Year
1460. in a Mine of the Alps was found a Ship with its Anchors; in confirmation
of what that Poet writes,

Et vetus inventa est in montibus anchora summis. In the Year of our Redemption
590. in the Month of October, Gregory being then Bishop of Rome, there happened
a mavelous overflowing in Italy, and especially in the Venetian Territory and
in Liguria, accompanied with a most fearful storm of Thunder and Lightning,
after which followed the great Plague at Rome, by reason of the many dead
Serpents cast up and left upon the Land after the Waters decreased and returned.

Strozius Sigog in his Magia omnifaria, tells of an Inundation in Italy in
the time of Pope Damasus, in which also many Cities of Sicily were swallowed:
another in the time of Alexander the Sixth: also in the Year 1515. Maximilian
being Emperor. He also remembers a perilous overflowing in Polonia about
Cracovia, by which many People perished.

Likewise Vignier a French Historian, speaks of a great Flood in the South
part of Languedoc, which fell in the Year of our Lord 1557. with so dreadful a
Tempest, that all the People attended therein the very end of the World and
Judgment-day; saying, that by the violent descent of the Waters about Nismes,
there were removed diverse old heaps and mountures of Ground, and many other
Places torn up and rent; by which accident there was found both Coin of Silver
and Gold, and diverse pieces of Plate, and Vessels of other Metal, supposed to
be hidden at such time as the Goths invaded that Province. These stories
related in the three last Paragraphs, I have borrowed of Sir Walter Ralegh his
History of the World.

To which I shall add one of late date happening in Sicily, a Narrative whereof
communicated in a Letter from Palermo, dated June the 25th, 1682. I met with in
the London Gazette, Numb. 1742. in the following words: We have an Account from
the Town of Tortorica, That on the sixth Instant, about seven a Clock in the
Evening, after so great a darkness that no object could be distinguished at the
distance of four paces, there arose such a great storm of Rain, Lightning and
Thunder, which lasted six and thirty hours, that about One a Clock the next
morning, great Torrents of Water, caused by these Rains, fell down from the
neighboring Mountains with so great rapidity, that they carried with them
Trees of an extraordinary bigness, which threw down the Walls and Houses of the
Town they happened to beat against. The Waters were so violent that they
overthrew the Church of St. Nicholas; and the Archdeacon of the Town, who
retired thither, perished there with many other persons: there remaining only
one Abbey, and about fifty Houses, and those so shattered, that they fell one
after another. There were about six hundred of the Inhabitants drowned, the
rest being abroad in the Field gathering their silk, fled to the Mountains,
where they suffered very much for want of Provisions. The Goods, Trees, Stone,
Sand and other Rubbish which the Waters carried away, were in so great
abundance, that they made a bank above the Water two Miles in length near the
mouth of the River, where before the Sea was very deep. This Town is situate in
that part of Sicily called the Valley of Demona, on the side of the River
Tortorica, about five and Twenty Miles from the Tuscan Sea. The Towns of
Randazzo and Francaville, and several others, have likewise been destroyed by
this great Flood. It is added that Mount Aetna casts out such abundance of
Water, that all the neighboring Country is drowned. Which if it be true, (as I
see no reason to doubt it) this is a further proof, against Borellius, that the
Caverns of Aetna are more then superficial, and reach down to the very Roots
and Foundations of that Mountain, communicating with the Subterraneous Abyss,
and the Sea its self, from whence in all likelihood these Waters were derived,
as is evident in those poured out by Vesuvius.

Many other Floods we read of in Histories, whether caused by Rains or
Inundations of the Sea, is uncertain, and therefore I shall not spend time in
setting them down. The effect of all which relating to the Earth in general is,
the wasting and washing away of Mountains and high Grounds, the raising of the
Valleys and Bottoms, and consequently levelling of the Earth, and landing up of
the Sea.

Thirdly, The last thing I shall mention, which has effected considerable
Changes in the Earth, is boisterous and outrageous Winds and Hurricanes, of
which I need not give Instances, they every year almost happening. These I
conceive have a great Interest in the Inundations of the Sea we have before
mentioned. These raise up those great Hills or Downs of Sand we see all along
the Coasts of the Low Countries, and the Western-shores of England, and the
like places. These sometimes blow up so much Sand, and drive it so far as to
cover the adjacent Countries, and to mar whole Fields, yea to bury Towns and
Villages. They are also a concurrent cause of those huge Banks and Shelves of
Sand that are so dangerous to Mariners, and bar up Havens, and ruin Port-Towns;
of which many Instances might be given.

I find in Dr. Hakewil's Apology, a story or two showing the great force and
strength of Winds; the one taken out of Bellarmine's Book De ascensu mentis in
Deum per scal. creat. grad. 2. Vidi ego (says the Cardinal) quod nisi vidissem
non crederem, a vehementissimo vento effossam ingentem terrae molem, eamque
delatam super pagum quendam ut fovea altissima conspiceretur, unde terra eruta
fuerat, and pagus totus coopertus, and quasi sepultus manserit, ad quem terra
illa devenerat: i. e. I my self have seen, which if I had not seen, I should
not have believed, a very great quantity of Earth, dug out and taken up by
the force of a strong Wind, and carried up a Village thereby, so that there
remained to be seen a great empty hollowness in the place from whence it was
lifted, and the Village upon which it lighted was in a manner all covered over
and buried in it.

The other out of Stow, who reports, That in the Year 1095. during the Reign of
King William Rufus, there happened in London an outrageous Wind, which bore
down in that City alone six hundred Houses, and blew off the Roof of
Bow-Church, with which the Beams were born into the Air a great height, six
whereof being 27 foot long, with their fall were driven 23 foot deep into the
ground, the streets of the City lying then unpaved.

Now then to sum up what we have said, The Changes and Alterations that have
been made in the Superficial Part of the Terraqueous Globe have been effected
chiefly by Water, Fire, and Wind. Those by Water have been either by the
Motions of the Sea, or by Rains; and both either ordinary or extraordinary: The
ordinary Tides and Springtides of the Sea do wash away the shores, and change
Sand-banks, and the like. The extraordinary and tempestuous motions of the Sea,
raised by raging and impetuous Winds, subterraneous Fires, or some other hidden
causes, overwhelm Islands, open Fretum's, throw up huge beds and banks of Sand,
nay vast baiches of Stone, extending some Miles, and drown whole Countries. The
ordinary Rains contribute something to the daily diminution of the Mountains,
filling up of the Valleys, and atterrating the skirts of the Seas. The
extraordinary Rains causing great Floods and Deluges, have more visible and
remarkable influences upon such mutations, doing that in a few days, which the
ordinary Weather could not effect, it may be, in an hundred years.

In all these Changes the Winds have a great interest; the motion of the Clouds
being wholly owing to them, and in a great measure also the overflowings and
inundations of the Sea.

Whatever Changes have been wrought by Earthquakes, Thunders, and Eruptions of
Vulcano's, are the effects of Fire.

All these Causes cooperate toward the lowering of the Mountains, levelling of
the Earth, straitning and landing up of the Sea, and in fine compelling the
Waters to return upon the dry Land, and cover the whole Surface of it, as at
the first. How to obviate this in a natural way, I know not, unless by a
transmutation of the two Elements of Water and Earth one into another, which I
can by no means grant. It Is true indeed, the rocky parts of the Mountains may
be so hard and impenetrable, as to resist and hold out against all the Assaults
of the Water, and utmost rage of the Sea; but then all the Earth and Sand being
washed from them, nothing, but as it were their Skeletons, will remain extant
above the Waters, and the Earth be in effect drowned.

But though I cannot imagine or think upon any natural means to prevent and put
a stop to this effect, yet do I not deny that there may be some; and I am the
rather inclinable so to think, because the World does not in any degree proceed
so fast toward this Period, as the force and agency of all these Causes
together seem to require. For, as I said before, the Oracle predicting the
carrying on the shore of Cilicia as far as Cyprus by the Earth and Mud that the
turbid River Pyramus should bring down, and let fall in the interjacent strait,
is so far from being filled up, that there has not any considerable progress
been made toward it, so far as I have heard or read, in these 2000 years. And
we find by experience, that the longer the World lasts, the fewer Concussions
and Mutations are made in the upper or superficial Region of the Earth; the
parts thereof seeming to tend to a greater quiet and settlement.

Besides the Superficies of the Sea, notwithstanding the overwhelming and
submersion of Islands, and the straitning of it about the Outlets of Rivers;
and the Earth it washes from the shores subsiding, and elevating the bottom,
seems not to be raised higher, nor spread further, or bear any greater
proportion to that of the Land then it did a thousand years ago.

So have I finished my second Discourse concerning the Deluge and its Effects;
and the Mutations that have been since made in the Earth, and their Causes.

DISCOURSE III.
OF THE DISSOLUTION OF THE WORLD.
THE INTRODUCTION TO THE Third Discourse.
THERE is implanted in the Nature of Man a great desire and curiosity of
fore-knowing future Events, and what shall befall themselves, their Relations
and Dependents in time to come; the Fates of Kingdoms and Commonwealths,
especially the Periodical Mutations, and final Catastrophe of the World. Hence
in ancient times, Divination was made a Science or Mystery, and many Nations
had their Colleges or Societies of Wisemen, Magicians, Astrologers and
Soothsayers; as for example, the Egyptians, Babylonians and Romans. Hence the
Vulgar are very prone to consult Diviners and Fortune Tellers.

To gratify in some measure this Curiosity, and that his People might not in
any Privilege be inferior to the Nations about them, it pleased God, besides
the standing Oracle of Vrim, not only upon special occasions to raise up among
the Jews extraordinary Prophets, by immediate Mission; but also to settle a
constant Order and Succession of them, for the maintenance and upholding
whereof, there were Colleges and Seminaries instituted for the educating and
fitting young Men for the Prophetic Function. These were the Sons of the
Prophets, of whom we find so frequent mention in Scripture.

Moreover, it pleased God so far to condescend to the weakness of the Jews,
that in the Infancy of their State, he permitted them to consult his Prophets
concerning ordinary accidents of life, and affairs of small moment: As we see
Saul did Samuel about the loss of his Fathers Asses: which it is not likely he
would have done, had it not been usual and customary so to do. In the latter
times of that State, we read of no consulting of Prophets upon such occasions.
At last also by their own confession, the Spirit of Prophecy was quite taken
away, and nothing left them but a Vocal Oracle, which they called Bath col, i.
e. the Daughter of a Voice, or the Daughter of Thunder, a Voice out of a Voice.
This Dr. Horae Hebr. in Matthew. cap. 3. v. 17.
Light foot thinks to have been a mere Fancy or Imposture. Quae de Bath Kol
referunt Iudaei, ignoscant illi mihi si ego partim pro fabulis habeam Iuduicis,
partim pro praestigis Diabolicis. What the Jews report concerning Bath Kol, I
beg their pardon, if I esteem them no other then either Jewish Fables or
Diabolical Illusions. It is a Tradition among them, that after the death of the
last Prophets, Haggai, Zachary and Malachy, the Holy Spirit departed from
Israel. But why, I beseech you, was Prophecy withdrawn, if Celestial Oracles
were to be continued? Why was Vrim and Thummim taken away, or rather not
restored, by their own confession, after the Babylonish Captivity? It were
strange indeed, that God taking away his ordinary Oracles from a People should
bestow upon them one more or equally noble; and that after they were extremely
degenerated and fallen into all manner of Impiety, Superstition and Heresy,
etc. And a little after, if I may freely speak what I think, those innumerable
Stories, which every where occur [in the Jewish Writings] concerning Bath Kol,
are to be reduced to two Heads: viz. 1. The most of them are mere Fables,
invented in honor of this or that Rabbin, or to gain credit to some History.
2. The rest mere Magical and Diabolical Illusions, etc.

In the Primitive Churches of Christians planted by the Apostles, there was
also an Order of Prophets, 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the Church,
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, etc. This Spirit of Prophecy was an
extraordinary and temporary Gift, as were the Gifts of Healing and Speaking
with Tongues, continuing not long after the Death of the Apostles, and
Consignation of the Canon of Scripture. So that now we have no means left us of
coming to the knowledge of future Events, but the Prophecies contained in the
Writings of the Holy Penmen of Scripture, which, we must search diligently,
consider attentively, and compare together, if we desire to understand any
thing of what shall befall the Christian Church or State in time to come.

This Text which I have made choice of for my Subject, is part of a Prophecy
concerning the greatest of all Events, the Dissolution of the World.

2 PETER iii. 11. Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what manner
of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? CHAP. 1.
The Division of the Words and Doctrine contained in them, with the Heads of
the following Discourse.
THESE Words contain in them two Parts; 1. An Antecedent or Doctrine, All these
things shall be dissolved. 2. A Consequent, or Inference thereupon, What manner
of persons ought we to be?

The Doctrine, here only briefly hinted, or summarily proposed, is laid down
more fully in the precedent Verse; But the day of the Lord will come as a thief
in the night, in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up.

These words are by the generality of Interpreters, Ancient and Modern,
understood of the final destruction or dissolution of Heaven and Earth: in
which sense I shall choose rather to accept them at present, than with the
Reverend and Learned Dr. Hammond, and some few others, to stem the Tide of
Expositors, and apply them to the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish
Polity. I say then, That this World, Doctr.
and all things therein contained, shall one day be dissolved and destroyed by
Fire.

By World in this Proposition We, and by Heaven and Earth in this place, the
most rational Interpreters of Scripture, do understand only the whole Compages
of this sublunary World, and all the Creatures that are in it; all that was
destroyed by the Flood in the days of Noah, and now secured from perishing so
again, that I may borrow Dr. Hammond's words, in his Annotations on this place.
And again, the word Heavens (says he) being an Equivocal word, is used either
for the superior Heavens, whether Empyreal or Ethereal, or for the sublunary
Heavens, the Air (as the word World is either the whole Compages of the
superior and inferior World, as the Author of the Book De Mundo, ascribed
falsely to Aristotle, defines (...), The Systeme or Compages of Heaven and
Earth, and the Beings therein contained: or else only of the sublunary lower
World) we may here resolve, that the (...) and (...), Heaven and Host, or
Elements thereof, are literally the sublunary Aereal Heavens, and all that is
therein, Clouds and Meteors, etc. Fowls and flying Creatures, and so, fit to
join with the Earth and Works that are therein.

In prosecution of this Proposition, and in order to the Proof and
Confirmation, and likewise the clearing and illustration of it, shall, (1.)
Give you what I find concerning the dissolution of the World; 1. In the Holy
Scripture. 2. In Ancient Christian Writers. 3. In the Heathen Philosophers and
Sages.

(2.) I shall endeavor to give some answer to these seven Questions, which are
obvious and usually made concerning it.

1. Whether there be any thing in Nature, which might prove and demonstrate; or
argue and infer a future Dissolution of the World?

2. Whether shall this Dissolution be brought about and effected by Natural, or
by Extraordinary Means and Instruments; and what those Means and Instruments
shall be?

3. Whether shall the Dissolution be gradual or sudden?

4. Whether shall there be any Signs and Forerunners of it.

5. At what Period of Time shall the World be dissolved?

6. How far shall this Conflagration extend? Whether to the Ethereal Heavens,
and all the Host of them, Sun, Moon and Stars, or to the Aereal only.

7. Whether shall the Heavens and Earth be wholly dissipated and destroyed, or
only refined and purified?

CHAP. II.
The Testimonies of Scripture concerning the Dissolution of the World.
1. THen, Let us consider what we find delivered in the Holy Scriptures,
concerning the Dissolution of the World. And first of all, This place, which I
have made choice of for my Text, is in my opinion the most clear and full, as
to this particular, in the whole Scripture; and will give light for the
Solution of most of the proposed Questions. Verse. 10. The day of the Lord shall
come as a thief, etc. This answers the third Question, Whether the Dissolution
shall be gradual or sudden? Wherein the Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and all
the works that are therein shall be burnt up. And again, Verse. 12. Wherein the
Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat. This answers the second Question, What the Means and Instruments
of this Dissolution shall be? Verse. 13. Nevertheless we according to his
promise, look for a new Heaven and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.
This gives some light toward the anwering of the last Question, Whether shall
the Heavens and the Earth be wholly burnt up and destroyed, or only renewed and
purified? These Words as clearly as they seem to refer to the Dissolution of
the World, yet Dr. Hammond doubts not to be understood of the remarkable
destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish State, he thus paraphrasing them.

Verse 10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which
the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat, and the Earth also, and the works that are therein shall be
burnt up. But this Judgment of Christ, so remarkable on the Jews, shall now
shortly come, and that very discernably; and the Temple shall suddenly be
destroyed, the greater part of it burnt, and the City and People utterly
consumed.

Verse 11. Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of
Persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness. Seeing then this
destruction shall thus involve all, and now approaches so near, what an
engagement does this lay upon us to live the most pure strict lives that ever
Men lived?

Verse 12. Looking for and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, wherein
the Heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat. Looking for the coming of Christ, for our deliverance, and
by our Christian lives quickening and hastening God to delay it no longer; that
Coming of his, I say, which as it signifies great mercy to us, so it signifies
very sharp destruction to the whole Jewish State.

Verse 13. Nevertheless we according to his promise, look for new Heavens and a
new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Instead of which we look for a new
Christian State, wherein all provision is made by Christ for Righteousness to
inhabit, according to the Promise of Christ concerning the Purity that he
should plant in the Evangelical State.

How he makes out and confirms this Paraphrase, see in his Annotations upon
this place. So confident is he of the Truth of this his Interpretation, that he
censures the usual one as a great Mistake, in his Annotation on verse 10. where
he thus writes; What is here thus expressed by S. Peter, is ordinarily
conceived to belong to the end of the World, and by others applies to the end
of this World, and the beginning of the Millennium, or thousand years. And so,
as S. Peter here says, verse 16. many other places in S. Paul's Epistles, and
in the Gospel, especially Matthew 24. are mistaken and wrested. That it does
not belong to either of those, but to this fatal day of the Jews, sufficiently
appears by the purport of this whole Epistle, which is, to arm them with
Constancy and Perseverance till that day come; and particularly, in this
Chapter, to confute them who object against the Truth of Christ's Predictions,
and resolve it should not come at all: Against whom he here opposes the
Certainty, the Speediness, and the Terribleness of its coming. That which has
given occasion to those other common Mistakes, is especially the hideousness of
those Judgments which fell upon the People of the Jews, beyond all that ever
before are related to have fallen upon them, or indeed any other People, which
made it necessary for the Prophets, which were to describe it (and who use
Tropes and Figures, and not plain Expressions, to set down their Predictions)
to express it by these high Phrases, of the passing away and dissolving of
Heaven and Earth and Elements, etc. which sounding very tragically, are
mistaken for the great and final Dissolution of the World. So far the Doctor.
Two things there are in this Chapter which seem to contradict this
Interpretation; First, That the Destruction here spoken of, is compared with
Noah's Flood; and the Heaven and Earth to be dissolved by this, made parallel,
and of equal extent to the World destroyed by that. Of this the Doctor was well
aware, and therefore grants that the seventh Verse, But the Heavens and the
Earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire
against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men, is to be understood
of the general and final destruction of the World by fire, but the following
Verses to be an Answer to the first part of the Atheists Objection, viz. Where
is the promise of his coming? To me it seems, that all refer to the same
matter. The second thing which seems to contradict the Doctor's Interpretation,
is, the Apostles citing for the instruction and confirmation of the Believers,
and in Answer to the Atheists Objection (Where is the promise of his coming?)
that place of the Psalmist, Psalm. 90. 4. That one day is with the Lord as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. For the Apostle seems to
suppose, that the time of Christ's coming, might possibly be a thousand years
off; and that they were not to think much, or distruct the Promise, if it were
so: for though it were predicted as a thing shortly to come, yet they were to
consider, that a thousand years in God's sight is but a very short time; so
that it might be foretold as shortly to come, though it were a thousand years
off. Whereas it might seem improper to mention a thousand years to support them
in expectation of an Event that was not twenty years to come.

Another place where mention is made of Christ's coming to Judgment, and the
Dissolution of the World, is Matthew. 24. to which may be added as parallel Mark
13. and Luke 21. In which places you have considerable, 1. The Suddenness of
Christ's coming, verse 27. As the lightning comes out of the East, and shines
even unto the West, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. 2. The Signs of
his coming, verse 29. Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the
Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall
from Heaven, and the powers of Heaven shall be shaken. 3. The manner of his
coming, verse 30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven;
and then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, when they shall see the Son
of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven with power and great glory. And he shall
send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together
his Elect from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. 4. The
uncertainty of the time of his coming, and this dissolution as to us, But of
that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in Heaven: and Mark adds,
neither the Son, but the Father only.

All this Prophecy Dr. Hammond understands of the destruction of the City and
Temple of Jerusalem, and whole Nation of the Jews; as may be seen in his
Paraphrase and Annotations upon this place. And indeed our Savior himself
seems to limit it to this, saying, verse 24. Verily I say unto you, this
generation shall not pass away, till all these things be fulfilled. For if
these Prophecies look further than the destruction of Jerusalem, even to
Christ's coming to Judgment, how could it be true, that that generation should
not pass away till all those things were fulfilled? Whereas we see that that
generation is long since passed away, and yet the end is not come? And indeed,
Expositors that understand them of the end of the World, and Christ's second
coming to Judgment, are hard put to it to answer this Objection. S. Chrysostom
will have this word (...) to be understood not of the Generation of Men then
living, but of the Generation of the Faithful, which should not fail till the
end of the World. (...) (says he) (...), etc. He denominates a Generation not
only from living together in the same time, but from having the same form and
manner of religious Worship and Polity; as in that place, This is the
generation of them that seek thee, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Beza
understands (...) of the present Age, and will have it to be of the same valor
with (...) in Hebrew, and (...) to refer not to all particulars mentioned in
this Chapter, but only to those which are spoken of the destruction of the City
and Nation of the Jews: But (says he) if any one urges the universal
Particle, Vertere licebit, Fiant omnia, viz quae ultimam illam diem pra^cessura
dixit. Nam ab illo tempore coeperunt fieri, and adhuc perseverant ill signa,
suo demum tempore Filio hominis venturo.

But on the other side, 1. Some passages there are in this Chapter, which are
hardly applicable to the destruction of Jerusalem, and the Dissolution of the
Jewish Commonwealth; as the appearing of the Sign of the Son of Man in Heaven,
and the Tribes seeing the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with power
and great glory. And his sending his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet. 2.
The coming of Christ is in like manner described in places which undoubtedly
speak of his coming to Judgment at the end of the World. As in 1 Cor. 15. 52.
mention is made of the Trumpets sounding at the time of the Christ's coming:
and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. it is said, The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with
the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God: and verse 17. We that
are alive shall be caught up together with them [that are risen] in the Clouds
to meet the Lord in the Air. All which places are perfectly parallel, and seem
manifestly to allude to the forementioned words Matthew. 24. 30, 31. I am apt to
think that these Prophecies may have a double respect; one to the City, Temple,
and Nation of the Jews: another to the whole World at the great Day of Doom:
and that the former is indeed typical of the latter: and so they have a double
completion; the first in the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish Polity: In
reference to which it is truly said, This Generation shall not pass away till
all these things be fulfilled. The second in the final Dissolution of the
World, which is yet to come.

But to proceed; Another place which is usually understood of the Dissolution
of the World by fire, is 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. When the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, etc. Other
parallel places may be seen, Rev. 6. 12. 13, 14. Rev. 10. 6. Rev. 21. 1. And I
saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, for the first Heaven and the first Earth were
passed away, and there was no more Sea, Hebr. 12. 26, 27. These places speak
more directly of the Dissolution of the World, and the coming of Christ to
Judgment. Others there are that speak only concerning the time of it, 1 Pet. 4.
7. But the end of all things is at hand. James 5. 9. Behold the Judge stands
before the door. 1 John 2. 18. Little Children it is the last time; or as some
translate it, the last hour, (...). Hebr. 10. 37. Yet a little while, and he
that shall come will come, and will not tarry. (...). Luke 18. 17. I tell you
he will avenge them speedily. All these places the forementioned Dr. Hammond
still applies to that famous Period of the destruction of the City, Temple and
Polity of the Jews; only in his Note upon (...), that everlasting destruction
mentioned 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. he has some qualification, saying thus, Mean while
not excluding the eternal torments of Hellfire, which expect all impenitent
sinners that thus fall, but looking particularly on the visible destruction and
vengeance which seizes on whole Nations or Multitudes at once in this life.
And in conclusion has left us but one place in the N. Testament, to prove the
general Con^lagration of the World, viz. 2 Pet. 7. 7.

Now because some have been offended at these Interpretations of his, others
have spoken very slightingly of them: I shall briefly sum up what has been
alleged in defense of them by this great Man.

1. That the Prophets use to set down their Predictions in Tropes and Figures,
and not in plain Expressions, (their Style being Poetical.) And therefore in
describing those hideous Judgments which fell upon that People of the Jews,
beyond all that ever before fell upon them, or indeed any other People, they
^ound it necessary to employ those High and Tragical Phrases of the passing
away and dissolving Heaven, and Earth, and Elements. And that this was the
manner of the Prophets, may be proved; because we find the destruction of other
places described in as high Strains, as lofty and tragical Expressions as this
of Jerusalem. For example, that of Idumaea, Isai. 34. 9. The streams thereof
shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land
thereof shall become burning pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor day, the
smoke thereof shall go up for ever. And in the fourth Verse he seems but to
Preface to this Destruction in these words, And all the host of Heaven shall be
dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their
hosts shall fall down as the leaf falls off from the Vine, and as a falling
Fig from the Fig Tree; for my Sword shall be bathed in Heaven: Behold it shall
come down upon Idumaea. And in the Burden of Babylon, Chap. 13. 8, 9. we have
these words, Behold the day of the Lord comes, cruel both with wrath and
fierce anger to lay the Land desolate: For the Stars of Heaven and the
Constellations thereof shall not give their light: The Sun shall be darkened in
his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her Light to shine.

2. All the Predictions in that famous place, Matthew. 24. to which all other
places in the New Testament relating to this matter are parallel, are by our
Savior himself restrained to the destruction of Jerusalem, and the full
completion of them limited to the duration of that Age: Verse 34. Verily I say
unto you, This generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled.
What reason then can we have to extend them further.

3. In most of the places where this coming of Christ is mentioned, it is
spoken of as near, and at hand; as in the places last cited. Now, (says the
Learned Doctor) in his Note upon Luke 18. 7. I tell you he will avenge them
speedily. All which, if (when it is said to approach and to be at the door) it
belonged to the Day of Judgment (now after so many hundred years not yet come)
what a (...) were this? what a delaying of his coming? and consequently, what
an Objection against the truth of the Christian Religion? As Mahomet having
promised after his death he would presently return to life, and having not
performed his Promise in a thousand years is by us justly condemned as an
Impostor.

4. That this place of S. Peter, out of which I have taken my Text, does not
belong to the end of the World, sufficiently appears (says he) by the purport
of this whole Epistle, which is to arm them with constancy and perseverance
till that Day come, and particularly in this Chapter to confute them who object
against the truth of Christ's Predictions, and resolve it should not come at
all; against whom he here opposes the certainty, the speediness, and the
terribleness of its coming. And for that other famous place, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9.
that it belongs to the same Period; see how he makes it out in his Annotations.

I shall now superadd some places out of the Old Testament, which seem to speak
of the Dissolution of the World, Job 14. 12. Man lies down and rises not till
the Heavens be no more. Psalm. 102. 5, 6. quoted Hebr. 1. 10, 11. Of old have
thou laid the foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy
hands. They shall perish, but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as
does a garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed, Isai. 34. 4. And all the host of Heaven shall be dissolved, and the
Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and all their host shall fall
down as a leaf falls from the Vine, etc. Isai. 51. 6. The Heavens shall
vanish away like smoke, and the Earth shall wax old like a garment, Joel 2. 31.
The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before that
great and terrible day of the Lord comes. Malachi 4. 1. Behold the day comes
that shall burn like an Oven, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 22. For a fire is kindled in my
anger, and shall burn to the lowest Hell, and shall consume the Earth with her
increase, and set on fire the foundations of the Mountains. I must confess that
the Prophetic Books are full of figurative Expressions, being written in a
Poetic Style, and according to the strain of the Oriental Rhetoric, which is
much different from the European, a^^ecting lofty and tumid Metaphors and
excessive Hyperbola's and Aggravations, which would either sound harsh to our
Ears, or import a great deal more to us than they did to them. This is obvious
to any one that reads their Books; and may clearly be demonstrated from the
Ti^l^^ that their Kings assumed to themselves as well anciently as lately, viz.
Sons of the Sun, Brethren of the Sun and Moon* Partners of the Stars, Lions
crowned in the Throne of the World, Endued with the strength of the whole
Heaven, and Virtue of the Firmament. Now we cannot possibly imagine them so
vain as to think themselves literally to be such: no sure, all they meant by
these Expressions was that they were great, and honorable, and powerful. Now
the Prophetic Books of the Old Testament being written in a Style somewhat
conformable to the Oratory of those Countries, are not (I humbly conceive) in
every title to be so exactly scanned and literally expounded, but so to be
interpreted as a Jew or an Asiatick would then have understood them. And this I
rather think, because there be diverse passages in the Prophets, which cannot be
verified in a strict literal sense; as in the place before quoted, Isa. 34. 9.
It is said of the streams of Idumaea that they should be turned into pitch, and
the dust thereof into brimstone; and the Land thereof should become burning
pitch, and should not be quenched night nor day; but the smoke thereof should
go up for ever. And of the City of Tire it is said, Ezekiel. 26. 14. It shall be
built no more. And verse 19. When I shall make thee a desolate City, like the
Cities that are not inhabited, when I shall bring up the Deep upon thee, and
great waters shall cover thee. And verse 21. which is thrice repeated, I will
make thee a terror, and thou shall be no more: though thou be sought for, thou
shall never be found again, says the Lord God. And yet we see that the City of
Tire, though it was indeed wholly dis-peopled at that time, the Inhabitants
transferring themselves into Africa, when it was besieged by Nebuchadnezzar;
yet was it afterward peopled again, and continues a City inhabited to this day.
And of Babylon* it is said that there should none remain in it, neither man nor
beast, but that it should be desolate for ever, Jer. 51. 62. Isai. 13. 20. and
of the Land of Babylon, Verse. 29. that it should be a desolation without an
Inhabitant. And though indeed this Prophesy was, I think, as to the City, at
last verified in the Letter; yet did Babylon long continue a great City after
this Prophesy: And the Land of Babylon is now inhabited, there being at this
day a great City not far from the place where Babylon stood. So that these
places import no more, then that there should be a very great Destruction and
Devastation of those Cities and Countries. As for those places in the Old and
New Testament, wherein mention is made of the last Days and the last Times, it
is clear that they are to be understood of the Age of the Messiah, all the time
from the Exhibition of the Messiah to the end of the World. Isaiah 2. 1. And it
shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords House shall
be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the
Hills, and all Nations shall flow to it; which very words we have repeated
Michah 4. 1. So in that Prophecy of Joel 2. 28. quoted Acts 2. 17. And it
shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all flesh, etc. it is clear the last days are to be understood. The
Apostle Peter interpreting the Prophecy, (verse 16.) of the gift of Tongues
bestowed upon the Disciples at that time. Hence the last Days have among the
Jews proverbially signified the days of the Messiah, as Doctor Hammond in his
Annotations upon this place tells us; who also notes, that in that place of
Joel the last days do literally signify the last days of the Jews, immediately
preceding their destruction, called there the great and terrible day of the
Lord. So Hebr. 1. 2. by (...), in these last days is meant the days of the
Messiah. So 1 Pet. 1. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 1. mention is
made of the last days in this sense. In like manner the end of the World,
(...). Hebr. ^. 20. Bu^ now once in the end of the world ^^th he appeared to
put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself* (...) (...) the Ends of the Wo^^d*
(...) 1 Cor. 1. 11. Upon whom the Ends of the World are come, signify the Age
of the Messiah, though indeed the former seems more peculiarly to denote the
shutting up of the Jewish Age or Economy.

CHAP. III.
The Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, concerning
the Dissolution of the World.
2. I Proceed now to what the Ancient Fathers of the Church and Christian
Writers have delivered concerning the Dissolution of the World.

That there should be a Dissolution of this World, and that it shall be by
Fire, is so certain and clear among them, that it would be superfluous to cite
Particulars to prove it: nay, so general and unanimous is the consent of all
Christians in this Point, that, as Origin observes in his third (...), and the
Learned Doctor Hakewill after him, whereas there can hardly be named any
Article of our Faith, which some Heretics have not presumed to Impugn or call
in Question, yet not any to be met with who question this; but herein all
agree, being compelled (says Origin) by the Authority of the Scriptures. As
for the time of this Dissolution the ancient Christians held it to be at hand,
as might easily be proved by many Testimonies, were it not granted on all
hands. And here it may be worth the observing, that the longer the World stood,
the further off generally have Christians set the Day of Judgment, and end of
it. Many of the Ancients did conceive, that the Dissolution should be at the
end of six thousand years. As for Example, Justin Martyr in Quaest. and Resp.
ad Orthodoxos, if he be the Author of that Piece, where this Question (When the
end of the World should be?) being put, the Answer is, (...), etc. We may
rationally conjecture and conclude from many Scripture Expression, that they
are in the right who say that the World will last six thousand years. For in
one place it says, In these last days; and in another, Upon whom the Ends of
the World are come; and in a third, When the fullness of time was come. Now it
is evident that these things were spoken in the sixth Millenary.

Irenaeus adv. haeres. lib. 5. cap. ult. Who gathers so much from the
Similitude of the six days Creation, after which six days was the Sabbath, that
is, the day of Rest; Hoc autem (says he) est and praeteritorum narratio, and
futurcrum prophetia. Dies enim unus mill annos signi^icabat, sicut Scriptura
testatur; ^ Pet 3.
Mill anni ante Dominum sicut Dies unus: ergo sicut consummatus fuit mundus in
sui creatione intra sex dierum spatium, and poslea quies; sic in sui five
consummabitur intra spatium sex milli^m annorum, deinde vera and perpetua quies
subsequetur. This is both a Narration or History of what is past, and a
Prophecy of things to come. For one day signified a thousand years, as the
Scriptures testify, A thousand years in the sight of God are but as one day.
Therefore as the World at the first C^eation was consummated in the space of
six days, and afterward followed the Sabbath or Rest; so in the end its
duration shall be consummated within the space of six thousand years* and then
shall follow the true and perpetual Rest.

To these I might add Lactantius, in his ^eventh Book of Institur. cap. 14. who
uses the same Argument with Iren^cus, Ergo quoniam sex diebus cuncta Dei opera
perfecta sunt: per secula sex, id est, sex annorum millia manner in hac statu
mundum necesse est. Dies enim magnus Dei mill annorum circulo terminatur,
sicut indicat Propheta, qui dicit, Ante oculos tuos, Domine, mill anni tanquam
dies unus, etc. Therefore because all the works of God were perfected or (...))
in six days, it is necessary (or necessarily follows) that the World shall
continue in this state six Ages, that is six thousand years. For the great Day
of God is terminated in a Circle of six thousand years; as the Prophet
intimates, who says, A thousand years in thy sight, O Lord, are but as one
day. S. Augustine l. 20. de Civitate Dei. S. Hieronymus Comment ^in Mich. cap.
4 Most clear and full to this purpose is Eustath. in his Comment in Hexa meron
(...), etc. We reckon (says he) that the Creation shall continue till the end
of the sixth Chiliad, because God also consummated the Universe in six days;
and I suppose that the Deity does account days of a thousand years long; for
that it is said, A thousand years are in the sight of the Lord as one day.
Ho^beit the most of them did not propose this Opinion as an undoubted Truth,
but only as a modest Conj^cture. And S. Austine is very angry with them, who
would peremptordy conclude from so flight an Argumentation.

This Conceit is already confuted, and the World has long outlasted this
(...), according to their Computation who followed the Septuagint or Greek
account, and reckoned that Phaleg lived about the Three thousandth year of the
World, and had his Name from his living in the division of Time, there being to
come after him Three thousand years, that is, just so many as were past before
him.

As concerning the future Condition of the World after the Conflagration, I
find it the general and received Opinion of the ancient Christians, that this
World shall not be annihilated or destroyed, but only renewed and purified. So
Eusebius, (...). The World shall not be wholly destroyed, but renewed. Diverse
other passages I (...) produce out of him to the same purpose: Cyril of
Jerusalem Catech. 15. (...). He folds up the (...), not that he might destroy
them, but that he might rear them up again more beautiful. Again, Cyril upon
this place, (...), etc. He acutely or ingeniously calls (...) death of the
Elements their change into letter. So that this Renovation in respect of the
Creation shall be such a kind of thing as the Resurrection in reference to
Man's Body. Oecumenius upon this place, He says, new Heavens and a new Earth,
(...), yet not different in matter. And again, (...). They shall not be
destroyed or annihilated, but only renewed and purified. And upon Revel. 21. 2.
(...). This he says, not denoting the Nonexistence of the Creation, but the
Renewing. In this manner he expounds Psalm 102. 5, 6. and proceeding, says, We
may here take notice, that the Apostle does not use the word (...), as if the
Heaven and Earth were annihilated and brought to nothing, but (...), they
passed away or removed, or changed state. Saint Hierome upon the Psalms, Psalm
102. says, Ex quo ostenditur perditionem coelorum non interitum sonare, sed
mutationem in melius. From which words [as a Vesture shall thou change them]
may be shown and made out, that the Dissolution of the Heavens does not
signify their utter destruction or annihilation, but only their change into a
better state. I might add abundance more Testimonies, but these I think may
suffice.

CHAP. IV.
The Opinions of the Ancient Heathen Philosophers, and other Writers concerning
the Dissolution.
3. IT follows now that I give you an account what the ancient Philosophers and
Sages among the Heathens thought and delivered concerning this Point. Two of
the four principal Sects of Philosophers held a future Dissolution of the
World, viz. The Epicureans and Stoics.

As for the Epicureans, They held that as the World was at first composed by
the fortuitous concourse of Atoms, so it should at last fall in pieces again
by their fortuitous Separation, as Lucretius has it, lib. 5. Principio maria
ac terras coelumque tuere,
Horum naturum triplicem, tria corpora, Memmi,
Tres species tam dissimiles, tria talia texta
Vna dies dabit exitio, multosque per annos
Sustentata ruet moles and machina mundi.
But now to prove all this; first cast an Eye,
And look on all below, on all on high,
The solid Earth, the Seas, and arched Sky:
One fatal hour must ruin all,
This glorious Frame, that stood so long, must fall.
This Opinion of theirs is consonant enough to their wild Principles, save only
in that point of its suddenness, Vna dies dabit exitio, etc. one day shall
destroy or make an end of it.

The Stoics were also of Opinion that the World must be dissolved, as we may
learn from the Seventh Book of Laertius in the Life of Zeno, (...), etc. They
hold that the World is corruptible for these Reasons; 1. Because it was
generated, and had a beginning. 2. Because That is corruptible in the whole,
whose parts are corruptible: But the parts of the World are corruptible, being
daily transmuted one into another. 3. That which is capable of Mutation from
better to worse is corruptible. But such is the World; sometimes being
afflicted with long Heats and Droughts, sometimes with continued Showers and
Inundations. To those we may add 4. according to some of their Opinions,
Because the Sun and Stars being fed with Vapors exhaled from the Earth, all
the moisture will at length be drawn out, and the World fly on fire. They were
afraid Mlnut. Fellx.
Ne humore omni consumpto totus mundus ignesceret. The Poet Lucan, who seems to
be of the Stoic Sect, in the beginning of his first Book, describing the
Dissolution of the World, makes it to be a falling in pieces of the whole Frame
of Heaven and Earth, and a jumbling and confounding of all their parts
together. -- Sic cum compage soluta
Secula tot mundi suprema coegerit hora;
Antiquum repetent iterum Chaos omnia; mistis
Sydera syderibus concurrent; ignea Pontum
Astra petent, tellus extendere litora nolet,
Excutietque fretum; fratri contraria Phoeb^
Ibit, and obliquum bigas agitare per orbem
Indignata diem poscet sibi; tot aque discors
Machina divulsi turbabit foedera mundi.
-- So when the last hour shall
So many Ages end, and this disjointed, All
To Chaos back return: then all the Stars shall be
Blended together, then those burning Lights on high
In Sea shall drench, Earth then her shores shall not extend,
But to the Waves give way, the Moon her Course shall bend
Cross to her Brothers, and disdaining still to drive
Her Chariot wheel athwart the heavenly O^b, shall strive
To rule the day; this Frame to discord bent
The Worlds Peace shall disturb, and all in sunder rent.
This Dissolution of the World they held should be by Water and by Fire
alternately at certain periods, but especially by Fire, which they call (...).
Philo, (...). The Stoics say that the cause of the destruction of the World is
the irresistible force of Fire that is in things, which in long periods of time
consumes and dissolves all things into it self. Eusebius. Praep. l. 15. (...). The
most ancient of that Sect held, That at certain vast Periods of time all things
were rarefied into Air, being resolved into an Ethereal Fire. This (...) of the
Stoics we find mentioned by many, both Christian and Heathen Writers, as
besides the fore-quoted Minutius Felix, Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus in
5. Strom. Plutarch, Seneca, and others. The time of this Conflagration Seneca
determines not, but says only, it shall be when God pleases. 3 Quaest. not.
cap. 20. 8. Cum Deo visum, vetera finire, ordiri meliora; When it shall seem
good to God to put an end to old things and to begin better. Some there be who
tell us of the Annus Platonicus or magnus, by which they understand such a
period of time, as in which all the heavenly Bodies shall be restored to the
same site and distance they were once in, in respect of one another: As
supposing that all the Seven Planets were at the moment of Creation in the
first degree of Aries, till they come all to ^e in the same degree again, all
that space of (...) is called the Great Year, Annus magnus: In this Year they
tell us that the height of Summer is the Conflagration, and the depth of Winter
the Inundation; and some Astrologers have been so (...) as to assign the time
both of the Inundation and Conflagration, Seneca 3 Quest. Not. cap. 20.
Berosus, qui Belum interpretaius est, dicit, cursu ista syderum fieri, and adeo
quidem assirmat, ut conflagrationi atque diluvio tempus as^ignet. Arsura ^nim
terrena contendit, quando omnia sydera in Cancro convenerint: inundationem
futuram, quando eadem syderum turba in Capricorno convenerit. Berosus, who
interpreted Belus, says, That those things come to pass according to the
course of the Stars: and he so confidently affirms it, that he assigns the time
both for the Conflagration and Inundation. For that all earthly Bodies will be
burnt up, when all the Stars shall meet in Cancer; and the Inundation will fall
out, when the same shall be in conjunction in Capricorn. Concerning the manner
of this Conflagration, they held it should be sudden. Senec. Natura subito ad
ruinam, and toto impeturuit; licet ad originem parce utatur viribus,
dispensetque se incrementis fallacibus. Momento fit cinis, diu sylva, etc.
Nature does suddenly and with all its force rush on to ruin, though to the rise
and formation of things it uses its strength sparingly, dispensing its
influence, and causing them to grow by insensible degrees; a Wood is long in
growing up, but reduced to Ashes almost in a moment. And some of them were so
absurd as to think, that the Stars should justle and be dashed one against
another Senec. lib. de consolatione ad Marciam: Cum tempus advenerit: quo se
mundus revo^aturus extinguat, viribus ista se suis caedent; and syde^^
^yderilus incurrent; and omni flagrante materia, uno igne, quicquid nunc ex
disposito lucet ardebit. When the time shall come that the World, again to
restore and renew it self, shall perish, these things shall batter and mall
themselves by their own strength, the Stars shall run or fall foul upon one
another, and all the matter flaming whatsoever now according to its settled
order and disposition shines, shall then burn in one fire. Here by the way we
may with Dr. More [Souls Immortality, lib. 3. cap. 18.] take notice how
coursly, not to say ridiculously, the Stoics Philosophize, when they are
turned out of their Roadway of Moral Sentences, and pretend to give an account
of the Nature of Things. For what Errors can be more gross than they entertain
of God, of the Soul, and of the Stars; they making the two former Corporeal
Substances, and feeding the latter with the vapors of the Earth, affirming
that the Sun sups the Water of the great Ocean to quench his Thirst, but that
the Moon drinks off the lesser Rivers and Brooks, which is as true as that the
Ass drank up the Moon. Such conceits are more sit for Anacreon in a drunken Fit
to stumble upon, who to invite his Companions to Tiple, composed that Catch,
(...),
(...).
The Sea drinks up the Vapors,
And the Sun the Sea.
then to be either found out or owned by a serious Philosopher. And yet Seneca
mightily triumphs in this Notion of foddering the Stars with the thick Fogs of
the Earth, and declares his Opinion with no mean Strains of Eloquence, etc.

As for the extent of this Conflagration, they held that not only the Heavens
should be burnt, but that the Gods themselves should not escape Scot-free. So
Seneca, Resoluto mundo, and Diis in unum confusis. When the World shall be
dissolved, and the Gods confounded and blended together into one. And again,
Atque omnes pariter Deos Perdet nox aliqua and Chaos. And in like manner a
certain Night and Chaos shall destroy all the Gods. Is not this wise
Philosophy? If their Morality were no better than their Physics, their Wise
man they boast of might be so denominated (...), as they of Gotham.

But let us look a little further, and we shall find that the Stoics were not
the first Authors of this Opinion of the Conflagration; but that it was of far
greater Antiquity than that Sect. Others of the more ancient Philosophers
having entertained it, viz. Empedocles, as Clemens Alexandrinus testifies in
his 5 Strom. (...). That there shall sometime be a change of the World into the
nature or substance of Fire. 2. Heraclitus, as the same Clemens shows at large
out of him in the same place, (...), etc. And Laertius in the Life of
Heraclitus, He taught (...). That there is but one World, and that it was
generated out of Fire, and again burnt up or turned into Fire at certain
periods alternately throughout all Ages. I might add to these the Ancient Greek
Poets, Sophocles and Diphilus, as we find them quo^ed by Justin Martyr and
Clemens Alexandrinus. Neither yet were these the first Inventers and Broachers
of this Opinion, but they received it by Tradition from their Forefathers, and
looked upon it as an Oracle and Decree of Fate. Ovid speaks of it as such in
the first of his Metamorphosis; Esse quoque in fati reminiscitur, affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
-- Besides by Doom
Of certain Fate, he knew the time should come,
When Sea, Earth, ravished Heaven, the curious Frame
Of this Worlds Mass should shrink in purging Flame.
And Lucan Lib. 7.
; Hos Caesar, populos si nunc non usserit ignis,
Vret cum terris, uret cum gurgite ponti:
Communis mundo superest rogus ossibus Astra
Misturus. --
If now these Bodies want their Fire and Urn,
At last with the whole Globe they will surely burn;
The World expects one general Fire: and Thou
Must go where these poor Souls are wandering now.
Now though some are of Opinion that by Fata here are to be understood the
Sibylline Oracles, and to that purpose do allege some Verses out of those
extant under that Title, as Lactantius in his Book De ir a Dei, cap. 2. 3.
(...),
(...)
(...).
And it shall sometime be, that God not any more mitigating his Anger, but
aggravating it, shall destroy the whole Race of Mankind, consuming it by a
conflagration.

And in another place there is mention made, of a River of Fire that shall
descend from Heaven, and burn up both Earth and Sea.

Tunc ardens fluvius coelo manabit ab alto
Igneus, at que locos consumet funditus omnes,
Terramque, Oceanumque ingentem, and caerula ponti,
Stagnaque, tum fluvios, fontes, Ditemque severum,
Coelest^mque polum, coeli quoque lumina in unum
Haxa ruent, ^orma deleta prorsus eorum,
A^tra cadent, etenim de coelo cun^a revulsa.
Then shall a burning Flood flow from the Heavens on high,
And with its fiery Streams all places utterly
Destroy, Earth, Ocean, Lakes, Rivers, Fountains, Hell,
And heavenly Poles, the Lights in Firmament that dwell,
Losing their beauteous Form shall be obscured, and all
Raught from their places, down from Heaven to Earth shall fall.
Now because the Verses now extant under the Name of Sibylline Oracles are all
suspected to be false and Pseudepigrapha; and many of them may be demonstrated
to be of no greater Antiquity than the Emperor Antoninus Pius his Reign: and
because it cannot be proved, that there was any such thing in the Ancient
genuine Sibylline Oracles; I rather think, (as I said before) that it was a
Doctrine of ancient Tradition, handed down from the first Fathers and
Patriarchs of the World. Josephus in his Antiquities runs it up as high as
Adam; from whom Seth his Son received it; his Father, says he, soretelling
him, (...). (...) there should be a destruction of the Universe, once by the
violence of Fire, and again by the force and abundance of Water; in consequence
whereof he erected two Pillars, one of Brick, which might endure the Fire, and
another of Stone, which would resist the Water; and upon them engraved his
Astronomical Observations, that so they might remain to Posterity: And one of
these Pillars, he says, continued in Syria until his days. Whether this
Relation be true or not, it may be thence collected, that this was an Universal
Opinion, received by Tradition, both among Jews and Gentiles. That the World
should one day be consumed by Fire. It may be proved by good Authority, that
the ancient Gauls, Chaldaeans and Indians had this Tradition among them: which
they could not receive from the Greek Philosophers or Poets, with whom they had
no intercourse; but it must in all probability be derived down to both from the
same Fountain and Original; that is, from the first Restorers of Mankind, Noah
and his Sons.

I now proceed to the Third Particular proposed in the beginning; that is, to
give answer to the several Questions concerning the Dissolution of the World.

CHAP. V.
The first Question concerning the World's Dissolution, Whether there be any
thing in Nature that may probably cause or argue a future Dissolution? Three
probable Means propounded and discussed.
SECT. I.
The Waters again naturally overflowing and covering the Earth.
THE First Question is, Whether there be any thing in Nature, which may prove
and demonstrate, or probably argue and infer a future Dissolution? To which I
answer, That I think there is nothing in Nature which does necessarily
demonstrate a future Dissolution: but that Position of the Peripatetick Schools
may, for ought I know, be true Philosophy, Posito ordinario Dei concursu mundus
posset durare in aeternum. Supposing the ordinary concourse of God [with second
Causes] the World might endure for ever. But though a future Dissolution by
Natural Causes, be not demonstrable; yet some possible, if not probable,
Accidents there are, which, if they should happen, might infer such a
dissolution. Those are Four: The possibility of 1. The Waters again overflowing
and covering the Earth. 2. The Extinction of the Sun. 3. The Eruption of the
Central Fire enclosed in the Earth. 4. The Dryness and Inflammability of the
Earth under the Torrid Zone, and the Eruption of all the Vulcano's at once.


But before I treat of these, it will not be amiss, a little to consider the
old Argument for the Worlds Dissolution, and that is, its daily Consenescence
and Decay: which, if it can be proved, will in process of time, necessarily
infer a Dissolution. For as the Apostle says in another case, That which
decays and waxes old is ready to vanish away, Hebr. 8. 13. That which
continually wastes, will at last be quite consumed: that which daily grows
weaker and weaker, will in time lose all its force. So the Age, and Stature and
Strength of Man, and all other Animals, every Generation decreasing, they will
in the end come to nothing. And that all these, and all other things do
successively diminish and decay in all Natural Perfections and Qualities, as
well as Moral, has been the received Opinion, not only of the Vulgar, but even
of Philosophers themselves from Antiquity down to our times. Plin. Not. Hist.
l. 7. c. 16. In plenum autem cuncto mortalium generi minorem indies mensuram
staturae propemodum observatur: rarosque patribus proceriores consumente
ubertatem seminum exustione; in cujus vices nunc vergat aevum. In sum; It is
observed that the measure of the stature of all Mankind decreases and grows
less daily: and that there are few taller then their Parents; the burning (to
which the Age inclines) consuming the Luxury of the Seeds. Terra malos homines
nunc educ a^ que pusillos. Juvenal. Sat. The Earth now breeds Men bad and
small. And Gellius Noct. At. lib. 3. c. 10. Et nunc quasi jam mundo senescente
rerum atque hominum decrementa sunt. And now, as if the World waxed old, there
is a decrement or decay both of Things and Men* I might accumulate places out
of the Ancients and Moderns to this purpose, but that has been already done by
others.

But this Opinion, how general soever it was formerly, was inconsiderately and
without sufficient ground, taken up at first; and afterward without due
examination embraced and followed; as appears by Dr. Hakewil's Apology, wherein
it is so fundamentally confuted; that it has since been rejected by all
considerate Persons. For that Author has at large demonstrated, that neither
the pretended decay of the Heavenly Bodies in regard of Motion, Light, Heat or
Influence; or of any of the Elements: neither the pretended decay of Animals,
and particularly and especially of Mankind, in regard of Age and Duration, of
Strength and Stature, of Arts and Wits, of Manners and Conversation, do
necessarily infer any decay in the World, or any tendency to a Dissolution. For
though there be at times great Changes of Weather, as long continuing Droughts,
and no less lasting Rains; excessive Floods and Inundations of the Sea;
prodigious Tempests and Storms of Thunder, Lightning and Hail; which seem to
threaten the ruin of the World; violent and raging Winds, Spouts and
Hurricanes, which turn up the Sea to the very bottom, and spread it over the
Land; formidable and destructive Earthquakes, and furious Eruptions of
Vulcano's or burning Mountains, which waste the Country far and wide,
overwhelming or subverting great Cities, and burying the Inhabitants in their
ruins, or as the Scripture speaks, Making of a City a heap, of a defenced City
a ruin. Though these and many other Changes do frequently happen, at uncertain
Seasons as to us, yet are they so ordered by the wise Providence of the
Almighty Creator and Governor of the World, as nearly to balance one another,
and to keep all things in an Aequilibrium; so that as it is said of the Sea,
that what it gains in one place, it loses in another, it may be said
proportionably of the other Elements and Meteors; That, for Example, a long
Drought in one Place is compensated probably at the same time by as long a Rain
in another; and at another time, the Scene being changed, by as durable a
Drought in this, as lasting a Rain in that. The same may be said of violent and
continuing Heats and Colds in several Places, that they have the like
Vicissitudes and Changes, whereby in the whole they so balance and counterpoise
one another, that neither prevails over other, but continue and carry on the
World as surely and steddily, as if there were no such Contrarieties and
Fights, no such Tumults and Commotions among them. The only Objection against
this Opinion, is the Longaevity of the Antediluvian Patriarchs, and of some
also (I mean the first) of the Postdiluvian. For immediately after the Flood
the Age of Man did gradually decrease every Generation in great proportions? so
that had it continued so to do at that rate, the Life of Man had soon came to
nothing. Why it should at last settle at Threescore and ten Years, as a mean
Term; and there continue so many Ages, without any further Change and
Diminution, is, I confess, a Mystery too hard for me to reveal: However, there
must be a great and extraordinary Change at the time of the Flood, either in
the Temperature of the Air, or Quality of the Food, or in the Temper and
Constitution of the Body of Man, which induced this decrement of Age. That the
Temper and Constitution of the Bodies of the Antediluvians was more firm and
durable than that of their Posterity after the Flood: and that this Change of
Term of Life was not wholly to be attributed to Miracle, may both be
demonstrated from the gradual decrease of the Age of the Postdiluvians. For had
it been miraculous, why should not the Age of the very first Generation after
the Flood have been reduced to that Term? And what account can we give of their
holding out for some Generations against the Inconveniences of the Air, or
deteriority of Diet, but the strength and firmness of their Constitutions?
which yet was originally owing to the Temperature of the Air, or Quality of
their Diet, or both; seeing a Change in these (for there was no other visible
Cause) did by degrees prevail against, and impair it. What influence the lying
so long of the Water upon the Earth might have upon the Air and Earth, in
ch^nging them for the worse, and rendering them more unfit for the maintenance
and continuance of Humane Life, I will not now dispute. But whatever might be
the Cause of the Longaevity of the Antediluvians, and the contracting of the
Age of the Postdiluvians, it is manifest, that the Age of these did at the last
settle, as I said, at or about the Term of Threescore and ten, and has there
continued for Three thousand years without any diminution.

I proceed now to the Accidents which might possibly, in process of Time, infer
a Dissolution of the World.

1. The possibility of the Water in process of Time again overflowing and
covering of the Earth.

For, first of all, the Rains continually washing down and carrying away Earth
from the Mountains* it is necessary, that as well the height as the bulk of
them that are not wholly rocky, should answerably decrease; and that they do
so, is evident in Experience. For, as I have elsewhere noted, I have been
informed by a Gentleman of good Credit, that whereas the Steeple of Craich in
the Peak of Derbyshire, in the memory of some old Men then living [1672.] could
not have been seen from a certain Hill lying between Hopton and Wirksworth, now
not only the Steeple, but a great part of the Body of the Church may from
thence be seen; which comes to pass by the sinking of a Hill between the Church
and the place of view: a parallel example whereto the learned Dr. Plot gives
us, in a Hill between Sibbertoft and Hasleby in Northamptonshire, Hist, Not.
Stafford p. 113. And thus will they continue to do so long as there falls any
Rains, and as they retain any declivity, that is, till they be levelled with
the Plains.

In confirmation of this Particular, I have received from my ingenious Friend
Mr. Edward Lloyd, some notable Observations of his own making concerning the
Mountains of Wales; which do demonstrate that not only the looser and the
lighter parts of the Mountains, as Earth, Sand, Gravel, and small Stones, may
be washed down by the Rains: but the most solid and bulky Rocks themselves, by
the violent descent of the Waters down their Chinks and Precipices, be in time
undermined and subverted. Take them in his own words:

Upon the reading of your Discourse of the Rains continually washing away, and
carrying down Earth from the Mountains, I was put in mind of something
pertinent thereto, which I have observed in the Mountains of Caernarvonshire,
viz*

1. First, That generally the higher the Hills are the more steep are their
Precipices and Declivities (I except the Sea-rocks) thus Moel^y Wydhrha, y G^ib
gotch, and twenty others that might be named, reputed the highest Hills in
Wales, have the steepest Rocks of any Mountains I have seen; and that not only
in their highest Cliffs, but also in most of their other Crags, till you
descend to the lower Valleys: This I can ascribe to nothing else but the Rains
and Snow which fall on those high Mountains, I think, in ten times the quantity
they do on the lower Hills and Valleys.

2. I have observed a considerable quantity of the chips or parings (if I may
so call them) of these Cliffs to lie in vast heaps at the roots of them; and
these are of several sorts and materials: being in some places covered with
Grass, and in others as bare as the Seashore: and those bare places do consist
sometimes of Gravel, and an innumerable number of Rock-fragments from a pound
weight to twenty, etc. and are sometimes composed of huge Stones from an
hundred pound weight to several Tuns.

3. In the Valleys of Lhanberys and Nant-Phrankon, the People find it necessary
to rid their Grounds often of the Stones which the Mountain floods bring down;
and yet notwithstanding this care, they often lose considerable parcels of Land.

4. I affirm, That by this means not only such Mountains as consist of much
Earth and small Stones, or of softer Rocks, and such as are more easily
dissoluble, are thus wasted, but also the hardest Rocks in Wales; and they seem
to be as weighty, and of as firm and close a texture as Marble it self. It
happened in the Valley of Nant-Phrancon, Anno 1685. that part of a Rock of one
of the impendent Cliffs, called (...), became so undermined (doubtless by the
continual Rains and subterraneous ^eins of Water occasioned by them) that
losing its hold it fell down in several pieces, and in its passage down a sleep
and craggy Cliff, dislodged thousands of other Stones, whereof many were
intercepted e're they came down to the Valley, but as much came down as ruined
a small piece of Ground; and several Stones were scattered at least 200 yards
asunder. In this Accident one great Stone, the biggest remaining piece of the
broken Rock, made such a Trench in its descent, as the small Mountain rills
commonly run in; and when it came down to the plain Ground, it continued its
passage through a small Meadow, and a considerable Brook, and lodged it self on
the other side it. From hence I gather that all the other vast Stones that lie
in our mountainous Valleys, have by such Accidents as this fallen down. Unless
perhaps we may do better to refer the greatest part of them to the Universal
Deluge. For considering there are some thousands of them in these two Valleys
[of Lhanberys and Nant-Phran^on] whereof (for what I can learn) there are but
two or three that have fallen in the memory of any Man now living; in the
ordinary course of Nature we shall be compelled to allow the rest many
thousands of years more then the Age of the World. So far Mr. Lloyd.

To this last Particular, and for a further account of it, may be added, That
sometimes there happen strange and violent Storms and Hurricanes, wherein the
Rain is driven with that sorce upon the tops and sides of the Mountains by
furious and tempestuous Winds, as to do more execution upon them by breaking in
pieces, tearing and throwing down Rocks and Stones, in a few days, then in the
ordinary course of Nature, by the usual Weather is effected in many hundred
years.

2. By reason of the abundance of Earth thus washed off the Mountains by shots
of Rain, and carried down with the Floods to the Sea; about the out-lets of the
Rivers, where the violent Motion of the Water ceases, settling to the bottom,
and raising it up by degrees above the Surface of the Water, the Land
continually gains upon, and drives back the Sea: The Egyptian Pharos or
Light-house of old time stood in an Island a good distance from Land, which is
now joined to the Continent, the interjacent Fretum having been filled up by
the Silt brought down by the River Nilus in the time of the Flood subsiding
there. Indeed the ancient Historians do truly make the whole Land of Egypt to
have been (...), the Gift of the River, and by this means gained from the Sea.
Seneca in the sixth Book of his Not. Quest. chap. 26. gives this account,
Aegyptus ex limo tota concrevit. Tantum enim (si Homero fides) aberat a
continenti Pharos, quantum navis diurno cursu metiri plenis lata velis potest.
Sed continenti admota est. Turbidus enim defluens Nilus, multumque secum limum
trahens, and eum subinde apponens prioribus terris, Aegyptum annuo incremento
semper ultra tulit. Inde pinguis and limosi soli est, nec ulla intervalla in se
habet; sed crevit in solidum arescente limo, quo pressa erat and cedens
structura, etc. that is, all Egypt is but a Concretion of Mud. For (if Homer
may be believed) the Pharos was as far distant from the Continent, as a Ship
with full sail could run in a days time; but now it is joined to it. For Nilus
flowing with troubled Waters brings down a great deal of Mud and Silt, and
adding it to the old Land, carries on Egypt further and further still by an
annual increase. Hence it is of a fat and muddy Soil, and has no pores or
cavities in it. And this Reason he gives why it is not troubled with
Earthquakes. Which also may be the Reason why it has no fresh Springs and
Fountains: For though indeed Dr. Robinson does very probably impute its want of
Rain and Springs to the want of Mountains; yet because (as we shall afterward
prove) Springs may be derived from Mountains at a good distance, I know not
whether all Mountains are so far remote from Egypt, as that there may be no
subterraneous Channels of that length as to derive the Water even thither from
them; and therefore probably one Reason of their wanting of Springs may be the
density and thickness of the Soil, whereby it becomes impenetrable to the
Water; and it may be, should they use the same Artifices there, which the
Inhabitants of the lower Austria, and of the Territory of Modena and Bologna in
Italy do, that is, dig and bore quite through this Coat of Mud till they come
to a Sand or looser Earth, they might in like manner procure themselves
Fountains of springing Water. Thus by reason of the great Rivers, Po, Athesis,
Brenta, and others, which empty themselves into the Lagune, or Shallows about
Venice in Italy, and in times of Floods bring down thither great store of
Earth, those Lagune are in danger to be in time atterrated, and with the City
situate in the midst of of them, added to the firm Land, they being already
bare at every Ebb, only Channels maintained from all the neighboring Places to
the City, not without considerable Charge to the State in Engines and Laborers
in some places to clear them of the Mud, wherewith otherwise they would
endanger to be obstructed and choked up; which Engines they call Cava-fango's.
Thus in the Camarg, or Isle that the River Rhosne makes near Arles in Provence,
there has been so much lately gained from the Sea, that the Watchtower had,
in the memory of some Men living 1665. been removed forward three times, as we
were there informed. And it seems to me probable, that the whole Low Countries
were thus gained from the Sea: For Varenius in his Geography tells us, That
sinking a Well at Amsterdam, at near an hundred foot depth, they met with a bed
or floor of Sand and Cockle-shells; whence it is evident, one would think, that
of old time the bottom of the Sea lay so deep, and that that hundred foot
thickness of Earth above the Sand, arose from the Sediments of the Waters of
those great Rivers, the Rhine, Scheld, Maes, etc. which there abouts emptied
themselves into the Sea, and in times of Floods brought down with them
abundance of Earth from the upper Grounds: The same Original doubtless had that
great Level of the Fens, running through the Isle of Ely, Holland in
Lincolnshire, and Marshland in Norfolk. That there has been no small quantity
of Earth thus brought down, appears also in that along the Channels of most
great Rivers, as for Example, the Thames and Trent in England, especially near
their Mouths or Out-lets, between the Mountains and higher Grounds on each
side, there are large Levels and Plains, which seem to have been originally
part of the Sea, raised up, and atterrated by Earth and Silt brought down by
those Rivers in great Floods.

Strabo in the first Book of his Geography (...) much to this purpose; (...)
(...)
(...).
And after a while, he adds, (...). That is, For this landing up and
a^^erration of the skirts of the Sea, is for the most part about the mouths of
Rivers, as about the Out-lets of Ister the places called (...) and the Deserts
of Scyt^ia: about those of Phasis the Seacoast of Colchis, which is sandy, and
low, and so^t: About Thermod^n and Iris all Them^scyra, the Plain of the
Amazons, and the most part of Sidene. And the like may be said of other Rivers.
For all of them imitate the Nile, adding to the Continent or Mainland the part
lying before their mouths, some more, some less: those less, that bring not
down much Mud; and those more, that run a great way over soft and lose Ground,
and receive many Torrents: Of which kind is the River Pyramus, which has added
a great part of its Land to Cilicia. Concerning which there is an Oracle come
abroad, importing, That there will a time come in future Ages, when the River
Pyramus shall carry on the Shore and Land up the Sea as far as Cyprus -- So it
might in time happen that the whole Sea should gradually be landed up,
beginning from the Shores, if the Effusions of the Rivers, that is, the Earth
and Mud they bring down did spread so wide as to be continuous. Thus far
Strabo. But the Oracle he mentions, predicting the carrying on and continuation
of Cilicia as far as Cyprus, and the joining that Island to the Continent,
proves false; there having not been as yet, that we hear or read of, any
considerable advance made toward it, in almost 2000 years.

Now the Rain thus continually washing away, and carrying down Earth from the
Mountains and higher Grounds, and raising up the Valleys near the Sea, as long
as there is any descent for the Rivers, so long will they continue to run,
carry forward the low Ground, and streighten the Sea; which also by its
working, by reason of the declivity, easily carries down the Earth toward the
lower and middle part of its Channel [alveus] and by degrees may sill it up.
Monsieur Loubere in his late Voyage to Siam, takes notice of the increase of
the Banks and Sands in and near the Mouths of the great Rivers of the Oriental
Kingdoms, occasioned by the Sediments brought down from the Countries by the
several Streams; so that, says he, the Navigation into and up those Rivers
grows more and more difficult, and may in process of time be quite interrupted.
The same Observation, I believe, may be made in most of our great Europaean
Rivers, wherein new Beds are raised, and old ones enlarged. Moreover, the
Clouds still pouring down Rain upon the Earth, it will descend as far as there
is any declivity; and where that fails it will stagnate, and joining with Sea,
cover first the skirts of the Earth, and so by degrees higher and higher, till
the whole be covered.

To this we may add, that some assistance toward the levelling of the
Mountains, may be contributed by the Courses and Catarracts of subterraneous
Rivers washing away the Earth continually, and weakening their ^oundations, so
by degrees causing them to founder, subside, and fall in. That the Mountains do
daily diminish, and many of them sink; that the Valleys are raised; that the
skirts of the Sea are atterrated, no man can deny. That these things must needs
in process of time have a very considerable and great effect, is as evident;
which what else can it be, then that we have mentioned?

Moreover, toward this levelling of the Mountains, and filling up of the Sea,
the fire also contributes its Mite. For the burning Mountains or Vulcano's, as
for example Aetna and Vesuvius, vomit at times out of their Bowels such
prodigious quantities of Sand and Ashes, and with that force, that they are by
the Winds carried and dispersed all over the Country, nay transported over Seas
into foreign and remote Regions; but let fall so copiously in the circumjacent
places, as to cover the Earth to a considerable thickness; and not only so, but
they also pour forth Floods of melted Stones, Minerals and other Materials,
that run down as low as the Sea, and fill up the Havens, as of old one near
Catana; and make Moles and Promontories or Points, as in the last Eruptions
both of Aetna and Vesuvius; the Tops of these Mountains falling in and
subsiding proportionably to the quantity of the ejected matter, as Borellus
proves. Meeting with a quotation in Dr. Hakewil's Apology out of Josephus
Blancanus his Book De Mundi Fabrica, I earnestly desired to get a fight of that
Book, but could not procure it till the Copy of this Discourse was out of my
hands and sent up to London in order to its printing, But then obtaining it, I
found it so exactly consonant to my own thoughts, and to what I have here
written concerning that Subject; and some Particulars occurring therein by me
omitted, that I could not forbear translating the whole Discourse into English,
and annexing it to this Chapter, especially because the Book is not commonly to
be met with. The Discourse is first set down in his Book De locis Mathematicis
Aristotelis more at large, and afterward repeated in his Book De Mundi Fabrica
more briefly.

Pergratum Lectori fore existimavi, si rem s^itu dignissimam exposuero, etc. I
thought it might be very acceptable to the Reader, if I should discover to him
a thing most worthy to be known; which I have long ago, and for a long time
observed, and am daily more confirmed in; especially seeing no former Writer
that I know of has published any thing concerning it. It is this, That the
Superficies of the whole Earth, which is now rough and uneven by reason of
Mountains and Valleys, and so only rudely Sphaerical, is daily from the very
beginning of the World reducing to a per^^^t roundness, in so much that it will
necessarily come to pass in a natural way, that it be one day overflown by the
Sea, and rendered unhabitble.

First then, that we may clearly apprehend the Causes of this thing, we must
lay down as a Foundation from Holy Writ, That the Terraqueous Globe was in the
beginning endued with a more perfect Spherical Figure, that is, without any
inequalities of Mountains and Valleys: and that it was wholly covered with the
Sea, and so altogether unfit for Terrestrial Animals to inhabit: but it was
then rendered habitable, when by the beck or command of its Creator the greatest
part of the Land was translated from one place to another, whereupon here
appeared the hollows of the Seas, there the heights of the Mountains: And all
the Waters which before covered the face of the whole Earth receded, and
flowing down filled those depressed and hollow places; and this Congregation of
Waters was called the Sea. Hence some grave Authors doubt not to assert, That
the Mountains were made up of that very Earth which before filled the Cavities
of the Sea. Whence it follows, that the Earth as now it is, mountainous and
elevated above the Waters, has not its Natural Figure, but is in a violent
state: but Nullum violentum est perpetuum. Besides the Earth being heavier then
the Water, none of its parts ought to be extant and appear above its
Superficies; and yet we see that the Earth is really higher than the Sea,
especially the mountainous parts of it: in which respect also both Land and
Water are in a violent state. Wherefore it is very convenient to the Nature of
both, that they should daily return toward their ancient and primigenial state
and figure, and accordingly we affirm that they do so.

Moreover, we say that the Waters, both of Rains and Rivers, are the Cause of
this Restitution, as will appear by the following Observations.

First we see that Rivers do daily fret and undermine the Roots of the
Mountains, so that here and there from most Mountains they cause great Ruins
and Precipices, whence the Mountains appear broken: and the Earth so fallen
from the Mountains the Rivers carry down to the lower places.

From these Corrosions of the Rivers proceed these ^low, but great Ruins,
called, Labinae a labendo; in which some Streets, and whole Villages are
precipitated into the Rivers.

2. We daily see, that the Rain-waters wash away the Superficies of the
Mountains, and carry them down to the lower places. Hence it comes to pass,
that the higher Mountains are also harder and more stony than the rest, by
means whereof they better resist the Water. Hence also it comes to pass, that
ancient Buildings in Mountains, their Foundations being by degrees discovered,
prove not very durable. For which reason the Foundations of the Roman Capitol
are now wholly extant above ground; which of old, at its first erection, were
sunk very deep into it. This same thing all the Inhabitants of the Mountains do
confirm; all saying, that this lowering of Mountains was long since known to
them; for that formerly some intermediate Mountains intercepted the sight of a
Castle, or Tower, situate in a more remote Mountain; which after many Years the
intervenient Mountain being depressed, came clearly into view. And George
Agricola is of Opinion (which I very much approve of) that the Rivers produced
the Mountains and Hills in this manner. In the beginning of the World there
were not so many particular divided Mountains, but only perpetual eminent
Ridges of Land, not dissected into so many Valleys as we now see. So, for
example, our Appennine was at first one continued even eminent Ridge of Land,
not divided into any particular Mountains and Hills by intervening Valleys, as
now it is: but that after the Rivers began to flow down from the top of it, by
little and little fretting and corroding the Ground, they made Valleys, and
daily more and more; and by this means the whole Apennine came to be divided
into many Hills and Mountains.

3. In Plains we see the directly contrary happens: for the Plains are daily
more and more elevated, because the Waters do let fall in the plain and hollow
places the Earth they brought down with them from the Mountains. Hence we see
that ancient Buildings in such places are almost wholly buried in the ground.
So in Rome, at the foot of the Capitoline Mountain, we see the Triumphal Arch
of Septimius almost wholly overwhelmed in the Earth: and everywhere in ancient
Cities many Gates and Doors of Houses almost landed up, little thereof being
extant above ground.

From which it appears, that this sinking and demersion of Buildings into the
Earth is a manifest sign of their Antiquity, which is so much the greater, by
how much the deeper they are sunk. So, for example, at Bononia in Italy, many
of the ancient Gates of the City, which the Bolognese call Torresotti, are very
deeply sunk, which is a certain argument of their Antiquity, and thence it
appears to be true that Histories relate, that they were built in the time of
S. Petronius, about 1200 Years ago. But here it is to be noted, that other
things agreeing, those are deeper depressed that are built in lower places than
those in higher, for the reason abovesaid. So at Bononia, that old Port
called, Il Torresotto di S. Georgio, is deeplier buried, or landed up, than
that which is called, Il Torresotto di Stra Castilione, because that is
situated in a lower place, and therefore the Earth is more easily raised up
about it.

4. The same is affirmed by Architects, who when they dig their Foundations, do
everywhere in plain places first of all remove the Earth which they call
Commota [loose or shaken] which is mixed with Fragments of Wood, Iron, Rubbish,
Coyns, ancient Urns, and other things; which when it is thrown out, they come
to another sort of Earth that has never been stirred, but is solid, compact,
and not mixed with any heterogeneous things, especially artificial. That moved
[Commota] and impure Earth, is it which the Waters have by little and little
brought down from the higher to the more depressed places, which is not
everywhere of equal depth. But now because in the Mountains there is no where
found such moved or new Earth, as is plain from the Experience of Architects,
it is manifest that the Mountains do by no means grow or increase, as some
dream.

5. Our Observation is proved from that Art which is now much practiced of
elevating and landing up depressed places by the Waters of Rivers, and
depressing the higher by running the Water over them.

The same things happen about the Sea, for whereas the bottom of the Sea is
more depressed than the Superficies of the Earth; and all the great Rivers
empty themselves into the Sea, and bring in with them a great quantity of Earth
and Sand, there must needs be great Banks or Floors of Earth raised up about
the Sea-shores, near the mouths of Rivers, whereby the Shores must necessarily
be much promoted and carried forward into the Sea, and so gain upon it, and
compel it to recede.

This may be proved first by the Authority of Aristotle, lib. 1. Meteor. cap.
De permutatione terrae ac maris; and that of the ancient Geographers and
Historians. To omit that Proof from Egypt; Aristotle's second example of this
landing up of the Sea, is the Region of Ammonia, whose Lower and Maritime place
(says he) it is clear, were by this landing up first made Pools and Fens, and
in process of time these Pools were dried up, and raised to be firm Land, by
Earth brought down. A third example is that of the Maeotis palus, whose skirts
are so grown up by what the Rivers bring down, that the Waters will not carry
any thing so great Ships, as they would have done sixty Years ago. A fourth is
the Thracian Bosphorus, which for brevity's sake may be seen in him. Add hereto
in the fifth place, the Testimony of Pliny, who tells us, that much new Land
has been added to the Earth, not only brought in by the Rivers, but deserted
by the Sea.

So the Sea has receded ten Miles from the Port of Ambracia, and five from
that of Athens, and in several other places more or less. What he adds out of
Strabo, concerning the River Pyramus is already entered.

6. Neither are later and nearer Experiments wanting. Of old time Ravenna stood
upon the br^^k of the Seashore, which is now by reason of the landing up the
Shallows ^ar distant from it. The Sea washed the Walls of Pad^^, which is now
Twenty five Miles remote therefrom. In fine, our Rhene of Bologn^, though it ^e
but a small Torrent, yet in a few Years since it has been by an artificial Cut
let into the Po, it has so filled it up, and obstructed its Channel with Sand
and Mud, that it has much endamaged the neighboaring Fields. Seeing then by
these various ^ggerations of Sand and S^lt, the Sea is da^^y cut short, and
driven back, and its Ba^in or R^ceptable straightened, and the bottom (...), it
will necessarily come to pass (...) that it will begin to overflow; as (...) in
many places, for example, (...) and Holland Sho^es, (...) ^orced to erect and
(...) long and high Banks and (...) of the Sea.

Therefore (...) manner, that Earth which no^ malces (...) Mountains, being by
the Water little by little brought down unto the (...) is the Cause why the Seu
(...) ^^erflows the (...) Globe of the Earth by the affusion of the Waters,
will be again rendered unhabitable, as at first it was in the beginning of the
World; and the Earth and Water will return to their primitive state and figure,
in which they ought naturally to rest.

Hence we may deduce some Consectaries worthy to be known; viz. That the World,
or at least the Earth, was not endued with that Figure which we now see;
neither can the World endure for ever. For if this mountainous Figure had been
in it from Eternity, all those protuberancies of the Mountains had been long
since eaten away and wasted or consumed by the Waters. Nor can this World be
Eternal; because, as we have proved* in process of time it will be reduce^ to a
per^ect rotundity, and be overflown by the Sea; whereupon it will become
un^abitable, and Mankind must necessarily perish. Where^ore unless that Deluge
were prevented by the (...) which the Holy Scriptures mention the World would
(...) by Water. Long after I had committed these (...) writing. I met with
Phi^o Iud^u^ (...) book De Mundeo* wherein (...) ^ouches this matter but
ob^cure^ and in a very ^ew words*

Thus far Blancanus, whose Sentiments and Observations concerning this matter
thus punctually concurring and according with mine, to my great wonder and
satisfaction, I could not but think that the Conclusion has a high degree of
probability. Only he takes no notice, that in compensation of what the Rivers
gain from the Sea about their Outlets, the Sea may gain from the Land by
undermining and washing away the Shores that are not rocky, (as we see it does
in our own Country) perhaps as much as it loses, according to the Vulgar
Proverb before remembered. However, all contributes toward the filling up of
the Sea, and bringing on an Inundation, as I shall afterward show.

But it may be objected, That if the Waters will thus naturally and necessarily
in process of time again overflow and cover the Earth, how can God's Promise
and Covenant be made good, Genesis 9. 11. That there should not any more be a
Flood to destroy the Earth.

To which I answer, 1. That though this would follow in a natural way, yet the
power of God may interpose to prevent it, and so make good his Promise. 2.
Though it might come to pass in the Course of Nature, yet would it be after so
many Ages, that it is not at all likely the World should last so long: but the
Conflagration or Destruction of it by Fire, predicted by the Scriptures, will
certainly prevent it. 3. Possibly there may be something in Nature which may
obviate this Event, though to us at present unknown, which I am the more
inclinable to believe, because the Earth does not hasten so fast toward it as
some of the Ancients imagined, and as the activity of such Causes might seem to
require, as I have already intimated.

Varenius in his Geography putting the Question, Whether the Ocean may again
come to cover all the Earth, and make an Universal Deluge; answers, That we may
conceive a way how this may naturally come to pass. The manner thus; Supposing
that the Sea by its continual working does undermine and wash away the Shores
and Cliffs that are not rocky, and carry the Earth thereof down toward the
middle, or deepest parts of its Channel, and so by degrees fill it up. By doing
this perpetually, it may, in a long succession of Time, carry all away, and it
self cover the whole Earth. That it does thus subvert and wash away the Shores
in many places is in experience true. About Dort in Holland and Dullart in
Friesland, and in Zealand many Villages, some say Three hundred, have been
drowned by the encroachments of the Sea, as some of their Towers and Steeples
still extant above the Waters do testify. On the Tuscan shore, Kircher tells
us, That not far from Ligorn he himself had observed a whole City under Water,
that had been in former times drowned by the Inundation of the Sea. And over
against Puteoli in the Sinus of Baia, he tells us, That in the bottom of the
Sea, there are not only Houses, but the Traces and Footsteps of the Streets of
some City manifestly discernable. And in the County of Suffolk, almost the
whole Town of Donewich, with the adjacent Lands, has been undermined and
devoured by the Sea.

This washing away of the Shores is, I conceive, in great measure to be
attributed to the forementioned streightning and cutting short of the Sea, by
the Earth and Si^t that in the times of Floods are brought down into it by the
Rivers. For the Vulgar have a Proverbial Tradition, That what the Sea loses in
one place, it gains in another. And both t^gether do very handsomely make out
and expl^in, how the Earth in a natural way, may be reduced to its primitive
state in the Creation, when the Waters covered the Land. But this according to
the (...) proceedings of Nature, would not come to pass in many Ages, I might
say, in Ages of Ages: Nay, some think, that those vast Ridges and Chains of
Mountains, which run through the middle of the Continents, are by reason of
their great height, weight and solidity, too great a Morsel ever to be devoured
by the Jaws of the Sea. But whether they be or not, I need not dispute, though
I incline to the Negative, because this is not the dissolution the Apostle here
speaks of, which must be by Fire.

But I must not here dissemble an Objection I see may be made, and that is,
That the Superficies of the Earth is so far from being depressed, that it is
continually elevated. For in ancient Buildings, we see the Earth raised high
above the foot of them. So the Pantheon at Rome, which was at first ascended up
to by many [eight] Steps, is now descended down to by as many. The Basis and
whole Pedestal of Trajan's Pillar there was buried in the Earth.

Dr. Tancred Robinson in the year 1683. observed in some places, the Walls of
old Rome, to lie Thirty and Forty Foot under Ground; so that he thinks the
greater part of the Remains of that famous Ancient City is still buried, and
undiscovered; the prodigious heaps of Ruins and Rubbish enclosed within the
Vineyards and Gardens being not half dig'd up or searched, as they might be,
the tops of Pillars peeping up and down. And in our own Country we find many
Ancient Roman Pavements at some depth under Ground My Learned and Ingenious
Friend Mr. Edward Loyd, not long since informed of one, that himself had seen
buried deep in the Churchyard at Wychester in Glocestershire. Nay, the Earth
in time will grow over and bury the Bodies of great Timber Trees, that have
been ^allen, and lie long upon it; which is made one great reas^n, that such
great numbers (even wh^^, Woods) of Subterraneous Trees are frequently met
with, and dug up at vast depths in the Spanish and Dutch Netherlands, as well
as in many places of this Island of Great Britain.

To which I answer, as to Buildings, 1. The Ruins and Rubbish of the Cities
wherein they stood, might be conceived to bury them as deep as they now lie
under ground. And by this means it is likely the Roman Pavements we find, might
come to be covered to that height we mentioned. For that the places where they
occur, were anciently Roman Towns subverted and ruined, may easily be proved;
as particularly in this we mentioned, from the Termination Ches^er; whatever
Town or Village has that addition to its Name, having been anciently a Roman
Town or Camp: Chester seeming to be nothing but Castra.

2. It is to be considered, That weighty Buildings do in time overcome the
resistance of the Foundation, unless it be a solid Rock; and sink into the
ground.

Nay, the very soft Water, lying long upon the bottoms of the Sea or Pools,
does so compress and sadden them by its weight, that the very Roads that are
continually beaten with Horses and Carriages, are not so firm and sad: And in
the Sea, the nearer you dig to the Low Water-Mark; still the sadder and firmer
it is: and it is probable still, the further the sadder; which seems to be
confirmed by the strong fixing of Anchors. [This firmness of the Sand, by the
weight of the incumbent Water, the People inhabiting near the Sea are so
sensible of, that I have seen them boldly ride through the Water cross a
Channel three Miles broad, before the Tide was out, when in some places it
reached to the Horses Belly.] A semblance whereof, we have in Ponds, which being
newly dug, the Water that runs into them, sinks soon into the Earth, and
they become dry again, till after some time, by often filling, the Earth
becomes so solid, through the weight of the Water, that they leak no more, but
hold Water up to the brink. Witty Scarborough Spaw, p. 86.

What force a gentle, if continual pressure has, we may understand also by the
Roots of Trees, which we see will sometimes pierce through the Chinks of Stone
Walls, and in time make great Cracks and Rifts in them; nay, will get under
their very Foundations. The tender Roots of Herbs overcome the resistance of
the ground, and make their way through Clay or Gravel. By the by, we may here
take Notice, that one reason why plowing, harrowing, si^ting, or any
comminution of the Earth, renders it more fruitful, is, because the Roots of
Grass, Corn, and other Herbs can, with more facility, creep abroad, and
multiply their Fibers in the light and loose Earth.

That the rotting of Grass, and other Herbs upon the ground, may in some places
raise the Superficies of it, I will not deny; that (...), ^n Gardens and
Enclosures, where the Ground is rank, and no Cattle are admitted (...) eat off
the Fog or long Grass: but elsewhere, the raising of the Superficies of the
Faith is very little and inconsiderable; and none at all, unless in level
Grounds, which have but little declivity: For otherwise the Soil would by this
time have come to be of a very great depth, which we find to be but shallow.
Nor do I think, that so much as the Trunks of fallen Trees, are by this means
covered; but rather, that they sink by their own weight, in time overcoming the
resistance of the Earth, which without much difficulty yields, being soaked and
softened by the Rains insinuating into it, and keeping it continually most in
Wintertime. But if these Buildings be situate in Valleys, it is clear, that
the Earth brought down from the Mountains by Rain, may serve to land them up.
Again, the Superficies of the Earth may be raised near the Sea Coast, by the
continual blowing up of Sand by the Winds. This happens often in Norfolk, and
in Cornwall, where I observed a fair Church, viz. that of the Parish called
Lalant, which is the Mother Church to St. Ives, and above two Miles distant
from the Sea, almost covered with the Sand; little being extant above it, but
the Steeple and Ridge of the Roof. Nay, a great part of St. Ives itself lies
bu^ied in the Sand: and I was told there, that in one Night there had been a
whole Street of Houses so covered with Sand, that in the Morning they were fain
to dig their way out of their Houses through it. All along the Western Shore of
Wales, there are great Hills of Sand thus blown up by the Wind. We observed
also upon the Coast of Flanders and Holland, the like sandy Hills, or Downs,
from which Westerly Winds drive the Sand a great way into the Country. But
there are not many places liable to this Accident, viz. where the bottom of the
Sea is sandy, and where the Wind most frequently blows from off the Sea; where
the Wind sets from the Land toward the Sea this happens not; where it is
indifferent, it must in reason carry off as much as it brings on, unless other
Causes hinder.

SECT. II.
The Second possible Cause of the World's Destruction in a Natural Way, the
Extinction of the Sun.
II. THE possibility of the Sun's extinction. Of which Accident I shall give an
Account in Dr. More's words, in the last Chapter of his Treatise of the
Immortality of the Soul. This (says he) though it may seem a Panick Fear at
first sight; yet if the matter be thoroughly examined, there will appear no
contemptible Reasons that may induce Men to suspect, that it may at last fall
out, there having been at certain times such near Offers in Nature toward this
sad Accident already. Pliny speaks of it as a thing not unfrequent, that there
should be, Prodigiosi and longiores Solis defectus, qualis occiso Dictatore
Caesare and Antoniano bello, totius anni pollore continuo, Hist. Not. lib. 2.
cap. 30. Prodigious and lasting defects of the Sun, such as happened when
Caesar the Dictator was slain; and in the War with Anthony, when it was
continually pale and gloomy for a whole Year. The like happened in Iustinian's
time, as Cedrenus writes; when for a whole Year together the Sun was of a very
dim and duskish Hue, as if he had been in a perpetual Eclipse: And in the time
of Irene the Empress, it was so dark for seventeen days together, that the
Ships lost their way in the Sea, and were ready to run one against another, as
Theophanes reports. But the late accurate Discovery of the Spots of the Sun by
Scheiner, and the appearing and disappearing of Fixed Stars and Comets, and the
excursions of these last, do argue it more than possible, that after some vast
Periods of Time, the Sun may be so inextricably inveloped by the Maculae, that
he may quite lose his Light; and then you may easily guess what would become of
the Inhabitants of the Earth. For without his vivisick heat, neither could the
Earth put forth any Vegetables for their sustenance; neither if it could, would
they be able to bear the extremity of the Cold, which must needs be more
rigorous, and that perpetually, than it is now under the Poles in Winter time.
But this accident, though it would indeed extinguish all Life, yet being quite
contrary to a Dissolution by Fire, of which the Apostle speaks, I shall pass it
over without further consideration, and proceed to a Third.

SECT. III.
The Third possible Cause of the World's Destruction, The Eruption of the
Central Fire.
III. THE Possibility of the Eruption of the Central Fire, if any such there
be, enclosed in the Earth. It is the Hypothesis of Monsieur des Carts, that
the Earth was originally a Star, or great Globe of Fire, like the Sun, or one
of the Fixed Stars, situate in the Center of a Vortex continually whirling round
with it. That by degrees it was covered over, or incrustated with Maculae,
arising on its Surface, like the Scum on a boiling Pot, which still increasing
and growing thicker and thicker, the Star losing its light and activity, and
consequently the motion of the Celestial Vortex about it growing more weak,
languid, and unable to resist the vigorous incroaehments of the neighboring
Vortex of the Sun; it was at last drawn in, and wholly absorpt by it, and
forced to comply with its motion, and make one in the Quire of the Sun's
Satellites. This whole Hypothesis I do utterly disallow and reject. Neither did
the Author himself (if we may believe him) think it ture, that the Earth was
thus generated. For he says, Quinimo ad res naturales melius explicandas,
earum causas altius hic repetam quam ipsas unquam extitisse existimem. Non enim
dubium est, quin mundus ab initio fuerit creatus cum omni sua perfectione, ita
ut in eo and Sol, and Terra, and Luna, and Stellae extiterint -- Hoc fides
Christiana nos docet; hocque etiam ratio naturalis plane persuadet. Attendendo
enim ad immensam Dei potentiam, non possumus existimare illum unquam quidquam
fecisse, quod non omnibus suis numeris fuerit absolutum. That is, Moreover, for
the better explicating of Natural Things, I shall bring them from higher or
more remote Causes than I think they ever had. For there is no doubt, but the
World was originally created in its full perfection, so that in it were
contained both Sun and Moon, and Earth and Stars, etc. For this the Christian
Faith teaches us, and this also Natural Reason does plainly persuade; for
attending to the immense Power of God, we cannot think that he ever made any
thing that was not complete in all points. But tho he did not believe that the
Earth was generated, or formed according to his Hypothesis, yet surely he was
of Opinion, that it is at present such a Body as he represented it after its
perfect Formation, viz. with a Fire in the middle, and so many several Crusts
or Coats enclosing it: else would he have given us a mere Figment or Romance
instead of a Body of Philosophy.

But though I do reject the Hypothesis; yet the being of a Central Fire in the
Earth is not, so far as I understand, any way repugnant to Reason or Scripture.
For first of all, the Scripture represents Hell as a Lake of Fire, Mark 9. 43,
44, etc. Revel. 20. 10, 14, 15. and likewise as a low place beneath the Earth.
So Pslam 86. 13. and Deuteronomy. 32. 22. it is called the nethermost hell. Prove. 15.
24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.
2. Many of the Ancients understand that Article of the Creed; He descended into
Hell, of our Savior's Descent into that local Hell beneath the Earth, where he
trimphed over the Devil, and all the Powers of Darkness. And particularly
Irenaeus interprets that saying of our Savior, That the Son of man should be
three days in the heart of the earth, of his being three days in the middle of
the Earth, which could not be meant (says he) of the Sepulcher, because that
was hewn out of a Rock in its Superficies. 3. It is a received Opinion among
the Divines of the Church of Rome, that Hell is about the Center of the Earth:
insomuch as some of them have been solicitous to demonstrate that there is room
enough to receive all the Damned, by giving us the Dimensions thereof.

Neither is it repugnant to the History of the Creation in Genesis. For though
indeed Moses does mention only Water and Earth, as the component parts of this
Body; yet does he not assert that the Earth is a simple, uniform, homogeneous
Body; as neither do we, when we say, Upon the face of the earth, or the like.
For the Earth, we see, is a Mass made up of a multitude of different Species of
Bodies, Metals, Minerals, Stones, and other Fossils, Sand, Clay, Marle, Chalk,
etc. which do all agree in that they are consistent and solid more or less, and
are in that respect contradistinguished to Water; and together compound one
Mass, which we call Earth. Whether the interior parts of the Earth be made up
of so great a variety of different Bodies, is to us altogether unknown. For
though it be observed by Colliers, that the Beds of Coals lie one way, and do
always dip toward the East, let them go never so deep; so that, would it quit
cost, and were it not for the Water, they say, they might pursue the Bed of
Coals to the very Center of the Earth, the Coals never failing or coming to an
end that way; yet that is but a rash and ungrounded Conjecture. For what is the
depth of the profoundest Mines, were they a Mile deep, to the Semidiameter of
the Earth? not as one to four thousand. Comparing this Observation of Dipping
with my Notes about other Mines, I find that the Veins or Beds of all generally
run East and West, and dip toward the East. Of which what Account or Reason
can we give, but the motion of the Earth from West to East? I know some say,
that the Veins, for Example, of Tin and Silver, dip to the North, though they
confess they run East and West, which is a thing I cannot understand, the Veins
of those Metals being narrow things. Sir Tho. Willoughby, in his forementioned
Letter writes thus, -- "I have talked with some of my Colliers about the lying
of the Coal, and find, that generally the Basset end (as they call it) lies
West, and runs deeper toward the East, allowing about twenty Yards in length to
gain one in depth; but sometimes they decline a little from this posture; for
mine lie almost South-West, and North-East. They always sink to the East more
or less. There may therefore, for ought we know, be Fire about the Center of
the Earth, as well as any other Body, if it can find a Pabulum, or Fuel there
to maintain it. And why may it not? since the Fires in those subterraneous
Caverns of Aetna, Vesuvius, Stromboli, Hecla, and other burning Mountains or
Vulcano's, have found wherewith to feed them for Thousands of Years. And as
there are at some, though uncertain Periods of Time, violent Eruptions of Fire
from the Craters of those Mountains, and mighty Streams of melted Materials
poured forth from thence: so why may not this Central Fire in the Earth, (if
any such there be) receiving accidentally extraordinary supplies of convenient
Fuel, either from some inflammable Matter within, or from without, rend the
thick exterior Cortex which imprisons it, or finding some Vents and Issues
break forth and overflow the whole Superficies of the Earth, and burn up all
things. This is not impossible, and we have seen some Phenomenon in Nature
which bid fair toward a Probability of it. For what should be the reason of
new Stars appearing and disappearing again; as that noted one in Cassiopeia,
which at first shone with as great a luster as Venus, and then by degrees
diminishing, after some two Years vanished quite away? but that by great
supplies of combustible Matter, the internal Fire suddenly increasing in
quantity and force, either found, or made its way through the Cracks or Vents
of the Maculae which enclosed it, and in an instant, as it were, overflowed the
whole surface of the Star, whence proceeded that illustrious Light; which
afterward again gradually decayed, its supply failing. Whereas other newly
appearing Stars, which either have a constant supply of Matter, or where the
Fire has quite dissolved the Maculae, and made them comply with its motion,
have endured for a long time, as that which now shines in the Neck of Cygnus,
which appears and disappears at certain Intervals.

But because it is not demonstrable that there is any such Central Fire in the
Earth, I propose the eruption thereof rather as a possible than probable means
of a Conflagration: and proceed to the last means whereby it may naturally be
effected; and that is:

SECT. IV.
The Fourth Natural Cause of the World's Dissolution, the Earth's Dryness and
Inflammability.
IV. THE Dryness and Inflammability of the Earth under the Torrid Zone, with
the eruption of the Vulcano's to set it on fire. Those that hold the
Inclination of the Equator to the Ecliptic daily to diminish, so that after
the Revolutions of some Ages they will jump and consent, tell us, that the
Sunbeams lying perpendicularly and constantly on the parts under the Equator,
the Ground thereabout must needs be extremely parched and rendered apt for
Inflammation. But for my part I own no such Decrement of Inclination. And the
best Mathematicians of our Age deny that there has been any since the eldest
Observations that are come down to us. For though indeed Ptolomy and Hipparchus
do make it more than we find it by above twenty Minutes, yet that Difference is
not so considerable, but that it may well be imputed to the Difference of
Instruments, or Observations in point of Exactness. So that not having
decreased for Eighteen hundred Years past, there is not the least ground for
Conjecture, that it will alter in Eighteen hundred Years to come, should the
World last so long. And yet if there were such a Diminution, it would not
conduce much (so far as I can see) to the bringing on of a Conflagration. For
though the Earth would be extremely dried, and perchance thereby rendered more
inflammable; yet the Air being by the same Heat as much rarefied, would contain
but few nitrous Particles, and so be inept to maintain the Fire, which, we see,
cannot live without them: It being much deaded by the Sun shining upon it; and
burning very remisly in Summer time, and hot Weather: For this reason in
Southern Countries, in extraordinary hot Seasons, the Air scarce suffices for
Respiration. To the clearing up of this, let us a little consider what Fire is.
It seems to consist of three different sorts of parts. 1. An extremely thin and
subtle Body, whose Particles are in a very vehement and rapid motion. 2. (A
supposed) Nitrous Pabulum or Fuel, which it receives from the Air. 3. A
Sulphurous or unctuous Pabulum, which it acts and preys upon, passing
generally by the Name of Fuel. This 'fore-mentioned subtle Body agitating the
(supposed) Nitrous Particles it receives from the Air, does by their help, as
by Wedges, to use that rude similitude, penetrate the unctuous Bodies, upon
which it acts, and divide them into their immediate component Particles, and at
length perchance into their first Principles: which Operation is called the
Chemical Anatomy of mixed Bodies. So we see Wood, for Example, divided by Fire
into Spirit, Oil, Water, Salt, and Earth.

That Fire cannot live without those Particles it receives from the Air is
manifest, in that if you preclude the access of all Air, it is extinguished
immediately: and in that, where and when the Air is more charged with them. as
in cold Countries, and cold Weather, the Fire rages most: That likewise it
cannot be continued without an unctuous Pabulum or Fuel, I appeal to the
Experience of all Men.

Now then in the rarefied Air in the Torrid Zone, the nitrous Particles being
proportionably scattered and thin set, the Fire that might be kindled there
would burn but very languidly and remisly, as we said just now: And so the
Eruptions of Vulcano's, if any such happened, would not be like to do half the
Execution there that they would do in cold Countries. And yet I never read of
any spreading Conflagration caused by the Eruptions of any Vulcano's, either in
hot Countries, or in cold. They usually cast out abundance of thick Smoke like
Clouds darkning the Air: and likewise Ashes and Stones, sometimes of a vast
bigness; and some of them, as Vesuvius, Floods of Water; others, (as Aetna)
Rivers of melted Materials, running down many Miles: as for the Flames that
issue out of their Mouths at such times, they are but transient, and mounting
upwards, seldom set any thing on fire.

But not to insist upon this, I do affirm, that there has not as yet been, nor
for the future can be any such drying or parching of the Earth under the Torrid
Zone, as some may imagine. That there has not yet been I appeal to Experience,
the Countries lying under the Course of the Sun, being at this day as fertile
as ever they were, and wanting no more Moisture now than of old they did;
having as constant and plentiful Rains in their Seasons as they then had. That
they shall for the future suffer any more Drought than they have heretofore
done, there is no reason to believe or imagine, the Face of the Earth being not
altered, nor naturally alterable, as to the main, more at present than it was
heretofore. I shall now add the Reason, why I think there can be no such
Ex^iccation of the Earth in those parts. It Is true indeed, were there nothing
to hinder them, the Vapors exhaled by the Sunbeams in those hot Regions, would
be cast off to the North, and to the South, a great way, and not fall down in
Rain there, but toward the Poles; But the long and continued Ridges or Chains
of exceeding high Mountains are so disposed by the great and wise Creator of
the World, as, at least in our Continent, to run East and West, as Gassendus in
the Life of Peireskius well observes, such are Atlas, Taurus, and the Alps, to
name no more: They are, I say, thus disposed as if it were on purpose to
obviate and stop the Evagation of the Vapors Northward, and reflect them back
again, so that they must needs be condensed, and fall upon the Countries out of
which they were elevated. And on the South Side, being near the Sea, it is
likely that the Wind, blowing for the most part from thence, hinders their
excursion that way. This I speak by presumption, because in our Country for at
least three quarters of the Year the Wind blows from the great Atlantic Ocean:
which was taken notice of by Julius Caesar in the Fifth of his Commentaries, De
Bello Gallico. Corus ventus, qui magnam partem omnis temporis in his locis
flare consuevit.

As for any Desiccation of the Sea, I hold that by mere natural Causes to be
impossible, unless we could suppose a Transmutation of Principles or simple
Bodies, which for Reasons alleged in a former Discourse I cannot allow. I was
then, and am still of Opinion, that God Almighty did at first create a certain
and determinate number of Principles, or variously figured Corpuscles,
intransmutable by the force of any natural Agent, even Fire itself, (which can
only separate the Parts of heterogeneous Bodies) yet not an equal number of
each kind of these Principles, but of some abundantly more, as of Water, Earth,
Air, Ether; and of others fewer, as of Oil, Salt, Metals, Minerals, etc. Now
that there may be some Bodies indivisible by Fire, is, I think, demonstrable.
For how does, or can Fire be conceived to divide, one can hardly imagine any
other way than by its small parts, by reason of their violent Agitation
insinuating themselves into compound Bodies, and separating their parts; which
allowing, yet still there is a term of Magnitude, below which it cannot divide,
viz. it cannot divide a Body into smaller parts than those whereof itself is
compounded. For taking, suppose, one least Part of Fire, it is clear that it
cannot insinuate itself into a Body as little or less than itself: and what is
true of one is true of all: I say, we can imagine no other way than this,
unless perchance by a violent stroke or shock, the parts of the Body to be
divided may be put into so impetuous a motion as to fall in sunder of
themselves into lesser Particles than those of the impellent Body are, which I
will not suppose at present. Now it is possible, that the Principles of some
other simple Bodies may be as small as the Particles of Fire. But however that
be, it is enough, if the Principles of simple Bodies be by reason of their
perfect solidity naturally indivisible. Such a simple Body, I suppose, Water
separated from all Heterogeneous Mixtures to be: and consequently the same
quantity thereof that was at first created, does still remain, and will
continue always in despite of all natural Agents, unless it pleases the
Omnipotent Creator to dissolve it. And therefore there can be no Desiccation of
the Seas, unless by turning all its Water into Vapor, and suspending it in the
Air, which to do, what an immense and long-continuing Fire would be requisite?
to the maintenance whereof all the inflammable Materials near the Superficies
of the Earth would not afford Fuel enough. The Sun, we see, is so far from
doing it, that it has not made one step toward it these four thousand Years,
there being in all likelihood as great a quantity of Water in the Ocean now as
was immediately after the Flood: and consequently there would probably remain
as much in it, should the World last four thousand Years longer.

This Fixedness and Intransmutability of Principles secures the Universe from
Dissolution by the prevailing of one Element over another, and turning it into
its own Nature; which otherwise it would be in continual danger of. It secures
likewise the perpetuity of all the Species in the World, many of which, if
their Principles were transmutable, might by such a change be quite lost: And
lastly bars the Production or Creation of any new Species, as in the
forementioned Treatise I have shown.

CHAP. IV.
Containing an Answer to the Second Question, Whether shall this Dissolution be
effected by natural or by extraordinary Means, and what they shall be?
2. AS to the Second Question, Whether shall this Dissolution be brought about
and effected by natural or by extraordinary Means and Instruments, and what
those Means and Instruments shall be? I answer in brief, that the Instrumental
Efficient of this Dissolution shall be natural. For it is clear both by
Scripture and Tradition, and agreed on all hands, that it shall be that
Catholic Dissolvent, Fire. Now to the being and maintenance of Fire, there are
four things requisite. I. The active Principle or Ether. 2. Air, or a Nitrous
Pabulum received from it: These two being commixt together, are everywhere at
hand. 3. Fuel, which considering the abundance of combustible Materials, which
are to be found in all places upon or under the Surface of the Earth, can no
where be wanting. 4. The Accension and the sudden and equal Diffusion of this
Fire all the World over. And this must be the Work of God, extraordinary and
miraculous.

Such a Dissolution of the World might indeed be effected by that natural
Accident mentioned in the Answer to the Precedent Question, viz. The Eruption
of the Central Fire. But because it is doubtful, whether there be any such Fire
in the middle of the Earth or no: and if there ever were, it is hard to give an
account, how it could be maintained in that infernal Dungeon for want of Air
and Fuel. And because, if it should break forth in the Consistency of a thin
Flame, it would in all likelihood speedily like Lightning mount up to Heaven,
and quite vanish away; unless we could suppose Floods, nay Seas of melted
Materials, or liquid Fire, enough to overflow the whole Earth, to be poured
forth of those Caverns. For these Reasons I reject that Opinion, and do rather
think that the Conflagration shall be effected by a superficial Fire. Though I
must confess we read in Tacitus, Annal. 13. at the end, of a sort of Fire that
was not so apt to disperse and vanish. " -- The City of the Inhonians in
Germany (says he) confederate with us was afflicted with a sudden Disaster:
for Fires issuing out of the Earth, burned Towns, Fields, Villages everywhere,
and spread even to the Walls of a Colony newly built, and could not be
extinguished neither by Rain, nor River-water, nor any other Liquor that could
be employed, until for want of Remedy, or Anger of such a Distraction, certain
Peasants cast Stones afar off into it; then the Flame somewhat slacking,
drawing near, they put it out with Blows of Clubs, and other like, as if it had
been a wild Beast; last of all, they threw in Clothes from their Backs, which
the more worn and fouler they were, the better they quenched the Fire. I use
Dr. Hakewil's Translation.

CHAP. VII.
The Third Question answered. Whether shall this Dissolution be Gradual and
Successive, or Momentaneous and Sudden?
3. THE Third Question is, Whether shall this Dissolution be gradual and
successive, or momentaneous and sudden?

I answer, The Scripture resolves for the latter, The day of the Lord shall
come as a thief in the night: a similitude we have often repeated in Scripture,
as in the tenth Verse of this Chapter, in 1 Thessalonians. 15. 2. Rev. 3. 3. and 16.
15. And the Resurrection and Change of Things, it is said shall be in a moment,
in the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15. 52. Consonant whereto both the
Epicureans and Stoics held their Dissolutions of the World should be sudden
and brief, as Lucretius and Seneca in the place 'fore-mentioned tell us. And it
is suitable to the nature of Fire to make a quick dispatch of things, suddenly
to consume and destroy.

And as it shall be sudden, so also shall it be unexpected, being compared to
the coming of the Flood in the Days of Noah, Mat. 24. 37, 38, 39. But as the
days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For as in the
days that were before the flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and
giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark: And knew not
until the flood came and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the
Son of man be. And the raining of Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom. Luke 17.
Thessal. 5. 3. For when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden
destruction comes upon them as travail upon a woman with child. Now if it
shall be thus sudden and unexpected, it is not likely there should be in Nature
any manifest Tendency to it, or remarkable Signs and Forerunners of it: for
such must needs startle and awaken the World into an expectation and dread of
it. That there is at present no such Tendency to Corruption, but that the World
continues still in as good state and condition as it was two thousand Years
ago, without the least impairment or decay, has been, as we before noted,
without any possibility of contradiction clearly made out and demonstrated by
Dr. Hakewill in his Apology: and therefore, arguing from the past to the (...)
vangelist had told us, That there shall be Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon,
and in the Stars -- the Sea and the Waves roaring; he adds, as a Consequent
thereof, Verse 26. Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after
those things that are coming on the Earth. And indeed, how could any Man
possibly be buried in so profound a Lethargy of Senslessness and Security, as
by such stupendous Prodigies not to be rowsed and awakened to an expectation
of some dismal and tremendous Event? How could he sing a Requiem to his Soul,
and say Peace and Safety, when the World so manifestly threatens Ruin about his
Ears? For the reconcil^ng of these Expressions to this sudden coming of our
Savior to Judgment, it were most convenient to accept them in the Figurative
and Metaphorical Sense. For if we understand them of the Ruin, and Devastations
of Cities and Countries, and Changes of Governments, the Subversions of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, the Falls and Deposings of Princes, Nobles and
Great Men; these happening more or less in every Age, though the serious and
inquisitive Christian, who searches and understands the Scriptures, may discern
them to be the Signs of the World's Catastrophe; yet the careless and
inconsiderate, the vicious and voluptuous are not like to be at all startled or
moved at them, but may notwithstanding, looking upon them as ordinary and
insignificant Accidents, Dormire in utramque aurem, sleep securely till the
last Trump awaken them. Or it may be answered, That these Prophecies do belong
to the Destruction of Jerusalem only, and so we are not concerned to answer
that Objection.

CHAP. IX.
The Fifth Question answered; At what Period of Time shall the World be
dissolved?
5. THE Fifth Question is, At what Period of Time shall the World be dissolved?
I answer, This is absolutely uncertain and indeterminable. For since this
Dissolution shall be effected by the extraordinary Interposition of Providence;
it cannot be to any Man known, unless extraordinarily revealed. And our Savior
tells us, That of that Day and Hour knows no Man, no not the Angels of Heaven,
etc. Matthew. 24. 36. And again, Acts 1. 17. It is not for us to know the Times
and the Seasons, which the Father has placed in his own power. And this Dr.
Hakewill brings as an Argument that the World decays not, neither tends to
Corruption; because if it did, the time of its actual Dissolution might be
collected and foretold; which, says he, the Scripture denies. We may invert
this Argumentation, and infer; Because the World does not decay, therefore the
time of its Dissolution cannot be known.

But yet notwithstanding this, many have ventured to foretell the Time of the
End of the World, of whom some are already confuted, the Term prefixed being
past, and the World still standing. Lactantius in his time said, Institut. lib.
7. cap. 15. Omnis expectatio non amplius quam ducentorum videtur annorum; The
longest expectation extends not further than two hundred years. The continuance
of the World more than a Thousand years since convinces him of a gross Mistake.
Paulus Grebnerus a high Pretender to a Spirit of Prophecy, sets it in the Year
1613. induced thereto by a fond Conceit of the Numeral Letters in the Latin
Word Iudicium. Other Enthusiastical Persons of our own Country have placed it
in the Years 1646. and 1656. The event shows how ungroundedly and erroneously.
Others there are, whose Term is not yet expired, and so they remain still to be
confuted. Du (...).
As those who conceit that the end of the World shall be when the Pole Star
shall come to touch the Pole of the Equator, which (say they) ever since the
time of Hipparchus has approached nearer and nearer to it. That it does so I
am not satisfied; but if it does, it is merely accidental, and has no
Connection with the End of the World. But the most famous Opinion, and which
has found most Patrons and Followers even amongst the Learned and Pious, is
that of the Worlds duration for Six thousand years. For the strengthening of
which Conceit they tell us, That as the World was created in six days, and then
followed the Sabbath, so shall it remain six thousand years, and then shall
succeed the Eternal Sabbath. Hebr. 4. 9. * (...), etc. There remains therefore
a Rest or Sabbath to the People of God. Here we see that the Apostle institutes
a Comparison between the Heavenly Rest and the Sabbath. Therefore as God rested
upon the Seventh Day, so shall all the World of the Godly rest after the Six
Thousandth year. For ^he that has entered into his rest, cease from all his,
Works as God did from his. Of this Opinion were many of the Ancient Fa^^ers, as
I showed before, grounding themselves upon this Analogy between the six days of
the Creation and the Sabbath; and the six thousand years of the Worlds
duration, and the Eternal Rest: For, says Irenoeus in the place before quoted,
Hoc autem, (that is, the History of the six days Creation and succeeding
Sabbath) est and proeteritorum narratio, and futurorum prophetia. Dies enim
unus mill annos significat, sicut Scriptura testatur: 2 Pet. 3. 8. Psalm. 90.
4. the Scriptures reckoning days of One thousand years long, as in Verse 8. of
this Chapter, and in Psalm. 90. 4. This is likewise a received Tradition of the
Jewish Rabbis, registered in the Talmud, in the Treatise Sanhedrim, delivered
(as they pretend) by the Prophet Elias the Tishbite to the Son of the Woman of
Sarepta, whom he raised from the Dead, and by him handed down to Posterity. I
rather think with Reuterus, that the Author of it was some Rabbi of that Name.
The Tradition is, Sex millia annorum erit mundus: and uno millenario vastatio,
i. e. Sabbathum Dei: Duo millia inane: Duo millia Lex: Duo millia dies Messioe.
Two thousand years vacuity: Two thousand years of the Law: Two thousand years
the days of the Messiah. But they shoot far wide: For according to the least
account, there passed a far greater number of years before the Law was given,
2513. says Reuterus, and on the contrary less time from the Law to the
Exhibition of the Messiah. All these Proofs laid together, do scarce suffice to
make up a probability. Neither do those Rabbinical Collections from the six
Letters in (...) the first word of Genesis, or from the six Alephs in the first
Verse of that Book, each signifying a thousand years; or from the six first
Patriarchs in the order of the Genealogy to Enoch, who was caught up to Heaven,
and found no more, add much weight to this Opinion. S. Austin very modestly
concludes, after a Discussion of this Point concerning the Worlds duration, Ego
tempora dinumerare non audeo: nec aliquem Prophetam de hac re numerum annorum
existimo praefinivisse. Nos ergo quod scire nos Dominus noluit libenter
nesciamus. I dare not calculate and determine times: neither do I think that
concerning this matter, any Prophet has predicted and defined the number of
years. What therefore the Lord would not have us to know, let us willingly be
ignorant of.

But though none but presumptuous persons have undertaken peremptorily to
determine that time, yet was it the common and received Opinion and Persuasion
of the Ancient Christians, that that day was not far off? and had they been to
limit it, they would hardly have been induced to set the term so forward, and
remote from their own Age, as by experience we find it proves to be, but in
their own times, or shortly after; and many places of Scripture seem to favor
that Opinion, so that some have presumed to say, that the Apostles themselves
were at first mistaken in this particular, till after further illumination they
were better informed. But though this be too bold a Conceit, yet that the
Churches, at least some of them, did at first mistake the Apostles meaning in
their Sermons and Epistles concerning this Point, and so understand them, as to
think that the End of the World and final Judgment was at hand, appears from 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. I beseech you, Brethren, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be
troubled, neither by Spirit, nor by Word, nor by Letter, as from us, as that
the day of Christ is at hand. We see the Apostle labors to rectify, and for
the future to prevent this Mistake: so likewise the Apostle Peter in the 8th
and 9th Verses of this Chapter. And yet this Opinion had taken such deep root
in them, that it was not easy to be extirpated; but continued for some Ages in
the Church. Indeed there are so many places in the New Testament which speak of
the Coming of Christ as very near, that if we should have lived in their time,
and understood them all as they did, of his Coming to Judge the World, we could
hardly have avoided being of the same Opinion. But if we apply them (as Dr.
Hammond does) to his Coming to take Vengeance on his Enemies, then they do not
hinder, but that the Day of Judgment, I mean the General Judgment, may be far
enough off. So I leave this Question unresolved, concluding that when that Day
will come God only knows.

CHAP. X.
How far this Conflagration shall extend.
6. A Sixth Question is, How far shall this Conflagration extend? Whether to
the Ethereal Heavens, and all the Host of them, Sun, Moon and Stars, or to the
Aereal only?

I Answer, If we follow Ancient Tradition not only the Earth, but also the
Heavens and heavenly Bodies will be involved in one common Fate, as appears by
those Verses quoted out of Lucretius, Ovid, Lucan, etc.

Of Christians some exempt the Ethereal Region from this Destruction: for the
two following Reasons, which I shall set down in Reuterus 's words. 1. Because
in this Chapter the Conflagration is compared to the Deluge in the time of
Noah. But the Deluge extended not to the upper Regions of the Air, much less to
the Heavens, the Waters arising only fifteen Cubits above the tops of the
Mountains, if so much. Therefore neither shall the Conflagration transcend that
term. So Beza upon 2 Pet. 3. 6. Tantum ascendet ille ignis quantum aqua altior
supra omnes montes. That fire shall ascend as high as the Waters stood above
the Mountains. This passage I do not find in the last Edition of his Notes. The
ordinary Gloss also upon these words, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 2. In flaming fire rendering
vengeance, says Christum venturum praecedet ignis in mundo, qui tantum
ascendet quantum aqua in diluvio. There shall a fire go before Christ when he
comes, which shall reach as high as did the Water in the Deluge. And S.
Augustine De Civit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 18. Petrus etiam commemorans factum ante
diluvium, videtur admonuisse quodammodo, quatenus in fine hujus seculi istum
mundum periturum esse credamus. Peter also mentioning the Ancient Deluge, seems
in a manner to have advised us how far at the consummation of time, we are to
believe this World shall perish.

But this Argument is of no force, because it is not the Apostle's design in
that place to describe the limits of the Conflagration, but only against
Scoffers, to show, that the World should one day perish by fire, as it had of
old been destroyed by Water.

2. The second Reason is, Because the Heavenly Bodies are not subject to
Passion, alteration or corruption. They can contract no filth, and so need no
expurgation by fire.

To this we answer, not in the words of Reuter, but our own, That it is an idle
and ill grounded conceit of the Peripateticks, That the Heavenly Bodies are of
their own nature incorruptible and unalterable: for on the contrary it is
demonstrable, that many of them are of the same nature with the Earth we live
upon, and the most pure, as the Sun, and probably too the fixed Stars, suffer
Alterations; maculoe or opaque Concretions being commonly generated and
dissolved in them. And Comets frequently, and sometimes New Stars appear in the
Etherial Regions. So that these Arguments are insufficient to exempt the
Heavens from Dissolution; and on the other side many places there are in
Scripture which seem to subject them thereto: As Psalm. 102. 25, 26. recited
Hebr. 1. 10. which has already often been quoted, The Heavens are the Works of
thy Hands; They shall perish. Matthew. 24. 35. Heaven and Earth shall pass away.
Isa. 65. 17. and 51. 6. The Heavens shall vanish away like smoke. Yet am I not
of opinion, that the last Fire shall reach the Heavens; They are too far
distant from us to suffer by it: nor indeed does the Scripture affirm it; but
where it mentions the Dissolution of the Heavens, it expresses it by such
Phrases as seem rather to intimate, that it shall come to pass by a
consenescency and decay, than be effected by any sudden and violent means.
Psalm. 102. 25, 26. They all shall wax old as does a Garment, etc. Though I
confess nothing of Certainty can be gathered from such Expressions; for we find
the same used concerning the Earth; Isa. 51. 6. The Heavens shall vanish away
like smoke, and the Earth shall wax old as does a garment. The heavenly Bodies
are none of them uncorruptible and eternal; but may in like manner as the Earth
be consumed and destroyed, at what times and by what means, whether Fire or
some other Element, the Almighty has decreed, and ordered.

CHAP. XI.
Whether shall the Whole World be consumed and annihilated, or only refined and
purified?
THere remains now only the Seventh Question to be resolved, Whether shall the
World be wholly consumed, burnt up and destroyed, or annihilated; or only
refined, purified, or renewed? To this I answer, That the latter part seems to
me more probable, viz. That it shall not be destroyed and annihilated, but only
refined and purified. I know what potent Adversaries I have in this case. I
need name no more than Gerard in his Common Places, and Dr. Hakewil ^n his
Apology and the Defense of it, who contend earnestly for the Abolition or
Annih^lation. But yet upon the whole matter, the Renovation or Restitution
seems to me most probable, as being most consonant to Scripture, Reason, and
Antiquity. The Scripture speaks of an (...), or Restitution, Acts 3. 21. Whom
the Heavens must contain until the time of the restitution of all things.
Speaking of our Savior: and (...), or Regeneration of the World, the very word
the Stoics and Pythagoreans use in this case, Mat. 19. 28, 29. Verily, I say
unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of
man shall sit on the Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
Thrones, etc. Psalm. 102. 26. As a vesture shall thou change them, and they
shall be changed. Which words are again taken up and repeated, Heb. 1. 12. Now
it is one thing to be changed, another to be annihilated and destroyed. 1 Cor.
7. 31. (...) The fashion of this world passes away. As if he had said, It
shall be transfigured, or its outward form changed, not its matter or substance
destroyed. Isa. 65. 17. Behold I create new Heavens and a new Earth, and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. Isa. 66. 22. As the new
Heavens and new Earth, which I shall make, shall remain before me. To which
places the Apostle Peter seems to refer in those words, 2 Pet. 3. 13.
Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new Heavens, and a new
Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. This new Heaven and new Earth we have
also mentioned, Rev. 12. 1. And I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth: for the
first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea.
These places, I confess, may admit of an Answer or Solution by those who are of
a contrary Opinion, and are answered by Doctor Hakewil: yet all together,
especially being backed by ancient Tradition, amount to a high degree of
probability. I omit that place, Romans 8. 21, 22. The creature itself also shall
be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God: though it be accounted the strongest proof of our Opinion, because
of the obscurity and ambiguity thereof.

2. For Antiquity, I have already given many Testimonies of the ancient Fathers
and Doctors of the Church, and could, if need were, produce many more, the
whole stream of them running this way. And though Dr. Hakewill says, That if we
look back to higher times before S. Hierome, we shall not easily find any one
who maintained the World's Renovation: yet has he but two Testimonies to
allege for its Abolition; the one out of Hilary upon the Psalms, and the other
out of Clemens his Recognitions. To this Restitution of the World after the
Conflagration many also of the Heathen Philosophers bear witness; whose
Testimonies Mr. Burnet has exhibited in his Theory of the Earth, lib. 4. cap.
5. Of the Stoics, Chrysippus de Providentia, speaking of the Renovation of the
World, A^ud ^a^lant. l 7. c. 23.
says, (...). We after death, certain Periods of time being come about, shall
be restored to the form we now have. To Chrysippus Stobaeus adds Zeno and
Cleanthes, and comprehends together with Men all natural things, (...). Zeno
and Cleanthes and Chrysippus were of Opinion, That the Nature or Substance of
Things changes into Fire, as it were into a Seed; and out of this again* such a
World or Frame of Things is effected as was before. This Revolution of Nature
^ntoninus in his Meditations often calls (...), The Periodical Regeneration of
all things. And Lib. 5.
Origin against Celsus ^aith of the Stoics in general. (...) The Stoics say,
That at certain Periods of time there is a Conflagration of the Universe; and
after that a Restitution thereof having exactly the same Disposition and
Furniture the former World had. More to the like purpose concerning the
Stoics, we have in Praep. Evang. l. 15.
Eusebius out of Numenius. Nature, faith he, returns, (...), to the
Resurrection which makes the Great Year, wherein there is again a restitution
made from it self alone to it self. For returning according to the order
wherein it began first to frame and dispose things, (as reason would) it again
observes the same Economy or Administration; the like Periods returning
et^rnally without ceasing. He that desires more Authorities of the Heathen
Philosophers and Poets in consirmation of the World's Restitution after the
Conflagration, may consult the same Mr. Burnet in the place forequoted; where
he also shows, that this Doctrine of the Mundane Periods was received by the
Grecians from the Nations they call barbarous. Pythagoras, says Porphyry,
brought it first into Greece: and Origin witnesses of the Egyptian Wise Men
that it was delivered by them. Laertius out of Theopompus relates, That the
Persian Magi had the same Tradition: and Berosus says, that the Chaldeans
also. In fine, among all the barbarous Nations, who had among them any Person
or Sect, and Order of Men, noted for Wisdom or Philosophy, this Tradition was
current. The Reader may consult the Book we refer to, where is a notable
passage taken out of Plutarch's Tractate, Di Iside and Osiride, concerning a
War between Oromazes, and Arimanius, somewhat parallel to that mentioned in the
Revelation between Michael and the Dragon.

3. The Restitution of the World seems more consonant to Reason than its
Abolition. For if the World were to be annihilated, what needed a
Conflagration? Fire does not destroy or bring things to nothing, but only
separate their parts. The World cannot be abolished by it, and therefore had
better been annihilated without it. Wherefore the Scripture mentioning no other
Dissolution than is to be effected by the Instrumentality of Fire, its clear,
we are not to understand any utter Abolition or Annihilation of the World* but
only a Mutation and Renovation, by those phrases of perishing, passing away,
dissolving, ^eing no more, etc. They are to be no more in that state and
condition they are now in.

2. There must be a material Heaven, and a material Hell left. A place for the
glorified Bodies of the Blessed to inhabit and converse in; and a place for the
Bodies of the Damned, a (...), or Prison for them to be shut up in. Now if the
place of the Blessed be an Empyreal Heaven far above these visible Heavens, as
Divines generally hold; and the place of the Damned be beneath, about the
middle of the Earth; as is the Opinion of the Schoolmen, and the Church of
Rome, and as the name Inferi imports, and as the ancient Heathen described
their Tartarus, -- (...) Hom. II.

(...),
(...).
Then when all the intermediate Bodies shall be annihilated, what a strange
Universe shall we have? Consisting of an immense Ring of Matter, having in the
middle a vast vacuity, or space void of all Body, save only one small point for
an infernal Dungeon. Those that are of this Opinion have too narrow and mean
thoughts of the Greatness, I had almost said Immensity of the Universe, the
glorious and magnisick Products of the Creator's Almighty Power: and are too
partial to themselves, to think the whole World was created for no other end
but to be serviceable to Mankind: But of this I have said somewhat in a former
Discourse, and therefore shall not at present enlarge upon it.

But let us hear what they have to say for the Abolition.

Their first and most weighty Argument is taken from the End of the World's
Creation, Hakewil's Apol. l. 4. c. 13. sect. 5.
which was partly and chie^ly the Glory of the Creater, and partly the use of
Man, the Lord Dep^ty, as it were, or Viceroy thereof. Now for the Glory of the
Creator, it being by the admirable Frame of the World manifested unto Man, Man
being removed out of the World, and no Creature being capable of such a
Manifestation besides him, we cannot imagine to what purpose the Frame itself
should be left, and restored to a more perfect Estate. The other End, being for
Man's Use, either to supply his Necessity in matter of Diet, of Physic, of
Building, of Apparel; or for his Instruction, Direction, Recreation, Comfort
and Delight; or lastly, that therein, as in a Looking-glass he might
contemplate the Wisdom, the Goodness and Power of God: when he shall attain
that blessed Estate, as he shall have no further use of any of these, enjoying
perfect Happiness and seeing God as he is, face to face, the second or
subordinate End of the World's Being must needs be likewise frustrate. And what
other End can be given or conceived for the remaining or restoring thereof? etc.

To this I answer, there may be an end of the restoring of the World, though we
are not able to find out or determine what. We are too short-sighted to
penetrate the Ends of God. There may be a new Race of rational Animals brought
forth to act their parts upon this Stage, which may give the Creator as much
Glory as Man ever did or could. And yet if there should be no material and
visible rational Creature made to inhabit the Earth, there are spiritual and
intellectual Beings, which may be as busy, and as much delighted in searching
out, and contemplating the Works of God in this new Earth, and rendering him the
Praise of his Wisdom and Power as Man could be. These things we may conjecture;
but we must leave it to the only wise God to determine what use shall be made
of it. It seems to me to be too great presumption, and over-valuing our selves
to think that all this World was so made for us, as to have no other end of its
Creation; or that God could not be glorified but by us.

This first and principal Argument being answered, the second admits of an
easy Solution. They enquire whether the Vegetables, and Creatures endued with
Sense shall all be restored, or some only? namely such as shall be found in
being at the Day of Judgment. If all, where shall we find Stowage for them?
Surely we may in this case properly apply that which the Evangelist in another
uses figuratively, if they should all be restored, even the World itself could
not contain the things which should be restored. If some only, then would I
gladly know, why those some should be vouchsafed this great Honor, and not
all, or how those Creatures without a Miracle shall be restrained from
propagating and multiplying, and that infinitely in their kinds by a perpetual
Generation. Or lastly, How the several Individuals of these kinds, shall
contrary to their primitive Natures, live and dure immortally?

To all this I answer, That not only all Animals, but all Vegetables too, yea,
and their Seeds also, will doubtless be mortified and destroyed by the violence
of the Conflagration; but that the same should be restored, and endued with
eternal life, I know no reason we have to believe; but rather that there should
be new ones produced, either of the same with the former, or of different
kinds, at the will, and by the power of the Almighty Creator, and for those
Ends and Uses for which he shall design them. This Question being answered in
this manner, all that follows concerning the Earth remaining without any
Furniture or Inhabitants, etc. falls to the Ground. So I have dispatched these
Seven Questions concerning the Dissolution of the World, there remains now only
the Inference or Use of the precedent Doctrine.

CHAP. IX.
The Apostle's Inference from the precedent Doctrine.
I Come now to the Inference the Apostle makes from the precedent Doctrine,
What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness?
One word here needs a little explication, and that is holy; What is meant by a
holy conversation.

Holiness is an Equivocal Term. It is attributed either to God, or to the
Creature. When it is attributed to God, it signifies either,

1. The unspotted Purity of his Nature, and the constant and immutable
rectitude of his Will. So it is taken, 1 John 3. 3. And every man that has
this hope in him purifieth himself as he is pure: and 1 Pet. 1. 15. As he which
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation: Because it is
written, be ye holy for I am holy. Psalm. 145. 17. The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works.

2. His Sovereign Majesty and Greatness, appearing in his transcendent Wisdom
and Power, in his Supreme and Absolute Dominion over all things: in respect
whereof, he is called the Holy One of Israel, and his Name is said to be Holy:
that is, to be invoked with the greatest reverence. Holy and reverend is his
Name. Because of this his Greatness and Excellency he is to be worshipped and
adored with the most submissive humility and veneration, with a transcendent
and incommunicable Worship and Devotion.

When Holiness is attributed to Creatures, it signifies either an Inherent and
Inward, or a Relative or Outward, Holiness.

1. Inherent or Inward Holiness is a Conformity of Heart and Life to the Will
of God: or as Bishop Wilkins's Universe. Charact.
others define it, An habitual Frame of Mind: whereby we are fitted for
Virtuous Actions, but more especially for the Duties of Religion: Indeed
Holiness does always include a reference to God.

2. Relative or Outward Holiness results from a Separation and setting apart
any thing from a profane and common, and applying it to a Sacred or Religious
Use. For the Majesty of God, who at first created, and continually sustains and
governs all things, being so great and inviolable, all Persons, Things, and
Times, and Places, and Ceremonies separated and appropriated to his Service and
Worship, are by all Nations esteemed Sacred, and to have a Character of
Holiness imprinted on them.

By Holiness in this place, is to be understood an inherent Holiness, which is
well defined by Dr. Outram, De Sacris. l. 1. c. 1.
a Conformity of Heart and Life to the Will of God. I shall not discourse at
large concerning a holy Conversation, nor instance particulars wherein it
consists. That would be to write a Body of Practical Divinity: I shall
therefore at present suppose the Reader sufficiently instructed in that. My
business shall be to show the strength of the Apostle's Inference.

It may be said, How does this Dissolution concern us, who may perchance be
dead and rotten a thousand Years before it comes? What have we to do with it?

I answer, It concerns us, 1. Because it is possible it may happen in our times;
it may surprise us before we are aware. The precise time thereof is uncertain.
And it shall be sudden and unexpected, coming as a Thief in the Night, as we
have before shown; therefore we ought always to be upon our guard, to have our
loins girt about and our lights burning. This use the Scripture in many places
makes of the uncertainty, of the time of Christ's coming, Luke 12. 40. Be ye
therefore ready: for the Son of Man comes at an hour when ye think not, Luke
21. 34, 35. And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so
that day come upon you unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them that
dwell on the whole earth. Parallel whereto are Matthew. 24. 42. and Mark 13. 33,
35. That it shall come is certain, when it shall come is uncertain, and it
every day draws nearer and nearer, therefore it is not wisdom to remove the
evil day far from us: and as in reference to the day of Death, it is an usual
and prudent advice, so to live every day, as if it were our last day; or at
least, as we would not be afraid to do should it be so: because we are sure,
that one day will be our last, and for ought we know, the present may be it: so
likewise it is rational Counsel in respect of the End of the World, so to
prepare our selves for it by a holy Conversation, that we may get above the
terror and dread which will otherwise attend the apprehension of the approach
of it: and that we may be provided against the worst that may follow; and be
secure come what can come.

Secondly, It concerns us, should it be a thousand Years to come. Because then
is the general Resurrection both of the just and unjust, Acts 24. 15. and the
general Judgment, When we must all appear before the dreadful tribunal of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad. 2. Cor. 5. 10. which, Romans 2. 5.
is called the revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Who will render to
every man according to his deeds, etc. Upon this account, I say, it concerns us
much how we have our Conversation here.

First, As we hope to be acquitted at that day, and to enter into those new
Heavens, in which dwells righteousness. Holiness is a necessary condition and
antecedent to happiness. Necessary I say,

1. By God's appointment, Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord. Romans 6. 22. Have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end eternal life. Psalm. 50. ult. To him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God. Eternal Life is the Gift
of God. He is not obliged to bestow it upon any Man. He may make what Condition
he pleases for the obtaining of it. No Man has any Right to it: No Man can lay
any claim to it, but from this Donation, and from the performance of these
Conditions. Rev. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they
may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the
city. For without are dogs and whoremongers, and sorcerers, etc. All the Right
they have depends upon God's Promise, which is conditionate, and accrues to
them by the performance of the Condition, which is the doing of his
Commandments.

2 Necessary, not only by God's appointment, but in the very nature of the
thing. Holiness is the very quality and complexion of Heaven. No Man without it
is qualified to be a subject of that Kingdom: For thereinto nothing that is
impure or unclean can enter. Revel. 21. 27. And there shall in no wise enter
into it [the New Jerusalem] any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works
abomination. In this new Heaven dwells righteousness. 2 Pet. 3. 15. Therefore
1 John 3. 3. Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is
pure. Heaven would naturally spue out and eject a wicked Person, as one
heterogeneous to it. Heaven and Hell are not more distant in Place, than they
are in Nature. There is not more antipathy between fire and water, between
light and darkness, between straight and crooked, neither are they more
incompatible, or do more naturally resist and expel one another, than holiness
which is the quality of Heaven, and wickedness which is the disposition and
temper of Hell. Some do think Heaven to be rather a state, than a place; and
that he that is partaker of the Divine Nature has Heaven within him. This is
true, but this is not all. The whole Notion of Heaven comprehends both a state
and a place. A Man must be in a heavenly state, before the local Heaven can
receive him, or he brook it. Heaven without him would be no Heaven to the Man
who has not Heaven within him. A wicked Person could find no business or
employment in Heaven; nothing to satisfy his corrupt and depraved affections,
inclinations, and appetites. He would there meet with no suitable company; no
persons whose conversation he could take any delight and complacency in, but
rather hate and abhor. For what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? or what communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6. 14. Like
naturally loves like, and unites with it, and does refuse, resist, and hate
that which is unlike it. For every thing is made to love itself; and
consequently whatsoever resembles and comes near it, and is as it were a
replication of it; and to hate the contrary. As therefore we would be glad to
be Partakers of the blessedness of the local Heaven, so let us endeavor to get
into our Minds and Spirits the qualities and conditions of Heaven; that so we
may be fit Subjects for that Kingdom, sit Companions for that Society. This is
the time allotted us to purify our selves from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God. There is no invention
in the Grave whither we are going, Eccles. 9. 10. Upon this moment depends
eternity. As the tree falls so it it lies, Eccles. And as Death leaves, so will
Judgment find us. Quando isthinc excessum fuerit, nullus jam locus poenitentiae
est. Hic vita aut amittitur, aut tenetur: Hic saluti aeternae cultu Dei and
fructu fidei providetur. Cyprian Sermon. de Immortal. After we shall depart hence
there remains no more place for repentance. Eternal life is here, either lost
or won. Here provision is made for everlasting salvation by the worship of God,
and fruit of faith. We must work while it is day, the night [of death] comes
wherein no man can work, John 9. 4. And therefore the time our Bodies shall
rest in the Grave, should it be a thousand Years, will little avail us: for if
the Soul be mean while awake, the certain and dreadful expectation of the
Sentence of Condemnation to an eternal Hell at the Day of Judgment, will be
little less afflictive than the Torments thereof themselves. I might add by way
of Digression, that Sin and Wickedness is naturally productive of Hell in the
Soul. A wicked Man carries Hell in his Breast. Sin necessarily infers Misery:
It is contrary to the nature of the Soul, and whatsoever is so must needs be
grievous. Diversion and Non-Attention to his Condition, is the wicked Man's
only Security: I have heard it often from a Doctor Witchcot.
great Divine in his Sermons, That there is but a Thought's distance between a
wicked Man and Hell. For do but fix and bind his Thoughts to the Consideration
of his Life and Actions, and he will anticipate Hell himself, he shall need no
infernal Furies to lash him, he will be his own Tormentor: Such a Man's
Pressures will be heavy enough, should the Divine Nemesis superadd no more. The
Reason of this I have given in a former Discourse, and therefore shall now omit
what else might have been added on this particular.

Conversation in all Holiness, as we desire to avoid that Shame and Misery
which will then otherwise certainly befall us.

1. As we desire to avoid that Shame which will cover our Faces at that day. If
here Shame and Disgrace be more grievous and insupportable than Death itself,
what will it be then, when the Soul shall be rendered more quick and
apprehensive and sensible of such Impressions? There is nothing shameful but
sin, nothing else has any natural Turpitude in it. Shame follows Sin as the
Shadow does the Body: He that will commit the one cannot avoid the other.
Therefore such wicked Persons as have not quite renounced Modesty, and lost all
Sense of Shame, especially if guilty of secret Crimes, the Consideration of a
future Judgment would be a powerful Curb to restrain them from Sin for the
future: because then God will produce and bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and disclose and make manifest the counsels of all hearts. 1 Cor. 4.
5. Then he will judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2. 16. Then will
he bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, Eccles. 12. 14. For
would they but consider and ponder what Confusion will overwhelm them when this
shall be done in the face of the whole World, and before all that knew them,
and they not able to make any denial, or excuse. This, I say, if any thing,
would be a powerful Curb to withhold them from those Enormities to which this
shame is appendant. It may be thou made a great Figure in the World for Piety
and Religion, would seem to be Somebody in the Eyes of Men, when thou were
false and unsound, did harbor and nourish some Viper in thy Bosom, Introrsum
turpis, speciosa pelle decorus: When thy secret Faults shall be exposed before
thy Neighbors, and Friends, and Children, And the shame of thy nakedness shall
be made to appear, Revel. 3. 18. How will thou then be confounded and
astonished, and unable to list up thy Head? What horror will then seize thee,
When thy confusion shall be continually before thee, and the shame of thy face
shall cover thee? Psalm 44. 15. It concerns thee therefore to look about thee
in time, and search thy Conscience to the Bottom to remove whatever grates, to
cast out whatever offends, though never so customary, never so pleasing to
Flesh and Blood: to apply thy self to the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ
Jesus for the Expiation of what is past; and for the future to resolve and
endeavor the amendment of whatsoever has heretofore been amiss in thee; and
to beg the assistance of the Divine Grace to strengthen in thee every good
purpose and resolution of heart, and to enable thee to bring it to issue and
effect. And for thy security, I think it good Advice, to resolve so to behave
thy self in thy Retirements, so to live in the secret of thy Chamber and
Closet, as though the Doors were thrown open upon thee, and all the Eyes of the
World beheld thee; as though thou were it in the Arena of a Public Theater,
exposed to the view of Men and Angels. I remember the ingenious Writer of
Politic Discourses, Boccalini, does often divert himself and his Reader, with
facetious Reflections upon the contrivance of a Window into the Breast; which,
if I mistake not, be fathers upon Lipsius. However he may deride it, I think it
would be prudent Counsel to give and take, for every Christian. So to live and
carry it in the secret of his Heart, as if there were a Window into his Breast,
that every one that passed by, might look in thereat, and see all the thoughts
and imaginations that passed there, that found any entertainment or acceptance
with him. For though indeed God searches the hearts and reins, and
understands our thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139. 2. Yet such is the hypocrisy
of Mankind, that they do for the most part more reverence the Eyes of Men, than
of God: and will venture to do that in his presence, which they would be
ashamed the Eyes of Man should see them doing. You will say, Is it not better
to be modest, than to be impudent? Is it not better to conceal, than to publish
ones shame? Is it not better to reverence Man, than neither God nor Man? Does
not the Scripture condemn a Whore's Forehead? Is it not a true Proverb, Past
Shame, Past Grace? Was it not good Advice of a Cardinal (as I remember) Si nou
cast, tamen caute? He that has devoured shame, what Bridle is there left to
restrain him from the worst of evils? I answer, That it seems indeed to me,
that public sins of the same nature, are more heinous than s^cret; and that
impudence in sinning, is an aggravation of sin. For open sins dare God, and bid
defiance to Heaven, and leave the Sinner unreclaimable, and are of more
pernicious influence. I do not now speak of the hypocrisy of seigning holiness
to serve our own ends, which is rightly esteemed duplex iniquitas, but that of
concealing and hiding vicious actions, to avoid the shame of Men. And yet there
is a great obliquity in this too. Because even this is a slighting and
undervaluing of God, a preferring of Man before him, setting a greater price
and esteem upon the praise and commendation of Men, than the praise and
approbation of God, John 12. 43. God sees the secretest Actions, yea, the most
retired thoughts. They that believe this, and yet make bold to do in his
presence, what the fear of Man's Eye would restrain them from, it is clear that
they reverence Man more than God, a poor frail, impotent Creature like
themselves, more than the most pure and ever blessed Creator. Nay, let the
Temptation to any sin be never so strong, and the natural inclination never so
vehement, if the knowledge and conscience of Men be a motive and consideration
powerful enough to enable us to resist and repel them, had we but as firm a
belief of the presence and inspection of God, and as great a reverence and
dread of him, Why should not these have the same influence and effect upon us?
Let us then avoid the hypo^risie of desiring to be thought better than we are,
by endeavoring to our utmost to be as good as we would be thought to be, and
if possible, better. So shall we satisfy our selves that we seek the praise of
God, more than the praise of Men.

Here before I proceed, I cannot but admire the Wisdom and Goodness of Almighty
God, in implanting such a Passion in the Nature of Man as Shame, to no other
use or purpose, that I can imagine, than to restrain him from vicious and
shameful Actions. A Passion I call it, because the Body, as in other Passions,
suffers from it, and that in a peculiar manner; it causing a sudden motion of
the Blood to the outward parts, especially to the Face, which is called
blushing; and a dejection of the Eyes. If you ask me what Shame is, I answer,
It is an ungrateful and afflictive sense of Soul proceeding from Dishonor. Now
Dishonor is nothing else but Men's ill Opinion of me, or dislike and
condemnation of my Actions, some way declared and manifested to me; which why I
should have such an abhorrence of, and why it should be so grievous and
tormenting to me, there seems not to be a sufficient ground and foundation in
the nature of the thing, supposing such as have this Opinion, have neither
power nor will to hurt my Body: but only in the Ordination of God, who has so
made our Natures, to secure our Innocence, and with hold us from the commission
of what is disgraceful and ignominious, as all sinful Actions, and none else
are.

And as for secret sins, I think shame may take place there too. It was a
precept of the Pythagoreans, (...), Of all Men reverence your self most: be
ashamed to do that before your self, which before others you would abhor or
blush to do; otherwise you must suffer dishonor from your self, and condemn
your own Actions, which will in all reason be more grievous and afflictive than
the ill Opinion and Word of other Men. Hence Conscience of sin is esteemed a
most painful and tormenting thing, by the generality of all Mankind, tho no
other Man be privy to it.

But to return from whence we digressed, though Daniel 12. 2.
shame and everlasting contempt shall at the general Resurrection be the
portion of them who persist and die in their sins, yet a serious and unfeigned
Repentance, attested by a holy Conversation for the future, is an effectual
means to deliver us from this shame, whatever our forepast sins have been. For
they shall not be produced against us, they shall not be objected to us at that
day; they shall be buried in eternal silence and oblivion, and be as though they
had not been. And this Opinion I hold, 1. More agreeable to the Scripture,
which in this matter makes use of the Terms of hiding, and covering, and
blotting out, and forgetting, Psalm 32. 1. Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, Esaias 43. 25. I, even I am
he, that blotteth out thy transgressions, and will not remember thy sins. So
Psalm 51. 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
Jerem. 48. 34. I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more.
Ezekiel. 28. 22. All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not he
mentioned unto him, Mich. 7. 19. Thou will cast all their sins into the depths
of the Sea. And as it is more consonant to the Scripture, so is it, 2. More
grateful and consolatory to the Penitents. For the mere mentioning and reciting
of their sins before such an Assembly, must needs refresh their shame and
sorrow, and so diminish their happiness and joy. To which I might add, that it
is written, our Savior at the last Judgment, in pron^uncing the Sentence,
shall enumerate the Good Works of the Godly to their praise; but not a word
said of producing their sins. I say, I hold this Opinion more probable upon
these accounts, than theirs who affirm they shall then be published, for the
magnifying and advancing, the declaring and illustrating the Mercy and Grace of
God, in pardoning so great and heinous Offenses.

And truly, I do not know, but that the sins of the Blessed may be blotted out,
even of their own Memories. Some Philosophers who were of Opinion, that Souls
prae-exist before their Bodies, thought they were dipped in Lethe, which is a
Fountain causing Oblivion, by means whereof they forgot whatever they had done
before. This I look upon as a dream, or Fancy: but truly I am inclinable
sometimes to imagine, that the Soul of Man can hardly be entirely happy, unless
it be as it were thus dipped in Lethe: for every sinful Action having a natural
Turpitude in it, and being dishonorable, how can the Memory and thought of it,
but beget such an ungrateful Passion as Shame, even to Eternity? And what do
Divines mean by saying, that the action [of sinning] suddenly passes away, but
the stain and blot of it remains; but that a vicious action, even by them to
whom it is pardoned, can never be thought of without grief and disturbance, it
leaves an indelible scar in the Soul, which can never be perfectly healed and
obliterated.

2. It concerns us much to live in all holy Conversation in this World, as we
desire to avoid that Pain and Misery, which we shall otherwise most certainly
be adjudged to at that day: that indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish, which God shall render to them that do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, Romans 2. 8. That worm that dies not, and that fire that is not
quenched, Mark 9. 44. and 46, and 48. That outer darkness, where is weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 8. 12. and 22. 13. and 25, 30, That
furnace of fire, Matthew. 13. 42. 50. That lake of fire and brimstone, Revel. 20.
10. or of fire burning with brimstone, Revel. 19. 20. Which places, though they
be not literally to be expounded, yet do they import at least a very sad and
deplorable Estate, a high degree of torment and anguish: and all this eternal
and without intermission night and day. These shall go into everlasting
punishment, Mat. 25. 46. The state of the Damned is supposed to be a state of
absolute and complete Misery, made up of the loss of the greatest Good, and a
constant, fresh, and lively apprehension of it: which Divines call Poena Damni.
And, 2. Excess of bodily pain and sufferings, and sad distress and Trouble of
Mind, occasioned by all manner of frightful Apprehensious, and vexatious
Perturbations and Reflections, which they call Poena Sensus; and this without
any intermission or hope of deliverance eternally. Jude 7. it is called the
vengeance of eternal fire. Revel. 14. 11. The smoke of their torment is said to
ascend up for ever and ever. And Revel. 20. 10. it is said of the Beast and
false Prophet, that they shall be tormented night and day for ever and ever. If
this be so, is it not our greatest Wisdom to use our utmost diligence and
endeavor to avoid so deplorable a Condition, and to secure to our selves an
interest in a future estate of everlasting (...) and Happiness when this Life
shall be ended?

But here the Epicureans, and sensual Persons will be ready to object and
argue, Here are Pleasures and Delights in this World, which are very inviting
and taking, and do highly gratify my Senses and Appetites. I hear likewise of
future Rewards and Punishments for those that deny or fulfill their carnal Lusts
and Desires. These sensual Pleasures I see and taste, and feel, and am sure of,
the other I do but only hear of, and therefore they do not, they cannot so
strongly affect me: Were Heaven and the Happiness thereof set before my eyes,
and did I see it as plainly and clearly as I do these things below, then indeed
I should not need many motives to provoke me to endeavor the obtaining of it.
But alas, that is far above, out of our sight, the Joys of Heaven are by the
Apostle termed things not seen. Again, these outward, and temporal enjoyments
are present and easily obtainable; the other at a great distance, future, and
besides, very hard to come by; and I love my ease, Vt est ingenium hominum a
labor proclive ad libidinem. Should I deny my self Good in this Life, and then
perchance cease to be, and so have no Reward for my pains; nay, on the contrary
expose my self to the hazard of many afflictions and sufferings, which are the
portion of the Godly in this Life, how unnecessarily shall I make my self
miserable? Miserable I say, because by the Apostle's own confession Christians,
If in this life only they had hope, would be of all men the most miserable, 1
Cor. 15. 19 Had I not better make sure of what is before me? Why have I these
Appetites within me, and such Objects about me, the one being so suitable to
the other, is it not more natural and reasonable to fulfill, than deny them?
Surely it cannot be Wisdom to lose a certain Good, for an uncertain Hope; and
for an ungrounded fear of Hell hereafter, to undergo a Purgatory here.

To this Argumentation upon the false Foundation of the uncertainty of a Future
Estate of endless Happiness or Misery, accordingly as we have behaved our
selves in this Life, I answer,

That for the futurity of such an estate, we have the best Authority in the
World, to wit, the holy Scriptures, and universal Tradition.

1. The Holy Scriptures, whose Authority to be more than humane, has been by
many so clearly and convincingly demonstrated, that I shall take it for
granted, and not waste time to prove it. The Testimonies herein contained
concerning eternal Happiness and Misery are so clear and full, that it seems to
me impossible without manifest distortion to elude or evade the force of them.
Some we have already recited, and might produce many more, Isa. 33. 14. Who
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? Dan. 12. 2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of
the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9 Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, etc. speaking of them who know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Isa. 66. 24. For their
worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched.

The Origenists, and others, that cannot be reconciled to the Catholic
Doctrine of the Eternity of the Punishments of the Damned, make the word (...),
from which the Latin aevum is derived, to signify sometimes a determinate
time, as might (say they) easily be proved by many examples, and so (...) or
(...), which we translate for ever, signifies when applied to this matter, a
long indeed, but yet a finite time; and (...), which we render for ever and
ever, may likewise signify not an eternal duration, but a time to which some
term may be set by God, though to us unknown. In the same sense they accept the
Adjective (...) for a long, but finite time. But I am of S. Augustine's
Opinion, that (...) does in the New Testament signify the same with aeternus
in Latin, and is appropriated to things that have no end: and that (...), for
ever and ever, does in like manner always denote eternal or endless duration.
That the word (...), when applied to the state of the Damned, does signify
eternal. S. Augustine well demonstrates from the Antithesis in that place of
Matthew. 25. 46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal. Where it is in the same sense attributed to that
Life which is the Reward of the Righteous, and that Fire which is the
Punishment of the Damned; there being no reason to believe that the same word
in the same Verse, when applied to opposites, should be taken in a different
sense. But by the confent of all Christians it is granted, that the Life of the
Blessed shall be eternal, therefore so must the Punishment of the Damned be too.

This acception of the word (...) for eternal or endless, when it refers to the
state of those miserable Persons, receives a further and strong confirmation
from the

Second Particular we proposed, that is, Universal Tradition: It being a
received Opinion among the Heathen, which must needs descend down to them by
Tradition from the Ancients, that Eternal Punishments awaited the Wicked after
Death.

What more common Notion among the Grecians and Romans, than of an Elysium, and
Tartarus? the former to reward good Men, the latter to punish wicked. And those
too esteemed to be Eternal States. Of this the Epicurean Poet Lucretius is a
sufficient and unexceptionable Witness: For he makes the fear of these
Punishments to be the cause of all the Miseries of Humane Life, and the
Foundation of all Religion,

Aeternas quoniam poenas in morte timendum. Now, that he could derive this from
no other source but Tradition, is clear; because he lived a good while before
our Savior's time, and the divulgation of the Scripture among the Heathen. And
because it may be objected, that Aeternas may signify only of long
continuance, to put the Matter out of all doubt, in another place he says, --
Nam si nullum finem esse putarent,
Aerumnarum homines, nulla ratione valerent
Relligionibus atque minis obsistere vatum.
-- But if it once appear
That after Death there is neither Hope nor Fear.
Then Men might freely triumph, then disdain
The Poet's Tales, and scorn their fancied Pain.
But now we must submit, since Pains we fear
Eternal after Death, we know not where.


And that this Opinion and Belief generally prevailed among the People before
Epicurus his time, the same Lucretius testifies in the beginning of his first
Book, Humana ante oculos foede cum vita jaceret
In terris oppressa gravi sub Relligione, etc.
Primum Graius homo, etc.
Long time Men lay oppressed with slavish fear,
Religion's Tyranny did domineer,
Which being placed in Heaven, looked proudly down,
And frighted abject Spirits at her frown
At last a Mighty One of Greece began
T'assert the Natural Liberty of Man,
By senceless Terrors, and vain Fancy led
To Slavery, straight the conquered Fantoms fled.
for he makes (as we saw before) the Fear of Eternal Pain and Misery, to be the
Foundation of all Religion.

1. Now because these Objectors do represent Religion to themselves and others
as a melancholic and disconsolate thing: and think and say, that those that
enter into this state, must bid adieu to all the Pleasures of Sense, and taste
no sweetness in any worldly Object. I shall endeavor to remove this prejudice.
I say therefore, That our gracious God does not envy us any real Good that the
Creatures can afford us, and therefore has not denied us a moderate use and
fruition of any of them. And seeing he has annexed Pleasure to those Actions
that are necessary for the support of life, and continuation of kind, as a bait
to invite us to the performance of them, it seems to me highly absurd and
contradictious to affirm, that he has forbidden us to partake or taste those
Enjoyments which himself has appointed as effectual means for the security of
those great Ends; and which are so necessary Consequents of those Actions, that
we cannot but partake them. Where the Appetite is eager, God has indulged, I
might say, commanded a moderate and regular satisfaction. And we know, nay, the
blindness of Atheism cannot deny, that the greatest pleasure results from a
moderate and well circumstantiated use of Pleasures. Voluptates commendat
rarior usus. Now a Religious Man enjoys all the Pleasures of these worldly and
sensible Goods, without any of the pain, which is annexed to the excessive and
irregular use, or indeed abuse of them: and besides, his Pleasure is enhansed,
in that he beholds and receives them as Blessings of God, and Tokens of his
Favor and Affection; and is without all fear of a future sad Reckoning for his
participation of them. Howbeit a denial of our selves for God's sake and cause
in any thing which we might otherwise lawfully enjoy, though it be not
commanded, yet is accepted, and shall be rewarded by him.

Others there are who grant, That these words grammatically signify as we
contend, and that Eternal Punishments are indeed threatened to the wicked; but
say they, these Threatenings are intended only, as Terriculamenta, or Bug-bears
to Children, to terrify and keep People in awe, and to preserve the World in
some tolerable condition of quietness. And Origin himself, though he be of
opinion, that these Threatenings signify only temporary Pains; yet he says,
that such Mysteries are to be sealed up and concealed from the Vulgar, left
wicked Men should rush into sin with all fury and licentiousness, if this
Bridle were taken off, who by the opinion and fear of eternal and endless
Punishments can scarce be deterred and restrained from it.

To this I answer, 1. That it seems to me indecorous and unsuitable to the
Person and Majesty of God, to make use of such sorry and weak means to bring
about his ends, as grave Men can hardly condescend to. 2. I do not see how it
can consist with his Veracity, in plain terms, absolutely to threaten and
affirm what he never intends to do.

Indeed it is questionable, Whether it be allowable in Man: it being a best but
an officious Lie: for it is a speaking what we do not think, and that with an
intention to deceive.

Secondly, I proceed now to a second Objection against the Eternity of the
Pains and Sufferings of the Damned, and that is, its inconsistency with the
Justice of God. What proportion can there be between a transient and temporary
act, and an eternal Punishment? The most rigid Justice can exact no more than a
Talio, to suffer as I have done. (...). If I have hurt, or grieved, or injured
any Man, to be punished with the same, or an equivalent suffering: if I have
taken any unreasonable Pleasure, to compensate it with an answerable Pain.
Indeed the enormities of my Life cannot well deserve so much, if it be
considered, that I have been strongly instigated and inclined, and as it were
fatally driven upon all the Evils which I have committed, by those Affections
and Appetites, which I made not for my self, but found in my self; and have
been exposed to strong and almost inexpugnable Temptations from without; beset
with Snares, encompassed about with innumerable Evils.

To this I answer First, That every sin, injury, or offense is aggravated and
enhansed by the dignity or merit of the Person against whom it is committed. So
Parricide is esteemed a greater Crime than ordinary Murder, and by the Laws of
all Nations avenged with a sorer Punishment. The like may be said of Laesa
Majestas, or Treason. Now God is an infinite Person, and Sin being an injury
and affront to him, as being a violation of his Law, an infinite Punishment
must be due to it.

This answer Dr. Hammond in his Practical Catechism, lib. 5. sect. 4. accounts
a Nicety, and unsatisfactory, as also that other common answer, That if we
should live infinitely, we would sin infinitely; and therefore gives us
another, which in his Discourse of the Reasonableness of Christian Religion, he
thus briefly sums up.

2. That the choice being referred to us to take of the two which we best like,
eternal Death set before us on the one hand, to make eternal Life the more
infinitely reasonable for us to choose on the other hand, and the eternal Hell
(whenever we fall into it) being perfectly our own Act, neither forced on us
by any absolute Decree of God, nor irresistible temptation of the Devil, or our
own Flesh; but as truly our wish and choice, and mad purchase; nay, much more
truly and properly, than eternal Heaven is (when our Obedience is first wrought
by God's Grace, and yet after that so abundantly rewarded by the Doner) it is
certain, if there be any thing irrational, it is in us unkind and perverse
Creatures (so obstinate to choose what God so passionately warns us to take heed
of; so wilfully to die, when God swears he wills not our death) and not in him,
who has done all that is imaginable to be done to reasonable Creatures (here
in their way or course) to the rescuing or saving of us.

But to this may be replied, If the thing itself be unjust, how can our choosing
of it make it just? How can it be just to annex such a Penalty as eternal Hell
to a short and transient offense? Suppose a Prince should make a Law, that
whosoever did not rise up and bow himself before an Old Man, should be put to
Death with Torments; and one of his Subjects knowingly should transgress this
Law upon some great temptation; would it not be accounted Cruelty in the Prince
to execute this Law upon him? Laws may be unjust upon account of
disproportionate Penalties. Neither does our Choice much help the Matter, for
that is but an effect of our Error or Folly, or, if you will, Madness, which
does as little deserve eternal Death as the Sin committed does.

If any Man be dissatisfied with the precedent Answers, all that I have to add
further, is, that before this Sentence adjudging to eternal Death be pronounced
against him, and executed upon him, there shall be such a revelation made, as
shall convince and satisfy him of the Righteousness thereof. And this the
Apostle seems to intimate, Romans 2. 5. when he calls the Great Day of Doom, the
Day of the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. Then shall be made
appear what now to our dim-sighted Reason is not penetrable; how the Justice of
God can consist with the Eternal Damnation of the wicked.

As for Man's being as it were fatally determined to Evil by the strength of
Temptation, and the violence of unruly and headstrong Passions and Appetites: I
answer, That there are motives and considerations sufficient to enable a Man to
resist and repel, to conquer and overcome the most alluring and fascinating
Temptations, the most urging and importunate Appetites or Affections; such are
certain Shame and Disgrace, and that not long to come, eternal Infamy and
Dishonor; present Death, strong fear and dread of approaching Death, or sad
and intolerable Pains or Calamities. Now the Divine Threatenings are of the
greatest and most formidable Evils and Miseries that Humane Nature is capable
of suffering; and therefore were they but firmly beheved and apprehended, they
would be of force sufficient to stir up in us such strong Passions of Fear and
Terror, as would easily chase away all Temptations, and embitter all the Baits
of Sensual Pleasure.

3. There remains yet a third Objection against an eternal Hell, and that is,
that it is inconsistent with the Divine Goodness. For the Unbeliever will say,
It Is contrary to all the Notions and Ideas I have of God, to conceive him to be
so angry and furious a Being. How can it stand with Infinite Goodness to make a
Creature that he fore knew would be eternally miserable? We Men account it a
piece of goodness to pardon offenses: And all Punishments are intended either
for the reformation and amendment of the Offender, or if it be unreclaimable to
prevent the Mischief which he might otherwise do, or for an Example to others
to deter them from the like Enormities: but I do not see for what such end any
Man can be eternally tormented. So that of such inflictions one may rationally
demand, Cui bono? What Good comes of them? How then can they come from God, who
by all Men's confession is infinitely Good?

To which I answer: First, That God is just as well as good. You will say, what
is Justice? It is an equal weighing of Actions, and rendering to every one his
Right or Due. A setting straight again what was perverted by the sins and
extravagancies of Men. Now that the breaking of order and equality in the
World, this usurping and encroaching upon others Rights is a great Evil, and
ought to be rectified, some may take an Argument from the strong inclination
and desire to revenge Injuries, that is implanted in the Nature of Man, and of
all Creatures. You Will say, all desire of Revenge is absolutely sinful and
unlawful. I answer, I am no Patron of Revenge. I know the very Heathen by the
Light of Nature condemned it. -- Infirmi est animi exigu^que voluptas
Vltio --
Revenge is the pleasure of a poor and weak Spirit. Yet let us hear what they
have to say. 1. It is hard to affirm, that any innate Appetite or Desire is in
itself simply and absolutely, and in all Circumstances whatsoever unlawful, for
this seems to reflect upon the Author of Nature.

To which may be answered, that a well circumstantiated Desire of Revenge may
not be in itself unlawful, yet for the evil Consequents of it, it may be, and
is prohibited by a positive Law. 2. Divine Persons have prayed to God to avenge
them, as David and the Prophets. And S. Paul himself, 2. Tim. 4. 14. prays God,
to reward Alexander the Coppersmith according to his works. To which may be
answered, that those Expressions are rather Predictions of what should befall
their Enemies, than desires that they might. Again, whereas it is said, Revel.
6. 9, 10. That the souls of them under the altar that were slain for the word
of God, and the testimony which they held, cried with a loud voice, saying, How
long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them
that dwell on the earth: Doctor Hammond says, It signifies no more, than that
their Blood cries to God for Vengeance, as Abel's is said to do. 3. The Nature
of Forgiveness seems to imply the Lawfulness of some desire of Revenge. For
what is Forgiveness but a parting with, and as renouncing the Right I have to
be avenged, and therefore before I forgive I do retain at least some will to be
revenged. And I am not obliged by our Savior to forgive absolutely, but upon
condition of Repentance. Luke 17. 3, 4. If thy brother sin against thee rebuke
him, and if he repent forgive him, etc. And in the Lord's Prayer one Petition
is, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. But
God forgives not without Repentance. To which may be answered. That before
Repentance, I may retain a will of punishing an Offender for his own Good and
Reformation, but with no respect of avenging what is past. And if his
Repentance prevents his Punishment, then I am to forgive him, that is, cease to
desire his Punishment. But all allow Vengeance to be just in God, whose Actions
are not to be scanned by our Measures.

2. If it be just with God to propose to us such a choice as Heaven upon
condition of our Obedience to his Law, or Hell in case of Disobedience; as we
see some wise Men make no scruple to grant; then it cannot be injustice in him
to inflict the Punishments of Hell upon them that make it their choice. Nay, I
cannot see how it can consist with his Veracity not to do it; why then should
any Argument from his Goodness move us to distrust his Veracity? To which I
shall add, That the very being of Sin and Misery in the World is as great an
Argument against the Goodness of God, as the eternal Punishment of it; Since we
must needs grant, that God Almighty, Blessed for ever, could, if he had
pleased, have prevented it. If any Man shall say, This was not possible without
changing the very Nature of Man, and taking away the Liberty of his Will. To
him I reply, How then can he confirm the Blessed, reserving their Liberty? Or
must we say with Oriegn, That they are in a mutable state too, and that Heaven
will have an end as well as Hell? If any Man remain still unsatisfied with what
has been said, I must refer him for full satisfaction to the Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God at that Great Day, of which mention has been already
made.

I am as unwilling as any Man to limit the Mereies of God: but yet I must refer
it to him, whether he will be more favorable than he has threatened or no,
whether he will remit something of the Severity of his Comminations. I am also
willing to restrain and consine the sense of these words (...), and (...), as
far as the Context will permit. But let our Opinions and Hopes of the Mercies
of God, and a temporary Hell be what they will: a temporary Hell, I say, or
rather a Purgatory instead of Hell: For the word Hell, according to the usual
acception of it, includes Eternity. I shall propose two things to be considered.

1. That Origin the first Broacher of this Opinion of the Determination of the
Punishments of the Damned, does acknowledge that the contrary Doctrine is very
useful to restrain the common People from Sin: and that this is to be held as a
great Secret, and studiously concealed from them. Now if it be of such eminent
use to them, why may it not also be to the Learned and Noble; who, I fear me,
may want such a Bridle as well as they?

2. Since God has threatened eternal Punishments, whether he intends to execute
them upon us or no, it is clear, I think, he would have them be believed by us,
else they cannot have that end and effect he designed them to; and therefore it
must be unbelief and presumption in us to deny or distrust them, though upon
supposition, that they are irreconcilable with his Goodness; with which yet
perhaps they may accord well enough, though we cannot at present discern it. All
Divine Revelations are to be believed and accepted by us, as well Threatenings
as Promises; and if we may distrust the Veracity of God in them, I know not but
we may as well do it in these: if we deny the Eternity of the Torments of Hell,
I do not see but that we may upon as good grounds, with Origin, deny the
Eternity of the Joys of Heaven.

Let not then the presumption of a temporary Hell encourage thee to go on in
sin: for, I fear, such a Persuasion may have an ill influence on the Manners of
Men. Eternity is the very sting of Hell: take that out, and the Sinner will
think it tractable enough. The very thought of an eternal Hell intervening (and
it will often intrude itself) strikes a cold damp to his very Heart in the
midst of his Jollities, and will much qualify and allay all his Pleasures and
Enjoyments. Rid him of this fear, and he will be apt to despise Hell and all
its Torments, be they never so grievous or lasting. Take off this Bridle, and,
as we hinted before, he will rush into Sin, as a Horse rusheth into the battle.
He will be ready thereupon thus to argue with himself, What need I take so much
pains to strive against Sin? What need I swim against the Stream, and resist
the Tide and Eddy of my Passions, my natural Appetites and Inclinations, and
the Solicitations of Company? What need I maintain such a constant Watch and
Ward against my Spiritual Enemies, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh? If I
fall into Hell at last, that is no eternal State, it lasts but for a time,
and will come to an end. I Will venture it: I hope I shall make a shift to ru^
through well enough. Let me ask thee, But how if thou should find thy self
mistaken? If the Event frustrate thy Hopes, and fall out contrary to thy
Expectation? What a sad case will thou be in then? How will the unexpectedness
thereof double thy Misery? Improvisa gravius seriunt. How will thou be stricken
as it were with a Thunderbolt, when the Almighty Judge shall sulminate against
thee a d^eadful indeed, but by thee formerly undreaded Sentence, adjudging thee
to endless Punishments? How walt thou damn thine own Credulity, who by a
groundless Belief of a temporary Hell, have precipitated thy self into an
eternal, which otherwise thou might possibly have avoided?

Well, but suppose there be some shadow of hope of the determination of the
Punishments of the Damned: It is by all acknowledged to be a great piece of
folly to leave Matters of the highest moment, and which most nearly concern us,
at uncertainties: and a point of Wisdom, to secure the Main Chance, and to be
provided against the worst that can come. An eternal Heaven or State of
complete Happiness is the Main Chance, and is not to come into any competition,
or so much as to be put into the balance against a few short, transient,
fordid, loathed, and for the most part upon their own account repented
Pleasures: To secure to our selves an Interest in such a State is our greatest
Wisdom. And as for being provided against the worst that may or can come. What
can be worse than an eternal Hell? which, there is I do not say a possibility,
but the greatest probability imaginable, that it will be our portion; if we
persist in impenitency, and dye in our sins. But suppose the best should happen
that we can hope or conceive, that Hell should last only (...), for Ages of
Ages, and at last determine: do we think this a small matter? If we do, it is
for want of consideration and experience of acute Pains. Should any of us be
under the sense and suffering of a raging Paroxysm of the Stone, or Gout, or
Colic, I doubt not but rather than endure it for ten thousand Years, he would
willingly part with all his expectation of a blessed Estate after that Term
were expired, yea, and his Being to boot. But what are any of these Pains to
the Torments and Perpessions of Hell? or the duration of ten thousand Years to
those Ages of Ages? If thou make light of all this, and nothing can restrain
thee from Sin, but the Eternity of Punishment, thou art bound to thank God, who
has used this only effectual means, threatening an eternal Hell. And it ill
becomes thee to complain of his rigor and severity, who would have made so
pernicious an use of his lenity and goodness. But thou who have entertained
such an Opinion, and abusest it to encourage thy self to go on in thy sins,
though others should escape with a temporary Punishment, surely thou have no
reason to expect any milder Doom, than to be sentenced to an eternal.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of BOOKS Sold by Samuel Smith, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1693.
MArci Tullii Ciceronis Opera quae extant omnia, ex Manuscriptis codicibus
emendata Studio atque industria Jani Gulielmii, and Jani Gruteri. Additis earum
Notis integris: Nunc denuo Recognita ab Jacobo Gronovio cujus ubique adjectae
sunt emendationes, petitae partim ex Libris MSS. partim ex animadversionibus
virorum Doctorum; Etiam Orationibus illustratis accessione Ascenii Pediani, and
Doctissimi veteris Scholiastae nunquam antea editi: apositis in marg^^e ad
utentis commodum numeris, non tantum Gruterianis, sed etiam Apparatui Latinae
Locutionis Nicoliano respondentibus; cum Indicibus aliis Correctis, aliis Novis
and Accuratissimis. In 4. Tom. in Quarto. Idem cum eisdem Notis and
additionibus, nitidissimae Characteris in 11 Tomis in Duodecimo. Lugd. Bat.
1692.

Diogenis Laertii de Vitis, Dogmatibus and Apothegmatibus clarorum
Philosophorum, Libri X. Gr. and Lat. Cum subjunctis integris Annotationibus F.
Casa^boni Th. Aldrobandira and Mer. Casauboni, Latinam Ambrosii Versionem
complevit, and emendavit Marcus Meibornius, excusas Aeg. Menagii in Diogen^s
Observationes Auctiores habet Volumen II. ut and ejusdem (...) de Muliebribus
Philosophis, and Joachini Kughnii ad (...) Notas. Cum Junibus. 2 Vol. 4o, 1692.

Philippi Limborch Historia Inqui^itionis, (...) Liber Sententiarum
Inquisitionis Tholosanae ab An. (...). ad An. MCCCXXIII. in Foli^, 1692.

Musarum Anglicanarum analect^: Sive (...) quaedam meli^ris Notae, seu hactenus
inedita, seu sparium (...), in en^m Volumen congesta. Oxon. 1692. 8o

Boil Experimenta, Observation^s, etc. circa Mech^nicarum variarum
particularium Qualitatum Originem five productionem, Land. 8^ 1692.

A new History of Aethiopia: Being a full and accurate Description of the
Kingdom of Abessin^, vulga^ly (the erroneously) called, The Empire of Prester
John. (...) with Coppe^plates, the Second Edition. To which is added a Pre^ace,
showing the Usefulness of this History, and a Map of the Country. By Job
Ludo^fus, in Folio, 1684.

The Spiritual Year: Or, Devout Contemplations, digested into distinct
Arguments for every Month in the Year, and for every Week in that Month:
Containing most of the Principal and Fund^mental Doctrines of Christianity;
being very plain and useful for the Instruction of Families in all Christian
Duties, and for the disposing, of them to a Religious and Spiritual
Conversation. London, in 8^, 1693.

The Meditations of Mar^us Aurelius Anton^^^^, the Roman Emperor, concerning
himself: of a Natural M^ns (...) wherein a (...) and of (...) means to attain
unto it. (...), out of the Original Greek, with Notes. by M^rie* (...) D. D.
The Fifth Edition. To which is (...), The Life of Antoninus, with some select
Remarks upon the whole, by Montieur and Madam Dacier. Never before in English,
in 8^, 16^2.

The Wisdom of God, manifested in the Works of the Creation. In two Parts, viz.
The Heavenly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, Fossils, Vegetables, Animals, (Beasts,
Birds, Fishes, and Insects) more particularly in the Body of the Earth, its
Figure, Motion, and Consistency, and in the admirable Structure of the Bodies
of Man, and other Animals, as also in their Generation, etc. By John Ray,
Fellow of the Royal Society. The Second Edition, very much enlarged. In 8^,
1692.

A Treatise of Church Government, or a Vindication of Diocesan Episcopacy,
against the Objections of the Dissenters, in Answer to some Letters lately
Printed, concerning the same Subject. By R. Burscough, M. A. in 8^, Land. 1692.

Medicinal Experiments: or a Collection of Choice and Safe Remedies, for the
most part Simple, and easily prepared; useful in Families, and being cheap, may
be made very serviceable to poor Country People. By the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire Fellow of the Royal Society. To which is added, A Catalogue of all
his Theological and Philosophical Books and Tracts. The Second Ed^tion, in 12^,
1693. Price (...).

An Es^ay of the great Effects of even, languid, and unheeded local Motion.
Whereunto is annexed, An Experimental Discourse of some little observed Causes
of the Insalubrity, and Salubrity of the Air, and its Effects. By the
Honorable Robert Bail, Esquire Land. 8^, 16^^.

(...): Or, Hydrostaticks applied to the (...); showing, by the Weight, that
diverse Bodies used in Physic have in Water, one may discover whether they
genuine or adulterate. By the Honorable, Robert Boyl^, Esropyui London, 1690,
(...).

(...) Short Memoirs for the Natural and Experim ^ntal History of Mineral
Waters. Land. 1684. (...).


