A COLLECTION Of Curious TRAVELS and VOYAGES.

In Two Tomes.

The First containing Dr. Leonhart Rauwolff's Itinerary into the Eastern
Countries, as Syria, Palestine, or the Holy Land, Armenia, Mesopotamia,
Assyria, Chaldea, etc. Translated from the High Dutch by NICHOLAS STAPHORST.

The Second taking in many parts of Greece, Asia minor, Egypt, Arabia Felix,
and Petraea, Ethiopia, the Red Sea, etc. from the Observations of Mons. Belon,
Mr. Vernon, Dr. Spon, Dr. Smith, Dr. Huntingdon, Mr. Greaves, Alpinus,
Veslingius, Thevenot's Collections, and others.

To which are added, Three Catalogues of such Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs as grow
in the Levant.

BY JOHN RAY, Fell. of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for S. Smith and B. Walford, Printers to the Royal Society, as
the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1693.

To the Honorable Sr ROBERT SOVTHWELL PRESIDENT: TO THE COUNCIL AND FELLOWS OF
THE Royal Society: These TOMES OF Curious Travels and Voyages ARE Most Humbly
Dedicated, AS A Monument of GRATITUDE.

THE BOOKSELLERS TO THE READER.
THese Two Tomes of Travels and Voyages containing great Variety, both as to
the several Countries, the Observations, and Authors of them, we think it
proper to give the World a short account of them.

The first is Rauwolf, a Person very famous for his Skill in Natural Products,
and in the Practice of Physic, whose Itinerary into the Eastern Countries
being written in High Dutch, was grown very rare, valued as a Manuscript, and
much desired by some learned Gentlemen, who are justly esteemed to have a
delicate Taste and fine Judgment in the choice of Books and Subjects; therefore
being informed that the High Dutch Copy of these Travels was only to be found
in the Arundelian Library at Gresham College, we freely undertook the Charge of
having it translated, and printed in our Language, which is here performed with
great care and diligence.

The Plants collected by the worthy Author Dr. Leonhart Rauwolff, in his
Itinerary, were curiously preserved by the late Isaac Vossius, in four large
Volumes, and justly esteemed by that great man as the most noble Rarity and
Ornament of his Bibliotheque, which when it came to be sold to the University
of Leyden, was particularly valued by the Great Here van Beverning, for these
Volumes of dried Plants collected by our Author in his Travels of the Eastern
Countries; and though some perhaps may give a slight Character of him, for a
Mistake or two about Prest^r John and the Unicorn, yet if they consider, that
he only relates what he accidentally heard of them from others, they ought to
take that part only as a Story told him upon the Road, as he himself indeed
delivers it. But this may very truly be said of Rauwolff, that whatever he
writes upon his own Observation or Knowledge, is most faithful and sincere;
therefore it was not without Reason, that Carolus Clusius and the two Bauhines
(all very good Judges) depended so much upon him, and made such frequent and
honorable mention of this Itinerary.

But because some might think that the aforementioned Journey of Dr. Leonhart
Rauwolff was consin^d to too narrow a compass of Ground, and to some Countries
not much frequented, as Arme^ia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Babylonia, Judea. etc.
we therefore consulted a Friend, how to render the Piece more useful to the
Public, who advised us to extend it to many other places of the Levant, where
Rauwolff never traveled, as Greece, Egypt, and other adjacent Countries,
bordering near the Sphere of Rauwolff's Itinerary: This being thought most
serviceable to the Republic of Learning, we immediately concluded to supply
and enlarge Rauwolff with a Second Tome, out of some of the most renowned
Travelers of those parts of the World, such as Bellonius, Alpinus, Veslingius,
Mr. Greaves, Mr. Vernon, and many others of great Fame and Reputation for their
excellent Observations in the Levant, as Dr. Smith, Dr. Huntingdon, Dr. Spon,
Sir G. Wheeler, etc.

To these we have added something of Arabia Felix and Ethiopia, which curious
persons may be desirous to read, being taken from Original and Authentic
Voyages.

Lastly, We prevailed with Mr. Ray to draw up three Catalogues at the end,
containing the Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs growing in the Levant part of the
World, together with their various synonimous Names, which do much illustrate
and beautify the whole.

But before we take Leave, a Point of Honor, of Candor and Ingenuity ought not
to be forgotten, which is a decent acknowledgment of the Writings from whence
the several parts of the Second Tome were extracted, for the benefit of the
Reader; these were Clusius's Edition of Monsieur Belon's Itinerary, by Plantine
at Antwerp. The Egyptian Observations of Alpinus, printed at Padua and Venice.
The Pyramidographia of Mr. Greaves. The Collections of Voyages and Travels, by
Ramusio, Hakluyt, Purchase, and Thevenot. The Philosophical Transactions
published by Mr. Oldenburg, at London, and afterward by Dr. Plot at Oxford: To
which we may add some of the most learned Missionaries of the Church of Rome
into foreign Countries; such we mean only as applied themselves to
Topographical and Philosophical Observations, as Father Alvarez, Father Lobo,
Father Tellez, and Father Vansleb, who, setting aside the business of their
Calling and Mission, are not only worthy of entering the List of Gentlemen
Travelers, and Virtuoso's, but of appearing in a Protestant Kingdom. From all
these we fetched Materials for the forming and raising our Second Volume, which
we cannot but hope will prove beneficial and grateful to the Public, seeing we
had no other design in it, than purely that of pleasing and instructing, as
well as of enlarging the Empire of Knowledge.

Dr. Leonhart Rauwolff, TO His Honored Cousins and Friends, HANS WIDTHOLTZ,
CHRISTOPH. CHRISTEL, AND NICHOLAS BEMER.
Honored and Dear Cousins,
THE Ancient Philosophers were wont not unfitly to compare the study and
pursuit of Ingenious Arts and Sciences to the practice of Merchandising; for as
Merchants fear no Dangers, neither spare any Pains or Cost in traveling to
foreign Countries, by Sea and Land, that they may procure and bring thence, to
furnish their Storehouses, such Goods and Commodities as they chiefly deal in.
So those who make the attainment of Skill in the forementioned Liberal Arts
their principal End, and the study thereof their Delight, are not deterred from
prosecuting this Design, by any distances of Places, by Winter or Summer,
fearing neither Rain nor Snow, nor the traversing of horrid Deserts, or the
wild and roaring Seas, nor wasting or weakening their Patrimonies, if at last
they can but arrive at those places, where they may gain the acquaintance and
familiarity of eminently-learned Masters, able to instruct them in those Arts
and Sciences, to the Knowledge and Comprehension whereof they aspire; or where
they may inform themselves of the Constitutions and Customs of famous Nations,
and of other things subservient to their Intentions. We have an Instance of
this in the Wise Philosopher and famous Lawgiver Solon, who (as Plutarch in
the Description of his Life remarketh) traveled through many foreign
Countries, to acquire the knowledge of their Government and Polity, their Laws
and Constitutions, in order to the qualifying and enabling himself to
accomplish his design of giving Laws to his own. We read also in Diogenes
Laertius, that Plato did travel to Megara, to visit Euclide; to Cyrene, to see
Theodorus Mathematicus; into Italy, to encounter the Pythagorean Philosophers;
and also into Egypt, to converse with the Priests and Sages there, so mightily
cried up in the World, and to acquaint himself with their Learning and
Mysteries: Moreover, that he intended a Journey into Asia, had he not been
hindered by a War then newly commenced.

After the same manner Galen writes of himself, That he sailed to Lemnos,
Cyprus, and Palestina of Syria, on purpose to see foreign Plants, and rare
Oars and Minerals.

To relate what great Troubl^ and Dangers those that have written of Exotic
Plants to this day have sustained and incurred in their foreign Peregrinations,
would not be grievous to me, did I not fear that it would extend this
Dedication to too disproportionate and tedious a length; wherefore I will omit
it, and briefly touch what concerns my self, mine own Inclinations to travel,
and proceedings in pursuance thereof.

Although I dare not compare my self with those Excellent and Incomparable
Persons newly mentioned, nor boast of any high Understanding, Experience, or
Learning, (so far as I know my self) yet to confess the Truth, I am forced to
own, that from my Infancy I always had a great desire to Travel into foreign
parts, and to enquire out Learned and Famous Men, that I might get something of
them to increase my Stock of Knowledge. From whence it did proceed (I having
chiefly before all other Faculties, a great inclination to the Study of
Physic, and finding that it required the assistance of a great many Sciences
more, and especially Skill in Botanicks) that after serious and mature
deliberation, with the Consent of my Parents and Relations, and at their
Expenses, I did leave the German Universities, and traveled into France and
Italy, where the Knowledge and Practice of Medicine does chiefly flourish,
where also several rare Plants of great use in Physic, do naturally grow; to
acquaint my self with which, and to gain the knowledge of them I have taken
abundance of pains, and chiefly at Montpellier, where in company with the
highly learned Jeremias Martius, Doctor of Physic, I wandered over several
Hills and Valleys in many places, but chiefly the high Mountain Ceti, situate
near Frontignan, on the Seashore, etc. by which means I gathered several
hundreds of Simples, and kept them by me as a Treasure.

But when I began to consult Authors concerning them, finding a great many
others, no less useful and advantageous in Physic, that were said to grow in
Greece, Syria, and Arabia, etc. I was highly therewith pleased, chiefly when I
found also those fruitful places of the Eastern Countries described, which
several Authors, and above all the Holy Scriptures have mentioned; and from
thence I was enflamed with a vehement desire to search out, and view such
Plants growing spontaneously in their Native places, and propounded also to my
self to observe the Life, Conversation, Customs, Manners, and Religion of the
Inhabitants of those Countries. And although I did not then immediately put
this my design in execution, but delayed for several years, doing mean while
what Service I could to my Native Country, yet I embraced the first opportunity
that offered it self of accomplishing it: For when my deceased Brother-in-law
Mr. Melchior Manlich wished me to take a Voyage into the Eastern Countries, to
find out their Drugs and Simples, and other things convenient and profitable
for his Trade, and did promise me requisite Charges, and a considerable Salary,
I immediately accepted his agreeable Offer, and readily embraced so
often-desir'd an opportunity, and addressing my self instantly to the
Magistrates of this City (for I was then in their Service) craved Leave to go;
which I had no sooner obtained, but I began my Travels into the Levant: What I
saw, learned, and experienced, during the space of Three years, (for so much
time this Journey took me up) not without great danger and trouble, I consigned
all in good order, as it occurred daily, in a Pocket-Journal, to keep as a
Memorial of my Life.

But after I returned home again, being desired, nay, continually importuned by
several Gentlemen and others, my very good Friends, to communicate this my
Itinerary to them, and to make it public. At last, after many Refusals, not
being able any longer to resist their Solicitations, I was prevailed upon to
comply with their Desires, to publish it in Print.

Wherefore I looked my Itinerary over again, and whatever Curiosities I had
observed, I did transcribe into a peculiar Diary, which I divided into three
parts, according as I traveled into several Countries, and committed it to the
Press, that I might communicate Copies thereof to my Friends.

It is not Vainglory that has prompted me to do this, but rather the Profit
and Pleasure it may afford the Reader; that those who have no opportunity to
visit foreign Countries, may have it before their Eyes, as a Map, to
contemplate; and that others may be excited further to enquire into these
things, and induced, by reading this Account, to Travel themselves into those
parts whereof I have written, to observe that more narrowly and exactly wherein
I have been too short.

But if any shall object, and say, That I might have spared this Labor and
Trouble, and employed it to better purposes; and, that the present State,
Condition, Situation, and Manners of the World have been so fully surveyed and
described by others, that there is hardly a corner of it left unsearched. To
this I answer, That what others have written I have not transcribed into this
Work, but what I have seen, experienced, observed and handled my self, is only
mentioned here: But if any one has already, out of the like Books printed
before, learned all these things, so that nothing here propounded is new to
him, I confess this my Labor is of no use to such an one, neither have I
written it for him. But he that by daily experience observes how Wars,
Plagues, Distempers, and other Accidents, may and do mightily alter Kingdoms,
Countries, Cities, and Towns, so that what was praised formerly as glorious and
beautiful, lies now desolate and in Ashes, and what then was accounted barren
and waste, may be now become fruitful and glorious; he will confess, that still
in our times a great many things remain to be searched and inquired into, which
others before us never did nor could observe, treat of, or publish. Pursuant to
this the wise Solon before mentioned said, That he grew old, continually
learning many things.

(...). And Julian the Lawgiver was wont to say, That if one of his Feet were
in his Grave, yet he should be desirous to learn.

If this my Work does not make or improve Divines, Lawyers, or Physicians, (for
which purpose I never intended it) yet I hope some way or other it may be as
well useful as pleasant to them and others; for whosoever shall read in this my
Itinerary, how the glorious and strong City of Jerusalem is now ruined, and
become a heap of Stones, and great Babylon laid in Ashes, and other famous
places in like manner destroyed and desolate, the Land of Promise also changed
into a barren Ground, he may thence collect, that the Wrath of God is a
consuming Fire, that he has not only not spa^ed the Jews, his elect and
peculiar People, which he chose for his Inheritance, but also destroyed that
once fruitful Land, flowing with Milk and Honey, which though it self did not
sin, yet he has cursed with Barrenness, for the Transgressions of its
Inhabitants, Psalm. 107.30. and turned the holy City into a desolation and
solitude; the due consideration whereof would be an effectual Motive to provoke
Christians to amend their Lives and Manners; for, if this was done in the Green
Tree, the chosen People of God, what will become of the Dry, if once the wrath
of the Lord be kindled.

Moreover, he that by this Book is instructed in the Manners, Customs, Laws and
Orders of the People of the East, and what Tricks and Cunning they make use of,
in time both of Peace and War, will know the better how to behave himself in
all his Necessary Occasions of Traffic and Dealings with them.

Further, this Book also teaches a Christian how to behave himself in his
Slavery, (if it should befall him) toward his Master, without any detriment to
his Soul or Conscience; and how by convenient means he may procure his Liberty
again.

You may also see here how many Sects of Religions there are in these places,
and how there are many good and well-disposed People, which are not far from
the true knowledge of God, and might easily be brought to embrace the Orthodox
Christianity.

I hope also that this my Work will not be very unacceptable to Apothecaries
and Physicians, containing Descriptions of many useful Herbs, of which I had
willingly added the Cuts, but was forced to forbear at present, for several
Reasons, not needful here to be related, but I hope it may be done afterward,
when Time and Opportunity shall serve.

You will likewise find here several strange Stories, both pleasant to read,
and which may give occasion to higher Considerations: So that I am in good
hopes I shall not have taken all these Pains, and used this Diligence
altogether in vain.

Now, Honored Gentlemen and Cousins, to return to you; Since it has been
always used by Writers, both ancient and modern, to dedicate their Books to
some person or other, I also in compliance with this laudable Custom, have
thought fit to dedicate this my Itinerary to you, not only because of that
Relation we stand in to each other, by reason of consanguinity, but also to
acknowledge my Obligations, and declare my Gratitude for the many Favors,
Good-turns, and Friendly Offices done me by Mr. Leonhart Christel, our dear
Uncle of pious Memory (in whose Steps you Mr. Nicholas Bemer, and Christopher
Christel, the Heirs as well of his Virtues as his Estate, do tread) when he was
alive, and do still at present receive of you three my Honored Kinsmen; which
my well-meaning Dedication I hope you will favorably accept, and own and
acknowledge as your Cousin.

Your most humble Servant, Leonhart Rauwolff.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
Chap. I. WHich way I went first of all, from Auspurg to Marseilles, and from
thence shipped over the Seas toward Tripoli of Syria, situated in Phenicia.
page 1 Chap. II. Of the famous City of Tripoli, of its fruitful Neighborhood
and great Trade; and also of the splendid Baths, and other magnificent
Buildings, to be seen there. Their ways of making Rusma, Potashes, Soap, etc.
p. 19 Chap. III. Of the Turks of high and low Conditions, Men and Women: Of
their Employments, Offices, Manners, Customs, Clothes, as much as I could at
Tripoli (during my abode) understand, see, and learn thereof. p. 35 Chap. IV. A
Description of the Plants I gathered at Tripoli. p. 47 Chap. V. Which way I
traveled from Tripolis further to the two famous Cities of Damant and Halepo.
p. 57 Chap. VI. Of the Situation of the Potent City of Halepo; of the Buildings
thereof, and also of the delicate Fruits and fine Plants, that grow there,
within and without Gardens. p. 61 Chap. VII. Of the high Places and Authority
of Bashaws, what great Courts they keep, and how they administer their Offices;
as also of their way of living, of their Privileges, of their Manners and
Conversation. p. 69 Chap. VIII. Of the great Trading and Dealing of the City of
Halepo; as also of several sorts of their Meats and Drinks; of their
Ceremonies, and their peculiar way of sitting down at Meals. p. 83 Chap. IX. A
short and plain Relation of Plants, which I gathered during my stay at Halepo,
in and round about it, not without great danger and trouble, which I glued upon
Paper very carefully. p. 100
PART II.
Chap. I. HOW I departed from Halepo to the famous City of Bir; and how I
sailed from thence on the Euphrates to old Babylon. p. 121 Chap. II. Which way
we went into the Ship, and sailed to Racka; and how the Son of the King of
Arabia, with his Retinue, came to our Ship to demand his Customs: What else we
saw by the way, and what we did suffer from the Arabians and their Mendicants.
p. 131 Chap. III. Of the City of Racka, and of its Situation; and also
something of the Departure of the King of Arabia; and of his League with the
Turkish Emperor; and also of the trouble we had with the Custom-house Officer
or Publican. p. 146 Chap. IV. Of the Inhabitants of the Mountains, and the
great Wilderness we came through to Deer; of their ancient Origination, and
miserable and laborious Livelihood. p. 153 Chap. V. Of our Voyage to the famous
Town Ana, in which we passed again through great Sandy Wildernesses; for the
performance whereof we must provide our selves with Victuals, and be very
careful in our Navigation: Some relation of the Inhabitants, of their Clothes,
and other things we did observe and see by the way, and what else did happen
unto us. p. 161 Chap. VI. Which way we traveled from Ana further to Old
Babylon, by some ancient Towns called Hadidt, Juppe, Idt, and saw more
pleasant, fruitful and well cultivated Fields on each side than before. p. 169
Chap. VII. Of old Babylon the Metropolis of Chaldee, and its Situation; and how
it is still to this day, after its terrible Desolation to be seen, with the
Tower or Turret, and the old ruined walls lying in the Dust. p. 174 Chap. VIII.
Of the Famous City of Bagdet, called Baldac; of its Situation, strange Plants,
great Traffic, and Merchants of several Nations, that live there, together
with several other things, I saw and did learn at my departing. p. 179 Chap.
IX. Which way I came in my return from Bagdet, through Assyria, the Confines of
Persia, and the Province of the Curters, to the Town Carcuch, Capril, etc. and
at length to the River Tigris, to Mossel, that Famous Town which was formerly
called Nineveh. p. 197 Chap. X. Which way we went through Mesopotamia by the
way of Zibin and Orpha, to Bir, not without a great deal of danger; and
afterward how we passed the great River, the Euphrates, and came at last into
Syria, by Nisib, to the famous Town of Aleppo. p. 206 Chap. XI. Of the Turkish
Physicians and Apothecaries; of my Comrade Hans Ulrich Krafft, of Ulm's hard
Imprisonment; of the great Danger that I was in, in the 2 Towns of Aleppo and
Tripoli; of the murdering of some Merchants, and what else did happen when I
was there. p. 218 Chap. XII. Of the large and high Mount of Libanus, its
Inhabitants and strange Plants that are found there. p. 224 Chap. XIII. Cunning
and deceitful Stratagems of the Grand Turk against the Inhabitants of Mount
Libanus the Trusci, and Maronites: And how he made War with them, and what
damage they sustained by it. p. 236
PART III.
Chap. I. A Short Description of his Departure from Tripoli, a Town of Phenicia
in Syria, and how he went from thence to Joppa. p. 257 Chap. II. A short
Relation of my Travels by Land from the Harbor of Joppe, to the City of
Jerusalem. p. 266 Chap. III. A plain Description of the City of Jerusalem, as
it was to be seen in our time: And of the adjacent Countries. p. 274 Chap. IV.
Of Mount Sion, and its Holy Places. p. 283 Chap. V. Of the Mount Moria, and the
glorious Temple of Solomon. p. 293 Chap. VI. Of the Saracens and Turkish
Religion, Ceremonies and Hypocritical Life, with a short hint how long time
their Reign shall last after Mahomet's Decease. p. 301 Chap. VII. Of Mount
Bethzetha, and the two Houses of Pilate and Herod. p. 312 Chap. VIII. Of the
Mount Calvaria, and the holy Grave of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. p. 315
Chap. IX. Here follow some Epitaphs of the Christian Kings of Jerusalem,
together with a short Relation of their Reigns and mighty Deeds. p. 326 Chap.
X. A common Account of several sorts of Christians, but chiefly of them that
are always to be found in the Temple of Mount Calvaria. And also how these, and
many other Strangers, are treated by the Turkish Emperor (as by their chief
Head, to whom they are generally subjected) and his Officers. p. 331 Chap. XI.
Of the Greeks. p. 343 Chap. XII. Of the Surians that esteem themselves to be
Christians. p. 346 Chap. XIII. Of the Gregorians. p. 347 Chap. XIV. Of the
Armenians and their Religion. p. 348 Chap. XV. Of the Nestorians. p. 350 Chap.
XVI. Of the Jacobites called Golti. p. 352 Chap. XVII. Of the Abyssins, Priest
John called Lederwick, Subject unto the King of the Moors. p. 353 Chap. XVIII.
Of the Maronites. p. 356 Chap. XIX. Of the Latinists or Papists. 357 Chap. XX.
Of the Knights of the Temple of Jerusalem, the Order of the Johannites. p. 360
Chap. XXI. A short description of some Places, Hills, Valleys, etc. that lie
near and about Jerusalem* Of the Mount of Olives, and its Holy Places. p. 365
Chap. XXII. Of Bethlehem, the Mountains of Judea, and their famous places.
Where also is made mention of my returning back from Jerusalem to Tripoli. p.
373 Chap. XXIII. How I took Ship at Tripolis in Syria, and sailed back from
thence to Venice, and traveled home again to my own Relations at Augspurg. p.
384
TOME II.
Chap. I. MR. Belon's Remarks in the Island of Crete or Candy. p. 3 Chap. II. A
Description of Mount Athos, commonly called Monte Santo, by Mr. Belon. p. 7
Chap. III. An Account of a Journey by Land from Mount Athos to Constantinople,
wherein the Gold and Silver Mines of Macedonia, together with many Antiquities
and Natural Rarities, are described. p. 12 Chap. IV. The ways of Fishing on the
Propontis, the Bosphorus, and Hellespont; as also of the Fishes taken. By M.
Belon. p. 17 Chap. V. Of some Beasts and mechanic Trades at Constantinople. p.
18 Mr. Francis Vernon's Letter, written to Mr. Oldenburg, Jan. 10. 1675/0 p. 19
Some Plants observed by Sir George Wheeler, in his Voyage to Greece and Asia
minor. p. 30 Historical Observations relating to Constantinople. By the
Reverend and Learned Tho. Smith, D.D. Fellow of Magd. College Oxon. and of the
Royal Society. p. 35 An Account of the City of Prusa in Bithynia, and a
continuation of the Historical Observations relating to Constantinople. p. 50
An Account of the Latitude of Constantinople and Rhodes; by the learned Mr.
John Greaves. p. 84 Chap. VI. Some Observations made in a Voyage to Egypt. By
Mr. Belon. p. 90
More Observations made in Egypt, by Guilandinus, Alpinus, and others. And,
Chap. I. Of the Weather and Seasons in Egypt. p. 92 Chap. II. Of the meats and
drinks of Egypt. p. 94 Chap. III. Of the Diseases and Physic. p. 95 Of the
Pyramids of Egypt; by Mr. Greaves, Professor of Astronomy in the University of
Oxford. A description of the First Pyramid. p. 98 A description of the Second
Pyramid. p. 121 A description of the Third Pyramid, out of Mr. Belon and Mr.
Greaves. p. 124 Of the rest of the Pyramids in the Lybian Desert. p. 127 In wh^
manner the Pyramids were built. p. 129 Of the (...) Sphynx, Mummies, etc. by
Father Va^ (...) ^hers. p. 134 Of the Sphynx. p. 139 Of the Wells where the
Mummies are. p. 140 A description of an entire Body of a Mummy. p. 144 A Letter
from Dublin concerning the Porphyry Pillars in Egypt; by Dr. Huntingdon. p. 149
A Journey from Grand Caire to Mecha. p. 156 Of the Aga sent to meet the Caravan
upon their Return. p. 159 Of Mecha and Medina. p. 162 An Extract of a Journey
through part of Arabia Felix, from the Copy in Ramusio's Collection. p. 167
Some Observations made by Sir Henry Middleton, and other Englishmen in Arabia
Felix, etc. p. 169 Of the Ways and Roads between Egypt and Ethiopia. p. 172 Of
Ethiopia; by Michael of Tripoly, Ambassador from the Habessine Emperor to the
Grand Signior. p. 175 More Observations of Ethiopia, by Father Lobo, Father
Alvarez, Father Tellez, and others, extracted from their Portuguese Voyages. p.
183
THE FIRST PART OF Doctor Leonhart Rauwolff's Travels into the Eastern
Countries: In which is chiefly Treated, how he got into Syria, and what strange
things he there saw and observed.
CHAP. I.
Which way I went first of all, from Augspurg to Marseilles, and from thence
Shipped over the Seas toward Tripoli of Syria, situated in Phoenicia.

I Having always had a natural Inclination almost from my Infancy, to Travel
into Foreign Countries, but chiefly into the Eastern ones, which have been of
old, celebrated for fertility, which were cultivated by the most ancient
People, and whose Princes in former Ages, have been the most potent Monarchs of
the World; not only to observe their Lives, Manners, and Customs, but chiefly
to gain a clear and distinct knowledge of those delicate Herbs, described by
Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Avicennas, Serapio, etc. by viewing them in their
proper and native Places, partly that I might more exactly describe them,
especially the most strange and rare; partly also, to provoke the Apothecaries
to endeavor to procure those that are necessary for them to have in their
Shops: I strove always to put this my desire into execution, but was forced to
defer, until in the Year of our Lord, 1573. I found an opportunity by my
honored Brother-in-Law, Mr. Melchior Manlick, Senior, which was very
convenient. He received me presently, (having before a design to increase the
number of them that were employed in his Trade) and fitted me out for my
Voyage, that I might go with the first Company that should Travel for
Marseilles, and then from thence further in one of their Ships to Tripoli,
situated in that part of Syria which is called Phoenicia.

After that my honored Friend Mr. Frederick Rentzen, of that same City was
come to me, we set out the 18 th of May, May 18.
Anno 1573. from Augspurg toward Lindaw, designing to go through Piedmont to
Milan and Nissa, and so further: the same day we came to Mindelheim, a very
pleasant Town with a princely Castle situated upon the Mindel, then belonging
to the Baron of Frundsberg.

19.
The 19 th at Noon we came to Memmingen, a very pleasant City of the Empire, and
at Night to Leutkirch.

The 20 th we rode thorough Wangen, May 20.
another Imperial City, situated in Algaw, where they drove a very good Trade
with fine Ticking, and Linen Cloth; about Noon we arrived at Lindaw, an
Imperial City situated in the Boden sea, where there is a very great Depository
or Staple of all sorts of Commodities or Merchandises; some have called this
the German Venice, because it is in like manner situated in Water, and has
also a great Trade. After Dinner we crossed the Lake toward Fuzach, a Village
not far from Bregentz, toward the Rhine. 21.


The 21 st about breakfast-time we came to Veldkirch, a very pleasant Town,
situated upon the Ill, belonging now to the House of Austria, but formerly to
the Counts of Montfort. By the way I saw several fine Plants, viz. Saxifraga
Aurea, Caryophyllata Alpina, a fine sort of Bellismajor, Crista galli with
white Flowers, and Auricula Ursi with brown Flowers, etc. At Night we came to
Mayenfeld, belonging to the Grawpunters, upon the Rhine, which runs by the
Town, and there runs into it a River called Camingen, which slides down between
high Rocks, where the Famous warm Bath (from an adjacent Abbey) called Pfeffers,
rises, which may be numbered amongst the Wonderful Waters, in regard of its
Admirable Operation, in strengthening lame and contracted Members, and has
this Property beyond other Baths, that it loses its self from October till
May, and then it comes on again powerfully.

The 22 d. we came at Night to Chur, 22.
a very Ancient City, (where also is a deposition of Goods, that are brought
thither from Germany by Pack-horses over the Mountains.) A Seat of that Bishop
lies half an hours going from the Rhine, wherefore this Bishopric is
accounted the Chief of all the Bishoprics of the Rhine, or the Pfaffen gaste,
called by others, because it is situated near the first beginning of the Rhine,
according to the Ancient Proverb: Costentz the biggest, Basil the pleasantest,
Strasburg the noblest, Spires the devoutest, Worms the poorest, Mentz the
worthiest, Trier the ancientest, and Collen the richest.

May 23.
The 23 d. we rode to Tusis, an Ancient Village belonging to the Grawpunters,
the Name whereof shows its Original, for the Rhetians are descended from the
Tuscans, who under the Conduct of one Rhaetus of old took Possession of those
Countries; not far off upon a high Mountain is still situated a ruined Castle,
called Realt, or which is righter, Rhoetia alta, derived also from the Rhetians.

24.
The 24 th. at Noon we came by the Splewerhill into a Village called Splugi, not
far from the beginning, head, or source of the Rhine: Thence we passed over the
Hill, and came at Night to a little Village called Gampolschin, situate in a
Valley of the same Name, where we rested.

25.
Monday the 25 th. at Noon we came to Claeven, or Clavenna, a very Ancient Town,
belonging to the Bunts, which had Anciently a strong Castle, which was
demolished by the Grawpunters themselves, Anno 1524* after it was cunningly
taken from them by Castle de Maess and John Jacob de Medicis, in which bustle
the Town was also ruined, for the Gates and Walls were beaten down, that no
Enemy might after that lodge himself there again. From Claeven we went to Riva
upon the Lago di Como (where the Water Addua runs into the Lake, and yet
notwithstanding adds no Water to it, nor takes any from it, but only runs
strait through it; and so does the Rhine through the Lake called the
Boden-Sea.) From thence we traveled to Gera upon the same Lake, where we lay
all Night; on the Bank I saw some purple-coloured Lillies, a sort of Lilium
Saracenicum with small Leaves, and in the old Walls the Cymbalaria.

The 26 th. about Noon we came to Como, May 26.
a very glorious and pleasant City, from whence the Lake has its Name to this
day. From thence we rode the same Night to Milan, the Metropolis of that
Dukedom. What strange passages have been committed in this Town before it was
possessed by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, after the Decease of the last Duke
Francis Sfortia, is related sufficiently in History.

The 27 th. we rode through Binasco, 27.
a pleasant Village, where the very learned and famous Andreas Alciatus, Doctor
in Law, and Professor of several Universities in France and Italy, has built a
very Glorious Palace: And in the Evening passing by the great Park (in which in
the Year 1525. was fought that bloody Battle between Francis King of France,
and the Emperor Charles the Fifth's Officers, in which the King himself was
made Prisoner, and many of his Men killed) the same Night arrived at Pavia, an
Ancient Glorious City, situated on the River Tesin, where the Kings of the
Longobards did formerly keep their Courts, and afterward Charles the Great,
the first German Emperor, did institute an University, which has brought up
many Eminent and Learned Men since.

The 28 th. departing from Pavia, 28.
we passed the River Padus, or Eridanus, which is believed to be the biggest
River in Italy, to Vogera, a pleasant Village situated on the River Stafora,
there we began to take Post, and had Eighteen Stages to Nissa: By Noon we
arrived at Dertona, a pretty Town, yet not very full of People, by reason of
the many Wars and intestine Quarrels in which it was engaged, belonging to the
Duke of Milan. In this Country I found whole Acres sown with Woad, and there I
saw the White Poplar, also Millefolium flore luteo, and further upon the Hill
Brotho the Cineraria, and the Stoechas Citrina, Cotinus Plinii, and many more
fine Plants. At Night we came to Alexandria della Paglia, that is to say, of
Chaff. When heavy and long Wars did arise between the Emperor Frederick the
First and the Towns of Lombardy, by Instigation of Pope Alexander the Third,
the Towns of Lombardy did agree to compile this City out of several Villages in
the Year 1168. and did Fortify it the Year next ensuing, and called it after
the Pope's Name, Alexandria: But the Imperialists called it Alexandria of
Straw, which Name it does retain to this day; yet we did not stay there, but
rode the same Night to Bellizona, a strong place, which perhaps formerly had
its own Princes, which did sell it from Uri and his Relations (because they
could not defend it from the Duke of Milan) in the Year 1422. and yet it cost a
great deal of Blood, until the Switzers got it into safe possession in the Year
1500.

May 29.
The 29 th. at Noon we came to Ast, a considerable City belonging to the Dukedom
of Milan, where the King of Spain keeps a Garrison, which had just then
received the new Governor of Milan, and conducted him into the City. Not far
off lies Carmagnola, belonging to the King of France, and to the Markgraviat
of Saluzo, where is kept a French Garrison, as at Moncalier (which is very near
it) the Duke of Savoy has a Garrison, and so Garrisons of three Eminent
Princes lie very near one another. That Night we lodged in a pitiful Village
called Baieron.

The 30 th. we rode through Racones and Savigliano, May 30.
two small Villages, and at Night came to Coni.

The last of May, after we had broke our Fast in a Village called Limona, we
came to Mount Brothus, where we saw many pleasant Vineyards; and so by Tenda
into another Village called Sorgo, where we staid all Night.

The first of June we reached to Nizza in the Morning, a City with a strong
Citadel, June 1.
upon the Ty^henian Sea, belonging to the Duke of Savoy, which the Turkish
Admiral Barbarossa did for a long time Besiege with great fury, and yet was
forced to leave it, although he had the City in his possession, in the Year
1543. Thither also came Francis King of France, and the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, to Pope Paul the Third, to have Peace made between them. There-about I
espied some fine Plants, but chiefly two sorts of Papaver Corniculatum, with
large and stately Flowers yellow and brown, and also the Ladanum latifolium,
and upon the Hill toward Villa Franca, a Convolvulus with white and
purple-striped flowers, and with long and cut leaves.

The Second we went from thence with more Company, passing through the Villages
of Antibo, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Cacabo, Luc, Brignola, etc. (where I found in the Shops a sort of very
delicate preserved Prunes, called in English Prunella's, which would be very
useful in burning Fevers against the Thirst, in great quantity) to Marseilles,
which makes Thirty French Miles or Leagues; and we rode so fast onward during
this Journey, that we arrived there in Nineteen days after our departure, that
is, on the fifth day of June; by the way I saw Convolvulus foliis a^utis, Rubia
Tinctorum, Stoechas, a fine Seseli Peloponnesiacum, Thymelaea, Cistus with
white and purple flowers, and also a kind of Ladanum of the learned Carolus
Clusius with small Rosemary-leaves, Terebinthus, Ilex Coccifera, Aspalathus,
and the Polemonium Monspeliensium of Rembert Dadonaeus, called Trifolium
fruticans, Ruscus, Lentiscus, Calamintha montana, some common Thistles, and
others.

In Marseilles where I was lodged in my forenamed Kinsman's House to stay until
the Ships were ready, I met with one John Ulrich Kraft, Son of John Kraft, one
of the Privy Council at Ulm, who was arrived there a few days before, also with
the same intention to go along with us, about his own Business; we staid
together, and while the Ships were fitting out, we made our selves acquainted
with the Physicians and Apothecaries, but above the rest with one experienced
Man, Jacob Renaud, a great lover of Plants, who showed me in his Garden many
pretty and strange Simples, viz. Scammonium verum, Ambrosia, Moly, Ammi, Aloes,
etc. and a great many dried and laid between Papers. I found also about the
City, Trifolium Asphaltites, Lactuca marina, Dentillaria, Tragacantha Guilhelmi
Rondeletii, a great Scabiosa with white flowers, Gratiola, Gnaphalium marinum,
Medica marina, Polygonum marinum, Eryngium marinum, Coris Monspeliensium,
another sort of Tamariscus, and of Consolida with yellow sweet flowers, which I
also found between Nimes and Pont du guard, an old, strong, and fine Building,
upon which I did find Ruta Sylvestris, a sort of Verbascum foliis dissectis,
Papaver corniculatum flore flavo. I also found there-about Chondrilla Viminea,
growing chiefly in the Vineyards, Conyza major, Vermicularis fruticans, Carduus
tomentosus, not unlike to Leucacantha, Nepa Lobelii in adversariis novis. I
also found Tartonrayre, Aster atticus luteus, Psyllium, Seseli Aethiopicum
fruticans, Jujubes, red Valeriana, Corruda Rembert* Dodon* the first kind of
Catanance Dioscor* which I first spied by its dried leaves, just like to a
Vulture's Claw, and many others, not needful to be here related.

After that the Ship Santa Croce was laden, victualled for three Months, and
provided with Guns, and all other Necessaries for a three Months Voyage, we two
went with our Master, Anthony Reinard, with some others belonging to him,
September 1.
in a Frigate the first day of September in the Year 1673. to our Ship, which
lay at Anchor with several other laden Ships, near the adjacent Islands, with
an intention to set Sail the next day.

The next day about two in the Afternoon, 2.
when God sent us a good Wind, we hoisted up our Sails, and went on: When our
Patron began to exhort his Men to agree together, and to be obedient to him,
which they all faithfully promised; then we went to Prayers, and recommended
our selves to the protection of God Almighty.

In the first setting out, before we got to Sea, our Ship came so near to
another, that they touched almost, and had not the Seamen in time got them off,
we might have suffered Shipwreck.

When this was over, and we out of danger, we sailed on with full Sails six of
us, and advanced so fairly, that we lost the sight of Land before Night, and
could see nothing but Sky and Water.

Not long after most of us began to be Seasick, and to bring up what we had
eaten some days before, Sept. 3.
but I and my Camrade Kraft purged our selves that Night so well, that we were
very fresh again the next Morning: Some of the rest remained sick for seven
days after, and not one of us (although we were 48) but was sick, and found an
alteration after our Shipping off.

After we had sailed two days with a favorable Wind, by the Latins called
Caurus, but by the French and Italians Maistral, (which blows between North
and West) and proceeded an Hundred French Leagues, 4.
there arose on the fourth day about Midnight another Wind called Graeco, and
by the Latins Caecias, which the more it went to the East, the more it was
against us, so that we being hindered from going Eastward, were forced to go
side-ways, and to traverse up and down, and were driven so far Southwards, that
on Sunday Night, 5, 6, 7.
and Monday Morning we sailed in sight of the Coast of Barbary. After the Wind
was laid a little, and the Dolphins appeared in great numbers, we hoped for
better Weather, but for want of it, finding our selves advance toward Africa
more and more, we were forced to Tack about, and to direct our Course toward
Marseilles again.

We going thus back again, contrary to our Intentions, feared that the Wind
would hold so a while still, but contrary to our expectation it came to be so
calm toward the Night, that we could hardly perceive any. Then we hoped it
would change, which did also succeed accordingly, for the next Morning before
break of day the Maistral began to blow again, which pleased us extremely, and
so we returned and pursued our former Course again toward the East, Sept. 8.
and on Monday we sailed so fast, that in an hours time we made Ten Italian
Miles, 9.
and on the 9 th. day came into the Straights of Sardinia and Africa, where we
saw an Island called Galicia, which although it be but small, yet because of
the high Mountains is seen afar off: we left it about 30 Leagues on one side of
us. This Island is subject to no body, wherefore a great many Pirates lie
lurking there: In it is no great matter to be seen, only wild Capers grow there
in great plenty. We finding our selves in this dangerous place, were not idle,
(although the Ship was well provided with Guns, Pikes, and other Arms) but got
our Great Guns ready, and filled our Chamber, in which we two were, with Guns
and Swords, so that it looked rather like an Armoury of the whole Ship than a
Chamber. Moreover because we were afraid of some huge Rocks that lie in the
Sea, chiefly of them which the Seamen call Leuci, they observed them
diligently, not only in their Sea-cards, to know which way they might avoid
them, but kept a good Watch all that Night to observe them, and so with the
help of God we got safely clear of them.

A little after we came in view of the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, with some
adjacent Islands; amongst them there is one called Simles, which, though but
small, is very fruitful, and therein grows the best Aristolochia rotunda in
abundance.

We lost this the next Morning, 10.
and Westward upon our right hand, at about Forty Miles distance, we saw
another, called Panthalarea, subject to the King of Spain, which is inhabited
by above 300 people: Sicily on our left, because the Night fell in, we did not
then see, but came so near it, that early in the Morning we could not only see
the Hills and Mountains, and chiefly the Mongibello, which is very high
situated at the other side of the Famous City of Syracusa, but also the
Buildings and Steeple distinctly, sailed also the whole day by that side, that
lies over against the Island Malta, so long till we came to the last point
thereof: And although we were not in a little danger there, because of the War,
yet we saw no more than one small Ship early in the Morning by Malta, which we
took to be of Marseilles. So (God be praised) we arrived very well, and without
any hindrance at the furthest point of Sicily on the 11 th. day of September in
the Evening, Sept. 11.
which is reckoned to be 900 Italian Miles from Marseilles; and we hoped also
with the help of the Almighty to go the rest of our Voyage to Cyprus, which is
1300 more, (three of which are reckoned to a French League) for we crossed the
Adriatic and Tyrrhenian Seas so happily by good Weather, as if we had gone the
other way through the Straights. And although we sailed on very fast, yet the
Wind was uncertain, for one arose after another, 12.
so that we had three several Winds that Night and Day, viz. First, Maistral
after Midnight, 13.
which lasted until Morning; then the Betsch, that blew from South-West very
violently, in Latin called Africus, which lasted till Night: Then followed the
Ponente, which blows from the West, toward Night, which commonly arises
upon the Coast of Africa, as the Old Seamen observe, and we found it so our
selves, on the day of the Holy Cross, not without Trouble or Danger: For as the
Seamen kept that Day, and according to their Old Custom discharged three Great
Guns, Sept. 14.
the Betsch arose immediately with very great violence, so that the Waves
swelled very high, and the Ship was tossed about from one side to the other,
and did rock us so, that if we had not held our selves, we could not have kept
our places, as did happen to some of our Company that did not observe this, and
were strangely tumbled about in the Ship, and forced to creep on all four to
their places again. This Wind began to remit toward Night, when the Maistral
began to blow. With this Maistral we went on, and came so far, that on Monday
the 15 th. of September early we did make the Island Candy, 15.
and soon after another, now called Cerigo, anciently Cythera, near to the
Morea. That day we had very good Weather, and it was so calm, that we could
reach no further than to the Point of Candy. Thus going on, another Wind arose,
blowing from South-East, called Sirocco, and in Latin Vulturnus, which was
contrary to, 16.
and hindered us very much, so that we were forced to Sail upon one side, to
Weather the Point from one side to the other; when we came to the side of
Creet, and our Patron would neither Land in Candy, nor in a little Island
called Legosia, we turned on Wednesday toward Africa. Some while after a very
great Tempest arose, with Thunder and Lightning, so that we had work enough
with our Sails, and to Rule the Ship that it might take no hurt: And we sailing
thus against the Wind, that it might not cast us back, this made us more work
then the rest, for the Waves went against us so vehemently, that when we were
mounted to the top of a Wave, we seemed to look down thence into a deep and
dark Valley; then down we went again with such a Fury, that we thought we
should descend to the bottom, which continued almost 'till the next Morning.
And although the Tempest had thrown us a good way back, Sept. the 17.
yet in a little time we got so far forward again, that we could descry Candy,
and the little Island Legosia. Just then we spied two Ships, one a Bark, ten
Miles off to the Left, and the other a great Ship going to Africa.

18.
After we were thus gone along by Creet, we came on Friday just over against the
City of Candy; it came to be so calm and so warm, that we could hardly perceive
we were come above three or four Miles. We going thus slowly, some of our
Company jumped out into the Sea to wash themselves, but the Mate of our Ship
run a Fish through with a long Spear for that purpose, called Lischa, and so
pulled it out; this was delicately Colored, and very pleasant to look upon,
his Back was Blew, and his Belly White and Glisning, above a Yard long, of a
tender Flesh, and very good to Eat. This seems to have been a Tunny.

Just over against it, is a Monastery of St. Francis, in which is a very good
Apothecaries Shop, and a delicate Garden filled with strange and useful Plants.

There is also not far off, a good and safe Port, called Calisme, where we
would willingly have taken in Water, but because it lay thirty Miles before us,
and the Wind Sirocco contrary to us began to blow again, and hindered us in this
Enterprise; we steered on Saturday toward the South, that we might reach it
the next Morning.

About Noon, Sept. the 19.
when we turned again to the Porto, we saw another Ship on the Left, and
because we did not know how to trust her, we looked to our great Guns, of which
we had thirteen, and got them ready, and also the rest of our Arms, etc. But
the longer we looked upon the Ship, the further we perceived her go from us.
When we came within twelve Miles of the Port, (and hoped to make it) the Wind
changed, and the Tramontana blew from the North vehemently, 20.
so we went on in our right Course to the Islands Calderon and Christiana, so
that on Monday we passed the furthest Point of Creet called Caput Salomonis,
where we saw on the hight another Island situated sixty Italian Miles from
Rhodus, called Scarpanthos, 21.
and also Carpathos, where Night befell us. But when we expected to go forwards
with this Wind we lost it, and it changed into Graeco again, contrary to us,
and so we could not go on further, but were forced to cross up and down and to
weather the Point. 22.
On Monday we saw a Ship that came directly down upon us, wherefore we went to
meet her, and put our Flag at the top of our Mainmast. But when we came nearer
we knew her to be a Marsilian, called Santa Maria de Lacura Bursa, they did
send out one of their Boats to tell us, that they came seven Weeks agone from
Tripoli, and that they wanted Biscuits very much, and therefore desired us to
let them have some of ours, to which we willingly agreed, and let them have
what they would, and so they were very well pleased. While this was done, a
good Wind arose again, serving us both, called Tramontana, so that we could go
forwards and they homewards, and so we parted. Then our Master ordered three
Guns to be discharged, which they answered with two, so we went on, and lost
the sight of one another in half an Hours time.

Here is to be observed, that of the four Cardinal, and four side Winds five
were for us (for we could go on as well with the Tramontana and the Midi,
called North and South, as with the three other, called North-West, West, and
South-West, and so we had three contrary ones, Syrocco, Levantino, Sept. the 23.
and Graeco, which were contrary to us in our going; during this Wind we went
on with such speed, that on the 24 th of September in the Evening we saw the
great Island Cyprus, 24.
five hundred Miles beyond Candy. But because we had steered too much on the
Right, we were forced to spend all that Night and the next Day before we could
come to Cyprus. 25.
The same Morning we saw the high Mountain Libanus in Syria, two hundred Miles
distant from us, and so at Night we got into the Harbor of Salamine, here is
made the best Bay Salt that is in the World: Here we also discharged three
Guns, for Joy of our safe Arrival, and some of us Landed, together with our
Master, to take in Water, and to enquire after our Friends and Acquaintance. No
sooner were we Landed, but we met with two traveling Turks, with an Italian
that understood their Language: they spoke to us by their Interpreter, and
conducted us to their Colonel, who was encamped near the Marketplace of
Salamine upon a Hill, where one might see a great way off into the Sea. After
an Hours walk we came in sight of him, and saw about thirty Tents, and amongst
them his also, where we saw some curious Tapestry spread, and him sitting in
the midst, with a delicate white Turbant, and a long red lined Caban.

He held in his Hand a long Iron, like a Grater, we use to grate Bread withal,
only it was a great deal smaller: The Turkish Persons of Quality have generally
such Irons in their Hand in the Summertime; which they put in between their
Back and Clothes to scratch their Backs when they itch: About him sat some more
Gentlemen bended down, and others kept Sentinel without his Tent, with Guns and
Scymmeters well provided. Amongst the rest there was one of a good Presence
covered with a Tiger's Skin, that held a great Iron Club in his Hand. Upon his
desire we went to him, with the usual Reverences, according to their Custom,
bending our Head and the whole Body downwards, and laying the Right Hand upon
our Breasts: Our Master also pulled off his Shoes, went in, and sat down with
the rest before him: but we two set our selves down without upon two Seats that
were brought us. Then the Lord began to ask our Master, by his Interpreter,
from whence we came, how long we had been a coming, what Merchandises we had
brought, and whether we designed to make any Sale there: which Questions our
Master answered. Then he began to enquire after News: Viz. Where-about the
Spanish Armada was at present, and how strong it was reputed, whether the King
of Spain had made any Leagues with other Princes: and how the King of France
did agree with his Hugonots, how strong the City of Rochelle was, and whether
the King took it by violence, or whether they submitted themselves voluntarily.
After this Conference had lasted for half an Hour, he dismissed us with great
Civility, giving us leave, to go about our Affairs. So we went off with the
usual Ceremonies, and went the same Evening into the Market of Salamine, to
enquire after our Friends, but we found this Market Town, and also all the
Neighborhood so strangely spoiled, that there were but very few whole Houses
standing. But being that we found none of ours, nor having any business there,
we returned to our Ship, I found nothing by the way but a few Caper-bushes with
some Paliurus's and Kali.

Sept. 26.27.28.29.30.
After our Men had filled Water enough out of the Well by the Harbor we went
aboard the Ship again, hoisted up our Sails, and departed in the Night. But in
going thence for Tripoli we had for the most part contrary Winds, which hindered
us so much, that we did not arrive there until the last day of September.
Thanks, Honor, and Glory be to the Almighty God, that mercifully did protect
us from all Dangers and Mischiefs, and bought us safely into this Harbor.

CHAP. II.
Of the Famous City of Tripoli, of its fruitful Neighborhood, and great Trade:
And also of the splendid Baths, and other magnificent Buildings, to be seen
there. Their ways of making Rusma, Potashes, Soap, etc.

BEfore Tripoli near the Seashore, we saw five Castles like high Towers
distant from one an other about a Musket Shot, where some Janisaries are kept
in Garrison, to cover the Ships in the Harbor (which is in some measure
surrounded with Rocks) and to defend that Custom-house, and the several
Warehouses (where you may see all sorts of Goods brought from most parts of
the World) from any hostile Attempt or Assault: but after the Sun was set, and
Night began to approach we made what haste we could to the Town, which was an
Hours going distant from us. Some Turks went with us no other ways armed but
with good strong Cudgels, which, as I was told, they commonly carry to keep off
the Wolves called Jacals (whereof there are a great many in these Countries
that are used to run, seek and pursue after their Prey in the Night.) While we
were a talking of them some came up pretty near us, but as soon as they saw us
they turned and ran away. When we came to the Gate of the Town, we found it
shut up, wherefore one of our Friends (that met us to make us welcome) called to
some French Men that were in their Inn, in their Language called Fondique,
which is near the Gate, and reaches quite to the Wall of the Town, and desired
that one of them would take the Pains to go to the Sangiacho, to desire him to
let the Gate be opened to let us in, which they were willing to do. But in the
mean time that we staid before the Gate, another that was an Enemy to our
Friend ran also away, and bespoke some Turks and Moors to set upon us, which
they were very willing to do, and came with all speed through another Gate that
is never shut, along the Wall to us, fell unawares upon us, struck at us, and
took hold of us, chiefly at our good Friend, for whose sake all this was done:
others drew their Scymmeters upon us, so that I thought we should have been all
cut to pieces. While this was a doing the Gate was opened, and some French Men
and their Consul himself came to our assistance, and spoke to these Fellows,
earnestly exhorting them to desist, and to let the Cause be decided by the
Sangiacho and Cadi, which at length they did. So we came after this unfriendly
welcome in the Crowd into their Fondique, where we remained all that night. The
Consul was very much displeased at this, considering that such like Proceedings
would be very troublesome to them, wherefore he made great Complaints and
Enquiries, until at length he found out who was the Author thereof.

The next Morning we went to our Friends Houses in order to stay a while with
them: in the mean time we walked sometimes about in our own Clothes to see the
Town, which is situated in the Country of Syria, called Phoenicia, which
reached along the Seashore, to Berinthus, Sidon, Tyrus and Acon, as far to the
Mountain of Carmelus. The Town Tripoli is pretty large, full of People, and of
good account, because of the great Deposition of Merchandises that are brought
thither daily both by Sea and Land, it is situated in a pleasant Country, near
the promontory of the high Mountain Libanus, in a great Plain toward the
Seashore, where you may see abundance of Vineyards, and very fine Gardens,
enclosed with Hedges for the most part, consisting chiefly of Rhamnus,
Paliurus, Oxyacantha, Phillyrea, Lycium, Balaustium, Rubus and little
Palm Trees, that are but low, and so sprout and spread themselves. In these
Gardens as we came in, we found all sorts of Salletting and Kitchin-herbs, as
Endive, Lettice, Ruckoli, Asparagus, Seleri, whose tops are very good to be
eaten with Salt and Pepper, but chiefly that sort that comes from Cyprus,
Taragon by the Inhabitants called Tarchon, Cabbages, Colliflowers, Turnips,
Horse-raddishes, Carrots, of the greater sort of Fennel, Onions, Garlic, etc.
And also Fruit, as Water-melons, Melons, Gourds, Citruls, Melongena, Sesamum
(by the Natives called Samsaim) the Seeds whereof they are very much used to
strew upon their Bread, and more; but chiefly the Colocasia, which is very
common there, and are sold all the Year long: I have also found them grow wild
about Rivulets, but could never see either Flowers or Seeds on them. I found
also without the Gardens many Dates and white Mulberry-Trees, which exceed our
Aspen and Nut-Trees in height very much; and also Pomgranat-Trees, and Siliqua,
which the Grecians call Xylocerata the Arabs, Charnubi. Also Olive and
Almond-Trees, and Sebesten, the Fruit whereof are to be had at Apothecaries
Shops by the same Name. Poma Adami Matthew: But in great plenty there are
Citrons, Lemons and Oranges, which are as little eaten there as Pears or Crabs
here. Between these Gardens run several Roads, and pleasant Walks, chiefly in
the Summer, for they afford many shady Places and Greens, where you are
defended from the Heat and the Sunbeams: and if passing through you should
have a mind to some of the Fruits, you may either gather some that are fallen
down, or else pull them from the nearest Trees without danger, and take them
home with you.

Without at the Seashore, near the Old Town of Tripoli (which together with
many more, as Antiochia, Laodicea, etc. in the Year of our Lord 1183. was so
destroyed by an Earthquake, that nothing but a few Marks remain) there were
more Spring-gardens, which some of the Merchants still remember. But these were
a few Years agone by the violence of the Seas so destroyed, and so covered with
Sand, that now you see nothing there but a sandy Ground, like unto the Deserts
of Arabia. Yet at Tripoli they have no want of Water, for several Rivers flow
down from the Mountains, and run partly through the Town; and partly through
the Gardens, so that they want no Water neither in the Gardens nor in their
Houses.

The New Town in it self is of no strength, for it is so meanly walled in, that
in several places in the Night you may get in and out: But within there is a
Citadel situated upon an ascent near the Water, where a Garrison of a few
Janisaries is kept. They have low Houses ill built and flat at the top, as they
are generally in the East, for they cover their Houses with a flat Roof or a
Floor, so that you may walk about as far the Houses go: And the Neighbors walk
over the tops of their Houses to visit one another, and sometimes in the Summer
they sleep on the tops of them: And so it may very well be, that the four Men
(of which we read in St. Mark the 2 d. and St. Luke the 5 th. Chapter) that
carried the Paralytick Man, and could not come to Christ because of the Crowd
of the People, did carry him on the tops of the Houses, and so let him down
through the Roof into the Room where our Savior was. They have not great
Doors, Gates or Comings in from the Street as we have in our Country (except
some few Merchants Houses) because they use neither Wagons nor Carts, wherefore
they have only a little low Door, sometimes not above three Foot high, so that
you cannot go into them without stooping. In a great many Houses the Comings in
are so dark and deep that one would think he were going into a Cave or Cellar,
but when you are come through this Entry into them, you see in some great
Court-yards wherein are Cisterns to wash themselves in, in others large Halls
paved, and therein some Ascents that go up two or three Steps, paved delicately
with Marble, which they keep very clean, and adorned with rich Tapestry,
whereupon they sit, and this is covered with a large Arch left open at one
side, that the Turks may, chiefly in the Summer, sit underneath them very airy.

Their Doors and Houses are generally shut with wooden Bolts, which are hollow
within, and they unlock them with wooden Keys about a Span long, and about the
thickness of a Thumb, into this Key they have driven, five, six, seven, eight
or nine short Nails, or strong Wires in such an order and distance that they
just fit others that are within the Lock, and so pull them forwards or shut
them backwards as they please.

The Streets are but narrow, paved with broad Stones, and have, chiefly those
that are great Roads, a Channel in the middle of them about ten Inches broad,
so that a laden Camel may walk in them with ease, or that a Man may step over
them, which they say are made that the laden Camels or Asses, etc. that daily
arrive in great Caravans, may be obliged to walk in them one after another, in
good order, that People may walk in the Streets without being disturbed by
them. And that these Channels may be kept clean and dry, they have in some
places some hidden drains covered with broad Stones, that as well the
Rainwater as that of the Wells may run away through them.

They cannot brag of any fine Buildings, save only the Mosques or Temples, into
which no Christian must come, except he has a mind to be circumcised, and so
turn a Mammeluck or Renegado: And also some great Houses by the Natives called
Champ or Carvatscharas, (Caravanseries) wherein are a great many Shops or
Warehouses, and Chambers by one another, as is in stately Cloisters, in the
middle thereof is a great Courtyard, where the strange Merchants (that daily
bring their Merchandises in great Caravans) do Inn, considering that the Turks
keep no other Inns.

The Inns commonly belong to the Grand Seignor, or his Basha, which they build
in several Towns to get themselves a yearly Revenue, as the Venetians do in
Venice out of the German House.

Besides these Buildings they have also Hot-Houses or Bagnios, which are so
glorious and sumptuous, that they far exceed all their other Buildings in
Beauty, wherefore they are very well worth seeing. And because the Turks,
Moors, and Arabs, etc. according to their Mahumetan Laws are bound to bath
themselves often, to wash themselves clean from their manifold Sins which they
daily commit, but chiefly when they are going to their Mosques, therefore they
have their Hot-houses always ready, and keep them warm and in an equal heat,
with a very small Charge, and with far less Wood then one can imagine, all the
Week long, both by Night and by Day. They have underground a large and deep
Vault, like unto a large Cellar, which is every where very close, and it has
no more but two Air holes, one on the top about three or four Inches Diameter,
and the other below which is a great deal larger, where they put in Wood, or
for want of it pieces of Peat (which they make out of Camels or Goats Dung,
etc. and also out of the Dregs of the pressed Grapes) these are so dry that the
great Heat melts them just like Sea-coals or Turf, which are burnt in the low
Countries, and other places where they have not plenty of Wood: and these give
so great a heat that it warmeth the whole Vault quite through. And yet this
Vault is so close made that you do not perceive the least Smoke nor Vapor,
although it is sometimes very hot. But that the Fire may not decay, there is
one on purpose to attend it, that flings on as much Fuel as is necessary to
keep it. These Hot-houses (which according to the Custom of the Ancient Greeks
and Romans are magnificently built) have near to the Entry a delicate Hall
which is curiously paved; (as also is the whole Bath) and set with Marbles of
all colors very artificially, and a great Cupolo at the top thereof, which is
covered with an Arch in shape of a Ball or Globe. Round about the Walls are
broad Benches made, where the People put off their Clothes; wherefore this
first part of the Bath (whereof the Ancients had five) was called Apodyterium.
In the middle of the Baths is a fine Fountain, where they sprinkle every one
that goes out of the Bath with sweet Water, and also wash the Bathing-cloaths
that were made use of in the Bath, which they afterward fling up upon Lines
that are hung at the top of the Vault, two or three Fathoms high, with an
admirable Certainty, and spread them out with a long-Pole, with one-stroke
(that they may dry the sooner) so even, as if it were done with Hands, which no
body can see without admiration; when they have a mind to make use of them
again, they take them down with the same Sticks that are ready stuck up about
the Fountain. These are wrought finely with all sorts of Colors, whereof they
give two to every one that goes into the Bath or Bagnio, two others when he
comes out, one to put upon his Head, the other to put about him in the manner
of an Apron. When you will go into the Hot-house you must go through two or
three Chambers, whereof one is warmer than the other (which each of them are
covered with round Arches) until you come into the great Room, these Arches are
full of round holes all about, which are made in such order, and set with Glass
so curiously, that they do not only make them very light, but give also a fine
Ornament to them. In the great Bath are several great Marble Vessels which they
let the Water into; round about the great Room, there are three or four small
Chambers, which they keep chiefly for Persons of Quality, where they may wash
themselves apart from others without any disturbance. Besides these there is
still another Room where there is a very great Marble Trough, in which every
one may wash himself after his Sweat; there are several Pipes laid in it, that
you may temper your Water according to your own desire. All these Rooms are
heated with the same Fire, and the Turks and Moors (which two Nations have
almost the same Religion and Ceremonies) go into them very frequently; but
chiefly the Women, which flock to them in great numbers, for they never meet
any where else, but here, and at the Graves of their Relations; wherefore they
keep these sumptuous Buildings (the like whereto are hardly any where else
found) in very good repair. As soon as you come into the Hot-house, and are
grown a little warm one of the Servants (which are generally black Moors) meets
you, and lays you backwards down upon the Floor, and stretches and snaps all
your Joints after such a manner that they crack again; then he kneeleth down
upon your Arms, which he puts upon your Breast one over the other, and holds
them so for a good while together with his Knees, then he bends forwards and
stretches with both his Hands (keeping you still like a Prisoner under him)
your Head upwards. (So it happened once, when some of us went in together, and
were treated by the Moor after this manner, that he sprained the Neck of one of
my Companions, so that he could not turn his Head in several Days after it)
when this is done he turns you round upon your Belly, touches and stretches
your Joints again in such a manner, as if he did malax a Plaster; at length he
stands upon your Shoulder-blades and bending himself down, he rubs you all over
your Back with his Hands, then he lifts you up, and goes away. Then when you
lay your self down to rest you, or to sweat, he makes a Paste, to take of your
Hair (for they wear no Hair upon their Body, saving only their Armpits) he
takes Quicklime (by the Arab's called Rils) and a little Sarnick, (Arsnick)
that is. Orpiment, powders them, and mixeth them with Water, and anoints your
Hair with it, and looks very often after it, until he finds that the Hair
begins to come off, then he washes it perfectly off again (before it can hurt
you;) when this is done, he takes a fine white Cloth, dips it in Sope-suds, and
rubs your whole Body over with it. The before mentioned Clothes are white like
unto Cotton, but the Threads are harder, which the Pilgrims bring with them
from Meca: being made of the Bark of Trees that bear Bdellium, and they make
Ropes of them, as also of the Fibers of the Leaves of Palm Trees, and of the
covering of the Fruit of the same Tree (which is of the bigness of a Wall-nut)
by putting it on a Distaff, and so spinning it out.

Lastly, They wash Peoples Heads, and mix sometimes with their Lees (chiefly
for Women) an Ash-colored Earth called Nalun, which cleanses the Head, and
makes the Hair grow long. They have also another Earth called Jusabar, which
the Women eat frequently, so as breeding Women in our Country use to eat
sometimes Coals or other things. These their Baths, are as free to strangers as
Germans, French and Italians, etc. as to Moors and Turks, but they must have a
care not to come into those where the Women are, if they will not run the
hazard of their Lives. But that you may know where the Women are, they commonly
hang a Cloth over the Door toward the Street, that if any Man should intend to
go in there, when he sees this he may find himself another entrance.

Further concerning their Traffic, there are in the Town (because there is
there a very great Deposition of all sorts of Merchandises, that are brought
thither from great distances) a great many Merchants, chiefly French and
Italians, which have two Wise, Understanding and Grave Presidents, of which the
one that lives here is a French Man, and the other at Alepo, a Venetian,
called Consuls, to assist their Countrymen with good Counsel. They are sent
thither by their Government, and confirmed, and have great Privileges given
them of the Turkish Emperor, to let the Merchants with their Commodities lodge
with them, and to defend them against any assault of the Turks and Moors, that
they may trade and deal without disturbance. These Consuls, wear still their
usual Habits, made of Red Satin, Velvet, or Damask, etc. very richly adorned,
and they bring along with them, Tailors, Shoe-makers, but chiefly their
Physicians, Apothecaries, Barber-Surgeons and Ministers, etc. and have besides
them their Interpreters, skilful in the Turkish and Arabian Language, chiefly
the Consul of Venice, because he must stay there but three Years, when they are
expired the Dogue sends another in his place. When the new one is arrived at
Tripoli he dare not go on shore, before the other gives him a visit of
Reception in the Ship.

To these two Consuls there are given two large Buildings, called by them
Fondiques, situated near two Gates of the City, which lead toward the Haven
and the Seashore, that they may the easier send their Goods in and out. There
are all day long a great many Moors with their Asses, that stand waiting for an
opportunity to conduct Merchants and Seamen with their Goods in and out. These
two Houses are large, and have abundance of Vaults and Chambers, so that there
is room enough to lodge both Merchants and their Goods.

With the French are also lodged, those from Genua, Florence, St. Luck,
Germans, and Dutchmen, etc. as also with the Venetians those of Candia, Corfu,
etc. that are under their Master's Jurisdiction. These Fondiques have no more
then one large Gate, where Janisaries keep watch: when their Masters the
Consuls go out, they are accompanied with a multitude of Merchants and their
Servants, and they are in great Authority with the Turks and Moors, even beyond
the Bashaw himself: They always take along with them their Janisaries, which go
before with great and long Cudgels, and beat the People out of the way (even
the Turks themselves.)

The Merchants have daily great Conversation with the Jews, for they know a
great many Languages, and the Prizes of all Merchandises, how to buy and to
sell them; wherefore they always help to conclude Bargains in Merchandises, pay
the Money and give Bills of Exchange, wherefore they have their Broakage. I
have seen chiefly three sorts of their Silver Coins, viz. Aspers, Medin and
Saiject, which are very good, and pass through all Turkey. When great Sums are
paid, they do not tell the whole, but only part of it, and weigh it, and so
take the rest proportionably by the same weight. Of Gold Coins they have only
Ducats which are made of fine Gold, and are very limber: besides these you
hardly see any other Coins, but Venetian Ducats, French Testons, Joachims
Thalers, of which they have so many, that they often do not only pay with them
great Sums and their Bills of Exchange, but turn them also into their own Coin.
So that there is abundance of Jews through all Turkey in any Trading-Town, but
chiefly in Alepo, and in this Town of Tripoli, where they have built a very
large Habitation, and a delicate Synagogue. These Jews have the Revenues of
Customs of the Grand Signior in their hands, so that nothing can be brought in
or out, but it must go through their hands, which is very troublesome to the
Merchants. Those that buy any thing of them, must have a special care, that
they be not cheated, for they are full of it, insomuch as they confess of
themselves, that no body can get any thing by them, except he will be a greater
Harmani (that is cheat) than they, that dare to sell Wall-nuts, for Nutmegs or
Myrobolans.

Concerning the Merchandises: if one will see several sorts of Goods they are
to be found in the Carvatscharas or Champen, whereof I have made mention
before, but chiefly in the Batzaren, or Houses where they buy and sell, or
Exchanges. These Exchanges are wide and long, and partly arched, partly covered
with Timber, that you may walk and trade there without being wetted, they have
Shops on both sides, which are also kept by Handicrafts, Tradesmen, as
Shoe-makers, Tailors, Sadlers, Silk-embroiderers, Turners, Copper-smiths,
Cutlers, Woollen-drapers, Grocers, Fruiterers, Cooks, and many more, which are
very orderly distributed and placed in their several Streets and Places. They
also drive a great Trade in Silk, and there are a great many that deal in
nothing else, but Silk, which is conveyed thither from the adjacent places, for
Mount Libanus is inhabited by a numberless People, that live by spinning and
working of Silk, but chiefly they of Damascus, where is such plenty of Silk,
that a Merchant may quickly lay out in it many thousand Ducats: Because of the
great abundance of white Mulberry-Trees (by the Natives called Tut) which grow
there so high and large, that they have plenty of Leaves to feed their
Silkworms: But the Mulberries thereof are white, and they carry them about in
Baskets to sell to ordinary People. So there is in the Batzars many
Silk-workers, which make all sorts of Embroidery, as Purses, Buttons, and
Girdles or Sashes of several colors, which they tie about their Loins; these
are at work before their Shops, that every one may see them. When they work, or
tie two Threads together, they hold the Work oftener with their great Toe, then
pin it to any thing, and the same do the Turners, (which sitting to it) hold
their turning Irons as well with their Toes as with their Fingers. Further at a
certain time of the Year there is brought from Damascus and other adjacent
places, to these Batzars so great a quantity of large and well-tasted Cibebs, a
kind of Raisins, having but one or no Stone, that several Ship loads are sent
from thence to us. These and the like Goods are daily brought and found in
their Batzars, as rare Tapestry and delicately wrought Silks with Flowers and
Roses of several colors, some of which look like pure Gold. But of all the
Tradesmen there are not so many of one sort as of them that only deal in Soap
and Potashes, for of these Ashes (besides Soap) several Ship-loads are yearly
sent from thence to Venice, which they use for making of Glase as well as Soap.
These Ashes are made chiefly of a Herb called by the Arabians Schivan, whereof
there are two sorts (which amongst others I have pasted upon Paper) one whereof
is not unlike to our little Kali, it is a thick and knobby Plant, with several
small Sprigs growing out of it, which have several full Buttons at the top, and
underneath small pointed Leaves, just like the lesser Kali, as I said before,
tasting somewhat sharp, the Leaves thereof are underneath white, and on the
other side of the color of Ashes. The other sort becomes also many Stalks,
which are full of knots like our Equisetum, and underneath them appears a Woody
and Ash-colored Root.

Both these Herbs grow thereabout in great quantities, and are burnt into Ashes
upon the high Mountains, in burning thereof there settleth an Oily Matter
underneath toward the bottom, which united with the Ashes is almost as hard as
a Stone when it is cold: at the top thereof a part of the Ashes remains unmixed
and loose, therefore it is not so good as the rest. These ashes are brought
down from the Mountains upon Camels backs by the Moors, to some Merchants that
drive a great Trade with them, for partly they send away into Foreign parts,
and partly they make Soap of them, some more, some less, according to every
one's Capacity and Pleasure. The way they make their Soap in Syria, I am
informed is this, viz. They take commonly Twelve hundred weight (or twelve
Centners) of these Ashes, which in the Summer they divide into Eight, and in
the Winter into Four parts, because the Soap is sooner boiled up in Winter (for
the Heat being then included by the outward Cold is more vehement) then in
Summer. Of this they take first one part and make it into a good sharp Lie,
which they pour into a very large Kettle or Caldron made of Stone, with a large
bottom made of a Copper-plate, and very thick, wherein they have before put
Sixteen hundred weight of Sallet-Oil, and let it simper for twenty four Hours,
pouring daily in more Lie of another part. But before it is quite boiled up
(which in Winter requires perhaps five Days, and in Summer nine or ten) they
take an Hundred weight of Quicklime, and mixing it with the Ashes, draw a Lie
from it, which they put two days before it is quite enough into the Caldron,
more or less according as they find it thick or thin. But if it should happen,
that there should be too much of the Lie in the Kettle, they have a Cock coming
out of the Copper-plate, whereby they let out as much of the Lie as is
convenient. When it is almost boiled up, they take out, with a Copper-kettle
that holds eight or ten Pounds, the thicker part of the Soap that swimmeth on
the top, and pour it upon the Floor, which is covered with Lime or Chalk beaten
to Powder, let it lie there for one Day in the Winter, and two Days in the
Summer, and it grows so hard that they can walk over it, then they make it
smooth, cut it into square pieces, and put their Mark upon it.

CHAP. III.
Of the Turks of high and low Conditions, Men and Women: of their Employments,
Offices, Manners, Customs, Clothes, as much as I could at Tripoli (during my
abode) understand, see and learn thereof.

THE City of Tripoli is, as well as a great many more of the adjacent Towns and
Provinces, subject to the Turkish Emperor, wherein he has his Officers, as in
all other places, that they may be ruled according to his Pleasure, and
protected from all assaults and dangers. Such Superiors are by them called
Sangiacks or Bashaws, which we may render State-holders, which have several
hundred Horsemen under their Command, more or less according to the Revenues
of the Provinces that are committed to their care. These are brave and
experienced Soldiers, that lead their Men out into the Fields several times in
the Week, to exercise them, the Horsemen in Riding and the Foot in Shooting
with Bows and Arrows, which have their several Marks done upon high Poles to
shoot at in their running, that if there should be occasion they may be ready
to take the Field presently to fight their Enemies. These Sangiachi have other
Captains and Commanders under them, of which the Soubashaws or Judges are the
Chief, these are placed by him round about in the adjacent places, to officiate
for him where he cannot be present. To such places are commonly called the
Burgers or Citizens of the same places, and they continue no longer then half a
Year. By them are examined all Criminal Matters, and they have Power to examine
and put to the Torture all Malefactors, to make them confess their Crimes. They
also accompany the Malefactors that are Sentenced and Condemned by the Cady to
the place of Execution, to see the Sentence duly executed: So I have seen them
often to ride along, but chiefly at one time with a poor Malefactor condemned
to die, who was carried on a Camel's back, tied with his Back to a Cross, with
his Arms extended, to the place of Execution, and between the Cross and his
Shoulders were put two burning Torches prepared with Bacon, so that the Grease
ran all over his Body, and burnt it severely. The Turks have also for several
Crimes (whereof there are a great many) their several Punishments, as for
Thieves and Murderers the Gallows, for Traitors impaling, and for them that
kill a Man Beheading, etc. And so they keep a great many Servants, which they
send out every where, to bring to them any that are suspected to have
transgressed the Laws, by beating or wounding one another (which happens very
seldom) by Stealing or Murdering, or Adultery.

For any other Transgressions besides these, the Turks are brought before other
Magistrates, called Cadi, which are to understand the Laws, and to Judge, and
to pronounce Sentence after they have examined the Witnesses. If it be for
Debt, they are immediately cast into Prison until they pay, or find out any
other means, to make up the Debt. But if it be for transgressing the Laws, they
are severely fined, or else punished with blows. Wherefore also their Cadi keep
several Men and Spies, which they daily send out, to find out any, that
transgresses the Laws in drinking of Wine, in not going to Prayers frequently,
in not strictly observing their Fasts, or in transgressing the Laws any other
ways. If they find any, they summon them before their Cadi, who punishes them
according to the default, with a pecuniary Mulct, or if they have no Money to
give, he Sentences them to receive a certain number of Blows upon the Soals of
their Feet, and besides pay half a Penny for each blow. Being that a great many
of such Transgressors are daily brought before him, whereof the greatest part
receive Blows, it causes so miserable a howling and crying, that we might
plainly hear it in the French Fondique, which is just over against it: and
although the Cadi is very much troubled with such Transgressors, yet
Matrimonial Causes take him up a great deal more time, because all that will
Marry must come to him, and make their Agreements and Contracts, which are
consigned into his Books, partly that they may have them to show if any
Differences should arise between them (seeing that the Turks and Moors have
several Wives, and are divorced again for a small matter) and partly that they
may give them Copies of their Contracts upon their Marriages, which they write
for ordinary People upon smooth and plain Paper, but for others that are rich
upon a piece of white Satin, about a Yard long. These their Contracts they
comprehend in a few Words, and draw them up so short, that they scarce contain
above eight or ten Lines apiece, at least two Inches distant from one another.
For this purpose they keep several Clerks, which oftener write upon their Knees
then upon Desks or Tables. These Sangiachs, Soubashaws and Cadis, of which I
have made mention before, and also their Wives go very richly clothed with
rich flowered Silks, artificially made and mixed of several colors. But these
Clothes are commonly given them by those that have Causes depending before them
(for they do not love to part with their own Money) to promote their Cause, and
to be favorable to them: for they are so very covetous, that where there is
nothing given them, there they do but little, for the Bashaws and Sangiachi
(which under the Grand Signior, rule Kingdoms and Principalities) know very
well that they must rule but three Years in the same place: For as soon as
their Sultan commands them they must go to another place, perhaps far distant
from that place. Wherefore they always strive after Honor and Riches, that
they may either by Gift or Favor be by the Court promoted, to greater
Authority and Office, or else if that cannot be obtained, they may at least lay
up in the mean time such Riches, that they may be able to maintain themselves
after the same Greatness, as they did before.

When I lived there, a new Sangiach was promoted into the place of the old one,
who made his entrance followed by his Spahis, and was honorably received by
the Town: his Train consisted most in Horse, and Archers with Arms and Shields
very well stored, they also had Drums and Kettle-drums, and other Musical
Instruments, etc. their Sabers or Scymeters were for the most part tipp'd up a
great way with some gilded Metal, and very smooth and shining, and so were
their Stirups, that at a distance they made a great glistering.

All these Officers, love to be looked upon, as if they performed their Office
with great Integrity, and yet they are so addicted to Covetousness (which is
the root of all Evil) that, for Gifts or Bribes, they let the false Depositions
of those that out of Spite accuse the innocent pass for Good. Therefore it is a
very easy matter, for any one that would be revenged of his Enemy (by way of a
small present) to bring him into great trouble and costs. The Soubashaws are of
the same Stamp, for they do not at all stick to punish for Lucre-sake, the
Innocent, chiefly if they be Rich and Strangers: their Men are very well
skilled in these Affairs, to find one trifle or other against them; and because
their time is also but short, therefore they make all possible speed to grow
rich: and this so much the bolder and opener as they need not to fear their
Sangiach, ^ nor Bashaw, for they wink at it, as being Sharers of the Prey, that
receive their Dividend Weekly. In short, let one have committed never so much
Evil, if he gives but Money to them all is well, and he is as good again as
ever he was before. Seeing that many, chiefly in Law Suits, are wronged by
them, therefore higher Judges (called Cadileschier) are set over them, to
punish them for their Roguery: these are esteemed by the Turks to be the
principal Teachers of the Mahumetan Faith and Laws, they are generally grave
and understanding Men, before whom are brought all intricate Causes and Appeals
to be decided, and they have Power to punish these and other Officers, but
chiefly the Cadis, and to put them in and out, according to their behavior,
wherefore they often take their Circuits from Town to Town, to see how the
Cadis execute Justice, wherefore they are very much afraid of their coming, and
if they know themselves guilty of any Misdemeanors, they oftentimes run away.
If they are complained of by the People, they are presently punished, with many
blows, put out of their places, and if the Crime be great, they are after
beheaded, strangled, burnt, or other ways executed, and this happens very
often in these Countries. But if one or more, that were also wronged by the
Cadi, could not stay till the Arrival of the Cadileschier, to make their
Complaints to him, they have another way, that is to make their Complaints to
the Port, or the Emperor's Court, or else to go themselves, and make their
complaints in Person, where they are speedily heard (for such Causes as I am
informed are heard certainly once in fifteen days) and righted. If any be poor
he is maintained by the Court until his Cause is ended.

Such a Cause did formerly happen to an Interpreter of the Venetian Consul, who
being very well to pass, a Soubashaw did strive to make booty of him: but not
being able to prove any thing against him whereby he could make him punishable,
he found at length a way, and got one of his Servants to hide a common Whore in
the Interpreter's House, unknown to him, that he might have sufficient cause to
accuse him. This being done, the Servants of the Cadi broke into the House, and
searched it, and finding this Whore* they put him into Prison. The Interpreter,
notwithstanding he pleaded his innocence, and that he was totally ignorant of
the Fact, yet could not satisfy the Cadi by any means, but was condemned by
him in Nine hundred Ducats, which he was forced to pay. This troubling the
Interpreter, he could not brook this unjust Imposition (being an experienced
Man, well skilled in their Laws) wherefore he took Horse immediately (unknown
to the Cadi) for Constantinople, where he made his Complaints to the Court
himself so well, and with that Success, that he was declared innocent and not
guilty of the Fact. But as this Court usually does severely punish those that
do commit Injustice, so this Cadi did not escape: for within a little while
after the Turkish Emperor sent to him a Chiausbashaw (which may be compared to
an Executioner) with a little Note, whereof the Contents were to send him his
Head by the Bearer, which frighted the Gentleman very much, but yet (after by a
peculiar Favor he had taken his leave of his Wife) submitted himself to it.
This is the Reason, That many ill Intentions and Designs (chiefly if one
summoned the other to appear at the Court before the Emperor) are stopped and
drawn back, which else would have taken effect and been gone on with all.

If a Man appears before any Turk that is a Person of Quality, he must have
especial care, that chiefly in departing he do not turn his backside toward
him, for this is accounted the greatest Incivility and Affront that can be
given throughout all the Turkish Dominions. Nay if a Servant appears before his
Master to ask him forgiveness of his Faults, he uses peculiar Ceremonies,
first he submits himself, and shows his Master all respect imaginable,
then he takes with his Knees bended, his Master's Hands to kiss them: if his
Master lets him have them freely, he is in good hopes that his Master will
grant him his request, but if not, but draws them back, although he makes
several proffers toward them, he knows certainly that he is still out of
favor, and that there is but small hopes of obtaining his Intention.

They love that one should bear a great deal of Honor and Respect toward
them, for they know that their Masters the Sultan's Power has for a long time
past, not been decreasing but always increasing; wherefore they take very much
upon themselves, and are always richly clothed, and ride delicate Horses, well
adorned with stately Accoutrements, with embroidered Saddles, and Saddle cloths
of Scarlet, Velvet, or other Silks, the Bridles and Stirrups well garnished
with Silver and Gold.

They commonly speak in the Turkish Language (and so do all that lie about in
Garrisons) which is a very Manly one, and sounds in pronouncing much like unto
our German Tongue: but they also generally are expert in the Arabian Tongue,
which is the common one there to the whole Country, and goes through many
Provinces: for you meet there with many Arabians, Syrians, Jacobites, etc.
Christians and Heathens to whom this Speech is common.

The Turks have also some very fine Manners and Customs, they are affable, they
begin their Discourse (chiefly to Relations and Acquaintance) with a friendly
Salutation and Kissing: but they are also lazy, and do not esteem the liberal
Arts and Sciences, love Idleness better than Labor, for you shall see them
spend a whole Day in the Game of Chesse, and other Games, and in playing on
their (Quinterns) Guitarhs which have three, five, seven, and sometimes eleven
Strings, as I have seen them with the Musicians of the Bashaw of Aleppo several
times: they commonly play only with their Forefinger, or a piece of a Quill,
they walk about with them in the Streets (chiefly the Soldiers) all day long,
and so use themselves to Laziness and Leachery, and contaminate themselves with
all sorts of terrible, and chiefly Sodomitical Sins, which by them (because
both high and low are equally guilty thereof) are not at all punished.

They love to wear good Clothes (but do not care they should cost them much) of
light colors; their upper Garments which hang down very long before, set with
Buttons, under which they wear other Coats instead of Doublets, which (commonly
those of the Soldiers) are made of blew Cloth, somewhat shorter before then
behind, with white Sleeves, and without Collars about the Neck, and so are
their Shirts, which generally are wrought of Cotton, and cut about the Neck as
wide as their Clothes: instead of Bands they wear Neck-cloths, which they wrap
about their naked Necks to defend them from the violent Heat of the Sun. They
also, chiefly in the Summer wear white and wide Cotton Drawers, which reach to
their Ancles, and are much narrower below; to them they have no Cod-pieces
(which they do not suffer others to wear) that they may wash themselves without
hinderance, their Private parts, Feet, Arms, Necks or any other parts, to
cleanse themselves as often as their Laws shall direct them. These Drawers they
tie about their middle with some Strings or Bands about their naked Body, and
let their Shirts hang down over them. When they have occasion to make Water,
they untie their Drawers again, sit down, and cast their Clothes round about
them like Women, turn themselves from the South, to which they turn when they
are going to pray. If they see a Man make his water standing, they immediately
conclude him to be a Christian, and none of their Faith. They commonly sit with
their Legs laid one over the other (which they do every where in the East)
wherefore they have neither Chair nor Table, but instead thereof, they have a
paved place two or three steps high, which is arched over head, which they keep
very clean, and cover it with Tapestry, or Serge, or Mats finely twisted with
several colors, according to their Ability: wherefore to save them, the Turks
pull of their Shoes and leave them at the Chamber Door. Their Shoes are like
unto those our Lacques use to wear, and like Slippers easy to be put on and
off, they commonly are of a white or blew color, painted before, underneath
defended with Nails before, and with Horse-shoes behind; these are worn by
young and old, Men and Women, rich and poor. Besides these they also wear
sometimes wooden Shoes, which are to be sold every where, they are about three
Inches high, and in the middle underneath carved out, to distinguish the Soals
from the Heels, painted with several colors: the same wear the Women, which
have almost the same Garments with the Men, and have also Drawers, which
sometimes are so long that they hang out before their Coats: they are commonly
made of fine Cotton of several colors, and laced at the sides. You very seldom
see any Turkish Women either in the Streets or in the Markets to buy Provision,
or in their Churches, where only the chiefest of them come, (and that but
seldom) where they have a peculiar place separated from the Men. They have also
in their Houses secret places and corners, where they hide themselves
immediately, if any body should come to see their Households. When they go
abroad, which is very seldom, you see three or four of them together with their
Children, which are all one Man's, for according to their Law they are allowed
to take as many as they can maintain. Their Faces are all covered with black
Vails, whereof some are of fine Silk, and some of Horse-hair, which the poorer
sort wear: and over their Head they put some white Scarfs made of Cotton, which
are so broad that they cover not only their Heads but their Arms and Shoulders,
they look in them almost like our Maids, when to keep themselves from the Wet,
they put a Table-cloth or Sheets over their Heads. But because the Turks are
very Jealous, therefore their Wives seldom meet in the Streets or Markets, but
only in the Hot-houses, or when they go to visit the Tombs of their deceased
Parents or Relations, which generally are out of the Town near the Highways.
When they go thither they take along with them Bread, Cheese, Eggs, and the
like to eat there (which was called Parentalia by the Latins) just as the
Heathens used to do in former Ages: and sometimes they leave some of their
Cheer behind them, that the Beasts and Birds may eat it after they are gone,
for they believe, that such good bestowed upon the Beasts is as acceptable to
God, as if it were bestowed on Men. Their Graves are commonly hollow covered at
the top with great Stones, which are like unto Childrens Bed-steads in our
Country, which are high at the head and feet, but hollowed in the middle; they
fill them up with Earth, wherein they commonly plant fine Herbs, but chiefly
Flags, they also put some green Myrtles in little Air-holes that are round the
Tombs, and they are of opinion that their Relations are the happier the longer
these remain green, and retain their color, And for the sake of this
Superstition, there are in several places of the Town Myrtles to be sold that
stand in Water, that they may remain fresh, which the Women buy to stick up at
the Graves of their Relations. Their Burying-places are always out of Town near
the Highways, that any body that goes by may be put in mind of them, and pray
to God for them, which is the reason that so many Chapels are built about
their Burying-places, that People that go by (chiefly the Relations of the
deceased) may go into them to pray to God on their behalf. When any of them
dies they wash him, and put on his best Clothes, then they lay him on a Bar or
Board, and strew him with Sweet Smelling Herbs and Flowers, leaving only his
Face bare, that every body may look upon him that knows him, as he is carried
out. If it be a Tschelebii, that is a Noble Person, they put his Helmet and his
other Ornaments at his Head, his Friends and Acquaintance, which go before and
follow the Corpse, keep no order, but hang upon one another, as if they were
fudled, and go merrily, and shouting along to the Grave: as also do the Women,
who come behind and hollow so loud, that you may hear them a great way off.

CHAP. IV.
A Description of the Plants I gathered at Tripoli.

COnsidering that I undertook this Journey into the Eastern Countries, not only
to see these People, and to observe their Manners, etc. but also, and that
principally, diligently to enquire, and to search out the Plants that were
growing there. I cannot but shortly describe those I found about Tripoli during
my stay there, and will begin with such as grew on the Sea-shores, which were:
Medica marina, Gnaphalium marinum, Leucoium marinum, Juncus maritimus, Peplis,
Scammonium Monspeliense, which the Natives call Meudheuds; but Rhasis in his
Book ad Almans. calls it Coriziala, Brassica marina, which spreads its Roots
above the Sand for some Cubits round, and has instead of round Leaves rather
square ones. A kind of wild white Lillies by the Latins and Greeks called
Hemerocallis, which did not only grow on the Seashore, but also in Islands
thereabout in great plenty; with a great many others, which I forbear to
mention here, being common: Behind the Custom-house, near the Harbor, I found
in the Ruins of the old Wall that are left of that City, Hyoscyamus, and hard
by it in the Sand an Herb not unlike unto Cantabrica secunda Caroli Clusii,
saving only the Stalks and Leaves which are woolly. But the Ricinus grows
there above all in so great plenty, that you can hardly make your way through
it, the Inhabitants call it still by its old Arabian Name Kerva.

If you turn from thence to the Highway toward your Right Hand, you see the
Tythimalus Paralius, and also a kind of Conyza Diosc. out of one Root there
spring up several Stalks, whereof some grow upright, but the greater part of
them lie down upon the ground, and so shoot new Roots, which afterward sprout
out into new Stalks: it bears long Olive-leaves, which are thick, fattish,
and somewhat woolly, and have a strong, and equally sweet smell: for the rest,
as the Flowers, it is very like unto the great one. You find there also the
lesser and greater Medica, which the Moors to this day still call Fasa.
Likewise so great and many Squills, that the Inhabitants weed them up, chiefly
those that grow near their Gardens, and fling them up in high heaps like
Stones. There also grows Securidaca minor, Tribulus terrestris, by the
Inhabitants called Haseck, and a kind of Echium, which grows by the way as
you go to St. James' Church, which from thence is situated upon an ascent at a
Mile's distance. Hereabout, and in other adjacent places, grows a great
quantity of Sugarcanes, so that there is yearly sold a great many Sugar-loaves
that are made thereof. These are as high and big as our Canes, and not much
differing from them, but within, and down toward the Root, where they are
best, they are full of this pleasant Juice, wherefore the Turks and Moors buy a
great many of them, being very pleasant to them to chew and eat, for they are
mightily pleased with Sweetmeats (whereof they have variety.) Before they
begin to eat or chew them, they stripped off the long Leaves and cut away what is
tasteless, so that only the juicy and good remains, which is hardly two Foot.
Of the thus prepared Canes they carry many along with them through the Streets,
and cut off one piece after another, skale them, and so chew and eat them
openly every where in the Street without shame; for they are, principally near
the Root, very tender and feel as mellow between your Teeth as if it were Sugar
it self. So the Turks use themselves to Gluttony, and are no more so free and
courageous to go against their Enemies to fight as they have been in former
Ages. The Sugar Canes do not grow there from Seeds, neither are they propagated
by the Root, but by the Canes themselves, whereof they lay into the Ground,
some green pieces of two or three Joints long, and that they may grow the
sooner, they bore pretty large holes in between the Joints; when they begin to
grow they sprout out in the Joints, and grow up into great Canes, and so bring
in good profit.

There also by the Rivers are found Anthillis marina, Visnaga, the first
Apocymum, and Oleander with Purple Flowers, by the Inhabitants called Defle,
and a delicate kind of Scabiosa Melisra Maluca, and if you go to the Gardens,
you see Heliotropium majus, Convolvulus folio acuto, Vitis nigra, Phaseolus
Turcicus, with yellow Flowers, which still retain the ancient Name of Lubie,
Lysimachia lutea, and wild Vines called Labruscae, whereon nothing grows but
only the Flowers called Ocnanthe: and also a Shrub like unto the Polygonus of
Carol Clusius; which climbs up into high Trees, and hang down again from the
Twigs, and I very believe they are the same with Ephedra, whereof Pliny makes
mention in the 7 th Chapter of his 26 th Book.

When I went farther, with an intention to consider the Plants that grew in the
Country, first came before me some Sycomors, whereof chiefly Dioscorides and
Theophrastus make mention, and tell us of two sorts, and when I called these
things to mind, I light of one of the second sort of Sycomors, whereof
abundance grow in Cyprus, wherefore these wild Figg-Trees might be called the
one the Cyprish Sycomore-Tree, and the other the Egyptian Sycomore-Tree,
according to the places where they are most frequent and fruitful. I found a
great many of them, the Moors and Arabians call them Mumeitz, they are as great
and as high as the white Mulberry-Trees, and have almost the same Leaves, but
they are only somewhat rounder, and are also whole at or about the sides, they
bear Fruit not unlike to our Figg-Trees, only they are sweeter, and have no
little Seeds within, and are not so good, wherefore they are not esteemed, and
are commonly sold only to the poorer sort of People, they grow in all Fields
and Grounds, as you may see by the Words of the second Book of the Chronicles
in the 9 th. Chap. Verse. 27 th. And the King made Silver in Jerusalem as
Stones, and Cedar-Trees made he as the Sycomore-Trees that are in the low
Plains in abundance. Zacheus did climb upon such a one when he had a great mind
to see our Savior, Essaias also makes mention of them in his 9 th. Chap.
Verse. 10. and Amos in his 7 th. Chap. Verse. 14. where he says of himself: I
was a Herds-man, and a Gatherer of Sycomore-Fruit. These two sorts are very
like one another, in Stem, Leaves, and Fruit, only as the Fruit of the one
comes more out of the great Stem and great Twigs, so that of the other does the
same, but not out of the Stems and Twigs immediately, but out of Twigs or
Sprouts without Leaves of the length of five or six Inches, whereon they grow
sometimes very thick, and in a bunch together. These Trees bear Fruit three or
four times yearly, which are small, of an Ash color, oblong round, like
Prunes, and are found upon the Trees almost all the Year long. Hereabout also
grow many Thorns, whereof is made mention in the Scriptures, by the Inhabitants
called Hauseit, and by the Arabians Hausegi, but the Latins call them Ahamnus,
and also white Poplars, still to this day called Haur by the Arabians. There
also grows a great and high Tree which bears delicate Leaves and Flowers
pleasant to look upon (by the Inhabitants called Zensetacht, but by Rhazes and
Avicenna, Astirgar, and Astergir, and Azadaracht) whereof you see here and
there several planted in the Streets, to make a pleasant Shade in the Summer,
the Fruit thereof remains upon them all the Year long, until they put out
again a new, for they are hurtful, and kill the Dogs if they eat thereof.

Near the Town upon the Highlands (where you see abundance of Cornfieldsd, and
abundance of pleasant Olive Trees, that reach quite up to Mount Libanus) are
found Polium montanum, Pecten veneris, ferrum equinum, Chamaeleon niger, with
its sharp pointed and black Roots and Leaves, very like unto the Leaves of
Carlina, whereof the Stalks are of a reddish color, a Span long, and of the
thickness of a Finger: whereon are small prickly Heads, of a bluish color,
not unlike to these of the little Eryngium. Another fine Plant grows
thereabout, called Sathar in their Language, but when I consider its beautiful
Purple-coloured Flowers, and its small Leaves which are something long withal,
I rather judge it to be the Hasce of the Arabians, or the true Thyme of Diosc.
which we call Serpillum Romanum. It has so pleasant an Acrimony, as any Spice
can have, wherefore the Inhabitants use it very much, whole or in powder, at
home and abroad, with and without their Meat, chiefly for to correct an ill
digestion of their Stomach. This Herb is never found in our Apothecaries Shops,
they take another in its room, which has lesser and greener Heads, and is
rather the first Satureia of Diosc. brought from Candia. There are also two
sorts of Clinopodium, whereof the lesser and tenderer (considering its long
Stalks, Leaves and Flowers, which grow in good order, and at equal distances
one over the other) may very well be taken for the true one of the Diosc. There
are also Ilex minor, Sabina baccifera, Terebinthus and many more.

In the Town are found several strange Plants, one called Musa, whereof the
Stalks are from nine to twelve Foot high, which are smooth, and without (they
are enclosed in their Leaves, and often quite surrounded like our Reeds) of a
fine shining Green; at the top thereof the Leaves spread themselves out, and
look like a great bush of Feathers, for they are very long, and so broad that
the biggest Person may lie upon them with his whole Body very well. These
Leaves have a rib in the middle, which keeps them up straight, and so
strongly, that although the Wind breaks them at the sides in several places,
yet notwithstanding they remain upright. These Trees bear their Fruit no more
but once, wherefore they are cut down, and so the Root shoots out several other
Stalks about a Foot distant from the old one, which grow up again, and bring
forth Fruit, which grows on a thick Stalk in great numbers; they are almost
shaped like the Citruls, round and bended, only they are less, smooth without,
environed with a thick rind, which is first yellow, but when they are kept a
few days it grows black, it is easily separated when they are new, within they
are whitish, full of Seeds; sweet and good to eat; but they fill mightily, and
are apt to gripe: wherefore (as Theophrastus mentions in the 5th. Chapter of
his 4th. Book) Alexander the Great, forbid his Army to eat them, when he went
into the Indies. There grows but very little of this Fruit about Tripoli, but
it is brought from the Neighboring places plentifully. We also find there
another Tree, not unlike unto our Privett, by the Arabians called Alcanna, or
Hen, and by the Grecians in their vulgar Tongue Schenna, which they have from
Egypt, where (but above all in Cayro) they grow in abundance. The Turks and
Moors nurse these up with great care and diligence, because of their
sweet smelling Flowers, and put them into earthen Pots, or wooden Cases or
Boxes, to keep them in the Winter in Vaults from the Frost, which they cannot
endure. And because they hardly begin to sprout before August, they water them
with Soapsuds, but others lay Lime about the Root, to make it put forth the
earlier, that it may flower the sooner, because of the pleasantness of the
Smell of the Flowers, which is somewhat like Musk: They are of a pale yellow
color, and stand in Spikes of the length of a Span, but not very close, so
that Leaves appear between them; Their Twigs are also of the same color,
whereof many sent to us, to cleanse the Teeth with them, as it were with a
Brush, when they are bruised a little at the ends. They also (as I am informed)
keep their Leaves all Winter, which Leaves they powder and mix with the Juice
of Citrons, and stain therewith, against great Holydays, their Hair and Nails
of their Children of a red color. Which color perhaps may be seen with us on
the Mains and Tails of Turkish Horses. The Powder is greenish, and so common
with them, that you see in their Batzars whole Bags full thereof standing
before their Shops, which come from Egypt and Africa, from whence whole
Ship-loads are sent through Turkey, as I have seen my self in this Harbor
several, from whence the Turkish Emperor has yearly a great Revenue. The
Arabians burn their Spodium out of the Root thereof, as Avicen remarks in his
17 th. Chapter. This being thus, it appears that there is no small difference
between these two, ours and theirs, I am of opinion, that theirs (which is
mentioned in the first Chapter of Solomon's Song) is liker to that which
Dioscor. describes, then our Ligustrum.

Thereabout is also found within and without the Gardens a peculiar sort of
Mallows, by them called Chethince, which is very large, and high, and like
other Trees, spreads its woody Twigs and soft Boughs, that are covered with a
brownish Bark; amongst the rest I saw one as big as a Man's middle, the Leaves
thereof are of a dark Green, long, and at the sides toward the point crenated,
its Flowers are rather bigger than other Mallows, of a blew color, their Seeds
I did never see. Hard by I found another Outlandish Doschet Flower, which was
almost decayed, so that it had neither Leaves, Flowers nor Seeds: It was about
three Foot high, the Stem and Twigs were hairy, hollow within as other Stalks,
of a green color inclining somewhat to yellow, which had at top many other
shoots, each of them had behind like unto other Tree-stems its proper Joint.
This is so juicy quite through, that it drops almost with Milk, which is
sharper than any Spurge. I made great inquiry of them about it, but could have
no certain account thereof, but as it seemed to me, it is very like unto Xabra
and Camarronus of Rhazes by the Arabians called Tanaghut and Sabeam, and may be
taken according to that Author's description for it.

Further hereabout, chiefly in the Town upon the Cisterns and Conduits I found
Adiantum, by the Apothecaries called Capillus Veneris, and in old Walls the
Apollinaris. I also found in the Shops in their Batzare two sorts of Roots,
whereof one was rounder, which may be the Bulcigeni of the Venetians, which are
called Thrasi at Verona, where they g^w (as the learned Malthiolus testifies)
many of these are sent out of Egypt to Tripoli, and sold there, chiefly to eat
in June, by the Name of Habel, Assis and Altzis, this being true, and they
being very like both in Name and Quality to the Grains of Altzelem of the
Arabians, they must be the same, although Rhazis reckons these amongst the
Fruits. The other called by them Hakinrigi, and Hakeuribi is somewhat longer,
not unlike to our Doronicum, there is also a great many of them to be sold,
they are hard, of a sweetish Taste, with a piercing bitterness, and in their
bigness, and white Nerves (which spread themselves under ground in the Gardens
round about like unto the wild Angelica of Tragus) so like to the Haronigi
Serapionis, and to the Durungi and Durunegi of Avicenna, according to their
Description, and so uniform, that they must be taken for the same. Then I found
also in their Shops abundance of the Seeds of Sumach, whereof they make a red
Powder, to excite the Appetite of the Stomach. These and more strange and
unknown Simples I did find at Tripolis. But because it would be too tedious to
describe them all, therefore I have only made mention of those that Authors
have described.

CHAP. V.
Which way I traveled from Tripolis further to the two Famous Cities of Damant
and Halepo.

AFter I had rested for several Weeks in Tripolis, and had observed that City,
its Building, and pleasant Situation, and moreover the Manners, Customs, and
Habits, as well of the low as high ones, I propounded to my self to Travel to
Aleppo, which is almost the biggest, and the most Famous, Trading City of
Syria, which lies five or six days Journey toward the North-east of Tripolis.
And when I met with some Companions to Travel with me, we stored our selves
with Provisions, viz. Bread, Cheese, Eggs, etc. for our Journey, and so set out
of Tripolis the 9 th. of November, Anno 73.

By the way we met with a great deal of Rain, which commonly begins at that
time of the Year, and continues almost all the Winter long: This kept us so
much back, that we reached not to Damant, which is in the midway from Tripolis
to Aleppo, before the fourth day. There we lodged in one of their great Champs,
called Carvatscharas, where we had a Chamber assigned us, in which we found
neither Table, nor Chairs, nor Bench, nor Bed, only upon the Floor was laid a
Stromatzo twisted, of Canes, which was to serve us instead of them all. There
we bought in their Bazar some Victuals according to our pleasure, and staid
there all Night long. The Town, which some take to be the Old Apamia, is pretty
big, and pretty well built; it lies in a Valley between Hills, so that you can
see nothing of it (the Castle only excepted, which lies on the Hill, and
guardeth it very well) before you are just come to it. Round about it there is
many Orchards and Kitchen-Gardens, which they Water out of the River Hasce,
which is pretty large, and runs through the Town. The Water they lift up with
Wheels for that purpose fixed in the River, that pour it into Channels that
carry it into the Gardens, and so Water them in the great heat of the Sun, to
refresh them. These Gardens had been worth my seeing, but my Fellow-Travellers
were in have, and so we put on the next Morning for Aleppo.

By the way we saw very good Cornfieldsd, Vineyards, and Fields planted with
Cotton, which is brought from thence, and sold to us under the Name of the
place where it grew, and also Silks and other Goods that are bought there at
the first hand. In these Countries are a great many Wild Asses called Onagri,
the Skins of them are very strong to wear, and as they prepare them, finely
frockt on the outside, as Strawberries are, or like the Skin of the Sepia, or
Cuttle-Fish, wherefore they commonly make their Scabbards for their Scymitars,
and Sheaths of their Knives thereof. Their Blades are watered on both sides
very subtly; they are made of good Metal, well hardened, and so sharp
(chiefly these that are made in Damascus) that you may cut with them a very
strong Nail in pieces, without any hurt to the Blade. They wear rather Knives
than Daggers, which they tie to their Girdles with finely wrought Tapes, by
their backs.

When we went on and came to the Promontory of Mount Libanus, we saw abundance
of Villages by the way, which for the most part are inhabited by Christians,
viz. Syrians, Maronites, etc. with whom we did Lodge sometimes overnight;
these entertained us very civilly, and gave us such Wine to drink, as grew on
the Mountains, than which I hardly remember I ever drank better. Amongst the
rest of the Villages we came to one called Hanal, lying high in a Fruitful
Country, where, as I am informed, in former days a very fine City stood, which
is so desolated, and in process of time decayed to that degree, that in our
days there is almost nothing of it left but a small Village, and here and there
in the Fields some small Ruins of Old Houses.

We went on further between the Mountains, where we spied a little Town upon
the Hills, and above it a strong Castle, which it is said the French did
formerly build, that lies in a very convenient place between the Mountains, so
that you must go just by it; but because it is haunted with Evil Spirits and
Hobgoblins, it remains unrepaired, and uninhabited. We left it on our left
hand, and came out into a spacious Corn-Field well tilled, where on our left we
saw the Town Sermin at a great distance, and near to it and about it, great
Woods of Pistacio-Trees, which are gathered there, and sent to Tripolis, and so
by the Merchants to us: Some of them grow also near the Highways, chiefly in
the Village of Basilo, where we stayed all Night.

In our way we found nine or ten Champs called Caravatscharas, these are open
Inns, where the Caravans and Travelers go in, commonly toward Evening, to
stay there all Night; they are free to any body, but you find neither Meat nor
Drink there, if you will have it you must bring it along with you, and must be
contented to lie upon Straw (if you can have it) upon the lower Wall, which
goes round about the sides, on purpose to give to Horses, Asses, and Camels
their Food upon it. They are generally three Miles distant from one another;
they are large and stately, and as strong in Walls as Castles, commonly built
apiece, and have within a large Yard, and round about it are Stables which
are quite open, just like Cloisters. Some of them have a Garrison of Nine or
Twelve Janisaries, to keep the Roads clean, and to protect the Travelers from
Assaults of the Inhabitants and Arabians.

When we had traveled over several rough Mountains, and came almost near to
Halepo, we saw at last the City just like Damand, of the bigness of Strasbourg;
at the Gates we dismounted, because in Turkey no Outlandish Man has liberty to
Ride through a City; and so we went into it, and I went into the French
Fundique to take my Lodgings, as all Germans use to do.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Situation of the Potent City of Halepo, of the Buildings thereof, and
also of the delicate Fruits, and fine Plants, that grow there within and
without Gardens,

THE Town of Halepo (which is the greatest and most Potent in Syria, anciently
called Nerea) is in some places well Fortified with Ditches and Walls, only
they are not quite round it, so that one may (the same it is with Tripolis) at
any time of Night go in and out: Neither are the Gates, as used in our Country,
chiefly in Cities of Account, beset with Soldiers, but you will only see two
or three waiting at the Head-Gates, where the Highways go through, which are
rather there to take Custom, than to keep the Gates, neither have they any
Arms. But in the middle of the City there is a Castle on a high Hill, which is
strong, large, surrounded with Walls and Ditches, and well beset with a good
Guard. Concerning their other Buildings (which are flat at the top, and covered
with a sort of Pavement, that one may walk on the tops of them) they are like
unto them of Tripolis. Amongst the rest there is a very Magnificent Building,
which they say has cost a great deal of Money, which has for its Entrance a
very low and small Door, so that one must bend himself very low that will go
into it, but when you come in, you find there delicate large Halls, high open
Arches, (very pleasant and cool to sit underneath in the Summer) Waterworks,
Orchards, and Kitchen-Gardens, where among the rest was one of these Ketmy's:
Besides these there was also some fine Mosques with Steeples, which were round
and small, but very high; some of them had a Balcony at the top, like unto a
Garland, whereupon the Waits are, and their Priests go about at the time of
Prayers, to call People in. But for other stately Buildings, that might be
erected for the Memory of some Potent King or Prince, there is none.

Without the City they have here and there some Country-Houses, among the rest
one built for the Turkish Emperor, at four Miles distance from the City, where
he used to be sometimes, chiefly when he is at War with the Sophy, King of
Persia, that he may presently assist his Army, in case of Necessity: This is
very large, but not built so stately as so great a Monarch deserves. In the
great Garden is a Chapel built by the River that runs through it, upon
Pillars, where the Great Sultan used to hold Conferences with his
Privy-Councellors and Visier-Bashaws. It happened in the Reign of Solomon the
Great, (as the Gardener did relate to us) that when they were assembled, to
consult whether it was more profitable to him, to suffer the Jews in his
Provinces, or to root them quite out: After every one had given his Opinion,
and the most of them were of the Opinion, that they ought not to be tolerated,
because of their insufferable Usury, wherewith they oppressed his Subjects: And
after the Emperor had heard every ones Sentiment, he gave them also to
understand his, and that in this instance, viz. He bad them look upon a
Flower-Pot, that held a quantity of fine Flowers of diverse colors, that was
then in the Room, and bid them consider whether each of them in their color,
did not set out the other the better; and that if any of them should decay, or
be taken away, whether it would not somewhat spoil the Beauty of the rest.
After every one had heard the Sultan's Opinion, and did allow of it to be true;
the Emperor did begin to explain this, and said, The more sorts of Nations I
have in my Dominions under me, as Turks, Moors, Grecians, etc. the greater
Authority they bring to my Kingdoms, and make them more famous. And that
nothing may fall off from my Greatness, I think it convenient, that all that
have been together so long hitherto, may be kept and tolerated so still for the
future; which pleased his Council so well, that they all unanimously agreed to
it, and so let it remain as it was. Without the City of Halepo, are abundance
of Quarries, where they dig great Free-stones of a vast bigness, almost as
white and soft as Chalk, very proper for Building: There are also about the
Town some Walks or Grotto's under Ground, which are above an English Mile long,
which have the Light let into them by holes made near the Highway, so that a
Man must be very careful, (chiefly at Night) that he may not fall into them, or
that he may not be trapan'd by the Moors that live in them in great numbers.
The Ground about it being very Chalky, it causes to the soles of our Feet,
chiefly at Night, although one be very well provided with strong shoes, a very
considerable dryness and heat, as one may also see by the Moors, that, for the
most part, go barefoot, which causes the soles of their Feet to be so
shrifled, that into some of their crevises you may almost put your little
Finger. Yet notwithstanding that, Halepo is surrounded with Rocky Hills, and
the Valleys thereof are Chalky; they have no want of Corn, as Barley, Wheat,
etc. but rather it is very Fruitful, and their Harvest begins commonly in
April or May: But they have but few Oats, and less Grass or Hay; for the
dryness is so great, and it is so Sandy, and the Hills are so rough and full of
Bushes, that they make but very little Hay. Wherefore they feed their Cattle
with Barley, and with Straw, which is broken in pieces by threshing Wagons,
that are drawn by Oxen. The Valley is also full of Olive Trees, so that Yearly
they make several Thousand Hundred Weight of Oil for to make Soap. There is
also a great quantity of Tame and Wild Almond-Trees, of Figgs, of Quince, and
white Mulberry-Trees, which are very high and big: Pistacies-Trees, which they
call Fistuc, are hereabout very common; they have underneath very strong stems,
which have outwardly an Ashen-colour'd Bark, and are adorned with handsome
Leaves of a sad green color, like unto their Charnubis, and behind them grow
many small Nuts like Grapes in Clusters together. In the Spring when they first
put out, they send forth long shoots, which the Moors gather in great quantity
for their Sallad, and dress them as we do Asparagus. There are also abundance
of delicate Orchards, that are filled with Oranges, Citrons, Lemons,
Adams-Apples, Sebesten, Peaches, Morelloes, and Pomgranats, etc. and amongst
them you find sometimes Apples and Pears, but very few, nor so many sorts, nor
so big, nor so well colored as ours. There grow many Mirtles, which bear
roundish Berries of the bigness of our Sorbus or Services, of a bluish Gray
color, very good to eat, which have white Seeds of the shape of our jumping
Cheese-magots, they propagate them diligently, because they are beautiful, and
remain long green, to put about their Graves. Moreover there are many
Sumach-Trees, which they plant for their Seeds sake, which is much used by
them: But Cherries, Amelanchier and Spenleny I have not seen there, and very
few Gooseberries, or Currants: Weychseln they have, but very few, wherefore they
esteem them, and keep them choice, as a Foreign Plant, to show them to others,
and to present great Persons with them. This may suffice of Trees. Concerning
their Garden Plants, those that are common, are Endives, Lettice, Kel or
Coleworts, Colliflowers, Caulorapa Rauckelen Apium, Tarcon whereof Rhases
describes two sorts, one with long small Leaves, by us called Taragon, and the
other with broad Leaves, which I reckon to be our Lepidium, by the Inhabitants
called Cozirihan. Ravos Serap: or our Hartichokes. But beyond all they plant
Colocasia in such plenty, as we do Turnips, whereof they have also great
plenty. They are also very well provided with Horse-raddishes, Garlic and
Onions, which the Inhabitants still call Bassal. Of Pumpions, Citruls, and
Cucumis anguinus (which they call Get) they plant as many as they have
occasion for; but many more Angurien an Indian Muskmillion, (Water-mellons)
which they call Batiechas, but Serap. Dullaha, they are large, of greenish
color, sweet and pleasant to eat, and very cooling, wherefore they esteem them
to be their best Fruits: but chiefly those, which have more red than white
within, they are very innocent and harmless, and keep so long good, that they
sell them in their Batzars all the Winter long. Moreover, there are three sorts
of those Plants which the Arabians call Melanzana, Melongena, and Beudengian,
as Ash colored, Yellow and Flesh colored, which are very like one another in
their Crookedness and Length, and like unto the long Gourds. There are two
other sorts, which are called Bathleschain, viz. oblong and round ones, which
are much bigger, of a black color, and so smooth and glazed, that they give a
Reflection. They eat these oftener, boiled (chiefly after the way which
Averrhoes mentioned) than raw. Without their Gardens are two other strange
Plants, which also (being they eat them commonly with others) may be reckoned
among the Kitchin-Herbs: whereof one is called by them Secacul, which I found
about the Town in shady places, and among Trees, and in the Corn, its Roots are
of an Ashen color without, and white within, smooth, mellow, or tender, of one
Inch thick, and one and a half long, it has instead of Fibers, little knobs
like unto Warts, and a sweet taste, not unlike to our Carrots in Stalk, Herb or
Head, saving only the Flowers which are yellow; the Herb-women carry them
strung upon Strings about the Streets to sell them. The other sort is also very
plentiful, and is found in dry and rough places, which the Inhabitants to this
day with Serapio called Hacub, whereof he makes mention in his 295 Chapter,
under the Name of Hacub Alcardeg, whereof they cut in the Spring, the young
Shoots or Sprouts that grow round about it, boil and eat it as we do Sparagus,
corruptly called Sparrowgrass, the whole Plant is very like to our Carlina,
only this has bigger, higher and more prickly Heads, whereon appear
Flesh-coloured Flowers. It being that it is every way like it, and that also
the Root has the same Virtue, for if you steep it in Water, and drink of it,
it makes you vomit and fling up; therefore I am of opinion, that without doubt
it must be, the true Silybum Dioscoridis: Besides this there grow also in the
Road, and on old Walls, such plenty of Capers, that they are not at all
esteemed; they take these Flowers before they open, and pickle them, and eat
them for Sauce with their Meat. I had almost forgot another Herb, which I found
in their Gardens, that bears roundish smooth Stalks about two Foot high, the
Leaves are two and two equally distant from one another, and one above the
other, they are long, crenated at the sides, like unto our Mercurialis; between
them sprout out in harvest time yellow Flowers, which produce long aculeated
Cods, which open themselves when they are ripe, within them are six
distinctions, and in each of them little black Seeds placed in very good order:
the Herb is of a sower taste, like Sorrel, wherefore it is to every body
(chiefly the Jews) known, which boil the Leaves thereof with their Meat to eat
them: Wherefore some take it to be Olus Judaicum Avicennae, and others take it
for Corchorum Plinii, whether it be or no I suspend my Judgment.

They have abundance of Pulses in these Countries, which they feed upon, so
that you see several in their Batzars which sell nothing else but them. Among
the rest you will find abundance of Phaseoli, or Kidney Beans, little and great
ones, very white; and many sorts of Cicer, which they call Cotane, and with
Avicenna Hamos. Whereof they have as many as we have Pease in our Country, and
boil them for their daily Food, and oftentimes they eat them raw, chiefly if
they be roasted till the outward Shell falls off, they often call for them thus
dressed, when they are a drinking in their Coffee-houses, and have them brought
to Table with Cheese after their Meals instead of Preserves, or Fruit, as
Cibebs, Hasel-nuts and the like, for they eat very mellow, and have a fine
saltish Taste. They dress the Orobus after the same manner, which they call now
Ades and Hades, but whether right or no I leave to the Learned, they are
somewhat less and rounder, and not unlike the Cicers in their color, only that
these are reddish and white, and the other white and yellow. These put me still
in mind of another strange Plant, by the Arabians called Mas, whose Leaves and
Cods are pretty like our Phaseolus, and the Cods contain little round Seeds
something less than our Pease, of a dark green color, and are so smooth and
shining that they reflect again. Serapio makes mention of them in his 116
Chapter under the Name of Mes. And Avicennas in his 488 Chapter under the Name
Meisce; and the very learned and experienced Botanist Carolus Clusius calls
it in his Epitome of the Indian Plants by the Name of Mungo. The Turks love
these Pulses very well, chiefly to eat them among their Rice. So much I thought
convenient to mention here of their Kitchin-Herbs and Fruits that grow in
Gardens and about Halepo; of others that belong not to the Kitchen I shall make
mention hereafter.

In this City of Aleppo, the Merchants buy great store of Drugs brought from
several parts by the Caravans, as Rheubarb, Galbanum, Opoponax, Styrax, Laser,
Sagapenum, Scammony, etc.

CHAP. VII.
Of the high Places and Authority of Bashaws, what great Courts they keep, and
how they administer their Offices; as also of their way of living, of their
Privileges, of their Manners and Conversation.

THE City of Halepo (which some considering the Name and Situation believe to
be the Town Chalibon of Ptolomaeus situated in Chalibonitis) is subject unto
the Turkish Emperor, together with all the adjacent places, wherefore he
keeps a Bashaw in it, which is to rule it, and the whole Province according
to his Will and Pleasure. Now as the Bashaws are almost the chiefest and
highest under the Emperor, so they keep according to their Station and Dignity,
their Courts as great as the Princes do in our Country (according as they have
great or small Provinces. So they have under them their chief Commanders, as
Sangiacks, Bolucs-bashaws and others, which are continually with them go with
them to their Temples, or any other place wherever they have a mind to go, in
great flocks, both on Foot, and on Horseback, which by their several Habits
are to be distinguished, but chiefly the Bolucsbashaw, which as Captains have
an Hundred Janisaries under them, which in costly Clothes, and high Heads with
Feathers, run on Foot like Lacqueys by their Master. They have also besides
their Court, as well as the Emperor himself, peculiar Lodgings for their
Concubines, which they either have picked up here and there out of Towns and
Countries, or else taken in time of War by Sea and Land from Christians and
other Nations; wherefore they keep many Eunuchs to attend them constantly. They
take great delight in Hunting, and go often several Days Journeys after it: If
they take Wild Boars, they give them (because they are by their Laws forbid to
eat them) to the Christians, which makes the Turks often to mock them in the
Streets, crying out and calling them Chansir quibir, that is, great Boars or
Hog-eaters. Although the Bashaws are great Persons, that Command over Cities
and Countries, yet they are rckoned to be, like others, but Slaves to their
Master, that have nothing of their own, that they can bequeath to their Heirs
or Posterity after their decease, as our Princes can, because the Emperor
after their decease takes Possession of all their visible Estates, and allows
only to their Children an Annuity: Nay, if their Sultan Commands them to go
from one place to an Inferior one, or to leave their Dignity quite and clean,
they must obey immediately, if they will not run themselves into greater
Inconveniences or Dangers. This is the Reason that such Persons, although
Rich, seldom build great Buildings, so that you see none in all the Country,
except it be a Chapel, or a Champ, which they build to be remembered by: They
rather keep their Riches in Gold and Silver, which can be hid, and so secretly
given to their Posterity. They bestow but very little upon Jacks, for they are
too Covetous, neither have they many Workmen that are able to set them. These
Bashaws being altogether for their own Advantage, that strive to get Wealth,
their Subjects must needs suffer very much under them, but chiefly Strangers,
that live there to Traffic, as Italians, Frenchmen, etc. whereby between them
and the Bashaws (that mind their own and not the Public Good) arise often
great Differences, and they must have suffered great damage, if their
Sovereigns, to prevent these things, and that their Subjects may deal securely,
had not taken care to send them discreet and prudent Men, which are called
Consuls, endued with great Privileges from the Grand Signior, to hear their
Complaints, and to protect them against any Assaulters. It happened in my time,
while I staid there, that great Differences arose between the Consul of Venice,
and the new Bashaw, who was sent thither, instead of the deceased one, in the
Year 75. the 6 th. day of March, who came in to take Possession with a great
number of Horse and Foot. At his Arrival the Consul of Venice went (accompanied
with a great number of Merchants in great State) to meet him, to bid him
Welcome, and presented him with Fourteen Clothes Richly wrought of Silk,
desiring him to take his Countrymen into his Protection, that they might Trade
and deal safely under him. The Bashaw looking upon the Clothes, behaved himself
very unkindly, and looking upon them to be very inconsiderable, he not only
refused them, but answered the Consul very scornfully. So it often happens that
these great Persons come to differ, and pursue their Differences so far, that
at last it must be brought before the Emperor and his Court. If they find that
the Bashaw is in the wrong, he is immediately punished (not regarding his great
Authority) according to the default, either in Money, or else, if it be a great
Crime, he must lose his Life for it; which is the oftener done, because they
depend very much upon Traffic, which brings the Emperor in yearly a very
great Revenue. Yet notwithstanding they are punished so severely sometimes, the
Pride and Ambition of the Bashaws is so great, that to uphold their Greatness,
they will not cease to strive by any means after Riches and great Wealth, which
their Subjects (not to speak of Strangers) find daily, whom they squeeze and
press, chiefly if they find them Rich, to that degree, that they cannot come to
any thing, nor thrive under them: Moreover they draw, after the decease of
their Rich Subjects, for the most part, the greatest share of what they leave,
into their own Purses; so that such Persons do not take Pains, nor bestow any
great Cost to build their Houses, or to till their Grounds, as we do in our
Country. They have commonly in Market Towns and Villages, low Houses or Halls,
whereof many are so covered with Hills, that you cannot see them, before you
are quite at them. When you come into them, you find neither Chairs, nor
Stools, nor Tables, only a couple of pieces of Tapestry spread, whereon they
sit after their fashion; and instead of Feather-Beds (whereof they make no use
at all) they have Mats and Quilts, which they fold together in the Day, and
hang them up in a corner, at Night they spread them out again to sleep on them:
They have no occasion for Sheets, to cover themselves as we do, nor for any
Towels neither, for instead of them they use long pieces of Rags, which they
hang about their naked Necks, or hang them at their Girdles. We see sometimes
in their Houses, above all in the Country, several strange-shaped Earthen
Vessels, which cover whole sides of the Wall in their Rooms, which their
Relations use to Present them with at their Wedding, which to please them, they
use to put up, and to keep there, rather for their Remembrance, than to make
any other use of them. In their Kitchen they have very few Utensils, perhaps a
few Pipkins, Pans, and Trenchers, for they boil all their Victuals in one Pot
together, that their Maids may not have many to cleanse, or to put up.

Concerning their Clothes, they bestow not very much upon them, although they
be well to pass, for they love Money so well, that they will rather spend a
whole day in contending for a Penny, than pay it willingly: Wherefore a Man
that will Travel through these Countries, must have his Purse well stored, and
keep it very close, that no body may know its worth, but chiefly he must have a
care of the Jews, which are not to be trusted, if you will escape great danger:
They will not only do nothing for you without Reward, but if they suspect you
to have any Money, they will endeavor to get it from you. Wherefore those that
take a Pilgrimage into the Holy Land, and go in pitiful Clothes, are not much
troubled by them. The Courtiers of the Bashaws, and amongst the rest chiefly
the Eunuchs and Dwarfs, etc. whereof they have several, go in their Taffety and
Satin Clothes, which are long, and very well trimmed, wherewith their Master
furnishes them, being Gifts from others, which he distributeth among them. The
Soldiers, Spahees, Janisaries, etc. commonly have blew woollen Clothes from
the Court, and they live of their Pay, that is, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 Medins, (which
are abut three Farthings apiece) more or less (according as their Places are)
which are paid them daily, as well in Peace as in War-time: If they can get any
thing else, by Excursions and Fighting, from their Enemies, it is well for
them. The Soldiers commonly wear white Turbants on their Heads, and so do all
Turks, and put painted Paper underneath them, chiefly when they go into the
War, believing if they wear them they cannot be hurt nor wounded. On their
Turbants they commonly wear Cranes Feathers, that others may believe them to be
Valiant Soldiers, and that by their Number People may guess that either they
have been in so many Campagnes, or else killed so many Christians. Besides
these Turbants the Janisaries have also Hats with high Crowns, called
Zarcellas, made of white Felt, which they wear instead of Helmets, when they
are in waiting, or go out to the War, these have before on the forehead a
gilded Sheath, set without with Granats Rubies, Turkey-stones, and other
Jewels, (yet of no great value) wherein they put their Feathers. They (and also
other Turks and Moors) let no Hair grow upon their Heads, but as soon as it
grows they shave it again, only behind they keep a lock, which hangs down a
pretty way: They let their Beards grow now, which they used formerly to cut
off, so that now for some Years they have worn huge great Mustachies. In War
time they carry Muskets, and in Peace (chiefly when they are in waiting) their
long Poles. They are also allowed to Marry, and besides their Wives, to keep
any they take Prisoners in the War, or else to sell them to any body. When they
are at home they are great lovers of Wine, and when they can come at it, that
no body sees them, they will drink more without mixture than any other Nation:
But in time of War, when they are in Expedition, they can live very sparingly,
and will March all day long before they will Refresh themselves. Yet to speak
the truth, these, and almost all Soldiers (because they are as well paid in
Peace as in War) are no more so ready to take the Field, and to change a quiet
Life for a troublesome one, or a secure one for a dangerous, as they they have
been in former Ages, being used to Laziness for a great while together. Besides
the Power and Strength of the Turks is reckoned much inferior to that of the
Christians, for we are better armed with Muskets and Pikes, to keep them off
at a distance, that they may not be able to come in with us to Club-Law, and so
overpower us; for if their Enemy does not give way at the first Onset, they
turn their backs and run away. But that notwithstanding all this, we gain
nothing from the Turks, but they rather from us; the reason is (not to mention
our manifold Transgressions) rather our great Divisions and Contentions, which
hinder us from going out with such an Army as is necessary, and we might
otherways do. Wherefore the Turks come out the bolder, to frighten and to
plague us, and make use of all sorts of Stratagems, to amuse us, or to draw us
into an Ambush, by pursuing them, and when they think we are almost tired, they
fall upon us with a multitude of fresh Men, to surround and to beat us. Nor do
they value it, if they lose one Regiment or another, because there is enough of
them, and they know how to have in the room of the Slain others again that will
be very glad (because of their Pay that they receive daily of their Prince out
of his Provinces) to accept of it. It being then so that he does not only
maintain his own Provinces, but rather gains others, and enlarges his Dominions
daily, we ought to be very careful; for the more he increases, the more we are
in danger. Thus he takes one Town, Country, or Kingdom after another with his
Sword, as we have seen hitherto in Europe (not to mention any thing of Asia)
not without great detriment and damage to all Christians. So he comes daily
the longer the nearer to us, that at length we must expect no better Success
than Greece, Thracia, Servia, Bosnia, Hungary, and Wallachia, etc. which are
brought into Slavery, under which some Persons of Quality still groan to this
day. So I found at Aleppo an Ancient Queen of Wallachia with her Sons, whereof
the Youngest was born after the King his Father's Death, who is maintained by a
very small Allowance from the Turkish Emperor. She is a very discreet Woman,
and well skilled in the Turkish and Arabian Languages. Her Subjects still hope
for her, that God Almighty will restore her to them again, that so their
Slavery may have an end.

After the Turks have obtained a great Victory, they lift up their Hands, thank
and praise God, and the Prophet Mahomet, God Almighty's dearly beloved
Messenger, and pray further, that God may send Differences and Quarrels among
us (that are against the Book Jugilis, as they call it, that is, the Book of
the Gospel) that the Magistrates may quarrel with the Subjects, and the Clergy
with the Seculars, that from thence may arise such Disorders, that we may go on
to transgress the Laws of God still more and more; that our Belief in Messiah
may be extinguished, and that all good Orders and Policies may be dissolved: So
that God may take from thence occasion to make them further our Punishers to
afflict us. And when they see that the Rich Men Oppress the Poor, that the
Magistrates do not Protect the Just and Innocent, but that the Chief and Heads
do strive to ruin one another, then they rejoice at our Misfortune and Misery,
and do not fear us in the least to do them any Mischief (which might easily be
done if we were unanimous) but rather threaten what Mischief they will do us.

When the Turks have taken a strong Town, or a whole Country by the Sword, that
they may keep them the easier in Subjection without a great Garrison, Pains, or
Danger, they Demolish the places that are not very strong, and send away the
Nobility and Chief Persons, which otherwise might do them a great deal of
Mischief; and in the room of these they bring in Sangiacks, with their
Soldiers, to keep the strong places, and to take care of the Emperor's
Revenue. So that in these places there is no Nobility, that come from any
Ancient Races, and have their own Estates Hereditary and Descending from Heir
to Heir: Which one may also suppose when he considers that the Law of Mahomet
allows to those that adhere to it, to have four Wives at a time, besides
Concubines, or Slaves as many as they please: I will say nothing of the Liberty
they have to Divorce them upon any small Occasion, and to take others in their
room; from whence flow such Disorders and Uncertainties, that very few Children
know who are their Parents, and so there is but little Love shown between them
as one may easily suppose. And this is no Disgrace to them, but rather reputed
to be an Honor, because they conclude from thence that those that keep many
Wives, behave themselves diligently according to their Laws: Wherefore they
sooner trust them, prefer them before others, in Places and Salaries, and
esteem them to be true Tschelebiis, that is, Noblemen. Although these and
other Turks have several Wives, that are not all equal in their Birth and
Extraction, yet they all have in Family Affairs their equal share and power,
and they all are equally provided for, with Meat, Drink, Clothes, etc. and they
have also their Work and Business equally among them: And that because they
bring their Husband no Portion, but he must rather buy them from their Parents,
sometimes for a considerable Sum of ready Money, and give them Clothes and
other Necessaries to boot: Wherefore the Matrimonial tie (which they call
Chebia) is more in the power of the Husband than the Wife, so that he may Marry
one three times and reject her again; but further he must not go, except he
will be accounted a scandalous base Fellow: As you may perceive by the words of
the Turkish Emperor Bajazet, which he did send to Temyry, who is also called
Tamerlan, saying, that he had better to take a Wife again after he was three
times divorced from her, than to go to War with him; which scornful Language he
might well have forborne: For Tamerlan did not only beat him in a cruel and
bloody Battle, but took him Prisoner, and carried him about in an Iron Cage
like a Wild Beast of the Forest.

But that I may return from whence I digressed, the Marriages of the Turks are
never looked upon to be ratified before they are married by one of their
Priests. Their Wives must agree together, and live peaceably and amicably, and
must not resist their Husbands, except he makes inequality among them: If any
should appear (which happens very often) they do not forbear to complain of
their Husband to the Cadi or Judge. So that daily very strange Transactions
(which are not strange to him) come before him: If so be that the Husband is
convicted, and the Wife absolved, they are divorced immediately in the same
hour.

The Turkish Women are pretty handsome, and well shaped, very Civil in their
Discourses, and other Behavior: When any of them is married, and carried to
her Bridegroom's House, their Relations go along with her, that are invited, to
the Wedding, and begin to make a noise immediately in the Streets, and extol
their Voices more and more as they go along, that you may hear them a great way
off.

The Turks that are of some Condition, and rich and able Men, have at their
Weddings several Diverting Shows; in the Daytime they have Dancing, Running,
Actings, Singing; Jumping, and Leaping, and Dancing on the Ropes, etc. After
Sunset, and at Night, they let off Rockets, and Fireworks of several sorts,
made artificially. These are let off in public and open places, that every one
may see them, and they last often till break of Day. The Rope-dancers have
three Ropes one above the other, whereof the uppermost is the longest; upon
every one of them they have their peculiar Lessons, which they perform exactly
and dexterously, with Dancing, Jumping, Running, Gesticulating, going upon
Stilts, etc. which is pleasant to look upon. Their Children when they are
married, soon forget their Parents, they dare not see them again in a great
while, nor do they desire to do it.

When they have Children born, they do not justly Circumcise them on the Eighth
Day, but let them be 8, 9, or 10 Years old, until they can make their
Confession: There are some, chiefly among the Arabians, that imitate their
Patriarch Ishmael, who was not circumcised until the Thirteenth Year of his
Age. It is commonly performed in the House of their Parents. If Rich Men's Sons
are circumcised, they make a Feast, and roast a whole entire Bullock, into his
Belly they put a Wether, and into his Belly a Pullet, into the Pullet's Belly
an Egg, and so they roast them all together, what remains they give to the
Poor. When the Children grow up, and begin to go, they cloth them in loose
flying Coats, of fine Stuff, woven of several colors, which are pleasant to
look upon; and they put upon the Heads of those that are not yet circumcised,
colored Caps, which are wrought with Flowers, and very common to be sold in
their Batzars. After they are circumcised, they begin to wear white Turbants,
which are made of Cotton, and rolled about their Caps after a peculiar manner,
and are commonly Twenty Yards long.

They have still another strange Custom, which Young and Old, Men and Women use
in these Countries, viz. They make a thin Paste of Galls and calcined Copperas,
(to beautify themselves, and to keep their Eyes from Rheums) with it they
blacken their Lips, and make a Ring round about their Eyes, in the same manner
as our Ring-doves have about their Necks. These Paintings they have had
Anciently, and some of them they have prepared of Stibium or Antimony: Of these
Paintings of the Eye we read in several places, chiefly (that I may not mention
others) in the 23 d. Chap. of Ezekiel, the 40 Verse, where the Lord says, by
the Prophet, And lo, they came, for whom thou did wash thy self, paintedst
thy Eyes, and deckedst thy self with Ornaments.

Concerning the Education of their Youth, they only learn in Schools to Read,
and to write the Arabian Alphabet, the Characters or Letters whereof are common
both to the Turks and Arabians, although their Languages are very differing:
Besides these, there are other Schools, wherein the Young Men are Instructed in
the Emperor's Laws, and those that go on in their Learning, and take it well,
are soon called to high Offices, (as Cadi's and Cadileschiers.) But in Liberal
Arts and Sciences, such as we teach in our Countries, they are not Instructed,
for they have not only none of these Learned Men, but esteem learning of these
Sciences a Superfluity, and loss of Time; they rather love old Rhimes, and
Ballads that speak of and commend the Mighty Deeds of their Ancient Emperors,
and other Champions; or other Fancies that make Foreign Nations, or any of
their Enemies ridiculous: And such things they put either themselves into
Rhimes, or else hear those that have been put into Rhimes by others already,
which they say daily with peculiar Actions, out of Town in pleasant Greens,
(where also other Divertisements are performed with Singing, Dancing, Leaping,
etc.) So that they are rather pleased with the Reading of these frivolous silly
Writings, than to learn Arts and Sciences: Which you may evidently see, in that
they do not esteem, nor will admit of that Noble Art of Printing Books, that
might inform them in any thing: Which the Clerks, whereof there is a great
number up and down in the Cities, like very well, because they daily take a
great deal of Money for the Writings of their Prophet Mahomet and others, which
makes them generally very Rich, and wear greater Turbants than the rest, that
they may be distinguished from others. Their Paper is generally smoothed and
glazed, and they comprehend their Letters in very few Words: When they will
make them up, they fold them up until they come to be no broader than an Inch,
the outward crevise of the Paper they fill all along with Wax within, and so
glue it as it were to the other, or else they take any other Paste made for
that purpose, and so imprint their Name upon it with their Seal that is done
over with Ink, so that nothing remains white but the Letters: These Seals are
generally made at Damasco, where the best Artists live that cut in Steel, and
they put nothing more in it but their Name. They do not make any use of Paper
that is writ on, although they have great quantity thereof, neither to put
things up in, nor for any other use, and yet if they find any of it in the
Street, they do not let it lie, but take it up carefully, fold it together, and
put it into the next crevise they meet with, for they are afraid that the Name
of God may be written on it: Instead thereof the Grocers make use of great
Leaves of Colocasia, whereof they have great store.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the great Trading and Dealing of the City of Halepo; as also of several
sorts of their Meats and Drinks, of their Ceremonies, and their peculiar way of
sitting down at Meals.

HAving heretofore treated of the Buildings and Situation of that Excellent
Town of Halepo; and of the Customs, Manners, and Offices of the Turks, as much
as I could apprehend of it, I cannot but speak, before I leave it, of the
Dealings and Merchandisings that are daily exercised there, which are admirably
great. For great Caravans of Pack-Horses and Asses, but more Camels arrive
there daily, from all Foreign Countries, viz. from Natolia, Armenia, Egypt,
and India, etc. with Convoys, so that the Streets are so crowded, that it is
hard to pass by one another. Each of these Nations have their peculiar Champ to
themselves, commonly named after their Master that built it, viz. Champ Agemi,
Champ Waywoda, Champ Abrac, Sibeli, Mahomet's Bashaw, and which are kept for
them, that they may make them their Inns, and live in them, and to keep or sell
their Merchandises according to their pleasure. So among the rest of the
Nations there are Frenchmen and Italians, etc. which have also there their
peculiar Buildings (which, as is before said, are called Fundiques) wherein
some live together, and others (chiefly the Italians that are married) live
without in Lodgings; they have very small Habitations, and live sparingly like
the Turks. In these Champs you meet with several sorts of strange Merchandises,
before all in Champ Agami, where you have all sorts of Cotton-works, viz.
Handkerchiefs, long Fillets, Girdles, which they roll about their Loins and
Heads, and other sorts, by the Arabians called Mossellini (after the Country
Mussoli, from whence they are brought, which is situated in Mesopotamia) by us
Muslin; with these do the Turkish Gentlemen Cloth themselves in Summer. There
is delicate Tapestry, Artificially wrought with all manner of colors, such as
are sometimes brought over by us. From Persia they bring great quantity of an
unknown Manna in Skins, by the name of Trunschibil, which is gathered from a
prickly Shrub, called by the Arabians, Agul and Albagi, which is the reason
that it is mixed with small Thorns and reddish Chaff. This Manna has Grains
something bigger than our Coriander-seeds, so that, to all appearance, it is
very like unto our Manna, which we gather from the Larix. It might also very
well be taken to be the same that the Israelites did eat, had not God the
Almighty fed his People and maintained them Miraculously and Supernaturally.
But that it falls upon Thorns, is also attested by Serapio and Avicen, in those
Chapters where they treat of Manna, which they call Theceriabin and Trangibin,
and that very learned and experienced Botanist Carolus Clusius says the same
in his Epitome of Indian Plants. I found some of these Shrubs that grew about
Haleppo, which were about a Cubit high, which shout out into several roundish
Stalks, and divide and spread themselves from the Stem into several Sprigs like
unto a Flower (part whereof were quite overgrown with Epithymum, as Thymus
used to be) and had abundance of long thin and soft Prickles, from whence grew
out flesh-coloured reddish Flowers, that bore small red Cods, very like, and of
the same shape with the Cods of our Scorpioides, (whereof I have found many at
Montpelier) wherein are Seeds of the same color. The Root thereof is pretty
long, of a brown color, its leaves long, like unto those of Polygonum, of an
Ash color; those that grow at the bottom of the Thorns are of a warm and dry
Quality. The People use the Herb for a Purge, they take a handful thereof and
boil it in Water. Besides this they have another Manna like unto that, that
comes to us from Calabria by the way of Venice, and is the concreted Saccarine
Exudation of the Ornus.

Among the rest they also show costly Stones, by the Arabians called Bazaor,
which are oblong and roundish, and smooth without, and of a dark green Color.
The Persians take these from a peculiar sort of Bucks, and use the Powder
against mortal and poisonous Distempers. There are some that are very like unto
these in Form and Figure, but not to be compared for Goodness: Wherefore a Man
must have great care that he be not cheated. But there are some Proofs to know
whether they are good or no, which a Merchant communicated to me as infallible.
Take Quicklime and mix it in Powder with a little of this Stone, and with Water
make them up into a Paste, when that is dry grind it, if it then remains
white it is esteemed false, but if it turns yellow it is good, and brought from
Persia. They also bring hither Turkey Stones, that grow almost only in their
Country, and their King the Sophy has an incredible Treasure of them together:
Lately so many of them were brought to us that the Prices fell very much; but
when the King heard of this, he immediately forbid that any should be Exported
in seven years time, that so they might come to their former Price again, which
seven years as I am informed are now expired. There are also put to Sale many
Chains of delicate Oriental Pearls, which are for the greatest part taken or
found in the Persian Seas, near to the Island called Bahare, situated not far
from that great trading City of the Turkish Batzora, or Balsara.

From India they bring hither many delicate Spices, Cinnamon, Spicnard, Long
Pepper, Turbith, Cardamoms, Nutmegs, Mace, and China Roots, which the Arabians
make more use of then of Guajacum, and delicate China Cups and Dishes, Indico:
and in very great quantity they bring that noble Root called Rhubarb. And
moreover, they sell several sorts of precious Stones, viz. Garnats, Rubies,
Balasios, Saphirs, Diamonds, and the best sincerest Musk in little Gods. These
precious Stones are hid by the Merchants in the great Caravans that come from
India, and they bring them secretly, because they dare not pay Custom for them,
that the Bashaws, Sangiachs and others, may not rob them of them on the
Highways, for they use to do so if they find any. I will cease to discourse
any longer of these and other Drugs, and several Merchandises, which the
Merchants convey thither from foreign Places daily, and from thence to other
places again, because it is none of my Business to deal in them. With the
Spices are sometimes by the Merchants brought from the Indies delicate Canes,
which are very long, solid, or full within, flexible and bright without, of a
yellowish Color, they are almost everywhere alike thick, only a little
tapering; but few Joints, far distant from one another, and are hardly seen in
them. There are two sorts of them, great and small ones; the great and stronger
ones are used by old and lame People instead of Crutches to walk with, but the
lesser (which are very like the former) are made into Arrows and Darts, for
which they are very fit, the Turks wind them about with Silk of many sorts of
Colors, which they are very proud of when they make their entries. You find
also in the Shops another sort of Canes to be Sold, which are small and hollow
within, and smooth without, a brownish red Color, wherewith Turks, Moors, and
the Eastern People write, for to write with Goose-Quills is not in use with
them; wherefore these may be esteemed to be the true Syringas or Fistularis of
Dioscor: Besides these there is another bigger sort of Canes, almost of the
same Color, but full of Joints; the Pilgrims that go to see their Mahomet
bring these with them from Mecha, and the People of that Country carry them
along with them on Horseback instead of short Pikes, chiefly the Arabians, for
they are long, strong, and light, and yet solid or full within, with these they
come running on upon their Enemies, or else they (lifting it up above the
middle in one of their Hands) fling it at them, with such force, that they
penetrate deeper with their sharp Iron, (wherewith they are tipped before and
behind) then their Arrows. Theophrastus makes peculiar mention of them in his
fourth Book and the 11 th. Chapter, and Pliny in his Sixteenth Book and the 36
th. Chapter.

We see very few of these in our Country, for the Christians are forbidden
under great Penalties to carry any of them (the same it is with any other Arms
that they make use of in their Wars) out of the Country, if any does and is
found out, he exposes himself to infinite Troubles and Dangers, as did happen
to one in my time, which after a Scimiter was found about him, was very highly
accused, and fined Seventy Ducats to be paid in two days time, and if he had
not paid it they would certainly have circumcised him and made him a Turk.

Besides these abovementioned Champs, there are a great many more without and
within the City, where also all sorts of Merchandises are Sold, viz. Quibir the
Great, Sougier the Little, Gidith the New, Atich, Old, etc. And besides all
these they have a great Exchange called Batzar by the Inhabitants, which is in
the middle of the Town, and is bigger then Friberg in Bavaria, in it there is
many Alleys, and each of them divided for several Wares and handycraft Trades;
first the Grocers and Mercers, then those that sell Tapestry and other soft
Woollen Clothes, and also Turkish Machyer, Camlet, Taffety, and other Silks and
Cottons delicately wrought. There are also good Cardavon, delicate Furrs of
Martins, and chiefly Wild Cats, whereof abundance runs about in these Countries.

There are also Jewellers that sell all manner of Jewels, precious Stones,
Pearls, etc. All sorts of Handy-craft Tradesmen, as Shoe-makers, Tailors,
Sadlers, Needle and Pin-makers, Painters, Goldsmiths, Brasiers, Locksmiths,
etc. that have their Shops in the Batzars where they work, but their work is
chiefly that of the Goldsmiths, Painters, and Locksmiths, is so silly, that it
is by no means to be compared with ours. There are also Turners, Fletchers that
make Arrows and Darts, and Bow-makers, that have besides their Shops small
Butts, that any body that goes by may exercise himself, or try his Bow before
he buyeth it. These Bows are sometimes plain Work, and some inlaid with Ivory,
Buflers Horns, etc. which makes them of a differing Price. The Archers wear a
Ring upon their right Thumbs, as our Merchants wear their Seals wherewith they
draw the String on when they are going to shoot, these are made of Wood, Horn,
or Silver, and some are set with Precious Stones. Besides these you find in
great Batzars some Barbar-Surgeons, which, (when they have no body to trim) use
to go about the Streets with their Instruments and a Flask of Lather to look
out for Work; if they find any that will be trimed they do not come back to
their Shops but go to Work in the Streets, or in the next Champ if any be near,
and there begin to Lather him, and shave all the Hair of his Head, save only
one long Lock which he leaves to hang down his Back. There are also places
where they sell Slaves of both Sexes, old and young, which are sold dearer or
cheaper, according to their Strength or Handsomeness, etc. But in all these
Countries I saw neither Wheel-wright nor Cart-wright, because neither Wagons
nor Carts are in use with them: Neither could I find (for all it is so great a
City) a Gunsmith that understood how to mend the least fault in a Gun-lock,
because there is a great Trade daily driven in these Batzars, you shall find
there at all times of the day a great number of People of several Nations
walking up and down, which makes a Crowd as if you were in a Fair. Amongst them
you will often see drunken Turks, which use to push People that do not give
them the way immediately, chiefly if they be Christians; but the Christians are
not afraid of them for all that, but prepare themselves (when they perceive
some of them to approach among the People) and stand upon their Guard to be
even with them, and when the Turks come and push them, they make them rebound
again to one side, or to one of the Shop-boards. Sometimes also the Turks will
lean themselves backwards against the Shops, and when they see a Christian go
by they let him fall over their Legs, and so laugh at them, but then the
Christians again when they perceive this, they kick up the other Leg of the
Turk whereon he rests and so make him fall down himself. For it is usual with
the Turks to try the Christians what Metal they are made of, whether they have
Courage or no, wherefore they oftentimes before they are aware of them, assault
the Christians with rough Words, and if they find them to be afraid they laugh
at them to boot, but if they resist them they give over immediately as soon as
they find them in earnest (just like some Dogs that sooner bark then bite) and
esteem him afterward the more for it, and call them brave People that are fit
for the War.

You find also in this Crowd several that are in Orders, called Sacquatz,
(which commonly are Pilgrims that have been at Mecha) that go about with Skins
full of Water, and for Charity give to any, nay, even to the Christians that
desire it: (because the Mahumetans are forbid to drink Wine in their Alcoran)
Wherefore you see many in their peculiar Habits (moved thereunto by Devotion)
that go all day long among the People to exercise a Work of Love and Charity to
those that are thirsty. They have in one hand a fine gilded Cup whereinto they
power the Water out of their Skins, wherein they have commonly laid
Chalcedonicks, Jaspirs, etc. Sometimes also delicate tasted Fruit, to keep the
Water fresh, and to recreate the People. When they give you to Drink out of it
they reach you also a Looking-glass with this Admonition, That you shall look
your self in it, and remember that you are Mortal and must die. For this
Service they desire nothing of you, but if you give them any thing they take it
and thank you, and spout into your Face and Beard (to show their thankfulness)
some fragrant Water which they have in Glasses, in a great Pouch tip'd with
many Brass Clasps. The Turks and Arabians also esteem it to be a great Charity
and Love, if they let their Marble Troughs or great Pots that stand everywhere
about their Doors be filled up with fresh Water every day, that Travelers or
any that are dry may quench their Thirst as they pass by; in it hang little
Kettles to drink out of: If one goes to it, others that see him go also, and
drink rather for Companies sake then to quench their Thirst: So you find often
a whole Multitude about a Pot. If you have a mind to eat something or to drink
other Liquors, there is commonly an open Shop near it, where you sit down upon
the Ground or Carpets and drink together. Among the rest they have a very good
Drink, by them called Chaube, (Coffee) that is almost as black as Ink, and very
good in illness, chiefly that of the Stomach; of this they drink in the Morning
early in open places before every body, without any fear or regard out of China
Cups, as hot as they can, they put it often to their Lips but drink but little
at a time, and let it go round as they sit. In this same Water they take a
Fruit called Bunru, which in its Bigness, Shape, and Color, is almost like
unto a Bay-berry, with two thin Shells surrounded, which as they informed me
are brought from the Indies; but as these in themselves are, and have within
them, two yellowish Grains in two distinct Cells, and besides, being they agree
in their Virtue, Figure, Looks, and Name, with the Buncho of Avicen, and Bancha
of Rasis ad Almans exactly; therefore I take them to be the same, until I am
better informed by the Learned. This Liquor is very common among them,
wherefore there are a great many of them that sell it, and others that sell the
Berries, everywhere in their Batzars: They esteem it as highly as we do in our
Country Wormwood Wine, or that that is prepared with several Herbs and Drugs:
yet they love Wine better if their Law would allow them to drink it, as we have
seen in the Reign of the Emperor Selymo, when he gave them leave to drink it,
that they met together daily in Drinking-houses, and drunk to one another, not
only two or three Glasses of strong Wine not mixed with Water, but four or five
of such as came from Venice to them so quickly one after another with such
eagerness, (as I have often seen it) that they would not allow themselves to
eat a Morcel or two between it; and so as you may easily guess, they become to
be sordid presently, and so Hoggish, that they excel all other Nations in it.
But after Selymus was dead, and his Son Amurath succeeded him in his right, he
immediately forbad them to drink Wine in the very beginning of his Reign, and
looked after it with such severity, that any body that did but smell of Wine
was Imprisoned immediately, put out of his place, and a great Fine put upon him
according to his capacity, or for want of it, punished severely with many Blows
under his Soals. During this Prohibition it happened, that when the Bashaw of
Halepo had a mind to go abroad and met in the Courtyard one of his men that was
Drunk, and perceived it by his staggering, he drew his Scimeter and cut off his
Head, and so left him dead upon the place. But yet notwithstanding all this
Severity, and be it never so peremptorily forbid, they do not only not mind
such Prohibition, chiefly the Renegadoes, (being very much used to it) but long
and linger the sooner after it with that eagerness, that in the Summer time
they use to carry in privately (just like the Ants) great quantities of Wine,
and lay up good Stores that they may meet at Night and drink together until
they have their Bellies full, and so rest after it all Night that they might
not smell of Wine the next Day. In that time when they were prohibited to drink
Wine we Christians fared very well and bought our Wine very cheap, until
afterward they had leave to drink it again: Their Wines are generally red,
very good and pleasant, they keep it in Skins; they are brought to Halepo from
several places, but chiefly from a famous Town called Nisis, which lies two
days Journey distant from it upon the Borders of Armenia: The use of Skins is
still very great with them as it was in former Ages, as we may see by the
similitude of Christ, when in St. Matthew Chap. 9. Verse. 17. he says, No man
put new wine into, etc. Seeing that the Christians have leave to drink Wine,
therefore they sell and buy most of it, they also plant it, and have whole
Villages in their Possessions, with abundance of Vineyards. But the Turks not
being allowed to drink Wine by their Laws do not keep or cultivate many
Vineyards, and if they do they press the Grapes after several ways, for some
they make into Cibebs, chiefly these People that live in and about Damascus,
where indeed the best grows; others boil the Juice of the Grapes up to the
consistence of Honey which they call Pachmatz, chiefly these that live at
Andeb, a Town between Bir and Nisib. They have two sorts of this rob, one very
thick, and the other somewhat thinner, the former is the best, wherefore they
put it up into little Barrels to send into other Countries, the latter they use
themselves, mix it sometimes with Water and give it to drink (instead of a
Julep) to their Servants, sometimes they put it into little Cups, to dip their
Bread in it, as if it were Honey, and so eat it. Besides these they have other
sweet Drinks which they prepare out of red Berries called Jujubes (or of
Cibebs, which when boiled in Water with a little Honey the Inhabitants call
Hassap) and others called still by the old name of Berberis, of which they
bring great quantities down from Mount Libanus. Among other Liquors they have a
special one called Tscherbeth, which boiled of Honey tastes like unto our
Mead; they have another made of Barley or Wheat, by the Ancients called Zychus
and Curmi: these two last make the Turks so merry and elevated, that as our
Clowns do when they drink Beer, they sing and play on their Hautboys, Cornets,
and Kettle Drums (which their Musicians make use of every Morning when the
Guards are relieved): All these Liquors are sold in their great Batzars, where
they have Baskets full of Ice and Snow all the Summer long, whereof they put so
much into the Drink that it makes their Teeth chatter and quake again. Thus
much I thought convenient to mention of their Liquors or Drinks.

Concerning their Food, their Bread is nourishing and good, and so white,
chiefly at Halepo, that none is like it in all Turkey: so they have several
sorts of it, of several shapes and mixtures, whereof some are done with Yolks
of Eggs, some mixed with several sorts of Seeds, as of Sesamum, Romish
Coriander, and wild Garden Saffron, which is also strowed upon it; Meat is
cheap with them and very good, by reason of the precious Herbs that grow
thereabout, chiefly upon Mount Tauri, which extends itself very far
Eastwards, from whence they have abundance of Cattle, as Rams, Weathers, and
Sheep with broad and fat Tails, whereof one weighs several Pounds. They have
also great store of Goats which they drive daily in great Numbers through that
City to sell their Milk, which every one that has a mind to it drinks warm in
the open Streets; among them there are some that are not very big, but have
Ears two foot long, so that they hang down to the Ground and hinder them from
feeding, when one of them is cut off which is commonly done, they turn
themselves always upon that side that the other Ear may not hinder them from
feeding. They have no want of Beefes and Bufles, for they are very common
there, and the Butchers kill the Beasts in the Fields without Town, where they
have their Slaughter-houses; thereabout are a great many Dogs that live of the
Offels, and have their young ones in Holes and Cliffs where they bring them up,
and these become so Ravenous and Wild, that they run about in the Night after
their Prey (as I am informed) like Wolffs in our Country: And this may very
well be, for the Turks do not only not kill any Dogs but rather carry them home
when they are young, and there feed them till they are grown up and able to
shift for themselves, and they believe that they do a deed of Charity that is
very acceptable to God Almighty: like unto the Divines in the Indies, called
Banians, which serve the Birds in the same manner as these do the Dogs and
Cats. These Wolves are more like to our Dogs both in Shape and Bigness; and so
says Pliny, that the Wolves in Egypt are less and lasier then these toward
the North; being there are no Inns in Turkey, where, as with us, Travelers may
Lodge and have their Diet, therefore there is a great many Cake-shops kept in
the Batzars, where all manner of Victuals are cleanly dressed, viz. Butchers
Meat, Fouls, and all sorts of Sauces, and Broths, and Soups, where every body
buys what he has a mind to, according to the capacity of his Purse. Among the
rest nothing is so common as Rice, which they boil up to such a stiffness, that
it crumbleth. A great many other sorts you shall see in Copper Basins, upon
their Shop-boards, prepared after the same way, amongst the rest peculiarly a
very common one, called Bnuhourt, made of Barley and Wheat, which were first
broke on a Mill, and perhaps dried, and so boiled with or without Milk, into a
thick Pap. Dioscorides, in the 83d Chapter of his Second Book, makes mention
of this by the name of Crimnon; and also Avicen. and Rhasas ad Almans. in
Synonymis, calls it Sanguick and Savick. The Turks provide themselves with
good store of this, chiefly in War-time, by Water and by Land, that when they
want Provision, they may make use of it instead of Bread. Besides these, they
have more Dishes amongst them: I remember one called Trachan; when it is
dressed, it is so tough, that you may draw it out like Glue; this they make up
into little pieces, which being dried, will keep good a great while, and is
very good and pleasant Food after it is boiled; wherefore they lay up great
Stores of this in their strong Fortifications, as we do of Corn, that in case
of necessity they may eat it instead of Bisquets, or other Food. That such
sorts of Foods (by the Latinists called Pulls) have been very well known to the
Ancients, and that in case of necessity they use to make a shift with it, Pliny
testifies in his Eighteenth Book, and the Eighth Chapter.

They have also all manner of Poultry in great plenty, viz. Pullen, Snipes,
Partridges with red Bills, Woodcocks, etc. but very few Fishes, because they
have only a small Rivolet, (which is full of Turtles) so that at Halepo they
are very scarce: Neither do they esteem them much, because most of them drink
Water instead of Wine (which is prohibited by their Law) wherefore there are
but very few brought thither from foreign places, as Antiochia, and the great
River Euphrates, etc. distant from thence two or three miles. Besides this,
they have little By-dishes, as Kal, Colliflowers, Carrots, Turnips,
French-Beans, Besides Trees and Codded Fruits, and many more; but yet they are
not so well skilled in the dressing of them, as we are in our Country.

Lastly, They put also up with their Cheese, Cibebs, Almonds, dried Cicers,
Pistachio's, and cracked Hasel-nuts, which (although they are carried thither
from our Country) are better tasted, and pleasanter than ours. They have many
sorts of Preserves, very well done with Sugar and Honey; very artificially
(chiefly those they carry about to sell upon Plates very well garnished) made
up and set out with several Colors and Shapes very beautiful to behold. For
the rest, they live very sparingly, and bring the Year round with small and
little Expenses, for they do not make so great Feasts, nor have so many Dishes,
nor bestow so great Cost as we do in our Country.

In these Eastern Countries they eat upon the plain Ground, and when it is
Dinnertime they spread a round piece of Leather, and lay about it Tapestry,
and sometimes Cushions, whereupon they sit cross-leg'd: Before they begin to
eat, they say Grace first, then they eat and drink hastily, and every one
takes what he has a mind to, and do not talk much. The Rich have fine
Cotton-Linnen about their Necks, hanging downwards, or else hanging at their
Silk-girdles, which they use instead of Napkins: Their Wives or Women do not
eat with them, but keep themselves in their peculiar Apartments. After they
have done, they rise altogether with a Jerk, swinging themselves about, which
our Countrymen cannot easily imitate, till after they have been there a long
while, for the Limbs are numbed in sitting cross-legg'd, so that one has a
great deal to do to bring them to themselves again. At last they take up the
Leathern Table, with Bread and all, which therefore serves them also instead
of a Table-Cloth and Bread-basket, they draw it together with a String, like a
Purse, and hang it up in the next corner.

CHAP. IX.
A Short and Plain Relation of Plants, which I gathered during my stay at
Halepo, in and round about it, not without great danger and trouble, which I
glued upon Paper very carefully.

BEing I undertook this long Journey, chiefly on purpose to see my self those
fine Outlandish Plants, whereof Authors so often make mention, growing in their
native Soil, and so gain a more clear and perfect Knowledge of them. I was very
glad to have an opportunity to stay longer than I intended, that I might the
oftener go out with my Friends and Comrades into the Fields, among the Turks and
Moors, (not without great pain and danger of being knocked on the Head) to
fetch in more and greater variety of Plants: Wherein my Comrade Hans Ulrich
Krafft, who came into these parts along with me, very often has faithfully and
honestly assisted me. But having heretofore made mention of the Garden-Herbs
and Fruits, I will only in this place write of them which grow abroad without
the Gardens, and that with all possible shortness, and begin with the
Poplar-Tree, as the commonest of all, which the Inhabitants still call by the
ancient Arabian Name Haur; they grow very high in these Countries, and
abundance of them grow about the Rivolet near Halepo, which make very shady
Walks underneath in the heat of Summer. There is also a peculiar sort of
Willow-Trees, called Safcaf, etc. these are not all alike in bigness and
height, and in their Stems and Twigs they are not very unlike unto
Birch-Trees, (which are long, thin, weak, and of a pale-yellow color) they
have soft Ash-colored Leaves, or rather like unto the Leaves of the
Poplar-Tree, and on their Twigs here and there are Shoots of a span long, like
unto those of the Cypriotish wild Fig Trees, which put forth in the Spring
tender and woolly Flowers, like unto the Blossoms of the Poplar-Tree, only they
are of a more drying quality, of a pale color, and a fragrant smell. The
Inhabitants pull of these (because they bear no Fruits) great quantities, and
distill a very precious and sweet Water out of them, very comfortable and
corroborating to the Heart. The Arabians call these Trees Zacneb and Zacnabum;
Rhases in 353 d, and Avicenna in his 749 th Chapt. And after the same manner
makes Serapio mention of them in his 261 st Chapt. by the common Name of
Zucumbeth; and Theophrastus in his Fourth Book, and Eleventh Chapter, where he
treats of Elae-agnus, which this is very like unto, and may be taken for the
same, although they differ in bigness, which often and easily happens according
to the soil and place where they grow. Hereabout are other small Trees, which I
rather take to be thorny Shrubs; they are very like in leaves unto the others,
and are called by the Moors Scisesun. They love to grow in moist places, and in
Hedges; from the Root shoot several Stems, clothed with a smooth
brown-colour'd Bark; they bear at top pretty long and strong Twigs, which here
and there are beset with a few Prickles, whereon grow small Flowers, white
without and yellow within, whereof three and three sprout out between the
Leaves. I did not see any of their Fruit, but yet I do believe that they are
like unto the Olives of the Bohemian Olive Tree, to which this Plant is very
like, which is very naturally delineated in the Herbal of the learned
Matthiolus. These Trees cast forth such an odor in the Spring, that any body
that goes by must needs be sensible of it presently. Wherefore the Turks and
Moors cut many of their Branches, and stick them up in their Shops.

On the Banks of the abovementioned Rivolet, chiefly about the Stone Bridge,
as you travel to Tripoly, grow many Agnus Castus's, of the lesser sort, and on
the other side, in the Fields, many Pistachia Nut-trees.

Within and without the City grow also many sorts of Trees, viz. that which
Avicen. calls Azedarack, but Rhases, Astergio; white Mulberry-Trees,
Date-Trees, and Cypresses, by the Natives called Sacub (which hereabout grow
very big and high) Turpentine-Trees, etc.

About the Fences and Hedges you will find wild Pomgranate-Trees, with fine
double Flowers, wild Almond-Trees, the Fruit whereof the Moors carry about in
great plenty to sell to the Poor; and near it, in old decayed Brick-walls, and
Stony places, you shall see Caper-bushes: Among the rest there grows a very
strange Bush, by the Inhabitants called Morgsani, which is very green and
thick, has a long Woody Coat, whereout sprout several Stalks, with round
Leaves, like unto Caper-leaves, only with this difference, that four of them
stand together all opposite to one another, like unto our Beans; between them
there appear small Flowers, red within and white without, whereout grow long
Pods, like unto these of the Sesamum. This Plant has a very unpleasant scent,
wherefore the Inhabitants use it frequently to destroy Worms: But what the
Ancients formerly called it, I know not, but really am of this opinion, it must
be according to the description the Ardifrigi of Avicen. and Aadician of
Rhasis; he that pleases may read more thereof in the quoted places. In these
places is also found the thorny Acacia, by the Inhabitants called Shack, and by
the Arabians Schamuth, which are very small and low, chiefly these that stand
in the Fields, which give as much trouble to the Plowmen as the Ferns and
Rest-harrow do here; the Twigs are of an Ashen-colour, crooked, full of
Prickles, like unto those of a Rose-bush, and have very small-feather'd Leaves,
like unto Tragacantha, which are almost divided like unto our female Fern, the
Flowers of them I have not seen, but the Cods that grow out of them are without
brownish, in their shape thicker and rounder than our Beans, spongy within, and
containing two or three reddish Seeds.

I have, besides these, seen in Shops Pods of a Chestnut-brown color, sold
under the name of Cardem, which have two or three little distinct Cells or
Baggs, in each whereof is a reddish Seed, in the Figure of our male Balsam;
these are brought from Egypt, and by some thought to be the true Acacia Diosc.
whether it be so or no I cannot well tell, because I never saw the Plant. Very
near it, in untilled places, grows Galega; Sisynrichium Theophrasti, which is
very curiously delineated in the Book of Rempert. Dodon. de herbis and floribus
coron.

There is also found another fine Plant, by the Inhabitants called Tharasalis,
which has seven or eight waved Leaves, which stand about a round Stalk, almost
as it is to be seen in Sisynrichium, only they are a great deal broader, and
not so long, when the Stalk thereof (which is not above a cubit long) is grown,
through and above them; it gets at top a white Flower, not very unlike unto the
low blew Flower de Luce which blow early in the Spring; it has a roundish Root,
like unto that of Narcissus, and also has many long white Fibers. Not far from
thence, when you get upon the Hill, there grows in the rough places others,
viz. Bistorta, still by the Inhabitants called Zuph, a fine sort of Verbacum;
Scorzonera with purple Flowers, Saffron with small little Leaves, and a
delicate yellow Flower; also Arisarum, Homaid. and Arum, called by them
Carsaami, whereof there are four sorts, among the rest a strange one, with long
Ears, wherefore they call it in their Language Ovidne.

There also are about the Rivers some Anemones of several sorts, and of several
colors, very beautiful, as red, purple color, yellow, etc. all which they
call with a common name Sakaick, and give an additional Name according to the
color to it, viz. Schackaick achmar, Sakaik assar, Aserack, etc. that is to
say, red-yellow, of a Violet color, etc. which would be too long and tedious,
to describe all here: Chiefly if I should at length relate the common ones, as,
Wild Rue, Asphodelus albus; Rheseda Plin. Flos solis foliis minoribus serpilli,
Wild Onions, and other innumerable more. As you come down by another way back
again, nearer to the Cornfieldsd, you find other fine Herbs, as the wild new
Harmala, a delicate sort of Astragalus foliis hedysari minoris, and by it
another which is very like unto Astragalus of Dioscor. so that I really believe
it to be the same. There appear a great many of them upon the the height; it
is a low Herb, with a long brownish Root, as big and long as the Roots of
Horseradish, which puts out at the sides some strong Fibers, which are almost
blacker and harder to cut than the Root it self: Some of them go downwards, and
others the greater part upwards, and bended like unto Horns. These contain,
together with their sweetness, also a dryness; they shoot out at the top into
several Branches of the same color, yet not above the length of a Finger,
which incline toward the Earth, where out grow nine or ten small Leaves, like
Lentil-leaves, not very unlike to those of Orobus, and distributed after the
same manner. Between them sprout out purple-brown Flowers, after them come long
and thick and full Bladders, whereof some are as big as those of the Colutea.

All these, and several other Herbs, have I preserved and glued to some Paper
with great and peculiar care, so that they are to be seen in their natural
colors, so exact as if they were green.

About the River, up a Hill, I found a tender and fragrant Herb, with long and
white Roots, of a pretty acrimonious taste, its Leaves were like unto our
Coriander, only somewhat rounder, and not so much cut, but only a little about
the edges; I found no Stalks nor Flowers, for it was early in the year, and
about Easter, which is the time of their first springing, these they called
Zarneb Melchi, and the Inhabitants dig so many of these Roots, that they send
yearly several Chests-full into Persia, where they use them (as I am informed)
very frequently in Pains of their Backs, and all other accidental Pains. As far
as I can see, when I look upon the Leaves, I reckon it to be the third sort of
Daucus of Diosc. A little lower, as you come to the plowed Fields, I found also
the second kind of Chondrilla of Diosc. with round Roots of a smooth and
dark-yellowish color, perhaps at the top half an inch thick, and five or eight
long, whereon at the end where it is thinnest, hangs another round Root of the
bigness of a Chestnut, which are so full of Milk, that they are ready to crack;
at top, where it is divided into three parts, sprout out many long and small
Grass Leaves together, which lie flat upon the Ground; between them come out
yellow Flowers like unto these of auricula muris, each whereof has its
peculiar Stalk.

Not far from it, yet in rougher and stonier Ground, grows another
Chondrilla, which is like unto that former in all parts, only the Leaves
thereof are broader, and more woolly, and of an Ash Color, very like unto the
Holostium of Montpellier. As you go to the Grand Signior's Garden, (about a
small mile from the Town) at the Road, I found a good many Plants, viz. Draba
Diosc. called Orobanche Halinu, Spina solstitialis, a kind of Carduus Mariae;
Wild Cucumbers, by them called Adiural hamar; Xyphium, Peplium, Heliotropium
tri coccum Caroli Clusii, and also his Paronychia Hispanica, and his third
Lichnis, with pale and red purple-coloured Flowers; Coris Mathi. with yellow
Flowers; two delicate sorts of Geraniums; and upon old Walls I found a little
Rauckel, with pale-colour'd Flowers, Umbilicus Veneris, and a great many more.
I cannot leave unmentioned those that are growing round about in the Fields,
and chiefly amongst them a Medica, with dissected trifoliated Leaves; and many
more, whereof some have long and straight, and others many bended Pods, in a
cluster together. I also found one with many white and hoary Heads, which
looked almost like unto Lagopodium, and another little one with green-colour'd
Pods pressed together, so long and broad as those of Senna, which were a great
Ornament to the whole Plant. And also thereabout are found many sorts of
Corn-flowers, quite differing from ours: Papaver erratic, in their Language
called Schuck, of which they make a Conserve with Sugar, and use it in Coughs;
Papaver corniculatum with stately purple Flowers. I found also there Eryngium,
with bluish Tops and starred Heads: Two sorts of Henbane, whereof one that
grows in the Fields has red and purple-colour'd Flowers, the other which I
found in the Town upon the old Walls had white ones, by the Latins called
Apollinaris. Much thereabout, in the Corn, grew the less Melampyrum, by them
called Paponesck, which at the top bears thick yellow flowers, very like unto
the Melampyrum Tragi; Item the second kind of Wild Cumin, with yellow flowers,
and long bended pods: Poterion Math. by the Inhabitants called Megasac, which
they stick up in their Chambers, to keep them from being bewitched. A delicate
sort of Horminum, with small woolly and dissected leaves, a Garden-Cypress with
gold-colour'd flowers: Seabiosa, Anchusa, and a Salvia, which has many
roundish leaves, and about their square stalks grow purple-colour'd Bells,
wherein is its black Seed, like unto that of Melissa Molucca, whereof I have
made mention above. In the Corn also grows Leontopetalon, in their Language
Aslab, with its brown-colour'd round Root, and large Leaves, which are
roundish, and very near divided like unto these of our Paeonia; the Stalk has
at the top, which is about a foot high, and hollow, more Twiggs, whereof the
point of each of them bears several small purple and yellow Flowers, which
make roundish Bladders, that contain one, two, and sometimes three Seeds, the
Children use to play their Tricks with them as they do with the Flowers of
Papaver erraticum in our Country. The great Roots they bruise, and rub with it
Spots in Clothes, which they (as they say) draw out immediately.

By these in the Corn grows also the true Chrysogonum of Diosc. which is as
high as the former, and also in Flowers, Stalks, and roundish Root (which is
redder within) very like it, only the Stalk is slenderer, and has more and
longer by-shoots, or germina, at the end whereof you see stately yellow
Flowers, so that it is thicker, and more spriggy than the other: Its pennated
Leaves (whereof there are commonly four that come from the Root with long
footstalk almost as slender as a Thread) lie close to the Ground, as you may
easily imagine, and have every one their Ribs, two and two Leaves growing
together on each side, one after another, so that four of them stand together
in a cross; they are darkish green, and at the out side, where they are
broader, very like unto Oaken leaves. Now, as these and others, that grow in
these Countries, are as yet very little known, so may also the following, that
grows in plowed Fields, be reckoned among the unknown, which is very like
unto the Lycopsis of Diosc. for which, in my opinion, it ought to be taken.

This Plant has a red Coat, and a straight Stalk about two foot high, from
whence round about below spread themselves many strong and rough Leaves, in a
circle, as if it were from one center; not unlike the wild Bugloss, they
decrease a little by degrees, as they grow higher and higher: Out of each of
them, close to the Stalk, sprouts out many Twigs, with their peculiar small
Leaves, as you see in Echium; between them shoot out very tender
purple-colour'd Flowers, which are whole within, and divided into six small or
longish Leaves, almost like unto these of the Caryophillus montanus. In the
beginning of February I have seen several Sorts of Hyacinths, and the Oriental
one in the greatest quantity, which they call Zumbel in their Language. In
April I saw another very delicate one, known to them by the name Ayur, with
long and very small Leaves of our Philangium; it grows pretty high, and
bears at the top four Stalky Flowers; the Leaves thereof are very like in
shape and color unto the three Leaves that stand up in our Flower de luce; the
Root is very like to that of a Tulip, whereof I have also seen a great number
in these Grounds of all sorts of colors. I have also found some Daisies like
unto our own, and also another sort of them with nine or ten white
Saffron-flowers, which sprout sooner in the Spring in the Corn, not so bare as
ours, but between the Leaves. The Leaves are pretty thick, but narrower,
longer, and narrower pointed than the beforementioned: They also spread more
about upon the Ground, and come from a white Coat with a brown-red Skin,
surrounded and divided in the middle, it is called Kusan in their Tongue, but
by some others it is still called Surugen.

These and a great many more strange Herbs have I found, but because they were
unknown to me, I forbear to mention any more of them. But yet I cannot but
describe to you one more, for the taking of which I and my two Comrades fell
into great danger, as we often did, both of Turks and Moors, which needs not
all to be related here: This is called by the Inhabitants Rhasut, and also
Rumigi; it has a strong, yet unpleasant savor, and about four stalks of a
whitish color, and so tender toward the Root, and so small as a Packthread,
whereon at each side grow seven or eight tender ash-colored Leaves one against
the other, distributed like unto those of Osmond-Royal, only they have round
Ears toward the St^lk, like unto the small Sage, and between the lowermost,
which are a little more distant, Flowers like unto our Aristolochia, yet a
great deal bigger, of a more brownish color, and hanging on longer Stalks. The
Root strikes very deep, and is very like unto our Pellitory, of a drying
quality, and somewhat hot, as the bitter taste intimates. When I was busy
about this tender Plant, and strove to get it out whole, which took me up the
more time, because I had no proper Tools by me, a Turk well armed came
galloping upon us, to see what we were doing; but when we perceived him to be
fuddled, and that he earnestly set upon us, to make booty of us, each of us
gave him, according to his own desire (seeing that he would not leave us
without it) something, that so we might get rid of him, so he rode away very
well pleased out of our sight, so that we took no further care of him. But
before I could get the Root quite out, he came back again with full speed upon
us, so I bid my Comrades to run to the next Olive Trees, and I would follow
them presently; but when I saw him come pretty near me, and found I could not
get the Plant whole, I pulled it up as well as I could, and so ran to my
Companions. But when I came to the Olive Trees, I found they were ran several
Olive Trees further, which stand row by row, and found my self quite alone and
destitute, and that I must defend my self behind the Tree; so he came down upon
me with his Cymeter drawn, and fetched one blow after the other at me, which I
still declined running from one side of the Tree to the other, so that they
went into the Tree and mangled it mightily. In the mean time defending my self
thus unarmed against him, I took a Resolution, that if he should take hold of
his Bow and Arrow to shoot at me, which he could not do except he left his
Cymeter, to run in upon him, and struggle with him: But this Fight during very
long, and perhaps his Anger did not give him leave to think of it, I found out
another way (knowing them to be very covetous) to make my self free again with
a piece of Money, and to give him a small Silver piece, (which in their
Language they call Saict, worth about threepence or a Groat) so pulled it out,
and showed it him still standing behind the Tree: As soon as he saw it he gave
over, and beckened to me to give it him, so I stepped to him, and when I
reached it to him, he took it. But my Table Book fell out of my Pocket when I
pulled out the Money, upon the Ground, wherein I had recorded many things,
which when he saw, he would have it also, but I refusing it, he grew mad, and
began to renew the same Game again; then I repented that I did not dismount him
when I gave him the Money; yet I considered, that if I should have done him a
Mischief, as he deserved, yet although I had never so good a Cause, I was sure
I must be cast, and perhaps come to a greater mischief and hurt; so I gave him
it, and after he had received it, he was pacified and rode away.

But to come to my former purpose again, I found about the River the other
Tragium Diosc. in the ploughed Grounds, and afterward also in abundance upon
the Hill, but generally in moist places, near to the Spring that runs down the
Hill: Its Root is whitish, pretty long and slender, from thence spread
themselves some woody Stalks not above a little finger long, whereon grew
toward the top many Leaves together, which were long, and had of each side of
their rib small Leaves, one opposite to the other, which were (just like the
Trichomanes) divided, only somewhat longer, about the bigness of these of
Asplenium, and are (as they) delicately green within, but without, and against
the Ground, of an Ash Color, and woolly, chiefly the small ones, that are just
sprouting out between the others. Out of these first-mentioned Stems come first
naked long Stalks, upon which grow, at the top, Violet-brown Flowers close
together, as if it was an Ear of Corn: The Inhabitants call it Secudes, and so
did the ancient Arabians, chiefly Avicen. in the 679th Chapter, where he also
attributes this Virtue, that it is very proper in the Bloody Flux.

In their Gardens the Turks love to raise all sorts of Flowers, wherein they
take great delight, and use to put them on their Turbant, so I could see the
fine Plants that blow one after another, daily, without trouble. In December I
saw our Violets, with dark-brown and white Flowers, whereof they gave me in
that Season several Nosegays. Then came the Tulips, Hyacinths, Narcissies,
which they still name by the old name Nergis. Before all other, I saw a rare
kind with a double yellow Flower, called Modaph, and a strange Convolvulus
hederae foliis, with great purple Flowers, whereout grew Seed-vessels, as you
see in the new Harmala, with three distinct Capsula's, wherein is kept its
black Seed, to which they attribute the virtue of evacuating tough Slime. This
is found sometimes in Gardens, and by the Inhabitants called Hasnisca, and the
Persians Acafra, and Serapio, Chapt. 273. Habalnil; the Latins, Granum
Indicum, and Carthamus Indicus; and he that has a mind to know more of it, let
him look into the Author himself, in the abovementioned place, in the 306th
Chapter of Avicen. and the 208th of Rhases. I also found in their Gardens Balm,
Basil, and a fine sort of Amaranthus, which for his colour-sake may be called
Symphonia Plinii, and therefore called Parrots Feather.

I cannot forbear, before I conclude, to mention some which I found here and
there in the Batzars, and among them a strange sort of Lillies, which as I am
told grow in sunny, moory, mossy, and moist places; whereon grows a long
Stalk of the same color and thickness of ours, only a great deal broader, but
broadest of all at top, where it is about three fingers broad, so that it is
like unto a Spatula that is painted at one end: On this Stalk grow at each side
several tender Leaves, which are pretty long, but very small and pointed, and
at the top thereof some white Flowers like unto ours. When I was thinking of
this at several times, what they were called by the Ancients, it came into my
mind, that I had read of them in Theophrastus, lib. 4. cap. 9. and I really
believe it to be the same. But whereas Theophrastus writes in the quoted place,
that they do not touch the Ground, I can say nothing to it, for I never saw any
of them growing. They have also some small Roots to sell, called Mamirani
tchini, good for Eyes, as they say; they are yellowish like Curcuma, but a good
deal longer, and thinner, and knotted, and very like unto our Poligonatum, and
may be esteemed to be the true Mamican, whereof Rhases makes mention in
several places. There is also among others brought a great quantity of the
Juice of Scammony, that is still very soft, it comes in Leathern Bags from out
of the Country, and so it is sold to our Merchants in their Fondiques; but those
that buy it must have a great care (because it is often adulterated) that they
be not cheated. There is also a good deal of the Juice, by the Apothecaries
called Opium, and by the Inhabitants Ofinn, which the Turks, Moors, and
Persians, and other Nations take inwardly, not only in War, at the time when
they go to fight their Enemies, to make them courageous and valiant, but also
in time of Peace, to drive away Melancholy and Care, or at least to ease it.
Their religious People make also use of it, but above all the rest the Deruis,
and take so much of it, that it makes them presently drowsy, and without
consideration, that when, after their barbarous and silly way, they cut, slash,
or burn themselves, they may feel less smart or pain. If any one has so begun
to make use of it, (they take about the quantity of a large Pea at a time) they
cannot well leave it off again, except they have a mind to throw themselves
into a Sickness or other Inconveniences: For, as they confess themselves, that
if they omit taking of it, they find themselves very ill in their Bodies. Opium
is commonly taken from the white Poppy-heads, in their Language called
Cascasch, wherein they cut (when they are young and tender) a spiral or
winding-circle round about it from top to bottom, one under the other; out of
those runs some Milk, which they let be there until it grows thick, then they
gather it and make it into Balls, like unto our perfumed Soap-balls. Being that
the Turks use this Opium so commonly, it happens sometimes that they take so
much of it, that it is very dangerous; wherefore they have an Antidote (as I
was informed) that is the Root Aslab (whereof I have made mention before) which
they give to bring them to rights again.

I found also in the great Batzars a sort of Alga sold in their Shops, which
was dark-red, and therefore very useful for Dyers; it had Stalks of the
thickness of a Finger, and was surrounded with several thin Scales, or rather
Leaves, and round: Wherefore it may be taken to be a Saderva Serap. and Herb
Alargivan of Andreas Bellunensis, whereof he makes mention in his Index, where
he interprets the Arabian words. For a kind of this may also be taken
(because it affords a delicate purple color) that Alga that is found in the
Seas near Candia, and is described by Theophrastus in his Fourth Book and
Seventh Chapter. Lastly, Among the rest, I did also enquire after the Amomum,
and thought, because they were near unto the Confines of Armenia, that
therefore they might easily have it by the Caravans, which come daily from
those parts; yet I was forced to run a great while after it, till at length I
got a little Stalk thereof in one Shop: They call it by the name of Hamama. But
of the other, so called by Dioscor. which is like unto it, and therefore may
easily be taken for the right one, they had a great deal. These two small
Shrubs, although they are very like to one another, yet for all that they may
be distinguished by their Stalks and different colors. Wherefore Dioscorid.
bids us (if we will not be imposed upon) to pick out the bigger and smoother,
with its noble Seed, and to leave the small. This Stalk, which I found about
the length of a Finger, is almost of the color of the Bark of the
Cinnamon-tree, and also in its acrimony and good odor (although it was old)
still very strong. At the top had been several woody Stalks, close to one
another, whereon I believe had been the Flowers and Seeds. But the Twigs of the
other sort, which are cracked and bended, are of a brown color, which at the
top divide themselves into other less ones, like a Tree, whereon grow several
Stalks, with little Heads like unto the Masaron, or Marum Syriacum from Crete,
wherein is no great strength nor odor.

Thus much I thought convenient to mention of strange Plants, chiefly of these
the ancients make mention of, and so I conclude the first part of my TRAVELS.

Here ends the First Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE TRAVELS OF Dr. Leonhart Rauwolff, INTO The Eastern
Countries. Wherein is treated of his Journey from Halepo, through the famous
Town of Babylonia, to Badgee; what he saw by the way, and what did befall him in
going and coming by Water and by Land. With a brief account of the high Mount
of Libanus; of the strange Plants and Inhabitants thereof.

THE SECOND PART OF THE TRAVELS OF Dr. Leonhart Rauwolff INTO THE Eastern
Countries. Wherein is treated of his Journey from Halepo through the Famous
Town of Babylonia, to Bagdet; what he saw by the way, and what did befall him in
going and coming by Water and by Land. With a brief Account of the high Mount
of Libanus, of the strange Plants and Inhabitants thereof.
CHAP. I.
How I departed from Halepo to the Famous City of Bir, and how I sailed from
thence on the Euphrates to old Babylon.

AFter I had stayed a good while in Halepo, and had seen and understood the
Trade and Merchandices of the Inhabitants, together with that of all the other
Nations, viz. Grecians, Armenians, Georgians, Arabians, Persians, and Indians,
which come and go daily with their Caravans, and very well observed and
understood their Manners and Customs, and had also Collected a fine parcel of
foreign and undescribed Plants; I resolved to go farther Eastward into
Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Babylonia, etc. as the ancientest and most fruitful
Countries that ever were, where the ancientest People, and the most Potent
Monarchs did inhabit. But these Countries lying far off, and the Way that
leads thither, passing through vast Deserts and Wildernesses, and therefore
the Voyage being so much the more difficult and dangerous to attempt and
accomplish; I first looked out for a trusty Companion, to take as my Assistant,
and met presently with an experienced Dutchman, that had lived a great while in
Halepo, who granted my request (being as desirous to go this Voyage as my self)
to go along with me. We agreed presently, and began to consider, which was our
best Way to take. But that we being Strangers, might not be taken to be
Vagabonds or Spies (they being very suspicious) from whence they might
presently take occasion (as the Turks use to do) to lay great Avarias, or
unjust Taxes, upon us, which the Christians that deal to these Parts, have
often to their great Loss and Damage experienced; we did consider, and found,
that the Trading here was very great, so that they did not only deal from
hence, into Armenia, Egypt, and Constantinople, (for from thence come the
Caravans through Natolia, in about a Months time) but also very much into
Persia and India: Wherefore we thought best to profess our selves Merchants,
that so we might Travel the more safely with other Merchants, in order thereto,
to buy some Merchandices, that would Sell in those Places, and to carry them
along with us. That we might put this in execution, my formerly mentioned
Friend Hans Vlrich Raft, from Vlm, took great Pains to furnish me at my Desire
and Request, with several fit Commodities for those Places, upon account of my
Patron, Mr. Melchior Manlich, which I got packed up immediately, to go with
them to the Famous City Bagdet, situated upon the Tigris, where is a great
Staple and Deposition of Merchandices that are to go farther for Persia and
India. But seeing that seldom any Merchants go from Halepo further into these
Countries, so that our Habits are very rarely seen there; we clothed our
selves as is usual, in the common Turkish Habit (that every body might not
presently look upon us as Strangers); first, we had long blue Cabans, which are
buttoned before quite down, and cut out about the Neck, not unlike to those of
the Armenians; and white Drawers made of Cotton, that hung down to our Ankles,
and were drawn in, and tied about our Bodies, and also Shirts after the same
Fashion, and without Collars. We also fitted our selves with white Turbants
with a blue Brim, such as Christians usually wear, and put on yellow Shoes
which were painted, before guarded with Nails, and with Horse Shoes behind.
Besides this we put on a kind of a Frock, made of a certain course Stuff called
Meska in their Language, which is common among the Moors. They are generally
made of Goats and Asses Hair, pretty narrow, without Sleeves, and short,
reaching only to our Knees. But these Stuffs being not all alike, the finest
thereof (chiefly that which is striped white and black) is taken for Clothes;
and the courser for Tents and Portmantles, wherein they carry their Provision
through the Deserts, and also keep their Camels and Mules meat, hanging it
about their Necks. This puts me in mind of the plain clothing which the
ancient Inhabitants of these Countries, (chiefly the Israelites, when they
mourned for their deceased Relations, or when they repented of their committed
Iniquities, and turned from them, and prayed God to forgive them their
accumulated Transgressions) used to put on, as we read in the 37th. Chapter of
Genesis, where Jacob lamented the Death of his Son Joseph; and in the Book of
the Prophet Jonas, of the Ninevites, who believing the Prophet's Words,
denouncing their Destruction within Forty Days, and repenting of their Sins,
put on Sackcloth, and prayed to God for forgiveness. The like we read of the
King and Prophet David, after he had numbered his People. Item, in the 10th.
Chapter of Luke and other places, etc. that they put on Sackcloth and did
repent in Ashes. It is therefore very probable, that those were very like unto
them that are still in use.

When we had thus accoutred our selves for the Voyage, and provided us with all
Necessaries, viz. Cloths, Merchandices, Provision of Biskets and Drink, and did
stay only for some Fellow-travellers, we were still doubtful whether it were
more convenient for us to go by Land with Caravans, which go from hence and
Damascus very strong to Bagdet, through great Sands and Deserts in Fifty Days,
more or less, according as the Weather proves: Or, whether we should go by
Water, either upon the Tigris or the Euphrates, there being good Opportunity to
go in Company with others. But it happening that we met with some Armenian
Merchants Servants that did live at Halepo, who were also provided with Goods,
and had a mind to go into the same Countries, we did readily embrace this
Opportunity, partly because they understood the Turkish and Arabian Languages,
which two are chiefly spoken in Syria, and partly because some of them had been
four times already in the Indies; wherefore we put our Goods to theirs, and
loaded a great many Camels together, to deliver them to us at Bir, to ship them
there upon the Euphrates; And that we might pass every where in the Turkish
Dominions, we took a Pass from the Bashaw and Cadi, and so we began our Travels
to Bir, distant Three Days Journey, the 13th. of August, Anno 74. By the way we
were so strange to one another, that in our new Fashioned Clothes we did hardly
know one another among them all. After we had the first Day a rough Road, and
traveled through many Deserts and uninhabited Places, we reached at Night a
little Village, where we encamped and pitched our Tents. We put all our Packs
in a circle round about us, and without them our Beasts (as it is usual in
great Caravans) to defend us from the Assaults of the Moors in the Night. A
little after Midnight we heard a great Caravan of many Camels and Asses to go
by, very near to us, which after it was passed, we broke also up and followed
them; when the Day Light appeared, we saw several plowed Fields more than the
Day before, and also here and there in some pleasant Places many Tents of the
Arabians, which were fixed together as it were in a Camp; ranged very orderly
into Streets. After we had that Morning traveled very hard, so that our Beasts
under their heavy Loads began to be tired in the great Heat, we rested behind a
little Chapel, to refresh our selves, and to feed our Camels; in the mean time
some poor Women came down from the High-lands to us to gather the Dung of our
Camels to burn it instead of Wood, whereof they were in great want. When the
great Heat was over, and we had staid there for two Hours, we went on again,
and came before it was Night, to a little Village lying in a Valley, near which
upon the Height, the Arabians had formed a great Camp: We went up to them, and
pitched our Tents in the Plain by them, and kept as abovesaid a good Watch.
They came quickly to us, spoke kindly to us, and their Wives brought us Water
and good Milk; but after we saw that they were very naked and hungry, and in
their shape like to our Gypsies, we did not trust them at all, but kept a very
good Watch all that Night. These are Vagabond People, that are used to Idleness
from their Infancy, and will rather endure Hunger, Heat and Cold, than get any
thing by their Handiwork, or Till the Fields, or Plant Garden-herbs for their
Maintenance, although they might do it in several fruitful Places in their own
possession. So you find here a great Number of them by the sides of these sandy
Deserts, that have no where any Habitation, but live in their Tents like as the
Beasts do in Caves, and go like unto the Gypsies from place to place, until
they light on one, where they may live a great while with their Cattle, and
when all is eat up, want drives them from thence, to look out for another.

On the 15th. early before break of Day, we were up in the cool of the Day,
with an intention to reach to Bir that Night, but our Camels were grown so
faint by reason of the excessive Heat and the great Burdens, that they fell
down several times, wherefore we looked out for a convenient place where we
might stay all Night, and found at last a Village near which we pitched our
Tents, eat some Gourds and Biskets, and so went to rest.

Two Hours before break of the Day, we began our Journey again, and came early
in the Morning to the great River called Euphrates, we went over with our Goods
and Chattel, and fixed our Tents before the Town near the River, on the other
side, to stay for a Barge that was to come from Armenia, to go from thence to
Babylon, which is now called Felugo. By the way I saw no Herbs of any worth,
except the Galega, in our Language called Goats-rue, which grew plentifully on
the dry Heaths; and near to the Road, the first sort of Apocynum, by us called
Dogs-bane, very like unto the great Celandine in its Leaves and Pods: I also
saw whole acres of Turkish Corn called Sesamo, and others all sown with Cotton,
and also a kind of Esula, very full of Milk, wherewith the fallow Grounds were
so filled up, that at a distance, you would have taken it for good Corn. Seeing
that the Scammony that uses to be brought to Halepo, is wont sometime to be
very sharp, therefore it may very well be, that they adulterate it with this
Esula. Near the Town grew abundance of Acacia, called Schack and Schamuck, as
is above mentioned, which are here in Stem and Fruit, greater and larger than
ever I saw any any where. The Town Bir is situated on the other side of the
great River Euphrates in Mesopotamia, near the high Hill Taurus, just like
Tripolis near the Libanus, or our Losanna on our Alps: It is neither big nor
strong, but pretty well defended by a Castle that lies on a high Rock above
the River, not easily to be taken. There is a very pleasant Country round about
it, and very fruitful, which (chiefly on this side of the River where it is
plain) is very well Tilled and Sown with Corn (which they did just thrash out
when we came, with little Wagons drawn by Oxen) and here and there are very
good Villages. But beyond the River it is more hilly, which kind of Ground
extends it self a great way toward the East, and divides Armenia from
Mesopotamia. It is at the top very rough and bare; nothing but Bushes and Herbs
to be seen there; wherefore abundance of Beasts, chiefly Lambs and Goats, are
daily brought down, which are carried over the Euphrates, and so driven to
Halepo and other adjacent places. This River where it runs by the Town is about
a Mile broad, and so deep that it is not easy to make a Bridge over it: Yet
because it has not a swift Current in that place, it is not very dangerous to
Sail on it, except where it enlarges it self (as it does in great Deserts) or
else where it divides it self into several Branches, so that the Watermen do
not know, which is the best way for them to take; wherefore the Merchants that
have a mind to come quicker and with less Pains to Bagdet with their
Merchandices, carry them by Land to Orpha, to the Famous Town of Carahmet,
which lies Six Days further toward the East, on the Borders of Assyria and
Media, upon the rapid River Tigris, where is a great Deposition of
Merchandices, that are sent from thence to Ormutz and the Indies. The Euphrates
is continually muddy, and therefore almost not fit to be drunk, except you let
it stand Two or Three Hours, until the Sand and Mud is sunk down to the bottom,
which sometimes is of the thickness of an Inch: So that in every House where
they have no Wells, all along the River in Towns and Villages, they have
several great Pots which they fill out of the River, and let them stand until
it be settled, but if they have occasion to drink of it before, they drink
through their Towels.

During the time of our staying there they brought us several sorts of Fishes
they had caught in the River to Sell, and among the rest one sort called
Geirigi, which in their Shape and Scales were very like unto Carps, only they
were not so thick in the Belly, but a great deal longer and bigger, so that
sometimes one of them did weigh three Rotula's of their Weight, which is about
Seventeen or Eighteen of our Pounds. They are very delicate and good to eat,
and so cheap, that we could buy one for one Medin, in our Money worth about
three Pence. To catch these, our Ship's Crew flung out oftentimes some Pellets
made up with Cocculus Indic; (which Fruit is named by them Deam Samec) and
presently after some of the Fish flung themselves up at the top of the Water,
whereupon they jumped out of the Ship, to catch them, and to carry them
a-shoar. I saw also a peculiar sort of Vultures, which were so tame, that they
did not only sit very thick upon the Houses, but they sat down in the Street
before all the People without any fear, they are more of an Ashen Color than
ours, but for bigness, height and the rest, exactly like unto them. Besides
these there was another sort of them, that were something bigger, and of a
lighter Color than the former, and had some black at the Ends of their Wings
like unto our Storks. They eat also Carrion, and Meat, and are somewhat wilder,
wherefore they may be affirmed to be the very same that Rhasis called Gyuni,
and Avicenn, Rachame. During the time that we staid there, a Bashaw was sent
hither by the Turkish Sultan, with some hundred Spahi's, pretty well armed, for
his Master did intend to make War with the Trusci, that so he might defend the
Confines of Syria, Mesopotamia, and Armenia, etc. from being assaulted by them,
and to keep every thing secure. The Trusci live on the Mountain of Libanus, and
pretend to be the Off spring of those People that under Godfrey de Bouillon did
possess themselves again of the Land of Promise. They are since so much
increased, that they are able to bring into the Field Sixty Thousand (most of
which are very good Gunners) which if occasion be, they can bring together in a
short time. The Grand Signior seeing that they increased daily, so that he did
fear they would be in time too great for him, to prevent this (as then the
common Discourse went) and to subdue them, and bring them under his Yoke, did
summon some Bashaws and Sangiacs, chiefly him of Damascus to bring together a
great Army, to fall upon them. But which way he did beat them, and how he
encroached upon them, I shall (because I did for this time, during my Travels,
hear no more of it) relate more largely after my return. The Spahi's which came
with the Bashaw, took (because they would not be Idle) their Diversion in
Running, Shooting with Arrows, and in Fencing, or Cudgel-playing, and sometimes
the Country People came in with them, and played with them, but not in so many
sorts of Arms as the Fencing-Masters do in our Country, viz. with Daggers,
Swords or Halbarts, for these are not in fashion in those Countries. They take
instead thereof only Cudgels, with them they approach toward one another three
times, yet not with such flourishes and neatness as our Fencers do before they
begin, for their long Clothes hinder them. In their left hand they have a
Buckler which is about a Foot Diameter round, covered with Leather, and stuffed
out with Hair; in their right Hand they have a Cudgel, wherewith they strike
strait at one another in the first bout, as the Boys do in our Country, but in
the second and third bout, they strike cross-ways, chiefly in the third which
is the last, which they take off cleaverly with their Bucklers; and sometime
they strike at one another Legs, but never to hurt one another; when this is
done, they turn back and march off. This manner of Fencing is very common in
these Countries.

At length after we had staid a great while, several Ships did arrive from
above, and ours, for which we did stay, among them. So our Patron begun to
load, and to fit himself for our departure: And so did two more that had a mind
to go in Company with us. One among them belonging to a Turk was laden only
with Corn, to carry during the Scarcity (which was occasioned by the great
Heat, and for want of Rain) to Bagdet. We also bought several sorts of Fruits,
viz. Cibebs, Anguria's, Garlic and Onions, etc. and took also along with us
some Ground Corn, as is usual to do in such Voyages, which with Rice Flower is
fit to make Puddings, or to bake Bread of; Honey and other things to serve as
Provision for our Ship; for we were to travel a great way through many Deserts
and Places not inhabited, where nothing was to be had. For there are no Inns
upon this River, as upon the Rhine or Danube, where they dress Victuals for
Travelers against they come. And that we might have sometimes something Hot to
eat, we provided ourselves with several Cooking Vessels (as is usual in these
cases) to dress our Meat in. But the Master of our Ship still wanting both Men
and Merchandices to load his Ship withal, we were forced to stay somewhat
longer, for other Merchants which came in a little time from Halepo (whereof
some were Armenians, some Persians, others from Bagdet and Balsora) to us; with
these also came into the Ship Four Soldiers that were listed by the Turks to
go to Bagdet, to reinforce the Confines of Persia: Our Master also took in some
of their Jews, which are worse than ours, and so we were warned to have a care
of them. Besides all these we were forced to take in some of their Religious
Men, which had long before begged thereabout, for they commonly live by
begging, and desire you to give them something Alla hitsi, that is, for God's
sake, and yet if they find an Opportunity they will fall upon you and Rob you.
They are very ill-favored, idle, and yet very hardy Men, that run about all
Countries, and often do a great deal of hurt; wherefore one must have especial
Care of them, chiefly upon the Road. Yet for all this they have in these
Countries very great Privileges; they pretend to great Holiness and Devotion,
and pray often, and persuade the Vulgar sort of People, that God does hear
their Prayers before any others, and grants their desires, but People do not
believe them so readily now, as their Ancestors have done formerly, wherefore
they do not remain long in one place, that their Roguery may not so much appear.

CHAP. II.
Which way we went into the Ship, and sailed to Racka; and how the Son of the
King of Arabia with his Retinue came to our Ship to demand his Customs: What
else we saw by the way, and what we did suffer from the Arabians and their
Mendicants.

AFter our Ship as well as the others was sufficiently laden, and with all
Necessaries provided, we went aboard, and began our Voyage in the Name of God,
the 30th. Day of August, Anno 74. (having stayed there and lost Seventeen Days)
in the Evening, with an intention to go that Night three Leagues further. But
two of our Ships got into a branch of the River, whereof there are several in
the very beginning: Our Watermen took great pains to bring them into the right
way again, and stayed for them, which retarded us so long, that we were forced
to stay all Night, at a Market Town, called Caffra, which lies a good League
below, on the top of a Hill, where we landed.

The next morning at break of Day, we got in again and in the beginning we went
on very fortunately, and began to leave by degrees on our left Hand, the
Mountain Taurus, which extends its self Eastward, and went more to the right,
through the great Deserts and Sandy Places of Arabia, where that River divides
it self into several broad Branches, that the Skippers knew hardly how to steer
the right way. When we went on so, thinking of no danger, for the Turkish Ship
was got already very safe through one of them, the second (which we followed)
stuck upon the Sand, by the neglect of their Pilot toward the right, so that
it did not only stick there, but took away the Stream from us, which turned
their Ship cross very violently, after such a manner, that we were forced
(because we were too nigh, and our Ship was in her full running, so that we
could turn no way) to fall foul upon it. So ours drove with the Stream upon
theirs with that force, that we broke the two uppermost Boards of their side;
so the Water ran in, and the Ship sank deeper. Our Ship, although it had
received no hurt, yet did it not go on, but stuck by the other. Whereupon we
began to labor hard, removed the Sand below, and made a way to get it clear;
after we had half drawn it before the other into the Stream, the Stream drove
it so hard against the other that also a row and a half of our side-board were
broken, and if it had broken the second row quite, we had incurred the same
Mischief and Damage as they. When we were in this Condition, and could not
otherwise think but that we must perish all together, yet our merciful God and
Lord did order it so, that we did not only secure the breach, but came into the
right River free and quit before the other Ship, where we did land immediately.
After we had recovered our selves a little, we did not delay to assist the
other, but unloaded our Ship, to load theirs into it, and so to land them,
which we did with all speed: In the mean time appeared behind the Trees and
Tamarisks at each side a good many Arabians, both on Horseback and foot, and
came so near, that they were not afraid to attack our Guards we had left with
our Goods, and to attempt to rob us. But when they found resistance, and heard
several of our Guns discharged on our side, they were frighted (for Guns were
unknown to them) to that Degree, that they turned their Backs and run away as
hard as they could drive. At last we attempted to draw out the Ship together
with some small Goods that were still left in it, which succeeded very well,
for when we hoisted our Sails and drew them on, and wrought with all our might
and strength, it yielded by Degrees, so that at length we got it quite off, and
brought it a-shoar. The loss of their Merchandices, although it was but small
in quantity, yet it was very great in their Silk, Stuffs of Damasco, Soap,
Sugar, Roots of Zarneb Melchi, which is good for the Pain in the Back, as is
here before mentioned, Figs and Corn, which suffered very much; wherefore they
begged of us, that we would be pleased to stay with them, until they had dried
their Goods and mended their Ship, so that they might go along with us more
safely through these Deserts, which we granted them readily. During this our
Stay, when we were helping them, it fell out that I and one of my Comrades were
falsely accused by some Jews, before some of their Religious Men, that we were
often fudling with the Master of the Ship, which the Jew did on purpose, to
make us Outlandish Men hated among them (for they do according to their Law
not easily admit of drinking of Wine) and to disparage us; and this his
Intention did succeed so well that when their Clergymen did understand it, they
became very angry with us, took our Vessel of Wine, flung it into the River,
and drew it upon the Land where they let it run out, which did not well please
the Soldiers and others, wherefore they took our part, and did give the Jew
for it a very severe Reprimand. But as no good Deed remains unrewarded, and
no ill one unpunished, so it happened here; for the chiefest of them (which was
a Moor and of the Order of the Dervis) was the next Day punished severely, for
a frivolous Cause, whereof I unadvisedly was the occasion. While our Goods were
yet on shore I got toward Night upon the Balls to stand Sentinel, it being my
turn; so when I saw one with a Mug full of Water, I desired him to give me some
to drink, which he was willing to do, and reached me the Mug, I going to take
it, trod by chance upon a Fiddle of one of the Turks and broke it: Although he
had had great occasion to be angry with me for this, yet (understanding that I
had Give enough to mend it) he was presently quieted and well contented. The
next Morning we sat together and mended the Fiddle as well as we could; when
the Dervis saw us busy about the Fiddle, he was very angry that we did not help
to spread out the Merchandices, which we had done already before we began; so
he took the Fiddle, broke it and flung it into the River; then he came back,
and pretended to bang us, thinking to have the same Success with this as he had
with the Wine. But the Turk seeing this, took up a good Cudgel that was thrown
up by the River, and struck him several times over his Head and Limbs, that the
Blood ran down his Ears and Face, and at length he grew so angry that he went
to draw his Scymeter, but before he could, we stepped in between them, got them
asunder, mitigated the business and appeased them. So this Saint of theirs
looked very dismal in his long and lank black Hair, and had besides on his Body
here and there several Scars, viz. on his Head and Breast, and above all upon
his Arms, which he had cut or burnt himself, which is usual to that Order, and
other Turks to do; which set often on their Flesh burning and red glowing
Spangs, or instead of them Linen Rags, about an Inch thick twisted very hard
together, broad below, and pointed on the top, tapering just like unto a
Pyramid, which they set on Fire, and let it burn out with a great deal of
Patience upon their bare Skin, so long until it is quite consumed and brought
to Ashes, then they tie it up with Cotton; they also do the same sometimes in
Rheums of the Head and Eyes, etc. to dry them up, or to turn them, and to draw
them into another place. So I have seen several which have had at least Twenty
Scars about them, but chiefly on their Arms, (whereof-some were of the bigness
of a Shilling) besides Wounds and Scratches they had. But from whence they
received this inhumane way (to wound and torment themselves) I do not know,
except they had it anciently from the Priests of Baal, which used to wound
themselves with Knives and Lances (as we read in the 18th. Chapter of the 3d*
of the Kings) until the Blood followed. These Holy Scars and Tokens of their
Zeal, I could soon see and observe on this Moor, for according to his Order
(which is a very great one) he was to wear no Cloths upon his Body neither
Winter nor Summer, only a little Scarf to cover his Privy Members withal:
Instead of them they put Sheep Skins about them, whereon they lie also at
Night, and so they serve them for Clothes, Bed and Cover. And so they pretend
by their exterior Apparel and Behavior, to great Virtue and Patience, as if
they were dead to the World; and to a peculiar Holiness, in praying, fasting,
watching, etc. whereas they are full of Roguery and Knavery, so that you shall
hardly find any like them. With this came also several other Religious Men of
several Orders, which were all in several distinct Habits, as they are in our
Country; among them was a very strong, well set young Man, of the Order of the
Geomaliers as they call it, which are rather Secular than Clergymen, they are
generally Tschelebys, that is Gentlemen and rich Persons, which take great
delight in traveling in their young Days, under pretense of Holiness, like
Pilgrims, at other Peoples Costs, through several Countries and Kingdoms, to
see and learn, and to get Experience. This had only a blue Coat on that covered
his Body, tied about with a Sash and Shoes of Sheeps Skins, such as the
Arabians in the Deserts use to wear. There went along with us Two more; whereof
one had a great Ring in each Ear, about the thickness of a Finger, and so heavy
that it stretched down his ear-laps to his very Shoulders. These are of the
Order called the Calendriers, which lead a sober, and abstemious Life before
People, wherefore they separate themselves from the People, and walk about like
Hermits into Deserts wherever they can, to pray there ardently, and to cry
out the hours (whereof they have Five every Day) as the Priests do from the
Steeples, wherefore this Man did separate himself as often as he had an
Opportunity far from us, that the Beasts could rather see and hear him, than we
that were in the Ship. When he had done this, he came to us again, and looked
so devoutly as if he had been in a Rapture or Ecstasie. The other was a Dervis,
whereof I have made mention before, which also kept to a very strict Order, for
he prayed devoutly and ardently, chiefly at Night after Sun set, at what time
two or three more used to come to him, and among them sometimes some of our
Merchants; they did stand together in a circle, and so began to pray (as I
heard often) first very lowly, then by degrees louder, but when they came to
the Leila Hillalla, etc. they were so loud, that you might hear them afar of,
and then they repeated only these Words very often; and every time they
repeated them, they turned their Head from one side to the other, as if they
looked upon one another by turns, to show their great Love one to another, so
they repeat these words very often, and every time quicker and quicker, until
they abbreviate them at last, and say only, Lahu Huhu. By this prattling or
jabbering and moving of their Heads, they became at length so giddy and weary,
that the cold Sweat ran down them. But this their Saint did not pronounce the
words of their Prayers with the rest, but struck on his Breast with his Fist,
upon his Heart, which gave instead thereof so strange a Tune, as if he had been
hallow within, much like unto the Noise that a Turky-Cock uses to make when he
is very angry, so that it would have frighted any Man, chiefly if he had been
alone with him; and he would (with his terrible Face) rather have taken him to
be an Apparition than a Man. These abovementioned Words he repeateth so often,
and so long, until he faints away, and falls down, and there he lies as if
he were dead. Then the others cover him, let him lie and go their ways. After
he has lain thus a good while as if he had been ravished in his Prayers, or
had seen a peculiar Vision, he comes to himself, rises and appears again.
All these Saints, although they practice their Religion after a peculiar
manner, which according to their Opinion, is quite surpassing that which is
prescribed in their Law, to move the People the sooner (regarding their
severity in living, their great Patience and frequent Ecstasies) to believe
them, that they under pretense of Piety, may go on in their hoggishness,
uncleanness, and robberies (as they do) without any controuling: Yet because
their idle Hypocrisy, and great Rogueries do daily appear more plainly, (not
without great Damage to the Country) therefore they are no more in so great
esteem, nor have so much given them as formerly. Concerning their strange way
of Praying, (chiefly that of the Moors) their own People have often told me,
that because such a Devotee changed his natural Voice given by him God, into an
unnatural one, therefore he ought rather to be accounted a Beast than a Man,
and consequently much less ought to be esteemed a Divine. Thus much I thought
convenient to relate here of their Mendicants that traveled with us, and now I
come to my former purpose again.

After we had spent four Days in drying our Merchandices, and in mending our
Ships, we did load them again, and so set out the next Friday, being the 3d. of
September, about Noon. All that Day we saw nothing but Bushes on both sides of
the River, wherein were several wild Beasts, but above all wild Boars, till
Night, when we came in sight of a little Village about two or three Miles
distant, upon the ascent, on our left Hand, where we landed and stayed all
Night. In that place I found nothing but a bastard Camel's Hay, which was like
unto the true one, but without any Virtue in it.

The next Day our Navigation proceeded very well, and at Noon we came to a
strong Citadel called Galantza, which is situated at this side of the River,
on a Hill belonging to the King of Arabia, with whom the Turkish Emperor (as I
was informed, and could understand, that did not know their Language well) had
long and heavy Wars; and could have done him (because he could not follow him
through the Deserts for want of Water and Provisions) no great hurt, if the
King's Eldest Son had not put himself into this Castle, believing that he might
be secure there from any Assault from without, wherein he was mightily
mistaken. For after the Sultan did understand that he was there, he was
resolved to take it notwithstanding all Difficulties. And therefore he summoned
all his Forces together in the Year 1570. and did Assault it in three Places at
the same time, so long and so often, until at length he took it by Storm, and
so he made the King's Son his Prisoner, and carried him to Constantinople,
where he had (as they say) his Head cut off the following Year. This Castle
(being surrounded with strong Walls, and having within a very high and large
Tower) is still, according to my Apprehension, very strong, but yet it lies in
ruins, and the three open places remain unrepaired. At Night we landed in a
small Island, which was not inhabited, and in the middle of the River, we did
not question but we were there very well secured from the Arabians, and yet
notwithstanding, as soon as we had supped and began to go to rest, some of them
came creeping along to us, about Midnight, rather to visit our Goods than us.
But because they durst not venture to go to our Ships, without great danger of
being discovered by our Watch, they did visit them that rested on shore, and
had taken something considerable from them, if they had not been discovered
immediately by them, and had retaken from them again, that which they could not
so readily carry over the River.

The Fifth Day of September, some Arabians appeared on shore early in the
Morning; by and by we saw more at a great Distance upon the height, and some
Squadrons of Horse of Forty or Fifty strong, ride about, from whence we
concluded that the King's Camp was not far off, which proved to be true. For
about Noon, after we landed, the King's Youngest Son came riding to us, on a
high black Horse, with a Retinue of about Hundred Men, most of which had Bows,
and long Pikes made of Reed. He was but young, about Twenty Four or Twenty Five
Years old, of a brownish Color, and had a white Turbant on his Head made of
Cotton, one end whereof hung down behind about a Span long, according to their
usual Custom. He had on a long Gown made of ordinary Sheeps Skins with the
Wool on them, which hung down to his Ankles, and so had all his Courtiers,
which were in their common Dress so like unto one another, that one could not
have discerned them, if his had not been edged with some Gold Lists (as we use
to edge Childrens Coats in our Country) about the Neck and Sleeves, and had not
had long Sleeves, whereon were some Escutcheons to be seen. Because Custom is
due to the King of Arabia, by reason of the Euphrates, therefore this Young
Prince came to demand and take it; so he went into the River, and rode first to
the Turkish Ship, to see what Goods they carried, but finding nothing but Corn
therein he did not stay long there, but came to ours, his Servants that were on
purpose ordered for that, helped him soon up into it, and placed him in the
middle of it on a Bale, but they themselves went about from one Merchant to
another, to visit their Goods, and did open now and then a Chest or a Bale, and
took some out of them more or less, according as they liked them, so that it
was a great while before they came about from Merchant to Merchant. In the mean
while, they brought also into the Ship a Young Prince, perhaps two Years old,
which one carried before him on Horseback after his Father. He had nothing on
but only a Cotton Shirt, and Rings about his Neck, Wrists and Legs, made of
fine Arabian Gold. At length his Servants came to me and my Comrades into the
Poop of the Ship; but before we began to show them any of our Goods, they saw
my Gun that was in-laid with Ivory, which they took immediately, to show it to
their Master, with a great deal of Admiration, being such a one as they had
never seen in their Life before. The King took it presently into his Hands, and
was mighty well pleased with it, and said that it was Outlandish-Work made by
the Franks (by which Name they call Outlandish-Men, French, German, Italian,
etc. because they know no Divisions or Distinctions of our Country) so we went
both to him, and acquainted him that we were lately come from those Countries,
with an Intention to go into the Indies. After the King understood this, he
spoke very kindly to us, and bid his Man to leave off and to search no more our
Goods, and enquired after several other things, and at length he told my
Comrade that he thought he had seen him before: Which was very true; for when
my Comrade lived at Halepo, where he had drove the Goldsmith's Trade for a
great while, he and others were sent to the King (who was then at a little
distance from Halepo) by the Consul of Venice, to present him in his Name, with
several Presents (whereof some were costly and rich wrought Cloths) when they
came to him, and presented them to him, he took them with a great deal of
Kindness, and treated them very honorably, and showed them several sorts of
Sport, as Jumping, Running, etc. that they might see that he had a great many
brave and handy Soldiers; and did dispatch them very generously again, and
promised them (as my Friend told me) all Kindnesses, chiefly to their Masters,
saying, That if they should have occasion to make use of him against the Turks,
he would faithfully assist them, and that he did not doubt at all, if they
should agree together, but they might go a great way with him in these
Countries; nay, advance further upon the Turk in a short time, even to
Constantinople it self. After the beforementioned Discourse, the King went to
his Tents, that were pitched on a Plain by a Hill, within two Miles of us, and
took some of our Company along with him, to discourse his Father about our
Concerns. I would willingly have presented the King with my Gun (although we had
to travel through many Deserts) and perhaps he would have been pleased with it,
but durst not do it before the Turkish Soldiers, Mendicants and Jews, for I
feared, that they would betray it, and accuse me before the Bashaw and Cadi's,
which soon would have made me punishable, although innocent, as they use to do to
Strangers; nay, sometimes those of their own Nation; and besides, I did
remember, that when the King was encamped near Halepo, and some of his Men did
daily come into the Town, to buy Provision, Clothes and other Things, that then
it was strictly forbidden to Sell them any Arms, Bows or Pikes, to take along
with them into the Deserts. After we had staid for our Friends a great while,
they came so late to us, that we were hindered from going any farther that Day,
for it began to be late, and so we stayed there all Night. They told us, that
the King, after they had told him that we came from Halepo, would not believe
them, but thought rather we came from Saphet (which Town is within a Day's
Journey of Sidon, which the Sultan had taken from him a little while before)
that he might have a Pretense to arrest us and our Goods; and that he did so
obstinately persist in this Opinion, that they did really fear, he would have
sent some of his Men with one of us to Halepo, to know the certainty thereof,
until they plainly demonstrated to him by their Letters from whence they came;
whereupon he gave them Liberty to go on in their Journey. But I understood
afterward, that it was only to press something more out of them, as he really
did, for they were forced to give him some Knives tip'd with Silver that came
from Damascus, and also some Damasks.

On the Sixth of September, we were up early, and passed between great
Wildernesses, wherein were abundance of Wild Boars, that appeared sometimes in
great Herds: These Wildernesses continued so long, that we saw nothing else the
whole Day but Woods, till in the Evening we came to Cala, a Village and Castle
on this side of the River, which is no more but two Days Journey from Halepo,
situated in a Plain; from whence you may conjecture how crooked the River is
hitherto. This Castle belongs to a great Bashaw, called John Rolandt, and
also the fine House at Halepo, as is before mentioned. He has very great
Revenues and Sixty Sons: Six or Seven of them are Sangiacks, whereof some live
at the Sultan's Court. Beyond this Castle on the other side of the River, we
lodged all Night in the Wilderness, which continued so far, that we saw nothing
all the next Day long, but only here and there a little Cottage of the Moors,
which generally are built upon Four Sticks, and covered with Bushes: Within
them there are so many Children, that I have often admired at the Number of
them. They run in their first Infancy to the River, and learn to swim so well,
that they undertake without any fear to swim over the broad River. When we went
by, the Moors saluted us very often, if the distance did not hinder them, and
that chiefly to learn of us where about their King was in the Country. For they
have so great a Respect for their King (although they are an Idle and Vagabond
People) and unanimously show him such Obedience, as no other Nation does to
their Superiors; which also you may guess by this, that if any Outlandish Man
has a mind to get safely through the Wilderness, or to see their King, let him
but cloth himself in their Habit, and take a Moor along with him, to show him
the way, and to be his Interpreter, they will readily tell him the way to go to
him; or when they see that he has one of their own Nation with him, they let
him pass without any Molestation or Examination. So that those that are Slaves
on the Confines of Arabia, might easily free themselves without any trouble or
danger. Their Wives did also often come to us, and brought us Milk in great
flat Dishes, which they showed us at a distance to sell; wherefore we did land
sometimes, and received it, and gave them Biskets for it, for they have great
want of Corn, so that this interchanging pleased us both. We used to break
Biskets into this Milk, and so to eat it for Dinner or Supper, and sometimes if
it was too thick (or rather too little of it, that it might go the farther) we
used to temper or mix it with Water. They have also sometimes put it into
oblong Linen-Sacks, which it did hardly penetrate, and let it hang in the Ship
for two or three Days, until it did curdle, and came to be in Curds, and so it
used to serve us with Biskets and Onions for Breakfast or for Supper. When we
did land and had time to spare, I used to look about me for some strange
Plants, and among the rest, I found a peculiar Schoenanthum, which was very
like in Figure unto the true one, but had not its Virtues, and the first kind
of Rhannus of Carolus Clusius, with fat Leaves like unto Housleeke. I found
also Goats Rue, and a strange sort of Willows, which still are called by the
Inhabitants by their old Name Garb. There also were abundance of Tamarisks;
they were as big and high as our Cherry or Plum Trees, wherefore these Trees
are discerned soon at a distance by their height; they have very tender Leaves,
and long purple colored tops, as you see in the second kind of our Tamarisks,
so that between them and ours, there is no great Matter of Difference, but only
in Bigness, and Fruit, whereof I found none at that time. The Moors feed their
Cattle, for the most part, with those Bushes that grow at the River side, for
in the Wilderness and Deserts (where the Ground is very sandy, lean and barren)
there is but little Grass or tilled Ground, which occasioneth the great
Scarcity of Bread among them, so that often they see none in a great while, and
are forced to eat their other food, as Fish, Flesh, Cheese and Milk (which they
take from Goats, Sheep, Camels, etc.) without Bread; so that these poor People
make a shift with a mean Diet, and yet they are strong and in good Health, and
live to a good Age. At Night before it was dark, I saw another Fortification,
at the other side in Mesopotamia, on a high Hill called Jabar, belonging to the
King of Arabia, which is very large, and has several Towers in the Wall, so
that as far as I could see, it was very like to that of Halepo. We stayed all
Night on this side of it, in an Island, where we had been robbed again, If we
had not kept a good Watch, so as to perceive the Thieves, and to let off
several Guns: Yet this we did not to hurt, but only to frighten them; for if we
should have killed or wounded any of them, they would have fetched immediately,
some (according as they are in strength) it may be, Thousand together, to
revenge their Friend, to fall upon us, to beat us, and to plunder us (whereof
they are very eager) and to take all we had. The same happened to us the next
Day in another uninhabited Island of the River, where we would dress no
Victuals that Night, that they might not spy us by our Fire, to find us out and
to fall upon us. For when we expected to keep our selves thus quiet, and to
rest in good Tranquillity, they did not miss us, but came to us in a greater
Body than before, and that so near, that we could not only hear them, but they
began to talk with us. But when we saw that they were in earnest, we rouzed up
our selves, and got into Order, and spoke big to them, and bid them to offer no
Violence to us, for if they did, they would find greater Resistance than they
expected. But when we saw that this our Exhortation would do no good, we were
forced again to have recourse to our Guns, whereof we had but three, which we
let go off, which frightened them in such a manner (for they are not used to
them) that they ran away, and left us in quietness. But it is no wonder that
the Arabians are so restless, for they are full of Want and Nakedness, have not
to fill their Belly, nor to cover their Body withal; besides; they have nothing
else to do, and are used to idleness from their very Infancy, and then because
they hate to Work, they are forced to wander like Vagabonds from one place to
another. And (if they will maintain themselves and theirs) to seek their
livelihood from those that travel through their Country. So several times there
came two, three, or four together, swimming through the River, were it never so
broad or deep, to our Ship, whereof some were black, and some brown, which came
as naked into our Ship as ever they were born into the World, to beg a piece of
Bread; to each of them we gave as much as would content them, so they went
sometimes for a whole League along with us; and when they had eaten the Bread,
and thanked us, they jumped into the River again and swam away. Besides these
we saw daily as we went along many more, swim over the River, which commonly
had some Bucks Skins blown up, whereon they tried to get over the easier (for
the River is so broad, that it is not easy to make a Bridge over it, neither
did I find any.) They take their Shirts (for besides them they wear no other
Clothes) tie them with their leathern Girdles about their Heads, and therein
stick their Daggers (which are pretty broad and bended like unto a Scythe)
which hang down by their Temples.

The Ninth Day our Voyage went on again chearily, and we came pretty near to
the Town Racka, (which belongs to the Turkish Emperor) but it did not
continue so long, for before we had Dined and eaten a few Fruit, viz. Cibels,
Anguries and Indian Musk-Melons, to refresh our selves in the great Heat, we
incurred greater Danger again than that we were in before, for our Ship (which
was a great deal bigger than either of the other two) did strike upon the Sand
so severely, that we could not bring her off again without the assistance of
others, (as we had done several times before) nor bring her into the right way
again. So we were forced to desire the Arabians our Antagonists, which stood
and looked upon us, rather rejoicing in our Misfortunes, than pitying us, to
assist us, which at length we did obtain, and so they came to help us: But
because they had their Daggers, and great Cudgels, which they use to wear with
them, we durst not trust them, but were forced to leave a small Guard in the
Ship, but the rest of us helped them with all our Force and Strength, but we
could not stir her, so that they went away twice and left us. At last we
concluded, that we had no better way, than to unload our Ships, yet we durst
not do it for fear of the Arabians, nor venture our Merchandices; so we
resolved to draw her out another way, wherefore we desired the Arabians a third
time, to assist us, and if they were in earnest to help us, we begged of them
to lay down their Arms, which at length, upon our promising them a good Reward,
they did. When they came we took also our Guard to our Assistance, set all
hands at work, and with hard Labor we brought it at length into the right
Stream again, so we paid the Arabians, and went on, and came that same Night to
Racka.

CHAP. III.
Of the City of Racka, and of its Situation, and also something of the
Departure of the King of Arabia, and of his League with the Turkish Emperor,
and also of the trouble we had with the Custom-House-Officer or Publican.

RAcka, a Town of Mesopotamia, is situated in the Deserts of Arabia upon the
great River Euphrates, between two ascents, so that you cannot see any thing of
it before you come near it. There is a Castle by it, which is given to a
Sangiack by the Turkish Emperor to keep it with 1200 Spahi's. This Town is
pitifully Built, and not well Guarded with Walls, it having been built after
the Desolation of the Old Town, which was situated on the Height, as one may
see still by the Old Wall, and other Arches and Pillars. Among the rest there
is yet standing a very ancient high Building, which is still very strong, and
looks very great (although it is much decayed and run to ruin) and such as
one shall rarely see, so that one may conjecture, that it has perhaps been
formerly the Seat and Habitation of their Kings or Magistrates. Between the New
and Old City lies a Castle, which is also Old and pretty strong, where is kept
a Turkish Garrison, it being on the Confines or Limits of Arabia and Persia,
etc. to defend them and all the Country from Danger and Incursions. The Old
Town is besides this quite demolished, and even with the Ground, so that here
is no convenient place where the Turks can exercise themselves in Running,
Cudgel-playing, etc. but this, where I have often sat upon the ruined Walls
and looked upon them when they were a Playing. To the Desolation of this Town,
have very much contributed the Tartars, under their King Haalono, who took it
in the Year of our Lord, 1260, and not long after the Town and Castle of
Halepo, with the help of Ayton King of Armenia. Some will have this to be the
Town of Rhages, which is also called Edessa, whither the Ancient and Pious
Tobias, did send his Son from Nineve, to his Friend Gabel, to fetch the Money
from him which he had lent him: But because this lies a Day's Journey further
from the River Euphrates, therefore it cannot be the same.

After we had landed there, the Receiver of the Custom came on Horseback to
the shore, and desired the Master of the Turkish Ship, to deliver his Arms,
Lances and Bows, who absolutely denied it, seeing that it never had been a
Custom before; whereupon they fell about this into such a hot Dispute, that
they began to draw upon one another, and had not we timely put in between them,
it would have caused a great Tumult. The reason why this Man behaved himself so
strangely, was because we did not go with our Goods to Carahemit (which Town is
distant four Days Journey, and situated on the rapid River Tigris) to have laid
there upon that River, where he would have received a great deal more Custom,
that also belonging to him. But the Turk not mattering him, having nothing in
but Corn, which he would not carry, he let him alone, and came to us as
Strangers, thinking to make up his Loss from us, and to frighten us out of it.
He staid all Night in the Ship, and lay between us (fearing that we should hide
some Goods from him;) and sometimes he came upon us with big Words, saying,
Seeing that it was not allowed to us Outlandish Men to travel in these Parts,
therefore he could not but take us to be Spies, that came to discover, rather
than for any thing else, wherefore he had reason enough to take our Goods in
Arrest, and to send us two as Spies to Constantinople, to make us Slaves to his
Master, the Great Sultan. After we had heard this his unreasonable Discourse,
and were also sensible of his Intention to cheat us, we were not presently
frightened, but drew out our Pass we had from the Bashaw and Cadi of Halepo, and
showed it to him. He looked it over, and after he understood that he durst not
very well act against it, he went away from us with a deal of Indignation, and
immediately he began to quarrel with all the Merchants of the two Ships, and
desired of them an unreasonable Sum to pay him as Toll, whereof they complained
heavily; but he went on and would accept of no reasonable Conditions, but took
away our Rowers from our Ships, to hinder us from going away, to squeeze us the
more. But the Merchants although they saw his earnestness, they did not matter
it, but sent on the 11th. of September one of them with a Moor to Carahemit, to
the Great Bashaw, which was the Son of Mahomet Bassa, to complain to him of
these Impositions and Extortions. When the Toll-keeper did understand this, he
followed them with his Son immediately. But because he did not find the Bashaw
(which was then in another place called Giselet, whither our Friend was forced
to follow him three Days Journey from thence) he returned again immediately.
Although he did not speak with the Bashaw, yet he falsely told us, that it was
the Bashaw's Order that we should pay him Ten Ducats per cent. Notwithstanding
that, ours did not know any thing, yet they would not trust him, but had
carried the best and greatest Part of their Goods out, before he came into the
Ships to search, and also some thereof they buried in the Sand by Night, where
the Turks and Moors went over by Day Light, and yet they could find none of
these hidden Goods. The next morning early the Publican came with his Crew, and
searched every thing with a great deal of Care, as if he had a peculiar Command
for it, but did not find any thing near (as you may think) what he expected.
When he was thus very busy in exercising his Office, our Friend came in at
last, and told us, that the Bashaw was very much displeased, that the Publican
did deal so unjustly with us, contrary to the Orders and Law of his Master the
Grand Signior, and did keep us so long, and hinder us in our Navigation.
Wherefore he had writ to the Sangiack in our behalf, and ordered him on pain of
Death, to take all Care that we might not be detained any longer, but to take
the Publican Prisoner, and to send him to Constantinople, to have him tried at
the Court kept for that purpose every 15th. Day, and that he feared very much,
that he would pay for this his Misdemeanour with his Life.

In the mean time we were thus detained Prisoners on the Rivers of Babylon,
expecting with a deal of Patience the time of our Deliverance, it happened,
that the King of Arabia broke up with his Retinue from here-about on the 21st.
Day of September, and traveled toward the South in great Numbers, to find
better Pastures for his Beasts, as Horses, Asses, and Camels, that they might
the better subsist; for in these Places there are not so many Villages, Towns
and Market Towns, where they might have their continual abode. Neither do they
love Farming nor Trading, but are contented, if they have a great Stock of
Cattle, and good store of Grass for them, that they may keep them. So if they
come to a Rivolet, where a little Herbage or Grass grows, they immediately
erect their Tents there, to stay there till want forces them to remove, and to
look out for another Place. When they break up, they take along with them Man,
Maid, Beasts and all their whole Substance, as I did see them remove at this
very time, and come toward this Town in great Numbers, so that the Turks kept
their Gates shut up for four Days, until they were all passed by. On Horseback
they are armed with Darts and Bows, etc. and also if they ride on Camels,
whereof they have a very great Number, chiefly when the King is moving from one
place to another, as some of them did relate to me, where generally are
employed 150000. I my own self have once seen at one time together about the
number of 3 or 4000 Camels. They are strong and hardy Creatures, fit to carry
heavy Burdens, and also to subsist without Drinking in the greatest Heats for
Three Days together. They stale out between their hind Legs, so that those that
go in Caravans behind them must have a great Care, that they be not hit by
them, and so become all bedaubed. Their Horses are very Noble, Neat, and fit
for business; they seldom feed them more than once a Day, although they ride them
very hard all Day long through the Wildernesses. They commonly cut off all the
Hair from their Mains and Tail, so that their Tails remain very naked, and look
something like the Tail of a Lion. They put their Wives on little Asses, and
also upon high Camels with their Children, three or four of them together in
Boxes, as it is the fashion in these Countries. They are of a brown Color like
unto our Gypsies, and almost the fourth Part of them black, which difference of
Color proceeds from that in traveling up and down, to places where Blacks
are. They sometimes leave their own there, and take Blacks in the room of them.
The King of Arabia is always encamped in the Fields, and never comes into a
place that is shut up or enclosed; and this the less now, after the Mischance
of losing his Son that retired into one, happened; so he goes from place to
place like unto the Tartars, so that often it is not known where he is. In the
Summer time he goes further to the North, and in the Winter to the South, to
avoid both the Heat and Cold, and to have better Subsistence and Provision for
himself, his Men and Cattle. So it has happened several times, that the
Arabians in their march have come too near to the Turks Dominions, and the
Turks again to his, from whence arose between these two great Princes such
Differences, that they are come to great and bloody Wars. And yet for all this
(as I am credibly informed) they have now both made a peculiar League and
Contract between them, wherein it is agreed that if the Grand Turk should go to
a War with his Neighbors, then the Arabian King will Assist and Defend him,
wherefore the Grand Signior writes to him as his Cousin and good Friend, and is
to pay him the sum of 60000 Ducats yearly as his certain Salary or retaining
Fee. And besides all this, the Sultan sends to the New King of Arabia after the
Decease of the Old one, a Standard with his Coat of Arms in it, which together
with other Presents he sends him, with usual Ceremonies, to congratulate him on
his happy coming to the Throne, and to renew and confirm their Alliances. Their
Religion does contribute not a small matter to this, which (together with all
their Ceremonies, and all other Points) is the same almost they profess in both
Nations: And they take as many Wives as the Turks do, neither do they extol or
magnify one before the other, because they come from better Parents, being
they buy them all from them. And therefore none of them is excused, because she
comes from a greater Extraction, from doing the Family-business, nor has a
poor one more put upon her, because she came from mean Extraction. So one of
the King of Arabia's Wives is a Daughter of a Man that keeps a Sawing-Mill at
Racka, which by him (although of a mean Extraction) is as much respected as any
of the rest. Her Father and Brothers are very good People; they came very often
to us, and showed great Compassion, for that we were so abused by the Publican.
His Milk is not drawn by Horses as ours are, nor by Water, (for they know
nothing of that) but two of them cut the Wood with great hand-labour. During
our staying there, a Young Arabian Gentleman, nearly related to the King of
Arabia, came very often to us to the Waterside, who was always accompanied
with Twenty Servants with Bows and Darts; he had a delicate white Turbant on,
and a long Violet, colored Caban made of Wool, but his Servants went pretty
bare, for some of them wore black Caps and long Indigo colored Shirts with
wide Sleeves, which they girt up with broad Leathern Girdles, wherein stuck
bended Daggers or Bagonets, as it is their usual Custom. It once happened, that
some of us being upon the High-Town Walls together, from whence we had a
pleasant Prospect down into the Valley to the great River Euphrates, this same
Gentleman came to us again, and seated himself with his Retinue over against
us, and presented us with some dried Cicer Pease (whereof I have made mention
before) and some Cibebs mixed together, which we thankfully received; and to
show our thankfulness, we presented him again with some Almonds, Figs, Nuts,
and some very good Sweetmeats we had brought with us from Halepo, which he
also received very kindly. So we all began to eat each of us part of his
Present, and drunk with it some Water of the Euphrates. After we had eat them
all, and we thought the time to be long, he beckoned to one of his Musicians,
and bid him to divert us with his Instrument, which he pulled out presently
(which about the Neck looked very like unto a Cittern) and we expected to hear
some rarity, but when I looked upon it, and saw it had but one String that was
as big as a Cord of their Bows, he began to play some of their Tunes, but with
what Art and Dexterity you may easily fancy. He did this for almost two Hours,
and according to his Opinion very harmoniously, but we thought the time so
long, that we were very glad when he had done.

About the River I found that sort of Acacia that bears roundish and
brown-coloured Pods, called Schock and Schamuth by the Arabians: Some Thorns
called Algul, whereon the Manna falls, chiefly in the County of Corascen, as
Avicen tells us. Chamesyces, some strange kinds of Mosses, which are very much
differing in bigness: Among the rest I saw the low prickly Herb, by some
esteemed to be the Tragun of Dioscorides. Below, close to the River, I found
the Herba Sacra of Dioscorides, which the Learned Carolus Clusius has
accurately described in his Second Book and the 45th. Chapter of his History of
Outlandish Plants; and just by these, more strange ones, chiefly a delicate
one growing plentifully there in the Sand, which had from Five to Eight tender
Stalks, which spread themselves into others, that were very full of Joints, so
that it crept rather on the Ground than grew up; by each of them stood three or
four roundish Marjoram or Origanum Leaves together, and above between them some
Star like white Flowers, with six pointed Leaves like unto our Ornithogalum,
each of them on a peculiar Footstalk, the Seeds thereof I have not seen, but
the Roots are small and fibrous, which together with their small bitterness,
have a pretty exsiccating quality; and so in this respect are very like unto
the Polycnemon of Dioscorides, but whether it be the same or no, I leave the
learned to decide. Besides those before as we came down the River, I saw a
great many large Tamarisk Trees, and abundance of a certain kind of Agnus
Castus, almost like unto the other, only a great deal less, and it had no more
but three strong claver Leaves; but above all the Galega, called Goats-Rue in
our Language, which in these Parts grows very high, and in so great plenty,
that on the River side I could see nothing but this for several Miles together.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Inhabitants of the Mountains, and the great Wilderness we came through
to Deer: Of their ancient Origination, and miserable and laborious Livelihood.

UPon this good and severe Command of the Bashaw, Son of Mahomet Bashaw, we
were acquitted of our long Arrest, and went away about Noon on the 27th. of
September; we went again from thence through such great Deserts, that for some
Days we saw nothing worth relating, but here and there little Huts made of some
erected Boughs, and covered with some Bushes, wherein the Moors with their
Families live, to secure themselves from the great Heat, Rain and Dews that are
in these Parts most violent, so that I admired how these miserable People could
maintain themselves and so many Children in these dry and sandy Places where
nothing was to be had. Wherefore these poor People are very naked, and so
hungry that many of them if they saw us afar off, would fling themselves into
the great River, and swim to us to fetch a piece of Bread. And when we flung at
them whole handfulls, they would snap at it just like hungry Fish or Ducks, and
eat it: Others did gather it and put it into the Crown which they make neatly
of their Sheets on the top of their Heads, and so swim away with it. After
these sandy Deserts had continued a great while, we came at length out of them
between high, rough and bare Hills, which were so barren, that there was to be
seen neither Plough-Lands nor Meadows, neither House nor Stick, neither
Highway nor Foot-path, wherefore those People that live there, have no Houses,
but Caves and Tents, as they have in the great Deserts, where because of the
great Heat and Dryness, the Soil is so barren, that they cannot subsist in a
place for any considerable time, nor have Villages or certain Habitations:
Wherefore they wander up and down, fall upon the Caravans and plunder them, and
make what shift they can to get a livelihood. These Mountains, as I am
informed, reach to the River Jordan, the Dead and the Red-Seas, etc. wherein
are situated Mount Sinai, Horeb, etc. and the Town Petra, which by the Prophet
Isaiah is called Petra of the Deserts. The Arabians that live in these Deserts,
and round about them, are extraordinary Marks-men for Bows and Arrows, and to
fling Darts which are made of Canes: They are a very numerous People, and go
out in great Parties every where almost: they are a very ancient Nation, and
come from the Sons of Ishmael, but chiefly from his Eldest Son Nebajoth, and
were anciently called the Warlike Nabathees, and their Country, the Land or
Province of the Nabathees, which Josephus testifies in Book I. Chap. 21. where
he says, that the Twelve Sons of Ishmael, which he had by an Egyptian Wife,
(his Mother Agar, from whom they were called Agarens, as you may see in the
first of the Chronicles and the sixth Verse, being also of the same Country*)
were possessed of all the Country between the Euphrates, and the Red-Seas, and
called it the Province of the Nabathees. The Midianites that bought Joseph of
his Brethren, and carried him into Egypt, may also be reckoned among these.
This same Country is also chiefly by Pliny (because thereabout are no other
Habitations, but Tents, wherein the Inhabitants live) called Scenitis. From
this we may conclude that the Prophet Isaiah in his 60th. Chapter, and David in
his 120th. Psalm did speak of them, when chiefly the latter makes mention of
the Tents of Kedar, whereby he understands a Country that is inhabited by such
a Nation as lives in Tents, and is derived from Kedar the Son of Ishmael, whom
his Father Abraham as a strange Child, born by his Maid Agar, did thrust out
together with his Mother into the Deserts; his words are these, Woe is me, that
I sojourn in Mesheck, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar. In our times these
and other Nations are called the Saracens, which have very much increased under
Mahomet (which by his Mother was an Ishmaelite) and did spread very much; and
so they were in David's time a very strong Nation, wherefore he prays very
earnestly (in his 83 Psalm) that God would punish and slay and disperse them,
as Enemies of his Holy Church. But that I may come to our former Intention
again, here the Arabians asked us very often again, where their King was at
that time, so that our Master had business enough to answer them; whereby you
may observe what great Respect and Love they have for their King. But that they
might not altogether look upon us as Outlandish Men, nor presently discern us
to be Strangers, we did sometimes when there was occasion for it, change our
Turbants, and let one end thereof according to their Fashion hang down, which
they do to make themselves a Shade against the Heat, that is very cruel in
these Countries. But yet if any body, be he who he will, does enquire after
their King, and wants to come before him, to present him with a Suit of
Clothes, etc. or to desire a Pass from him, or if one should go about to hire
one of them, to show him the way to a certain place, or through their Country,
(which he may do for a very small price,) he would soon find one or other that
would be ready to do it; but among the Turks there is no such Obedience; for if
you should desire any thing of them to do, in the Name of their Sultan, they
are not willing to do it, except it would redound to their great Profit.
Wherefore a Turkish Guide to conduct you would cost you a great deal more than
one of them. Besides, they also remember their Master daily, and hardly speak
of any thing but of him, his great riches, etc. but with such Pride and
Greatness, chiefly when they speak of his powerfulness, and enlarging of his
Kingdom, as if some share of these were belonging to them, and that they must
be respected for it. In this Navigation through the great Deserts, we two did
not spend much, because the Towns were at so great a distance from one another
that we could not reach them, to provide our selves daily with Necessaries (as
we do in our Country on the Danube and Rhine) or Lodgings. We were necessitated
to be contented with some slight Food or other, and make a shift with Curds,
Cheese, Fruits, Honey, etc. and to take any of these with some Bread for a good
Entertainment. The Honey in these Parts is very good, and of a whitish color,
whereof they take in their Caravans and Navigations, great Leathern
Bottles-full along with them; this they bring you in small Cups, and put a
little Butter to it, and so you eat it with Biskets. By this Dish I often
remembered St. John the Baptist, the forerunner of our Lord, how he also did
eat Honey in the Deserts, together with other Food. Besides this when we had a
mind to Feast our selves, some ran, as soon as our Master had landed at Night,
to fetch some Wood, and others in the mean time made a hole in the Ground on
the Shore, in the nature of a Furnace, to boil our Meat. So every Company
dressed accordingly what they had a mind to, or what they had laid up in Store;
some boiled Rice, others ground Corn, etc. And when they had a mind to eat New
Bread instead, or for want of Biskets, they made a paste of Flower and Water,
and wrought it into broad Cakes about the thickness of a Finger, and put them
in a hot place on the ground, heated on purpose by Fire, and covered it with
Ashes and Coals, and turned it several times until it was enough. These Cakes
were very savory and good to eat. Some of the Arabians have in their Tents,
Stones or Copper Plates made on purpose to bake them. On the 4th. Day, being
the last of September, about Noon, we came to the end of the Mountains, before
which without, on this side, lies a very strong Citadel, on a high Hill, built
three square, by the Inhabitants called Seleby, whereof two Points go downwards
toward the River, and the third upward a great way on the Mountain, so that in
its situation it is very like unto Baden in Switzerland. Although it is
demolished, yet it is still very strong in its Walls, that are to be seen at
the top and on the sides, chiefly toward the Hills, and the River side, to
hinder the Passage both by Water and Land. There are also still standing some
Watch-houses without, as you come toward it near the Mountains, which may hold
three or four Soldiers: yet it lies still to this Day in ruins, and so
desolated, that nothing but Birds and Beasts inhabit it; whereof a great many
appeared on the Rivers side, as Herns, Ducks, that were very large and of a
delicate Color, and others, among which were some of a white Color, called
Pelicans by Aristotle, and Onocrotali by others, which are as big as Swans; the
Prophet Zephaniah makes also mention of them in his second Chapter, when he
prognosticated the punishment that was to come to the Ninevites, Assyrians and
Moors; there also appeared some quite black, with long Necks; whereof I did see
abundance in my Travels into the Land of Promise, and especially near Acon,
among the Rocks and Crags of the Sea; as far as I could discern them at a
distance, they seemed to be a kind of a I guess them rather to have been
Cormorants; no Eagles having long Necks.
Sea-Eagle, that feed more upon Fish than any thing else. Six Miles lower, and
at the other side of the Euphrates, lies still another Fortification which is
called Subian Seleby, that is lower Seleby, on a very high Bank, and seeing
that we sailed very near it, I could not well discover it. Of these two which
way they were besieged and taken; and also of the way of Government, or ruling
of the Kings of Arabia, etc. I should have been very glad to have been a little
better informed, but the Language wherewith I was not well acquainted, did
hinder me. And suppose I should have understood it very well, or enough to have
made an enquiry after those Particulars, yet I could not have done it without
great Danger, to have been taken for a Spy; for they soon suspect Outlandish
Men on every little occasion, which those that Trade in these Parts have often
experienced not without great Loss and Danger. Beyond the Mountains in the low
Country we saw more tilled Grounds, and Habitations of the Arabians than we had
done before, wherefore our Master landed sooner than he used to do, near a
Village, to take in Provision for our further Journey, where the People brought
Flesh and Indian Melons to us to sell. Here it happened, that about Midnight,
one of the Turkish Soldiers went out to ease himself to the River side; and
when he was busy about it, a Moor came creeping along to him, and thrust him
into the River before he was aware of it, and run away. The Turk finding
himself in the Euphrates, fell a crying out for help; I hearing him, standing
Sentinel that Night, did not fail him, but made what haste I could, with my
Scymeter in my Hand, followed his Voice, and came to the place, although it was
very dark, drew him out, and brought him into the Ship, which was so kindly
taken by the rest of the Turks, that I got mightily into their Favor, and
received many Kindnesses of them all the way until we came to Bagdet, the
Garrison which they went to reinforce.

The first of October when our Voyage went on again, there came early in the
Morning a Post of six Arabians on Horse back to the River side, to enquire of
us whither their King was gone, or where we thought they might find him, they
had received Letters for him from the Sultan, wherefore they must follow him
until they found him. The Master of our Ship told 'em (and so he did to every
body that asked him) that we had seen him in Mesopotamia, which Province he
called Amanachar, that he was broken up with his Men to go back into Arabia,
where they would find him. After this relation they departed, and we went on
our way, and soon saw below a Town to our right at a distance, called Seccard,
very well situated on an ascent, belonging to the King of Arabia, wherefore
some of the Turks said, that none but Haramiquiber, that is great Thieves lived
in it, which they do out of spite to all them, that are subject to any other
Master, than their Sultan. This Town we passed by, and went directly toward
Deer another Town, whence we were then three Leagues distant, yet they do not
account their distances by Leagues, for they know little or nothing of it, but
rather reckon by Days Journeys, for their Towns are so situated, at such a
distance, that they have sometimes to go through diverse Wildernesses, several
Days, more or less, before they arrive there. Before we came thither, one of
the Ships in our Company did go too much toward one side, toward a Branch of
the River, that runs by the Town, (for it divides it self into several
Branches) where it got into the Mud and stuck. Our Master seeing this, landed
immediately, and did send his Men to help them. So I got time to look after the
strange Plants, and found there about the River many great Tamarisk-Trees, and
also a peculiar sort of Willow, which the Inbitants still call by its ancient
Arabian Name Garb. These Trees do not grow high, but spread very much; the
Twigs thereof are stronger and not so tough, as to make Bands or Withs as ours
will; the Bark is of a pale yellow Color, and so are the Leaves, which are
long and about two Fingers broad, and at the edges round about crenated, so
that they are very much differing from the rest of this kind. I found them to
be of a pretty drying and astringent quality. Of their Flowers and Fruit
(whereof Avicen makes mention in his 126 and 686 Chap.) I can say nothing,
because I saw none. Hereabout the Turk (that would not stay until we were
cleared, but went away before us) did suffer Shipwreck, and so lost a great
deal of his Corn, that he intended to carry to Bagdet (called Baldac) to sell
it in the great Scarcity, which was occasioned for want of Rain, for there fell
none in the space of two Years and a half. And yet, as they say, if it raineth
but twice or thrice a Year, they have enough to supply themselves. After our
Men had wrought longer than an hour together with theirs, until they had
emptied the Ships, they came to us again to go that Night to Deer. But there
being several Rocks before it, which were very dangerous to pass, some of their
Pilots, that understood the depths, came out to meet and did help us, so that
we got safe there. The Town of Deer, which is not very big, and belongs to the
Sultan, is situated on this side of the River, on an ascent, and is pretty well
built with Houses (whereon stood great Numbers of People when we went into it,
to see us) but as for the Walls and Ditches, they are but very slight. At our
first arrival, we thought we should soon get clear for the Custom with the
Armin, and so Ship off again, but he was not in Town, so that we were forced to
stay three Days for his coming. In the mean time we got acquaintance with the
Inhabitants, which were handsome, lusty and well-set, and white, and more
mannerly than the rest; they visited us frequently, and spoke kindly to us, so
that we found a vast Difference between those and the former. The Armin also
(who was no less civil) we presented at his return, with a great dish filled up
with Cibebs, and several sorts of Confectures, and laid round about with Soap
balls (as is the Fashion in these Countries) but to them that were with him and
of his Family, we gave some Sheets of white Paper, which they willingly
received, and were so well pleased with it, that some of them (as the Children
do in our Country when we give them something that is strange or pleasing to
them) smiled at it as often as they looked on it. The Country there about is
pretty fertile and plentiful of Corn, Indian Millet, Cotton, etc. and they have
also between the Rivers very good Gardens for the Kitchen, with all sorts of
Plants and Fruits in them, viz. Colliflowers, Citruls, Pumpions, Cucumbers,
Anguriens, or Water-Melons, which they call Bathiecae, whereof they have so
many, that you may buy forty great ones for one Asper (whereof three make a
Medin) much about the value of our Penny. There were also some Date Trees,
Limon and Citron, and other Trees, which I could not distinguish at a distance.

CHAP. V.
Of our Voyage to the Famous Town Ana, in which we passed again through great
sandy Wildernesses; for the performance whereof we must provide our selves with
Victuals, and be very careful in our Navigation: Some relation of the
Inhabitants, of their Clothes, and other things we did observe and see by the
way, and what else did happen unto us.

AFter we had paid the Custom to the Armin (who was a great deal more civil
than he at Racka) and provided our selves with all Necessaries, we did but half
load our Ships, to draw them out of the branch again, into the River, and then
we carried the rest to them by Boats and small Ships, for the Water was very
low and full of Mud, so that we went from thence on the 4th. Day of October in
the Evening, and so staid all Night, a little below Deer.

The next Morning our Navigation proceeded very well till Noon, when we came to
a very broad and shallow place of the River, that our Master did not know which
way to get through. When he was thus troubled and considering, there appeared
on the Height, on the Shore, some Arabians, and showed us the Course we must
take, but we durst not trust them, for we had heard before, that they had sunk
some great Stones there, and that a Month before they had persuaded a Ship to
go that way, which did not discover their Cheat, until their Ship after several
hard knocks did split in pieces and sink. The same they would have served
others, which, although they did not follow their Counsel, yet they came into
such Danger, that they could not deliver themselves out of it in a whole
Days-time. We (Thanks be to God) got sooner through than in an Hour, after we
had drawn our Ship a little back into the deep Stream, to the great Admiration
of the Arabians: But the other, in our Company, did not stick much longer, yet
we had more to do to get her off, because she was shorter, with a hollow
Bottom, wherefore she was sooner turned, but could not be got out so well as
ours which was flat-bottom'd. In the Evening very early we saw at a great
distance on the other side in Mesopotamia, a Castle in the Plain, called Sere,
which the Arabians (as they say) have many Years ago demolished, which the
River Chabu, which is pretty large, runs by, which begins not much above the
Castle (which one may guess by its Fresh Water like unto Fountain Water) and
runs a little way below into the River Euphrates. From thence we thought to
have reached Errachaby, a Town belonging to the King of Arabia, but being
hindered in our Navigation, as is abovementioned, we landed a little above this
before the Night befell us, and went the next Morning early to the
beforementioned Town, which was pretty large, and lay about half a League from
the River in a very fruitful Country, where we stayed until the next Day, to
sell some Goods there. Wherefore two of ours went into the Town to call out
some of their Merchants to trade with them.

After they had spent that whole Day with them, we went off the next Morning
early toward Schara, a little Village which lies on the Right Hand half a
League distant from the River, belonging to the King of Arabia, where we landed
to pay the usual Custom. All about the Sides and the River I saw a great many
Bushes and Trees. I would fain have been at them to discern what they were,
that I might have viewed them exactly, but I was forced to stay in the Ship and
so I missed them. From Schara our Navigation went on for several Days very
well, but chiefly through sandy Deserts which were as large as any we had
before passed; for they extended sometimes so far, that we could not see the
end of them; and they were so dry, that you could see neither Plough-land nor
Meadow, Tree nor Bush, Leaf nor Grass, nor Path to go in; wherefore these may
very well be called Deserts, which are also called the sandy Seas. First you
must expect there great Storms, as well as in the Seas, which cause Waves in
the Sand as well as at Sea; then those that go in great Caravans through them,
must have their Leader or Pilot (by them called Caliphi) as well as those at
Sea, which knows how to direct their way by the Compass, as Pilots do on
Shipboard. Then they provide themselves (because the way is very long through
them) with Victuals for a long time, as well as those that go by Sea, wherefore
they load generally the third Part of their Camels with Provisions, chiefly
with Water, to refresh themselves, and their Beasts, in the great heat of the
Sun, for throughout all the Deserts there is never a Spring to be found, except
one should light by chance on a Cistern, which yet are also generally dry, for
nothing but the Rain fills them. The Turkish Emperors have ordered 30000 of
these Cisterns to be dug in the Ground in these Deserts (as I was informed when
I was at Aleppo) and to be provided with Water, that their Armies when they
marched from place to place in those times when they had War with the Kings of
Persia or Arabia, etc. might not want for Water, and if one should be empty
they might perhaps find some in the others. In these Wildernesses I saw nothing
worth speaking of, but on the 9th. of October, some ancient Turrets that stood
upon the high Banks on a Point, called Eusy, where, as some say, has been
formerly a Famous Town. Thereabout the River takes so large a Circumference,
that we went longer than half a Day, before we could pass it. By the same River
below us, we saw on the other Side of it several Arabians on Horseback: And
nothing else remarkable, but as I have told you before, some small Hutts of the
Moors, who came to see us often, but chiefly at Nightime, to pilfer
something, which they are used to from their Infancy. Wherefore it behoved us
to have great Care, and to keep a good Watch, as I did find it the same Night:
For when it was come to my Turn to stand Sentinel again, which I commonly did
in the hindermost part of the Ship on high, that I might espy the Thieves the
sooner if any should come, I laid down by me a good Cudgel (as we all used to
do every time) so I lay down and wrapped my self up in a Frize Coat with hanging
Sleeves to it, to keep my self from the Frost and Dew, which are very frequent
and violent there. After long watching, I began to be drowsy and fell asleep, a
Thief came through the Water to the Ship, where I was laid down very silently,
and took hold of one of my Sleeves that hung down, in hopes to draw out the
Coat gently, not knowing that I was in it: So I was sensible that Somebody was
there that would steal the Coat, and got up, and seeing the Head of the Rogue,
I took hold of my long Cudgel, to have a Blow at him; but he was too nimble for
me, swam back and ran away: The rest that lay by me were awakened at this, and
did perceive that I had seen Somebody, but did not know the Particulars, so
they were very glad that I had frightened away the Thief, and gave me Thanks for
my great Care and diligent watching. As the Moors by Night follow their
Robbery, so they came by Daylight often with their Wives to trade with us.
Wherefore our Master sometimes to please some Merchants, did sooner land, who
took all sorts of Goods out with them; as Soap-balls, Beads of Crystal, and
yellow Agates, Glass-Rings of several Colors, which they wear on their Hands
and Feet; and several other Toys made of Red, Yellow, Green and Blew Glass; and
set in Tin Brass or Lead, high Shoes, which are tied with Leathern Straps at
the Top, etc. for these Goods they trucked with the Moors for Sheep's Skins,
Buck-skins, Cheese-Curds, and several other Things, and sometimes for Money.
These Moors do not differ much in their Form from our Gypsies, only that these
are a good deal Browner. They are very nimble in their Actions, but they do not
much care to work; they rather spend their time in idle Discourses, or begin to
quarrel with one another, with loud and big Words, and a great Clamor, but
seldom are so much in earnest as to come to Blows. Their Heads are shaved
saving only the Crown, where they let generally a long Lock grow, like unto the
Turks, that hangs down behind. As to their Clothing they wore Coats, made of
Course Stuff, whole before, and without Sleeves; they are pretty long before,
and reach to their Knees, such an one I wore on my Journey, striped with White
and Black; underneath they have long Shirts, which are cut out about the Necks,
and reach down to their Ankles, they are commonly Blew, and have wide Sleeves,
which they let fly about, chiefly in their walking, when they fling their Arms
about to show their Pride. These Shirts they gird up with broad Leathern
Girdles so high, that you cannot see the Girdle, but only their bended Dagger
that sticks or hangs in them, as we wear our Swords. The Archers put sometimes
one of their Arms out of their Shirts, and so leave their Breast bare at the
same time, that they may shoot and fight the freer without being hindered; those
that are not able to buy Shoes, take instead of them Necks of undressed Skins,
and put them about their Feet with the Hair outward, and so tie or lace them
up. The Men wear no Breeches, but the Women do, and they come down to their
Ankles: Their Faces are not veiled, as the Turkish Women's, but else they cover
themselves with broad Scarfs, which more incline to Blew than to White, and let
them (chiefly those that wear narrow ones) hang behind in a great knot. When
they have a mind to be fine, they put on their precious things (as are Marbles,
Amber Beads, Glasses of several Colors, etc.) fixed to Laces and hang them
down their Temples, which come down about a Span long, and fly about from Face
to Neck, so that in bending or moving their Head they often hurt their Face,
and do not a little hinder them in their Actions. Those that are of greater
Substance, and have a mind to be richer and finer in their Dress, wear Silver
and Gold-Rings in one of their Nostrils (as some do in one of their Ears in our
Country) wherein are set Garnets, Turquois, Rubies and Pearls, etc. They also
wear Rings about their Legs and Hands, and sometimes a good many together,
which in their stepping and working, slip up and down about their Hands and
Feet, and so make a great noise. So much I thought convenient to relate of the
Inhabitants of these Countries and Deserts, as I have seen and found it.

After we had passed through the great Deserts, and began to come pretty near
unto Ana, our Master landed early in the Evening in a very pleasant Place which
was about a League and a half on this Side of the Town, where we stayed all
Night: For the River is very dangerous to navigate because of its swift
Current, and some Rocks that lie between the Mountains* This Place was so
pleasant by Reason of its fruitful Trees, viz. Olive Trees, Orange, Citron,
Limon, Pomgranate, and chiefly Date-Trees, that the like I had not seen before
in my Travels, and hard by it was a very thick Wood of Date-Trees, whereinto I
went with some of our Company, and found so great a Quantity of Fruit that they
did not esteem them at all, and among them we found two new Sorts different
from them that use to be brought to us in our Countries, viz. quite Red, and
Yellow ones, by Serapio called Hayron, in his 69th Chapter; which although
something less than ours, yet are very good, and of a delicate Taste.

The next Morning we recommended the Ship to the Master, and walked (the Ship
being pretty well laden) to the Town. By the way we found concerning
Fruitfulness so great a Difference, that we could really say, we were come from
the barren and desolated Arabia (which hitherto had continued from Dir, nay
very near from Aleppo) into the well cultivated and fruitful one. For just in
the very Entrance there appeared Fields sown with Cotton, which was as tender
and woolly as one could any where find: Then delicate Fields of Corn which grew
very high, and was full ripe, and fit to be cut down: Then Trees that stood
round about, full of Fruit, so that we had a very pleasant Walk to the Town. In
this way I saw no strange Plants at all, only in the Corn the Moluchi of the
Arabians, whereof I have made mention before, which is esteemed to be the
Corchorum Plinii; and also another, which because of its Height is easily seen;
this is very like unto the Sesamum, only that the Stalk is longer and fatter,
the Leaves are rougher, and the uppermost ones are cut into three different
ones, which is not to be seen in the uppermost Leaves of the Sesamum, the
Leaves whereof are more like unto Willow-Leaves both in Length and Color:
Between the Leaves that stand singly about the Stalk one above the other,
sprout out stately Flowers, which are Yellow without, and intermixed with Red
Veins, and of a purple brown Color within, and have a long Style or Pointel in
the middle thereof; when these are fallen off, there grow long Pods out of
them, about a Finger long and thick, which are hairy without, pointed toward
the Top, and have Five Distinctions within, wherein the seeds are contained
(which are very like unto the sort of Malva that is called Abutilon) and are
placed in good Order one above the other. I did very much enquire after this
plant, but they know no other Name for it, but Lubie Endigi, that is Indian
Kidney-Beans: But according to my Knowledge, I rather take it to be the
Trionum, whereof Theophrastus makes mention in several Places.

The Town Ana is by the Euphrates divided into Two Parts, or rather into Two
Towns, whereof the One is not very big, and subject to the Turk, and is very
well guarded with old Walls, and so surrounded by the River, that you cannot go
into it but by Boats, but the other that lies on this Side, belongs to the
King of Arabia, is very great, and very ill-provided with Walls and Ditches, so
that you may go in and out by Night, as in all other Towns belonging to him.
This, and also the whole Province, is called Gimel, and is fifteen Days Journey
distant from Aleppo, and goes down a great way the River, so that we had a
good Hour to go, before we came to the House of our Master, which was near the
Harbor, where our Ship did lie. The Houses are built with Brick and Stone
Walls, and very well done; and we could hardly see one on either side but what
had a Garden to it, planted with Dates, Limon, Citron, and Pomgranate Trees,
with delicate Fruit in it. At the other side on the left in Mesopotamia, I saw
nothing but some Summer-houses standing about the Hills. By the way before we
came to Ana, I observed very well, that some of our Company (to whom I was of
an Outlandish Man recommended) left me, and began to contrive with the Master,
who was born in that Town, to accuse me by a second Hand, that they might not
be seen in it, as a Spy, before the Magistrates, pretending that I observed all
Towns and Places accurately, and had a mind to betray them at my Opportunity,
which they chiefly did to frighten me, and so to get the sooner some good Booty
out of me. In Order whereunto, some of them went to the Sub-Bashaw, and
obtained presently of him to send one of his Servants with them, which came to
me in the long Street, having some Iron Chains and Fetters in his Hands, which
he let hang down upon the Ground, and led me along; so that I presently
understood that they had an ill Intention against me, which they intended to
execute. So I went along with him, to see what they would do with me; when they
came to the Harbor, they gave me leave to go into the Ship, and to stay there
until I heard more of them. So they soon aggreed together, and told me, chiefly
one of them that was on Horseback in a long Furred Coat, that if I would be at
Liberty, I must pay to the Sub-Bashaw 500 Ducats. When I was considering these
things, and saw my self also left quite alone, and their Demands so
extraordinary unreasonable, and found my self in this great Necessity and
Danger, it came into my mind, that there was another Magistrate in the other
Town Ana, at the other side of the River, which was a Turkish one, to whom I
would make my Complaint of their unjust and unreasonable Imposition, to see
whether I might not find help and assistance of them, wherefore I provided my
self with my Pass, and fitted my self so in Clothes that I might be able to
swim, so that if they should Assault me to take hold of me, I might soon make
my escape over the River without any opposition or hindering. At length, when
they expected my Answer, and the Money, I told them my Intention plainly and
clearly, which put them into greater Fright and Fear, than they had put me in
before. Wherefore they gave over their unjust Demands, and desired of the 500
Ducats, no more but a single one, which they were forced to give to the Servant
of the Sub-Bashaw, for the Pains he had taken.

CHAP. VI.
Which way we traveled from Ana further to Old Babylon, by some ancient Towns
called Hadidt, Juppe, Idt, and saw more pleasant, fruitful and well cultivated
Fields on each side than before.

AFter the designed Storm, that should have befallen me was over, and I by the
Power of the Almighty God delivered, as it has pleased him to do with a great
many more, (which would be too long to relate all here) we immediately departed
from thence on the 15th. of October. A little below it we found a fruitful and
well cultivated Country; and some fine Houses standing here and there, so near
together, that before we passed one, we could see another, which had also their
Orchards and Kitchin-Gardens, and round about them fine Woods of Date-Trees,
and many others, which I could not discern because it was too far off; so that
we found a great Alteration, and our Wilderness (wherein, chiefly at a Distance
from the River, we hardly saw a Tree in a whole day) changed at the lower end
of the Town into a fertile Soil: Wherefore our Voyage was very pleasant to us,
for we had also less danger to fear from the Arabians. But our Master was very
much troubled, because the River was often stopped up at the Sides with great
Stones that made the River swell, for there was a great Number of large and
high Water-Engines or Wheels, therefore these Stones were laid to lead the
Stream to them, to make them work, for it often happened that Two of them stood
close together, which took up so much of the River, that we had hardly room to
pass by them in the middle of the Stream, wherefore he was forced to have great
Care, to find the right way where he might pass without Danger. The Reason why
these Water-Wheels are so much in Use is, because this River does not overflow
(as the River Nilus) to water the Grounds, neither does it rain enough here
sufficiently to moisten the Seeds and Garden-Plants, that they be not burnt by
the great Heat of the Sun, wherefore they must look out for such Means, as will
supply this Want. To do this they erect Water-Wheels (whereof Three or Four
stand behind one another) in the River, which go Night and Day, and dip up
Water out of the River, which is emptied into peculiar Chanals, that are
prepared on purpose, to water all the Ground. But if the Places lie not
conveniently, or the Shore be too high to erect such Wheels, they make instead
of them Bridges and peculiar Engines, that are turned by a Couple of Bullocks,
to bring the Water up, with great Leathern Buckets, which are wide at Top and
narrow at Bottom. This Land being so fruitful, we soon found, to our great
Pleasure, great Quantities of delicate Fruit, sold for a small Matter of Money,
and among the rest chiefly Indian Musk-Melons, that were very well tasted.

When we came further we had generally even ground at both Sides, and not a few
Fields, the most Part whereof, were sown with Indian-Millet, for they sow more
of this than of Wheat or Barley, for the Sand is pretty deep, wherein the Corn
would not grow so well. This Millet was just fit to be cut down, and in some
Places they had it in already. It shoots up into a high Stalk about Six, Seven,
or Eight Cubits high, the Leaves thereof are like unto the Indian-Corn, or
Sugar-Reeds, which I took it for at First, and that because the Inhabitants did
chaw it as well as the Sugarcanes, because of the sweet and pleasant Juice
(which is more in the upper Part of the Cane, whereas that of the Sugarcanes
is more in the lower) which they draw out of it, until I saw at length their
white hairy Tops sprout out, which are large and not unlike to the
Italian-Millet. These are full of whitish Grains, each of which sticks between
Two broad flying Leaves, of the Bigness of those of the Orabus, yet somewhat
more compressed at the Sides. Hereof they bake very well-tasted Bread and
Cakes, and some of them are rolled very thin, and laid together like unto a
Letter, so that they are about Four Inches broad, Six long, and Two thick; they
are of an Ashen Color. The Inhabitants call it still at this Day by its
ancient Arabian Name Dora, whereof Rhases makes mention, he that will may read
more of it in Authors.

Our Voyage went on very well, wherefore the Merchants began several Pastimes,
some did play at a Play called the Eighteenth, and others played at Chess, in
which Two Games they were very well versed; others spent their time in Reading
and Singing. Among the rest there was a Merchant from Balsara, that sung out of
his Alcoran (which was put into Rhymes in the common Arabic) several times
with a loud and delicate Voice; so that I took great Delight in hearing him.
Yet they were not so hot in their Gaming or Jesting, that they should therefore
forget the Hour of their Prayers, chiefly their Divines that were in Orders,
which used to call them out with a loud Voice, at the usual Hour, either in the
Ship, or without in the Deserts, if they could have convenient Time and
Opportunity. But among the Persians I found a greater Zeal and Earnestness,
than among the Turks or Moors, all which Nation have notwithstanding the same
Ceremonies in their Prayers. For as they have chiefly Five Hours of Praying,
whereof Three are in the Daytime; viz. the First about Noon, the Second about
Three, and the Third when the Sun begins to set, the two others in the Night,
one in the Morning an Hour and half before the Sun rises, and the Second after
Sun set when the Firmament begins to look white and the Stars to appear: So the
Persians would not be hindered, by the Darkness of the Night, Danger of the
Place, Inconveniency of the Time, to go out, when the others were asleep, on
the Ground in the Island where we were landed, and say their Prayers with such
an Earnestness and Devotion, as I have often seen it, that the Tears run out of
their Eyes: I must also needs say that they keep closer and stricter to their
Laws than almost any other Nation, which forbid them to drink Wine, and command
them to live in Poverty, and to watch and pray continually.

The Eighteenth Day of October we came early to Hadidt, a pretty large, yet
anciently built Town, belonging to the King of Arabia, which is also divided
into two Towns by the River Euphrates, like unto Ana, whereof the greater part
lies on this Side of the River. Here the Master paid for his Ship two Sayet,
(one whereof is about Threepence in our Country) to the Customers, and so set
Sail again, to try whether he could reach that Night to Juppe: And he did
oftener than ever before, speak to his Men to pull on (chiefly where the River
in its Breadth and Depth was almost like unto the Sea) so that at Night pretty
late we arrived at Juppe, a pleasant and well built Town belonging to the
Turks, and it is also divided into two Parts, whereof one lies in the middle
of the River on a high Ground, at the Top whereof is a Fortress, so the Town is
pretty well defended: The other (which is rather bigger) lies on the lest in
Mesopotamia, wherein are many fine Orchards belonging to the Houses, full of
high Date-Trees, etc. wherefore the Merchants spent half a Day there to buy
Dates, Almonds, and Figs to carry with them into the Inns; the same they did at
Idt another great Town of the Turks, on the Right Hand of the Euphrates situate
on a high Ground, where we arrived on the 20th of October at Night in very good
Time, and gave them instead thereof Soap-balls, Knives, and Paper, etc. After
which goods they have often enquired of us; and we have given them sometimes
some Sheets of white Paper, which they received with great Joy, and returned us
many thanks for them.

After our Merchants had sufficiently stored themselves with these Goods, and
our Master had paid the Duty for his two Ships, he put off about Noon on the
21st of October and went away. About the Evening we saw at this Side of the
River a Mill, and also the next Day another, whereby were several old Walls
Doors and Arches, etc. Whereby I conjecture that formerly there stood a Town.
These two Mills (as I was informed were two Powder-Mills that make Gunpowder
for the Turkish Emperor, and send it to him in Caravans, together with other
Merchandises through the Dominions of the King of Arabia, wherefore he must as
well as other Merchants, pay Duty (for that Liberty) and Toll or Custom. The
Gunpowder is not made from Saltpeter, as ours is, but out of another Juice,
which they take from a Tree that is reckoned to be a kind of Willow; known to
the Persians by the Name of Fer, and to the Arabians by Garb, as I have
mentioned above. Besides this they take the small Twigs of these Trees together
with the Leaves, and burn them to Powder, which they put into Water to separate
the Salt from it, and so make Gunpowder thereof, yet this is nothing near so
strong as ours. Pliny chiefly testifies this in his 31st Book and 10th
Chapter, where he says that in former Days they have made Niter of Oak-Trees,
(which certainly he has taken these to be, for they are pretty like Oaks) but
that it has been given over long before now. Which is very probable, chiefly
because the Consumption thereof was not so great, before they found out Guns,
as it is now since they have been found out.

Further on the Waterside, on the high Banks, I saw an innumerable many
Coloquints grow and hang down, which at a distance I could not well know, until
they called them by their ancient Arabic Name Handbel, whereby they still to
this Day are known to the Inhabitants. After we had navigated a great way
several Days one after another, through even Grounds, and in a good Road, we
arrived at length on the 24th. Day of October, at Night, near to Felugo or
Elugo, a little Village called so, and with it the whole Province.

CHAP. VII.
Of Old Babylon the Metropolis of Chaldee, and its Situation, and how it is
still to this Day, after its terrible Desolation to be seen, with the Tower or
Turret, and the old ruined Walls, lying in the Dust.

THE Village Elugo lies on the place where formerly Old Babylon, the
Metropolis of Chaldee, did stand; the Harbor lies a quarter of a League off,
whereinto those use to go, that intend to travel by Land, to the Famous trading
City of Bagdet, (which is situated further to the East on the River Tigris, at
a Day and a half's distance). At this Harbor is the place where the Old Town
of Babylon did stand, but at this time* there is not a House to be seen,
whereinto we could go with our Goods and stay till our departure. We were also
forced to unload our Merchandises into an open Place, as if we had been in the
midst of the Deserts, and to pay Toll under the open Sky, which belongs to
the Turks. This Country is so dry and barren, that it cannot be tilled, and so
bare, that I should have doubted very much, whether this Potent and Powerful
City (which once was the most Stately and Famous one of the World, situated in
the pleasant and fruitful Country of Sinar) did stand there, if I should not
have known it by its Situation, and several ancient and Delicate Antiquities
that still are standing hereabout in great Desolation. First by the Old Bridge,
which was laid over the Euphrates (which also is called Sud by the Prophet
Baruch in his first Chapter) whereof there are some Pieces and Arches still
remaining, and to be seen at this very Day a little above where we landed.
These Arches are built of burnt Brick, and so strong, that it is admirable; and
that so much the more, because all along the River as we came from Bir, where
the River is a great deal smaller, we saw never a Bridge, wherefore I say it is
admirable, which way they could build a Bridge here, where the River is at
least half a League broad, and very deep besides. Near the Bridge are several
heaps of Babylonian Pitch, to pitch Ships withal, which is in some places grown
so hard, that you may walk over it, but in others that which has been lately
brought thither is so soft, that you may see every step you make in it.
Something farther, just before the Village Elugo is the Hill whereon the Castle
did stand in a Plain, whereon you may still see some Ruins of the
Fortification, which is quite demolished and uninhabited: behind it pretty near
to it, did stand the Tower of Babylon, which the Children of Noah (who first
inhabited these Countries after the Deluge) began to build up unto Heaven; this
we see still, and it is half a League in Diameter, but it is so mightily
ruined, and low, and so full of Vermin that have bored holes through it, that
one may not come near it within half a Mile, but only in two Months in the
Winter, when they come not out of their holes. Among these Insects, there are
chiefly some in the Persian Language called Eglo, by the Inhabitants, that are
very poisonous; they are (as others told me) bigger than our Lizards, and have
Rauwolff was here too credulous and facil to suffer himself to be abused and
imposed upon by these Relaters; for that there neither are, nor ever were any
Animals with more Heads than one naturally, I do confidently affirm.
three Heads, and on their Back several Spots of several Colors, which have
not only taken Possession of the Tower, but also of the Castle (which is not
very high) and the Spring-well, that is just underneath it, so that they cannot
live upon the Hill, nor dare not drink of the Water (which is wholesome for the
Lambs.) This is Romance.

From this Tower, at two Leagues distance Eastward, lies the strong Town
Traxt, which was formerly called Apamia, mentioned by Pliny in Book VI. 26 and
27 Chap. between the Tigris and Euphrates, those two great Rivers of Paradise,
whereof is made mention in the Second Chapter of Genesis; which two Rivers not
far below it meet together, and are there united. The Town Traxt is surrounded
with Ditches, and very well defended by two strong Citadels, that lie on each
side thereof, so that it is (as it were a Key and Doorway into the Kingdom of
Persia, to which it does also belong, as others not far from thence, viz,
Orthox, Laigen, which lie on the Road toward Media; and also Goa (which lies a
League and a half at the other side of the Tigris,) and Axt (two Leagues
further still) in the way to Persia.

The next Day, the 25th. of October, we spent in bespeaking of Camels and Asses
to load our Goods upon, and after we were quite ready, we broke up the Day
following early in the Morning with the whole Caravan, to travel to Bagdet. In
the beginning the ways were very rough of the Stones and Ruins that lie still
from thence dispersed. But after we were passed the Castle and also the Town of
Daniel, the dry Deserts began again, where nothing was to be seen but Thorns,
neither Men nor Beasts, neither Caves nor Tents, so that a Man that knows the
ways never so well, has enough to do to find them through it, which I did
often observe in our Guide or Caliphi, who did several times (because there was
neither way nor mark neither of Men nor Beasts to be found) very much doubt
which way to turn himself, and so he did more than once turn sometimes toward
one, then toward the other side the whole Caravan. By the way we saw in the
Plain many large, ancient, high and stately Buildings, Arches and Turrets
standing in the Sand (which is very fine, and lies close together, as you find
it in the Valleys) here and there, whereof many were decayed and lay like
Ruins; some to look upon, were pretty entire, very strong, adorned with
Artificial Works, so that they were very well worth to have been narrowlier
looked into. Thus they stand solitary and desolated, save only the Steeple of
Daniel, which is entire, built of black Stones, and is inhabited still unto
this Day; this is in height and building something like unto our Steeple of the
Holy-Cross Church, or of St. Maurice in Augsburg; on which as it stands by it
self, you may see all the Ruins of the Old Babylonian Tower, the Castle-Hill,
together with the stately Buildings, and the whole Situation of the Old Town
very exactly.

After we had traveled for Twelve Hours through desolate places, very hard, so
that our Camels and Asses began to be tired under their heavy Burdens, we
rested and lodged our selves near to an ascent, we and our Beasts, to refresh
our selves, and so to stay there till Night, and to break up again in the
middle thereof, that we might come to Bagdet before Sun rising. The mean while,
when we were lodged there, I considered and viewed this ascent, and found that
there was two behind one another, distinguished by a Ditch, and extending
themselves like unto two parallel Walls a great way about, and that they were
open in some Places, where one might go through, like Gates; wherefore I
believe, that they were the Wall of the Old Town (whereof Pliny says that they
were 200 Foot high, and 50 broad) that went about there, and that the places
where they were open, have been anciently the Gates (whereof there were a
Hundred Iron ones) of that Town; and this the rather, because I saw in some
places under the Sand (wherewith the two ascents were almost covered) the Old
Wall plainly appear. So we found our selves to be just lodged without the Walls
of that formerly so Famous Kingly City, which now with its Magnificent and
Glorious Buildings, is quite desolated and lies in the Dust, so that every one
that passes through it, in regard of them, has great reason to admire with
astonishment, when he considers, that this which has been so Glorious an one;
and in which the Greatest Monarchs and Kings that ever were, Nimrod, Belus, and
after him King Merodach and his Posterity to Balthazar the last, have had their
Seats and Habitations, is now reduced to such a Desolation and Wilderness, that
the very Shepherds cannot abide to fix their Tents there to inhabit it. So that
here is a most terrible Example, to all impious and haughty Tyrants, shown in
Babylon, which may be sure, that if they do not give over in time, and leave
their Tyranny, ceasing to persecute the Innocents with War, Sword, Prison, and
all other cruel and inhumane Plagues (as these did the People of God the
Israelites,) that God the Almighty will also come upon them, and for their
Transgressions punish them in his Anger, for God is a jealous God, that at long
run, will not endure the Pride of Tyrants, nor leave unpunished the Potentates
that afflict his People; wherefore be sure, he will also in them verify the
Prophecies, which he has uttered by the Prophet Isaiah in his 12th. Chapter,
and Jeremiah in the 51st. against those insolent and haughty Babylonians.

As I passed by, I found some Thorns growing in the Sand, viz. the Acacia,
called Agul, whereon (chiefly in Persia) the Manna falls, whereof I have made
mention before; above all I found in great Plenty some strange kinds of Cali of
Serap., of Coloquints, and when Evening fell in, and the Night did approach,
our Mockeries that drove the Asses, made themselves ready again for our
Journey, which kept every thing together in good Order, and were so quick in
loading and unloading, that they were ready in less than a quarter of an Hour.
By the way I saw again several Antiquities, but the Night falling in I lost
them; so we went on a-pace in darkness, so that we did arrive at Bagdet, by
some called Baldac, two Hours before Day. In the Morning, which was the 27th.
of October, I and one of my Comrades took our Lodging at an Eminent Merchant's
House, that belonged to Aleppo, and was lately come from the Indies; he
received us kindly, and very readily, and kept us for four Days, when we took a
Shop in the great Camp of the Turkish Bashaw, in the other Town, on the other
side of the Tigris, which we went into.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Famous City of Bagdet, called Baldac; of its Situation, strange Plants,
great Traffic, and Merchants of several Nations, that live there, together
with several other things, I saw and did learn at my departing.

THE Town Bagdet, belonging to the Turkish Emperor, is situated on the most
Easterly part of his Dominions, on the rapid River Tigris, and the Confines of
Persia, in a large Plain, almost like unto Basle on the Rhine, it is divided
into Two Parts, which are rather bigger than Basle, but nothing near so
pleasant, nor so well built, for the Streets thereof are pretty narrow, and
many Houses so miserably built, that some of them are down to the first Story,
and others lie quite in Ruins: The case is the same with the Churches, which
for age look black, and are so much decayed, that you shall hardly find a whole
one; whereon are still several Old Arabian, or rather Chaldean Inscriptions to
be seen, cut out in Stone, by the means whereof many Antiquities of the Town
might have been truly explained, but I could not only not read them, but could
get no body that could interpet them to me. There are some Buildings that are
worth seeing, as the Camp of the Turkish Bashaw, and the great Batzar or
Exchange beyond the River in the other Town, and the Baths which are not to be
compared with those of Aleppo and Tripoli, for they are at the bottom and on
the Walls done over with Pitch, which makes them so black and dark, that even
in the Day time, you have but little Light. There being two Towns, one of them
which lies on this side is quite open, so that you may go in and out by Night
without any molestation; wherefore it should rather be called a great Village
than a Town; but the other that lies toward Persia on the Confines of
Assyria, is very well Fortified with Walls and Ditches, chiefly toward the
Tigris, where there are also some Towers, two whereof are within by the Gates
that lead toward the Waterside, to guard them, and between them are the old
high Walls of the Town, whereon on the top are stately Writings, with Golden
Letters, each whereof is about a Foot long, to be seen; the true meaning
thereof, I would fain have learned, but for want of Understanding and
Interpreters, I could not obtain it, but was forced to go without it. Near unto
it there is a Bridge made of Boats that reaches over the Tigris into the other
Town, which in that place is about as broad, as the Rhine is at Strasburg, and
because of its rapid Stream so dark and dull, that it is a dismal sight to look
upon it, and may easily turn a Man's Head and make him giddy. This River
runs not much below the Town into the Euphrates, and so they run mixed
together into the Persian Gulf, by the Town Balsara, which is six Days Journey
distant from thence Eastward. These two Towns as is said, at the River Tigris,
were many Years agon, built out of the ruinated City of Babylon, whereof the
one on the other side of the River is accounted to be the Town of Seleucia of
Babylon, and that on this side, which is more like unto an open Village, is
believed to be the Town Ctesiphonta. Strabo in his Book XV. does testify this,
when he writes thus of them; That Babylon has formerly been the Metropolis of
Assyria, and that after its devastation, the Town of Seleucia, situated upon
the Tigris, near which was a great Village, wherein the King of the Parthians
did keep his Residence for the Winter. Pliny makes also mention thereof in his
Sixth Book, and in the 26th. and 27th. Chapter, viz. that the two Towns of
Seleucia of Babylon, and Ctesiphonta were built out of the Ruins of the Old
City, and that the River Tigris runs between them. In the Town Seleucia, stands
in a large place, the Castle, which is without guarded neither with Walls nor
Ditches, nor is quite finished within. Before it lie some Pieces of Ordnance in
the Road, which are so daubed with Dirt, that they are almost quite covered. In
it dwells the Turkish Bashaw, who (when he understood that two Strangers were
come into his Camp) sent for us, and had us before him by his Men; along with
us went freely an Armenian, whom we had known formerly at Aleppo, to assist us,
and to be our Interpreter, to give the Bashaw a good and sufficient account of
us.

When we came into the Room of the Bashaw (which was but very ordinary, yet
spread with delicate Tapestry and well adorned) and appeared with accustomed
Reverences, he asked us (sitting in his Costly yellow-coloured long Gown) by
one of his Servants in French, which he did not understand very well, from what
places we came, what Merchandises we had brought with us, and whither we
intended to go. After we had punctually answered him to each Question, yet he
was not satisfied, but bid us to withdraw, and stay until we heard his Answer.
We understood his meaning very well, that it was only to scrue a Present out of
us, yet we would not understand it, but showed him our Pass, subscribed both by
the Bashaw and the Cadi of Aleppo, to try whether that would give him Content.
So he took it and read it over, and looked very diligently upon their Seals, as
they use to seal (after they have dipped it first into Ink) so that all but the
Letters is black. When he found them right, and did not know any more to say to
us, he let us go, then we made him his Reverence again, and so we went
backwards out of his Lodgings, for if you turn your Back to any one (although
it be a far meaner Person) they take it as a great uncivility, rudeness, and
disparagement. This Bashaw keeps a great Garrison in the Town of Bagdet,
because it lies on the Confines of Susiana, Media, etc. which are Provinces
belonging to the King of Persia, and the Grand Signior has nothing more
toward the East of it to command. His greatest Dominions are the Wildernesses
of the Desert Arabia, whereof the Turk has one Part, but the other, and the
bigest belongs to the King of Arabia. After the Bashaw had given us leave to
go, we went to our Lodgings again, and bought by the way in the Batzar some
Provision to eat, and to boil for Supper, for in these Countries are no Inns to
be found, whereinto one may go, and find a Dinner ready prepared for
Chance-Customers, as in our Country is done, except one would go into a Cook's
Shop, whereof there are a great many in the Batzars; but every one boileth for
himself what he has a mind to, without Doors, before his Lodgings, where there
is a Chimny for that purpose, so that in the Morning, and at Night when it is
time to eat, you see every where in the Allies of the Camp several Fires. When
we went to eat we were forced (because in these Chambers is neither Table, nor
Stools, nor Bench) to sit down on the Ground, and also lie upon it all Night,
so that our Cloaks were very useful to us, to serve us instead of a Bed,
chiefly in the Winter, to keep us warm, yet the Winter is not very severe in
those Countries; which you may conclude, for that our March-Flowers,
Narcissus's, Hyacinths, Violets, etc. were here full in Flowers in the Month of
December; and that the Farmers went to Plough at that time; wherefore I judge
that their Winter is like unto our Spring. When we lived at Bagdet, I found by
our Catering, that the Scarcity was still very considerable, and it would have
been more, and have increased, if the Towns that lie above it on the Euphrates
and Tigris, and chiefly Mossel, which formerly went by the Name of Nineve, had
not sent them great Supplies, as did also those of Carahemit, etc. which Supply
they have also almost always, at any other time, occasion for, for their
cultivated Grounds are chiefly in Mesopotamia, where they have almost none at
all, so that there grows not enough to maintain themselves; wherefore the two
Rivers are very necessary to them, not only to provide them with Victuals, as
Corn, Wine, Fruit, etc. but also to bring to them all sorts of Merchandices,
whereof many Ship-loads are brought in daily. So that in this Town there is a
great Deposition of Merchandices (by reason of its commodious Situation) which
are brought thither by Sea as well as by Land from several Parts, chiefly from
Natolia, Syria, Armenia, Constantinople, Haleppo, Damascus, etc. to carry them
further into the Indies, Persia, etc. So it happened that during the time I was
there, on the 2d. Day of December, in 74. there arrived 25 Ships with Spice and
other precious Drugs here, which came over Sea from the Indies, by the way of
Ormutz, to Balsara, a Town belonging to the Grand Turk, situated on the
Frontiers, the furthest that he has South-Eastwards, within Six Days Journey
from hence, where they load their Goods into small Vessels, and so bring them
to Bagdet, which Journey, as some say, takes them up Forty Days. Seeing that
the Passage both by Water and Land, belongs both to the King of Arabia and
Sophi of Persia (which also have their Towns and Forts on their Confines) which
might easily be stopped up by them, yet that notwithstanding all this they may
keep good Correspondence with one another, they keep Pigeons (chiefly at
Balsara) which in case of necessity might soon be sent back again with Letters
to Bagdet. When laden Ships arrive at Bagdet, the Merchants (chiefly those
that bring Spice, to carry through the Deserts into Turkey) have their peculiar
places in the open Fields without the Town Cresiphon, where each of them fixes
his Tents, to put his Spices underneath in Sacks, to keep them there safe,
until they have a mind to break up in whole Caravans; so that at a distance,
one would rather believe that Soldiers were lodged in them, than Merchants; and
rather look for Arms than Merchants Goods: And so I thought my self, before I
came so near that I could smell them.

Some of these Merchants that came with the same Ships, came directly to our
Camp, and among the rest a Jeweller, which brought with him several precious
Stones, viz. Diamonds, Chalcedonies, which make incomparable Hafts to Daggers,
Rubies, Topazes, Sapphirs, etc. the two first whereof he had procured in
Camboya, and most of the rest in the Island of Zeylan, whereof he showed us
several very fine ones. The Merchants bring these along with them in great
Caravans, and keep them very close and private, that they may not be found out
at the Custom-Houses and be taken away from them, which the Bashaws, do
constantly endeavor with all their Might and Power. For the Turks do not love
that Precious Stones should cost them Money, for they are extraordinarily
covetous, wherefore you find but a few among them, but if they can have them
without cost, after the aforesaid manner they love them dearly; and keep them
in great Esteem. In the room of them other Stones are sent into the Indies
again, Corals, Emralds (which are bought best in Egypt) Saffron,
Chermes-berries, and several Sorts of Fruit, as Cibebs, Dates, (which are there
so pliable and Soft that you may pack them together in great lumps as they do
Tamarinds) Figs, Almonds and many others which I cannot now remember, and also
several Sorts of Silks; and Turkish Handkerchiefs: But above all, fine Horses,
whereof they send Abundance into the Indies by the way of Persia, but more by
the way of Ormutz, wherefore the King of Portugal, received yearly a good Sum
of Money for Custom, viz. Forty Ducats for each, which the Merchants pay very
freely, because that those that import Horses (as I am informed) pay but half
Duty for their other Goods at the Custom-Houses, and sell them besides with
good Profit. Some of these Horses are also sent (because of their Beauty and
Goodness) into Syria, Natolia, and to us into Europe, where they are sold or
presented to Princes, and other great Persons of Quality. They feed there
Horses in these Countries chiefly with Barley and Straw, so as it is broke by
their Threshing-Waggons, which they hang about their Heads in Sacks, as they do
also about Asses, rather than give it them in Mangers, as we do. For want of
Straw they sometimes litter them with a fine loose Earth, which they afterward
throw by in heaps to make it clean again to serve another time. When among
other Merchants, Christians arrive from our Countries at Ormutz, which
happens very seldom, all those of them that have been any ways afflicted by
Turks, Arabians, or Jews, must appear, before some certain Officers of the King
of Portugal, appointed for that purpose, and make their Complaints to them, of
what has happened to them, or what Damage they have suffered or received; and
in Case they should omit any thing, they are themselves severely punished. If
then it appears, that one of them has been cheated of his Money, immediately
some Merchants of the same Nation although innocent, and knowing nothing of it,
are flung into Prison, where they must remain until they have made Satisfaction
to the utmost Farthing, and are besides severely punished, for an Example to
others that they may take warning. But if a Christian should be murdered, and
they come to know of it, then Three or Four of them, more or less, according to
the Manner of the Fact, must suffer and lose their Lives for every Christian.
From thence it comes, when Merchants of many Nations are going into a Ship in
order to go to the Indies by the Way of Ormutz (where they must land upon
Penalty of Confiscation of all their Goods) that, when first they put off, they
look strangely upon one another, and take great notice of, or mind one another
much, and say very little or nothing, not making themselves known, fearing that
something may be had against them; and this endures so long, until they are
gone half the way, then they begin to be acquainted. Further I understood, that
the King of Portugal's Governor in the Indies has already (to make himself
strong and the more able for a War) made several of the chiefest and
powerfullest Indians Knights or Noblemen, to the Number of 5000; and has sent
many Jesuits to reform these Countries, to propagate their Religion and to
institute there the Spanish Inquisition. The Indians are lank in Body, brown in
their Color, well shaped, and of a very good Understanding: Wherefore Persons
of Quality, and Merchants love to buy them, and choose them for their Servants,
being in their Business very faithful, diligent and careful, as I have known
many of them. These and many more Nations, as Turks, Moors, Armenians, Curters,
Medians, etc. which every one of them have their peculiar Language, are at
Bagdet in great Numbers, but chiefly the Persians; so when I was there, there
arrived a Caravan of Three Hundred, with Camels and Horses, etc. with an
Intention to go to Mecha, to give Mahomet a Visit, which they think, after Hali
and Omar (who were his Companions and did live in that City) to be a very great
Man. These Persians have a peculiar Language, so much differing, That neither
Turks nor Arabians, nor other Oriental Nations can understand them, and so they
are forced to make them understand their meaning by Signs or an Interpreter, as
well as I and other Strangers. They also have their peculiar Characters. They
sit well on Horseback, and have on long and wide Drawers, which serve them
also for Boots, and are very well furnished with Scymeters, Bows and Darts:
instead of Spurs, they have, as it is the Fashion in those Parts, pointed Irons
which are about an Inch and a half long, and are sowed to the hind part of
their Shoes. They are also called Red Turks, which I believe is, because they
have behind on their Turbants, Red Marks, as Cotton-Ribbands, etc. with Red
Brims, whereby they are sooner discerned from other Nations. They may also be
distinguished, by their gray woollen Coats, which have commonly Three Plaits
behind, and come hardly down to their Knees. They are a strong and valiant
People, of a noble Countenance, and Mind, very Civil, and in their Dealings
upright. They are very wary in their Undertakings, which you may see by this,
that before they conclude a Bargain, they take up more time to consider than
others to two or three, which I have several times observed. Among other
Merchandices they have delicate Tapestry of several colors, and several sorts
of Cotton-Work, in which they are great Artists, and well skilled, but as for
others, as Gold and Silver working, etc. they understand little, and a great
deal less of Gilding, wherefore they take any thing that is glossy for Gold.
They love the Christians that are Artists and Ingenious in these sorts of
Works, and show them all Civilities. But as for the Turks, because great and
bloody Wars arise often between them, they hate them very much, and call them
Heretics; 1. Because they will not esteem nor receive Hali and Omar (which
they denominate Caliphi) as the greatest and highest Prophets or Legates of
God, that have, after Mahomet, given more certain and better Laws. Wherefore
they esteem them a great deal higher; nay, worship them like Gods. 2. Because
that they as circumcised Men, esteem their Women to be unclean, and reckon them
to be Members that are not to be saved, and therefore exclude them out of their
Churches, so that they may not appear there publicly, which by the Persians
according to their Laws and Ordinances, after they have spoke some Words after
them, are received as blessed Ones, and admitted to come to their Churches.
From whence arise between these two Nations great Quarrels and Differences
sometimes, but yet they do not fall upon one another, nor make Incursions in
time of Peace, so violently on the Frontiers, as they do in Hungary; probably
that one may (because Negotiation goes further into Persia, and brings in
great Custom to the Grand Signior) trade the safer into these Parts. It is
cheap and very good traveling through these Countries into the Indies, and the
Customs and Duties are very easy.

Further I understood from others, that here and there in Persia live several
Christians, and that most of them are of the persuasion of Prester-John, whom
they call Amma; and which way they are brought to it, I am thus informed, That
formerly about Twelve Years agone, it did happen that the King of Persia made a
League with Prester-John against the Turks, which came then very hard upon him,
and gave him his hands so full, that he was forced to seek for help by
Strangers. Now when Prester-John thought it very inconvenient for him to make a
League with a King that was not of his Religion, he sent him a Message again,
that he could make no League with him, except the chiefest of the Articles
were, that he and his Subjects would receive his Religion, then he would not
only do him all Friendship that in him lay, but also assist him with all his
Might and Power, which at length was agreed upon. Whereupon he did send him one
of his Patriarchs and some of his Priests, which in process of time had this
Effect, that now even at this Day, there are above twenty Towns in Persia,
where the most of the Inhabitants are addicted to the Religion of Prester-John.
They have also as I was told, several Books of the Holy Scripture, and chiefly
among the rest, some of the Epistles of St. Thomas, which they call Aertisch.
And besides that, their Patriarch has brought it to that pass, that they are
no more so zealous in their Superstitions; and are of Opinion that Circumcision
is not necessary, and that so much the rather, because their Enemies the Turks
and Jews have it. And, for the same reason they do not abhor the forbidden
Beasts, but eat Pork, etc. nor refuse to drink Wine, and that as before said,
because their Adversaries are forbid it by their Law. So that the Christian
Faith does in Persia increase daily more and more, and they begin to be
Christened with Fire, according to their Fashion, and in the Name of God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, whom they notwithstanding (according to their
Opinion) rather believe to be a Creature, than the Third Person of the Trinity,
and that he does only proceed from the Father and not from the Son. But that
those that are Christians may be discerned, they wear a blue Cross on the
inside of their left Leg a little above the Knee. They also administer the
Sacrament of the Holy Supper or Communion, and give it as well to the Young as
to the Old ones in both kinds; but before they go to it, they must have their
Feet washed, wherefore there are little Rivolets led through the Churches,
where they sit down, and some of the chiefest of the Town come to them and wash
their Feet, and when that is done they give unto one another a Kiss of Love;
then they read the Words of Christ's Institution, and so go to receive it; they
do not come to Confession before: And they endure no Images in their Churches,
but instead of them they make use of Harps, Pipes and other Instruments,
wherewith they make Music, but chiefly at the King's Court, at Samarcand
(where his best Musicians are) which Town, as they say, was built by Sem the
Son of Noah, and called after his Name. What else is to be said concerning the
Points of their Religion, shall be hereafter mentioned in the Chapter of the
Abissines.

Further I was informed at my return, that after the Decease of Gamach the King
of Persia, that had three Sons and one Daughter (who was soon married to one of
the chiefest of the Council at Court) whereof the Eldest called Alschi was
beheaded, because he did endeavor to take away his Father's Crown, the other
two are still in being; the youngest of them Balthazar lives in Parsid, a
peculiar Province and Town in Persia, which lies on the Borders of the Indies;
and the middlemost, called Ismael, was lately after his Father's Decease,
elected King, almost at the same time, when the now reigning Turkish Emperor
Amurathes came to the Crown. This is still young, and of a tall and slim Body,
but very manly, and full of Courage, and well skilled in all Warlike Exercises,
so that he dare before any of his Courtiers ride wild and unbroken Horses (by
them called Aecaik) which are not easily mastered. They are brought to him a
great way off out of the Eastern Parts; they are as I am informed of an Ashen
color, only some have white Legs; in these and other Exercises he has shown
his Manliness from his Infancy. But when he did increase in Age and in
Strength, the Anger and Displeasure he bore against the Turks did increase
also, and to that Degree that he resolved, during his Father's Life, to be
revenged of them, for the wrong they had done to his Ancestors. Wherefore, a
little while agone he brought together a great many Men in the frontier Places,
to surprise the Town of Bagdet unawares, being one of the Chiefest, that
formerly had belonged to his Ancestors, together with the whole Country,
wherein the new Kings of Persia when they first come to the Government are used
to be crowned. When he was thus prepared for the Onset, and nothing was
wanting, some Traitors ran away from his Troops and acquainted the Bashaw of
Bagdet with his Design, so the Bashaw was forced to arm himself with all Speed
as well as he could, that he might be able to oppose him in his Designs. But
when the King's Son would have put his Intention into Execution, the Bashaw
fell upon him unawares with such a Number and Strength, that he could not only
attempt nothing but was beaten, and he himself taken Prisoner. Besides this the
Grand Turk would have had him to be beheaded, if his Father had not with great
earnestness taken his part, and given him for his Ransom the Town Orbs in
Mesopotamia. After this the old King had enough to do, to keep his Son in safe
Custody, that he might not begin new Alarms and Wars against the Turks.

Before I began my Voyage in March, in the Year 74; certain News came to Aleppo
that 25000 Turks were killed on the Confines of Persia and Arabia; but in what
Place this Battle was fought, and which way it was done, I could not learn (for
if they suffer any Damage they always keep it very close and secret) nor any
ways hear: Wherefore the Turks at that time were a great deal harder toward
the Christians, so that many suffered for their Misfortunes Sake: But if they
had obtained the Victory (as well as not) they would not have been so silent,
but would have spread it abroad, and have related it to others, that did not
ask them, with high and big Words. So great an Opinion have the Turks of
themselves, that they really believe, there is no other Nation, that can
conquer the World so as they, although they are not to be compared with the
Persians, neither for Strength, Manliness, nor Shape; so therefore they could
effect but very little against others, if it were not for their great Number,
wherewith they overpower them. And to speak only of the Inhabitants of this
Town, there are so many sick and lame People in it, that you would admire to
see so many lame and limping ones in the Streets; yet the King of Persia cannot
hold out the War at length, nor keep a War at a great Distance, for his Revenue
is not so great as to make sufficient Provision for his Officers and Soldiers,
etc. to pay them as well in time of Peace as of War: For his Subjects are freed
from all Taxes and Impositions, according to their ancient Privileges and
Customs. They never arm themselves for a Defense, but when they are called
together by their King, to defend and protect their Country, House or Land,
Wife and Children, against the Assault of an Enemy.

When I was thus enquiring from one or other, and endeavoring to inform my
self and learn whether it were more commodious for us two, to go by Water to
Ormutz, or by Land through Persia into the Indies, and we thought of nothing
else but to begin our Voyage daily to go further; I was called on a sudden by a
Letter to come away for Aleppo immediately, which troubled me very much, and
that the more when I considered, that I was passed the Wilderness and come into
the fruitful Eastern Countries, which would have been very well worth seeing.
So after I had considered a while, I agreed with my Comerade, that he should go
on with the Voyage in hand, and that I (because besides the Letter, I had
others no smaller Hindrances) would go back again. So I fitted him out for his
Voyage with all Necessaries, so that two Days after he went with other
Merchants into the Ship for Balsara. Not long after I had of him, a very
mournful Message or Account that the Ship (wherein he went from Balsara to
Ormutz) was perished in a great Storm, near the Island Baccharis in the Persian
Sea (where they find good store of Oriental Pearls) and that he and several
other Merchants, and rich Merchants Sons from Aleppo were drowned. At the same
time I might have returned back again with a great Caravan to Aleppo, but
because they took the straightest way through great and sandy Deserts, which
lasted for Fifty Days Journeys or thereabout, where we had but two places to
pay Custom in, where we could buy Provision, as Water and other Necessaries, I
resolved within my self to go by more Fruitful Places, and Famous Towns
(although I went about) where I might see and learn something more; so I did
stay in the great Camp longer until I met with some Companions. In the mean
time, while I stayed there, I made my self acquainted with an eminent Merchant,
that lived in Aleppo, and had been several times in the Indies; who told me,
that the Jesuits had begun to set up a very severe Inquisition in the Indies,
chiefly in God, where they observed diligently, those that did not take of
their Hats to the Images (which were set up in several Streets of the Town)
that they might put them into Prison, which he did very much dislike, believing
it to be very great Idolatry.

After he had said this, he began to talk further to me concerning Religion,
and chiefly of the Articles of our Christian Faith; and made me immediately
(when he began to be sensible that I was of the same) so fine a Confession of
his Christian Faith, so plainly and with such Grounds of Scripture, that I was
astonished, for I could never have believed, I could have met with the Fellow
of him in these Countries. So he began to have a great Love for me, and desired
me to go along with him, and to stay with him in his House, until I had an
Opportunity to go further, or that I might make him a Companion in his Voyage
into the Indies, that during those Travels, he would show me all Kindnesses he
could; nay, be as careful of me, as if I were his own Son. And after he
understood that I was a Physician, he proferred of his own accord to recommend
me to the Bashaw, who was then sick, and his very good Friend, to be his
Physician. But I having understood before, that others that had done the same,
had been but very ill rewarded for their Pains and Care they had taken, and
chiefly by those they did Cure; I would not undertake it, fearing I should have
the same measure, and instead of a Reward have my Liberty taken away from me,
wherefore I thanked him for his Kindness. Had it not been for this, I should
have accepted of it, notwithstanding that they have no Apothecaries Shops that
are any thing provided, but I must have bought the Ingredients from one
Shopkeeper or other, and so collected them from several places, for I could
hardly find any thing by them, saving some strange sort of Turpentine Nuts,
whereof they have abundance, and they are as good, as Pistachia's, wherefore
the Inhabitants keep them by them, and eat them as we eat small Nuts in our
Country. I have eaten several of them, and found them of a saltish taste and of
a drying quality. These are called by the Arabians, Botn, and by the Persians,
Terbaick. I have chiefly seen two kinds of them, the greater and the less, and
so the Arabians distinguish them into Botnquibir and Sougier. The bigger is in
shape pretty like unto the Pistach Nut, only it is a little rounder and so
shorter; the lesser is with its hard shell of the bigness of a Pea, and are
shaped like unto an Heart, or the Dora, that is, the Indian-Hart. A great many
of them grow in Agemia, Persia, Mesopotamia and Armenia, etc. and grow together
in clusters like Grapes as the Pistachies do, or rather the Berries of our
Turpentine-Trees, for which they ought to be taken; chiefly, because the Trees
wherein they grow, are in their long Leaves pretty like unto the
Turpentine-Tree, whereby they are easily distinguished from the Pistachia-Tree,
which has roundish ones. This being so, I take the little one for the Bell,
and the great one for the Fael of Serapio, Avicen and Rhases, which (as Authors
say) grow chiefly in the Indies: And this the rather, because Authors attribute
the same Virtue and Operation to them. So may according to this, chiefly the
great Nuts Fael, be taken for the Fruit of the Indian Turpentine-Tree, whereof
Theophrastus in his Fourth Book and Chapter Five, makes mention, all which
would be too tedious to be related here at large. Besides these Nuts, the
beforementioned Authors (chiefly Serapio in his 251st. Chapter) makes still
mention of another sort of Fruit, called by him Sell, and by Avicen, Scel, which
are not in hard shells, but as I saw them, quite bare, of the bigness of a
Pistachia-Nut, and of the color of the Kernel of our Wall-nut; they have a
pretty bitterish taste, and sensibly Sharp. I did find none of them in these
Parts by the Shopkeepers, but had it only after that in the Monastery of the
Minorites in Jerusalem, of one of their Order, who told me also that they did
grow in these Countries. Of Coloquints, or white gourd Apples, still known to
the People by the old Name Handhal, there grow so many hereabout, that they
send them to Aleppo, and from thence into our Countries; and also the delicate
round Cyperus Root, by the Inhabitants called Soedt, whereof one may find great
quantities growing in mossy and wet Grounds. I did also find by the
Shopkeepers, the white Seed of Machaleb, which are in hard shells, which are
long and pointed, and covered without with a tender skin, like unto the
Pistachia-Nut. A great quantity of them are carried from thence into Syria, and
used to perfume Soap-Balls. The Trees whereon they grow I did not see, yet, as
I am informed, they grow hereabout, but chiefly on the Mountains that are by
the way to Persia. They are still to this Day by the Inhabitants, as by
Serapio, called Nahandt. But although there are several sorts of them, yet they
all boil them (after they have been steeped for some hours in Water, to get off
the thin shells, as we do with Almonds) in Milk or Wine into a Pap, and put
Sugar or Honey to it, chiefly to the white ones to take away their bitterness.
I found farther a strange Gum in great pieces, somewhat like unto Frankincense,
or Ammoniacum, which the Inhabitants chew all Day long instead of Mastich, and
they attribute the same Virtues to it. Wherefore great quantities thereof are
brought thither (chiefly from Persia) which they call Taxa, as I am informed
from the Tree Tax, which are very like unto Cypresses in show and bigness, only
their Roots are not so long, wherefore they are the easier over-turned by the
Wind. According to this, I remember of the Trees Thuja, whereof Theophrastus
makes mention in Book V. Chap. 5. and of Thya of Pliny. I also saw without the
Batzers or Exchanges, very high and big Caper-Trees; and here and there in the
Fields a peculiar sort of Red-grass, like unto that of Babylon, according to
the description of Dioscorides, and has still retained his ancient Arabian
Name Negil among the Inhabitants. This has long fibrous and yellowish Roots,
with many Joints, and puts out by them yearly several Buds, which grow into
hard Leaves, which are long and pointed, and at each side very sharp and
cutting, like unto them of the Red-grass; between them come out small Stalks or
Holms, each whereof has a peculiar Ear at the top coming out of its
Grass-sheath, which is long, thin, and its Seeds grow in two rows, between
small Leaves, like unto the wild Galengal. This does not only grow hereabout,
but also in several other Places and Provinces, where the Ground is sandy, as
Susiana, Persia, etc. in great quantity, and because it is by reason of its
sharpness and cutting, very pernicious to Beasts, as to Bullocks, Horses, etc.
so that they die of it, therefore they have or keep the fewer of them, but
instead thereof they keep Buffles (which can feed upon it easier than other
Beasts) to eat this Grass, which makes the Buffle very cheap in these
Countries, for I have seen one buy three of them for eight Ducats ( which is in
our Money about 48 Shillings) that was bigger than an Hungarian Bullock. Thus
much I had to relate of Bagdet, its Situation, Trade, and strange Plants, so
much as I could find and see at that improper time.

Being that I expected daily Company to go with me to Aleppo again, by the way
of several Towns, and not straight through the sandy Wildernesses, a Persian
that I got acquainted withal in the mean while did inform me, that the Sophi
King of Persia, had several Unicorns at Samarcand, which he kept there; and
also in two Islands Alc and Tylos, which lay from Samarcand nine Days Journey,
further toward the East, near Spaam, some Griffins (by them called Alera)
which were sent him out of Africa from Prester-John. They are a great deal
bigger and higher, have a red colored Head, a bearded Bill, and a Neck
overgrown with Feathers, a thick Body, black Wings like unto an Eagle, and a
long Tail like a Lion, and Feet like a Dragon, they are very eager for Flesh;
while they are yet young, the King takes them along with him, and goes often
thither for Sport and Pleasures sake; but as they grow up and strong, he has
them chained about their Necks very strongly. I did believe this the sooner Too
soon, for that there are no such Creatures in the World as either Unicorn or
Griffin, I am as sure as I can be of a Negative. Nay, Dr. Brown has well
demonstrated, that there cannot be such a Creature as the common Pictures of
him represent the Unicorn. I cannot again but wonder as the credulity of so
curious and inquisitive a Man as Rauwolff, in believing the idle Stories of
such a vain and lying Fellow.
, because he could also tell me what Trees and Fruit grow there, and chiefly
those whereof Theophrastus makes mention, and out of him Pliny. He also gave
me an Account besides these of others that grow out of Persia in several
places, as of the Tree Palla, which Theophrastus and Pliny mention, which the
Wise men did eat in the Eastern Countries, and of the Musa of the Arabians,
whereof the former bear delicate sweet-tasted, and very wholesome Fruit, by
them called Wac, which are round, reddish, and as big as the Indian Melons. But
whether this be the noble Fruit Mangas, (whereof Clusius makes mention in his
History of Indian Plants, which for Goodness sake is carried over Sea into
Persia) I leave to the learned to decide. But the Musa (which is as aforesaid,
also common in Syria) bears a great deal smaller Fruit, which is smooth,
yellowish, and bended, almost like unto Citruls in shape. These are also of a
sweetish taste, and therefore the pleasanter to eat; but are very unwholesome,
so that Alexander the Great, was forced to forbid his Soldiers to eat of them.
The same Persian, did also inform me of the Poisonous Fruit Persea, which is
still known to them by the Name of Sepha* which they esteem very little; and
also the Peaches (called Het) which are not so poisonous (as some say) as the
abovementioned; for they esteem the Kernels thereof to be good, wholesome
Physic. But yet that they are not esteemed by them, the chief Reason is, that
they persuade themselves, that Nimrod (who was a great Magician or Necromancer)
poisoned them by his Black-Art, and that since that time, they could not be
eaten; wherefore they have not been esteemed ever since: This I thought
convenient to mention, rather for the sake of those, that have a mind to
travel, that if one or more of them should go into these Countries, they might
have occasion to make a more accurate enquiry after these things.

CHAP. IX.
Which way I came in my return from Bagdet through Assyria, the Confines of
Persia, and the Province of the Curters, to the Town Carcuch, Capril, etc. and
at length to the River Tigris, to Mossel, that Famous Town which was formerly
called Nineve.

WHen hindered in my Travels, for several weighty Reasons, I was forced to go
back again; I looked up my Goods, as I was advised by my good Friend, the
Christian, (whereof I made mention here before) and fitted my self for my
Journey. I got for my Companions three Jews, one whereof came down the
Euphrates with me, the others came from Ormutz, (for I could get no others) to
travel with me to Aleppo. We set out on the 16th of December of the 74th. Year,
for Carcuch distant Six Days Journey, in the Confines of Media, on the other
side of the River Tigris, which is still called by them in their Language
Hidekel. By the way we first saw some well-tilled Fields, and above us on the
River Tigris some Villages, so that I could not but think I should meet with a
Country that had plenty of Corn, Must and Honey, etc. as it was commended by
the the Arch-koob bearer of the King of Assyria, and compared even with the
Land of Promise, but the further we went, the greater grew the Wildernesses, so
that we were forced to lodge all Night in the Fields.

The next Morning there appeared a great way off more little Villages belonging
to the King of Persia: But we went on through the Deserts (and my Fellow
Travelers told me that they extend themselves to Persia and Media) where we
lost our way, and came in the Evening into a Bog which hindered us so much,
that I (because their Sabbath began, whereon according to their Laws they must
not travel) was forced to stay there, with them, all Night long in it, and also
the next Day, in great Showers of Rain, not without great Inconveniency and
Trouble. During our staying there I looked about me for some Plants; but found
none because they did but first begin to sprout, but in the moist Places some
wild Galengal with great round Roots by the Inhabitants called Soedt, and by
both Latins and Grecians, Cyperus.

The 19th Day, after we were, not without trouble, got out of the Mire, our way
extended its self still further through desolate Places and Deserts. I thought
of Julian that impious Roman Emperor, and of his Army, which when it went
against the Persians, and was very numerous, over the River Tigris near to
Ctesiphon, he was by an Ancient Persian that was a Prisoner, decoyed into these
Deserts, where he was beaten and routed by the Persians. In this great Fight
when the Emperor himself was mortally wounded, he took up (as Nicephorus and
Eusebius say) a handful of Blood and flung into the Air, yielded the Victory
and said, Then Galilean (so he called Christ in whom he at first believed, and
afterward denied and persecuted) thou have beaten and conquered me. After we
had lived for several Days very hardly in the Deserts, and spent our time in
Misery, we came on the 20th by Scherb a Village, over an Ascent, into another
more fruitful and well tilled Country, situated on the Confines of Persia, and
for the most part inhabited by them, which we could conjecture by the common
Language. Now though traveling through the Confines, uses commonly to be very
dangerous, yet (I thank God) we met with none, so that we without any Stop or
Hinderance, reached that Night, the 21st. of December, to Schilb, a curious
Village, where we rested all Night and refreshed our selves.

From thence we went on through large and fruitful Valleys, but I found nothing
(for it was but just at the beginning of plowing time) that was worthy to be
mentioned, for the Plants did but just begin to sprout; we had by the way
several Villages, and so we had better opportunity to buy Provision. The Three
and Twentieth at Night we came to one where we could buy near one hundred Eggs
for Two pence.

The next Day we got up early again, and saw before us the high Mountain Tauri
all covered with Snow (which extends its self a great way from North and West
to the Eastward) at a great Distance. We went on apace, and advanced to Tauk
early in good time, and before their Sabbath began again. This Town is not very
strong and lies on a Plain. We went into a Camp without it, and rested there
all the Sabbath. After Sunset, when it began to grow dark, they desired of me
to light a Candle. I remembered then immediately, that they could not do it
themselves* being forbid by Law, as you may find in the 35th Chapter of Exodus,
where you may see that they must kindle no Fire in any of their Habitations,
wherefore they furnish themselves the Day before with all sorts of Provisions
and Necessaries, that they may not need to do any Labor on the Sabbath, and
yet may not want. When these Jews say their Prayers, they use the same
Ceremonies as the Christians and Heathens in the Eastern Parts do: For first
they lift up their Hands, then they bow down forwards with their whole Body,
and at last they kneel down and kiss the Ground. These Jews bragged continually
of their Patriarchs, and made mention of the Laws; but of the Ten Commandments
they knew nothing, wherefore I took an Occasion to repeat them before them in
the Portugal Language (which is very much spoke in the Indies) as well as I
could, and they did admire when they heard them, how I came to know them. But
when I began to speak of Christ and his Office, they bursted out into such
Blasphemies, that I was glad to say no more, but hold my Tongue.

Not far off from Tauk, we saw a very strong Castle, near unto a Wood, that is
guarded by a Turkish Garrison: This is situated in the Province of the Curters,
which begins there, and lies between Media and Mesopotamia all along the
River Tigris and reaches to Armenia. These Curters, which are almost all
Nestorians, speak a peculiar Language, which was unknown to my Fellow
Travelers, wherefore they could not speak to them in the Persian nor Turkish
Language, which is spoke all along from Bagdet through Assyria (in the Confines
of two potent Monarchs) to that place. We were therefore forced to desire
others that understood both Languages, to be our Interpreters through the
Country of the Curters. But whether this Language did run upon that of their
Neighbors the Medians or no, I could not certainly learn; but yet I was
informed that the Parthians, Medes and Persians, as peculiar Nations, had their
peculiar Languages, as Histories tell us, and we may also perfectly see in the
Acts of the Apostles the 2d Chapter and the 8th Verse, where it is thus
written: And how hear we every Man in our own Tongue, wherein we were born?
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites and the Dwellers in Mesopotamia, etc. all
which People almost are Subject unto the Sophi, the mighty King of Persia. The
before mentioned Curters were formerly called Carduchi, and afterward also
Cardueni (as chiefly Xenophon testifies) have had their peculiar Policy and
Government. But after many Changes and Wars, they are at length subdued and
brought under the Dominion of the Turkish Emperor, to whom they are still
subject to this Day, and he has every where his Garrisons in opposition to the
Sophi. But what is further to be said of them, chiefly concerning their
Religion, shall be hereafter mentioned, when I shall give you an account among
other Christians, of those that live in the Temple of Mount Calvaria in
Jerusalem.

After the Sabbath of the Jews, my Companions, was over, we went on again, and
came the 26th. of December to Carcuck, a glorious fine City lying in a Plain,
in a very fertile Country; at four Miles distance, is another that lies on an
ascent, whither we also traveled, my Companions having Business in both of
them, and so we spent two Days in them, before we were ready to go on again.

The 29th. we traveled through large and dry Heaths, and came at Night to some
Tents, which were made of Hair or Hair-cloth, wrought out of Goats and Asses
Hair, and fixed in such an Order, that they made Streets and Allies like unto a
Market Town. In one of these we went to lodge with these poor People (that are
white Moors, and like unto the Gypsuns in their shape and figure) and to stay
there all night long. But whether these People are subject to the Turkish
Emperor, or to the King of Persia, or any other, I could not find out by their
Cloths, because they all wear the same hereabout, nor could I discern any thing
by their Language. To us came a little after some more Travelers, so that we
had hardly room to lie down in. These People were very diligent and busy to get
us some Meat and Drink, for the Husband went soon out of Doors to gather dry
Boughs and Stalks of Herbs (which I could not at that time discern what they
were) and brought them to us to boil or dress some Meat with them. The Woman
was not idle neither, but brought us Milk and Eggs to eat, so that we wanted
for nothing; she made also some Dough for Cakes (which were about a Finger
thick, and about the bigness of a Trencher, as is usual to do in the
Wildernesses, and sometimes in Towns also) she laid them on hot Stones, and
kept them a turning, and at length she flung the Ashes and Embers over them,
and so baked them thoroughly. They were very good to eat, and very savory. This
way of baking Cakes is not new, but has been very usual among the ancients, so
we find in Scripture mention made of Bread baked among the Ashes; the Romans
called it, Panes Subcineritios; and so we read in Genesis the 18th. Chapter, of
Cakes made upon the Hearth, which Sarah made in haste when the three Men came
to see Abraham.

The 30th. we went from thence, and about Noon we came to a Town called Presta,
which is chiefly toward the River whereon it lies, very well fortified, but
what the Inhabitants call that River, I do not remember, but according to its
Situation it must be that which Ptolomy calls Gorgus, which runs below into
the Tiger. In this place they make Floats, which although they are not very
big, nor have much Wood in them, yet they have abundance of Bucks and Goats
Skins blown up, hung or fixed underneath the bottom, without doubt, by reason
that they may load the more upon them, and also because the River is rapid,
that they may have the less fear or danger. On these Floats they carry several
sorts of Merchandices, but chiefly Fruit, viz. Figs, Almonds, Cibebs, Nuts,
Corn, Wine, Soap, etc. a great part whereof goes further into the Indies.

The last Day of December we traveled on, and came through well tilled Fields
about Night into the Town Harpel, which is pretty large, but very pitifully
built, and miserably surrounded with Walls, so that it might easily be taken
without any great Strength or Loss; there we rested again the next Day being
the Sabbath (and on the same Day fell New-Years-Day.) In the mean time I
understood that the Turkish Sangiack did a few Days ago condemn and put to
execution eight great Malefactors, which made it their Business to Rob and to
commit Murder up and down on the Highway, (for there are a great many of these
Rogues in this Province) chiefly on the borders of Armenia, which are very
Mountainous, which makes traveling very dangerous. The Relations and Friends
of these Murderers and Robbers did take this very ill, that the Sangiack should
execute them, and were resolved to be revenged of him one way or other. In
order thereunto they combined and agreed all together, and had every thing
ready, and only staid for the word to fall upon him, which would have been done
accordingly, if he had not had good Intelligence of this their Intention,
wherefore he went away incognito for Constantinople, to complain to the Turkish
Emperor of this their unjust Proceedings, and what they must expect for this,
they will know in a short time. This Sangiack, when he found necessity of
making his escape, and found that he wanted Money (which is very seldom) he
took up from an Armenian Merchant (that was very rich, and was arrived there to
buy several Merchandices, chiefly Gauls, whereof grow many in these Parts) 300
Ducats, which put the Merchant into great danger: for when these rebellious
People came to understand it, they took it very ill of him, and threatened him
very much, so that he was forced to stay some Days longer for more Company,
that so he might go the safer.

After we had joined him, we went from thence on the 5th. of January in a very
handsome Number, for the Merchant alone had about Fifty Camels and Asses, which
were only laden with Gauls, with him, to carry to Carahemit (where he lived)
and to send from thence to Aleppo, where they are bought by our Merchants, to
be sent into our Country. So we traveled all Day long and also half the Night,
without eating or drinking, very fast, and began to rest about Midnight. After
we had for the remaining part of the Night hardly refreshed our Beasts and our
selves with eating and drinking a little, we broke up again before Daylight,
to go on in our way. When we were gone a good way through fruitful and pleasant
Valleys, we came betimes to another River by Ptolomy called Caprus, which
although it is not very broad, yet it is very deep, so that we had much to do
to get through, which I found not without a great detriment to my Plants, which
I carried on Horseback before me.

Soon after Noon a great way off before us, appeared a great Market Town,
Carcuschey, where we arrived by Night, and fixed our Camp without and pretty
near to it. This is quite inhabited by Armenians, which we could presently find
by the alteration of the Language and their Habit. They received us very
willingly, and let us want for nothing. After we had staid with them till
Night, and refreshed our selves and our Beasts, we broke up again immediately
and traveled all Night, which was so dark, that we heard several Caravans that
met us, but we could not see them, much less know how strong they were, or from
whence they came. At break of Day we came to another much larger River, by the
Inhabitants called Kling (if I do not mistake) and by Ptolomy, Licus, which
hindered us very much in our Day's Journey; for the River being very broad, at
least a long Mile, it was very hard to hit exactly the right Ford, and not
without great Danger, which the Curters knew very well, so that we were also in
great fear of them. But after some were found in our Company that had often
forded that River formerly, we ventured it, went in, and got over (thanks be to
God) very safe, only one Ass which went over below us, where the Stream went
stronger, was drowned, so that we arrived very early on the 7th. of January to
the Tigris again, and went into the Famous City Mossel, that lies on this side
of the River, over a Bridge made of Boats. This is situated in the Country of
the Curters, and so we were forced still to keep our Interpreter. It belongs
to the Turkish Emperor, as all the rest hereabout. There are some very good
Buildings and Streets in it, and it is pretty large; but very ill provided with
Walls and Ditches, as I did observe from the top of our Camp which extended to
it. Besides this, I also saw just without the Town a little Hill, that was
almost quite dug through, and inhabited by poor People, where I saw them
several times creep in and out as Pismires do in Ant-hills. In this place and
thereabout, stood formerly the Potent Town of Nineve (built by Ashur) which was
the Metropolis of Assyria, under the Monarch of the first Monarchy, to the time
of Sennacherib and his Sons, and was about three Days Journey in length. So we
read that the Prophet Jonas, when at the Command of God, he preached Repentance
to them, did go into it one Day's Journey, which the People did hearken
willingly unto, and did amend their Lives, but they did not long remain
penitent, but turned to their former Iniquity again, wherefore their
Destruction and Ruin, was prognosticated to them by the Prophets Nahum and
Zephaniah, and also by the pious Tobias, that did live there again, which did
also not long after follow. Yet was it rebuilt again afterward, and did suffer
very much upon changes of Governments, until at length Tamerlan came and took
it by Storm, burnt it, and reduced it into Ashes to that degree, that
afterward in the same place grew Beans and Colocasia, etc. So that at this
time there is nothing of any Antiquities to be seen as in Old Babylon, save
only the Fort that lies upon the Hill, and some few Villages, which as the
Inhabitants say, did also belong to it in former Days. This Town lies on the
Confines of Armenia, in a large Plain, where they sow the greatest part of
their Corn, on the other side of the River; for on this side in Mesopotamia, it
is so sandy and dry, that you would think you were in the middle of the Deserts
of Arabia. Yet there is a very large Deposition of Merchandices, because of the
River, wherefore several Goods and Fruits, are brought thither from the
adjacent Countries, both by Land and Water, to Ship them for Bagdet. Among the
rest I saw abundance of small and great Turpentine-Nuts, by the Inhabitants
called (as abovesaid) Bont-quiber and Sougier; and also another sort of Manna
as big as a double Fist, which is very common here, and is brought from
Armenia, as they told me. It is of a brown color, a great deal bigger and
firmer, and not so sweet as that of Calabria, yet very good and pleasant to
eat. Within it are several red Grains, so small that one takes no notice of
them when one eats it. It looseneth the Body very well, but not so much as
ours, wherefore the Inhabitants eat great pieces thereof in the Morning, as the
Countrymen on the Mountains of Algaw eat Cheese. But whether the Arabians make
mention thereof, if it be not the Manna Alhagiezi, whereof Avicen in his Second
Book the Second Treatise, and the 758th. Chapter makes mention, I know not
neither what it is to be reputed. The Town Mossel is as abovesaid, for the
greatest part inhabited by Nestorians, which pretend to be Christians, but in
reality they are worse than any other Nations whatsoever, for they do almost
nothing else, but rob on the Highways, and fall upon Travelers and kill them:
Therefore being that the Roads chiefly to Zibin (to which we had Five Days
Journey, and for the most part through sandy Wildernesses) are very dangerous,
we staid some Days longer expecting more Company that we might go the surer.

CHAP. X.
Which way we went through Mesopotamia by the way of Zibin, and Orpha, to Bir,
not without a great deal of danger; and afterward how we passed the great
River the Euphrates, and came at last into Syria, by Nisib, to the Famous Town
of Aleppo.

AFter our Journey had been deferred for four Days, we broke up on the 11th. of
January several Hundred strong, and went on for the whole Day without eating,
with all speed until the Sun set at Night, when we encamped on an ascent near a
small Village, to keep our Beasts and Goods safe, and to refresh our selves and
them. We watched all Night long, and went continually three and three together,
round about our Camp by turns.

The next Day we proceeded on again in our Journey with all speed, rather for a
good Fountain or Spring's sake, (as they do in these Countries, in the vast
Deserts) than to reach a good Inn, where we arrived late at Night, and encamped
near it, to stay all Night to rest. A little after when we were at Supper, some
of the Curters came to us into our Camp, spoke to us kindly, and asked us
whether we did want any thing that they could help us to, but we soon perceived
them to be Spies, that were sent by their Companions, to see what Strength we
were of. But when they perceived that we were not pleased with them, they did
not stay but went away, and we composed our selves to rest, but kept a good
Guard as we had done the Night before. About Midnight when we were in our first
Sleep, our Watchmen perceived a great Number of the Curters to approach,
wherefore they awaked us with a great shouting to alarm us the sooner, and to
bring us into good Order, and to frighten our Enemies and to drive them away.
But they did not only not mind us, but made all haste they could up to us, and
that so near, that we could see them, although it was dark, before our Camp, by
their Heads. But when they found us in a good Order and Condition to oppose
them, and did hear that our Gunners and Archers (which were ready to let fly at
them) called with a loud Voice to them, tahal, tahal Harami, that is, Come
hither, come hither you Thiefs, etc. they halted for a little while, and were
so afraid of us, that they turned their Backs and run away. Afterward when we
feared nor expected their Assaults any more, they came quickly again a second
time, in a far greater Number than before. They led before them one Camel, and
several Horses (which in the dark we could only discern by their Heads looking
against the Sky) in their Hands, without doubt, that we might look upon them to
be Travelers, or else that we might not be able to discern their Number. But
notwithstanding all this their first Assault was still in fresh Memory,
wherefore we did not tarry, but drew soon up in our former Order again (wherein
I was the left hand Man in the first Rank again, with my Scymeter drawn, and
had before armed my Breast with several sheets of Paper, that I had brought
with me to dry my Plants in) expecting their assault every Moment. But when
they made a halt again, (fearing their Skin as much as we did ours) and did
neither shout nor move up toward us, one of ours provoked them, and did shoot
at the Camel, and did hit it so that it gave a Sign thereof, but the rest
forbore to fire. So they Staid a little while, and then went off a Second time.

So we kept awake all the Rest of the Night, and kept a good Watch, and went on
our Journey again early the next Morning about break of the Day; and came again
to wide and dry Heaths, where we saw neither Men nor Beasts, and so we went on
till Noon, where we encamped in a large Place, which was surrounded with Walls
and Ditches pretty well, just like unto a Fortress, whereof there are several
in these dangerous Places to be seen. When we stayed there, two Curters came
again to us into our Camp, and spoke to us, pretending that they came to demand
the Toll that was due there, it being their Place: but our Merchants soon
perceived, that they were not in a right Cause, wherefore they would allow them
nothing, which put these two into such a Passion, that they drew their Swords,
and would have at us; but our Friends did not stay idle neither, but took their
swords away, and laid on with dry Blows at them, and so flung them out of our
Camp. After this Hubbub was over, we dined, and that the rather that we might
not be too much weakened by our hard traveling, and so be the less able to
resist these Robbers, for want of Strength if they should fall upon us, which
we were not wont to do before Night, chiefly in great Deserts, for there we
used to get up presently after Mid night, and travel all Day long with all
Speed, without eating, which I had often experimented before; wherefore I used
to provide my self always with Bread, and when I had a mind to eat it, I did
either stay behind or go before: for no body eats openly by the way in the
sight of others, except he has a mind to run a Hazard, because that most of
them are very hungry, and so eager at it, that they will assault one another
for it, and take it away from their very Mouths. After we had refreshed our
selves, and fed our Beasts (which uses to be done also but once aday) we broke
up with our Caravan, and went on again. We quickly saw some Mountains before
us, where, when we approached them toward the Evening, there appeared
sometimes, on a high one that before the rest lies nearer to the Plain, some
of them, so that we might very well presume, that there was more of them behind
in Ambuscado, which also proved very true: For no sooner were we passed it, but
before we went up the Hill, they came out from behind the Mountain, in great
Troops on Horseback, which immediately drew up into order in the Fields, in
Two Squadrons, Three and Three in a Rank, to the Number of about 300, almost as
many as we were. They exercised their Horses (which were very lank) very
swiftly, turned sometimes on one, and then on the other hand, and came at
length to us within a Bows Shoot. They had most of them Darts, which they played
withal in their full Speed, sometimes holding it down-wards as if they would
run through a Deer, which was a pleasant but very dangerous Sight to us. When
they showed themselves so as if they would fall upon us instantly, we drew our
Caravan close together, in order to resist them. Wherefore we stood still, and
tied our Beasts together and bound the Fore foot of each of them, that they
could not stir: behind them stood our Mockeri, with their Bows and all those
that were not well provided with Arms, and Horses, either to shoot at the
Enemy, or else in Case of Necessity, if they should come too near us, to sally
out, and cut off their Horses with our Scymeters. Near unto us our Horses were
drawn up into a Troop, ready for their Assault, to venture their Success. After
a whole Hour's delay we sent at length two of our Company to them, and they
sent also Two of theirs to meet them to parley together: But which way they
made up an Agreement I know not, but they prevailed so much with them, that
soon after they left us, and rode away, and we went on in our Journey. After
this we kept our Caravan (that is so much to say as a great many People, with
laden Camels, Asses, and Horses) in far better Order than we had done before,
and came that same Day a good Way, to a small Village, where we encamped and
stayed all Night. We found no Wood thereabout, wherefore we made shift with
Bread, instead of other Victuals, and were very glad we had it. In the mean
time the Inhabitants came to us, to gather the Dung of our Beasts (as they do
in several other Places, chiefly in the Deserts of Arabia) to burn it instead
of Wood, which they do after the following Manner.

They make in their Tents or Houses a Hole about a Foot and half deep, wherein
they put their earthen Pipkins or Pots, with the Meat in them closed up, so
that they are in the half above the middle, Three Fourth Parts thereof they lay
about with Stones, and the Fourth Part is left open, through which they fling
in their dried Dung (and also sometimes small Twigs and Straws, when they can
have them) which burn immediately and give so great a Heat, that the Pot
grows so hot as if it stood in the middle of a lighted Coal-heap, so that
they boil their Meat with a little Fire quicker than we do ours with a great
one on our Hearths; so that these poor People, must make very hard Shift, and
do sometimes as the Israelites did in the Siege of Jerusalem, where they also
in their greatest Necessity did boil their Meat with Dung of Men and Beasts, as
you may read in the 4th Chapter of Ezekiel. This Night and several others
before, we passed more with watching than with sleeping, so that sometimes we
contemplated the Constellations of the Skies, which are very much observed by
these Nations, but chiefly by the Arabians, which lodge always in the open Air
and have no Shelter, so that by the Stars they know the Hour of the Night, and
when it is time for them to break up. They care not for Beds, but rather have
Cloaks or Tapestry wherein they wrap themselves up and keep themselves warm, so
that no Frost, nor Rain, nor Dew can hurt them.

The next Morning we broke up (that we might not expose our selves any further)
only after Daylight, and traveled all Day long without any Molestation or
Hinderance a long way after several rough Mountains: and also the next Day
through sandy Deserts, which were deep and hindered our going on very much. When
it began to be Night, our Beasts were almost ready to lie down under their
Burdens in the Sand, which was very tiresome to us, and that the rather,
because we saw the Town Zibin far off before us, at Four Miles distance, but at
length we got out of this bad Road, into green Meadows, to very clear Springs,
which run over in several Places to water them: So that we began to make more
speed, and came the same Night yet very late into the Town. It is a fine Place
subject unto the Turkish Emperor, not very big, lying on Ascent, very well
surrounded and fortified with Walls and Ditches. It is full of Conduits or
Springs, but chiefly in the great Camp, where we rested for five Days to stay
for more Company. There live Abundance of Armenians in it, for it lies in the
Confines of the greater Armenia, and so we were no more in so great danger as
we were in the Country of the Curters. During my staying there, the
abovementioned rich Armenian Merchant, and also an eminent Turkish Gentleman
(which were very kind to me upon the Road) desired me several times (having
heard from the Jews that I was a Physician) that I would be pleased to go along
with them to Carahemit, which Town was Four Days distant at the other side of
the Tigris) to cure some of their Relations that were not well, they proffered
me good Entertainment, and to recommend me to the young Bashaw Son of Mahomet
Bashaw (which was also sick at that time) and to bring me into good Business;
which I would have done with all my Heart, and nothing could have pleased me
better, than to have served the Armenian for his Kindness. Yet because I was
sent for to come to Aleppo, and could not but be as good as my Word, wherein I
had also no small Interest, I was obliged to leave that Journey, and to strive
with all Speed and Diligence to get thither. Now as this Bashaw is among the
rest (except the Visir-Bashaws, whereof there are four or five, which are
always at Court about the Turkish Emperor, as being his Privy Council) the
Chiefest in Turkey, so he has larger and more fruitful Territories than he of
Bagdet, or any other, to govern, viz. Assyria, Mesopotamia, and a large part of
the greater Armenia, and of the Province of the Curters, etc. all which border
upon the Dominions of the Sophi King of Persia.

After we had refreshed our selves during this time, very well, and other
Companies had joined us, we broke up on the 20th. toward Night, and went away.
By the way we saw several plough'd Fields and Villages, and we could speak
better with the People, for they understood the Armenian, Turkish or Arabian
Languages, which are generally used in these Countries. So our Travels went on
with great speed, so that we reached on the 21st. late, the Town of Hochan,
where the Jews rested and kept their Sabbath. Here we received the News that
Solomon the Turkish Emperor was Deceased.

The 23d. we got up early again, and went the next way to Orpha, another Town,
to which we had Five Days Journey. From thence the nearer we came to the Mount
Tauri (which separateth Armenia from Mesopotamia, toward the South) the worse
grew the Roads, which we found very sufficiently the next Day, for when we came
further into the Mountains, the ways were so full of Stones that we were
hindered very much. Going thus on, after it had snowed a little (which I have
never seen but twice in these Countries) it happened, that one of the Jew's
Horses which was empty was frightened at something, and flung it self over and
over. The Jew hearing this noise, looked back, and seeing me stand by it, he
grew angry with me, as if I had done it, and began to handle his Bow and Arrows
to shoot at me, when I found him in earnest, and remembered how I lost my Wine
in the Ship, when we went down the River, I did not delay, but went to hinder
him, took him by his Leg and flung him off his Horse, before he could take his
aim at me; so we fell a boxing one another so long, until at length I tripped
up his Heels. When the other two saw that we spoiled thus the Figure of the
Snow, and that I was too hard for him, and had given him several hard blows,
they came immediately to separate us, and to make Peace again between us; I
seeing that they did not come to wrong me, and also considering that we were to
Travel together still further, took their Counsel, and was friends with him
again, and so we went on in our way. At Night we came to another Village again,
in a narrow Valley lying at the bottom of a great ascent, near which we found a
great Stable wherein we went, this was quite cut into the Hill, and so was that
wherein we lodged the Night before, so that you could see nothing of it, but
only the entrance, for they are commonly so in these hilly Countries under
Ground, that the Caravans may safely rest there and defend themselves from Cold
in the Winter. This Stable (being 25 Paces long and 20 broad, and all through
equally high) was cut out of a Rock. About midnight, when we were in our first
Sleep, one of the Grand Signior's Chiaus, or Chamber-Messengers, knocked at the
door of the Stable, who was come back from Bagdet in Six Days to this place, to
look about for some fresh Horses (because he had tired his own, and could not
have others by the way, as in our Country where Posts are ordered.) So he went
in, took away from one Mockeri or Carrier, three Pack-Horses, and two more from
the Jew (that I had had Contention with before) for these Messengers of the
Chamber have great Privileges, and in case of necessity, wherever they see
Horses in City or Country, they may take them leaving theirs in the room
thereof: They value one no more than another, except Merchants and Strangers,
which they excuse before others, to encourage Trade; those that they come to,
must deliver up their Horses, without any reluctance, except they have a mind
to be soundly banged (as one of our Friends was that did not open the Gates
immediately) or else to fare worse. When this Chiaus believed he had got very
good Horses, he soon found his mistake, for the Jew's Horses had galled Backs,
wherefore he let him have them again for a small recompense, which was a
Child's Coat made of delicate Indian Stuff. When our Journey was thus stopped,
chiefly because of the Mockeri or Carrier, until he could procure himself other
Horses in the room thereof, at least for that Day, we rose the earlier the next
Day, and traversed several rough Mountains, and went through narrow Valleys
that Day, until at Night we came to a Village inhabited by Armenians. These are
good-hearted Christians, which have great Compassion on their
Fellow Christians, and love to entertain and to be kind to Strangers, which I
have very often experienced, but chiefly in this Village, where one of the
Armenians took me and the Jews into his House, and would fain have kept us also
the next Day. Being at leisure, I would fain have conferred and discoursed with
him concerning our Christian Faith, and so was he willing, but being that we
could not understand one another, and the Jews were in this case by no means
proper Interpreters, we were forced to have patience by silence, and to look at
one another. About that time they kept Lent, which I could perceive by their
small sort of Diet (for they did eat nothing but leguminous Food and Bread and
Water.) After he had set before us some boiled Eggs at Night, and I being
hungry fell on them, not imagining that they kept such strictness and
difference in their Diet, he admired that I did not refuse to eat the Eggs, and
asked me by one of the Jews, whether I did not know that it was not allowed to
Chistians to eat Eggs and the like Victuals in Lent; at this I would fain have
answered him (that it became Christians to keep Lent rather with Soberness and
Abstinency, than with Distinctions and Differences of Foods.) But I not
understanding the Language, only answered him briefly, that our Lent was not
yet begun, nor would until three Weeks hence begin, which did content him
presently.

The 28th. we went on our Journey again, and came right among the high
Mountains, which were very rough, and full of Bushes; we got out of them before
Night, and lodged our selves in the next Village, which lies on an ascent in
the Plain, where we also stayed the next Day being the Sabbath. By the way,
when the Jews were in fear of having their Horses taken away, as was done some
Days before, they often gave them to me to lead them, as if they were mine,
hoping to carry them off the easier, so that although they were my Guides, yet
I was their Safeguard.

After we had past the great and rough Mountains, and were come into a very
fruitful Valley, which extends it self for a small Day's Journey to Orpha,
there appeared presently on each side several Villages, and afterward the
Costly City against us with the Castle situated on the Hill, very pleasantly.
Into this we got on the 30th. at Night very early, and went to lodge in the
large and very well built Camp, and stayed there for four Days. This Town is
very pleasant, pretty big and with Fortifications well provided. It was
formerly together with the whole Country, belonging to the Kings of Persia, but
now it is as well as the greatest part of the Country, brought under the
subjection of the Turkish Emperor. Orpha is a Town of very good Trade; they
deal in Tapestry of several sorts, some whereof are made there, and sent out to
us; there is also a great Deposition of Merchandices, which are brought thither
from Aleppo, Damascus, Constantinople, and other places, to go to Carahemit,
Five Days Journey distant from hence, and so to be carried further into Media,
Persia, the Indies, etc. yet all these Goods are brought thither in Caravans by
Land, because there is no Navigable River belonging to it. Some say that this
Town was anciently called Haran and Charras, from whence the Patriarch Abraham
departed with his Wife Sarah, and his Brother's Son Lot, according to the
Command of God, Genesis Chap. 12. and went forth to go into the Land of Canaan,
which the Lord had promised to give him, and there is a plentiful Well still to
this Day called Abraham's Well, where the Servant of Abraham (whom he sent into
Mesopotamia to the Town of Nahor, to fetch a Wife for his Son Isaac, from his
own Kindred) did first see Rebecca, when she gave him and his Camels some Water
to drink out of this Well. And so did afterward the Patriarch Jacob, when he
fled from his Brother Esau, at this same Well, make himself known to Rachel the
Daughter of Laban his Mother's Brother, when he removed the Stone from the head
of the Well, and so let her Sheep drink. The Water of this Fountain has a more
whitish troubledness than others. I have drunk of it several times out of the
Conduit, that runs from thence into the middle of the great Camp, and it has a
peculiar Pleasantness and a pleasant Sweetness in its taste. To the same did
also come the Son of the Pious Tobias, conducted by the Angel Raphael, whom his
Father sent to Rages (now called Edessa) as is abovementioned, to call in a
Debt from Gabel, as you may read in the 11th. Chapter of his Book, when they
returned by the way of Haran, which is half way to Nineve.

After the Jews had done their Business there with good Success, we went on in
our Travels again, and came again into the high and rough Mountains, where we
spent also the next Day with great trouble and hardship, until we came again to
the great River Euphrates into the Town Bir, whereof I have made mention
before. And although we had no more but two half Days Journey to Aleppo, yet
the Jews my Fellow-travellers had Business in the Famous Town Nisib, (which is
situated on this side the River on the borders of the lesser Armenia) so that
we were bound to go thither; so we put out again on the 6th. of February after
their Sabbath, and went through very fruitful and well cultivated Cornfieldsd,
to Andeb, toward Evening. It is a pretty big Town, but not very strong. It
lies on two small Hills very pleasantly, so that you may see it plainly and
distinctly, as soon as you come from out of the Valley by the Lake into the
Fields. Yet notwithstanding that it is so pleasantly situated and looks so
stately at a distance, it is but pitifully built when you come within it. In
former Ages this Town has been several times besieged by the Kings of Persia,
by whom it was taken at last, and kept so long, until the Roman Emperor
Galienus Odenatus Palmyrenus, took it from King Sapor, together with the Town
Orpha, and laid it to the Roman Empire again. But in these our Times, to our
grief, it is brought again, together with all the Country, under the Ottoman
Slavery. The Inhabitants have very little Trade, they live for the most part
upon their Estates, by cultivating their Grounds, and chiefly from the Fruits
of Vineyards and Orchards, which are planted with Pomgranates and Figs, etc. so
thick, (that from the great quantity of Trees they may have the more Fruit)
that you would at a distance, rather take them to be Woods of wild Trees, than
of fruitful ones. So they send Yearly many sorts of Fruits, but chiefly Cibebs
into the Eastern Countries, by great Caravans, whereof I have met many. After
we had staid here, and I had lost a whole Day, for their Business sake, we
broke up again directly for Aleppo, and having passed for several Miles through
rough, bad, hilly ways, we came at length into a plain, delicate and fruitful
Country, so fruitful of Wine and Corn, that on all my Journey, I have seen none
like unto it. This did almost extend it self to Aleppo, where we arrived early,
with the help of the Almighty God, in very good health, on the 10th. Day of
February. At my arrival, because my Comrade Hans Vlrich Krafft, with the rest,
were not there then present, presently some French Merchants (which I had cured
of several Distempers before my departure) came to me, and carried me home with
them, desiring me to live with them until my Business (which caused me to come
back) were done, wherein really they did me a very great Kindness. For I having
very well torn my Clothes (which never came from my Back in half a Years time)
I had there an Opportunity to rest my self and to procure my self some new
ones. I thank the Almighty God, for his many Mercies and Favors bestowed on
me, and the Assistance he graciously afforded me in this Voyage, returning him
Praise, Honor and Glory, etc.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Turkish Physicians and Apothecaries; Of my Comrade, Hans Ulrich Krafft
of Ulm 's, hard Imprisonment. Of the great Danger that I was in, in the two
Towns of Aleppo and Tripoli. Of the murdering of some Merchants, and what else
did happen when I was there.

AT my return to Aleppo, where my Business obliged me to stay a while, I came
to understand, that during my absence, several Italians and Frenchmen, were in
their Sickness but very slightly served by the Jews their Physicians; wherefore
I did not only soon recover my former Acquaintance and Practice by them, but
might have also stepped into great Business with the Turks, for I was presently
so well known, that I had much to do to excuse my self with Discretion to get
off of them, that I might escape their Anger and Displeasure, which I must have
got, if I had served them never so faithfully, which I knew several had before
me found by experience. Wherefore at the instance of several good Friends, I
only cured two great Persons, whereof one was a Georgian, and at that time
Sangiack of Jerusalem, which were very well pleased with me, and requited me
accordingly. The Physicians generally in these Parts, agree before hand for the
Cure with their Patients, for a certainty, according to the Condition of the
Patient, and his Distemper, and have security for their Money, but yet it is
not paid to them, before the Patient is cured. They have a great many
Physicians, but they are very unskilful, chiefly the Turks which know none but
their own Language, and so cannot read the Authors of Physic that have writ in
another Language, as the Jews can. But seeing that the Jews are very much
addicted to Covetousness, they endeavor rather to promote their own Interest,
than that of their Patients; so that the Turks are but slightly provided with
Physicians, and therefore rather die like Flies, than take advise of their
Physicians, chiefly of the Jews, which are not contented with a small Reward;
to this add also that the Turks never put any Confidence in the Jews, and
esteem their Counsel but little; and besides, they believe that God has
already pre-ordained every one his Death, so that he that is born to be drowned
cannot be hanged. And besides all this, the Jews do not stick close to them in
time of necessity, but fly presently, and first of all in time of Sickness
(which certainly happens once in Seven Years, if not in Five or sooner) just
like Hirelings, as they have sufficiently experienced in the last Plague in the
Year 72, with the loss of several Persons of Worth and Quality; chiefly among
the rest a Turkish Play Master, by them called Daftedar, and another Eminent
Turk, and their own Sons, which both of them (although this proferr'd to lay
3000 Ducats, and the other 10000, into the Hands of a third Person) yet were
neglected and lest by their Physicians and died. It is very much in use among
them, that if any body does find himself not well, another puts his Arms cross
before him, and so graspeth him about his Back, and lifts him up, and sets
him down again, and shakes him several times, just as they use to do Sacks
with Corn, to make them lie the closer and to hold the more. As the Physicians
are, so are also the Apothecaries, where you find nothing of any great
Compositions, nor purging Electuaries, as Elect. Diacatholicon, Diaphoenicon,
etc. (although they have the best Ingredients thereof, for we have them all
sent from them) except they be sent to them from Marseilles or Venice, etc. If
you have occasion for any Herbs, Roots or Seeds, etc. you must go your self,
not without great trouble and losing of time, and find them either in the
Fields, or else at the Grocers and other Shopkeepers. Among the rest of the
things they had, I soon knew the Rob Ribes by its ancient Name and pleasant
sourish Taste, whereof they make a great quantity in this place, and send it
further into other Countries, but chiefly to the Turkish Emperor; wherefore in
the Easter Week they had already gathered several Sacks full of the Stalks of
the true Ribes of the Arabians (which are hairy, almost two Foot long, and of
the thickness of an Inch, of a greenish color, and underneath, as also Serapio
mentions, reddish,) from the Mount Libanus, and brought it to the Cadi to
make Rob of it for him. I saw them lie in his Courtyard, and several of them
were given me to taste, and to take away with me. What Herbs I found at my
return else, because there are but a few of them, therefore I have put them
among the rest here-above in a peculiar Chapter. I saw there several strange
Birds, and among others some of a delicate green and blue color, which were
about the bigness of our Nut-crackers, by them called Sucuruck, and by others
Alsecrach. I also found their Alhabari, which are not unlike our Peacocks, and
almost as big, and could not fly much. Of four-footed Beasts, I saw seveveral,
and among them some Civet-Cats, which were brought thither in Caravans, from
remote Parts and the Indies. In the Fundique of the Consul of the Venetians, I
saw a very sharp sighted one like unto a Lynx, exactly of the shape of a Cat,
so that it was not easily distinguished from it, save only in its bigness (for
it is much higher and slimmer). This is a very wild and fierce Beasts, so that
his Keeper himself was afraid of it. It once got loose, and got through the
Yard below into an Apothecaries Shop, wherein he had just then put a great many
Glasses that were sent him from Venice, whereof it broke the greatest part
before it could be taken again. When I was there, a young Rhinoceros was
carried through the Town to Constantinople. It came from the most Eastern
Parts, and had killed above 20 Men before they could take it. They also lead
daily some Lions about the Town in small Chains, which have small Bells before,
that every body may take the sooner Notice of them; they are so tame, that
their Keepers sometimes wrestle with them in open Places, neither do they
easily grow wild, except they should see Sheep, then their Keepers have enough
to do to keep them off, and to appease them. Without in the Fields in high and
bushy Places, are sometimes found Chamelions, which are somewhat bigger than
our green Lizards, but a great deal leaner and higher upon their Legs; they
walk very slowly and lazily, they live a great while without Meat like the
Serpents, and are a very ugly Creature. If we put it upon a colored red,
yellow, or black Cloth, it has by degrees changed its natural green Color
into the same that the Cloth was of.

Having ended my Business I had, and in the mean time received a Letter from my
Comrades that were at Tripoli, I parted from thence according to their desire,
and came on the 5th. of May, Anno 75, to them in Tripoli. After some Days
arrived also with some Goods, one of their chiefest Carriers, which they call
Mokeri, which swore to me by his Head, that is, he affirmed upon his Faith and
Reputation, that the Sub-Bashaw of Aleppo, when he was departing from thence,
had sent his Bailiffs to my Lodgings to apprehend me, and to fling me into the
public Turkish Gaol, because they were very well assured, that when I was on
the Hills (where they had seen me look for Plants) I had observed the Situation
of the Town, and all the Country very diligently, that I might, when I should
have an opportunity, betray them to their Enemies, and show them the best way
to take it. But all this was contrived that they might have an opportunity to
take an Avaria on me, as the Merchants call it there in these Countries, that
is to say, they would accuse me falsely to make me punishable, that they might
get a sum of Money out of me. And the Carrier also really believed, for as much
as he heard of them, that they would not have let me come off for less than 200
Saraffi or Ducats, one whereof makes two of their Gilders. Thanks be to our
Lord God, who has delivered me from their unjust Accusations and Contrivances,
and brought me safe to this place. At my arrival at Tripoli, when I expected to
live securely and quietly, and thought that I was passed all danger, I fell
notwithstanding all this into another; for when my Comrades, and with them also
Hans Vlrich Krafft (yet without any transgression) were flung into the Turkish
Gaol, by the Contrivances of some Turks, the same Rogues had also a mind to
contrive something against me, to bring me in also. But the French Vice-Consul,
Andrew Bianchi, who was my very good Patron, took my Part, in so much that he
did recover my Liberty by the Turks, in spite of my Accusers and not only got
me License to walk freely without molestation in and about the City wherever
I pleased, but did also procure me a free and safe Access to my Comrades, to
see them in Prison as often as I pleased. Into the Prison wherein they were
kept, I must always go through three small and low Doors, which the Keepers did
always very freely and without any grumbling open unto me, to go in or out, and
sometimes I have staid there all Night with them. I was always in very great
hopes that God Almighty would have ordered it so, that their Adversaries might
have agreed with them, so that I and my dear Friend whom I loved as my own
Brother, Hans Vlrich Krafft, might have been returned home again with Joy. But
it pleased God to order it other ways, for the Differences grew the longer the
more difficult, and were so long produced, that this Young Gentleman,
particularly Hans Vlrich, was kept there in this hard Imprisonment very near
three Years. To tell all that he suffered and endured there, would be too long
here; only this I cannot omit to tell you, that he did endure and conquer all
these Troubles and Adversities (as I did see my self) with such a Courage,
Patience and good Conduct, that notwithstanding all these (although he was
almost left quite Comfortless) he was rather fit to comfort others than to be
comforted. When I went thus in and out to them, I observed very well that the
Turks have very great Compassion on poor distressed Prisoners, and are very
free to give them Alms, and a Man used to come in daily with Bread or boiled
Meat, as Rice, and other sorts of boiled Corn, chiefly on Feast-Days after the
Afternoons Lecture was over, and when he distributed them, he did also always
as he went by, fling in for each of them a little Loaf (very like unto them
they Bake in Lent in our Country) into their Apartment before them upon the
Ground, wherewith they must make shift, except they could live of their own
means, or get something by their Hand-labour (whereof there was a good many
that did) to maintain themselves. These Alms the Turks give rather freely,
without being asked for it, for they believe that God is better pleased with
that which they give freely, than that which is begged of them. Wherefore they
have very few or no Beggars in their Towns, which beg Alms as they do in our
Country. During my stay at Tripoli, I did at the request of the Consul, live in
his Fundique, who entertained me very honorably, that I might give Attendance,
and if any of the Merchants or Seamen, should happen to be sick, I might use
my best endeavor to cure them. So I did in the space of three Months, cure,
only in our Fundique, above Forty Men of all sorts of Distempers, viz.
malignant Fevers, violent Gripings of the Guts, etc. which generally befell
them that were lately arrived, and were not yet acquainted with the Air and
Diet of the Country. There happened in these Days, a miserable cruel Case, that
some (among whom were Five Italians and One Frenchman) did arrive at Tripoli,
which made themselves soon ready to go from thence further to Aleppo, with
their Merchandices to sell there. Upon the Road they left their Caravan too far
behind them, and met with some Horsemen, which spoke to them, and desired them
that they would halt at the Command of their Master the Sub-Bashaw, and
dismount, and go into the next Camp (which I found very desolate and ruined
when I went by formerly) to stay there until he came to them, which would not
be long, for he had something to say to them; the Merchants obeyed them
readily, fearing that if they should not, they would be punished severely by
the Sub-Bashaw for their Disobedience. After they were gone into the Camp, the
Murderers immediately fell upon them, Shooting and Striking at them, until they
killed them all at last, then they buried them in the Ground, mounted their
Horses and rode away. After these Murderers thought they were very secure, one
of these Rogues (which were said to be Arabians) met one of the Mockeri or
Carriers of the same Caravan, he knew the Horse immediately, and perceiving it
to be bloody, his Heart gave him that it was not right, wherefore he made haste
up to him, and thrust his bended Bagonet into his side, and took him Prisoner,
and carried him to Aleppo, where he was (as I did hear afterward) having
confessed the Fact when he was upon the Torture, executed for it. They did also
seek for the rest, but did apprehend none of them in the time of my staying.
The Sultan else takes great Care to keep the Roads safe and free from Highway
Men, that Trading may go on without hinderance. Yet sometimes there are some of
the great ones, and Men of Note, that put others upon it for gain's sake, so
that one must be very careful in these Countries. It is not long ago when we
had News, that not far off the Christians had taken some Ships from the Turks,
and carried them off, and also formerly in the beginning of July of the last
Year, they lost some more, and as I am informed, among them were Four great
ones, Three Fliboats, and Two other, that were taken by Six Galleys of the
Christians, which made the Turks mightily discontented; wherefore the Emperor
sends out many Galleys into several places, chiefly to Rhodes, to cross the
Seas up and down to keep them clear from Pirates, and to hinder them from
making Incursions or Descents upon him. These come sometimes into this Port,
but our Merchants and the Masters of our Ships do not care for their arrival,
for they are forced to present them with Cloths, Woollen Clothes, Money, etc.
if they will remain in Favor with them.

CHAP. XII.
Of the large and high Mount of Libanus, its Inhabitants and strange Plants
that are found there.

WHen I stayed with the Consul at Tripoli, and had not a few of his in cure, in
his Fundique, some others of other Nations did sometimes between whiles desire
my Assistance and Advice, and among the rest, an Eminent Patriarch of the
Maronites, which reckon themselves to be Christians, and are called so from the
Heretic Maro to this Day. This did live in the Mount of Libanus, and was
carried down (although he had a whole Day's Journey to Tripoli, and was
afflicted with that painful Distemper the Gout very severely) to be cured by
me. After some Days when he was pretty well recovered again, so that he
intended to return home, he spoke to some of us in our Fundique, that we would
be pleased to conduct him up the Hill home again, which was agreed unto very
readily, considering that this Mountain is the most Famous in all the Country
of Syria, whereof the Holy Scripture makes several times mention, speaking of
its great Height and Famous Rivers (of which Jordan is one) of its sweet
smelling Plants, and pleasantly tasted Fruits; and also because there is a
great many strange Plants to be found. So we rode along with the Patriarch (who
had no little reason to be afraid of the Turks clandestine Assault) with all
possible diligence, and came immediately from the Town upon the heights of the
Promontories of the Mount Libanus, which were very Fruitful at the Top, and had
many pleasant plain Fields, which extended themselves for three Leagues to the
high Mount, so that this was a very pleasant Road, where we saw sometimes on
one side, delicate Vineyards, then on the other, fruitful Fields sowed with
Barley, white Indian Millet, etc. After this we came to pleasant Woods, where
sweet singing Birds let themselves be heard, and recreated us; sometimes we saw
some Hares and some Deer, so that we could not but fancy that we went through
thick and dark Woods. When we came out of them, and were very near unto the
Mountain, there lay some small Villages before it, and we went to one of them,
and very near unto it in a green shady Place we sat down, and refreshed our
selves with some Victuals, which we had taken along with us, before we began to
go up the Mountain.

The Patriarch was very merry with us, and presented us with some
Venice-Bottles of his Wine, whereof we drank a good deal, for it was so
pleasant that I must confess that I never in all my Life drank any like it.
Soon after we broke up again, with an Intention to reach his Monastery that
Night, called our Ladies, which lies on the middle of the Mountain as we so
traveled toward the Top thereof; in the beginning we came into a narrow, and
rough Valley, which had on both sides very steep Walls, wherewith it was
enclosed, of a vast Height, chiefly at our left Hand, and yet toward the Top
there were several Caves within them, wherein Christians live, whereof we saw a
great many that appeared so near to the edges as they went about, that we that
traveled underneath had much to do to keep us from being giddy. In that place
(where from the Height one may plainly see the whole Neighborhood to the very
Seas, as if it was a Specula, such as the Ancients used to have) is always a
strong Watch kept by the Inhabitants of these Mountains (because they are not
under the Jurisdiction of the Turks, as others are, nor in any League with
them) to hinder the Turks from making Incursions upon them. When we went
further, and got over some little Hills, we came out of this narrow Place into
wide Meadows, Pastures, Corn fields, and to some fruitful Vineyards: Then again
into narrow and deep rocky Roads where we had enough to do to climb over: And
afterward again into pleasant Groves, by delightful Rivolets that arose from
Springs that made so sweet a Noise, that those Mountains are therefore admired
and commended, chiefly by King Solomon in the 4th Chapter of his Song, verse
15th in Comparison, where he mentions the Streams from Lebanon, which make
Damascus one of the most pleasant and delicious Places in the World.

On this Mount grow here and there, besides ordinary Trees and Bushes, thick
shrubby Vines, Zizipha alba and rutila, Poplars, two kinds of Dwarf-Cedars with
pointed and obtuse Leaves, Eupatorium Mesuae, Absinthium Ponticum, Elaeagni
Math. by the Inhabitants called Seisesun; and wild Horn-beams, a peculiar sort
of Willows, Phyllireas, Styrax-Trees, the fragrant Gum whereof is to be found
in Apothecaries Shops: But chiefly, and in the greatest Number were the
Maple-Trees, which are large, big, high, and expand themselves very much with
their Branches. After we had rested our selves, and were a little refreshed
underneath these, our Labor began again, to climb up these high and steep
Steps. When we were thus a climbing, some Country People (that we saw up so
high before) came out of their Caves down to us, with Muggs full of Wine, which
they presented first to their Master the Patriarch that was on Horseback,
receiving him with a great deal of Reverence (bowing themselves down to his
Feet) and loving Kindness, and afterward they did detain us also, and
presented each of us with a Mug of Wine, to bid us welcome, which I and the
rest received very willingly, but having pretty well heated my self with going,
I at that time loved spring water with Bread dipped in it very well, I only
tasted a little of it. After we were got up these Stairs, a great many more
came running to present their Master with Chickens, Pullets and other Poultry,
which his Man took and carried it up with them. Then the ways were pretty good,
and much straighter so that we went on apace, until at length we came to the
Monastery, which we could not see before we came just upon it. Just before it
without is a most incomparable copious Spring, that sloweth with delicate
Water, which is worthy to be often visited.

This Monastery (which is not extraordinarily built) lies toward the left,
almost in the middle of the Mountain under a great Rock, which does so cover
and preserve it, that it cannot easily receive any harm from above. At our
Arrival the Monks came immediately, whereof I saw no more but Ten, and received
us very kindly, and showed us presently our Lodging, which because they had no
Chambers to spare, was an arched Chapel, that we might know whither to repair:
Yet we kept more upon the Top of the House (which was like others covered with
Plaster) which was the delicatest and pleasantest Place of all the Buildings,
where we could see the Situation of the snowy Hill toward the East above the
Cedars, which was a very pleasant sight, and also below us several other Hills,
whereon they feed their Cattle, together with the deep and dark Valley: And,
the Monastery being but small, so that they had not much room in it, we also
supped there in the open Air, with the Patriarch and some of his Fraternity, on
a long Table. They treated us very well, and gave us some white wind to drink
(which was better than that we drunk on the Hill) in Venice Glasses, the like
whereof is not to be found neither in Candia nor Cyprus. But they fed,
according to their Order, only upon plain Food as Beans and French-Beans, and
the like leguminous Fruit, etc. At Night when they conducted us to our Chambers
to go to rest, they showed us instead of Beds some Straw-Mats, and Tapestry
spread upon the Ground in their Church on which we were to lie, and so we did
and rested that Night. In the Morning they came very early before break of Day
into the Church, when we were still very sleepy, to do their Office, and began
immediately to ring two Bells, which made underneath the Rock such a resounding
Noise, that it stupefied us and made us (chiefly because some of us had heard
none in two Years time, and were full of Sleep and but half awake) so dull,
that we did not for a good while know where we were, until we came a little to
our selves again. Afterward I heard them with Attention for a good while, and
did look into their Books which were written with Arabian Letters: But what
Religion they were of, I shall tell you hereafter, when I shall make mention of
other Christians.

At break of the Day we made our selves ready to go further up the Hill, to the
Height thereof where the Cedars stand, to see them, so that we might come to
the Monastery again. Along with us went two Monks to show us the way; they
conducted us back again to the rich Springs of Water, to the Stairs, which were
very rough, and so steep that we were often forced to hold our selves by the
Bushes, which we could reach at both Sides; but chiefly when we turned on a
sudden, of which Turnings they had very many. So we got up higher and higher,
with a great deal of Labor, until we came to a little Chapel standing just at
the Top of the Stairs, on the Hill. Near to this Chapel is a small Village,
which we went through, and saw spacious Fields well cultivated, so that the
Inhabitants of these Mountains, could have no want of Corn, Wine, Flesh or Oil,
etc. although their Neighbors should not supply them for Years with any thing:
And besides, their Lands are so well secured on the Height, and so locked up,
as if they were surrounded with high Walls and deep Ditches: And moreover they
are very a stout and warlike-People, very well provided with Bows and Guns,
etc. so that their Neighbors cannot easily hurt nor do any Mischief to them;
and they are also soon alarmed, which we found, when these two Monks did
immediately raise twelve Men well armed, in the furthermost Village toward the
snowy Hill, to conduct us safe up to the Cedars of the highest Mount, that
their Neighbors the Trusci might not hurt us. But as I understood afterward
the Trusci are in Confederacy with the Inhabitants of Mount Libanus, so that
they need not to fear any harm from them. But they rather did it to frighten
us, to get a good Recompense from us that they might rejoice, and treat us the
better (as Christians) on our return. So these Twelve went before us and
conducted us up to another but very barren and rough Plain, where we found our
selves to be upon the highest point of the Mountain, and saw nothing higher but
only a small Hill before us, all covered over with Snow, at the Bottom whereof
the high Cedar-Trees were standing, some whereof King Solomon ordered to be cut
down to be employed for the use of the building of the Temple of Jerusalem. And
although this Hill has in former Ages been quite covered over with Cedars, yet
they are since so decreased, that I could tell no more but Twenty Four that
stood round about in a Circle and Two others, the Branches whereof are quite
decayed for Age. I also went about in this place to look out for some young
ones, but could find none at all. These Trees are green all the Year long, have
strong Stems that are several Fathoms about, and are as high as our Firr-Trees.
They have very large Twigs that bend the Tree, and make it lean that way, which
somewhat spoileth their Straightness. Branches grow up straight, as also do the
Cones thereof, which are large and round, and extend themselves a great length,
in so delicate and pleasant, Order and Evenness, as if they were trimmed, and
made even with a great deal of Diligence, so that at a Distance, you may see
the Tops of them very even to one another. So that one may immediately see at a
great Distance, a great Difference between these and other Firr-Trees. They are
else very like unto the Larch-Trees chiefly in their Leaves, which are small,
and all close together, but stand further asunder upon small brown Shoots,
which in their Length and Bigness are like unto them of the Muscus terrestris.

After we had rested awhile underneath the Cedars, and began to be coldish in
this windy, snowy and cold place, we began to return to the Monastery again. By
the way I saw about the River three sorts of Tragacanth, one whereof I took
according to its Shape to be that of the learned Carolus Clusius, which is very
like unto the True Tragacantha. The Second is somewhat lower than the First,
else it is very like unto it, only it bears Yellow Flowers, each whereof
grows by its self in round yellowish bags, and several of them stand one
above the other on long Stalks. The Third is almost of the same Height, and
has more brown colored strong Stalks, with white woolly heads of Poterius,
whereon you see purple colored Flowers. I found also by them another Plant,
which to be brief, (considering its brown colored flexible Twigs, and longish
fat Leaves* is very like unto the Chamaelea, of a very sharp Taste) I think to
be the first kind of Sanamu^da of Carolus Clusius. Besides these I saw
hereabout two thorny Shrubs, one whereof was with its red colored Grapes
(setting the Leaves aside as far as I remember) very like unto our Oxyacantha.
The other which was full of Thorns, and had small red purple colored Flowers,
was like into the first kind of Scorpius of Carolus Clusius. Among the Bushes I
saw the Scorzonera with yellow Flowers, and also a pretty sort of Tulips with
yellow stripes, and not far from it the true Ribes of the Arabians, which I
found in Autumn at an ill time, without Flowers or Seeds, only with two Leaves,
as if it was just sprung up. The Leaves thereof are rough and round, as big
very near as those of Petasites (called Butterburn in our Language) which grow
upon short yet thick Stalks, which are also full of a pleasant sowrish Juice,
as well as their Stalks, whereof chiefly the True Rob Ribes is prepared, as I
have seen it my self, and Serapio testifies. This loves moist Grounds, has a
strong brown colored Root, which is pretty long, wrinkly, bended, and of a
very unpleasant Taste. On the hight of the Mount I saw more Plants, some
whereof I had not time to mind, and others that are not yet known, wherefore I
omit (for shortness sake) to say more of them.

The Mountain is very high, so that it may be seen in Cyprus about 200 Italian
Miles off; wherefore the Day breaks later at Tripoli, and not until the
Morning Sun appears before it: And moreover you find there Snow all Summer
long, which they bring down from the Mountains, into the Batzars or Exchanges
to sell, to cool their Drink with it chiefly in the Dog days, and fling it in
by handfuls. Yet when we were at the Top, we could not see far about, being
hindered by some Hills.

After we were come down from the Mountains into the little Village again, our
Conductors brought us into a pleasant Garden where their Wives came to us,
which brought to us several yet strange sorts of Milk-Meats to eat, and very
good Wine to drink, so we sat down in the Grass according to their Fashion, to
eat and drink, and to make merry, and spoke to them in the common Arabian
Country Language, and what we could not speak out, we made them understand by
Signs. After we had dined, we returned them many thanks, for all their Kindness
and good Cheer, and so we went away. By the way we saw more Plants, viz. the
Alyssum of Diosc.; a delicate kind of Cynoglossum. And also near the Stairs
some wild Fir-Trees, Polium Montanum, Marrubium Creticum Lobelii, as I judged
according to its shape. A delicate yellow Jacea with scaly Heads, and prickles
like unto the Spina Solstitialis, which is low, yet it has a long and strong
Root, covered with a gray and hairy Rind, like unto the Victorialis, the Leaves
are jagged or laciniated, of an Ashen color and hairy, as also the two before
mentioned; and another kind of Jacea, with purple colored Flowers, which is
very like unto the yellow one of Lobelius (which I have also found in Provence
in France near Aix) saving only the prickles that are about the Heads. Just
before we came quite down I found two kinds of Linaria, one whereof (that is of
a pretty bitter Taste) puts forth long and slender Stalks from the Root,
closely surrounded with a great number of Linaria Leaves, and has at top one,
two or three long scaly Heads, from whence issue small purple colored Flowers;
the other grows also in Leaves and Stalks almost like unto the first, only
they are smaller and tenderer, and has quite to the top abundance of light and
small purple colored Flowers round about it (as the blue one of our Gardens).
At length after a long traveling and climbing, we came just when the Night
broke in, down to the Monastery again; after Supper we went strait to rest,
that we might be up early again to go for Tripoli. After break of the Day when
we had taken our leave of the Patriarch and his Brethren, and made our selves
ready for our Journey, we came strait away. By the way we saw several of
Arbores Judae, with their red colored Husks; and also in the Rock a fine
Gnaphalium, with Ash colored roundish, Mouse-ear Leaves, and Snow-white double
Flowers. As we went on, and were almost come to the House that stood upon the
height, whereof we made mention before, these Inhabitants came down again, got
before us, stopped us, and would not let us pass until we had drunk with them.
Then we went on again, and I found in the deep and dark Valley the right Medium
Dioscoridis, and Mindium Rhazis, which I did spy immediately among the Bushes,
by its hight and specious purple colored Flower. This Plant is very like unto
the Viola Mariana, of the learned Rempert Dodonus, very stately, so that no
great Difference can be found but only in the Leaves, which in this are more
carved, like unto those of Plantain, and in the Flowers which are more open,
and spread themselves with their long and narrow Leaves, (whereof each has
eight) into a round Circle; the Seeds I saw not because they were not yet ripe,
yet I found a greater Austerity in the Root than in the Seed Vessels. Not far
off, I also saw in the Valley a strange Plant, which was of the height of a
Cubit, and had whitish and woolly Leaves, like unto our Mullein, only they are
less, and grow quite to the Stalk, as those of Tabaco, or of Hyoscyamus
Peruvianus, of Rempert Dodon, at the top thereof grow fine purple colored and
white double Flowers which stand close together, as those of the yellow
Amaranth, or in the little Auricula Muris of Fuchsius, so that according to all
this, having also fragrant Roots, and like unto those of black Hellebore (which
broke because I pulled it up in haste) as I judged by that part thereof which
still was left to them, I clearly take it to be the true Baccharis of Dioscor.
In the Valley further down toward the Water, grew also the Oleander, and the
Apocynum Repens, which climbeth upon the Trees that stand nigh it, and covers
them so that it hangs down again at the sides, like the Ephedra of Pliny.
After we came out before the Mountain, there appears the Italian Sphondylium,
Visnagia, etc. there we went into the next Village, and looked after the
Victuals we had left, to refresh our selves. When we came from thence I found
the black Chamaeleon with its handsome blue colored Tops; Origanum, Onites,
Lycium called also Zaroa by the Inhabitants, the second Acacia with trefoil
Leaves, and when we came near to Tripoli, to the old and high Rivolet, between
the Mountains, I found the second Tragoriganum of Carol. Clusius Ceterach and
low St. John's Wort, a fine Chamaedrys, etc. but above all, a Thorn-bush, about
the height of a Cubit, very thick of Twigs and Stalks, so that some of them lie
upon the Ground: The Stalks (whereof many grow out of a Root of a drying
quality, and somewhat bitter) are surrounded with a tender gray Rind,
underneath which is another reddish one to be found. Its long tender Leaves
that grow one against the other (which are of the color of Ashes underneath,
and green above) are very like unto the Leaves of our Sanguisorba; between them
at the Top or the Crown sprout out many Thorns, the biggest whereof divide
themselves at the Top into other less ones in very good order, so that some
point down, and some upwards, and others toward the sides, and some thereof
sprout out further before the rest, which sprout our early in the Spring, and
bear small greenish colored starry Flowers; from underneath them grow out
small soft Berries of a whitish Color, and some reddish, which are so close
together, and stand in their Ranks, (at the Top whereof the Flower is still
plainly to be seen) like unto our Currants. The Seeds thereof I have raised in
the famous Garden of the Generous and eminent Hans Heinrich Herwarts, Alderman
of this Place, very easily and they grew up until they were ready to blow: But
as other Outlandish Plants do seldom endure our Climate, so did this also die
the next Winter. It is called by the Inhabitants Bellen. But I am of Opinion,
according to its shape, (for of its Virtue and Use, I can say nothing because I
never tried it) that it is the Hippophie of Dioscor. so long until others give
me a better instruction. Not far from hence I found on the Height, near to the
Town in a rough place, another fine Plant, not unlike unto our Gingidium, only
that it has less Fenil Leaves and bears a roundish Seed, with many smooth
Wings hanging round about it, which close themselves almost into a Knot
together, with its tender Leaves, which sprout out underneath the Crown, like
unto the black Coriander: Which induced me to enquire after it, more narrowly
what to call it, and being I found that it had a small white Root, tender
Leaves, and a bitterer Taste than our wild Parsnip, and also in the middle of
the Crown a bluish Knob, I cannot judge it but to be the true Gingidium of
Dioscor. From thence we soon went down the Stairs again, and came by some
Turkish burying-Places, and some wild Figg-Trees, by them called Mumeitz
(whereof a great many are growing in these Grounds) into the Town of Tripoli.

Soon after an honest and skillful Botanist, to whom I came to inquire after
Plants, told me that a great many more were to be found thereabout. Wherefore I
went out again to look for them, and to get them also. So I found first upon
the Height near the Vineyards a Cassia Monspeliensium, which be called Mackmudi
and Mackmisi, and the Berries thereof Habel Mickenes. But whether this is to be
taken for the Avacsium Rhasis, or no I cannot certainly affirm. This is so
common in these places that they make Brooms of its Twigs. Moreover I found in
the Vineyards another stately fine and strange Plant, which was about two
Cubits high, and had whitish, woolly, and long, sharp pointed Leaves, which are
set round with small prickles about the edges, and had on each side toward the
Stalk little Ears, as our Sorrel and Spinach have: It is of a bitter Taste, and
at the Top thereof on long Stalks grow many smooth Hands which in their bigness
and Flowers are very like unto the yellow Jacea.

But that I may not be too tedious (it being not my Intention to treat here of
every one at length) I will mention but one more before I conclude, which I
found just at the Spouts where in Rainy Weather the Water runs down from the
Mount of Libanus; which is the true white Behen of the Arabians, and is still
to this Day called Behmen-ahied, as the red is called Behmen-ackmar, which also
does not stand far off, as my Friend that experienced Botanist has informed
me. But because I was daily ready to go on Ship board, to come home again, I
had not time to obtain it; this was at that time almost decayed, yet I found
still some green Leaves about it, so that by all appearance, it does endure the
Winter, and so shoots out a new by degrees, which grow up yearly again instead
of the old ones, these put forth long great and pointed Leaves, as big, sharp
and as thick as a Leaf of a Pear Tree; they have partly underneath on the
Stalks four much less, which stand two and two against one another; and one
also finds out a few of them on round Stalks (many whereof grow out of the same
Root, about the height of a Cubit) where the uppermost stick quite close to it,
as you may see on the Smyrnium Creticum; On the Top it puts forth oblong scaly
yellow Buttons, each of them on their peculiar Stalk, from whence issue Flowers
of the same color; it has a very long Root, which at the Top shoots out great
Branches, that grow so thick, that in time they may be separated and
transplanted; but else they have but very few Fibers, so that they rather are
smooth, and also almost as tough and pliable as Liquorish Root, to which it is
very like in its bigness and color, only it is somewhat whiter, and not so
strait. But why Avicen makes mention also of its wrinkles, I am of Opinion
that he rather speaks of the greater sort, which is more wrinkly and rougher,
and also for above a Span long, seem to be shrunk of Age and turned woody, or
decayed and dried up, although within they are still juicy, limber, and have
kept their natural color. I was also informed of others, viz. of the Costus
Syriacus, which they still know by the Name of Chaste, and is found about
Antiochia: And not far off from thence is also found the Nux vomica as some
esteem them, by the Inhabitants called Cutschula; which together with a great
many other Famous ones I might have obtained, if I could have had a true,
faithful and experienced Guide; but for want of such a one, and also because I
could stay no longer, I was forced to leave them behind, to be hereafter found
out by such that shall undertake the like Journies.

CHAP. XIII.
Cunning and deceitful Stratagems of the Grand Turk against the Inhabitants of
Mount Libanus the Trusci, and Maronites: And how he made War with them, and
what Damage they sustained by it.

HAving here before made mention of the Maronites and Trusci their Neighbors
and Allies, I cannot but must also go further, and briefly relate, how the Turk
did make War against them (as to whom they are not yet quite subjected) during
the time of my staying in these Countries. But from whence this War did first
arise, and had its beginning, I was thus informed, that it broke out about one
of their Governors, which lived then for a little time at Damascus. For when
the Grand Signior did observe that these People did daily grow in Number and
Strength, he considered, that if he should let them go on so, and neglect to
curb them in time, they might probably after a while grow too Potent for him;
wherefore he thought it requisite, to study and make it his Business to find
out ways and means to subdue them and to reduce them under his Power. In order
thereunto, he apprehended the Governor that lived then in Damascus, and put
him into Prison, and at length took away his Life unjustly under pretense as if
he had endeavored to raise a Rebellion; not doubting but that when he had
removed their Head, he might the easier subdue and reduce these People. But
when the Trusci and Maronites understood this cruel and abominable Fact, not
without Grief and Trouble, they were not only not at all discouraged from
resisting so Great and Formidable an Enemy, but rather took new Courage that
was promoted by the great Anger this detestable Fact put them into, so that
they united themselves the firmer, and did unanimously resolve to oppose him
with all their Might and Power, and to stand by their ancient Liberty; and
accordingly they began immediately to Arm themselves, to Fortify their
Villages, and chiefly their Passes, and to provide themselves with Guns, Bows
and Arrows, and all other things necessary for their Defense, so that in case
of Necessity they might be ready to resist their Enemies, being such a kind,
that kept neither Faith nor Promises, which they had often experienced to their
great Grief and Losses. So that in all probability it was like to be a War,
which also broke out with great Violence within a little time after. But
because I went for Bagdet at the same time (where in former Years the Potent
Caliphi did reside) I did hear no more of it in all my Journey until at my
return, when my Comrade Hans Vlrich Krafft of Vlm, then Prisoner in Tripoli,
did relate it to me, so as it was reported to him by Credible Hands; who told
me that the Trusci are very numerous, that they were divided into several
Regiments, of several colors, and that those that live in the middle of the
high Mountains were the most numerous of them all, that they live in a Country
that is very well secured and surrounded, so that they need not, nor will not
be subject either to the Turks or any other Potentate. They are Warlike People,
for the generality good Gunners, that make their own Guns and any other sorts
of Arms, etc. they have plenty of Corn, Oil, Wine, good Meat and good Fruit, so
that they need not any Assistance of Strangers. They chiefly deal in Silk,
whereof they wind (from Silkworms) about 100 Rotulas in a Year (which is about
450 Hundred weights) to send from thence into other Countries. These have their
white Colors, and their Confederates that live on the outward Hill toward the
Sea, at Baruti near Tripoli, have red ones, and have also their Colonel which
they call Ermin Mackfur, which also those that belong unto the white Colors
acknowledge to be theirs, as well as their own (which was lately murdered.)
This because he could not entrench himself as well as the other Trusci on the
Hill, agreed with the Great Sultan, and made Peace, upon this account, that if
he would let him live peaceably and quietly, he would help him to Protect the
Country, and pay unto him yearly the accustomed Tribute, but if the Grand
Signior would not be pleased with this proferr, he would join the rest and
assist them. The Emperor accepted of this, and did not only make this Ermin
Mackfur Lord of all Baruti and Seide, called Sidon, but did also procure him a
great and plentiful Yearly Revenue out of these Countries; thinking thus to
oblige him, to help him with his Trusci to subdue the others, not doubting but
that he might easily overcome these, when once the others on the Mountains were
killed. But they would not get up the Hill, but did proferr to the Turks, that
if their Men and the Moors would go up, they would be ready in the Valley about
Baruti, to cut off all that should fall into their hands. This Answer they gave
to the Sultan, only for Fashion's sake, for no Truscus kills the other. When
the Sultan saw that they would not bite one another, and that he was not like
to obtain any great matter from the Colonel, he did notwithstanding send up the
Bashaw, of Damascus with Six other Bashaws and Seventeen Sangiacks about Two
Hundred Thousand strong, both Foot and Horse well Armed, to subdue the
beforementioned Trusci which were about Sixty Thousand strong, to burn,
demolish and destroy their Towns, Villages, Houses and Plantations. After they
were come up to the Ascent Two Days Journey from Damascus, they found the Roads
so steep that no body could pass them on Horseback, for there was nothing to be
seen but rough and sharp-pointed Rocks. So they agreed to dismount, and to go
up to them on Foot, and so they took presently Six or Seven Villages (whereof
there is said to be Twenty Seven in all) but they found nothing in them but
some Women and Children and very few Men (the rest were got upon the Hills
where they had entrenched themselves) which were all cut in pieces, and the
Villages burnt.

The Turks and Moors thought themselves obliged, according to their Emperors
Command, to go on further, so they endeavored and got up higher, but could not
do any more harm to the Trusci, being hindered by the bad ways: But on the
contrary the Trusci met them sometimes and poured their Shot upon them from all
Sides, before they were aware of it, so that they were but in an ill Condition.
Then when the Turks would pursue these Men, they were too quick for them, as
being born and bred in these Mountains; so they did only laugh at them, and bid
them kiss their Breeches: So the Turks (partly for want of Provision, partly
being tired by the steep Roads) were sometimes forced, not without great damage
and loss of their Men, to retire again to take better Measures. Sometimes also
the Trusci would stand between the Rocks covered and when they found any of
their Enemies appear, chiefly those that endeavored to climb up the Rocks,
they would all of a sudden shoot among them as among a Flock of Pigeons, so
that many of them did precipitate themselves and broke their Necks. They would
also sometimes decoy the Turks into a good Road and after Eight or Ten Thousand
of them were passed, they would with Six Thousand Trusci fall in the Rear of
them, to drive them up higher, where others soon did appear that came down upon
them: so they surrounded them sometimes, and received them so warmly, that but
very few of them came back again to tell what was become of the rest. After
this War had continued for about two Months, the Bashaw at last was forced to
make a shameful Retreat with the Remainder of his Forces, and that so much the
sooner because the Winter began to approach, so that it was impossible to
endure the Frost and Snow, which occasioned many to die, and the chiefest of
them came home sick.

The Trusci pretend to be Christians, and the Posterity of those that some
Years ago by Might and Strength recovered the Holy Land; so that still to this
Day, they have a great Affection for Christians, which those that travel among
them to buy Silks can testify, whom they treat and entertain very civilly with
good Meat and good Wine, yet refuse to take any Money for it: And say, That
what God has given them they are bound to distribute among us Christians. But
they hate Mahometans and Jews, and keep very good Intelligence with the
Christians of this Country. Yet they themselves are neither Christians, Turks,
Moors nor Jews: For they do not go to Mass, nor any other public Worship of
God: They cry out sometimes to Heaven that God would be pleased to protect
them. They also believe, according to the Opinion of Pythagoras, that the Souls
of the deceased according to their Merits, transmigrate from one Body into
another; That the Soul of a pious Man goes into a newborn Child, and that of
an ill Man into the Body of a Dog or other wild Beast; chiefly if he has lived
very ill. As they believe so they live also. Among them they marry to their
nearest Relations, the Brother to his Sister, the Son to his Mother, the Father
to the Daughter, and they lie all together at Night, but they will not marry
into a strange Family. The Father or the Mother says, Seeing that God has
given me this Child as a Seed unto me, why should I throw it away upon a
Stranger? or else, I have a Garden, and God gives me Flowers in it, is it not
reasonable, that I should enjoy them rather than a Stranger? etc. they make use
of a great many of these and the like Expressions. They also keep a Yearly
Feast with their Wives which then they change one with the other as they
please. Else they are not given to stealing, killing, or any such like Crimes
(because they want for nothing) but if any be taken that has thus transgressed
he is executed immediately. So they live in Peace together, and care not for
any other Monarch.

The End of the Second Part.
THE THIRD PART OF Dr. Leonhart Rauwolff 's TRAVELS INTO THE Eastern Countries.
Wherein is chiefly Treated of the Land of Promise, the City of Jerusalem, and
also of several Opinions, Beliefs and Errors of the Turks and Christians.
CHAP. I.
A Short Description of his Departure from Tripoli, a Town of Phenicia in
Syria, and how he went from thence to Joppa.

AFter my Return to Tripoli, when I found my self near to the Confines of
Canaan, the Land of Promise, promised and given to the Israelites by the Lord
of Zebaoth, and considered, that, our long before promised Messiah, Lord and
Savior of the Gentiles, was there, according to the Prophecies of the
Prophets, born in Bethlehem of the Virgin Mary, and by the Jews suffered the
shameful Death of Crucifixion at Jerusalem on the Mount of Calvaria, and
afterward was laid in the New Tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, that was cut out of
a Rock, etc. I found in me a great desire to see these and other the like holy
Places: Not that I thought still to find there Christ our Lord, as the two
young Men, Peter and John, and the three Mary's did, but to exercise my outward
Senses in the Contemplation thereof, that I might the more fervently consider
with my inward ones his bitter Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and
to appropriate to my self, and to apprehend the better, and to make my own, by
Faith* and firm Confidence, Christ our Lord himself together with his Heavenly
Gifts and Treasures, as he has manifested himself in the Holy Scriptures;
wherefore I was fully resolved to look out for Fellow-Travellers, to accompany
me in this Journey, before I returned home again. I staid not long in quest of
Company, but quickly met with four Pilgrims that came out of the Low Countries
that had the same intention: there also came to us a Grecian Monk, of the Order
of the Carmelites, whom I knew before when he lived with his Master, that I
cured of a very dangerous Distemper, and desired to go in company with us. So
we agreed together, and bespoke a small Turkish Vessel with eight Oars, by them
called Caramusala, whereof there were many in the Harbor, that wait constantly
for Travelers, Goods and Provision, to be carried into the Neighboring Towns
and Provinces, vix. to Antiochia, Caramania, anciently called Cilicia, Cyprus,
Baruthi, Caramania, or quite into Egypt. We bought some Bisquets, Cibets, Eggs,
Cheese, Pompions, which the Arabians call Baticcas, Margeropfel, Oranges, good
Wine, etc. which we had occasion of, for our Journey, of which as much as would
last us eight days: for the Ship-Masters, do not willingly land, chiefly with
Pilgrims, because of the great Customs the Roguish Turks demand unjustly from
us Christians, every where, until we arrive at our designed Stations.

After we had thus fitted our selves, and got a good Wind, we went aboard the
Ship on the Seventh of September, in the Year 1575, and put off, and came
before Night to the Point Capugio, to the Village Aniffe, anciently called
Neuphrus, which was in former Ages very well Fortified, as still appears by
some Remainders to this Day. This Village is pretty big, but every where open,
that one might easily take it with a handful of Men: it is situated on the Foot
of Mount Libanus, which is very high there, and reaches unto the Sea. It is
chiefly inhabited by Maronites, as are also many more Villages of this
Mountain, chiefly those that lie in Valleys toward Aleppo, where I have inned
many times, when I went through it, and was very kindly received: they keep
very good Wine by them, which the Turks know very well, and come there very
often for it (although they are forbidden by the Laws of their Mahumetan Alcoran)
to satisfy their Desire. These Maronites are Christians, and speak the Arabian
Language, and have their Patriarchs, which are first chosen by the People, and
then confirmed by the Pope. After we had went on from thence very well all
Night long, all along the steep mountainous Shore, and had made the utmost
Point of the Promontory of Baruthi, we saw in the morning a far off that famous
Town, lying behind it where formerly great Commerce has been drove, well
fortified with strong Towers toward the Sea, and surrounded with fruitful
Orchards and Vineyards. In this, and also in more adjacent Towns and Villages,
live a very Warlike People, called Trusci, very nimble and expert in shooting
with Guns and Bows, and call themselves the posterity of the ancient French
Men, which took and possessed many years agon under Godfrid and Baldwin,
Jerusalem and all the Land of Promise. They are still a Free People to this
Day, and not subject unto the Great Sultan, as others are; wherefore he has
many times attempted to bring them under his Yoke. And in order thereunto he
did send in the Year 1574 last past, a great Army consisting of Two hundred
thousand Horse and Foot, to subdue them; but what harm he did them I have
already mentioned in the precedent part of this Journal. They are very willing
to accommodate and serve Outlandish Christians, as Germans, French Men and
Italians, whereof they make no Difference, and to take them up into their
Habitations, and to show them all Civility and Kindness: nay, and what is more,
to assist them according to their utmost Power against the Common Enemy of
Christendom, as we have formerly found indeed, before Cyprus was taken by the
Turks: for after they were informed, that some Italian Galleys were to arrive
to make an Incursion into the adjacent Towns and Places, chiefly to plunder
Tripoli, they raised Seven thousand Men very well armed to help them, and to
come to their Assistance, some of which did then appear and show themselves on
the Frontiers: but finding that their Galleys did not arrive, they also
returned home again, and left their Design unaccomplished. The Trusci have a
Head called Ermin Macksur, that is a judicious Man, and a very experienced
Soldier, whom they acknowledge to be their Supreme Governor, and are obedient
to him: he lives in a Castle on the bottom of the Mountain, not far from the
Town we went by; he takes great pains, chiefly now after the Turkish War, and
makes great Provision to keep the Country in Peace and Security. He also
keeps good Correspondence with the Neighboring People, chiefly the
Maronites, (that have lived long before in these Mountains) with whom he has
lately renewed the old Confederacy again, as I know very well, and their
Patriarch himself was with him, before I was called to cure him of his
Distemper. He also leaves no Stone unturned to get in with others, and to make
them his Confederates: so he has already secured to himself the Syrians (which
are also Christians, yet not without gross Errors) by paying to them a yearly
Pension. These speak also Arabic, and are very like unto them in Shape,
Manners, Fashion and Clothes; and I sound two of them among our Seamen, that
confirmed this to me.

After we had gone on a great while, and were passed by the Point of the
Promontory of Baruti, which extends it self far into the Sea, our Ship-Master
(who was a Turk, and understood the Arabian Language) showed me a Village lying
beyond it, called Burgi, and told me, that that was also inhabited altogether
by Harani Quibir, that is great Robbers and Murderers, as they always call
these People. But I being better informed beforehand, I prayed by my self that
God would be pleased to let the poor Slaves that live in hard Servitude under
the Turks, who were these they call Harani: and I do not at all question, but
they would soon take their Refuge to them, to make themselves free of their
Servitude, as those might easily do, that live about these Countries in Syria.

We saw also upon the Shore some ancient Towers, and among them chiefly two,
which are renewed again, wherein the Trusci keep Watches to observe the
Pirates, but the others, whereof there are a great many, not above a League
distant from one another, are for the greatest part by Age decayed. Some say
that they were formerly built by the potent Emperors, that if any Nation should
rise up in Rebellion, they might immediately give notice thereof to
Constantinople. These gave notice, before Guns were invented, in the Night by a
flaming Fire, and by Daytime by a great Smoke. And they still keep to this in
many places, although Guns are now invented.

In the Afternoon we were becalmed, and so our Journey went on but slowly, we
saw late at Night a small Village called Carniola upon the height: and soon
after at the Foot of the high Mount of Libanus, Southward of the City of Sidon,
by the Inhabitants still called Scida, which is not very great, but as far as I
could see, very well built, and defended by two Castles, one whereof is
situated toward the North on a high Rock, the other on a little Hill Those
that are going to Saphet, which is a Days Journey distant from it, land there.
Before we could reach it, Night befell us, and brought contrary Winds, which
hindered us so much, that we could hardly reach the glorious and rich Town of
Tyrus, now by the Inhabitants called Sur, which lies in a manner close to it,
until the next Morning. This is still pretty large, and lies on a Rock in the
Sea, about Five hundred Paces distant from the Shore of Phenicia. In former
Ages Alexander the Great did besiege it for Seven Months, and during the Siege
he filled up the Straight of the Sea, and did join it to the Continent, and
after he had taken it, he laid it into Ashes, so that Punishment was inflicted
on the Inhabitants which the Prophet Esaias denounced against them Four hundred
years before.

On the Confines of Tirus and Sidon, that Cananean Woman came to Christ on
behalf of her Daughter, that was possessed of an unclean Spirit, whereof the
Lord, seeing her Faith, did deliver her immediately.

Just before it we heard a great noise of large running Springs, which rise
within the Country with so great a vehemence, that they drive several Mills.
Within a large distance from thence, we saw a very fine new House called Nacora.

Two Miles farther near Mount Saron within, Southward, we saw a large Village
called Sib, without it in the Sea round about were several Banks and Rocks,
behind which we hid our selves, the Wind being contrary, and staid for a more
favorable one; in the mean while, some of our Men got out among the Rocks to
catch Fish, and to find Oisters, where they also gathered so much Sea Salt,
that they filled up a great Sack with it.

Between this and Mount Carmelo, which are Eight Leagues distant, and run out a
great way into the Seas, lies almost in the middle thereof, as it were in a
Half Moon, the famous Town of Acon, anciently called Ptolemais, on a high Rocky
Shore, which some years ago, when Baldewin, the Brother of Gotefrid, first, and
Guidon after him, did possess themselves of the Holy Land, was not without
great Loss of many Men taken by them, from Saladine King of the Saracens in
Egypt, which had (after some obtained Victories) surrendered it self again a
second time, after a long Siege. This Town has very good Fields of a fertile
Soil about it, and is at this time, together with the Land of Promise and
others, to the great grief of the Christians) subjected under the Yoke and
Slavery of the Turkish Emperor.

The next Day, the Wind favoring us, we hoisted up our Sails, and got out at
Sea, with less danger to get before the Point of the Mountain: but our Design
was frustrated; for about Noon a contrary Wind arose, which did not only hinder
us in our Course, but violently drove us back again, so that we were forced to
have recourse to our old Shelter behind the Rocks again. After Midnight, when
it began to be calm, and another Wind arose, we put out two hours before Break
of Day, and went all along the Shore toward the Town Hayphe, formerly called
Caypha, or Porphyria, Four Leagues beyond Acon, lying just within Mount Carmel,
where on the Evening when we came very near it, several Frigates came out of all
sides to surround us. As soon as the Master of our Ship perceived them, he did
not like it, wherefore he let fall his Sails, and exhorted his Men to ply their
Oars warmly to get clear of them. When they saw they could not reach us, they
left their Design and went back; but we landed without on that Mount Carmelo,
to put out again in the Night. This Mountain is very high and famous in
Scripture; for we read in the Third Book of the Kings, and the Eighteenth
Chapter, that the holy Prophet Elias called before him upon the Hill the People
of Israel, the Four hundred and Fifty of Baal's Priests, and and the Four
hundred of Hayns, to chide them for their Idolatry: where also God heard him,
and consumed his Sacrifice by Fire that came down from Heaven; but the Priests
of Baal were not only not heard by their Idols, but killed as Idolaters near
the River Kison: and also in the Fifth of the Epistle of James: that after the
Heavens had been locked up for the space of three years and a half, Elias did
pray to God on this same Mount, and the Lord heard him, and let Rain fall down
upon the dry and barren Earth. From this Mountain, the (presumed) holy Order of
the Carmelites takes its Name, which was first there endu'd with several
Privileges, by Pope Innocent the Third, and Albert the Patriarch of Jerusalem,
in the Year 1205; and afterward when they were increased to a great number,
under pretense of greater Holiness, confirmed by the Name of the Brothers of
our Lady, by Pope Honorius the Third, in the Year 1226. These pretend to be
Followers of the Doctrine of Cyrillus, wear daily black girded Coats, and over
it, when they say Mass, white Monks Habit. Some years ago without doubt, have a
great many of this Order lived here about, as still to this day does appear by
their Cloisters and Churches, which by Age are so mightily decayed, that they
are left deserted, and uninhabited. This Mountain is also round about toward
the Sea Coast very bare and rough, that we may very well say with the holy
Prophet Amos, That the Pastures of the Herdsmen shall look miserably, and the
top of the Mountain dry up.

The Town Hayphe lies at the bottom of the Mount Carmelo, is pretty large, but
very ill Built, and the Houses are so decayed, that half of it is not fit to be
Inhabited. Salidinus King of the Saracens, who in his time carried on long and
heavy Wars against the Christians, and was almost hardly able to resist them,
caused the Walls of it, and also that of Caesarea in Palestina, and others of
less strength, to be pulled down, that his Enemies might not find any place of
Reception against him.

Out of this Port (as we are afterward informed) was a little time before
taken away a pretty large and richly Laden Ship, by some Pirates, which vexed
the Inhabitants very much, and being that the Christians chiefly were suspected
by them, they had a great desire to revenge it upon them again; so that we, had
not our Master been very honest, should have suffered for the loss they had
sustained.

After we had lain there at Anchor till after Midnight, not without danger, as
you must imagine, our Master made haste to get out to Sea, although it was very
calm, in hopes to get good Weather. After they had wrought very hard, a good
Wind arose behind us toward the Morning, and drove us along, so that we got
soon about, and passed the Point of the Mountain, and saw the Country of the
other side, which was above on the height so Pleasant, Green and Shady, that
there in a Village resides a Turkish Sangiach for Pleasure sake.

Not far from thence lies the Castle of the Pilgrims in the Sea, by the
Inhabitants called Altlit, where most of them touch that take their way through
Galilaea and Nazareth to Jerusalem. This has been in former Ages so well
Fortified with Walls and Bastions, that it was thought to be Impregnable; but
now it is on two sides toward the Sea, so demolished and destroyed, that one
may very reasonably guess, that it has been formerly taken by Storm.

The Wind still increasing more and more, we went on with such a swiftness,
that although two little Ships persued us toward Morning, yet they were forced
to leave us, and so we soon passed the Castle, and came toward Dor, three
Leagues distance from thence; it lies near Mount Carmel in the Country of
Phoenicia, as Josephus testifies; and it is so decayed that there is nothing
more extant, than a large and high Tower, which the Inhabitants still call
Dortaite. In this Country, when the Jews took Canaan the Land of Promise, they
let the Inhabitants remain, as you may read in the first Chapter of the Judges.

At a League distance from thence, you see the Ancient and Famous Town Caesarea
of Palestine, situated on the Sea on a high Bank, which King Herod did renew,
and called it after the Emperor Caesarea, which still to this day, among the
Turks and Moors, retains its ancient Name Kaesarie. In this Town did live the
Pious Centurion Cornelius, who was Baptized there with his whole Family by
Peter the Apostle (who was called thither from the Town Joppe): There did also
live Philip the Evangelist (one of the seven Deacons) into whose House the Holy
Apostle Paul did go, and staid there some days; where also the Prophet Agabus
did foretell him, That he was to be made a Prisoner at Jerusalem. Now although
this Town in those days was very well built, as one may still see by the
important and stately Antiquities that are still remaining there, yet now in
our times it is in Walls and Buildings so mightily decayed, that it is hardly
fit to be Inhabited, much less to be Defended, or to make any Resistance. And
for all that it is still pretty large, but so lonesom, and depopulated, that we
could hardly see any body in the large and broad Streets thereof as we passed
by.

For some Leagues before, or about it, I saw nothing remarkable, only a Turkish
Mosque, or Church, in the height upon a hilly shore, where tbey meet to Worship
their Mahumet.

When the Evening broke in, we had still 10 Leagues to Sail to the Port or
Harbor of Joppe (where the Pilgrims use to go ashore to Travel by Land to
Jerusalem) yet the Wind drove us on with such a force, that we got into it two
hours after Sunset.

CHAP. II.
A short Relation of my Travels by Land from the Harbor of Joppe, to the City
of Jerusalem.

IN the Morning early as soon as the day did appear, which was the 13th day of
September 1575, we got on shore, and dispatched immediately some to the Town of
Rama, two Leagues distant from thence, to get us a safe Conduct, or Pass, from
the Sangiach, and to bring along with them some Mockeri, or Ass-driving
Carriers, to provide us Carriage to Jerusalem. In the mean while we stayed upon
the high Rocky shore, where the Town Joppe did stand formerly, which at this
time was so Demolished, that there was not one House to be found, where the
Pilgrims at their arrival could shelter themselves, save only three large
Vaults, which went very deep into the Hill, and extended themselves toward the
Sea. Into these are sometimes the Pilgrims let in, but being that at that time,
a great deal of Corn was laid up there, whereunto they still daily added, on
purpose to supply Constantinople during the scarcity, it was forbidden that any
Body should be let in.

The Town Joppe, by the Inhabitants called Japha, is by its old Name very well
known to us, by the Books of the Prophets and Apostles, etc. where we Read.
That the Prophet Jonas (when the Lord bid him to Preach to the Ninevites
Desolation and Destruction) for fear did retire thither, and there took Ship,
where he was thrown out into the Seas in the great Storm and Tempest, and
swallowed up by a great Fish; and after he had been there for three Days and
Nights he was vomited out again. And we read also in the Acts of the Apostles,
in the 9th and 10th Chapter, from Peter the Apostle, That he lay (or tarried)
for a while at the House of Simon the Tanner, where he raised the Sister
Tabitha from the Dead, etc.

Joppe at that time was very well Built and Fortified, which does appear,
because a good many of the Jews did, at the time of the Desolation of
Jerusalem, retire thither, to defend themselves against the Might of the
Romans, although it was but in vain; for being that the time of the punishment,
that was to befall them, was at hand, the City therefore was two several times
one after another, besieged and taken, and demolished, and as Josephus
testifies, about 12600 Jews were killed in it. We also read, That after the
time of Gotfrid de Boullion, when the Christians lost again the Land of
Promise, that then this Town also was retaken again by the Infidels, and razed
to the Foundations; so that now there are no Antiquities at all to be seen. And
I should have doubted very much whether there did ever stand such a Town there,
had not I seen some large pieces of the Ancient Town Walls still remaining,
which are so near to the Sea, that there is hardly room to go at the outside of
them.

Hard by this I suppose was the Habitation of Simon the Tanner, where Peter
sojourned, because the Evangelist St. Luke says, That it was near to the Sea
shore.

Above it on the height stand two Towers, where some Watchmen attend to look
after the Vaults and Ships in the Harbor, that they may not be assaulted by the
Pirates; this Harbor, although it is surrounded with Rocks and Banks, yet it is
but very slightly secured, and very narrow and shallow, so that Ships of any
great bulk, or heavy Laden, cannot ride in it.

Near to them growth the Hemerocallis, which I have also found about Montpelier
and Aigemort near to the Sea. And also in the adjacent Moist and Mashy Meadows,
I found a delicate kind of Limonium which has about ten or twelve Aspleniun or
Ceterach Leaves on both sides; these proceed from a long Root of a brown color
without, and red within; between them sprout out two three-square Stalks, about
a Cubit high, with a great many Joints, that have three long small Leaves, and
are adorned at the top with beautiful and stately blue and purple colored
Flowers; they are of a dryish Nature, and the Inhabitants use to eat them in
Sallads.

Presently after Dinner our Men returned, and brought along with them the Pass
and the Carriers; our Master of the Ship left some of the Crew in his
Caramusala to look after it in our absence: We Mounted and went away, and came
soon into the plain Fields where Jonathas slew Apollonius the Captain, as is
said in the 1st of Maccabees the 10th Chapter.

Soon after we saw a pleasant Village called Jasura, and when we came a little
nearer, a Camp of a great Turkish Lord, who sent (as soon as he espied us on
the Road, and found that we were Pilgrims) some of his Men to us, to call us
before him, and also to tell us, That he was one of them to whom the Grand
Sultan had given Charge of the Temple, and the Mount Calvaria, with strict
order to let no Pilgrim in before they had paid a certain sum of Money. So we
went along with them, and appeared before him in his Tent, put our Right Hand
on our Breast, bended our selves forwards, and made him (according to their
Custom) his Compliments. After he had looked upon us a great while, he bid his
Men to receive the Money of us; so each of us paid him Nine Ducats that had
their full weight, except the Grecian who paid only Five, and at their Request
we staid with them all Night, because their Master intended to send a Janizary
with us the next day, to let us into the Temple. This Lord, who was an Eunuch,
had a great many Offices; for in these Countries they are by the great ones, as
Bashaws, Sangiachs, Cadees, etc. so much esteemed, that in their absence they
make them Stewards over all their Goods and Chattels, Wives and Children, etc.

At that time he was there to gather great quantity of Corn from these fruitful
Countries, it being Harvest time, and to send it from thence to Joppe, to go by
Sea for Constantinople.

After Midnight we mounted again, and came early in the Morning to the Town
Rama, and went into the House of the Pilgrims, which Philip Duke of Burgundy
bought, and gave it to the Pilgrims as their Inn. This is very large, and has
a great many Arched Chambers within, and a fine Well; within the Inner Court is
a pretty large place, all grown over with green Aloes, the Juice whereof is
brought over to us in large pieces, from the Eastern Countries, and is very
useful in many tedious Distempers: Nicodemus did also bring with him, (together
with) Myrrh to the quantity of 100 pounds, to the Grave of Christ our Lord, to
Bury his Body decently according to the Jewish fashion, as you may read in the
19th Chapter of St. John. Here we staid almost three days, and had all along
enough to do to agree with the Cadi Subashaw Clerks, Janissaries and Paityfs,
etc. about our free passage; so Unjust, Malicious, and Infidel a People are
they, that one would hardly believe it.

The Town is situated on an Ascent in plain Fields, as is before said, which
extend themselves for two Leagues to the Hill of the City of Jerusalem. These
Fields are very Fruitful, and very well Tilled and Sown with Corn, Cotton, and
Indian Millet. Hereabouts do also grow Indian Muskmelions in great quantity, by
the Arabians called Batiere, which are very pleasant and well tasted, chiefly
those that are red within: so that in all my Travels I hardly met with the like.

The Town is pretty large, but very open like unto a Village, very pityfully
built, where one may still see here and there some signs of old Building,

From thence Northwards within half a League lies the Town Diospolis, formerly
called Lidda, where Peter did visit the Saints, and cured one named Aeneas,
that had had a Palsy for Eight Years. Nothing else is to be seen there, but
the Church of St. George, whom the Turks chiefly honor, as a Knigt and Hero,
before all other Saints. After they had quite tired us, during this time, with
their continual Impertinencies, we agreed with them, and went away early in the
Morning, and came in good time over the Plain, to the Mountain of the City of
Jerusalem, to which we had still Four Leagues to travel. By the way there
appeared presently on the Mountains several Arabians, and ran before us in
great Clusters to cut us off in our way, with such violence, that we were
almost forced to come to our defense, and to push through them by force: for
our Janissaries had already flung their Iron Club into the Backside of one of
them, and had almost spoiled him. When they found us to be in earnest, they
took something to drink of us, and let us alone. So we must, before we arrived
at the old destroyed and ruinated Jerusalem, (where there is no Joy nor Hopes
to get any thing, as is in the Heavenly One) soon one after another pay them,
just like Boys that have lost their Game, and run the Gauntlet.

After we had endured all these Brushes, we went on, and came to the middle of
the way of the Mountains, where it was very rough and stony, into a small
Village called Anatoth, lying on a height, where we rested a little, and
watered our Beasts at a very rich Spring, that runs through it by an ancient
little Church down the Hill; this is situated (as Josephus writes in his Tenth
Book and Tenth Chapter of his Antiquities, or ancient History) within Twenty
Furlongs of Jerusalem. There was born the holy Prophet Jeremias, as you may see
in his First Chapter: and it is also called by Esaias a pitiful Village, which,
together with the Town Rama, did formerly belong to the Inheritance of the
Children of Benjamin. Thither went also Abiathar, when King Solomon did depose
or exclude him from his Priesthood, to live on his own Ground. A little before
it they showed us at the top of the height or Silo, of Mount Ephraim, some
Relicts of the Grave of the holy Prophet Samuel (where we could look about for
several Leagues round) which was of Rama^ha, or Arimathea, as also Joseph the
Just whom helped to take Christ down from the Cross* and did put him into his
own new Grave. The Town was underneath the Mountain where the Prophet Samuel
was buried at first, but carried up to Silo, after the Town was taken.

Just when you come to Jerusalem, Nicopolis lies on the Left Hand upon the
Height, formerly called Emmaus, from Jerusalem Threescore Furlongs distant, as
the Scripture tells us: whither Christ did accompany the two Disciples, and
explained the Scriptures to them, and at last made himself known to them. We
left it and went up to Jerusalem, which is now called Gotz by the Arabians and
Turks. The Road is very rough and rocky; so that we saw very little, but on
each side in the Valleys many delicate large Olive Trees, and some few
Vineyards.

The City lies on the height of the Mountains, as the 125th. Psalm
testifies. It is not to be seen, until you come over the bare and rough
Mountains intercepting the Prospect of it on this side.

Just before it without, on the top of Mount Gihon, are to be seen still some
Antiquities of the Town Helia, which Adrian the Emperor built after the
Desolation of Jerusalem, and called it after his own Name Helia. This was first
taken by Cosroe, King of Persia, in the time of the Emperor Heraclius (who did
overcome him again) and afterward by Homar the Third King of the Saracens, who
demolished it; afterward it was more contracted, and somewhat built again in
its old place. In these days it is, as well as all that Country, under the
Dominion of the Turkish Emperor.

Before it we dismounted, for no outlandish Man has permission to ride into
their Towns, and went under the Gate Hebron, to stay there for the Father
Guardian, to whom we had, by one of our Carriers given notice of our Arrival,
and also desired him to get us License from the Sangiach to come in. In the
mean time some Mendicant Friars came out of the Monastery, and received us very
kindly. Soon after the Ermin came also riding, with his Clerk, and asked us
from whence we came, how many there were of us, and what our Names were. And
after they had written it down, and every one had paid him his due (to have
safe conduct to see the holy Places) the Ermin promised it us, and put his
Right Hand upon his Head, (which is the fashion in these Countries) and bended
forwards to let us know that we might confide in his Promise. Then they let us
pass, and the Friars conducted us in, toward the Left Hand, through some small
Streets or Lanes, into the Monastery, which is behind on the Town-Wall toward
the West.

This, although it is not large and spacious, yet is it very handsome, and
strong-built: we went into lodge there as all Pilgrims do that come there,
where Father Jeremy of Brixen, a Brother of the Order of the Minorites of St.
Francis, a Guardian of the holy Mount Zion, (which had been President of this
Monastery of Jerusalem, and of the other of Bethlehem for Eighteen Years
together) received us very kindly. There are but very few Monks in it, and they
are of all sorts of Nations, as Italians, Spaniards, French and Germans, yet of
the last named I found not one when I arrived there. These lead the Pilgrims
about, together with an Interpreter, or Truschemant, that understands the
Arabian and Turkish Language, and show them the holy Places as well within as
without the City. But before we went out the Father Guardian admonished us,
that we must have a care, and not go to the Graves of the Heathens, which are
almost throughout Turkey without the Towns, near to the Highways: for if one or
more should, before he was aware of it, which may easily happen, go to them,
the Turks would be very much offended at it, partly because they take any one
that is not circumcised, to be unclean, and so they fear that they might make
them also unclean: partly because they are very jealous of their Wives,
wherefore they permit them not easily to walk or appear in the open Street,
except they have a mind to go into the Bath or Pagnio, or to visit the Graves
of their deceased Parents or Relations: and where Women are present, every one
had best to come away, to avoid Danger.

After he had said this, he went on saying, That if any should be among us,
that were come over the Sea hither, that could not bring very good proof, that
they did appear before his Holiness the Pope at Rome, and were there absolved
by him, that such were in his Holinesses Excommunication, and therefore could
not be admitted to see those holy Places, much less obtain the Indulgences,
which in former Ages had been left with them, out of great kindness of the
Popes, to be distributed among the Pilgrims, wherefore he desired, that every
one might show him their Certificates. All these Points he used to propound to
every one that comes there, in course, as I had heard before of several that
had been there formerly; that they were very glad to see Pilgrims arrive, and
that they used to show the holy Places to them also that bring no
Recommendation from his Holiness the Pope, hoping, that they will recompense
them at their Departure. Wherefore I did not much mind this Excommunication,
but let that remain in its ancient Credit: but my Comrades, two whereof were
Priests that used to say Mass, were very much astonished at it, and full of
Trouble, that they should be under his Holiness's Excommunication before they
were aware of it: wherefore they began to excuse themselves, and said, That
they did not know any thing of it, neither had they had any opportunity in
their Travels to come to Rome: But although this had been omitted before their
Arrival, yet they would certainly do it as they went back. Notwithstanding all
this the Guardian seemed to be very earnest, and made show as if he could not
absolve them; yet at last, after he had long enough kept them in this fear, he
began to declare, that he had also received full power from his Holiness and
the whole Roman Catholic Church, to absolve all those that did not bring any
Certificates. And so at last absolved us in the Cloisters of his Monastery in
Latin with these Words: I absolve you of all your Sins in the Name of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. And with this he concluded his Speech.

CHAP. III.
A Plain Description of the City of Jerusalem, as it was to be seen in our
time: and of the adjacent Countries.

THE Glorious and Kingly City of Jerusalem (which formerly the Saracens called
Kurzitadon, but now is named Chutz, by the Inhabitants) is still situated in
the old Place, in the middle of Judea on the high Mountains, and as the Head is
extolled above the rest: which may be concluded, partly because from thence you
may see all the the Country as from a Center: partly also because the Springs
rise here, and so run down, as from a higher place, every way and to every part
thereof; as the holy Prophet Ezekiel does testify in his Fourteenth Capter,
where he says: That at that time fresh Streams shall flow from Jerusalem, half
thereof to the Sea toward the East, and the other half toward the furthest
Sea. There are also many other places of Scripture, that Though Jerusalem might
be situate in the highest part of Judea, yet are not the following places of
the Scripture a sufficient proof of it. For because it was the Capital, and
supreme Town, in regard of Greatness, Multitude of People, Strength,
Jurisdiction, and other Privileges, tho its site were not higher than that of
other Towns, yet might People well enough be said to go up thither, it being
highest in respect of Dignity, tho not of place. So we make no scruple to say
in common speech, that whosoever travels up to London, goes up thither; and
whosoever travels from thence, goes down into the Country, let his Habitation
be never so much higher situate then London. Yet was Jerusalem situate on a
Hill, which is enough to verify all those Expressions, tho that Hill were not
the highest in Judea.
testify the high Situation of Jerusalem, as in the Eighth Chapter of the
Acts, Verse 26. where the Angel of the Lord spoke unto Philip, saying: Arise
and go toward the South, unto the way that goes down from Jerusalem unto
Gaza, etc. And in the Tenth Chapter of St. Mark, and the Thirty second Verse:
And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem. And the Tenth Chapter of St.
Luke, Verse 30. A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho. And Verse
31. And by chance there came down a certain Priest that way, etc.

The Situation of Jericho, together with the great Plains thereabout, through
which the Jordan runs from the North toward the South, together with the Dead
Sea, where formerly Sodom and Gomorrah stood, you see from the Town, over a
barren Hill, below so plainly, that one would think we might go thither with
ease in three Hours, and yet it would require a whole Days Journey. Beyond the
River that separateth Arabia from Judea, lie the high Hills Abarim and Nebo
over against Jericho, whence Moses, (as is said Deuteronomy the 32d. and 34th.
Chapters) had a full Prospect of the Land of Canaan, promised to Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob; one may see them thence so plainly, as also the Mount Seir, which
touches them beyond the Dead Sea, in the Land of the Moabites and Ammonites,
that one would also think they were very near.

They bring yearly a vast quantity of Sheep to Jerusalem from off the
Mountains, which feeding upon the fragrant, delicate and hearty Herbs that grow
there, have Meat that tastes very pleasantly, the Tails thereof are very fat,
above half a span thick, and one and a half broad and long. The Levitical
Priest (as we read in Leviticus the Ninth Chapter, and other places) used to
burn this together with all the Fat of the Entrails, and the two Kidneys for a
Sin-Offering.

There are also Goats, with hanging Ears, almost Two Foot long. And therefore
some Arabians, called Balduini keep in the Deserts, that have no certain Abode,
but lie continually in the Fields, and go from Country to Country in great
numbers, wheresoever they find good Pasture for their Beasts and Camels. I have
met with many of them in my Travels, and have some time stayed with them all
Night in their Tents, they are commonly Soldiers armed usually with Bows and
Long-Pikes made of Cane, as the other Arabians, and because of their Nimbleness
and Courage they are very much preferred before the rest.

This holy Land (which, according to the Promise made to the Patriarchs, was
for many years in the possession of the Israelites) was (as you read in
Deuteronomy, Chap. 8.) a most fruitful and rich Country, abounding with Corn,
Fruits, Wine and all that is required to the maintenance of Man's Life. So the
Lord himself says, That he will give them a Land, that still flows with Milk
and Honey. For it has rich Valleys, Hills, Fields, and Gardens, richly adorned
with Fountains and Trees* so that it was very well chosen to be the worldly
Paradise, wherein Adam and Eve did live, honor and serve God. Now as the Land
in its Goodness surpassed other Lands, so did Jerusalem excel all other Cities
in Building, Glory, Fortification, and Number of Inhabitants. Moreover God
visited the Israelites from the beginning, and had a House built in this City
for himself, which he chose before all others to sanctify his Name there. And
above all this he provided them with High Priests, Kings and Prophets, until
God the Father did send his only Begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ in the
Flesh, to reveal to them his Will with Teaching and Miracles.

But when they would not acknowledge his merciful Visitation, nor receive his
Messengers, but did rather abuse, ridicule, and kill them, rejected the Lord of
Glory himself, and adhered to, and adored strange Gods, and served them; God
did reject and disperse them among the Heathens burnt and destroyed their City
and Temple, and reduced their fruitful Country into barren Deserts, and a
desolate Wilderness, and so the Punishment came upon them, which the holy
Prophet Esaiah did foretell them in the Thirteenth Chapter, and 9th. Verse,
saying, Behold the day of the Lord comes, cruel both with wrath and fierce
anger, to lay the land desolate; and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out
of it. And further in the Twenty fifth Chapter, and Second Verse, Thou have
made of a City a heap; of a defenced City a ruin; a place of Strangers to be
no City, it shall never be built. And Daniel also makes mention of this in his
Ninth Chapter, etc. This ought to serve us and all Men as an Example of the
fervent Anger of God, to be a warning to us for ever. For if of the Glorious
City of Jerusalem, which God had chosen before others, and of its vast
Buildings, that made her famous before her Desolation, there is at this Day
nothing at all to be seen, so that one might very well doubt, whether it ever
stood there, were it not for some holy places, and its situation, that give us
demonstration thereof. If I say this worldly Jerusalem, because of its
unbelieving Inhabitants, that would not acknowledge the Blessed Messiah, nor
adhere to his Doctrine to their Salvation, is quite rooted out; and instead
thereof, the way of the Heavenly Jerusalem opened to us Heathens, by the holy
Apostles: How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? This way to our
Lord Christ, has for many years past, been showed us sincerely by the
Ministers of the holy Word of God, but we do not only, not much care for it,
but seek rather other by ways, that lead us to Idolatry, Sin and Vices nay, to
our utter ruin. Wherefore it is to be feared, that if we do not repeat in
time, and return to God again, that he will come upon us with his wrath (as he
has already begun) and deliver us up into the Hands of our Adversaries, that
we may fall by their Swords (as Ezekiel does threaten us in his Thirty ninth
Chapter,) and to punish us according to the Deserts of our Sins. Wherefore we
ought to lay to heart the terrible Example of the Jews, and turn from our evil
ways, that we may avoid the Punishments that befell them. We see that those who
were formerly the People of God, are now come to be so blind, and full of
Errors, and of so depraved a Life, that there is hardly any like them to be
found even among the Infidels and Impious. Wherefore they are by all Men
despised and hated, chiefly by the Turks (which hate them more than any other
Nation) so that they would not let them live among them, if the Turkish Emperor
had not for a great Sum of Money given them a peculiar freedom. And besides all
this, now adays, their Towns and Countries are inhabited by Turks, Moors, and
Arabians, that do not love to till or cultivate the Ground, but will rather
starve, than take pains to get a good Livelihood by their Hand-Labour. And
although the Country about Jerusalem is very rocky, rough, stony, and ill
managed, yet notwithstanding they will not endeavor to mend and improve it,
but find out the fruitful Lands that are here and there, and overrun the
Country like Grasshoppers, so that you may observe it yearly to decay more and
more. Seeing then that there is but little Tillage about the City, therefore
the product of the Earth there is but very small, so that they must have almost
all Necessaries brought them from other places.

The Town of Jerusalem which is still pretty large; but very ill built, has
within its Walls (which the Turkish Emperor caused to be built about Twenty
Years ago) large places that lie desolated, and are so full of Stones and
Rocks, that one can hardly walk in them. The Gardens (even those that are
within the City, and are but ill managed) are surrounded with Mud Walls, not
above Four Foot high, so that one may climb over them without any difficulty.
These are washed down again by Rain in a very little time, so that they want
mending continually.

Their Habitations are also little and and low, have Clay-Walls, and many of
them are decayed, some lie quite in a heap. The Churches of the two Apostles,
that of St. John and St. Peter are in the same Condition, as also the Prison
where St. Peter was kept, the Habitation of Veronica (which the Cordeliers show
us for them) and a great many places more. In some Streets chiefly near to
their Bazar, or Exchange, are very old Vaults, part whereof are decayed and
broken, part filled up with Dust, which runs out into the Streets: wherefore
(chiefly in the Summer) the Dust lies so thick in them, that you may see every
step in it, as in Snow or Sand.

All which shows, that the Turks destroy or ruin more than they build;
wherefore they are deservedly called Turks, that is to say, Destroyers. The
present Town, as to the Extent of its Walls, is not much less than the old one
was, wherefore one should admire, considering how it is built now, how it was
possible it should hold so many People as it is said were in it at the time of
its Desolation, viz. a Million of Men, or as Josephus and Eusebius say, Three
Millions. Jerusalem was formerly surrounded with very steep Cliffs, deep
Ditches and Valleys, chiefly on three Sides, toward the South, East and West,
so that one could not easily get up to it but only on the North Side, where the
Town was low, lying in a Plain: therefore did Titus first attack it in a place
near the Village called Scapas, Seven Miles distant from it, and afterward
advanced and took it: which the holy Prophet Jeremiah did foretell many years
before, in the First Chapter and Twelfth Verse, saying, Out of the North an
Evil shall break forth upon all the Inhabitants of the Land.

These Ditches and Valleys are now quite filled up with the Ruins of the broken
Walls and Buildings, so that one may go into the Town, as into an open Village,
without any hinderance or pain. But when the Grand Signior, after he had taken
it, saw that the Town was open, and that the Christian Pilgrims came thither in
great numbers from all places and Countries, he feared that they might make
themselves Masters of it again, as they had done some years agone, wherefore he
ordered it to be surrounded again with new Walls, which although they are very
high, yet they are so thin and slight, that they are not able to withstand the
least violence. But as the Town was anciently built four square, so it is now
built more round, chiefly toward Mount Calvaria, which formerly was without
the Town, but now is Walled in; so that you may still see two corners, one
whereof is toward Galilee, where the Gate of that corner is, which is still
open, and almost one of the handsomest, through which you go to Nazareth,
distant three days Journey; as also to Caesarea Philippi, which is now called
Balbec, where still are to be seen some very fine Antiquities; and also toward
Damascus, which is six days Journey distant from Jerusalem, and from thence 6
days Journey more to Aleppo, the greatest Town for Trade in all Syria. Jeremiah
makes mention of this Gate in his 31st Chapter and the 38th Verse, Behold the
days come, says the Lord, that the City shall be built to the Lord, from the
Town of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner. And also Zacharias, in his 14th
Chapter, and in the 2d Book of Chronicles, the 26th Chapter, and 9th Verse; It
is said Vzzia built Towers in Jerusalem, at the Corner-Gate, and at the
Valley-Gate, etc. The second corner Mount Zion makes, where it does end toward
the South, whereon, as also on the Mount Moriah, the City is rising toward the
North. The old City had twelve Gates, as you read in the Revelation. The 1st,
the Fish-gate, which was also called the Gate of Hebron, because the Road of
Hebron went through it, which is about seven or eight hours walking distant
from it. 2. The Old-Gate. 3. The Prison Gate, whereof Nehemiah makes mention
in his 12th Chapter, through which our Savior Christ carried his Cross. 4.
Rayn-Gate. 5. The Gate of Ephraim, before which St. Stephen was Stoned to
Death, as you may read in the 2d Book of the Ecclesiastical History in the 1st
Chapter. 6. The Gate of Benjamin, where the holy Prophet Jeremiah was taken and
Imprisoned, as he says himself in the 37th Chapter. 7. Corner Gate, 8.
Horse-Gate. 9. Valley-Gate, through which they went into the Valley of
Josaphat. 10. Dung Gate, through which the Water carried out all the Soil into
the Valley of Josaphat; and about this River is still to this day a great
stink. 11. Sheep-Gate. 12. Fountain-Gate, which is now Walled up. The Prophet
Nehemiah makes mention of them, in his 3d, 8th, and 12th Chapter, so that it
is not needful to say any more. These Gates are so mightily decayed, that there
is not to be seen the least of the old Buildings. The Turks have instead of
them, built others in the New raised Wall, but yet not half so many in number,
whereof some (according as the Town is enlarged in some places, and contracted
in others) are displaced; others are erected again in the same places,
according to the Old Streets, viz. 1. The Fish-Gate, which is still standing
toward the West behind Mount Sion, and over against Mount Gihon, as you may
conclude out of the words of the 2d Book of Chronicles, in the 33d Chapter, and
14th Verse. Manasses built a Wall without the City of David, on the West Side
of Gihon, in the Valley even to the entering in at the Fish-Gate. This Gate has
its Name, because they brought many Fishes from the Seaside through this Gate
into the City. So is also still standing, on the outside of the Valley
Tiropaeon (which distinguished the two Mounts, Sion, and the Temple Mount
called Moriah) the Gate of the Fountain, which has its Name because it leads
toward the Fountain of Siloha, which Nehemiah in his 2d Chapter, Verse 14,
calls the Kings Pool. Through this was our dear Lord Christ, the true
promised Siloha, brought a Prisoner bound from the Mount of Olives, over the
Brook Kidron, into the House of Hannas and Caiphas in the upper Town, as we
read in the 12th Chapter, Verse 37. that by the Fountain-Gate they went up to
the City of David. The same way also the two Disciples, Peter and John, were
sent to bespeak the Paschal Lamb, by Christ, where they met the Man with the
Pitcher of Water.

The Sheep, or Beast-Gate, is also still standing by Moriah, the Mountain of
the Temple, which the Turks have taken to themselves, and have built on it a
Turkish Mosque, or Temple, because that God Almighty has done many and great
Miracles on this Mount; and besides Mahumet did find himself again on this
Mount, after he had been carried up (as his lying Writings tell us) through the
Heavens before God by the Angel Gabriel. Wherefore they take this Mount to be
Holy, so that none that is not Circumcised, and so Unclean, dare approach or
come near it, nor take the nearest way without, over the height of the Mount,
as Nehemiah did, as you may see in the before quoted place; so that the
Christians must take a further way about, and from the Gate Siloha, go below
through the Valley of the Brook Cedron, between this and the Mount of Olives,
to the Beast-Gate, which has its Name because the Beasts that were to be
offered in the Temple were driven through it.

Near the Gate you see still the Sheep-pond, which is large and deep, yet has
but little Water in it, wherein the Nathineens used to wash the Beasts, and
then to give them to the Priests. And also immediately within toward the North
a Conduit, which was the Pool by St. John the Evangelist, in the 2d Verse of
his 5th Chapter, called Bathesda, erected by King Ezechia; that had five
Porches, wherein lay a great multitude of impotent folk, that waited for the
moving of the Water. Through this Gate is the straight way over the Brook
Cedron, by the Mount of Olives toward Bethania, down to Jericho, on the River
Jordan, into the Valley of Josaphat, wherefore this also (being nearer now in
these days) is called the Valley-gate.

There is also still the Corner-gate in its old place, where the North and East
Walls meet on large and high Rocks, and (...) called still by some the Gate of
Naphthali.

This I thoug^ convenient to say of the City of Jerusalem in the g^ner^ of its
Buildings, Fruitfulness, and adjacent Countries; what Famous and Holy Places
are within and without the City, thereof I intend to treat in particular.

CHAP. IV.
Of Mount Sion, and its Holy Places.

MOunt Sion, very famous in holy Scripture, has round about it steep sides,
high Rocks, deep Ditches and Valleys, so that it is not easy to climb up to
it, only on one side toward the North, where it buts upon the lower Town, so
that the Castle and Town of David, situated on it, was very strong, and almost
Invincible, as you may read in the 48 Psalm, verse. 2. The joy of the whole
earth is Mount Sion, on the sides of the north, the City of the great King. God
is known in her places for a refuge, for the Kings were assembled, etc. Seeing
then that the Castle, and the upper Town Millo, was so well fortified with
Towers and Walls that it was not easily to be taken, the Jebusites (after
that Canaan the whole Land of Promise, together with the Town of Jerusalem
was taken) did defend themselves in it against the whole force of Israel for
a long time, although they often attempted to take it, and called the Town of
Jerusalem after their Name Jebus, until the Kingly Prophet David came, who
took it by force; and after he had rebuilt the upper Town, and joined the
Castle with it into one Building, and surrounded it with Walls, he called it
after his own Name, The City of David, and kept his Court there, and gave also
Lodgings to his Hero's and Officers, whereof Vriah was one, who had his
Lodgings near to the Kings Palace, wherein the King vvalking on the Roof of
his House, savv the fair Bathsheba his Wife, and committed Adultery with her.

These their Habitations, as they are still built in these Days, have instead
of Thatch or Tiles, plastered Roofs, so that one may walk on them, as you may
see here, that King David walked on it. And also in the Second Chapter of the
Book of Joshua, where is said, That when the Two Spies, sent into the Land of
Promise to Jericho, came into Rahab's House, and the King sent to search after
them, they went at her request up to the Roof of the House, where she hid them
with the Stalks of Flax, which she had laid in order upon the Roof. But seeing
there is nothing so strong in in this World that is not transitory, therefore
is also this Worldly Mount Zion, together with its strong Building and
Fortification (which was rather a Type of the true Rock in Zion, Christ our
Lord, and his Heavenly Kingdom, and Holy Church that was built thereon) so
ruined and desolated, that the greatest and highest part thereof before the
Town, (except a Turkish Mosche, some Tile Houses and a few Acres of it) lies
quite like a Desert, covered with Rocks and Stones. So it is come to pass, what
Micah in his Third Chapter and the Twelfth Verse predicted: Therefore shall
Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and
the mountain of the house, as the high places of the forest. And Jeremiah in
his Lamentations, Cap. 5. Verse 18. says, The mountain of Zion, which is
desolate, the foxes walk upon it. And Isaiah in his Thirty second Chapter,
Verse 14. The Palaces shall be forsaken, the multitude of the City shall be
left, the forts and towers shall be dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a
pasture of flocks.

The great Castle of the Turks is situated at the top of the inward part of the
Mount, toward the West Side near the Fishgate, which is also newly built, and
very well surrounded with Walls and Ditches: under the Gate are several great
Guns to frighten the Christians that come thither in great Flocks, chiefly
against great Feasts from all Nations, Armenians, Georgians, Abyssins,
Latinists, etc. for they fear that else the Town might be taken from them again.

Within the Fort near the Fishgate, is still a strong high Tower, built up with
great Freestone, which is quite black through Age: wherefore some say, that it
did anciently belong to the Fort, and was built by one of the Kings of Juda.

So much I thought convenient to mention of Mount Zion, concerning other famous
places that are to be seen upon and about it, I will only mention the chiefest
thereof.

First as you go out of the New Gate of Mount Zion, there is a long Street
wherein on the Left Hand is an ancient Church, of the holy Apostle James the
Greater, Brother of John, which Helena the Mother of Constantine the Emperor,
as also many more, did build on the Market Place of the upper City where he was
beheaded. The Armenians that have possession thereof, did conduct us into it,
showed us the Building, and the place where the holy Apostle was beheaded with
the Sword (as you read in the Acts of the Apostles, the 12th. Chapter) by Order
of Herod Agrippa, to whom he was delivered out of spite, as a seditious person,
by the High Priest Abiathar.

Then we came to the place of the Habitation of Hannas, whereto Christ our Lord
was first of all brought a prisoner, and bound (or fettered) wherein was
nothing observable, only a large Court, and in it an old Chapel, called the
Angels, which we soon left, and went out of the Gate of Mount Zion, to the
Habitation of Cayaphas, where we saw an Orange-tree planted in the place where
the holy Apostle Peter did warm himself when he denied our Savior the third
time: further within a Chapel, called St. Salvators, where, in former Ages was
the Place of the High Priest, where Christ was severely accused by Cayaphas,
and by his Servants mocked, spit upon, and beaten; wherein is an Altar, whereon
the great Stone of the Grave still lies, that stopped the Door of the
Sepulcher, which is very like unto the Rock of the Grave in its breaking. That
the Habitation of the High Priest was in the upper City Josephus does testify
in the Seventeenth Chapter of his Second Book of the Desolation of Jerusalem,
where he says thus: When the rebellious Jews, that had the lower Town in
possession with the Temple, did undertake to possess themselves also of the
upper Town, they did assault it with all might and power, and at last take it;
then they drove out the Soldiers, which had the Chief Priests and Men in power
with them, out of the upper Town, set the Habitation of Ananias the High Priest
on fire and burnt it.

Before this on the top of the Mount, stands on the Plain a large Church, which
the Franciscan Monks had not long ago in possession, and lived in it, wherefore
their Father did call himself a Guardian of the holy Mount Zion. But after that
the Turks did about Twenty years agon possess themselves of it, and kept it to
themselves, and made a Mahumetan Mosche of it; the Monks were forced to fly,
and take the Habitation where they now live instead thereof.

Of this Church or Mosche we saw only the outside of the Habitation of
Caiaphas, for no Christian is allowed to go into it. It was built many years
agon by Helena, Mother of Constantin the Emperor, as Nicephorus testifies in
the Thirtieth Chapter of his Eighth Book: wherein is also included the
Habitation the Disciples were locked up in for fear of the Jews: and also the
paved Dining Room (or Hall) wherein Christ with his Disciples did eat the
Passover; where he also washed their Feet, and sent the Holy Ghost after his
Ascension to them: where also James the Son of Alpheus, one of the Apostles,
was usually called James the L^ss; but it was not he that was Elected first
Bishop of Jerusalem, but James the Just, who was called the Lord's Brother, and
was none of the Apostles.
James the Lesser was Elected Overseer, and first Bishop of Jerusalem. In this
Temple (which is above a thousand paces distant from Golgotha, or the place of
a Scull) was for some time kept the Stone-Pillar, whereto Christ our Lord and
Savior was tied and whipped. Near unto this, in the place of the Palace of
Caiaphas, the same Queen Helena ordered a Church to be built for the Holy
Apostle Peter, and many more, whereof mention is made at large in the above
quoted place.

This Mount extends its self toward the South, out before the City, and has
on the other side where it is highest, other higher ones about it,
distinguished with Ditches and Valleys, viz. toward the West Mount Gihon, at
the bottom whereof Solomon was anointed King by the Priest Zadock and the
Prophet Nathan, as we read in the First Chapter of thr First Book of Kings:
upon this at the top toward the Road of Bethlehem, lies the Field of Blood,
in their Language called Hakeldemas that was bought for 30 Silver Pieces; to
bury the Pilgrims there, where you see still to this day here and there large
and deep holes, and one among the rest very big one, wherein are still to be
seen several whole Bodies lying by one another.

A deep Valley separates this Mount from Mount Zion, which begins at the
Fish-gate, and goes down to the Brook Cedron: in it is a Conduit by the upper
Pool called Asuia in the Third Chapter of Nehemiah, which is pretty large, yet
without any Water) which receives its Water from the high Spring of Gihon,
this was covered by King Hezekias, and laid down to the Town of David, as we
read in the Second Book of Chronicles, Chap. 32. The holy Prophet Isaiah, Chap.
7. Verse 3. mentions it, when she Lord said to him; Go forth now to meet
Ahaz, thou and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper
pool, in the path of the fullers field, etc. And in the Fourth Book of Kings,
in the Eighteenth Chapter, Verse Seventeen: The King of Assyria sent a great
host against Jerusalem, and when they were come up, they came and stood by the
conduit of the upper pool, which is in the high way of the fullers field.

Before Mount Zion, toward the South, at the other side of the Rivulet Kidron
lies the Mount of Transgression, in the Fourth Book of Kings, Chap. 23. called
Mashith: between this and Mount Olivet is a Valley, through which goes down
the Road by Bethania to Jericho, etc. This is higher and steeper than any
hereabout. There you see still some old Walls of the Habitation wherein the
Concubines of Solomon did live, after whom the King ran in his old Age; and
they did so possess him, that they turned his Heart from God Almighty after
their Gods, and so he did that that did not please the Lord God, as you may
read in the First Book of Kings, Chap. 11. Verse 4.

Underneath the Mount was the Valley Benhinnem, wherein the Kings of Jerusalem
did build a Temple to the Idol Moloch, and did worship him, viz. Solomon,
Achaz, Manasseh, etc. whereof we read in several places in the Holy Scripture,
Levit. xviii. 21. Thou shall not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to
Moloch. And also Jerem. vii. 30. And they have set their abominations in the
house which is called by my name to pollute it. And they have built the high
places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their
sons and their daughters in the fire, which I commanded them not, neither came
it into my heart, therefore behold, the days come, says the Lord, that it
shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the
valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in Tophet till there be no place. And
also 2 Chronicles. xxviii. 2. Ahaz made molten images for Baalim, and burnt incense
in the valley of the son of Hinnon, and burnt his children in the fire after
the abominations of the Heathen. The holy Prophet Amos does also make mention
of these abominable Idolatries in his Fifth Chapter; which Luke in the Seventh
Chapter, Verse Forty third of the Acts does thus explain: Ye took up the
Tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, etc. which the holy
Prophet calls Sicchuth and Chiun: But the Heathen called them Jupiter and
Saturn, the Devourer of Children, and so he is also painted. This Statue was
hollow within, of cast Brass, whereinto they did put the Children, and burnt
them alive, and did believe they served God in it, as Abraham when he would
sacrifice his Son Isaac: they had also Kettle Drums and other Musical
Instruments which they played on, that the Parents might not hear their
Children cry: wherefore Christ gave unto Hell it self, and its perpetual flames
the Name of the Valley Benhinnon, calling it Gehenna: to give us warning and
exhortation, that we hate false and abominable Idolatries, introduced contrary
to his Command, worse than the Devil himself.

Besides this there is little else seen hereabout, only above on the steepness
and highest part of the Mount many little Tents and Habitations, as if they
hung at it, which in these times are not inhabited either by Turks nor Moors:
in the Valley you see the Rivulet Kidron, where over they brought our Lord
Christ bound as a Prisoner, from Mount Olivet: this proceeds only from Rain
Water near to the place Gethsemane* and runs without by the Town from South to
West. Beside this Brook did King Asa burn the Images of Priapus, as Josias and
Hezekiah the Idols of Baal, all Incenses and Uncleanness that are found in
the Temple of the Lord.

Further toward the East, you see from the top of Mount Zion the Fountain and
Pool of Siloah below in the Valley, called by Josephus Tiropaean, which
divides this and the Temple Mount, and becomes to be very narrow between
them, and extends it self from the Rivulet Kidron toward the North to the
place of Skulls, where it grows so large again, that the lower Town of
Jerusalem (by Isaiah in his Tenth, and Zacharias in his Ninth Chapter, called
The daughter of Zion and Jerusalem) was situated therein. Out of which near to
the Gate of the Fountain of Siloha, which is now walled up) the way goes up to
the Gate of Zion into the upper Town, through which two our Lord Christ was
brought a Prisoner to the Houses of Hannas and Caiaphas.

This Valley has been since the Desolation so filled up, that no depth at all
appears in our Days; but only without the Fountain Gate by the Fountain
Siloah, that is very rich of water, where is still the Pool wherein the Blind
Man washed his Eyes (that were anointed with Clay and Spittle, St. John ix. 6.)
according to the Command of our Lord, and did see.

Just by it are still the two Hills whereof Josephus makes mention, with a
very steep Cliff, very rocky on both sides, one whereof toward the East
(called the Rock of the Pigeons) has a great Cave, out of which the Fountain
springs, and runs off immediately below through a Channel, that goes so strait
and smooth through the Rock, as if it had been made on purpose.

Near to this Fountain and Gate of Siloha, stood the Tower of Siloha, that
killed Eighteen Men, as we read in St. Luke, Chap. xiii.

Without between the Fountain and Stream of Kidron, they show a great
Mulberry-Tree, fenced in below, this stands in the place where the holy Prophet
Isaias was buried, whom the King Manasse ordered to be cut in pieces with a
wooden Saw, as being an Heretic.

This may suffice of Mount Zion, its situation and some adjacent places.

As we went about, and came to one of the places, the Monks did show the
Pilgrims in each of them, the Number of the Years for the Pardons laid there by
his Holiness, as in some Seven Years and Seven Indulgences, but in some others,
as in the place where the Holy Ghost was sent, where Christ did eat the
Passover with his Disciples, and washed their Feet, and where he at several
times appeared when the Doors were shut: and where also (as Nicephorus says)
the Virgin Mary, after the Resurrection of Christ her dear Child, did dwell for
Fourteeen Years, etc. full Absolution and Indulgences from all Sins and Facts
for ever.

Now that all those that come there, may receive it more worthily, the Monks
exhort them to kneel down before every of such places, and to pray the Lord's
Prayer, and Ave Maria with Devotion: and that when they have done so, they need
not to doubt, but that they have fully received the Absolution that was given
for that place by his Holiness. After they had thus prayed in several places,
some of our Company rejoiced mightily, and confessed, that after it they were
holy, and so innocent, that if they should die then, they were secure, that
their Soul should go immediately out of their Mouth into Heaven, and eternal
life. To this I answered them: That I expected Remission of Sin no other ways
but only in the Name, and for the Merits, of our Lord Jesus Christ: and that I
had not undertaken this Pilgrimage, as they did, to get any thing by it, as by
a good Work: nor to visit Stone and Wood to obtain Indulgence: or with opinion
to come here nearer to Christ; because all these things are directly contrary
to Scripture. As the Lord himself says: Time will come that you shall neither
on this Mount nor at Jerusalem worship the Father. And he also forewarneth us
of these that say; Lo Christ is here, Christ is there, lo he is in the deserts,
he is in the Chamber: that we should not believe them, nor go out, but rather
confide on his promise, that he will be with us to the end of the World: and
where two or three are met together in his Name that he will be in the middle
of them. Wherefore our dear Lord Christ has no need, because he is himself
present with them that believe in him, of any Vicegerent, that should on Earth
usurp such Power, and take such Honor and Glory to himself, as to give
Indulgence at his pleasure: because all these things belong only to God. When I
saw that they did not much mind this my Discourse, I let them alone in their
Opinions, but yet I saw here and there all these places, and considered by my
self what our Lord Christ had, by his bitter Sufferings and Death, by his
Glorious Resurrection and Ascension, procured us from his Heavenly Father. When
the Pilgrims came to one of the abovementioned places of Mount Zion, and had
said their Prayers, they went into it, and contemplated it, fell down again
before it, and kissed it with great Submission and Devotion; pulled out several
pieces, viz. Beads and Rosaries turned of the Wood of the Trees of the Mount of
Olives, some wrought Points, Laces, etc. tied together in Bundles, to touch the
holy place with it; they also knocked off in some places (where they might)
some small Pieces, to take them along with them as consecrated Sanctuaries, to
distribute them amongst their Friends at their Return.

All the while that they were thus busy, I considered rather standing behind,
what our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ had suffered for us in these places, how
he had humbled himself, and came down to us miserable Sinners, to help us, and
to extol us that were fallen, and to make us free of the heavy Burden of our
Sins: how he was led before the Seat of Judicature of Caiaphas, that we might
not be led before the severe Judgment Seat of the Almighty God: that he
suffered himself to be led captive and bound, to deliver us from the Bands of
the Devil and Death, and to save us from the Jaws of Hell: and as Esaias says
in his 53d. Chapter, Verse 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. But that our dear Lord Christ was delivered to
the High Priest, and Scribes, etc. for our sakes, and that he was obedient to
his Heavenly Father, unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, to deliver us
from the Curse of God and eternal Death. And to make us certain, that he had
procured these his unspeakable Benefits and Heavenly Treasures for us, and that
we really should be partakers thereof; before his passion he did institute his
holy Supper upon the Mount, in the large upper Room, wherein he does not only
communicate them to us, but gives us also (if we receive the holy broken
Bread, and the blessed Cup, with true Faith according to the Institution) his
real Body and Blood, to feed us to eternal Life: where we then shall sit, with
our Lord Christ, and all the elected ones (after this life) as Coheirs in the
high upper Room of his Heavenly Father, at his Table, to eat and drink it with
him anew. And that we might heartily comfort our selves with these his
unspeakable Benefits, he also after his Ascension, sent us on the Day of
Pentecost his Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, to incline our Hearts, to
believe steadfastly all that he has promised us in his holy Word and
Sacraments. So the sending of the Holy Ghost, which was long before predicted
by the holy Prophets was fullfilled on this Mount: whereof we read in several
places of the holy Scripture, viz. Joel ii. 28. And it shall come to pass
afterward that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, etc. For on mount
Zion, and in Jerusalem, must be a Deliverance according to the promise of the
Lord. And Isaiah ii. 3. Come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,
etc. for out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. So that the Preaching of Christ's holy Gospel, and his Kingdom did
begin from Zion and Jerusalem, and was afterward spread abroad by his holy
Apostles throughout the whole World.

Grant then, O our dear Lord Christ, unto us, thy Holy Ghost; that he may keep
us in the Knowledge of thy holy Word, and that he may so strengthen and comfort
us in it, that we may freely and without any fear confess it before the Face of
our Enemies and Adversaries; and if they offend and prosecute us, that we may
overcome our Crosses and Persecutions with patience, that thy Honor may be
advanced, and our Constancy appear. Grant us also, that he may plant these thy
Graces in our Hearts, that we may comfort our selves with the hope and
expectation of those Treasures which thou have by thy Death and Passion merited
and purchased for us. So that we may abide in thy Tabernacle, and dwell in thy
holy Hill for ever. Amen. Psalm xv. 1.

CHAP. V.
Of the Mount Moria and the Glorious Temple of Solomon.

WIthin the City near to Mount Zion lies another called Moria, divided from it
by the Valley of Tiropaeon, which is now filled up and made even with the top
(as I have said before) that hereabout is hardly any Depth or Unevenness to be
seen. This as well as the other meets with the Rivulet or Brook of Kidron
toward the North, and on both of them the Town lies on the sides or descent.
This is very famous in the Holy Scripture, as you read Genesis xxii. That the
pious Patriarch Abraham was ready to offer his Son Isaac on this Hill, for a
Burnt-Offering to the Lord: whereon Melchisedec the first Founder and King of
the Town Salem, and Priest of the Almighty God, did first build a Temple, and
therefore named the City Jerusalem. So we read in the Second Book of
Chronicles, Chap. iii. That on the same holy Mount King Solomon did begin to
build a House for the Lord, at Jerusalem, many years afterward. This was
formerly very high, surrounded with deep Ditches and Cliffs, so that it would
make a Man giddy to look down from the top into the depth. Wherefore Pompey and
Titus took a great deal of pains before they could get upon it, to take and
destroy that glorious and well built Temple, which was in the last Desolation
(as well as before in the first burnt by Nabuhcodonosor) demolished and razed
to the Foundations, as Christ foretold them, Mark xiii. That there should not
be left one stone upon another that should not be thrown down, because they did
not acknowledge the gracious time of their visitation.

And that all hopes might be taken away from the Jews, to return and to build
the Temple again, to reestablish their Worship; Hadrian the Emperor, to prevent
all, ordered, in the year of Christ 134, all to be broken down that was left,
and to root it up, to demolish all heighths* to fill up all Ditches, to level
Cliffs, and to make the Ground even all over: he did also alter the Name and
Religion of the Inhabitants, and instead thereof introduced the Heathenish
Idolatry. In the place of the Grave of Christ he built a Temple for the Idol
Jupiter; on Mount Calvaria another for the Idol Venus; and another at Bethlehem
to the Idol Adonis: and at last in the place where formerly in the Temple of
Solomon did stand the Sanctum Sanctorum, he erected his own Image on a high
Column for his memory, which was still standing, in Hieronymus's time. The
height of this Mount cannot be observed any where else now then without by the
Fountain Siloah, and in the Valley of Benhinnon, and so it did remain desolate
to the times of the great Emperor Constantine.

After that, when the Jews undertook to rebuild the Temple at the Charge of
Julian the Apostate (who would make Christ a liar, the Lord having said that
their House should be left unbuilt) a great Earthquake (when they had opened
the Ground to lay the Foundation) did move and shake the whole place to that
degree, that every thing was turned upside down, and abundance of Jews did
perish in it. But when the Jews did not matter this, but endeavored to go on
with the Work in hand, the next day Flames of Fire broke out of the Ground, and
fiery Beams struck down from Heaven, which destroyed more than the Earthquake,
and burnt all their Tools, viz. Saws, Axes, Shovels, Hammers, etc. When the
Jews would not leave their Error for all this, the night following some small
glittering Crosses like Stars fell down upon their Clothes, which they could
not wash off the next Morning, nor get out by any means: and an Earthquake and
such a violent Hurricane came upon it, that it dissipated all t^ Mortar and
other Materials into the Air, so that frightened, and full of fear, they were
forced to confess, that Christ, whom their Ancestors Crucified, was the true
and only Lord and God.

Seeing that the Temple, together with the Mount it stood upon, are razed and
desolated, so that one can hardly now discern what they have been anciently
every one that goes by (because the Lord did not favor his own House, where
his Name was sanctified) has reason to be astonished at it, and to call to
mind the strange anger of God against those that leave the Lord their God, and
adhere to other gods, serve and adore them.

Now adays the Turks have taken possession of this Mount, and all the Ground
whereon Solomon's Temple did stand, and have built a Mahumetan Mosche on it;
which Homar the Third after the great Impostor Mahomet built when he had taken
the holy Land and the City of Jerusalem. This is not very large nor high, but
fine and covered with Lead, has a great Court Yard about it, paved with white
Marble, and here and there Orange and Date Trees are planted in it, which is
very pleasant, about the sides thereof are some high Towers and Gates, one
whereof is vastly bigger than any of the rest, which is near to their Batzar,
or Exchange, which is very old, high, and has very good Workmanship in it,
wherefore the Franciscan Monks show it instead of the Gate of Solomon's Temple,
before which lay the Man that was lame from his Mother's Womb, that begged Alms
from Peter and John, to whom Peter said: Silver and gold I have none, but such
as I have give I thee: In the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and
walk.

At the end of the Gate of this Yard, as commonly in all their Church Porches,
hung some Lamps. I could have willingly gone in before them, to see the Rock
and Fountain, whereof Ezekiel. in his Forty seventh Chapter makes mention,
together with the inward Building, but because according to their Mahumetan
Laws, all those that are not circumcised are accounted to be unclean, therefore
going into their Churches is forbid to Christians: if any one is caught
^ithin, he is in danger of his life, or else he must deny his Faith, and be
made a Mamaluck or Renegado.

In this Courtyard is still another Gate, called the Golden Gate by the
Franciscans, but because it stands just over against the Mount of Olives,
therefore it is to be taken to be the Gate Sur, or rather, as Nehemias chapter iii.
Ezekiel. xlvii. and 2 Chronicles. xxxi. say; For the Gate of the Stairs, which Semaia,
the Son of Sahamia, the Keeper of them did build: through which our Lord Christ
did go into the Temple on Palm-Day, to drive out the Buyers and Sellers. Now
although this is walled up in the New Town Wall, so that you cannot go either out
or in; yet considering its ancient Arches, it looks rather like a Church than
a Town-Gate.

In the middle of the Yard stands a Turkish Mosche, or Temple, called the Rock:
this is esteemed very much by the Turks, and next to those of Mecha and Medina
reputed to be the most holy. Because God Almighty has wrought many great
Miracles there: and that there Mahomet (as they falsely write of him in their
Books) called by God to be the last and greatest Prophet, did ride from Mecha
to that of the holy Rock of the Temple of Jerusalem, which is Forty Days
Journey, on a very swift Beast called Elmparae, conducted thither by the Angel
Gabriel, who, at his arrival did help him off of his Beast, tied it up, and
then led him by the Hand into the Temple, where he found many Prophets standing
together in a Circle, which God had resuscitated for his Honor, and to receive
him, and to acquaint him with new good Tidings, and what God had prepared for
him (I suppose ever burning Flames of Fire) among the rest he did also find
Abraham, Moses, and Jesus the Son of Mary, each of them presenting him, first
Moses with a Fatt of Wine, Abraham with a Fatt full of Milk, and Jesus with a
Fatt of Water. Then a Voice spoke to him from Heaven, saying, If thou chusest
the Fatt with Wine, thou and thy People shall perish: if thou chusest the Fatt
with Milk, thou shall also perish: but if thou chusest the Fatt of Water, thou
and thy People shall be saved eternally*

These and many more insipid Lies of their Mahomet, which are very ridiculous
and silly Fables, are believed to be as true as the Gospel by the Turks, Moors,
and Arabians, etc. They also certainly believe (chiefly these that live at
Jerusalem as the Pilgrims know) that on the last day their Mahomet is to come
and seat himself on the Rock of the Temple of M^ria, and Christ on the other
side of the Valley of Josaphat on the Mount of Olives, over against him. Then
when all the People of the Earth shall appear before the Lord of Judicature, he
shall ask Mahomet, who the rest are (meaning the Christians that have been
under the Yoke of the Turkish Emperor) then shall Mahomet answer and say, They
are these that have served me faithfully: whereupon Christ shall let them pass
into Paradise and eternal Felicity: which they believe to consist in gratifying
Fleshly Lusts and Desires, in Eating and Drinking, Fine Clothes, costly Jewels,
Gold, Silver, Pearls, pleasant Spring-Gardens, beautiful and cleanly Women.
Therefore the Temple is so highly esteemed by the Turks and others of the same
Faith, and believed to be so holy, that they go into it on their bare Feet with
great Devotion, and come twice a year thither in Pilgrimage in great Caravans
from all places, moved thereunto by the great Zeal they have toward their
Mahomet: but chiefly these Pilgrims that have been at Madina-Talnabi, and
Mecha, that is Three Days Journey farther, who return by the way of Jerusalem
(which is now by them caled Chutz) to say also their Prayers there: and are of
opinion, that if they should do otherwise, than to come thither, their
Peregrination would not be acceptable to God. Amongst these are a good many
Renegado Christians, that go with them to Mecha, to get by their Devotion into
greater preferment, and Wealth, wherefore they are esteemed by them as holy and
creditable ones (although they are full of Knavery and Roguery) as these that come
from Mahomets own Blood: they keep them very honorably, and pray for them as
their Victors, and endue them with great great and peculiar Privileges, so that
their single Witness is as valueable as three, four, six, ten of others,
according as they have been oftener in these places. And that every body may
know them, they put upon their Turbans on their Heads, their Mahomet's green
Colors, as those of their Priests do, which esteem themselves to be his
Relations, which are only permitted (as the Persians wear their red Color) to
wear such Turbants. Wherefore the Turks believe it to be a sin to cover those
Members, which Nature has made secret, with that Color which their Prophet
did bear on his Head. When the beforementioned Renegado- Christians; are come
to this degree, they are bought by every Body for Money, to bear witness before
the Cady, or any other Turkish Magistrate, and that even in Causes whereof they
have not the least knowledge. So it happens daily, that those that give larger
Bribes to the Magistrate, and do exceed their Adversaries in number of
Witnesses, make their lost and foul cause good: and of this they make no
Conscience, because their Alcoran teaches them, that God does not impute to
them perjury, but only if they do not invoke him: so that it is full
Satisfaction, if they feed ten poor ones for this Transgression, or if they
cloth them, or if they redeem one prisoner: but if they are not substantial
enough to do this, they fast for it three times. This is of a very ill
consequence, because they are not afraid to be Perjured and to cheat others.
And although these and other the like Sins, are very common amongst the Turks,
Viz. Robbing, and to break their Faith, etc. (which are directly against God)
yet for all that these (because they have lost all remembrance of Confession,
Penitence or mending of their Lives) exceed them in this by far. Besides all
this they do not let the Christians know who or what they are, but rather study
to their utmost Power, to abuse and hurt them, as often as they find an
opportunity, nay they would not spare their very Lives, if they dare do it for
fear of the Turkish Magistrates. In this they are very like unto the Abyssins
(which in former Ages were subject unto the Soldans of Egypt, and did live on
the south side of Mount Libanus) which, as Defenders and Protectors of their
own Religion, were set out before other Saracens, to Murder and Kill
clandestinly all those that did oppose their Mohammedan Laws and Religion. But
after the Turkish Emperor did beat the Sultan, and took his Dominions from him,
the Fury of these Assassinators was also soon quelled. For the Great Turk, does
not allow in any of his Provinces, of Murders, as the Saracens did, but
punishes them severely, and keeps very strict Laws that no Body may hurt the
other, which you may Conclude by this, that if one does but fetch Blood from
the other in the least, he is not only mulcted in one or two Ducats, but
sometimes in Forty, Fifty, Nay, sometimes in a Hundred, according to the
Hainousness of the Crime, and the Ability of the Offender; and so he keeps
his Subjects in Peace and Quietness.

Besides these Pilgrims that go to Mecha, there are many others in their great
Caravans, that rather, like unto Pedlers, endeavor to get thither with small
Charges, by the help of their Carvatscharas, or Inns, and Hospitals, to make
good Profit there, by Buying and Selling, then out of Devotion to wait on their
Mahomet, and amongst them there are also sometimes Christians, but at their
Arrival they must not Visit the Holy Places, much less touch them. Wherefore
they buy before hand all sorts of Merchandises, chiefly at Cayro, (from whence,
to Jerusalem it is ten days Journey) to sell or swap them at Mecha, and other
places. Which custom we need not think to be strange among the Turks, seeing
that a great many are found among the Roman Pilgrims, that pretend to be good
Christians, that go Pilgrimages to Rome, St. Jacob, Jerusalem, etc. not only to
get his Holinesses Absolution and Indulgences, but rather to make good^ profit
of Goods they buy for that purpose: Or which is more, they pass over their
Estates during their Absence, into the Hands of others, to reap the Benefit
thereof with this Condition, that if they return home from these places where
they Vowed to go, they shall have them restored again with great profit. Now as
among all these Pilgrims, chiefly these that have been oftnest at Mecha are by
the Turks in greatest esteem, and that Green Color, which only belongs to
the Priests to wear, is the sooner allowed them, whereby they may be known, as
the Brothers of St. Jacob are known by the Scallopshells: The same is also with
their Camels, for on the lower part of one of their Forefeet, you may see as
many small Chains hung as they have been times there in Caravans, so that you
also may soon discern them.

And that I may return to my purpose again; near to the Turkish Moschee of the
Holy Rock, is also an other Church, which by the Christians (when they were in
possession of Jerusalem) was called the Virgin Mary's Church, which is very
well built, rather bigger then the Turkish, and stands without toward the
South on the place of the great Porch of the Israelites, which is several times
mentioned in the Scriptures: Viz. Joh. 10. Math. 21. where it is called the
Temple and Porch of Solomon, where Christ did Preach, and drove out the Buyers
and Sellers, etc. Underneath it is a great Cave, so wide that some hundred
Horse may with ease be drawn up in Battalia therein. This is also in the
Possession of the Turks, and the Christians dare no more come in here then in
the other. By this Prohibition ( Viz. That the Mahumetans shall admit into
their Churches or Porches thereof no Strangers which according to their Laws
are not Cleansed and Washed) you may easily see, that the Turks have taken many
Ceremonies and Laws from the Jews, and according to their depraved
understanding and mind, Transcribed them into their Alcoran: So we see that
anciently they have their Circumcision, Offerings, Washings, Fasts at certain
times of the year, marrying more then one Wife, not Eating any thing that is
Unclean, or Pork, or what is suffocated, not having Bells, not drinking Wine,
as the Levitical Priest must not do, derived from the Jews: But this last Law
concerning not drinking of Wine, is not only not kept, for they drink thereof
without mixture, let it be as strong as it can, more than any other Nation. It
being then true that they choose the Fatt with Wine presented them by Moses, as
is before said, to their own Ruin and Destruction, wherefore I pray that God
may fulfill their Prophecy, Amen.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Saracens and Turkish Religion, Ceremonies and Hypocritical Life, with a
short hint how long time their Reign shall last after Mahomet 's Decease.

Seeing I have here above made mention, amongst the rest of the Places and
Churches of Jerusalem, of the Turkish Moschees, and also of Mahomet their
Prophet: I cannot but also Relate something of theit Hypocritical and
Superstitious Life and belief, as I have observed in my Travels, and during my
stay among them, chiefly something of their outward Ceremonies, good Works,
wherewith they think to fulfill the Laws, to cleanse themselves from their
manifold Sins and Transgressions, and to obtain Gods Mercy and Love. Wherefore
they strive that they may be found always busy in these good Works, whereof
they reckon the chiefest to be; Alms, Pilgrimage, Fastings, to make Offerings,
to abstain from certain Food or Drinks, frequent Washing, Praying, upon which
two last they look most of all, as the true means, by which (if they keep them
diligently) they may be freed and absolved from their Sins, according to the
Promises of their dear Prophet Mahomet. Such and the like have also the Jews
had in the Old Testament, where without doubt their Prophet (being by his
Mother an Ishmaelite) had them also. But seeing that he also Attributes to
these Absolution and Satisfaction for our Sins, and also consequently Salvation
and everlasting Life: Therefore all those that follow and believe his Doctrine,
miss the only Mediator and Savior Jesus Christ (of whom as well as of his Holy
Word, they else have a good Opinion, as appears by their Alcoran) in whom God
the Father Almighty will only be known, Invoked, and Adored. As St. John says
in his 5th. Chap. 23. He that Honors not the Son, Honors not the Father
that has sent him: And Chap. 14. verse. 9. where Jesus says, He that has seen
me has seen the Father; and in the 4th Chapt. of the Acts, it is said, verse
12. There is no Salvation in any other, for there is no other Name under Heaven
given among Men, whereby we must be saved, wherefore although Mahomet does
greatly Command and Teach, that we must Adore the only God, yet they do not
know the true God, that will only be Adored and Honored in his Beloved Son;
and besides Mahomet will not allow that God has a Son, and much less, That
Christ is the true God, in whom we shall believe. For in his Diabolical and
Blasphemous mind and thoughts he has this precaution, that if God should have
a Son he might come to be Disobedient unto him (as happens sometimes chiefly
amongst them, to worldly Princes) which would expose all Creatures in Heaven,
as well as on Earth unto great Danger. So he denies the Deity of Christ and
Esteems him to be no more (as Arius does) then a great Saint, and mere Man.
So he has the same Opinion with Macedonius, of the Holy Ghost whom, and Christ
he sometimes makes but one person. And so the Turks know no more, by the
Instruction of their Cursed Prophet, of the true living God (that is one in his
Essence and three in Persons) then when they Adored the Fire, water and other
Elements, nay Heaven and Earth (as also the Persians have done) before they
come over to the Saracens, and adhered to the Doctrine of their Mahomet. And
besides they have no more comfort in our Lord Christ, then the Jews, because
they do not believe that Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, and Messenger of
God, was Crucified, Dead and Buried, but that another, that was very like him,
suffered instead of him, because he was Seated in Heaven (where into God
received him, and that he was to return again at the End of the World) a great
deal higher then that he could be so shamefully killed by the Jews that impious
people; wherefore the Turks admire it very much, that so many Pilgrims of all
Nations, come to see the Grave of Christ with so great a Devotion, which is not
his. And although the Turks prefer their Mahomet before Christ, and also do not
believe right neither of his Essence nor of his person, so that therefore all
their Worship, with what Devotion soever performed, is null and in vain,
because it is not in Christ: Yet for all that they Praise and Esteem Christ
very high, and Extol him far beyond any Man, as one that was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, and that has here on Earth carried on his
Doctrine, and confirmed it with powerful Miracles. Wherefore they Esteem the
Books of Moses, and the other Writings of the Prophets, but chiefly the Four
Evangelists, which they call the Book Jugilis (and the Books of Moses Thresit)
as true and Godly. And sometimes they pretend so fairly, that an ordinary Man
that is not well instructed in the Chief Articles of Christianity, although
there is so great a difference, might easily be seduced, and persuaded. Besides
the Turks will not allow, neither to Jews, Moors, nor Christians, nay not to
their own Nation, to say any thing ill of Christ, nor to Curse him, but if any
body should presume to do it, the soles of his Feet are struck very severely
with many blows, and he is Fined besides according to his Ability. So their
Prophet Mahomet commends the Holy Scripture very much, and says, that it
contains Truth and Happiness.

If they would but often look into it (as their Alcocan teaches them in
several places) to read in it, and mend their Lives according to it, they might
easily be brought to the right way again; but he himself does not stand by his
words, but falls off again from them afterward, and speaks quite otherways
of the holy Scripture, and that so differing, that he quite contradicts
himself. For as he did commend it before, so now he discommendeth it again,
when he says, That it has been (because it is too difficult to be kept) long
since quite out of Doors, chiefly in those parts where is written, That we must
do good to our Enemies; leave all for his sake; love God with all our heart,
etc. and our Neighbor as our own self. And that therefore he Mahomet, was
peculiarly and purposely chosen by God Almighty, to bring down with him the
Alcoran, and communicate it to the World (that was then drowned in Lusts, Sin
and Vices) to reform and bring it to rights again. Besides this he knew very
well how to disguise his Tricks, and how to behave himself in his Life and
Conversation, devoutly and discreetly toward the People, and how to blind them
under this pretense, that they did believe him, and receive him the sooner to
be a great Prophet and Messenger from God. When he found that he had got a good
Party, and a great many Adherents, that empowered him, he Studied daily more
and more, to order his Laws so, that they might be acceptable and pleasing to
all the World. And thus he got in a great many places such a fame, that, to our
Grief, in these times, he has seduced and possessed a great part of the World
with his Erroneous and Poisonous Doctrine, the Turks closely adhering to this
Doctrine, therefore their Hearts are so blinded with darkness, that they cannot
have any true knowledge either of God the Father, or the Son, or the Holy
Ghost, and so they miss of the right way that would bring them to the
Knowledge, and Acknowledgment of their Sins, and consequently to the Remission
thereof, and so make them Children of God, and Heirs of Life Everlasting. But
on the contrary, they remain Impenitent, and persist in their sinful Life, with
such a Confidence and Security, that they know not when they commit Sins; as to
take a Man's Property and Goods away by force; to destroy his House and Lands;
to undermine his Life and Livelihood; and also, to contaminate themselves with
Uncleanness, Whoredom, Sodomy: Not to keep an Oath that has been taken; to
Revenge themselves; from whence Results, Envy, Hatred, Anger, Contention,
Murder, etc. as we hear, what Injustice and Violence the Grand Signior
commits daily upon our Brethren and Sisters, that border upon his Dominions;
which we need not to wonder at, because, if they fall out amongst themselves,
they try all Unjust means to Revenge themselves. Wherefore they accuse their
Adversaries often falsely (because they dare not offer any violence) before
their Judges, and so bring them to Damage, Trouble and Pains. But when they
have committed one of these, or the like Facts, and have a mind to free
themselves of it, or to be Absolved, they go after their own invented Devotion,
to good Works, Alms, Prayers, Fasting, Redeeming of Captives, etc. to make
satisfaction to God for their committed Sins, as their Alcoran teaches them.
And so they lead a Life of good outward Conversation, and are very diligent in
their Devotion, chiefly in going to their Prayers at the five Customary hours
of the Day, when they leave their Work, and go to Church. And seeing that in
these Countries they have neither Clocks not Watches, to tell them the time of
the Day and Prayers, instead of them they have their Priests (called Meitzen by
them) on the Steeples, which are ordered to cry out the Hours with a loud
Voice, that you may hear them as far almost as the Ringing of a Bell, even
throughout the whole Town. The first Hour of Prayers is an Hour and half before
Daylight: The second is about Noon: The third (which the Arabians call
Latzera) is about Three a Clock in the Afternoon: The fourth is at Sunset; and
the fifth when after the Sun is down, the Twilight or whitishness of the Skies
is gone, and the Stars appear clearly. Sometimes two of these Priests sing
together, which is common in great Towns, and they sing almost as with us they
sing a Ballad, so that while the one is singing, the other may fetch his
breath; and so they sing by turns, until the Song is at an end. When I came
first into these Countries, and heard them Sing about that time in the
Morning, I believed the Turks did it that they might brisk themselves up to go
to Work, until I heard them do the same at other hours in the day time, and
understood they were their Priests. So they Sing about Five a Clock at Night
very well, and sometimes something longer, because of the Sick that live near,
which desire it of them, to make them cheerful, and to have a good heart, which
we need not to wonder at, for their Clergy (which are not Wiser or more Learned
than the Laymen) know not how to comfort them, or to make them joyful, much
less how to give good and wholesome Instruction, out of the Word of God
(although they believe it to be true) how to obtain forgiveness of Sin, and
Gods Mercy, Love, or Commiseration, but think it to be sufficient, if they
Admonish them that lie a dying, to think of God, and to Pray to him that he may
have Mercy upon them; and afterward to wash their Body to cleanse them quite
from all Sins, according to the Law of their Mahomet, which they highly esteem,
and that the rather, because they serve not only the Living but also the Dead;
wherefore the Turks wash themselves daily, chiefly at the Hours of their
Prayer, when they are a going to Church, and that very carefully and
diligently, viz. Their Hands, Privy-Members, Head, Neck, Feet, nay the whole
Body, according as they are Contaminated or become Unclean. So in consideration
of their Sins, they have three sorts of washing; whereof one is that of the
whole Body, which these must make use of that are not Married, and contaminate
themselves with Concubines; wherefore the Baths are kept continually in an
equal heat, and are open to any body both by Day and Night, that these that
have occasion to wash their whole Body, may not be hindered in their Devotion,
but soon go to Church again. The second is performed on the Organs of the five
Senses, and the Head, to cleanse them from all spots and blemishes, which are
contracted by ill thought, and frivolous and unseemly discourses; wherefore
there are several Cisterns here and there, but chiefly in their Churches and
Chapels, where they wash themselves first, that being clean, they may be worthy
to come to Church to Prayers, for if they should omit it, they believe that
their Prayers would not be acceptable to God, and so he would not hear them. So
they begin first with washing of their Hands, then they lift up the Water with
the hollow of their Hands, and so let it run down to their Elbow; then they
wash their Mouth, Nose, Eyes, Ears, Head, Neck, and at last their Feet, and
speak some peculiar words with it. When they have no Water, which often
happens in large Deserts of Arabia, they are allowed by their Laws instead
thereof, to rub these Members over with Sand. But that they may not be hindered
by their Clothes, from coming to these Members, they wear such ones that have
wide Sleeves, no gatherings about their Neck, nor have any Strings about their
Drawers. The third sort is also esteemed to be very necessary, and is made use
of as often as they empty their Body by Stool or Urine, or Belching, and so
they wash themselves cowring down before the Cisterns, publicly without shame,
both before and behind, in the sight of every Body. According to what has been
said, we see that they mind only the outward cleansing of their Body, and so
they look also upon the outward Circumcision, rather than to think how they
ought, according to Gods Commands, to cleanse themselves from their inward
Leprosy, by the Bath of Regeneration, and to Circumcise their Hearts, by an
inward Spiritual Circumcision, whereof they know nothing. When their Clergymen
have cried out the Hours, from the Steeples to the Batzars, or Exchanges, etc.
and the Turks have washed and cleansed themselves, they go into their Chapels,
which are in the middle of their great Camps, or Carvatschars, where I could
see it best, because I durst not go into their Mosques. After they have left
their Shoes at the Gate, they do not turn, nor look back for one another to
speak, but go straight forwards, until they come to their places where they
stand still, and look upon their Priest that is before them, and mind him, when
he begins the Prayers, that they may say it after him, and imitate his
Ceremonies or means, whereof he makes use, as the lifting up his Hands,
stroking over his Forehead, bending his whole Body forwards, falling down upon
his Knees, kissing the Earth; and at length when the Leila hillalla begins,
turning their Heads from one side to the other, whereby they give a hint, That
they are in Peace, and good Will with God and their Neighbors. While they are
in their Holy Places, you shall hear none of them Sneeze, Cough, Hawk or Spit,
for they are of Opinion, that, if they should do so, God would not hear their
Prayers so effectually, because they should not be perfectly clean. They have
no set Form of their Prayers, and Pray generally for good Fortune, and other
Worldly welfare; for Victory for their Emperor; that God may send great
Divisions amongst us Christians, that so they may have a better opportunity to
fall upon us, and to beat us. They suffer no Images in their Temples or
Chapels, and are only for Adoring the true and only God, Creator of Heaven and
Earth; and so instead of them they have Pictures of sine Plants or Flowers,
viz. Of Roses, etc. and Writings of their Prophet Mahomet; and so you find on
their Gold and Silver Coins, no Pictures or Images of their Emperors, as upon
ours, but only the Names of them, or of the Towns where they are Stamped, in
Arabian Letters, (which are common to both Nations) together with the date of
the Year, which they begin from the time when Mahomet fled into the Deserts,
which for that reason they call the Year of Hegira, where he got a great number
of Adherents, and was made by them a King; this was done in the Year of Christ
622. After they have ended their Prayers, they begin to talk to one another,
and so every one of them goes home to Work again; and they are allowed on
their Feast-days (which they keep on Friday, as we do on Sunday, and the Jews
on Saturday) to open their Shops again after Prayers, and to go to Work,
because they say that Idleness may the easier draw them into Sins. So one may
easily know by their Shops, according as they are opened or shut up on these
three days, whether they belong to Christians, Turks, or Jews; besides none of
these forces one to observe the others Holy Days, and so they live peaceably
and quietly together. Before the Turks Holy Day begins, they lighten on
Thursday Night before, as soon as it begins to be dark, upon their high
Steeples, many Lamps, whereof they hang without on the Galleries round about,
three rows one above the other, so that as you look upon them in the Night,
they look like unto a threefold Garland; they let them burn so long until they
go out of themselves one after the other. The same Lamps they also light every
Night during their Lent, which begins in their Month Romadan (so called by
the Arabians) and does last all that Month long. Their Year consists of
Twelve Months, which they Account by the Moon-lights; so that their Months do
not agree with ours, (for theirs have not one with the other above 29 or 30
days) and consequently their Years want between 10 or 11 days of ours, so that
their Lent falls at an uncertain time, sometimes in the Spring, and sometimes
in the Summer, etc. so in my time it began in December, and ended in January.
During all this time they are very Devout, and strive to be at the Prayers and
Duties; for if any body should Dye in Lent time, that had used not to frequent
them, they would look upon him as a lost and damned Man, and doubt whether they
should Bury him or no. During their Lent they Eat nothing before Night; when
the Stars appear, then every one goes home to Eat, or else in the great
Batzars to a Cooks Shop, to buy Victuals, where all Night long is so great a
throng of poor People, that have nothing to Eat at home, that they lift one
another almost up; there you see one Eating, another Drinking, another Crying
out, others Quarrelling, which causes such a Crowd and Noise, as is enough to
make one Deaf and Giddy. When Lent is at an end, then they begin their
Easter-Feast (which they call Vlubaira) which they keep with great Solemnity
for three days, salute one another very kindly, and wish one the other all
health and happiness, as we do on New-years-Day: They also seek all sorts of
Pastime, chiefly the Janissaries, which in great places erect Gibbets three
Fathoms high, to the top whereof they tie strong Ropes, almost like as the
Children do in our Country, where they Swing others for a small recompense;
when any body sits in it, two stand ready with a broad String, one on each
side, which they fling before him, and fling him backwards with it, and so set
him a Swinging. Others run before the People that are walking, and sprinkle
them with sweet smelling Water, to get a little spell of Money out of them,
chiefly the Christians, which they will not easily leave before they have
satisfied them; wherefore they are necessitated to stay at home on these days.
Not long after they keep another peculiar Feast, called Chairbairam, where they
also use all sorts of Gesticulations, which were too long to relate here; they
do not Fast on those days, but they Sacrifice young Steers and Wethers, etc.
cut them into small pieces, to distribute them among the People, for the Honor
of Abraham, because he did obey God, and would have Sacrified his Son Isaac to
him: At this abundance of Heathens congregate themselves in certain places
before the Towns, to go in Pilgrimage to Medina-Talnabi, Mecha, and Jerusalem,
for love to Mahomet. Amongst them many are found, that are recovered again from
dangerous Distempers, or delivered from great Dangers, and then did make a Vow,
either to go on Pilgrimage to one of these places, or else to kill such a
number of Beasts to distribute among the Poor as an Alms.

According to what I have said before, that they compute their Months more by
the Moonlight, and so account Twelve of them to a Year, they observe mightily
the Change of the Moon, chiefly the New Moon, to see it again. Wherefore at
that time they go often in great Numbers out, unto the next Hill, to observe it
the better, after Sun set. He that sees it first shows it with great
rejoicing to his Companions. In their Prognostications they also mind the Moons
Light and according to that, they make their Account, to know then if any thing
shall happen. They have also (as some of them have told me) a peculiar Book,
which they keep very close to themselves, wherein is briefly Written, what
shall happen to them every year, whether it be good or bad: This begins in
the same Year, with their Prophet Mahomet, and continues for 1000 Year, when
this is at an End, they have nothing more of that Nature worth any thing.

And being they go no further, some will deduce or conclude from thence, that
their Reign will soon have an end, when those years are passed. Wherefore they
fear the Christians very much, and confess themselves, that they expect to
suffer a great blow from the Christians: And this one may see or conclude, from
hence for on their Holidays in the Morning about 9 of the Clock, they shut up
the Gates of their Towns, great Champs, and other public Habitations, as I
found at Aleppo, so that many times I could not get either out or in until they
opened them again, for they fear at that time to be Assassinated by the
Christians.

Being then that their Term of Years is near expired, for when I lived in these
Places in the year 1575. they Writ 982 of this same Term, so that there was not
quite 18 Years more to come. Now if we compare these 1000 Years with those
whereof John the Evangelist and Apostle makes mention in the 20th Chapt. and
7th Verse of his Revelation, saying, When the 1000 Years are expired Satan
shall be loosed out of his Prison. And shall go out to deceive the^ Nations
which are in the Four Quarters of the Earth, Gog and Magog to gather them
together to Battle (as also is written in this same Book of Revelation in the
9th Chapter, and by the Holy Prophet Ezekiel in his 38th and 39th Chapters) the
Number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea, etc. We find not only that they may
also be interpreted and applied to the Turks and their Adherents, but also that
they have begun their Reign almost at the same time when Mahomet and the
Antichrist should appear, about the year 666 as we Read in the 13th Chapter and
the last Verse of St. John in his Revelation. And besides it looks in these
miserable times (when it seems as if every thing would turn topsie turvy) that
these Years are passed, and that Satan is loosed, as if our dear Lord God would
make an End of this malicious World. Add that some Learned Mathematicians do
Prognosticate that at these times, but chiefly in the year 1588. great
Alterations will be in all the parts of the World. When we add to this Date the
42 Months, or 1260 days, or the 3 years, whereof the Prophet Daniel, and also
the Holy Evangelist and Apostle John in his Revelation make mention, the
Eighteen Years that are still wanting of the 1000 Years of their Mahomet (as is
above said) will be completed, so that these two years Numbers do very well
again agree together.

God the Almighty preserve us in all Adversities, that we may persevere in the
acknowledged Truth of his Holy Gospel, and send us Penitent Hearts, that we may
be sensible of his merciful Visitations, and also overcome the two last Wees
that are not quite over, with Patience. Amen. CHAP. VII,
Of Mount Bethzetha, and the two Houses of Pilat and Herod.

FRom the Temple Mount toward the North, you come presently toward the House
of Judicature, where Pontius Pilat did Live, and condemn Innocent Lord Christ,
to that Heinous Death of the Cross. But because the House has been since
surrounded with ^igh Walls we saw in the Court (where the Soldiers (...) cloth
ou^ Lord Christ with the Purple Cloak, and (...) upon his Head the Crown of
Thorns, and afterward did spit upon him, and Mock, Beat and Whip him) nothing
Remarkable, but only without, a very Old and High Arch, like unto an Arched
Bridge. This is almost black with Age, and so Artificially Erected, that one
can hardly find any juncture, where the Stones are put together. This was the
High Place (as it is said) before the Judgment Hall, whereon the Condemned Men
use to be exposed to the sight of the People, because the Jews durst not go
into the House of Judicature at their High Feasts, as Easter and Whitsunday (as
you may Read in the 18th Chap. of St. John) that they might not make themselves
Unclean, but Eat of the Paschal Lamb: Wherefore Pilat did several times go out
to the People to show them our Lord Christ, and sit down in the Judgment Seat
in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew Gabbatha, as you Read
in the 19th Chap. of St. John Verse. 13. This Arch is open at the Top in the
Middle, and has two other small Arches about the widness of an ordinary door
one by the other supported by a Marble Column, in one of them stood Christ with
his Crown of Thorns on, and Pontius Pilat in the other, when he said to the
People, Behold the Man.

Hard by at the other side of the Arch, at the Right Hand, on an Ascent, they
show the Habitation of King Herod, which is still very fine, and gloriously
built of Marble. Wherefore, although it is not the same (which has been burnt
long agone by the Jews, and afterward Rooted out by the Romans) yet it is
built in the same Place, where the King's Palace did stand, on the height of
Mount Bethzetha, as Josephus Testifies, from the North over against the
Temple, and the Fort Antonia: Where our dear Lord Christ was Mocked and Abused
by Herod and his Servants, and had a White Garment put upon him, and so was
sent back again to Pilate. In these Habitations, chiefly these of Pilate, are
still to this day, Turkish Magistrates (Sanchiachs, Cadis, and Soubashaws)
dwelling, that keep Courts of Judicature there; and therefore no body is
admitted to come in, before he has Gratified the Master and Servants. These
Magistrates are very severe, and Punish their Subjects for no great Matter,
either in their Body or Purse, or with a certain Number of Stripes, which they
give with straps of rough Neats Leather upon the Soles of their Feet, fewer or
more, in proportion to their committed Crimes more or less, which sort of
punishment is very common to all Eastern Countries. This sort of Punishment is
very Ancient, and mention thereof is made in the 25th Chapt of Deuteronomy
Verse 2. And it shall be, if the Wicked Man be Worthy to be beaten, that the
Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his Face, according
to his Fault by a certain Number, Forty Stripes he may give him and not exceed;
least if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many Stripes, then thy
Brother should seem vile unto thee. So the Holy Apostle St. Paul has received
them several times, whereof he makes mention in the 2 Corinthians chap. 11.
verse. 23. Where he says, I am in Labors more abundant, in Stripes above
measure, in Prisons more frequent, in Deaths often. Of the Jews five times
Received I forty Stripes saw one.

When we came back from these Habitations, we saw some more Remarkable Places,
which are usually shown unto Pilgrims, some whereof are mentioned in Scripture.
Viz. The Iron Gate, through which the Angel of the Lord, did conduct St. Peter
out of Prison: The Habitation of Mary the Mother of St. John, where the Holy
Apostle Peter did knock at the Door: The Temple of St. John the Evangelist,
whereof the Knights of the Order of St. John call themselves, and several
others, which are for the most part fallen down, and lie in Ruins. But because
in these times, it is uncertain in what Condition they were then, I also omit
to say any more of them. After we had seen these two Places, with their
Habitations; we returned back again at Night, according to the appointment of
the Father Guardian, to go with us into the Temple of Mount Calvaria.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Mount Calvaria* and the Holy Grave of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

ON the 27th of September. in the year 1575 after Dinner, the Father Guardian did
send to the other Lords of the Temple, to let us in to the Temple of Mount
Calvaria (which the Turks keep always Locked up.) But we and some other Friars
in their own Habit, went with their Father Guardian to the Temple of the Mount,
which first of all the Pious Queen Hellen Mother of the Great Emperor
Constantine (after she had destroyed the Temple of Venus that was Built upon
the Place of the Grave) did Build, as she did also build several Churches in
several Places, Viz. That at Bethlehem, where Christ was Born: That of the Holy
Apostle James the greater, in the Place of the Upper Town, where he was
Beheaded: And an other on the Mount of Olives, where Christ did Ascend into
Heaven: As also another at Bethania, where Christ did Raise Lazarus his dear
Friend, from the Dead, and in many other places, at Nazareth, and on the Mount
Thabor, etc. But when afterward the City of Jerusalem was many times Besieged,
and at length taken from the Christians, by the unbelieving Saracens, Hequen
that malicious King of Egypt did in the year of Christ 1011. Demolish these
Churches, and so they remained until after his Decease his Son Daber came to
the Government, who afterward in the year 37. did give leave to Constantine
the Emperor of Constantinople (when he renewed with him their Old
Correspondency) to Rebuild it again at his own Cost and Charges. In these our
times, when it remains in the possession of the Turks, free Egress and
Regress, is quite denied to the Christian Pilgrims, that come to see the Holy
Places: For when they saw that many Christians came yearly thither from all
Places, Viz. From Armenia, Aethiopia, Syria, Egypt, Greece, Italy, Nay from
all Places of Europe, they have put a certain Sum of Money (according as they
are near, or further off, under his Dominions or not) to be paid by them, to be
admitted. For some pay two or three Seckins or Ducats, other four and five; but
we that are Outlandish, as Italians, Frenchmen, and Germans (as well knowing
that we do not spare for Money) must pay Nine Seckins a piece, and that without
any Remission, must be paid in weighty Turkish or Venetian Ducats: And they
keep the Temple Locked up close, until every one of them have paid their due:
By these means the Grand Senior has acquired himself a considerable yearly
Revenue, which amounts to several thousand Ducats yearly. But yet it is now
adays nothing near to what it has been formerly, when all was under Popish
Darkness, and the Pilgrims used to Flock thither in great Numbers. For since in
our time, by the Grace of God, the Holy Gospel has been brought to Light
again, and began to be Preached (which shows us a far nearer and better way
to find Christ, and to have true and full Pardon and Remission of our Sins) so
that daily more come to the knowledge of the Truth, and return to the Lord, his
Revenues decrease as much as the Number of the Pilgrims that used to resort
thither.

When we came pretty near to the Temple, and expected to have seen Mount
Calvaria, the Franciscans told us, that this Mount, together with the holy
Grave, and the Garden (wherein Christ did first appear unto Mary Magdalen) were
entirely taken into the Temple, so that no height at all was to be seen without.

Just when we came into the Court of the Temple there appeared an old
Heathenish Prison, wherein are Prisoners kept to this day, near which did stand
the Prison-Gate (whereof we saw still some part of the Wall up in the Wall of
the Church) through which Christ did carry his Cross to the place of Sculls,
which in former days was without the Town, as you may chiefly in St. Mark,
Chap. 17. V. 20. clearly see, where he writes; And they led him out to crucify
him. And in the Thirteenth Chapter to the Hebrews, Verse. 12. where it is
plainly writ, that Christ suffered without the Gate. But when afterward the
Emperor Adrian did rebuild and enlarge the desolated Town, he did also surround
with a Wall the place where our Lord Jesus Christ did suffer, which was without
toward the North-West, beyond the Mount Moria, so that now it is situated
almost in the middle of the City of Jerusalem, and becuse of this Enlargement
he called the Town after his Surname Helia.

We staying a great while at the Gate, before they did open it unto us, several
Oriental Christians, to wit, Greeks, JACOBITES, Armenians, etc. came to us to
visit their Priests, and to perform their Devotion in it, so that about
Threescore went in with us.

The Building of the Temple is very large, of strong Walls, and so thick, that
it takes away the Light within: it is richly covered with Gray Marble within
and without, and supported by some Marble Pillars about a Fathom and a half
thick, so strongly, that one may conclude from thence, that neither Labor nor
Costs were spared in its Building. Yet the Turks, (notwithstanding the holy
Places and the Costliness of the Building) have in some places spoiled and
demolished some part of the Walls thereof, so that now they are no more like to
the old ones that were before, and besides (as the Guardian told us) half of it
is hardly remaining. Yet it is still very large, and so well closed up again,
that one can hardly perceive the Loss thereof.

As we went through, we passed by the Grave of Christ, in a glorious large
Chapel, called our Ladies which the Franciscans have in possession, and is hung
with Tapestry very well wrought. Within it is a great Altar, on each side
whereof is to be seen a Nick, artificially made of white Marble, the Windows
whereof are very well guarded with Iron Bars: in that toward the Left Hand is
kept a piece of the Column whereon Christ was whipped; it is of a reddish
Color, three spans long, and four over. In the other on the Right there is a
small Crucifix, in the middle whereof is in-laid a small piece of the true
Cross of Christ.

From thence we went further into their Vestiary; which has several large
Rooms, where we staid until the Franciscans had put on their usual Habits to go
their Rounds with us, and to show us the holy places with the usual Ceremonies.
When they had made themselves ready we came out again into the Church, and left
the Chancel of the Grecians, that is in the middle, and the holy Grave upon our
Right Hand, and went to the Left to another Chapel, whereby the Grecians have
an Altar without, by which in the Marble Floor, are two Holes to be seen,
wherein they pretend that Christ was detained prisoner until they had fixed the
Cross for him on the place of the Sculls. This Chapel is within very deep, and
so dark, that when you go into it you believe that you go into a Cave, where
the Romanists believe, as I understood by a French Man of their Convent, who
was in a Priest's Habit, and as we went about, standing before the Altar, did
tell us, what they had done to Christ our Lord, in every place; that they did
detain Christ there (as in a place where into they threw the Dust) to mock him,
until his Cross was got ready for him.

Just by the Chapel behind the Chancel, they show on a high Arch another place,
where the Soldiers did share Christ's Clothes amongst them, and cast Lots for
his Coat.

Somewhat farther about they show a pair of Stairs of Twenty nine Steps, which
we descended, and came into a great Chapel of Queen Helen, situated underneath
Mount Calvaria, wherein is still toward the Right Hand of the Altar a glorious
and beautiful high Seat of Marble whereon the Queen used to sit, when she had a
mind to overlook the Workmen, to see whether they went on right; for she loved
Building mightily, as appears still to this day by the number of her mighty
Buildings. Behind this Seat are eleven Steps, which go further down Mount
Calvaria, where the Cistern has been, wherein Queen Helen found the Cross of
Christ.

Underneath on the Altar, it is true, there stands one, but it is new, and
therefore to be supposed, to be put there of late years. At the bottom of the
Stairs do also appear very plainly the cracked Rocks, as it is mentioned in
Scripture: And the rocks rent. And these Rents or Cracks are a foot wide, and
so deep as to reach from the top to the bottom of the rocky Mount of Calvaria.

When we came up into the Church again, they showed us at the bottom of Mount
Calvaria, a Chapel that was locked up, and in it underneath the Altar a large
blackish Stone with some reddish Spots upon it, in the shape of a piece of a
Pillar, which was brought thither from Pilate's House of Judicature, whereon
our Lord did sit, when the Soldiers did put the Crown of Thorns on his holy
Head, and did salute him as a King with their Knees bended, and did also mock
him, spit in his Face, and whip him. This Crown was twisted out of Thorns,
called by the Arabians, Nausegi and Athausegi; and by the Grecians and
Latinists, which have kept the same Name, Rhamnus, whereof there are three
sorts, the first of which is the true one (which is also common in France and
Italy) which does not only grow without, but also within the Town of Jerusalem
plentifully; this puts out early in the Spring, into long, thin and pliable
Twigs, with a great many long and strong Prickles. Just by it comes out above
from the Chancel of the Grecians, a path up to Mount Calvaria, which they
forced from the Georgians, as they did before from the Armenians, by giving
Money to the Turks. Which is very common in these Countries; for if one has
any Business to be done by the Turks, it cannot be easier obtained, than if you
bribe them more than your Adversary, wherefore it happens very often that
such places are taken away from one Nation, and given to the other.

Underneath this Way or Gallery you ascend nineteen Steps to go up to Mount
Calvaria, where we saw two Chapels one behind the other, which were open, and
had a very delicate Floor, artificially inlaid wirh Flowers of several Colors,
the like whereof is hardly to be seen any where else.

At the top of the Stairs we left our Shoes, and went in, and attended the
Priest, which did also there, as he had done in other places before, give us a
short account of what had been done to our Lord Jesus Christ in these places,
viz. that in the hindmost Chapel his Hands and Feet had been extended, and
sharp Nails drove through them, and so with a great deal of Indignation he was
fixed to the Cross. And that in the foremost our Lord Christ did hang on the
Cross between the two Malefactors, where there was still to be seen the Hole
wherein the Cross of our Lord did stand. He also briefly repeated to us the
Seven Words which he did say when he was upon the Cross; and for a Conclusion
he told us, that his Holiness the Pope had laid there Indulgences for ever, for
all Sins and Transgressions, to be distributed among the Pilgrims.

When we had done we went further into the Chapel, and saw first a place two
Cubits high, which was also covered with fine Ashen-coloured Marble, watered
with Blew, in the middle whereof was a round Hole about a Span over, and was
lined with Tin, wherein did stand the Cross of our Lord Christ, which is so
closely tipped and lined, that the Pilgrims can take neither much nor little of
this, nor any other place, as the holy Grave, or Bethlehem where Christ was
born, etc. Wherefore notwithstanding the pretense of the Franciscans, that in
their Agnus Dei's and Crucifixes are little pieces of the forementioned
places, it is all false and nothing of Truth in it, which they must confess
themselves, it being all covered with Marble. Near to this Hole, both to the
Right and Left, where the Crosses of the Two Thieves did stand, in the Room of
them two others are erected, where hard by that on the Left at the inside, is
to be seen a long and large Fissure in the Rock of the Mount, which the Queen
left on purpose open in the Marble Pavement, so that you may very plainly see
it, and it goes down very deep, as I have told you before.

When we come down again from the Mount, and come out behind the Chancel toward
the Gate of the great Church, there lies in the Pavement a fine and large
Marble, which is surrounded, or taken in, with Iron Bars in the same place,
where Joseph and Nicodemus, the Two Disciples of Christ, did wrap up the Body
of Christ, after it was taken down, in Linen with Spices.

From thence as we went further toward the Grave of our Lord Christ, we left
below toward the Left on the place of a Scull, another Chapel, wherein are the
Graves of some Christian Kings, viz. Gottofredi, and Baldewin, etc. which took
the Land of Promise by force from the Infidels, and came toward the Right by
the Chancel of the Greeks into a great round and high Building of the holy
Grave, which butts upon the Church, and is below toward it, it standing upon
very strong double Marble Pillars, quite open: it is covered with Lead, and
has at the top a great Window, where the Light falls in, which is four
Fathoms square, where underneath is the holy Grave of our Lord Jesus Christ
under the open Sky, so that at all times, both Rain, Dew and Snow fall upon it.

Before the Passage into the Sepulcher is a small Chapel, wherein is nothing of
any moment to be seen, than a Square Stone, just before the Door of the Grave;
this is of the true Rock of the Grave, about eight Inches thick, whereon (as
some say) the Angel of the Lord, that rolled back the Stone from the Door, did
sit. This was also useful and did serve to keep the great Gravestone, that was
before the Door of the Grave (which is hardly three Foot high) steady, that it
might not give backwards. That the Door was but low, and that the Stone did
lean before it, you may sufficiently see out of the Twenty fourth Chapter of
the holy Evangelist S. Luke, Verse 12. when he says: Then arose Peter, and ran
unto the sepulcher, and stooping down, etc. And also in the Twentieth Chapter,
and the Eleventh Verse of St. John, where you read: But Mary stood without at
the sepulcher weeping: and as she wep^, she st^oped down, and looked into the
sepulcher. And also the holy Apostle and Evangelist St. John came before Peter
to the Sepulcher, and looked into it, and saw the Linen Clothes, but he did
not go in himself. And we read also of the Door of the Sepulcher, and that the
great Stone before it used to be rolled. When you will go into the Door you
must stoop very much, and rather creep than go into it. The Sepulcher within is
even with the Floor of the Chapel, and of the whole Church, and is so large,
that four persons may stand very easily by one another.

After the Priest had ended his Speech which he made in the Sepulcher, of the
Resurrection of Christ, which we heard without in the Chapel, and had also
proclaimed the Popes Indulgences for ever, we went in also, and looked upon the
Rock whereout the Sepulcher was cut, and found it underneath on the Right Hand
(although it had been very much torn by the Infidels) still in very good Order, so
that we could discern it still distinctly, where now the Monks have made an
Altar, and covered it with a large fair Marble. Over it hung about Twenty
Lamps, which made the Sepulcher (which else is very dark) very light; one
whereof belongs to the Catholic King of Spain, another to the Christian King
of France, and others to other Princes; they look very carefully after them,
because they bring them in a considerable Revenue yearly. The holy Sepulcher is
lined within and without with gray Marble, and chiefly without some adorned
with carved Columns that stand between it.

On the outside of the Door of the Sepulcher does hang a fine Golden Piece,
wherein our Lord Christ is very artificially wrought, as he did appear after
his Resurrection unto Mary Magdalen first, and afterward also to the Women: at
the top of the Sepulcher is also a small round Steeple, which is covered with
Lead, and upheld with six double Marble Columns: besides this there is at the
Back of the Sepulcher another plain Chapel, wherein the JACOBITES, as I was
informed, perform their Devotion.

More at the Left Hand, as we went out of the Sepulcher again, near to it in
the Pavement, are two large Circles, rarely inlaid of Mosaic Work, in the
middle whereof are two round Stones of Marble, one whereof is white, and the
other red, lying in the same place of the Garden, where Mary Magdalen turned
about, and took our Lord Jesus Christ to be the Gardener. Thus much I thought
convenient to relate of these places that are shown in the Circuit.

When I found my self to be in these places where our dear Lord Christ did walk
about, teach, and by his Passion, Death, Resurrection and Ascension work our
Redemption, and procure and purchase our Salvation, from his Heavenly Father
again, I did remember and rejoice at these incomparable Benefits, and merciful
Treasures with all my heart; for it cannot otherwise be, but that every true
Christian, that is upon this Mount of Calvary, and thinks there of the Cross of
Christ, and in the Sepulcher of his glorious Resurrection, must find great
Passions within his Breast: as you also read in the last Chapter of St.
Matthew, Verse 8. of the Women, where you find these Words: And they departed
quickly from the sepulcher, with fear and great joy. This I found also in my
Heart and Mind, so that it was, as if I saw our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of
the Almighty God, to humble himself, and to become obedient to his Heavenly
Father, even to Death, nay, to the Death of the Cross, to bring us miserable,
sinful Men to Rights again, and to deliver us clearly from all Debts and
Punishments, and so to procure us the only and true Indulgences.

After we had seen Mount Calvaria, the Sepulcher of Christ our Lord, and other
places, we went into the Vestiary again to eat our Supper.

After Supper, they led us up into the Gallery (which is in the round Building
over against the holy Sepulcher) to stay there all Night: but some of the
Eastern Christians sung below in the Church, others did grumble together, and
played with their sweet sounding Cymbals (which were made of pure Metal about
the bigness of a large Walnut-shell) so pleasant Tunes or Music, that I rather
looked on them, and minded their Music, than slept.

The next Morning my Comerades, after they had been at Confession, and received
the Sacrament upon Mount Calvaria, came to me into the Church again, with an
intention to go round once more. So we saw the holy places once more, and at
last also the Chapel, which we left the day before at the Foot of the Hill on
our Left Hand, belonging to the Grecians; they let us in very willingly,
because of our Chaplain, who was also a Grecian, and showed us in it at the
furthest part where it was pretty dark, a large and deep Crack of the Rock:
afterward also on each side, some fine and high Tombs of some Kings, viz. that
of Gottefrid de Boulion, and others, which were for some time possessed of the
Land of Promise: these stand on delicate Columns, cut out of curious gray
Marble, whereon are some Epitaphs, which I thought to set down here underneath,
together with a short Relation when they did take the Land of Promise, and the
famous City of Jerusalem, how long they were possessed of it, and how many
Kings did succeed one another in it.

Plants observed by Monsieur Belon, to grow about some of the Holy Places.

Near Jerusalem on the Mounts, Hills and Valleys.
Adrachne seu Arbutus folio non serrato, Picea, Aria, Ilex cocci-glandifera,
Terebinthus, Lentiscus, several sorts of Cislus, Capparis Spin^sa, Paliurus or
Christ's Thorn, Fig Trees, Olives, Almonds a sort of Wild Peach, Jujubes or
Zizyphus, Esculus or Dwarf-Oak, Alaternus, White Mulberry for the Silkworms,
the Inhabitants trading a little in Silk and Kermes, which they gather from a
Holm Oak: Sesamum, Gossipium seu Xylon, Thymbra, Marum, Origanum Heracleoticum,
Tragoriganum, Salvia, Stachys, Ruta Sylv. Trifolium Asphaltites: a rare fort of
Hy^scyan^us on the Walls of Jerusalem: Azadarach Arbor in Palestina secundum D.
Monconny.

Between Mount Sinai, Mount Oreb and Suez.
Oenoplia a sort of Zizyphus; Arbor Lanigera or Cotton-Tree; Glans seu Nux
Vnguentaria, called Bal^nus Mirepsica; Alcanna a Species of Ligustrum, of great
use and sale for Dying and Coloring: Senna, Rose of Jericho, or Hiericho a
sort of Thlaspi, Colocynthis, Ambrosia, or Oak of Cappadocia.

Some Plants mentioned by Breynius, and taken out of Rauwolff's Hort. Sic. or
else found in those Countries where Rauwolff Traveled.
Acaciae similis Mesopotamica minutissimis foliis, siliqua integra contorta,
crassa, and obtusa; sive siliqua Nabathaea nobis,

Azadirachta foliis ramosis majoribus Syriaca sive vulgaris flore caeruleo maj.
Perlato, falso Sycomorus Italorum, Bellon. Astergir Rhasis, and incolis
Zenselacht Rauwolff.

Horminum Syriacum, tomentosum, foliis Coronopi, sive profunde laciniatis
Breyn. Horminum rarum foliis laciniatis Rauwolff. in Herbar. vivo.

Lapathum Rotundifolium montis Libani, semine maximo Breyn. Ribes Arabum
Rauwolf.

Lycium Buxi foliis angustioribus Syriacum Breyn. Lycium Dioscoridis Rauwolff.
in Herbar. Hadhad Arabibus, and Zaroa incolis montis Libani, ejusdem. In Syria
and Palestina observavit Rauwolffius.

Lycium Buxi foliis rotundioribus Syriacum vel Persicum Breyn. Hoc Lycium apud
Rauwolffium cum priore confunditur.

Marrubium villosum Syriacum, sive montis Libani Breyn.

Melanthium Syriacum minus frutescens latifelium, Rutae flore, fructu
tricapsulari, Breyn. Ruta voca^a Harmala J.B.

Melilotus minima Syriaca. Nephel sive Nephal, Ibenbaithar and Malasesae.

Plantago angustifolia minor lanuginosa Syriaca and Cretica, pediculis and
capitulis maturi^ate ad terram inflexis Breyn. Leontopodium Alpin. Exot.
Leontopodium Creticum C.B.

Plantago angustifolia p^niculis Lagopi C.B. Plantago quinquenervia cum
globulis albis pilosis J.B. Catanance Dioscoridis Rauwolff. in Herbario vivo.

Satureia frutescens Arabica folio fimbriato hirsuto Breyn. Sathar Arabum
Rauwolff.

Tithymalus (vel Tithymalo affinis) aphyllos dictus major latifolius, flore
sanguineo aviculae capitulum repraesentante Breyn. An Planta lactaria Xabra and
Camarronum Rhasis Rauwolff.

Jacea maxima Hicrosolymitana Alpin. Exot.

Marum Syriacum foliis incisis.

CHAP. IX.
Here follow some Epitaphs of the Christian Kings of Jerusalem, together with a
short Relation of their Reigns and mighty Deeds.

IN the Year of our Lord Christ 1096, when Henry the Fourth was Emperor of the
West, and Alexius the Grecian Emperor at Constantinople in the East. Pope Urban
the Second called a Council at Claremont in France, where they consulted
together which way the Land of Promise might be delivered again from the Hands
of the Infidels. Where it was concluded and agreed upon, to take the Field in
common, and for their General they chose Gottefrid de Boulion, Count of B^nonia
in France. Along with him went many Princes, Counts and Noblemen, viz. Baldwin
and Eustachius his Brethren, and many more, and brought together an Army of Six
hundred thousand Foot, and One hundred thousand Horse: so they went in several
Parties through H^g^ria, Greece, etc. till they had passed the Hellesp^nt, and
came into Asia the L^ss, (now called Nat^lia, and belonging to the Turks) where
they joined again, and took some Towns, to wit, Nicea, Tarsus, and also
Antiochia situated in Caelosyria. Yet in these Actions were a great many
Christians slain by the way, others were taken Prisoners, some were starved, a
great many died of Sicknesses, that came by changing of the Air in these hot
Countries; so that in three years time, for so long dured this March, there
were hardly Forty thousand Men (as some write) left, of the aforenamed Sum that
did arrive in the Land of Promise. These went with their Master and General
Gottefrid de Boulion before the City of Jerusalem, wherein were a greater
number of the Infidels, to defend it; yet they surrounded the City, and took it
in a little time, and killed a great number of them. When they had taken the
Town on the 15th. Day of July, in the Year 1099, and had reduced it, they laid
down their Armors and Arms, and went to visit the Holy Sepulcher with great
Devotion, and chose there unanimously their General King of Jerusalem, who at
their request undertook the Government, would not be called King, nor Crowned
with a Golden Crown in that place, where our Savior that Arch-King had worn
one of Thorns. After he had obtained this Victory, he also subdued some
adjacent Towns, viz. Joppe called Jassa, Porphria situated at the Foot of Mount
Carmel (by the Arabians and Turks called Hayphe) Tiberias and the Consines of
Galilea. He also overcame with a handful of his Men, the Captain of the Sultan,
who had a great number of Men with him, and killed above Thirty thousand of
them. But as nothing is lasting in human Affairs, he died in the Eleventh Month
of his Reign, and was buried in the abovementioned Chapel, and upon his
Tombstone is still to be read this following Epitaph.

Hic jacet inclitus dux Gottefridus de Boulion, qui totam istam terram
acquisivit cultui Christiano: cujus anima regnet cum Christo. Amen. After his
Decease the Christians unanimously chose his Brother Baldewin King of Jerusalem
in his place: He overcame with a small number of Men the King of Egypt, that
was Two and twenty thousand strong, and killed the greatest part of his Men.
And when he died in the Eighteenth Year of his Reign, they chose Cousin
Baldewin of Burgo, the Second of that Name, King. This was a great Warrior, and
did many Heroic Deeds with few Men against the Heathens; he overcame and took
Prisoner Gatzim the Turkish Prince of the Lesser Asia, with a great number of
Men; but soon after in the Fifth Year of his Reign, he was beaten in a Battle
by the King of the Parthians, and carried away Prisoner. In the mean time, the
Venetians and Genoueses came with Two hundred and seventy Ships, and dispersed
and beat the Armada of the Saracens, and sunk many of their Ships, and took
also the strong Town of Tyrus, so that both by Sea and Land there was abundance
of Blood shed. When the Enemies saw this, that they set the King at liberty
again in the Eighteent Month of his Imprisonmenth, for a Sum of Money; after
that he did execute in the six following Years of his Reign, in order to an
Enlargement of his Kingdom, many glorious and famous Deeds. He overthrew the
King of the Ascalonites, who was assisted by the Egyptians, and fell upon
Jerusalem in one single Battle, and also beat the King of Damascus in three
several ones, as you may see by his Epitaph here underneath written.

Rex Baldewinus, Judas alter Machabaeus,
Spes patriae, vigor ecclesiae, virtus utriusque
Quem formidabant, cui dona, tributa ferebant
Cedar, and Aegyptus, Dan, and homicida Damascus
Proh, dolor, in modico clauditur hic tumulo.
In the Year 1131, the Crown was presented to Fulcon, Count of Andegavia, and
Son-in-law to the before-said Baldewin, who also obtained several Victories
against the Persians and Turks. But in his time there arose some Differences
among the Christians, and some Conspiracies, which proved afterward very
disadvantageous to him, he lost also Edessa, a City in Mesopotamia, which King
Baldewin the First had conquered before, which the Turks took by force from
him. This King left two Sons Baldewin and Alamric, and after he had reigned
Eleven Years, he fell dead when he hunted a Hare on full speed. After him his
Son Baldewin the Third was Crowned, who also died in the Twenty fourth Year of
his Reign, after he had fought several Battles, and taken some Towns. Then his
Brother Alamric came to the Crown, who was a great Warrior, so that he was very
fit for this Dignity, he obtained many Victories against Sultan Saladin. But
afterward when the Scales were turned, he died also after his return from
Egypt in the Year 1178, his Son Baldewin the Fourth, and the Seventh King,
undertook the Government of the Kingdom in the Thirteenth Year of his Reign.
This, although he was leprous, yet he managed his Business very well, and
defended his Dominions courageously and gloriously against the Infidels. And
because he would not be married by reason of his Distemper, therefore he
married his Sister Sibylla to a Marquis of Monteferrato, called William. She
was brought to Bed, in the first year, of a Son, and called him after his Uncle
Baldewin. But when William died, he married her again to Guido of Lusignan,
Count of Joppe; with this condition, that after his Decease he should Rule the
Kingdom for his Son-in-law, and be his Guardian so long until he came at age.
But he behaving himself very ill in the mean while, the King grew so angry with
him, that he would by no means suffer him to live in his Dominions, and ordered
another to fill up his place, one Raymond, a Count of Tripoli. Soon after the
King died before his Son was quite Twenty Years old, and was also buried in the
Temple of the holy Sepulcher. Within Eight Months after, did also die the true
Heir of the Crown, the Son of Sibylla his Sister, and was also buried by the
other Kings; so that we find still on three several Tomb-Stones that stand
close one behind the other, viz.

Septimus in tumulo puer hic regnum tumulatus
Est, Baldewinus regum de sanguine natus.
Quem tulit e mundo sors primae conditionis
Vt Paradysiacae loca possideat regionis.
So by the Incitation of his Mother, Guido was proclaimed the last King.

Raymund the Count of Tripoli, was extremely disgusted at this Election, being
that the Kingdom was already recommended to him, wherefore he resolved to go to
war with him, and that he might be strong enough for him, he made a League with
Sultan Saladin, to his own Grief and Ruin. For when the Sultan saw these
Differences between them two, he raised suddenly a great Army, and took
Jerusalem, and the whole Country by force of Arms. So the Kingdom of Jerusalem,
after the Christians had been possessed of it Eighty eight Years, and Nineteen
Days, was retaken again by the Infidels, not without great Loss and Damage.

Not long after, the Infidels did pull down the Walls of the City, turned the
Churches into Stables (saving the Temple of Solomon) and spoiled the holy
Sepulcher of our Lord Christ, which in all the other Wars did still remain
entire, so that only one side of the Rock thereof is now to be seen. This was
done by the Infidels on purpose, to show us the foolish Zeal we have to conquer
and visit the holy Grave and City, as if Christ were still in it. This and
other places had been quite demolished also, had it not been for the Eastern
Christians, the Armenians, Surians, etc. which did stop their Fury, by giving
of them a great Sum of Money, and so redeemed it.

CHAP. X.
A Common Account of several sorts of Christians, but chiefly of them that are
always to be found in the Temple of Mount Calvaria: And also how these, and
many other Strangers, are treated by the Turkish Emperor (as by their chief
Head, to whom they generally are subjected) and his Officers.

IN the Temple of Mount Calvaria live Christians of several Nations; as Latins,
or Italians, Abyssins, Graecians, Armenians, Georgians, Nestorians, Syrians,
Jacobites, etc. which for the most part are Priests and Friars, which are of so
different Opinions in many Articles of Faith, that many of them might sooner be
reckoned amongst the Superstitious and Heretics than Christians; wherefore
each of them have their peculiar Habitation and Chapel, that they may perform
their Devotion undisturbed by one another. The Turkish Emperor also lets them
alone, and does not at all trouble them for their Religion, nor endeavor to
bring them over to the Mahumetan Religion and Alcoran; and is very well
contented to receive his Yearly Tribute, which is exactly demanded as it comes
to be due. I have seen many of them in the Temple, to go up and down in their
peculiar Habit, and once I did attend at their Devotion, so that I easily
passed away the time, that the Turks kept us Locked up in it.

Their Pilgrims resort thither Yearly, chiefly against the great Feasts or Holy
Days, in great Numbers, to see the holy Places, not only from the Eastern, but
also from the Western Countries: These that are under the subjection of the
Sultan, which they are almost all of them (except the Latins and Abyssins) must
pay him Yearly the fourth part of all their Revenues: He that has four Olive,
Almond, or Quince-Trees, must yield one of them to be the Emperors. So in their
Harvest, every fourth Sheaf is also his; their Harvest begins in the
beginning of April, and ends in May, as you may see, Deuteronomy. chap. 16. verse. 9.
Seven weeks (that is from Easter to Whitsonday) shall thou number unto thee:
begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the
sickle to the corn. Besides this Imposition, they have another; that is, They
must pay Yearly for every Head that is Male, the Poor as well as the Rich, one
Ducat, and sometimes two, chiefly when the Sultan intends to go to War with
the Christians; then he begins to lay these Taxes upon them a Year
beforehand, and has it Gathered in. He that has not wherewithal to pay it,
is forced either to sell one or the other of his Children to perpetual Slavery,
or else to give one of them to the Grand Turk, according to his liking to be
his own for ever: And what is more, he sends every 4th or 5th Year through
all his Dominions his Emissaries, viz. Wallachia, Servia, Bosnia, Albania,
Colchid, etc. to fetch away every third Son of his Christian Subjects, and they
always choose that which they like best; and so they bring together a great
Number, and call them Azanoglans, and give them to the Janissaries to be their
Servants. These have in some chief places their Exercises from their Infancy,
that in time they may be fit to be made Officers and Commanders in time of War.
In this the Turks exercise great Cruelty and Pride, they spare no Body, for if
a Christian does possess some small matter of Riches, he must either keep it
very privately, or else with a great deal of discretion say, That it is all
belonging to his Emperor and him. So if the Grand Signior has occasion for any
thing of theirs whatsoever, it must be granted him without any refusal: But
what a trouble and heartbreaking this must be to the poor Parents, not only to
have their Children that are free by Nature, forced to such a Brutal way of
Life and Education, but, what is more, taken away from Baptism to Circumcision,
from the Christian Congregation and Faith, into a severe Slavery and
Superstition, wherein they are brought from their Duty to their Parents, into a
mortal enmity against them and their other Relations, every Christian may with
himself consider.

The Turks, where there is choice, take them that are single and young,
because, they being still infirm, and but slightly grounded in their Faith,
they are the sooner seduced, chiefly if they are Instructed in their Mahumetan
Laws, and Educated therein for a while, for then they soon forget their own
Faith, and grow in theirs, and so as they grow up in Years, they also grow in
their Malice, and become to be worse than they themselves, as daily Experience
does sufficiently testify.

Of the same stamp are also these Christians, that after they have been taken
Prisoners in the War, turn Mamalucks (which they call in their Language Haracs)
and are Circumcised. These are free from all Imposition as well as the Turks,
save only the Tenth, but dare not go away without their Masters leave, upon
pain of Death; if they are taken, they are according to their Law, without any
Trial, Sentenced and Condemned to be burnt. And these also are confirmed and
obdurated in their impious and base Life, that they forget God and themselves,
never think of coming home again to hear the Gospel Preached, or to see their
Friends and Relations again. Yet the Prisoners are not so very much pressed by
the Turks to deny their Faith and turn, except there should be found one or
more great Persons among them, for such they always use to press more, and
endeavor to turn them one way or other, and promise them great Preferment if
they will declare for their Religion; for they are in hopes, that if they could
persuade them, a great many more of the little ones would also come over with
them. If such are persuaded by them and turn, they are entertained by the Turks
very Honorably, and called Tscheleby, that is, Gentlemen, and endued with great
Revenues, but yet they do not easily confide in them, or put any Trust into
their hands, and do not esteem such inconstant and faltering Men in their
Heart, although they carry themselves very friendly before their faces, for
they make account, That he that will easily deny his Religion, will also betray
his Prince and Country if occasion should serve. I have known in these
Countries some Slaves, whom their Masters that bought them as their Servants,
did very much press to be Circumcised, but when they did mightily resist, and
excuse themselves, and say, That they could not admit thereof with a safe
Conscience, and if by force they should take away their Prepuce and Circumcise
them, that notwithstanding all that, they could not Circumcise their Hearts,
and therefore they desired them not to trouble themselves any further with
them, they were for all that ready and willing to serve them honestly and
faithfully to the utmost of their power: So their Masters have been satisfied
with this Answer, and have pressed them no more. But if it should happen that a
Christian should be taken in one of their Mosques (for they as unclean Men are
forbid to come there) or should dispute with them, or speak ill of their
Prophet Mahomet and his Laws, or should pronounce these words, which are almost
written every where in their Churches, and underneath their Gates, in their
Arabian Language: Leila hillalla Mahammet rasur alla; that is to say, O God
only God, and Mahomet a Prophet of God, he must (because they are an Epitome of
their Religion, Confession, Belief and Laws) suffer himself to be Circumcised,
or else lose his Life. For being that Mahomet did defend his false Doctrine
described in the Alcoran, rather with the Sword than with Reason and true
Grounds, that it might not be discovered, and so his Adherents leave him.
Mahomet to prevent this, by the Devils Inspiration, has strengthened it with
strong Points and Articles, viz. That no body shall discourse or dispute with
any Sectaries whatsoever, much less believe them, or read their Books, as such
wherein is no ground to be found, because all that is good and true in the Old
Testament, testified by the Jews, and in the New one, by the Christians, is by
him taken out and Transcribed into his Alcoran, and therefore it must be
believed and kept as the Word of God, without any scruple or search; and he
that speaks or writes against it, must fall by the Sword, and besides be
Damned for ever.

Who does not see that this subtle Mahomet did this, that any Body that he
gets once into his Snares, or that falls into his Net, might be so entangled,
that he must be forced to keep there, to perish and to be damned for ever;
notwithstanding all his sweet Promises of great Privileges, Salaries, and
Permission of Sodomitish Sins, Robbing, Burning, Perjury, etc. which
Transgressions they regard but very little, seeing that according to their
Prophets promise, if they Pray but often, and Wash themselves often, they do
not only not hurt them, but by continual usage of the beforementioned means,
they become to be cleaner than we Christians from our Sins, in the Bath of
Regeneration. To these Traditions of Mahomet, the Turks and Moors stick so
close, and believe them implicitly, according to the Commands of Mahomet; so
that one, although he be of another Opinion, because they will hear no
Contradiction nor Objection, is forced to hold his Tongue and say nothing. And
in case you should ask them, why they are forbid to Eat Pork, or Drink Wine?
they answer and say, That their Parents did so before them, partly because they
are unclean, and partly because they are forbid it in their Alcoran; or else
that if they should over-fill themselves with it, so that they should bring it
up again, it might contaminate their Clothes, and so they should commit a great
Rusticity; so that they know not how to give any reason concerning their
Religion. Wherefore their Law ought to be called or reputed Cruel, and a
Tyrannical one, that is rather upheld by the Sword than by Reason and Justice;
which also appears from thence, that they carry a Naked Scymiter before the
Noble-mens Sons, when they carry them about the Streets in order to be
Circumcised; and also their Priests, chiefly those that are called Antippi,
after Prayers and Sermon, show unto the People from a high place, a burning
Torch in one Hand, and a Naked Scymiter in the other, to encourage their own
Adherents, and to frighten those that are of a contrary Opinion; and so Mahomet
pretends to his Adherents, that God has bidden him to Conquer all other
Nations by the Sword, until they confess that there is no other God besides
God, and Mahomet his Prophet; or else agree to pay him Yearly Tribute, and to
be his obedient Subjects; if they follow his directions, his Laws will endure
so long as they defend them by the Sword. Now how strictly they have hitherto
prosecuted these his Commandments, the Inhabitants of the Eastern Countries
have formerly, to their grief, sufficiently Experienced, viz. Asia, Syria, the
Land of Promise, Egypt, Thracia, Greece, etc. which they have not only
Conquered, and to their own great Improvement subdued, but have also infected
them with their Poisonous Doctrine to such a degree, that in these our times
there are but very few to be found in these parts, that do adhere unto the true
Religion.

It being so then, that God Almighty has visited them with these great
punishments, by reason of their manifold Sins and Ingratitude, for his Holy and
Sacred Word, and that we also are guilty of these and the like Sins and Vices,
we cannot wonder that the Almighty and Just God, should, according to our
Demerits, send also such a horrid Tyrant against us, to terrify us very much,
and come so near to us, that we must expect every moment (except we amend) the
like Punishments and Execution. And so we hear daily, to our grief, that this
potent Tyrant is continually at Work, and takes one strong Town after another;
and what is more, they take often in their Excursions a great number of our
Brethren and Sisters, part whereof they Murder Barbarously, others they carry
away into perpetual Slavery. When they have obtained a Victory, and have got
Booty, there is ready, and at hand, several Sutlers, that drive a great Trade
with Buying and Selling poor Prisoners; these buy them of the Soldiers, Chain
them (after they have given the Grand Turk the Tenths thereof, according to his
Choice and Pleasure) together with long Chains, and so drive them away
miserably, as if they were Beasts, to the chief Trading Towns, to sell them
with profit again to other^ that come thither from Foreign Countries. There you
find Weekly, in their Betzars or Exchanges, many Prisoners of several Nations,
viz. Christians, Moors, Arabians, Indians, Abyssins, and amongst them Young and
Old, Men and Women, some whereof are White, and others Black; thither come the
Chapmen and cheapen them; they have liberty to look upon their Naked Bodies, as
if they were Beasts, and to feel them, whether they are sound in their Limbs,
or whether they have any defect, which they always fear. If they like their
Bargain, the Buyers take them home with them into their small Habitations or
Tents, and put them (chiefly those that were given to Idleness, and have
Learned no Trade) to any sort of hard Labor, and all that they get so
belongs to their Master, who disposes of it as he pleases. Wherefore those
that keep many Men and Maids, esteem themselves richer for it; and sometimes
they Marry them together, and when they beget Children, they are Slaves as well
as themselves, and he has power to Educate them, and to dispose of them as he
pleases. Wherefore the Christians (that to their Temporal Punishment, they may
not also acquire Eternal ones, for their Childrens sake) in these Countries do
seldom Marry, but rather study how to make their escape (if they are not
hindered for want of that Language, and by Unskilfulness of the Roads); or else
they go with their Master before a Justice, in their Language called Cadi, and
there buy their Liberty for a Sum of Money, or else agree with him for a
certain time, and so make a Contract with him concerning their Liberty, which
commonly these do that intend to persevere in their Christian Religion, or
undertake to get something by their Handiwork, that when the time is past, or
the Money paid, the Justice may, according to the Instrument before made by him
at their Request, declare him Free, and give him a Pass, to show upon the Road,
that he may not be molested. Other ways to get their Liberty there are but very
few, except their Master should happen to Dye, which commonly in their last
Will, declare that their bought Servants, after the opening of it, shall have
their Liberty. Sometimes it happens, that from others they buy false Letters
(which are soon found out in these Countries) and so by the help of them get
away Clandestinely.

But yet that but a few Slaves come from thence to us again, the chief reason
is not, as many think, Because the Turks press them to change their Religion;
for although they sometimes threaten them, as they use to do or treat them
somewhat more hardly than is usual in their Servitude, as Christians also do
very often, but rather their Secure and Impenitent Life which they lead,
forgetting God and his holy Word to that degree, that they know not how to give
an Account of their Christian Faith and Religion; nay (what is more) they know
not the difference between these two Religions, which are so vastly differing,
although they would, if they did know it, rather suffer Death than be seduced
from the true Religion, and precipitate the Soul, together with the Body, into
Damnation. When then the knowledge of the Truth is gone, and Faith almost, if
not quite Extinguished, so that there is but little hope left of their
Salvation, they daily forsake their Religion as fast as Worm-eaten Fruit falls
from the Tree; begin to think how to compensate their bodily suffering, they
may lay up and get Money by Robbing and Burning, and so get Privileges, to live
according to their own Will and Pleasure, like Beasts in daily Uncleanness; and
when they are hardened in it, they come at last to such a degree of Sottishness
and Brutality, that (as St. Peter says) they believe the chief good of this
World to consist in Voluptuousness, wherein they perish at length, and must
expect the Wages of Unrighteousness with the rest.

When the Turks have Conquered one or more (which they discern at first by
their Forefinger, which these that have a mind to turn use to show to them
first, as a Token by lifting of it up over their Heads, chiefly in their
Mosques) they rejoice in them mightily, and are clearly of Opinion, That this
their Work is precious and good before God, and that their Religion is
confirmed and upheld by the assenting of many; wherefore they soon meet
together, to confirm these Turn-coats with their usual Ceremonies, and so to
make them true Turks. First they lay before them a Cross, whereon they must
trample three times, spit upon it, and repeat every time some words after them
taken out of the Alcoran; so the Christians that will be made Turks pronounce
them after them. When this is done, three of them are ready with their Bows,
and shoot together up, and give them before the Arrows fall down again Turkish
Names: Then (if they be Men) they set them up upon high Horses, put them on
their best Clothes, and Dress them neatly, and so lead them for two days
together through all the Streets, that every body may see them, and know them
to be such as do adhere to their Religion, and so to be free to walk and deal
among them without any hinderance. If they are of an higher degree, and of
great Authority, sometimes Ride along with them some Turkish Gentlemen of
Quality, in their best Dress, accompanied by many Janissaries, who fire here and
there in the Streets for Joy, but chiefly in those places where they spy
Christians. They have with them all sorts of Musical Instruments, viz. The
Drums, great Drums, and little Drums, (which they beat at that same time both
above and below) Hautboys, and others: They also carry in this their Procession
long Streamers upon long Poles, almost like unto them that we see in the
Cross-walks in our Frieries; and besides, the Rabble that run before and behind
make such a noise, that one cannot hear the other. When all this is over, they
Circumcise them at last on the third Day, and then they reckon such an one to
be a true Musulman, that is, A Circumcised one, who has leave to go to their
Mosques without being hindered, to buy their Books and Writings, and to Read
them, which must not be sold to others that are not of their Religion, upon
pain of great punishment, that they may not come into unclean hands, or to be
trod upon as Writings of no Worth.

Their Jews, whereof there are a great many among them, and are called by them
Choifut or Chifoutler, excel ours in Cheating and Cozening by far, and there is
no doubt but they would oftentimes renounce their Religion to make profit: But
the Turks envy them more than we Christians, they do not Trust them, they
reckon them not worthy to Eat with them as they do with us Christians, nor
Marry with them; much less will they receive them as any thing related to their
Religion, except it be, that before for some days they have frequented the
Christian Churches, and there are Baptized, and have often Eaten Pork, that
unclean Meat that is also forbidden unto them. When they have done thus, they
proceed with them after the same manner as is before said.

Concerning the Christians that live among the Turks, as the Surians,
Armenians, etc. they have here and there in great Trading Cities, their
peculiar Streets which they Inhabit, and they are commonly without in the
Suburbs; and thereabout also small and low Churches, where they perform their
Devotions. When they begin to be decayed of Age, or are burnt by Fire, or
destroyed in War time, if they will have them built up again, they must have
leave first of the Turkish Magistrate, and lay down a good Sum of Money, which
grants nothing except you grease them well.

The Turks (to save Charges) suffer no Bells nor Clocks, neither in their own
nor other Temples, nor will they give leave to the Christians to Ring to Church
with them, so that all day long you neither hear a Bell Toll, nor a Clock
Strike. Instead thereof, the Turks have, according to their Alcoran, their Five
Hours set, which their Priests call out from the high Steeples, and in the
Exchanges, with a loud Voice, and with stopped Ears, and cry, Alla Haickbar,
that is, God is true; and then, Leila hillalla, Mahammet rasur alla; each of
them he repeats twice, to call the people to their Devotions. But the
Christians have a Servant, that at the Hours of Prayers and Sermon goes about
with a strong Cudgel, and strikes, in every Street, on one or more Doors made
strong for that purpose, as if it were upon an Anvil, several times, which
resounds through all the Street.

When the Christians pray, they observe almost the same Ceremonies with the
Turks, Persians and Arabians, etc. they turn themselves toward the South, they
speak low in the beginning, lift up their Hands, bend their Heads and whole
Bodies downwards; then they fall down upon their Knees, kiss the Earth several
times, and pray with great Devotion, which Custom the Jews keep also, and that
without doubt, because the Patriarchs used the same in their Prayers, as we
read in the Seventeenth Chapter of Genesis, Verse 3. and 17. And Abraham fell
on his face: Exodus xvii. 11. When Moses held up his hands Israel prevailed: and
in 1 Kings xviii. 42. is said* And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel, and he
cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees: and also
Nehemiah viii. 6. And all the people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up
their hands: and they bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord with their
faces to the ground. So did Christ himself, lying on his Face, vehemently pray
the Third Time. If we Christians did but mind the Fervency and Zeal of the
Heathens and Superstitious in their Prayers, we should see what reason we have
to awake from our Laziness and Coldness in our Prayers, and to pray with
earnestness. There live in Turkey so many Christians, that they inhabit the
greatest part of that Country; wherefore considering their great number (to
speak according to all human probability) it would be an easy matter to subdue
the Turks without the assistance of any outlandish Power, and to drive them out
of their own Countries, did not God Almighty, who visits us for our manifold
Sins, set them over us as a Punishment: For although the Turkish Emperor sets
his B^glerby's and Bashaws, as great and mighty Lords here and there over great
Provinces and Countries, to rule them with great Zeal and Severity, and and to
order all Business according to his pleasure, so that among so great a number
of People, and considering their severe Reign and Government (where small
Transgressions are vigorously punished) there is not easily to be feared an
Insurrection: yet he could not be half so strong, without the help of the
Christians that live amongst his People, nor be able to bring together such
mighty and numerous Armies of good and experienced Soldiers.

The Christians, for the most part, wear as well as the Turks long Clothes, and
gird their Loins with fine and soft Rollers, some of Silk, and others made of
Cotton; in them they keep still to this day their Money, chiefly the poor, as
some with us, that have no Pockets, do in their Handkerchiefs, tied up in a
strong knot; the same without doubt did the Ancients wear, as the Words of
Christ our Savior, Matthew. x. 9. give us to understand; where he speaks to
his Disciples, and sends them into the whole world, saying, Provide neither
gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses. (In the German Bible we read
Girdles.) With such a one, without doubt, the Prophet Agabus, did tie the Hands
and of the Apostle Paul in Cesarea in the House of Philip, when he would make
him to understand, that the Jews at Jerusalem would take and tie him, and at
length deliver him up into the hands of the Heathens, as you may read in the
21st. of the Acts. Now although the Christians go as well as the Turks in long
Clothes, so that that way they are hardly to be distinguished from one another;
yet they are distinguished by the peculiar Colors of their Turbants, which
they wear; for the Turks wear white ones, as also do the Arabians, and
Persians, only these put behind to it a red colored Cloth, and the others make
it up in another form, and let one of the ends hang down behind, to defend
their naked Necks from the excessive heat of the Sun. But the uncircumcised
that have a differing Religion are not allowed to wear a white one, unless
another Color be mixed with it, much less a green one; which Color being
their Mahomets, and esteemed to be holy, is not allowed to be worn by any Body,
neither Turks nor Christians, (except to their Priests and some Pilgrims that
have been on Pilgrimage to Mecha) neither in Turbants nor other Clothes. So the
Armenians have blue; the Nestorians flesh colored: the Grecians, Maronites,
Surians, and others have white ones with blue Lists wrought into them. But the
Jews have yellow ones, as they have in our Country yellow Bonnets: yet when
they have a mind to travel afar off, as into Mesopotamia, Assyria, Persia, or
into the Indies, etc. (seeing that the Turks hate them, that so they may travel
the securer, and with little Charges) they put on white ones by the way, and
pretend to be Tschelebys, or Noble Men, nay sometimes Messengers of the Cambre,
which they may easily do, because they understand the Languages, yet not
without great danger. But they stay not long in a place, that they may not come
to be known.

There are also some Jewish Physicians, which instead of the yellow Turbants,
wear red high Hats, of Scarlet, they exceed in number the Turkish ones, that go
clothed like the common people. They are commonly more Able and Learned,
because they can read the Physical Books of Galen and Avicen, etc. in their
original Languages Greek and Arabic; which they generally understand. But for
the Latin Tongue, very few of them understand that, neither have they any good
Books in it, but what they have received in the taking the Island Cyprus.

So much of the Christians in general. But because I have made mention of
Christians of several Nations, that inhabit the Temple of Mount Calvaria, what
places in and without the Town of Jerusalem, each of them are possessed of, and
with what Errors in Religion they are contaminated, I cannot but relate in
particular of each of them, as much as I could understand and learn in that
little time.

CHAP. XI
Of the GREEKS.

AS the ancient Greeks in former days did excel almost all other Nations in
Wisdom and Understanding, and used to have their Children instructed at home in
their own Universities in all manner of Learning; so in our times we find the
contrary; for in all Greece there is not one University to be found, where such
Discipline and Learning flourishes as did anciently: just so is the desire of
Learning, and instructing their Children extinguished in them. They take
greater delight in idle Discourses, and rather love Idleness, which they have
learned very well, since they truckle under the Turkish Yoke. It Is true, they
write the Greek Language, but which is as corrupt and different from the
Ancient, as the Italian is from the Latin. The Turks despise them for their
Laziness and Cowardice, and on the contrary they love the Germans, French and
Italians, and praise them, saying, That they are stout and courageous Soldiers;
they call them all by the same Name Franci, because the Divisions of our
Country are unknown to most of them.

In former Ages they had here and there in large and eminent Towns, instead of
the Pope (whom they will not obey, nor be subject unto) their Patriarch,
Archbishops and Bishops, whereof some are still kept up: but after the Turks
did take and possess themselves of their Country, there is fewer of them in
number, and they have smaller Revenues.

Without their Country, they have in great trading Cities, as Cayro, Alepo,
Antiochia of Syria, Venice, etc. their peculiar Churches, and chiefly in some
holy places in the Land of Promise. As at Jerusalem the Temple of Mount
Calvaria, the place of Sculls whereon Christ was Crucified: and also the
beautiful Chancel that is in the middle of the Church: wherein is a round hole
about a span over in a stone, which is, as they pretend, the middle of the
Earth, according to the Words of the Kingly Prophet David, when he says: God,
who now is my King from the beginning, has wrought our selves on the middle of
the Earth. Besides these, they have another called the Holy Cross, about an
English Mile out of Town, which, as they pretend, is built on the same place
where the Tree did grow, whereof they made the Cross of Christ. Besides this
they have a great many more which I reckon unnecessary to mention here.

Some of their Church-Doors are so low, that you must stoop when you will go
through them.

They believe that the Holy Ghost does proceed only from the Father, and not
from the Son. They keep yearly two great Fasts, and they eat Flesh upon the
Sabbath, or Saturday, at pleasure: they sing the Mass in their own Language,
that every Body may understand it. In their Churches they suffer no embossed
Work, nor carved Images, but have plain Pictures on Boards, or on the Walls.
They do not believe a Purgatory (as the Papists there called Latini) nor that
our Praying, Fasting or Offering, for the Dead, can do them any good. And they
are mightily displeased, that the Roman Priests do not, according to the plain
words of St. Paul, marry as well as they, nor give the Lords Holy Supper in
both kinds, as our Lord himself did institute it. Wherefore they condemn such
Errors of the Popish Church, and excommunicate the Pope and his Adherents on
the holy Friday yearly. And because they reckon them to be superstitious, they
will not permit them to say Mass upon their Altars; but if they should do it,
they accuse them before the Turkish Magistrates.

So it happened when I first came over, that they were very angry with a Papist
that had said Mass upon their Altar, and so had profaned it, wherefore they did
immediately consecrate the Altar again, and had the Priest before the Cadi: and
they brought it so far, that he was mulcted Five hundred Ducats, to pay in a
short time. When he thought that the Punishmenr was greater than the Trespass
or Transgression, he did seek for help at Alepo and Tripoli by the French and
Italian Consul, but did obtain no great matter, so that he was still in
election to pay the Forfeiture.

CHAP, XII.
Of the SURIANS that esteem themselves to be Christians.

AMong the Eastern Christians we also find them that are called Surians,
whereof there is a great many, but chiefly in Syria. They have like unto the
Jews in several Towns their peculiar Churches. In Jerusalem they live in the
Church of St. Mark, which stands in the place, where the House stood formerly,
at the Door whereof St. Peter the Apostle did knock, when the Angel had
delivered him out of Prison.

In their Religion they follow for the greatest part the Greeks; they
Administer the Sacrament in Leavened Bread: and they say their Masses like unto
them in the vulgar Arabian Tongue. They are a sort of poor, naked, covetous and
helpless People; their Gowns reach only to their Knees, as those of the
Maronites, some whereof are wrought of course Goats Hair, striped black and
white, such as the Arabians make use of commonly, and almost alike unto their
Mescha, which they use for Sacks and Tents, and they wear nothing underneath
them, but Shirts without Neckbands, as is usual in all the Eastern Countries,
they wear High Shoes, which serve them for Stockings and Breeches also, being
tied up with Straps. They are subject unto the Turks, who make use of them as
Laborers, both by Water and Land. They also mind their Trade more than their
Religion; wherefore having lived so long among the Turks, they have already
assumed their Customs and Manners in Temporal and Spiritual Affairs, and are
thereby become so confident and secure, that now adays the Difference between
these two Religions are esteemed by them to be small and frivolous. If a
Christian has to deal with them, and desires to buy something of them, either
Opium, Scammony, or any other the like Drug, which they commonly falsify, he
must look to himself as if he had to deal with Jews.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the GEORGIANS.

NEar unto the glorious City of Trapozinta, situated on the Euxine Sea,
begins the Country of the Georgians, and butts toward the South upon
Armenia. These are very civil and simple People, but yet strong and brave
Warriors; they esteem and honor among other Saints, but chiefly for warlike
Businesses, as their Patron, the Knight St. George, from whom they take their
Denomination. Their Merchants come very often in great Caravans to Alepo, and
are, according to all appearance in their shape and posture like unto the
Persians, only that these are more whitish, and the others more tawny and
browner: they wear also like them short flying Coats, and long and wide
Drawers, etc. They have, as the rest, their Patriarchs and Bishops, who although
they are differing and dissenting in some points; yet for the most part they
follow the Doctrine and Errors of the Grecians, and so they have and use the
same Writings and Offices. Their Priests are, as well as those of the
Armenians, allowed to be married; but yet if either of them should happen to
die, they must not marry again. In Jerusalem they are also possessed of their
peculiar places, wherein they sing and exercise the Offices, and chiefly of one
in the Church of Mount Calvaria, in the place near the Sepulcher of our Lord
Christ, where he did first appear unto Mary Magdalen in the similitude of a
Gardener, after his Resurrection.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the ARMENIANS and their Religion.

THE Armenians possess a large Country, which is chiefly divided into two
parts, viz. The Lesser Armenia, which is now subject to the Turks; and the
Greater, now called Turco-Mannia by some, which is partly belonging to the
Sophy King of Persia. In it arise two great Rivers, the Euphrates and the
Tigris, which run a great way toward the South, mix together below Bagadet, and
at length fall into the Persian Gulf, by the Town Balsora or Batzera. They are
pious and honest People, innocent, but very zealous in their Religion, and
receive Strangers readily that come to them, and give them Lodging, as I have
often found it in my Travels. They are also very much inclined to help and
assist the poor Slaves, that are under Turkish Confinement, and ready to help
them out. Their Merchants, whereof there are many amongst them, are dispersed
not only over all Turkey, but also Persia, the Indies, and many other
Countries; wherefore they have in all chief Towns of Trading, as Antiochia,
Alepo situated in Coelosyria, Orpha, etc. their peculiar Warehouses and
Churches: and also in Jerusalem (whither they go in great numbers) the
beautiful Church of St. Jacob the Greater: and also below near to the place of
Sculls, another Chapel locked up, etc. and have commonly before their Chancels
large Hangings, behind which the Priests keep separated from the People.

These, although they agree in very many Points and Articles exactly with those
of the Reformed Religion, yet notwithstanding they have some Errors worth to be
rejected, and some scandalous Customs besides. So you may see them here and
there cry over the Graves of their deceased Friends: for to give them Visits
they go out in the morning early, the greater part of them old Women, and there
they make such Mourning and and Howling, that the Travelers that come by (for
their Graves or burying places are generally out of Town near the High Ways)
may hear them a great way off. There you shall see them sit, some folding their
Hands over their Heads, and looking mournfully: others fetching great Sighs,
beating on their Breasts: others spreading themselves over the Graves, as if
they would embrace their Friends, and take them in their Arms. In the mean
while their Priests go about among them Reading and Praying, and sometimes they
speak to some of them. When they have done mourning thus, and cast Sorrows from
their Hearts sufficiently, they sit down together, eat, drink, and be merry.

They do not at all esteem the Popes of Rome, but have their own Prelates,
which they honor with great and peculiar Reverence: neither do they believe
any Indulgences, nor Purgatory.

Their Priests go in plain Habits: they have Wives as well as their Laymen:
they let their Hair and Beards grow: they keep on Easter Day a great Feast, and
soon after begins their Lent, which they keep strictly, and therein, as also
on Wednesday and Friday all the year round, they eat neither Eggs nor Flesh,
nor any thing else that ever had life in it, only Saturdays and Sundays they
are allowed them, to refresh themselves: other Feasts and Holydays they do not
keep any at all. In all these points, they rather agree with the Abyssines than
the Romans: and also in these following, viz. That they eat not of unclean
Meats, that are forbidden in the Old Testament; they admit to the Communion
young and old without distinction: they baptize their Children in the Name of
the Holy Trinity: they believe the Articles of our Christian Faith: they
Preach, Sing, Pray, and perform all their Devotion, in the Vulgar Tongue, that
every one may understand it: they use for the Interpretation of the Word of
God, the Writings of John Chrysostom, and Gregory Nazianzen: they dare not, no
more than all the other Nations that live amongst the Turks, (except the
Maronites) make use of any Clocks, to call People to Church, in place whereof
they have strong wooden Tables, or some House-Doors prepared, several in each
Street, whereon they strike several Strokes with a great Cudgel, and so call
People to Church.

CHAP. XV.
Of the NESTORIANS.

Toward the East are other People which esteem themselves Christians, and
among the rest chiefly the Nestorians, called after the Heretic Nestorius, who
was a Bishop at Constantinople. Some of their Priests live upon the Mount
Calvaria in the Temple, and there are a great many Adherents to this Sect, most
of them living in Mesopotamia, Chaldaea and Assyria, but chiefly in the
mountainous Country of the Curtans, called Carduci by Ptolomy, which they
almost quite possess, and have poisoned with their base and obnoxious Error, as
if it were by an infectious Air; for in passing through I have found many of
them in their Cities, as Hapril, Carcuck, Mosel, formerly called Ninive. They
are strong and warlike People, but full of Vices, and from their Infancy given
to robbing. They inhabit toward North and East, as is before said upon the
Armenians and Medes: and they are a very ancient People, whereof chiefly
Xenophon makes mention under the name of Carducci, and are called to this day
Curters. They speak their peculiar Language, which neither the Arabians,
Armenians, nor Turks do understand: they are of a Brownish Color, like unto
the Surians and Maronites, and wear the same Cloth or Habiliments, that one
cannot readily discern or distinguish one from the other, save only by their
flesh-coloured Lists in their Turbants. The Grand Signior is their Head, whom
they obey, and they are kept and respected very well by the Turks, partly that
he may not give them occasion for an Insurrection (because they are upon the
Borders) and partly because Mahomet has charged them to be kind to them before
others, and that the rather because he had a Friar of their Sect called Sergius
for his Tutor, who did baptize him, and counseled and assisted him to make
such Laws, and to give them to his Adherents; and so you may still see, that
they agree more than any other Sect with the Saracens. For whereas they
believe, that in Christ (according to his two Natures (are two distinct
persons, one of the Godhead, the other of the Manhood. They will not allow any
more than Mahomet; the Virgin Mary to to be the Mother of God, but the Mother
of Christ, according to his human Nature. They have a Prelate in stead of the
Pope whom they call Jacelich. They bless and give the Sacrament as the Surians
do, and use in their Spiritual Services the Chaldean Language, else they speak
the common of their Provinces, viz. in their own Country, as is abovesaid,
their own Language; in Chaldea and Mesopotamia commonly the Arabian and Saracen
Language. So in Assyria beyond the River Tigris, where the two mighty Princes
the Turk and the King of Persia do border upon one another, the Language of the
Turks, Persians, and Medes, although they are quite differing. These and other
Languages the holy Apostles did understand, and in them they did speak on the
Day of Pentecost, when they received the Holy Ghost, as you may read in the
Second Chapter of the Acts, Verse 5. where it is thus written: And there were
dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men out of our every nation under Heaven,
each whereof heard the Apostles speak in his own Language wherein he was born,
as that of the Parthians, Medes, Elamits or Persians, that of those also that
live in Mesopotamia and Judea, etc. This Sect was rejected and condemned in the
Counsil of Ephesus.

CHAP XVI.
Of the JACOBITES called Golti.

IN the Temple of Mount Calvaria also live, in the Chapel behind the Sepulcher
of Christ, another sort, that boast to be Christians, called Jacobites, after
Jacob the Heretic, who was a Pupil of the Patriarch of Alexandria. They
pretend to have been first converted to the Christian Religion by the holy
Evangelist and Apostle Matthew; but they did not adhere to it, but fell
afterward into a great many Errors, so that in our time they are divided into
other Sects and Orders. For some have assumed the Order of S. Macharius, who
with Eutychius did own or believe no more but one Nature in Christ: others that
of St. Anthony, who was an Eremite in the year of our Lord Christ 324, in
Egypt. Others have their Male Children circumcised; but others, and the greater
part, have their Children baptized with Fire, and have Crosses made on their
Foreheads or Temples, according to the words of St. John the Baptist in the 3d.
Chapter of St. Matthew, V. 11. He that comes after me, shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost and with Fire: They live chiefly in Egypt, and in other adjacent
places. They are generally subject unto the Turkish Sultan, they speak the
vulgar Arabian Language, and agree in most points, partly with the Abyssines,
and partly with the Surians. We saw many of their Wives go about in the Temple,
they wear Hats near a Span high, which at top have a broad Brim like unto our
Bonnets, else they are habited like unto the Surians. This Heresy was rejected
and condemned in the Chalcedonian Council.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Abyssins, Priest John called Lederwick, Subject unto the King of the
Moors.

THese live at Jerusalem in the Temple of Mount Calvaria, just by the Church
Door toward the left, and have through their Lodging a peculiar way, so that
without hinderance, according to their pleasure they may go in and out; and
pretend that their King has made a peculiar Agreement to let his Subjects have
Free-ingress and Re-gress. According to all appearance they are a Naked People,
yet for all that they may be Rich and Able; they are of a dark brown color.
When we spoke to them by an Interpreter, they showed themselves very kind and
friendly, and always did give with a great deal of discretion such Answers to
our Questions, that one might easily conclude that they were of good
Understanding, and well Instructed and Grounded in their Religion. To their
King is given, in the beginning of his Reign, the Surname of David, which else
are called Lederwick, and by the Persians Amma, to show and to make known by
it, that they are derived from the Kingly Race and Stem of David and Solomon;
and to prove this, they allege the History of the Queen of Saba, called
Merquerda, who, as we Read in Scripture, came from Rich Arabia, with many
Camels Laden with Gold, Spices, and precious Stones, to Jerusalem, to see the
great Wisdom and Glory of Solomon, whereof she had heard much. When she had
been there a good while, and in the mean time was got with Child by Solomon,
and brought him a Son into the World called Meytich, she left him at Jerusalem,
but she returned into her own Country again. Many Years after, when the Son was
grown up, and came to his Understanding, his Father, seeing he had more Sons,
was persuaded to send him home to his Mother, who had a greater Kingdom than
he. So he did dispatch him, and sent along with him the chiefest of his
Courtiers, and sent him away with a great Train, as did become a King. When he
was come into his Kingdom, he entertained these Lords and Gentlemen very
Honorably, and promoted them before all others to the highest and best places,
that they might the willinger stay with him. But all this would not prevail
with them, but they grew daily more tired, and unwilling to stay longer in
these strange and unaccustomed Countries; and this increased daily more and
more, and at length to that height, that they resolved that (if the King would
not give them free leave) they would endeavor to make their escape Clandestinly
against the Kings Will to Jerusalem in Judea. When this their design came
before the King he was very angry, and ordered immediately, that a Mark should
be burnt on their Foreheads, that every body might know them; and issued a
Proclamation, That all his Subjects might watch them, and if any or more of
them, that were a going away should be taken, they should detain them, and send
them to him again. Now as at this time the Marks did begin, and then those had
them that were of a great Race, so they are retained by their Posterity to this
very day, as we still see in these times, that their Nobility have them on
their Foreheads toward the right; yet not all, for there are some that wear
them rather upon their Shields and Arms, etc. These marks are not all alike,
for in some you see a Bear, a Dragons-Head, etc. in others a Lion, a Wolf, or
three crossed Arrows, etc. because every one has that made that they give in
their Coats of Arms; they color it with an Oil which they call A^a^cinte and
is brought to them from Greece. Be^s this Custom, they still keep in many
things to the Ancie^ ones of the Jews, for they keep the Sabbath for their
peculiar Holiday; and also they do not eat all sorts of flesh, nor any of them
that are forbid as Unclean in the Old Testament: They pretend that the Holy
Apostle Philip has, when he Traveled with the Chamberlain of Candaces Queen
of the Moors to Gaza, and Converted him there, allowed them this and other
things, being Born Jews. Circumcision they believe unnecessary, and that it can
neither profit nor hurt a Christian. And again, Baptism they believe to be
necessary, wherefore through all his large Dominions, they bring their Children
to it on the third day, and Baptize them yet with Fire, in the Name of God the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, (whom they believe to proceed only from
the Father, and not from the Son) according to the Words of St. Matthew, Chap.
3. Verse. 11. He shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with Fire. They take
the Oil of Achalcinte, dip a Stick into it, and lay Frankincense upon it, and
set it on Fire; and so they let some drops fall down, which do not hurt the
Children, being mixed with the Oil; and at last they make a Cross with it upon
the left side of their Forehead near unto the Temple.

They begin their Lent about Easter, as the Armenians, wherein the Laymen Eat
nothing else but (...), Herbs, and Pulse; but their Priest generally nothing
but Bread and Water, and so they do every Wednesday and Friday throughout all
the Year. They Marry also according to the Words of St. Paul, That a Priest
shall be a Husband of one Wife: They give the Lords Supper to Young and Old
alike in Leavened Bread in both kinds; and they confess their Sins like unto
the Jacobites, to no body but only God. The Portuguese that go to the Indies
know them very well, and love them for being good Soldiers, and are glad if
they will live among them, and go out and in with them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the MARONITES.

BEsides all these there is also a sort of Christians, who first after Maro the
Heretic were called Maronites; who believed that their is but one Nature,
Understanding, and Work in Christ, according to the Opinion of Macharius the
Heretic, whom he follows diligently; but since they have by degrees left
this, and are returned to the Popish Religion again. And although they are
still of it, yet they give the Sacrament in both kinds to the Laymen, as
almost all other Nations do, according to the Words of the Institution of our
Lord Christ. In all other Points they follow the Roman Religion more than any
other Nation. Their Priests wear over their Clothes black hair Vestments. They
live for the most part in Syria, but chiefly upon the Promontory of Mount
Libanus, where upon they have a Monastery within a days Journey of Tripoli
called our Ladies, which is situated underneath a large Rock, wherein their
Patriarch dwells, whom they respect very much, and kiss his Hands with their
Knees bended, etc. whereof I have made mention here before. The Patriarchs are
still to this day chosen by the Commons, and afterward confirmed by the Pope;
and so this (when he after the Decease of his Predecessor, came into a Dispute
with one of his Competitors concerning the Election) did presently, unknown to
his Adversary, go to Rome, and so obtained in person the Patriarchal Seat from
the Pope.

The Common People are in their Shape and Habits so like unto the Surians, and
their Neighbors the Arabians, that except by their Turbants none can know them
from each other. They are a Courageous and Warlike People, very well provided
with Guns and other Arms, as well as their Confederates the Trusci: And because
they are not subject, nor pay any Contribution unto the Turkish Sultan,
therefore they still keep their Bells, and other Privileges.

They speak the Arabian Language, and their Books are also written (as many as
I could see of them in their Churches) with Arabian Characters or Letters,
which they always kiss with great reverence when they take them up, or lay them
down, according to the Custom of all other Eastern People or Nations, as well
Heathens as Christians.

They keep a very severe Order, and never Eat Flesh, and on their Fasts neither
Butter nor Eggs, but live upon Fruits, as Beans, Pease, French-Beans, and such
other common Victuals. But yet if any Merchants, or Pilgrims, come from
Tripoli, or any other places, they let them want neither for Meat nor Drink;
nay, they show themselves to every body so benevolent (as I have found it three
several times) and civil, that one would wish to stay some time with them.
These live not continually in the Temple of Mount Calvaria, but go often
thither on Pilgrimages.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Latinists or Papists.

THE Latinists or Papists, living at Jerusalem in the often before-named
Temple, are Friars of the Order of the Lesser Franciscans; they chiefly possess
the Holy Sepulcher of our Lord Jesus Christ, which they keep in very good
order, and read their Hora's diligently, wherefore their Father styles himself
Guardian of the Holy Sepulcher, and Mount Sion. Besides this, they are
possessed of more Holy Places, as at Bethlehem the Stable, wherein our dear
Lord Christ did lie in the Manger with the Ox and the Ass: In the Mountains of
Judea, the Temple of St. John the Baptist: In Bethania, the Sepulcher wherein
Lazarus had lain four days, when Christ raised him from the Dead, and here and
there many others. These, as all know, are dispersed in a great many places and
Kingdoms; nay, almost through all the World. Their Head is the Pope of Rome,
who pretends to be the Vicegerent of Christ, and takes upon himself so much
Power, as to prescribe to all Men Laws according to his own pleasure, which
Christendom finds every day to its great grief. Wherefore in the mean while
they are grown into so many Divisions, Idolatry, and Ceremonies, that they
outdo quite all the before-named Nations. But being that they are in these our
times so very well described, that (thanks to God) they are very well known to
every body, therefore I forbear to write more of them, and will only, before I
conclude, make mention of these Brethren that live at Jerusalem, only in a few
Points, and say that these that live in the Monastery at Jerusalem are about 20
in number more or less, according as they go and come, and among them are
Spaniards, Italians, Frenchmen and Germans, etc. that commonly are sent
thither by Kings and Princes; but being that they have more Churches and places
in and without Jerusalem to provide for, their Father Guardian distributeth
them, sends some to Bethlehem to look after the Manger of Christ, others upon
the Hills of Judea; to the Mount of Olives, and toward Bethania, etc. but
before all others, always two and two into the Temple of Mount Calvaria, to
stay there for 14 days together. But being that the Temple is always Locked up,
that the Priests that are within it may not want for Food, as well as others
that are with them, therefore three holes, one bigger than the other, are made
in the great Door of the Church, that through them all Necessaries of Meat and
Drink may be conveyed to them. These that are thus Locked up in the Temple, do
but look diligently after the Holy Sepulcher, and Read their Hora's, with
Singing and Praying, and to look after the Lamps; but chiefly those that hang
in the Sepulcher of Christ to illuminate it. There are about twenty of these
Lamps, one better and clearer than the other; they belong for the most part to
great Persons, as Kings and Princes, whereof they have their Yearly Revenue,
that is sent them by their Brethren; but chiefly from Italy and the Italian
Princes, and the most Catholic King of Spain. But from Germany, England, and
also now Cyprus the Isle, since it has been taken by the Turks, they complain
they have nothing as they had in former Ages; and the Most Christian King of
France, does also already begin to forget them, which they have found some
years since; and the number of the Pilgrims does also decrease, which formerly
used to flock thither in great numbers, and sometimes to reward them, besides
Meat and Drink, very Nobly, which they find very prejudicial to them, seeing
they have no Revenues of any other Lands, or the like.

They receive the Pilgrims, that come in to them, very kindly, and treat them
very well with Meat and Drink, and show them all the Holy Places, and keep them
so long until they have seen every thing to their satisfaction, and are willing
to depart.

They are but very meanly Clothed, like unto Poor Mendicants; they live very
privately, and keep their concerns very close, because of the Arabian Horsemen
or Beduins, that fall upon them daily, and Ravage these Countries continually,
wherefore they are in great danger. When they come, you must at least give them
Meat and Drink, if not other Booty, as I saw my own self at Bethlehem when I
first arrived there, that twelve Horsemen, with Guns, Arrows, and Darts, very
well Armed, came to the Gates of the Temple, and they were forced to satisfy
them, before they would leave them, and to give them good words besides. So
that they are not only sufficiently plagued by them, but also by the Sangiachs,
and Cadis, the Turkish Magistrates at Jerusalem, who have continually their
Eyes over them that are well to pass, for Covetousness is so great with them,
that if they can but hear of one that has Money, they study Night and Day, how
(if possible they can) they may right or wrong make him punishable. So they
lately accused the Eastern Christians falsely, and punished them in some
hundred Ducats; whereat the Bassaw of Damascus (under whose Command Jerusalem
is) did wink, in hopes to have a great snack out of it.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Knights of the Temple of Jerusalem, the Order of the Johannites.

HAving made mention of these, I remember still an other Order, that is, The
Johannites, or Knights Templars of Jerusalem, which did first begin in the
Reign of Baldewin de Burgo, the second of that Name, and the third King of
Jerusalem. This Order is more Secular than Divine, and therefore quite
differing from all the rest, for they need not to say Mass, nor perform any
other Devotion; but when they have heard Mass, and said so many Pater-Nosters
and Ave-Maries, they have sufficiently discharged their Office. This Order was
first Invented by His Holiness the Pope to that end, and endued with many
Privileges, that they might resist and oppose the Turks, and that all Infidels
and Heretics might by them and their Adherents, by force of Arms, be driven
and routed out of the Roman Empire. And that he might promote this design of
his, more earnestly, he took in those chiefly that were well Born, and had
great Revenues (as Princes, Counts, and other Noblemen). So it has often
happened formerly, chiefly when Popery was in a flourishing condition, that
along with the Pilgrims, that had a mind to see the Holy Places, and to go to
the Land of Promise, many Persons of Quality came, moved thereunto out of great
Zeal, together with them, to see them also, and to take upon them the Order of
that Knighthood, in the Sepulcher of our Lord Christ, as the proper place for
that purpose. And besides that, other considerations there were which moved
them to it, viz. The high Title, and the Authority of the Place, and great
Privileges, whereby they hoped to be still preferred to greater Dignities. Now
as every one of them had laid before them to consider these Points and
Articles, which every one must promise and take an Oath to keep them strictly,
some great and potent Men found it so severe and hard, (as you may see by that
that follows) that they were not only astonished at it, but refused openly to
take it upon them. But what is laid before them that are made Knights, and also
what Ceremonies are used in it, I thought convenient to mention here briefly.

If there be one or more of them ready for it, that have at the instance of the
Guardian, according to the Ancient Custom, been at Confession, and also
received the Sacrament, sub una Specie, under one Species, on Mount Calvaria,
they are with great Ceremonies conducted from thence into the holy Sepulcher,
whither are also conveyed some other things that belong thereunto, viz. A fine
Book, a Sword richly tipped with Gold, with a red Velvet Girdle, a Chain
weighing about a hundred Hungarian Ducats, whereon hangs a Golden Cross of
this Form and Shape,
a pair of Spurs with red Velvet Straps, which are laid down one by another
upon the Altar of the Sepulcher. As soon as the Gentleman comes into it, they
begin immedidiately to say Mass, and after that they Sing without some Latin
Psalms. In the mean while the Gentleman lies down upon his Knees in the
Sepulcher before the Guardian, until the Friars have done Singing. Then the
Guardian bids all that stand about, to say Our Father and an Ave-Mary, on
behalf of the Gentleman that is to be Knighted. When this is done, he
admonishes the Gentleman, before he takes the Oath, to consider upon what
condition he is admitted there; When this is done, he bids the standers by Pray
for him once more, and then admonishes the Gentleman again, and tells him
also, That hereafter he must be in all things subject and obedient to the Roman
Church; That he must fight and resist the Turks and Lutherans as Enemies and
Heretics, so long as his Blood and Heart is warm. Then the Guardian asks him
further, whether he does receive all these Points (as they are written word by
word, in that Book, and ordered by his Holiness the Pope, and subscribed by his
own Hand) and whether he will Swear by the holy Sepulcher to keep them.
Whereupon he consents to it presently, and promises with great eagerness and
joy to keep it with all his Heart, and thanketh God that he has made him
worthy of this Blessing, and for having made him capable of it. After this the
Monks begin again a long Song; and then the Guardian takes up the three
Pieces, the Chain, Sword and Spurs, and puts them on upon him, and so adorneth
him as beginning Knight. At last he takes also the Book, and puts it before
him, and tells him once more what he is about, and what he is going to Swear.
When he has understood it, he kneeleth down again, and puts out his two
Fingers, which the Guardian puts upon the red Cross in the Book, and reads to
him the Oath; the Contents whereof are these:

First, That upon his Conscience he do Swear there to these following Words,
Not with a false Heart, but that he does confess out of Zeal, with great
eagerness, and with a clean Heart, and also Swear by Gods Omnipotence, the Sea
of Rome, and his Holiness the Pope, that he is a good Catholic, Educated in
that Religion from his Infancy to that present hour; and that he never will go
from it so long as he lives, but will always Defend and Protect the Roman
Church against the Lutheran, and their Adherents, with Words and Deeds, so long
as his Heart is warm; and that he will never be in a place where any evil is
taught, or spoke of his Holiness the Pope. Secondly, That he does Swear by Gods
Omnipotence, and the Pope at Rome, and the Cross of Jerusalem, that he is a
Nobleman in the fifth Generation, both by Father and Mother. Thirdly, He
Swears also, that has so good Income that he need not to follow
Merchandising, or any other Trade, nor to borrow Money, or to ask others for
help, but that he has so much that he can live upon his Revenues, and keep
three Horses besides from year to year, for the Service of the Church of Rome.
Nay, if necessity should urge, and others should rise against the Roman Church,
to molest it, that he will then always be willing and ready, besides the three
Horses, to assist her with all his utmost power. He must also promise that he
will so long as he shall live, diligently attend at Mass, and hear four or five
every day; and also that he will keep the Fasts zealously, and Eat neither
Flesh, nor Butter, nor Cheese, nor Eggs, on them; and also that he will confess
and receive the Sacrament once a month, or every six Weeks at furthest, and
send his Family at least once a year in Lent time to do the same. And also that
he will not forget, to the Honor and Increase of the said Church, to remember
her in his last Will; that he will protect and provide for the Widows and
Fatherless; that he will maintain the Friars and Nuns, and their Monasteries;
and if by the Seculars any thing should be taken away from them, that he will
not conceal it, but endeavor to the utmost of his power, as if it were his
own, to recover it again. That he will assist those that would willingly turn
Roman Catholics, and endeavor to bring them over; but that he will keep none
in his service, nor any ways assist them that do not firmly adhere unto it.
Then there is also inserted, That he will say 49 Pater-Nosters, and as many
Ave-Maries, every day, and visit his Holiness the Pope once a Year, and come
into the seven Church Processions, and perform his Office; and also assist at
the Sacraments, and other Ceremonies, with due Reverence; and also Respect and
Honor the Holy Water. At length to conclude, he is forbid to talk Idly, to be
Drunk, to live Loosely, and to commit Sodomy, that he being Knighted, may not
lead a disorderly Life, and give to others ill Example.

When then the Guardian has read the Oaths that are written upon Parchment out
of the Book, the Chevallier kneeleth down again, and when he bends his face
down, and leans with both his Arms on the Book, which lies on the
Altar-Stone of the Sepulcher, the Guardian bids the Friars, or Monks, again to
Pray; then he draws out the Sword, and makes with the flat side of it three
Crosses upon his Head and Shoulders, saying, At the Command of God, and the Sea
of Rome, and for the Increase of the Church of Rome, I create you N.N. now a
Member of the Roman Church, a Knight, in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. And further he adds, That in the room of his Holiness the Pope of Rome,
he does Absolve him of all his Sins: And that he does also give him leave, and
command him, by the Oath he has taken to his Holiness the Pope, to wear the
usual red Cross (as a Sign whereby he may be known) publicly in his Coat of
Arms, and on his Clothes. Also, if he please, to put him in mind, as often as
he shall look upon it, what he has Sworn, and to keep it the firmer. When all
this is over, and they have Prayed again, the Guardian wishes him Joy of his
Knighthood, and rejoices with the whole Convent that he is come to this
acknowledgment, and is become a true Member of the Roman Catholic Church; that
he and all his Brethren will always pray for his long Life, and that God may
keep him in health, to the comfort of the Sea of Rome. Immediately approach to
him all the Monks (while he is still standing in his Ornaments) and call him
Brother; and when they have also wished him Joy one after the other, the
Guardian begins the Te Deum, etc. and then he takes all the Ornaments away
again from him. Afterward he leads him about with the Vicar in Procession to
the Holy Places, to Invest him also in every one of them; when that is done
they go to Dinner.

Although in former years every body was not presently admitted (as you may see
by what has been here before said) except he were a Nobleman for several
Generations; yet in our time it is come to that pass, that they admit every
body to it without any strict Examination, that can pay the Money (which comes
to eleven or twelve Ducats). Nay, every Pilgrim that does intend to take upon
him that Knighthood, does pray and persuade his Companions by the way that they
would do the same, that he may have company, which the Pope does allow of
(because very few Noblemen come there now adays) that he may in case of
Necessity still have some friends to assist him, for his Holiness wants
Champions, because he takes upon him the Civil Government as well as the
Ecclesiastic, that when they can defend and prove their Religion no longer by
Scripture, they may defend and uphold it by Power and Strength of Arms. Now as
the Guardian, according to Ancient Custom, gives Attestates to every Pilgrim
concerning their Pilgrimage, under his great Seal, that they may have it to
show, so he gives also one to the Knights of the Order of St. John of
Jerusalem, and bids them to carry the Letter themselves in Person to Rome, to
show it to the Pope. This is sufficient of the Temple of Mount Calvaria, and
its Holy Places, and the Christians that are dwelling there of their Chapels,
and of their Errors.

CHAP. XXI.
A short Description of some Places, Hills, Valleys, etc. that lie near and
about Jerusalem. Of the Mount of Olives, and its Holy Places.

I Having hitherto briefly described the situation of Jerusalem, and also
related what Buildings and Holy Places are still in being, and to be seen
there, after it has sustained so many Wars, Assaults, and Desolations, I
cannot but speak of some adjacent places before I conclude. And so I begin with
the Mount of Olives, which lies toward the East before the Temple-hill, over
against the Sheeps-gate, on the other side of the Brook of Cedron, as the Holy
Prophet Zachariah, testifies in his 14th Chapter and 4th Verse, when he says,
And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before
Jerusalem on the East. This Mount is about a quarter of a League, on as St.
Luke says, A Sabbath Days Journey distant from Jerusalem, pretty high, rough
and stony, full of pleasant Olive Trees, (from whence it has its Name) and
also others; as Fig Trees, Lemon and Orange, and Citron, and Siliqua-Trees, by
the Inhabitants called Charnubi, Turpentine-Trees, and Palm Trees; the like I
have seen but few, etc, There is also some good Herbs, viz. A strange Origanum,
Tragoriganum, Roman Mother of Time, Spicanardi, and a peculiar sort of Coniza,
etc.

At the foot of the Mount they show us first a great Church, between the
Rivolet Cedron and the Valley of Josaphat, which was so covered with Earth,
that you could see nothing of it but the Entry, and before it without, a large
place three steps deep. This Church was built by Helena Mother of Constantine
the Emperor, and called the Sepulcher of our Lady the Mother of God; to go into
it, you must go down 44 steps: Within it toward the right, there is a small
Chapel, where they say our Lady was Buried; and therefore, by the Benevolence
of the Pope, there is distributed and given to the Pilgrims, full forgiveness
of all Transgressions and Punishments for ever. Some are of Opinion, That this
Church did formerly stand even with the Ground, and that after the Devastation
of Jerusalem, when part of the Valley of Josaphat was filled up, it was covered
thus over. This Church stands (as Nicephorus says in his 8th Book and the 30th
Chapter) on that place where the Village Gethsemane stood, whereby the Garden
was whither our dear Lord Christ did, just before his Passion, go with his
Eleven Disciples, after he had Eaten the Paschal Lamb with them, and given
Thanks, according to his usual Custom, over the Rivolet of Cedron, to regain us
that which was formerly lost by our Ancestors in the Garden. There he left his
Eight Disciples, while he went to Pray, as the Scripture tells us; when he
took with him Peter, James and John, the two Sons of Zebedeus, and began to
mourn, to quake, and to tremble, and said to them, My soul is sorrowful unto
death, stay here, watch with me, and pray that you enter not into temptation;
and he withdrew from them about a Stones cast (where he kneeled down, fell
three times on his face, and prayed to his Heavenly Father, where he wrestled
with Death, and Sweat a bloody Sweat, so that an Angel must come down from
Heaven at last to Comfort him). This place is underneath a great Rock that
hangs over a great Cave, just at the Entry of the Valley of Josaphat.

This Valley is still where it comes down from the Mount of Olives, pretty
deep, and is called by the holy Prophet Joel the Valley of Judgment, as you may
read in his 3d Chapter, 14 Verse; which words of Joel give us to understand,
that the Lord, as he was (when he came first upon Earth) in this Valley taken
Prisoner, Bound, and carried away to the place of his bitter Suffering,
Crucifixion and Dying, so he shall in his second and glorious coming, appear in
this Valley of Judgment again to Judge all people of the whole Earth, etc. that
then the Impious shall see whom they have pierced. Zacharias speaks also of it
in the abovementioned place.

As you go from thence to the Mount of Olives, you see below toward your left
hand, near unto the Bridge of the River Cedron, an old square Building like
unto a Steeple. This, although it is believed to this day not only by Christians,
but also by the Turks and Moors, to be the Grave of Absalom, as you shall see
them fling Stones into it as they go by, to revenge his Undutifulness shown to
his Father King David, yet notwithstanding he was not Buried there, as we read
in the 2d Book of Samuel, the 18th Chapter, Verse. 17. And they took Absalom and
cast him into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of stones
upon him. Yet for all this, when Absalom was alive (as you may farther read in
the beforementioned Chapter) he erected a Column in the Kings Dale, for he
said, I have no Son, therefore this shall be for a remembrance of my Name, and
called this Pillar after his Name; and it is still called to this day Absaloms
Place. Of this Pillar writes also Josephus in the 7th Book of his Antiquities
and the 10th Chapter, saying, And Absalom did erect a Kingly Column of Marble
in the Valley ( Genes. chap. 14. it is called the Kings Valley) that is two
Furlongs from Jerusalem. Just by this Pillar begins a very steep Foot-Path,
which parts a little above it into two, one whereof goes Southward, at the
bottom of the Mount of Olives toward Bethania and Jericho, etc. down through
the Valley that is made by this and the other part of the Hill (called Mashit
in the 4th of the Kings, Chap. 23.) but the other goes over the height of the
Mount of Olives out by Bethania to the House of Mary and Martha. A little
higher on this Hill did our Savior sit, over against the Temple, when he
foretold his Disciples that showed him the glorious Buildings thereof, That not
one Stone should remain upon another that should not be thrown down. And did
also tell them at length, the terrible and prodigious Signs that should come to
pass before the Desolation of Jerusalem, and the end of the World. To this day
we still see into the Turkish Mosque, with its large Paved Courtyard, over the
Walls thereof, so perfectly, that you may distinguish almost the Persons that
walk there. From thence, when you go up to the Hill, which is very steep and
rough, there is a large Plain, from whence our dear Lord Jesus Christ was taken
up, and ascended into Heaven, as you may see by the words of the Holy
Evangelist St. Luke, in his first Chapter of the Acts, Verse 9. where he says,
And he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. And Verse 12.
Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the Mount called Olivet, which is from
Jerusalem a Sabbath Days journey. On this place (as Nicephorus mentions) did
Queen Helena also afterward Build a stately Church, which now is so decayed,
that there is no more to be seen of it but a New built Chapel in a large Yard
surrounded with a Wall. Just by it on a Hill of the Mount toward the North and
Galilea, there is an old decayed Building, which was formerly (as my Guide
informed me) an Inn for the Galileans, where commonly did take up those that
went to Jerusalem from Galilea. Wherefore they are of opinion, that some of
them were there in the time of Christ, that also were Spectators of his
Glorious Ascension, as it does appear by the Words of the two Angels, that
spoke to them, and said, You men of Galilea, why stand you here gazing up into
Heaven, etc. But if you duly consider these words, you will find, as you read
it in the Second Chapter of the Acts, Verse 7. that the Apostles themselves
were these Galileans, where it is written: Behold, are not all those which
speak Galileans? and how hear we every man in our own tongue, etc. So did also
the holy Angels speak to the Apostles after the same manner, and called them
Galileans, rather to bring them, as Elders of the Christian Church, off their
worldly thoughts, which they had conceived in their Hearts, of the restoring of
the worldly Regiment or Kingdom again (which they should have left, and instead
thereof looked upon the Heavenly Kingdom, whereinto Christ was ascended, unto
the Kingdom of God, whereinto they were received as Members, which is a more
spiritual Kingdom, that does not consist in outward things, Eating and
Drinking, etc. but in a clean and faithful heart. After this they ought to
strive, and to make it their only business, that it may be notified to all men,
and be spread abroad all the World over.

From the top of the Mountain, you have a prospect over all the holy Land,
toward the North over the Valley Josaphat, (which is just at the bottom of the
Hill) into the Country of Galilea: toward the East, over some naked Mountains,
down into a large Field which extends it self to the Dead Sea, that is, as
Josephus mentions, Twenty nine Leagues long, and Fifteen broad, whereof the
Scripture makes often mention, chiefly in the Books of Macchabees, and in the
Second of Samuel, Chap, 15. where it is written, That when King David did fly
from his Son Absolon, he tarried in the Plain Fields until he had intelligence
of him. In these is still remaining the Pillar of Salt that Lot's Wife was
turned into, when she against the Command of God, turned to look back to the
City. The famous Historiographer Flavius Josephus did in his time see it in his
own person: and the Pilgrims visit it to this day, and beat off of it some
small pieces, as they do every where, chiefly in holy places, and yet it is
found still whole, and without any defect; which did put some Pilgrims, that
once went toward the Dead Sea, into great admiration. Now, that they might be
certain and assured of the Truth of the common Assertion, That whatsoever was
broken off of this Pillar, was always found whole again; they did, chiefly one
of them, (as I was informed by one that had had been there before) knock a
whole Hand off, and took it away with them. Now after they had been at the end
of their Journey, and came back again, and went to look for it on purpose, they
found it whole again, and exactly like unto the old one as it had been before.
Further beyond the Plain Fields, at the other side of Jordan that runs through
it, there appear the Arabian Mountains, that were inhabited by Ruben, Gad, and
half the Tribe of Manasse, they are very high, and afford very good Pastures
for the Cattle: some among them were much noted and famous of old, as the
Mountain of Seir beyond the Dead Sea, Mount Garizim and Ebal, whereof is made
mention in the Twenty seventh Chapter of Deuterenomy; and also in the Thirty
second Chapter, of Mount Abarim, Nebo, and the point of Pisgah, situated in the
Land of the Moabites, overgainst Jericho, which together with all the adjacent
places are very well seen; as well as toward the West the Rivulet Cedron, and
the situation and largeness of the City of Jerusalem. After we had looked about
sufficiently, we went down to the place of the Village Bethphage, which is at
the other side on the Ascent of Mount Olivet, and belongs to the Priests of
Jerusalem: this is so ruined, that now adays there is nothing left of it save
only a few Foundation-Walls. Into this did Christ send his Disciples, to loosen
the She-ass and the Colt which was tied to the Door in the Road) and to bring
them to him, whereon our Lord Christ also did ride to Jerusalem Five days
before he suffered, being the true Savior.

Before it the Mount is pretty plain, and is very rough and rocky, wherein
Bethania lies on the Right Hand upon one ascent, of the other part of Mount
Olivet, as is before said, But the Village of Mary and Martha (whereof you read
in the Gospel of St. John, Chapter XI,) is further out by the beginning of the
Road toward Jericho, which is still very dangerous, because of the Arabian
Vagabonds. In these Habitations did our dear Savior oftentimes take up his
Lodgings with them; and in the same did Mary the Sister of Lazarus, and Martha
anoint the Feet of our Lord Christ with a precious Ointment of Nard, and dry
them again with her hair: in our days they are quite desolated, and nothing
left thereof but Ruins. Near it as you come back again to Bethania, in the
Plain lies a large Stone, where also you may see the abovementioned places
very plain: where they say that Martha did meet the Lord, when he came up the
Steps, and rested on the Mount, and talked with him of the Resurrection of her
Brother, before her Sister Mary did know any thing of the arrival of the Lord.
Wherefore she went back again into their Village, to call her Sister Mary
secretly, who, when she heard that our Lord Christ was near, at hand, did
hasten and went to him, for he was not yet come into the Village, and fell down
at his Feet, and said weeping, Lord, if thou had been here my brother had not
died: then he groaned in his spirit, and enquired presently after the place
where Lazarus, his dear Friend was laid, and went with them to it to Bethania
that Village, distant a League, (about an hours going) or as the Scripture
says, about fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem on an ascent: wherein was a small
Chapel, and underneath it a deep covered Cave, wherein Lazarus had lain Four
Days, as you may also see in the before quoted Chapter, where it is in the
Thirty eighth Verse said: It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it. When the
Franciscan Friars would go to the Grave of Lazarus, they were forced to go
through this Village, and a great concourse of the poor Inhabitants used to
flock about them, and did surround them, and detained them till they gave them
something to be distributed amongst them; that they might evade this Trouble,
and not be necessitated to go through his Village, when they go to the Grave,
they have made behind at the other side on the height, another Avenue, but
they do not escape the Mobile for all that, for they meet them notwithstanding,
chiefly, if they know or have intelligence, that any Pilgrims came along with
them to see the Grave. So we did find it, for they came and kept us locked up
in it so long, till we had given them so much as did satisfy them. As you come
out again from Bethania toward Jerusalem, the Friars show an old Building,
where Simon the Leper did dwell, in which when Christ was at the Table, Mary
the Sister of Lazarus did come, and did break again, yet several days after, a
Glass of precious Unguent of Nard over his Head, which filled the whole House
with a fragrant Scent; which pleased Christ so well, that he took her part
against his Disciples, and commended her proceedings so highly, that it is
recorded to her perpetual memory. From thence if you come nearer into the
Valley between the Mounts of Olives, there is still to be seen several
Fig Trees whereabouts Christ did curse one of that kind, because he found no
Fruit thereon when he was hungry. Just at the coming out of the Valley near
unto the Steps of Mount Olivet, you see the City again, but chiefly the Mount
of the Temple and Gate where you go up, walled up in the new Wall. From this
Valley, when our Lord Christ came in sight, and came down the Mount Olivet, the
People, as he came riding long, cried, saying, Hosanna, to the Son of David,
etc. And a little after when he came nearer unto it, he lamented with tears
also their future misery, and the terrible destruction of the Town, and went in
from thence toward the Golden Gate into the Temple, and drove out the Buyers
and Sellers.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Bethlehem, the Mountains of Judea, and their famous Places. Where also is
made mention of my returning back from Jerusalem to Tripoli.

BEthlehem formerly called Ephrata, is situated toward the South Twenty
Furlongs or a German Mile distant from Jerusalem. The nearest way to it you go
through the Gate of Hebron, and come to the Right by the upper Mote, and the
bloody Field, up the steps over mount Gihon, where just before you see a
Cistern with good fresh Water near the Path, made of white Stones, and well
prepared: near which the Star did appear again unto the three wise Men of the
Eastern Countries, and led them into Bethlehem. Near it there grows a
Turpentine Tree larger and higher than any that ever I saw elsewhere in my
life. Further, about half way, you pass over a Hill, at the top whereof you may
see both Towns, Jerusalem and Bethlehem. Before you is a large Valley, which
although it be rocky, yet is it fruitful both of Corn and Wine. In it toward the
Right Hand near the Road is an Acre called the Cicer-Field, which had its Name
(as I was informed) from the following Transaction. It is said, that when
Christ went by at a certain time, and saw a Man that was a sowing Cicers, he
did speak to him kindly, and asked him what he was a sowing there, the man
answered scornfully, and said, He sowed small stones. Then let it be, said our
Lord, that thou reap the same seed thou sowest. So they say, that at
Harvest-time he found instead of the Cicer-pease, nothing but small Pebles in
shape, and color and bigness, like unto them exactly. Now whether there be any
thing of truth in it or no I cannot affirm, but this I must say, that there are
to this day such stones found in this Field. For as we went by, some of us went
into it, and did gather a great many of them, that were in bigness, shape and
color, so like unto these Cicers (by the Arabians called Ommos, and in Latin
Cicer arietinum) that we could hardly distinguish them from natural ones.

Hard by it you see still some old Ruins of old Stones, where first Abraham the
Patriarch did build a Tent as you read Genesis 12.8. And he removed from thence
unto a Mountain on the East of Bethel, and pitched his Tent, having Bethel on
the West, and Hai on the East. Senacherib, the King of Assyria, when he went
before Jerusalem, did come into this Valley with all his might and power: and
had by the Angel of the Lord in one nights time, One hundred and eighty five
thousand Men slain: and still to this day there are two great holes to be seen,
wherein they flung the dead Bodies: one whereof is hard by the Road toward
Betlehem, the other toward the Right Hand over against old Bethel: which Town
fell to the Children of Benjamin, and is called still to this day Bethisella,
and is situated half a League farther toward the West at the Foot of the Hill,
in a very fruitful Country. There did Jacob the Patriarch when he fled from his
Brother Esau, see in his sleep the Ladder which reached up into Heaven, whereon
the holy Angels ascended and descended, wherefore he erected there a stone for
a mark, and called the place Bethel, which was called Luz before, as you may
read in the Twenty eighth Chapter of Genesis. As you come nearer to Bethlehem,
you see the Grave of Rachel at your Right Hand near the Road, which Jacob did
erect there, when his Wife died in labor with Benjamin, as you read in Genesis
xxxv. 16. And they journeyed from Bethel and there was but a little way to come
to Ephrath: and Verse 18. And it came to pass as her soul was in departing (for
she died) that she called his name Benoni: but his father called him Benjamin:
and Rachel died, and was buried in the way Ephrath, which is Bethlehem. And
Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of Rachel's Grave unto
this day. Before you come quite thither there is just by without it on the Left
a good rich Cistern, which is deep and wide. Wherefore the People that go to
dip water, are provided with small Leathern Buckets and a Line, as is usual in
these Countries; and so the Merchants that go in Carrvans through great Deserts
into far Countries, provide themselves also with these, because in these
Countries you find more Cisterns or Wells than Springs that lie high. This was
formerly under the Gates of Bethlehem, whereof King David longed to drink:
wherefore his three Champions did break into the Camp of the Philistines, and
did dip some Water out of the Well, and brought it to the King: but the King
would not drink of it for certain Reasons, as you may read in the Twenty third
Chapter of Samuel, and in the Twelfth Chapter of the First of Chronicles. From
thence we went by the Path of the Mount into Bethlehem the Town of David, where
he was born, and anointed King by the Prophet Samuel; it lies upon an Ascent,
its Buildings, Town-Walls and Towers are so decayed, that now it is quite open,
and nothing at all to be seen, except the Well and Monastery, but ruined
Cottages.

Just without Bethlehem at the the other side of the Path, toward the East
(for formerly the Town reached fo far) they show still the Stable, under a
large Rock, wherein Jesus Christ the promised Messiah, God and Man was born of
the immaculate Virgin Mary, and laid in a Manger. Of his coming, and the place
where he should be born, the holy Prophet Micah long before prophesied in his
Fifth Chapter, and Second Verse, saying: But thou Bethlehem Ephrata, though
thou be little among the thousands of Juda, yet out of thee shall he come forth
unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel: whose goings forth have been from of
old, from everlasting. On that place has Helena, Mother of Constantine the
Great, also built a stately Church; but since it is so ruined and demolished,
that hardly half of it is left, as one may see by the old Walls of the
Foun-Foundation, and other Places and Arches that are still left without; yet
that part that still remains standing, is very large, covered with Lead at
top, and is so glorious a Building, that one shall hardly find a better any
where. For within it is paved with white Marble all over, and upheld with a
great many large and high Marble Pillars, each whereof is about Nine Spans in
Diameter; I told about Fifty of them, they stand without before the Chancel
(and underneath them is the place of the holy and joyful Birth of our Lord
Jesus Christ) in four Rows one behind the other, and so give a glorious
Ornament to the whole Church. There are also to be seen on the Arches and the
Walls about, some fine Histories, taken out of the Old Testament, made in
Mosaic Work, laid in with Colors very artificially: and are still so plain to
be seen and and discerned, as if they were made but the other day. The Cave
wherein Christ was born, has without on each side of the Chancel, underneath
which it is a peculiar way into it, one against the other, the Doors thereof
are commonly locked up, because behind the Church there is still another,
through which they generally go down into it; therein is below at the Right
Hand still another less one, going down two steps more, which is the true
Stable, wherein our Savior Jesus Christ did lie in the Manger between the Ox
and Ass: so there is still in the same place made a marble one very well
wrought. Without before it we put off our Shoes, and went in with the Father
Guardian into the holy place. Where when I considered, the joyful Birth of our
Lord Jesus Christ: where he, as the true long before promised Messiah and
Savior was born, I was affected as if I saw the Child wrapped up in Swaddling
Clothes, and lying in the Manger, disguised in our mortal Flesh and Blood, yet
without sin, that we as Children of Wrath and eternal Damnation, might be
received again by God his Heavenly Father, as his Children, unto everlasting
Salvation: that did humble himself so low, as to be born in a dark Stable in
the miserablest Poverty, that he might bring us out from the Filth and Mire of
Sin wherein we lay, into the Parlour of his Heavenly Father. Seeing then, my
dear Lord Jesus Christ, that thou art come to us into the World, as the true
Light, to make of us, that were Children of Darkness and eternal Damnation,
Children of Light and eternal Salvation and Felicity; I return unto thee, O
Lord, for these thy unspeakable Benefits, eternal Praises, and seeing that thou
have assumed our Flesh and Blood, and have also caused these thy Merits and
Benefits to be by thy holy Angels proffered to me; theresore I pray thee let me
come to thee with the poor Shepherds, and see thy saving Incarnation, give me
and us all thy Grace and Holy Spirit, that we may comfort our selves with this
thy blessed Birth, against our sinful and impure one, constantly and without
cessation, that we may rejoice in it, in good and bad Times, in Tribulations
and Adversities, in prosperous Success and ill Fortune, in the time of this
temporal Life, heartily, until at length we shall, in the life to come, see
thee with all the elected ones, face to face, to all Eternity. Amen.

This Cave is underneath about the Walls lined, with long Tables of Gray
Marble, adorned with Blue, artificially laid in: the Rock that comes out over
the Stable only excepted. Just by the furthermost Entry of the fine Chapel
there are others, in one whereof St. Jerome did live, and did Translate the
Bible out of the Hebrew and Chaldean Languages into the Latin. In another near
it lies buried, the Noble Pious Roman Lady Paula, with her Daughter Eustachia.
Who after the Decease of her Husband, went thither to St. Jerome, where she led
all the rest of her Days in Christian Piety, until at length she died in the
Lord. From thence we came up again into the Church, wherein without close to
the Chancel on each side were to be seen two Altars, covered with good large
Marble; on one thereof on the Left the Father Guardian did show me the Effigies
of the old Simeon, holding the Child Jesus in his Arms, and in the Manger still
another, with this Admonition, That from hence we may see, conclude and learn,
that it is not culpable at all to have Images, seeing that Nature it self
allows so much unto Stones that Images may grow in them. Wherefore they are
not only not to be forbidden, but rather to be honored. But what every
Christian ought to think of this, being quite contrary to the Holy Scripture,
every Child that has but begun to learn the Catechism, can easily and
sufficienlty decide. The Franciscan Monks have near the Church a large and
pleasant Habitation, and also by it great Gardens, (rich of fine Plants and
good Fruits) defended round about with high Walls, against the Incursions of
the Arabians, which they make daily. Bethlehem lies high, surrounded by the
Hills of Judaea, as you may see by the Words of Jeremiah in the Thirty first
Chapter, Verse 15. where he does prophecy the Murdering of the Children,
which cruel Tyranny Herod Ascalonit did a great while after in Christ's time
execute, the words are these: Thus says the Lord, a voice was heard in Ramah,
lamentation and bitter weeping: Rachel weeping for her Children, refused to be
comforted for her children because they were not. In this Monastery, because it
lies at the top of the path, you see with pleasure, as well as on Mount
Olivet, the Confines of Hiericho, and the Dead Sea, and the Mountains of
Arabia, but chiefly within the space of a League and half toward the South, a
great and high Hill, which extends it self much further than the rest,
whereupon in former years the strong and mighty Castle of Theckoa was built,
whereof the holy Prophet Jeremias makes mention in his Sixth Chapter, and also
Amos (who did prophecy there) in his First Chapter. The Christians had this in
possession a great while, and did keep it against the Infidels and Heathens for
above Thirty years after Jerusalem and the Holy Land were taken; for they had
Corn and Wine, and Water, and other Necessaries abundantly of their own
growing, so that they might have kept it longer, if a great contagious
Distemper had not got among them, which did increase to that degree, that they
were forced to leave it, and to retire to more healthy places. When the
Heathens did understand that the Christians were marched off, they fell into
the Castle with a great multitude, tore it all to pieces, and did demolish it
to the very Ground, so that now one cannot discern that such a one did stand
there before. But this lost Troop of the Christians did at length settle
themselves on Mount Libanus, and began to inhabit it, where they are still
remaining in our times, and call themselves (as I have told you before) Trusci.
About Bethlehem there are some Valleys very well tilled with Corn and Wine, and
among the rest a very pleasant and fruitful one, that begins immediately by
the Church and Fountain, and runs down toward Jericho and Jordan. This is
below pretty wide, full of Olive and Fig Trees, it also brings forth some
comfortable Herbs, viz. some strange Origanums, Tragoriganum, Roman Serpillum,
which the Arabians call Sathar, Absintium Santonicum, which grows every where
in the holy Land, this has small ash-colored Leaves, very like unto them of
ours, and many small Stalks, full of small yellowish Seeds, it is of an
unpleasant Smell, very bitter, with a saltish sharpness, wherefore it is
reputed to be the Scheha of the Arabians: from whence our Worm-seed comes.

In this Valley were the Shepherds, to whom the Angels of the Lord did appear,
and declared to them the saving Birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, saying, Behold
I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people; for unto
you is born this day, in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord,
etc. and suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host,
praising God, and saying: Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good
will toward men. In that place, which is about half a League below Bethlehem,
is still a Church, which also Queen Helena did build, as Nicephorus testifies
in the Thirtieth Chapter of his Eighth Book, this is for the greatest part
fallen in, so that nothing more but a small Arch is to be seen of it. Hard by
it did stand the Tower Ader, as St. Jerome writes, whereby Israel did erect a
Tent, (as you may read in Genesis:) and looked after the Sheep with his Twelve
Sons. This is in our time so demolished, that it lies quite in Ruins. Beyond
it in another Valley not far from Bethlehem, they show still to this day a
large Orchard, full of Citron, Lemon, Orange, Pomegranate, and Fig Trees, and
many others: which King Solomon did plant in his Days, with Ponds, Canals, and
other Waterworks very pleasantly prepared: as he says himself in the Second
Chapter of Ecclesiastes, Verse 5. I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted
trees in them of all kind of fruits: I made me pools of water, to water
therewith the wood that brings forth trees. This is still in our time full of
good and fruitful Trees, wherefore it is worthy to be seen for their sakes, and
also for the Ditches sake that are still there. Wherefore I really believe it
to be that same whereof Josephus makes mention in his Eighth Book of the
Jewish Antiquities, and the Seventh Chapter. saying: And the King rode in a
Chariot, clothed in white, and it was his Custom to ride early in the morning
to a place called Hetten, a hundred Furlongs from Jerusalem, where he had a
Garden with Water-pools and Works very pleasant and rich. Thither went the King
for his pleasure; and did always use great diligence and consideration in all
things, and took delight to see every thing neat and handsome, etc. After we had
seen the chiefest places within and without, near and a far off of Bethlehem,
we returned to Jerusalem again by another way that was near as far again about,
and went over the Mountains of Judea, which have first as you come from thence
very good and fruitful Valleys, full of Vines and Corn, but the nearer you come
to Jerusalem, the higher and rougher are the Mountains. In this way half a
League from Nebeleschol, the Friars showed us a Well very rich of Water, just
by the Road that goes down to Gaza, this runs into a small Rivulet, wherein
the holy Apostle Philip did baptize Candaces Chamberlain to the Queen of
Aethiopia, by it is nothing else to be seen but a small Church, and a
Fish Pond. From thence we came over high, rough and steep Hills into the
Deserts, where St, John the Baptist did lead his life in his young Age, there
is nothing to be seen but a very ancient Chapel, and hard by it a delicate
Spring on the top of the Hill, where we went up to refresh our selves a little,
with eating and drinking of what we had taken along with us. About the Roads
grow many Trees, by the Inhabitants called Charnubi, the Fruit whereof is
called St. John's Bread in our Country, and is brought to us in great plenty.
From thence we had still a very rough and hilly way to the Church and
Habitation of Zachary, whither the Virgin Mary did come (climbing over the
Hills) to give Elizabeth a Visit, etc. before it a League distance nearer to
the Town, at the end of the Valley Raphaim (whereof the holy Scripture makes
often mention, viz. in the Fifteenth and Eighteenth Chapters of Joshua; and in
the First of the Chronicles, and the 12th. Chapter) stands in a very pleasant
and fruitful place, the Church of St. John the Baptist: and by it, before you
come quite to it, falls down the Spring of Nephthaah that is very rich of
Water. This Church is very ancient, but yet pretty well built, and has on the
Left Hand as you go in, a deep and hidden Cave, wherein Elizabeth did hide her
self with John her Child, that it might not be slain, with the Children of
Bethlehem, by the Servants of Herod, whereof you may read more in the
Proto-Evangelium of St. Jacob, where it is thus written: When Elizabeth did
hear that among the rest of the Innocents which Herod had commanded to be
killed, her Son John was also searched for, she did climb up the Hills, and
looked about her where she might hide him; but when she saw no place there
where she could do him, she sighed, and cried out with a loud voice, saying: O
ye hills of Gad, take both the Mother and the Child: for she could not ascend
them: the Hill did open it self instantly, and took them into it, etc. But how
afterward Herod did search for John, and how he did threaten and exhort his
Father Zachary, to tell him where his Son was, and also how his Servants did
kill Zachary, (not being satisfied with his Answer) for it in the Porch of the
Temple, is at length related in the Books of the Martyrs of the Learned and
Reverend Ludowich Rabus. As you come from the beforementioned Church, nearer
to the Town of Jerusalem, there is still seen a large Pillar, that is of great
Antiquity, and lies very high between the Mountains on a high Hill, five
Furlongs off of Jerusalem, wherefore some take it to be Ruins of the
Fortification of Betzura: but as far as one can understand by the Books of
Maccabees, that is situated more toward the East behind Mount Olivet. Just
before it within stands in the Valley (that is full of pleasant Olive Trees) a
very old, yet well built Church called the Holy Cross, whereof some Greek
Friars are possessed: they pretend that in that place, the Tree did stand, that
was made use of for the Cross of Christ: this we did soon leave, and went over
a small height through the Gate of Hebron again into Jerusalem, and made our
selves ready to return the next day again to Joppe toward our Ship. And so we
rewarded the Father Guardian, their Interpreter and others that had conducted
us, for their Faithfulness and Services done us according to our Ability, to
their full content and satisfaction, wherefore the Father Guardian did freely
give to each of us a Certificate under his usual Seal, that we had seen all the
holy places, which were named in it. This done, we went away, and came the next
day to Rama toward Joppe. By the way I found some Lentiscus's from whence the
Mastich comes, Arbutus, Ilex, and a strange sort of Willows, by the
Inhabitants called Sassaf, but by Theophrastus Elaeagnus, some Olive Trees,
Palm Trees, White Mulberry-Trees, Sumach-Trees and Styrax, from which comes a
fweet smelling Gum, called by the same Name, that is brought from thence into
our Country; Spartium, Lycium, which is a strange Shrub, and the Juice thereof
retains the same Name, and is found sometimes in our Apothecaries Shops: the
King and Prophet David makes mention thereof, under the Hebrew Name Hadhadd,
by which also the Arabians call it, their Speech running much upon the Hebrew.
Hereabout grow also very many Fruits (called Siliquae by the Latins, and (...)
and (...) by the Greeks, but by the Inhabitants Charnubi) whereof many are
brought out to us, and are very well known by the Name of St. John's Bread.
These are so common in these Countries, that they esteem them less than we do
the worst Fruit we have, wherefore they give them to the Cattle to eat.
Wherefore it is probable, that the prodigal Son desired to fill his Belly with
these Fruits, which, as it appears by the Greek Text, the Hogs did eat, and
yet could not have enough of them to satisfy his Hunger. Besides these I found
also by the way many Turpentine-Trees, by the Inhabitants called Botin and
Albotin, which are very common in France, chiefly about Montpelier, they have
small green Kernels; that are of a reddish Color, and hollow within, and are
oftentimes basely sold and used by the Apothecaries for the true Carpabalsamum:
for these and others abovementioned, as we read in the Eighth Chapter of
Nehem. the Israelites did take Bows, and made themselves Tents of them to live
in, during their great Feast of Tabernacles. I saw also chiefly between Rama
and Joppa some white Barbery Trees, which I took first for Paliurus the third
kind of Rhamnus, unto which they are very like, except the Fruits whereby I did
discern them first, and besides they are much higher, and their Branches
covered with a white Bark. Now although they are not to be taken for the same,
yet they are very like unto the second Paliurus whereof Theoprastus makes
mention in the Fourth Chapter, and the Fourth Verse. Among the Corn I did find
a strange Origanum, Serpillum: Smilax aspera, Triones of Theophrastus, whereof
I have made mention above.

After we had made our selves quite ready to sail for Tripolis, whither we had
about Forty German Miles, we went aboard the Ship, and set Sail with a fair
Wind. But this did not last long, for as soon as we were out at Sea, there
arose one that was so contrary to us, that we hardly reached the Confines of
Tirus and Sidon the Fourth Day, where we arrived in our former Voyage at night,
as I have said before, I saw nothing of any Buildings on the Shore, but some
small Houses in the place where formerly the Town Sarepta did stand, which (as
you may read in the Fourth Chapter of St. Luke, and in the Third Book of Kings,
Chap. 17.) was situated near unto Sidon, or as Josephus writes in his Eighth
Book of the Jewish Antiquities, Chap. 13. between Tyrus and Sidon in the
Country of Phaenicia, wherein the holy Prophet Elias, during the great scarcity
did live a great while with a Widow, and did restore her dead Son to life again.

Departing thence the night befell us before we gat over against Sidon, but we
went so near the Town, that we could see the Houses, and some Rocks butting
upon them by Moonlight. From thence the nearer we came to Tripolis, the more
the wind was for us, so that we arrived there on the First of October in the
year 1575, in very good health and condition. Wherefore I give eternal Thanks,
Glory, and Praise unto the Almighty God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Amen.

CHAP. XXIII.
How I took ship at Tripolis in Syria, and sailed back from thence to Venice,
and traveled home again to my own Relations at Augspurg.

AT my Arrival at Tripolis, when I hoped that something might have been done
for the Good of Hans Vlrich Krafft (whom I left in Prison behind, as is
abovementioned) toward his Deliverance: that we seeing we came out together
might have remained together a while longer, and have ended our Journey to our
content, I found there was not only nothing done to the purpose, but his Cause
came to be worse and worse, so that it was even or odd whether I should not
have been cast into Prison also, and beaten severely to boot. When thus he was
detained in Prison, I received a Letter and Command, as well from his
Adversary, as from my own Friends, desiring me to take the Cause in hand
earnestly, to bring them both to an Accommodation; and that if I would do so, I
should do him greater service, than if I should stay a whole year longer at
Tripoli, expecting his Deliverance. Now although many means were used after my
Departure, for his Liberty, yet they proved all fruitless, unsuccessful and
vain, so that he was forced to spend three entire years miserably in this
severe Turkish Imprisonment, until at length he was miraculously delivered.
Wherefore I got every thing ready for my Departure, and went aboard the Ship
called the St. Matthew, on the Day of St. Leonhard, being the Sixth Day of
November in the year 75, (having first taken my leave of the abovementioned my
dear Friend Hans Vlrich Krafft, whom I loved as my own Brother) and the next
day we put out, having a very good wind. So our Navigation proceeded in the
beginning very successfully, and we discovered on the Third Day early the great
Island of Cyprus. But when we approached unto it, a Hurricane arose suddenly,
and blew so fiercely upon us, that it wound our great Sail round about our main
Mast, so that it was a wonder to me, that it did not bring it by the Board, or
(as it would if the Seamen had not struck it down immediately) turn the Ship
over, and sink her. These Winds arise from a Wind that is called by the Greeks,
Typhon; and Pliny calls it Vertex and Vortex: but as dangerous as they are,
as they arise suddenly, so quickly they are laid again also. The Seamen
pretend, that one shall sooner perceive them in the Ship below (because they
come up from the depth of the Sea) than above Deck. After this had continued
about a quarter of an hour it was quite over, so that it was perfectly calm,
and the Sea very quiet. So our Seamen hoisted up their Sail again, and steered
toward the Capo del Graeco, with an intention to run in still before Sunset
into the Harbor of the Metropolis called Famagusta: but before we were aware
of it another Wind arose that did send us back again, so we stood out at Sea,
and went on with it so well, that we passed the Island that is One hundred and
sixty Italian Miles long. Not long after the Wind did change, and it came to be
foul Weather, and so contrary to us, that we went on but very slowly, and we
were forced to drive upon the Sea only for several Days, until at length we
came before the Land of Pamphylia and Lycia (which came in sight now and then)
nearer to the Island of Rhodes: then arose a Northerly Wind that helped us into
our true Road again, and blew so fresh, that in a few hours we went by that
mountainous Island Scarpanthus, and afterward by Solomon's Point of the Isle of
Candia out toward the South, which is Forty Leagues further: and we had been
almost quite thrown over into Africa, if we had not sheltered our selves under
the next Mountains, so we got clear of the Noise and Turbulency of the Wind and
Sea: but instead of that our Ship came so near unto the Shore of Candia, that
we feared every moment to have been shipwracked, which had certainly befaln us,
if our Nacchier, (that manageth the Sails) with his Seamen, (who wrought very
hard until they brought the Ship out at Sea again) had not had not for two days
and nights done their utmost endeavor. When we kept thus out at Sea, foul
Weather befell us again, and contrary and rough Winds blew afresh, so that it
was very dangerous sailing; wherefore our Master as well as the Men thought it
best to get into a Harbor: but finding that it was very dangerous to get in
there, they went back again to the Island Calderon, which lies not above a
German Mile from Candia, to land there* and to stay for better Weather. This
Island is small, and so rough and sandy within, that it cannot be inhabited;
but yet being full of Bushes, those of Candy, turn, chiefly in the Summer,
their Cattle into it. Here I found a kind of Mandrake with blue Flowers in
great quantity, and also very many Oxycedri like unto our Juniper Bushes,
which, are almost as high as our Pine-trees. When we, during this hard Weather,
were in this Island Calderon for shelter, we saw sometimes Clouds in the shape
of a Pillar, that came down from the Skies to the next Mounta^n, and so
extended themselves sloping down into the next Sea. Pliny makes mention also of
them in his Forty ninth Chapter of the Second Book. When this did touch the
Sea, it began to suck as it were through a Spout so fiercely, that the Water
began to move in that place, as if it were in a storm, so that we could not
only hear the Noise, but also see the great motion thereof. In the beginning it
was pretty clear, but the longer it remained there, the darker it grew, until
at length it arose up again and ascended into the Skies like unto a thick
Cloud. Wherefore it may very well be, that sometimes Worms, Frogs, Fungusses,
Snails, Muscles, etc. may fall down with the Rain, chiefly in those places that
are near to the Sea: for I have my self seen it many times in my Travels
between Bononia and Florence on the high Mountains, where I have found several
of them. When the Wind blew fair for us again, and we had sufficiently provided
our selves with Wood and fresh Water, we hoisted up our Sails again and came
away; and at length (not without great labor and changing of the wind) we got
out before the Island of Candy (which is about Two hundred and fifty Italian
Leagues long) into the open Sea, with an intention to go strait away for
Venice. In the mean time one of our Seamen did catch on a Hook, that he had
baited with some meat, a large Fish, by the Latins called Lamia, but this Fish
being of some hundred Weight in bulk, he brought him upon the hook by degrees
to the Ship, then they fastened a Rope about his Gills, and so drew him up very
safely. When they did cut it open to salt it, I found that its Bones were but
very small, and not harder than a Cartilage. They gave us now and then some of
it to eat, but it was so much salted, that we could not eat it, so that at last
they were forced to leave it. Soon after one of the Pilgrims, that was a Priest
at Lille in Flanders, got a Bloody Flux so violently, that he was in danger of
his life, so I took care of him, and gave him what Physic I had by me in the
Ship. When we came to the Island of Cerygo, (else called Cithera) belonging to
the Venetians, lying near to the Morea (from whence Paris took away the Queen
of King Menelaus, and carried her to Troy) upon a sudden a Hurricane arose
toward Night with Blowing, Thundering and Lightening, so that we at several
times did despair of our Lives. For when the Waves swelled as big as large
Rocks, and pressed very hard upon our Ship, so that they did fling it now on
this, and then on the the other side again, with great violence; so that not
only our Goods, Arms, Trunks and Boxes were tumbled up and down in the Ship,
but that also we were forced to take great care of our selves during this
Tempest, that we might not tumble over board, we were in great danger. But how
terribly soever this looked in the dark night, yet it still increased; for in a
little-while after the place that held the Cannon Bullets that were near unto
the Steerage (where I had my Cabin) broke open, so that the Bullets ran up and
down over all the Ship according as she rolled. Soon after the beating of the
Waves knocked off the Garland that was behind at the outside of the Ship, and
left some Nails about a Finger thick, that held it in the Wood, with such a
power, that one might hear it almost all over the Ship. After all this the
great Sail was also torn off and fell down into the Sea, so that we thought no
less than that we were all lost: for then the Ship was wholly left to the mercy
of the roaring Waves, that flung her, and tossed her about like a Football,
from place to place (which you may deduce from thence, that the Guardian that
held himself fast to the Main Mast upon the Deck, was sometimei above a Man's
depth under Water) so that every moment we expected to be overturned, and so
drowned. Yet in all this Calamity, we did not give over all, but did what we
could for our safety, seeing that we could not do what we would, we stood
together and pulled the Sail out again, yet we did not all pull together, for
it was so dark that we could not see one another, but when it lightened, and in
the place of the torn one we put up another new one; for generally in such
Ships they are provided with two Sails, and also with two Masts and Rudders.
After the Seamen had put on the new Sail, not without great labor, difficulty
and danger, they fell down upon their knees, and began to pray to their
Intercessors and Patrons (which every one chooses for himself) by their Names,
some to Peter, other, to St. Paul, others to the holy Virgin Mary, but chiefly
and before all the rest to St. Nicholas, who in the like imminent Dangers,
Necessities and Calamities, has oftenest before all the rest showed himself by
sundry Tokens (according to their Opinion) ready to assist and to help, so that
they might be sure of his help, and so comfort themselves with a certain
Deliverance.

After they had said their Prayers, they let me understand that they had seen
three burning Candles on the top of the Main Mast, wherefore some of them for
Joy vowed solemnly to go a Pilgrimage to certain Holy Places, or else to give a
certain Sum to one of their Churches. This Tempestuous weather held on all the
Night long, and also for a great part of the next Day, so that the Seamen
Prayed three several times; I cannot justly tell whether I was more astonished
at their Prayers or at the Tempestuousness of the Sea, but chiefly when I
understood, that they sought, without Christ our true Savior and Helper, in
this great danger to others, and such that did not only know nothing of us, as
we may see by the words of Esai, when he says, Abraham knows nothing of us,
and Israel does not know us; but that also (if they had been still alive) would
have directed us themselves to the true and only Mediator Jesus Christ. And so
we read, That the Virgin Mary her self did not know what was become of her Son,
until she found him sitting amongst the Teachers in the Temple of Jerusalem;
and also at the Wedding of Cana in Galilea, she did direct the Servants (that
told her that they wanted Wine) her self to her Son our Lord Christ, that they
might not look upon her any more) when she says to them, What he bid^ you so
do. Seeing then that the Saints will not receive such Honor that only belongs
unto the Lord; and on the contrary, The Lord bids us come to him, I turned from
them all to Christ (when our Ship was almost quite covered over with the Waves)
to awake the Lord as his Disciples did when he was asleep, saying, Lord help us
or else we perish; and with the Apostle St. Peter, O Lord save and deliver us,
let us not sink down quite, but draw us out from the depth of the Sea, and
preserve us graciously in this great danger. This Tempest made our Seamen so
distracted, that they did hardly know whether, and how far the Weather had
drove us out of our way, until we came quite about the Morea, and saw the
Island Zant (formerly called Zacynthus). This we left on our right, and did go
straight forwards to the next Island of C^phalonia. This is about 250 Leagues
distant from Candy, and does belong, as well as Zant, to the Venetians, and had
over against us a fine large and strong Port called Argostala, before which it
was 14 days before we arrived; toward the left, a Ship (being under full Sail
before a strong Wind and missing the Entry) was Staved all in pieces. Into this
we got (the Lord be thanked) safe, and remained there for some days to refresh
our selves. Just behind this Island is the Channel Viscardo, wherein the Great
Armada of the Christians did ride against the Turkish ones, until at length it
came to a Fight before it, where the Christians obtained a Glorious Victory.
After we found our selves in a safer and quieter place than we were before, and
did hope quickly to get good Bread also, instead of our old black and
Worm-eaten Biskets (which had been Laden in Spain a great while agon,
wherewith we had made shift a good while) some of us went the next morning into
the next Village (which was pretty large) to buy some. But we did miss of our
aim very much; for being that the Inhabitants continually and hourly feared
that the Turks, whose Armada was not far off, would make a descent upon them
therefore they conveyed all the Goods they had into the Castle, that we could
see lie very high beyond the great Harbor, and had kept no more but what was
necessary for their daily use; so that no Provision at all was to be had or
found: And they had so little of Bread, that we went about in the Village from
House to House, and could hardly get for Money as much Bread as would serve us
for our Dinner. But as for Wine they let us have what we would, which was Red,
and very good, which the Merchants knew very well; wherefore they bought a
considerable quantity thereof, to carry to Venice, and so did our Ships Master
also. We also found many small Grapes growing there, on the Vines, which (as
many as I saw of them) are rather less and lower than ours in our Vineyards.
During this our tarrying, our Pilot being Sick, so that he was not able to
direct the Ship any further according to the Compass, our Master strove to get
another, and that the rather, because the Adriatic Sea whereinto we expected
to come daily) is very dangerous, because of its narrowness, plenty of Islands,
and hidden Rocks, to Navigate. So we got a Greek, and after the Weather began
to be fairer, we put out to Sea again. But this did not continue long, for when
we came out a little out of the Harbor, we had other Winds upon the Sea, that
were rather contrary to us, and hindered us so very much in our Navigation,
that after many days we arrived only before the Fort of Corfu, otherways called
Corcyca (which we could hardly see in that Misty and Foggy Weather) not without
great pains and labor. This ill Weather, with the contrary Winds, lasted very
long, and increased more and more, the Wind continuing high; so that we had
almost been cast over into Apulia against our intention, chiefly between Cataxo
and Ragusa, which Ptolomy called Epidaurus, had we not quickly made the Island
of Meleda. So we spent our time in this Navigation, not only in hard and
contrary Winds, with great pains and labor, but were besides obliged to be
above Deck, (because she was filled up with Goods all within to the weight of
above Twelve Thousand Centners) where we endured great Cold, and must remain
there in all the Rain and Storms.

After this we went into a small Channel between this and another Island, where
we lay at Anchor all Night: Early in the morning we saw a Galley coming from
the Sea upon us. As soon as we saw her, before we could well discern her
because of the too great distance, we made all ready for our defense to resist
her; but when she came nearer to us, and we found by her Flags that she was our
friend, we were at rest again, and discharged, when she went by us, three great
Guns to salute her according to the usual Custom of the Sea. When she was past
by, we weighed our Anchor also, and sailed to Curtzola, another Island and
Town, toward Dalmatia, called Corcyra nigra, which is very strong, and
formerly did belong to Ragusa, but now it is subjected to the Venetians. This
we left on the left hand, and went toward another now called Liesena, by
Ptolomy called Pharia, which lay about 50 Leagues nearer to us. This we did
soon make, and arrived in the Port on Christmass-Eve, which is close by the
Town, so that one can look very pleasantly into the wide open place. In the
morning early, at the breaking of the day, those in the Town discharged some
great Guns for Joy, which were in the next Church, standing near to the Harbor,
according to their Ancient Custom on such great Holy Days. When these had
begun, those also that were upon the Castle, which is very strong, and lies
close to the Town Walls up very high, did discharge some; after them, those
also that were upon the 6 Galleys that arrived in the Harbor after us did the
same; at length it came also to our turn, that lay at Anchor in the Harbor, as
well the little as the great ones, whereof there was a great many; there it
began to bounce and crackle, (for in our Ship we had 16 great ones) and it made
such a noise in the Harbor, that one would have thought all the Buildings fell
over one another. This shooting also occasioned so great and thick a smoke,
that we could hardly see one another. After Dinner we went ashore to buy good
New Bread, instead of our Worm-eaten Biskets, whereof (God be thanked) we found
enough, which did refresh us very much. In this time the Priest that was
dangerously Sick of the Bloody Flux, was so well recovered of it, that he, with
his Comrades, went over to Ancona, to go from thence to Rome. After we had rode
at Anchor in this Harbor for four days, by reason of bad weather, we weighed at
length, and came away to the Ancient and Famous Town Zara, (by Ptolomy called
Jadera) which is accounted to be 150 Leagues. Between Liesena and Zara there
lies abundance of small Islands, where a great many Pirates shelter themselves,
that are called by a peculiar Name Scacki. These sleep in the day time, and are
here and there on high places, to take notice of the Ships that go up and down,
that they may fall upon them in the Night, and take them at a disadvantage, so
that it is very dangerous to Ride there; and that so much the more, because the
Sea is hereabout very narrow, by reason of the many Islands that lie in it,
wherefore the Pilots must daily take care, to get in good time into a Port,
where they may Ride securely all Night-Nay, sometimes even the Ships in the
Harbors are not secure from these Scacki's or Pirates, for so it happened that
we were once in a Port at Anchor in our Voyage, which although it was very well
secured and strong, yet we were not secure there from the Sacki's; as it had
happened in this same Harbor but a year before, to a Ship called Cantarena
(which the Sacki's did get into by Night) which came off greatly by the loss,
so that they had great occasion to remember it; wherefore we divided our selves
into four parts, and so kept Watch by turns all Night long. Whiles we thus kept
Watching, we saw them several times come in small Boats, as if they were
Fishermen, yet as I am informed, there are often 40, 50, and 60 Men that lie
hid in these small Boats, and watch their opportunity to get near to the great
Ships, to Board them, and enter upon them. Wherefore as soon as we saw that
they would come to us, we cried out, Fuoco, fuoco, that is to say, Fire, to
shoot off the Guns at them; when they heard this, they presently answered,
Amici, amici; that is to say, We are friends; and so they went away again. Now
when we believed that we were escaped all danger, we got into a greater one by
the oversight of our Pilot; for when he had order to go to Zara, he did not
obey this Command, fearing that our Ship-master would put him out there because
of his ill behavior, and take another in his room, wherefore that he might
stay longer with us, he Steered for the Islands of Vergetes, thinking that
because he could get over with Galleys (whom he had all along generally served)
he might also get over with a Merchant-man (that was heavy Laden and so drew
more Water) safe and without any danger. But this did not succeed well, for
when we sailed along between the Islands, we lost the depth of Water by
degrees, and at last struck with a great cracking, so that we could expect
nothing but Shipwreck, which would of necessity have followed if our Rudder had
not remained whole in this striking, and lifted up the Poop of the Ship, and so
shoved the forepart sidewards into the depth; to which success the swelling
Sails did not also contribute a little. So did God, our dear Lord, Miraculously
send that the Ship, chiefly by the help of the Rudder (which was at least three
spans deeper in the Water than the Ship) got off and went on her way. Having
escaped again this great misery and danger, we Landed in another Island that
was not far off; over against which, on the side of Dalmatia, lies the Village
Mortera, between two famous Towns, viz. Zara and Sebernis, by Ptolomy called
Ficum, on a Mountain of this Island (behind which lies a good Village) you may
pleasantly see the whole situation, together with the confines of the Turks,
very plainly; in this Village we took up and Lodged in it, until our Sloop,
that we had sent out to Zara for another and more expert Pilot, came back again.

As soon as they arrived with the New Pilot, we broke up again, embarked and
sailed for Venice, whither we had about 250 Italian Leagues. When we came out
before the Castle of St. Michael (which lies in the Sea over against Zara on a
high Mountain) a North Wind arose, with such a Tempestuousness, that it had
almost cast us toward Italy, had not our Pilot (who knew the Shores, and
Landings of Ships, better than the former) done his best, and Landed presently,
which could not be done but with great Might and Labor, (for we were bound to
go against the Wind) yet we accomplished it; which you may easily guess, for of
those 6 Galleys that met us in Liesena, but two could make our Harbor (because
they were not strong enough for the Wind although they used their utmost force
in Rowing) the rest were forced to go back again, and to shelter themselves
behind the outward Islands.

Into the same Harbor was also just before us run in, to shun the ill Weather,
a Yatcht, that had about eleven Men on Board; they did Pump out the Water that
was run in, and dry their Sails upon the Land, by which we did conjecture that
they also had not been in small danger. We did send some of our Men on Board of
them to know who they were; and they answered us, That they had Letters from
the Great Sultan, to their Masters the Venetians, concerning a Peace that was
agreed upon, which their Envoy at Constantinople had sent by Land to Cattaro,
one of their Towns, where they were delivered up to them, to carry them to
Venice with all possible speed. After this great Storm was over, we went on
again in our Voyage. By the way I saw nothing worth mentioning, but now and
then a Village, where sometimes, if convenient, we Landed, and staid there all
Night. In one of them I found a great deal of Saffron, which was very like unto
that of Vienna, both in look and goodness. So at length we came to the large
and very deep Golfo Carnaro, by which within lies the Town Segna, where the
Windy-Country ends, and the Hister-Land begins. This Golfo is about 100
Miles long and 30 broad, so that in clear Weather one may see very well over
it, but it is very dangerous to sail over it, and because of its great motion,
it is easily discerned from the Sea from without; over this we came (God be
thanked) very well, and Landed at Rovigna, a small Town situated on a high
Rock. This belongs, as well as others thereabout, as Pola, Parentza, etc. to
the Venetians, from whence to Venice we have still about 100 Miles. But being
that it is very dangerous to go from thence with large and Laden Ships to
Venice, therefore that Republic does keep there always several Experienced
Pilots (to prevent further mischief) that do nothing else but conduct the Ships
that arrive in Histria safely thither. And these do not easily put off, unless
they have very good mild and clear Weather; which was the occasion that our
Ship did tarry there; so that we all, except the Seamen, which we left in the
Ship behind, went into a Barge on the 14th day of January late, and went all
Night long to Venice, where we all safely arrived the 15th of the same Month
about Noon.

At my arrival I met with some very good Friends and Acquaintance, with whom I
stayed for several days, to refresh and rest my self after the great Hardships
I had endured, and Dangers I had passed. After they had made me very welcome,
and shown unto me all kindness and civility, and I had rested my self
sufficiently, I resolved to Travel with a Venetian Post into Germany again; so
we Traveled together from thence to Treviso, Trent, Botzan, Inspruck, Amberga,
etc. (whereabouts, I found my Cousin Hans Widholtz, and George Hindermayer
Botzen Riding by him, who kept me all that Night with them in their Inn) so at
length I arrived on the 12th day of February 1576, at Augsburg, my dear Native
Country, to the great Rejoicing of my dear Parents and Relations, which I all
found in indifferent good Health. I thank the Almighty, Merciful and Good God,
that is one in his Essence, and three in Persons, for all his Mercies he has
bestowed upon me, in all my great Dangers and Necessities, both by Sea and
Land, for his dear Son Jesus Christ his sake. Praise, Glory and Thanks be to
him, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A COLLECTION Of Curious TRAVELS AND VOYAGES, etc. The Second Tome.

A COLLECTION OF Curious Travels and Voyages.

The Second Tome.

CONTAINING Observations made by several Learned and Famous Men in their
Journeys through the Levant, viz. the Isle of Candy, Greece, Egypt, Asia
minor, etc. by Monsieur Belon, Prosper Alpinus, Dr. Huntingdon, Mr. Vernon, Sir
George Wheeler, Dr. Smith, Mr. Greaves, Father Vansleb, and others.

To which are added, Two Itineraries to Mecha, and into Aethiopio.

Curious TRAVELS AND VOYAGES, etc. TOME II.
CHAP. I.
Mr. Belon 's Remarks in the Island of Crete or Candy.

THE Roots of Mount Ida (called now by the Natives Psiloriti) extend to both
the Shores of the Island: When I was at the top, I not only saw under me all
Candy, but some adjacent-Islands, as Milo, Cerigo, etc. The Snow lies all the
year long on this Hill, whilst the Plains underneath are extremely scorched,
and burnt up: It Is so cold, that the Shepherds cannot inhabit it in the
Summertime, but are forced every night to descend, and leave their Flocks of
Goats and Sheep feeding. This Mountain, on one side, abounds with pleasant
Springs, Woods, many sorts of Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs, as Maples, Ilices or
Holme-Oaks, Arbutus and Adrachne, Alaterni, Cisti Labdaniferi, Firrs, Cypress,
Chamaelea, Thymelea, Oxycedrus, Nerion or Oleander with a white Flower,
Olive Trees, Vines, many Legumes, and Pulse.

Near and round this famous Mountain Ida are found Salvia Pomifera, which is
carried to all the Markets, Caper Shrubs, Mandragora Mas and foemina, two kinds
of Paeony with a white Flower, Tragium seu Androsaemum foetidum, Leontopetalum,
Melilotus vera Odorata, Trifolium Moenianthe (perhaps our Palustre)
Heliocryson, which grows so thick as to cover and shelter the Hares; Staechas
Citrina, two kinds of Tragacanth, which yield no Gum in this Island; Staphis
agria, common up and down; Coris (a sort of Hypericum, with Leaves like Heath
or Tamarisk) grows plentifully, the Root has an ungrateful taste, and vomited
me. The Anagyris stinks so upon the Roads, that it makes the Head ach, and
scarce any Animal will touch it. Tithymalus Dendroides, Thapsia, Ferula,
Libanotis, and Seseli abound. Agriomelea frutex (a sort of Sorbus or
Cotonaster); a fourth Species of Aristolochia different from those three
described by the Ancients; it is scandent like a Smilax. The Coccus Baphica or
Kermes is found plentifully here upon an Ilex, the Shepherds and Boys gather it
in June, separate the red Animalcules from the Vesicle or Excrescence by
Sieves, and form them into Balls very gently for sale, for if they are squeezed
or pressed, they dissolve, and the color perishes. The Dictamnus grows only
between the Fissures of the Rocks, but the Pseudo dictamnus in other places.
Lotus Arbor, Zizyphus or Jujube, Scolymus Chrysanthemos, called commonly
Ascolimbros, whose milky Root and young Leaves make a common Dish. Tithymalus
Myrsinites and Paralius in the mountainous and maritine places, as also a
Gnaphalium candicans littoreum, and a wild Brassica, Chamaesyce and Soldanella,
a Dracunculus with an Ivy-leaf; the Halimus makes their common Hedges up and
down the Island, the tops are edulous; Agnus Castus, Sedum fruticescens, Thymum
legitimum, which last serves them for common Fuel; the Thymbra or Satureia
vulgaris all loaded with Epithymum or Dodder; the Tribulus Terrestris is very
noxious to their Fields, and Pulse; Scammonea or Scammony in hilly places;
Sesamum and Xylon, or Cotton, are sown in April; Pitch is boiled out of the
Pines on the Mountains. There is none of our Asparagus, but instead of it two
prickly kinds, called Corruda and Polytricha. Ten varieties of wild Anemone's.
There is a sort of Artichoke, called by the Shepherds Agriocinara, whose
turbinated Root is sold by many Druggists for the Costus Indicus, the tops are
eaten, the Flower is white, sometimes purple. There is a sort of Carline
Thistle, called Chamaelion Albus, whose odorate Root sweats out a Gum, which
the Women in Candy chew, as they in Scio do Mastick, or they in Lemnos the Gum
of a Condrilla. Two sorts of Acanthus, one soft, the other prickly. The
Inhabitants have not left off the old manner of preserving the tops of an
Anonis, as also the tender shoots of an Eryngium. The Island affords three
kinds of Origanum, a sort of Squill or Sea-Onion, Orobus, Securidaca, and many
other Legumes. It abounds with Terebinths and Mastick-Trees, Laurels, Styrax,
an arborescent Ricinus, or Palma-Christi; Aspalathus, and a Genisto spartium,
called Echinopoda.

The Ibex or Steinbock, a swift nimble Animal, whose Horns are heavy and long
for the bulk of the Creature, frequents the Rocky Mountains: There is also the
Strepsiceros, a sort of Gazella.

The Bird called Merops and Apiastrum, or Beeater (a sort of Woodpecker) is
common in the Island, catches Bees, and feeds on them in the Air. The Attagen
and Francolino, as also a white large Partridge, frequent the Mountains;
Eagles, Vultures, and Falcons build on the Rocks.

The Fish called Scarus, which I never observed in the Euxine, Propontis, or
any other part of the Mediterranean Sea, is common on the Coasts of Candy, and
is generally taken at the same Season that the Inhabitants rake and gather
their sweet Labdanum or Ladanum: The only Bait for this Fish is made of the
Leaves of a Phaseolus, which they swallow very greedily.

I observed only three kinds of Serpents in this Island, the first is called by
the Country People Ophis; the second Ochendra; the third Tephloti; but none of
these is venomous: I saw one bite and draw Blood, but without any harm. Hence
the Ancients might say, that Crete nourished no poisonous Animal.

The Phalangium is common up and down; it weaves Webbs like other Spiders, to
catch its Prey, Butterflies and Flies, and other Insects. It lays about sixty
Eggs, carries and hatches them under its Belly; it fights much with the
Ichneumon Wasp.

The Stone called Dactylus Idaeus, or Belemnites, erroneously taken and sold
for the Lapis Lyncis, is plentiful on Mount Ida.

The Vinum malvaticum, or Pramnium, as also the Moschatell, are made here, and
transported up and down.

For a full Catalogue of such Vegetables as grow in the Island of Candy,
together with their synonymous Names and Places, the Reader may be pleased to
consult Mr. Ray's Collection of Exotic Catalogues, published this year at
London, and annexed to the end of this Second Tome, amongst which the Cretick
Plants are all drawn together out of Bellonius, Honorio Belli, Alpinus, Pona,
etc.

CHAP. II.
A Description of Mount Athos, commonly called Monte Santo, by Mr. Belon.

THIS famous Mountain, so celebrated by the Ancients, stands in a Peninsula or
Promontory of Macedonia, stretching out into the Aegaean Sea; its Shadow
reaches to Lemnos, or Stalamine; it is inhabited only by Monks, called Caloyers,
who never marry, though other Priests of the Greek Church do. These Caloyers
abstain from all Flesh, and even from sanguineous Fishes in Lent time; they
live very hardly and severely; their ordinary Dish is pickled Olives, not green
like ours, but black and ripe, dried without Pickle. There are about 6000 of
these Monasticks, that inhabit several places of this Mountain, on which are
seated 24 large old Monasteries, encompassed with high strong Walls, for
defense against Pirates and other Robbers, though they who spare no body are
kind and indulgent to the Caloyers.

In these Monasteries the Ceremonies of the Greek Church are most diligently
and strictly observed, and these Caloyers or Monks are the most reverenced of
any belonging to that Communion; the Turks themselves will often send them
Alms, being taken with the Sanctity of their Lives; and the Monks who inhabit
Mount Sinai, Mount Libanus, the Deserts of St. Anthony, Jerusalem, and other
holy places, are always the more valued, and respected, if they have lived
before on Mount Athos, which is in as great esteem and veneration amongst the
Greeks as Rome amongst the Latins. This place is under the Jurisdiction of the
Patriarch of Constantinople, who pays about 12000 Ducats per annum to the Grand
Signior, upon the account of the Europaean Greek Church. The Patriarchs of
Alexandria, Damascus, Antioch, etc. give also their particular Sums to the
Turk, who gives liberty of Religion to all that pay Tribute.

Of these 6000 Religious, or Caloyers of Mount Athos, none lead idle Lives (as
most of the Monks in other places do) but every one has his daily Employment,
some labor with the Ax, Spade, and Sickle, dress their Vineyards, cut Trees,
build Fishing-Vessels; others carry Sacks full of Provision, Bread, and Onions;
some spin and weave, their Distaff being made of the Arundo Donax, and their
Spindle of the Herb called Attractilis; some are Tailors, Bricklayers, and
Carpenters; they are generally clothed like Hermits.

This Mountain is about three days Journey long, and may be seen about 30
leagues off at Sea; the Monasteries are at some distance: They give such
Provisions as they have gratis to all Travelers whatsoever, as pickled or
dried Olives, raw Onions, salted Beans, Bisquet, Salted Fish, sometimes fresh,
for they often go a fishing, their Vessels or Boats being cut without great
difficulty out of the thick Trunks of Plain Trees; their Nets, for want of
Cork, are supported with Gourds, as they are in the Propontis with the Bark of
Pines. The chief Monastery is called Ageas Laura, and fronts the Isle of
Lemnos, it contains about 300 Caloyers or Greek Monks; those that look toward
the Continent or Macedonia have all their peculiar Names, and contain some 200,
others 150 Caloyers. Formerly there were good Greek Manuscripts in these
Monasteries, but now none at all, unless of Theology; no Poets, no Historians,
no Philosophers, not one of the Monks learned, of 6000 scarce above two or
three know how to write or read, so degenerated and depressed is the Greek
Nation at present: They use Wax-Candles and Lamps in their Churches, as also
Statues, Pictures and Bells: They have no Poultry, Pigeons, or any other Birds;
nor Sheep, nor Cows, nor Goats; because they abstain from all Flesh: They hunt
no Game (though there is great variety and plenty) only Fish near the Shore. I
observed abundance of those Birds called Molliceps (a sort of Chaffinch) as
also of the Torquilla or Wrynecks. No People have the Privilege of living on
this Mountain but these Caloyers.

Mount Athos abounds with many rare Plants, but because many of them are
already mentioned to grow near Mount Ida in Candia; I shall industriously omit
to name such of them in this place. I observed here the Apion (a sort of
knobbed Spurge) which the Caloyers themselves know to be purgative.
Hippoglossum or Horse-Tongue, Veratrum nigrum, or Black Hellebore, common in
the Valleys; Beech, Hornbeam, Service, Oleaster, Myrtles, Oleander with a red
flower, several Bindweeds running up to the high tops of the Plane Trees, which
here vye in height with the Cedars of Libanus, or the Firrs of Olympus.

There is a sort of Cantharides on this Hill called Buprestis, of a yellowish
color, very foetid, feeding on Brambles, Succory, Nettle, Conyza, and other
Herbs: If any Beasts swallow this Insect, they swell and dye. There is a sort
of Cray-fish in the fresh Rivolets, which the Caloyers eat raw, and I my self
found the taste of them very sweet and grateful: They do not crawl up from the
Sea, but breed in the Streams above. There is a Plant in the Valleys called
Elegia (perhaps a Species of Arundo) whose Branches serve instead of
Writing-Pens, for neither the Turks nor the Greeks know the use of Quills.

The Caloyers brought us several things to eat, as Rocket, Roots of Smallage,
the Bulbs of Leeks, Cucumbers, Onions, Garlic, which we eat without either Oil
or Vinegar; black Olives, course Biscuit, and Wine; they also regaled us with
salted and dried Fish, Sepia's, Polypi, and Loligines, Crabbs, and other
Crustaceous and Testaceous Animals. These Monks had rather dye than eat Flesh
upon any occasion.

We ascended to the very top of Mount Athos, where we could not long endure the
Cold; we saw from thence many adjacent Provinces and Islands, as Cassandria,
Scyton, Lemnos, Thasson, Samothracen, Imbron, etc. In our descent we observed
Firrs, and Pitch-Trees, which differed a little from those of Mount Ida, for in
these the Cones adhered so close to the Branches, that they would not separate;
besides, these were very smooth, whereas the others were scabrous.

There being no Haven under this Mountain, the Caloyers are forced to draw
their Fishing-Vessels ashore, and place them behind Iron Gates, lest the
Pirates should set fire to them. They exchange their Grapes, Olives, Figgs,
Onions, Garlic, Beans, and Legumes with the Mariners, who bring them some
Wheat: They have Mills on the Streams of the Hill. They express an Oil out of
their Bayberries, which they send into Walachia, Bulgaria, and Servia, where
it is sold. They take abundance of the Long Oyster or Langouste.

The multitude of Springs and Streams, the variety of Herbage and Evergreens,
the Woods and pleasant Shore, do all render Mount Athos one of the most
charming places in the World.

CHAP. III.
An Account of a Journey by Land from Mount Athos to Constantinople, wherein
the Gold and Silver Mines of Macedonia, together with many Antiquities and
Natural Rarities, are described.

LEaving Mount Athos, we traveled in two days to Saloniki, formerly called
Thessalonica, and in two days more we reached Siderocapsa, the Chrysites of the
Ancients, where now the Turks, and many other Nations, work the rich Oars,
which afford yearly a very considerable Treasure, and make the place much
frequented and resorted to. It Is situated amongst the Valleys, at the foot of
high Mountains, and yields monthly to the Grand Signior for his share only
above 18000 Gold Ducats, and sometimes 30000 clear of all Disbursements. There
are about Five or Six hundred Furnaces dispersed up and down these Mountains,
which abound with great varieties of Pyrites, Marchasites, and other Oars,
which they work in a different manner from the Germans and Spaniards: Their
Furnaces and Workhouses are all placed on the sides of Rivolets, for all their
Bellows play with Wheels turned by Streams of Water. The white Soot of the
Chimneys is called Spodus and Pompholix, as it differs in color, of which
above ten pounds may be gathered every week. They separate the Lead from the
Gold and Silver by particular fusions, then the Silver from the Gold by Aqua
fortis: Out of the Gold they coin their Ducats, which are very flexible, and
esteemed the purest Gold in the World, always clean and resplendent.

From these metallic Mountains we saw Mount Athos, and great part of
Macedonia, which appeared hilly. I observed here two Serpents never seen before
by me; the Greeks called them Sapidi or Sapiti, which comes near to Seps or
Sips. The Inhabitants of Syderocapsa gather abundance of the Rhus or Sumach,
which they use in preparing their Skins, and tanning their Leather, which the
Egyptians do with the Pods of their Acacia, the Natolians with the Cups of the
Acorns of a Dwarf-Oak called Esculus, the Illyrians with a black Myrtle
(perhaps the Rhus Myrtifolia) the French with Oak bark, the Lesbians and
Phrygians with the bark of the Picea.

The Workmen use several Machines in working and drawing up the Oars, according
as the Veins lie: These Works employ above 6000 men.

In a Lake near Syderocapsa I took notice of several Fishes, as one called
Laros by the Natives, because the Gulls feed much upon it, by the Latins
Gania, by the French Mouatte, by those of Diepe and Newport, Mauue. Another
called Claria, by those of Lions, Lotte; by the Parisians Barbotte. Also the
Liparis, the Perch, young Mullets, etc.

In the adjacent Country there are Fallow Deer, Buffalo's, Wild Boar, Goats,
Red Deer, and our Roe Deer, Porcupines, Urchins, Wolfs, Foxes, Hares; the
Chamois or Rupicapra; the Tragelaphus different from the Hippelaphus.

Leaving Syderocapsa, we spent two days in getting to Cavalla, anciently called
Boucephala, whereas we might have gone by Sea in half a day: In this Journey we
saw the River Strymon, and on it Swans, and other Birds like Pelecans: At the
mouth of this River are seen the Remains of a place called by the Natives
Chrysopolis, though Pliny puts it not far from Chalcedon. We saw Ceres the Cranon
of the Ancients; afterward Tricala, and so by the side of the Mountain
Despota, through a great Plain to Philippi, near which are many Villages and
several Mines. We observed hereabouts Misseltoe on the Oak, as also in many
other places of Macedonia, where they make Bird-lime. The Ground is very much
overrun with the Paliurus and Rhamnus.

The Ruins of Philippi are about two days Journey from Trica or Tricala, and
Philippi scarce three more from Philippolis. These were great Roads in the time
of the Roman Empire, now heaps of Rubbish, and Sepulchers of Marble with
Inscriptions. The Isle of Tasso is but six hours distant, and from thence this
great quantity of white Marble might have easily been fetched. The Magnificence
of Philippi may be guessed at from the number of these noble Monuments and
Inscriptions, from the fair Amphitheatre still entire with its Marble Seats:
It Is not oval, as those at Otricholi and Rome, but spherical, as those at
Verona and Nismes: There are also Dorick and Ionick Pillars, with many Statues
belonging to the Temple of Divus Claudius. At Cavalla or Boucephala there are
still great Cisterns of hardened Cement (as at Baiae) and Aquaeducts.

Departing from Cavalla, we passed by Mount Haemus, over the River Nesus, and
came to Bouron on the Salt-Lake of Bisto, near a moist Plain, full of Cytisus,
Halimus, etc. as about Philippi. Here are taken great quantity of Dace or Dare,
which they pickle as we do Herrings, as also smoke and dry them. The Fishing on
this Lake is very considerable, for from hence they supply many distant places.
About six hours from Bouron we came to Commercina, where they sell great
variety of Provisions; from thence we went to Cypsella, where they make Alum by
gently calcining the Stone, and letting it dissolve afterward in the Air by
the Dews and Rains, and then boiling and crystallizing the impregnated Water.
In this Journey we saw many old Roman Highways paved with great Stones.

We passed the Marisca (of old Hebrus) in a Ferry, and came to Vire; here they
wash some Gold out of the Sand, but are often forced to use Quicksilver in the
separation. The Water of Hebrus is very cold in the middle of Summer, and the
Banks are set with Tamarisks; King's-fishers build their Nests in holes on the
sides, they make them of the Bones and Scales of little Fishes. The Natives
hereabouts often leave their Habitations to work in Harvest time: Their Sickles
differ from ours, and their Corn is not thresh'd but trodden with Cattle. In
this Journey we found great variety and plenty of Jaspars and Chalcedony.

The Thracians and Macedonians gather all the Galls or Excrescencies on the
Turpentine Trees, which they sell at Prusa, for the dying of Silks. This
Country abounds much with Tortoises, for the Greeks never eat nor destroy
their, unless they catch them in their Gardens or Plantations of Cotton and
Sesamum.

We left the Road of Gallipoli on the right, and came to Rodesto (the old
Perinthus) from thence we left Heraclea on the left, and past Selibria, a days
Journey distant from Constantinople. The Honey of Heraclea is said to be
pernicious, perhaps because the Country abounds with the Chamaeleon niger (a
sort of Carlina) to whose Root adheres a very venomous Excrescence called Ixia,
which may affect the Bees that feed on that Plant.

I found hereabouts a milky Plant (perhaps an Apocynum) with the leaves and
flower of a Nerion, or the purple Lysimachia.

Thrace is an open Country without Trees, like Picardy, the great Plains are
divided here and there with Ridges and little Hills: About three miles before
we came to Constantinople, we passed two long Wood-Bridges that run over the
Salt-Marshes, upon which are many Boats and Mills with eight Wings or Arms: On
these Lakes there is a great Fishery, as also on the Propontis, for the
Oriental People (as other Nations of old) are more delighted with the Fish Diet
than with that of Quadrupeds or Birds. This may be one reason why the Books of
the Ancients treat more of Fish than of Fowl, or any other Animals.

CHAP. IV.
The Ways of Fishing on the Propontis, the Bosphorus, and Hellespont; as also
of the Fishes taken. By M. Belon.

THESE Seas abound extremely with Fish, that pass between the Euxine and
Mediterranean, into which abundance of great fresh Rivers empty themselves: The
Streights and Shoars are full of little Wood-Cottages (wherein the Fishermen
watch and observe the several Shoals) and great variety of Nets, both loose and
fastened to Poles, of several figures, for the taking both of great and small
frys: There is also the Hook and Bait-fishing up and down with long Lines; the
Train and Hand-Nets, etc.

Besides all these ways, they practice another manner of fishing by lighted
Torches in dark calm nights, whereby they find the great Fishes asleep, and
strike them very silently with sharp Tridents and hooked Engines: This they
find the most convenient for taking the greater sorts of Fish, which often
break their Nets and Lines.

The common Fishes of these Streights are, the Tunny and the Pelamis, Macrel,
Scads, Giltheads, Mullets, Gurnards, Sheathfish, Swordfish, the Dolphin
different from our Porpess, the Wolf-fish, Lampreys, the Muraena, Sphyrena,
Melanurus, Salpa, Sargus, Moena, Atherina, Exocaetus which serve for Baits to
catch Congers, Celerinus, Sardina, Polypus, Loligo, Erythrinus, etc.

The Garus, so common in the Shops of Constantinople, is prepared here only out
of the Sanies or Ichor of the salted Intestines of the Macrel and Scads. The
red Cavear is not made of the Eggs or Roe of the Sturgeon, but out of the
Cyprinus. (Q. Whether the Author means the Bream or Carp.)

CHAP. V.
Of some Beasts and Mechanic Trades at Constantinople.

NEar the Hippodromus at Constantinople I observed some rare Animals, which the
Turkish Emperors are much delighted with, as the Onager, the Hystrix, the Lupus
Cervarius, the Lynx, the Ponticus Mus, or Ermine, many rare Weasils, and odd
Cats.

The Turks not using the Printing Trade, they levigate and polish their Writing
Paper in Box Frames, by rubbing it with the Chalcedony and Jaspar-stones put at
the end of Sticks. They damask their Cymeters with a bluish color, by
macerating Sal Ammoniac and Verdigrease in Vinegar, and steeping the Blades in
this Mixture, often pouring fresh upon them, this acts upon the Steel, and
renders it of that color upon polishing. They granulate Leather for Scabbards.
In the Cutlers Shops one sees great variety of Horns, Teeth, etc. as of
Bufalo's, Gazels, Morse-Teeth, and other Tusks. They color their Linen with
great variety, and with many Figures, which they cut in Wood and there paint,
afterward stamp and press it upon the Linen or Silk, as in printing upon
Paper, they first polish their Linen or Cottons with Pastes of fine Flower.
The Inhabitants on these Streights gather abundance of a broad-leav'd Alga,
which they mix with a fat Earth, and so cover their Houses with it: The Current
running so strong, casts out great variety of Marine Productions, as Alcyonium
or Arkeilli, Antipathos (a sort of Coralline.)

Mr. Francis Vernon's Letter, written to Mr. Oldenburg, Jan. 10. 1675/6, giving
a short account of some of his Observations in his Travels from Venice through
Istria, Dalmatia, Greece, and the Archipelago, to Smyrna, where this Letter was
written.
SIR,
I Must beg your Excuse for not having written to you in so long a space: The
little rest I have had, and the great unsettledness of my Condition is the
reason. Neither have I now any great Curiosities to impart to you; only some
small Circumstances of my Journey I will run over.

From Venice I set out with those Galleys which carried their Ambassador that
went for the Port. We touched at most of the considerable Towns of Istria and
Dalmatia by the way. In Istria we saw Pola, an ancient Republic. There remains
yet an Amphitheatre entire; it is of two orders of Tuscan Pillars, placed one
over another, and the lower Pillars stand on Pedestals, which is not ordinary;
for, commonly they have nothing but their Bases to support them. There is,
besides a Temple dedicated to Rome and Augustus, a Triumphal Arch, built by a
Lady of the Family of the Sergii, in honor of some of her Kindred, which
commanded in these Countries; besides several Inscriptions and ancient
Monuments, which are in diverse parts of the Town.

In Dalmatia I saw Zahara, which is now the Metropolis of the Country. It was
anciently called Jadera. It Is now very well fortified, being encompassed on
three sides with the Sea, and that part which is toward the Land extremely
advantaged by all the contrivances of Art, having a Castle and a Rampart of
very lofty Bastions to guard it. I found here several ancient Inscriptions, by
me copied, which will not find room in the compass of a Letter. We passed in
sight of Zebenico, and saw three Forts, which belong to the Town, St. Nicolo,
St. Gioanni, and la Fortezza Vecchia; but we went not ashore. That which is
most worth seeing in Dalmatia, is Spalatro, where is Dioclesian's Palace, a
vast and stupendous Fabric, in which he made his residence when he retreated
from the Empire: it is as big as the whole Town, for the whole Town indeed is
patched up out of its Ruins, and is said by some to take its Name from it. The
Building is massive; there is within it an entire Temple of Jupiter,
eight-square, with noble Porphyry Pillars, and Cornice, worth any bodies
admiration. There is a Court before it, adorned with Egyptian Pillars of that
Stone called P^repeiciles, and a Temple under it, now dedicated to Sta Lucia;
and up and down the Town several fragments of Antiquity, with Inscriptions and
other things, worth taking notice of.

Four miles from Spalatro is Salona, which shows the ruins of a great Town.
About as much farther from Salona stands Clissa, upon a rocky Hill, an eminent
Fortress of the Venetians, which is here the Frontier against the Turk, from
whence they repulsed him in their late Wars with great Honor. I was at Lesina,
where is nothing very remarkable; but Biondi, that has written our English
History, was of it. Trau is ancient, and has good marks of its being so. Here
I spoke with Doctor Stasileo, who put out that Fragment of Pe^ronius Arbiter,
and I saw his Manuscript.

I was in the Harbor of Ragusi, but not in the Town, because we made no stay
there. From hence we past the gulf of Budua, and saw the Mountains of
Antivari, the Plain of Durazzo and Apollonia, and came to Sassino a small
Island, from whence we could see the Town of Valona, and the Mountains
Aeroceraunii, which are very near, and are now called Mountains of Chimaera.

I stayed a fortnight in Carfu, and had time to view all that was considerable
in the Island, particularly the Gardens of Alcinous, that is, the place where
they are supposed to have been, now called Chrysida, a most delicious
situation: The ancient Port, now called (...), and several foundations of
ancient Fabrics. In Zante I was likewise a fortnight, where I saw but little
of Antiquity: What is modern is very flourishing, and the Island rich and
plentiful.

I went from Zante to Patras, a Town in Achaia, of good note among the
Ancients. Near it is a great Mountain, mentioned by Homer, by the name of Petra
Ol^nia. In the Town are several massive Ruins, which few there know how to
give any account of. There are the Remains of a large Church, dedicated to St.
Andrea, who, they say, was martyred there. This is the first Town I saw on the
Continent of Greece. The Plain about it is very fruitful, full of Springs and
Rivolets; finely wooded with Olive Trees, Cypresses, Orange and Lemon-trees.
The Citrons here are counted among the best of the Turkish Empire, and are sent
for Presents to Constantinople. So are all their Fruits in very good esteem.

In Athens I have spent two months. Next to Rome I judge it most worthy to be
seen for Antiquities of any I have yet been at. The Temple of Minerva is as
entire as the Rotunda. I was three times in it, and took all the dimensions,
with what exactness I could; but it is difficult, because the Castle of Athens,
in which it stands, is a Garrison, and the Turks are jealous, and brutishly
barbarous, if they take notice that any measures it. The length of the Cella or
Body of the Temple without side, is -- 168 Feet English. These Measures you may
rely on, as exact to half a foot.
The breadth -- 71 Feet English. The Portico of the Dorique Order, which runs
round it, has 8 Pillars in front, 17 on the sides; the length of the Portico
is 230 feet English. I have taken all the dimensions within, with those of the
(...) and Portico's; but they are too long for a Letter. The fuste or shaft of
the Pillars is 19 feet in circumference: The Intercolumnium 1 of the diameter
of the Pillars.

The Temple of Theseus is likewise entire, but it is much less, though built
after the same model. The length of its Cella is but 73 feet, the breadth 26.
The whole length of the Portico, which goes round it, 123 feet. It Is a Dorique
Building, as is that of the Minerva. Both of them are of white Marble.

About the Cornice on the outside of the Temple of Minerva is a basso relievo
of men on horseback, others in Chariots, and a whole procession of people going
to a Sacrifice, of very curious sculpture. On the Front is the History of the
Birth of Minerva.

In the temple of Theseus, on the Front within-side the Portico, at the
West End, is the Battle of the Centauri, and at the East End seems to be a
Continuation of that History: But there are several Figures of Women, which
seem to be P^rithous's Bride, and those other Ladies which were at the Wedding.
On the outside the Portico, in the spaces between the Triglyphi, are several of
the Prowesses of Theseus, most in Wrestling with several persons, in which he
excelled: All his postures and locks are expressed with great art. Others are
Monsters, which he is made encountering with, as the Bull of Marathon, the Bear
of Calydon, etc.

There is a Temple of Hercules, a round Fabric, only of six feet diameter, but
neat Architecture. The Pillars are of the Corinthian Order, which support an
Architrave, and Frise, wherein are done in relievo the Labors of Hercules. The
top is but one Stone, wrought like a Shield, with a Flower on the outside,
which rises like a Plume of Feathers.

There is yet standing the Tower of Andronicus Cirrhestes, which is an
Octogone, with the Figures of eight Winds, which are large, and of good
workmanship; and the names of the Winds remain legible in fair Greek
characters, (where a House, which is built against it on one side, does not
hinder) as (...). Each Wind placed against its quarter in the Heavens: And the
Roof is made of little Planks of Marble, broad at bottom, and which meet all in
a point at top, and make an obtuse Pyramid of some 32 or 36 sides.

There is a delicate Temple of the Conique Order in the Castle, whether of
Pandrosos, or whom, I cannot tell, but the Work was most fine, and all the
Ornaments most accurately engraven:

The Length of this Temple was 67 Feet.

The Breadth -- 38 Feet.

These Pillars which remain of a Portico of the Emperor Adrian, are very
stately and noble: They are of the Corinthian Order, and above 52 feet in
height, and 19 in circumference: They are canellate, and there are now standing
seventeen of them, with part of their Cornice on the top. The Building, to
which they belonged, I measured the Area of, as near as I could conjecture, and
found it near a thousand feet in length, and about six hundred and eighty in
breadth.

Without the Town, the Bridge over the Elissus has three Arches, of solid
Stone-work: the middlemost is near 20 feet broad. There is the stadium yet to
be seen, whose length I measured, and found it 630 feet, near to what the
precise measure of a stadium ought to be, viz. 625.

Toward the Southern Wall of the Castle there are the Remains of the Theater
of Bacchus, with the Portico of Eumenes, which is near it; the semi-diameter,
which is the right Sine of the demi-circle which makes the Theater, is about
150 feet, the whole Body of the Scene 256. Monsieur de la Guilliotiere, in that
Book he has written of Athens, has made a Cut of a Theater, which he calls
that of Bacchus, which is a mere fancy and invention of his own, nothing like
the Natural one, which by the Plan he has drawn of the Town, I judge he did not
know. I give you this one hint, that you may not be deceived by that Book,
which is wide from truth, as will appear to any body who sees the reality,
though to one who has not seen it, it seems plausibly written. I have dwelt
long on Athens, but yet have said nothing. This town alone deserves a whole
Book to discourse of it well, which now I have neither time nor room to do: but
I have Memorials by me of all I saw, which one day, if it please God, I may
show you.

Thebes is a large Town, but I found few Antiquities in it, excepting some
Inscriptions and Fragments of the Old Wall, and one Gate, which, they say, was
left by Alexander, when he demolished the rest. It is about some fifty miles
distant from Athens, as I judge.

Corinth is two days Journey distant: the Castle or (...) is standing, which is
very large. The main of the Town is demolished, and the Houses, which now are
scattered, and a great distance from one another. So is Argos, which to go
round would be some four or five miles, as the Houses now stand; but if they
stood together, they would scarce exceed a good Village. Napolo della Rumilia
is a large town, and full of Inhabitants, and the Bas^a of the Morea resides
there: It is but very few leagues distant from Argos.

Sparta is quite forsaken, and Mestra is the Town which is inhabited, four
miles distant from it: But one sees great Ruins thereabout; almost all the
Walls, several Towers and Foundations of Temples with Pillars and Chapiters
demolished: A Theater pretty entire. It might have been anciently some five
miles in compass, and about a quarter of a mile distant from the River Eurotus.
The Plain of Sparta and of Laconia is very fruitful, and long, and well
watered. It will be about eighty miles in length, as I judge. The Mountains on
the West side of it very high, the highest I have yet seen in Greece; the
Maniotes inhabit them. But the Plain of Calamatta, which anciently was that of
Messene, seems rather richer. Corone is very abundant in Olives. Navarrino,
which is esteemed the ancient Pylos, has a very strong Castle, fortified by
the Turks, and is the best Port in all the Morea. Alpheus is much the best
River, and the deepest, and with great reason extolled by all the ancient
Poets, and chosen for the Seat of the Olympic Games, for it is very pleasant.
The Plains of Elis are very goodly and large, fit to breathe Horses in, and for
hunting, but not so fruitful as that of Argos and Messene, which are all
Riches. The best Woods I saw in Peloponnesus are those of Achaia, abounding
with Pines and wild Pear, the Ilex and Esculus-trees, and, where there runs
Water, with Plane-trees.

Arcadia is a very goodly Champain, and full of Cattle, but is all encompassed
with Hills, which are very rough and unhewn. Lepanto is very pleasantly seated
on the Gulf, which runs up as far as Corinth; and without the Town is one of
the finest Fountains I saw in Greece, very rich in Veins of Water, and shaded
with huge Plane-trees, not inferior in any thing to the Spring of Castalia on
Mount Parnassus, which runs through Delphos, except in this, that one was
chosen by the Muses, and the other not; and Poetical Fancies have given
Immortality to the one, and never mentioned the other.

Delphos it self is very strangely situated on a rugged Hill, to which you have
an ascent of some two or three leagues, and yet that is not a quarter of the
way to come up to the Pique of Parnassus, on the side of which Hill it stands:
It seems very barren to the Eye, but the Fruits are very good, where there are
any. The Wines are excellent, and the Plants and Simples, which are found
there, very fragrant, and of great efficacy.

About Lebadia, and all through Baeotia, the Plains are very fertile, and make
amends for the barrenness of the Hills which encompass them: But in Winter they
are apt to be overflown for that reason, and to be turned into Lakes, which
renders the Baeotian Air very thick, and so were their Sculls too, if the
Ancients may be believed concerning them; though Pindar, who was one that
sublimated Poetry to its highest exaltation, and is much fancied and imitated
in our Age, as he was admired in his own, was born there: And Amphion, who was
said to be so divine in his Music, that he ravished the very Stones, had skill
enough to entice them to make up the Walls of Thebes: So that not every thing
that is born in a dull Air is dull. These Vales I found much planted with
Cotton, and Sesamum, and Cummin, of which they make great profit, and a great
Trade at Thebes and Lebadia.

I went from Thebes into the Island of Eubaea or Negropont, and saw the
Euripus, which ebbs and flows much after the nature of our Tides, only the
Moon, and sometimes Winds, make it irregular. The Channel, which runs between
the Town and a Castle which stands in an Island over against it, is some fifty
feet broad; and there are three Mills on it, which show all the changes and
varieties that happen in the Current. Near the Euripus, and opposite to the
Town, they show a Port, which they say was Aulis, and it is not improbable, for
it must be thereabouts. Between Negropont and Athens is a high Hill, called
(...), formerly very dangerous, but now guarded by Albaneses. It is part of
Mount Parnasse, and near it on the left hand lies Mount Pentelicus, from whence
the Athenians anciently fetched their Stone, and now there is a Convent of
Caloieri's there, one of the richest of all Greece.

In going from Athens by Sea, I embarked in a Port, which lies just by
Munichia. That which they call Porto Pyraeo lies behind it a mile distant,
which is a large Port able to contain 500 Vessels. There are the Ruins of the
Town yet remaining, and of the Walls, which joined it to the City of Athens. I
sailed by Porto Phalero, the ancient Haven of Athens, which is rather a Road
than a Port. I saw an Island called (...), where the Athenians had anciently
Mines. I went ashore on the Promontory of Sunium, to view the Remains of the
Temple of Minerve, which stood on it. Hence I sailed among the Isles of the
Archipelago, Macronesia, Thermea, Serphanto, Siphanto, till I came to Melo.
From Melo I sailed through the Cyclades to come hither. I passed by Andros,
Tenos, Mycone, Delos: Nuxia and Paros I saw at a distance. We sailed near the
Northern Cape of Scio, and the Southern of Mytilene or Lesbos, and so came into
the Gulf of Smyrna. Within this Gulf stands Burla, near some small Islands,
which is judged to be the ancient Clazomenae: Foja, which is the same with the
ancient Phocaea. Near this the River Hermus discharges it self into this Gulf.

In this my Journey I had some misadventures. My Companion Sir Giles Eastcourt
died by the way. At Sea I was plundered by the Serphiotes, where I lost all my
Letters, and yours among the rest, which you sent to my Lord Ambassador at
Constantinople, and Consul Rycaut, whom I find here a very civil and knowing
Gentleman, and am much obliged to him for his Favors.

I have been as curious as I could in taking the Latitudes of some remarkable
places: As I find them, I shall give them you.

Gr. m. Athens 38. 5. Corinth 38. 14. Sparta 37. 10. Corone 37. 2. Gr. m.
Patras 38. 40. Delphos 38. 50. Thebes 38. 22. Negropont or Chalcis 38. 31.

I desire you to present my humble Services to the Gentlemen of the Royal
Society.

I am, etc.


Some Plants observed by Sir George Wheeler in his Voyage to Greece and Asia
minor.
IN the Scoglio, or Island of St. Andre, on the Shore of Istria, Scorpioides
Limonii foliis, floribus luteis. Limonium reticulatum. Syderitis spinosa. Draba
caerulea Cretica. Convolvulus rectus argenteis foliis. Polium Creticum, etc.

On the Rocks near Pola in Istria: Cassia Poetarum. Trifolium Saxatile
hirsutissimum. Genista montana arborescens. Tordilium sive Seseli Creticum.
Tragoriganum Creticum, vel potius Satureia hyberna nostras. Polium Rorismarini
foliis. Salvia fruticosa. Abundance of Samphire, and a curious bulbose Plant,
crested with little Flowers striped with white and Cinnamon color.

Near Mortaro, thirty miles from Zara: Planta lactescens Altheae foliis; 'twas
not blown, (it might either be a Tithymal, an Apocinum, or Campanula major
lactescens Lobel.) Eryngium luteum monspeliense, etc.

On the great Rock near Clissa: After verbasci foliis. Jacea incana seu
argentea Alpin. in Exot. Lotus odoratus. Horminum creticum. Satureia citrii
odore. Aster montanus folio odorato, forsan Aster montanus luteus glabro
Salicis folio Bauhin. Libanotis Ferulae facie. Linum flore luteo. Hieracium
flore incarnato. Thlaspi Saxatile folio Poetarum. Caucalis platyphylla Colum.
Caucalis magno flore and fructu. Planta Equiseti frutescentis facie, on the
Steeple and hard Walls, (perhaps a Species of Tithymal) 'twas without leaves,
but full of joints, with abundance of yellow scaly knobs by pairs, between
which issue forth three or four little Tetrapetalose Flowers. Of this I saw an
Arborescent one near Troy.

On the Mountain near Lesina, in the Island of Pharos: Aconitum Lycoctinum
flore Delphinii, vel Napelli Species. Aloe in Flower. Asphodelus minor Junci
folio, fistulosa non bulbosa radice. Malva Romana rubra. Juniperus major seu
oxycedrus. Genista Spartium Septimo Bauhini simile; the Root is hot of a Spicy
taste. Pilosella major pilosissima, etc.

In the Island of Corfou: Thymus capitatus Dioscoridis. Lysimachia Hysopi
folio. Scabiosa caul altissimo, flore nigrescente, forte peregrina Bauhin.
Cyperus gramineus miliaceus. Scammonea. Acarna flore patulo rubente. Centaurium
maj. album. Centaurium rubens Spicatum. Centaurium ramosum rubens. Centaurium
ramosum album. Vitex flore caeruleo and albo. Consolida regalis foetida.
Glicyrrhiza. Pulegii Species erecto caul, latifolia, incana, and hirsuta. With
many others mentioned before.

In the Island of Zant: The Curran Grape. White and yellow Melons. A large
thin-skin'd Lemon without either Seed or Stone, as also the Curran Grapes are.
Genista seu spartium foliis argenteis. Convolvulus Sagittariae foliis. Prunella
spinosa. Coris Matthioli. Gossipium seu Xylon. Glaux Dioscoridis. Cistus
plantaginis folio. Cicer Creticum, etc.

In the Isle of Cerigo: Dictamnus falsus. Chamaedrys Alpina minima hirsuta.
Thymi capitari secunda species foliis minoribus densius Stipatis. Salvia
pomifera seu gallifera. Staechas citrina. That Species of Thyme is in Dr.
Plukenet's Phytographia, Tab. 116. F. 4.

In the Isle of Tenos or Tine: Limonium caul sinuato. Frutex Spinosus Jaceae
albae capitulis. Stachys parva foliis argenteis. Genista spinosa floribus
rubris.

Near the Ruins of Troy: Quercus glande majore. Gossipium. Sesamum. Anguria.
Tragacantha. Tartonreira Massiliensium seu Thymelaea incana Sericea, longifolia
and latifolia. Pastinaca echinifera Colum. Jacea lutea capite spinoso. Papaver
corniculatum flore tricolore. Pancratium in flower. Verbascum marinum
laciniatis foliis.

Near Constantinople: Abrotanum humile flore Chamaemeli. Serpilli species
foliis Satureiae. Androsaemum flore and theca omnium maximis. Guajacum
Patavinum.

On Mount Olympus, near Bursa or Prusa: Abies conis sursum spectantibus, foliis
subtus argenteis. Cistus laurinis foliis. Aster montanus, Linariae folio, flore
flavo. Coris seu Hypericum foliis crispis. Hypericum foliis hirsutis, margin
crinifero. Aster Conyzoides Gesn. Astragalus Matthiol. flore caeruleo. Pyrola
frutescens Arbuti folio. Gentianella verna. Senecio incana pinguis. Cerinthe
minor. Cistus argenteis foliis. Cymbalaria Italica. Calamintha montana
praestantior. Elichryson sive Gnaphalium coma aurea. Gramen junceum Echinatum.
Millefolium nobile odoratum. Hypericum seu Ascyron magno flore. Panax
Heracleum. Gnaphalium repens. Herba Tuitia Auriculae Affinis. Tragacantha.
Helleborus niger. Ephedra seu Polygonum Scandens bacciferum; climbing up to the
tops of the vast Plane-trees, according to Bellonius.

In our Journey to Mandragorai, and Courougouli: Scordium lanuginosum sive
Creticum. Alsine Lotoides seu Anthylloides, sive spergulae facie C.B. Gingidum
Hispanicum. Leucoium Alyssoides Clypeatum maj. C.B. Origanum Spicatum Mo^is
Sipyli foliis giabris.

Near Thyatira: Spartium alterum Monospermum, Pseudospartium Hispanicum
Aphyllon. A Thapsus minor longifolia; or rather a Sideritis or Stachys foliis
Salviae argenteis pilosis mollibus; which is the Panacea of the Country People.
Scabiosa argentea min.

About Smyrna: Two kinds of Jujubes or Zizyphus. Turpentine-trees, and
Mastick-trees. Smyrnion Creticum. Origanum perenne lignosum odoratissimum.
Several sorts of Olive Trees. Tamarisk and Ricinus, or Palma Christi. Near the
Gulf of Lepanto: Tithymalus Spinosus. The Fust or yellow Wood used to dye with,
called by the Greeks Chrysoxulo. Cedrus Lyciae. Arisarum angustifolium. Lamium
moschatum foliorum margin argentato.

About Mount Parnassus, Athens, and other places of Attica or Acbaja: Stachys
viscoso flore luteo, odore Narcisii juncifolii. Petromarula Cretica or
Rapunculus Pyramidalis altera. Sabina. Crocus Albus and Luteus. Poterion
Plinii, smaller than Tragacanth. Polium Gnapholoides. Ilex Chermifera. Acacia
Secunda Matthioli. Anemones of all colors. Many Asters, and Arisarums.
Aristolochia Clematitis. Two Asphodils. Brassica frutescens. Borago variegata
Cretica. Cneoron Matthew. and Clusii, sive Thymelaeae affinis facie externa.
Several Cisti. Jacea Moschata, with other Knapweeds. Leontopetalum all over the
Plain of Athens. Oleander. Scilla. Scotzonera Cretica Asphodeli fistulosi
facie, Galocorta Graecorum, it is the Women's Cosmetick, and Milk-plant. Siliqua
Edulis or Carob. Two Thymelaea's, argentea and tomentosa. Tithymalus Spinosus.
Equisetum frutescens Aphyllon (perhaps a sort of Tithymal) Lychnis frutescens:
With many more, which we have either mentioned in other places, or else were
doubtful of, as a kind of small Silver-leav'd Scabious, and a Dandelyon or
Hieracium, with Pilewort or small Colts foot-leaves, with a Root* like so many
Scorpions following one another. A sort of Medica lunata siliqua, or Loto
affinis siliquis hirsutis circinatis. Astragalus argenteus or Syriacus.

Near Corinth and the Isthmus: Pinus Maritima with small Cones. Cedrus* Lycia
vel Sabina baccifera. Ceratia or Siliqua Arbor. Lentiscus. Olea Sylv. Scabiosa
argentea petraea. Aristolochiae Clematitis species. Linaria latifolia valentina
Clusii, the flowers beautiful with three colors. Androsaemum umbelliferum.
Scorzonera bulbosa. Arbutus folio non serrato, Comarea Dioscoridis Adrachne
Theophrasti.

For these the Reader may consult Mr. Ray's Collection of Exotic Catalogues,
especially the Oriental one, where the synonymous Names are added.

Historical Observations relating to Constantinople. By the Reverend and
Learned Tho. Smith, D.D. Fellow of Magd. Coll. Oxon, and of the Royal Society.
COnstantinople, formerly Byzantium, was (...). So the Emperor Constantine in
a Letter to Eusebius, de Vita Constantini, lib. IV. cap. 39. and a^ud
Theodoritum Histor. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 16. v. etiam Socrat. Scholast. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 16.
by Constantine the Great called so after his own Name, who being mightily
pleased with the beautiful and advantageous situation of the place between two
Seas, and defended by narrow streights on both sides, removed the Seat of the
Empire hither, and laid the foundation of its future splendour and greatness. It
was also by a V. Socratem ibidem. Et Theophanem in Chronographia XXV. anno
Constantini.
special Edict or Law of the same Emperor, which he caused to be engraven on a
Marble Pillar, placed near his own Statue on Horseback, in one of the Piazza's
of his new-built City called Strategium, where the Soldiers used to muster, as
in the Campus Martius, called Second or New Rome, in emulation of old Rome,
which he designed and endeavored this should equal in all things. Accordingly
he endowed it with the same Privileges and Immunities, and established the same
number of Magistrates, and Orders of People, and divided the whole extent of it
into fourteen Precincts or The Itallan word Rione is a manifest corruption of
the Latin word.
Regions, according to the division of Rome. And the Greek Writers were as
elegant and extravagant in their commendations of it; but the usual Title in
their ordinary Discourses and Writings, when they had occasion to mention it
without any flourish, was (...), or (...), that is, the Imperial City, to the
same sense with that of In Panegyrico, quem Romae dixit Anthemio Augusto, bis
consu^i.
Sidonius Apollinaris.

Salve sceptrorum columen, Regina orientis,
Orbis Roma tui.
The Country about it was afterward called Romania in a limited and restrained
sense, (for that Romania was anciently the same with Orbis Romanus, seems clear
from Hoeresi LXIX. quae est Arianorum. Sect. 2. where he says a sad dismal fire
was kindled by Arius: (...), which seized almost upon all Romania, or Vniversum
Romanorum Imperium, as Petavius renders it, but especially the Eastern parts of
it.
Epiphanius) and the People (...). But I suppose this was not done till about
the middle times of the Empire, when it began to decline. The Greeks still
retain this name: For if you ask any of the Greeks born upon the Continent of
Thrace what Countryman he is, he answers forthwith, (...), Romios, for so they
pronounce it. The Turks in like manner call a Greek Christian Urum Gaour, or
the Roman Infidel, as they will call sometimes the Emperor of Germany, Urumler
Padisha, or Emperor of the Romans. Hence it was that the latter Grecian
Emperors styled themselves (...), Kings of the Romans, that is, such as were
born in Romania, and the other Countries, which made up the Eastern Division of
the Empire. Though perchance by this flourishing Title they pretended a right
to the Government of the West; upon which vain presumption they assumed also
the Title of (...), or Emperors of the World, as if they had been true
Successors of Augustus, and the Western Emperors, Usurpers, whom they called by
way of contempt and indignation, (...), Reges, as Page 144, 152, 155.
Luitprandus informs us in the account of his Ambassy to Nicephorus Phocas, and
afforded the People of Italy no other Title than that of Page 139.
Longobards or Lombards. The present Greeks call all the Western Christians
(...) or (...), Latins or Franks, the Turks only making use of the latter, when
they speak civilly of us, and calling Christendom Phrenkistan, in the present
Greek (...). The Turks now as proudly call Constantinople Alempena, or the
Refuge of the World; where indeed seems to be a medly of all or most Nations of
three parts of it, and of all Religions, which are allowed to be publicly
professed and exercised every where throughout the Empire, except the Persian.
For they look upon it as a corruption of, and deviation from the Rules and
Doctrine of Mahomet, their great false Prophet, and therefore absolutely forbid
it, as repugnant to, and destructive of the Doctrine of Life and Salvation, as
they speak. And accordingly they condemn with all imaginable fury the
Professors of it, who pretend to follow Ali, as Sectaries and Apostates, and
entertain worse Opinions of them, than of Christians, or Jews, or Infidels. The
Persians are not behind-hand with them in their Hatred and Disrespect, deriding
them as gross and stupid, and looking upon them as little less than barbarous:
Interest and Zeal for their several Tenants heightening their Differences so
much, that in time of War they destroy one another Moschs. I remember, that
there was a great Discourse in Constantinople among the Turks, concerning an
impudent hotheaded Persian, who publicly in the new Mosch, built by the
Mother of the present Emperor, asserted that Ali was equal to Mahomet. But it
seems he very luckily made his escape out of their hands, at which the Priests
and the more zealous Turks were very much scandalized.

The Greeks have twenty six Churches within the walls of the City, besides six
in Galata, of which I have given an account elsewhere. They have also two
Churches at Scutari, one at Kadikui or Chalcedon. So at Staurosis, Chingilkui,
and several other Villages upon the Asian shore of the Bosphorus, as at
Beshictash, Ortakui, Chorouch chesme, which Church is dedicated to St. Michael
the Archangel, Jenikui or Neochorion, Therapia, Bujukdere, and other Villages
on the Europaean side. They have also a Church at Haskui, where is their
Burying-place, and another near the Bagno, dedicated to St. Parasceve. And at
Tatoula about a mile from Pera, upon a Hill, which from the Name of the Church
is thence called by the Greeks and Franks, St. Demetrius's Hill. Next to the
holy Virgin, St. Demetrius and St. George have most Churches dedicated to them.

The Armenians have not, if I remember aright, above seven Churches, they being
few in number in comparison of the Greeks.

The Jews may have in the City and places adjacent between twenty and thirty
Synagogues, this being the greatest shelter of that accursed and contemptible
People in the Grand Signior's Dominions, next to Caire and Saloniki; and I
believe there may be about twenty or thirty thousand Families of them. They are
of great use and service to the Turks, upon account of their Brocage and
Merchandise, and Industry in several mechanical Trades. All these I look upon
as Natives, or Slaves rather, each paying Money for his Head every year. The
Jews indeed very wisely collect this tax among themselves, and according to an
Agreement made with the Tefterdar or Treasurer, pay a certain sum in gross for
their whole Nation residing there; by which piece of cunning they are great
gainers, and spare the Poor among them less able to pay, by a contribution of
the Rich to make up the sum. The English and Dutch Ambassadors have their
Chapels in their Palaces common to their respective Nations.

The Churches and Chapels of the Western Christians of the Roman Communion in
Galata, are

St. Peter's, belonging to the Dominicans, where is the famous piece of Madonna
di Constantinopoli, as the Italians call it, or of the blessed Virgin, holding
the holy Child Jesus in her Arms; which they pretend to be drawn by the hand of
St. Luke, celebrated by some of the latter Ecclesiastical Writers to have been
a famous Painter. Out of respect to this idle Tradition, the credulous and
superstitious Latins and Greeks of the Roman Communion show great veneration
to it, which otherwise has little in it of Proportion, Art, or Beauty to
derive any Reputation upon the designer, or upon his Work.

St. Francis, belonging to the Conventuali, Friars of the Order of St. Francis:
the ground of this by the wise Conduct and Intercession of Cavaliere Molino,
the Venetian Bailo, after the surrendry of Candia, upon the Peace made by the
Republic with the Grand Signior, was procured to be restored, and a handsome
Church rebuilt, with the large Contributions of Money sent out of Christendom.

St. Benedict, belonging to the Jesuits, where is a rich Altar curiously
adorned with several Figures in Mosaic. This Convent was purchased for them by
their great Benefactor, Henry the Fourth of France.

St. Mary, belonging to the Observantines or Zoccolanti, a branch of the Order
of St. Francis, so called from their going in Zoccoli or wooden Clogs.

The Capucines have a little Chapel dedicated to St. George, hard by the
French Ambassador's Palace.

St. Ann, a Chapel frequented by the Perots.

St. Paul and St. Anthony were both taken away some years since from the
Christians, and turned into Moschs. The former of which is now known by the
name of Arab Giamesi, or the Mosch of the Arabians. Our Interpreters mentioned
also to me the Church of St. John, which the Turks have seized upon for their
use, St. George, which the Jews are possessed of, and St. Sebastian, which was
used to be visited chiefly on Holy Days.

The North Wind blows for the most part at Constantinople, which must be
ascribed to its nearness to the Euxine Sea, which bears that point from it. So
that for want of a Southwardly Wind, Ships have been forced to lie a month or
two sometimes near the month of the Hellespont; this was taken notice of long
since by Eunapia^, in the Life of Aedesius who ascribes the seldom blowing of
the South Wind to the situation of the Mountains, whereas it is checked and
overpowered by the exuberance of the Vapors continually sent forth from the
black and great Sea, as the Greeks call it in comparison of the Mediterranean.
Vide ad finem Codini de Origin. Constantinopol. Edit. Paris. page 80.

The Hellespont is about forty miles in length, and at the Castles of Sestos
and Abydos the straight may be about three quarters of an English mile over, or
less.

The length of the Propontis is about a hundred and fifty miles, both Shores
may be seen in the middle of it. In it are

Cyzicus, an Island near the Asian Shore, to which it is joined by two Bridges.
It still retains its ancient name (...), and is the Seat of a Bishop, being
inhabited by a considerable number of Greeks.

Proconnesus, not far from the former; now, as for some Centuries past, called
Marmora, from the excellent Quarries of Marble there found, the Marmor
Cyzenicum also being famous in the time of Pliny.

Besbycus, now called by the Greek (...), or the Good Haven, not far from the
entrance into the Bay of Montanea to the North-and-by-East; the Turks call it
Imramle.

There are several Islands over against the Bay of Nicomedia; formerly called
Sinus Astacenus, according to Strabo, about six or seven leagues from
Constantinople V. Gillium de Bosp. Thraecii, l. 111. c. 12. etc.
.

Prote, so called because they approach first to it, coming from
Constantinople, to the South of this Prencipe and Pytis, which I take to be the
same with Pyrgos, that lies inmost toward the Bay: Chalcitis, in modern Greek
Chalce or Chalcis. Oxia and Platy to the North-west. I have expressed the
Turkish names of the lesser and uninhabited Islands elsewhere, which perchance
were fantastically imposed by some Franks.

The Seraglio is at the extreme point of the North-east Angle of
Constantinople, where formerly stood old Byzantium, within which, toward the
Haven is a stately Kiosk, or Summer House, from whence the Grand Signior
usually takes Barge, when he passes into Asia, or diverts himself upon the
Bosphorus, at which time the Bostangi bashi, who has the principal care of the
Emperor's Palace, and has the command of the Bosphorus, sits at the Helm and
steers.

The seven Towers are at the South-east Extremity.

The only Suburbs are to the North-west, along the Haven-side; for above the
Hill, where the three Walls begin, lies an open Champaign-country, except that
here and there at considerable distances Farm-houses are scattered.

The Haven runs in from the West, and so opens East.

At the East end of Galata is Tophana, where they cast their great Guns.

Pera and Galata have about six Gates to the Seaward. The whole tract of Ground
was anciently, before the times of the Emperor Valentinian, who enclosed and
fortified Galata with Walls and Towers, styled (...), on the other side of the
City to the North; which is the reason of its Name, seated on higher Hills, and
whose ascent is more steep and difficult.

Our modern Geographers, such as Mercator and Ortelius, who herein follow
Ptolemy, place Constantinople in the Latitude of 43 degrees and 5 minutes: the
Arabian and Persian Astronomers, as Abulfeda, Nassir Eddin, Vlugh Beigh, and so
the (...) of Chrysococcas, translated out of the Persian Tables, place it more
Northerly in 45. But by latter and better observation it is found, that they
have erred in assigning the Latitude of this City, as of several other places.
To salve these differences, there is no just ground of pretense to say, that
the Poles are moveable, and have changed their situation since their time;
whereas it may better be imputed to their want of due Care, or to their taking
things upon trust, from the Reports of Travelers and Seamen, not having been
upon the places themselves; which certainly is to be said for Ptolemy, whose
Observations, as to places more remote from Alexandria, are far from being
accurate and true. The learned Mr. John Greaves, as I find in a manuscript
Discourse, very worthy of being printed, which he presented to the most
Reverend and Renowned Archbishop Usher, took the height of the Pole at
Constantinople, with a brass Sextant of above 4 feet radius, and found it to be
but 41 degrees 6, but by the Observation we made in our Courtyard at Pera with
a good Quadrant, we found but 40 degrees and 58 minutes of North Latitude.

There is no place between the Propontis and the Walls of the City, except just
at the Seraglio point, which may be two hundred paces in length, where they
have raised on a Platform a Battery for great Guns; but from the point to the
end of the Haven West, the space to the Gates is unequal in some places about
twenty paces broad, in others three or four times as many more.

The distance between Constantinople and Chalcedon, upon the opposite Bithynian
shore, may be about three or four miles.

In the Walls are engraven the Names of several Emperors, who reigned toward
the declension of the Grecian Empire, as Theophilus, Michael, Basilius,
Constantinus Porphyrogenitus, by whose care, and at whose expense the several
Breaches caused in them, by the Sea, or by Earthquakes, were repaired.

Kumkapi, or the Sand-gate, lies toward the Propontis; this the Greeks call in
their vulgar Language (...), Contoscalium, of the little Scale or
Landing-place. Here formerly was an Arsenal for Galleys and other ^ll Vessels,
it being a convenient passage over (...). Over this Gate was anciently engraven
a curious Inscription, still preserved in that excellent Collection published
by Page 169 Number. 3.
Gruterus.

Jedicula Kapi, or the Gate of the seven towers, so called from its nearness to
that Acropolis, is that, I guess, which the Greeks formerly called (...), or
the golden Gate, and by some late Latin Writers Chrysea, in Luitprandus, Carea,
by a a mistake either of the Transcriber or Printer, for Aurea, for so
certainly it must be mended. Over this Gate was this Inscription; Haec loca
Theudosius decorat post fata Tyranni,
Aurea secla gerit, qui portam construit auro.
cited by Sirmond, in his Notes upon Page 121
Sidonius. This Gate is in the twelfth Region, and was also called (...), from
its beautiful and curious Structure.

The Gun-gate, formerly called Roman-gate, not because it leads toward the
Continent of Romania or Thrace, but from Vid. Historiam Politicam
Constantinopoleos apud Crusium in Turco-Graecia, page 9.
St. Romanus, where the last Christian Emperor was killed at the Assault, which
the Turks made to force their way into the City by it.

Near Adrianople-gate is a fair large Mosch called Ali-bassa, upon a hill
accounted the highest in the City.

The distance between tower and tower in the upper wall to the landward, may be
about ninety of my paces; the space between that and the second wall about
eighteen paces over.

The place, where the Lions, Leopards, and suchlike wild Creatures are kept,
(where I saw also several Jackals) was formerly, as the Greeks told me, a
Christian Church dedicated to (...) or the Blessed Virgin, where this Verse is
still legible: (...).

There is no tide or running back of the Water on any side of the Bosphorus,
into the black Sea, as This was an old error: for thus writes Dionysius
Byzantinus, in his little book of the Bosphorus. (...).
some have imagined, whose mistake might possibly arise hence, that the Wind
being at North, and blowing hard, the Current sets more violently at such times
against the several Headlands jetting out into the Channel, which admits of
several turnings, and so the Waters are forced back to some little distance: or
else because when the South Wind freshens and grows boisterous, it makes a high
rolling Sea in the Propontis and Bosphorus, and being contrary to the Current,
gives a check to it, so that it becomes less sensible, and is easily stemmed.
Where it is narrowest, the distance seems to the Eye to be scarce a mile over
from one shore to another; where broadest, not much above a mile and a half,
unless where it runs into the deep Bays, which by reason of their shallowness
only harbor Boats.

The Channel certainly is natural, and not cut by Art, as some have idly
fancied, not considering how the Euxine Sea should discharge it self otherwise
of those great quantities of Waters, poured into it by the Ister and Tanais,
now called Don, and the other Rivers, whereby it becomes less Salt, even very
sensibly to the taste, than several parts of the Mediterranean.

The Fish, by a strange kind of instinct, pass in vast shoales twice a year,
Autumn and Spring, through the Bosphorus, that is, out of one Sea into another;
of which the Greeks, who live several months of the year upon them, take great
numbers, and supply the Markets at easy rates; the Cormorants and other
ravenous Waterfowl, which the Turks will not suffer to be destroyed, or
otherwise molested, preying also upon them.

The Weather in some months is very inconstant, great Heats and Colds happening
the same day upon the change of the Wind.

The Winters at Constantinople are sometimes extraordinary severe. I have heard
it related by several old Greeks, as a thing most certain, that the Bosphorus
was frozen over in the time of Achmed, and that a Hare was coursed over it. It
happened thus; that upon a thaw huge Cakes of Ice came floating down the Danube,
into the black Sea, and were driven by the current into the Bosphorus, where,
upon the return of the Frost, they were fixed so hard, that it became passable.
In the year 1669. there was Ice in the Haven, to the great amazement of the
Turks; and some were so frighted at this unusual Accident, that they looked
upon it as a dismal Prodigy, and concluded that the World would be at an end
that year. The Aguglia or Obelisk in the Hippodrome is betwixt fifty and sixty
foot high.

The Historical Pillar in basso relievo, raised in honor of the Emperors
Arcadius and Honorius, may be in height about an hundred seven and forty feet.

Alexus Comnenus lies buried in the Patriarchal Church against the Wall, and
his Daughter Anna Comnena, the Historian, who lived about the year of Christ
1117. They pretend to show there the Relics of St. Anastasia, who suffered
Martyrdom under the Emperor Valerianus, and of St. Euphemia, Virgin and Martyr,
who lost her life most gloriously for Christ's holy Religion at Chalcedon under
Dioclesian.

In Sancta Sophia there are Pillars so great, that a man can scarce fathom them
at twice. At the end of the Gallery that joins the other two, each about thirty
of my paces wide, there is a piece of transparent Marble, two or three inches
thick. In the North Gallery, upon the Pavement is a reddish sort of a
Marble-stone, brought, as the Turks and Christians relate, from Palestine, on
which they fable, That the Blessed Virgin used to wash the Linen of our
Savior.

I observed but one Step from the Body of the Church to the Bema, or place
where the Altar formerly stood.

The great Mosch at Chasim-bassa on Pera-side to the West, was formerly a
Church dedicated to St. Theodosia.

Gianghir, a Mosch so called upon a Hill at Fondaclee near Tophana.

In Constantinople there are several narrow streets of Trade, closed up with
Sheds and Pent-houses, which I suppose were in use before the Greeks lost their
Empire, and are the same with the (...), in Chrysaloras's Epistle, p. 119. But
besides these places, several Trades have their distant quarters. The Streets
are raised for the most part on each side for the greater convenience.

Not far from Suleimania is the House of the Aga, or General of the Janissaries,
which so often changes its masters.

Pompey's Pillar, as the Franks erroneously call it, is of the Corinthian
Order, curiously wrought, about eighteen foot in height, and three in diameter

Beshiktash, a Village within three or four miles of Constantinople, toward
the Bosphorus, where lies buried the famous Pyrate Ariadin, whom the Christian
Writers call Barbarossa, who built here a handsome Mosch, having two rows of
Pillars at the entrance. The Captain Bassa usually, before he puts to Sea with
his Armata of Galleys, visits the Tomb of this fortunate Robber, who had made
several thousand Christians Slaves, and makes his Prayers at the neighboring
Church for the good success of his Expedition.

They reckon in the City above a hundred public Baths, every Street almost
affording one. They are esteemed Works of great Piety and Charity, there being
a continual use of them, not only upon the account of Religion, but of Health
and Cleanliness: For their Diet being for the most part hot spiced meats in the
Winter, and crude Fruits in the Summer, their Liquor Fountain Water or Coffee,
to which we may add their lazy kind of life (for walking is never used by them
for digestion, or otherwise in the way of diversion) frequent bathing becomes
necessary.

There are several Receptacles of Water under Ground, and one particularly
under the Church of Sancta Sophia, as I was informed; but I did not think it
worth my Curiosity to descend into it. These were of great use to the poor
Greeks in the last fatal Siege; but the Turks are so secure, that they do not
think that they deserve either cost or pains to keep the Waters sweet, or the
Cisterns in repair.

The Aquaeducts, which answer to those glorious Aquaeducts, near Pyrgos, and
convey the Water to the great Cistern near Sultan Selim's Mosch, are in that
part of Constantinople, which lies between the Mosch of Mahomet the Great and
Sha zade.

The Turks began to besiege Constantinople on the fifth of April, and took it
the twenty ninth of May, on Whitsun-Tuesday morning, 1453. or as the Turks
reckon in the year 857. of the Hegira, or flight of Mahomet, the 22d day of the
first Jomad.

The Chapel, where Ejub Sultan is interred, at whose Head and Feet I observed
great Wax Candles, is enclosed with latten wire grates, for the better
accommodation of such religious Turks, as come to pay their respect to the
memory of this great Musulman Saint. In the middle of the Area there is raised
a Building sustained by excellent Marble Pillars, ascended by two several pair
of stairs, where the new Emperor is inaugurated, and where he usually goes in
Biram time.

An Account of the City of Prusa in Bithynia, and a Continuation of the
Historical Observations relating to Constantinople; by the Reverend and Learned
Tho. Smith, D.D. Fellow of Magd. Coll. Oxon. and of the Royal Society.
MOntanea, formerly called Nicopolis, according to Bellonius, or rather Cios,
the Bay hence called Sinus Cianus, lies in the bottom of a Bay about fourscore
miles from Constantinople, and is the scale or landing-place for Prusa, from
which it may be about twelve miles; in the middle way to which is the Village
Moussanpoula.

Prusa, now called by the Turks Bursia, the chief City of Bithynia, is seated
at the foot partly, and partly upon the rising of the Mount Olympus, which is
one of the highest Hills of the lesser Asia. Its top is covered with Snow for
nine or ten months of the year, several streams of Water flowing down the Hill
continually, accounted very unwholesome from the Snow mixed with it. In the
upper part of the City to the North-west lies the Seraglio, which is walled
round; but the Emperors not residing here since their acquists in Thrace, or
scarce making visits to this Imperial City, and none of their Sons living he^e
of late, according to the former policy of the Turkish Emperors, who did not
permit their Sons, when grown up, to be near them, but sent them to some
honorable Employment, accompanied with a Bassa and Cadi, to instruct them in
the Arts of War and Government; it lies now neglected and despoyled of all its
Ornaments.

In this part also are the Sepulchers of Osman, the Founder of the Family which
now reigns, and his Son Urchan, who took the City, near a Mosch, formerly a
Christian Church dedicated to St. John, and where was formerly a Convent of
Religious, built by Constantinus Iconomachus, where I saw the figure of a Cross
still remaining upon the Wall. Here hangs up a great Drum of a vast bigness,
such as they carry upon the backs of Camels, and I suppose is one of those
which they used in the taking of the place.

In the lower part, near the bottom of the Hill, Norad the second, the Father
of Mahomet the Great, lies buried; near whereunto was formerly the
Metropolitical Church of the Holy Apostles. The Bezesten, or Exchange, seems to
be much better and larger than the great one at Constantinople, as are the
several Caravanserais built for the use and accommodation of Merchants and
Travelers; in one of which, the Rice Chane, I took up my quarters.

Without the City, toward the East, is the Mosch and Sepulcher of the Emperor
Bajazid the first, whom the Turks call Jilderim, or Lightning, and the Greek
Writers (...). Not far from hence is the Mosch of Mahomet the first, and his
Sepulcher. Toward the West, upon the side of the Hill, is the Mosch of Morad
the first, whom they call Gazi, or the Conqueror, near which he lies buried.
There are in the whole about 124 Moschs, several of which were formerly
Christian Churches, and between fifty and sixty Chanes. The Castles built by
Osman, when he besieged the City, are slighted and altogether unfortified, the
one to the North, the other to the South-west.

At Checkerghe, about a mile and a half out of Town, are the hot Baths, much
frequented both by Christians and Turks. They are made very convenient to bath
in, and are covered over, that they may be used in all weathers. Among others,
there is a large round Basin, where they usually divert themselves by swimming.

What Opinions the Turks have of our B. Savior and the Christian Religion, I
shall briefly show, as they lie dispersed in several Chapters of the Alcoran,
according to which they frame their Discourse whenever either Zeal or
Curiosity puts them upon this Topic; for Mahomet, upon his setting up to be
the Author of a new Religion, finding such a considerable part of the World
professing the Doctrine of Christ, with all the Mysteries of Faith therein
contained, was cast upon a necessity of saying something both concerning him
and it. By which it will appear how great the power of Truth is above Imposture
and Subtilty, and that as the Devils in the possessed confessed, though against
their wills, Christ to be the Son of God, so this Daemoniack, in the midst of
all his Forgeries and Lies, and ridiculous and childish Narratives, not being
able to contradict the universal Belief of the Christians of that, and the
preceding Ages, founded on the History of the Gospel, has been forced to give
testimony to several particulars of it.

They confess then, that Christ was born of a pure spotless Virgin, the Virgin
Mary, chosen by God, and sanctified above all the Women in the World; and that
the Angel Gabriel was dispatched out of Heaven, to acquaint her with the news
of it. That such a kind of miraculous and supernatural Birth never happened to
any besides, and that Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and that he
wrought mighty Miracles, for instance, that he cleansed Lepers, gave Sight to
the Blind, restored Sick persons to their Health, and raised the Dead.

That he is a great Prophet, sent by God to convert men from the vanity and
error of their false worship to the knowledge of the true God, to preach
Righteousness, and to correct and restore the imperfection and miscarriages of
human Nature; that he was of a most holy and exemplary life; that he was the
true Word of God, the Apostle or Ambassador of God; that his Gospel was
revealed to him from Heaven, and that he is in Heaven standing nigh to the
Throne of God. They blaspheme indeed with a brutishness and stupidity only
befitting Turks, the Mysteries of the Holy Trinity, and of the Divinity of our
B. Savior, and deny that he was put to death, and say, that another in his
shape was crucified by the Jews, and that he himself was assumed into Heaven in
his body without dying at all, and consequently they will not own, that he
satisfied Divine Justice for the Sins of the World; so great an affinity is
there between the Heresy of Socinus and professed Mahometanism.

I could never yet see any Turkish Translation of the Alcoran; they cry up the
elegance of the style, which being Enthusiastic and high-flown, by reason also
of the tinkling of the periods, is very delightful to their Ears, who seem to
be affected with Rythme mightily. Though I suppose it is upon a more politic
account, that they are so averse, as to the translating it into their vulgar
Language, not out of respect to the sacredness of the Original only, whose full
commanding Expressions they think cannot be translated without a great
diminution to the sense; but to keep it in greater veneration among the People,
who might be apt to slight and disesteem it, should it become thus common among
them. It is enough that the Priests and Learned men explain the difficult
passages of it to the people, and write Commentaries for the use of the more
curious and inquisitive. The Persians on the contrary think it no disparagement
to the Arabic, or profanation of the sense, to translate this cursed Book into
their own Language, and Copies are frequent among them.

The Grand Signior's Women are usually the choicest Beauties of the Christian
Spoils, presented by the Bassa's or Tartars. The present Sultana, the Mother
of the young Prince Mustapha, is a Candiot; the Valide or Emperors Mother, a
Russian, the Daughter of a poor Priest, who with her Relations were seized upon
by the Tartars, in an Incursion which they made into the Muscovites Country.
She being received into the Seraglio, by her beautiful Complexion and cunning
Behavior, gained the Heart and the Affection of Sultan Ibrahim, (a man wholly
addicted to soft Pleasures, and who seldom cared to be long absent from the
Women's Apartment, but chose to spend his time among them.) Having the good
Fortune to be the Mother of the Prince Mahomet, the eldest Son of his Father,
who now reigns, she had all the Honors that could possibly be done her, and
was the beloved Hazaki, or chief Concubine. During this height of Splendor and
Glory, the Court removing from Constantinople to Adrianople, distant about an
hundred and twenty miles, as she was passing in great state attended with her
Guards, through the Streets of the City, in a Coach much like our
Carriage-wagons, but that they are latticed to let in the Air (for no one must
presume to stare, or scarce look upon the Women, much less must they themselves
suffer their Faces to be seen in this jealous Country) she out of curiosity
looking through the holes, saw a poor Christian Slave in a Shop where Sugar and
suchlike Wares were sold. Upon her return she sent one of her Eunuchs to
enquire for the person, and to ask him several Questions about his Country,
Relations, Friends, and the time when and how long he had been a Slave: His
Answers were so particular and satisfactory, that she was soon convinced of the
truth and certainty of her apprehensions, when she first cast her Eyes upon
him, that he was her Brother, and accordingly it proved so. Whereupon
acquainting the Emperor with it, she immediately redeemed him from his Patron,
and having made the poor Wretch turn Turk, got him considerably preferred.

The Bassa's for the most part are the Sons of Christians, taken into the
Seraglio, near the Emperor's person, and so are preferred to considerable
Governments, or else they raise themselves by their Conduct and Valor. Mahomet
Bassa, in the time of Achmet, whose eldest Daughter he married, was the first
natural Turk that was made chief Vizier, having before been Captain Bassa. The
chief Vizier Mahomet Kupriuli, (who settled the Empire in the minority of this
Emperor, when it was ready to be shaken into pieces, and dissolved by several
powerful Factions in the State, and by the Mutinies and Discontents of
Janissaries and Spahi's, who drove different ways) was an Albanese by Birth, the
Son of a Greek Briest, whom out of the height of his zeal for Mahomet, he made
turn Turk in his old age, and converted the Christian Church in the Village
where he was born, into a Mosch. This man also forbad the Dervises to dance in
a ring and turn round, which before was their solemn practice at set times
before the People, which they would do so long, till they were giddy by this
swift circular motion, and fell down in a swoon, and then oftentimes upon their
recovery from such Trances, they pretended to revelation. The Churchmen are not
very kind to his memory, looking upon him as a man of little or no Religion;
and they give out, that if he had lived, he would have forbid their calling to
Prayers from the Spires of their Moschs, and hanging out Lamps; both which they
look upon as solemn and essential to the exercise of Religion; but he as the
effect of Bigottry and Superstitition.

They have a mighty honor and esteem for Physicians, for though they are of
opinion, that they cannot with all their Art prolong Life, the period and term
of it being fatal, and absolutely determined by God, yet they often consult
them upon any violent sickness or pain, in order to make the time allotted them
in this World more pleasant and easy. It is extraordinary rare, that a natural
Turk makes Physic his profession and study. They who practice it among them,
when I was in Turkey, were for the most part Greeks and Jews, who know nothing
of chemical Medicines, but follow the usual methods, which they learnt in Italy
and Spain, the former having studied in Padua, and the latter in Salamanca,
where they passed for good Catholics. And I remember I met with a certain Jew
Physician, who had been a Capucine in Portugal. During the tedious Siege of
Candia, the Vizier, what with Melancholy, and what with the ill air of the
Camp, finding himself much indisposed, sent for a Christian Physician Signior
Massalini, a Subject of the Republic of Venice, but married to a Greek Woman,
by whom he had several Children, who was our Neighbor at Pera, an experienced
able man, to come speedily to him, and made him a Present of about a thousand
Dollars, in order to fit himself for the Voyage, and bear the expense of it. By
this worthy Gentleman's care he recovered his Health, and would not permit him
to depart, till after the surrender of that City, which might be about seven
months after his arrival there, treating him in the mean while with all
imaginable respect. During our short stay at Bursia, one of our Janissaries
accidentally discoursing with a Turk about us, whom they knew to be Franks,
told him that there was a Physician in the company, who had been lately at the
Grand Signior's Court at Saloniki with the English Ambassador, and was now upon
his return from Constantinople to Smyrna, where he lived. This presently took
vent, and the Turks thought that they had got a man among them that could cure
all Diseases infallibly; for several immediately came to find us out in behalf
of themselves or their sick Friends, and one of the most considerable men upon
the place, desired the Doctor to go to his House to visit one of his Women sick
in Bed, who being permitted to feel her naked Pulse (for usually they throw a
piece of fine Silk or Curle over their Women's Wrists at such times) soon
discovered by that and other symptoms and indications of her Distemper, that
opening a Vein would presently give her ease, and recover her; which he did
accordingly; for which he received an embroidered Handkerchief instead of a
Fee, and gained the reputation of having done a mighty Cure.

They have little of ingenious or solid Learning among them; their chief study,
next to the Alcoran, being metaphysical Niceties about the Attributes of God,
or else the maintenance of other odd speculative Notions and Tenants, derived
down to them from some of their famed Masters and Holy men, whom they pretend
to follow. Their knowledge of the motion of the Heavens, for which the Arabians
and the other Eastern Nations have been so deservedly famous, as their
Astronomical Tables of the Longitude and Latitude of the fixed Stars, and of
the appulse of the Moon to them, fully evince, is now very mean, and is chiefly
studied for the use of Judiciary Astrology. The great Instrument they make use
of is an Astrolabe, with which they make very imperfect Observations, having no
such thing as a Quadrant or Sextant, much less a Telescope, or any mechanical
Engine, to direct and assist them in their calculation. Their Skill in
Geography is as inconsiderable; I remember I heard the Captain Bassa, whom they
style Admiral of the black and white Seas, meaning the Euxine and the
Mediterranean, ask this silly question, Whether England were out of the
Straits: And at another time the Caymacan or Governor of Constantinople
hearing that England was an Island, desired to know how many miles it was
about, in order, we supposed, to make an Estimate of our King's greatness and
strength, by the extent and compass of it.

One of the great Astrologers of Constantinople, having heard that I had a pair
of Globes in my Chamber, made me a visit on purpose to see their contrivance,
being introduced by a worthy Gentleman of our own Nation. After the first
Ceremonies were over, I took my terrestial Globe, and rectified it to the
position of the place, and pointed to the several circles both without and upon
it, and told him in short the several uses of them; then showed him how
Constantinople beared from Candia, at that time besieged, Cair, Aleppo, Mecca,
and other chief places of the Empire, with the other parts of the World: at
which he was mightily surprised to see the whole Earth and Sea represented in
that figure, and in so narrow a compass, and pleased himself with turning the
Globe round several times together. Afterward I set before him the celestial
Globe, and rectified that, and showed him how all the noted Constellations were
exactly described, and how they moved regularly upon their Poles, as in the
Heavens; some rising, and others setting, some always above the Horizon, and
others always under, in an oblique sphere, and particularly what Stars would
rise that night with us at such an hour; the man seemed to be ravished with the
curiosity of it, turning this Globe also several times together with his
Finger, and taking a mighty pleasure in viewing the motion of it; and yet this
silly Animal passed for a Conjurer among the Turks, and was looked upon as one
that could foretell the Events of Battles, the fates of Empires, and the end of
the World.

They have no Genius for Sea-voyages, and consequently are very raw and
unexperienced in the Art of Navigation, scarce venturing to sail out of sight
of Land. I speak of the natural Turks, who trade either in the black Sea or
some part of the Morea, or between Constantinople and Alexandria; and not of
the Pirates of Barbary, who are for the most part Renegado's, and learnt their
Skill in Christendom, which they exercise so much to the terror and damage of
it. A Turkish Compass consists but of eight points, the four Cardinal and four
Collateral; they being at a mighty loss how to sail by a side-wind, when by
hauling their Sails sharp they might lie their course, and much more, when they
are in the Winds eye, not knowing how to make tacks and bords, but choose rather
to make haste into some neighboring Port, till the Wind blows fair. An English
and Turkish Vessel, both bound for the Bay of Saloniki, at the time of the
Grand Signior's being there, passed together out of the Hellespont, but foul
weather happening, the Turks got into Lemnos; while our men kept at Sea, and
pursued their Voyage, and after three weeks stay returned back to us, observing
in their way, that the Turks remained in the same place where they left them,
for want of a fore-wind to put to Sea in.

They trouble not themselves with reading the Histories of other Nations or of
ancient times, much less with the study of Chronology, without which History is
very lame and imperfect; which is the cause of those ridiculous and childish
mistakes, which pass current and uncontradicted among them. For instance, they
make Job one of Solomon's Judges, and (Iscander) Alexander the Great
Captain General of his Army. They number Philip of Macedon among the Ancestors
of our B. Savior, and believe that Sampson, Jonas, and St. George were his
Contemporaries. In this they are more excusable than their false Prophet
Mahomet, who in his Alcoran has perverted several Historical Notices in the
Writings of the Old Testament, and is guilty of vile and absurd
Pseudo-chronisms. To remedy this defect, of which he was very conscious, and
the better to understand the state of Christendom, and the particular Kingdoms
and Republics of it, the late great and wise Vizier, Achamet, made his
Interpreter Panagiotti, a learned Greek, at leisure hours, even at the Siege of
Candia, as well as at other times, read several ancient Histories to him, and
render them extempore into the Turkish Language, and particularly Blaeus Atlas,
with which he was mightily pleased, and made great use of, and truly gained the
reputation of a solid and judicious Statesman, as well as Soldier among the
Christian Ministers, who in the ordinary course of their Negotiations applied
themselves to him.

Though their year be according to the course of the Moon, and so the Turkish
months run round the civil year in a circle of thirty three years and a few odd
days, yet they celebrate the Neuruz, which signifies in the Persian Tongue the
New year, the twenty first day of March, (on which day the Vernal Equinox was
fixed by the Greeks and other Oriental Christians, in the time of the Emperor
Constantine, who made no provision for the (...), or Procession, which in
process of time the inequality between the civil and astronomical year must
necessarily produce) at which time the Cadyes and other annual Magistrates, and
Farmers of the Customs take place, and reckon to that day twelve month again.

In their civil deportment and behavior one toward another, the left hand is
the more worthy and honorable place, except among their Ecclesiastics; and
the reason they allege is, because they write from the right hand, and the
Sword is worn on the left side, and so is more at his disposal, who walks on
that hand. The chief Vizier accordingly in the Divan sits at the left hand of
the Mufti, each maintaining their Right of Precedence, according to this way of
decision.

In their Moschs they sit without any distinction of degrees.

Some of the more zealous Turks cause to be engraven on their Cymeters and
Bucklers a Sentence out of the sixty first Surat, which is concerning Fighting
or Battle-array, and contains Encouragements to fight in the way and path of
God, as the Impostor words it; for which he assures them, besides assistance
from Heaven, to help them to get the Victory over their Enemies, and that God
will pardon their Sins, and bring them to Paradise. Thus spirited with zeal, a
Turk lays about him with fury, when he is a fighting, and seems ambitious of
dying to gain the delights of Paradise, at least indifferent whether he dies or
lives.

The Turks are, as to their temper, serious, or rather enclining to morosity,
seldom laughing, which is accounted an Argument of great vanity and lightness.
They perform the Exercises which they use in the way of diversion, as Shooting
and Hunting, with a great deal of gravity, as if they designed them more for
Health than for Pleasure; and this too but seldom. The better and richer sort,
who have nothing to do, sitting all day at home, dolling upon a Sofa, or raised
place in their Rooms, and taking Tobacco, which their Slaves fill and light for
them: And if they retire in the Summer or Autumn for a week or fortnight, to
some convenient* Fountain in a Wood, with their Women, it is chiefly to enjoy
the Refreshments of the cool Air. In the times of Triumph indeed for some great
Success obtained against the Christians, when the Shops are open for three
nights together, and hung with Lights, as well as the Spires of the Moschs in
curious Figures, they are guilty of extravagant Mirth, running up and down the
Streets in companies, and sometimes singing and dancing after their rude way;
but this fit being over, they soon return to their former melancholy. In the
Coffee-houses where they use to resort to tipple, there is usually one hired by
the Owners to read either an idle Book of Tales, which they admire as Wit, or
filthy obscene Stories, with which they seem wonderfully affected and pleased,
few of them being able to read. These are the Schools which they frequent for
their Information, though in times of War when things went ill with them, their
Discourses would be of the ill Government; and the Grand Signior himself, and
his chief Ministers, could not escape their Censures, which manifestly tending
to Sedition, and to the heightning of their Discontents by their mutual
Complaints, and by this free venting of their Grievances during the War at
Candia, the wise Vizier seeing the evil consequences that would follow, if such
Meetings and Discourses were any longer tolerated, commanded that all the
public Coffee-houses should be shut up in Constantinople, and several other
great Cities of the Empire, where the Malcontents used to rendevouz
themselves, and find fault upon every ill success and miscarriage, with the
administration of Affairs.

The Custom of the Turks to salute the Emperor, or the Vizier Bassa's, with
loud acclamations and wishes of Health and Long-life, when they appear first in
their Houses or any public place, is derived from the Greeks, who took it from
the Romans. This was done by them in a kind of singing tone; whence Luitprandus
Bishop of Cremona tells us, that in a certain Procession ((...)) at which he
was present, they sang to the Emperor Nicephorus (...), that is, many years,
(which Codinus, who lived just about the taking of Constantinople by the Turks,
expresses by (...), or by (...), and to wish or salute by (...)) and at Dinner
the Greeks then present wished with a loud voice to the Emperor and Burdas, Ut
Deus annos multiplicet, as he translates the Greek.

The Turkish Coin in it self is pitiful and inconsiderable, which I ascribe not
only to their want of Bullion, but to their little Skill in matters relating to
the Mint. Hence it comes to pass, that Zecchines and Hungars for Gold, and
Spanish Dollars and Zalotts for Silver stamped in Christendom pass current
among them, most of the great Payments being made in them, they not caring
either through Ignorance or Sloth, to follow the example of the Indian or
Persian Emperors, who usually melt down the Christian Money imported by the
Merchants into their several Countries, and give it a new stamp. The most usual
pieces are the Sheriphi of Gold, somewhat less in value than a Venetian
Zecchine, and Aspers, ten of which are equal to Sixpence English, and some few
three Asper pieces. A Mangur is an ugly old Copper piece, eight of which make
but one Asper, and is not I think a Turkish Coin, but rather Greek. They have
no Arms upon their Coin, only Letters embossed on both sides, containing the
Emperor's Name, or some short Sentence out of the Alcoran.

The Turks look upon Earthquakes as ominous, as the Vulgar do upon Eclipses,
not understanding the Philosophy of them. During my stay in Constantinople,
which was above two years, there happened but one, which was October 26. 1669.
about six a Clock in the morning, a stark Calm preceding. It lasted very near a
minute, and we at Pera and Galata were as sensible of it as those who were on
the other side of the Water; but, praised be God, nothing fell, and we were
soon rid of the Fears in which this frightful Accident had cast us, being in
our Beds, and not able, by reason of the surprise, in so little a space to have
past through a Gallery down a pair of Stairs into the Court, if we had
attempted it. The Turks made direful Reflections on it, as if some Calamity
would inevitably fall upon the Empire, quickly forgetting the great Triumphings
and Rejoycings which they expressed but a few days before for the Surrender of
Candia. In the year 1668, in August, the Earth shook more or less for forty
seven days together in the lesser Asia at Anguri (Ancyra) and for fifteen at
Bacbasar, as we heard from a Scotch Merchant, who lived there: and
particularly, that at this latter place, on the second of August, between three
and four of the clock in the Afternoon it lasted for a quarter of an hour;
several Houses were overthrown, and some hundreds of Chimneys fell (it being a
very populous Town) and yet there were but seven killed. The Trembling being so
violent, both Turks and Christians forsook their Houses, and betook themselves
to the Fields, Vineyards, and Gardens, where they made their abode for several
days.

Their Punishments are very severe, this being judged the most effectual way to
prevent all public Disorders and Mischiefs. They use no great formality in
their processes: If the Criminal be taken in the Fact, and the Witnesses ready
and present to attest it, and sometimes if there be but probable circumstances,
without full conviction, condemn him; and soon after Sentence, sometimes an
hour or less, hurry him away to execution. For an ordinary Crime, Hanging is
the usual Death; but for Robbery and Murder committed upon the Highway, by
such as rob in Parties and alarm whole Provinces, or for Sacrilege, or for any
heinous Crime against the Government, either Gaunching or Excoriation, or
cutting off the Legs and Arms, and leaving the Trunk of the Body in the
Highway, or empaling, that is, thrusting an Iron stake through the Body out
under the Neck, or at the Mouth; in which extreme torment the miserable wretch
may live two or three days, if the Guts or the Heart happen not to be wounded
by the pointed Spike in its passage. This Punishment seems to have been in use
among the Romans, Seneca's Epist. 14. Cogita hoc loco carcerem, and cruces, and
eculeos, and uncum, and adactum medium hominem, qui per os emergat, stipitem:
And so in his Book De Consolatione ad Marciam, cap. 20. Alii capite conversos
in terram suspendere: alii per obscena stipitem egerunt, alii brachia patibulo
explicuerunt: Murder is seldom pardoned, and especially if the Relations of the
murdered person demand Justice.

The Circumcision, though it be a sacred Rite, is performed in their private
Houses, and never in the Moschs.

The Women color their Eyebrows and Lids with an ugly black Powder, I
suppose, to set off their Beauty by such a shadow; and their Nails with the
Powder of Kanna, which gives them a Tincture of faint red, like Brick, (as they
do the Tails and Hoofs of Horses) which they look upon as a great Ornament.
Their great Diversion is Bathing; sometimes thrice, if not four times a week.
They do not permit them to go to Church in time of Prayer, for fear they should
spoil their Devotion: The Turks being of so brutish a temper, that their Lust
is raised upon the sight of a fair Object. They are called oftentimes by the
Names of Flowers and Fruits, and sometimes fantastic Names are given them,
such as Sucar Birpara, or bit of Sugar, Dil Ferib, or Ravisher of Hearts, and
the like.

Their Skill in Agriculture is very mean. In their Gardens they have several
little Trenches to convey Water where it may be most necessary for their Plants
and Flowers. They know little or nothing of manuring their Grounds: Sometimes
they burn their Fields and Vineyards after Harvest and Vintage, partly to
destroy the Vermin, and partly to enrich the Soil. They tread out their Corn
with Oxen, drawing a square Plank-board, about a foot and half or two foot
over, studded with Flints, and winnow it upon their Threshing-floors in the
open Air, the Wind blowing away the Chaff. They feed their Horses with Barley
and chopped Straw, for I do not remember ever to have seen any Oats among them;
and they make but little Hay.

For draught of great weight in their Carts they make use of Buffalo's.

Camels will endure Travel four days together without Water, and will eat tops
of Thistles, Shrubs, or any kind of Boughs: They are very sure footed, and
kneel when they are a loading, and live to a considerable number of years, some
even to sixty.

The chief Furniture of their Houses are Carpets, or Matts of Grand Cairo,
neatly wrought with Straw, spread upon the Ground; they having no occasion of
Chairs, Couches, Stools, or Tables, their Postures within doors being different
from ours. They have no Hangings, but their Walls are whited and set off with
Painting, only adorned with a kind of Porcelane; no Beds closed with Curtains.

They Seal not with Wax, but Ink, at the bottom of the Paper, the Emperor's
Name being usually written with flourishes and in perplexed characters: Nor
have they any Coats of Arms upon their Seals, there being no such thing as
Gentility among them.

Some of them, notwithstanding their Zeal for Mahomet and the Religion by him
established, retain not only a favorable and honorable Opinion of our Blessed
Savior, but even place some kind of confidence in the usage of his Name, or of
the words of the Gospel, though it may seem to be wholly in the way of
Superstition. Thus in their Amulets, which they call Chaimaili, being little
bits of Paper about two or three fingers breadth, rolled up in pieces of Silk,
containing several short Prayers or Sentences out of the Alcoran, with several
Circles with other Figures, they usually inscribe the holy and venerable Name
of JESUS, or the figure of the Cross, or the first words of St. John's Gospel,
and the like. They hang them about their Necks, or place them under their
Armpits, or in their Bosom near their Hearts (being the same with what the
Greeks call (...)) and especially when they go to War, as a Preservative
against the dangers of it; and indeed against any misfortune whatsoever. Some
have them sowed within their Caps: and I heard of a Turk who was so
superstitious herein, that he always plucked it off, and was uncovered, when he
had occasion to make Water. Some are such Bigots in their Religion, and so
furious against Christians, that not only they treat them with all imaginable
Scorn and Contempt, but take it ill to be salam'd or saluted by them, as if it
were the effect of sawciness or unbecoming familiarity. Their malice against
the Christians makes them envy the rich Furs they line their Vests with, and it
is a trouble to these hypocritical Zealots to see the Franks ride upon their
fine Arabian Horses.

The respect which they show the Alcoran is wonderful; they dare not open the
Leaves of it with unwashen hands, according to the advice or command written in
Arabic upon the Cover, Let no one touch this Book, but he that is clean. They
kiss it, and bend their Heads, and touch their Eyes with it, both when they
open it and shut it.

The Janissaries, when they attend upon Christian Ambassadors to their Audience,
seem to appear in their Bravery, and in a Habit far from that of a Soldier,
being without either Firearms or Swords, which latter are not worn, but in
time of Service, or when they are upon a march, or embodied, wearing a Cap made
of Camels Hair, with a broad flap dangling behind, a gilt embroidered Wreath
running round it, and an oblong piece of Brass rising up from the middle of
their Porehead near a Foot, with a great Club in their Hand, like inferior
Officers of the Civil Government. But when they are in the Camp, they throw off
their upper Vest and Turbants, which they wear at all other usual times, as
troublesome, and put on a Fess, or red Cap, which sits close to their Head, and
tuck up their Duliman or long Coat to their Girdle, that they may be the more
quick and expedite in their Charge.

They affect sinery and neatness in their Clothes and Shashes; not so much as a
spot to be seen upon them, and in rainy or suspicious Weather are very careful
how they go abroad without their Yamurlicks, which is a kind of Coat they throw
over their Heads at such times.

Their Pans and Dishes are for the most part of Copper, but so handsomely
tinned over, that they look like Silver.

There are thousands of Gypsies or Zinganies in Turkey, who live the same idle
nasty kind of life as they do in Christendom, and pretend to the same art of
telling Fortunes; and are looked upon as the offscouring of Mankind. It is
accounted the extremest point of human misery to be a Slave to any of this sort
of Cattle.

The Haggi or Pilgrims, that have been at Mecca and Medina, forbear to drink
Wine most religiously, out of a Persuasion, that one drop would efface all the
merits of that troublesome and expensive Journey; and some have been possessed
with such a mad zeal, that that they have blinded themselves after their having
been blessed with the sight of Mahomet's Sepulcher.

After Jatzah, that is, an hour and a half in the night, throughout the whole
year, there is as great a silence in the Streets as at midnight: The Emperor
Achmet, in the year 1611, having made an Order, that no one should presume to
be out of his House after that time, which is to this day most punctually
observed. The Bostangi bashi, who has the Command of all the Agiamoglans in the
Seraglio, the Topgibashi, or such great Officers, attended with a great Train
of armed men, walking the Rounds, and drubbing such as they find abroad at
unseasonable hours, of what Nation or Quality soever, except Physicians,
Chyrurgions, and Apothecaries, whom they allow at all times to visit Sick.

The Turkmans, (for so they are peculiarly called, as if they were the true
Descendents of the old Turks or Scythians, whose wandering kind of life is
described by the Poet. (...) Nulla domus, plaustris habitant, migrare per arva
(...) Mos, atque errantes circumvectare penates.)
have no fixed residence any where, but travel with their Families and Cattle
from place to place, carrying their Wives and Children upon Camels; they pitch
their Tents usually near Rivers and Fountains, for the convenience of Water,
and according as their Necessities require, make a longer or shorter stay.
Their whole Estate consists in their numerous Flocks and Herds, which they sell
upon occasion, to supply themselves with what they want, at the Towns they pass
by. Their only concern is, how to enjoy the Benefits and Blessings of Nature,
without the troubles and turmoils and disquiets of Life, being contented and
happy in one another Company, void of all Ambition and Envy, courteous and
humane to Strangers, that may want their Help and Assistance, kindly
entertaining them with such Provision as their Folds afford. I have met with
some Companies of these harmless Wanderers in my Travels. The Country lies open
without any Enclosures, and the Propriety not being vested in any one, they
travel through the Plains unmolested, and find excellent Pasture every where.
The Turks till no more ground than will serve their necessities, being supplied
with Corn from Egypt, and from Moldavia and Walachia, by the way of the black
Sea, letting vast tracts of Ground lie waste and uncultivated; so that their
Sloth herein sometimes is justly punished with Dearths.

They have nothing to show for their Houses and Possessions, but an Hogiet or
piece of Paper subscribed by the Cadi, if they have acquired them by their
Money, or that they were their Father's before them.

The Dervises generally are melancholy, and place the greatest part of their
Religion in Abstinence and other Severities. Some cut their Flesh, others vow
not to speak for six or seven years, or all their lives long, though never so
much provoked or distressed. Their Garments are made of a course sort of Wool,
or Goats Hair: they are tied up by the Vow of their Order ever from marrying.
Several of this Sect, in the height of their Religious Phrenzy, have attempted
upon the lives of the Emperors themselves, (at whose Government they have taken
disgust) as Mahomet the Second, and Achmet, as if such desperate attempts were
fatal to Bigots in all Religions.

They pay a mighty Veneration to any Relick of Mahomet, his Banner is still
preserved in the Treasury of the Seraglio, and is looked upon as the great
Security of the Empire. They believe that it was sent from Heaven, and conveyed
into the hands of Mahomet, by the Angel Gabriel, as a Pledge and sign of
Success and Victory in his Battles against the Christians, and all other
Enemies of the Musulman Faith. It was sent to Candia, to encourage the
Soldiers to endure the fatigue of that long and tedious Siege; and when it was
brought thence after the surrender of that City, to be deposited in its usual
place, the Vizier gave several Christian Slaves, that rowed in the Galley that
was fraught with this holy Ware, their Liberty. They pretend to have some Rags
of Mahomet's Vest, to which they ascribe great virtue. In confidence of which
the Emperor Achmet, in the time of a great fire, which raged at Constantinople,
when all other means failed, dipped part of them in Water, to be sprinkled upon
the Fire to rebate the fury of it.

Next to the Mufti or Cadaleskires are the Mollas, of which these four are the
chiefest in Dignity. The Molla of Galata, Adrianople, Aleppo, Prusa; and after
them are reckoned these eight, Stambol Ephendi, Larissa, Misir or Cairo, Sham
or Damascus, Diarbekir or Mesopotamia, Cutaia, Sophia, Philippi.

The Priests have no Habit peculiar to their Profession, whereby they are
distinguished from others. If they are put from their Moschs for Miscarriage or
Neglect of doing their Duty, or if they think fit to resign and be Priests no
longer, they may betake themselves without any scandal to secular Employments,
their former Character and Quality wholly ceasing. While they remain Priests,
they counterfeit a more than ordinary gravity in their discourse and walking:
and affect to wear Turbants swelling out, and made up with more cross folds:
which was all the difference which I could observe by their Head-Attire, which
is various, though I could not find that this was constantly and strictly
observed.

In Byram time, which is the great Festival of the year, at which time every
one looks cheerfully and merrily, among other signs of mutual Respect, they
besprinkle one another with sweet Water. They indulge to several Sports; and
some are mightily pleased with Swinging in the open air, the ordinary sort of
People especially, paying only a few Aspers for the diversion.

The Government is perfectly arbitrary and despotical; the Will and Pleasure of
the Emperor having the force and power of a Law, and oftentimes is above it.
His bare Command, without any process, is enough to take off the Head of any
Person, (though never so eminent in Dignity; though usually for formality, and
to silence the murmurings of the Soldiery and People, the Sentence is
confirmed by the Mufti.) Sometimes Bassa's, who have amassed great Treasures in
their Governments, are cut off in their own Houses in the midst of their
Retinue, the Messengers of Death producing the Imperial Command, usually sent
in a black Purse, and not a Sword drawn in their defense. Others, if they are
obnoxious to the least Umbrage or Jealousy, though dismissed the Seraglio with all
possible Demonstrations of the Grand Signior's Favor, and with rich Presents
in order to take possession of Places of great command in the Empire, before
they have got two or three days Journey from Constantinople, have been
overtaken and strangled. In the Army Commands are given according to merit,
Courage and Conduct are sure to be rewarded, the way lying open to the meanest
Soldier to raise himself to be the Chief of his Order. But other Preferments
depend upon mere Chance, and upon the Fancy of the Emperor, whether the person
be fit or no, and they are as soon lost. The least ill success or miscarriage
proves oftentimes fatal, and a more lucky man is put in his place, and he
succeeded by a third, if unfortunate in a design, though managed with never so
much Prudence and Valor. They admit of no hereditary Honors, and have no
respect to Descent or Blood, except the Ottoman Family; he only is great and
noble whom the Emperor favors, and while his Command lasts. According to a
Tradition that passes current amongst them, a Bassa's Son by a Sultana, or a
Daughter or Sister of the Emperor, can rise no higher than to be a Sangiacbei,
or Governor of some little Province, much inferior to a Bassa, and under his
Jurisdiction. Being born of Slaves for the most part, they do not pride
themselves in their Birth, very few among them being scarce able to give any
account of their Grandfathers. They have no Sirnames, but are distinguished by
their possessions and places of abode, and enjoying by Law a liberty of having
what Women they please, they have little or no regard to Alliance or Kindred.

Their Empire owes the continuance of its Being to the severity of the
Government, which oftentimes takes place without regard either to Justice or
Equity, and to their frequent Wars, which prevent all occasions of Mutiny and
Faction among the Soldiers, which happen frequently when unemploy'd. So that
though Ambition may put a warlike Sultan upon enlarging his Territories by new
Conquests, yet reason of State forces a weak and effeminate Prince, such as was
Ibrahim, to make War for his own security. Their Politics are not owing to
Books and Study, and the Examples of past-times, but to Experience, and the
plain suggestions of Nature and common Sense: They have Rules of Government,
which they firmly adhere to, holding the Reins straight, especially being cruel
and inexorable to Criminals of State, who never are to expect any Mercy or
Pity. Their Councils formerly were open, and their Designs known, and
proclaimed beforehand, as if this had been a Bravery becoming their greatness,
and that they scorned to steal a Conquest. But they have learned since the Art
of Dissimulation, and can lie and swear for their Interest, and seem excessive
in their Caresses to the Ministers of those Countries, which they intend to
invade. But their Preparations for arming are made with so much noise, that an
ordinary Jealousy is soon awakened by it to oppose them, in case of an attack.
They seldom or never care to have War at both Extremes of the Empire at the
same time, and therefore they are mighty sollicitous to secure a Peace with
Christendom, when they intend a War upon the Persian; and as much as is
possible, they avoid quarrelling with two Christian Princes at once, being
usually at league either with Poland and Muscovy, when they war upon Hungary,
and so on the contrary; dreading nothing more than a Union of the Christian
Princes bordering upon them, which would prove so fatal to their Empire, and
quickly put a Period to their Greatness; for hereby they would be put upon a
necessity of making a defensive War, to their great loss and disadvantage, and
at last either be forced to beg a Peace of the Christians, or run the hazard of
losing all by a further prosecution of War.

This they are very sensible of, and therefore as they take all occasion to
promote Quarrels and Dissentions in Hungary and Transylvania, so they greatly
rejoice, when the Princes of Christendom are at War one with another. This is
their great time of advantage, and they know, that it is their true Interest to
pursue it, though they do not always, by reason of the ill condition of their
own Affairs, make use of it. During the Civil Wars of Germany, the Bassa's and
other Commanders of the Army were very importunate with the Grand Signior, to
make a War on that side, and to enlarge his Conquests as far as Vienna, no
conjuncture having been ever so favorable to consummate such a design, in
which Solomon so unhappily miscarried. They promised him an easy Victory,
assuring him, that the Animosities of the Princes of the Empire were so
heightened, that there was no room left for a Reconciliation, that he was but to
go in the Head of an Army to take possession, and that Austria would surrender
at the first news of his march toward it. The Emperor was not to be moved at
that time by these Insinuations and plausible Discourses; being continually
urged, he as often denied. One day when they came to renew their Advice about
the German War, he having given order before, that several Dogs should be kept
for some days without Meat, commanded that they should be brought out, being
almost starved, and Meat thrown among them; whereupon they snailed and bit one
another: In the midst of their noise and fighting he caused a Bear to be let
loose in the same Area; the Dogs forgetting their Meat and leaving off their
fighting, ran all upon the Bear, ready to prey upon them singly, and at last
killed him. This Diversion the Emperor gave his Bassa's, and left them to make
the application.

A certain Prophecy, of no small Authority, runs in the minds of all the
People, and has gained great credit and belief among them, that their Empire
shall be ruined by a Northern Nation, which has white and yellowish Hair. The
Interpretation is as various as their Fancy. Some fix this Character on the
Moscovites; and the poor Greeks flatter themselves with foolish hopes, that
they are to be their Deliverers, and to rescue them from their Slavery, chiefly
because they are of their Communion, and owe their Conversion to the Christian
Faith, to the Piety and Zeal of the Grecian Bishops formerly. Others look upon
the Sweeds, as the persons described in the Prophecy, whom they are most to
fear. The Ground and Original of his Fancy, I suppose, is owing to the great
Opinion which they have of the Valor and Courage of that warlike Nation. The
great Victories of the Sweeds in Germany, under Gustavus Adolphus were loudly
proclaimed at Constantinople, as if there were no withstanding the shock and
fury of their Arms: and their continued Successes confirmed the Turks in their
first Belief, and their Fears and their Jealousies were augmented afterward,
when Charles Gustave, a Prince of as heroic a Courage, and as great Abilities
in the Art and Management of War as the justly admired Gustavus, entered Poland
with his Army, and carried all before him, seized upon Warsaw, and drove
Casimire out of his Kingdom, and had almost made an entire and absolute
Conquest, only a few places holding out. This alarmed the Grand Signior, and
the Bassa's of the Port, as if the Prophecy were then about to be fulfilled,
who did not care for the company of such troublesome Neighbors, who might push
on their Victories, and joining with the Cossacks, advance their Arms further,
and make their Country the Seat of a War, which might draw after it fatal
consequences. To prevent which, Couriers are dispatched from Constantinople to
Ragotski, Prince of Transylvania, then in concert with the Sweeds, to command
him to retire with his Army out of Poland, as he valued the Peace and Safety of
his own Country, and the friendship of the Grand Signior, whose Tributary he
was, and by whose Favor he had gained that Principality: And the Crim-Tartars,
the sworn Enemies of the Poles, who at that time lay heavy upon them, were
wrought upon by the same Motives and Reasons of State, to clap up a Peace with
them, that being freed from these distractions, they might unite their Forces
the better together, and make head against the Sweeds.

The Ambassadors of Christian Princes, when they are admitted by the Grand
Signior, to an Audience, (their Presents being then of course made, which are
looked upon as due, not to say, as an homage) are dismissed in few words, and
referred by him to his Wakil or Deputy, as he usually styles the chief Vizier:
and a small number of their Retinue only permitted the honor of kissing his
Vest, and then rudely enough sent away.

The Grand Signiors keep up the state of the old Asiatick Princes: They do not
expose themselves often to the view of the People, unless when they ride in
Triumph, or upon some such solemn occasion; when they go to the Moschs, or
divert themselves in the Fields, either in riding or hunting, they do not love
to be stared upon, or approached. It is highly criminal to pry into their
Sports, such an insolent Curiosity being often punished with Death. The Story
is famous of Morad the Third, who baiting a Bear in the old Palace with a
Mastiff, and espying three fellows upon the Tower of Bajazid's Mosch, who had
planted themselves to see the Sport, commanded their Heads to be struck off
immediately, and be brought before him, which was done accordingly. Instances
of such Capricio's are frequent in the Turkish History: This following happened
during my stay at Constantinople.

Upon the return of Vizier Achmet from Candia, after the surrender of that
City, and a happy end put by him to that tedious and bloody War, he acquainting
the present Emperor, then at Adrianople, with the History of that famous Siege
at large, made such terrible Representations of their and the Venetians mining
and countermining one another, that the Emperor was resolved out of curiosity
to see the Experiment made of a thing that seemed to him almost incredible. A
Work was soon raised and undermined, and above thirty Murderers and Robbers
upon the Highway, and suchlike Villains were put into it, as it were to
defend it. The Grand Signior stood upon an Eminence at some considerable
distance, expecting the issue of it; upon a Signal given, the Mine was sprung,
and the Fort demolished, and the poor wretches torn piecemeal, to his great
satisfaction and amazement.

The Moon is the auspicious Planet of the Turks; according to the course of
which they celebrate their Festivals. They begin their Months from the first
appearance of it, at which time they choose, except a Delay brings a great
Prejudice and Inconvenience with it, to begin their great Actions. The Crescent
is the Ensign of the Empire, which they paint in their Banners, and place upon
the Spires of their Moschs. Next to the day of the appearing Moon, they pitch
upon Friday, to fight upon, to begin a Journey, and especially their
Pilgrimmage toward Mecca, or do any thing of great consequence, as very lucky
and fortunate.

An Account of the Latitude of Constantinople and Rhodes; written by the
Learned Mr. John Greaves, sometime Professor of Astronomy in the University of
Oxford, and directed to the most Reverend James Ussher, Archbishop of Ardmagh.
UPON intimation of your Grace's Desires, and upon importunity of some Learned
men, having finished a Table, as a Key to your Grace's exquisite disquisition,
touching Asia, properly so called; I thought my self obliged to give both you
and them a reason, why in the situation of Byzantium, and the Island Rhodus,
(which two eminent places I have made the (...) and Bounds of the Chart) I
dissent from the Traditions of the Ancients, and from the Tables of our late
and best Geographers, and consequently dissenting in these, have been
necessitated to alter the Latitudes, if not Longitudes, of most of the
remarkable Cities of this Discourse. And first for Byzantium, the received
Latitude of it by Appianus, Mercator, Ortelius, Maginnus, and some others, is
43 degrees and 5 minutes. And this also we find in the Basil Edition of
Ptolemy's Geography, procured by Erasmus out of a Greek MS. of Pettichius. The
same likewise is confirmed by another choice MS. in Greek, of the most learned
and judicious Mr. Seldom, to whom for this favor and several others I stand
obliged. And as much is expressed in the late Edition of Ptolemy by Bertius,
compared and corrected by Sylburgius, with a Manuscript out of the Palatine
Library. Wherefore it cannot be doubted, having such a cloud of Witnesses, but
that Ptolemy assigned to Byzantium, as our best modern Geographers have done,
the Latitude of 43. 5. And this will farther appear, not only out of his
Geography, where it is often expressed, but also out of his (...) or Almagest,
as the Arabians term it, where describing the Parallel passing (...), he
assigns to it 43. 5. What was the Opinion concerning Byzantium of Strabo
preceding Ptolemy, or of Hipparchus preceding Strabo, or of Eratosthenes
ancienter, and it may be accurater than all of them, (for Strabo ( lib. 2.)
calls him (...)) though Tully (Lib. Ep. ad At.) makes Hipparchus often
reprehended Eratosthenes, as Ptolemy after him does Marinus, their Writings not
being now extant, (unless those of Strabo) cannot be determined by us. But as
for Strabo, in our enquiry, we can expect little satisfaction; for his
description of places, having more of the Historian and Philosopher, (both
which he has performed with singular Gravity and Judgment) than the exactness
of a Mathematician, who strictly respects the Position of places, without
inquisition after their Nature, Qualities, and Inhabitants, (though the best
Geography would be a mixture of them all, as Abulfeda, an Arabian Prince in his
Rectification of Countries above Three hundred years since has done;) I say
for these Reasons we can expect little satisfaction from Strabo, and less may
we hope for from Dionysius Afer, Arrianus, Stephanus Byzantinus, and others.
Wherefore next having recourse to the Arabians, who in Geography deserve the
second place after the Grecians, I find in Nassir Eddin the Latitude of
Byzantium, which he terms Buzantiya, and Constantiniya, to be 45 degrees, and
in Ulug Beg's Astronomical Tables the same to be expressed. Abulfeda chiefly
follows four principal Authors as his Guides, in the compiling of his
Geographical Tables, those are Alfaras, Albiruny, Hon Saiid Almagraby, lastly,
Ptolemy, whose Geography he terms a description of the Quadrant, (or the fourth
part of the Earth) inhabited; and all these, according to his assertion, place
Byzantium in 45 degrees of Latitude. And here it may justly be wondered how
this difference should arise between the Greek Copies of Ptolemy, and those
translated into Arabic by the command of Almamon, the learned Calife of
Babylon; for Abulfeda expressly relates, that Ptolemy was first interpreted in
his time, that is, in the computation of Almeeinus, in Erpenius's Edition, and
of Emir Cond a Persian Historiographer, more than 800 years since; concerning
which Abulfeda writes thus, This Book (discoursing of Ptolemy's Geography) was
translated out of the Grecian Language into the Arabic for Almamon: And in
this I find (by three fair MSS of Abulfeda) Byzantium to be constantly placed
in 45. and as constantly in the Greek Copies in 43. 5. But in the (...) of
Chrysococca, out of the Persian Tables, (made about the year 1346. in
Scaliger's Calculation) it is placed in 45. To reconcile the difference between
the Greeks and Arabians, may seem impossible, for the common refuge of flying
to the corruption of numbers by Transcribers, and laying the fault on them,
which sometimes is the Author's, will not help us in this particular; seeing
the Greek Copies agree amongst themselves, and the Arabic amongst themselves.
The best way to end the Dispute, will be, to give credit concerning the
Latitude of Byzantium, neither to the Greeks nor Arabians. And that I have
reason for this Assertion, appears by several Observations of mine at
Constantinople, with a Brass Sextant of above four foot Radius. Where taking,
in the Summer Solstice, the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, without using any
(...) for the Parallax and Refraction, (which at that time was not necessary) I
found the Latitude to be 41 degrees 6 minutes. And in this Latitude in the
Chart I have placed Byzantium, and not in that either of the Greeks or
Arabians. From which Observation, being of singular use in the rectification of
Geography, it will follow by way of Corallary, that all Maps for the North-East
of Europe, and of Asia, adjoining upon the Bosphorus Thracius, the Pontus
Euxinus, and much farther, are to be corrected; and consequently the situation
of most Cities in Asia properly so called, are to be brought more Southerly
than those of Ptolemy, by almost two entire degrees, and then those of the
Arabians, by almost four.

Concerning Rhodes, it may be presumed, that having been the Mother, and Nurse
of so many eminent Mathematicians, and having long flourished in Navigation, by
the direction of these, and by the vicinity of the Phoenicians, they could not
be ignorant of the precise Latitude of their Country, and that from them
Ptolemy might receive a true information. Though it cannot be denied, but that
Ptolemy, in places remoter from Alexandria, has much erred. I shall only
instance in our own Country, where he situates (...), that is London, in 54
degrees of Latitude, and the (...), or the middle of the Isle of Wight, (which
in the printed Copies is falsely termed (...), but in the MSS rightly (...)) in
52 degrees, and 20 minutes of Latitude. Whereas London is certainly known to
have for the Altitude of the Pole, or Latitude of the place, only 51 degrees
and 32 minutes; and the middle of the Isle of Wight not to exceed 50 degrees,
and some minutes.

But in my judgment Ptolemy is very excusable in these and the like Errors, of
several other places far distant from Alexandria, seeing he must for their
position necessarily have depended either upon relations of Travelers, or
Observations of Mariners, or upon the Longitude of the day, measured in those
times by Clepsydrae; all which how uncertain they are, and subject unto Error,
if some celestial Observations be not joined with them, and those exactly taken
with large Instruments, (in which kind the Ancients have not many, and our
times, (excepting Tycho Brahe, and some of the Arabians) but a few) I say no
man, that has conversed with modern Travelers and Navigators, can be
ignorant. Wherefore to excuse these Errors of his (or rather of others fathered
by him) with a greater absurdity, by asserting the Poles of the World since his
time to have changed their site, and consequently all Countries their
Latitudes, as Mariana the Master of Copernicus, and others after him have
imagined; or else to charge Ptolemy, being so excellent an Artist, with
Ignorance, and that even of his own Country, as Cluverius has done, (from
which my Observations at Alexandria and Memphis may vindicate him) the former
were too great a stupidity, and the latter too great a Presumption. But to
return to Rhodes, an Island (in Eustathius's Comment upon Dionysius's (...)) of
920 furlongs circuit, where according to Ptolemy, the Parallel passing (...),
has 36 degrees of Latitude, and so has Lindus, and (...) the chief Cities of
the Island; the same is confirmed by the MS, but where the printed Copy and
Eustathius read (...), which Mercator renders Talyssus, the MS renders (...).
Abulfeda in some Copies situates the Island Rhodes, (for he mentions no Cities
there) in the Latitude of 37 degrees and 40 minutes: And the Geography of Said
Ibn Aly Algiorgany, commended by Gilbertus Gaulmyn, in 37 degrees, if it be not
by a transposition in the MS of the numerical Letters in Arabic, 37 for 36.
which by reason of their similitude, are often confounded in Arabic MSS. By my
Observations under the Walls of the City Rhodes, with a fair Brass Astrolabe of
Gemma Frisius, containing 14 inches in the diameter, I found the Latitude to be
37 and 50. A larger Instrument I durst not adventure to carry on shore in a
place of so much jealousy. And this Latitude in the Chart I have assigned to
the City Rhodes, (from the Island so denominated, upon which on the North-east
side it stands situated) better agreeing with the Arabians than with Ptolemy,
whom I know not how to excuse.

CHAP. VI.
Some Observations made in a Voyage to Egypt.

By M. Belon.
IN our sailing between Rhodes and Alexandria, a sort of Falcon came and sat
two hours upon our Sails. Abundance of Quails flying from the North Southwards,
fell into our Ship. We observed in our sailing many Pelecans, and some unknown
Birds.

At Alexandria I observed them to burn the Kali for Fuel, Wood being scarce;
they calcine Lime with the Ashes, then call it Soda, and sell it to the
Venetians, who melt it with a particular Stone brought from Pavia, by the River
Tesino, and so make their famous Crystal Glass at Muran; but the French find
the Sand brought from Estampes to serve as well as the Pavian Stone. From this
place they send their Commodities and Merchandise into all parts of the World.

In my passage to and from Grand Cairo, and during my abode there, I observed
besides other things the Animals and Plants.

As the Garaffa or Camelopardalus; the Bubalus of Africa, different from the
Buffalo; Flocks of the Oryx, and of Gazells which they shoot; the Axis, a most
beautiful Creature ( by the Description it may be the Zebra or Zembra of
Africa) great varieties of Monkeys at Caire; the Hippopotamus about the Lakes
and Rivers; Goats with very long Ears hanging down almost to the Ground; Sheep
with great Tails, and vast Laps under their Chin; the Ichneumon tame in their
Houses like Cats, this Animal destroys Rats and Mice like Weasils, hunts
Serpents which the People eat, destroys Chamaelions and other Lizzards, it
creeps and darts upon its Prey; it is bigger and much stronger than a Cat. I
observed at Caire many Civet-Cats.

Two kinds of Camelions frequently sitting on the Rhamnus, catching of Insects
with their Tongues as they fly by; Crocodiles common in the Lakes and Rivers;
the little Lacerta Chalcidica hunts Insects under the Walls; the Stellio or
Swift Lizzard is common about the Pyramids, and the other Sepulchers, where it
runs after Flies; the Excrement of this Animal is sold up and down for an
excellent Cosmetick: I saw also the Serpent called Cerastes. The great Batts
abound in the Caves.

Amongst the Birds the Ostrich, whose Skins and Feathers are in use amongst the
Turks; the Pelecan, with whose Bills and Bags the Watermen of the Nile throw
the Water out of their Boats; the Vulp-Anser is common in the watery places. I
observed also the Crex, and the Ibis. The Inhabitants never hatch their Eggs
under Hens, but all in Ovens or Furnaces.

The common Trees are, the Tamarisk, loaded with Galls or Animal Excrescencies;
the Date-Palm; the Acacia or Gum-Arabick Tree; the Cassia Solutiva; the
Tamarind; the true Sycamore, or Pharaoh's Fig Tree; the Musa Arbor, or the
Plantane; the Siliqua or Carob; yellow Jasmine and yellow Roses; Syringa;
Alcanna (a sort of Ligustrum) Cotton Trees, etc.

The most remarkable Herbs I took notice of were the Papyrus Nilotica (a sort
of Cyperus out of whose Threads or Filaments the Ancients made their Paper). The
Colocasia or great Egyptian Arum, whose Root they boil with most of their
Meats; The Sugar Cane or Reed, by the Fuel whereof they melt their Metals, Wood
being scarce in Egypt; Hyoscyamus niger, out of whose Root they prepare an Oil
for their Lamps and other uses: A milky Convolvulus on the Walls ( perhaps an
Apocynum, being podded;) several Phaseoli or Kidney-beans; Gourds, Pumpions,
Thorn-apples, Coloquintida; many Ocimums or wild Basils; the Harmala common
about Alexandria ( a sort of Rue with great white Flowers) the Abrus, two
Senna's, Bammia, Melochia, Stratiotes, etc.

The Eagle-stone is found up and down Egypt in very great plenty.

More Observations made in Egypt, by Guilandinus, Alpinus, and others.
CHAP. I.
Of the Weather and Seasons in Egypt.

THE Months of January and February make the Spring in Egypt, the Trees
beginning to germinate and put forth, and the Herbs to flower, so that then the
Fields and Gardens are in their glory.

They reckon two Summers, their first is in March, April, May, which is the
most unconstant, unequal, and most sickly season of the year, as also the
hottest and most scorching; which is imputed to the East and South Winds, that
blow generally for fifty days together over desert sandy places, accompanied
with a hot burning Sand, that spoils all their Eyes: Strangers during this
Season retire into Grotts and subterraneous places, and drink much of the Water
of Nile, which is excellent in quenching epidemical Thirst at that time.

Their second Summer is in June, July, August, which is equal, constant, and
healthful, the Wind blowing then from the North over Sea, the Nile also
swelling and overflowing by the Rains falling in Aethiopia, and the Air moist
and refreshing. Now all the People abstain from Business and Labor, follow
Spectacles, Games, Plays, etc. the Land being under Water.

September and October make their Autumn, at the end whereof they sow their
Wheat, which they reap in March following. This Autumn is temperate and
salubrious.

November and December are their Winter; Ice, Snow, and Hail are seldom or
never seen: Rain falls rarely in the inner parts of Egypt, only a Dew; but at
Alexandria, and other places near the Sea they have Rain, and a more healthful
Air; these Showers come most in November.

CHAP. II.
Of the Meats and Drinks of Egypt.

THE Inhabitants, especially the Mahometans, live abstemiously, eat little and
often; their Diet is generally simple, abhorring mixtures and variety. Rice
boiled in Mutton Broth, Lentils, Pulse, and Legumes; Beat, Mallows called
Bamia, Cucumbers, Melons, Citruls, Dates, Figs of the Sycomore, Plantanes,
Pomegranats, Grapes, Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Sugar Canes, Colocasia Root,
etc. make up the greatest part of their Diet.

The richest sort eat Mutton, Poultry, and several sorts of Fish from the Nile,
which though fat, are not esteemed wholesome, because the bottom of that River is
very muddy, and the Water much troubled. All their Bread is made of Wheat, and
they make abundance of Milk-meats. Their Kitchin-herbs are watered every day,
all their Gardens being planted near the banks of the Nile, which is one reason
that their Salleting is more watery and insipid than in Italy; yet if they did
not water them every day in Egypt, they would soon be dried up. There are no
Gardens but near the River, because there is no Rain nor fresh Water in other
parts.

The ordinary People will eat Camels, Buffaloes and Crocodiles. The Water of
the Nile, purged and clarified either by standing in Jarrs or precipitated with
Powder and Pastes of sweet Almonds, is the general Drink of the Country, being
esteemed the lightest, the most nutritious, and the most refreshing liquor in
the World, the Water running so far under a hot Sun, and falling down so many
Cataracts.

The Inhabitants sleep little, indulge Venery, having many Wives and
Concubines, are generally idle, yet live long, and see more years than the
Poles, Germans, and other Northern Nations, where Gluttony and Drunkenness are
much more in fashion than in the Egyptian Climate. The Jews and Christians, as
also the Turkish Soldiers, will often debauch at Grand Caire, with those rich
Wines brought from Candy, Rhodes, and Cyprus; those from Italy, Corfou, and
Zant will not keep in Egypt, the heat soon pricking them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Diseases and Physic.

THE most epidemical and endemial Distempers of Egypt are sore Eyes from the
East and South Winds bringing along with them a burning Sand and piercing Nitre
mixed with it, which makes them frequently wash and cleanse their Eyes with the
Nile Water at that Season. Leprosies from their Salt and rotten Fish.
Inflammatory Phrenzies, killing in three or four hours time. A pestilential
Small pox, and pestilential Fevers, especially at Alexandria in Autumn.
Ruptures are very common, by reason of their moist and watery Diet: But that
which destroys most is the Plague, which they take no care to obstruct or
avoid, depending upon their Principle of inevitable Fate and Predestination;
therefore in the year 1580 they lost above 500000 Souls in 6 or 7 months time,
in the single City of Grand Caire.

The Plague in Egypt rages for the most part from the beginning of September
to June, at which time it never fails to cease, the Wind turning then to the
salubrious Quarter of the North, and the Nile swelling with fresh Streams.

They reckon this Plague is constantly brought either from Barbary, Lybia, or
other African Countries, or else from Syria or Greece; that from Barbary is
most furious and pernicious, the other two mild and gentle.

Their practical Physic consists in Phlebotomy, which they administer
universally in almost every Disease; in cauterizing or burning, in scarrifying,
in cupping, bathing, in a few lenitive Purgatives, and cooling quieting
Alteratives.

They Bleed by cutting or pricking the Veins and Arteries themselves in most
parts of the Body; yet in Eunuchs, Women, Children, and other soft
Constitutions, they take away Blood by scarrifying the Thighs, Ears, Lips,
Nostrils, Gums, etc. They generally bleed after Meat. Their Cupping-glasses are
of different Figures from ours, and their Cautery is Cotton set on fire.

They have a gross way of Cutting in Dropsies, to let the Water out. Their
manner of extracting Stones out of the Bladder is by blowing and extending the
Urethra, then pressing the Stones to the neck of the Bladder by their Fingers
put into the Anus or Fundament, and afterward sucking them out through the
expanded passages.

Their Women bath very much, and use all manner of Arts to soften and plump
their Bodies.

They abstain from all hot or violent Purgatives, as Scammony, Coloquintida,
Elaterium, Hellebores, Cataputia, Metezeon, etc. and use only the most gentle
Lenitives, as Cassia, Tamarinds, Manna, Myrobalans, sometimes Rheubarb and a
little Sena, as also cooling Clysters.

Their Alterative Physic consists of Coolers, and Anodyns, as Nymphaea, Poppy,
Endive, Lettice, Berberries, China-root (never Guaicum or Sarsa) Opium, Flowers
of the Alcanna, Coffee: The Women will eat Hermodactyls like roasted Chestnuts
at night. They have few Compound Medicines, unless a Theriaca different from
the Venetian, or that of Andromachus, in the preparing of which they seem very
careful and ceremonious. Some amongst them pretend to many Arcanums against
Fevers.

For a full Catalogue of such Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs as grow in Egypt,
together with their synonymous names and places, the Reader may consult Mr.
Ray's Collection of Exotic Catalogues, published at London 1693, and annexed at
the end of this Work, amongst which he will find an Egyptian one.

The manner of hatching Chickens at Grand Cairo, with a particular delineation
of the Ovens, Fire, Matts, etc. may be read at large in Mr. Greaves's Relation,
printed in the Philosoph. Trans. N. 137. page 923, 924, 925.

Several Conjectures and Experiments upon the Egyptian Nitre, commonly called
Natron, (found floating on the Lake Latron near Nitria, a Town lower upon the
Nile than Grand Cairo) may be read in the Philosoph. Trans. N. 160. from p. 609
to p. 619. also in N. 167. p. 837, 838. where it is proved to be little
different from Sal Armoniack, and may owe its original to a natural union or
mixture of the fossile Salt of the Lakes with the Urinose one, that comes from
the Crocodiles, Hippopotami, and other Animal Inhabitants of those Waters.

Of the Pyramids of EGYPT. By Mr. Creaves, Professor of Astronomy in the
University of Oxford.
A Description of the Pyramids in Egypt, as I found them in the 1048 year of
the Hegira, or in the years 1638, and 1639 of our Lord, after the Dionysian
Account.

A Description of the first and fairest Pyramid.
THE first and fairest of the three greater Pyramids is situated on the top of
a rocky Hill, in the Sandy Desert of Lybia, about a quarter of a mile distant
to the West, from the Plains of Egypt, above which the Rock rises an hundred
feet or better, with a gentle and easy ascent. Upon this advantageous Rise,
and upon this solid Foundation the Pyramid is erected; the height of the
situation adding to the beauty of the Work, and the solidity of the Rock giving
the Superstructure a permanent and stable support. Each side of the Pyramid,
computing it according to Herodotus, contains in length 800 Grecian feet: And
in Diodorus Siculus account 700 Strabo reckons it less than a furlong, that is
less than 600 Grecian feet, or Six hundred twenty five Roman. And Pliny equals
it to 883. That of Diodorus Siculus, in my judgment, comes nearest to the
Truth, and may serve in some kind to confirm those proportions, which in
another Discourse I have assigned to the Grecian measures: For measuring the
North side of it, near the Basis, by an exquisite radius of ten feet in length,
taking two several stations, as Mathematicians use to do, when any Obstacle
hinders their approach, I found it to be Six hundred ninety three feet,
according to the English Standard; which quantity is somewhat less than that of
Diodorus. The rest of the sides were examined by a line, for want of an even
level and a convenient distance to place my Instruments, both which the Area on
the former side afforded.

The Altitude of this Pyramid was long since measured by Thales Milesius, who
according to Tatianus Assyrius lived about the fiftieth Olympiad, but his
Observations is no where by the Ancients expressed: Only Pliny tells us of a
course proposed by him, how it might be found, and that is by observing such an
hour, when the shadow of the body is equal to its height. A way at the best, by
reason of the faintness and scattering of the extremity of the shadow, in so
great an Altitude, uncertain, and subject unto Error. And yet Diogenes
Laertius, in the life of Thales, has the same Story, from the Authority of
Hieronymus. Hieronymus reports, That he measured the Pyramids by their shadow,
marking when they are of an equal quantity. Wherefore I shall pass by his, and
give my own Observations. The Altitude is something defective of the Latitude;
though in Strabo's computation it exceeds; but Diodorus rightly acknowledges it
to be less, which if we measure by its perpendicular, is Four hundred eighty
one feet; but if we take it as the Pyramid ascends inclining (as all such
Figures do) then it is equal, in respect of the lines subtending the several
angles, to the Latitude of the Basis, that is to six hundred ninety three feet.

What excessive heighths some fancy to themselves, or borrow from the relations
of others, I shall not now examine. This I am certain of, that the Shaft or
Spire of Paul's in London, before it was casually burnt, being as much, or
somewhat more than the altitude of the Tower now standing (1647) did exceed the
height of this Pyramid. For Cambden describes it to have been in a
perpendicular, five hundred and twenty feet from the Ground.

If we imagine upon the sides of the Basis, which is perfectly square, four
equilateral triangles mutually propending, and enclining, till they all meet on
high as it were in a point (for so the top seems to them which stand below)
then shall we have a true notion of the just dimension and figure of this
Pyramid: The Perimeter of each triangle comprehending two thousand seventy nine
feet (besides the Latitude of a little Plain, or Flat on the top) and the
perimeter of the Basis Two thousand seven hundred seventy two feet: Whereby the
whole area of the Basis (to proportion it to our measures) contains four
hundred eighty thousand, two hundred forty nine square feet, or eleven English
Acres of Ground, and 1089 of 43560 parts of an Acre. A proportion so monstrous,
that if the Ancients did not attest as much, and some of them describe it to be
more, this Age would hardly be induced to give credit to it. But Herodotus
describing each side to contain eight hundred feet, the area must of necessity
be greater than that by me assigned, the sum amounting to six hundred and forty
thousand; or computing it as Diodorus Siculus does, the area will comprehend
four hundred and ninety thousand feet: And in the calculation of Pliny, if we
shall square eight hundred eighty three (which is the number allotted by him to
the measure of each side) the Product seven hundred seventy nine thousand six
hundred eighty nine, will much exceed both that of Herodotus and this of
Diodorus. Though certainly Pliny is much mistaken, in assigning the measure of
the side to be eight hundred eighty three feet, and the Basis of the Pyramid to
be but eight iugera, or Roman Acres: For if we take the Roman iugerum to
contain in length two hundred and forty feet, and in breadth one hundred and
twenty, as may be evidently proved out of Varro, and is expressly affirmed by
Quintilian, then will the superficies, or whole extention, of the iugerum be
equal to twenty eight thousand eight hundred Roman feet; with which if we
divide seven hundred seventy nine thousand six hundred eighty nine, the result
will be twenty seven Roman iugera, and 2089 of 28800 parts of an Acre.
Wherefore if we take those numbers eight hundred eighty three of Pliny to be
true, then I suppose he writ twenty eight iugera, instead of eight, or else in
his proportion of the side, to the area of the Basis he has erred.

The ascent to the top of the Pyramid is contrived in this manner. From all the
sides without we ascend by degrees; the lowermost degree is near four foot in
height, and three in breadth. This runs about the Pyramid in a level; and at
the first, when the Stones were entire, which are now somewhat decayed, made on
every side of it a long but narrow Walk. The second degree is like the first,
each Stone amounting to almost four feet in height, and three in breadth; it
retires inward from the first near three feet, and this runs about the Pyramid
in a level, as the former. In the same manner is the third row placed upon the
second, and so in order the rest, like so many Stairs rise one above another to
the top. Which ends not in a point, as Mathematical Pyramids do, but in a
little flat or square. Of this Herodotus has no where left us the dimensions,
but Henricus Stephanus, an able and deserving man, in his Comment has supplied
it for him; for he makes it to be eight orgyiae; where if we take the orgyia,
as both Hesychius and Suidas do, for the distance between the Hands extended at
length, that is for the fathom, or six feet, then should it be forty eight feet
in breadth at the top. But the truth is, Stephanus, in this particular, whilst
he corrects the Errors of Valla's Interpretation, is to be corrected himself;
for that Latitude which Herodotus assigns to the admirable Bridge below (of
which there is nothing now remaining) he has carried up, by a mistake, to the
top of the Pyramid. Diodorus Siculus comes nearer to the truth, who describes
it to be but nine feet. Pliny makes the breadth at the top to be twenty five
feet, Altitudo (I would rather read it latitudo) a cacumine pedes 25. By my
measure it is 13 feet, and 280 of 1000 parts of the English foot. Upon this
flat, if we assent to the Opinion of Proclus, it may be supposed that the
Egyptian Priests made their Observations in Astronomy; and that from hence, or
near this place, they first discovered, by the rising of Sirius, their annus
(...), or Canicularis, as also their periodus Sothiaca, or annus magnus (...),
or annus Heliacus, or annus Dei, as it is termed by Censorinus, consisting of
1400 sidereal years, in which space their Thoth Vagum, and fixum, came to have
the same beginning. That the Priests might near these Pyramids make their
observations, I no way question, this rising of the Hill being, in my Judgment,
as fit a place as any in Egypt for such a design, and so much the fitter by
the vicinity of Memphis. But that these Pyramids were designed for
Observatories, (whereas by the testimonies of the Ancients I have proved
before, that they were intended for Sepulchers) is no way to be credited upon
the single authority of Proclus. Neither can I apprehend to what purpose the
Priests with so much difficulty should ascend so high, when below with more
ease, and as much certainty, they might from their own Lodgings hewn in the
Rocks upon which the Pyramids are erected, make the same observations: For
seeing all Egypt is but as it were one continued plain, they might from these
Cliffs have, over the Plains of Egypt, as free and open a prospect of the
Heavens, as from the tops of the Pyramids themselves. And therefore Tully
writes more truly, Aegyptii, aut Babylonii, in camporum patentium aequoribus
habitantes, cum ex terra ad nihil emineret, quod contemplationi coeli officere
posset, omnem curam in siderum cognitione posuerunt. The top of this Pyramid is
covered not with Les voyages de Seign. Villamont.
one or Sands Travels.
three massy Stones, as some have imagined, but with nine, besides two which
are wanting at the Angles. The degrees by which we ascend up (as I observed in
measuring many of them) are not all of an equal depth, for some are near four
feet, others want of three, and these, the higher we ascend, do so much the
more diminish: neither is the breadth of them alike, the difference in this
kind being, as far as I could conjecture, proportionable to their depth. And
therefore a right line extended from any part of the Basis without, to the top,
will equally touch the outward angle of every degree. Of these it was
impossible for me to take an exact measure, since in such a revolution of time,
if the inner parts of the Pyramid have not lost any thing of their first
perfection, as being not exposed to the Injury of the The Air of Egypt is
confessed by the Ancients to be often full of Vapors; which appears both by the
great dews that happened after the Deluge of Nilus for several months; as also
in that I have discovered at Alexandria, in the Winter time, several obscure
Stars in the constellation of Vrsa major, not visible in England; the which
could not be discerned there, were there not a greater refraction at that time,
than with us, and consequently a greater condensation of the medium, or Air, as
the Optics demonstrate.
Air, yet the outward parts, that is these degrees or rows of Stone, have been
much wasted and impaired by both. And therefore they cannot conveniently now be
ascended, but either at the South side, or at the East angle on the North. They
are well styled by Herodotus (...), that is, little Altars, for in the form of
Altars they rise one above another to the top: And these are all made of massy
and polished Stones, hewn according to Herodotus and Diodorus, out of the
Arabian Mountains, which bound the upper part of Egypt, or that above the
Delta, on the East, as the Lybian Mountains terminate it on the West, being so
vast, that the breadth and depth of every step is one single and entire Stone.
The relation of Herodotus and Pomponius Mela, is more admirable, who make the
least Stone in this Pyramid to be thirty feet. And this I can grant in some,
yet surely it cannot be admitted in all, unless we interpret their words, that
the least Stone is thirty square, or to speak more properly, thirty cubical
feet; which dimension, or a greater, in the exterior ones, I can without any
difficulty admit. The number of these Steps is not mentioned by the Ancients,
and that caused me, and two that were with me, to be the more diligent in
computing them, because by modern Writers, and some of those too of repute,
they are described with much diversity and contrariety. The degrees, says
Bellonius, are two hundred and fifty, each of them single contains in height
forty five digits, at the top it is two paces broad; for this I take to be the
meaning of what Clusius renders thus: Abasi autem ad cacumen ipsius
supputationem facientes, comperimus circiter, 250 gradus, singuli altitudinem
habent 5 solearum calcei 9 pollicum longitudinis, in fastigio duos passus
habet. Where I conceive his passus is in the same sense to be understood here
above, as not long before he explains himself in describing the Basis below,
which in his account is 324 passus paululum extensis cruribus. Albertus
Lewenstainius reckons the Steps to be two hundred and sixty, each of them a
foot and a half in depth. Johannes Helfricus counts them to be two hundred and
thirty. Sebastianus Serlius, upon a relation of Grimano the Patriarch of
Aquileia, and afterward Cardinal, (who in his Travels in Egypt measured these
degrees) computes them to be two hundred and ten, and the height of every step
to be equally three palms and a half. It would be but lost labor to mention
the different and repugnant relations of several others; that which by
experience and by a diligent calculation I and two others found, is this, that
the number of degrees from the bottom to the top, is two hundred and seven,
though one of them in descending reckoned two hundred and eight.

Such as please, may give credit to those fabulous Traditions of some, That a
Turkish Archer standing at the top, cannot shoot beyond the bottom, but that
the Arrow will necessarily fall upon these steps. If the Turkish bow (which by
those figures which I have seen in ancient Monuments, is the same with that of
the Parthians, so dreadful to the Romans) be but as swift and strong as the
English; as surely it is much more, if we consider with what incredible force
some of them will pierce a Plank of six inches in thickness, (I speak what I
have seen) it will not seem strange, that they should carry twelve score in
length, which distance is beyond the Basis of this Pyramid.

The Description of the Inside of the first Pyramid.
Having finished the Description of the Superficies of the greater Pyramid,
with the figure and dimensions of it, as they present themselves to the view
without; I shall now look inwards, and lead the Reader into the several spaces,
and partitions within; of which if the Ancients have been silent, we must
chiefly impute it to a reverend and awful regard, mixed with Superstition, in
not presuming to enter those Chambers of Death, which Religion and Devotion had
consecrated to the rest and quiet of the Dead. Wherefore Herodotus mentions no
more, but only in general, That some secret Vaults are hewn in the Rock under
the Pyramid. Diodorus Siculus is silent, though both enlarge themselves in
other particulars less necessary. Strabo is also very concise, whose whole
Description both of this and of the second Pyramid is included in this short
expression: Forty Stadia (or Furlongs) from the City (Memphis) there is a
certain brow of an Hill, in which are many Pyramids, the Sepulchers of Kings,
three of them are memorable, two of these are accounted amongst the seven
Miracles of the World; each of these are a furlong in height; the Figure is
quadrilateral, the Altitude somewhat exceeds each side, and the one is somewhat
bigger than the other. On high, as it were in the midst, between the sides,
there is a Stone that may be removed, which being taken out, there is an
oblique (or shelving) entrance (for so I render that which by him is termed
(...)) leading to the Tomb. Pliny expresses nothing within, but only a Well
(which is still extant) of eighty six cubits in depth, to which he probably
imagines, by some secret Aqueduct, the Water of the River Nilus to be brought.
Aristides in his Oration entitled (...), upon a misinformation of the
Egyptian Priests, makes the Foundation of the Structure to have descended as
far below, as the Altitude ascends above. Of which I see no necessity, seeing
all of them are founded upon Rocks; his words are these: Now as with admiration
we behold the tops of the Pyramids, but that which is as much more under ground
opposite to it, we are ignorant of, (I speak what I have received from the
Priests.) And this is that which has been delivered to us by the Ancients,
which I was unwilling to pretermit, more out of reverence of Antiquity, than
out of any special satisfaction. The Arabian Writers, especially such as have
purposely treated of the Wonders of Egypt, have given us a more full
description of what is within these Pyramids; but that has been mixed with so
many Inventions of their own, that the truth has been darkened, and almost
quite extinguished by them. Which Traditions of theirs are little better than a
Romance; and therefore leaving these, I shall give a more true and particular
description out of mine own Experience and Observations.

On the North side ascending thirty eight feet, upon an artificial bank of
Earth, there is a square and narrow passage leading into the Pyramid, through
the mouth of which (being equidistant from the two sides of the Pyramid) we
enter as it were down the steep of an Hill, declining with an angle of twenty
six degrees. The breadth of this Entrance is exactly three feet, and 463 parts
of 1000 of the English foot; the length of it beginning from the first
declivity, which is some ten palms without, to the utmost extremity of the
Neck, or straight within, where it contracts it self almost nine feet
continued, with scarce half the depth it had at the first entrance, (though it
keep still the same breadth) is ninety two feet and an half. The Structure of
it has been the Labor of an exquisite Hand, as appears by the smoothness and
evenness of the Work, and by the close knitting of the Joints; a Property long
since observed, and commended by Diodorus, to have run through the Fabric of
the whole Body of this Pyramid. Having passed with Tapers in our Hands this
narrow Straight; though with some difficulty (for at the farther end of it we
must Serpent-like creep upon our Bellies) we land in a place somewhat larger,
and of a pretty height, but lying incomposed: Having been dug away, either by
the curiosity or avarice of some, in hope to discover an hidden Treasure; or
rather by the Command of Almamon, the deservedly renowned Calife of Babylon. By
whomsoever it were, it is not worth the enquiry, nor does the place merit
describing, but that I was unwilling to pretermit any thing, being only an
Habitation for Batts, and those so ugly, and of so large a-size, (exceeding a
foot in length) that I have not elsewhere seen the like. The length of this
obscure and broken space contains eighty nine feet, the breadth and height is
various, and not worth consideration. On the left hand of this, adjoining to
that narrow Entrance through which we passed, we climb up a steep and massy
Stone, eight or nine feet in height, where we immediately enter upon the lower
end of the first Gallery. The Pavement of this rises with a gentle acclivity,
consisting of smooth and polisht Marble, and where not smeared with Dust and
Filth, appearing of a white and alabaster color; the Sides and Roof, as Titus
Livius Burretinus, a Venetian, an ingenious young man, who accompanied me
thither, observed, was of impolish'd Stone, not so hard and compact as that on
the Pavement, but more soft and tender; the breadth almost five feet, and about
the same quantity the height, if he have not mistaken. He likewise discovered
some irregularity in the breadth, it opening a little wider in some places than
in others; but this inequality could not be discerned by the eye, but only by
measuring it with a careful Hand. By my observation with a Line, this Gallery
contained in length an hundred and ten feet. At the end of this begins the
second Gallery, a very stately piece of work, and not inferior, either in
respect of the curiosity of Art, or richness of Materials, to the most
sumptuous and magnificent Buildings. It is divided from the former by a Wall,
through which stooping, we passed in a square hole, much about the same bigness
as that by which we entered into the Pyramid but of no considerable length. This
narrow passage lies level, not rising with an acclivity, as does the Pavement
below and Roof above of both these Galleries. At the end of it, on the right
hand, is the Well mentioned by Pliny, the which is circular, and not square, as
the Arabian Writers describe: The diameter of it exceeds three feet, the Sides
are lined with white Marble, and the descent into it is by fastening the Hands
and Feet, in little open spaces, cut in the Sides within, opposite and
answerable to one another in a perpendicular. In the same manner are almost all
the Wells and Passages into the Cisterns at Alexandria contrived, without
Stairs or Windings, but only with inlets and square holes on each side within,
by which, using the Feet and Hands, one may with ease descend. Many of these
Cisterns are with open and double Arches, the lowermost Arch being supported by
a row of speckled and Thebaick Marble Pillars, upon the top of which stands a
second row, bearing the upper and higher Arch: The Walls within are covered
with a sort of Plaster for the color white, but of so durable a substance,
that neither by time, nor by the water is it yet corrupted and impaired. But I
return from the Cisterns and Wells there to this in the Pyramid, which in
Pliny's Calculation is eighty six cubits in depth, and it may be was the
passage to those secret Vaults mentioned, but not described by Herodotus, that
were hewn out of the natural Rock, over which this Pyramid is erected. By my
measure sounding it with a line, it contains twenty feet in depth. The reason
of the difference between Pliny's Observation and mine, I suppose to be this,
That since his time it has almost been dammed up, and choked with Rubbage,
which I plainly discovered at the bottom, by throwing down some combustible
matter set on fire. Leaving the Well, and going on straight upon a level, the
distance of fifteen feet, we entered another square passage, opening against the
former, and of the same bigness. The Stones are very massy, and exquisitely
joynted, I know not whether of that glistering and speckled Marble I mentioned
in the Columns, of the Cisterns at Alexandria. This leads (running in length
upon a level an hundred and ten feet) into an arched Vault or little Chamber,
which by reason it was of a Grave-like smell, and half full of Rubbage,
occasioned my lesser stay. This Chamber stands East and West* the length of it
is less than twenty feet, the breadth about seventeen, and the height less than
fifteen. The Walls are entire, and plastered over with Lime; the Roof is
covered with large smooth Stones, not lying flat, but shelving and meeting
above in a kind of Arch, or rather an Angle. On the East side of this Room, in
the middle of it, there seems to have been a passage leading to some other
place, whither this way the Priests went into the hollow of that huge Sphynx,
as Strabo and Pliny term it, or Androsphynx, as Herodotus calls such kinds
(being by Pliny's calculation 102 feet in compass about the Head, in height 62,
in length 143, and by my observation made of one entire Stone) which stands not
far distant without the Pyramid, South-east of it, or into any other private
Retirement, I cannot determine; and it may be too this served for no such
purpose, but rather as a Theca or Nicchio, as the Italians speak, wherein some
Idol might be placed; or else for a piece of Ornament (for it is made of
polished Stone) in the Architecture of those times, which ours may no more
understand than they do the reason of the rest of those strange proportions
that appear in the Passages and inner Rooms of this Pyramid. Returning back the
same way we came, as soon as we are out of this narrow and square passage, we
climb over it, and going straight on, in the trace of the second Gallery, upon
a shelving pavement (like that of the first) rising with an angle of twenty six
degrees, we at length come to another partition. The length of the Gallery from
the Well below to this partition above, is an hundred fifty and four feet; but
if we measure the pavement of the floor, it is somewhat less, by reason of a
little vacuity (some fifteen feet in length) as we described before, between
the Well and the square hole we climbed over. And here to reassume some part of
that, which has been spoken, if we consider the narrow entrance at the mouth
of the Pyramid, by which we descend, and the length of the first and second
Galleries, by which we ascend, all of them lying as it were in the same
continued line, and leading to the middle of the Pyramid, we may easily
apprehend a reason of that strange Echo within, of four or five Voices,
mentioned by Plutarch, in his Fourth Book, De placitis philosophorum; or rather
of a long continued Sound, as I found by experience, discharging a Musket at
the entrance; for the sound being shut in, and carried in those close and
smooth passages, like as in so many Pipes or Trunks, finding no issue out,
reflects upon it self, and causes a confused noise and circulation of the Air,
which by degrees vanishes, as the motion of it ceases. This Gallery or
Corridore (or whatsoever else I may call it) is built of white and polished
Marble, the which is very evenly cut in spacious Squares or Tables. Of such
Materials as is the Pavement, such is the Roof, and such are the Side-walls
that flank it; the coagmentation, or knitting of the Joints, is so close, that
they are scarce discernable by a curious Eye; and that which adds a grace to
the whole Structure, though it makes the passage the more slippery and
difficult, is the acclivity and rising of the Ascent. The height of this
Gallery is 26 feet, the breadth is 6 feet, and 870 parts of the foot divided
into a thousand of which three feet, and 435 of 1000 parts of a foot, are to be
allowed for the way, in the midst; which is set, and bounded on both sides with
two banks (like Benches) of sleek and polished Stone; each of these has one
foot, 717 of 1000 parts of a foot in breadth, and as much in depth. Upon the
top of these Benches, near the Angle, where they close, and join with the Wall,
are little spaces, cut in right angled parallel Figures, set on each side
opposite to one another, intended, no question, for some other end than
Ornament. In the casting and ranging of the Marbles in both the Side-walls,
there is one piece of Architecture, in my judgment very graceful, and that is,
that all the courses or ranges, which are but seven, (so great are those
Stones) do set, and flag over one another about three inches, the bottom of the
uppermost course oversetting the higher part of the second, and the lower part
of this overflagging the top of the third, and so in order the rest, as they
descend.

Having passed this Gallery, we enter another square hole, of the same
dimensions with the former, which brings us into two anticamerette, as the
Italians would call them, or Anticlosets, (give me leave in so unusual a
structure to frame some unusual terms) lined with a rich and speckled kind of
Thebaick Marble. The first of these has the dimensions almost equal to the
second; the second is thus proportioned, the Area is level, the Figure of it is
oblong, the one side containing seven feet, the other three and an half, the
height is ten feet. On the East and West sides, within two feet and an half of
the top, which is somewhat larger than the bottom, are three Cavities, or
little Seats, in this manner,



This inner Anticloset is separated from the former, by a Stone of red speckled
Marble, which hangs in two Mortices (like the leaf of a Sluice) between two
Walls, more than three feet above the pavement, and wanting two of the Roof.
Out of this Closet we enter another square hole, over which are five lines cut
parallel and perpendicular.

Besides these, I have not observed any other Sculptures or Engravings in the
whole Pyramid, and therefore it may justly be wondered whence the Arabians
borrowed those vain Traditions I before related, That all Sciences are
inscribed within in Hieroglyphics. And as justly it may be questioned, upon
what authority Dio, or his Epitomizer Xiphilinus, reports that Cornelius Gallus
(whom Strabo more truly names Aelius Gallus, with whom he traveled into
Egypt, as a friend and companion) engraved in the Pyramids his Victories,
unless we understand some other Pyramids not now existent. This square passage
is of the same wideness and dimensions as the rest, and is in length near nine
feet, (being all of Thebaick Marble, most exquisitely cut) which lands us at
the North end of a very sumptuous and well proportioned Room. The distance from
the end of the second Gallery to this Entry, running upon the same level, is
twenty four feet. This rich and spacious Chamber, in which Art may seem to have
contended with Nature, the curious Work being not inferior to the rich
Materials, stands as it were in the Heart and Center of the Pyramid,
equidistant from all the Sides, and almost in the midst between the Basis and
the top. The Floor, the Sides, the Roof of it are all made of vast and
exquisite Tables of Thebaick Marble, which if they were not veiled, and
obscured by the steam of Tapers, would appear glistering and shining. From the
top of it descending to the bottom, there are but six ranges of Stone, all
which being respectively sized to an equal height, very gracefully in one and
the same altitude, run round the Room. The Stones which cover this place are of
a strange and stupendous length, like so many huge beams lying flat, and
traversing the Room, and withal supporting the infinite mass and weight of the
Pyramid above. Of these there are nine which cover the Roof, two of them are
less by half in breadth than the rest, the one at the East end, the other at
the West. The length of this These proportions of the Chamber, and those which
follow of the length and breadth of the hollow part of the tomb, were taken by
me with as much exactness as it was possible to do; which I did so much the
more diligently, as judging th^s to be the fittest place for the fixing of
measures for Posterity. A thing which has been much desired by learned men,
but the manner how it might be exactly done, has been thought of by none. I am
of opinion, that as this Pyramid has stood three thousand years almost, and is
no whit decayed within, so it may continue many thousand years longer: and
therefore that aftertimes measuring these places by me assigned, may hereby
not only find out the just dimensions of the English foot, but also the feet of
several Nations in these times, which in my Travels abroad I have taken from
the Originals, and have compared them at home with the English Standard. Had
some of the ancient Mathematicians thought of this way, these times would not
have been so much perplexed, in discovering the measures of the Hebrews,
Babylonians, Egyptians, Greeks, and other Nations. Such parts as the English
foot contains a thousand, the Roman foot on Cossutia's Monument commonly called
by Writers Pes Colotianus) contains nine hundred sixty seven. The Paris foot a
thousand sixty eight. The Spanish foot nine hundred and twenty. The Vene^ian
foot 1062. The Rhinland foot, or that of Snellius, 1033. The Bracio at Florence
1913. The Bracio at Naples 2100. The Deran at Cairo 1824. The greater Turkish
Dike at Constantinople, 2200.
Chamber on the South side, most accurately taken at the Joint or Line, where
the first and second row of Stones meet, is thirty four English feet, and 300
and 80 parts of the foot divided into a thousand (that is 34 feet and 380 of
1000 parts of a foot.) The breadth of the West side at the Joint or Line, where
the first and second row of Stones meet, is seventeen feet, and an hundred and
ninety parts of the foot divided into a thousand (that is 17 feet, and 190 of
1000 parts of a foot.) The height is nineteen feet and an half.

Within this glorious Room (for so I may justly call it) as within some
consecrated Oratory, stands the Monument of Cheops, or Chemnis, of one piece of
Marble, hollow within, and uncovered at the top, and sounding like a Bell.
Which I mention not as any Rarity, either in Nature or in Art; (for I have
observed the like sound in other Tombs of As appears by a fair and ancient
Monument brought from Smyrna to my very worthy Friend Mr. Rolt Esquire which stands
in his Park at Woolwich.
Marble cut hollow like this) but because I find modern Authors to take notice
of it as a Wonder. Some write, that the Body has been removed hence, whereas
Diodorus has left above sixteen hundred years since, a memorable passage
concerning Chemmis the Builder of this Pyramid, and Cephren the Founder of the
next adjoining. Although (says he) these Kings intended these for their
Sepulchers, yet it happened that neither of them were buried there: For the
people being exasperated against them, by reason of the toilsomness of these
works, and for their Cruelty and Oppression threatened to tear in pieces their
dead bodies, and with Ignominy to throw them out of their Sepulchers. Wherefore
both of them dying, comma^nded their Friends privately to bury them in an
obscure place. This Monument, in respect of the nature and quality of the
Stone, is the same with which the whole Room is lined; as by breaking a little
Fragment of it, I plainly discovered, being a speckled kind of Marble, with
black, and white, and red spots, as it were equally mixed, which some Writers
call Thebaick Marble; though I conceive it to be that sort of Porphyry which
Pliny calls Leucosticto^ and describes thus: Rubet Porphyrites in eadem
Aegypto, Plin. lib. 36 cap. 7.
ex eo candidis intervenientibus punctis Leucostictos appellatur. Quantislibet
molibus caedendis sufficient lapidicinae. Of this kind of Marble there were,
and still are, an infinite quantity of Columns in Egypt; but a Venetian, a man
very curious, who accompanied me thither, imagined that this sort of Marble
came from Mount Which may also be confirmed by Bellonius's Observations, who
describing the Rock, out of which, upon Moses's striking it, there gushed out
waters, makes it to be such aspeckled kind o^ T^baick Marble: Eit une gross^
pierre massive droicte de mesmegrain and de la couleur, ba que.
Sinai, where he had lived amongst the Rocks, which he affirmed to be speckled
with party colors, of black, and white, and red, like this: And to confirm his
Assertion, he alleged, that he had seen a great column left imperfect amongst
the Cliffs, almost as big as that huge and admirable The compass of the Scapus
of this Column at Alexandria near the Torus is 24 English feet: The compass of
the Scapus of those at Rome is fifteen English feet, and three inches. By these
proportions, and by those Rules which are expressed in Vitruvius, and in other
Books of Architecture, the ingenious Reader may compute the true dimensions of
those before the Pantheon, and of this at Alexandria, being in my calculation
the most magnificent Column that ever was made of one entire Stone.
Corinthian Pillar standing to the South of Alexandria, which by my measure is
near four times as big as any of those vast Corinthian Pillars in the Porticus
before the Pantheon at Rome, all which are of the same colored Marble with
this Monument, and so are all the Obelisks with Hieroglyphics, both in Rome
and Alexandria. Which Opinion of his does well correspond with the Tradition of
Aristides, who reports, that in Arabia there is a Quarry of excellent Porphyry.
The figure of this Tomb without is like an Altar, or more nearly to express it,
like two cubes finely set together and hollowed within: It is cut smooth and
plain, without any sculpture and engraving, or any relevy and imbossment. The
exterior Superficies of it contains in length seven feet three inches and an
half. Bellonius makes it twelve feet, and Monsieur de Breves nine; but both of
them have exceeded. In depth it is three feet three inches and three quarters,
and is the same in breadth. The hollow part within is in length, on the West
side, six feet, and four hundred eighty eight parts of the English foot divided
into a thousand parts (that Six feet 488. 1000.
is 6 feet and 488 of 1000 parts of a foot) in breadth, at the North end two
feet, and two hundred and eighteen parts of the foot divided into a thousand
parts, (that Two feet 218.1000. In the ^eiteration of these numbers, if any
shall be offended, either with the novelty or tediousne^s of expressing them so
often. I must justify my self by the example of V^ug ^g, Nephew to Timurlane
the great (for so is his Name, and not Tamerlane) and Emperor of the Moguls or
Tartars, (whom we term amiss the Tartars) for I find in his Astronomical Tables
(the most accurate of any in the East) made about 200 years since, the same
course observed by him, when he writes of the Grecian, Arabian, Persian, and
Gelalean Epocha's, as also of those of Ca^aea and Turkistan. He expresses the
numbers at large, as I have done, then in figures, such as we call Arabian,
because we first learned these from them; but the Arabians themselves fetch
them higher, acknowledging that they received this useful invention from the
Indians, and therefore from their Authors they name them Indian Figures.
Lastly, he renders them again in particular Tables. Which manner I judge worthy
the imitation, in all such numbers as are radical, and of more than ordinary
use: For if they be only twice expressed, if any difference shall happen by the
neglect of Scribes* or Printers, it may often so fall out, that we shall not
know which to make choice of; whereas if they be thrice expressed, it will be a
rare chance, but that two of them will agree; which two we may generally
presume to be the truth.
is 2 feet, and 218 of 1000 parts of a foot.) The depth is 2 feet and 860 of
1000 parts of the English foot. A narrow space, yet large enough to contain a
most potent and dreadful Monarch, being dead, to whom living all Egypt was too
straight and narrow a circuit. By these dimensions, and by such other
observations, as have been taken from me by several embalmed Bodies in Egypt,
we may conclude, that there is no decay in Nature; (though the Question is as
old as Homer) but that the men of this Age are of the same stature, they were
near three thousand years ago; notwithstanding St. Augustine and others are of
a different opinion. Quis jam aevo ist'o non minor sais Parentibus nascitur?
says Solinus.

It may justly be questioned how this Monument could be brought hither, since
it is an impossibility that by those narrow passages before described, it
should have entered. Wherefore we must imagine, that by some machina it was
raised, and conveyed up without, before this Oratory or Chamber was finished,
and the Roof closed. The position of it is thus, it stands exactly in the
Meridian, North and South, and it as it were equidistant from all sides of the
Chamber, except the East, from whence it is doubly remoter than from the West.
Under it I found a little hollow space to have been dug away, and a large Stone
in the Pavement removed, at the angle next adjoining to it; which Sands
erroneously imagines to be a passage into some other compartiment, dug away, no
doubt, by the Avarice of some, who might not improbably conjecture an hidden
Treasure to be reposited there.

The ingenious Reader will excuse my curiosity, if before I conclude my
description of this Pyramid, I pretermit not any thing within, of how light a
consequence soever. This made me take notice of two inlets or spaces, in the
South and North sides of this Chamber, just opposite to one another; that on
the North was in breadth 700 of 1000 parts of the English foot, in depth 400 of
1000 parts; evenly cut, and running in a straight line six feet, and farther,
into the thickness of the Wall. That on the South is larger and somewhat round,
not so long as the former; and by the blackness within seems to have been a
Receptacle, for the burning of Lamps. T. Livius Burretinus would gladly have
believed that it had been an Hearth for one of those eternal Lamps, such as
have been found in Tulliola's Tomb in Italy, and, if Cambden be not
misinformed, in England, dedicated to the Urns and Ashes of the Dead; but I
imagine the Invention not to be so ancient as this Pyramid.

A Description of the second Pyramid.
FROM this Pyramid we went to the second, being scarce distant the flight of an
Arrow from it; where by the way I observed, on the West side of the first, the
Ruins of a pile of Building, all of square and polished Stone; such as Pliny
calls Basaltes, and describes to be ferrei coloris, and duritiae, of an Iron
color and hardness. Formerly it may be some Habitation of the Priests, or some
Monument of the Dead. To the right hand of this, tending to the South, stands
this second Pyramid, of which besides the Miracle, the Ancient and modern
Writers, have delivered little. Herodotus relates, that Cephren, in imitation
of his Brother Cheops, built this, but that he fell short in respect of the
magnitude: For (says he) we have measured them. It were to be wished, for
fuller satisfaction of the Reader, he had expressed the quantity, and also the
manner how he took his measure. He adds, It has no subterraneous Structures,
neither is the Nilus by a Channel derived into it, as in the former. Diodorus
somewhat more particularly describes it thus: That for the Architecture, it is
like unto the former, but much inferior to it in respect of magnitude: Each
side of the Basis contains a stadium in length. That is, to comment on his
words, of Grecian feet six hundred, of Roman six hundred twenty five. So that
by this computation, each side should want an hundred Grecian feet of the
former Pyramid. Pliny makes the difference to be greater, for assigning eight
hundred eighty three feet to the former, he allows to the side of the Basis of
this, but seven hundred thirty seven. By my observation, the Stones are of
color white, nothing so great, and vast, as those of the first and fairest
Pyramid; the sides rise not with degrees like that, but are smooth and equal,
the whole Fabric (except where it is opposed to the South) seeming very
entire, free from any deformed Ruptures or Breaches. The height of it, taken by
as deliberate a conjecture as I could make, (which it was easy to do, by
reason of the nearness of this and the former, being both upon the same Plain)
is not inferior to it; and therefore Strabo has rightly judged them to be
equal. The sides also of the Basis of both are alike, as, besides the authority
of Strabo, the Venetian Doctor assured me, who measured it with a line. There
is no Entry leading into it, and therefore what may be within, whither such
spaces and compartiments, as I observed in the former, or whether different, or
none, I must leave to every man's private conjecture, and to the discovery of
aftertimes.

This is bounded on the North and West sides, with two very stately and
elaborate pieces, which I do not so much admire, as that by all Writers they
have been pretermitted. About thirty feet in depth, and more than a thousand
and four hundred in length, out of the hard Rock these Buildings have been cut
in a perpendicular, and squared by the Chessel, as I suppose, for Lodgings of
the Priests. They run along at a convenient distance, parallel to the two sides
we mentioned of this Pyramid, meeting in a right angle, and making a very fair
and graceful Prospect. The entrance into them is by square openings, hewn out
of the Rock, much of the same bigness with those I described in the first
Pyramid. Whether these were symbolical (as the Theology of the Egyptians
consisted much in mysterious figures) and the depressure and lowns of these
were to teach the Priests humility, and the squareness and evenness of them an
uniform and regular deportment in their actions, I leave to such as have
written of their Hieroglyphics to determine. The hollow space within of them
all, is somewhat like to a square and well-proportion'd Chamber, covered and
arched above with the natural Rock: In most of which, (as I remember) there was
a passage opening into some other compartiment, which the rubbage and darkness
hindered me from viewing. On the North side without I observed a line, and only
one, engraven with sacred and Egyptian Characters, such as are mentioned by
Herodotus and Diodorus, to have been used by the Priests, and were different
from the vulgar characters in civil Affairs: In which former kind Justin Martyr
makes Moses to have been skilful, as the Scripture makes him to have been
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. These ran not downwards, as the
Chinese in our times write, but were continued in a straight line, as we use to
write: And are to be read (if any understand those mysterious Sculptures) by
proceeding from the right hand to the left, and as it were imitating the motion
and course of the Planets: For so Herodotus expressly informs us, That the
Graecians write and cast account, going from the left hand to the right, the
Egyptians from the right hand to the left. And this is that which in an
obscure expression is also intimated by Pomponius Mela: Aegyptii] suis literis
perverse utuntur. A manner practiced by the Hebrews, Chaldaeans, and Syrians,
to this day, and not unlikely to have been borrowed by them from the
Egyptians, to whom the Chaldaeans also owed their first Skill in Astrology, as
the Graecians did their knowledge in Geometry, the former being attested by
Diodorus, and the latter confessed by Proclus, and other Graecians. And surely
in imitation of these, or of the Jews, the Arabians neighboring upon both,
have taken up this manner of writing, and continued it to our times,
communicating it also by their Conquests, to the Persians and Turks.

A Description of the third Pyramid, out of Mr. Belon and Greaves.
AMongst many modern Writers, none deserves to be placed before Bellonius, or
rather before P. Gillius. For Thuanus makes the other to have been a
plagiarius, and to have published in his own name the observations of P.
Gillius, a man very curious, and inquisitive after Truth, as appears by his
Typography of Constantinople, and his Bosphorus Thracius, to whom Bellonius
served as an Amanuensis: The third Pyramid is much less than the former two,
but is a third part greater than that which is at Rome, near the Mons
teitaceus, as you pass to St. Paul's in the Ostian way. It is still perfect, and
no more corrupted, than as if it had been newly built: For it is made of a kind
of Marble, called Basaltes, or Aethiopick Marble, harder than Iron it self.

It will be in vain to repeat the Traditions and Descriptions of several
others; all which by a kind of Confederacy agree in the same Tale for the
substance, only differing in some circumstances: So that I shrewdly suspect
that Diodorus has borrowed most of his Relation from Herodotus; and Strabo and
Pliny from Diodorus, or from them both; and the more learned Neotericks from
them all. For else how can it be imagined they should so constantly agree in
that, which if my Eyes and Memory extremely fail me not, is most evidently
false? And therefore I have a strong jealousy, that they never came near this
third Pyramid; but that they did, as I have observed all Travelers in my time
in Egypt to do, fill themselves so full, and as it were so surfeit with the
sight of the greater and fairer Pyramid, that they had no Appetite to be
Spectators of the rest, where they should only see the same Miracle (for the
Pyramids are all of the same figure) the farther they went, decreasing, and
presented as it were in a less Volume. Or if they did view this, it was quasi
per transennam, very perfunctorily and slightly; and that through a false and
colored Glass; for they have mistaken both in the quality of the Stone and
color of the Pyramid. I begin with Herodotus, who by a notable piece of
Forgetfulness, if it be not a (...) in the Copies, makes the dimensions of each
of the sides, in the Basis of this, to be three hundred feet, and yet want but
twenty of the first Pyramid, to which he assigned before eight hundred feet; an
Impossibility in Arithmetic; and therefore it will be no Presumption to
correct the place, and instead of (...), to write (...). I know not how to
palliate or excuse his other Error, where he makes this Pyramid to be built as
far as to the middle of it, with Aethiopick Marble. If this sort of Marble be
ferrei coloris, as it is described by Pliny, and granted by Diodorus and
Strabo, both of them expressing the color to be black, and the latter bringing
it from the remotest Mountains of Aethiopia, where the Marble has the same
Tincture and Color with the Inhabitants, then can this relation of Herodotus
no way be admitted; for the whole Pyramid seems to be of clear and white Stone,
somewhat choicer and brighter than that in either of the two other Pyramids.
And therefore I wonder that Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny, and amongst latter
Authors Bellonius, Gillius, and several others, should have all followed
Herodotus, when with a little pains and circumspection, they might have
reformed his, and their own error. It may perhaps be alleged in their
defense, that they mean the Buildings within are erected with black and
Aethiopick Marble; and yet if this be granted, since there is no entrance
leading into this, no more than is into the second Pyramid, what may be within
depends upon the uncertainty of Tradition or Conjecture, both which are very
fallible; though it cannot be denied, but that close by this, on the East side
of it, there are the ruins of a Pile of Building, with a sad and dusky color,
much like that we described in passing to the second Pyramid, which might be
the ground and occasion of this Error. I cannot excuse the Ancients, but
Bellonius or Gillius (for it is no matter which of them owns the relation, when
both of them have erred) are far more inexcusable, because it might have been
expected from them what Livy supposes, Novi semper scriptores, aut in rebus
certius aliquid allaturos se, aut scribendi art rudem vetustatem superaturos
credunt. Whereas these on the contrary have depraved what has been in this
particular with Truth delivered by the Ancients; for whereas Herodotus and
Diodorus equal the side of the basis to three hundred feet, and Pliny extends
it to three hundred sixty three, these make it only a third part greater than
the Pyramid at Rome of C. Caestius, near the Mons testaceus. So that either
they have much enlarged that at Rome, or shrunk and contracted this; for the
Pyramid at Rome, exactly measured on that side which stands within the City, is
completely seventy eight feet English in breadth, to which if we add a third
part of it, the result will be an hundred and four; which should be equal to
this Egyptian Pyramid in the notion and acception of Bellonius.

Of the rest of the Pyramids in the Lybian Desert.
I Have done with these three Pyramids, each of them being very remarkable, and
the two first reckoned amongst the Miracles of the World. The rest in the
Lybian Desert lying scattered here and there, are (excepting one of them) but
lesser Copies, and as it were Models of these: And therefore I shall neither
much trouble my self nor the Reader with the description of them. Though to
speak the truth, did not the three first, standing so near together, obscure
the luster of the rest, which lie far scattered, some of them were very
considerable. And therefore I cannot but tax the omission of the Ancients, and
the inadvertency of all modern Writers and Travelers, who with too much
supineness have neglected the description of one of them; which in my Judgment
is as worthy of memory, and as near a Miracle as any of those three which I
have mentioned. And this stands from these South and by West, at twenty miles
distance, more within the Sandy Desert, upon a rocky level like these, and not
far from the Village whence we enter the Mummies. This as the Venetian Doctor
assured me, and as I could judge by conjecture at a distance, has the same
dimensions that the first and fairest of these has, Graduations or Assents
without, and of the same color like that, (but more decayed, especially at the
top) and an entrance into it on the North side, which is barred up within; and
therefore whatsoever is spoken of the first, in respect of the exterior
figure, is applicable to this. Bellonius exceeds in his computation of the
number of them, who thus writes: Above an hundred others are seen dispersed up
and down in that Plain. I could not discover 20. And long since Ion Almatoug in
his Book of the Miracles of Egypt, reckons them to be but 18: There are in the
West side no more famous buildings than the Pyramids, the number of them is 18;
of these there are three in that part which is opposite to Fostat ( or Cairo.)

In what manner the Pyramids were built.
WE had ended our Discourse of the Pyramids, but that I find one scruple touched
upon by Herodotus, Diodorus, and Pliny, which is worth the discussion, as a
point of some concernment in Architecture; and that is, in what manner these
Pyramids were built, and with what Art and Contrivance the Stones, especially
those vast ones in the first were conveyed up. Herodotus, who first raised the
Doubt, gives this solution: They carried up the rest of the Stones with little
Engines made of Wood, raising them from the ground upon the first row: When the
Stone was lodged upon this row, it was put into another Engine, standing upon
the first step, from thence it was conveyed to the second row by another: For
so many rows and orders of Steps as there were, so many Engines were there; or
else they removed the Engine, which was one, and easy to be carried, to every
particular row, as often as they moved a Stone. We will relate that which is
spoken of either part; therefore those in the Pyramid were first made, which
were the highest, then by degrees the rest, last of all, those which are
nearest to the Ground, and are the lowest. The first part of this Solution of
Herodotus is full of difficulty. How in the erecting and placing of so many
machinae, charged with such massy Stones, and those continually passing over
the lower degrees, could it be avoided, but that they must either unsettle
them, or endanger the breaking of some Portions of them; which mutilations
would have been like Scars in the Face of so magnificent a Building? His second
Answer is the sounder; but I conceive the Text to be imperfect. Diodorus has
another Fancy: The Stones (says he) at a great distance off were prepared in
Arabia, and they report, that by the help of Aggeres (Engines not being then
invented) the Work was erected. And that which begets the greatest admiration
is, that so vast a Structure was perfected in that place, which is all about
replenished with Sand, where there appears not any Relics either of the
Aggeres, or of the hewing and polishing of the Stones: So that it seems not
piecemeal by the Industry of Men, but altogether, and at once, the whole pile,
as it were by some God, was erected in the midst of the Sands. Some of the
Egyptians relate Wonders of it, and endeavor to obtrude I know not what
Fables, namely, That these Aggeres consisting of Salt and Nitre, were dissolved
by letting in the River, which wholly consumed them without the labor of
Hands, leaving this Structure (entire.) But the truth of the business is not
so, but that those multitudes of men which were employed in raising the
Aggeres, carried them away unto their former places: For as they report three
hundred and sixty thousand men were employed in these Offices, and the whole
Work was scarce finished in the space of twenty years. Pliny partly agrees with
him, and partly gives another Answer: The question is, by what means the Cement
is conveyed up to such a height (he rather might have questioned how those vast
Stones were conveyed up) some say, that banks of Nitre and Salt were made up as
the Work rose, which being finished, they were washed away by the River
(Nilus.) Others imagine that Bridges were made with Brick; which, the Work
being ended, were distributed into private Houses: for they conceive that the
Nilus being much lower, could not come to wash them (away.) If I may assume the
liberty of a Traveller, I imagine that they were erected, neither as Herodotus
describes, nor as Diodorus reports, nor as Pliny relates, but that first they
made a large and spacious Tower in the midst reaching to the top; to the sides
of this Tower, I conceive, the rest of the Building to have been applied, piece
after piece, like so many Buttresses or Supporters, still lessening in height,
till at last they came to the lowermost degree. A difficult piece of building
taken in the best, and easiest projection; and therefore it is no wonder, if it
were not often imitated by the Ancients, and no where expressed or commended by
the great Master of Architecture Vitruvius. Yet surely if we judge of things by
the events, and if we reflect upon the intention of Monuments, which are raised
by the Living, to perpetuate the Memory of the Dead, then is this as
commendable a way as any. And therefore we see at Rome, that though by the
revolution of so many Ages the Mausoleum of Augustus be almost decayed, and the
Septizonium of Severus be utterly lost, both intended for lasting and stately
Sepulchers, yet the Pyramid of C. Caestius stands fair and almost entire; which
is no more to be compared, either for the vastness of the Stones or the whole
bulk and fabric of it, with these, than are the limbs and body of a Dwarf to
the dimensions of a Giant, or some large Colossus.

I have done with the Work, but the Artizans deserve not to be pretermitted;
concerning whom the observation of Diodorus is as true, as it is boldly
delivered by him. It is confessed, that these Works (speaking of the Pyramids)
far excel the rest in Egypt, not only in the massiness of the Structures, and
in the Expenses, but also in the Industry (and Skill) of the Artificers. The
Egyptians think the Architects are more to be admired than the Kings, who were
at the expense; for they by their abilities and study, these by their Wealth
received by Inheritance, and by the labors of others erected them.

The Conclusion.
AND thus much of the Sciography, or of the artificial and architectonical
part; I shall shut up all with one observation in Nature for the recreation of
the Reader, recited by Strabo in these words. We ought not to omit one of the
strange things seen by us at the Pyramids: Some heaps of Stone, being Fragments
hewn off lie before the Pyramids, amongst these are found little Stones, some
in the similitude and bigness of lentils, some as grains of Barley, which appear
half unscaled: They report these are some Relics of the Provisions, which were
given to the Workmen, and have been petrified; which seems probable enough.

These, if there were ever any such, are either consumed by time, or scattered
by the Winds, or buried with those Tempests of Sand, to which the Deserts are
perpetually exposed: But Diodorus, who not long preceded him, was not so
curious as to deliver this Relation. And were not Strabo a Writer of much
gravity and judgment, I should suspect that these petrified grains (though I
know such petrefactions to be no impossibility in Nature; for I have seen at
Venice the Bones and Flesh of a man, and the whole Head entirely transmuted
into Stone; and at Rome clear Conduit-water, by long standing in Aquaeducts,
has been turned into perfect Alabaster) are like those Loafs of Bread, which
are reported to be found by the Red Sea converted into Stone, and by the
Inhabitants supposed to be some of the Bread the Israelites left behind them,
when they passed over for fear of Pharaoh. They are sold at Grand Cairo
handsomely made up in the manner of the Bread of these times, which is enough to
discover the imposture; for the Scripture makes them to have been unleavened
Cakes: And they baked unleavened Cakes of the dough which they brought forth
out of Egypt. Or else Strabo's relation may be like the Tradition of the
rising of dead men's Bones every Sands in his Travels writes That they are seen
to rise o^ Good Friday. A Frenchman at Grand Cairo, who had been present at the
resurrection, showed me an arm which he brought from thence: the flesh
shriveled, and dried like that of the Mummies. He observed the Miracle to have
been always behind him: once casually looking back, he discovered some Bones,
carried privately by an Egyptian under his Vest, whereby he understood the
Mystery.
year in Egypt; a thing superstitiously believed by the Christians, and by the
Priests either out of ignorance or policy, maintained, as an Argument of the
Resurrection. The possibility and truth of it, Metrophanes the Patriarch of
Alexandria thought (but very illogically) might be proved out of the Prophet
Esaias; And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men that have
transgressed against me, for their worm shall not dye, neither shall their fire
be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.

But I have digressed too far; the confutation of these, and the description of
the Mummies, or of the rest of the Egyptian Sepulchers (for from thence comes
the matter of this their supposed Resurrection) and that infinite mass and
variety of Hieroglyphics, which I have either seen there, or bought or
transcribed elsewhere, may be the An Argument intended by me, and for which I
made a collection of several Antiquities, in my Travels abroad, but these (and
would only these) have unfortunately perished at home amidst the sad
distractions of the time.
Argument of another Discourse.

Of the Pyramids, Sphynx, Mummies, etc. By Father Vansleb, and others.
IN my first Voyage to Egypt I had seen the Pyramids, but having another
opportunity offered to me, I went thither to view again these rare Monuments of
Antiquity, to see whether I might not observe something more than I have taken
notice of in my first Relation.

On the 27th of April I went thither, in the company of the French Consul, and
many other Merchants, and with almost all his Household: We had with us three
Janissaries to guard us, so that we were in all about fifty Cavaliers well
mounted upon Asses, taking with us Provisions sufficient for three days.

When we were come to the Pyramids, and had observed exactly every thing, I
took notice that the place where they stood was a Burying-place. This is plain
to any that see the place; and doubtless it was the Burying-place of the old
City Memphis; for all the Arabian Histories inform us, that this City stood
where the Pyramids now are, over against old Cairo.

2. I took notice, that all the Pyramids have an entrance that leads to a low
Alley, which is very long, and at the end is a Chamber, where the ancient
Egyptians did place the Bodies of those Persons for whom the Pyramids were
built. This Entrance is not to be seen in every one of the Pyramids, because
the Wind has stopped them with Sand. I saw upon some of them some Hieroglyphick
Characters, but I had not time to write them out.

3. I took notice, that all the Pyramids were built in very good order; and
that each of the three greatest were at the head of ten lesser, which are not
well to be distinguished, because of the heaps of Sand: One may yet imagine, to
see the place, that in former Ages there have been here one hundred Pyramids
little and great.

4. I took notice, that they are all built upon an even Rock covered over with
white Sand; so that it is very probable that the Stones have been taken from
the place, and not brought from far, as some Travelers imagine, and old
Writers, for the greatest is nothing but a Rock cut as a Pyramid, and covered
over with a Wall of Stone.

5. I took notice, that of all the Stones of the greatest there is scarce one
entire, but either worn out with the Weather and Time, or broken by some other
Accident; so that though one may ascend on all sides to the top, yet not in all
places with the same ease.

6. I have taken notice, that none of the Pyramids are alike, or perfectly
square, but that all have two sides longer than the others. I intended to
measure the greatest; for that purpose I had with me a String of about thirty
Land-yards; but because the Winds have heaped about it Mountains of Sand, I
could not possibly draw a line strait from one angle to the other.

On the 28th day of December I went to see the Pyramids the third time, with
some Strangers. In our way we were mightily troubled with a very thick Mist,
which lasted till ten a clock in the morning; and we found a great deal of Mud
in the Trenches and Ditches, which was not yet dry since the retreat of the
River, so that we were carried over upon the Moors backs that were with us.

At this time I went up to the top of the great Pyramid, and I observed, as at
the first, that the place where the Pyramids stand is a pure Rock, covered over
with white Sand, which appears sufficiently by the Ditches and Caves round
about the Pyramids cut in the Rock.

2. The Rock is to be seen, upon which stands the greatest Pyramid, by a hole
at one of the Angles, between the East and the North sides.

3. The Pyramids are not built with Marble, as some say, but with a white Sandy
Stone very hard.

4. The greatest has but two hundred and six steps; and though Monsieur Th.
says that it has two hundred and eight, this proceeds from his not taking
notice that two steps are broken into four.

5. On the top of the greatest Pyramid there was anciently a Statue or Colosse.
This appears, because it is not sharp as the others, but plain: And there are
yet to be seen great Pits, which were to keep fast the Colosse from falling.

At present there is nothing on the top but many Letters of the Names of
Persons of all Nations, who have left them to witness that they had been there.
There is no sign of the Play at Mancala, which a Coptie told me was there
imprinted in the days of the Pharaohs.

6. The Stones of the biggest Pyramid are not equal, for some of the undermost
are four foot high, some three foot and an half, and five foot long. The Stones
of the middle are three foot and five inches high, and the uppermost Stones are
but two foot high, and three and an half long.

7. The sides of the Pyramids are not equal; for in the greatest it is visible,
and so in the others, that the North side is longer than that which stretches
from East to West.

8. In all the Pyramids there are very deep Wells cut in the Rock, square; as I
have seen in more than ten.

On the 26th day of June I went the fourth time to see the Pyramids, in the
company of Monsieur Sabatery Vice-Consul of Alexandria.

In the passage to old Cairo, on the other side of the River, I took notice of
one thing very remarkable in its Channel; the Water was perfectly green, as a
Cake covered over with green Grass. This was the first time that I saw it of
this color; which caused me to ask of the Boatmen what this green color was:
They told me, that the River Nilus did then putrify, that it had continued so
fifteen days, and would be so five more. Some of them said, that there was none
could remember to have seen the River so green as that year, 1672.

To return again to the Pyramids, I went up this time to the top of the highest
Pyramid, I entered into the Chamber, but saw no new thing which could cause me
either to change or add to my former Observations. It is needless to speak of
its Dimensions, seeing so many Travelers have already published them, as
Monsieur Thevenot in his Levant Travels.

From the Pyramids we went to take a view of the Caves that are adjoining.
There are many, all cut in the side of a Rock; their outsides are out of order,
without any proportion, but their inside very equal and polished. In every one
there is a deep Well square, cut in the Rock, where the Egyptians did put the
Body of that person, for whom the Cave was made; for it was their Sepulcher.
The Walls of many of these Caves are full of Hieroglyphick Figures, carved in
the Rock. In some they are but small, in others very lively. In one I numbered
sixteen great Figures, that represented eight Men and eight Women, holding one
another by the hands, with many other small Figures or Shapes, on both sides.

The great Pyramid is 520 foot high upon a Base of 682 foot square: The
Platform at top is 16 foot and two thirds square, and is composed of 12 large
Stones, yet this from below appears to the Eye a sharp point. A strong man
cannot throw a Stone from the top, so as to make it fall beyond the Steps or
Basis of the Pyramid.

Of the Sphynx.
WE saw next the Sphynx, near the Pyramids, on the East side. On the top stands
the Head of a Woman of an extraordinary bigness and height. The Arabians call
it Abulhon, or Abul-houl.

Pliny says, that it was the Tomb of King Amasis. I imagine that this Sphynx
was a Sepulcher, but we cannot understand that it belonged to Amasis; for all
the Records and Traditions of this Sphynx are lost.

That it is a Tomb may appear, first by its situation, which is in a place
which was in former Ages a Burying-place; and near the Pyramids and mortuary
Caves. Secondly, it is to be imagined that it was a Sepulcher from its
building. In the hinder part is a Cave under ground, of a bigness answerable to
that of the Head, into which I have looked by an entrance that leads into it,
so that it could serve to no other purpose, but to keep a dead Corpse.

Some Franks have, out of an excess of curiosity, climbed up by the means of
Rope-Ladders, to see whether this Head was hollow or massy, and they have found
it to be hollow, but filled at present with Sand.

The Neck is worn out round about, which causes men to imagine that it will
not be able to support the weight of that great Head.

Of the Wells where the Mummies are.
WHen we had fully viewed this Sphynx, we took the Road that leads to Saccara,
a Village, at four hours traveling from the Pyramids, and about eight from
Cairo toward the South. The Burying-place of the Mummies is near adjoining to
this Village.

And because it was very late, and that we were to agree with the Arabians of
the Village about the Price, the Number and Quality of the Wells, that they
were to open for us, we stopped there all night, and the next morning we took
with us twelve Horsemen, to guard us, of the Arabians; with them we went to
this Burying-place, where the Mummies are in Caves under ground.

The first Well that we saw was that of Birds embalmed: When we had caused the
Sand that stops the Wells mouth to be removed, through which we were to go
down, and from thence to enter into the Cave, we caused our selves to be let
down one after another, by tying a double Rope about our middles. As soon as we
were at the bottom, and that every one had lighted his Taper, and several
Matches that we had brought, we went into the Cave creeping upon our Bellies.
The Cave is an Alley in the Rock, about the height of a Man, and about the
breadth of a Perch, and of an extraordinary length. We found there many other
Alleys on both hands, cut in the Rock, where were many large Stores, full of
earthen Pots, covered over with Coverings of the same substance. In these Pots
were embalmed Birds of all kinds, every Bird in its own Pot. And as I thought
that the remembrance of a Custom so ancient and superstitious was worthy of our
notice, I brought about half a dozen with me, some I have sent to the Kings
Library. We found also some Hens-Eggs empty, but entire, without any ill smell
or crack.

When we had viewed sufficiently this Cave, we returned up in the same manner
that we went down, and found another opened, called the Virgin, which is that
was never opened before. According to our Orders to the Arabians, Monsieur
Tiger and the others went down in the same manner as into the former, I alone
could not follow them, because of a Quartan Fever, which had troubled me
fourteen months, and took me at that very moment; but I lost nothing by that;
for these Gentlemen told me at their return, that they found an horrid stench,
and a close air, that put out their Cand^es and their Matches also, every time
that they endeavored to light them, which caused them to get up again without
entering further. They told me that this Well was much deeper than the former.

We caused another to be opened, which was not a Virgin Well, as the former,
because it was not so deep. I ventured into that, notwithstanding my
indisposition.

We found there two Mummies, a great one and a little one of a Child, both in
Coffins, the greatest was of Marble, upon the Covering it had the likeness of
the person for whom it was made. We caused these Biers or Coffins to be opened,
but found nothing extraordinary, therefore we made no account of them, and left
them where we found them.

We went down next into a Cave, called, The Church, which was not so deep as
the former. It was nothing but a long Alley under ground, well plastered, and
painted all over with Hieroglyphick Figures round about the sides. It was
almost all full of Sand, which caused us to creep along upon our Knees.

If the Reader desires a Prospect, and a Description of this ancient
Burying-place, let him think upon a boundless Champain, even and covered over
with Sand, where neither Trees, nor Grass, nor Houses, nor any such thing is to
be seen; let him represent to himself the Superficies of this large Field full
of dry Bones of Arms, Legs, Feet, and Heads; full of scattered pieces of Wood
of Coffins, of little Idols, some of Wood, others of Plaster embolish'd with
green, and marked before and behind with Hieroglyphick Letters. These Idols the
Arabians have taken from the broken Mummies, which they have cast away. In some
places you may see great Tombstones, full of Ciphers and enigmatical Figures,
that represent something of Chemistry, and of other Sciences and Mysteries, and
full of strange characters that are no Hieroglyphics. Whilst I was looking
upon this Spectacle, the Arabians brought me two, whereof I caused the Copies
to be drawn as soon as I was returned to Cairo.

You have here a Description of some Relics of the Grandeur and Vanity of the
ancient Egyptians, and the mournful signs of man's Mortality. The first sight
is able to dash a person newly arrived out of countenance, and to affright him:
I mean the sight of so many Bones all scattered up and down, one would think
that here has been a grievous fight.

In this Champain or Field here are fifteen Pyramids; three are of an
extraordinary bigness, which seem to have been favored by Time; for they
appear entire without much decay. Here is also an entrance into every one, that
shows a long Alley which leads to a Chamber; Monsieur de Tiger went into that
which is farthest from the Village, commonly named The Pyramid of Rodope, where
he found nothing in the Chamber.

This Pyramid is built as a Pavillion. The Franks say, that Rodope, a famous
Strumpet, caused it to be built with the Money that she had gotten with the
loss of her Honor. But this is doubtless an Error, if it be true what Pliny
says, That the Pyramid of Rodope was but small, though very beautiful;
therefore this which is one of the greatest in all Egypt, cannot be that of
Rodope. These are the words of Pliny; Supremumque illud ne quis Regum opes
miretur, minimam extitisse laudatissimam a Rodope meretricula factam. Aesopi
fabularum Philosophi conserva quondam, and contubernalis haec fuit, majore
miraculo tantas opes meretricio esse conquisitas quaestu.

For the others that are in the same Field, time has almost worn them out; for
they are but so many heaps of Sand, which have scarce the shape and shadow of
what they have been heretofore.

Here is also a square heap of very great hewn Stones. The Arabians name it
Mastabet Faraoun; for they say, that when the Pharaohs, Kings of Egypt, were to
declare and give a new Law to the People, they stood on the top of this heap.
But these are the Traditions of the poor Arabians that have nothing of
certainty.

To return to the Wells of the Mummies; As soon as the Franks have visited any,
the Wind, or the Arabians fill the Entry again full of Sand, to get a little
Money at the second opening: This is the greatest gain of these Wretches. The
least they take for to open a Virgin-Well is thirty Piasters, because they that
make the Well to be opened, have the liberty to carry away all the Curiosities
and Mummies that he finds there.

A Description of an entire Body of a Mummy.
THis was a long and large Body, in a very thick Coffin of Wood, shut close on
all hands; the Timber was not at all rotten, and we found it to be
Sycamore-wood, which in Egypt they call Pharaoh's Fig Tree, that does not rot
so soon as other Wood. Upon the Coffin the Face of him that was within it, was
cut in embossed Work. Some Coffins there are also of Stone, with the Face of
the person within, cut in Boss, and Hieroglyphics all along the length of it.
There are two of these Stones in the House of Monsieur Fouquet at St. Mande,
and I had two of them also, of which one was broken at Alexandria, and the
other I brought home with me very whole, which weighs betwixt seven and eight
hundred weight. Some of these Coffins are made of several pieces of Cloth
pasted together, which are as strong as the wooden ones. I have one of this
kind in my Closet, made of above forty Cloths glewed or pasted together in
thickness, which are not in the least rotten; it is covered all over with Idols
and Hieroglyphics, painted on a very thin Plaster, with which the outside
Cloth is daubed over, but it is a little spoiled, the Plaster in some places
being rubbed off. Among these Figures there is a Compartment at the lower end,
two inches broad, and a foot long, being painted cross-ways over the Coffin,
wherein may be seen the manner how the ancient Egyptians embalmed dead Bodies.
In the middle of this Compartment there is a long Table shaped like a Lion, on
the back of which the Body that is to be embalmed is laid at length, and hard
by there is a Man with a Knife in his Hand opening the Body; this man has on a
Vizard Mask, shaped like the Beak of a Sparrow-hawk, which (without doubt) was
the Custom of their Embalmers, who made use of that kind of Mask, that they
might not breath in the Corruption that might evaporate from the dead Bodies,
as the Physicians of Italy do at present, who in time of a Plague never stir
abroad without a Mask of this kind, in the long Nose of which they put
Perfumes; though I make no doubt, but the Mask I speak of is the Head of
Osiris, which the Egyptians represented with the Head of a Sparrow-hawk, as
they did Anubis with the Head of a Dog, the Nile with a Lions Head, etc But as
a surer mark that it is an embalming, there are four Vessels without Handles
upon the aforesaid Table, which could be nothing else but the Vessels wherein
the necessary Drugs were kept not only for the embalming, as Balm, Cedria, etc.
but also for the wrapping up and incrustation of the Body, as Bitumen and
others: By the sides of the Table there are several Persons standing and
sitting in diverse postures. Within this Coffin is the figure of a naked Maid
with her Arms stretched out.

But to return to my first Discourse. This Wooden Coffin I mentioned being
broken to pieces with Hatchets, we found an entire Body in it, which lay in
this manner. The Face was covered (as commonly all the rest are) with a kind of
Headpiece of Cloth fitted with Plaster, on which the Countenance of that
person was represented in Gold, and when we took off the Helmet, we found
nothing of the Face remaining, which is commonly reduced to Ashes; I believe it
is, because it will not admit of gumming so well as the other parts of the
Body. However, I brought to Paris the Head of a Mummy whole and entire, but it
is all covered with Fillets of Cloth, so neatly fitted, that they hinder not,
but one may see the shape of the Eyes, Nose, and Mouth. The rest of the Body
was swathed with little Bands of Cloth very neatly made, but wrapped about with
so many casts and turnings, that I believe there were above a thousand Else in
it; and certainly it is so rare a way of Swathing and Binding, that I think it
cannot be imitated at present, as many Chyrurgions have acknowledged to me.
Along the Breast and Belly there was a Band of Cloth three good Fingers broad,
and a large foot and a half long, it was fastened to the other Bands, and upon
it were several Hieroglyphics done in Gold. I took this Writing, and folded
it, that I might the more conveniently carry it up with me. I hoped to have
found Idols in that Coffin, knowing that they interred many with their Dead,
either of Stone, Copper, or Green Earth, as I have several that have been found
in these Bodies, but finding none, I thought there might be some within his
Body; for after they had emboweled them, they often enclosed Idols within their
Bellies; for that end I had it broken up, but we could find nothing. I
considered then that Balm which is now quite lost, it is black, hard, and
shines like Pitch, having much such a smell, but more pleasant, that kept
Bodies entire, and (I believe) the Sand contributed not a little thereto, for
even in the greatest Deserts of Arabia, sometimes the dead Bodies of Men and
Dogs are found entire, who falling asleep, and staying behind the Caravans, are
covered over with an ocean of Sand driven by the high Winds, in which the
Bodies being buried, are by the dryness and salt that is in the Sand, which
drys up all the humidity of them, preserved entire, and are afterward found,
when another Wind blowing, carries off the Sand again. Many think that the
Bodies so dried, are the true Mummy; it is a mistake, and that which Merchants
bring into Christendom, to be used in Medicine, is the Mummy we first
described. Near the Room I went into there were several others full of Bodies,
but seeing the entries into them were full of Sand, I called to them above to
pull me up again with the same Rope, with which I was let down, being much
dissatisfied with my Moors, who had opened so sorry a Pit for me. When I was
got up I looked upon my Cloth, whereon were Characters of Gold, but was much
vexed to see that all the Letters disappeared, and that by my own fault,
because I had folded it together when it was very humid, and so all the Gold
and Paint stuck to the opposite sides; whereas I should have brought it up open
and dried it in the Sun. But I have others that are finer, which are only a
little spoiled in the bringing. I brought with me also some Hands of Mummies,
which are as entire at present as ever they were. I had also the good fortune
to buy upon the place some Idols, of the Moors, who come and sell them to the
Franks in the City. These Idols are of several sorts, and in many postures,
there are of them of Copper, of several sorts of Stone, and several sorts of
Earth also; at least, I have some of all these kinds, all which I am very sure
have been taken out of Mummies, and cannot be said to be counterfeit, for
besides that, they have not the Art to do it, they sell them at so easy a
rate, that the very Materials are worth more. This is all I could observe of
the Pyramids and Mummies: And hence it appears, that the ancient Egyptians
spent more in their Tombs than during their whole Lives; and one reason they
gave for that was, That their Houses were only for living a short time in, and
their Tombs the Palaces that were to be inhabited by their Souls for many Ages.
Not far from these Mummies, toward the Nile, are some remains of a large Town,
which was Memphis, the Inhabitants whereof were buried there, the Ancients
never burying their Dead within Towns, for fear of infecting the Air, none but
Christians (who mind not that) bury their Dead any where. Now, to prove that
these great Ruins are the remains of Memphis, Pliny affirms it, when he says,
that the Pyramids are betwixt the Delta of Egypt and the City of Memphis on the
side of Africa. At length we returned by old Caire, and saw all that is
curious, or worth being seen in it.

A Letter from Dublin, concerning the Porphyry Pillars in Egypt. By Dr.
Huntingdon.
SIR,
YOU engage me after a very undeniable manner, as I perceive by the minutes of
your Philosophical Society, to send you some account of the Porphyry Pillars in
Egypt; and though I could have satisfied your Curiosity much better in this
matter, had you thought of it when I was amongst my Papers in Oxford, yet
rather than hazard your good Opinion, or give the least pretense of disrespect
to your worthy Company, for whose Persons and Designs I have so just an esteem
and veneration: I here send not what is fit for me to write, or you to read, but
what I can remember upon this subject.

Nor do I intend to speak concerning the nature or composition of Stones in
general, or of Porphyry more particularly, but merely as to matter of Fact, so
far chiefly as it fell under my own cognizance, i. e. if you please, rather
like an Historian than a Philosopher.

In the first place then, I think it may be taken for granted, that there is no
such Quarry, or Rock of Stone rather, in all the lower parts of Egypt; for so
far as the Nile overflows is perfect Soil. A Sample whereof I hope you still
retain, and let me entreat you to be very exact in weighing it this year, that
you may be sure whether it be heavier in the time of the inundation (as is
generally believed) than before or after: And when, and in what proportion it
increases.

The Boundaries of this overflow (which are never ten miles from the Channel,
that I saw, generally scarce half of it, and in some places but a mile or two,
(the Delta still excepted, which is universally covered, all but the North side
to the Sea, and a little to the East for some miles above Damiata) are rising
Hills of Sand, beyond which is perfect Desert, upon the Africa side, the
Lybian. [Higher South I have been told, there are Rocks nearer the River, and
in some places streighten it] but under those Sands is a yielding Stone, not
much harder than Chalk, though not so white, and very easily managed, as at the
Mummies, deep spacious Vaults, which were the old Repositories for the Dead.
And the like also may be said of those Cells or Sepulchers which are hewn
purely out of the Rocky Earth three quarters of a mile on the South of
Alexandria. Albeit nearer the Sea there are Stones of a harder kind, and with
which they build; but by their mouldering away, as appears by the Remains of
Houses within the Walls of the City, it is plain they cannot endure the Weather,
which is sufficiently corroding there. The Iron which once plated their thick
wooden Gates being mostly eaten away, and the deep Characters upon the sides of
these very Porphyry Pillars exceedingly defaced. Indeed about Memphis, i. e. by
the Pyramids, they have a milder Air, and the Hieroglyphics cut in those
Stones will last well enough, till they shall be removed into a rougher: But
then they will crizle and scale, as I found by sad experience. For having procured
four Stones, the best marked with those figures of Antiquity I could meet with,
and sent them down to Alexandria, in order to their transportation for England,
I found them, upon my second Voyage into Egypt, very much injured, being put
into the Custom-house-yard (where they lie still embargo'd) by the Aga, who
demanded an intolerable Sum for liberty to ship them, as you may remember I
told you the Story.

But yet farther in the Country there are Mountains of harder Stone: In the
Nitrian, now the Desert of St. Macarius, and not far from the Lake where the
Latroon or true Nitre incrustates upon the top of the Water, there are many,
and some of them not utterly unlike Porphyry. That which nearest resembles its
color, though not its Consistence, is the vein that produces the Eagle-stone,
of which there are many in the Bahr Batama, a great Sandy Valley: But these
Stones are of a different complexion from Porphyry, as you may perceive by
those I sent you, which also will assist your conjectures of their original.

However, I cannot pronounce that there is no Porphyry hereabouts; for in the
chief Monastery of the four now remaining (of 366, as many as are days in the
longest year) dedicated to the Blessed Virgin; the two Stones which secure
their entrance are of the like, if not the very same substance; which I more
particularly observed upon the account of their ingenious contrivance; for
these poor People, lying otherwise at the mercy of the roving Arabs, with these
two Millstones (for that is their make) thus make good their Gate against them,
(or rather their passage) into which they run them, and then drive a great
wooden Wedge between them on the inside, which so fastens them, that they
cannot be loosed, but upon the inside neither. And of such a sort of Porphyry
is the noted Sphynx (a mighty head and shoulders 110 feet in compass) yet
standing by the Northern Pyramids.

I have indeed been told of the place upon Mount Sinai, whence this Porphyry
came, but so they show the very Rock where the two excellent double rows of
Pillars in the Church of Bethlehem were hewn; though I went away satisfied that
'twas a quite different sort of Stone. Another tells of a Pillar of the same
make yet lying there; and if this be certain, you need seek no further. Albeit,
I must tell you, that the Stones brought thence with the representation of a
Buck (it must needs be called) upon them, some of which you had, though
reddish, are of a much finer, and more even texture.

Wansleben writes of a great many, more Southerly; but I know him too well to
believe all that he says for Gospel. And a more sober man, Father Carlo
Francisco d' Orleans, now Superior of the Capucines at Cairo, who went 300
leagues up the Nile in the year 69, told me of many Temples, Statues, and
Pillars at that distance; tho I cannot be sure he said there were any of
Porphyry. But since 'twas in Thebais, why may we not suppose them of that
black, white, and red speckled Thebaick Marble, famous in the World, and
wherewith the lesser Pyramid perhaps was crusted, yet to be seen upon the
ground about it, and when polished looks finely.

Those which I have my self seen, are one of them at the Matarea, three or four
miles East of Grand Cairo, and two at Alexandria, just within the Wall upon the
North side of the City; (for Pompey's Pillar, as they call it) half a mile
without the Gate to the South, is quite of another make and matter: One of
these is thrown down and broken into pieces, but was of the same dimensions for
breadth and thickness with the other. The Franks call them Aguglia's, the
English particularly Cleopatra's Needles, but the Inhabitants content
themselves with the general name of Pillars. They have no Basis or Pedestals
above ground; and if they never had, they must needs be very deep in the Earth.
The Draughts I here send you will excuse all farther Description. One of them
was very well taken by Monsieur Brute a French Druggerman, the other by a Dutch
Painter, who, you will see, has but little commended his Art.

If you have a fancy, upon the sight of them, to sift out the Hieroglyphick
character with which they are engraven, perhaps you will find it to be the
aboriginal Egyptian Letter, long since worn out of common use in the Country,
as the Samaritan (so it is now generally called) was amongst the Jews; and that
it bears proportion with the China (now in use) where each note represents a
word, or rather an entire signification. And moreover, that it is wrought the
same way too, from the top to the bottom; as you have seen in the Board I
brought from a Door in the Village Succara (which is next to the Mummies) the
largest piece of Egyptian Writing, perhaps, at this day in Europe. I confess
that in the Vaults or Priests Chambers cut out of the Rock, close by the second
Pyramid, the whole Walls are inscribed therewith, but I speak of an Original.
And if all that is there written were but exactly copied, it might be then
lawful to hope, that the Language so long since dead and buried in the House of
Bondage, might have its resurrection in the Land of Liberty.

That such vast Monuments might be removed from place to place, is difficult
indeed, but not impossible. And if one Archimedes (as Athenaeus preserves the
Story for us) could lanch the vast Ship of Hiero, which all the Strength of
Syracuse was not able to bring to Sea; what might not many great Masters in the
same Art perform, and upon their own Dunghill too? for I may call Egypt the
Mother of the Mathematics.

Besides, some of these Mountains are near the Red Sea, and Suss from Cairo but
two or three days, from Nile less: And how possible it is to convey mighty
weights by Water, let the Obelisks at Rome declare; which were all of them
brought from this very Country: And that such things may be done by Land too,
though not by every one, is plain enough, because we see they have been done.
At Baalbec, which is 14 hours from Damascus, (for thence I went, accompanied
with Mr. Anth. Balam and Mr. Jo. Verney, both now in England, whom I thought
fit to name for my Compurgators, if you should question the credit of Story:)
There is a Stone about 66 foot long on the North side of the Castle-wall, and
two more of 60 each: And I believe we saw the way they traveled, having left
one of their Company, though not quite so big in the Road, as a Monument
thereof to this very day.

If you have got the piece of this Aguglia, (for I have nothing here) you will
thereby best discern its color and composition. It Is something more lively
than the Porphyry of St. John's Font (for by that name it is known) at Ephesus,
much more vivid than those four tall square Pillars at Tadmore (in its middle
age Palmyra) which are each of them but of, I think, one piece, whilst all the
rest, exceeding many, of another sort of Stone, are of several pieces, and
round. If you will attribute the clearness of their Complexion in part to the Air,
which corrodes them especially upon the North and East; I impose not upon the
liberty of your Reason.

If the Ichnography of them (which I desire you to reserve for me) wont excuse
me from any farther description, I beg your pardon that I have said thus much,
and hazarded my Judgment to demonstrate my Affection, how much I am, and
endeavor to be,

Your faithful Friend, And humble Servant, R.H.


The Cutts of these Pillars are not prefixed to this Paper, because engraven and
published elsewhere. See Philosoph. Trans. N. 178. p. 1252.
Monsieur Cuper, in his Letter to l' Abbe Nicaise, informs the World, that he
had received Letters from Aleppo, which say, that some English Gentlemen, out
of curiosity, going to visit the Ruins of Palmyra, had found 400 Marble
Columns, of a sort of Porphyry, and also observed some Temples, yet entire with
Tombs, Monuments, Greek and Latin Inscriptions, of all which he hopes to get
Copies. Journal des Seavans, No. 25. An. 1692.

A Journey from Grand Caire to Mecha.
THE day that the Emir-Adge parted from Caire, he encamped in Tents, close by
the City, and a few days after he encamped at the Birque, which is a great Pond
about twelve miles from Caire, near to which they encamp. This place is the
Rendesvouz of all the Caravans. The Emir-Adge parted from thence with the whole
Caravan, Wednesday the eighth of August, it being the Custom for the Caravan of
Caire to set out Seven and fifty days after the beginning of the Ramadam, that
so it may be there punctually at the time. It is very pretty to see them
encamped in the Nightime, because of the infinite number of Lamps that are in
the Tents and Pavilions. Next day, the ninth of August, the Caravan of the
Magrebins parted also from the Birque, and there all of Barbary, who intend to
make the Journey, meet, and make a distinct Caravan; which depends not on the
Emir-Adge o^ Caire, but have a Chief of their own. That Caravan never sets out,
but a day after the Caravan of Caire; they travel commonly by night, and rest
in the day time, as all other Caravans do that go to other places, that so they
may avoid the heat, which is almost insupportable; and when the Moon does not
shine, there are men who carry Links before the Caravan. In all Caravans, the
Camels are tied tail to tail, so that let them but go, and there is no trouble
of leading them.

Here I Will give the Reader an account, how many Stages there are betwixt Caire
and Mecha, how many days they stay in them, how many hours traveling there is
betwixt them, and at what Stages the Waters are sweet or bitter, all along the
way. This little Itinerary I had from a Prince of Tunis, who made that Journey
whilst I was at Caire. From Caire to the Birque it is reckoned four hours
Journey; there is fresh Water there. From the Birque to Misana, that is to say,
Cistern, ten hours; no Water there. From Misana to Kalaat Aadgeroud, which is
to say, the Castle of Sand-pits, twelve hours and an half; there is bitter
Water there. From the Castle of Aadgeroud to Navatir, seven hours and an half;
no Water there. From Navatir to Rastagara, ten hours; no Water there, and the
way bad. From Rastagara to Kalaat el Nahhal, that is to say, the Castle of
Palms, fifteen hours; there they stay a day, and have fresh Water. From the
Castle of Nahhal to Abiar Alaina, fourteen hours; only bitter Water there. From
Abiar Alaina to Sath el Akaba, that is to say the Plain of the Hill, fifteen
hours; no Water there. From Sath el Akaba to Kalaat el Akaba, that is to say,
the Castle of the Hill, (that is upon the side of the Red Sea) sixteen hours,
there they stay two days and an half, the way is very bad, but they have fresh
Water. From the Castle el Akaba to Dar el Hhamar, six hours and an half; no
Water there, ( Dar el Hhamar signifies Asses Back, and it is like the Mountain
in Italy, where there is an Inn called Scarga l' asino.) From Dar el Hhamar to
Scharafe Benigateie, fourteen hours; no Water there. From Scharafe Benigateie
to Magare Chouaib, that is to say, the Grott of Jethro, fourteen hours; fresh
Water there: that is the Country of the Midionites. From Magare Chouaib to
Eyoun el Kased, fourteen hours and an half; fresh Water there: It was in that
place where Jethro's Daughters going to water their Cattle, and the Shepherds
offering to hinder them, Moses protected and defended them against those who
would have hindered them to draw Water. From Eyoun el Kaseb to Kalaat el Moilah
which is by the Seaside, fifteen hours; there they rest two days and an half,
and have fresh Water. From Kalaat el Moilah to Castle, eleven hours; bitter
Water there. From Castle to Kalaat Ezlem, fifteen hours and an half; bitter
Water there. From Kalaat Ezlem to Istanbel antir, fourteen hours; fresh Water
there. From Istanbel antir to Kalaat el Voudge, that is to say, the Castle of
the Face, thirteen hours and an half; fresh Water there. From Kalaat el Voudge
to Ekre, sixteen hours: no Water there but what is bitter. From Ekre to Hank
Krue, that is to say, Gulf, twelve hours and an half: no Water there. From Hank
Krue (going to Hhawre, they enter into the Territory of Mecha) to Hhawre, it is
thirteen hours: only bitter Water there. From Hhawre to Nabte, fifteen hours:
fresh Water there. From thence come the Nabathean Arabs, Eurus ad auroram
Nabathaeaque regna recessit. From Nabte to Hazire, thirteen hours and an half:
no Water there. From Hazire to Yanbouh, that is to say, Fountain, fourteen
hours and an half: there they stay two days and an half, and have fresh Water.
From Yanbouh to Soucaife, thirteen hours: no Water there. From Soucaif to Beder
Hunein, that is to say, the Moon of Hunein, eight hours: fresh Water there.
Hunein was a man that showed the Moon in his Well. From Beder Hunein to Ssbil
el Mouhsin, that is to say, the way of Benefaction or Benefit, fourteen hours:
fresh Water there: Rabii is a Sacred place, that is to say, not to be entered
into, without being well prepared and purged from all Sin. Hence it is that
there are two places which are called Haramein, Sacred places, to wit, Mecha
and Medina, that is to say, which are two Holy places, where one should take
heed not to set his foot, unless he be well washed from all Sin. From Rabii to
Kawdire, fifteen hours, no Water there. From Kawdire to Bir el fan, fourteen
hours, fresh Water there. From Bir el fan to Vadi fatima, fourteen hours: fresh
Water there. From Vadi fatima to Mecha six hours.

Of the Aga sent to meet the Caravan upon their Return.
ABout six weeks after the setting out of the Caravan of Caire, when they know
that it is ready to return from Mecha, an Aga goes from Caire to guard the
fresh Provisions that the People of the Country send to their Friends and
Relations in the Caravan, every one sending according to their abilities and
Friendship, all which are well sealed up, and delivered to those they belong
unto. For this effect the Aga has many Camels with him, and gets considerably
by the Caravan, which he meets half way. This year it returned on Tuesday the
thirteenth of November, and encamped at the Birque, where the Caravan of the
Magrebins arrived the day before. Several come to Caire the same day, and their
Friends go as far as the Birque to welcome them; whereupon meeting, they kiss
again and again five or six times, and all who know them salute and kiss them
in the same manner; and indeed, for some days after there is nothing to be seen
in the City, but people kissing one another, or lamenting their Relations who
died in the Journey, Men, Women, and Children, who howl and make fearful
gestures, when they hear the news from the first of the Caravan, whom they
meet. These Pilgrims are forty five days in going, and as much in coming back
to Caire, besides some days they stay there; but they make but easy Journeys,
it being impossible that so great a body should march fast, for they must often
stop to load the Camels whose loads have fallen off, to unload those that fall
or die, or to bury their Dead, and a thousand such other accidents; and when
one Camel stops, all the rest must wait. They travel commonly (as I said) in
the nightime with Links, that they may avoid the heat. In this Journey they
find but little Water, and that exceeding bad too: As for fresh Provisions,
they find none, and eat only what they carry along with them: But the worst
thing they meet with in the Journey, are certain hot Winds, which stifle the
Breath, and in a short time kill a great many people. The Prince of Tunis told
me, that in one day several hundreds died of that Wind, and that he himself was
much afraid that he should have been one of the number. In fine, in this
Expedition there died six thousand, what of Fatigue, Thirst, and these hot
Winds. In that Journey People are to be seen riding on Camels, and singing
Verses of the Alcoran, who suddenly fall down dead. Those who return with life
are so altered and extenuated, that they can hardly be known; and nevertheless
vast numbers of People from all parts yearly perform that Pilgrimage, and there
passes not a year wherein Women and little Children do not make it. They who
have performed that Journey are called Adgi, that is to say, Pilgrims, meaning
though only the Pilgrimage of the Kiaabe, and they are much respected by all as
long as they live, and highly credited. The Emir-Adge gains much by this
Journey, for the Goods of all that dye belong to him, besides a vast deal of
other profits that he makes on several occasions; and it is thought, that every
Expedition he gets above an hundred thousand Piastres, but this year he got
above three hundred thousand, for many People died. The greatest Prerogative of
this Office is, that during the whole Expedition he is absolute Master of the
Field, and administers Justice as he thinks fit.

Having in my hands an exact Description of Mecha, and considering that few or
no Travelers have spoken of it with any certainty, I thought it would not be
amiss to add it, and make a particular Chapter thereof.

Of Mecha and Medina.
MEcha is seven and thirty days Journey from Caire, and all over Deserts; it is
a days Journey from the Red Sea; the Port of it is called Gidde, which is a
little Town, wherein are two Castles on the two sides of the Port, one on each
side, and the Turks say that Eve lies buried there: They show her Sepulcher,
which is in length 38 or 40 steps of a man's walk, and has no other Ornament
but a Stone at each end.

Mecha is about the bigness of Marseilles, in the middle whereof is the Kiaabe
or Beytullah, that is to say, the House of God, which (the Turks say) was first
built by the Patriarch Abraham. This House is about fifteen foot in length,
eleven or twelve in breadth, and about five fathom high. The Threshold of the
Door is as high from the ground as a man can reach his Hand, being within
filled up even with the Threshold. The Door is about a fathom and an half high,
and a fathom wide, and is in the corner to the left hand, when one faces the
House. This Door is of beaten Silver, and opens with two leaves; they go up to
it by a Ladder supported by four Wheels, two whereof are fastened to the lower
end of the Ladder, and the other two to two wooden Posts about the middle of
it, by means of which Wheels the Ladder is run to the Wall, when any body is to
enter into the Beytullah.

This House has a flat Roof, supported by three Pillars of an Octogone Figure,
which are of Aloes-wood, as big as the Body of a man, and about three fathom
and a half long; they are of one entire piece each, and yet run in a straight
Line the length of the Building, which is hung with red and white Stuff, having
here and there these words upon them, La Illah Illallah, Mouhammed Resoul allah.

At the same corner where the Door is (but on the other side by the Wall) is
the black Stone, which they call Hadgiar Asuad, and is had in veneration by
them, because (as they say) Abraham stood upon it when he built that House, and
that it served him for a Scaffold, to the end he might make no hole in the
Wall, it rising higher or lower as he pleased, and being for that purpose
brought him by the Angel Gabriel.

There is a Court about this House, which the Turks call Haram, and it is
encompassed with Walls, with three rows of Pillars, and Arches on the inside of
it. The four Sects of Mahometanism have their places of Prayer in this Court,
which are the Hanifi, Chafii, Maliki, and Hambeli, each in one of the four
parts of the Court, with their Faces turned always toward the Beitullah, or
House of God.

This House is begirt with two Belts of Gold, one below, and the other on high.
On one side of the Terrass that covers the Beitullah there is a Spout of beaten
Gold, about a fathom long, that jets out, to carry off the Rainwater that
falls upon the Terrass.

The same House is covered on the outside with Hangings of black Silk, which
is a kind of Damask, and every year there are new ones sent from Caire, at the
charges of the Grand Signior.

Ten days Journey from Mecha, upon the Road to Damascus, is the City of Medina,
three days Journey from the Red Sea: The Port of it is called Iambo, which is a
little Town of the same shape and bigness as Gidde.

Medina is about half as big as Mecha, but it has a Suburbs as big as the Town
it self: Much about the middle of that Town there is a Mosch, in a corner
whereof is the Sepulcher of Mahomet, covered in the same manner as the
Monuments of the Turkish Emperors are at Constantinople. The Sepulcher is in a
little Tower, or round Building, covered with a Dome, which the Turks call
Turbe. This Building is quite open, from the middle up to the Dome, and all
round it there is a little Gallery, of which the outside Wall has several
Windows with Silver Grates to them, and the inside Wall, which is that of the
little Tower, is adorned with a great number of precious Stones, at that place
which answers to the head of the Tomb. There are rich things there also, of an
inestimable value, sent by the Mohammedan Kings, during so many Ages, which are
fastened within this Gallery, all round the said Turret. Among others, at the
place which answers to the head of the Tomb, there is a great Diamond, half as
long as ones Forefinger, and two Fingers broad, over which is the Diamond
which Sultan Osman, the Son of Sultan Ashmet, sent thither, and is equal to
that which the Ottoman Emperors wear on their Finger. These two Diamonds were
heretofore but one, which Sultan Osman caused to be sawed in two in the middle.
Lower down there is a Half Moon of Gold, set with Diamonds of great worth.

The Pilgrims see not Mahomet's Tomb, because that Turret wherein it is
enclosed has no Windows, being only open above, as has been said; but such as
make any stay at Medina have liberty and leisure to enter into the Turbe, and
see it, when there is no clutter of Strangers there, that is to say, three or
four months after the departure of the Pilgrims, who see no more but the
aforesaid Gallery, and the Riches that are within it, through the Silver Grates
of the Windows, which we mentioned before. Those then who enter into the Turbe,
see that the Tomb hangs not in the Air, as many have falsely written, and (which
is more) never did hang so, but is upon the flat Ground raised and covered like
the Tombs of Turkish Emperors and Bashaws.

The Turbe is hung all round with Hangings of red and white Silk, like Damask,
which cover all the Wall, except at the place where the great Diamonds are, for
there they are tucked aside, that the Diamonds may not be covered. Round all
these Hangings are the aforementioned words in Characters of Gold, La Illah
Illallah, Mouhammed Resoul allah. These Hangings are renewed every seven years
by the Ottoman Emperors, unless when a new Emperor succeeds, before the seven
years be accomplished; for in that case the Emperor renews them so soon as he
comes to the Throne.

The Door by which they enter into the Gallery is of Silver, and so is the
other that goes out of the Gallery into the Turbe.

When the Pilgrims (to the number of Two hundred thousand Souls) are come to
Mecha at the usual time, which is a short while before the little Bairam, and
that it is the day before the Vigil of the said Bairam, they go and lie at a
place called Mine, half a league from Mecha, and next day being the Vigil of
Bairam, they go half a league farther off, to another place called Arafa, which
is a great Plain, in the middle whereof there is a Rock, or rising Hillock, and
on the top of it a Member, or place for preaching in, into which steps a
Scheikh, who preaches to all the People about in the Plain.

The Pilgrims being returned to Mecha, divide themselves in several Caravans,
because of the different Countries they come from, and are to go back to them
again. The Caravan that met at Damascus, upon their return pass by Medina, and
visit Mahomet's Tomb, seeing it is upon their Road: Of the rest, those who are
prompted by Devotion go thither, but a great part return back to their several
Countries, without turning out of their way to visit the said Sepulcher, their
Law not obliging them to that, as it does to visit the other places above
mentioned: So that they are grossly mistaken, who have affirmed, that the
Pilgrimage of the Turks is to the Sepulcher of Mahomet, who obliged them to it.
For that false Prophet told his Followers, when he drew near his death, that if
any one returning from Mecha, had the curiosity to come and see his Sepulcher,
he should say a Fatha for his Soul (which is a Prayer taken out of the Alcoran,
resembling in some manner our Pater Noster) and be gone. Mecha is the place of
Mahomet's Birth, Medina of his Burial.

An Extract of a Journey through part of Arabia Felix, from the Copy in
Ramusio's Collection.
WE traveled in most places of Arabia by the help of a Compass, and were forty
days and forty nights in going between Damascus and Mecha; Port Ziden is forty
miles distant from Mecha, from whence it receives the greatest part of its
Provisions by the Red Sea, from Egypt, Aethiopia, and Arabia Felix, the
numbers of Pilgrims and Camels being incredible, and fresh Water very scarce,
and as dear as Wine in Europe.

I stole away secretly from Mecha in the disguise of a Mammaluke, to Ziden, in
order to pass round Arabia by Sea into Persia. Ziden contains about 500 Houses;
there lay at Anchor in the Haven almost 100 Brigantines and Foysts, with diverse
Barks of sundry sorts, both with and without Oars. After six days sailing we
came to Gezan, a fair commodious Port full of Vessels; the Soil is very
fruitful and delicious, abounding with many rare Fruits and Flowers: The
Inhabitants for the most part go naked. Leaving Gezan in the space of five or
six days, we reached an Island named Camaran, ten miles in circuit: In it is a
Town of 200 Houses, the Inhabitants are Mahometans; it has great store of
Flesh, and fresh Water: The Haven is eight miles from the Continent, and is
subject to the Sultan of Arabia Felix. In two days sailing we came to the mouth
of the Red Sea.

The day after our arrival at Aden, I being suspected for a Portuguese Spy, was
cast into heavy Chains, and thrown into Prison: After fifty five days
Imprisonment, I was set upon a Camel with my Shackles, and in eight days
Journey came to Rhada, a City where the Sultan then lay with 30000 men, to make
War against the Sultan of Sana three days distant from Rhada. The Sultan's
Guard were Aethiopians, with short broad Swords, painted Targets and Darts,
Slings and Ropes made of Cotton. Having obtained ^y Liberty, I passed through
Almacaran and Lagh^, to Aden, where I embarked for Persia.

In this Journey I observed many Monkeys, Lions, Sheep with prodigious great
Tails; variety of Spices, Sugars, and a sort of Grape without Stones, very
delicious: Many strange Gum Trees, as the Balsam, the Myrrh, Frankincense,
Coffee, Coco's, etc.

Some Observations made by Sir Henry Middleton, and other Englishmen, in
Arabia Felix, when they were most treacherously seized, and led Prisoners from
Moha and Aden up to Zenan. Also Capt. Payton's and Capt. Heyn's Observations in
some parts of Arabia Felix.
WE were fifteen days in going from Moha to Zenan, which is about 180 miles
distant N. N. W. it lies in 16 degrees and 15. min. Lat. We were carried about
our Christmas time, and were almost starved with cold, there being hoary Frosts
and Ice at Zenan: Some of our men got Furrs, this was wonderful in such a
Latitude: We fed much upon Dates and Plantanes.

Zenan appeared to me bigger than Bristol, its situation is in a Stony Valley,
encompassed with high Hills, with many Gardens and places of Pleasure. The
Buildings are of good Stone and Lime.

February the 17 th, we obtained our Liberty, and began on the 18 th our
Journey from Zenan to Moha: That night we came to Siam, 16 miles, some on
Asses, others on Camels: On the 19 th to Surage, 18 miles: On the 20 th to the
City Damare, in a plentiful Country 20 miles from Surage. On the 21 st we
arrived at Ermin, 15 miles, here we staid the 22 d. On the 23 d we came to
Nagual Samare. The 24 th to Mohader 13 miles from Nackelsamar. On the 25 th to
Rabattamain, 16 miles from Mohader: Here they make Opium of a Poppy, but it is
not good. The 26 th we came to Coughe, called Meifadine, 16 miles from
Rabattamain. On the 27 th we were at Tayes, half as large as Zenan, here they
make Indigo out of an Herb. March the 1 st, we traveled from Tays to Eufras,
16 miles distant. March the 2 d, to Assambine 11 miles. On the 3 d, to
Accomoth. The 4 th to Mousa, 17 miles: Here we observed them steeping the
Indigo Plant. On the 5 th we got to Moha.

Moha is less than Tayes, but very populous, it stands close by the Sea in a
Salt and Sandy Soil, unwalled: yet it has Platforms and Forts: Abundance of
Shipping resort thither from India, and great Caravans by land from Syria and
Mecha, to trade and exchange Commodities.

Aden is the greatest Port of Arabia Felix, it is situated at the foot of vast
high Mountains, which rise up with Pikes, and run with great Promontories into
the Sea: These Hills were called Cababarre, according to the Journal of Don
John of Castro the Portuguese. Capt. Dunton, of Sir Henry Middleton's Fleet,
observed Aden to lie in 12 degrees. 35 min. of N. Lat. The variation Westerly was
12 degrees and 40 minutes. It flows upright between 6 and 7 foot Water on the
change day. The Canoos came about the English Ships with Indigo, Olibanum, and
Myrrh, but no trade with them by reason of their treachery. Aden has been a
great City of above 6000 Houses, but Capt. Dounton found the Buildings much
decayed, and many of them sunk. Capt. Sharpeigh was the first Englishman that
ever landed at Aden, he had been there 16 months before, in the year 1610.

The aforementioned parts of Arabia Felix were at that time under the
subjection of the Turks, who had got possession of them from the Arabians, by
tricks and treachery, whom they kept in awe by many Castles built on Hills and
Passes, and by the many Captives they always kept as Pledges. Sir Henry
Middleton observed many of the mountainous parts to be under the Dominion of
the Arabians, who are very populous in all the places where he passed, and are
at frequent Wars with the insolent Turks, who pretended secret Orders from the
Grand Signior, to destroy all the Christians that came ashore, lest they should
go up to Mecha and Medina, to ransack and burn them.

Cap. Walter Payton, in the year 1613, found great Hospitality and Ingenuity in
some Ports of Arabia Felix, nearer the Persian Gulf, especially at Doffar, a
very good Road for Ships, and a fair City, where the Arabians presented his
Crew with Bullocks, Sheep, Hens, Goats, Sugarcanes, Plantans and Coco's. This
Cape stands in 16 degrees 38 min. of N. Lat. and is free from the Turkish Yoke.

Capt. Edward Heyns anchored before Moha or Mocha, in Arabia Felix, An. Dom.
1618. the Governor sent him as Presents a young Bullock, two Goats, Mangoes,
Limes, Cucumbers, Water Melons, Quinces, Rack made of Rice, etc. He went freely
ashore, and found it a very neat, populous, and flourishing Town, built of
Brick and Stone, curiously plastered over like Paris, two Stories high with
flat Roofs and Terrasses on the top, whereon they build Summer-houses with
Canes and Matts, wherein they sleep and receive the fresh Breefes in the great
heats. They excused the Cruelty to Sir H. Middleton, laying it on the cruel
Governor at that time.

Of the Ways and Roads between Egypt and Ethiopia.
IN the month of October an Ambassador of Ethiopia came to Caire, with several
Presents for the Grand Signior, and among others an Ass that had a most
delicate Skin, if it was natural, for I will not vouch for that, since I did
not examine it. This Ass had a black List down the Back, and the rest of its
Body was all begirt with white and tawny streaks, a finger broad a piece: The
Head of it was extraordinarily long, striped and partly colored as the rest of
the Body: Its Ears, like a Buffles, were very wide at the end, and black,
yellow, and white: Its Legs streaked just like the Body, not long ways, but
round the Leg, in fashion of a Garter, down to the Foot, and all in so good
proportion and symetry, that no Lynx could be more exactly spotted, nor any
Skin of a Tiger so pretty, this may be the Zembra. The Ambassador had two more
such Asses, which dyed by the way, but he brought their Skins with him, to be
presented to the Grand Signior, with the live one. He had also several little
black Slaves of Nubia, and other Countries, confining on Ethiopia, Civet, and
other costly things for his Present. These little Blacks serve to look after
the Women in the Seraglio, after that they are gelded. The Ambassador was an
old man, and had the end of his Nose, part of the upper and under Lip cut off,
but was otherwise a shapely man, and of a very good presence: He was clothed
after the Cophtish fashion, wearing a Turban like them, and spoke very good
Italian, which gave me the opportunity of conversing with him: He told me his
name was Michael, that he was a Native of Tripoly, in Syria, and that he had
made three or four Voyages into Christendom: That eighteen months before, he
had parted from Gontar, the Capital City of Ethiopia, and was so long retarded
by the way, because of the contrary Winds he met with on the Red Sea, by which
he came. That of an hundred Persons whom he had brought with him, of his own
Servants, and the Slaves he was to present to the Grand Signior, thirty or
forty were dead. If he had come by Land, he had not been so long by the way;
for from Gontar to Schouaquen it is about six weeks Journey, and from
Schouaquen to Caire forty or fifty days by Camels; but he could not take that
way because of his Train. He told me many things relating to the Kingdom of
Ethiopia, which I shall here give the Reader an account of.

But first, of the ways of passing out of Egypt into Ethiopia. The Merchants
setting out from Grand Caire, are carried up the Nile against the Stream, as
far as Monfallot, and thence traveling in Caravans, first come to Siint, and
so in order to the following Towns: Wack three days Journey; Meks two days;
Scheb three; Sellim three; Moschu five; Dungala five, accounted the Metropolis
of Nubia, then they come into the Kingdom of Sennar: From Dungala they travel
to Kshabi, three days Journey; Korti three more; Trere three; Gerry one;
Helfage one; Arbatg three; Sennar four: From Sennar in fourteen days they
arrive at the Confines of Habessinia, the Entrance is called Tshelga. The
passage by Sea is various, for the Merchants embark in several Ports on the Red
Sea, as Suesso, Gidda, Alcossir, and so coast it to Suaquena and Matzua. The
safest way of traveling into the Kingdom of Prester John, is with some
Metropolitan or Ambassador. Some land at Baylar, a Port belonging to the King
of Dengala, in amity with the Habessins, but the Journey thence by Land is
tedious, and infested by the Gallons. It Is but three months travel by Land from
Grand Caire to Gontar, the chief City of Ethiopia.

Of Ethiopia: By Michael of Tripoly, Ambassador from the Habessine Emperor to
the Grand Signior.
EThiopia, or the Country of the Abyssins, called in Arabic Abesch, from
whence comes the word Abyssin, is a great Empire, being above seven months
travel in circuit: On the East side it is bordered by the Red Sea, and
Zanguebar, on the South with Zeila, Avousa, Naria, etc. On the West by the
Country of the Negros and Nubia, and on the North with the Country of Nubia and
Bugia, because to come from Ethiopia into Egypt, one must cross Nubia down the
Nile. About an hundred years ago, Greyu Mahomet, King of Zeila, of which the
Inhabitants are all Moors, invaded Ethiopia, and forced the King to save
himself on a Mountain, from whence he sent to demand assistance of the King of
Portugal, who immediately sent it him, but hardly was he who commanded these
Auxiliaries entered the Country, when he resolved to return back again, finding
that they ate raw Flesh there: However, his Brother Don Christopher had more
Courage, and would not return without doing some Exploit: He marched up into
the Country with about Three hundred Musketeers, fought, vanquished, and
killed the Moorish King, and then re-established the lawful King of Ethiopia:
For reward of which Service, the King of Ethiopia gave Lands and Estates to all
the Portuguese that stayed within his Dominions, and their Offspring are still
in that Country. The Father of this present King was a Catholic, but he dying
some thirty odd years ago, the Queen his Wife, who was a great Enemy to the
Jesuits, and no Catholic, and who suffered impatiently, that they should
govern (as they pleased) the late King her Husband, wrought upon her Son that
succeeded him, to persecute all the Roman Catholics, in such a manner, that
the Jesuits were obliged to make their escape, and he put to death all the
Capucins whom he found. Since that time, three Capucins more were put to death
at Schouaken; for the King of Ethiopia knowing that they had a mind to come
into his Kingdom, sent to the Governor of Schouaken, praying him to put to
death those three religious Franks. The Governor of Schouaken caused their
Heads to be immediately struck off, and sent them to the King of Ethiopia, who
as a Reward, made him a Present of three Bags of Gold Dust, promising him as
many Bags of Gold Dust as he should send him Heads of Franks. And fifteen or
sixteen years since, two others have been put to death, in the Province of
Oinadaga, whose Names were Father Fioravanti, and Father Francesco. In short,
this King is a declared Enemy to all Franks, whom he accuses of being
Heretics, and of having conspired to put the Crown upon the Head of one of his
Enemies: So that a Frank who would go into that Country, must pass for an
Armenian or Cophte, for the King and his People are of the Cophtish Religion.
They believe but one Nature in Jesus Christ. At the end of eight day they
circumcise, as the Jews do, and baptize Fortnight after. Before the Jesuits
went thither, they baptized none before they were thirty or forty years of age.
They say Mass as the Cophtes do, but their Church-books are in the Ethiopick
Language. Their Patriarch depends on the Patriarch of Alexandria, and when the
Patriarch of the Abyssins dies, they send Deputies to Alexandria, to entreat
the Patriarch to send them another, and he convocating his Clergy, chooses out
the fittest among them, whom he sends, but is never any more heard of in Egypt,
till he be dead.

There are four Kings that pay Tribute to the King of Ethiopia, to wit, the
King of Sennar, who pays his Tribute in Horses. Sennar is a very hot Country.
The King of Naria, who pay his Tribute in Gold. The King of Bugia, and King of
Dangala. Naria is a good Country, and in that Country are the Mines out of
which they have the Gold that passes on the Coasts of Soffala and Guiney. These
Mines are not deep, as in many other Countries. From that Country also comes
the Civet. I think it will not be amiss here to say somewhat of Civets, which
are so rare in our Country, as that they deserve to be taken notice of where
one can find them. They are called Civet-Cats, come from Naria, (as I just now
said) and are taken in Snares. The Jews in Caire keep many of them in their
Houses, where for buying a few drachms of Civet one may see them. It is a Beast
almost as big as a good Dog: It has a sharp Snout, small Eyes, little Ears,
and Mustachios like a Cat: The Skin of it is all spotted black and white, with
some yellowish specks, and has a long bushy Tail, almost like a Fox. It is a
very wild Creature, and I believe the bite of it would put a body to no small
pain. The Jews keep them in great square Wooden Cages, where they feed them
with raw Mutton and Beef, cut into small pieces. When they would get from them
that which is called Civet, (and is the Sweat of this Beast, that smells so
sweet) they make him go back with a stick which they thrust in betwixt the Bars
of the Cage and catch hold of his Tail: When they have that fast, they take
hold also of his two hind Legs, pulling him half out of the Cage by the Door,
which falls down upon his Back, and keeps him fast there, then another opens a
certain Cod of Flesh that these Beasts have, which is shaped like a split
Gyserne, and with an Iron Spatula scrapes all the Sweat off it within. The
Males have that piece of Flesh betwixt their Stones and Yard, which is like a
Cats. The Females have it betwixt their Fundament and Privities, and it is
emptied of the Sweat but twice a week, each Beast yielding about a dram at a
time, by what I could discern. When that Sweat or Excrement is taken out, it is
of a whitish gray, but by little and little, in some short space, it turns to a
very brown color. It smells very sweet at a distance, but near hand it stinks
and causes a Headache. There are as many kinds of Civet-Sweat, as there are of
Civet-Cats, for it is more whitish, greyish, or yellowish, and dryer in some
than in others, and yet they mingle all together. After all, it is in vain to
think to have pure Civet, for the Jews falsify it; and if a man imagine it to
be pure, because he has seen it taken from the Beast, he is mistaken, for
before People come to their Houses, they rub the inside of that piece of Flesh,
with a little Oil, or some such Stuff, that so the Sweat and it together may
make more weight, but when no body is present, they take it out pure, and
mingle it afterward. To find out the truth of this, I went one day to the
House of a Jew, that kept Civet-Cats, without giving him notice before, (for
because I had bought a little of him, and promised to come again another time,
he asked me as often as he saw me, what day I would come) and having desired
him to get me some fresh Civet, he told me, that it was not the day he used to
take it out; and having returned without acquainting him before, upon one of
the days when he said he was accustomed to gather it, he refused then also to
do it, pretending Business, which confirmed all that had been told me of that
matter. In the mean time they hold these Beasts very dear; for having asked
that Jew, and others also, how much they would have of me, for a Civet Cat,
they all told me, an hundred Chequins. Dangala is the capital City of Nubia,
the King of Dangala is King of the Barberins, who are a kind of Blacks, of the
Musulman Religion, that came in Crowds to Caire, to get Services; they are
somewhat silly, but very faithful, and serve for a small matter, for two
Maidins a day, or a Maidin and their Diet: You may make them do whatsoever you
please. They wear a blew Shirt, plat all their Hair in Tresses, and then rub it
over with a certain Oil, to keep their Head from being lousie. At Caire, when
they have any falling out, they go before the Scheiks of their own Nation, who
make them Friends, and if they think it convenient, adjudg them to pay a Fine,
with which they feast and make merry together. They are great lovers of
Crocodiles Flesh; and when any Frank has got one for the Skin, they come and
beg the Flesh, which they dress with a pretty good Sauce. When these Blades
have scraped together ten or twelve Piastres, they return home again wealthy to
their own Country, provided they escape being robbed by the Arabs upon the way,
who many times serve them so, therefore they commonly return in companies, as
they came. The King of Dangala pays his Tribute to the King of Ethiopia, in
Cloth. The Provinces of Ethiopia are Gouyan, (where the King keeps a Viceroy)
Beghandir, Dambia, Amara, (which is a great Province, full of Mountains and
good Castles) Damoud Tegre, and Barnegas. Besides, there are several Provinces
governed by Princes, who are Vassals to the King of Ethiopia. In short, the
Kingdom of Ethiopia comprehends twenty four Tambours or Vice Roys. The capital
City is called Gonthar, and is in the Province of Dambia. Ethiopia (as the
Ambassador told me) is as cold as Aleppo or Damascus, only the Countries near
the Red Sea, and the Country of Sennar are hot. The King of Ethiopia has above
an hundred Wives, and keeps no Eunuchs to look after them, because they look
upon it as a Sin to geld a man; so that the Women have the same liberty there
as in Christendom. He is a King of very easy access, and the poorest have the
freedom ^o come and speak to him when they please. He keeps all his Children on
a Mountain, called Ouhhni, in the Province of Oinadaga, which is a Mountain two
days Journey distant from Gonthar; there is a place like a Cistern on the top
of the Mountain, into which they are let down every night, and taken up again
in the daytime, and suffered to play and walk about. When the King dies, they
choose out one of the wittiest of them, and make him King, without any regard to
Birthright; and when he comes to have Children, he sends his Brothers
Prisoners to some other place, and places his Children at Ouhhni. The place
where the Kings are buried, is called Ayesus, and is a kind of Grott, where the
Aged are laid in one side, and the young in the other. Heretofore there was a
Church there of the same name, in time of the Jesuits; and in the same place
there is a Library. The Ambassador assured me, that he had been in that
Library, and I fancy it is the old Library of the Ancient Ethiopians. Ethiopia
is a good and fertile Country, producing Wheat, Barley, etc. The greatest
Deserts of it are not above three or four days Journey over; and nevertheless,
when the King makes any progress, he lodges in Tents. The Houses of the great
Lords are like those of Caire, that is to say, very mean, in respect of the
Houses of Europe, and the rest are only of Mud. The Country affords men of all
Trades, except Watch-makers. They have no Camels there, but Mules, Asses, Oxen,
and Horses. All the People of this Country eat raw Flesh, except the King, who
has it dressed, and drinks Wine of Grapes; the rest drink only Wine made of
Millet or Sarasin Wheat, but as strong as ours, and Brandy made of the same
Grain. They are clothed after the fashion of the Franks, and wear Cloth,
Velvet, and other Stuffs imported to them by the Red Sea. They have
Harquebusses from the Turks, and of those People there are not above three or
four hundred who serve in the Wars with Harquebusses. In Trading they make no
use of coined Money, as the Europeans do, but their Money are pieces of fifteen
or twenty Pies of Cloth, Gold, which they give by weight, and a kind of Salt,
which they reduce into little square pieces like pieces of Soap, and these pass
for Money. They cut out that Salt upon the side of the Red Sea, five or six
days Journey from Dangala, as you go from Caire, and the places where they make
it are called Arho. Among them is the Nation of the Gauls, whom in Ethiopick
they call Chava, and are a Vagabond people in Ethiopia, as the Arabs are in
Egygt. These Gauls are rich in Cattle, and are always at wars with the
Ethiopians. They have no Harquebusses, nor other Firearms, but make use of
Lances and Targets. After all, they speak so many different Languages in
Ethiopia, that the Ambassador said to me, If God has made seventy two
Languages, they are all spoken in Ethiopia. I asked his Excellency if he knew
any thing of the Source of the Nile, and this he told me concerning it: The
Head of Nile is a Well that springs out of the Ground in a large Plain, where
many Trees grow: this Fountain is called Ouembromma, and is in a Province
called Ago. It makes that a very delightful place, casting up Water very high
in several places: And this Ambassador of Ethiopia assured me, that he had
been above twelve times with the King of Ethiopia, to spend several days about
that Fountain, which is twelve days Journey from Gonthar.

More Observations of Ethiopia, by Father Lobo, Father Alvarez, Father Tellez,
and others; extracted from their Portuguese Voyages.
THE Rains begin to fall in June, and continue July, August, and part of
September, which make the Nile swell and overflow in those Months. Father
Tellez says, the Mountains of Habessinia are much higher than our Alps and
Pyrenean Hills; these render the Country more temperate and healthful, and make
that torrid Climate tolerable to the European Bodies: There is plenty of good
Springs and Herbage. In the midst of the Plains there rise up many steep Rocks
of wonderful Figures and Shapes, on the tops whereof are Woods, Meadows,
Fountains, Fish Ponds, and other conveniences of Life: The Natives get up to
them by Ropes, and crane up their Cattle: These are like so many Fortresses,
which defend the Natives against the sudden Incursions of barbarous Nations on
all sides.

This Kingdom abounds with Metals, but they neglect to work them, lest Turkish
or other Invasions should follow, if such Baits were discovered. Their Winter
is from May to September, the Sun then passing and repassing perpendicular over
their Heads. During this Season, once every day it rains Torrents, and thunders
most violently, which are accompanied sometimes with sudden and furious
Hurricanes.

The Jesuits residing in the Province of Zambea observed both the Poles, the
Antarctick higher with his cross Stars: In this tract of Heaven there is as it
were a Cloud or Blot full of little Stars, as our Via Laclea.

The Animals of this vast Kingdom are, the Hippopotamus, or River-horse, which
makes great devastation in their Plantations, Crocodiles, Rhinocerots,
Elephants, Lions, Tigers, Panthers, Camelopardalus, Gazels, Zembra's,
Civet-Cats; great varieties of Monkeys, Apes, and Baboons; Ostriches,
Cassowars, Turtles, Locusts in prodigious numbers. The ordinary Trees are, the
Date, Coco, Tamarind, C^ssia, Oranges, Musa, or Plantane, Cotton-Trees, with
many others peculiar to the Climate and Region.

In one year they will have three several crops of Rice, Millet, Tef-Seed,
(their common Food ten times less than Mustard Seed) of Wheat, and other
European Grain, yet the Locusts often devour all, and bring on Famines.

They make a Drink of Honey, burnt Rice, Water, and a Wood called Sardo. They
have no Mills, but grind all their Grain with the Hand.

Great Caravans pass up and down the Country, to and from the Seaports, with
Merchandise. In many places the Towns and Villages are extremely thick, and
very populous.

Snow sometimes lies on the high Mountains of Ethiopia, especially those called
Semam and Salleat, or the Jews Hills. This part of Africa called Habessinia, is
much the highest of that Quarter of the World, the great Rivers running East,
North, and West, a^ Hawas, Hanazo, the Nile, Niger, or Gambia, the Zaire, etc.
taking their rise in it.

Ludolfus in his late learned Commentaries on his Ethiopick History, figures
several Animals proper to these African Regions: as, 1. Tigris orbiculis,
minutis variegata. 2. Tigris maculis virgatis. 3. Pardus maculis seu scutulis
varius.

The Habessine Ports toward the Red Sea are very ill guarded, therefore the
Turks are in possession of Arkiko and Matzua. The Habessines are not addicted
to Navigation, they Trade only with the Arabians, and carry their Goods to
Suaquena, Arkiko, and Matzua: The Armenians often get entrance into the
Country, where they are very well received.

The Arabians come in their Barks cross the Red Sea, from Mocha, Aden, Ziden,
Cameron, and other Ports: Few of the Habessines pass over into Arabia, and when
they do, they dissemble their Religion, and disguise themselves in the Habits
of Musulmans. This comes from Hubert Klock, in his Letters to the Dutch
East-India-Company, Anno 1685.

Father Hieronymo Lobo observed the Red Sea to be navigable only in the middle,
in which are some small Islands and Rocks above Water, of little danger in
clear weather: The two Shoars of Arabia and Ethiopia are of very bad passage,
full of Shoals, Rocks, and Corals. The entrance of this Sea is the clearest and
deepest on the side of Arabia, and is the ordinary passage for Ships of
burden, the other part of the mouth toward Ethiopia is full of Flats and
Shoals, so that none ventures through but little Vessels: The Pearl-fishing is
near the Island of Daleca. On several parts of this Sea we observed abundance
of reddish Spots made by a Weed resembling Cargaco (or Sargasso) rooted in the
bottom, and floating in some places. Upon strict examination it proved to be
that which we found the Ethiopians call Sufo, used up and down for dying their
Stuffs and Cloths of a red color, (perhaps this may be one of the Rocoella's
in Imperati, a fucus or Alga tinctoria.)

FINIS.
STIRPIUM ORIENTALIUM. RARIORUM CATALOGI TRES.
Stirpium Orientalium rariorum Catalogus, praesertim Graeciae, and Syriae
provinciis nascentium.
A.
A Brotanum foemina verum Dioscoridis Zanoni v. Heliochrysum Abrotani foeminae
facie.

Acaciae foliis frutex Mesapotamicus Col. Annot. in Res medicas Novae Hisp.
Recchi. A caciae similis Mesopotamica, minutissimis foliis, siliqua integra
contorta, crassa and obtusa, seu Siliquae Nabathaea Breyn. Prod. 2. Juxta
Tlgridem fluvium in Mesopotamia, and Euphratem in Arabia deserta.

Ageratum Persicum Breyn. Prod. 2.

Alhagi Maurorum Rauwolf. Genista spartium spinosum foliis Polygoni C.B.
Spinosum Syriacum Park. Agul and Alhagi Arabibus, planta spinosa Mannam
resipiens J.B. Manna in hac arbuscula invenitur Tereniabin aut Trungibin
Arabibus dicta. In Persia and circa Halepum. Rauw. p. 84.152.206.

Alcea Indica parvo flore C.B. Aegyptia Clus. Aegyptiaca Ger. emac. Bamia J.B.
Bamia seu Alcea Aegyptia Park. parad. Trionum Theophrasti Rauwolf. Lugd. app.
Non in Aegypto tantum sed etiam in Syria invenitur. Rauwolf. p. 167.

Alcea arborescens Syriaca C.B. Althaea arborescens glabra, Ketmia dicta J.B.
Althaea frutex 2. Clus. Frutex flore albo vel purpureo Park. Rauwolf. p. 54.
Circa Tripolin Syriae observavit.

Androsaemum Constantinopolitanum fore maximo Wheeler. Flore and theca quinque
capsulari omnium maximis Moris. Hist. p. 473. Non est hoc Ascyron magno flore
C.B. prod. Notae enim non convenient. Circa Constantinopolin, eundo inde ad
Pontum Euxinum, secus vias, and alibl copiose,

Anemone maxima Chalcedonica Park. Latifolia maxima versicolor C.B. Maxima
Chalcedonica polyanthos Ger. Latifolia pleno slore 1. Clus.

Anetho similis planta semine lato laciniato J.B. Gingidium folio Foeniculi
C.B. Verum, sive Syriacum Park. Dioscoridis Rauwolf. Lugd. ap. In monte Libano,
locis praeruptis, p. 234.

Anonis latea annua siliqua glabra breviore Moris. Hist. Halepo transmisit D.
Rob. Huntington.

Apocynum folio subrotundo C.B. Folio rotundo, flore ex albo pallescente J.B.
Latifolium non repens Park. Periploca latifolia Ger. Syriae and calidiorum
regionum incola esse dicitur.

Apocynum repens and scandens Rauwolf. Monte Libano observavit Author Itin. p.
233. Arbores tegit ut Ephedra.

Arbutus ((...)) Dioscoridis vera Wheeleri. Folio non serrato C.B. Adrachne
Park. Adrach. Theophrasti J.B. (...) Graecis modernis, Bellonius multis locis
in sua peregrinatione observavit. D. Wheelerus in Achaia prope montem
Pentelicum.

Arisarum angustifolium Wheeleri itiner, p 309. Caul folioso pingitur. Prope
Panthaeam inter Amphissam and Naupactum.

Aristolochia Maurorum C.B. Peregrina Rauwolfii Clus. Rhasut and Rumigi a
Mauris nominata Rauwolf. Lugd. app. Aristolochiis similis Rhasut and Rumigi
Maurorum J.B.

Aristolochia clematitis Attica, foliis in summo bifidis seu crenatis Wheeleri.
(...) Graecis. In monte Hymetto.

Arum auriculis longis, Ovidne dictum, Chalepense Rauwolf. p. 104.

Aster luteus angustifolius Park. J.B. Luteus Linariae rigido glabro folio C.B.
6 Clusii Ger. In monte Olympo Asiae. Wheel.

Astragalus Syriacus hirsutus C.B. Syriacus Lob. Ger. Park. J.B. Astrag.
Dioscoridis, vulgo Christiana radix Rauwolf. Lugd. app. p. 105. D. Wheelerus
Itiner. p. 435. Astragalum quendam describit and depingit, quem in Graecia
prope Megaram invenit, and argenteum vocat. Qu. An Syriacus sit?

Atractylis Cypria Ang. Lugd. Purpurea C.B. Purpurea Cypria Park.

Atractylis vera Antiquarum, cujus caulibus prosusis utuntur mulieres Graecae
D. Covel. An Atractylidi and Cnico sylvestri similis C.B? Calochierni carduns
Cretensibus J.B. In Thracia prope Constantinopolin. V. Hist. nost. p. 304.

Avellana Byzantina J.B. Pumila Byzantina Clus. Ger. emac. Peregrina humilis
C.B. Nux Avellana Macedonica seu Byzantina Park.

Azadirachta foliis ramosis majoribus Syriaca, seu vulgaris flore majore
coeruleo Breyn. Azedaraeth arbor, Fraxini folio, flore coeruleo C.B.
Azadaracheni arbor J.B. Azadarach Avicennae Park. Zizipha alba Ger. Fructus
hujus arboris venenatus est, and canes intersicit. Rauwolf. p. 51. In Syria and
Palestina.

B.
Baccharis Dioscoridis Rauwolfio Park. Gnaphalio montano affinis Aegyptiaca
C.B. Rauwolfius in Syria observavit, and Monte Libano, Itin. p. 233.

Balsamum verum J.B. Genuinum Antiquorum Park. Rutae folio, Syriacum C.B.
Balsamum Alpini Ger. emac. Bellonius and Alpinus Arabiam Faelicem Balsami locum
patrium semper suisse, nunquam Judaeam aut Aegyptum, contendunt.

Behmen abiad, i. e. Ben album Rauwolfii Park. Serratulae affinis capitulo
squamoso luteo, ut and flore C.B. Ad pedem montis Libani humido and umbroso
loco, p. 235.

Bellis Chalepensis praecox Kusan and Surugen dicta Rauwolf, p. 109.

Borago variegata Cretica Wheel. Muralis variegata flore odorato Cretica
Zanoni. In monte Hymotto Atticae. Folia maculis albis variegata sunt: flores
(qui candidi) maculis and striis purpureis caeruleisve.

C.
Calamus aromaticus Syriacus vel Arabicus supposititius Park. Syriacus C.B.
prod. A Paludano ex Aegypto reduce habuit C. Bauhinus.

Camarronum Rhasis Rauwolf. v. Tithymalus.

Capparis arborescens fructu Juglandis magnitudine C.B. Arabica non spinosa
Park. Cappares arborescentes J.B. In Arabia observavit Bellonius, Obs. l. 2. c.
20.

Castanea equina Ger. Park. Equina folio multifido J.B. Folio multifido C.B.
Constantinopoli and in Creta nasci fertur: certe Constantinopoli ad nos
transmissa est.

Catanance Dioscoridis Rauwolf. est Plantago quinque nervia cum globulis albis
pilosis J.B. Consule Breynii Prod. 2. in Plantago.

Caucalis Syriaca cum maximo semine J.B. Gingidium latifolium Ger. Latifolium
Syriacum Park. Foliis Pastinacae latifoliae C.B. Semen ex Syria allatum J.
Bauhino Rauwolfius communicavit.

Cedrus magna conifera Libani Park. Magna sive Libani conifera J.B. Conifera
folio Laricis C.B. In monte Libani, ubi sponte oritur, 24 tantum arbores
supputavit Rauwolfius, nec plures Melchior Lussy* ast Bellonius, qui non multo
antea peregrinatus est, circiter 28, qui and in Amano and Tauro montibus se
Cedros observasse scribit; ut Libano propriae and peculiares non sint. V.
Rauwolf. p. 229.

Cedrus Lycia retusa dicta and nonnullis Cedrus Phoenicia, Galliae etiam and
Germaniae communis est. V. Cat. general.

Chomaeleon niger Dioscoridis Rauwolf. p. 51. 233.

Charnubi Arab. i. e. Siliqua, p. 21. V. Synonyma in Cat. genesis

Chondrilla altera Dioscoridis Rauwolf. p. 106. Clus. Conyza marina Lugd. C.B.
J.B. At nostro judicio descriptio Rauwolfii illi non convenit.

Chondrillae alterius aliud genus Rauwolf. aliud genus Dioscoridis Lugd.
Bulbosa, Conyza facie major, foliis latioribus C.B. Bulbosa altera latiore
folio Park. Qui praecedentem bulbosam Syriacam angustisoliam vocat. Utramque
invenit Rauwolfius circa Halepum Syriae, alteram in arvis, alteram in locis
saxosis, p. 106.

Chrysocome vera. Dioscoridis Zanoni, Helichrysum Persieum nonnullis.

Chrysocome Syriaca candidissimis floribus Breyn. cent. In saxosis Libani
montis Rauwolf. herbar, sicc. Gnaphalium Rauwolf. p. 232.

Chrysogonum Dioscoridis, Rauwolf. Lugd. app. Quibusdam J.B. Ponae Ital.
Leontopetalo affinis foliis quernis C.B. In Syria inter segetes Rauwolf. p. 108.

Cistus foliis laurinis. In Olympo Asiae monte observavit Wheelerus. Invenitur
prope Monspelium and in Hispania. V. Cat. Genesis

Clinopodium Dioscoridis Rauwolf. 52.

Cneorum Matthew. In Hymetto Atticae Monte invenit Wheelerus.

Colchicum Fritillaricum Chiense Park. Variegatum Cornut.

Convolvulus Hederae foliis Rauwolf. Itin. p. 113. Caeruleus Hederaceo anguloso
folio C.B. Trifolius s. hederaceus pupureus Park. Caeruleus Ger. Nil Arabum
quibusdam s. Convolvulus caeruleus J.B. Halepi in hortis.

Convolvulus purpureus folio subrotundo C.B. Caeruleus major rotundifolius
Park. parad. Caeruleus folio subrotundo Ger. emac. Campanula Indica J.B. Ex
Syria and Orientalibus delatum aiunt.

Convolvulus Sagittariae foliis flore amplo purpureo Wheeleri. Zacynthi ad
puteos bituminosos.

Convolvulus Marinus Soldanellae affinis J.B. Soldanella maritima major Park.
Soldanella vel Brassica maritima major C.B. Brassicae maritimae genus Rauwolf.
p. 47. Lugd. app. In Syria circa Tripolin. Folia in summo bifida sunt seu
crenata.

Convolvulus Arabicus seu Aegyptius Alpin. exot. 186. Park. Hujus semen ex
Aegypto accepit Pr. Alpinus Convolvuli Arabici nomine.

Conyza Syriae quibusdam J.B. Minor Rauwolfiii Park. Major altera C.B. Circa
Tripolin Syriae observavit Dasylycus. Conyza Dioscoridis Rauwolf. p. 48.

Conchorus Plinii C.B. Conchorus sive Melochia J.B. In hortis Halepi Rauwolf.
p. 67. v. Cat. Egypt.

Coris foliis crispis montis Olympi Asiae Wheeler p. 220. An Hypericum foliis
parvis crispis seu simulatis Siculum Hist. nost. p. 1018.

Coris legitima Clus. Hypericoides quorundam J.B. In Hymetto Atticae monte
Wheeler. v. Cat. Cret.

Corona Imperialis Ger. Park. Cor. Imper. sive Tusai aliis J.B. Lilium sive
Corona Imperialis C.B. Hujus bulbos ex Persia primo Constantinopolin delatos
sibi persuadet Clusius, quoniam cum eos primum accipiebat, inter reliquas haec
fuit Inscriptio, Tusai fior Persiano rosso o discolorito con la Testa abasso,
h. e. Tusai flos Persicus ruber aut decolor nutante Capite.

Cyanus floridus odoratus Turcicus major and minor Park. Variat floris color
albo.

Cyanus floridus odoratus Turcicus latifoliis laciniatus Hort. Paris.

Cyanus Orientalis alter seu Constantinopolitanus flo. fistuloso candicante
Hort. Reg. Par.

Cyclamen Antiochenum autumnale flore purpureo duplici Park.

Cyclamen Autumnale, folio subrotundo lucido molliore and crenato suave-rubente
flore, Syriacum Hort. Reg. Par.

Cyclamen hyemale, orbiculatis foliis, inferius rubentibus, purpurascente
flore, Coum Herbariorum Ejusdem.

Cycl. hyeme and vere florens, folio anguloso, amplo flore albo, basi purpurea,
Persicum dictum Ejusdem.

Cycl. Autumnale, orbiculato, circumroso folio, subtus rubente, odoratissimo
flore Ejusdem.

Cyperus rotundus odoratus Syriacus major Park. Orientali^ major vel Babylonius
Rauwolf. Rotundus orientalis major C.B. Rotundus Syriacus Ger. emac. Syriaca
and Cretica rotundior J.B. In Babylonia circa urbem Bagadet muscosis humidis
copiose Rauwolf. In Aegypto, locis paludosis Alpin.

Cyperus rotundus Orientalis minor C.B. Rotundus odoratus Syriacus minor Park.
Minor Creticus Ger. emac. In Syriae montosis udis. Reperitur etiam in Italia.

Cytisus folio argenteo montis Olympi Wheeler.

D.
Daucus Tertius Dioscoridis Rauwolf. p. 105. Folio Coriandri, flore luteo J.B.
v. Cat. Cret. Halepi in colle quodam juxta fluvium observavit Rauwolfius.
Radices Zarneb Melchi Turcis dicuntur.

Dictamnus Origani foliis Montis Stipuli Flo. Bat. fl. Origanum spicatum montis
Sipyli foliis glabris Hist. nost. In monte Sipylo copiose Wheeler itin.

Draba Chalepensis repens humilior, foliis minus cinereis and quasi viridibus
Moris. Hist. D. Huntingdon. Hujus semen circa Chalepum collectum misit.

E.
Ephedra v. Polygonum.

Eruca Chalepensis, caulibus and Siliquis hirsutis, foliis inferioribus
maculatis Moris. hist. Chalepo semen a D. Huntingdon transmissum est.

Eruca Chalepensis, flore dilute violaceo, siliquis articulatis Moris. hist.
Haec etiam ab eodem missa, and ejusdem loci est.

Eryngium stellatum capitulis caeruleis Rauwolf. Halepi inter segetes
observavit Author p. 107.

F.
Ficus Cypria J.B. Rauwolf. Sycomorus altera seu Ficus Cypria Park. Ficus folio
Sycomori, fructum non in candice gerens C.B. Circa Tripolin p. 50.

Fustick Wood, Chrysoxylon Wheeleri. In rupibus Peloponnesiacis.

G.
Garab. s. Garb. v. Salix.

Genista spinosa floribus rubris Wheeler. In Insula Teno.

Genista-spartium spinosum foliis Polygoni C.B. v. Alhagi.

Gingidium folio foeniculi C.B. v. Anetho similis, etc.

Glans unguentaria C.B. Nux Ben sive Glans unguentaria Park. Nux unguentaria
J.B. Balanus myrepsica Ger. In Arabia prope Pharagou in itinere a Cayro ad
montem Sinai Bellon.

Gnaphalio affinis Aegyptiaca C.B. Baccharis Rauwolfii Lugd. app. Clus. Hist.
Dioscoridis Rauwolfio J.B. Gnaphalium foliis Auriculae subrotundis, flore
duplici niveo in Monte Libano observavit Rauwolf, p. 232. v. Chryso come.

H.
Habhel Assis Tripolitanis, sive Granum Altzelem Arabum Rauwolfii p. 55. i. e.
Trasi veronensium Lob.

Hacub seu Silybum quibusdam J.B. Circa Halepum locis asperis. p. 66, 67.

Harmala v. Ruta Syriaca.

Heliochrysum Abrotani foeminae foliis Boccon. Abrotanum foemina verum
Dioscoridis Zanoni. Ex semine Perside allato in horto M. Ducis Etruriae
succrevit.

Helichryson Orientale C.B. Heliochrysum Orientale, sive Amarantus luteus Park.
parad. Stoechas citrina floris and magnitudine and color speciosa J.B. An
Chrysocome vera Dioscoridis Zanoni? Helychryson Orientale a Cretica specie
diversum nobis esse videtur.

Hesperis Syriaca J.B. Syriaca Camerarii Park. Peregrina siliquis articulatis
C.B. Leucoium Melancholicum quibusdam. In Syriae montanis oritur test Clusio.

Hieracium echioides, capitulis Cardui benedicti majus, Arabicum, folio sinuato
Hort. Edinburg.

Horminum sativum genuinum Dioscoridis Park. Sativum C.B. Sylv. foliis
purpureis Ger. Coma purpuro violacea J.B. In Insula Lesena and universa Graecia.

Horminum Syriacum C.B. prod. Park. Gallitrichum exoticum flore magno albo.
J.B. Bisermas Camerarii Am^n quibusdam. Paludanus e Syria redux hujus semen
attulit.

Horminum Syriacum tomentosum foliis Coronopi sive profunde laciniatis Breyn.
Prod. 2. rarum foliis laciniatis Rauwolf. p. 107.

Hyacinthus comosus Byzantinus Clus. Ger. Park. Comosus albus Byzantinus C.B.
Comosus Byzantinus candicans cum staminulis purpureis J.B.

Hyacinthus racemosus moschatus C.B. Botroides major moschatus, sive Muscari
flore cinericeo Park. Odoratissimus dictus Tibcadi and Muscari J.B. Muscari
obsoletiore flore Clus. Muscari Clusii Ger. E vicinis Constantinopoli hortis,
ultra Bosphorum in Asia sitis primum Europae communicata est Clus.

Hyacinthus Orientalis, quibusdam Constantinopolitanus J.B. Orientalis C.B.
cujus duodecim aut tredecim recenset spec^es: plures Parkinsonus. Alii enim
latifolii sunt, alii angustifolii. Horum alii floribus purpureis sunt, alii
albis vel exalbidis. Utriusque generis alii polyanthes sunt floribus vel in
unum latus propendentibus, vel in omnem partem aequaliter sparsis; alii
pauciores producunt flores. Circa Halepum copiosiss. Rauwolf. p. 109.

Hyacinthus stellatus Byzantinus J.B. Stell. Byzantin. nigra radice Park. St.
Byz nig. rad. flore caeruleo Ger. Stellaris obsolete caeruleus vel major C.B.

Hyacinthus Stellatus Byzantinus major flore Boraginis Ger. St. Byz. alter s.
flore Boraginis Park. St. Byz. alter elegantissimus serotinus bullatus J.B.
Stellaris caeruleus amoenus C.B.

Hyacinthus eriophorus Park. parad. Bulbus eriophorus Clus. Ger. Eriophorus
Orientalis C.B. Constantinopoli saepius missus est Clus.

Hyacinthus Tripolitanus J.B. Exoticus flore Phalangii C.B. Florebat Aprili
Hepali, ubi observavit Rauwolfius. Hyacinthus Halepi Air dictus Rauwolfii p.
109.

Hyoscyamus Aegyptius cauliculis spinosissimis Moris. hist. Aegyptius,
cauliculis spinosis C.B. Peculiaris flore purpurascente J.B. Et Hyoscyamus
Syriacus ejusdem and Came. Ex semine Halepo a D. Huntingdon misso Morisono ortus
est. Eundem observavit etiam Rauwolfius in arvis circa Halepum. p. 111.

Hypericon montis Olympi Wheeler. An Ascyron magno flore C.B? In Olympo Asiae
monte.

Hypericum Syriacum Ger. Syriacum and Alexandrinum J.B. Folio breviore C.B.

I.
Jacea Babylonica C.B. prod. Park. Hujus Folium C. Bauhinus ex horto Contareni
habuit.

Jacea maxima Alpin. exot. Ex seminibus Hierosolyma delatis enata est.

Jaceam laciniatam capitulis luteis, and Jaceam capitulis purpurascentibus
Monte Libano observavit Rauwolf. p. 231, 232. Vide Catalogum generalem.

Jasminum sive Sambac Arabum Alpino J.B. Sambac Arabicum s. Gelseminum Arabicum
Alpin. Egypt. Syringa Arabica foliis Mali Aurantii C.B.

Jasminum Persicum v. Syringa.

Iris bulbosa Persica Park. parad. Persica variegata praecox Ferrar. Flor.

Iris Chalcedonica Ger. Chalcedonica s. Susiana major Park. Susiana flore
maximo ex albo nigricante C.B. Latifolia major Susiana vel Chalcedonica, flore
majore variegato Clusio J.B. Constantinopoli delata est.

Iris Asiatica caerulea Polyanthos C.B. Asiatica caerulea omnium amplissima,
Dalmaticae affinis J.B. Constantinopoli accepit Clusius.

Iris Byzantina purpuro-caerulea C.B. Major latifolia Byzantina, Dalmaticae
minori similis J.B. Major Latifolia 18. Clus.

Iris Asiatica purpurea C.B. Asiat. purp. major latifolia J.B. Major latif. 5.
sive Asiatica purp. Clus.

Iris Damascena polyanthos C.B. Major latifolia 4. s. Damascena Clus. Major
latif. sive Damascena caerulea J.B.

Iris Tripolitana Clus. Tripolitana foliis longissimis, flore aureo J.B. Media
longissimis foliis lutea C.B.

Iris tuberosa C.B. Ger. Park. Tuberosa Belgarum J.B. Ex Arabia and regionibus
Orientalibus.

K.
Kali Arabum primum genus Rauwolf. Lugd. app. C.B. Juxta Tripolin copiosissimum
observavit Rauwolfius p. 33.

Kali Arabum secundum genus Rauwolf. Lugd. app. Kali geniculatum alterum vel
minus C.B. Cali Arabum aliud J.B. Circa Tripolin Syriae Rauwolf. ibid.

Kismesen vel Kesmesen Bellonio. Acacalis quorundam s. Kesmesen foliis Ceratiae
J.B. Siliquae Sylvestri similis, an Dioscoridis Acacalis C.B. Semen hujus
Cayrinae and Kismesen nomine a Paludano ex Syria reduce accepit C. Bauhinus.

L.
Lamium moschatum, foliorum marginibus argentatis Wheeler. Circa Panthaeum
inter Amphissam and Naupactum in Graecia.

Lapathum Chalepense folio acuto, seminum involucris profunde dentatis Moris.
hist.

Laserpitium Alpin. exot. Bod. a Stapel. Comm. in Theophr. hist. lib. 6. p.
588. Ex seminibus a Thracia delatis ortum est.

Lathyrus (...) s. supra infraque terram siliquas gerens Moris. hist. An Araco
similis planta ex Hispania missa Bod. a Stapel. In Asia Syriaque provenit.
Semina ab urbe Chalepo a D. Roberto Huntingdon ad Morisonum transmissa fuere.

Laurocerasus Clus. Ger. J.B. Cerasus folio Laurino C.B. Cerasus Trapezuntina
s. Lauro-cerasus Park. A Trapezunte primo in Constantinopolin illata dicitur,
inde in Europam.

Leontopetalon Ger. Park. C.B. quorundam J.B. Assab Syrorum. Circa Halepum
Rauwolfius reperit. D. Wheelerus per totam planitiem Atticam inter Athenas and
Hymettum Rauw. p. 108.

Lepidium Dioscoridis Zanoni, Planta Persica. Maximum Chalepense, primis foliis
minoribus and serratis; secundis majoribus and profunde sinuatis, spissis
incanis Moris. hist.

Lencoium Alyssoides clypeatum majus C.B. Alysson Dioscorides. Ad Conrongeli
pagum in Bythinia Wheeler. Monte Libano Rauwolf. p. 231.

Libanotis latifolia Aquilegiae folio C.B. Park. J.B. Ligusticum Rauwolfii
foliis Aquilegiae J.B.

Lilium album Syriacum Rauwolfii J.B. Album Byzantinum Clus. Park. Ger. Album
floribus dependentibus seu peregrinum C.B. Sultan Zambach and Martagon
Constantinopolitanum flore albo Clus. hist. Halepi locis aquosis.

Lilium Byzantinum miniatum C.B. Flore miniato nutante, sive Hemerocallis
Chalcedonica quibusdam J.B. Lil. rubrum Byzantinum s. Martagon
Constantinopolitanum Park.

Lilium Susianum Clus. Persicum Ger. Park. C.B. Persicum sive Susianum J.B.
Susianum dictum est, quod Susis Persiae urbe delatum fuerit.

Linaria annua Chalepensis, minor, erecta, flore albo, lineis violaceis notato,
calyci ex quinis foliis constanti insidente Moris. hist. A.D. R. Huntingdon
semen accepit.

Linariae purpurascentis duas species Monte Libano observavit Rauwolf. p. 232.

Lupinus peregrinus pentaphyllos C.B. Arabicus, sive Pentaphyllum peregrinum
Ponae Ital. Pentaphyllum peregrinum Siliquosum bivalve minus Moris. hist. Ex
semine Chalepo Syriae urbe transmisso Morisono enata est.

Lychnidis Chalcedonicae umbella Phlomos Lychnitis altera Syriaca Lob. Phlomos
Lychnitis Syriaca Ger. Verbascum acuto Salviae folio C.B. Foliis Salviae
tenuifoliae Syriacum Park. Verb. Lychn. Syriacum incanum summitate floris
Hierosolymitanae J.B.

Lychnis Chalcedonica Ger. Park. Hirsuta flore coccineo major C.B. Flos
Constantinopolitanus miniatus, albus and varius J.B.

Lychnis flore punctato Wheeleri. In Insula Zazyntho.

Lychnis Sylvestris hirsuta annua, flore minore carneo Moris. hist. Semina a D.
Huntington Chalepo transmissa sunt.

Lychnis Chalepensis annua, foliis parum hirtis and angustis, flosculis
carneis, pediculis biuncialibus insistentibus, capsulis fere rotundis Moris.
hist.

Lycium Dioscoridis Rauwolf. Buxi foliis angustioribus Syriacum Breyn. Prod. 2.
Hadhad Arabibus and Zaroa incolis montis Libani. p. 233.

Lycium Buxi foliis rotundioribus Syriacum vel Persicum Breyn. Prod. 2. quem
consule.

Lycopsis Dioscoridis Rauwolf. Lugd. app. Lycopsis Aegyptiaca C.B. p. 109.
Circa Halepum in arvis.

M.
Majorana Syriaca vel Cretica C.B. Marum Syriacum Ad. Lob. Ger. Syriacum vel
Creticum Park.

Malva hortensis seu rosea folio subrotundo caulescens, flore simplici minore
luteo-pallido Chalepensis Moris. hist.

Marrubium villosum Syriacum seu montis Libani Breyn. Prod. 2.

Medica trifolia foliis dissectis Rauwolf. p. 107.

Medica siliquis compressis viridibus longitudine and latitudine Siliquarum
Senae Rauwolf. ibid.

Medium Dioscoridis Rauwolfii J.B. Viola Mariana laciniatis foliis peregrina
C.B. Mariana peregrina Park. v. viola.

Megasac Arabum, i. e. Poterium Matthew. Rau. 106.

Melantzana vel Melongena v. Solanum pomiferum.

Melilotus curvis siliquis biuncialibus Syriaca s. Chalepensis major Moris.
hist. D. Huntington misit.

Melilotus Syriaca Park. Syriaca odora Ger. Melilotus corniculis reflexis major
C.B. Non Syriaca tantum est, sed and Italica, verum in Syriaca siliqua videtur
magis curva falcatave Lob. Melilotus siliculis pendentibus longis, curvis ex
eodem centro ortis Germanica seu Italica Syriacave recta Moris. hist. D.
Huntingdon semen ex Halepo transmisit.

Melilotus lutea minor, floribus and siliculis majoribus, spicatim and raro
dispositis, foliis angustioribus, maculis sub exortum notatis Moris. hist. Hanc
etiam speciem semine a D. Huntington accepto debemus.

Melilotus minima Syriaca. Nephel sive Naphal Iben baithar and Malasefae Breyn.
prod. 2.

Melissa Turcica Ger. Turcica multis dicta J.B. Turcica flore caeruleo and albo
Park. Peregrina folio oblongo C.B. Ex Moldavia ad nos primum deleta est.

Melissa Moluca laevis sive Syriaca laevis Park. Rauwolf. p. 49. Mel. Molucca
laevis Ger. Molucana odorata C.B. Asiaticae originis est, Constantinopoli
primum delata, unde and nonnullis Melissa Constantinopolitana dicitur. Ejusdem
loci and originis est Melissa Molucca asperior; quae and in Sicilia spontanea
est v. Cat. Sic.

Melochia v. Corchorus Plinii.

Mes sive Meisce Avicennae v. Mungo.

Morgsani Syrorum Rauwolf. i. e. Capparis Portulacae folio C.B. Capparis fabago
Ger. Fabaginea seu Peplis Lutetianorum J.B. Fabago s. leguminosa Park.
Telephium Dioscoridis and Plinii Col. Circa Tripolin invenit Rauwolfius.

Mosselini seu Muslin panni linei e Gossipii quadam specie facti, and a regione
Mossoli dicta in Mesopotamia denominati.

Mungo Col. Clus. J.B. Garc. Fructus niger Coriandro similis C.B. Mes sive
Meisce Avicennae Rauwolf. p. 68. Nasci ferunt in Palaestina Halepi observavit
Rauwolfius; ubi semina Turcis in pretio sunt, and cum Oryza mixta in deliciis
habentur.

Myagyrum Arabicum Rosa Hierichuntina perperam dictum Zanoni v. Rosa
Hierichontica.

Myrtus fructu nigro caeruleo, Sorbi magnitudine eduli Rauwolf. p. 65. An
Myrtus angustifolia Baetica C.B. Clus. Hist.

N.
Narcissus Persicus Clus. Park. Ger. Colchicum melino flore C.B.

Nasturtium Babylonicum Lob. Est Draba umbellata s. Draba major capitulis
donata C.B.

Negill Rauwolf. Gramini rubro loliaceo affine p. 195. Pecori exitiale.

O.
Olea sylv. folio molli incano C.B. Zizyphus Cappadocia quibusdam olea Bohemica
J.B. Zizyphus alba Bellon. Seisefun Rauwolf. Monte Libano aliisque Syriae locis
observavit Rauwolfius p. 101, 226.

Origanum Smyrnaeum Wheeleri hist. nost. p. 540. Smyrnae in monte cui Arx
inaedificatur copiose.

Ornithogalum Arabicum Clus. Park. Majus Arabicum Ger. emac. Umbellatum maximum
C.B. Lilium Alexandrinum s. Ornithog. maximum Syriacum J.B.

Onobrychis major annua, siliculis articulatis, asperis, clypeatis, undulatim
(i. e. antrorsum and retrorsum) junctis, flore purpuro-rubente Moris. hist. Ex
semine Chalepo a D. Huntington transmisso in horto Academico Oxomenia enata est.

P.
Parma major C.B. Palma Dactylifera Jonston. In Syria frequens.

Panax Syriacum Theoph. est Panax Pastinacae folio sive Heracleum majus; in
Sicilia nobis observatum. v. Cat. genesis

Papaver Corniculatum flore sanguineo Wheeleri. In Attica circa Hymettum.

Persea C.B. J.B. Arbor Ger. Arbor Clusii Park. In Persia oriri dicitur and
venenosa ibi esse, cum in Aegypto nata innocens sit.

Periploca latifolia Wheeleri itin. p. 223. Ad vias publicas prope Prusiam
Bythiniae urbem.

Petromarula Cretica in Monte Parnasso e rupium fissuris exit Wheeler.

Phaseolus Turcicus flore flavo Rauwolf. p. 49.

Planta lactaria Xabra and Camarronum Rhasis etc. v. Tithymalus.

Pistacea Ger. J.B. Nux Pistacea Park. Pistacea Peregrina fructu racemoso, sive
Terebinthus Indica Theophrasti C.B. Multis Syriae locis abundat, ut circa
Sermin urbem, inter Tripolin and Halepum, ubi integrae earum Sylvae sunt necnon
circa Tripolin ipsam p. 59, and 64.

Polium Gnaphaloides Alpin. exot. Park. Wheelerus in Monte Parnasso observavit,
unde Plantam a Gnaphalio maritimo vulgari distinctam esse, contra quam
aliquando opinati sumus, verisimile est.

Polygonum bacciferum scandens C.B. Ephedra sive Anabasis Bellonii Park. Ad
pedes montis Olympi and in monte Haemo. item circa Tripolin Syriae Rauwolf. p.
49.

Polygonum maximum, longissimis cauliculis and foliis Moris. hist. Circa
Halepum Syriae urbem invenitur.

Poterium Matthew. i. e. Tragacanthae affinis lanuginosa sive Poterium C.B. Circa
Halepum observavit Rauwolf. p. 107. v. Cat. Hispan.

Prunella Spinosa Wheeler. In Atticae monte Hymetto.

Pseudo dictamnus acetabulis Moluccae C.B. alter Theophrasti Ponae Park. In
Cithaera Insula Wheeler.

Pulsatilla rubra Ger. J.B. Flore rubro Park. Flore rubro obtuso C.B. Ex Halepo
habuit Lobelius.

Q.
Quadrifolium annuum Persicum Zanoni.

R.
Ranunculus Asiaticus grumosa Radice 1. Clus. Tripolitanus Ger. Tripolitanus
flore Phoenicio J.B. Asiaticus sive Tripolitanus flore rubro Park. Grumosa
radice, flore Phoeniceo minimo simplici C.B.

Ranunculi Asiatici plurimae seu species, seu varietates in hortis aluntur,
quas omnes recensere nimis Longum foret. Consulantur Clusius, C. Bauhinus,
Hortus Regius Parisiensis, aliique.

Raphanistrum monospermon maximum Chalepense, flore luteo, capsula rotunda
striata. Moris Hist.

Rhamnus spinis oblongis, flore candicante C.B. Hauset and Hausegi sive Rhamnus
primus Rauwolf. Circa Tripolin.

Rhaponticum Thracicum s. Hippolapathum maximum rotundifolium exoticum,
Rhabarbarum verum nonnullis falso creditum. In Rhodope Thraciae monte Alpin.

Ribes verum Arabum J.B. Arabum, foliis Petasitidis C.B. Lapathum rotundifolium
montis Libani semine maximo Breyn. prod. 2. An Ribes Bellonii de Coniferis?
Rauwolfius in monte Libano observavit, and figuram ejus exhibuit. p. 220, 230,
231.

Rosa Hierichontea vulgo dicta C.B. Park. Thlaspi Rosa de Hiericho dictum
Moris. Hist. Myagrum Arabicum Rosa Hierichuntina perperam dictum Zanoni. Circa
Hiericho nusquam reperitur, sed in Arabia deserta ad litora maris in sabulo.
Bellon.

Rosae Hierachonteae altera species sylvestris C.B. Park. Myagrum Syriacum
femine spinoso Zanoni. In Syriae tectis and ruderibus invenit Rauwolfius.

Ruta quae dici solet Harmala J.B. Sylvestris Syriaca sive Harmala Park. Sylv.
flore magno C.B.

Melanthium Syriacum minus frutescens latifolium, Rutae flore, fructu
tricapsulari Breyn. Prod 2.

Ruta Chalepensis tenuifolia, florum pet^lis villis scatentibus Moris. Hist.
Cat. Hort. Lugd. Bat.

S.
Salix Arabica folio Atriplicis C.B. Humilis Arabica folio Atriplicis Park.
Garab Maurorum, Salicis genus J.B. Garab Maurorum Rauwolf. Lugd. app. p. 101.
Garb Itinerar. Rauwolf. p. 159.

Salix Syriaca folio oleagineo argenteo C.B. Aegyptiaca and Syriaca Park.
Salsaf Syrorum, Salicis species J.B. Circa Halepum.

Salvia Syriaca Cisti faeminae foliis, acetabulis moluccae Breyn. cent. Hujus
meminit Rauwolfius in Hodoeporico p. 108.

Satureia frutescens Arabica folio fimbriato hirsuto Breyn. prod. 2. Sathar
Arabum Rauwolfii, Hyssopum montanum Cilicium quibusdam J.B. Hyssopus montana
angustifolia aspera C.B. Montana vel de Cilissa Park.

Scabiosa argentea petraea. In isthmo Corinthiaco.

Scabiosa argentea minor montis Sipyli Wheeleri itin. p. 239.

Scammonia Syriaca C.B. Syriaca legitima Park. Syriaca flore majore Convolvuli
J.B. Scammonium Syriacum Ger. In calidis pingui solo exit ut in Asia and Syria,
and Bellonio test etiam in Creta.

Schamuth Arabum seu Schack Rauwolf. p. 103, 152. C. Bauhino Acacia Aegyptiaca
habetur: nobis tamen aliter videtur, ut ex siliquae descriptione apparet.

Scorzonera radice rotunda Wheeleri. Ga^acorta Graecis modernis. In Attica
circa Hymettum montem.

Scorzonera foliis fistulosis, Galacorta etiam dicta Wheeler. Cum priore.

Scorzonera Orientalis Vesling notis in Prosp. Alpin. de Plant. Egypt. In
Palaestina and finitimis Aegypti. An Scorzonera Chalepensis flore purpureo
Rauwolf? p. 104. Alterum Scorzoneram floribus luteis monte Libano observavit
Rauwolf. p. 230.

Scordium lanuginosum alterum verticillatum C.B. Scordotis tomentosa Cretica
J.B. Prope Mandragorui vicum in Phrygia observavit D. Wheelerus.

Sebestena domestica an (...) Athenaeo C.B. Myxa sive Sebesten J.B. Myxos sive
Sebesten Park Sebestena, Myxa s. Myxara Ger. In Asia and Aegypto Rau. p. 21.

Secacul Arabum. v. Sisarum.

Secudes Arabum. v. Stoechadi serratae affinis.

Seisefun Rauwolf. Halepi in locis humidis and sepibus frequens, est Olea
Bohemica Matthew. Rauwolf. p. 101.

Sepha, seu Persea Arbor Venenata Rauwolf. p. 197.

Sideritis Persica odorata Zanoni. An Herba venti Monspeliensium?

Sisarum Syriacum C.B. Alterum Syriacum Park. Secacul Arabum and Mauritanorum,
sive Pastinaca Syriaca Rauwolf. Lugd. app. J.B. Rau. p. 66.

Sisyrinchium Persianum C.B. Flos Persicus Sisyrhinchio congener Clus. Hist.

Sisyrhinchium Chalepense Tharasalis dictum Rauwolf. p. 104.

Solanum pomiferum fructu incurvo C.B. J.B. Melantzana Arabum Rauwolfii Lugd.
app. Halepi. p. 66.

Solanum pomiferum fructu spinoso J.B. Melantzana nigra Rauwolf. Lugd. app.

Sorghi album, Milium Indicum J.B. Milium Arundinaceum semine plano and albo
C.B. Dora Rauwolf. p. 171. In Arabia circa Anam.

Spartium alterum monospermon, semine reni simili C.B. Secundum Hispanicum
Clus. Prope Thyatiram in Asia invenit D. Wheelerus. v. Cat. Hispan.

Speculum Veneris Thracicum flore amplissimo. Inter segetes prope
Constantinopolin invenit D. Covel SS. Theol. Doctor, and Collegii Christi in
Cantabrigia Praeses dignissimus.

Stachys viscosa flore luteo Wheeleri. In monte Parnasso.

Stoechadi serratae affinis C.B. Tragium alterum Dioscoridis quibusdam, folio
Trichomanis J.B. Secudes and Sucudus Avicennae Rauwolf. p. 112. Lugd. app.

Sycomorus J.B. Jer. Sycomorus sive Ficus Aegyptia Park. Ficus folio Mori,
fructum in caudice ferens C.B. In Syria and Palaestina non minus frequens est
quam in Aegypto. p. 50, 51.

Syringa Persica sive Lilac Persicum incisis foliis. Jasminum Persicum dictum
Park. Agem Lilag Persarum, s. Lilac inciso folio Cornuto Ligustrum foliis
laciniatis. C.B. Syringa Persica purpurea duplex, foliis laciniatis, and soliis
integris.

T.
Terebinthus Indica major fructu rotundo J.B. Peregrina, fructu majore.
Pistaciis simili eduli C.B. latifolia Ger. Park. Indica prior Theophrasti,
major Rauwolf. Lugd. app.

Terebinthus Indica, fructu parvo ad coeruleum accedente J.B. Peregrina fructu
minore coeruleo and eduli C.B. Hujus fructus Botn Soagier illius Botn quibir
Arabibus dicitur. Rauwolf. p. 193.205. In Persia Mesopotamia and Armenia.

Tereniabin Mannae genus v. Alhagi. Rauw. p. 85.

Tharasalis v. Sisyrhynchium.

Thlaspi fruticosum Persicum foliis Keiri Zanoni. Fruticosum Leucoii folio C.B.
Park. Latifolium platy carpon Leucoii foliis P. Boccone.

Thlaspi verum Dioscoridis s. Persicum Zanoni. Thlaspi Alexandrinum C.B. Park.
Alexandrinum Cortusi Jo. Bauhini J.B.

Thymus verus Dioscoridis, Hasce Arabum Rauwolf. p. 52.

Tithymalus spinosus Creticus Alpin. Maritimus spinosus C.B. Marit. Creticus
spinosus Park. In Graecia, plurimis in locis.

Tithymalus (vel Tithymalo affinis) aphyllos dictus major Indicus, latifolius,
flore sanguineo aviculae capitulum repraesentante Breyn. An Planta lactaria,
Xabra and Camarronum Rhasis Rauwolf. and C.B. pin.

Tragacantha humilior floribus luteis C.B. Syriaca flavescers Park. Trag.
Rauwolfii J.B. In monte Libano. Rauwolf, p. 230.

Tragacantha Syriaca purpurascens Park. Tertia Rauwolfii. In eodem monte.

Tragium alterum Dioscoridis Rauwolf. v. Stoechadi serratae affinis.

Trionum Theophrasti Rauw. Lugd. app. Est Alcea Indica parvo flore C.B. i. e.
Bamia. v. Alcea.

Trunschibil Mannae genus Rauw. p. 84. v. Alhagi.

Tulipa Persica Park. Variegata Persica C.B. Persica praecox Clus. cur. post.

Tulipam omne genus colorum circa Halepum observavit Rauwolfius p. 109.

V.
Verbascum subrotundo Salviae folio Syriacum C.B. Salvifolium exoticum
cistoides Park. Sylvestre Salvifolium exoticum, folio rotundiore J.B.

Viola Mariana laciniatis foliis peregrina C.B. Medium Dioscor. and Mindium
Rhosis Rauwolf. p. 232. Monte Libano observavit Rauwolf. Trachelii seu
Campanulae species est.

Vitex trifolia minor C.B. Agni casti species multo minor caeteris, tribus
tantum firmis foliis donata Rauwolf. p. 153.

Z.
Zarneb and Zarnabum Arabum v. Salix Safsaf.

Zarneb melchi v. Daucus tertius Dioscoridis.

Zaroa. v. Lycium.

Stirpium Aegyptiacorum Catalogus.
A.
ABdellavi v. Melo Aegyptius.

Abelmosch v. Alcea Aegyptiaca villosa C.B.

Abrus v. Phaseolus Indicus ruber Bontii.

Absynthium Santonicum Aegyptiacum Park. C.B. Aegyptium quibusdam J.B. Abrotani
foeminae species secunda Zanoni.

Absus seu Lotus Aegyptiaca Park. Absus Alpin, Egypt. Vesling. Loto affinis
Aegyptiaca C.B.

Abutilon Avicennae Ponae Ital. Alpin. Est Abelmosch seu Alcea Indica Moschata.

Acacalis est Kismesen Bellon. v. Cat. Orient.

Acacia vera J.B. Vera sive Spina Aegyptiaca Park. Dioscoridis Ger. Foliis
scorpioidis leguminosae C.B.

Achaovan Alpin. Aeg. Matricaria inodora C.B. Park. Parthenium inodorum sive
Achaovan Aegyptiorum J.B.

Agihalid Aegyptiaca Lycio affinis Park. Aegytium folio buxi, an Lycium? J.B.
Lycio affinis Aegyptiaca C.B. Uzeg Alpini affinis and similis est, si non eadem.

Alcanna v. Ligustrum Orientale.

Alcea Aegyptia villosa C.B. Aegyptia moschata Park. Belmuscus Aegyptia Honor.
Bell. J.B. Ab-el-mosch sive Mosch Arabum Vesling.

Alchimelech Aegyptiorum v. Melilotus Aegyptiaca.

Amomum Plinii Ger. Solanum fruticosum Americanum, dictum Amomum Plinii Park.
Fruticosum bacciferum C.B. Strychnodendros J.B. In Aegypto passim Vesling.

Arum maximum Aegyptiacum, quod vulgo colocasia C.B. Egypt. rotunda and longa
radice, vulgo Colocasia dicta Park. Colocasia Clus. J.B. Aegyptiaca Ger.

B.
Balsamum verum antiquorum nec Aegypti nex Judaeae indigena est, sed Arabiae
Faelicis v. Cat. Oriental.

Bammia J.B. Seu Alcea Aegyptiaca Park. Parad. Alcea Aegyptiaca Ger. emac.
Indica parvo flore C.B. In Aegypto frequentissima.

Ban vel Bon arbor J.B. Item Buna, Bunnu and Bunchos Arabum ejusdem. Bon arbor
cum fructu suo Buna Park. Euonymo similis Aegyptiaca, fructu baccis Lauri
simili C.B. Male Aegyptiacam vocat, neque enim spontanea, neque culta in
Aegypto invenitur sed in Arabia Faelice tantum Bunnu Rauwolfii, Buna ex qua in
Alexandria fit potio [ Coffee dicta.]

Ban seu Calaf Alpin. Safsaf Syrorum Rauwolf vel eadem est, vel ei valde
affinis. v. Cat. Orient.

Baobab Alpino, Baohab sive Abavus Clus. J.B. Abavo arbor radice tuberosa C.B.
Abavi Aethiopicus fructus bello J.B. Guanabanus Scaligeri huic Eadem arbor esse
videtur. Aethiopiae natales debet, Aegypto advena est.

Beidelsar Alpini, seu Apocynum Syriacum J.B. Apocynum Syriacum Clusii Ger.
emac. Lapathum Aegyptiacum lactescens siliqua Asclepiadis C.B. Paul. Hermannus
in Cat. Hort. Leyd. Plantam hanc ab Apocyno majori recto Syriaco Cornut. Specie
diversam facit; quo cum consentit Commelinus in Cat. Hort. Amstel. Jac.
Breynices in Prod. 2. Veslingum reprehendit quod pro Apocyno hoc Apocynum majus
Syriacum rectum Cornuti posuerit. Verum in titulo Apocyni hujus non omnino
consentit cum Hermanno and Commelino: Siquidem hi, ut and Scholae Botanicae
Tournefortii, Apocynum latifolium Aegyptiacum, incanum, erectum, floribus
spicatis maximis pallide violaceis, siliquis folliculatis rugosis hoc vocant:
Breynius autem, Apocynum erectum majus latifolium Aegyptiacum flore luteo
spicato. Apocynum autem illud latifolium etc. floribus pallide violaceis etc.
Hermanni and aliorum. Indicam and distinctam plantam facit, titulo Apocyni
erecti majoris latifolii Indici flore concavo amplo carneo suave-rubente and
cum antecedenti i. e. Aegyptiaco non confundendam monet.

Brassica spinosa C.B. Aegyptiaca Alpin. exot. Park. In Aegypto, Aethiopia and
Syria.

C.
Caova Alpin. i. e. Coffee Potio.

Capparis non spinosa fructu majore C.B. Park. Alpinus Cappares Alexandriae
majores quam alibi inveniantur provenire scribit.

Carob s. Carub i. e. Siliqua dulcis in Syria and Palaestina, and circa
Hierosolymam multo frequentior est quam in Aegypto.

Cassab and Darira Alp. exot. Lysimachia lutea Aegyptiaca Hist. nost. p. 1022.
In Aegypto, locis humidis, inque judaea circa lacum Gennesareth, and multis
Syriae in locis.

Cassia fistula Alexandrina C.B. Fistula Ger. Purgatrix J.B. Solutiva vulgaris
Park. In Aegypto aliisque regionibus calidioribus.

Chate Alpin. Cucumis Aegyptius Chate J.B. Cucumis Aegyptius rotundifolius C.B.

Caucalis Daucoides Tingitana Moris. prael.

Chamaedrys arborea Aegyptiaca C.B. Arborea in Insula Corcyra Alpin. Nescio cur
C. Bauhinus hanc Plantam Aegyptiacam denominet, cum Alpinus in Aegypto nasci
non affirmet, sed in Corcyra insula.

Colocasia v. Arum Aegyptiacum.

Convolvulus Aegyptiacus quinquefolius C. Bauhini J.B. Foliis laciniatis, vel
quinquefolius C.B. Major Arabicus sive Aegyptius Park. Aegyptius Vesl^ngii qui
vix dari cultiorem in Aegypto hortum scribit cui non ornamentum commodet.

Cyperus rotundus Orientalis major in Aegypto etiam copiose provenit. v. Cat.
Orient.

Cyprus i. e. Alcanna seu Elhanne v. Ligustrum Orientale.

D.
Datura v. Stramonium.

E.
Elhanne v. Ligustrum Orientale.

F.
Faba Aegyptia Bod. a Stapel. Faba Aegyptiaca Dioscoridis affinis C.B. Fructus
valde elegans, Faba forte Aegyp. Diosc. J.B. Alpinus Fabam Aegyptiam pro
Colocasia habet. Nascitur in paludosis and ad fluviorum ripas in India
Orientali, an in Aegypto nescio. Nymphaeae speciem faciunt qui de ea
scripserunt.

Felfel-tavil seu Piper longum Aegyptium Alpini and Veslingii qui in maritimis
Africae locis plantam satis frequentem esse ait.

Ferula Tingitana, folio latissimo lucido Hort. Edinburgh.

Ficus Aegyptia seu Sycomorus Park. Folio Mori fructum in caudice ferens C.B.
Sycomorus Ger. J.B. In Aegypto and Syria copiose.

G.
Gossipium arboreum caul laevi C.B. Xylon arboreum J.B. Park. In Aegypto
invenitur.

Gramen erucis sive Neiem. el. salib. Alpini J.B. Bont. dactylon Aegyptiacum
C.B. Park. In Aegypto frequens.

Gramen Stellatum Aegyptium Veslingii. Dactylon Egypt. Park. Qui in
praecedentis descriptione hujus quoque meminit. Circa Heracleam seu Rossetum
oppidum.

H.
Hyacinthus Mauritanicus Clus. Hist. ap. 1. Oblongo Flore fusco C.B. Ex ea
Mauritaniae part ubi urbes Fessa and Marochum sita sunt delatus est.

Hyoscyamus Aegyptius Park. Rubello flore Ger. Peculiaris flore purpurascente
J.B. Et Hyos. Syriacus ejusa'em. Canliculis spinosissimis Aegyptiacus C.B. Et
rubello flore ejusdem. Hyoscyamus albus Aegyptius Alpin. Aeg.. and Exot.
Vesling. Juxta Pyramides Aegyptias majores.

K.
Kali Aegyptiacum foliis valde longis hirsutis C.B. An Psyllium minus quod
Gottne rubri and Botrio rubro nomine accepit C. Bauhinus? Kali tertia species
Alpini Aeg.

L.
Lablab seu Leblab Alpini v. Phaseolus.

Lathyrus Tingitanus flore amplo ruberrimo* Semina hujus Plantae, ut and
aliarum rariarum D. Alex. Balam e Tingi urbe Africae in Angliam primus detulit.

Libanotis cachryophoros semine sulcato laevi Moris. praelud. E Mauritania
Tingitana attulit D. Alex. Balam.

Ligustrum Orientale sive Cyprus Dioscoridis and Plinii Park. Ligustrum
Aegyptiacum latifolium and angustifolium C.B. Alcanna and Elhanne Arabum, nunc
Graecis Schenna Rauwolfii.

Lotus Aegyptia Alpin. exot. Nymphaea seu Neufar Aegyptium Vesling. Nymphaea
alba major Aegyptiaca sive Lotus Aegyptia Park. In aquis.

Luffa Arabum seu Cucumis Aegyptius reticulatus Vesling. In horto Arabis
cujusdam prope Cayrum vidit Veslingius.

Lupinus Aegyptius Sylvestris Veslingii v. Cat. Oriental. In villarum sepibus
prope Heracleam seu Rossetum.

Lycium Indicum creditum Alpino Park. Indicum Alpino putatum J.B. Indicum
alterum (Uzeg) C.B. Supra ripas rami Nili C^lig vocati 10. ab Alexandria m. p.
invenit Alpinus.

Lycopsis Aegyptiaca Park. v. Cat. Orient.

M.
Marum Aegyptiorum Alpin. exot. l. 2. c. 10. Aegyptiorum Alpino Park. app.
Vesling.

Musa arbor J.B. Park. Musa Serapionis Ger. Mauz Musa Alpin. Palma humilis
longis latisque foliis C.B. In Aegypto frequens.

Melilotus Aegyptiaca Park. Aegyptia Alchimelech vocata J.B. Corniculis
reflexis minor C.B.

Melo Aegyptius C.B. Melones Abdellavi Aegyptii J.B.

Melochia Alpini. Corchorus Ger. Plinii C.B. Cor sive Melochia J.B. Park. Olus
Judaicum nonnullis. In cibis nihil est ea Aegyptiis familiarius aut gratius Alp.

Moly Africanum umbella purpurascente C.B. prod. Africum umbella purpurascente
Park.

N.
Nabca folio Rhamni vel Jujubae J.B. Nabca Paliurus Athenaei credita Alpin.
Oenoplia spinosa and non spinosa C.B. Ger. emac. app. Spinosa and non spinosa,
sive Napeca, sive Zizyhus alba Park. In Aegypto folia per totum annum retinet,
at in Creta, observante Bello per hyemem amittit. Aegyptus, Syria and Armenia
hac arbore abundant Bellon.

Nymphaea seu Nuphar Vesl. v. Lotus.

O.
Ocimum Aegyptium Alpini Rihan. dictum Herm. Hort. Acad. Leyd.

Oenoplia v. Nabca.

Oenanthe altera minor Africana Park. Item tenuisolia altera Africana, ejusdem
p. 895. E Barbaria Africae regione attulit Gulielmus Boelius.

P.
Paliurus Athenaei Alpino v. Nabca.

Palma Ger. C.B. vulgaris Park. Major C.B. Dactylifera major vulgaris Jonst. In
Aegypto and Syria.

Papyrus Nilotica Ger. J.B. Antiquorum Nilotica Park. Nilotica seu Aegyptiaca
C.B. Provenit etiam in Siciliae palustribus v. Cat. Sicularum rariorum P.
Boccone.

Phaseolus indicus ruber Bontii. Pisum Americanum coccineum, aliis abrus. J.B.
Abrus. Alpini de Plant. Egypt. Glyzyrrhiza Indica vulgo.

Phaseolus Lablab Alpini J.B.

Phaseolus Aegyptiacus nigro femine C.B.

Polium montanum pumilum tenuifolium Africum Park. A Guil. Boelio circa
Tunisium urbem collectum est.

R.
Ruta Sylvestris quae dicisolet Harmala J.B. Juxta Alexandririam v. Cat. Orient.

S.
Sabina Aegyptia Lob. est Abrotanum foemina Sabinae folio C.B.

Sebesten v. Cat. Orient. Non enim in Aegypto tantum sed and in Asia provenit.

Secamone Alpin. Egypt. Apocynum angusto Salicis folio C.B. Apocyno affinis
Secamone flore albo J.B. An Apocyni Secundi species altera Clus?

Sena J.B. Ger. Alexandrina Park. Alexandrina sive foliis acutis C.B. In Syria,
Persia, Arabia nasci aiunt, unde Alexandriam desertur.

Sefamum J.B. C.B. Park. and aliorum. Myagrum Aegyptiacum Zonani.

Sesban Alpini Egypt. Sesban sive Securidaca Aegyptia articulata Park. Galega
Aegyptiaca siliquis articulatis C.B.

Sinapi maritimum Aegyptiacum Alpin. exot. l. 2. c. 19. Ex seminibus Aegypto
delatis enata est.

Sonchus frutico^us Africanus petraeus spinosus Park. In petrosis circa Tunis
and Sapphi a Boelio inventus and ad Parkinsonum delatus est.

Sophera Alpini and Belli J.B. Galegae affinis Sophera dicta C.B. Sophera seu
securidac^ Aegyptiaca villosa Park. Hoxocoquamoclit Came. hort.

Stramonium minus flore geminato purpurante Park. Fructu rotundo, foliis per
ambitum X^nthii modo incisis Col. Solanum foetidum pomo spinoso rotundo, semine
pallido C.B. Datura Aegyptia Vesling. Contarena Alpin. exot.

Stratiotes Aegyptia J.B. aquatica vera Dioscoridis and Aegyptiaca Park.
Lenticula palustris Aegyptiaca, sive Stratiotes aquatica foliis Sedo majore
latioribus C.B. Aquis innatat sine radice, ut aiunt.

Stratiotes Aegyptia Dioscoridis Vesling. Haec and superior vel Nilo, vel
fossis inde deductis supernatat, nec radice in terram demissa firmatur, sed huc
illuc fluitat.

Sycomorus v. Ficus.

T.
Tamarindus Ger. Park. J.B. Siliqua Arabica quae Tamarindus C.B. Ex Aethiopia
in Arabiam and Aegyptum delatam nonnulli volunt.

Tamariscus Aegyptia gallifera J.B. Tamaria Aegyptia arbor C.B. Aegyptia gallas
serens Park. In Aegypto locis humidis secus slumina oritur, non raro etiam
aridis and sabulosis. Bellon.

Thlaspi Alexandrinum C.B. Park. Alexandrinum Cortusi J.B. Verum Dioscoridis
Zanoni.

U.
Uzeg arbor v. Lycium Indicum.

Z.
Zatar-hendi Origanum Indicum Alpini and Veslingii Origano congener Zatar-hendi
C.B. Zatarendi herba J.B. Planta Aegyptiaca non est, sed ex India illuc
deportata, ut nomen arguit. Coeterum. Zatarendi Alpin.

Stirpium Creticorum rariorum Catalogus.
A.
ABellicea Cretica sive Santalus adulterina J.B. Pseudo-santalus Cretica,
Abelicea dicta Park. Pseudosantalum Creticum C.B. In montibus Leucis, corumque
jugis altissimis.

B. Absinthium Ponticum Creticum grati odoris C.B. prod. In viridi saltem
amaritudo nulla percipitur, unde ab Asinis, pecoribus, omnibusque Brutis valde
expetitur.

Acanus Theophrasti Park. vid. Agavanus Cretensium.

Acanthus spinosus in agris and juxta semitas frequens est Bellon.

Acetosa Cretica semine aculeato C.B. Mihi descriptiones utriusque conferenti
eadem aliquando visa est cum Acetosa Neapolitana Ocimi folio (...) Col. Verum
peritissimus Botanicus D. Jacobus Breynius, qui utrumque coluit, and
observavit, nos erroris insimulat, and distinctae species cum sint, a me
perperam confundi scribit; cui non repugno, cum nec initio id fidenter, sed
timide affirmaverim.

Achlades Bellon. Pyri sylvestris genus.

Adrachnae Park. Theophrasti J.B. Arbutus folio non serrato C.B. Adracla
Graecis. In Creta, montibus Leucis, and alibi inter saxa.

Aga Cretensium C.B. i. e. Silybum minus Baeticum Park. Carduus lacteus
peregrinus Camerarii J.B. albis maculis notatus exoticus C.B.

Agasuga Bellon. i. e. Pyra sylvestria Cretica.

Agavanus Cretensium i. e. Acanus Theophrasti Park. Agavanus Cret. forte Acanys
Theophr. Hon. Belli ep. 5 ad Clusium, and Ponae Ital. Carduus latifolius
echinos obsoletae purpurae ferens C.B. Vulgaris est notit^ae in Creta.

Agriocinara Cretica Ponae Ital. Cinara Sy^vestris Cretica C.B. Park. Carduus
Agriocinara Cretensium, ex quo Costus niger Officinarum J.B. Agrioanzinari
Cretensium Bello ep. 2. ad Clusium. An Cinara sylv. Baetica Clus. cur. post?
Supra Chisami arcem Bellon.

Agriomelea Bellonii, quam in Cretae montibus invenisse scribit, exiguorum
malorum Pyris forma similium feracem, an Cotoneaster Gesn? v. Cat. genesis

Agriostari seu Frumentum sylvestre Creticum Ponae Ital. Bell.

Althaea fruticosa Cretica Park. Frutex 3. Clus. Hanc cum Althaea frutescente
Bryoniae folio C.B. s. frutescento folio acuto, flore parvo. Althaea Olbiae
perperam dicta, eaudem putamus. V. Cat. Sic.

Ammi Creticum Ger. Park. Creticum aromaticum Lo^. odore Origani J.B. Alterum
femine Apii C.B. Semen ex Alexandria Aegypti adfertur.

Anchusa humilis Alpin. exot. humilis Cretica Park. In locis montosis and
sylvis Cretae.

Anemone tenuifolia Cretica albo magno flore C.B. prod.

Anthyllis falcata Cretica Park. Trifolium falcatum Alpin. exot.

Anthyllis Alpin. exot. In maritimis copiose. Accedit ad Anthyllidem a Clusio
and J. Bauhino descriptam.

Arachydna aut Aracoides Honorii Belli, J.B. Cretica Park. Viciae similis,
supra infraque terram fructum ferens C.B.

Archontoxylon i. e. Ebenus Cretica.

Arcturus Creticus Belli v. Blattaria pilosa Cretica.

Aristolochia polyrrhizos v. Pistolochia.

Aristolochia clematitis serpens C.B. Reliqua Synonyma v. in Cat. Hisp. Arbores
scandit Ephedrae aut Smil^cis modo. Bellon.

Arundo graminea aculeata Alpin. exot. In locis humidis supra terram serpit.

Asclepias Cretica Clusii J.B. Park. Siliqua bifido mucrone C.B.

Ascolimbros Bellonii non est (ut puto) Scolymus chrysanthemos s. Eryngium
luteum Narbonensium, sed Carduus Siculus chrysanthemus procerior caul eduli
Hist. nost. p. 258.

Ascyroides Cretica Alpin. exot. Cretica major Park. Hanc plantam in Hist.
nost. eandem putavimus cum Androsaemo Constantinopolitano flore maximo Wheeler;
icon tamen non respondet, at neque descriptio: ut nunc murata sententia
diversam suspicer.

Aspalathus secundus Creticus Alp. v. Cytisus.

B.
Blattaria pilosa Cretica sive Arctos quorundam J.B. Verbascum humile Creticum
laciniatum C.B. Verbasculum sylv. Creticum Alpin exot. Blattaria Cretica
incana, rotundo laciniato folio Park. Arcturus Creticus Belli. Provenit inter
saxa and super parietes.

Blattaria Cretica spinosa Park. Leucoium Creticum spinosum Clus. J.B. Creticum
spinosum incanum luteum C.B. Spinosum Creticum Ger. Spinosum cruciatum Alpin.
Glastivida Cretensium Belli.

Borago Sylvestris annua Cretica Zanoni. Buglossum procumbens annuum pullo
minimo flore Moris. praelud.

Borago muralis variegata, flore odorato Cretica Zanoni, Buglossum Lusitanicum
bullatis foliis Moris. praelud. In muris urbis Candiae ex ipsis petrarum
fissuris exit.

Borago sylvestris Cretica flore rubro cremesino perennis, eadem videtur Echio
Cretico latifolio rubro C.B.

Buglossum Creticum verrucosum, perlatum quibusdam Schol. Bot. seu Hort. Reg.
Par. Tournefort.

Bryonia Cretica Pon. Ital. Cretica dicoccos Park. Cretica maculata C.B. Alba
maculata J.B. In Creta frequens est.

Buphthalmum Creticum Cotulae facie Breyn. Flore luteo and albo.

C.
Calamintha Cretica Came. Folio and flore parvo incana J.B. Incana Ocimi foliis
C.B. Minor incana Park. Montana vulgaris Ger. Ex semine e Creta misso Camerario
succrevit. Lobelius tamen cautibus Linguagotticis calidarumque regionum innasci
scriptum reliquit.

Calochierni carduus Cretensibus J.B. Atractyli and Cnico sylvestri similis
C.B. Forte Atractylis major e cujus caulibus mulieres fusos efficient.
Atractylidi vulgari similis, not tamen eadem. Vid. Hist. nost. p. 304.

Caloschirrida v. Echinus Creticus Alpin.

Carduus pinea Theophrasti Alpin. exot. pinea seu Ixine Theophrasti Park.
Chamaeleon albus gummi ut mastix ferens Bell.

Carduus Eryngoides capite spinoso Alpin. exot.

Caryophyllus arborescens Creticus C.B. Sylvestris arboreus Alpin. exot. Nostra
sententia. Betonica coronaria arborea Cretica J.B. In montibus Cretae oritur.

Caucalis Cretensium and Graecorum i. e. Seseli Creticum.

Cerasus Alpina Cretica, seu Idaea Alpin. exot. Vitis Idaea Cretica elatior
Park. Agrifolii folio. In monte Ida Cretae familiaris est. An Agriomelea
Bellonii?

Chamaecerasus Idaea Alp. ex. Vitis Idaea Cretica humilior Park. In monte Ida
nascitur.

Chamaecistus Alpin. exot. An Chamaecistus Serpyllifolia floribus carneis C.B?
Serpylli folio, flore carneo J.B? 7 Clus?

Chamaedaphnoides Cretica, seu Laureola Cretica humilis Alp. exot.
Chamaedaphnoides sive Laureola Cretica Park. In Cretae montanis.

Chamaedrys spinosa Cretica Park. Spinosa C.B. J.B. Ex horto Bembi Patavio
accepit C.B.

Chamaegenista Cretica C.B. Park. Parkinsonus pro Spartio Cretico Alp. ex. hanc
habet.

Chamaepeuce Plinii Anguillarae, v. Stoebe fruticosa Cretica.

Chamaepitys futicosa Cretica, v. Stoebe capitata Rosmarini foliis Ponae.

Chrysocome Cretica Clus. Elichrysum Creticum C.B. Santolina Cretica Alpin.
Hanc plantam pro Stoechade citrina alteri inodorae Lobelii affini capitulis
brevioribus J.B. habemus Vid. Hist. nost. p. 282. In montosis Cretae.

Cichoreum spinosum Creticum Park. Pon. In maritimis, inque siccis collibus and
arenosis locis. Hanc speciem in Sicilia observavimus. v. Cat. genesis

Cissampelos ramosa Cretica Park. Helxine Cissampelos ramosa Cretica Ponae.
Convolvuli species.

Cistus Ledon Cretense C.B. Led. latisolium Creticum J.B. Ladanifera Cypria
Park. Item ladanifera Cretica vera ejusdem. Ledon 4 Clusii Ger. Descriptionem
vid. in Alpin. exot.

Clinopodium Creticum Alpin. exot. Persimile est, si odorem excipias, Acino
vulgari.

Cneoron album folio Oleae argenteo molli C.B. v. Convolvulus rectus odoratus
Ponae.

Cnicus singularis Alpin. exot. alter Creticus Park.

Colutea Scorpioides Cretica odorata. Alpin. exot.

Convolvulus ramosus incanus, foliis Pilosellae C.B. Helxine Cissampelos ramosa
Cretica Pon. Ital Park.

Coris legitima Cretica Dioscoridis Belli Ger. emac. Park. Item Coris Matthioli
ejusdem: Nos enim has non distinguimus. C. Hypericoides quorundam J.B. Lutea
C.B. In collibus foecundis copiose.

Coronilla frutescens coronata glauco folio Cretica, flo. luteo odorato Breyn.
prod. 2

Cyanus arborescens longifolia Alpin. exot. In montanis Cretae nascitur.

Cyanus arborescens altera, Styracis folio Alpin. exot.

Cyanus tomentosus Alpin. exot.

Cyanus lanuginosus spinosus Creticus, and Cyanus fruticosus Creticus, v.
Stoebe fruticosa Cret.

Cynara sylvestris Cretica C.B. Park. Carduus Agriocinara Cretensium, ex quo
Costus niger Officinarum J.B. An Cinara sylv. Baetica Clus. cur post. Supra
Chisami arcem, etc. v. Bellon.

Cynoglossum Creticum secundum Clusii J.B. Creticum alterum Ger. Cret.
latifolium Park. Latifolium foetidum C.B. Cynoglossae alteri mediae fructu
cotylode sive Lychniode Col. eadem videtur planta.

Cynoglossum Creticum angustifolium Park. Creticum argenteo angusto folio C.B.
Creticum 1. Ger.

Cyperus rotundus odoratus Creticus Came. Park.

Cytisus Creticus, Aspalathus secundus Alpino dictus. In loco Fraschia dicto
prope Cretam urbem. Aspalathus 2. Dioscoridis Bello and aliis. V. Cat. genesis
Acacia trifolia.

D.
Daucus Creticus Ger. Creticus verus Dioscoridis Park. No^ videtur diversus a
Dauco Cretico semine hirsuto J.B. seu Dauco montano umbella candida C.B. V.
Hist. nost. p. 463.

Daucus stellatus Alpin. exot. Park. Planta a Dauco long diversa est.

Daucus tertius Dioscoridis Bello Ponae Park. Tertius solio Coriandri, flore
luteo J.B. Creticus nodosus umbella lutea C.B.

Dictamnus Creticus C.B. Park. Dict. Cretica seu vera J.B. Dictamnum Creticum
Ger. In monte Ida; in scopulorum fissuris, nec usquam alibi.

Dorycnium Creticum v. Convolvulus rectus.

Dorycnium Dioscoridis forte Ponae Park. Jaceae oleae folio affinis C.B. Item
Cneoro albo affinis ejusdem. Hujus semina e Creta ab Honorio Belli ad fe missa
Lagochymicae nomine scribit C. Bauhinus in Pinace.

E.
Ebenus Cretica Alpin. exot. Cytisus Creticus incanus sive Ebenus Cretica Belli
Park. C.B. Barba Jovis lagopodoides Cretica frutescens incana, flore spicato
purpureo amplo Breyn.

Echinopoda Cretensibus J.B. Echinop. frutex Creticus Park. Genista spartium
spinosum aphyllum, tribus aculeis semper junctis, floribus luteis C.B.

Echinus Creticus Park. Echinus seu Tragacantha alia humilior and spinosior
Alpin. exot. Graeci Caloschirrhida vocant.

Echium Creticum latifolium rubrum C.B. Park. An Echium Candiae flore pulchre
rubente J.B? V. Cat. genesis

Echium Creticum Alp. exot. Creticum album Park. Echium pumilum flore luteo
C.B. Park. h. e. Echium flavo flore Clus. cur. post. huic idem videtur.

Echium nigro flore eleganti Alp. exot. Creticum nigrum Park.

Echium Creticum angustifolium rubrum C.B. Park. Creticum 2. Clus. Habetur and
in Sicilia. Cat. Genesis

Equisetum montanum Creticum Park. Alpin. exot. In montanis Cretae. Flores fert
circa virgarum geniculos, quo ab Equisetis differt. Tragi sive Uvae marinae
species est.

Eruca maritima Cretica siliqua articulata C.B. E Creta Honorius Belli misit.

Eryngium trifolium Alpin. exot. Park. In locis asperis.

Erysimum Dioscoridis Zanoni Erysimi annui Creticae nomine missum.

F.
Foenum Graecum sylvestre polyceration majus Creticum Breyn. Cent.

Frutex pulcherrimus Belli i. Stoebe fruticosa latifolia Cretica.

Fumaria major Cretica Park. Altera tenuior Syriaca Came. minor folio oblongo
capillaceo C.B. Capnos Cretica Clus. An Fumaria nostra major scandens?

G.
Gaiderothymum v. Stachys spinosa Cretica.

Galastivida Cretensium prima v. Blattaria spinosa.

-- Altera v. Tithymalus marit. spinosus.

Gallium montanum Creticum Alpin. exot. Park. In montanis Cretae abundat.

Genista arborea Cretica, foliis semper virentibus Zanoni.

H.
Habbures Came. i. e. Leontopodium Creticum aliud.

Hedysarum argenteum, Alpin. exot. argenteum Creticum Park.

Hieracium majus Creticum Park. Majus folio Sonchi, semine curvo C.B. Item
Sonchus asper laciniatus Creticus ejusdem. Chondrillae Creticae nomine missa,
semine crispo J.B. Sonchus Creticus foliis laciniata vulgo.

Hieracium parvum Creticum Park. Clus. Minor flore ex albo carneo C.B.
Intybaceum, non ramosum Ponae.

Hieranzune Cretensium est Lotopisum Belli. v. Cat. genesis

Hippomarathrum Creticum C.B. prod. Park. Daucu^ 3. Creticus, aliis Seseli
nodosum and Hippomarathrum Ponae. Ital. (...) vulgo, i. e. Pedes corvini.
Foeniculum magnum sive Hippomarathrum J.B. Libanoti^ cacrhyoph. sem. sulcato
aspero Moris. Hist.

Holosteum sive Leontopodium Creticum C.B. Park. Ger. Leontopodium Cretense
Clus.

Holosteum Alpin. exot. quod ab Holosteo Salmanticensi Clusii differ
contendit. Plantago angustifolia minor lanuginosa Cretica vel Syriaca,
pediculis and capitulis maturitate ad terram inflexis Breyn. prod. 2.

Horminum coma rubra J.B. vulgo Horm. Creticum.

Horminum minus supinum Creticum Clus. C.B. Park.

Hyoscyamus Creticus luteus major C.B. Luteus minor J.B. Creticus Park.
Creticus alter Clus. Haec species in Italia and Gallia Narbonensi occurrit. v.
Cat. genesis

Hyoscyamus aureus Alp. exot. Creticus luteus minor C.B. 4. s. albus Creticus
Clus. Albus Creticus Ger. emac.

Hyssopus Graecorum Alpin. exot. An Hyssopus Origani folio Dalech. J.B?

J.
Jacea incana Cretica, flore luteo medio purpureo, squamis in molliores spinas
abeuntibus Herman. Hort. Lugd. Bat.

Jacea Cretica Park. laciniata squammata C.B. Squammata Cretica, quibusdam
Scabiosa Cretica dicta J.B.

L.
Lachryma Jobi Sesamum annuum Zanon. in Creta copiose.

Lagochymica Cretensium est Dorychium Dioscoridis Ponae. Bellonius Heliochryson
vulgo Lagochymithia dictum scribit, quod leporibus cubilia grata praebeat.

Lamium fruticosum non maculatum Creticum Zanon.

Laurus Sylvestris Cretica Alpin. exot. Park.

Lazegiri Cretensium i. e. Lycium Creticum alterum.

Leontopetalon crassa radice Bellon. In Ida monte hyeme floret.

Leontopodium Creticum Clus. v. Holosteum.

Leucoium Creticum Thlaspifolium C.B. Marinum Creticum majus Park. Marinum
Creticum 1. Clus.

Leucoium Creticum floribus minoribus C.B. Creticum minus Park. Marinum
Creticum 2. Clus.

Leucoium Creticum foliis oblongis crenatis C.B. Creticum oblongis foliis
crenatis Park. Creticum 3. Clus.

Leucoium Creticum minimum folio subrotundo C.B. Creticum caeruleum marinum
Alpin. exot. Park.

Leucoium album odoratissimum folio viridi C.B. prod.

Leucoium Creticum luteum utriculato semine Alp. exot. Park.

Leucoium spinosum Creticum Clus. Est Blattaria spinosa seu Glastivida.

Libanotis Apii folio femine aspero C.B. Theophrasti Apii folio Cretica Park.
Rosmarinus foliis Selino similibus Bell.

Linaria Cretica latifolia major Clus. Park. Latifolia triphylla major C.B.

Linaria Cretica angustifolia Clus. Park. Quadrifolia, exiguis flosculis
cinereis C.B.

Linaria perennis fruticosa Cretica C.B. prod. Cui and Linaria latifolia
Dalmatica magno flore dicitur.

Linum arboreum Alpini exot. Arboreum Creticum luteum Park.

Lotus (...) Cretica fruticosa argentea, siliquis longissimis propendentibus
rectis Moris. Hist.

Lotopisum Belli i. Lotus edulis Creticus v. Cat. genesis

Lutea maxima Cretica Honor. Belli J.B. Luteola herba folio Cannabino C.B.
Maxima Cretica foecunda and sterilis Park. Cannabis lutea fertilis and sterilis
Contareni Alpin. exot. Inter montes in Aquis nascitur, loco quodam (...) dicto,
tertio ab urbe Cydonia lapide Bell.

Lychnis Cretica angustifolia Park. Hirsuta angustifolia Cret. C.B. Ocymoides
flore rubro minus Creticum J.B. sylv. 7. Clus.

Lychnis Auriculae ursi facie C.B. Sylv. latifolia Clusii sive Muscipula
Cretica Auriculae ursi facie J.B. Sylv. latifolia Clusii Ger. emac.

Lychnis viscaria maxima Cretica Alpini. Viscaria maxima Cretica Alpini Park.

Lycium Cretense sive Berberis Cretica J.B. Creticum primum Belli Park.
Berberis Alpina Cretica C.B. Lycium Creticum s. Berberis Alpina Belli Bon. In
montium altissimorum convallibus.

Lycium Creticum alterum Park. (...) and (...) i. e. Amygdal^ Petraea, licet
cum Amygdalis nihil ^mmune habeat Bell. Ep. ^.

M.
Majorana Cretica vel Syriaca C.B. Marum Creticum Alp. exot. Syriacum A. Lob.
Ger. Syriacum vel Creticum Park.

Mandragora mas and foemina Bellon. In monte Ida. Quae quamvis in Hispania
etiam and Italia sponte proveniant, quia tamen rariores sunt omittere nolui.
Vid. Cat. Hispan.

Marrubium Creticum Ger. Park. Album angustifolium peregrinum C.B. Album
angustiore folio J.B.

Marrubium Creticum angustifolium inodorum Park. Album peregrinum brevibus and
obtusis foliis C.B.

Marrubium nigrum Creticum Alp. exot. Park. Planta Alpino descripta imperfecta
erat, absque flore and semine.

Melilotus quaedam Cretica Alpin. exot. Est Lotus Siliquis singularibus vel
binis tenuis J.B.

Melilotus vesicaria Cretica Hort. Altdorf.

Meum alexiterium Creticum Park. Alpin. exot.

Millefolium Creticum J.B. Incanum Creticum C.B. Park. Stratiotes Millefolia
Belli ep. 2. ad Clusium Alpin. exot. Parkinsonus ex hac planta duas facit:
priorem Millefolium incanum Creticum vocat, posteriorem Stratioten Millefoliam
Creticam.

Muscipula Cretica etc. v. Lychnis.

Myrrhis sylv. Cretica nodosa, seminibus asperis annua, semine striato aspero
oblongo, nodosa Moris.

N.
Napus Sylvestris Cretica Park. C.B. Bunias agrestis Belli, qui ad C. Bauhinum
e Creta misit.

Nardus montana Cretica Alpin. exot. An Valeriana Cretica tuberosa Park? Nardus
Cretica Belli. Cretica Filipendulae radice C.B? Nardus tamen Cretica Belli
diversa videtur a Nardo montana Cretica Alpini.

Nigella Cretica C.B. Melanthium simplici flore Creticum Clus. Nigella Cretica
inodoro semine Park.

Nigella Cretica latifolia odorata Park. Ponae Ital. Alba simplici flore Alpin.
exot.

Nigella Cretica altera tenuifolia odorata Park. Cretica folio Foeniculi C.B.

Nigella Cretica odorata, foliis Lini, seminibus biformibus Park. Male
inscribitur Nigella. Melanthium odoratum Alpin. exot.

O.
Oenanthe stellata Cretica Alpin. exot. Park.

Oenanthe Cretica prolifera Park. Apula prolifera C.B.

Oleander Creticus fruticosus major foetidus Zanon.

Origanum Creticum J.B. Ger. Sylvestre Syriacum Lob. Onites C.B. Matthew.

Ornithogalum Creticum and Pannonicum flore albo J.B.

P.
Paeoniae duo genera candido flore Bellon. Graecis Psiphaedile. In omnibus
humidis vallibus montis Idae.

Pastinaca tenuifolia Cretica, radiis umbellae Gingidii longioribus Moris.

Petromarula Cretica i. e. Rapunculus Creticus.

Petroselinum Creticum C.B. Park. Agriopastinaca vulgo in Creta Bello ep. 5. ad
Clusium, cui Buselinon Plinii videtur. In montibus Cretae and Dalmatiae. Duplex
genus est, radice nigra, and rad. ruffa.

Phyllitis alata sive ramosa Alpini: an and quomodo ab Hemionitide multifida
differat inquirendum. Alpini icon plantam distinctam repraesentare videtur: and
Jac. Breynius long diversam esse ait.

Pistolochia Cretica C.B. Cretica semper virens Par. Aristolochia Pistolochia
altera J.B. Diversa est a Pistolochia Virginiana, Polyrrhizos dicta, ex
accurata observatione and descriptione ad me missa incomparabilis Botanici D.
Joan. Banister, tristissimo casu nuper in Virginia rebus humanis erepti.

Polium latifolium incanum Creticum C.B. Park. Ad Polium montanum luteum
vulgar proxime accedere videtur. Circa Cydoniam urbem.

Polium angustifolium Creticum C.B. Park. Erectum Creticum and forte frutescens
Dioscoridis Ponae. In Creta ad maris littora frequens.

Polium gnaphaloides Alpin. exot. Park. Gnaphalii marini species est. In
maritimis Cretae. Gnaphalium marinum Clusii esse pernegat.

Polygonum Creticum Thymi folio C.B. Park. Non multum abludit a Polygono
nostrate parvo, flore albo verticillato.

Pimpinella spinosa Park. Poterio affinis folio, Pimpinella spinosa C.B.
Poterium quibusdam, sive Pimpinella spinosa J.B. Poterion Lobelii sive
Pimpinella spinosa Camerarii Ger. Stoebe legitima Dioscoridis Bello. In Creta
perpetuo viret, and multos annos durat.

Poterium Alpini. Tragacanthae species, multis Cretae Insulae in locis
invenitur.

Pseudostachys Cretica v. Stachys.

Pseudocistus Ledum Alpin. exot. 1. Park.

Pseudocistus Ledon alterum Alpin. exot. 2. Park.

Pseudodictamnus Cydoniae seu Ps. 2. Theophrasti Ponae i. e. Pseudod.
acetabulis Moluccae C.B.

R.
Ranunculus echinatus Creticus Park. Stellatus echinatus Creticus C.B. Creticus
echinatus latifolius Alpin. exot.

Ranunculus Creticus albo flore, majore quam Papaveris Rhoeados J.B.

Ranunculus Creticus latifolius Clus. Park. Ger. Emac. Asphodeli radice
Creticus C.B.

Ranunculus Creticus grumosa radice, flore niveo Clus. Grumosa radice, flore
niveo C.B.

Rapunculus Creticus seu Pyramidalis alter C.B. Creticus Petromarula J.B.
Pretrom. Cretica sive Rapunculus Creticus Park. Petromarula s. Lactuca petraea
Pon. Ital. Bell.

Rosmarious Selini folio Bell. v. Libanotis etc.

Rosmarinum Stoechadis facie Alpin. exot. Potius Euphrasia Stoechadis facie.

Rubia argentea Cretica Alpin. exot. Park. Cruciata argentea.

Rubia arborescens Cretica Alpin. exot. Laevis arborescens Cretica Park. An and
quomodo a Rubia Sylvatica laevi J.B. differat inquirendum.

S.
Salvia Cretica pomifera Clus. Ger. Baccifera C.B. Gallifera J.B. Major Cretica
latifolia and angustifolia, aurita and non aurita, pomifera and non pomifera,
nam specie convenient, Bellonius poma haec esui apta esse scribit, eaque
rusticos legere solere, issque plenos Saccos in proximas urbes venum defer:
quod mirum, cum nihil aliud sin^ quam Gallae, seu morbosi tumores ab Insectis
excitati. Park.

C. Salvia Cretica angustifolia Clus. Tenuifolia J.B. Angustif. serrata C.B.
Angustif non aurita Park. Semine e Creta accepto nata est.

Sandalida Cretica est Lotus siliquis quadripinnat. in Catal. general.

Santolina Cretica Alpini v. Chrysocome.

Satureia Cretica C.B. Ger. emac. Cretica legitima Park. Thymbra Graeca J.B.
Hoc genus Alpinus Tragoriganum esse contendit, non Thymbram, cujus rations
vide.

Satureia Cretica spinosa Ponae.

Saxifraga Cretica prior Park. Saxifraga Alpin. exot.

Saxiphraga altera Alpin. exot. Cretica altera Park.

Scabiosa arborea Alpin. exot. Arborea Cretica Pon. Peregrina Ger. Fruticosa,
folio non dissecto peregrina J.B. Stellata folio non dissecto C.B.

Scammonea macrorrhizos Alpin. exot.

Scandix Cretica major C.B. prod. Park. Pecten Veneris Creticum J.B.

Scordium alterum languinosum verticillatum C.B. Scordotis Plinii prima Park.
Ponae. Tomentosa Cretica J.B.

Scordotis Cretica C.B. prod. Altera Plinii Ponae Ital. Park. Scordotis Alpin.
exot.

Scrophularia Cretica 1. Clus. Cretica latifolia Park. Indica Ger. Foliis
Filicis modo laciniatis, vel Ruta canina latifolia C.B.

Seseli Creticum majus C.B. Ger. Creticum, sive Tordylium majus Park. An
Caucalis Lusitanica Alpin. exot?

Seseli Creticum minus v. Cat. genesis

Seseli Cretense nodosum Park. Myrrhis Sylvestris Cretica nodosa, seminibus
asperis Hist. nost p. 432.

Sideritis viscosa Cretica bitumen redolens Zanoni. Glutinosa bitumen redolens
Moris. praelud.

C. Siler Creticum quibusdam, foliis Cicutae, femine longo crispo J.B. Sil. 2.
foliis Cicutae C.B.

Solanum somniferum Antiquorum Alp. exot. Somniferum Antiquorum verum Park.
Item Solanum somniferum Park. Verticillatum J.B. Somniferum verticillatum C.B.
In Cretae locis maritimis.

Spartium Creticum Alpin. exot. Park.

Spartium spinosum Creticum Alpin. exot. Park.

Spartium spinosum secundum Alpin. exot. Spinosum aliud Creticum Park.

Spica trifolia Cretica Alpin. exot.

Stachys Cretica major seu latifolia Hort. Reg. Par. Tournefort. Catal.

Stachys Cretica C.B. Stachys sive Pseudostachys Cretica Park. C.B. prod.

Stachys spinosa Park. Spinosa Cretica C.B. Ger. Spinosa J.B. Gaidarothymo i.
e. Asininum Thymum rusticis Cretensibus.

Staphis agria in monte Ida passim sponte provenit Bellon. v. Cat. genesis

Stoebe fruticosa latifolia Cretica Park. Frutex rotundo argenteo folio, Cyani
flore C.B. Cyanus fruticosus Creticus Candiae Ponae Ital. Frutex pulcherrimus
Bello ep. 2. ad Clus.

Stoebe spinosa Cretica Park. Spinosa J.B. Spinosa maritima C.B. Cyanus
spinosus Creticus Ponae and Alpini.

Stoebe angustifolia Cretica i. Stoebe capitata Rosmarini foliis Ponae. Forte
Chamapeuce Alpin. exot. Chamae pitys fruticosa Cretica Belli. Jacea fruticans
Pini folio C.B.

Stoebe Plantaginis folio Alpin. Park.

Stratiotes Millefolia Cretica Alpin. v. Millefolium.

T.
Teuerium Creticum Clus. Park. J.B. Creticum incanum C.B. Ex semine e Creta
misso Chamaedryos majoris appellatione Clusio enatum est.

Thlaspi Creticum umbellatum flore albo odorato Park. Umbellatum Creticum flore
albo odoro minus C.B. Parvum umbellatum flore niveo odorato J.B.

Thlaspi clypeatum arborescens Creticum Alpin. exot. Park. Qu. An non idem sit
cum Thlaspi fruticoso altero Lob. aut fruticoso folio Leucoii marini minoris
J.B.

Thymbra v. Satureia.

Thymbra Alp. exot. Cretica vera Alpino Park.

Tithymalus cyparissias Creticus Alpin. exot.

Tithymalus arboreus Alpin. Dendroides ex codice Caesareo Lugd. Dod. In hort.
Reg. Paris. colitur, and pro distinc^ a Tithymalo Dendroide Matthioli specie in
Schol. Bot. Par. ponitur.

Tithymalus maritimus spinosus C.B. Mariti^us Creticus spinosus Park. An
Tithymalus spinosus Creticus Alpin?

Tragacantha altera feu Poterium densius ramificatum Alpin. exot.

Tragacantha humilior floribus luteis C.B. Tragacantha Alpin. exot.

Tragacantha Cretensis aut Idaea nigra, tota echinata Moris. Tragacantha altera
Alpin. exot.

Tragacantha humilior and spinosior v. Echinus.

Tragacantha quarta seu Spartium spinosum alterum Alpin. exot. Nec flores nec
fructum hujus plantae vidit Alpinus, proinde ad quod genus referenda sit certo
nequit definiri.

Tragoriganum Creticum C.B. Park. Cretense Ger. quibusdam nigrius folio duro,
flore purpureo J.B.

Trifolium spinosum Creticum C.B. Clus. Park. Ger. emac. Aculeatum Creticum
J.B. (...) Cretensibus Bell.

Trifolium peltatum Creticum C.B. J.B. Odoratum peltatum Creticum Park.
Rusticis Cretensibus (...) Bell.

Trifolium falcatum Creticum Alpin. exot. Anthyllis falcacata Cretica Park.

V.
Valeriana Cretica tuberosa Park. Nardus montana Cretica Alpin. exot. Nardus
Cretica Belli. q. v. Nardus.

Viscaria Cretica maxima Alpini v. Lychnis.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printted for, and are to be Sold by Sam. Smith and Benj.
Walford, at the Prince's Arms, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1693.
HIstoria Plantarum species hactenus editas, aliasque insuper multas noviter
inventas, and descriptas complectens; in qua agitur primo de Plantis in genere,
earumque partibus, accidentibus and differentiis; deinde genera omnia, tum
summa tum subalterna, ad species usque infinitas notis suis certis and
Characteristicis definita; Methodo Naturae vestigiis insistente disponuntur;
species singulae accurate describuntur, obscura illustrantur, omissa
supplentur, superflua resecantur, Synonyma necessaria adjiciuntur. Vires
denique and usus recepti compendio traduntur. Auctore Joanne Raio e Societate
Regia, and S.S. individuae Trinitatis Collegii apud Cantabrigienses quondam
Socio. In duobus Tomis. Londini Fol.

Leonardi Pluckenetii Phytographia, sive Plantae quamplurimae novae and literis
hucusque incognitae, ex variis and remotissimis provinciis, ipsisque Indiis
allatae. Nomine and Iconibus Tabulis aeneis magna cum Industria, and insigni
sane in Successores beneficio illustratae. Tribus Partibus. Londini Folio, 1692.

Observations Topographical, Moral and Physiological; made in a Journey through
part of the Low Countries, Germany, Italy and France: With a Catalogue of
Plants not native of England, found spontaneously growing in those parts, and
their Virtues. By J. Ray, Fellow of the Royal Society. Whereunto is added a
brief Account of Francis Willughby Esquire his Voyage through a great part of
Spain. London Octavo.

The Wisdom of God, manifested in the Works of the Creation. In two Parts, viz.
The Heavenly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, Fossils, Vegetables, Animals (Beasts,
Birds, Fishes and Insects) more particularly in the Body of the Earth, its
Figure Motion and Consistency, and in the admirable Structure of the Body of
Man, and other Animals, as also in their Generation, etc. By John Ray, Fellow
of the Royal Society. The Second Edition, very much enlarged. Octavo 1692.

Three Discourses concerning the Changes and Dissolution of the World. The
First of the Creation and Chaos. The Second of the general Deluge, Fountains,
formed Stones, subterraneous Beds of Shells, Earthquakes, and other Changes in
our terraqueous Globe, the third of the general Conflagration, Dissolution, and
means of bringing them to pass, of the Future State etc. The second Edition
corrected and very much enlarged, and illustrated with Copper Plates by the
same Author. London Octavo 1692.

Doctissimi Clarissimique Gerardi Joannis Vossi^ and ad eum virorum eruditione
celeberrimorum Epistolae quas inter centum ferme numerantur Illustriss. Guil.
Laud, Archiep. Cantuar. Jac. Usserii* Armach. Edw. Pocockii, Tho. Farnabii, Jo.
Meursii, Er. Puteani, Jo. Fr. Gronovii, Pet. Cunaei Gasp. Scioppi, multa
praeclara Theologica, Critica, Historica, Philosophica, complexae. Opus omnibus
Philologiae and Ecclesiasticae Antiquitatis studiosis utilissimum. Ex
Autographis Mss. collegit and ordine secundum singula tempora digessit Paulus
Colomesius Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbyter. Iterata Editio Rerum Indice uberrimo
aucta. Land. Folio. 1693.

Isaaci Vossii Observationes variae. De antiquae Romae magnitudine ut and
aliarum quarundam Urbium Nini, scil. Babylonis, Thebae, Aegyptae, Alexandriae,
Carthaginis, Cairo and Babylonis Egypt. Urbium Sinensium. De Artibus and
Scientiis Sinarum. De Origin and Progressu Pulveris bellici. De Triremium and
Liburnicarum Constructione. De patefacienda per Septentrionem ad Japonenses
Navigatione. De Emendatione Longitudinum. De apparentibus in Luna Circulis: and
de diurna Telluris Conversione, etc. Quibus adjungitur ejusdem ad P.R. Simonii
Objectiones Responsio: and Observationum ad Pomp. Melam Appendix adversus
Jacobum Gronovium. Editio secunda. Lon. Quarto. 1693.

A new History of Aethiopia: being a full and accurate Description of the
Kingdom of Abessina, vulgarly (tho erroneously) called The Empire of Prester
John. Illustrated with Copper Plates, the Second Edition. To which is added a
Preface, showing the Usefulness of this History, and a Map of the Country. By
Job Ludolfus, Folio.

FINIS.

