Robert Bridgman's REASONS For leaving the QVAKERS, (Upon Examination) Proved
Unreasonable; Being only A Demonstration Of his ENVY.

By W. Rawlinson.

Romans 1.22, 23. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish
Hearts was darkened. Professing themselves to be Wise, they became Fools.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-hart-court in Gracious-street,
1700

R. B's Reasons Unreasonable.
IT was our Savior's Doctrine, Mat. 7.18, 20. that a good Tree cannot bring
forth evil Fruit; neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit. Wherefore
by their Fruits ye shall know them. And it stands true for ever; so that upon
certainly knowing the Fruit, we may infallibly know the Tree, whether it be
Good or Evil. Now in all good Actions, Love is a chief Ingredient; and in most
evil Actions, Envy does much Influence. Hereby we may make a pretty safe
Judgment, both of Men and their Actions, whether they be Good or Bad; for Love
is of God, and seeks the real Good of all; as Envy is of the Devil, and seeks
their Hurt and Ruin. It might be of good use to instance some Presidents of
each sort; though my intended Brevity will not admit thereof at present: So, in
a general way, do say, That the Practice of all, in whom the Love of Christ
prevails, is, To seek the Good, both of the Souls and Bodies of all; even of
their Enemies; and never can, by any Provocation whatsoever, be prevailed upon,
to Detract, Calumniate and Misrepresent their greatest Enemies; much less
thereby to endeavor to Influence the Civil Magistrate against them, that so
they might come to suffer, either in their Bodies, Estates or Liberties; being
of the Mind of the good Houshoulder, who would not admit his Servants to pull
out the very Tares from among the Wheat, till the Harvest.

Praying for our Enemies, and doing unto all Men as we would have them to do
unto us; was the Doctrine of him whom we all pretend to follow: That my present
Adversary has been in this his Undertaking, acted by this sweet and amiable
Virtue, which is the true Characteristick of a true Disciple and Follower of
the blessed Jesus, does not appear; though the contrary it is very evident, has
too much prevailed upon him, which has been the Cause he has so grossly
misrepresented us: Not to say any thing of his abusive Language. And if so, as
I doubt not but what follows will make evidently appear; then I hope we may be
satisfied, what place all his endeavors will have with all sincere Christians;
so that the Pit he dug for his Neighbor, he is fallen into himself.

He begins his Paper with a very sad Account, viz. It has been matter of Sorrow
and Shame unto me, and many others, that have now left the Quakers Communion,
that we so long professed the Christian Religion, whilst we remained so
ignorant of the Fundamental Principles of it: The Doctrine of the Trinity, or
Three Persons of one Nature and Substance in the Godhead: The Incarnation of
the second Person, or Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ: The Satisfaction and
Atonement made unto God the Father, by his Obedience, and Death upon the Cross:
The Resurrection and Ascension of his Body and Person into Heaven: His
remaining in our Nature, at the right Hand of God, in the Glory of his Father,
our Head, High Priest, and Intercessor: The Faith and full persuasion of his
Second, Last, and Outward Appearance, and Coming again to Raise the dead Bodies
of the Saints, and of all Men, in the great Day, and solemn Assize of all
Nations, in which a final and infallible Sentence will be passed upon all,
according to the Deeds done in the Body; agreeable to the plain and positive
Sense of diverse Texts in holy Scripture.

Truly I am of his Mind, that to remain so long ignorant whilst under a
Christian Profession of these great Doctrines and Principles of the very
Christian Religion, is Cause sufficient both of Sorrow and Shame; but what is
that to the Christan Society, or Societies, he has joined himself with? For
except he can make it appear, those Societies he has belonged to, were
Ignorant of them, then (and not else) they also may come under the same
Reflection; but till then, both the Sorrow and the Shame is like to lie solely
at his own Door. Let not R. B. think hereby to Charge the Quakers, and render
them Guilty of being defective in their Christian Belief of these Doctrines,
offering that as his Reason for leaving them; if he do, I doubt not but to make
the contrary very evident, to the blasting all his vain Hopes. First, Let us
suppose, though not grant, what he insinuates to be true; would not this bespeak
him a great Ignoramus, or worse, first to join with such a People, and then to
continue so long with them; but that which does aggravate his Ignorance is,
that when his now Friend D. S. did Calumniate us in Print, he should appear in
our Vindication, and wrote an answer in our Defense, to that scandalous
Pamphlet (as he then called it) not thinking (I believe) then, which was but in
1694. that he should now write one a great deal more Scandalous himself; all
which tends little to his Reputation, (indeed if he were a Man that wanted
Bread, it were something) and he not being educated a Quaker, his ignorant
Education cannot reflect on them; and how much it was the Fruit of Humor I
will leave to him to reflect on. Since this were a heavy Charge, if true, That
we did not sincerely believe these great Doctrines of Christianity, enough to
offend any Christian Ear. I shall therefore be more particular in my Answer,
being sorry, that That which R. B. accounted the blessed Truth, in 1694. should
be so grossly Calumniated in 1700. because I believe it to be the blessed Truth
still. This at most is but R. B's insinuating Charge, without the least Proof;
so that my single Testimony is of equal Authority: I do therefore say, I was
brought up, and educated in this Way, and therefore must be granted to know
their Principles as well, nay, better than R. B. if there be any thing in
Education; and I am well assured, that we do sincerely believe all these
abovementioned Doctrines, as to the Matter and Substance of them, and do only
differ with the Church of England in some few Words and Terms; and why we
should be blamed for that, when we believe the same things, and the more,
seeing these Terms are such as the Holy Ghost did not see meet to express these
Mysteries by, in the Holy Scriptures; though I do say, if we did not differ with
the Church of England about weightier Matters than these Words or Terms, I do
not think it were worth our while to Dissent from Her. Yet let us hear what G.
Keith has taught on this Head, Way cast up, p. 88. And (says he) it is well
known that these Words, Three Persons, or Three Hypostases, have made great
Contention in former times; and diverse judged to be Pious and Learned Men, have
denied them, and disputed against them; as namely, Jerome against the Three
Hypostases; and Augustine disputed solidly, Lib. 5. and 7. de Trinitate, That
the Words [Three Persons] are not properly applicable to the Mystery it self,
although he does not know what other Names to give them: And surely it is too
great Presumption and Curiosity in any Man, to dive further into this Mystery,
than what God has been pleased to reveal, or to give Names to it; and yet it
is more Presumption, and smells rankly of a Persecuting Spirit, to impose
upon others these words, which the Spirit of God has not Taught, nor left upon
Record in the Scriptures; and yet because we do not own these Word's of Man's
Wisdom and Spirit, to cry out against us, as Blasphemers, and Deniers of the
true Christ; whereas we (the Quakers) believe in, and own the true Christ, more
according both to his Godhead and Manhood, more according to the Truth, and the
Testimony of the Scripture, than our Accusers do, as I hope in its due place to
show. And in p. 87. says, Nor indeed is there any need of these Terms, Three
Distinct Persons; but rather they darken than explain the Mystery, which have
occasioned, not only some of the Vulgar, but even some of them, called the
Learned, to Err grossly in their Conceptions about the Mystery it self; sure I
am, they are in an Error, occasioned in great part, by these unsound and
unscriptural Terms, of Three Persons in the Trinity, for Persons signifies
Substances, and not the Modes or Properties of One Substance.

Thus Keith, when a Quaker, spoke truly of the Quakers, though now he acts in a
contrary Line. These Men must be acknowledged to be, either Insincere formerly,
or else they are Insincere now: For as we were, we are; if we were Erroneous,
then Keith was Insincere for declaring us Orthodox: If we are Orthodox, Keith
is Insincere now for declaring us Heterodox: Nor is it in this one Particular,
for if it might be of Service, I believe I could make it appear, that he has
declared us in all our Principles Orthodox. Here, in this one Particular, we
may observe how zealously he Defends our Conscientious Scruple, not only by the
Authority of these Fathers, but also from the Unscripturalness and ill
Consequences of such Terms; withal, fully declaring our Sincere Belief in the
Holy Three, which may be sufficient to show we are Sound in Faith, touching the
Trinity, (so called) I shall not (for Brevity's sake) say any more to Vindicate
our conscientious Scrupling these Words and Terms, used by R. B. to express
these Mysteries by, but shall proceed, to show by a Quotation or two, that we
are Sound in the Faith, touching the Doctrines themselves; out of that Book
which is generally received by the Society.

But by this, as we do not at all intend, either to equal our selves to that
Holy Man, the Lord Jesus Christ, who was Born of the Virgin Mary, in whom all
the fullness of the Godhead dwells Bodily; nor to destroy the Reality of his
present Existence; so neither do we, as some have falsely callumniated us. For
though we affirm, that Christ dwells in us, yet not Immediately, but Mediately,
as he is in that Seed which is in us; whereas he, to wit, the Eternal Word,
which was with God, and was God, dwelt Immediately in that Holy Man: He then is
as the Head, and we as the Members; he the Vine, we the Branches -- so God
dwells otherwise in the Man Jesus, than in us. We also freely reject the
Heresy of Apolinarius, who denied him to have any Soul, but said, The Body was
only acted by the Godhead: As also the Error of Eutiches, who made the Manhood
to be wholly swallowed up of the Godhead. Wherefore, as we believe he was a
true, and a real Man; so we also believe, that he continues so Glorified in the
Heavens, in Soul and Body, by whom God shall Judge the World, in the great and
general Day of Judgment. -- Neither do we hereby intend any ways to Lessen, or
Derogate from the Atonement and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ; but on the contrary,
do Magnify and Exalt it. For as we believe all those things to have been
certainly translated, which are recorded in the Holy Scriptures, concerning the
Birth, Life, Miracles, Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ;
so we do believe, that it is the Duty of every one to believe it, to whom it
pleases God to reveal the same, and to bring to them the Knowledge of it: Yea,
we believe it were Damnable Unbelief, not to believe, when so declared; --
nevertheless, as we do firmly believe it was necessary that Christ should come,
that by his Death and Sufferings he might offer up himself a Sacrifice to God,
for our Sins, who his own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree; so we
believe, that the Remission of Sins, which any partake of, is only in and by
Virtue of that most satisfactory Sacrifice, and no otherwise; for it is by the
Obedience of that One, that the free Gift is come upon all to Justification,
Barclay's Apol. 334.335.

Thus, having given these Quotations of our Faith, by which it does evidently
appear, how falsely this R. Bridgman has insinuated against us, as well as the
Soundness of our Faith is sufficiently declared.

I shall now proceed, and be more Brief, because what he offers in the main, is
but Trifling. He adds, That without the true Faith of them, we cannot be saved;
which true Faith he acknowledges, ought to be wrought by the Operation of the
Spirit: I would hope, since he belteves it of so great Concernment, he will
take care for one, or else, notwithstanding all his other Performances, and
going to Church, he is like to remain still Ignorant of the true Faith of them;
besides, how can he be fully assured whether he has the true Faith of them
wrought by the Spirit, without sticking to his Quaker-Principle, of Immediate
Revelation. I would see this R. Bridgman and G. Keith to give over. playing
upon words, which is only a trying of Skill. If they would betake themselves
like Sampson, to the great Pillars of our Religion, our known and acknowledged
Principles; this were far more Manly, than raising up a Man of Straw to Fight
with; for then, if they could overthrow them, it would render them Sampsons
indeed. Now G. K. when a Quaker, accounted Immediate Revelation (as stated in
his Book on that Subject) and the Universal Principle of Light and Grace (which
Principle he States and Proves in his Books, The Universal Free Grace of the
Gospel asserted) the two great Principles or Pillars of our Religion, as
differing from other Societies of Christians; therefore, Oh ye mighty Men, to
work!

R. B. proceeds to Teach of what necessity it is to every one to be rightly
informed, concerning those abovementioned Doctrines; adding what a necessary
work it is, to yield our Love and Obedience to that Law and Light, with which
God instructs and enlightens our Nature; and that without some Experience
thereof, it is in vain to pretend to any Religion. Whether does he offer this
as one Reason for leaving us, or Digresses, and gives it as Advice to his
present Friends? For it is much but he may think himself (notwithstanding all
the pretenses of Sorrow and Shame) wiser than some Older and more Eminent
Churchmen.

He goes on, and tells how dangerous it is, To reduce all Religion and Faith
toward God, under a Profession and Experience of Light and Truth, without any
Distinction of common and special Illumination and Grace.

How far he intends this a Charge against us, I am not like to know; besides,
it is too general for him to expect a particular Answer; let him Charge us but
Honestly, and do his worst: We know that though there are Diversities of Gifts,
yet the same Spirit; and there are differences of Administrations, but the same
Lord; and there are diversities of Operations, but the same God; which works
all in all, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.

Next, he charge us by Name, for having ignorantly and blasphemously opposed
this Work of Faith and Reformation; and that if we contradict or deny, it must
bespeak great ignorance or obstinacy: But seeing he has been so kind, as to
account us Blasphemers and Ignorant, I will submit to be accounted Obstinate
too, before he shall pass without Rebuke; and do therefore Deny his Charge, and
Dare him to prove it. He now being upon the high Rope, goes on insinuating, we
Reject the Institutions of Jesus Christ; which, as he says, is evident from
our Writings constantly published from our beginning; yet he offers not one
Quotation of them all for Confirmation. If what he says were true, what must we
judge of him, as to join and continue so many Years with such a People, since
(as he says) It is evident from our Writings constantly published, that we
reject the Institutions of Jesus Christ, to which he cannot pretend Ignorance?
I think he is mightily to blame, thus to Reproach his old Friends, and all
without-Book; it looks like as if he had left them rather out of Humor, than
real Conviction; for real Conviction would have demonstrated it self with a
more Christian Temper: When I have added a little more of his, of like Nature,
I shall show from our Doctrine, how opposite his Charges are to what we
Believe, by which his Envy will evidently appear; he says, How under pretense
of high Seize, and further Glory, a Spirit of Pride and great
Uncharitableness has possessed us, is sufficiently manifest by its Fruits, in
Censuring and Reproaching all other Denominations of professed Christians, whom
we set at a great Distance, and account as the World which lies in Wickedness;
with some more of like nature.

As to this latter, That we account all other Denominations of Christians as
the World which lies in Wickedness; our Charity is so far reverse to that,
that we blieve there may be, even among Turks and Jews, such as belong to the
Catholick-Church; hear what is said, Barclay's Apology, p. 400. of his Works,
viz.

There may be therefore Members of this Catholick-Church, both among Heathens,
Turks and Jews, and of all the several sorts of Christians, Men and Women, of
Integrity and Simplicity of Heart, who though blinded in something in their
Understanding, and perhaps burdened with the Superstitions and Formality of
the several Sects, in which they are engrossed; yet being Upright in their
Hearts before the Lord, chiefly aiming and laboring to be delivered from
Iniquity, and loving to follow Righteousness, are by the secret Touches of this
holy Light in their Souls, inliven'd and quickened thereby, secretly united to
God, and there-through become true Members of this Catholick-Church. Is not
this very opposite to his false Charge? And to his other Insinuations, That we
reduce all Religion, and Faith toward God, under a Profession of Life and
Truth, without any distinction of Common and Special Illumination and Grace,
and so Reject the Institutions of Christ. See p. 405. of the same Book.

Secondly, The Church is to be considered, as it signifies a certain Number of
Persons, gathered by God's Spirit, and by the Testimony of some of his Servants
(raised up for that end) unto the belief of the true Doctrines and Principles
of the Christian Faith; who, through their Hearts being united by the same
Love, and their Understandings informed in the same Truth, Gather, Meet and
Assemble together to wait upon God, to Worship him, and to bear a
joynt-Testimony for the Truth, against Error.

Thus it is evident how notoriously False are his Charges and Insinuations
against us, what he observes of the Disagreeableness of what we Teach or
Publish. I should have thought, the small Earnings his Friend G. K. has made
thereof (for if we consider his Eminence, and the great Number of Years he
zealously preached and defended our Faith, even nigh thirty Years, which must
be granted the chief of his natural Life; and yet upon his Revolt, should be
able to draw off no more, looks almost incredible) might have given sufficient
Check to his Calumny. As to the oppositeness of our Principles to true
Christianity, is another gross Calumny, without any manner of Proof; however,
we are ready to vindicate them, and show their agreeableness with the Holy
Scriptures, either with this or any other Adversary. And for our Quibling and
Shuffling with dull and apparent Sophistry; I ascribe to his want of Matter,
and the effect of Envy: What he says of our altering the Sense of our own, and
our Opponents Writings, with more of the same kind, is all of a piece with the
former, and deserves no other answer; the poor Man being at a loss, must vent
his Envy some way. As to those Sounds and Echoes he speaks of, what he intends
thereby, is a little dubious; but if he has tender Ears, and cannot endure
great Sounds, I ought to pity him; for as the saying is, He is gone out of hot
Love, into red Fire.

Most of his ninth Page, as far as I find, is filled with his Resentments, for
our refusing G. K's Arbitrary Summons: And since he mentions a Paper writ by
our Friends, on that occasion, Titled, A word to the well-inclined; I shall for
answer, refer to that Paper, which I doubt not, but will give the Impartial
entire Satisfaction. As to the Spreading our Books, can he or any else blame
us? Would any Christian Society do less, if they were abused and railed on in
Print by their Adversaries, but use all lawful means to remove the Reproach,
and vindicate their just Case? Would he have us Dumb, that his beloved Keith's
Scotch Eloquence might pass without Remark? Then I doubt not, but Printing
would be accounted a more edifying Method, than building Stages, and drawing
Multitudes of People together. What he insinuates of the Increase of our
Number, does not well agree with his former account, of his and many others
leaving our Societies; this should not Increase, but Diminish our Number; though
I am willing to agree with him in this, I hope our Doctrine and Faith does take
place with many, and yet will more abundantly: The Lord hasten to accomplish
and fulfill these good things he has promised, that his dear Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ, may come to Reign in all Hearts, who has paid so precious a
Ransom to God for them. As to the Misery our numerous Proselites are under, in
Partiality and Prejudice, that what is published by our Party, passes for
Truth, not only in Doctrine and Fact, but that they conceive a peculiar
Presence of God as a continual Blessing that accompanies them; and the same
Conceit we have in all we say or do; and that we are so affected with the
relish and savor of it, that it puffs us up with intolerable Pride, while it
appears to us under a disguise of Humility. That we should be so Partial, and
Flatter our selves, is even against Reason to believe; for People are most apt
to Flatter themselves in an easy way, but few are willing to be biased in
that which may expose them to manifold Sufferings and Exercises; it must be the
dint of Reason, and force of Conviction, that must effect that, to which, if
God be pleased to give the Sense or Seal of his Spirit or Presence; I will
grant to him, it is a Confirmation past control; and this is so far from being
the Misery of any People, that it is the greatest Blessing, whatsoever he may
think: But that we conceive a peculiar Presence of God, in all we say or do; I
cannot tell how to give him Credit for, but desire proof, for I believe it is a
mistake, as well as he is mistaken, that we are so affected with the Relish and
Savor thereof, that it puffs us up with Intolerable Pride. I see his Charity
is near at an end toward us: however, he ought to pity us the more, because,
as he says, This intolerable Pride appears to us under a disguise of Humility,
which is the opposite to Pride; well, he had need to have some good evidence,
since he takes upon him to judge other Men's Hearts, and remember our Savior's
Doctrine, Judge not, that ye be not judged; for with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged: This rash judgment of his puts me quite out of conceit with
his fine Comment on true Humility.

His eleventh Page appears to me, to be a kind of Preachment, much like one of
G. K's new Sermons. What he says of a proud and obstinate Generation of Men,
who under pretense of Subjection to a Power above the Magistrate; being very
delusive in the Appearance of it: By which one might conclude (if one were as
rash in Judgment, as he) that he was gotten from under that Delusion, to
pretend Subjection to a Power above the Magistrate: If the good Men, the
Martyrs, in Queen Mary's time, could have done so, they might have saved their
Bodies from the Flames; however, those that believe Magistracy to be God's
Ordinance, and are desirous to be subject to God, cannot be ill Subjects,
notwithstanding R. B's Insinuations. He Insinuates, that being taught that
Reasoning is Dangerous in things of Religion, they stop their Ears, and close
their Eyes, etc.

If any that comes to us should be so unwise, it is to be feared they may not
continue so long with us as R. B. did; for these that comes to us, had need to
have both their Eyes and Ears open, for there is a daily Cross to be born by
all the Disciples of crucified Jesus. His Envy grows so big, that he cannot let
the Dead alone, even that Person, whom he in 1694. gave Testimony, had laid
down his Head in Peace; now he accounts him of a melancholy Temper, and an
ignorant Education, which blown up by a Spirit of Enthusiasm, gave Birth to his
Faction, in those Hurricane Times, when the Church lay despoiled of her Power
and Privileges: So that by this Man's Account, not only G. F. but even all the
Quakers, are stark Naught; this is he which judges others guilty of great
Uncharitableness: Let us hear what G. K. says of the Quakers, since he was
disowned by them, even in 97. in his Explications, p. 39. viz.

But yet I do affirm, that I have found diverse that go under that name, that to
my Understanding and Apprehension, have made a good Progress in spiritual
Experiences, and other spiritual Seize of Knowledge and Virtue; and I do
continue in my real Persuasion and Belief, that there was a good Work of God
upon the Hearts of many of that People, and his mighty Power did stir and
operate in them, as I hope it does still continue in some to do unto this day.

Thus Keith corrects Bridgman; and well he may, if we consider what George must
of necessity once have known; to Pity is now vain, and to Pray for, I want
Faith; so shall leave him to God; But since R. B. refers for Proof to the
entrance of the Journal, of the Deceased, I shall refer thither also, not
doubting but the impartial will differ with Bridgman in their Judgment: G. F.
was well known in his Day, and both his personal Acquaintance and Works gives
Bridgman the Lie: This Man is so very gross, I shall on this Head only return
him as a further Reply, what Michael returned the Devil, The Lord Rebuke thee.

What he would Insinuate of the Rise of the Quakers, that it was when the
Church lay spoiled of her Power and Privileges; as though the Quakers were then
in great Prosperity and Peace, whenas in Truth, they were also great Sufferers,
and many of them in Prisons and Dungeons for their Testimony; however, this
young Convert talks like a gallant Son of the Church, and as bravely does he
undertake to inform her; it is young days for him to conceit himself wiser than
his Teachers; yet he is seeking out Expedients how to heal the Breach, and
restore the Wastes; his present Thoughts are, by a laborious and diligent
Instruction of Youth, and detecting of Error, by open and free Conferences,
judiciously managed, in diverse parts of the Nation.

How the Ministers of the Church will like this, I will not determine: But to
me it seems they were defective in R. B's Account, or else what need is there
of this Proposal, if he would not have them to be more Diligent and Laborious?
And if so, they are not Diligent and Laborious enough; consequently Defective;
or would he have them take in Him, and F. Bugg to their Assistance? How he
would have the Conferences managed in the diverse parts of the Nation, he has
not sufficiently taught; he only says, Judiciously; but whether he intends that
the Church shall Summons all the several Societies of Christians in the Nation,
to Dispute, as G. K. Summoned the Quakers at Turner's-Hall, or the Church shall
state, as she sees meet, all the Principles of the several Societies, and so
refute them, and none of the several Societies to be there; or if present, not
suffered to vindicate their several and respective Principles; or he intends
all to have liberty to oppugn one another's Principles, though this is a Power R.
B. (I am apt to think) will scarce grant Dissenters: Or must the Church be sole
Plaintiff, and all others only Defendants? The words, open and free
Conferences, implies all the several sorts should have liberty to vindicate
their several Principles; of what consequence this might be to the King's
Peaceable Government, I will leave to more competent Judgments, and the
Churches Consideration.

R. B. having made these Proposals to the Church, proceeds very warmly,
declaring what a lamentable thing it is, that in a Christian Nation, the
public Seals and Badges of its Communion should be slighted, neglected,
opposed and rejected, by a sort and number of Men, that will not be accountable
in matter of Fact, for their Mistakes and Abuses. That he here intends the
Quakers, I need not to Question, for I take his whole Paper to be designed as a
valliant Sally against them; yet, seeing he does not also tell us, what these
public Seals and Badges are, I must be at a loss, what he intends thereby, his
words are general, and does imply we are guilty of slighting, neglecting, etc.
all the Seals and Badges of the Christian Religion; which is a high Charge, yet
since it is false, we may the better bear it. Now, with his leave, I conceive
the Seals and Badges of the Christian Religion are many; I would ask him,
whether not Swearing, be not one? And what he thinks of Mat. 5.33, 34. Also
whether to preach the Gospel freely, be not another? And what he thinks of Mat.
10.8. And whether not to Fight nor Persecute, make not up two more? And what he
thinks of Mat. 5.38, 39. and 26.52. John 18.36. James 4.1. 2 Cor. 10.4. Luke
9.55, 56. and Mat. 13.28, 29, 30. Nay, does not Christianity take in the Moral
Law? And if so, then will come in loving our Neighbor as our selves; which
Badge, I should have been glad to have seen more worn by him; that would have
given some evidence of his being Religious; for I am satisfied, true
Christianity does not destroy Morality, for I think, an honest, sober, and just
Liver, is preferable to a superstitious Pilgrim; and that there is more Virtue
in Praying for our Enemies, than visiting an old Relick. I see not how he comes
to reckon us a sort and number of Men, that will not be accountable in matter
of Fact, for our Mistakes and Abuses: For he gives no Instances; I may say, he
has a fine Art in abusing by wholesale, without proof. We have always been
ready to give a sincere account of the Hope that is in us; which is evident
from the many Acounts on that Head published, and all has been our readiness to
take notice of every occasion that did offer, wherein it might be of Service. I
hope R. B. would not have us take our Religion upon his Authority; Would he be
for Whipping in, as well as out of the Temple? When once Religion is turned,
from inward Sense, to outward Prescriptions; and from Conviction and Reason, to
implicit Faith and blind Obedience; I think a true Sense of God will be far
gone, it will then be time for the Magistrate to see that the Laws are duly
executed, for Conscience must be much a-sleep.

All that he has hitherto offered, has been only his bold and envious Say-soes,
and Charges without all show of Proof; wherefore it is high time, for what he
has further to offer, to produce some sort of Evidence; he begins thus: It is a
most lame and scandalous Insinuation, against the Institution and Practice of
outward Baptism, which G. Whitehead advances in his Rector Examined, p. 27.
saying, When this Rector, (meaning Mr. Meriton) can demonstrate a probatum est,
of such Virtue in that poor Element (as he calls it) of Water Baptism, as to
cure polluted and distempered Souls; as if the issue or effects of a Means that
is prescribed, must determine the right or lawfulness of its Institution or
Practice, without any Exception; he may at the same rate question the Authority
of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles, in their Teaching and Preaching,
because many that heard them were not effectually cleansed.

It Is a wonder to see a Man of such Pretentions, so lame in Matter, and so
abusive in his Charges: His charging G. W. with lame and scandalous
Insinuations against the Institution and Practice of Water Baptism, and yet
offer no better proof, than this one saying of G. W's to the Rector; we must
understand, that G. W's thus speaking, was even natural from the Comparisons
brought by the Rector, viz. Naaman's washing in Jordan, and the blind Man's
washing in the Pool of Siloam: To which G. W. argues, ad hominem, that if the
Rector could demonstrate such Virtue in Water Baptism to the curing Men's Souls
of their Infirmities, as Jordan had to Cure the Body of Naaman, and the Pool of
Siloam had to restore Sight to the Blind, then his Comparisons were of force;
otherwise, why did the Rector bring them? Was it only to fill up Paper? Now if
the Rector and this R. B. would from hence allude, the Efficacy of
Water Baptism to the Curing of Souls, since we must grant, neither of these
Waters had that Virtue essentially in them, being only made effectual by the
Grace and Blessing of that Power which appointed them; will it not then be
proper to enquire into the effects, to see if they be answerable; and that
which gives greater Suspicion that R. B. grants Water Baptism available to Cure
the Soul, is his Comparison of Christ's and the Apostles Preaching, that G. W.
might at the same rate question their Authority, because that many that heard
them, were not effectually cleansed: Now, though many that heard them were not;
yet many that heard them were. So, though a great many that are baptized with
outward Water remain uncleansed, yet if either the Rector, or this R. B. can
make proof, that many or any are cleansed by Water Baptism, it will answer G.
W's probatum est; for G. W. is not so unreasonable as not to admit of any
Exceptions, so that R. B. may dispose of his lame and scandalous Insinuations
elsewhere. But till such time as R. B. can make such proof, let him not blame
us in holding to those Remedies that we know are appointed by God for that
purpose, and that are effectual for that end, as the Blood of Christ, and the
Operation of the Holy Ghost. R. B. adds, And in the Commission that was given,
Mat. 28.19. there is no more mention made of outward Teaching, than of outward
Baptism; and the Quakers may as well reject Teaching with Words, as Baptizing
with Water.

What way he has to propound to Teach the Nations the Faith of Christ, save by
Words, I know not; however, I hope to show, that we have more reason to
question Water Baptism, than we have to question outward Teaching. To that end,
that I may both briefly and clearly state the Case, I will here present, what
all the Evangelists that takes notice of our Savior's Discourse at that time,
when he gave that Commission, says concerning it; by which, I have some hopes
we may perceive, whether outward or spiritual Baptism was intended by our
Savior; and if it does appear what Baptism was the Subject of our Savior's
Discourse, tho not expressly mentioned in the Commission, I hope it may suffice.
Luke has it thus, And that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached
in his Name, among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, and ye are witnesses of
these things: Tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with Power
from on high, Luke 24.47, 48, 49. All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in
Earth. Go ye therefore and Teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.18, 19. And being
assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from
Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which (says he) you have
heard of me: For John truly Baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with
the Holy Ghost, not many days hence, Acts 1.4, 5. Go ye into all the World,
preach the Gospel to every Creature; he that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved, Mar. 16.15.16. Thus we have the Substance of what Christ spoke on this
Subject; by all which, in all reason, it should remain no longer a doubt, what
Baptism was there intended, as the the Gospel-Baptism; upon all which I am
willing to make these few following Observations:

First, That these Relations of the several Evangelists, relating to, and being
an Account of our Saviors Discourse, concerning this Subject, at his Farewell,
was therefore spoke at one and the same time.

Secondly, That it is clear, that the Baptism insisted on by our Lord, was his
own spiritual Baptism, even that of the Holy Ghost, and is so particularly
expressed, as well as confirmed, by other Phrases and Terms Synonimous; as the
Power from on high, the Promise of the Father, etc.

Thirdly, Since it is evident that the Discourse of our Lord, relating to
Baptism, was not of Water, but the Spirit, which he then promised they should
witness not many days hence; and thereupon bids them tarry at Jerusalem, till
they were endued; then bids them Go Teach all Nations, baptizing them into the
Name of the Father, etc. And we know most commonly, the Name of the Father,
etc. signifies, his Power, Life and Virtue; nay always, when it relates to more
than a bare naming of him, and it was this the Nations wanted to be baptized
into, even into a spiritual and heavenly Life, and the true and proper
Signification of the particle (...), in the Text, is into, and not in, so it
naturally follows the Baptism in the Text was Spiritual Baptism.

Fourthly, Seeing it was the Baptism of the Spirit, our Lord was treating of;
there was no need, when he came to give the Commission, to express it afresh,
(though I do say Baptizing into the Name of the Father, etc. does signify
Spiritual Baptism,) it being the Subject of his Discourse at that Juncture;
though if he had intended Water, there had been an absolute Necessity to have
mentioned it, because it had been an altering the Subject of his present
Discourse; even from Spiritual to Elementary Baptism.

Fifthly, The very Nature of the Commission does much press the necessity of
spiritual Baptism, since it was to the Nations that lay in much Wickedness, and
therefore needed that spiritual Baptism, by which they might become Children of
God, and Heirs of Heaven.

Sixthly, Seeing it was this spiritual Baptism the Nations wanted, therefore it
was, our Savior was so very particular and careful, that the Apostles should
tarry at Jerusalem, till they were baptized themselves; for he knew right well,
that those that were not baptized themselves, could not so much as be
instrumental to the baptizing of others; for those that were not born again
themselves, could not be proper Persons to the begeting of others: And because
our Lord knew this to be an extraordinary work, which he had commanded them to;
so he was equally encouraging, telling them, All Power in Heaven and in Earth
was given unto him, and he would be with them always.

Seventhly and Lastly, How can we think our Lord intended Water Baptism, when
at the same time, he applies Water to John, as belonging to his Dispensation,
saying, John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost? The very relish of these Words at this instant, at giving this
Commission is enough, I should think to satisfy all, that it was far from our
Lord to institute Water, when he applies it thus to John, as a thing past. And
truly, very Reason it self is on our side; for how should that great Messenger
of the Everlasting Covenant, whose Dispensation should fulfill and end all
preceding Dispensations; and whom they all did but darkly represent, that he
should take up the chief Characteristick and Material part of the very
preceding Dispensation; were not this rather to adopt, than fulfill and end? And
would not this be and remain, as a Vail and Cloud upon his own Glorious and
Spiritual Dispensation, which is Spiritually and Substantially, what the others
were Outwardly, Materially and Typically? Glory to God for ever. Well, I must
remember, I am not writing a Treatise of Baptism, but only answering an
Adversary; yet am willing to add a few words of G. K's out of his Presbyterian
and Independent Visible Churches, printed 1691. p. 182, 183.

And if any were raised up by the Lord, as John was, and could prove and
instruct their being sent to Baptize with Water as he was, these to whom they
should be sent, ought gladly to receive it; but to do it by bare Imitation, or
a mere pretended Call, which they cannot prove to be either Mediate or
Immediate, is great Presumption, yea, Superstition; and to call that a Command
of God, which he has given them no Command to practice, is to set up the
Precepts of Men, in the room of God's Commandments, as the Pharisees did of
Old, and is a taking of his Name in vain; for which he will not hold them
guiltless: and they can never prove, by all their Art and Skill, that
Water Baptism is commanded by Christ, Mat. 28.18, 19. for all God's Commands
and Precepts, especially of public Institution, relating to the Church, are
express, in so many express words, and are not left to be gathered by uncertain
and doubtful Consequences. When God sent John to Baptize with Water, Water was
expressed; but in the Apostles Commission to Baptize, no mention is made of
Water, nor no words of Institution commanded to be used; but the command is,
Go, Teach, baptizing all Nations into the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. And the Name of either the Father, or the Son, or the holy Ghost,
is most frequently, if not always used in Scripture, to signify Power and
Life; as, The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower: Thy Name is as Ointment
poured forth, etc.

Thus we see Keith, after having been a Quaker nigh, if not altogether, 30
Years, holds out Zealous in his Testimony against Water Baptism, and says, It
can never be proved from Mat. 28.18, 19. And if Water Baptism can never be
proved, how much less can Sprinkling Infants be proved, for which there is
neither Precept nor Practice in all the Bible? And yet this is the Baptism R.
B. must stand by.

It will be necessary to show, that the Ministers of Christ may Instrumentally,
or Ministerially, Baptize with this Spiritual Baptism; indeed it were Gross, if
any held, that any Man or Men, had Power to Command, or Give the Holy Ghost;
but I doubt not, but it will be Plain, as well as Orthodox, That the Apostles
were the Means or Instruments, though Christ the Principal, by which the holy
Ghost was given; which when I have done, I hope I have performed what will be
expected from me at this time. My first proof shall be from Acts 10.44. While
Peter yet spoke these Words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the
Word. To this plain matter of Fact, what can be objected, or who dare deny, but
Peter's Preaching was the Means, or Instrumental Cause, of their being thus
eminently Baptized with the Holy Ghost; this passage exactly agrees, and runs
parallel with our Lord's Command, of Teaching all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.
for as the Text words it, it implies, that to Teach Baptizing, went together,
and was performed by Christ's Presence attending their Ministry; so here, not
only by Precept, but by Practice; and Matter of Fact is true, for through
Peter's Preaching, they both heard the Word, and were baptized with the Holy
Ghost, at one and the same instant, Acts 11.15, 16. And as our Savior said in
another Case, My Father works hitherto, and I work. So though this Power be
granted (as indeed it ought) to Christ, and that Christ does Principally or
Originally Baptize with the Holy Ghost, (and also that he administers it as it
pleases him, either Immediately, and without all outward Means, or Mediately,
and by Instruments) yet his Servants that are by him Commissionated, may be
truly said Instrumentally to Baptize with the Holy Ghost, and may say, Christ
works hitherto, and we work. So I would have all be very careful that they do
not oppose what they do not understand, but rather fall in with Peter, and say,
What are we, that we should withstand God? Though several Texts of like import
might be produced, that proves this Truth, yet for Brevity sake, shall conclude
with this one, Gal. 3.5. This only would I learn of you, received ye the Spirit
by the Works of the Law, or by the Hearing of Faith? He therefore that
ministers to you the Spirit, and works Miracles among you, does he it by the
Works of the Law, or by the Hearing of Faith? Thus it is clearly proved, that
the true Ministers are Ministers of the Spirit, and do minister it. And as Paul
says, They were made able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter,
but of the Spirit.

R. B. begins a new Charge thus, But to manifest how liable they are to pervert
the true sense of matter; see what G. Whitehead says concerning the Supper, p.
35. of his Rector Examined, where he produces some Testimonies out of the Book
of Martyrs to favor his Case, which duly considered are directly against it. I
have examined the Quotations, and for further satisfaction, if R. B. will not
be offended, I will be so Ingenuous, both to Transcribe them, and the end for
which G. W. produced them (in G. W's own Words) by which the Impartial may
perceive the falseness of R. B's Charge: And note, he does not bring this so
much to detect this particular Perversion of G. W's (as he accounts it) but
thereby to show, how apt we are to pervert the true sense of matter; so that we
may reasonably conclude, he would not bring one of the meanest in his Budget,
since it was to be his Goliath.

These following are G. W's Words, and therein is expressed the end for which
he quoted the following Testimonies. And that the Bread and the Cup which
Christ gave at his Supper, were a Figure, or Typical, was confessed by diverse
eminent Martyrs, as John Frith in his Reasons upon the Sacrament, treating of
Christ the promised Seed, says, Likewise the same Promise was made unto Moses,
the most meek and gentle Captain of the Israelites, which did not only himself
believe on Christ, which was so often promised, but also did prefigurate him by
diverse Means, both by the Manna which came down from Heaven, and also by the
Water which issued out of the Rock, for the refreshing the Bodies of his
People. Neither is it to be doubted, but that both Manna and this Water, had a
prophetic Mystery in them, declaring the very self-same thing, which the Bread
and the Wine does now declare unto us in the Sacrament: For thus says St.
Augustine, Whosoever did understand Christ in the Manna, did eat the same
spiritual Food that we do; but they which by that Manna sought only to fill
their Bellies, did eat thereof, and are Dead. On the Margent it is, Manna, and
the Water of the Rock, a Figure of Christ's Body: Bread and Wine a Figure
likewise of Christ's Body, 1 Cor. 10. See 2 Vol. Mart. p. 305. printed 1641.
And Dr. Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, confesses Christ's Speech, i. e.
[this is my Body] to be Figurative; and quoting Ambrose in 1 Cor. 11. he
calls the Bread and the Cup Signs, a Type, Figure or Sign of the Blood of
Christ, and of his Benefit ( In his Disputations in Oxford, Vol. 3. Mar. p. 59.
and Chap. 54. ibid.) he says, The Flesh lives by Bread, but the Soul is
inwardly fed by Christ. And Dr. Ridley ( Bishop of London) in his Disputations
at Oxford, says, And as one of the Fathers says, A Figure is in vain, where
the thing signified is present, ibid. p. 74. And p. 75, 76. in opposition to
the Popish Doctrine of Transubstantiation, he says, The Sayings of the Fathers
declare it to be a Figurative Speech, as appears in Origin, Tertullian,
Chrysostom, (in opere imperfecto) Augustine, Ambrose, Basil, Gregory Nazienzen,
Hilary, and most plainly in Bertram. Thus we have both the end for which G. W.
quoted them, in his own Words, and the whole Quotations themselves.

For my part I cannot find any Perversion; and it stands R. B. upon to manifest
it more plainly, if there be any; what because some of them was brought to
oppose the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, therefore they are no good Arguments
to G. W's purpose, to prove that they were Figures? R. B. might have saved his
Quotation, to prove that, for G. W. acknowledges it; so says R. B. The Martyrs
intended one thing, and G. W. would make them to intend another. May I not say,
O pertinent Logician! Is there not diverse Texts in holy Scripture, that one and
the same Text holds out two or more Principles of Faith? And what, because one
of these Texts is brought to prove one of these points, if one offer it for
proof of another, must it be accounted a Perversion? I hope not.

His next Charge is, That the Faith of the Body of Christ, now absent in
Heaven, is lost among us. I believe he here speaks Truth of us against his
will, and saves himself telling a great Lie thereby; for that Faith is indeed
lost, nay it never was received by us, That the Body of Christ is now absent in
Heaven; we have always, and still do, believe it to be there present. These are
fit Reasons to show his leaving us was out of Envy; for I hope I have made it
already manifest, that we believe the Existence of the Body of Christ in
Heaven, as really as any Christians whatsoever. As to his hopes and dependence
on the outward Baptism and Supper, as two such Pillars and Supports of the
Christian Faith: I may advertise him, that suppose they were what most
Protestants account them to be, yet if he have not regard to something beyond
them, he may find himself mistaken in the end; and the Army of Abaddon may
compass him about. To conclude, what I have to say concerning them at present
is, That as many as do practice them out of pure Conscience to God, believing
the same to be their Duty, we are charitable toward them, hoping in time they
will come to see further, as they continue true Seekers of God.

His next is, he says, It is a specious pretense the Quakers have made to the
Virtue and Efficacy of the inward Principle, as having therein an Art of
Extraction, by which they perform, as by one single Still, all that can be
proposed from the variety in a Laboratory.

This specious pretense (as he calls it) rightly stated, will stand all Winds
and Weathers: For, this Principle in it self, as held by the Quakers, is no
other than the Word God, in whom was Life, and the Life the Light of Men, John
1.4. Though the Quakers are no such ill Distinguishers, that if R. B. will be so
barbarous, as to divide the particular Measure or Manifestation from the
fullness, and the purchase of that Blessing (though that is a Presumption the
Quakers dare not attempt, because God, as Father, Word and Spirit, is present
therein) to say, That that particular Measure and Manifestation, so divided, is
sufficient: Though they do boldly say, This inward Principle, not divided, but
conjunctly taken as aforesaid, is able to effect whatever is needful; yet this
does not lead us to slight any of the least means appointed of God, as helps in
the Work of our Salvation; for there are many things very useful and highly
needful toward an End; yet cannot be said to be absolutely necessary; and yet
who so unwise as to reject them? At the same rate R. B. might find fault with
St. John, who told the Believers of his time, That they had received an Unction
from the Holy One, and they knew all things; and that they needed not that any
Man should Teach them; but as the same Anointing should Teach them of all
Things. Though the Apostle, no more than we, intended hereby to lay waste Gospel
Means, or outward and instrumental Helps, appointed by God. What he adds of
William Penn's Ranting at an unreasonable rate, and disparaging the Reputation
of our Principles; I must say, does not become him; if he had only regarded
Civility, it would have taught him better Language. Does he think his going to
Church will privilege him to abuse by Authority? Nay, surely, many of them are
Men of better Temper, and more Honor: Nor can I think he cares how much W. P.
disparages our Principle, though the Truth of his Heart may be, that he thinks
him too great an Honor to it; neither can I believe, that the repute of our
Principles affords him any great pleasure. His charging G. Whitehead with
irregularity of Practice, without producing proof, does not bespeak him a Man
of Honor; for a Person of worth would abominate to impeach Men of Note,
without producing some good Ground for so doing. P. 9. He has more cause to
reflect upon his own Incivility, for exposing in Print, part of G. W's private
Letter to his Father-in Law, unduly intercepted, together with his own angry
Resentments and Defamations against G. W, etc. I am sure (says R. B.) no
Principle of Truth, ever taught W. P. to advance such a Notion of the
Composition of Man, as he delivers in p. 71. of his Primitive Christianity. Man
(says W. P.) as I said just now, is a Composition of both Worlds; his Body of
this, his Soul of the other World. If R. B. has a better Notion of the
Composition of Man to advance, I should be glad to hear it, though a truer I am
confident he cannot; so that I cannot but tell him, he is mistaken in so rashly
judging W. P's Notion: Is it not apparent, that our Bodies are of this World?
Yet, where is the Person that believes that the Soul is a created, immortal and
invisible Spirit, that can be so gross as to believe it is of this World too?
If not of this, then of some other World; of this it cannot be, for this World
is Visible, Material and Corruptible; but the Soul is Invisible, Immaterial and
Incorruptible: Truly I should think R. B. cannot be so gross, as to think
otherwise, if he believes Man to have an Immortal Soul. He goes on, adding more
words of W. P's, viz. By the Body the Soul looks into, and beholds this World;
and by the Word it beholds God, the World without end. Upon which R. B.
Comments thus; So that the World without end, and God, are with him Terms
Synonimous [which by the way is falsely inferred] and of this endless World,
it is [with him] a part of Man's Composition; his Soul is of its Essence, and
beholds its being akin to God, not only by a Relation, but in Substance. Oh!
false Comment, and notable Reason for leaving the Quakers; it is much that Men
will expose their Envy so apparently: Let us consider W. P's Words, and then,
without any difficulty, we shall discern the disingenuity of this Adversary,
and the falseness of the Comment: First let us observe, though W. P. do say,
Man's Soul is of the other World; yet he does not say, The other World is God,
or that God and the other World are one and the same thing; so that except R.
B. can make it appear, that W. P. believes the other World, and God, to be one
and the same, he argues to no purpose; and all the fine Gloss and Guilt, with
which he would bespatter W. P. will fall as Dung upon his own Face, as well as
the dull and apparent Sophistry which he would father upon us, will a great
deal of it fall to his Share, to account for; neither will it all vindicate his
abuse of W. Penn and others. And as impertinent is he in making those words he
Quotes (out of Judas and the Jews, p. 130.) a description of God, and of the
Soul of Man, it being a part of him, from W. P's there saying, The new
dispersed Flock of God shall rest with him in that World, which never had
Beginning, and is without End. Where do we find such a Description of the Soul
in these Words? The words carped at, viz. That World which never had beginning,
may be allowed by the Ingenuous, as figuratively expressed; as That World is
put for Eternal Life in Heaven, Luke 20.35. They that be counted worthy to
enjoy that World; by the World, eternal Life is here intended See T. Wilsons
Dictionary.
it being only a Transmutation, as between the Cause and the Effect. Behold!
what a weighty Reason this is for R. B. his leaving our Society: But at the
rate he wrangles, he may even fault the very Doctrine of our Lord, that because
he told the Pharisees, that the Kingdom of Heaven was within them, that he
thereby destroyed the Kingdom of Heaven without. I think it is time to remind
him of what he writ in 1694. in our Vindication, Supposing (says he) there may
have been some defect in Expression, by which means the matter has not been
left so well guarded against the exceptions of malicious Cavillers, who, no
doubt (were it not for the general Authority of the holy Scriptures) would be
as ready to make their exceptions against many Sentences or Expressions therein
also. But R. B. making God, and the World without end, terms Synonimous with W.
P. for want of the word and, before the World without end, shows himseif now to
be turned a malicious Caviller. Would one have thought, that this Man would
have himself become herein so quickly guilty? What he quotes out of W. P's
Book, called Judas and the Jews, is one with this above, so needs no other
answer. And to his insinuating that G. F. held that Notion, of the Souls being
a part of God, is already answered (by abler Pens, as G. W. and J. W.) so I
need not say any thing thereto. He returns to W. P. again, touching W.P's
Answer to John Faldo, concerning the Resurrection of the Body; if I take for
granted what R. B. quotes as W. P's Answer, not having the Book by me, I do
say, W. P. answered wisely, and did well to put by his Antagonist as he did;
for I find that those that define so nicely, often run themselves into
Contradictions, even G. K. is scarce clear in this particular; as for Instance,
G. K. says, in his Testimony against that absurd Opinion, page 3. and That
which rises is the Mortal, that puts on Immortality; and the Corruptible, (that
puts on Incorruption. Now Paul says, It is sown a natural Body, it is raised
a spiritual Body, it is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption; so
that G. K. and Paul seems to assert two things; G. K. says, that which rises is
the Mortal and Corruptible; and Paul says, that it is raised Spiritual and
Incorruptible. Would not R. B. account this an Error in a Quaker? Besides, W.
P's words are safe, for neither do I remember any Text of Scripture that says
in express words, of a Body having the same Matter, and not the same Grosness,
etc. but that W. P. is Sound in the Faith, as well as we, is clear; see his
Key, where he thus expresses himself on our behalf as well as his own; In this
(says he) also (i. e.) the Quakers are grossly abused. They deny not, but
believe the Resurrection according to Seripture, not only from Sin, but also
from the Grave; but are conscienciously, not contumeliously Cautious in
expressing the manner of the Resurrection intended in the Change, because it is
left as a Secret in the Scripture. Are People angry with them for not believing
or asserting what is hidden, and which is more curious than necessary to be
known; and which the Objectors themselves cannot be positive in? Thou Fool, is
to the curious inquirer, as says the Apostle, which makes the Quakers
contented with that Body which it shall please God to give them; being assured,
that their Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and that their Mortal must put
on Immortality, but in such manner as it pleases him. And in the mean time,
they esteem it their Duty, as well as Wisdom, to acquiesce in his holy Will. It
is enough they believe a Resurrection, and that of a Glorious and Incorruptible
Body, without further nicities, for to that was the ancient Hope. Passing by
his Inference touching the Body of Christ, because of his following Query: For,
as he says, he could not obtain a plain and positive Answer thereto from
several of our Friends, appointed to hear his Reasons for declining our
Meetings; and least he should blame me too, I will first place the Query, and
then give a positive and plain Answer with little trouble.

Query, Whether our Lord Jesus Christ is now in Heaven above, or without us, in
the true and entire Nature of Man glorified, the same for Substance which he
had on Earth, and for ever to come united to the Godhead? Answer, Yea. What he
says of finding it fully and safely expressed in the Articles of the Church of
England, I think it is as fully and as safely expressed in the Apology, in the
Quotation I have brought at the beginning.

I come now to his last, which is touching a Letter writ by G. Whitehead, to
his Father-in-law, and G. W's Brother-in-law, he gives us some part of G. W's
Letter, as well as a Copy of his own Answer, requesting a meeting with G. W. in
order that G. W. might make good what he had insinuated against him to his
Father-in-law (as he says) but G. W. giving him no such Meeting, he was willing
to expose it to the public. As to the Letters, it being a private Concern
between them two, I have nothing further to say, than this, That G. W. was
under a simple impossibility to offer him a Meeting; for till G. W. saw his
Letter in Print, he knew nothing of it; wherefore R. B. ought either to have
taken more care in sending his Letter, or when he was in London, to have gone
to G. W. so he has no cause to Glory, as though G. W. declined to give him a
Meeting; it is nothing but an empty Flourish.

Having thus briefly gone through R. B's whole Paper of his wonderful Reasons
for leaving us, hoping I have not omitted any thing that might in the least
require my notice; withal, both modestly detecting his Envy, and also showing
the Soundness of our Faith, in opposition to his false Charges; whereby, as I
doubt not but the Impartial Enquirer will meet with satisfaction, and plainly
see, that it is more Envy than real Matter, that thus Influences our
Adversaries; hoping withal (though blessed be God, it is not only hopes, but we
see evidently, that it is true in Fact) that the very means our Adversaries use
to revenge themselves upon us, turns to our advantage; for thereby the Sober
and Enquiring are the more stirred up to examine into the Truth of Matters, and
God is daily adding to his Church, blessed be his holy Name.

Now, for a Conclusion, I heartily wish R. B. may cease to envy the Children
and People of God, and come to true Repentance; for I am heartily sorry for
him. So with the words that he was pleased to add to his Uncle, G. Whitehead's
Letter, I shall at present leave him, Prove. 26.26, 27. Whose Hatred is covered
by Deceit, his Wickedness shall be showed before the whole Congregation. Whosoever
diggeth a Pit, shall fall therein; and he that rolleth a Stone, it will return
upon him.

Graithwait, the 7th of the 6th Month, 1700.
FINIS.

