THE WISDOM OF GOD Manifested in the WORKS OF THE Creation. Being the Substance
of some common Places delivered in the Chapel of Trinity-College, in Cambridge.

By John Ray, M. A. sometimes Fellow of that, and now of the Royal Society.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1691.

TO THE Much Honored and truly Religious LADY, THE Lady LETICE WENDY OF Wendy
in Cambridgeshire.
MADAM,
TWO or three Reasons induce me to present this Discourse to your Ladyship, and
to make choice of you for its Patroness: First, because I owe it to the
Liberality of your Honored Brother, that I have this leisure to write any
Thing. Secondly, Because also your many and signal Favors, seeing I am not in a
Capacity to requite them, seem to exact from me at least a public
Acknowledgment, which such a Dedication gives me an Opportunity to make.
Thirdly, Because of such kind of Writings I know not where to choose a more able
Judge, or more candid Reader. I am sensible that you do so much abhor any thing
that looks like Flattery, that out of an excess of Modesty you cannot patiently
bear the hearing of your own just Commendations, and therefore should I enlarge
upon that Subject, I know I should have but little Thanks for my Pains.

Indeed you have much better Motives to do well, than the Praise of Men, the
Favor of God, Peace of Conscience, the Hope and Expectation of a future Reward
of Eternal Happiness; and therefore I had rather write of you to others, to
provoke them to imitate so excellent an Example, than to your Self, to
encourage you in your Christian Course, and to fortify you in your Athletick
Conflicts with the greatest of Temporal Evils, bodily Pain and Anguish; though
I do not know why you should reject any consideration that may conduce to
support you under so heavy Pressures, and of so long continuance; of which to
ingenuous Natures true Honor, that is the concurrent Testimony and Approbation
of good Men, is not the meanest. No less Man than S. Augustine was doubtful
whether the extremity of bodily Pain, were not the greatest Evil that Humane
Nature was capable of suffering: Nay (says he) I was sometimes compelled to
consent to Cornelius Celsus, that it was so, neither did his Reason seem to me
absurd; we being compounded of two Parts, Soul and Body, of which the first is
the better, the latter the worser, the greatest Good must be the best thing
belonging to the better Part, that is Wisdom, and the greatest Evil the worst
thing incident to the worser Part (the Body) that is Pain. Now though I know
not whether this Reason be firm and conclusive, yet I am of accord with him,
that of all the Evils we are sensible of in this World it is the Sorest; the
most resolute Patience being baffled and prostrated by a fierce and lasting
Paroxysm of the Gout or Stone, or Colic, and compelled to yield to its furious
Insults, and confess itself vanquished, the Soul being unable to divert, or to
do any thing else but pore upon the Pain. And therefore those Stoical vaunts of
their Wise Man's being happy in Perillus his Bull, I utterly reject and explode,
as vain Rhodomontades and Chimerical Figments, for that there never was such a
wise Man among them, nor indeed could be; Yet do I not say, that the Patience
of a good Man can be so far conquered by the sharpest and severest Torments as
to be compelled to deny or blaspheme God or his Religion, yea or so much as to
complain of his Injustice, though perchance he may be brought with Job to curse
his Day, yet not to curse his God, as his Wife tempted him to do.

Now that the great (...) and (...), the most just Judge and Rewarder would be
pleased so to qualify and mitigate your Sufferings as not to exceed the
measure of your Strength and Patience, or else arm you with such an high Degree
of Christian Fortitude, as to be able to grapple with the most extreme, and
when you have finished your Course in this World, grant you a placid and easy
Passage out of it, and dignifie you as one of his Victors, with a Crown of
Eternal Glory and Felicity, is the Prayer of,

Madam, Your Ladyships most devoted in all Service, John Ray.

THE PREFACE.
IN all Ages wherein Learning has Flourished, complaint has been made of the
Itch of Writing, and the multitude of worthless Books, wherewith importunate
Scriblers have pestered the World, Scribimus indocti doctique: And -- tenet
insanabile multos Scribendi Cacoethes. I am sensible that this Tractate may
likely incur the Censure of a superfluous Piece, and my self the blame of
giving the Reader unnecessary Trouble, there having been so much, so well
written of this Subject by the most Learned Men of our time; Dr. More, Dr.
Cudworth, Dr. Stillingfleet now Bishop of Worcester, Dr. Parker, late of Oxon,
and to name no more the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire, so that it will need
some Apology. First therefore, in excuse of it I plead, That there are in it
some Considerations new and untoucht by others: wherein if I be mistaken, I
allege Secondly, That the manner of Delivery and Expression may be more
suitable to some Men's Apprehension, and facile to their Understandings. If that
will not hold, I pretend Thirdly, That all the particulars contained in this
Book, cannot be found in any one Piece known to me, but lie scattered and
dispersed in many, and so this may serve to relieve those Fastidious Readers,
that are not willing to take the pains to search them out: and possibly, there
may be some whose Ability (whatever their Industry might be) will not serve
them to purchase, nor their opportunity to borrow those Books, who yet may
spare Money enough to buy so inconsiderable a Trifle. If none of these Excuses
suffice to acquit me of blame, and remove all prejudice, I have two further
Reasons to offer, which I think will reach home, and justify this Undertaking.
First, That all Men who presume to Write, at least whose Writings the Printers
will venture to publish, are of some Note in the World, and where they do or
have Lived and Conversed, have some Sphere of Friends and Acquaintants, that
Know and Esteem them, who it is likely will buy any Book they shall Write, for
the Authors sake, who otherwise, would have read none of that Subject, though
ten times better; and so the Book, however inferior to what have been already
Published, may happen to do much good. Secondly, By Virtue of my Function, I
suspect my self to be obliged to Write something in Divinity, having Written so
much on other Subjects: For being not permitted to serve the Church with my
Tongue in Preaching, I know not but it may be my Duty to serve it with my Hand
by Writing. And I have made choice of this Subject as thinking my self best
qualified to Treat of it. If what I have now Written shall find so Favorable
Acceptance, as to ^ncourage me to proceed, God granting Life and Health, the
Reader may expect more: if otherwise, I must be content to be laid aside as
useless, and satisfy my self in having made this Experiment.

As for this Discourse, it is the Substance of some Common Places (so in the
University of Cambridge, they call their Morning Divinity Exercises) delivered
in Trinity-College Chapel, when I was Fellow of that Society; which I have
enlarged with the Addition of some Collections out of what has been since
Written by the forementioned Authors upon my Subject. I have been careful to
admit nothing for matter of Fact or Experiment but what is undoubtedly true,
lest I should build upon a Sandy and Ruinous Foundation; and by the admixture
of what is False, render that which is True, suspicious.

I might have added many more Particulars, nay, my Text warrants me to run over
all the visible Works of God in particular, and to Trace the Footsteps of his
Wisdom in the Composition, Order, Harmony, and Uses of every one of them, as
well as of those that I have Selected. But First, This would be a Task far
transcending my Skill and Abilities; nay, the joint Skill and Endeavors of all
men now living, or that shall live after a Thousand Ages, should the World last
so long. For no Man can find out the Work that God makes from the beginning to
the end. Eccles. 3. 11. Secondly, I was willing to Consult the Infirmity of the
Reader, or indeed of Mankind in general, which after a short confinement to one
sort of Dish, is apt to loath it, though never so wholesome, and which at first
was most pleasant and acceptable: and so to moderate my Discourse, as to make
an end of Writing before he should be quite tired with Reading.

I shall now add a word or two concerning the Usefulness of the Argument or
Matter of this Discourse, and the Reason I had to make Choice of it, besides
what I have already mentioned.

First, The Belief of a Deity being the Foundation of all Religion; (Religion
being nothing but a devout Worshipping of God, or an inclination of Mind to
Serve and Worship him;) For he that comes to God, must believe that he is: it
is a Matter of the highest Concernment to be firmly Settled and Established in
a full Persuasion of this main Point: Now this must be Demonstrated by
Arguments drawn from the Light of Nature, and Works of the Creation. For as all
other Sciences, so Divinity proves not, but supposes its Subject, taking it for
granted, that by natural Light, Men are sufficiently convinced of the being of
a Deity. There are indeed supernatural Demonstrations of this fundamental
Truth, but not common to all Persons or Times, and so liable to Cavil and
Exception by Atheistical Persons, as inward Illuminations of Mind, a Spirit of
Prophecy and fore telling future Contingents, Illustrious Miracles and the
like. But these Proofs taken from Effects and Operations, exposed to every Man's
view, not to be denied or questioned by any, are most effectual to convince all
that deny or doubt of it. Neither are they only convictive of the greatest and
subtlest Adversaries, but intelligible also to the meanest Capacities. For you
may hear illiterate Persons of the lowest Rank of the Commonolty affirming,
that they need no Proof of the being of a God, for that every Pile of Grass, or
Ear of Corn, sufficiently proves that. For, say they, All the men of the World
cannot make such a thing as one of these; and if they cannot do it, who can, or
did make it but God? To tell them that it made it self, or sprung up by chance,
would be as ridiculous as to tell the greatest Philosopher so.

Secondly, The particulars of this Discourse, serve not only to Demonstrate the
being of a Deity, but also to illustrate some of his principal Attributes, as
namely his Infinite Power and Wisdom. The vast multitude of Creatures, and
those not only small but immensely great: The Sun and Moon, and all the
Heavenly Host, are Effects and Proofs of his Almighty Power. The Heavens
declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy Work, Psalm. 19.
1. The admirable Contrivance of all and each of them, the adapting all the
parts of Animals to their several uses: The Provision that is made for their
Sustenance, which is often taken notice of in Scripture, Psalm. 145. 15, 16. The
Eyes of all wait upon thee, thou give them their Meat in due season. Thou
openest thy Hand and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. Matthew. 6. 26.
Behold the Fowls of the Air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather
into Barns; yet your Heavenly Father feeds them. Psalm. 147. 9. He gives to
the Beast his food, and to the young Ravens when they cry: And Lastly, Their
mutual subserviency to each other, and unanimous conspiring to promote and
carry on the public Good, are evident Demonstrations of his Sovereign Wisdom.

Lastly, They serve to Stir up and Increase in us the Affections and Habits of
Admiration, Humility and Gratitude. Psalm 8. 3. When I considered the Heavens
the Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; What
is man that thou are mindful of him, or the Son of man that thou visitest him?
And to these purposes the Holy Psalmist is very frequent in the Enumeration and
Consideration of these Works, which may warrant me in doing the like, and
justify the denominating such a Discourse as this, rather Theological than
Philosophical.

THE CONTENTS.
OF the Celestial Bodies page 2, 3, 4. 45. to 51. Of Terrestrial Bodies p. 4.
52. The number of Animals, Vegetables, and Fossils; guessed at p. 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. The Aristotelian Hypothesis p. 12, 13. The Epicurean Hypothesis p.
20. to 40. The Cartesian Hypothesis p. 20. to 40. All these considered and
censured, from p. 12. to 40. A Plastic Principle above Matter and Motion, yet
not God himself p. 32. to 37. The differences of Natural and Artificial things
p. 41. The Natures and Divisions of Bodies p. 41, 42, 43. The several textures,
ends; and uses of them p. 44. As of the Sun p. 47, 48. Of the Moon and other
Planets p. 48, 49. The advantage of Eclipses in Chronology, and Geography p.
51. Of the fixed Stars p. 49. 51. Of Fire p. 52. 54. Of Air p. 54 to 60. The
respiration of the Foetus in the Womb explained p. 56. to 59. Of Water p. 60 to
62. Of Earth p. 62, 63. Of Meteors p. 63. Of Rain p. 64. Of Winds p. 65. Of
Stones p. 67. 70. Transparent, colored, opaque, variously figured like parts
of Animals. Lodestone, etc. ibid. Of Metals p. 70. to 73. Of Vegetation, and
Plants, their different parts, and uses: of their Roots, Fibers, Bark, Wood,
Vessels, Leaves, Claspers, Prickles, Gems, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, etc. from p.
74 to 86. Of Sensitive or Brute Animals, Quadrupeds, Birds, Fishes, Insects,
their regular and peculiar Methods, their Actions, their various parts and uses
from p. 86. to p. 112. 120. 122. From whence the uses of things p. 112. The
Study of Nature recommended p. 114. 116. 122, 123. preferred to other Studies to
132. Of the Terraqueous Globe, its Figure and use; its Motion, Posture,
Situation, Constitution and Consistency p. 135. to 150. Of the Body of Man, its
external and internal Mechanism, the Textures, Situations, Proportions,
Actions, and Uses of the several parts; many Anaiomical, Physical, and
Theological Observations thereupon from p. 151. to 235. More particularly upon
the Head p. 169. The Eye and Vision p. 170. to 184. The Suspensory or seventh
Muscle, and the Membrana Nictitans common to many Beasts, yet wanting in Man p.
133, 184. The Ear p. 185. to 187. The Teeth p. 187. 197. The Tongue p. 190.
192. The Windpipe p. 203. The Heart p. 204. to 209. The Hand and the Analogous
parts in other Creatures p. 209. to 213. Generation and Formation explained,
from p. 217. to 223. Observations on the propagations of several Animals and
Plants ibid. Many Divine Reflections and Conclusions from p. 222. to the end.
Psalm 104. 24. How Manifold are thy Works O Lord? In Wisdom have thou made
them all.
IN these Words are two Clauses, in the first whereof the Psalmist admires the
Multitude of God's works, How Manifold are thy Works O Lord? In the second he
celebrates his Wisdom in the creation of them; In Wisdom have thou made them
all.

Of the first of these I shall say little, only briefly run over the Works of
this visible world, and give some guess at the Number of them. Whence it will
appear, that upon this account they well deserve Admiration, the Number of them
being uninvestigable by us; and so affording us a demonstrative Proof of the
unlimited extent of the Creators Skill, and the foecundity of his Wisdom and
Power. That the Number of corporeal Creatures is unmeasurably great, and known
only to the Creator himself, may thus probably be collected: First of all, The
Number of fixed Stars is on all hands acknowledged to be next to infinite;
Secondly, Every fixed Star in the now received Hypothesis is a Sun or Sunlike
body, and in like manner encircled with a Chorus of Planets moving about it;
Thirdly, Each of these Planets is in all likelihood furnished with as great
variety of corporeal Creatures animate and inanimate as the Earth is, and all
as different in Nature as they are in Place from the terrestrial, and from each
other. Whence it will follow that these must be much more infinite than the
Stars; I do not mean absolutely according to the Philosophic exactness
infinite, but only infinite or innumerable as to us, or their number
prodigiously great.

That the fixed Stars are innumerable may thus be made out: Those visible to the
naked Eye are by the least account acknowledged to be above a Thousand,
excluding those toward the South Pole which are not visible in our Horizon:
Besides these, there have been incomparably more detected and brought to light
by the Telescope; the Milky Way being found to be (as was formerly conjectured)
nothing but great Companies or Swarms of minute Stars singly invisible, but by
reason of their proximity mingling and confounding their Lights and appearing
like lucid Clouds. And it is likely that, had we more perfect Telescopes, many
Thousands more might be discovered; and yet after all an incredible Multitude
remain, by reason of their immense distance beyond all Ken by the best
Telescopes that could possibly be invented or polished by the Wit and Hand of
an Angel. For if the World be, as Des Carts would have it, indefinitely
extended; that is, so far as no Human Intellect can fancy any bounds of it,
then what we see or can come to see must be the least part of what is
undiscoverable by us; the whole Universe extending a Thousand times farther
beyond the utmost Stars we can possibly descry, than those be distant from the
Earth we live upon. This Hypothesis of the fixed Stars being so many Suns, etc.
seems more agreeable to the Divine Greatness and Magnificence: But that which
induces me much to doubt of the Magnitude of the Universe and immense Distance
of the fixed Stars, is the stupendous Phenomenon of Comets, their sudden
accension or appearance in full Magnitude, the length of their Tails and
swiftness of their Motion, and gradual diminution of Bulk and Motion, till at
last they disappear: Neither do I think the Universe indefinitely extended, as
Des Carts upon a false ground [that the formal ratio of a Body was nothing but
Extension into length, breadth and profundity, or having parts extra parts,
and that Body and Space were synonimous terms] assert ed: For it may as well be
limited this way as in the old Hypothesis; which places the fixed Stars in the
same spherical Superficies; according to which (old Hypothesis) they may also
be demonstrated by the same mediums to be innumerable, only instead of their
distance substituting their Smalness for the reason of their Invisibility.

But leaving the celestial Bodies, I come now to the terrestrial; which are
either inanimate or animate. The inanimate are the Elements, Meteors and
Fossils of all sorts, at the Number of which last I cannot give any probable
guess; Bur if the rule, which some considerate Philosophers deliver, holds
good; viz. how much more imperfect any Genus or Order of Beings is, so much
more numerous are the Species contained under it; as for Example: Birds being a
more perfect kind of Animals than Fishes, there are more of these than of
those, and for the like reason more Birds than Quadrupeds, and more Insects
than of any of the rest; and so more Plants than Animals: Nature being more
sparing in her more excellent Productions. If this Rule I say holds good; then
should there be more Species of Fossils or generally of inanimate Bodies than
of Vegetables; of which there is some reason to doubt. unless we will admit all
sorts of formed Stones to be distinct Species.

Animate Bodies are divided into four great Genera or Orders, Beasts, Birds,
Fishes and Insects.

The Species of Beasts, including also Serpents, are not very numerous: Of such
as are certainly known and described I dare say not above 150. And yet I
believe not many, that are of any considerable bigness, in the known Regions of
the World, have escaped the Cognizance of the curious. [I reckon all Dogs to be
of one Species they mingling together in generation, and the breed of such
Mixtures being prolifick.]

The number of Birds known and described may be near 500; And the number of
Fishes, secluding Shelfish as many; but if the Shelfish be taken in, more than
double the number. How many of each Genus remain yet undiscovered one cannot
certainly nor very nearly conjecture, but we may suppose the whole sum of
Beasts and Birds to exceed by a third part, and Fishes by one half, those known.

The Insects, if we take in the Exanguious both Terrestrial and Aquatick, may
in derogation to the precedent Rule for number vie even with Plants themselves.
For the Exanguious alone, by what that Learned and Critical Naturalist my
Honored Friend Dr. Martin Lister has already observed and delineated, I
conjecture, cannot be fewer than 1800 or 2000 Species, perhaps many more.

The Butterflies and Beetles are such numerous Tribes, that I believe in our
own native Country alone the Species of each kind may amount to 150 or more.
And if we should make the Caterpillars and Hexapods from whence these come to
be distinct Species, as most Naturalists have done, the number will be doubled,
and these two Genera will afford us 600 Species. But if those be admitted for
distinct Species, I see no reason but their Aureliae also may pretend to a
Specific difference from the Caterpillars and Butterflies; and so we shall
have 300 Species more, therefore we exclude both these from the degree of
Species, making them to be the same Insect under a different larva or Habit.

The Fly-kind, if under that name we comprehend all other flying Insects, as
well such as have four as such as have but two Wings, of Both which kinds there
are many subordinate Genera, will be found in multitude of Species to equal if
not exceed both the forementioned kinds.

The creeping Insects that never come to be winged, though for number they may
fall short of the flying or winged, yet are they also very numerous; as by
running over the several kinds I could easily demonstrate: Supposing then,
there be a thousand several sorts of Insects in this Island and the Sea near
it: if the same Proportion holds between the Insects native of England, and
those of the rest of the World, as does between Plants Domestic and Exotic,
(that is, as I guess, near a Decuple) the Species of Insects in the whole Earth
(Land and Water) will amount to 10000, and I do believe they rather exceed than
fall short of that sum. The number of Plants contained in C. Bauhin's Pinax is
about 6000, which are all that had been described by the Authors that wrote
before him, or observed by himself; in which Work, besides mistakes and
repetitions incident to the most wary and knowing men in such a Work as that;
there are a great many, I might say some Hundreds put down for different
Species, which in my Opinion are but accidental Varieties: Which I do not say
to detract from the excellent pains and performance of that Learned, Judicious
and Laborious Herbarist, or to defraud him of his deserved Honor, but only to
show, that he was too much swayed by the Opinions then generally current among
Herbarists, that different Color or multiplicity of Leaves in the Flower and
the like accidents were sufficient to constitute a Specific difference. But
supposing there had been 6000 then known and described; I cannot think but that
there are in the World more then double that number; there being in the vast
continent of America as great a variety of Species as with us, and yet but few
common to Europe, or perhaps Asrick and Asia, and if, on the other side the
Equator, there be much Land still remaining undiscovered as probably there may,
we must suppose the number of Plants to be far greater.

What can we infer from all this? If the number of Creatures be so exceeding
great, how great nay immense must needs be the Power and Wisdom of him who
formed them all! For (that I may borrow the Words of a Noble and Excellent
Author) as it argues and manifests more skill by far in an Artificer to be able
to frame both Clocks and Watches, and Pumps, and Mills, and Grenades and
Rockets, then he could display in making but one of those sorts of Engines; so
the Almighty discovers more of his Wisdom in forming such a vast multitude of
different sorts of Creatures, and all with admirable and irreproveable Art,
than if he had created but a few: For this declares the greatness and unbounded
Capacity of his Understanding. Again, the same superiority of Knowledge would be
displaid by contriving Engines of the same kind or for the same purposes after
different fashions, as the moving of Clocks or other Engines by Springs instead
of Weights: So the Infinitely Wise Creator has shown in many Instances, that
he is not confined to one only Instrument for the working one Effect, but can
perform the same thing by diverse means. So though Feathers seem necessary for
flying, yet has he enabled several Creatures to fly without them, as two sorts
of Fishes, and the Bat, not to mention the numerous tribes of flying Insects.
In like manner though the Air-bladder in Fishes seems necessary for swimming,
yet some are so formed as to swim without it; viz. First, The Cartilagineous
kind, which by what artifice they poise themselves, ascend and descend at
pleasure, and continue in what depth of Water they list, is as yet unknown to
us. Secondly, The Cetaceous kind, or Sea-Beasts differing in nothing almost
from Quadrupeds but the want of Feet. The Air which in respiration these
receive into their Lungs may serve to render their Bodies equiponderant to the
Water; and the constriction or dilatation of it, by the help of the Diaphragm
and Muscles of respiration, may probably assist them to ascend or descend in
the Water, by a light impulse thereof with their Fins.

Again, though the Water being a cold Element, the most wise God has so
attempered the blood and bodies of Fishes in general, that a small degree of
heat is sufficient to preserve their due consistency and motion and to maintain
Life; yet to show that he can preserve a Creature in the Sea, and in the
coldest part of the Sea too, that may have as great a degree of heat as
Quadrupeds themselves; he has created great variety of these Cetaceous Fishes,
which converse chiefly in the Northern Seas, whose whole Body being encompassed
round with a copious Fat or Blubber (which, by reflecting and redoubling the
internal heat, and keeping off the external cold, does the same thing to them
that Cloths do to us) is enabled to abide the greatest cold of the Seawater.
The reason why these Fishes delight to frequent chiefly the Northern-Seas is I
conceive not only for the quiet which they enjoy there, but because the
Northern Air, which they breath being more fully charged with nitrous
particles, is fittest to maintain the vital Heat in that Activity as is
sufficient to move such an unwieldy bulk, as their Bodies are with due celerity
and to bear up against and repel the ambient cold; and may likewise enable
them to continue longer under water than a warmer and thinner Air could.

I come now to the second part of the words; In Wisdom have thou made them all.
In discoursing whereof I shall endeavor to make out in particulars what the
Psalmist here asserts in general concerning the works of God, that they are all
very wisely contrived and adapted to ends both Particular and General.

But before I enter upon this task, I shall, by way of Preface or Introduction,
say something concerning those Systems which undertake to give an Account of
the formation of the Universe by Mechanical Hypotheses of Matter moved either
uncertainly, or according to some Catholic Laws, without the intervention and
assistance of any superior immaterial Agent.

There is no greater, at least no more palpable and convincing Argument of the
Existence of a Deity than the admirable Art and Wisdom that discovers itself in
the make and constitution, the order and disposition, the ends and uses of all
the parts and members of this stately fabric of Heaven and Earth. For if in
the works of Art, as for example; a curious Edifice or Machine, counsel,
design, and direction to an end appearing in the whole frame and in all the
several pieces of it, do necessarily infer the being and operation of some
intelligent Architect or Engineer, why shall not also in the Works of Nature,
that Grandeur and Magnificence, that excellent contrivance for Beauty, Order,
Use, etc. which is observable in them, wherein they do as much transcend the
Effects of human Art as infinite Power and Wisdom exceeds finite, infer the
existence and efficiency of an Omnipotent and All-wise Creator?

To evade the force of this Argument, and to give some Account of the Original
of the World, Atheistical Persons have set up two Hypotheses.

The first is that of Aristotle, that the World was from Eternity, in the same
condition that now it is, having run through the Successions of infinite
generations; to which they add, Self-existent and unproduced. For Aristotle
does not deny God to be the efficient Cause of the World. But only asserts,
that he created it from Eternity making him a necessary Cause thereof; it
proceeding from him by way of Emanation, as light from the Sun.

This Hypothesis which has some show of reason, for something must necessarily
exist of it self; and if something, why may not all things? This Hypothesis, I
say, is so clearly and fully confuted by the Reverend and Learned Dr. Tillotson
now Dean of S. Paul's London, in his first printed Sermon, and the R. Reverend
Father in God John late Lord Bishop of Chester in Book I. Chap. V. of his
Treatise of the Principles of Natural Religion, that nothing material can by me
be added; to whom therefore I refer the Reader.

The Epicurean Hypothesis rejected.
The second Hypothesis is that of the Epicureans, who held that there were two
Principles self existent: First, Space or Vacuity; Secondly, Matter or Body;
both of infinite Duration and Extension. In this infinite Space or Vacuity,
which has neither beginning nor end, nor middle, no limits or extremes,
innumerable minute Bodies into which the Matter was divided called Atoms,
because by reason of their perfect solidity they were really indivisible (for
they hold no body capable of Division, but what has Vacuities intersperst with
Matter) of various but a determinate number of Figures, and equally ponderous
do perpendicularly descend, and by their fortuitous concourse make compound
Bodies, and at last the World it self. But now, because if all these Atoms
should descend plum down with equal Velocity, as according to their Doctrine
they ought to do, (being as we said) all perfectly solid and imporous, and the
vacuum not resisting their motion, they would never the one overtake the other,
but like the drops of a Shower would always keep the same distances, and so
there could be no Concourse or Cohaesion of them, and consequently nothing
created; partly to avoid this destructive consequence, and partly to give some
account of the Freedom of Will (which they did assert contrary to the
Democritick Fate) they did absurdly feign a declination of some of these
Principles, without any shadow or pretense of Reason. The former of these
motives you have set down by De Not. rerum. l. 2.
Lucretius in these Words:

Corpora cum deorsum rectum per inane feruntur
Ponderibus propriis, incerto tempore forte,
Incertisque locis, Spatio discedere paulum;
Tantum quod momen mutatum dicere possis.
And again;

Quod nisi declinare solerent, omnia deorsum
Imbris uti guttae caderent per inane profundum,
Nec foret offensus natus, nec plaga creata
Principiis, ita nil unquam natura creasset.
The second motive they had to introduce this gratuitous Declination of Atoms,
the same Poet gives us in these Verses, Lib. 2.

-- Si semper motus connectitur omnis,
Et vetere exoritur semper novus ordine certo;
Nec declinando faciunt primordia motus
Principium quoddam quod fati foedera rumpat,
Ex infinito ne causam causa sequatur;
Libera per terras unde haec animantibus extat,
Unde haec est, inquam, fatis avolsa voluntas?
The folly and unreasonableness of this ridiculous and ungrounded Figment, I
cannot better display and reprove than in the Words of Cicero, in the beginning
of his first Book de finibus Bonornm and Malorum. This Declination (says he)
is altogether childishly feigned, and yet neither does it at all solve the
difficulty, or effect what they desire. For first they say the Atoms decline,
and yet assign no reason why. Now nothing is more shameful and unworthy a
Natural Philosopher [turpius Physico] than to assert any thing to be done
without a Cause, or to give no reason of it. Besides this is contrary to their
own Hypothesis taken from sense, that all Weights do naturally move
perpendicularly downward. Secondly, Again supposing this were true, and that
there were such a Declination of Atoms, yet will it not effect what they
intend. For either they do all decline, and so there will be no more concourse
than if they did perpendicularly descend; or some decline, and some fall plum
down, which is ridiculously to assign distinct Offices and Tasks to the Atoms,
which are all of the same nature and solidity. Again, in his Book de Fato he
smartly derides this fond conceit thus; What cause is there in Nature which
turns the Atoms aside? Or do they cast Lots among themselves which shall
decline, which not? Or why do they decline the least interval that may be, and
not a greater? Why not two or three minima as well as one? Optare hoc quidem
est non disputare, For neither is the Atome by any extrinsecal impulse diverted
from its natural course; neither can there be any cause imagined in the Vacuity
through which it is carried why it should not move directly; neither is there
any change made in the Atome it self, that it should not retain the motion
natural to it, by force of its weight or Gravity.

As for the whole Atomical Hypothesis, either Epicurean or Democritick, I shall
not, nor need I spend time to confute it; this having been already solidly and
sufficiently done by many learned men, but especially Dr. Cudworth in his
Intellectual System of the Universe, and the present Bishop of Worcester Dr.
Stillinfleet in his Origines Sacrae. Only I cannot omit the Ciceronian
Confutation thereof, which I find in the place first quoted, and in his first
and second Books de Natura Deorum, because it may serve as a general
Introduction to the following particulars. Such a turbulent concourse of Atoms
could never (says he) hunc mundi ornatum efficere, compose so well ordered and
beautiful a structure as the World is; which therefore both in Greek and Latin
has from thence [ab ornatu and munditie] obtained its name. And again most
fully and appositely in his second De Not. Deorum. If the Works of Nature are
better, more exact and perfect than the Works of Art, and Art effects nothing
without Reason; neither can the Works of Nature be thought to be effected
without Reason. For is it not absurd and incongruous? that when thou beholdest
a Statue or curious Picture, thou should acknowledge that Art was used to the
making of it; or when thou see the course of a Ship upon the Waters, thou
should not doubt but the motion of it is regulated and directed by Reason
and Art; or when thou considerest a Sun-Dial or Clock, thou should understand
presently, that the hours are shown by Art and not by Chance; and yet imagine
or believe, that the World which comprehends all these Arts and Artificers was
made without Counsel or Reason. If one should carry into Scythia or Britain
such a Sphere as our Friend Posidonius lately made, each of whose Conversions
did the same thing in the Sun and Moon and other five Planets, which we see
effected every night and day in the Heavens, who among those Barbarians would
doubt that that Sphere was composed by Reason and Art? A wonder then it must
needs be, that there should be any man found so stupid and forsaken of reason
as to persuade himself, that this most beautiful and adorned World was or could
be produced by the fortuitous concourse of Atoms. He that can prevail with
himself to believe this, I do not see why he may not as well admit, that if
there were made innumerable Figures of the 21 Letters in Gold, suppose, or any
other Metal, and these well shaken and mixed together, and thrown down from some
high place to the ground, they when they lighted upon the Earth would be so
disposed and ranked, that a man might see and read in them Ennius's Annals;
whereas it were a great chance if he should find one Verse thereof among them
all. For if this concourse of Atoms could make a whole World, why may it not
sometimes make, and why has it not somewhere or other in the Earth made a
Temple, or a Gallery, or a Portico, or a House, or a City? Which yet it is so
far from doing, and every man so far from believing; that should any one of us
be cast, suppose, upon a desolate Island, and find there a magnificent Palace
artificially contrived according to the exactest rules of Architecture, and
curiously adorned and furnished; it would never once enter into his head, that
this was done by an Earthquake, or the fortuitous shuffling together of its
component Materials; or that it had stood there ever since the construction of
the World, or first cohaesion of Atoms: But would presently conclude that
there had been some intelligent Architect there, the effect of whose Art and
Skill it was. Or should he find there but upon one single sheet of Parchment or
Paper an Epistle or Oration written, full of profound Sense, expressed in
proper and significant Words, illustrated and adorned with elegant Phrase; it
were beyond the Possibility of the Wit of man to persuade him that this was
done by the temerarious dashes of an unguided Pen, or by the rude scattering of
Ink upon the Paper, or by the lucky projection of so many Letters at all
adventures; but he would be convinced by the evidence of the thing at first
fight, that there had been not only some man, but some Scholar there.

The Cartesian Hypothesis considered and censured.
Having rejected this Atheistick Hypothesis of Epicurus and Democritus, I
should now proceed to give particular instances of the Art and Wisdom clearly
appearing in the several Parts and Members of the Universe; from which we may
justly infer this general conclusion of the Psalmist, In Wisdom have thou made
them all: But that there is a sort of professed Theists, I mean Mons. Des
Carts and his followers, who endeavor to disarm us of this decretory Weapon;
to evacuate and exterminate this Argument which has been so successful in all
Ages to demonstrate the existence, and enforce the belief of a Deity; and to
convince and silence all Atheistick Gainsayers. And this they do,

First, By excluding and banishing all consideration of final Causes from
Natural Philosophy; upon pretense, that they are all and every one in
particular undiscoverable by us; and that it is rashness and arrogance in us to
think we can find out God's Ends and be partakers of his Counsels. Atque ob
hanc unicam rationem totum illud causarum genus quod a fine peti solet, in
rebus Physicis nullum usum habere existimo; non enim absque temeritate me puto
investigare posse fines Dei. Medit. Metaph. And again in his Principles of
Philosophy, Nullas unquam rations circa res Naturales a fine quem Deus aut
Natura in iis faciendis sibi proposuit admittimus, quia non tantum nobis
debemus arrogare ut ejus Consiliorum participes esse possimus. And more
expressly in his fourth Answer, viz. to Gassendus's Objections; Nec fingi
potest, aliquos Dei fines magis quam alios in propatulo esse: omnes enim in
imperscrutabili ejus Sapientiae abysso sunt eodem modo reconditi; that is,
neither can or ought we to feign or imagine, that some of God's Ends are more
manifest than others; for all lie in like manner or equally hidden in the
unsearchable abyss of his Wisdom.

This confident Assertion of Des Carts is fully examined and reproved by that
honorable and excellent Person Mr. Boil, in his Disquisition about the final
Causes of Natural Things, Sect. 1. from Page 10. to the end: And therefore I
shall not need say much to it; only in brief this, that it seems to me false
and of evil consequence, as being derogatory from the glory of God, and
destructive of the acknowledgment and belief of a Deity:

For first, Seeing, for instance, That the Eye is employed by Man and all
Animals for the use of Vision, which, as they are framed, is so necessary for
them, that they could not live without it; and God Almighty knew that it would
be so; and seeing it is so admirably fitted and adapted to this use, that all
the Wit and Art of men and Angels could not have contrived it better, if so
well; it must needs be highly absurd and unreasonable to affirm, either that it
was not designed at all for this use, or that it is impossible for man to know
whether it was or not.

Secondly, How can Man give thanks and praise to God for the use of his Limbs
and Senses and those his good Creatures which serve for his sustenance; when he
cannot be sure they were made in any respect for him; nay, when it is as likely
they were not, and that he does but abuse them to serve ends for which they
never intended.

Thirdly, This Opinion, as I hinted before, supersedes and cassates the best
medium we have to demonstrate the Being of a Deity; leaving us no other
demonstrative Proof but that taken from the innate Idea; which, if it be a
Demonstration, is but an obscure one, not satisfying many of the learned
themselves, and being too subtle and metaphysical to be apprehended by vulgar
Capacities, and consequently of no force to persuade and convince them.

Secondly, They endeavor to evacuate and disanul our great Argument, by
pretending to solve all the Phenomenon of Nature, and to give an Account of the
Production and Efformation of the Universe, and all the corporeal Beings
therein, both celestial and terrestrial as well animate as inanimate, not
excluding Animals themselves by a slight Hypothesis of matter so and so
divided and moved. The Hypothesis you have in Des Cartes's Principles of
Philosophy, Part. 2. all the matter of this visible World is by him supposed to
have been at first divided by God into Parts nearly equal to each other, of a
mean size, viz. about the bigness of those whereof the Heavenly Bodies are now
compounded; all together having as much motion as is now found in the World;
and these to have been equally moved severally every one by itself about its
own Center, and among one another, so as to compose a fluid body; and also many
of them jointly or in company, about several other points so far distant from
one another, and in the same manner disposed as the Centres of the fixed Stars
now are. So that God had no more to do than to create the matter, divide it
into parts, and put it into motion according to some few Laws, and that would
of itself produce the World and all Creatures therein.

For a Confutation of this Hypothesis, I might refer the Reader to Dr.
Cudworth's System p. 603. 604. but for his ease I will transcribe the words: --
God in the mean time standing by as an Idle Spectator of this Lusus Atomorum,
this sportfull Dance of Atoms, and of the various results thereof. Nay these
mechanic Theists have here quite outstripped and outdone the Atomick Atheists
themselves, they being much more extravagant then ever those were. For the
professed Atheists durst never venture to affirm, that this regular Systeme of
things resulted from the fortuitous motions of Atoms at the very first, before
they had for a long time together produced many other inept Combinations, or
aggregate Forms of particular things and nonsensical Systems of the whole, and
they supposedalso that the regularity of things here in this world would not
always continue such neither, but that some time or other Confusion and
Disorder will break in again. Moreover that besides this World of ours, there
are at this very instant innumerable other Worlds irregular, and that there is
but one of a thousand or Ten Thousand among the infinite Worlds that have such
regularity in them, the reason of all which is, because it was generally taken
for granted, and looked upon as a common notion, that (...), as Aristotle
expresses it; none of those things which are from Fortune or Chance come to
pass always alike. But our mechanic Theists will have their Atoms never so
much as once to have fumbled in these their motions, nor to have produced any
inept System, or incongruous forms at all, but from the very first all along to
have taken up their places and ranged themselves so orderly, methodically and
directly; as that they could not possibly have done it better, had they been
directed by the most perfect Wisdom. Wherefore these Atomick Theists utterly
evacuate that grand Argument for a God taken from the Phenomenon of the
Artificial frame of things, which has been so much insisted upon in all Ages,
and which commonly makes the strongest impression of any other upon the minds
of Men etc. the Atheists in the mean time laughing in their Sleeves, and not a
little triumphing to see the Cause of Theism thus betrayed by its professed
Friends and Assertors, and the grand Argument for the same totally slurred by
them and so their work done, as it were, to their hands.

Now as this argues the greatest Insensibility of mind, or Sottishness and
Stupidity in pretended Theists not to take the least notice of the regular and
artificial frame of things, or of the signatures of the Divine Art and Wisdom
in them, nor to look upon the World and things of Nature with any other Eyes
than Oxen and Horses do. So are there many Phenomenon in Nature, which being
partly above the force of these Mechanic Powers, and partly contrary to the
same, can therefore never be salved by them, nor without final Causes and some
vital Principle: As for Example, that of Gravity or the tendency of Bodies
downward, the motion of the Diaphragm in Respiration, the Systole and Diastole
of the Heart, which is nothing but a Muscular Constriction and Relaxation, and
therefore not mechanical but vital. We might also add among many others the
intersection of the Plains of the Equator and Ecliptic, or the Earth's diurnal
motion upon an Axis not parallel to that of the Ecliptic, nor perpendicular to
the Plain thereof. For though Des Carts would needs imagine this Earth of ours
once to have been a Sun, and so itself the center of a lesser Vortex, whose
Axis was then directed after this manner, and which therefore still kept the
same Site or Posture by reason of the striate Particles finding no fit Pores or
Traces for their passages through it, but only in this direction; yet does he
himself confess, that because these two motions of the Earth, the Annual and
Diurnal, would be much more conveniently made upon parallel Axes, therefore,
according to the Laws of Mechanism, they should be perpetually brought nearer
andnearer together, till at length the Equator and Ecliptic come to have their
axes parallel, which as it has not yet come to pass, so neither has there been
for these last Two Thousand Years (according to the best Observations and
Judgments of Astronomers) any nearer approach made of them one to another.
Wherefore the continuation of these two motions of the Earth the Annual and
Diurnal upon Axes not parallel is resolvable into nothing but a Final and
Mental Cause, or the (...), because it was best it should be so, the variety of
the Seasons of the year depending thereupon. But the greatest of all the
particular Phenomenon is the Formation and Organization of the Bodies of
Animals, consisting of such variety and curiosity; that these mechanic
Philosophers being no way able to give an account thereof from the necessary
motion of Matter, unguided by Mind for Ends, prudently therefore break off
their System there, when they should come to Animals, and so leave it
altogether untoucht. We acknowledge indeed there is a Posthumous piece extant,
imputed to Carts, and entitled, De la formation du Foetus, wherein there is
some Pretense made to salve all this by fortuitous Mechanism. But as the Theory
thereof is built wholly upon a false supposition, sufficiently confuted by our
Harvey in his Book of Generation, that the Seed does materially enter into the
composition of the Egg: So is it all along precarious and exceptionable; nor
does it extend at all to the differences that are in several Animals, nor offer
the least reason why an Animal of one Species might not be formed out of the
Seed of another. Thus far the Doctor, with whom for the main I do consent. I
shall only add, that Natural Philosophers, when they endeavor to give an
account of any of the Works of Nature by preconceived Principles of their own,
are for the most part grossly mistaken and confuted by Experience; as Des Carts
in a matter that lay before him, obvious to sense and infinitely more easy to
find out the Cause of, than to give an account of the Formation of the World;
that is the Pulse of the Heart, which he attributes to an Ebullition and sudden
expansion of the Blood in the Ventricles, after the manner of Milk, which being
heated to such a Degree does suddenly and as it were all at once flush up and
run over the Vessel. Whether this Ebullition be caused by a Nitro-Sulphureous
ferment lodged especially in the left Ventricle of the Heart, which mingling
with the Blood excites such an Ebullition, as we see made by the mixture of
some Chemical Liquors, viz. Oil of Vitriol, and deliquated Salt of Tartar; or
by the vital flame warming and boiling the Blood. But this conceit of his is
contrary both to Reason and Experience, For first, It is altogether
unreasonable to imagine and affirm that the cool venal Blood should be heated
to so high a degree in so short a time as the interval of two Pulses, which is
less than the sixth part of a Minute. Secondly, In cold Animals, as for Example
Eels, the Heart will beat for many hours after it is taken out of the Body, yea
tho the Ventricle be opened and all the Blood squeezed out. Thirdly, The
process of the Fibers which compound the sides of the Ventricles running in
Spiral Lines from the Tip to the Base of the Heart, some one way and some the
contrary, do clearly show that the Systole of the Heart is nothing but a
Muscular constriction, as a Purse is shut by drawing the Strings contrary ways:
Which is also confirmed by Experience; for if the Vertex of the Heart be cut
off, and a finger thrust up into one of the Ventricles, in every Systole the
Finger will be sensibly and manifestly pincht by the sides of the Ventricle.
But for a full Confutation of this Fancy, I refer the Reader to Dr. Lower's
Treatise de Cord, Chap. 2. and his Rules concerning the transferring of Motion
from one Body in motion to another are the most of them by Experience found to
be false, as they affirm which have made Trial of them.

This Pulse of the Heart Dr. Cudworth would have to be no Mechanical but a
Vital motion, which to me seems probable, because it is not under the command
of the Will, nor are we conscious of any Power to cause or to restrain it, but
it is carried on and continued without our knowledge or notice; neither can it
be caused by the impulse of any external movent, unless it be Heat. But how can
the Spirits agitated by Heat, unguided by a vital Principle produce such a
regular reciprocal motion? If that Site which the Heart and its Fibers have in
the Diastole be most natural to them, (as it seems to be) why does it again
contract itself, and not rest in that posture? If it be once contracted in a
Systole by the influx of the Spirits, why, the Spirits continually flowing in
without let, does it not always remain so? [For the Systole seems to resemble
the forcible bending of a Spring, and the Diastole its flying out again to its
natural site.] What is the Spring and principal Efficient of this
Reciprocation? What directs and moderates the motions of the Spirits? They
being but stupid and senseless matter, cannot of themselves continue any
regular and constant motion, without the guidance and regulation of some
intelligent Being. You will say, what Agent is it which you would have to
effect this? The sensitive Soul it cannot be, because that is indivisible, but
the Heart, when separated wholly from the Body in some Animals; continues still
to pulse for a considerable time; nay when it has quite ceased, it may be
brought to beat anew by the Application of warm Spittle, or by pricking it
gently with a Pin or Needle. I answer, it may be in these Instances, the
scattering Spirits remaining in the Heart, may for a time being agitated by
heat, cause these faint Pulsations; though I should rather attribute them to a
plastic Nature or vital Principle, as the Vegetation of Plants must also be.

But to proceed, neither can I wholly acquiesce in the Hypothesis of that
Honorable and deservedly famous Author I formerly had occasion to mention;
which I find in his free Enquiry into the vulgar Notion of Nature, P. 77, 78.
delivered in these Words, I think it probable, that the great and wise Author
of things did, when he first formed the Universal and Undistinguished Matter
into the World, put its parts into various Motions, whereby they were
necessarily divided into numberless Portions of differing Bulks, Figures and
Situations in respect of each other. And that by his infinite Wisdom and Power
he did so guide and overruled the motions of these Parts, at the beginning of
things, as that (whether in a shorter or a longer time Reason cannot determine)
they were finally disposed into that Beautiful and Orderly Frame that we call
the World; among whose Parts some were so curiously contrived, as to be fit to
become the Seeds or feminal Principles of Plants and Animals. And I further
conceive, that he settled such Laws or Rules of local Motion, among the parts of
the Universal Matter, that by his ordinary and preserving Concurse the several
parts of the Universe thus once completed, should be able to maintain the great
Construction or System and Economy of the mundane Bodies, and propagate the
Species of living Creatures. The same Hypothesis he repeats again, Page 124,
125. of the same Treatise.

This Hypothesis, I say, I cannot fully acquiesce in, because an intelligent
Being seems to me requisite to execute the Laws of Motion. For first Motion
being a fluent thing, and one part of its Duration being absolutely independent
upon another: it does not follow that because any thing moves this moment, it
must necessarily continue to do so the next; but it stands in as much need of
an Efficient to preserve and continue its motion as it did at first to produce
it. Secondly, Let Matter be divided into the subtilest parts imaginable, and
these be moved as swiftly as you will; it is but a senseless and stupid Being
still, and makes no nearer approach to Sense, Perception, or vital Energy than
it had before; and do but only stop the internal motion of its parts and reduce
them to Rest, the finest and most subtle Body that is may become as gross, and
heavy, and stiff as Steel or Stone. And as for any external Laws or established
Rules of Motion, the stupid Matter is not capable of observing or taking any
notice of them; neither can those Laws execute themselves: Therefore there must
besides Matter and Law be some Efficient; and that either a Quality or Power
inherent in the Matter itself, which is hard to conceive, or some external
intelligent Agent, either God himself immediately, or some Plastic Nature.
This latter I incline to, for the Reasons alleged by Dr. Cudworth in his
System, Page 149. which are; First, Because the former, according to vulgar
apprehension, would render the Divine Providence operose, solicitous and
distractious: and thereby make the belief of it entertained with greater
difficulty, and give advantage to Atheists. Secondly, It is not so decorous in
respect of God, that he should (...), set his own hand as it were to every
work, and immediately do all the meanest and triflingst things himself
drudgingly, without making use of any inferior or subordinate Ministers. These
two Reasons are plausible, but not cogent, the two following are of greater
force. Thirdly, The slow and gradual Process that is in the generation of
things, which would seem to be a vain and idle Pomp or trifling Formality, if
the Agent were omnipotent. Fourthly, Those (...), as Aristotle calls them,
those Errors and Bungles which are committed when the matter is inept or
contumacious, as in Monsters, etc. which argue the Agent not to be
irresistible; and that Nature is such a thing as is not altogether incapable,
as well as Human Art, of being sometimes frustrated and disappointed by the
indisposition of the Matter: Whereas an Omnipotent Agent would always do its
Work infallibly and irresistibly, no ineptitude or stubbornness of the Matter
being ever able to hinder such an one, or make him bungle or fumble in any
thing. So far the Doctor. For my part, I should make no Scruple to attribute
the formation of Plants, their growth and nutrition to the vegetative Soul in
them; and likewise the formation of Animals to the vegetative Power of their
Souls; but that the Segments and Cuttings of some Plants, nay the very Chips
and smallest Fragments of their Body, Branches, or Roots, will grow and become
perfect Plants themselves, and so the vegetative Soul, if that were the
Architect, would be divisible, and consequently no spiritual or intelligent
Being; which the Plastic Principle must be, as we have shown. For that must
preside over the whole Economy of the Plant, and be one single Agent, which
takes care of the Bulk and Figure of the whole, and the Situation, Figure,
Texture of all the Parts, Root, Stalk, Branches, Leaves, Flowers, Fruit, and
all their Vessels and Juices. I therefore incline to Dr. Cudworth's Opinion,
that God uses for these Effects the subordinate Ministry of some inferior
Plastic Nature; as in his works of Providence he does of Angels. For the
Description whereof I refer the Reader to his System.

Secondly, In particular I am difficult to believe, that the Bodies of Animals
can be formed by Matter divided and moved by what Laws you will or can imagine,
without the immediate Presidency, Direction and Regulation of some Intelligent
Being. In the generation or first formation of, suppose the Human Body, out of
(though not an Homogeneous Liquor, yet) a fluid Substance, the only material
Agent or Mover is a moderate Heat. Now how this, by producing an intestine
Motion in the particles of the Matter, which can be conceived to differ in
nothing else but Figure, Magnitude and Gravity, should by virtue thereof, not
only separate the Heterogeneous Parts, but assemble the Homogeneous into Masses
or Systems, and that not each kind into one Mass, but into many and disjoined
ones, as it were so many Troops; and that in each Troup the particular
Particles should take their places, and cast themselves into such a figure; as
for Example, the Bones being about 300 are formed of various sizes and shapes,
so situate and connected, as to be subservient to many hundred Intentions and
Uses, and many of them conspire to one and the same Action, this, I say, I
cannot by any means conceive. I might instance in all the Homogeneous Parts of
the body, their Sites and Figures; and ask by what imaginable laws of Motion
their bulk, figure, situation and connection can be made out? What account can
be given of the Valves, of the Veins and Arteries of the heart, and of the
Veins elsewhere, and of their situation; of the figure and consistency of all
the Humors and Membranes of the eye, all conspiring and exactly fitted to the
use of Seeing; but I have touched upon that already, and shall discourse of it
largely afterward. You will ask me who or what is the Operator in the Formation
of the bodies of Man and other Animals? I answer, The sensitive Soul itself, if
it be a spiritual and immaterial Substance, as I am inclineable to believe: But
if it be material, and consequently the whole Animal but a mere Machine or
Automaton, as I can hardly admit, then must we have recourse to a Plastic
Nature.

That the Soul of Brutes is material, and the whole Animal, Soul and Body, but
a mere Machine is the Opinion publicly owned and declared, of Des Carts,
Gassendus, Dr. Willis and others; the same is also necessarily consequent upon
the Doctrine of the Peripateticks, viz. that the sensitive Soul is educed out
of the Power of the Matter. For nothing can be educed out of the matter, but
what was there before, which must be either Matter or some Modification of it.
And therefore they cannot grant it to be a spiritual Substance, unless they
will assert it to be educed out of nothing. This Opinion, I say, I can hardly
digest. I should rather think Animals to be endued with a lower Degree of
Reason, than that they are mere Machines. I could instance in many Actions of
Brutes that are hardly to be accounted for without Reason and Argumentation; as
that commonly noted of Dogs, that running before their Masters they will stop
at a divarication of the way, till they see which hand their Masters will take;
and that when they have gotten a Prey, which they fear their Masters will take
from them, they will run away and hide it, and afterward return to it; and
many the like Actions, which I shall not spend time to relate. Should this be
true, that Beasts were Automata or Machines, they could have no sense or
perception of Pleasure or Pain, and consequently no Cruelty could be exercised
toward them; which is contrary to the doleful significations they make when
beaten or tormented, and contrary to the common sense of Mankind, all men
naturally pitying them as apprehending them to have such a sense and feeling of
Pain and Misery as themselves have; whereas no man is troubled to see a Plant
torn, or cut, or stamped, or mangled how you please. Besides, having the same
Members and Organs of Sense as we have, it is very probable they have the same
Sensations and Perceptions with us. To this Des Carts answers or indeed says,
he has nothing to answer; but that if they think as well as we, they have an
immortal Soul as well as we: Which is not at all likely, because there is no
reason to believe it of some Animals without believing it of all, whereas there
are many too too imperfect to believe it of them, such as are Oysters and
Sponges and the like. To which I answer that there is no Necessity they should
be immortal, because it is possible they may be destroyed or annihilated. But I
shall not wade further into this Controversy, because it is beside my Scope,
and there has been as much written of it already as I have to say, by Dr.
More, Dr. Cudworth, Des Carts, Dr. Willis and others, Pro and Con.

Of the visible Works of God and their Division.
I come now to take a view of the Works of the Creation, and to observe
something of the Wisdom of God discernable in the Formation of them, in their
Order and Harmony, and in their Ends and Uses. And first I shall run them over
slightly, remarking chiefly what is obvious and exposed to the Eyes and notice
of the more careless and incurious Observer. Secondly, I shall select one or
two particular Pieces, and take a more exact survey of them; though even in
these more will escape our notice than can be discovered by the most diligent
Scrutiny: For our Eyes and Senses, however armed or assisted, are too gross to
discern the curiosity of the Workmanship of Nature, or those minute Parts by
which it acts, and of which Bodies are composed; and our Understanding too dark
and infirm to discover and comprehend all the Ends and Uses to which the
infinitely wise Creator did design them.

But before I proceed, being put in mind thereof by the mention of the
assistance of our Eyes, I cannot omit one general Observation concerning the
curiosity of the Works of Nature in comparison of the Works of Art, which I
shall propose in the late Bishop of Chesters Words. The Observations Treat. of
Not. Religion. Lib. 1. c. 6.
which have been made in these latter times by the help of the Microscrope,
since we had the use and improvement of it, discover a vast difference between
Natural and Artificial Things. Whatever is natural beheld through that appears
exquisitely formed, and adorned with all imaginable Elegancy and Beauty. There
are such inimitable gildings in the smallest Seeds of Plants, but especially in
the parts of Animals, in the Head or Eye of a small Fly; such Accuracy, Order,
and Symmetry in the frame of the most minute Creatures, a Louse, for Example,
or a Mite, as no Man were able to conceive without seeing of them. Whereas the
most curious Works of Art, the sharpest and finest Needle does appear as a
blunt rough Bar of Iron, coming from the Furnace or the Forge: the most
accurate engravings or embossments seem such rude, bungling and deformed Work,
as if they had been done with a Mattock or a Trowel, so vast a difference is
there betwixt the Skill of Nature, and the Rudeness and Imperfection of Art. I
might add, that the Works of Nature the better Lights and Glasses you use, the
more cleaver and exactly formed they appear; whereas the effects of human Art
the more curiously they are viewed and examined, the more of Deformity they
discover.

This being premised; for our more clear and distinct proceeding in our cursory
View of the Creation, I shall rank the parts of this material and visible World
under several Heads. Bodies are either inanimate or animate. Inanimate Bodies
are either celestial or terrestrial. Celestial as the Sun, Moon and Stars:
Terrestrial are either simple as the four Elements, Fire, Water, Earth and Air;
or mixed, either imperfectly as the Meteors, or more perfectly, as Stones,
Metals, Minerals and the like. Animate Bodies are either such as are endued
with a Vegetative Soul, as Plants; or a Sensitive Soul, as the Bodies of
Animals, Birds, Beasts, Fishes and Insects; or a Rational Soul, as the Body of
Man and the Vehicles of Angels, if any such there be.

I make use of this Division to comply with the common and received Opinion,
and for easier Comprehension and Memory; though I do not think it agreeable to
Philosophic Verity and Accuracy; but do rather incline to the Atomick
Hypothesis. For these Bodies we call Elements are not the only ingredients of
mixed Bodies; neither are they absolutely simple themselves, as they do exist in
the World, the Seawater containing a copious Salt manifest to Sense; and both
Sea and Fresh Water sufficing to nourish many Species of Fish, and consequently
containing the various parts of which their Bodies are compounded. And I
believe there are many Species of Bodies which the Peripateticks call Mixed,
which are as simple as the Elements themselves, as Metals, Salts, and some
sorts of Stones. I should therefore with Dr. Grew and others, rather attribute
the various Species of inanimate Bodies to the diverse figures of the minute
Particles of which they are made up: And the reason why there is a set and
constant number of them in the World, none destroyed, nor any new ones
produced, I take to be, because the sum of the figures of those minute Bodies
into which matter was at first divided, is determinate and fixed. 2. Because
those minute parts are indivisible, not absolutely, but by any natural force;
so that there neither is nor can be more or fewer of them: For were they
divisible into small and diversely figured parts by Fire or any other natural
Agent, the Species of Nature must be confounded, some might be lost and
destroyed, but new ones would certainly be produced; unless we could suppose,
these new diminutive Particles should again assemble and marshal themselves
into corpuscles of such figures as they compounded before; which I see no
possibility for them to do, without some (...) to direct them: Not that I think
these inanimate Bodies to consist wholly of one sort of Atoms, but that their
Bulk consists mainly or chiefly of one sort. But whereas it may be objected
that Metals, (which of all others seem to be most simple) may be transmuted one
into another, and so the Species does not depend upon the being compounded of
Atoms of one figure. I answer, I am not fully satisfied of the matter of Fact:
But if any such Transmutation be, possibly all Metals may be of one Species,
and the diversity may proceed from the admixture of different Bodies with the
principles of the Metal. If it be asked, why may not Atoms of different Species
concur to the composition of Bodies? and so though there be but a few sorts of
original Principles may there not be produced infinite Species of compound
Bodies, as by the various dispositions and combinations of Twenty Four Letters
innumerable Words may be made up? I answer because the Heterogeneous Atoms or
Principles are not naturally apt to cohere and stick together when they are
mingled in the same Liquor, as the Homogeneous readily do.

I do not believe that the Species of Principles or indivisible Particles are
exceeding numerous: But possibly the immediate component Particles of the
Bodies of Plants and Animals may be themselves compounded.

Of the Heavenly Bodies.
First, For the Celestial or Heavenly Bodies, the Equability and Constancy of
their Motions, the certainty of their Periods and Revolutions, the convenience
of their Order and Situations argue them to be ordained and governed by Wisdom
and Understanding; yea so much Wisdom as Man cannot easily fathom or
comprehend. For we see by how much the Hypotheses of Astronomers are more
simple and conformable to Reason, by so much do they give a better account of
the Heavenly Motions. It is reported of Alphonsus King of Aragon, I know not
whether truly, that when he saw and considered the many Eccentricks, Epicycles,
Epicycles upon Epicycles, Librations, and contrariety of Motions, which were
requisite in the old Hypothesis to give an account of the Celestial Phenomenon,
he should presume blasphemously to say, that the Universe was a bungling Piece;
and that if he had been of God's Counsel, he could have directed him to have
made it better. A Speech as rash and ignorant, as daring and profane.

For it was nothing but Ignorance of the true process of Nature that induced
the Contrivers of that Hypothesis to invent such absurd Suppositions, and him
to accept them for true, and attribute them to the great Author of the Heavenly
Motions. For in the New Hypothesis of the modern Astronomers, we see most of
those Absurdities and Irregularities rectified and removed, and I doubt not but
they would all vanish, could we certainly discover the true Method and Process
of Nature in those Revolutions. For seeing in those Works of Nature which we
converse with, we constantly find those Axioms true, Natura non facit
circuitus, Nature does not fetch a Compass when it may proceed in a straight
Line; and Natura nec abundat in superfluis, nec deficit in necessariis, Nature
abounds not in what is superfluous, neither is deficient in what is necessary:
We may also rationally conclude concerning the Heavenly Bodies, seeing there is
so much Exactness observed in the time of their Motions, that they punctually
come about in the same Periods to the hundredth part of a Minute, as may beyond
Exception be demonstrated by comparing their Revolutions, surely there is also
used the most simple, facile, and convenient way for the performance of them.
Among these Heavenly Bodies;

First, The Sun, a vast Globe of Fire, esteemed by the ancienter and most
modest Computation above 160 times bigger than the Earth, the very life of this
inferior World, without whose salutary and vivifick Beams all Motion both
Animal, Vital and Natural would speedily cease, and nothing be left here below
but Darkness and Death: All Plants and Animals must needs in a very short time
be not only mortified, but together with the surface of Land and Water frozen
as hard as Flint or Adamant: So that of all the Creatures of the World the
ancient Heathen had most reason to worship him as a God, though no true reason;
because he was but a Creature, and not God: And we Christians to think that the
Service of the Animals that live upon the Earth, and principally Man, was one
end of his Creation; seeing without him there could no such things have been.
This Sun, I say, according to the old Hypothesis whirled round about the Earth
daily with incredible celerity, making Night and Day by his rising and setting;
Winter and Summer by his access to the several Tropicks, creating such a
grateful variety of Seasons, enlightening all parts of the Earth by his Beams,
and cherishing them by his Heat, situate and moved so in respect of this
sublunary World, (and it is likely also in respect of all the Planets about him)
that Art and Counsel could not have designed either to have placed him better,
or moved him more conveniently for the service thereof; as I could easily make
appear by the Inconveniences that would follow upon the Supposition of any
other situation and motion, shows forth the great Wisdom of him who so disposed
and moved him.

Secondly, The Moon, a Body in all probability somewhat like the Earth we live
upon, by its constant and regular Motion helps us to divide our time, reflects
the Sun beams to us, and so by illuminating the Air, takes away in some measure
the disconsolate darkness of our Winter Nights, procures or at least regulates
the Fluxes and Refluxes of the Sea, whereby the Water is kept in constant
Motion, and preserved from Putrefaction, and so rendered more salutary for the
maintenance of its Breed, and useful and serviceable for Man's conveniences of
Fishing and Navigation; not to mention the great Influence it is supposed to
have upon all moist Bodies, and the growth and increase of Vegetables and
Animals: Men generally observing the Age of the Moon in the planting of all
kind of Trees, sowing of Grain, grafting and inoculating, and pruning of
Fruit Trees, gathering of Fruit, cutting of Corn or Grass; and thence also
making Prognostics of Weather, because such Observations seem to me uncertain.
Did this Luminary serve to no other ends and uses, as I am persuaded it does
many, especially, to maintain the Creatures which in all likelihood breed and
inhabit there, yet these were enough to evince it to be the Effect and Product
of Divine Wisdom and Power.

Thirdly, As for the rest of the Planets; besides their particular Uses, which
are to us unknown, or merely conjectural, their Courses and Revolutions, their
Stations and Retrogradations, observed constantly so many Ages together in most
certain and determinate Periods of time, do sufficiently demonstrate that their
Motions are instituted and governed by Counsel, Wisdom and Understanding.

Fourthly, The like may be said of the fixed Stars whose Motions are regular,
equal and constant. So that we see nothing in the Heavens which argues Chance,
Vanity, or Error; but on the contrary, Rule, Order and Constancy; the Effects
and Arguments of Wisdom: Wherefore as Cicero excellently concludes, Coelestem
ergo admirabilem ordinem, incredibilemque constantiam, ex qua conservatio and
salus omnium omnis oritur, qui vacare mente putat, noe ipse mentis expers
habendus est.: Wherefore whosoever thinks that the admirable Order and
incredible Constancy of the Heavenly Bodies and their Motions, whereupon the
Preservation and Welfare of all things does depend, is not governed by Mind and
Understanding, he himself is to be accounted void thereof. And again, Shall we
(says he) when we see an artificial Engine, as a Sphere, or Dial, or the like,
at first sight acknowledge, that it is a work of Reason and Art: Cum autem
impetum coeli, admirabili cum celeritate moveri vertique videamus,
constantissime conficientem vicissitudines anniversarias, cum summa Salute and
Conservatione rerum omnium, dubitare quin ea non solum ratione fiant, sed
excellenti quadam Divinaque ratione: And can we when we see the force of the
Heavens moved and whirled about with admirable Celerity, most constantly
finishing its anniversary Vicissitudes, to the eminent Welfare and Preservation
of all things, doubt at all that these things are performed not only by Reason,
but by a certain excellent and Divine Reason.

To these things I shall add an Observation, which I must confess my self to
have borrowed of the honorable Person more than once mentioned already, that
even the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, though they be frightful things to the
superstitious Vulgar, and of ill influence on Mankind, if we may believe the no
less superstitious Astrologers, yet to knowing men, that can skilfully apply
them, they are of great Use, and such as common Heads could never have
imagined: Since not only they may on diverse Occasions help to settle
Chronology, and rectify the Mistakes of Historians that writ many Ages ago;
but which is, though a less Wonder, yet of greater Utility, they are (as things
yet stand) necessary to define with competent Certainty, the Longitude of
places or points on the Terraqueous Globe, which is a thing of very great
moment not only to Geography, but to the most useful and important Art of
Navigation. To which may be added, which I shall hereafter mention, that they
serve to demonstrate the spherical roundness of the Earth. So that I may well
conclude with the Psalmist, Psalm 19. 1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God,
and the Firmament shows his handy Work.

Of Terrestrial inanimate simple Bodies.
I come now to consider the Terrestrial Bodies; I shall say nothing of the
whole Body of the Earth in general, because I reserve that as one of the
Particulars I shall more carefully and curiously examine.

Terrestrial Bodies according to our Method before propounded are either
inanimate or animate, and the inanimate either simple or mixed: Simple, as the
four Elements, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air; I call these Elements in compliance
(as I said before) with the vulgarly received Opinion; not that I think them to
be the Principles or component Ingredients of all other sublunary Bodies: I
might call them the four great Aggregates of Bodies of the same Species, or
four sorts of Bodies of which there are great Aggregates. These notwithstanding
they are endued with contrary Qualities, and are continually encroaching one
upon another, yet they are so balanced and kept in such an aequilibrium, that
neither prevails over other, but what one gets in one place it loses in
another.

First, Fire cherishes and reviveth by its Heat, without which all things
would be torpid and without Motion, nay without Fire no Life; it being the
vital Flame residing in the Blood that keeps the bodily Machine in motion, and
renders it a fit Organ for the Soul to work by. The Uses of Fire (I do not here
speak of the Peripateticks Elementary Fire in the concave of the Moon, which is
but a mere Figment, but our ordinary Culinary) are in a manner infinite for
dressing and preparing of Victuals baked, boiled and roast; for melting and
refining of Metals and Minerals; for the fusion of Glass, a Material whose Uses
are so many that it is not easy to enumerate them, it serving us to make
Windows for our Houses, drinking Vessels, Vessels to contain and preserve all
sorts of fermented Liquors, destilled Waters, Spirits, Oils, Extracts, and
other Chemical Preparations, as also Vessels to destil and prepare them in; for
Looking Glasses, Spectacles, Microscopes and Telescopes, whereby our Sight is
not only relieved, but wonderfully assisted to make rare Discoveries: For
making all sorts of Instruments for Husbandry, mechanic Arts and Trades, all
sorts of Arms or Weapons of War defensive and offensive; for fulminating
Engines; for burning of Lime, baking of Bricks, Tiles, and all sorts of Potters
Vessels or earthen Ware; for casting and forging metalline Vessels and
Utensils; for Destillations, and all Chemical Operations hinted before in the
use of Glass. For affording us Light for any Work or Exercise in winter Nights;
for digging in Mines and dark Carvens: And finally by its comfortable Warmth
securing us from the injuries of Cold, or relieving when we have been bitten
and benumbed with it. A Subject or Utensil of so various and inexplicable use,
who could have invented and formed, but an infinitely wise and powerful
Efficient?

Secondly, The Air serves us and all Animals to breath in, containing the fuel
of that vital Flame we spoke of, without which it would speedily languish and
go out. So necessary is it for us and other Land-Animals, that without the use
of it we could live but very few minutes: Nay Fishes and other Water-Animals
cannot abide without the use of it: For if you put Fish into a Vessel of a
narrow mouth full of Water, they will live and swim there not only days and
months but even years. But if with your Hand or any other cover you stop the
Vessel so as wholly to exclude the Air, or interrupt its communication with the
Water, they will suddenly be suffocated; as Rondeletius affirms he often
experimented: If you fill not the Vessel up to the top, but leave some space
empty for the Air to take up, and then clap your hand upon the mouth of the
Vessel; the Fishes will presently contend which shall get uppermost in the
Water, that so they may enjoy the open Air; which I have also observed them to
do in a Pool of Water that has been almost dry in the Summertime because the
Air that insinuated itself into the Water did not suffice them for Respiration.
Neither is it less necessary for Insects than it is for other Animals but
rather more, these having more Air-vessels for their Bulk by far than they,
there being many Orifices on each side their Bodies for the admission of Air,
which if you stop with Oil or Honey, the Insect presently dies, and revives no
more. This was an Observation of the Ancients, though the reason of it they did
not understand (Oleo illito Insecta omnia exanimantur. Plin.) which was nothing
but the intercluding of the Air; for though you put Oil upon them, if you put
it not upon or obstruct those Orifices therewith whereby they draw the Air,
they suffer nothing: If you obstruct only some and not others, the parts which
are near and supplied with Air from thence are by and by convulsed and shortly
relaxed and deprived of Motion, the rest that were untoucht still retaining it.
Nay more than all this, Plants themselves have a kind of respiration, being
furnished with plenty of Vessels for the derivation of Air to all their parts,
as has been observed, nay first discovered by that great and curious
Naturalist Malpighius. Another use of the Air is to sustain the flight of Birds
and Insects. Moreover by its gravity it raises the Water in Pumps, Siphons and
other Engines, and performs all those feats which former Philosophers through
Ignorance of the Efficient Cause attributed to a Final, namely Natures
abhorrence of a Vacuity or empty space. The Elastick or expansive faculty of
the Air, whereby it dilates itself, when compressed (indeed this lower Region
of it by reason of the weight of the superincumbent is always in a compressed
State) has been made use of in the common Weather-glasses, in Wind guns, and
in several ingenious Waterworks, and doubtless has a great Interest in many
natural Effects and Operations.

Against what we have said of the necessity of the Air for the maintenance of
the Vital Flame, it may be objected, That the Foetus in the Womb Lives; its
Heart Pulsses; and its Blood Circulates; and yet it draws in no Air, neither
has the Air any Access to it. To which I Answer, That it does receive Air so
much as is sufficient for it in its present state from the maternal Blood by
the Placenta uterina, or the Cotyledones. This Opinion generally propounded,
viz. That the Respiration of the Dam, did serve the Foetus also; or supply
sufficient Air to it, I have met with in Books, but the explicit Notion of it I
owe to my Learned and worthy Friend Dr. Edward Hulse, which comparing with mine
own Anatomical Observations, I found so consonant to Reason, and highly
probable, that I could not but yield a firm Assent to it. I say then, That the
chief Use of the Circulation of the Blood through the Cotyledones of a Calf in
the Womb, (which I have often dissected) and by Analogy through the Placenta
uterina in an Humane Foetus, seems to be the Impregnation of the Blood with
Air; for the feeding of the vital Flame. For if it were only for Nutrition,
what need of two such great Arteries to convey the Blood thither? It would (one
might rationally think) be more likely, that as in the Abdomen of every Animal,
so here there should have been some lacteal Veins formed, beginning from the
Placenta, or Cotyledons, which concurring in one common ductus, should at last
empty themselves into the vena cava. Secondly, I have observed in a Calf, the
umbilical Vessels to terminate in certain Bodies divided into a multitude of
carneous papillae, as I may so call them, which are received into so many
Sockets of the Cotyledons growing on the Womb; which carneous papillae may
without force or laceration be drawn out of those Sockets. Now these papillae
do well resemble the Aristae or radii of a Fishes Gills, and very probably have
the same use to take in the Air. So that the maternal Blood which flows to the
Cotyledons, and encircles these papillae, communicates by them to the Blood of
the Foetus, the Air wherewith it self is impregnate; as the Water flowing about
the carneous radii of the Fishes Gills does the Air that is lodged therein to
them. Thirdly, That the maternal Blood flows most copiously to the Placenta
uterina in Women, is manifest from the great Hemorrhagy that succeeds the
separation thereof at the Birth. Fourthly, After the Stomach and Intestines are
formed, the foetus seems to take in its whole nourishment by the Mouth; there
being always found in the Stomach of a Calf, plenty of the liquor contained in
the Amnios wherein he swims, and faeces in his intestines, and abundance of
urine in the Allantoides. So that the foetus in the Womb does live as it were
the life of a Fish. Lastly, Why else should there be such an instant necessity
of Respiration so soon as ever the foetus is fallen off from the Womb?

This way we may give a facile and very probable account of it, to wit, because
receiving no more Communications of Air from its Dam or Mother, it must needs
have a speedy supply from without, or else extinguish and die for want of it:
Being not able to live longer without Air at its first Birth, than it can do
afterward.

And here methinks appears a necessity of bringing in the agency of some
Superintendent intelligent Being, be it a Plastic Nature, or what you will.
For what else should put the Diaphragm, and all the Muscles serving to
Respiration in motion all of a sudden so soon as ever the foetus is brought
forth? Why could they not have rested as well as they did in the Womb? What
aileth them that they must needs bestir themselves to get in Air to maintain
the Creatures life? Why could they not patiently suffer it to die? That the Air
of it self could not rush in is clear; for that on the contrary there is
required a great force to remove the incumbent Air, and make room for the
external to enter. You will say the Spirits do at this time flow to the Organs
of Respiration; the Diaphragm and other Muscles which concur to that action,
and move them. But what rouses the Spirits which were quiescent during the
continuance of the foetus in the Womb? Here is no appearing impellent but the
external Air, the Body suffering no change but of place, out of its close and
warm Prison into the open and cool Air. But how or why that should have such
influence upon the Spirits, as to drive them into those Muscles electively, I
am not subtle enough to discern.

Thirdly, Water is one part, and that not the least of our Sustenance, and that
affords the greatest share of Matter in all Productions; containing in it the
Principles or minute component particles of all Bodies. To speak nothing of
those inferior Uses of Washing and Bathing, Dressing and preparing of
Victuals. But if we shall consider the great Conceptacula and Congregations of
Water, and the distribution of it all over the dry Land in Springs and Rivers;
there will occur abundant Arguments of Wisdom and Understanding. The Sea, what
infinite variety of Fishes does it nourish? Psalm 104. 25. in the verse next to
my Text. The earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide Sea,
wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts, etc. How
does it exactly compose itself to a level or equal Superficies, and with the
Earth make up one spherical Roundness? How does it constantly observe its Ebbs
and Flows, its Spring and Nepe-tides, and still retain its saltness so
convenient for the maintenance of its Inhabitants? serving also the uses of Man
for Navigation, and the convenience of Carriage. That it should be defined by
Shores and Strands and Limits, I mean at first, when it was natural to it to
overflow and stand above the Earth. All these particulars declare abundance of
Wisdom in their primitive Constitution. This last the Psalmist takes notice of
in the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th verses of this Psalm. Speaking of the Earth at
the first Creation, he says, Thou coveredst it with the Deep as with a
garment, the waters stood above the mountains. At thy rebuke they fled, at the
voice of thy thunder they hasted away. (The mountains ascend, the valleys
descend) unto the place thou have prepared for them. Thou have set a bound that
they may not pass over: That they turn not again to cover the earth. Again, the
great use and convenience, the beauty and variety of so many Springs and
Fountains, so many Brooks and Rivers, so many Lakes and standing Pools of
Water, and these so scattered and dispersed all the Earth over; that no great
part of it is destitute of them, without which it must without a supply other
ways be desolate and void of Inhabitants; afford abundant Arguments of Wisdom
and Counsel. That Springs should break forth on the sides of Mountains most
remote from the Sea. That there should way be made for Rivers through Straits
and Rocks, and subterraneous Vaults, so that one would think that Nature had
cut a way on purpose to derive the Water, which else would overflow and drown
whole Countries. That the water passing through the Veins of the Earth, should
be rendered fresh and potable, which it cannot be by any percolations we can
make, but the saline Particles will pass through a tenfold Filtre. That in some
places there should spring forth metallic and mineral Waters, and hot Baths,
and these so constant and permanent for many Ages; so convenient for diverse
medicinal Intentions and Uses, the Causes of which things, or the Means and
Methods by which they are performed, have not been as yet certainly discovered;
how can we reasonably deny that they are the Products and Effects of profound
Counsel and Understanding?

Lastly, The Earth, which is the basis and support of all Animals and Plants,
and affords them the hard and solid part of their Bodies, yielding us Food and
Sustenance and partly also Clothing. How variously is the Surface of it
distinguished into Hills, and Valleys, and Plains, and high Mountains affording
pleasant Prospects? how curiously clothed and adorned with the grateful
verdure of Herbs and stately Trees, either dispersed and scattered singly, or
as it were assembled in Woods and Groves, and all these beautified and
illustrated with elegant Flowers and Fruits, quorum omnium incredibilis
multitudo, insatiabili varietate distinguitur, as Tully says. This also shows
forth to them that consider it both the Power and Wisdom of God: So that we may
conclude with Solomon Prove. 3, 19. The Lord by Wisdom has founded the Earth,
by Understanding has he established the Heavens.

But now, if we pass from Simple to Mixed Bodies, we shall still find more
matter of Admiration and Argument of Wisdom. Of these we shall first consider
those they call imperfectly Mixed, or Meteors.

Of Meteors.
As first of all Rain, which is nothing else but Water by the heat of the Sun
divided into very small invisible Parts, ascending in the Air, till encountering
the Cold, it be by degrees condensed into Clouds and descends in Drops; this
though it be exhaled from the Salt Sea, yet by this Natural Destillation is
rendered Fresh and Potable, which our Artificial Destillations have hitherto
been hardly able to effect; notwithstanding the eminent use it would be of to
Navigators, and the rewards promised to those that should resolve that Problem
of destilling Fresh Water out of Salt. That the Clouds should be so carried
about by the Winds, as to be almost equally dispersed and distributed, no part
of the Earth wanting convenient Showers, unless when it pleases God for the
punishment of a Nation to withhold Rain by a special interposition of his
Providence; or if any Land wants Rain, they have a supply some other way, as
the Land of Egypt, though there seldom falls any Rain there, yet has abundant
recompense made it by the annual overflowing of the River. This Distribution of
the Clouds and Rain is to me (I say) a great Argument of Providence and divine
Disposition; for else I do not see but why there might be in some Lands
continual successive Droughts for many Years, till they were quite depopulated;
in others as lasting Rains, till they were overflown and drowned; and these, if
the Clouds moved casually, often happening; whereas since the ancientest
Records of History we do not read or hear of any such droughts or inundations,
unless perhaps that of Cyprus, wherein there fell no Rain there for Thirty Six
Years, till the Island was almost quite deserted, in the Reign of Constantine.

Again, if we consider the manner of the Rains descent, destilling down
gradually and by drops, which is most convenient for the watering of the Earth,
whereas if it should fall down in a continued Stream like a River, it would
gall the Ground, wash away Plants by the Roots, overthrow Houses, and greatly
incommode, if not suffocate Animals; if, I say, we consider these things and
many more that might be added, we might in this respect also cry out with the
Apostle, O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!

Secondly, Another Meteor is the Wind; which how many Uses it does serve to is
not easy to enumerate, but many it does: viz. To ventilate and break the Air,
and dissipate noysom and contagious Vapors, which otherwise stagnating might
occasion many Diseases in Animals; and therefore it is an Observation
concerning our Native Country, Anglia ventosa, si non ventosa venenosa: To
transfer the Clouds from place to place, for the more commodious watering of
the Earth. To temper the excesses of the Heat, as they find, who in Brasil, New
Spain, the Neighboring Islands, and other the like Countries near the Equator
reap the Benefit of the Breezes. To fill the Sails of Ships, and carry them on
their Voyages to remote Countries; which of what eminent advantage it is to
Mankind, for the procuring and continuing of Trade and mutual Commerce between
the most distant Nations, the illustrating every corner of the Earth, and the
perfecting Geography and natural History, is apparent to every Man. To this may
be added the driving about of Windmills for grinding of Corn, making of Oil,
draining of Pools, etc. That it should seldom or never be so violent and
boisterous, as to overturn Houses; yea whole Cities; to tear up Trees by the
Roots, and prostrate Woods; to drive the Sea over the lower Countries; as were
it the effect of Chance, or mere natural Causes not moderated by a superior
Power, it would in all likelihood often do. All these things declare the Wisdom
and Goodness of Him who brings the Winds out of his Treasures.

Of Inanimate mixed Bodies.
I proceed now to such inanimate Bodies as are called Perfect mixta, perfectly
mixed, improperly enough, they being many of them (for ought I know) as simple
as those they call Elements. These are Stones, Metals, Minerals and Salts,

In Stones, which one would think were a neglected Genus, what variety? What
beauty and elegancy? What constancy in their temper and consistency, in their
Figures and Colors? I shall speak of first some notable Qualities wherewith
some of them are endued. Secondly, The remarkable Uses they are of to us. The
Qualities I shall instance in are first Color, which in some of them is most
lively, sparkling, and beautiful; the Carbuncle or Rubine shining with red, the
Sapphire with blue, the Emerauld with green, the Topaz or Chrysolite of the
Ancients with a yellow or gold color, the Amethyst as it were tinctured with
Wine, the Opal varying its colors like changeable Taffaty, as it is diversely
exposed to the Light. Secondly, Hardness, wherein some Stones exceed all other
bodies, and among them the Adamant all other Stones, being exalted to that
degree thereof, that Art in vain endeavors to counterfeit it, the factitious
Stones of Chemists in imitation being easily detected by any ordinary Lapidist.
Thirdly, Figure, many of them shoot into regular Figures, as Crystal and
bastard Diamonds into Hexagonal; others into those that are more elegant and
compounded, as those formed in imitation of the Shells of testaceous Fishes of
all sorts, Sharks Teeth and Vertebres, etc. If these be originally Stones, or
primary Productions of Nature in imitation of Shells and Fishes Bones, and not
the Shells and Bones themselves petrified, as we have sometimes thought. Some
have a kind of vegetation and resemblance of Plants, as Corals, Pori and
Fungites, which grow upon the Rocks like Shrubs: To which I might add our
ordinary Star-stones and Trochites, which I look upon as a sort of Rock-Plants.

Secondly, For the Uses; some serve for Building and many sorts of Vessels and
Utensils; for Pillars and Statues and other carved works in relieve, for the
Temples, ornament of Palaces, Portico's, Piazzas, Conduits, etc. as Freestone
and Marble; some to burn into Lime as Chalk and Limestone: Some with the
mixture of Beriglia or Kelp to make Glass, as that the Venetians call Cuogolo,
and common Flints which serve also to strike Fire; some to cover Houses as
Slates; some for marking as Morochthus, and the forementioned Chalk, which is a
(...), serving moreover for manuring Land, and some medicinal Uses; some to
make Vessels of which will endure the fire; as that found in the Country of
Chiavenna near Plurs. To these useful Stones I might add the Warming-stone,
dug in Cornwall, which being once well heated at the fire retains its warmth
a great while, and has been found to give ease and relief in several Pains and
Diseases, particularly that of the internal Haemorrhoids. I might also take
notice that some Stones are endued with an Electrical or attractive Virtue. I
might spend much time in the discoursing of the most strange and unaccountable
Nature and Powers of the Loadstone, a Subject which has exercised the Wits and
Pens of the most acute and ingenious Philosophers; and yet the Hypotheses which
they have invented to give an account of its admirable phoenomena seem to me
lame and unsatisfactory. What can we say of the subtlety, activity, and
penetrancy of its effluvia, which no obstacle can stop or repel, but they will
make their way through all sorts of Bodies, firm and fluid, dense and rare,
heavy and light, pellucid and opake: Nay they will pass through a vacuity or
empty space, at least devoid of Air and any other sensible Body. Its attractive
power of Iron was known to the Ancients, its verticity and direction to the
Poles of the Earth is of later Invention: Which of how infinite advantage it
has been to these two or three last Ages, the great improvement of Navigation
and advancement of Trade and Commerce by rendering the remotest Countries easily
accessible, the noble Discovery of a vast Continent or new World, besides a
multitude of unknown Kingdoms and Islands, the resolving experimentally those
ancient Problems of the Spherical roundness of the Earth; of the Being of
Antipodes, of the Habitableness of the Torrid Zone, and the rendering the whole
Terraqueous Globe circumnavigable, do abundantly demonstrate; whereas formerly
they were wont to coast it, and creep along the Shores, scarce daring to
venture out of the Ken of Land, when they did having no other guide but the
Cynosura or Pole Star and those near it, and in cloudy weather none at all.

As for Metals, they are so many ways useful to Mankind, and those Uses so well
known to all, that it would be lost labor to say any thing of them: Only it is
remarkable, that those which are of most frequent and necessary use, as Iron,
Brass and Lead, are the most common and plentiful: Others that are more rare,
may better be spared, yet are they thereby qualified to be made the common
measure and standard of the value of all other Commodities, and so to serve for
Coin or Money, to which use they have been employed by all civil Nations in all
Ages. Of these Gold is remarkable for its admirable Ductility and Ponderosity,
wherein it excels all other bodies hitherto known. I shall only add concerning
Metals, that they do pertinaciously resist all Transmutation; and though one
would sometimes think they were turned into a different Substance, yet do they
but as it were lurk under a Larva or Vizzard, and may be reduced again into
their natural Form and Complexions, in despite of all the tortures of Vulcan
or corrosive Waters. Note, That this was written above Thirty Years since, when
I thought I had reason to distrust what ever had then been reported or written
to affirm the Transmutation of Metals one into another.

I shall omit the consideration of other Minerals, and of Salts and Earths,
because I have nothing to say of their Uses, but only such as refer to Man,
which I cannot affirm to have been the sole or primary End of the Formation of
them. Indeed to speak in general of these Terrestrial inanimate Bodies, they
having no such organization of parts as the Bodies of Animals, nor any so
intricate variety of Texture, but that their production may plausibly be
accounted for by an Hypothesis of matter divided into minute Particles or Atoms
naturally indivisible, of various but a determinate number of Figures, and
perhaps also differing in Magnitude, and these moved, and continually kept in
motion according to certain established Laws or Rules; we cannot so clearly
discover the Uses for which they were Created, but may probably conclude that
among other Ends they were made for those for which they serve us and other
Animals. It is here to be noted, that according to our Hypothesis, the number
of the Atoms of each several kind that is of the same Figure and Magnitude is
not nearly equal; but there be infinitely more of some species than of others,
as of those that compound those vast Aggregates of Air, Water, and Earth, more
abundantly than of such as make up Metals and Minerals: The reason whereof may
probably be, because those are necessary to the Life and Being of Man and all
other Animals, and therefore must be always at hand; these only useful to Man,
and serving rather his Conveniences than Necessities. The reason why I affirm
the minute component Particles of Bodies to be naturally indivisible by any
Agent we can employ, even Fire it self (which is the only Catholic Dissolvent,
other menstruums being rather Instruments than Efficients in all Solutions, apt
by reason of the figure and smalness of their Parts to cut and divide other
Bodies, (as Wedges cleave Wood) when actuated by fire or its heat, which else
would have no efficacy at all; as Wedges have not unless driven by a Beetle:)
the reason, I say, I have already given; I shall now instance in a Body whose
minute Parts appear to be indissoluble by the force of Fire, and that is common
Water, which destill, boil, circulate, work upon how you will by Fire, you can
only dissolve it into Vapor, which when the motion ceases easily returns into
Water again; Vapor being nothing else but the minute Parts thereof by heat
agitated and separated one from another. For another Instance, some of the most
Learned and experienced Chemists do affirm Quicksilver to be intransmutable,
and therefore call it Liquor aeternus. And I am of opinion that the same holds
of all simple Bodies, that their component Particles are indissoluble, by any
natural Agent.

Of Vegetables or Plants.
I have now done with Inanimate Bodies both Simple and Mixed. The Animate are

First, Such as are endued only with a Vegetative Soul, and therefore commonly
called Vegetables or Plants; of which if we consider either their Stature and
Shape, or their Age and Duration, we shall find it wonderful. For why should
some Plants rise up to a great height, others creep upon the ground, which
perhaps may have equal seeds, nay the lesser Plant many times the greater seed?
Why should each particular so observe its kind, as constantly to produce the
same Leaf for consistency, figure, division, and edging; and bring forth the
same kind of Flower, and Fruit, and Seed, and that though you translate it into
a Soil which naturally puts forth no such kind of Plant, so that it is some
Seminal form or virtue.
(...) which does effect this or rather some intelligent plastic Nature, as we
have before intimated. For what account can be given of the determination of
the growth and magnitude of Plants from mechanical Principles, of matter moved
without the presidency and guidance of some superior Agent? Why may not Trees
grow up as high as the Clouds or Vapors ascend, or if you say the Cold of the
superior Air checks them, why may they not spread and extend their lateral
Branches so far till their distance from the Center of Gravity depress them to
the Earth, be the Tree never so high? How comes it to pass that though by
Culture and Manure they may be highly improved, and augmented to a double,
treble, nay some a much greater proportion in magnitude of all their Parts; yet
is this advance restrained within certain limits? There is a maximum quod sic
which they cannot exceed. You can by no Culture or Art extend a Fennel Stalk to
the stature and bigness of an Oak. Then why should some be very long lived,
others only Annual or Biennial? How can we imagine that any Laws of Motion can
determine the situation of the leaves, to come forth by pairs, or alternately,
or circling the stalk; the flowers to grow singly, or in company and tusts, to
come forth the bosoms of the leaves and branches, or on the tops of branches
and stalks; the figure of the leaves, that they should be divided into so many
jags or escallops and curiously indented round the edges, as also of the
flowerleaves, their number and site, the figure and number of the stamina and
their apices, the figure of the Style and Seed-vessel, and the number of Cells
into which it is divided. That all this be done, and all these parts duly
proportioned one to another, there seems to be necessary some intelligent
Plastic Nature, which may understand and regulate the whole Economy of the
Plant: For this cannot be the Vegetative Soul, because that is material and
divisible together with the Body: Which appears in that a Branch cut off of a
Plant will take Root and grow and become a perfect Plant it self, as we have
already observed. I had almost forgotten the complication of the Seed-leaves of
some Plants in the Seed, which is so strange that one cannot believe it to be
done by Matter however moved by any Laws or Rules imaginable. Some of them
being so close plaited, and straightly folded up and thrust together within the
membranes of the Seed, that it would puzzle a man to imitate it, and yet none
of the folds sticking or growing together; so that they may easily be taken out
of their cases, and spread and extended even with ones Fingers.

Secondly, If we consider each particular Part of a Plant, we shall find it not
without its End or Use: The Roots for its stability and drawing nourishment
from the Earth. The Fibers to contain and convey the Sap. Besides which there
is a large sort of Vessels to contain the proper and specific Juice of the
Plant: and others to carry Air for such a kind of Respiration as it needs; of
which we have already spoken. The outer and inner Bark in Trees serve to defend
the Trunk and Boughs from the excesses of Heat and Cold and Drought, and to
convey the Sap for the Annual augmentation of the Tree. For in truth every Tree
may in some sense be said to be an Annual Plant, both Leaf, Flower and Fruit
proceeding from the Coat that was superinduced over the Wood the last Year,
which Coat also never bears any more, but together with the old Wood serves
as a Form or Block to sustain the succeeding annual Coat. The Leaves before the
Gemma or Bud be explicated to embrace and defend, the Flower and Fruit, which
is even then perfectly formed; afterward to preserve the Branches, Flowers and
Fruit from the Injuries of the Summer Sun, which would too much parch and dry
them, if they lay open and exposed to its Beams without any Shelter; the Leaves
I say qualify and contemper the Heat, and serve also to hinder the too hasty
evaporation of the moisture about the Root; not to mention the pleasant and
delectable, cooling and refreshing Shade they afford in the Summer time; which
was very much esteemed by the Inhabitants of hot Countries, who always took
great delight and pleasure to sit in the open Air under shady Trees: Hence that
expression so often repeated in Scripture, of every Man's sitting under his own
Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, where also they used to eat; as appears by
Abraham's entertaining the Angels under a Tree, and standing by them when they
did eat. Genesis 18. 8. Moreover the Leaves of Plants are very beautiful and
ornamental. That there is great pulchritude and comeliness of Proportion in the
Leaves, Flowers and Fruits of Plants, is attested by the general Verdict of
Mankind, as Dr. More and others well observe. The adorning and beautifying of
Temples and Buildings in all Ages, is an evident and undeniable Testimony of
this. For what is more ordinary with Architects than the taking in Leaves and
Flowers and Fruitage for the garnishing of their Work; as the Roman the Leaves
of Acanthus sat. and the Jewish of Palm. Trees and Pomegranates; and these more
frequently than any of the five regular Solids, as being more comely and
pleasant to behold. If any man shall object, that comeliness of Proportion and
Beauty is but a mere conceit, and that all Things are alike handsome to some men
who have as good Eyes as others; and that this appears by the variation of
Fashions, which does so alter men's Fancies, that what erewhile seemed very
handsome and comely, when it is once worn out of Fashion appears very absurd,
uncouth and ridiculous. To this I answer, that Custom and Use does much in
those Things where little of Proportion and Symmetry show themselves, or which
are alike comely and beautiful, to disparage the one, and commend the other. But
there are degrees of things; for (that I may use Antidote against Athism l. 2.
c. 5.
Dr. Mores Words) I dare appeal to any man that is not sunk into so forlorn a
pitch of degeneracy that he is as stupid to these things as the basest of
Beasts, whether, for example, a rightly cut Tetraedrum, Cube or Icosaedrum have
no more Pulchritude in them than any rude broken Stone, lying in the field or
highways; or to name other solid Figures, which though they be not regular
properly so called, yet have a settled Idea and Nature, as a Cone, Sphere, or
Cylinder, whether the sight of those do not more gratify the minds of Men, and
pretend to more elegancy of shape than those rude cuttings or chippings of
Freestone that fall from the Masons hands, and serve for nothing but to fill up
the middle of the Wall, as fit to be hid from the Eyes of Men for their
ugliness. And therefore it is obvable, that if Nature shape any thing but near
to this Geometrical accuracy, that we take notice of it with much content and
pleasure, and greedily gather and treasure it up. As if it be but exactly
round, as those Spherical Stones found in Cuba, and some also in our own Land,
or have but its sides parallel, as those rhomboideal Selenites found near St.
Ives in Huntington shire, and many other places in England. Whereas ordinary
Stones of rude and uncertain Figures we pass by, and take no notice of at all.
But though the Figures of these Bodies be pleasing and agreeable to our Minds,
yet (as we have already observed) those of the Leaves, Flowers and Fruits of
Trees, more. And it is remarkable, that in the Circumscription and Complication
of many Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, and Seeds Nature affects a regular Figure. Of
a pentagonal or quincuncial Disposition Sir Tho. Brown of Norwich produces
several examples in his Discourse about the Quincunx. And doubtless instances
might be given in other regular Figures, were men but observant.

The Flowers serve to cherish and defend the first and tender Rudiments of the
Fruit: I might also add the masculine or prolifick Seed contained in the chives
or apices of the stamina. These beside the elegancy of their Figures are many
of them endued with splendid and lovely Colors, and likewise most grateful and
fragrant Odours. Indeed such is the beauty and luster of some Flowers, that our
Savior says of the Lilies of the Field (which some not without reason fuppose
to have been Tulips) that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these. And it is observed by Isag. ad rem Herbariam.
Spigelius, That the Art of the most skilful Painter cannot so mingle and
temper his Colors, as exactly to imitate or counterfeit the native ones of the
Flowers of Vegetables.

As for the Seeds of Plants, Antidote against Atheism. l. 2. c. 6.
Dr. More esteems it an evident Sign of Divine Providence, that every Kind has
its Seed. For it being no necessary result of the motion of the matter (as the
whole contrivance of the Plant indeed is not) and it being of so great
consequence that they have Seed for the continuance and propagation of their
own Species, and also for the gratifying man's Art, Industry and Necessities
(for much of Husbandry and Gardening lies in this) it cannot but be an Act of
Counsel to furnish the several Kinds of Plants with their Seeds.

Now the Seed being so necessary for the maintenance and increase of the
several Species, it is worthy the observation, what Care is taken to secure and
preserve it, being in some doubly and trebly defended. As for instance, in the
Walnut, Almond and Plums of all sorts, we have first a thick pulpy covering,
then a hard shell, within which is the Seed enclosed in a double membrane. In
the Nutmeg another Tegument is added besides all these, viz. the Mace within
the hard Shell immediately inveloping the Kernel. Neither yet does the exterior
Pulp of the Fruit or Pericarpium serve only for the defense and security of the
Seed, whilst it hangs upon the Plant: But after it is mature and fallen upon the
Earth, for the stercoration of the Soil, and promotion of the growth, though
not the first germination of the Seminal Plant. Hence (as Agric. l. 2. c. 6.
Petrus de Crescentiis tells us) Husbandmen to make their Vines bear, Manure
them with Vineleaves, or the Husks of expressed Grapes, and that they observe
those to be most fruitful, which are so manured with their own: Which
Observation holds true also in all other Trees and Herbs. But besides this use
of the Pulp or Pericarpium for the guard and benefit of the Seed, it serves
also by a secondary intention of Nature in many Fruits for the Food and
Sustenance of Man and other Animals.

Another thing worthy the nothing in Seeds, and argumentative of Providence and
Design, is that pappose Plumage growing upon the Tops of some of them, whereby
they are capable of being wafted with the Wind, and by that means scattered and
disseminated far and wide.

Furthermore most Seeds having in them a seminal Plant perfectly formed, as the
Young is in the Womb of Animals, the elegant complication thereof in some
Species is a very pleasant and admirable Spectacle; so that no man that has a
Soul in him can imagine or believe it was so formed and folded up without
Wisdom and Providence. But of this I have spoken already.

Lastly, the immense Smalness of some Seeds, not to be seen by the naked Eye,
so that the number of Seeds produced at once in some one Plant may amount to a
Million, is a convincing Argument of the infinite Understanding and Art of the
Former of them.

And it is remarkable that such Mosses as grow upon Walls, the Roofs of Houses
and other high Places, have Seeds so excessively small, that when shaken out of
their Vessels they appear like Vapor or Smoke, so that they may either ascend
of themselves, or by an easy impulse of the Wind be raised up to the Tops of
Houses, Walls or Rocks: And we need not wonder how the Mosses got thither, or
imagine they sprung up spontaneously there.

I might also take notice of many other particulars concerning Vegetables, as,
First, That because they are designed for the Food of Animals, therefore Nature
has taken more extraordinary Care and made more abundant Provision for their
Propagation and increase; so that they are multiplied and propagated not only
by the Seed, but many also by the Root, producing Off sets or creeping under
Ground, many by Strings or Wires running above Ground, as Strawberry and the
like, some by Slips or Cuttings, and some by several of these Ways. Secondly,
That some sorts of Plants, as Vines, all sorts of Pulse, Hops, Briony, all
Promiferous Herbs, Pumpions, Melons, Gourds. Cucumbers, and diverse other
Species, that are weak and unable to raise or support themselves, are either
endued with a faculty of twining about others that are near, or else furnished
with Claspers and Tendrels, whereby as it were with Hands they catch hold of
them and so ramping upon Trees, Shrubs, Hedges or Poles, they mount up to a
great height, and secure themselves and their Fruit. Thirdly, That others are
armed with Prickles and Thorns, to secure them from the browsing of Beasts, as
also to shelter others that grow under them. Moreover they are hereby rendered
very useful to Man, as if designed by Nature to make both Quick and Dead Hedges
and Fences, The great Naturalist Pliny, has given an ingenious Account of the
Providence and Design of Nature in thus arming and fencing them in these Words.
Inde (speaking of Nature) excogitavit aliquas aspectu hispidas, tactu truces,
ut tantum non vocem ipsius Naturae fingentis illas, rationemque reddentis
exaudire videamur, ne se depascat avida quadrupes, ne procaces manus rapiant,
ne neglecta vestigia obterant, ne insidens ales infringat; his muniendo aculeis
telisque armando, remediis ut salva ac tuta sint. Ita hoc quoque quod in iis
odimus hominum causa excogitatum est.

As for the Signatures of Plants, or the Notes impressed upon them as Indices
of their Virtues, though D. More Antid. l. 2. c. 6.
some lay great stress upon them, accounting them, strong Arguments to prove
that some understanding Principle is the highest Original of the Works of
Nature; as indeed they were, could it certainly be made appear that there were
such Marks designedly set upon them; because all that I find mentioned and
collected by Authors, seem to me to be rather fancied by men, than designed by
Nature to signify or point out any such Virtues or Qualities as they would
make us believe, I have elsewhere, I think upon good Grounds, rejected them;
and finding no reason as yet to alter my Opinion, I shall not further insist on
them.

Of Bodies endued with a Sensitive Soul, or Animals.
I proceed now to the consideration of Animate Bodies endued with a Sensitive
Soul, called Animals. Of these I shall only make some general Observations, not
curiously consider the Parts of each particular Species, save only as they
serve for Instances or Examples.

First of all, because it is the great design of Providence to maintain and
continue every Species, I shall take notice of the great Care and abundant
Provision that is made for the securing this End. Quanta ad eam rem vis, ut in
suo quaeque genere permaneat? Cic. Why can we imagine all Creatures should be
made Male and Female but to this purpose? Why should there be implanted in each
Sex such a vehement and inexpugnable Appetite of Copulation? Why in viviparous
Animals, in the time of Gestation should the nourishment be carried to the
Embryon in the Womb, which at other times goes not that way? When the Young is
brought forth, how comes all the nourishment then to be transferred from the
Womb to the Breasts or Paps, leaving its former channel, the Dam at such time
being for the most part Lean and Ilfavoured? Here I cannot omit one very
remarkable Observation I find in Cicero. Atque ut intelligamus (says he) nihil
horum esse fortuitum, sed haec omnia providae solertisque naturae, Quae
multiplices foetus procreant, ut Sues, ut Canes, his mammarum data est
multitudo, quas easdem paucas habent eae bestiae quae pauca gignunt. That we
may understand that none of these things (he had been speaking of) is
fortuitous, but that all are the effects of provident and sagacious Nature,
multiparous quadrupeds, as Dogs, as Swine, are furnished with a multitude of
Paps: Whereas those Beasts which bring forth few have but a few.

That Flying Creatures of the greater sort, that is Birds should all lay Eggs,
and none bring forth Live Young, is a manifest Argument of Divine Providence,
designing thereby their Preservation and Security; that there might be the more
plenty of them; and that neither the Birds of Prey, the Serpent, nor the Fowler
should straiten their Generations too much. For if they had been Viviparous,
the Burden of their Womb, if they had brought forth any competent number at a
time, had been so great and heavy, that their Wings would have failed them, and
they became an easy Prey to their Enemies: Or if they had brought but one or
two at a time, they would have been troubled all the Year long with Feeding
their Young, or Bearing them in their Womb. * Dr. More. Antid. Atheism. l. 2.
c. 9.


This mention of Feeding their Young puts me in mind of two or three
considerable Observations referring thereto.

First, Seeing it would be for many reasons inconvenient for Birds to give
Suck, and yet no less inconvenient if not destructive to the Chicken upon
exclusion all of a sudden to make so great a change in its Diet, as to pass
from liquid to hard Food, before the Stomach be gradually consolidated and by
use strengthened and habituated to grind and concoct it, and its tender and
pappy Flesh, fitted to be nourished by such strong and solid Diet; and before
the Bird be by little and little accustomed to use its Bill, and gather it up,
which at first it does but very slowly and imperfectly; therefore Nature has
provided a large Yolk in every Egg; a great part whereof remains after the
Chicken is hatched, and is taken up and enclosed in its Belly, and by a channel
made on purpose received by degrees into the Guts, and serves instead of Milk
to nourish the Chick for a considerable time; which nevertheless mean while
feeds it self by the Mouth a little at a time, and gradually more and more, as
it gets a perfecter Ability and Habit of gathering up its Meat, and its Stomach
is strengthened to macerate and concoct it, and its Flesh hardened and fitted
to be nourished by it.

Secondly, That Birds which feed their Young in the Nest, though in all
likelihood they have no ability of counting the number of them, should yet,
(though they bring but one morsel of Meat at a time, and have not fewer (it may
be) than seven or eight Young in the Nest together, which at the return of
their Dams, do all at once with equal greediness, hold up their Heads and
gape,) not omit or forget one of them, but feed them all; which, unless they
did carefully observe, and retain in Memory which they had fed, which not, were
impossible to be done; this I say, seems to me most strange and admirable, and
beyond the possibility of a mere Machine to perform.

Thirdly, the mavelous speedy growth of Birds that are hatched in Nests, and
fed by the Old ones there, till they be fledged and come almost to their full
bigness; at which perfection they arrive within the short term of about one
Fortnight, seems to me an Argument of Providence designing thereby their
preservation, that they might not lie long in a condition exposed to the ravine
of any Vermin that may find them, being utterly unable to escape or shift for
themselves.

Another and no less effectual Argument may be taken from the Care and
Providence used for the hatching and rearing their young and First, they search
our a secret and quiet Place, where they may be secure and undisturbed in their
incubation: Then they make themselves Nests, every one after his kind, that so
their Eggs and Young may lie soft and warm, and their exclusion and growth be
promoted. These Nests some of them so elegant and artificial, that it is hard
for man to imitate them and make the like. I have seen Nests of an Indian Bird
so artificially composed of the Fibers, I think, of some Roots, so curiously
interwoven and platted together as is admirable to behold: Which Nests they
hang on the ends of the Twigs of Trees over the Water, to secure their Eggs and
Young from the ravage of Apes and Monkeys, and other Beasts that might else
prey upon them. After they have laid their Eggs, how diligently and patiently
do they sit upon them till they be hatched, scarce affording themselves time to
go off to get them Meat? Nay with such an ardent and impetuous desire of
sitting are they inspired, that if you takeaway all their Eggs, they will sit
upon an empty Nest: And yet one would think that sitting were none of the most
pleasant Works. After their Young are hatched for some time they do almost
constantly Brood them under their Wings, lest the Cold, and sometimes perhaps
the Heat, should harm them. All this while also they labor hard to get them
Food, sparing it out of their own Bellies, and pining themselves almost to
Death rather than they should want. Moreover it is admirable to observe with
what courage they are at that time inspired, that they will even venture their
own Lives in defense of them. The most timorous, as Hens and Geese, become then
so courageous as to dare to fly in the Face of a man that shall molest or
disquiet their Young, which would never do so much in their own defense. These
things being contrary to any motions of Sense, or instinct of
Self-preservation, and so eminent pieces of Self-denial, must needs be the Work
of Providence for the continuation of the Species and upholding of the World.
Especially if we consider that all this Pains is bestowed upon a thing which
takes no notice of it, will render them no thanks for it, nor make them any
requital or amends; and also, that after the young is come to some growth, and
able to shift for it self, the old one retains no such (...) to it, takes no
further care of it, but will fall upon it, and beat it indifferently with
others. To these I shall add one Observation more, relating to this Head,
borrowed of Dr. Cudworth, System, page 69. One thing necessary to the
Conservation of the Species of Animals; that is, the keeping up constantly in
the World a due numerical Proportion between the Sexes of Male and Female, does
necessarily infer a superintending Providence. For did this depend only upon
Mechanism, it cannot well be conceived, but that in some Ages or other, there
should happen to be all Males, or all Females; and so the Species fail. Nay, it
cannot well be thought otherwise, but that there is in this a Providence,
superior to that of the Plastic or Spermatick Nature, which has not so much
of Knowledge and Discretion allowed to it, as whereby to be able alone to
govern this Affair.

Secondly, I shall take notice of the various strange Instincts of Animals;
which will necessarily demonstrate, that they are directed to Ends unknown to
them, by a Wise Superintendent. As 1. That all Creatures should know how to
defend themselves, and offend their Enemies; where their natural Weapons are
situate, and how to make use of them. A Calf will so manage his Head as though
he would push with his Horns even before they shoot. A Boar knows the use of
his Tushes; A Dog of his Teeth; A Horse of his Hoofs; A Cock of his Spurs; A
Be of her Sting; A Ram will but with his Head, yea though he be brought up
tame, and never saw that manner of fighting. Now, why another Animal which has
no Horns should not make a show of pushing, or no Spurs of striking with his
Legs and the like, I know not, but that every kind is providentially directed
to the use of its proper and natural Weapons. 2. That those Animals that are
weak, and have neither Weapons nor Courage to fight, are for the most part
created Swift of Foot or Wing, and so being naturally timorous, are both
willing and able to save themselves by flight. 3. That Poultrey, Partridge and
other Birds should at the first sight know Birds of Prey, and make sign of it
by a peculiar note of their Voice to their young, who presently thereupon hide
themselves: That the Lamb should acknowledge the Wolf its Enemy, though it had
never seen one before, as is taken for granted by most Naturalists, and may for
ought I know be true, argues the Providence of Nature, or more truly the God of
Nature, who for their preservation has put such an Instinct into them. 4. That
young Animals, so soon as they are brought forth, should know their Food. As
For Example, Such as are nourished with Milk, presently find their way to the
Paps, and suck at them, whereas none of those that are not designed for that
nourishment ever offer to suck, or to seek out any such food. Again, 5. That
such Creatures as are whole-footed or fin-toed, viz. some Birds and some
Quadrupeds, are naturally directed to go into the water and swim there, as we
see Ducklings, though hatched and led by a Hen, if she brings them to the brink
of a River or Pond of Water, they presently leave her, and in they go, though
they never saw any such thing done before; and though the Hen clocks and calls,
and does what she can to keep them out: So that we see every part in Animals is
fitted to its Use, and the Knowledge of this Use put into them. For neither do
any sort of webfooted Fowls live constantly upon the Land, or fear to enter the
Water, nor any Land-Fowl so much as attempt to swim there. 6. Birds of the same
Kind make their Nests of the same Materials, laid in the same Order, and
exactly of the same Figure, so that by the sight of the Nest one may certainly
know what Bird it belongs to. And this they do, though living in distant
Countries, and though they never saw, nor could see any Nest made, that is,
though taken out of the Nest, and brought up by hand; neither were any of the
same kind ever observed to make a different Nest either for Matter or Fashion.
This together with the curious and artificial Contexture of such Nests, and
their fitness and convenience for the reception, hatching and cherishing the
Eggs and Young of their respective builders (which we have before taken notice
of) is a great Argument of a superior Author of their and others Natures, who
has indu'd them with these Instincts, whereby they are as it were, acted and
driven to bring about Ends which themselves aim not at (so far as we can
discern) but are directed to; for (as Aristotle observes) (...), They act not
by any Art, neither do they enquire, neither do they deliberate about what they
do. And therefore, as Dr. Cudworth says well, they are not Masters of that
Wisdom according to which they act, but only passive to the Instincts and
Impresses thereof upon them. And indeed to affirm that brute Animals do all
these things by a Knowledge of their own, and which themselves are Masters of,
and that without Deliberation and Consultation, were to make them to be endued
with a most perfect Intellect, far transcending that of Human Reason: Whereas
it is plain enough, that Brutes are not above Consultation but below it; and
that these Instincts of Nature in them, are nothing but a kind of Fate upon
them. 7. The Be, a Creature of the lowest form of Animals, so that no man can
suspect it to have any considerable measure of Understanding, or to have
Knowledge of, much less to aim at any End, yet makes her Combs and Cells with
that Geometrical Accuracy, that she must needs be acted by an Instinct
implanted in her by the wise Author of Nature. For first, she plants them in a
perpendicular posture, and so close together as with convenience they may,
beginning at the top, and working downwards, that so no room may be lost in the
Hive, and that she may have easy access to all the Combs and Cells. Besides,
the Combs being wrought double, that is, with Cells on each side, a common
bottom or partitionwall could not in any other site have so conveniently, if at
all, received or contained the Honey. Then she makes the particular Cells most
Geometrically and Artificially, as the famous Mathematician Pappus demonstrates
in the Preface to his third Book of Mathematical Collections. First of all
(says he, speaking of the Cells,) It is convenient that they be of such
figures as may cohere one to another, and have common sides, else there would
be empty spaces left between them to no use, but to the weakening and spoiling
of the work, if any thing should get in there. And therefore though a round
figure be most capacious for the Honey, and most convenient for the Be to
creep into, yet did she not make choice of that, because then there must have
been triangular spaces left void. Now there are only three rectilineous and
ordinate figures which can serve to this purpose; and inordinate or unlike ones
must have been not only less elegant and beautiful but unequal. [Ordinate
Figures are such as have all their Sides and all their Angles equal.] The three
Ordinate Figures, are Triangles, Squares, and Hexagons. For the space about any
point may be filled up either by six equilateral Triangles, or four Squares, or
three Hexagons; whereas three Pentagons are too little and three Heptagons too
much. Of these three the Be makes use of the Hexagon, both because it is more
capacious than either of the other, provided they be of equal compass, and so
equal matter spent in the construction of each: And Secondly, Because it is
most commodious for the Be to creep into: And Lastly, Because in the other
Figures more Angles and Sides must have met together at the same point, and so
the work could not have been so firm and strong. Moreover, the Combs being
double, the Cells on each side the partition are so ordered, that the Angles on
one side, insist upon the Centers of the bottoms of the Cells on the other
side, and not Angle upon, or against Angle; which also must needs contribute to
the strength and firmness of the work. Another sort of Be I have observed, it
may be called the Tree-Bee, whose industry is admirable in making provision for
her young. First, She digs round Vaults or Burrows [Cuniculos] in a rotten or
decayed Tree, of a great length, in them she builds or forms her cylindrical
Nests or Cases, resembling Cartrages, or a very narrow Thimble, only in
proportion longer, of pieces of Rose or other Leaves which she shares off with
her mouth, and plats and joins close together by some glutinous Substance.
These Cases she fills with a red Pap, of a thinner consistence than an
Electuary, of no pleasant taste, which where she gathers, I know not: On the
top of the Pap, she lays one Egg, and then closes up the Vessel with a cover of
leaves. The enclosed Egg soon becomes an Eula or Maggor, which feeding upon the
Pap till it comes to its full growth changes to a Nympha, and after comes out a
Be. Another Insect noted for her seeming prudence, in making provision for the
Winter, proposed by Solomon to the Sluggard for his imitation, is the Ant,
which (as all Naturalists agree) hoards up grains of Corn against the Winter
for her Sustenance: And is reported by some to Plin. l. 11. c. 30.
bite off the germen of them, lest they should sprout by the moisture of the
Earth, which I look upon as a mere fiction; neither should I be forward to
credit the former relation, were it not for the Authority of the Scripture,
because I could never observe any such storing up of Grain by our Country-Ants.

Yet is there a Quadruped taken notice of even by the vulgar for laying up in
store provision for the Winter, that is, the Squirrel, whose hoards of Nuts are
frequently found and pillaged by them.

The Beaver is by credible persons Eyewitnesses affirmed to build him Houses
for shelter and security in Wintertime: See Mr. Boil of Final Causes.

Besides these I have mentioned, an Hundred others may be found in Books
relating especially to Physic; as that Dogs when they are Sick should vomit
themselves by eating Grass: That Swine should refuse Meat so soon as they feel
themselves ill, and so recover by Abstinence: That the Bird Ibis should teach
Men the way of administering Clysters. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 27. The wild Goats of
Dictamnus for drawing out of Darts, and healing Wounds: The Swallow the use of
Celandine for repairing the Sight, etc. ibid. Of the truth of which because I
am not fully satisfied, I shall make no Inference from them.

Thirdly, I shall remark the Care that is taken for the preservation of the
Weak and such as are exposed to Injuries, and preventing the increase of such
as are noisome and hurtful: For as it is a Demonstration of the divine Power and
Magnificence to create such variety of Animals, not only great but small, not
only strong and courageous, but also weak and timorous; so is it no less
Argument of his Wisdom to give to these Means, and the Power and Skill of using
them, to preserve themselves from the violence and Injuries of those. That of
the weak some should dig Vaults and Holes in the Earth, as Rabbets, to secure
themselves and their Young; others should be armed with hard Shells; others with
Prickles, the rest that have no such armature should be endued with great
Swiftness or Pernicity: And not only so, but some also have their Eyes stand so
prominent, as the Hare, that they can see as well behind as before them, that
so they may have their Enemy always in their Eye; and long, hollow, moveable
Ears, to receive and convey the least sound, or that which comes from far, that
they be not suddenly surprised or taken (as they say) napping. As for Sheep,
which have no natural Weapons or Means to defend or secure themselves, neither
Heels to run nor claws to dig; they are delivered into the Hand, and committed
to the care and tuition of Man, and serving him for diverse Uses, are nourished
and protected by him; and so enjoying their Beings for a time, by this means
propagate and continue their Species: So that there are none destitute of some
Means to preserve themselves and their kind; and these Means so effectual, that
notwithstanding all the endeavors and contrivances of Man and Beast to destroy
them, there is not to this day one Species lost of such as are mentioned in
Histories, and consequently and undoubtedly neither of such as were at first
created.

Then for Birds of Prey and rapacious Animals, it is remarkable what Aristotle
observes, That they are all solitary, and go not in Flocks, (...). No Birds of
Prey are gregarious. Again, That such Creatures do not greatly multiply (...).
They for the most part breeding and bringing forth but one or two, or at least
a few young ones at once: Whereas they that are feeble and timorous are
generally multiparous; or if they bring forth but few at once, as Pigeons, they
compensate that by their often breeding, viz. every Month but two throughout
the Year; by this means providing for the continuation of their kind.

Fourthly, I shall note the exact Fitness of the Parts of the Bodies of Animals
to every ones Nature and manner of living. Of this Dr. Antidote against Atheism
l. 2. c. 10.
More produces an eminent Instance in a poor contemptible Quadruped, the Mole.
First of all (says he) her dwelling being under ground, where nothing is to be
seen, Nature has so obscurely fitted her with Eyes, that Naturalists can
scarcely agree, whether she has any Sight at all or no [In our Observation,
Moles have perfect Eyes, and holes for them through the Skin, so that they are
outwardly to be seen by any that shall diligently search for them; though
indeed they are exceeding small, not much bigger than a great Pins head.] But
for amends, what she is capable of for her defense and warning of danger, she
has very eminently conferred upon her; for she is very quick of hearing
[doubtless her subterraneous Vaults are like Trunks to convey any Sound a great
way.] And then her short Tail, and short Legs, but broad fore-Feet armed with
sharp Claws, we see by the event to what purpose they are, she so swiftly
working her self under Ground, and making her way so fast in the Earth, as they
that behold it cannot but admire it. Her Legs therefore are short that she need
dig no more than will serve the mere thickness of her Body: And her fore-Feet
are broad, that she may scoup away much Earth at a time: And she has little or
no Tail, because she courses it not on the Ground like a Rat or Mouse, but
lives under the Earth, and is fain to dig her self a dwelling there; and she
making her way through so thick an Element, which will not easily yield as the
Water and Air do; it had been dangerous to draw so long a train behind her; for
her Enemy might fall upon her rear, and fetch her out before she had perfected
and got full Possession of her Works: Which being so, what more palpable
Argument of Providence than She?

Another instance in Quadrupeds might be the Tamandua or Ant Bear, described by
Marcgrave and Piso, who says of them, that they are Night walkers, and seek
their Food by Night. Being kept tame they are fed with Flesh, but it must be
minced small, because they have not only a slender and sharp Head and Snout,
but also a narrow and toothless Mouth; their Tongue is like a great Lute string
(as big as a Goosequill) round, and in the greater Kind (for there are two
Species) more than two foot long, and therefore lies doubled in a Channel
between the lower parts of the Cheeks. This when hungry they thrust forth,
being well moistened, and lay upon the Trunks of Trees, and when it is covered
with Ants suddenly draw it back into their Mouths; if the Ants lie so deep that
they cannot come at them, they dig up the Earth with their long and strong
Claws, wherewith for that purpose their fore-Feet are armed. So we see how
their Parts are fitted for this kind of Diet, and no other; for the catching of
it and for the eating of it, it requiring no comminution by the Teeth, as
appears also in the Chamaeleon, which is another Quadruped that imitates the
Tamandua in this property of darting out the Tongue to a great length, with
wonderful celerity, and for the same purpose too of catching of Insects.

Besides these Quadrupeds, there are a whole Genus of Birds, called Pici Martii
or Woodpeckers, that in like manner have a Tongue which they can shoot forth to
a very great length, ending in a sharp stiff bony tip, dented on each side; and
at pleasure thrust it deep into the holes, clefts and crannies of Trees, to
stab and draw out Cossi or any other Insects lurking there, as also into
Anthills, to strike and fetch out the Ants and their Eggs. Moreover they have
short but very strong Legs, and their Toes stand two forwards two backwards,
which disposition (as Aldrovandus well notes) Nature, or rather the Wisdom of
the Creator, has granted to Woodpeckers, because it is very convenient for the
climbing of Trees, to which also conduces the stiffness of the Feathers of
their Tails and there bending downward, whereby they are fitted to serve as a
prop for them to lean upon and bear up their Bodies. As for the Chamaeleon he
imitates the Woodspite, not only in the make, motion and use of his Tongue for
striking Ants, Flies, and other Insects; but also in the site of his Toes,
whereby he is wonderfully qualified to run upon Trees, which he does with that
swiftness, that one would think he flew, whereas upon the ground he walks very
clumfily and ridiculously. A full description of the outward and inward parts
of this Animal, may be seen at the end of Panarolus's Observat. It is to be
noted, that the Chamelion, though he has Teeth, uses them not for chewing his
Prey, but swallows it immediately.

II. In Birds all the Members are most exactly fitted for the use of flying.
First, The Muscles which serve to move the Wings are the greatest and
strongest, because much force is required to the agitation of them; the
underside of them is also made concave, and the upper unequal, that they may be
easily lifted up, and more strongly beat the Air, which by this means does more
resist the descent of their body downward. Then the Trunk of their body does
somewhat resemble the Hull of a Ship; the Head the Prow, which is for the most
part small, that it may the more easily cut the Air, and make way for their
bodies; the Train serves to steer, govern and direct their flight, and however
it may be held erect in their standing or walking, yet is directed to lie
almost in the same plain with their Backs, or rather a little inclining, when
they fly. That the Train serves to sleer and direct their flight, and turn
their Bodies like the Rudder of a Ship is evident in the Kite, who by a light
turning of his Train, moves his Body which way he pleases. Iidem videntur artem
gubernandi docuisse caudae flexibus, in Caelo monstrante natura quod opus esset
in profundo. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 10. They seem to have taught men the Art of
steering a Ship by the flexures of their Tails; Nature showing in the Air what
was needful to be done in the Deep. And it is notable that Aristotle truly
observes, that whole-footed Birds, and those that have long Legs, have for the
most part short Tails; and therefore whilst they fly, do not as others draw
them up to their Bellies, but stretch them at length backwards, that they may
serve to steer and guide them instead of Tails. Neither does the Tail serve
only to direct and govern. the flight, but also partly to support the Body and
keep it even, wherefore when spread, it lies parallel to the horizon, and
stands not perpendicular to it, as Fishes do. Hence Birds that have no Tails,
as some sorts of Colymbi or Douckers fly very inconveniently with their Bodies
almost erect.

III. As for Fishes their Bodies are long and slender, or else thin for the
most part, for their more easy swimming and dividing the water. The
wind-bladder, wherewith most of them are furnished, serves to poise their
Bodies, and keep them equiponderant to the water, which else would sink to the
bottom, and lie grovelling there, as has by breaking the Bladder been
experimentally found. By the contraction and dilatation of this Bladder, they
are able to raise or sink themselves at pleasure, and continue in what depth of
water they list. The Fins made of gristly spokes or rays connected by
Membranes, so that they may be contracted or extended like Women's fans, and
furnished with Muscles for motion, serve partly for progression, but chiefly to
hold the Body upright; which appears in that when they are cut off, it wavers
to and fro, and so soon as the Fish dies, the Belly turns upward. The great
strength by which Fishes dart themselves forward with incredible celerity, like
an Arrow out of a Bow, lies in their Tails, their Fins mean time, lest they
should retard their motion, being held close to their Bodies. And therefore
almost the whole Musculous Flesh of the Body is bestowed upon the Tail and
Back, and serves for the vibration of the Tail, the heaviness and corpulency of
the Water, requiring a great force to divide it. I might here take notice of
those Amphibious Creatures, which we may call Aquatic Quadrupeds (though one of
them there is that has but two Feet, viz. the Manati or Sea-Cow) the Beaver,
the Otter, the Phoca or Sea Calf, the Water-Rat, and the Frog, the Toes of
whose Feet are joined by membranes, as in Water-Fowls for swimming; and who
have very small Ears, and Ear-holes, as the Cetaceous Fishes have for hearing
in the Water.

To this head belongs the adapting of the parts that minister to Generation in
the Sexes one to another; and in Creatures that nourish their Young with Milk,
the Nipples of the Breast to the Mouth and Organs of Suction; which he must
needs be wilfully blind and void of sense, that either discerns not, or denies
to be intended and made one for the other. That the Nipples should be made
spungy, and with such perforations, as to admit passage to the Milk when drawn,
otherwise to retain it; and the Teeth of the Young either not spungy, or so
soft and tender, as not to hurt the Nipples of the Dam, are Effects and
Arguments of Providence and Design.

To this head of the fitness of the parts of the Body to the Creatures Nature
and manner of living, belongs that observation of Aristotle, (...). Such Birds
as have crooked Beaks and Talons, are all carnivorous; and so of Quadrupeds,
(...) carnivora omnia. All that have serrate Teeth, are carnivorous. This
observation holds true concerning all European Birds, but I know not but that
Parrots may be an exception to it. Yet it is remarkable, that such Birds as are
carnivorous have no Gizzard, or musculous, but a membranous Stomach; that kind
of food needing no such grinding or comminution as Seeds do, but being torn
into strings, or small flakes by the Beak, may be easily concocted by a
membranous Stomach.

To the fitness of all the parts and members of Animals to their respective
uses may also be referred another observation of the same Aristotle, (...). All
Animals have even Feet, not more on one side than another; which if they had,
would either hinder their walking, or hang by not only useless, but also
burdensome. For though a Creature might make limping shift to hop, suppose
with three Feet, yet nothing so conveniently or steddily to walk, or run, or
indeed to stand. So that we see, Nature has made choice of what is most fit,
proper and useful. They have also not only an even number of Feet, answering by
pairs one to another, which is as well decent as convenient; but those too of
an equal length, I mean the several pairs; whereas were those on one side
longer than they on the other, it would have caused an inconvenient halting or
limping in their going.

I shall mention but one more Observation of Aristotle, that is, (...), there
is no Creature only volatile, or no flying Animal but has Feet as well as
Wings, a power of walking or creeping upon the Earth; because there is no food,
or at least not sufficient Food for them to be had always in the Air; or if in
hot Countries we may suppose there is, the Air being never without store of
Insects flying about in it, yet could such Birds take no Rest, for having no
Feet, they could not perch upon Trees, and if they should alight upon the
Ground, they could by no means raise themselves any more, as we see those Birds
which have but short Feet, as the Swift and Martinet, with difficulty do.
Besides, they would want means of breeding, having no where to lay their Eggs,
to Sit, Hatch or Brood their Young. As for the Story of the Manucodiata or Bird
of Paradise, which in the former Age was generally received and accepted for
true, even by the Learned, it is now discovered to be a Fable, and rejected and
exploded by all men: Those Birds being well known to have Legs and Feet, as
well as others, and those not short, small not feeble ones, but sufficiently
great and strong and armed with crooked Talons, as being the Members of Birds
of Prey.

But against the Uses of several Bodies I Object.
have instanced in that refer to Man it may be objected, that these uses were
not designed by Nature in the formation of the things; but that the things were
by the wit of Man accommodated to those Uses.

To which I answer with Dr. More in the Appendix to his Antidote against
Atheism. That the several useful dependencies of this kind, (viz. of Stones,
Timber, and Metals for building of Houses or Ships, the Magnet for Navigation,
etc. Fire for melting of Metals and forging of Instruments for the purposes
mentioned) we only find, not make them. For whether we think of it or no, it
is, for Example, manifest, that Fuel is good to continue Fire, and Fire to melt
Metals, and Metals to make Instruments to build Ships and Houses, and so on.
Wherefore it being true, that there is such a subordinate usefulness in the
Things themselves that are made to our Hand, it is but reason in us to impute
it to such a Cause as was aware of the usefulness and serviceableness of its
own Works. To which I shall add, that since we find Materials so fit to serve
all the Necessities and Conveniences, and to exercise and employ the Wit and
Industry of an intelligent and active Being, and since there is such an one
created that is endued with Skill and Ability to use them, and which by their
help is enabled to rule over and subdue all inferior Creatures, but without
them had been left necessitous, helpless and obnoxious to Injuries above any
other; and since the omniscient Creator could not but know all the Uses, to
which they might and would be employed by Man, to them that acknowledge the
Being of a Deity, it is little less than a Demonstration, that they were
created intentionally, I do not say only, for those uses.

Methinks by all this Provision for the Use and Service of Man, the Almighty
interpretatively speaks to him in this manner, I have placed thee in a spacious
and well furnished World. I have endued thee with an ability of understanding
what is beautiful and proportionable, and have made that which is so agreeable
and delightful to thee; I have provided thee with Materials whereon to exercise
and employ thy Art and Strength; I have given thee an excellent Instrument, the
Hand, accommodated to make use of them all; I have distinguished the Earth into
Hills, and Valleys, and Plains, and Meadows, and Woods; all these parts capable
of Culture and Improvement by thy Industry; I have committed to thee for thy
assistance in thy labors of Plowing, and Carrying, and Drawing, and Travel; the
laborious Ox, the patient Ass, and the strong and serviceable Horse; I have
created a multitude of Seeds for thee to make choice out of them, of what is
most pleasant to thy Taste, and of most wholesome and pleasant Nourishment; I have
also made great variety of Trees, bearing Fruit both for Food and Physic,
those too capable of being meliorated and improved by Transplantation,
Stercoration, Insition, Pruning, Watering, and other Arts and Devices. Till and
manure thy Fields, sow them with thy Seeds, extirpate noxious and unprofitable
Herbs, guard them from the invasions and spoil of Beasts, clear and fence in
thy Meadows and Pastures; dress and prune thy Vines, and so rank and dispose
them as is most suitable to the Climate; Plant thee Orchards, with all sorts of
Fruit Trees in such order as may be most beautiful to the Eye, and most
comprehensive of Plants; Gardens for culinary Herbs, and all kinds of
Salletting; for delectable Flowers, to gratify the Eye with their agreeable
Colors and Figures, and thy scent with their fragrant Odors; for odoriferous
and ever-green Shrubs and Suffrutices; for exotic and medicinal Plants of all
sorts, and dispose them in that comely order, as may be both pleasant to behold,
and commodious for Access. I have furnished thee with all Materials for
building, as Stone, and Timber, and Slate, and Lime, and Clay, and Earth
whereof to make Bricks and Tiles. Deck and bespangle the Country with Houses
and Villages convenient for thy Habitation, provided with Outhouses and
Stables for the harboring and shelter of thy Cattle, with Barns and Granaries
for the reception, and custody, and storing up thy Corn and Fruits. I have made
thee a sociable Creature, (...), for the improvement of thy Understanding by
Conference, and communication of Observations and Experiments; for mutual help,
assistance and defense; build thee large Towns and Cities with straight and
well paved Streets, and elegant rows of Houses, adorned with magnificent
Temples for my Honor and Worship, with beautiful Palaces for thy Princes and
Grandees, with stately Halls for public meetings of the Citizens and their
several Companies, and the Sessions of the Courts of Judicature, besides
public Portico's and Aquaeducts. I have implanted in thy Nature a desire of
seeing strange and foreign and finding out unknown Countries, for the
improvement and advancement of thy Knowledge in Geography, by observing the
Bays, and Creeks, and Havens, and Promontories, the outlets of Rivers, the
situations of the maritime Towns and Cities, the Longitude and Latitude, etc.
of those Places: In Politics, by noting their Government, their Manners, Laws
and Customs, their Diet and Medicine, their Trades and Manufactures, their
Houses and Buildings, their Exercises and Sports etc. In Physiology or Natural
History, by searching out their natural Rarities, the productions both of Land
and Water, what Species of Animals, Plants and Minerals, of Fruits and Drogues
are to be found there, what Commodities for Bartering and Permutation, whereby
thou may be enabled to make large Additions to Natural History, to advance
those other Sciences, and to benefit and enrich thy Country by increase of its
Trade and Merchandise: I have given thee Timber and Iron to build thee Huls of
Ships, tall Trees for Masts, Flax and Hemp for Sails, Cables, and Cordage for
Rigging. I have armed thee with Courage and Hardiness to attempt the Seas, and
traverse the spacious Plains of that liquid Element; I have assisted thee with
a Compass, to direct thy Course when thou shall be out of all Ken of Land, and
have nothing in view but Sky and Water. Go thither for the Purposes before
mentioned, and bring home what may be useful and beneficial to thy Country in
general, or thy Self in particular.

I persuade my self, that the bountiful and gracious Author of Man's Being and
Faculties, and all things else, delights in the Beauty of his Creation, and is
well pleased with the Industry of Man in adorning the Earth with beautiful
Cities and Castles, with pleasant Villages and Country Houses, with regular
Gardens and Orchards and Plantations of all sorts of Shrubs, and Herbs, and
Fruits, for Meat, Medicine or moderate Delight, with shady Woods and Groves,
and Walks set with rows of elegant Trees; with Pastures clothed with Flocks,
and Valleys covered over with Corn, and Meadows burdened with Grass, and
whatever else differenceth a civil and well cultivated Region from a barren and
desolate Wilderness.

If a Country thus planted and adorned, thus polished and civilized, thus
improved to the height by all manner of Culture for the Support and Sustenance,
and convenient Entertainment of innumerable multitudes of People, be not to be
preferred before a Barbarous and Inhospitable Scythia, without Houses, without
Plantations, without Cornfieldsd or Vineyards, where the roving Hords of the
savage and truculent Inhabitants, transfer themselves from place to place in
Wagons, as they can find Pasture and Forage for their Cattle, and live upon
Milk and Flesh roasted in the Sun at the Pomels of their Saddles; or a rude and
unpolished America, peopled with slothful and naked Indians, instead of
well built Houses, living in pitiful Hutts and Cabans, made of Poles set
endways; then surely the brute Beasts Condition and manner of Living, to which,
what we have mentioned does nearly approach, is to be esteemed better than
Man's, and Wit and Reason was in vain bestowed on him.

Lastly, I might draw an Argument of the admirable Art and Skill of the Creator
and Composer of them from the incredible Smalness of some of those natural and
enlivened Machines, the Bodies of Animals.

Any work of Art of extraordinary Fineness and Subtlety, be it but a small
Engine or Movement, or a curious carved or turned work of Ivory or Metals, such
as those Cups turned of Ivory by Oswaldus Nerlinger of Suevia, mentioned by
Joan. Faber in his Expositions of Recchus his Mexican Animals, which all had
the perfect form of Cups, and were Gilt with a Golden Border about the Brim, of
that wonderful smalness, that Faber himself put a Thousand of them into an
excavated Pepper corn, and when he was weary of the work, and yet had not
filled the Vessel, his Friend John Carolus Schad, that showed them him, put in
Four Hundred more. Any such Work, I say, is beheld with much admiration, and
purchased at a great Rate, and treasured up as a singular Rarity in the Museums
and Cabinets of the curious, and as such is one of the first things showed to
Travelers and Strangers But what are these for their fineness and parvity (for
which alone and their Figure they are considerable) to those minute Machines
endued with life and motion, I mean the Bodies of those Animalcula not long
since discovered in Pepper water by Mr. Lewenhoek of Delft in Holland, (whose
Observations were confirmed and improved by our Learned and Worthy Countryman
Mr. Robert Hook,) who tells us, that some of his Friends (whose Testimonials he
desired) did affirm, that they had seen 10000, others 30000, others 45000
little living Creatures in a quantity of Water no bigger than a grain of
Millet. And yet he made it his request to them, that they would only justify
(that they might be within compass) half the number that they believed each of
them saw in the Water. From the greatest of these numbers he infers, that there
will be 8280000 of these living Creatures seen in one drop of Water; which
number (says he) I can with Truth affirm I have discerned. This (proceeds he)
does exceed belief. But I do affirm, if a larger Grain of Sand were broken into
8000000, of equal Parts, one of these would not exceed the bigness of one of
those Creatures. Mr. Hook tells us, that after he had discovered vast
multitudes of those exceeding small Creatures which Mr. Lewenhoeck had
described, upon making use of other Lights and Glasses, he not only magnified
those he had discovered to a very great bigness, but discovered many other
sorts very much smaller than them he first saw, and some of them so exceeding
small, that Millions of Millions might be contained in one drop of Water. If
Pliny, considering such Insects as were known to him, and those were none but
what were visible to the naked Eye, was moved to cry out, That the artifice of
Nature was no where more conspicuous than in these; and again, In his tam
parvis atque tam nullis quae ratio, quanta vis, quam inextricabilis perfectio?
and again, Rerum natura nusquam magis quam in minimis tota est. Hist. Not. l.
11. c. 1. What would he have said if he had seen Animals of so stupendous
smalness as I have mentioned? how would he have been rapt into an ecstasy of
Astonishment and Admiration?

Again, if considering the Body of a Gnat, (which by his own confession is none
of the least of Insects) he could make so many admiring Queries, Where has
Nature disposed so many Senses in a Gnat? Ubi visum praetendit? ubi gustatum
applicavit? ubi odoratum inseruit? ubi vero truculentam illam and portione
maximam vocem ingeneravit? qua subtilitate pennas adnexuit? praelongavit pedum
crura? disposuit jejunam caveam uti alvum? avidam sanguinis and potissimum
humani sitim accendit? telum vero perfodiendo tergori quo spiculavit ingenio?
atque ut in capaci, cum cerni non possit exilitas, ita reciproca geminavit
art, ut fodiendo acuminatum pariter sorbendoque fistulosum esset. Which Words
should I translate would lose of their emphasis and elegancy. If, I say, he
could make such Queries about the Members of a Gnat. What may we make? and what
would he in all likelihood have made had he seen these incredible small living
Creatures? How would he have admired the immense subtilty (as he phrases it) of
their Parts? for to use Mr. Hook's Words in his Microscopium p. 103. If these
Creatures be so exceeding small, what must we think of their Muscles and other
Parts? Certain it is that the Mechanism by which Nature performs the Muscular
Motion is exceedingly small and curious; and to the performance of every
Muscular Motion, in greater Animals at least, there are not fewer distinct
parts concerned than many Millions of Millions, and these visible through a
Microscope.

Let us then consider the Works of God, and observe the Operations of his
Hands: Use.
Let us take notice of and admire his infinite Wisdom and Goodness in the
Formation of them: No Creature in this Sublunary World is capable of so doing
beside Man; and yet we are deficient herein: We content our selves with the
knowledge of the Tongues, and a little skill in Philology, or History perhaps
and Antiquity, and neglect that which to me seems more material, I mean Natural
History and the Works of the Creation: I do not discommend or derogate from
those other Studies: I should betray mine own Ignorance and Weakness should I
do so; I only wish they might not altogether justle out and exclude this. I
wish that this might be brought in Fashion among us; I wish men would be so
equal and civil, as not to disparage, deride and vilify those Studies which
themselves skill not of, or are not conversant in; no Knowledge can be more
pleasant than this, none that does so satisfy and feed the Soul; in comparison
whereto that of Words and Phrases seems to me insipid and jejune. That Learning
(says a wise and observant Prelate) which consists only in the form and
pedagogy of Arts, or the critical notions upon Words and Phrases, has in it
this intrinsical Imperfection, that it is only so far to be esteemed as it
conduces to the knowledge of Things, being in it self but a kind of Pedantry,
apt to infect a man with such odd Humors of Pride, and Affectation, and
Curiosity, as will render him unfit for any great Employment. Words being but
the Images of Matter, to be wholly given up to the Study of these. What is it
but Pygmalions Phrenzy, to fall in Love with a Picture or Image. As for Oratory
which is the best skill about Words, that has by some Wise men been esteemed
but a voluptuary Art, like to Cookery, which spoils wholesome Meats and helps
unwholesome, by the variety of Sawces serving more to the Pleasure of Taste, than
the Health of the Body.

It may be (for ought I know, and as some Divines have thought) part of our
business and employment in Eternity to contemplate the Works of God, and give
him the Glory of his Wisdom, Power and Goodness manifested in the Creation of
them. I am sure it is part of the business of a Sabbath Day, and the Sabbath is
a Type of that eternal Rest; for the Sabbath seems to have been first
instituted for a commemoration of the Works of the Creation, from which God is
said to have rested upon the Seventh Day.

Let it not suffice us to be Book-learned, to read what others have written,
and to take upon trust more Falsehood than Truth: but let us our selves examine
things as we have opportunity, and converse with Nature as well as Books. Let
us endeavor to promote and increase this Knowledge, and make new Discoveries,
not so much distrusting our own Parts, or despairing of our own Abilities, as
to think that our Industry can add nothing to the Inventions of our Ancestors,
or correct any of their mistakes. Let us not think that the bounds of Science
are fixed like Hercules his Pillars, and inscribed with a Ne plus ultra. Let us
not think we have done when we have learnt what they have delivered to us. The
Treasures of Nature are inexhaustible. Here is Employment enough for the
vastest Parts, the most indefatigable Industries, the fairest Opportunities,
the most prolix and undisturbed Vacancies. Much might be done would we but
endeavor, and nothing is insuperable to pains and patience. I know that a new
Study at first, seems very Vast, Intricate and Difficult; but after a little
Resolution and Progress, after a man becomes a little acquainted, as I may so
say, with it, his Understanding is wonderfully cleared up and enlarged, the
difficulties vanish, and the thing grows easy and familiar. And for our
Encouragement in this Study, observe what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 111. 2. The
works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.
Which though it be principally spoken of the Works of Providence, yet may as
well be verified of the Works of Creation. I am sorry to see so little Account
made of real Experimental Philosophy in this University, and that those
ingenious Sciences of the Mathematics, are so much neglected by us: and
therefore do earnestly exhort those that are young, especially Gentlemen, to
set upon these Studies, and take some pains in them. They may possibly invent
something of eminent Use and Advantage to the World; and one such Discovery
would abundantly compensate the Expense and Travel of one man's whole Life.
However, it is enough to maintain and continue what is already invented:
neither do I see what more ingenious and manly Employment they can pursue,
tending more to the Satisfaction of their own Minds, and the Illustration of
the Glory of God. For he is wonderful in all his Works.

But I would not have any man cross his natural Genius or Inclinations, or
undertake such methods of Study, as his Parts are not fitted to, or not serve
those Ends to which his Friends upon mature Deliberation have designed him; but
those who do abound with leisure, or who have a natural Propension and Genius
inclining them thereto, or those who by reason of the Strength and Greatness of
their Parts, are able to compass and comprehend the whole Latitude of Learning.

Neither yet need those who are designed to Divinity it self, fear to look into
these Studies, or think they will engross their whole time, and that no
considerable Progress can be made therein, unless men lay aside and neglect
their ordinary Callings, and necessary Employments. No such matter. Our Life is
long enough, and we might find time enough, did we husband it well: Vitam non
accepimus brevem sed fecimus, nec inopes ejus, sed prodigi sumus, as Seneca
says. And did but young men fill up that time with these Studies, which lies
upon their hands, which they are encumbered with, and troubled how to pass away,
much might be done even so. I do not see but the Study of true Physiology, may
be justly accounted a proper (...), or Preparative to Divinity. But to leave
that, It is a generally received Opinion, that all this visible world was
created for Man; that Man is the end of the Creation, as if there were no other
end of any Creature, but some way or other to be serviceable to man. This
Opinion is as old as Tully, for says he, in his Second Book, De Not. Deorum.
Principio ipse Mundus Deorum hominumque causa factus est; quaeque in eo sunt
omnia ea parata ad fructum hominum and inventa sunt. But though this be
vulgarly received, yet Wise Men now adays think otherwise. Dr. Antid. Atheism.
l. 2. c. 11.
More affirms, That Creatures are made to enjoy themselves, as well as to serve
us, and that it is a gross piece of Ignorance and Rusticity to think otherwise.
And in another place, This comes only out of Pride and Ignorance or a haughty
Presumption, because we are encouraged to believe, that in some sense, all
things are made for Man, therefore to think that they are not at all made for
themselves. But he that pronounces this, is ignorant of the Nature of Man, and
the Knowledge of Things. For if a good Man be merciful to his Beast, then
surely, a good God is Bountiful and Benign, and takes pleasure that all his
Creatures enjoy themselves that have Life and Sense, and are capable of
Enjoyment. For my part, I cannot believe that all the things in the world were
so made for Man, that they have no other use.

For it is highly absurd and unreasonable, to think that Bodies of such vast
magnitude as the fixed Stars, were only made to twinkle to us; nay, a multitude
of them there are, that do not so much as twinkle, being either by reason of
their Distance or of their Smalness, altogether invisible to the naked Eye, and
only discoverable by a Telescope, and it is likely perfecter Telescopes than we
yet have, may bring to light many more; and who knows, how many may lie out of
the ken of the best Telescope that can possibly be made. And I believe there
are many Species in Nature, which were never yet taken notice of by Man, and
consequently of no Use to him, which yet we are not to think were Created in
vain; but it is likely (as the Doctor says) to partake of the overflowing
Goodness of the Creator, and enjoy their own beings. But though in this sense
it be not true, that all things were made for Man; yet thus far it is, that all
the Creatures in the world may be some way or other useful to us, at least to
exercise our Wits and Understandings, in considering and contemplating of them,
and so afford us Subject of Admiring and Glorifying their and our Maker. Seeing
then, we do believe and assert that all things were in some sense made for us,
we are thereby obliged to make use of them for those purposes for which they
serve us, else we frustrate this End of their Creation. Now some of them serve
only to exercise our Minds: many others there be, which might probably serve us
to good purpose, whose Uses are not discovered, nor are they ever like to be,
without Pains and Industry. True it is, many of the greatest Inventions have
been accidentally stumbled upon, but not by men supine and careless, but busy
and inquisitive. Some Reproach methinks it is to Learned Men, that there should
be so many Animals still in the World, whose outward shape is not yet taken
notice of, or described, much less their way of Generation, Food, Manners,
Uses, observed. If Man ought to reflect upon his Creator the Glory of all his
Works, then ought he to take notice of them all, and not to think any thing
unworthy of his Cognizance. And truly the Wisdom, Art and Power of Almighty
God, shines forth as visibly in the Structure of the Body of the minutest
Insect, as in that of a Horse or Elephant: Therefore God is said to be, maximus
in minimis. We men, esteeming it a more difficult Matter, and of greater Art
and Curiosity to frame a small Watch, than a large Clock: And no man blames him
who spent his whole time in the consideration of the Nature and Works of a Be,
or thinks his subject was too narrow. Let us not then esteem any thing
contemptible or inconsiderable, or below our notice taking; for this is to
derogate from the Wisdom and Art of the Creator, and to confess our selves
unworthy of those Endowments of Knowledge and Understanding which he has
bestowed on us. Do we praise Daedalus, and Architas, and Hero, and Callicrates,
and Albertus Magnus, and many others which I might mention, for their cunning
in inventing, and dexterity in framing and composing a few dead Engines or
Movements: and shall we not admire and magnify the Great (...), Former of the
World, who has made so many, yea I may say innumerable, rare Pieces, and those
too not dead ones, such as cease presently to move so soon as the Spring is
down, but all living, and themselves performing their own Motions, and those so
intricate, and various, and requiring such a multitude of Parts and subordinate
Machins, that it is incomprehensible, what Art, and Skill, and Industry, must
be employed in the Framing of one of them.

But it may be objected, That God Almighty was not so selfish and desirous of
Glory, as to make the World and all the Creatures therein, only for his own
Honor, and to be Praised by Man. To assert this, were in Des Carts his
Opinion, an absurd and Childish thing, and a resembling of God to proud Man. It
is more worthy the Deity to attribute the Creation of the World to the
exundation and overflowing of his Transcendent and Infinite Goodness, which is
of its own Nature and in the very notion of it most Free, Diffusive, and
Communicative.

To this I shall answer in two Words. First, The Testimony of Scripture makes
God in all his Actions to Intend and Design his own Glory mainly. Prove. 16. 4.
God made all things for himself. How, for Himself? He had no Need of them: he
has no Use of them. No, he made them for the manifestation of his Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, and that he might receive from the Creatures that were
able to take notice thereof his Tribute of Praise. Psalm. 50. 14. Offer unto God
thanksgiving. and in the next verse, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And again in the last Verse, Whosoever offers praise glorifieth me.
So Praise is called a Sacrifice, and the Calves of the Lips, Hosea 14. 2. Esaias
42. 8. I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another.
Esaias 48. 11. And I will not give my glory to another. And to me it seems, that
where the Heavens and Earth, and Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and all other
Creatures are called upon to Praise the Lord; the meaning and intention is, to
invite and stir up Man to take notice of all those Creatures, and to Admire and
Praise the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God manifested in the Creation and
Designations of them. Secondly, It is most reasonable that God Almighty should
intend his own Glory. For he being Infinite in all Excellencies and
Perfections, and Independent upon any other Being; nothing can be said or
thought of him too great, and which he may not justly challenge as his Due;
nay, He cannot think too highly of Himself, his other Attributes being adequate
to his Understanding; so that, though his Understanding be Infinite, yet he
understands no more than his Power can effect, because that is Infinite also.
And therefore it is fit and reasonable, that he should own and accept the
Creatures Acknowledgments and Celebrations of those Virtues and Perfections,
which he has not received of any other, but possesses Eternally and
Originally of himself. And indeed, (with reverence be it spoken,) what else can
we imagine the ever Blessed Deity to delight and take complacency in for ever,
but his own Infinite Excellencies and Perfections, and the Manifestations and
Effects of them, the Works of the Creation, and the Sacrifices of Praise and
Thanks offered up by such of his Creatures as are capable of considering those
Works, and discerning the Traces and Footsteps of his Power and Wisdom
appearing in the Formation of them, and moreover, whose bounden Duty it is so
to do. The reason why Man ought not to admire himself, or seek his own Glory,
is, because he is a dependent Creature, and has nothing but what he has
received, and not only dependent, but imperfect; yea, weak and impotent. And
yet do I not take Humility in man to consist in disowning or denying any Gift
or Ability that is in him, but in a just valuation of such Gifts and
Endowments, yet rather thinking too meanly than too highly of them; because
Humane Nature is so apt to err in running into the other extreme, to flatter it
self, and to accept those Praises that are not due to it; Pride being an
elation of Spirit upon false Grounds, or a desire or acceptance of undue
Honor. Otherwise, I do not see why a man may not admit and accept the
Testimonies of others concerning any Perfection, Accomplishment or Skill that
he is really possessed of: yet can he not think himself to deserve any great
Praise or Honor for it, because both the Power and the Habit are the Gift of
God: And considering that one Virtue is counter-balanced by many Vices; and one
Skill or Perfection, with much Ignorance and Infirmity.

I proceed now to select some particular Pieces of the Creation, and to
consider them more distinctly. They shall be only two. 1. The whole Body of the
Earth. 2. The Body of Man.

First the Body of the Earth, and therein I shall take notice of 1. Its Figure.
2. Its Motion. 3. The Constitution of its parts.

By Earth I here understand not the Dry Land, or the Earth contradistinguished
to Water, or the Earth considered as an Element: but the whole Terraqueous
Globe composed of Earth and Water.

1. For the Figure, I could easily demonstrate it to be Spherical. That the
Water, which by reason of its fluidity should, one would think, compose it self
to a Level, yet does not so, but has a Gibbose Superficies, may to the Eye be
demonstrated upon the Sea. For when two Ships sailing contrary ways lose the
sight one of another: first the Keel and Hull disappear, afterward the Sails,
and if when upon Deck you have perfectly lost sight of all, you get up the top
of the Mainmast you may descry it again. Now what should take away the sight
of these Ships from each other but the gibbosity of the interjacent Water? The
roundness of the Earth from North to South is demonstrated from the appearance
of Northern Stars above the Horizon, and loss of the Southern to them that
travel Northward; and on the contrary the loss of the Northern and appearance
of the Southern to them that travel Southward. For were the Earth a Plain we
should see exactly the fame Stars wherever we were placed on that Plain. The
roundness from East to West is demonstrated from Eclipses of either of the
great Luminaries. For why the same Eclipse, suppose of the Sun, which is seen
to them that live more Easterly, when the Sun is elevated 6 degrees above the
Horizon, should be seen to them that live one degree more Westernly when the
Sun is but five degrees above the Horizon, and so lower and lower
proportionably to them that live more and more Westernly, till at last it
appear not at all, no account can be given but the globosity of the Earth. For
were the Earth a perfect Plain, the Sun would appear Eclipsed to all that live
upon that Plain, if not exactly in the same Elevation, yet pretty near it; but
to be sure it would never appear to some, the Sun being Elevated high above the
Horizon; and not at all to others. It being clear then that the Figure of the
Earth is Spherical, let us consider the Conveniences of this Figure.

1. No Figure is so capacious as this, and consequently whose parts are so well
compacted and united, and lie so near one to another for mutual strength. Now
the Earth, which is the basis of all Animals, and as some think of the whole
Creation, ought to be firm, and stable, and solid, and as much as is possible
secured from all Ruins and Concussions.

2. This Figure is most consonant and agreeable to the natural Natus or
tendency of all heavy Bodies. Now the Earth being such a one, and all its parts
having an equal propension or connivency to the Center, they must needs be in
greatest rest, and most immovable when they are all equidistant from it.
Whereas were it an Angular Body, all the Angles would be vast and steep
Mountains, bearing a considerable proportion to the whole bulk, and therefore
those parts being extremely more remote from the Center, than those about the
middle of the Plains, would consequently press very strongly thitherward; and
unless the Earth were made of Adamant or Marble, in time the other parts would
give way, till all were levelled.

3. Were the Earth an angular Body and not round, all the whole Earth would be
nothing else but vast Mountains, and so incommodious for Animals to live upon.
For the middle point of every side would be nearer the Center than any other,
and consequently from that point which way soever one traveled would be up
Hill, the tendency of all heavy Bodies being perpendicularly to the Center.
Besides how much this would obstruct Commerce is easily seen. For not only the
declivity of all places would render them very difficult to be traveled over,
but likewise the midst of every side being lowest and nearest the Center, if
there were any Rain or any Rivers, must needs be filled with a Lake of Water,
there being no way to discharge it, and possibly the Water would rise so high
as to overflow the whole Latus. But surely there would be much more danger of
the Inundation of whole Countries than now there is: all the Waters falling
upon the Earth, by reason of its declivity every way, easily descending down to
the common Receptacle the Sea. And these Lakes of Water being far distant one
from another, there could be no Commerce between far remote Countries but by
Land.

4. A Spherical Figure is most commodious for dinetical motion or revolution
upon its own Axis. For in that neither oan the Medium at all resist the motion
of the Body, because it stands not in its way, no part coming into any space
but what the precedent left, neither does one part of the Superficies move
faster than another: whereas were it Angular, the parts about the Angles would
find strong resistance from the Air, and those parts also about the Angles
would move much faster than those about the middle of the Plains, being remoter
from the center than they. It remains therefore that this Figure is the most
commodious for Motion.

Here I cannot but take notice of the folly and stupidity of the Epicureans,
who fancied the Earth to be flat and contiguous to the Heavens on all sides,
and that it descended a great way with long Roots; and that the Sun was new
made every Morning, and not much bigger than it seems to the Eye, and of a flat
Figure, and many other such gross Absurdities as Children among us would be
ashamed of.

Secondly, I come now to speak of the Motion of the Earth. That the Earth
(speaking according to Philosophical accurateness) does move both upon its own
Poles, and in the Ecliptic, is now the received Opinion of the most learned
and skilful Mathematicians. To prove the diurnal Motion of it upon its Poles, I
need produce no other Arguments than, First, The vast disproportion in respect
of Magnitude that is between the Earth and the Heavens, and the great
unlikelyhood, that such an infinite number of vast Bodies should move about so
inconsiderable a spot as the Earth, which in comparison with them by the
concurrent suffrages of Mathematicians of both persuasions, is a mere point,
that is, next to nothing. Secondly, The immense and incredible Celerity of the
Motion of the Heavenly Bodies in the ancient Hypothesis; of its Annual Motion
in the Ecliptic, the Stations and Retrogradations of the superior Planets are
a convincing Argument, there being a clear and facile Account thereof to be
given from the mere Motion of the Earth in the Ecliptic; whereas in the Old
Hypothesis no account can be given thereof, but by the unreasonable. Fiction of
Epicycles and contrary Motions; add hereto the great unlikelyhood of such an
enormous Epicycle as Venus must describe about the Sun, not under the Sun as
the old Astronomers fancied; So that whosoever does clearly understand both
Hypotheses, cannot, I persuade my self, adhere to the Old and reject the New,
without doing some violence to his Faculties.

Against this Opinion lie two Objections, First, That it is contrary to Sense,
and the common Opinion and Belief of Mankind. Secondly, That it seems
contrary to some Expressions in Scripture. To the first I answer, that our
Senses are sometimes mistaken, and what appears to them is not always in
reality so as it appears. For Example, The Sun or Moon appear no bigger at
most, than a Cart-wheel, and of a flat figure. The Earth seems to be plain; the
Heavens to cover it like a Canopy, and to be contiguous to it round about: A
Firebrand nimbly moved round, appears like a circle of Fire; and to give a
parallel Instance, a Boat lying still at Anchor in a River to him that sails or
rows by it, seems to move apace: and when the Clouds pass nimbly under the
Moon, the Moon it self seems to move the contrary way. And there have been
whole Books written in Confutation of vulgar Errors. Secondly, As to the
Scripture, when speaking of these things it accommodates it self to the common
and received Opinions, and employs the usual Phrases and Forms of Speech, (as
all Wise Men also do, though in strictness, they be of a different or contrary
Opinion,) without intention of delivering any thing Doctrinally concerning
these Points, or confuting the contrary: And yet by those that maintain the
Opinion of the Earths motion there might a convenient Interpretation be given
of such places as seem to contradict it. Howbeit, because some pious Persons
may be offended at such an Opinion, as savouring of Novelty, thinking it
inconsistent with Divine Revelation, I shall not positively assert it, only
propose it as an Hypothesis not altogether improbable. Supposing then, that the
Earth does move, both upon its own Poles, and in the Ecliptic about the Sun, I
shall show how admirably its Situation and Motion are contrived for the
convenience of Man and other Animals: which I cannot do more fully and clearly
than Dr. More has already done in his Antidote against Atheism, whose Words
therefore I shall borrow.

First, Speaking of the Parallelism of the Axis of the Earth he says, I demand
whether it be better to have the Axis of the Earth steady and perpetually
parallel to it self, or to have it carelessly tumble this way and that way as it
happens, or at least very variously and intricately: And you cannot but answer
me, it is better to have it steady and parallel. For in this lies the necessary
Foundation of the Art of Navigation and Dialling. For that steady Stream of
Particles, which is supposed to keep the Axis of the Earth parallel to its
self, affords the Mariner both his Cynosura and his Compass. The Lodestone and
the Load-star depend both upon this. The Lodestone as I could demonstrate,
were it not too great a digression; and the Load-star, because that which keeps
the Axis parallel to its self, makes each of the Poles constantly respect such
a point in the Heavens; as for Example, the North Pole to point almost directly
to that which we call the Pole Star. And besides, Dialling could not be at all
without this steadiness of the Axis. But both these Arts are pleasant, and one
especially of mighty Importance to Mankind. For thus there is an orderly
measuring of our time for Affairs at home, and an opportunity of Traffic
abroad with the most remote Nations of the World, and so there is a mutual
Supply of the several Commodities of all Countries, besides the enlarging our
Understandings by so ample Experience we get both of men and things. Wherefore
if we were rationally to consult, whether the Axis of the Earth were better be
held steady and parallel to it self, or left at random, we would conclude it
ought to be steady, and so we find it de Facto, though the Earth move floating
in the liquid Heavens. So that appealing to our own Faculties we are to affirm,
that the constant Direction of the Axis of the Earth was Established by a
principle of Wisdom and Counsel.

Again, there being several postures of this steady Direction of the Axis of
the Earth. viz. Either perpendicular to a Plain, going through the Center of
the Sun, or coincident, or inclining, I demand which of all these Reason and
Knowledge would make choice of. Not of a perpendicular Posture. For so both the
pleasant Variety and great Convenience of Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumn
would be lost, and for want of Accession of the Sun, these Parts of the Earth,
which now bring forth Fruits, and are Habitable, would be in an incapacity of
ever bringing forth any, and consequently could entertain no Inhabitants, and
those Parts that the full heat of the Sun could reach, he plying them always
alike without any annual Recession or Intermission, would at last grow tired or
exhausted, or be wholly dried up and want moisture, the Sun dissipating and
casting off the Clouds Northwards and Southwards. Besides, we observe that an
orderly vicissitude of things, does much more gratify the contemplative
Property in Man.

And now in the second place, neither would Reason make choice of a coincident
Position. For if the Axis thus lay in a plain that goes through the Center of
the Sun, the Ecliptic would like a Colure or one of the Meridians, pass
through the Poles of the Earth, which would put the Inhabitants of the World,
into a pitiful condition. For they that escape best in the Temperate Zone would
be accloyed with long Nights very tedious, no less than Forty Days, and those
that now never have their Night above Twenty Four Hours, as Friesland Island,
the furthest parts of Russia and Norway would be deprived of the Sun, above a
Hundred and Thirty Days together. Our selves in England and the rest of the
same Clime would be closed up in darkness no less than a Hundred or Eighty
Days: and so proportionably of the rest both in and out of the Temperate Zones.
And as for Summer and Winter, though those Vicissitudes would be, yet it could
not but cause raging Diseases, to have the Sun stay so long, describing his
little Circles so near the Poles, and lying so hot on the Inhabitants, that had
been in so long extremity of Darkness and Cold before.

It remains therefore, that the posture of the Axis of the Earth be inclining
not perpendicular nor coincident to the forementioned Plain. And verily, it is
not only inclining, but in so fit a proportion, that there can be no fitter
imagined to make it to the utmost capacity as well pleasant as habitable. For
though the course of the Sun be curbed between the Tropicks, yet are not those
parts directly subject to his perpendicular Beams, either Unhabitable or
extremely Hot, as the Ancients fansied: By the Testimony of Travelers, and
particularly Sir Walter Ralegh, the parts under and near the Line, being as
Fruitful and Pleasant, and fit to make a Paradise of, as any in the World. And
that they are as suitable to the nature of Man, and as convenient to live in,
appears from the Longaevity of the Natives; as for Instance, the Aethiopes
called by the Ancients (...), but especially the Brasilians in America, the
ordinary Term of whose Life is a Hundred Years, as is set down by Piso a
Learned Physician of Holland, who traveled thither on purpose to augment
natural Knowledge, but especially what related to Physic. And reasonable it
is, that this should be so, for neither does the Sun lie long upon them, their
Day being but Twelve Hours, and their Night as long, to cool and refresh them;
and besides, they have frequent Showers, and constant Breezes or fresh Gales of
Wind from the East. Seeing then, this best posture which our Reason could make
choice of, we see really Established in Nature, we cannot but acknowledge it to
be the issue of Wisdom, Counsel and Providence. Moreover, a further Argument to
evince this is, That though it cannot but be acknowledged, that if the Axis of
the Earth were perpendicular to the plain of the Ecliptic, her motion would be
more easy and natural, yet notwithstanding for the Conveniences
forementioned, we see it is made in an inclining posture.

If any man shall object and say, It would be more convenient for the
Inhabitants of the Earth, if the Tropicks stood at a greater distance, and the
Sun moved further Northward and Southward, for so the North and South parts
would be relieved, and not exposed to so extreme cold, and thereby rendered
unhabitable as now they are.

To this I answer, That this would be more inconvenient to the Inhabitants of
the Earth in general, and yet would afford the North and South parts but little
more comfort. For then as much as the distances between the Tropicks were
enlarged, so much would also the Artick and Antartick Circles be enlarged too;
and so we here in England, and so on Northerly should not have that grateful
and useful Succession of Day and Night, but proportionably to the Suns coming
toward us, so would our days be of more than Twenty Four Hours length, and
according to his recess in Winter our Nights proportionable; which how great an
inconvenience it would be, is easily seen. Whereas now the whole Latitude of
Earth, which has at any time above Twenty Four Hours Day, and Twenty Four
Hours Night, is little and inconsiderable in comparison of the whole bulk, as
lying near the Poles. And yet neither is that part altogether unuseful, for in
the Waters there live Fishes, which otherwhere are not obvious, so we know the
chief Whale-fishing is in Greenland: And on the Land, Bears, and Foxes, and
Deer, in the most Northerly Country, that was ever yet touched, and doubtless
if we shall discover further to the very North Pole, we shall find all that
Tract not to be vain, useless or unoccupied.

Thirdly, The Third and Last thing I proposed, was the Constitution and
Consistency of the parts of the Earth. And first, Admirable it is that the
Waters should be gathered together into such great Conceptacula, and the dry
Land appear, and though we had not been assured thereof by Divine Revelation,
we could not in Reason, but have thought such a Division and Separation, to
have been the Work of Omnipotency and Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. For in this
condition the Water nourishes and maintains innumerable Multitudes of various
kinds of Fishes: and the dry Land supports and feeds as great varieties of
Plants and Animals, which have there firm Footing and Habitation. Whereas had
all been Earth, all the species of Fishes had been lost, and all those
Commodities which the Water affords us; or all Water, there had been no living
for Plants or Terrestrial Animals, or Man himself, and all the Beauty, Glory,
and Variety of this inferior World had been gone, nothing being to be seen,
but one uniform dark Body of Water: or had all been mixed and made up of Water
and Earth into one Body of Mud or Mire, as one would think, should be most
natural: for why such a Separation as at present we find should be made, no
account can be given, but Providence. I say, had all this Globe been Mire or
Mud, then could there have been no possibility for any Animals at all to have
lived, excepting some few, and those very dull and inferior ones too. That
therefore the Earth should be made thus, and not only so, but with so great
variety of parts, as Mountains, Plains, Valleys, Sand, Gravel, Lime, Stone,
Clay, Marble, Argilla, etc. which are so delectable and pleasant, and likewise
so useful and convenient for the breeding and living of various Plants and
Animals; some affecting Mountains, some Plains, some Valleys, some Watery
Places, some Shade, some Sun, some Clay, some Sand, some Gravel, etc. That the
Earth should be so figured as to have Mountains in the Mid-land parts,
abounding with Springs of Water pouring down Streams and Rivers for the
necessities and conveniences of the Inhabitants of the lower Countries; and
that the Levels and Plains should be formed with so easy a declivity as to
cast off the Water, and yet not render Traveling or Tillage very Difficult or
Laborious. These things I say, must needs be the result of Counsel, Wisdom, and
Design. Especially when (as I said before) not that way which seems more facile
and obvious to Chance is chosen, but that which is more difficult and hard to
be traced, when it is most convenient and proper for those nobler Ends and
Designs, which were intended by its Wise Creator and Governor. Add to all this,
that the whole dry Land is for the most part, covered over with a lovely Carpet
of green Grass and other Herbs, of a color, not only most grateful and
agreeable, but most useful and salutary to the Eye: and this also decked and
adorned with great variety of Flowers of beautiful Colors and Figures, and of
most pleasant and fragrant Odours for the refreshment of our Spirits and our
innocent Delight.

A Second particular I have made choice of, more exactly to survey and
consider, is the Body of Man: wherein I shall endeavor to discover something
of the Wisdom and Goodness of God. First, By making some general Observations
concerning the Body. Secondly, By running over and discoursing upon its
principal Parts and Members.

1. Then in general I say, the Wisdom and Goodness of God appears in the erect
Posture of the Body of Man, which is a Privilege and Advantage given to Man,
above other Animals. But though this be so, yet I would not have you think,
that all the Particulars I shall mention, are proper only to the Body of Man,
diverse of them agreeing to many other Creatures. It is not my Business to
consider only the Prerogatives of Man above other Animals, but the Endowments
and Perfections which Nature has conferred on his Body though common to them
with him. Of this erection of the Body of Man, the Ancients have taken Notice
as a particular Gift and Favor of God. Ovid. Metam. 1. Pronaque cum spectent
Animalia caetera terra^, Os hominum sublime dedit, coelumque tueri Jussit, and
erectos ad Sydera tollere vultus.



And before him, Tully in his Second Book De Not. Deorum.

Ad hanc providentiam naturae tam diligentem tamque solertem adjungi multa
possunt, e quibus intelligatur quantae res hominibus a Deo, quamque eximiae
tributae sunt, qui primum eos humo excitatos, celsos and erectos constituit, ut
Deorum cognitionem coelum intuentes capere possent. Sunt enim e terra homines,
non ut incolae atque habitatores, sed quasi spectatores superarum rerum atque
coelestium, quarum spectaculum ad nullum aliud genus animantium pertinet.

Man being the only Creature in this sublunary World, made to contemplate
Heaven, it was convenient that he should have such a Figure or Situs of the
parts of his Body, that he might conveniently look upwards. But to say the
Truth in this respect of contemplating the Heavens or looking upwards, I do not
see what advantage a man has by this erection above other Animals, the Faces
of most of them being more supine than ours, which are only perpendicular to
the Horizon, whereas some of theirs stand reclining. But yet two or three other
Advantages we have of this Erection, which I shall here mention.

First, It is more commodious for the sustaining of the Head, which being full
of Brains and very heavy (the Brain in Man being far larger in proportion to
the Bulk of his Body, than in any other Animal) would have been very painful
and wearisome to carry, if the Neck had lain parallel or inclining to the
Horizon.

Secondly, This Figure is most convenient for Prospect and looking about one. A
man may see further before him, which is no small advantage for avoiding
Dangers, and discovering whatever he searches after.

Thirdly, The convenience of this Site of our Bodies will more clearly appear,
if we consider what a pitiful condition we had been in, if we had been
constantly necessitated to stand and walk upon all Four, Man being by the make
of his Body, of all Quadrupeds (for now I must compare him with them) the most
unfit for that kind of incessus, as I shall show anon. And besides that we
should have wanted, at least in a great measure, the use of our Hand, that
unvaluable Instrument, without which we had wanted most of those advantages we
enjoy as reasonable Creatures, as I shall more particularly demonstrate
afterward.

But it may be perchance objected by some, that Nature did not intend this
Erection of the Body, but that it is superinduced and artificial; for that
Children at first creep on all Four, according to that of the Poet.

Mox Quadrupes, rituque tulit sua membra ferarum.

Ovid. To which I answer, that there is so great an inequality in the length of
our Legs and Arms, as would make it extremely inconvenient, if not impossible,
for us to walk upon all Four, and set us almost upon our Heads; and therefore
we see that Children do not creep upon their Hands and Feet, but upon their
Hands and Knees; so that it is plain that Nature intended us to walk as we do,
and not upon all Four.

2. I argue from the Situs or position of our Faces; for had we been to walk
upon all Four we had been the most prone of all Animals, our Faces being
parallel to the Horizon and looking directly downwards.

3. The greatness and strength of the Muscles of the Thighs and Legs above
those of the Arms, is a clear indication, that they were by Nature intended for
a more difficult and laborious Action, even the moving and transferring the
whole Body, and that Motion to be sometimes continued for a great while
together.

As for that Argument taken from the contrary flexure of the Joints of our Arms
and Legs to that of Quadrupeds; as that our Knees bend forward, whereas the
same Joint of their hind Legs bends backward; and that our Arms bend backward,
whereas the Knees of their fore Legs bend forward. Although the Observation be
as old as Aristotle, because I think there is a mistake in it, in not comparing
the same Joints (for the first or uppermost Joint in a Quadrupeds hind Legs
bends forward as well as a Man's Knees, which answer to it being the uppermost
Joint of our Legs; and the like mutatis mutandis may be said of the Arms) I
shall not insist upon it.

II. The Body of Man may thence be proved to be the effect of Wisdom, because
there is nothing in it deficient, nothing superfluous, nothing but has its End
and Use; so true are those Maxims we have already made use of, Natura nihil
facit frustra, and Natura non abundat in superfluis, nec deficit in
necessariis, no part that we can well spare. The Eye cannot say to the Hand I
have no need of thee, nor the Head to the Feet I have no need of you. 1. Cor.
12. 21. that I may usurp the Apostles similitude.

The Belly cannot quarrel with the Members, nor they with the Belly for her
seeming Sloth; as they provide Meat for her, so she concocts and distributes it
to them. Only it may be doubted to what use the Paps in Men should serve. I
answer partly for Ornament, partly for a kind of conformity between the Sexes,
and partly to defend and cherish the Heart; in some they contain Milk, as in a
Danish Family we read of in Bartholines Anatomical Observations. However it
follows not that they or any other parts of the Body are useless because we are
ignorant.

Had we been born with a large Wen upon our Faces, or a Bavarian Poke under our
Chins, or a great Bunch upon our Backs like Camels, or any the like superfluous
excrescency, which should be not only useless but troublesome, not only stand
us in no stead but also be ill favored to behold, and burthensom to carry
about, then we might have had some pretense to doubt whether an intelligent and
bountiful Creator had been our Architect; for had the Body been made by chance
it must in all likelihood have had many of these superfluous and unnecessary
Parts.

But now seeing there is none of our Members but has its Place and Use, none
that we could spare or conveniently live without, were it but those we account
Excrements, the Hair of our Heads, or the Nails on our Fingers ends; we must
needs be mad or sottish if we can conceive any other than that an infinitely
good and wise God was our Author and Former.

III. We may fetch an Argument of the Wisdom and Providence of God from the
convenient situation and disposition of the Parts and Members of our Bodies:
They are seated most conveniently for Use, for Ornament, and for mutual
Assistance. First, for Use; So we see the Senses of such eminent Use for our
well-being, situate in the Head, as Sentinels in a Watchtower, to receive and
conveigh to the Soul the impressions of external Objects. Sensus autem
interpretes ac nuntii rerum in capite tanquam in arce mirifice ad usus
necessarios and facti and collati sunt. Cic. de Not. Deorum. The Eye can more
easily see things at a distance, the Ear receive sounds from afar: How could
the Eye have been better placed either for Beauty and Ornament, or for the
Guidance and Direction of the whole Body. As Cicero proceeds well, Nam Oculi
tanquam speculatores altissimum locum obtinent, ex quo plurima conspicientes
funguntur suo munere: Et Aures quoe sonum recipere debent, qui natura in
sublime fertur, recte in altis corporum partibus collocatae sunt; itemque
Nares, eo quo omnis odor ad superiora fertur, recte sursum sunt. For the Eyes
like Sentinels occupy the highest place, from whence seeing many things they
perform their functions: And the Ears, which are made for the reception of
sounds, which naturally are carried upwards, are rightly placed in the
uppermost parts of the Body; also the Nostrils, because all odors ascend, are
fitly situate in the superior parts. I might instance in the other Members. How
could the Hands have been more conveniently placed for all sorts of Exercises
and Works, and for the guard and security of the Head and Principal Parts? The
Heart to dispense Life and Heat to the whole Body, viz. near the Center, and
yet because it is harder for the Blood to ascend than descend, somewhat nearer
the Head. It is also observable that the Sinks of the Body are removed as far
from the Nose and Eyes as may be; which Cicero takes notice of in the
forementioned place. Ut in Aedificiis Architecti avertunt ab Oculis and Naribus
Dominorum ea quae profluentia necessario essent tetri aliquid habitura, sic
natura res similes procul amandavit a sensibus. Secondly, For Ornament. What
could have been better contrived than that those Members which are Pairs,
should stand by one another in equal altitude, and answer on each side one to
another. And Thirdly, For mutual Assistance. We have before showed how the Eye
stands most conveniently for guiding the Hand, and the Hand for defending the
Eye; and the like might be said of the other Parts, they are so situate as to
afford direction and help one to another. This will appear more clearly if we
imagine any of the Members situate in contrary Places or Positions: Had a man's
Arms been fitted only to bend backwards behind him, or his Legs only to move
backwards; what direction could his Eyes then have afforded him in working or
walking? or how could he then have fed himself? nay had one Arm been made to
bend forward and the other directly backward, we had then lost half the use of
them, since they could not have assisted one the other in any Action. Take the
Eyes or any other of the Organs of Sense, and see if you can find any so
convenient a seat for them in the whole Body as that they now possess.

Fourthly, From the ample Provision that is made for the Defense and Security
of the principal Parts: Those are, 1. The Heart; which is the Fountain of Life
and Vegetation, Officina spirituum vitalium, principium and fons caloris
nativi, lucerna humidi radicalis, and that I may speak with the Chemists, ipse
Sol microcosmi, the very Sun of the microcosme or little World, in which is
contained that vital Flame or Heavenly Fire, which Prometheus is fabled to have
stole from Jupiter: or as Aristotle phrases it, that (...), Divinum quid
respondens elemento Stellarum. This for more security is situate in the Center
of the Trunk of the Body, covered first with its own Membrane called
Pericardium, lodged within the soft Bed of the Lungs, encompassed round with a
double Fence, (1.) of firm Bones or Ribs to bear off blows. (2.) of thick
Muscles and Skin, besides the Arms conveniently placed to fence off any
violence at a distance, before it can approach to hurt it. 2. The Brain, which
is the principle of all Sense and Motion, the Fountain of the Animal Spirits,
the chief Seat and Palace Royal of the Soul; upon whose security depends
whatever Privilege belongs to us as Sensitive or Rational Creatures. This, I
say, being the prime and immediate Organ of the Soul, from the right
constitution whereof proceeds the quickness of Apprehension, acuteness of Wit,
solidity of Judgment, method and order of Invention, strength and power of
Memory; which if once weakened and disordered, there follows nothing but
Confusion and Disturbance in our Apprehensions, Thoughts and Judgments, is
environed round about with such a potent Defense, that it must be amighty Force
indeed that is able to injure it.

First, A Skull so hard, thick, and tough, that it is almost as easy to split
a Helmet of Iron as to make a fracture in it. 2. This covered with Skin and
Hair, which serve to keep it warm being naturally a very cold part, and also to
quench and dissipate the force of any stroke that shall be dealt it, and retund
the edge of any Weapon. 3. And yet more than all this there is still a thick
and tough Membrane which hangs looser about it, and does not so closely embrace
it (that they call dura matter) and in case the Skull happens to be broken does
often preserve it from injury and diminution: And lastly, a thin and fine
Membrane strait and closely adhering to keep it from quashing and shaking.

I might instance (3.) in the Lungs, which are so useful to us as to Life and
Sense, that the vulgar think our Breath is our very Life, and that we breath
out our Souls from thence. Suitable to which notion both anima and spiritus in
Latin, and (...) in Greek are derived from words that signify Breath and
Wind: And efflare or exhalare animam signifies to Die. And the old Romans used
to apply mouth to mouth, and receive the last gasps of their dying friends, as
if their Souls had come out that way. From hence perhaps might first spring
that opinion of the vehicles of Spirits; the Vulgar, as I hinted before,
conceiving that the Breath was, if not the Soul itself, yet that wherein it was
wafted and carried away. These Lungs, I say, are for their bettter security and
defense shut up in the same Cavity with the Heart.

Fourthly, In the abundant provision that is made against evil Accidents and
Inconveniences. And the liberality of Nature as to this particular appears 1.
In that she has given many Members, which are of eminent use by pairs, as two
Eyes, two Ears, two Nostrils, two Hands, two Feet, two Breasts, [mammae] two
Reins: That so if by any cross or unhappy accident one should be disabled or
rendered useless, the other might serve us tolerably well, whereas had a Man but
one Hand, or one Eye, etc. if that were gone, all were gone, and we left in
evil Case. See then and acknowledge the Benignity of the Deity, who has
bestowed upon us two Hands, and two Eyes, and other the like parts not only for
our Necessity but Convenience, so long as we enjoy them: and for our Security
in case any mischance deprive us of one of them. 2. In that all the Vessels of
the Body have many Ramifications: Which particular Branches, though they serve
mainly for one Member or Muscle, yet send forth some twigs to the neighboring
Muscles; and so interchangeably the branches that serve these, send to them: So
that if one Branch chance to be cut off or obstructed, its defect may in some
measure be supplied by the twigs that come from the neighboring Vessels. 3. In
that she has provided so many ways to evacuate what might be hurtful to us or
breed Diseases in our Bodies. If any thing oppress the Head it has a power to
free itself by Sneezing: If any thing fall into the Lungs, or if any Humor be
discharged upon them, they have a faculty of clearing themselves and casting it
up by Coughing: If any thing clog or burden the Stomach, it has an ability of
contracting itself and throwing it up by Vomit. Besides these ways of
Evacuation there are Siege, Urine, Sweating haemorrhagies from the Nose and
haemorrhoidal veins, Fluxes of Rheum. Now the reason why Nature has provided
so many ways of Evacuation is because of the different humors that are to be
avoided or cast out. When therefore there is a Secretion made of any noxious
Humor, it is carried off by that Emunctory whose Pores are fitted to receive
and transmit the minute parts of it; if at least this Separation be made by
Percolation, as we will now suppose, but not assert. Yet I doubt not but the
same Humor may be cast off by diverse Emunctories, as is clear in Urine and
Sweat which are for the main the same Humor carried off several ways.

Fifthly, From the Constancy that is observed in the Number, Figure, Place, and
Make of all the principal Parts; and from the Variety in the less. Man is
always mending and altering his Works: But Nature observes the same tenor,
because her works are so perfect that there is no place for amendments; nothing
that can be reprehended. The sagacious Men in so many Ages have not been able
to find any flaw in these Divinely contrived and formed Machins, no blot or
error in this great Volume of the World, as if any thing had been an imperfect
Essay at the first, to use the Bishop of Chesters words: Nothing that can be
altered for the better; nothing but if it were altered would be marred. This
could not have been, had Man's Body been the work of Chance and not Counsel and
Providence. Why should there be constantly the same Parts? Why should they
retain constantly the same Places? Why should they be endued with the same
Shape and Figure? Nothing so contrary as Constancy and Chance. Should I see a
man throw the same number a thousand times together upon but three Dice, could
you persuade me that this were accidental and that there was no necessary Cause
of it? How much more incredible then is it that Constancy in such a Variety,
such a multiplicity of parts should be the result of Chance? Neither yet can
these Works be the effects of Necessity or Fate, for then there would be the
same Constancy observed in the smaller as well as the larger Parts and Vessels;
whereas there we see Nature does ludere, as it were, sport itself, the minute
Ramifications of all the Vessels, Veins, Arteries, and Nerves infinitely
varying in individuals of the same Species, so that they are not in any two
alike.

Sixthly, The great Wisdom of the Divine Creator appears in that there is
Pleasure annexed to those Actions that are necessary for the Support and
Preservation of the individuum, and the Continuation and Propagation of the
species; and not only so, but Pain to the neglect or forbearance of them. For
the support of the Person it has annexed Pleasure to Eating and Drinking:
Which else out of Laziness or multiplicity of Business a man would be apt to
neglect, or sometime forget. Indeed to be obliged to chew and swallow meat
daily for two hours space, and to find no Relish nor Pleasure in it, would be
one of the most burdensome and ungrateful tasks of a man's whole Life. But
because this Action is absolutely necessary, for abundant security Nature has
inserted in us a painful sense of Hunger to put us in mind of it, and to reward
our performance has adjoined Pleasure to it. And as for the continuation of
Kind, I need not tell you that the Enjoyments which attend those Actions are
the highest Gratifications of Sense.

Seventhly, The wonderful Art and Providence of the contriver and former of our
Bodies appears in the multitude of intentions he must have in the Formation of
the several Parts, or the qualifications they require to fit them for their
several Uses. Bishop of Chesters Not. Rel. lib. 1. c. 6.
Galen in his Book de formatione faetus, takes notice that there are in a
humane Body above 600. several Muscles, and there are at least ten several
Intentions or due Qualifications to be observed in each of these; proper
Figure, just Magnitude, right Disposition of its several Ends, upper and lower,
Position of the whole, the insertion of its proper Nerves, Veins, and Arteries,
which are each of them to be duly placed; so that about the Muscles alone no
less than 6000 several ends or aims are to be attended to. The Bones are
reckoned to be 284. The distinct Scopes or Intentions in each of these are
above 40, in all about 100000. And thus is it in some proportion with all the
other parts, the Skin, Ligaments, Vessels, Glandules, Humors: But more
especially with the several Members of the Body, which do in regard of the
great variety and multitude of those several Intentions required to them, very
much exceed the homogeneous Parts. And the failing in any one of these would
cause Irregularity in the Body, and in many of them such as would be very
notorious. Now to imagine that such a Machine composed of so many Parts, to the
right Form, Order and Motion whereof such an infinite number of Intentions are
required, could be made without the Contrivance of some wise Agent, must needs
be irrational in the highest degree.

Eighthly, Some fetch an Argument of Providence from the variety of Lineaments
in the Faces of Men, which is such, that there are not two Faces in the World
absolutely alike; which is somewhat strange, since all the Parts are in Specie
the same. Were Nature a blind Architect, I see not but the Faces of some Men
might be as like as Eggs laid by the same Hen, or Bullets cast in the same
Mould, or drops of Water out of the same Bucket. This particular I find taken
notice of by Pliny in his 7. Book, Cap. 1. in these Words, Jam in facie
vultuque nostro, cum sint december aut paulo plura membra, nullas duas in tot
millibus hominum indiscretas effigies existere, quod Ars nulla in paucis numero
praestet affectando; to which among other things he thus prefaces, Naturae vero
rerum vis atque majestas in omnibus momentis fide caret.

Though this at first may seem to be a Matter of small moment, yet if duly
considered, it will appear to be of mighty importance in all Human Affairs: For
should there be an undiscernable similitude between diverse Men, what Confusion
and Disturbance would necessarily follow? what Uncertainty in all Sales and
Conveyances, in all Bargains and Contracts? what Frauds and Cheats and
suborning of Witnesses? what a Subversion of all Trade and Commerce? what
hazard in all judicial Proceedings? in all Assaults and Batteries, in all
Murders and Assassinations, in Thefts and Robberies, what Security would there
be to Malefactors? who could swear that such and such were the Persons that
committed the Facts, though they saw them never so clearly? Many other
inconveniences might be instanced in: So that we see this is no contemptible
Argument of the Wisdom and Goodness of God.

I have done with my general Observations. I proceed now more accurately and
minutely to consider some particular Parts or Members of the Body; and First
the Head, because it was to contain a large Brain made of the most capacious
Figure, as near as could be to a Spherical; upon this grows the Hair, which
though it be esteemed an Excrement, is of great use (as I showed before) to
cherish and keep warm the Brain, and to quench the force of any stroke that
might otherwise endanger the Skull. It serves also to disburthen the Brain of a
great deal of superfluous moisture, wherewith it abounds; and for a graceful
Ornament to the Face.

Secondly, Another Member which I shall more particularly treat of, is the Eye,
a part so artificially composed, and commodiously situate, as nothing can be
contrived better for Use, Ornament or Security; nothing to advantage added
thereto or altered therein. Of the Beauty of the Eye I shall say little,
leaving that to Poets and Orators; that it is a very pleasant and lovely Object
to behold, if we consider the Figure, Colors and Splendour of it, is the least
that I can say. The Soul as it is more immediately and strongly moved and
affected by this part than any other; so does it manifest all its Passions and
Perturbations by this. As the Eyes are the Windows to let in the Species of all
exterior Objects into the dark Cells of the Brain, for the information of the
Soul; so are they flaming Torches to reveal to those abroad how the Soul within
is moved or affected. These Repre sentations made by the impressions of
external Objects upon the Eye are the most clear, lively and distinct of any
others. Now to this use and purpose of informing us what is abroad round about
us in this aspectable World, we shall find the Structure and Mechanism of the
Eye, and every Part thereof so well fitted and adapted, as not the least
Curiosity can be added. For first of all, all the Humors and Tunicles are
purely transparent, to let in the Light and Colors unfolded and unsophisticated
by any inward Tincture. It is usually said by the Peripateticks, that the
Crystalline Humor of the Eye (which they ineptly fansied to be the immediate
Organ of Vision wherein all the Species of external Objects were terminated) is
without all Color, because its office was to discern all Colors, or at least to
receive the Species of several Colors, and convey them to the common Sense. Now
if itself had been colored, it would have transmitted all visible Objects
tinctured with the same Color; as we see whatever is beheld through a colored
Glass appears of the same Color with the Glass, and to those that have the
Jaundice or the like Suffusion of Eyes, Objects appear of that same Color
wherewith their Eyes are infected. This they say is in a great measure true,
although they are much mistaken about the Organ and manner of Vision, and the
Uses of the Humors and Membranes of the Eye. Two Reasons therefore may be
assigned why all the Membranes and Humors of the Eye are perfectly pellucid and
void of Color. First, for the Clearness. Secondly, for the Distinctness of
Vision.

I. The Clearness. For had the Tunicles and Humors of the Eye, all or any of
them been colorate, many of the Rays proceeding from the visible Object would
have been stopped and suffocated before they could come to the bottom of the Eye,
where the formal Organ of Vision is situate. For it is a most certain Rule, how
much any Body has of Color, so much has it of Opacity, and by so much the
more unfit is it to transmit the Species. 2. For the Distinctness of Vision.
For, as I said before and the Peripateticks observe well, were the Humors of
the Eye tinctured with any color, they would refund that color upon the
Object, and so it would not be represented to the Soul as in itself it is. So
we see that through a colored Glass things appear as well more dim and
obscure, as tinctured with the color thereof.

Secondly, The parts of the Eye are made unequal, and especially the Crystalline
Humor, which is of a lenticular Figure, unequal on both sides, that by the
Refractions there made there might be a direction of many Rays coming from one
point in the Object, viz. as many as the Pupil can receive, to one point
answerable in the bottom of the Eye; without which the Sense would be very
obscure and also confused. There would be as much difference in the Clearness
and Distinction of Vision, where the outward surface of the tunica cornea
plain, and the Crystalline Humor removed; as between the Picture received on a
white paper in a dark room through an open or empty hole, and the same received
through a hole furnished with an exactly polished lenticular Crystal; which how
great it is any one that has but seen this Experiment made, knows well enough.
Indeed this Experiment does very much explain the manner of Vision; the hole
answering to the Pupil of the Eye, the Crystalline Humor to the lenticular
Glass, the dark Room to the cavity containing the vitreous Humor, and the
white Paper to the tunica retina.

Thirdly, The Uveous Coat or Iris of the Eye has a musculous Power, and can
dilate and contract that round hole in it, called the Pupil or Sight of the
Eye. It contracts it for the excluding superfluous Light, and preserving the
Eye from being injured by too vehement and lucid an Object, and again dilate it
for the apprehending Objects more remote, or placed in a fainter light; tam
miro artificio (says Scheiner) quam munifica naturae largitate. If any one
desires to make experiment of these particulars, he may, following Scheiner and
Des Carts their directions, take a Child, and setting a Candle before him bid
him look upon it: And he shall observe his Pupil to contract itself very much,
to exclude the light, with the Brightness whereof it would otherwise be dazzled
and offended; as we are when after we have been some time in the dark a bright
Light is suddenly brought in and set before us, till the Pupils of our Eyes
have gradually contracted themselves: Let the Candle be withdrawn, or removed
aside, he shall observe the Child's pupil by degrees to dilate itself. Or let
him take a Bead or the like Object, and holding it near the Eye, command the
Child to look at it, the Pupil will contract much when the Object is near; but
let it be withdrawn to a greater distance in the same light, and he shall
observe the pupil to be much enlarged.

Fourthly, The Uveous Coat, and also the inside of the choroides are blackened
like the Walls of a Tennis Court, that the Rays may be there suffocated and
suppressed, and not reflected backwards to confound the Sight: And if any be by
the retiform Coat reflected, they are soon choked in the black inside of the
Uvea. Whereas were they reflected to and fro, there could be no distinct
Vision; as we see the light admited into the dark Room we even now spoke of,
obliterates the species which before were seen upon the white Cloth or Paper.

Fifthly, Because the Rays from a nearer and from a more remote Object do not
meet just in the same distance behind the Crystalline Humor (as may easily be
observed in lenticular Glasses, where the point of concourse of the Rays from a
nearer Object is at a greater distance behind the Glass, and from a further at
a lesser) therefore the ciliary processes, or rather the ligaments observed in
the inside of the Sclerotick Tunicle of the Eye, by a late ingenious Anatomist,
do serve instead of a Muscle, by their contraction to alter the figure of the
Eye, and make it broader, and consequently draw the Retine nearer to the
Crystalline Humor, and by their relaxation suffer it to return to its natural
distance according to the exigency of the Object, in respect of distance or
propinquity: And besides possibly the ciliary processes may by their
constriction or relaxation, render the Crystalline itself more gibbose or
plain; and with the help of the Muscles a little alter the figure of the whole
Eye, for the same reason. To what I have said might be added, that the retiform
tunicle is whitish, for the better and more true Reception of the Species of
things. That there being a distance necessarily required for the collection of
the Rays received by the Pupil, viz. those that proceed from one point of the
Object to one point again in the bottom of the Eye, the Retine must needs be
set at a distance from the Crystalline Humor: And therefore Nature has
provided a large Room, and filled it with the pellucid vitreous Humor most fit
for that purpose.

I must not omit a notable Observation concerning the place of the insertion of
the optic Nerve into the bulb of the Eye, and the reason of it; which I owe to
that Learned Mathematician Peter Herigon, Nervus Opticus (says he in his
Optica) ad latus ponitur, ne pars imaginis in ejus foramen incidens pictura
careat. The Optic Nerve is not situate directly behind the Eye, but on one
side, lest that part of the image that falls upon the hole of the Optic Nerve,
should want its picture. This I do not conceive to be the true reason of this
Situation; for even now as it is situate, that part of the Object whose rays
fall upon the center or hole of the Optic Nerve, wants its picture, as we find
by experience; that part not being seen by us, though we heed it not. But the
reason is, because if the Optic Axis should fall upon this Center (as it would
do were the Nerve seated just behind the Eye) this great Inconvenience would
follow, that the middle point of every Object we viewed would be invisible, or
there would a dark spot appear in the midst of it. Thus we see the admirable
Wisdom of Nature in thus placing the Optic Nerve in respect of the Eye; which
he that did not consider or understand would be apt to think more
inconveniently situate for Vision, than if it had been right behind.

Another thing also concerning Vision is most remarkable, that though there be
a decussation of the rays in the Pupil of the Eye, and so the image of the
Object in the Retina or bottom of the Eye be inverted, yet does not the Object
appear inverted, but in its right or natural posture: The reason whereof is
because the visual Rays coming in straight lines, by those points of the
Sensory or Retina which they touch, affect the common Sense or Soul according
to their direction; that is, signify to it that those several parts of the
Object from whence they proceed lie in straight lines (point for point) drawn
through the Pupil to the several points of the Sensory where they terminate,
and which they press upon. Whereupon the Soul must needs conceive the Object,
not in an inverted but a right posture. And that the Nerves are naturally made
not only to inform the Soul of external Objects which press upon them, but also
of the situation of such Objects, is clear, because if the Eyes be distorted,
the Object, will we nill we, will appear double. So if the fore and middle
Fingers be crossed, and a round Body put between them and moved, it will seem
to be two; the reason is, because in that posture of the Fingers the Body
touches the outsides of them, which in their natural site are distant one from
another, and their Nerves made to signify to the Soul Bodies separate and
distant in like manner, two Fingers lying between them. And though our reason
by the help of our Sight corrects this error, yet cannot we but fancy it to
be so.

Neither is the aqueous Humor, as some may supinely imagine, altogether useless
or unprofitable as to Vision, because by its help the uvea tunica is sustained,
which else would fall flat upon the Crystalline Humor; and fluid it must be, to
give way to the contraction and dilatation of the Uveous: And because the
outermost Coat of the Eye might chance to be wounded or pricked, and this Humor
being fluid let out, therefore Nature has made Provision speedily to repair it
again in such a Case.

Moreover it is remarkable that the cornea tunica, [horny or pellucid Coat of
the Eye] does not lie in the same superficies with the White of the Eye, but
rises up as it were a Hillock above its convexity, and is of an Hyperbolical
or Parabolical Figure: So that though the Eye seems to be perfectly round, in
reality it is not so, but the Iris thereof is protuberant above the White; and
the Reason is because that if the cornea tunica or Crystalline Humor had been
concentrical to the Sclerodes, the Eye could not have admitted a whole
Hemisphere at one view, and sic Animalis incolumitati in multis rebus minus
cautum esset, as Scheiner well. In many things there had not been sufficient
caution or care taken for the Animals safety.

And now (that I may use the Words of a late * Author of our own) the Eye is
already so perfect, that I believe the reason Dr. More Antidote against Atheism.
of a Man would easily have rested here, and admired at his own contrivance.
For he being able to move his whole Body upward and downward and on every side,
might have unawares thought himself sufficiently well provided for; but Nature
has added Muscles also to the Eyes, that no perfection might be wanting: For
we have often occasson to move our Eyes, our Head being unmoved, as in reading
and viewing more particularly any Object set before us, by transferring the
axes of our Eyes all over it: And that this may be done with the more Ease and
Accuracy, she has furnished this Organ with no less than Six Muscles, to move
it upward, downward, to the Right and Left, obliquely and round about.

I shall now consider what Provision is made for the Defense and Security of
this most excellent and useful Part.

First the Eyes are sunk in a convenient Valley, latent utiliter, and are
encompassed round with eminent Parts, as with a Rampart, and excelsis undique
partibus sepiuntur, De nature. Rerum l. 2.
Cic. so are defended from the strokes of any flat or broad Bodies. Above stand
the Eyebrows to keep off any thing from running down upon them, as drops of
Sweat from the Forehead, or Dust, or the like. Superiora superciliis obducta
sudorem a capite and front defluentem repellunt. Cic. Then follow the
Eyelids, which fence them from any sudden and lesser stripes. These also round
the edges are fortified with stiff bristles, as it were Pallisadoes, against
the incursions of importunate Animals, serving partly as a Fan to strike away
Flies or Gnats, or any other troublesome Insect; and partly to keep off
superfluous light, Munitaeque sunt palpebrae tanquam vallo pilorum, quibus and
apertis oculis siquid incideret repelleretur. Idem ibid. And because it was
necessary that Man and other Animals should sleep, which could not be so well
done if the light came in by the Windows of the Eyes, therefore has Nature
provided these curtains to be then drawn to keep it out. And because the
outward coat of the Eye ought to be pellucid to transmit the light, which if
the Eyes should always stand open, would be apt to grow dry and shrink, and
lose their diaphaneity, therefore are the Eylids so contrived as often to wink,
that so they may as it were glaze and varnish them over with the moisture they
contain, and withal wipe off whatever dust or filth may stick to them: And
this, lest they should hinder the sight, they do with the greatest celerity.
Cicero has taken notice that they are made very soft, lest they should hurt
the Sight. Mollissimae tactu ne laederent aciem, aptissime factae and ad
claudendas pupillas ne quid incideret, and ad aperiendas, idque providit ut
identidem fieri posset maxima cum celeritate.

Secondly, If we consider the Bulb or Ball of the Eye, the exterior Membrane
or Coat thereof is made thick, tough, and strong, that it is a very hard matter
to make a rupture in it, and besides so slippery that it eludes the force of
any stroke, to which also its globular Figure gives it a very great advantage.

Lastly, Because for the guidance and direction of the Body in Walking and any
Exercise, it is necessary the Eye should be uncovered, and exposed to the Air
at all times and in all Weathers, therefore the most wise Author of Nature has
provided for it a hot bed of Fat which fills up the interstices of the Muscles;
and besides made it more patient and less sensible of cold than our other
parts; and though I cannot say with Cicero absolutely free from danger or harm
by that Enemy, yet least obnoxious to the injuries thereof of any part, and not
at all, unless it be immoderate and extreme.

To all this I might add the convenience of the situation of the Eye in respect
of its proximity to the Brain, the seat of Apprehension and Common Sense:
Whereas had they been further removed, the Optic Nerves had been liable to many
more dangers and inconveniences than now they are.

Seeing then the Eye is composed of so great variety of Parts all conspiring to
the Use of Vision, whereof some are absolutely necessary, others very useful
and convenient, none idle or superfluous, and which is remarkable, many of them
of a different figure and consistency from any others in the Body besides, as
being transparent, which it was absolutely necessary they should be, to
transmit the Rays of Light; Who can but believe that this Organ was designed
and made purposely for the Use for which it serves?

Neither is it to be esteemed any Defect or Imperfection in the Eyes of Man
that they want the seventh Muscle, or the nictating Membrane, which the Eyes of
many other Animals are furnished withal; for though they be very useful, and in
a manner necessary to them, considering their manner of living, yet are they
not so to Man. To such Beasts as feed upon Grass and other Herbs, and therefore
are forced to hold their Eyes long in a hanging posture, and to look downwards
for the choosing and gathering of their Food, the seventh or suspensory Muscle
is very useful, to enable them to do so without much pain or weariness; yet to
Man, who does not, nor has any occasion, indeed cannot hold his Head or look
long downwards, it would be useless and superfluous. As for the nictating
Membrane or Periophthalmium, which all Birds, and I think most Quadrupeds are
furnished with, I have been long in doubt what the use of it might be; and have
sometimes thought it was for the more abundant defense and security of the Eye;
but then I was puzzled to give any tolerable account why Nature should be more
solicitous for the preservation of the Eyes of Brutes than Men, and in this
respect also be a Stepmother to the most noble Creature.

But the Honble Author formerly mentioned, * Boil of Fin. Causes p. 53, 54.
gives a probable account why Frogs and Birds are furnished with such a
Membrane. Frogs, because being Amphibious Animals, designed to pass their lives
in watery places, which for the most part abound with Sedges, and other Plants
endowed with sharp edges or points; and the progressive Motion of this Animal
being to be made not by Walking, but by Leaping, if his Eyes were not provided
of such a sheath, he must either shut them, and so leap blindly and by
consequence dangerously, or by leaving them open run a venture to have the
Cornea cut, pricked, or otherwise offended by the edges or points of the Plants,
or what may fall from them upon the Animals Eye: Whereas this Membrane (being
something transparent as well as strong) is like a kind of Spectacle that
covers the Eye without taking away the Sight. Birds are likewise furnished with
it, because being destinated to fly among the Branches of Trees and Bushes,
their Prickles, Twigs, Leaves or other Parts would be apt otherwise to wound or
offend their Eyes. But yet still we are to seek why it is given to other
Quadrupeds, whose Eyes are in no such danger.

Thirdly, The Ear another Organ of Sense, how admirably is it contrived for the
receiving and conveying of Sounds? First, there is the outward Ear or Auricula,
made hollow and contracted by degrees to draw the Sound inward, to take in as
much as may be of it, as we use a Funnel to pour Liquor into any Vessel. And
therefore if the Auricula be cut clear off, the Hearing is much impaired, and
almost quite marred, as has been by experience found. From the Auricula is
extended a small long, round hole inward into the Head, to intend the Motion
and so augment the force of the Sound, as we see in a shooting Trunk, the
longer it is to a certain limit, the swifter and more forcibly the Air passes
in it, and drives the Pellet. At the end of this hole is a Membrane, fastened to
a round bony Limb, and stretched like the head of a Drum, and therefore by
Anatomists called also Tympanum, to receive the impulse of the Sound, and to
vibrate or quaver according to its reciprocal Motions or Vibrations; the small
Ear-bones being at the end fastened to the Tympanum, and furnished with a Muscle
serve for the tension of that Membrane, or the relaxation of it according to
the exigency of the Animal, it being stretched to the utmost when it would
hearken diligently to a lower or more distant Sound. Behind the Drum are
several Vaults and anfractuose Cavities in the Ear-Bone, filled only with what
Naturalists call the implanted Air; so to intend the least sound imaginable,
that the Sense might be affected with it; as we see in subterraneous Caves and
Vaults how the Sound is redoubled, and what a great report it makes however
moderate it be: And because it was for the behoof of the Animal, that upon any
sudden Accident it might be awakened out of its sleep, therefore were there no
Shuts or Stopples made for the Ears, that so any loud or sharp Noise might
awaken it, as also a soft and gentle Voice or Murmur provoke it to sleep. Now
the Ears for the benefit and conveniences of the Animal, being always to stand
open, because there was some danger that Insects might creep in thereat, and
eating their way through the tympanum harbor in the Cavities behind it;
therefore has Nature loricated or plaistered over the sides of the
forementioned Hole with Ear-wax, to stop and entangle any Insects that should
attempt to creep in there. But I must confess my self not sufficiently to
understand the nature of Sounds to give a full and satisfactory account of the
Structure and Uses of all the parts of the Ear.

Fourthly, The next part I shall take notice of shall be the Teeth, concerning
which I find Seven Observations in the honorable Mr. Boyls Treatise of Final
Causes, which I shall briefly recapitulate, and add one or two more.

I. That the Teeth alone among the Bones continue to grow in length during a
man's whole Life, as appears by the unsightly length of one Tooth when its
opposite happens to fall or be pulled out; which was most providently designed
to repair the wast that is daily made of them by the frequent Attritions in
Mastication. Here by the by I might advise men to be careful how they attempt
to cure this blemish by filing or cutting off the head of such an overgrown
Tooth, lest that befall them which happened to a certain Nun in Padua, who upon
cutting off a Tooth in that manner was presently convulsed and fell into an
Epilepssie, as Bartholine in his Anatomy reports.

II. That that part of the Teeth which is extant above the Gums is naked and
not invested with that sensible Membrane called Periosteum, wherewith the other
Bones are covered.

III. That the Teeth are of a closer and harder substance than the rest of the
Bones, for the more easy breaking and comminution of the more solid Aliments,
and that they might be more durable and not so soon worn down by grinding the
food.

IV. That for the nourishing and cherishing these so necessary Bones, the All
wise Author of things has admirably contrived an unseen Cavity in each side of
the Jaw Bone, in which greater channel are lodged an Artery, a Vein and a
Nerve, which through lesser Cavities, as it were through Gutters, send their
twigs to each particular Tooth.

V. Because Infants were for a considerable time to feed upon Milk, which needs
no chewing, and lest Teeth should hurt the tender Nipples of the Nurse, Nature
has deferred the production of them for many Months in a humane foetus,
whereas those of diverse other Animals, which are reduced to seek betimes food
that needs Mastication, are born with them.

VI. The different Figure and Shape of the Teeth is remarkable, That the
Foreteeth should be formed broad and with a thin and sharp edge like Chizzels,
to cut off and take away a morsel from any solid Food, called therefore
incisores. The next, one on each side stronger and deeper rooted, and more
pointed, called therefore Canini, in English Eye-Teeth, to tear the more tough
and resisting sort of Aliments. The rest called Jaw Teeth or Grinders, in Latin
Molares, are made flat and broad atop and withal somewhat uneven and rugged,
that by their knobs and little cavities they may the better retain, grind and
commix the Aliments.

VII. Because the operations to be performed by the Teeth oftentimes require a
considerable firmness and strength, partly in the Teeth themselves, partly in
the instruments which move the lower Jaw, which alone is moveable, Nature has
provided this with strong Muscles, to make it bear forcibly against the upper
Jaw. And thus not only placed each Tooth in a distinct Cavity of the Jaw Bone,
as it were in a close, strong and deep socket, but has furnished the several
sorts of Teeth with Hold-fasts suitable to the stress that by reason of their
different Offices they are to be put to. And therefore whereas the Cutters and
Eye-teeth have usually but one Root; (which in these last named is wont to be
very long) the Grinders that are employed to crack Nuts, Stones of Fruit,
Bones, or other hard Bodies, are furnished with three Roots, and in the upper
Jaw often with four, because these are pendulous, and the substance of the Jaw
somewhat softer.

VIII. The situation of the Teeth is most convenient, viz. the Molares or
Grinders behind, nearest the Center of Motion, because there is a greater
strength or force required to chew the meat, than to bite a piece; and the
Cutters before, that they may be ready to cut off a morsel from any solid Food,
to be transmitted to the Grinders.

IX. It is remarkable that the Jaw in Men and such Animals as are furnished
with Grinders, has an oblique or transverse Motion, which is necessary for
chewing and comminution of the Meat; which it is observed not to have in those
Animals that want the Molares.

Now if (as Gallen says) he that shall marshal a Company but of 32 Men in due
order, is commended for a skilful and industrious Person, shall we not admire
Nature which has so skilfully ranked and disposed this Quire of our Teeth?

Fifthly, The Tongue is no less admirable for the contexture and manifold Uses
of it. First, it is the Organ of Tasting; for being of a spungy substance the
small Particles of our Meat and Drink being mingled with the Saliva, easily
insinuate themselves into the Pores of it, and so do either gratefully affect
it, or harshly grate upon it, accordingly as they are figured and moved; and
hereby we discern what is convenient or inconvenient for our nourishment. It
helps us likewise in the chewing and swallowing of our Meat: and Lastly, It is
the main Instrument of Speaking, a quality so peculiar to Man, that no Beast
could ever attain to it. And although Birds have been taught to form some
Words, yet they have been but a few, and those learned with great difficulty;
but what is the chief, the Birds understand not the meaning of them, nor use
them as Signs of Things or their own Conceptions of them; though they may use
them as Expressions of their Passions: As Parrots having been used to be fed at
the prolation of certain Words, may afterward when they are hungry pronounce
the same. For this Des Carts makes his main Argument to prove that Brutes have
no Cogitation, because the highest of them could never be brought to signify
their Thoughts or Conceptions by any artificial Signs, either Words, or
Gestures, (which, if they had any, they would in all likelihood be forward
enough to do) whereas all Men, both Fools and Mutes, make use of Words or other
Signs to express their Thoughts, about any Subjects that present themselves;
which Signs also have no reference to any of their Passions. Whereas the Signs
that Brute Animals may be taught to use are no other than such as are the
motions of some of their Passions, Fear, Hope, Joy, etc. Hence some of the
Jewish Rabbis did not so absurdly define a Man Animal loquens, a speaking
Creature. Having had occasion just now to mention the Saliva or Spittle, I am
put in mind of the eminent use of this Humor, which is commonly taken for an
Excrement. Because a great part of our Food is dry; therefore Nature has
provided several glandules to separate this juice from the Blood, and no less
than four Channels to convey it into the Mouth, which are of late invention and
called by Anatomists* Ductus Salivales, through which the Saliva destilling
continually, serves well to macerate and temper our meat, and make it fit to be
chewed and swallowed. If a copious Moisture did not by these Conduit-pipes
incessantly flow down into the Mouths of Horses and Kine, how were it possible
they should for a long time together grind and swallow such dry meat as Hay and
Straw? Moreover it may be useful not only in the Mouth but in the Stomach too,
to promote Concoction.

Sixthly, To the Mouth succeeds the Windpipe, no less wonderful in its
Conformation. For because continual Respiration is necessary for the support of
our Lives, it is made with annulary Cartilages to keep it constantly open, and
that the sides of it may not flag and fall together. And lest when we swallow,
our meat or drink should fall in there and obstruct it, it has a strong shut
or Valve called Epiglottis, to cover it close, and stop it when we swallow: and
for the more convenient bending of our Necks, it is not made of one entire
continued Cartilage, but of many annular ones joined together by strong
Membranes, which Membranes are muscular, compounded of straight and circular
Fibers for the more effectual contraction of the Windpipe in any strong or
violent Expiration or Coughing. And lest the Asperity or hardness of these
Cartilages should hurt the Oesophagus or Gullet, which is tender and of a
Skinny Substance, or hinder the swallowing of our Meat, therefore these
annulary Gristles are not made round, or entire Circles, but where the Gullet
touches the Windpipe, there to fill up the Circle is only a soft Membrane,
which may easily give way to the Dilatation of the Gullet. And to demonstrate
that this was designedly done for this End and Use, so soon as the Windpipe
enters the Lungs, its Cartilages are no longer deficient, but perfect Circles
or Rings, because there was no necessity they should be so, but it was more
convenient they should be entire. L^^^ly, for the various modulation of the
Voice, the upper end of the Windpipe is endued with several Cartilages and
Muscles, to contract or dilate it as we would have our Voice Flat or Sharp; and
moreover the whole is continually moistened with a glutinous Humor issuing out
of the small Glandules that are upon its inner Coat, to fence it against the
sharp Air received in, or Breath forced out; yet is it of quick and tender
Sense, that it may be easily provoked to cast out by coughing, whatever may
fall into it from without, or be discharged into it from within.

Seventhly, The Heart which has been always esteemed, and really is, one of
the principal Parts of the Body, the primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, by its
uncessant Motion distributing the Blood, the Vehicle of Life, and with it the
Vital Heat and Spirits, throughout the whole Body, whereby it does continually
irrigate, nourish and keep hot and supple all the Members. Is it not admirable
that from this Fountain of Life and Heat there should be Channels and
Conduit-pipes, to every, even the least and most remote Part of the Body; just
as if from one Waterhouse there should be Pipes conveying the Water to every
House in a Town, and to every Room in each House; or from one Fountain in a
Garden there should be little Channels or Dikes cut to every Bed, and every
Plant growing therein, as we have seen more than once done beyond the Seas. I
confess the Heart seems not to be designed to so noble an Use as is generally
believed, that is to be the Fountain or Conservatory of the vital Flame, and to
inspire the Blood therewith; (for the Lungs serve rather for the accension or
maintaining that Flame, the Blood receiving there from the Air those Particles
which are one Part of the Pabulum or Fuel thereof, and so impregnated running
back to the Heart) but to serve as a Machine to receive the Blood from the
Veins, and to force it out by the Arteries through the whole Body, as a Syringe
does any Liquor, though not by the same Artifice: And yet this is no ignoble
Use, the continuance of the Circulation of the Blood being indispensibly
necessary for the quickening and enlivening of all the Members of the Body, and
supplying of Matter to the Brain, for the preparation of the Animal Spirits,
the Instruments of all Sense and Motion. Now for this use of receiving and
pumping out of the Blood, the Heart is admirably contrived. For First being a
Muscular Part, the Sides of it are composed of two orders of Fibers running
circularly or spirally from Base to Tip, contrarily one to the other, and so
being drawn or contracted contrary ways do violently constringe and straiten
the Ventricles, and strongly force out the Blood, as we have formerly
intimated. Then the Vessels we call Arteries, which carry from the Heart to the
several Parts, have Valves which open outward like Trap-doors, and give the
Blood a free passage out of the Heart, but will not suffer it to return back
again thither, and the Veins, which bring it back from the several Members to
the Heart, have Valves or Trap-doors which open inwards, so as to give way to
the Blood to run into the Heart, but prevent it from running back again that
way. Besides the Arteries consist of a quandruple Coat, the Third of which is
made up of annular or orbicular carneous Fibers to a good thickness and is of a
Muscular Nature, after every Pulse of the Heart serving to contract the Vessel
successively with incredible celerity, so by a kind of peristaltick Motion
impelling the Blood onwards to the capillary Extremities, and through the
Muscles, with great force and swiftness. So the Pulse of the Arteries is not
only caused by the pulsation of the Heart, driving the Blood through them in
manner of a Wave or Flush, as Des Carts and others would have it; but by the
Coats of the Arteries themselves, which the experiments of a certain Carts
Epist. Vol. 1. Ep. 77. and Seq.
Lovain Physician, (the first whereof is Galens,) do in my opinion make good
against him. First, says he, if you slit the Artery and thrust into it a Pipe,
so big as to fill the Cavity of it, and cast a strait ligature upon that part
of the Artery containing the Pipe, and so bind it fast to the Pipe;
notwithstanding the Blood has free passage through the Pipe, yet will not the
Artery beat below the ligature; but do but take off the ligature, it will
commence again to beat immediately. But because one might be ready to reply to
this Experiment, that the reason why when bound it did not beat, was because
the current of the Blood being straightened by the Pipe, when beneath the Pipe it
came to have more liberty, was not sufficient to stretch the Coats of the
Artery, and so cause a Pulse, but when the ligature was taken off, it might
flow between the enclosed tube and the Coat of the Artery; therefore he adds
another, which clearly evinces that this could not be the reason, but that it
is something flowing down the Coats of the Artery that causes the Pulse, that
is, If you straiten the Artery never so much, provided the sides of it do not
quite meet, and stop all passage of the Blood, the Vessel will notwithstanding
continue still to beat below or beyond the Coarctation. So we see some
Physicians both Ancient (as Galen,) and Modern were of opinion that the Pulse
of the Arteries was owing to their Coats; though the first that I know of who
observed the third Coat of an Artery to be a muscular Body, composed of
annulary Fibers, was Dr. Willis. The mention of the peristaltick Motion puts me
in mind of an ocular Demonstration of it in the Gullet of Kine when they chew
the Cud, which I have often beheld with pleasure. For after they have swallowed
one morsel, if you look steadfastly upon their Throat, you will soon see another
ascend, and run pretty swiftly all along the Throat up to the Mouth, which it
could not do unless it were impelled by the successive contraction or
peristaltick Motion of the Gullet, continually following it. And it is
remarkable that these ruminant Creatures have a power by the imperium of their
wills of directing this peristaltick Motion upwards or downwards. I shall add
no more concerning the Heart, but that it and the Brain do mutuas operas
tradere, enable one another to work; for first the Brain cannot itself Live,
unless it receive continual supplies of Blood from the Heart, much less can it
perform its functions of preparing and distributing the Animal Spirits; nor the
Heart Pulse, unless it receives Spirits or something else that descends from
the Brain by the Nerves. For do but cut asunder the Nerves that go from the
Brain to the Heart, the motion thereof in more perfect and hot Creatures
cease immediately. Which Part began this round is the Question.

Eighthly, The next Part I shall treat of shall be the Hand, this (...) or
superlative Instrument, which serves us for such a multitude of Uses, as it is
not easy to enumerate; whereto if we consider the Make and Structure of it, we
shall find it wonderfully adapted. First, it is divided into Four Fingers
bending forward, and one opposite to them bending backwards, and of greater
strength than any of them singly, which we call the Thumb, to join with them
severally or united; whereby it is fitted to lay hold of objects of any size or
quantity. The least things, as any small single Seed, are taken up by the Thumb
and Forefinger; those a little greater, by the Thumb and two Fingers, which
also we chiefly employ to manage the Needle in Sewing, and the Pen in Writing:
When we would take up a greater quantity of any thing we make use of the Thumb
and all the Fingers. Sometimes we use one Finger only, as in pointing at any
thing, picking things out of holes or long and narrow Vessels, sometimes all
severally at one time, as in stopping the strings when we play upon any musical
Instrument. 2. The Fingers are strengthened with several Bones, jointed
together for motion, and furnished with several Muscles and Tendons like so
many Pullies to bend them circularly forward; which is most convenient for the
firm holding and griping of any Object: Which of how great, constant, and
necessary Use it is in pulling or drawing, but especially in taking up and
retaining any sort of Tool or Instrument to work withal in Husbandry and all
mechanic Arts, is so obvious to every man's Observation, that I need not spend
time to instance in particulars: Moreover the several Fingers are furnished
with several Muscles to extend and open the Hand, and to move them to the Right
and Left: and so this Division and Motion of the Fingers does not hinder but
that the whole Hand may be employed, as if it were all of a piece, as we see it
is, either expanded as in striking out, smoothing and folding up of Cloths and
some mechanic Uses; or contracted, as in Fighting, Kneading of Dough and the
like. It is also notable and indeed wonderful, that the Tendons bending the
middle Joint of the Fingers, should be perforated to give passage to the
Tendons of the Muscles which draw the uppermost Joints, and all bound down
close to the Bone with strong Fillets, lest they should start up and hinder the
Hand in its work, standing like so many Bowstrings. 3. The Fingers ends are
strengthened with Nails, as we fortify the ends of our Staves or Forks with
Iron Hoops or Ferules, which Nails serve not only for defense but for ornament,
and many Uses. The Skin upon our Fingers ends, is thin and of most exquisite
Sense, to help us to judge of any thing we handle. If now I should go about to
reckon up the several Uses of this Instrument, Time would sooner fail me then
Matter. By the help of this we do all our Works, we Build our selves Houses to
dwell in; we make our selves Garments to wear; we Plow and Sow our Grounds with
Corn, Dress and Cultivate our Vineyards, Gardens, and Orchards, gather and lay
up our Grain, and Fruits; we prepare and make ready our Victuals. Spinning,
Weaving, Painting, Carving, Engraving, and that Divinely invented Art of
Writing, whereby we transmit our own Thoughts to Posterity, and converse with
and participate the Observations and Inventions of them that are long ago Dead,
all performed by this. This is the only Instrument for all Arts whatsoever; no
improvement to be made of any experimental Knowledge without it. Hence (as
Aristotle says well) they do amiss that complain, that Man is worse dealt with
by Nature than other Creatures; whereas they have some Hair, some Shells, some
Wool, some Feathers, some Scales, to defend themselves from the injuries of the
Weather, Man alone is Born Naked and without all covering. Whereas they have
natural Weapons to defend themselves and offend their Enemies, some Horns, some
Hoofs, some Teeth, some Talons, some Claws, some Spurs and Beaks; Man has none
of all these, but is weak, and feeble, and unarmed sent into the World. Why, a
Hand with Reason to use it, supplies the Uses of all these, that is both a Horn,
and a Hoof, and a Talon and a Tusk, etc. because it enables us to use Weapons
of these and other Fashions, as Swords and Spears and Guns. Besides this
advantage a Man has of them, that whereas they cannot at pleasure change their
coverings, or lay aside their Weapons, or make use of others as occasion
serves, but must abide Winter and Summer, Night and Day with the same Clothing
on their Backs, and sleep with their Weapons upon them; a Man can alter his
Clothing according to the exigency of the Weather, go warm in Winter, and cool
in Summer, cover up himself hot in the Night, and lay aside his Clothes in the
Day, and put on or off more or fewer according as his Work and Exercise is: and
can as occasion requires, make use of diverse sorts of Weapons, and choice of
such at all turns as are most proper and convenient; whereby we are enabled to
subdue and rule over all other Creatures; and use for our own behoof those
Qualities wherein they excel, as the Strength of the Ox, the Valor and
Swiftness of the Horse, the Sagacity and Vigilance of the Dog, and so make them
as it were our own. Had we wanted this Member in our Bodies, we must have lived
the Life of Brutes, without House or Shelter but what the Woods and Rocks would
have afforded; without Cloths or Covering; without Corn, or Wine, or Oil, or
any other Drink but Water; without the warmth and comfort, or other uses of
Fire, and so without any Artificial Baked, Boiled or Roast Meats; but must have
scrambled with the wild Beasts for Crabs, and Nuts, and Akhorns, and Sallets,
and such other things as the Earth puts forth of her own accord. We had lain
open and exposed to Injuries, and had been unable to resist or defend our
selves against almost the weakest Creature.

The remaining Parts I shall but briefly run over.

That the Backbone should be divided into so many Vertebres for commodious
bending, and not be one entire rigid Bone, which being of that length would
have been often in danger of snapping in sunder. That the several Vertebres
should be so Elegantly and Artificially compacted and joined together, that
they are as strong and firm as if they were but one Bone. That they should be
all perforated in the middle with a large hole for the spinal Marrow or Pith to
pass along; and each particular have a hole on each side to transmit the Nerves
to the Muscles of the Body, to convey both Sense and Motion.

That whereas the Breast is encompassed with Ribs, the Belly is left free; that
it might give way to the motion of the Midriff in Respiration; and to the
necessary Reception of Meat and Drink; as also for the convenient bending of
the Body; and in Females for that extraordinary extension that is requisite in
the time of their Pregnancy.

That the Stomach should be Membranous, and capable of Dilatation and
Contraction, according to the quantity of Meat contained in it; that it should
be situate under the Liver, which by its Heat might cherish it, and contribute
to Concoction: That it should be endued with an acid Ferment, or some
corruptive quality for so speedy a dissolution of the Meat, and preparation of
Chyle; that after Concoction it should have an ability of contracting itself
and turning out the Meat.

That the Bladder should be made of a membranous Substance, and so extremely
dilatable for receiving and containing the Urine, till opportunity of emptying
it; that it should have Shuts for the ends of the Ureters so artificially
contrived as to give the Urine free entrance, but to stop all passage backward,
so that they will not transmit the Wind, though it be strongly blown and forced
in.

That the Liver should continually separate the Choler from the Blood, and
empty it into the Intestines, where there is good use for it, not only to
provoke Dejection, but also to attenuate the Chyle and render it so subtle and
fluid as to enter in at the Orifices of the lacteous Veins.

Finally, That all the Bones, and all the Muscles, and all the Vessels of the
Body should be so admirably contrived, and adapted, and compacted together for
their several Motions and Uses, and that most Geometrically, according to the
strictest Rules of Mechanics, that if in the whole Body you change the Figure,
Situation, and Conjunction but of one Part, if you diminish or increase the
Bulk and Magnitude, in fine if you endeavor any Innovation or Alteration, you
mar and spoil instead of mending. How can all these things put together but
beget Wonder and Astonishment?

That under one Skin there should be such infinite variety of Parts, variously
mingled, hard with soft, fluid with fixed, solid with hollow, those in rest with
those in motion, some with cavities as Mortesses to receive, others with Tenons
to fit those cavities; all these so pact and thrust so close together that
there is no unnecessary Vacuity in the whole Body, and yet so far from clashing
or interfering one with another, or hindering each others Motions, that they do
all Friendly conspire, all help and assist mutually one the other, all concur
in one general End and Design, the good and preservation of the whole, are
certainly Arguments and Effects of infinite Wisdom and Counsel; so that he must
needs be worse than mad that can find in his Heart to imagine all these to be
casual and fortuitous, or not provided and designed by a most wise and
intelligent Cause.

I should now proceed to treat of the Generation and Formation of the Foetus in
the Womb; but that is a Subject too difficult for me to handle; the Body of Man
and other Animals being formed in the dark Recesses of the Matrix, or as the
Psalmist phrases it, Psalm. 139. 14. made in secret, and curiously wrought in
the lowest parts of the Earth. This Work is so admirable and unaccountable that
neither the Atheists nor mechanic Philosophers have attempted to declare the
manner and process of it; but have (as I noted before) very cautiously and
prudently broke off their Systems of Natural Philosophy here, and left this
point untoucht; And those Accounts which some of them have attempted to give of
the formation of a few of the parts, are so excessively absurd and ridiculous,
that they need no other Consutation than ha ha he. And I have already further
shown, that it seems to me impossible, that Matter divided into as minute and
subtle Parts as you will or can imagine, and those moved according to what
Catholic Laws soever can be devised, should without the presidency and
direction of some intelligent Agent, by the mere agitation of a gentle Heat,
run itself into such a curious Machine as the Body of Man is.

Yet must it be confessed, that the Seed of Animals is admirably qualified to be
fashioned and formed by the Plastic Nature into an Organical Body, containing
the Principles or component Particles of all the several homogeneous Parts
thereof; for indeed every part of the Body seems to club and contribute to the
Seed, else why should Parents that are born Blind or Deaf, or that want a
Finger or any other Part, or have one superfluous, sometimes generate Children
that have the same defects or imperfections; and yet (which is wonderful)
nothing of the Body or grosser matter of the Seed comes near the first
Principle of the Foetus, or in some so much as enters the Womb, but only some
contagious Vapor or subtle effluviums thereof. But to what shall we attribute
the Foetus its likeness to the Parents, or omitting them to the precedent
Progenitors, as I have observed some Parents that have been both black Hair'd
to have generated most red Hair'd Children, because their Ancestors Hair have
been of that Color, or why are Twins so often extremely alike; Whether is this
owing to the Efficient, or to the Matter?

These Effluvia we spoke of of the Male Seed, as subtle as they are, yet have
they a great, if not the greatest stroke in Generation, as is clearly
demonstrable in a Mule, which does more resemble the Male Parent, that is the
Ass, than the Female or Horse. But now why such different Species should not
only mingle together, but also generate an Animal, and yet that that hybridous
Production should not again generate, and so a new Race be carried on; but
Nature should stop here and proceed no further, is to me a Mystery and
unaccountable.

One thing relating to Generation I cannot omit, that is, the construction of a
set of temporary Parts, (like Scaffolds in a Building) to serve a present End,
which are afterward laid aside, afford a strong Argument of Counsel and
Design. Now for the use of the Young during its enclosure in the Womb there are
several Parts formed, as the Membranes inveloping it, called the Secundines,
the umbilical Vessels, one Vein and two Arteries, the Urachus, to convey the
Urine out of the Bladder, and the placenta uterina; part whereof fall away at
the Birth, as the Secundines and Placenta, others degenerate into Ligaments, as
the Urachus, and part of the umbilical Vein: Besides which, because the foetus
during its abode in the Womb has no use of respiration by the Lungs, the Blood
does not all, I may say not the greatest part of it, flow through them, but
there are two Passages or Channels contrived, one called the foramen ovale, by
which part of the Blood brought by the vena cava passes immediately into the
left Ventricle of the Heart, without entering the right at all; the other is a
large arterial Channel passing from the pulmonary Artery immediately into the
Aorta, or great Artery, which likewise derives part of the Blood thither,
without running at all into the Lungs: These two are closed up soon after the
Child is born, when it breaths no more (as I may so say) by the Placenta
uterina, but respiration by the Lungs is needful for it. It is here to be
noted, that though the Lungs be formed so soon as the other Parts, yet during
the abode of the foetus in the Womb, they lie by as useless. In like manner I
have observed that in ruminating Creatures the three foremost Stomachs, not only
during the continuance of the Young in the Womb, but so long as it is fed with
Milk are unemployed and useless, the Milk passing immediately into the fourth.

Another Observation I shall add concerning Generation, which is of some
moment, because it takes away some concessions of Naturalists, that give
countenance to the Atheists fictitious and ridiculous Account of the first
production of Mankind and other Animals; viz. that all sorts of Insects, yea
and some Quadrupeds too, as Frogs and Mice, are produced Spontaneously. My
Observation and Affirmation is, that there is no such thing in Nature, as
Aequivocal or Spontaneous Generation, but that all Animals, as well small as
great, not excluding the vilest and most contemptible Insect, are generated by
Animal Parents of the same Species with themselves; that noble Italian
Vertuoso, Francesco Redi having experimented that no putrified Flesh (which one
would think were the most likely of any thing) will of itself, if all Insects
be carefully kept from it, produce any: The same Experiment I remember Doctor
Wilkins late Bishop of Chester told me had been made by some of the Royal
Society. No instance against this Opinion does so much puzzle me, as Worms bred
in the Intestines of Man and other Animals. But seeing the round Worms do
manifestly generate, and probably the other kinds too; it is likely they come
originally from Seed, which how it was brought into the Guts, may afterward
possibly be discovered. Moreover I am inclinable to believe that all Plants
too, that themselves produce Seed, (which are all but some very imperfect ones,
which scarce deserve the name of Plants) come of Seeds themselves. For that
great Naturalist Malpighius, to make experiment whether Earth would of its self
put forth Plants, took some purposely dug out of a deep Place, and put it
into a Glass Vessel, the top whereof he covered with Silk many times doubled
and strained over it, which would admit the Water and Air to pass through, but
exclude the least Seed that might be wafted by the Wind; the event was that no
Plant at all sprang up in it; nor need we wonder how in a Ditch, Bank or
Grass-Plat newly dig'd, or in the Fenbanks in the Isle of Ely Mustard should
abundantly spring up, where in the Memory of Man none had been known to grow,
for it might come of Seed which had lain there more than a Man's Age. Some of
the Ancients mentioning some Seeds that retain their fecundity Forty Years: As
for the Mustard that sprung up in the Isle of Ely, though there never had been
any in that Country, yet might it have been brought down in the Channels by the
Floods, and so being thrown up the Banks together with the Earth, might
germinate and grow there.

From this Discourse concerning the Body of Man I shall make Three Practical
Inferences.

First, Let us give thanks to Almighty Infer. 1.
God for the Perfection and Integrity of our Bodies. It would not be amiss to
put it into the Eucharistical parr of our daily Devotions: We praise thee O God
for the due Number, Shape and Use of our Limbs and Senses, and in general of
all the Parts of our Bodies; we bless thee for the sound and healthful
Constitution of them; It is thou that have made us and not we our selves; in
thy Psalm. 100.
Book were all our Members written. The Mother that bears the Child in her Womb
is not conscious to any thing that is done there; she understands no more how
the Infant is formed than itself does. But if God has bestowed upon us any
peculiar Gift or Endowment, wherein we excel others, as Strength, or Beauty or
Activity, we ought to give him special thanks for it, but not to think the
better of our selves therefore, or despise them that want it.

Now because these Bodily Perfections, being common Blessings, we are apt not
at all to consider them, or not to set a just value on them; and because the
worth of things is best discerned by their want; it would be useful sometimes
to imagine or suppose our selves by some accident to be deprived of one of our
Limbs or Senses, as a Hand, or a Foot, or an Eye, for then we cannot but be
sensible, that we should be in worse condition than now we are, and that we
should soon find a difference between two Hands and one Hand, two Eyes and one
Eye, and that two excel one as much in worth as they do in number; and yet if
we could spare the use of the lost part, the deformity and unsightlyness of
such a defect in the Body, would alone be very grievous to us. Again, which is
less, suppose we only, that our Bodies want of their just magnitude, or that
they or any of our Members are crooked or distorted, or disproportionate to the
rest either in excess or defect; nay, which is least of all, that the due
motion of any one part be perverted, as but of the Eyes in squinting, the
Eyelids in twinkling, the Tongue in stammering, these things are such
Blemishes and Offenses to us, by making us Gazing-stocks to others, and Objects
of their Scorn and Derision, that we could be content to part with a good part
of our Estates to repair such defects, or heal such Infirmities. These things
considered and duly weighed, would surely be a great and effectual motive to
excite in us Gratitude for this Integrity of our Bodies, and to esteem it no
small blessing, I say a blessing and favor of God to us; for some there be that
want it, and why might not we have been of that number? God was no way obliged
to bestow it upon us.

And as we are to give thanks for the Integrity of our Body, so are we likewise
for the Health of it, and the sound Temper and Constitution of all its Parts
and Humors; Health being the principal blessing of this Life, without which we
cannot enjoy or take comfort in any thing besides.

Neither are we to give thanks alone for the first collation of these Benefits,
but also for their preservation and continuance. God preserves our Souls in
Life, and defends us from Dangers and sad Accidents, which do so beset us on
every side, that the greatest circumspection in the World could not secure us,
did not his good Providence continually watch over us. We may be said to walk
and converse in the midst of Snares; besides, did we but duly consider the Make
and Frame of our Bodies, what a multitude of minute Parts and Vessels there are
in them, and how an Obstruction in one redounds to the prejudice of the whole,
we could not but wonder how so curious an Engine as man's Body, could be kept in
Tune one Hour, as we use it, much less hold out so many Years: How it were
possible it should endure such hardship, such blows, so many shocks and
concussions, nay such violences and outrages as are offered it by our frequent
Excesses, and not be disordered and rendered useless; and acknowledge the
transcendent Art and Skill of Him who so put it together, as to render it thus
firm and durable.

Secondly, Did God make the Body, let Infer. 2.
him have the service of it. Romans 12. 1. I beseech you, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that you present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorify
God in your Body, or with your Body, and in your spirits, which are Gods, and
that not by Redemption only, of which the Apostle there speaks, but by Creation
also. Romans 6. 13. Neither yield ye your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, but as instruments of righteousness unto God. And
again Ver. 19. Even so now yield your members servants of righteousness unto
holiness. I shall instance in two Members, which are especially to be guarded
and restrained from Evil, and employed in the service of God.

First, The Eye. We must turn away our eyes from beholding Vanity, as David
prayed, God would his, Psalm. 119. 37. We must make a Covenant with our Eyes, as
Job did, Job 31. 1. These are the Windows that let in exterior Objects to the
Soul: by these the Heart is affected: this way Sin entered first into the World.
Our first Parents saw that the Tree and its fruit was pleasant to the eyes, and
so was invited to take and eat it. There are four sins especially for which the
Eye is noted, as either discovering themselves in the Eyes, or whose
Temptations enter in by, and so give denomination to the Eye.

2. There is a proud Eye. Prove. 30. 13. There is a generation, O how lofty are
their eyes, and their eye lids are lifted up. Chap. 6. 17. A proud look is
reckoned the first of those six things that God hates, Psalm. 18. 27. God (the
Psalmist says) will bring down proud or high looks. Psalm 101. 5. Him that
has a high look and a proud heart (says David,) I will not suffer. And in
Psalm. 131. 1. He says of himself, that his heart is not haughty nor his eyes
lofty. By which places it appears that Pride shows forth it self in the
Eyes especially, and that they are as it were the Seat or Throne of it.

2. There is a wanton Eye, which the Prophet Isaiah speaks of in his third
Chapter, at the 16th Verse, Because the Daughters of Jerusalem walk with
stretched out Necks, and wanton Eyes. The Apostle Peter in his second Epistle,
2. 24. mentions Eyes full of Adultery. For by these Casements enter in such
Objects as may provoke and stir up adulterous Thoughts in the mind, as they did
in David's, and likewise impure Thoughts conceived in the heart may discover
themselves by the motions of the Eye. And therefore in this respect we should
do well with holy Job, to make a Covenant with our Eyes; not to gaze upon any
Object which may tempt us to any inordinate Appetite or Desire. For our Savior
tells us, it were better to pluck out our right eye, than that it should be an
offense to us: which I suppose refers to this matter, because it immediately
follows those words, He that looks upon a Woman to lust after her has
already committed Adultery with her in his heart.

3. There is a covetous Eye. By Covetousness I understand not only a desiring
what is another man's, which is forbidden in the tenth Commandment, but also an
inordinate desire of Riches, which the Apostle John seems to understand in his
first Epistle, 2. 16. By the lust of the Eye. And Covetousness may well be
called the lust of the Eye, because 1. The Temptation or tempting Object enters
by the Eye. So the seeing the wedg of Gold and Babylonish Garment stirred up
the covetous desire in Achan. 2. Because all the fruit a man reaps of Riches
more than will furnish his Necessities and Conveniences, is the feeding of his
Eye, or the pleasure he takes in the beholding of them. Eccles. 5. 11. When
goods increase, etc. what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the
beholding them with their Eyes?

Fourthly, There is an envious Eye, which by our Savior is called an evil Eye.
Mat. 20. 15: Is thine Eye evil because I am good. That is, enviest thou thy
Brother because I am kind to him. And 7. 22. One of those evil things which
proceed out of the Heart and defile a Man is an evil eye. Envy is a repining at
the Prosperity or Good of another, or anger and displeasure at any good of
another which we want, or any advantage another has above us: As in the
Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, those that came in first envied the
last, not because they received more than they, but because they received equal
wages for less time. Those that are subject to this Vice cannot endure to see
another man thrive; and are apt to think his condition better than theirs when
indeed it is not.

Let us then so govern our Eyes, that we discover by them none of these Vices.
Let the humility and purity of our Minds appear even in our outward looks. Let
neither Pride nor Lust manifest themselves in the Posture or Motions of our
Eyes. Let us have a care that these Members be neither the inlets, nor outlets
of any of the fore mentioned Vices; that they neither give admission to the
Temptation, nor be expressive of the Conception of them. Let us employ them in
reading the Word of God, and other good Books, for the increase of our
Knowledge, and direction of our Practice: in diligently viewing and
contemplating the Works of the Creation, that we may discern and admire the
Footsteps of the Divine Wisdom easily to be traced in the Formation,
Disposition, and Designations of them. Let us take notice of any extraordinary
Events and Effects of Gods Providence toward our selves or others, personal or
national: that as they are the issues of his Mercy or Justice, they may stir up
suitable affections in us, of Thankfulness or Fear. Let those sad and miserable
Objects, that present themselves to our sight move us to pity and
commiseration: And let our Eyes sometimes be exercised in weeping for the
miseries and calamities of others, but especially for our own and their Sins.

Secondly, Another Member I shall mention is the Tongue, which as it is the
chief Instrument of Speech, so may it be well or ill employed in the exercise
of that Action, and therefore stands in need of Direction and Restraint. I
remember I once heard from an ingenious Anatomist of Padua this Observation,
That there are but two Members in the Body that have a natural Bridle, both
which do very much need it; the Tongue, and another I shall not name. The
signification whereof may be, that they are not to be let loose, but diligently
curbed and held in. For the better Government of the Tongue, I shall note some
Vices of Speech, which must carefully be avoided. First of all Loquacity or
Garrulity. This the contrivance of our Mouths suggests to us. Our Tongues are
fenced and guarded with a double Wall or Mound of Lips and Teeth, that our
Words might not rashly and unadvisedly slip out. Then Nature has furnished us
with two Ears, and but one Tongue, to intimate that we must hear twice so much
as we speak. Why Loquacity is to be avoided, the wise Man gives us a sufficient
reason, Prove. 10. 19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin. And
Eccles. 5. 7. In many words there are diverse vanities. To which we may add
another, of great force with most Men, viz. That it has been always esteemed
an Effect and Argument of Folly. Eccles, 5. 3. A fools voice is known by
multitude of words. And on the contrary, To be of few Words is a sign of
Wisdom: and he that is wise enough to be silent, though a Fool, may pass
undiscovered. Besides all this, a talkative Person must needs be impertinent,
and speak many idle Words, and so render himself burthensom and odious to
Company: and may perchance run himself upon great incoveniences, by blabbing
out his own or others secrets; for a word once uttered, fugit irrevocabile,
whatever the consequence of it be. Great need therefore have we to set a watch
over our Mouths, and to keep the Door of our Lips; and not suffer our Tongues
runs before the Understanding or Wit.
(...); as Isocrates phraseth it.

Secondly, Lying or False Speaking. There is difference between Mentiri and
Mendacium dicere, that is Lying, and speaking of an untruth, or thing that is
False. Mentiri is contra mentem ire, which though it be no good Etymology of
the Word, is a good Notion of the Thing; that is, to go again stones Mind, or
speak what one does not think. (...), as Homer expresses it, to conceal one
thing in the Mind, and speak another with the Tongue. Hence a Man may Speak an
untruth, and yet not Lie, when, he thinks he speaks the Truth; and on the
contrary, may speak what is materially True, and yet Lie, when he speaks what
he thinks not to be true. The Tongue was made to be the Index of the Mind,
Speech the Interpreter of Thought; therefore there ought to be a perfect
Harmony and Agreement between these two. So that Lying is a great abuse of
Speech, and a perverting the very end of it, which was to communicate our
Thoughts one to another. It has also an ill Principle for the most part,
proceeding either from baseness of Spirit or Cowardice, as in them that have
committed a fault, and deny it, for fear of Punishment or Rebuke: or from
Covetousness, as in Tradesmen who falsely commend their Commodities, that they
may vend them for a greater Price; or from Vanity and vain Glory, in them who
falsely boast of any Quality or Action of their own. It is odious both to God
and Man. To God, Prove. 6. 17. A lying tongue is one of those six or seven
things that are an abomination to him. To Men, as Homer witnesses in the verse
preceding the fore-quoted. (...), etc.

He that tells Lies is as hateful to me as the Gates of Hell or Death. -- The
Practice of Lying is a Diabolical Exercise, and they that use it are the Devils
Children, as our Savior tells us. John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil,
etc. for he is a liar, and the father of it. And lastly, it is a Sin that
excludes out of Heaven, and depresses the Soul into Hell. Revel. 21, 8. All
liars shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death.

Thirdly, Another Vice or Abuse of Speech, or vicious Action to which the
Tongue is instrumental is slandering; that is raising a false Report of any Man
tending to his Defamation. This might have been comprehended under the former
head, being but a kind of Lying proceeding from enmity or ill will. It is a
very great injury to our Neighbor, men's Reputation being as dear to them as
Life itself; so that it is grown to be a Proverb among the Vulgar, Take away my
good Name and take away my Life. And that which enhances this injury is that it
is irreparable. We cannot by any contrary Declaration so clear the innocence of
our Neighbor as wholly to extirpate the preconceived Opinion, out of the Minds
of those to whom our confession comes; and many will remain whom the Calumny
has reached, to whom the vindication probably will not extend; the pravity of
man's Nature being more apt to spread and divulge an ill Report than to stop and
silence it. I might instance in Flattering of others, and boasting of our
selves for two abuses of Speech, but they may both be referred to Lying, the
one to please others, and puff them up with Self-Conceit, and a false Opinion
that they have some excellent Quality or Endowment which they want, or have not
in such a Degree, or that they are better thought of by others than indeed they
are, and more honored: The other to gain more honor than is due to them.

Fourthly, Obscene and impure Words are another vicious Effect of the Tongue.
Those are principally the (...), rotten Speeches the Apostle speaks of Ephesians. 5.
29. Such as chaste Ears abhor, which tend only to the depraving and corrupting
the hearers: and are to be studiously and carefully avoided by all that pretend
to Christianity. Ephesians. 5, 3. But fornication and all uncleanness let it not be
once named among you.

Fifthly, Cursing, and Railing or reviling Words are also a great abuse of
Speech, and outrageous Effects and Expressions of Malice and Wickedness. Psalm.
10. 7. The Psalmist makes it part of the Character of a wicked Man, that His
mouth is full of cursing. Which passage we have quoted by the Apostle Romans 3.
14. Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.

Sixthly, Swearing and Irreverent using the Name of God in common Discourse and
Converse, is another abuse of the Tongue; to which I might add vehement
Asseverations upon slight and trivial occasions. I do not deny, but in a
matter of Weight and Moment, which will bear out such attestation, and where
belief will not be obtained without them, and yet it may much import the Hearer
or Speaker that his Words be believed, or where the hearer would not otherwise
think the matter so momentous or important as indeed it is, Protestations and
Asseverations, yea Oaths may Lawfully be used. But to call God to Witness to an
Untruth or a Lie perhaps, or to appeal to Him on every trivial occasion, in
common Discourse, customarily, without any consideration of what we say, is one
of the highest Indignities and Affronts that can be offered Him, being a Sin to
which there is no Temptation: For it is so far from gaining Belief (which is
the only thing that can with any show of Reason be pleaded for it) that it
rather creates diffidence and distrust. For as mult a fidem promiss a levant,
so mult a Juramenta too, it being become a Proverb He that will Swear will Lie.
And good Reason there is for it; for he that scruples not the breach of one of
Gods Commands, is not likely to make Conscience of the violation of another.

Lastly, For I will name no more, Scurrilous Words, Scoffing and Jeering,
Flouting and Taunting, are to be censured as vicious Abuses of Speech.

This Scoffing and Derision proceeds from Contempt, and that of all injuries
Men do most impatiently bear; nothing offends more, or wounds deeper; and
therefore what greater violation of that general Rule of Christian Practice, to
do to others as we would they should do unto us? This injury of being Derided
the Psalmist himself complains of, Psalm 69. 11, 12. I became a proverb to
them. They that sit in the Gate speak against me, and I was the song of the
Drunkards. And Psalm 35. 15, according to the Church Translation, The very
Abjects came together against me unawares, making mows at me, and ceased not.
and the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 20. 7. I am in derision daily, every one mocketh
me. And though there may be some Wit shown in Scoffing and Jesting upon others,
yet is it a Practice inconsistent with true Wisdom. The Scorner and the wise
Man are frequently posed in Scripture. Prove. 9. 8. and Chap. 13. 1, etc. It is
a Proverbial saying, The greatest Clerks are not always the wisest men. I think
the saying might as often be verified of the greatest Wits. Scorning in that
Gradation in the first Psalm is set down as the highest step of Wickedness. And
Solomon tells us That judgments are prepared for the Scorners.

You will say to me, how then must our Tongues be employed? I Answer, In
Praises and Thanksgiving unto God. Psalm 35. 28. And my tongue shall speak of
thy righteousness and of thy praises all the day long. Parallel whereto is
Verse. 24. of Psalm 71. Indeed the Book of Psalms is in a great measure but an
Exercise of, or Exhortation to this Duty. 2. We must exercise our Tongues in
Talking of all his wondrous Works. Psalm 145. 5, 6. I will speak of the
glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous works. 3. In Prayer to God.
4. In Confession of Him and of his Religion, and publicly owning it before
Men, whatever the hazard be. 5. In Teaching, Instructing and Counselling of
others. 6. In Exhorting them. 7. In Comforting them that need it. 8. In
Reproving them. All which Particulars I might enlarge upon; but because they
come in here only as they refer to the Tongue, it may suffice to have mentioned
them summarily.

Thirdly, Let us hence duly learn to prize and value our Souls; is the Body
such a rare Piece, what then is the Soul? the Body is but the Husk or Shell,
the Soul is the Kernel; the Body is but the Cask, the Soul the precious Liquor
contained in it; the Body is but the Cabinet, the Soul the Jewel; the Body is
but the Ship or Vessel, the Soul the Pilot; the Body is but the Tabernacle, and
a poor Clay Tabernacle or Cottage, the Soul the Inhabitant; the Body is but the
Machine or Engine, the Soul that (...), that actuates and quickens it; the Body
is but the dark Lanthorn, the Soul or Spirit is the Candle of the Lord that
burns in it: And seeing there is such difference between the Soul and the Body
in respect of Excellency, surely our better Part challenges our greatest care
and diligence to make Provision for it. Bodily Provision is but half Provision,
it is but for one Part of a Man, and that the meaner and more ignoble too, if
we consider only the time of this Life; but if we consider a future Estate of
endless duration after this Life, then Bodily Provision will appear to be, I do
not say quarter Provision, but no Provision at all in comparison, there being
no proportion between so short a period of time, and the infinite Ages of
Eternity. Let us not then be so foolish as to employ all our thoughts and
bestow all our time and pains about cherishing, accommodating and gratifying
our Bodies, in making Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, as
the Apostle phraseth it; and suffer our Souls to lie by neglected, in a
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked condition. Some Philosophers will not
allow the Body to be an essential Part of Man, but only the Vessel or Vehicle
of the Soul; Anima cujusque est quisque. Though I would not be so unequal to
it, yet I must needs acknowledge it to be but an inferior Part: it is therefore
so to be treated, so dieted and provided as to render it most calm and
compliant with the Soul, most tractable and obsequious to the dictates of
Reason; not so pampered and indulged, as to encourage it to cast its Rider, and
to take the Reins into its own Hand, and usurp Dominion over the better part,
the (...), to sink and depress it into a sordid compliance with its own Lusts,
Atque affigere humi Divinae particulam aurae.

This is our Duty, but alas what is our Practice? Our great partiality toward
our Bodies, and neglect of our Souls, shows clearly which Part we prefer. We
are careful enough of wounding or maiming our Bodies, but we make bold to lash
and wound our Souls daily; for every Sin we commit, being contrary to its
Nature, is a real Stripe yea a mortal Wound to the Soul, and we shall find it
to be so, if our Consciences be once awakened to feel the Sting and Smart of
it. We are industrious enough to preserve our Bodies from Slavery and Thraldom,
but we make nothing of suffering our Souls to be Slaves and Drudges to our
Lusts, and to live in the vilest Bondage to the most degenerate of Creatures,
the Devil: We are thrifty and provident enough not to part with any thing that
may be serviceable to our Bodies under a good consideration, and we so esteem
them, as that we will part with all we have for the life of them; but we make
little account of what is most beneficial to our Souls, the means of Grace and
Salvation, the Word of God and Duties of his Worship and Service, nay we can be
content to sell our Souls themselves for a Trifle, for a thing of nothing, yea
for what is worse than nothing, the satisfying of an inordinate and
unreasonable Appetite or Passion. We highly esteem and stand much upon our
Nobility, our Birth and Breeding, though we derive nothing from our Ancestors
but our Bodies and Corporeal Qualities; and it is useful so far to value and
improve this Advantage, as to provoke us to imitate the good Examples of our
Progenitors, not to degenerate from them, nor to do any thing unworthy of our
Breeding; and yet the divine Original of our Souls, which are Beams from the
Father of Lights, and the immediate Offspring of God himself, (...), has
little influence upon us to engage us to walk worthily of our extraction, and
to do nothing that is base or ignoble, and unsuitable to the Dignity of our
Birth.

You will say, how shall we manifest our Care of our Souls? what shall we do
for them? I answer, the same we do for our Bodies. 1. We feed our Bodies, our
Souls are also to be fed: The Food of the Soul is Knowledge, especially knowledge
in the Things of God, and the Things that concern its eternal Peace and
Happiness; the Doctrine of Christianity, the Word of God read and preached, 1.
Pet. 2. 2. As new born Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word that ye may
grow thereby. Heb. 5. 12. The Apostle speaks both of Milk and of strong Meat.
Milk he there calls the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and again, 1.
Cor. 2. 3. I have fed you with Milk and not with Meat, for hitherto ye were not
able to bear it. So we see in the Apostles phrase, feeding of the Flock is
teaching and instructing of them. Knowledge is the Foundation of Practice; it is
impossible to do Gods Will before we know it; the Word must be received into an
honest and good Heart and understood, before any Fruit can be brought forth.

Secondly, We heal and cure our Bodies, when they are inwardly Sick, or
outwardly Harmed; Sin is the sickness of the Soul, Matthew. 9. 12. They that be
whole need not a Physician, but they that be Sick, says our Savior, by way of
Similitude, which he explains in the next Verse, I am not come to call the
Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. For the cure of this Disease an humble,
serious, hearty Repentance is the only Physic; not to expiate the Guilt of it,
but to qualify us to partake of the benefit of that Atonement which our
Savior Christ has made, by the sacrifice of himself, and restore us to the
Favor of God, which we had forfeited, it being as much as in us lies an undoing
again what we have done.

Thirdly, We cloth and adorn our Bodies, our Souls also are to be clothed with
holy and virtuous Habits, and adorned with good Works. 1. Pet. 5. 5. Be ye
clothed with Humility; and in the same Epistle, Chap. 2. 3. he exhorts Women to
adorn themselves, not with that outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of
wearing Gold, etc. but with the Ornament of a meek and a quiet Spirit, which is
in the Sight of God of great price. And in Revel. 19. 8. The righteousness of
the Saints is called fine linen. And the Saints are said to be clothed in
white raiment. Matt. 23. 11. Works of Righteousness, and a Conversation
becoming the Gospel is called a wedding garment. Coloss. 3. 10. Put on the new
man. And again, Put on therefore as the Elect of God bowels of mercy, meekness,
etc. On the contrary vicious Habits and sinful Actions are compared to filthy
Garments. So Zechar. 3. 3. Joshua the High Priest is said to be clothed with
filthy garments; which in the next Verse are Interpreted his Iniquities either
Personal or of the People, whom he Represented, I have caused thy iniquity to
pass from thee, and will cloth thee with change of raiment.

Fourthly, We Arm and Defend our Bodies. And our Souls have as much need of
Armor as they: For the Life of a Christian is a continual Warfare; and we have
potent and vigilant Enemies to encounter withal; the Devil, the World and this
corrupt Flesh we carry about with us. We had need therefore to take to us the
Christian Panoply, to Put on the whole armor of God, that we may withstand in
the evil day, and having done all may stand; having our loins girt with truth,
and having the breast plate of righteousness, and our feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace. Above all taking the shield of faith, and
for an helmet the hope of Salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God. Ephesians. 6. 13, 14, etc.

He that with his Christian Armor manfully Fights against and Repels the
Temptations and Assaults of his Spiritual Enemies. He that keeps his Garments
pure, and his Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward Man, shall
enjoy perfect Peace here, and Assurance for Ever. Tacitus says of the Finni, a
Northern People, that they were securi adversus homines, securi adversus Deos.
They need not fear what God or Man could do to them, because they were in as
bad a condition as could consist with living in the World: They could not be
Banished into a worse Country, nor put into worse circumstances than they were
in already. I might say of the Man that keeps a good Conscience, that he is
secure against God and Man; not in that Sense the Finni were; but secure of any
Evil befalling him, from either. God can do him no harm, not for want of Power,
but for want of Will, which is regulated by his Truth and Justice. He is also
secure in respect of Men, because he is under the Protection of the Almighty:
and if any there be that would do him harm, they shall either be restrained by
the Divine Providence, or if they be permitted to injure him, it shall tend
only to the exercise and improvement of his Faith and Patience, and enhancing
his future Reward at that great Day, when the Almighty shall dispense Aureolae
to those Champions who have signalized their Valor and Fidelity by heroic
Actions, or patient Sufferings of unworthy things for his Sake. 3. A good
Conscience not only secures a Man from God and Men, but from himself too. There
is no peace to the wicked, says my God, no inward Peace. Such a Man is at odds
with himself. For the Commandments of God being agreeable to the Nature of Man,
and perfectly conformable to the Dictates of right Reason; man's Judgment gives
Sentence with the Divine Law, and condemns him when he violates any of them;
and so the Sinner becomes an Heautontimorumenos, a Tormenter of himself. Prima
est haec ultio, quod se Judice nemo nocens absolvitur. No guilty Person is
Absolved at his own Tribunal, himself being Judge.

Neither let any profligate Person, who has bidden Defiance to his Conscience,
and is at War with himself, think to take Sanctuary in Atheism, and because it
imports him highly there should be no God, stoutly deny that there is any. For
First, supposing that the Existence of a Deity were not demonstrably or
infallibly Proved, (as it most certainly is) yet he cannot be sure of the
contrary, that there is none. For no Man can be sure of a pure Negative, namely
that such a thing is not, unless he will either pretend to have a certain
knowledge of all Things that are or may be, than which nothing can be more
monstrously and ridiculously Arrogant; or else unless he be sure that the Being
of what he denies does imply a contradiction; for which there is not the least
Color in this Case. The true Notion of God consisting in this, That he is a
Being of all possible perfection. That I may borrow my Lord Bishop of Chesters
Words in his Discourse of Natural Religion, Page 94.

Now if he be not sure there is no Deity, he cannot be without some suspicion
and fear that there may be one.

Secondly, If there should be a Deity, so Holy and Just and Powerful as is
supposed, what Vengeance and Indignation may such vile Miscreants and Rebels
expect, who have made it their business to banish Him out of the World who is
the Great Creator and Governor of it, to undermine his Being, and Eradicate
all Notions of Him out of their own and other men's Minds; to provoke his
Creatures and Vassals to a Contempt of Him, a sleighting of his Fear and
Worship, as being but such imaginary Chimaera's, as are fit only to keep Fools
in awe. Certainly as this is the highest provocation that any Man can be guilty
of, so shall it be Punished with the sorest Vengeance.

Now a slender suspicion of the Existence of a Being, the denial whereof is of
so sad consequence, must needs disturb the Atheists Thoughts, and fill him with
fears, and qualify and allay all his Pleasures and Enjoyments, and render him
miserable even in this Life.

But on the other side, he that believes and owns a God; if there should be
none, is in no danger of any bad consequent. For all the inconvenience of this
Belief will be, that he may be hereby occasioned to tie himself up to some
needless restraints during this short time of his Life, wherein notwithstanding
there is, as to the present, much Peace, Quiet, and Safety; And, as to the
future, his error shall die with him, there being none to call him to an
Account for his mistake. Thus far the Bishop. To which I shall add, that he not
only suffers no damage, but reaps a considerable benefit from this mistake; for
during this Life he enjoys a pleasant Dream or Fancy of a future blessed
Estate, with the Thoughts and Expectation whereof he solaces himself, and
agreeably entertains his time; and is in no danger of being ever awakened out
of it, and convinced of his Error and Folly, Death making a full end of him.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Samuel Smith.
JO. Raise Historia Plantarum. 2 Vol. Fol. 1686.

-- Synopsis Methodica Stirpium Britannicarum, cum Indice and Virium Epit.

Newton Philosophia Naturalis principia Mathemat. 40.

R. Morton. Exercitationes de Phthisii. 8o. 1689.

G. Harris de Morbis acutis Infantum. 8o. 1689.

Pharmacopeia Bateana, cum Arcanis Goddardianis, etc. 1691.

Shipton Pharmacopeia-Col. Reg. Londini remedia omnia. 12o. 1690.

Plukenetii Stripium illustr. and minus cognitarum Icones. Fol. 1691.

Haver's new Observation of the Bones, and Marrow, of Rheumatisms and Gout,
etc. 1691.

Practical Christianity, or such Holiness as the Gospel enjoins 8o.

An Enquiry after Happiness by the Author of Pract. Christianity 8o.

Human Life; being a 2. Part of Enquiry after Happiness. 8o. 1690.

The Duty of Servants toward God, their Masters, etc. by the same Author.

A Sermon Preached at Mr. T. Lamb's Funeral, by the same Author.

A Sermon about frequent Communion, by Dr. Tho. Smith. 4o.

A Practical Discourse of the Causes, and Remedies of the Differences about
Religion; which distract the Peace of Christendom. 4o.

The History of the Persecutions of the Protestants, by the French King, in the
Principality of Orange. 4o.

The State of the Church of Rome, when the Reformation began. 4o.

Visions of Pasquin, or a Character of the Roman Court, Religion and Practices;
with a curious Description of Purgatory, and Hell. 4o.

The School of the Eucharist, or the Miraculous Acknowledgments which Birds,
Beasts and Insects have rendered to the Holy Sacrament of the Altar. 8o.

Art of Divine Converse, by D. Abercromby.

The Life of St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi, a Carmelite Nun; with the Nature,
Causes and Consequences of Ecstasy and Rapture, etc. 4o.

R. Boyle's Veneration Man's Intellect ows to God. 8o.

-- Hydrostaticks applied to the Materia Medicam. 8o.

-- Effects of Languid Local Motion; and the Causes of the Insalubrity and
Salubrity of the Air. 8o.

-- Natural and Experimental History of Mineral Waters. 8o.

-- Virtues of Specific Medicines, and the Use of Simple Medicines 8o.

-- Of the Porousness of Animal and Solid Bodies. 8o.

-- Experimental History of Cold. 4o.

-- Skeptical Chemist. 8o.


