A PERSUASIVE TO A Holy Life: FROM THE HAPPINESS That attends it both in this
World, and in the World to come.

By JOHN RAY, F. R. S. Some time Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed by Sam Smith, and Benj. Walford, Printers to the Royal
Society, at the Prince's-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCC.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving been desired by a learned and pious Mr. Edmund Elys.
Friend to draw up such a Persuasive as I now present the Reader with, finding
my self well at leisure from other Business; and considering that it was
suitable to my Profession, and present Condition; as being conducive to my
preparation for that change which the pains and infirmities I labored under
seemed to threaten the near approach of; and might possibly be in some measure
useful and beneficial to others: I was easily induced to comply with his
Request, and to employ those Intervals I had of ease or remission of pain, in
Meditations upon this Subject. I do not pretend to any thing new, or not
delivered by others. Practical Divinity and Morality are such beaten Subjects,
and have exercised the Wits and Pens of so many thinking men, that there is
nothing of this nature can be said or written, which has not already been so.
But because not every man, nay scarce any man, has read all that has been
written upon this, or any other Subject, something new to every Reader may
perchance occur in this Writing: And yet if there does not, it may not be
unprofitable to read the same things over again, as the Apostle in effect
says, Philip. But to do every man right, I must acknowledge my self to have
borrowed a good part of my Matter out of the Right Reverend Father in God, Dr.
John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of Chester, his Treatise of Natural Religion;
wherein he has in my judgment written so well concerning the Happiness that
attends a Religious Life in this World, that little which is material can be
added; and therefore I might well have spared my pains: Only this Tractate may
possibly fall into the hands of some who never saw, nor would else have seen
that; and recommend to them the reading of the whole.

Two or three things I have to add to this Discourse, which may be inserted in
their places.
Page 10. ad finem.
YET ought we not to rest contented with this degree of love to God, but to
labor after that which is more ardent and passionate; else how can we satisfy
our selves in a time of Temptation, that our Obedience to God's Commands
proceeds not rather from a Principle of Fear, or Self love, than of love to God.

Page 67. Line 28.
Indeed we are so made, as not much to value that which cost us no pains; and
on the contrary, as Dr. Cockburn well observes, the Mind of Man is never so
well pleased, as when it uses its Reason, and always takes most delight in the
things which it self has wrought. And therefore, as he proceeds, it was, and
is wisely provided, to set the Necessaries, the Comfor^s, and Conveniences of
Life at some distance from Laziness and Sloth, and to hedge them about with
some difficulties, that while we search and labor for them, we may at the same
time, and by the same means improve our Intellectual Faculties, and carry on
the growth and perfection of our Souls. I might add, That the labor and
exercise of the Body does also conduce much to the Health and Strength, and
Well-being of that. For as Hypocrates well says, (...), unslothfulness in
Labor, if I may make such a Word, is the means to preserve health.

2ly. Not only Bodily Necessaries, but the knowledge of the Mysteries of
Nature, and the Works of God, and curious Mathematical Speculation, is not to
be obtained without Study and Industry. But by this use and exercise of our
Intellectual Faculties, our Mind and understanding is highly advanced and
improved to such a degree, as suddenly to penetrate and comprehend the most
abstruse and subtle Inventions and Notions of Naturalists and Mathematicians.
For as Weapons and Utensils by lying by unoccupied do contract a Scurf or Rust,
but do usu and tractatione splendescere; become bright by handling and use, so
do our Understandings also. And though this study and contention of mind be
laborious and painful, yet the enlarging the Understanding, and acquisition of
Knowledge, and hitting upon useful Discoveries and Inventions, do abundantly
compensate for that; nay, sometimes fill the Mind with unspeakable joy and
pleasure. Pythagoras was so overjoyed at the invention of the 49th Proposition
of the First Book of Euclide's El. that he sacrificed a Hecatombe to the Gods:
And I have read of a Smith, that upon the invention of an Engine to make Water
to ascend by descending, which was nothing else but Archimedes his Screw, and
which had been invented, long before, though he knew nothing of it, was so
overwhelmed with joy, that it broke his Brains, and quite distracted him.

3dly, No wonder then that Virtue which is the most excellent of all
acquisitions should be difficult to attain. Indeed the difficulty and labor of
attaining and exercising of it, makes it to be commendable or rewardable. And
therefore though it be in it self an excellent thing, and may be said to be its
own reward, yet because it is difficult and uneasy to Flesh and Blood, in this
our lapsed and degenerate Estate, God is pleased for our encouragement, to
propose to us an ample reward, no less than Eternal Life and Happiness. He has
promised to give grace and glory, and to with hold no good thing from them who
lead a holy life. And if this be not sufficient to quicken our endeavors, and
to encourage us to strive, and wrestle, and run, nothing can; for I am sure a
greater than this cannot be proposed, it containing all the good we can desire,
or are indeed capable of enjoying.

Page 35. Line 4.
And to all this out of Seneca's 84th Epistle; Dic quam turpe sit, plus sibi
ingerere quam capiat, and stomachi sui non nosse mensuram; quam multa ebrii
faciant, quibus sobrii erubescant; nihil aliud esse ebrietatem quam voluntariam
insaniam, etc. Tell says he, a Drunkard, what a filthy thing it is to pour
down more than he can keep, and not to know the measure of his Stomach: How
many things Men do when they are drunk, of which they are ashamed when they are
sober: That Drunkenness is nothing else but a voluntary Madness. Extend this
Habit or Condition of the Drunken Man to many days, and you will not doubt of
his Madness; so that it is no less a Phrenzy than any other, only a shorter.
Relate to him the Example of Alexander the Great, who in a drunken fit killed
Clitus, his most dear and faithful Friend; and afterward when he came to
understand the Fact, he would have died, to be sure he deserved it.

That Drunk^nness does both inflame and discover other Vices, removing that
Modesty which prevents and gives a check to evil Endeavors, and which God has
engraft^d in ^ur natures to be a powerful curb to restrain us from sin. For
more abstain from Vice for fear of shame, than out of a good will and love to
Virtue. When the strength of Wine has got possession of the Soul, those Evils
which before lay hid, show themselves, and come abroad; for Drunkenness does
not make Vices, but manifest them, and bring them to light. Then the Adulterer
does not wait for the Twilight, or Bed Chamber, but without delay gives full
s^inge to his Sensual Appetites. The unchas^e person confesses and publishe^
his Disease: The Petulant and Quarrelsome cannot contain Tongue or ^^and: The
Insolent becomes more Proud; the Cruel more fierce and inhumane; the Spightful
more malignant and mischievous Much more he has worth the reading, for which I
refer to the Book.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. For cu^ul^te read cumulatum. P. 36. l. 15. after calls insert it. P.
66. l. 28. for as read ^s. P. 23. l. 25. for that read the. P. 69. l. 9. For
the read they.

Several BOOKS written by Mr. John Ray, Fellow of the Royal Society; and sold
by Sam. Smith, and Benj. Walford, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
CAtalogus Plantarum circa Cantabrigiam nascentium, Oct. 1660.

Catalogus Plantarum Angliae and Insularum adjacentium, Oct. 1670. 1677.

Catalogus Stirpium in Exteris Regionibus a nobis Observatarum, Oct. 1670.

Methodus Plantarum Nova cum Tabulis, Oct. 1682.

Synopsis Methodica Stirpium Britannicarum Oct. 1690. 1694.

Dissertatio de Variis Plantarum Methodis co^tra D. Tournefort, Oct. 1696.

Epistola ad D. Rivinum de Methodo Plantarum, in qua Elementa Botanica D. Jos.
Tournefort M. D. Tanguntur, Oct. 1696.

Sylloge Stirpium Europaearum Extra Britannias nascentium, Oct. 1694.

Historia Generalis Plantarum, 2 Vol. Fol. 1686, 1688.

Dictionarium Trilingue secundum locos communes, Oct. 1672. 1689. 1696.

Ornithologia Franc. Willoughbei cum siguris; Recognovit, digessit, supplevit
Joannes Raius, Fol. 1676.

The same Ornithology much enlarged in English, 1678.

Franc. Willoughbeii Historia Piscium cum figuris. Recognovit, digessit,
supplevit J. Raius, Oxon, Fol. 1686.

Synopsis Methodica Animalium Quadrupedum and Serpentini Generis, 1693.

A Collection of English and other Proverbs, Oct. 1672. 1678.

Observations made in a Journey through most parts of Europe, 1673.

A Collection of unusual English Words, with an account of preparing our
English Minerals, in 120 1674 1691.

The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of the Creation, in two parts, viz.
The Heavenly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, Fossiles, Vegetables, Animals, (Beasts,
Birds, Fishes, and Insects) more particularly in the Body of the Earth; its
Figures, Motion, and Consistency, and in the admirable Structure of the Bodies
of Man, and other Animals; as also in their Generation, etc. 3d Edition, much
enlarged.

Three Physico-Theological Discourses, concerning, 1. The Primitive Chaos, and
Creation of the World. 2. The General Deluge, its Causes and Effects. 3. The
Dissolution of the World, and future Conflagration, 2d Edition enlarged, 1693.

A Collection of Curious Voyages and Travels, by D. Rauwolfe, with Catalogues
of such Trees, Shrubs and Herbs as grow in the Levant, Oct. 1693.

Several other Books Printed for S. Smith, and B. Walford.
DR. Richard Lucas's Practical Christianity; or, an account of the Holiness
which the Gospel enjoins, with Motives to it, and the Remedies proposed against
Temptation; with a Prayer concluding each distinct Duty, In 8o price 3 s. 6 d.

-- His Enquiry after Happiness, in three parts, in 8 vo.

Vol. I. Of the possibility of obtaining Happiness.

Vol. II. Of the true Notion of Human Life.

Vol. III. Of Religious Perfection.

These three Parts bound in two Vol. Price 10 s.

-- Christian Thoughts for every day of the Month; with a Prayer, wherein is
represented the Nature of unfeigned Repentance, and of Love toward God, 12o
Price 1 s.

-- The plain Man's Guide to Heaven; containing his Duty, first, toward God;
secondly, toward his Neighbor: with proper Prayers, Meditations, and
Ejaculations; designed chiefly for the Countryman, Tradesman, and suchlike.
In 12o. Price One Shilling

-- The Duty oF Servants; containing, first, their Preparation for, and Choice
of a Service; secondly, their Duty in Service; together with Prayers suited to
each Duty, all which may be accommodated likewise, for the most part, to
Apprentices. To this is added a Discourse of the Sacrament, suited peculiarly
to Servants. The Second Edition. In 12o

-- Twelve Sermons preached on several occa^^ons before Their Majesty's, the
Lord Mayor, etc. some of which were never before printed. In Octavo.

A Persuasive to a Holy Life.
CHAP. I. Some Mistakes, about the Object of Happiness.
HAppiness is that which all Men desire, and yet but few obtain: One reason is,
because they mistake their Object, placing it in something wherein it is not to
be found. Some in Bodily Pleasures, whom Aristotle calls (...): others in
Riches, whom the same Author calls (...): Others in Honor and Power, whom he
denominates (...): which things cannot make us happy: Because,

1. They are not in our Power, but may forcibly be taken away from us; and
should they continue with us during Life, at Death we must necessarily part
with them.

2. They make us not better, being common to good and bad. Now if bad Men may
possess them, they cannot render us happy; because, as the Poet truly says,
Nemo malus felix. No wicked Man can be happy.

3. They cannot satisfy the vast desires, or fill the Capacity of the Soul.
The Soul of Man is spiritual and immortal, and therefore Bodily Pleasures, or
Temporal Enjoyments are no way suitable to it, nor of answerable duration.

My business in the following Discourse shall be, to prove that a Holy Life is
the only Happy Life, even in this World, advancing us to as high a degree of
Happiness as we are capable of in this Imperfect State, and the only
preparatory to a State of Eternal Felicity in the World to come.

Before I proceed to prove this, it will be requisite to explain the Terms.

1. What is meant by Holiness. 2. What by Happiness.

CHAP. II. What Holiness is.
HOliness (as I have shown in a former Treatise) is a Word of various
significations in Scripture.

When it is attributed to God, it signifies (as Dr. Owtram well Lib. 1. de
Sacrific. Chap. 1.
observes) either, 1. His transcendent Purity, or constant and immutable
volition of that which is right and good; which the Apostle Peter proposes to
our imitation, 1 Pet. 1.15. As he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy
in all manner of conversation. Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am
holy. 1 John 3.3 And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself,
as he is pure. Psalm 145. 17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in
all his works. Or,

2dly, His glorious Majesty, which manifests it self in all Excellencies and
Perfections, infinite Wisdom, infinite Power and Might, sovereign Dominion over
all things; in respect whereof he is worthy of all Praise and Worship. So that
Holy is often equivalent to great, and greatly to be feared, and had in
reverence of all that draw nigh to him. In this sense God is often in Scripture
called the Holy one of Israel; that is, that venerable Deity who is to be
worshipped by a transcendent and incommunicable Worship, and his Name to be
invoked with the most profound reverence and devotion.

When Holiness is attributed to other things besides God, it signifies either,
1. A relative or outward Holiness, which results from a Separation from common
and profane use, and application to a religious. God being the Sovereign Lord
of all things, and himself holy, whatever is in a peculiar manner related to
him, and appertains to his Worship and Service, whether Person or thing, has a
kind of relative Holiness, and upon account thereof an esteem and respect is
due to it. Or 2. An inherent or inward Holiness, or perfect conformity of heart
and life to the Law and Will of God.: Which kind of Holiness is proper only to
Rational Beings.

You will say, If Holiness be such a perfect conformity, etc. then no Man ever
was, is* or shall be holy in this Mortal Life. Does not the Scripture tell us,
1 Kings 8.46. There is no man that sins not. And Eccles. 7.20. For there is
not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not. Prove. 20.9. Who can
say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? James 3.2. In many
things we offend all. 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. And an Heathen Man could say, Nemo
invenitur qui se possit absolvere; and innocentem quisque se dicit, respiciens
testem, non conscientiam: There is no Man to be found that can absolve himself;
and he that says he is innocent, must respect a Witness, not his own
Conscience.

I answer, It is true, that perfect and sinless Holiness is not attainable by
Mortal Men in this present Life, and therefore God is pleased to accept of
sincerity of Obedience instead of Perfection; and so we may define Holiness, so
far as it is attainable in this imperfect state, to be a sincere and constant
desire and endeavor to obey God in all his Commands. More than this, we cannot
perform, and less than this God will not accept.

1. This Obedience must be universal, without reserve or exception of any
Command. Whatsoever we shall be convinced to be God's Will, and our Duty, we
must set about it, and do it, be it never so uneasy to Flesh and Blood:
Whatsoever we shall be convinced to be contrary thereto, though never so
pleasing, never so customary to us, we must resolutely shun and avoid it. God
must have the whole Heart; he admits no rival; Zeal for one Commandment will
not compensate for the breach of another. We must with the Psalmist, Psalm.
119.128. Esteem all his precepts concerning all things to be right, and hate
every false way.

2. This desire and endeavor must be sincere and hearty; we must not harbor
or entertain any secret inclination to any evil way. We must withdraw all
degrees of Affection from whatever is sinful, or unlawful, or prohibited by
God. The love or liking of any sin, or even wishing it were lawful, cannot
consist with the love of God, which is the spring and source of sincere
Obedience. Quis coram Deo innocens invenitur, qui vellet fieri quod vetatur, si
subtrahas quod timetur. Ac per hoc in ipsa voluntate reus est, qui vult facere
quod non licet fieri. Augustine. Epist. 121. Who can be found innocent before
God, who wishes that might be done which is forbidden; and would do it were it
not for fear of punishment, etc.

CHAP. III. What Happiness is.
HAppiness in general may be defined to be the secure and constant presence and
enjoyment of whatsoever is really good, desirable and delightful; together with
the absence of whatever is afflictive and tormenting.

It is described by Boethius, to be Status omnium bonorum aggregatione
perfectus: An Estate perfect by the confluence of all good things. And by
Cicero, Secretis malis omnibus cumulate bonorum possessio: An accumulated
possession of good things, all evil things being withdrawn. The holy Psalmist
himself makes the happiness of the Beatifick Vision to consist in fullness of
Joy, and Eternal Pleasures, Psalm. 17. ult. In thy presence there is fullness of
joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. And by our Blessed
Savior the happiness of Heaven is called the joy of the Lord, Matthew. 25. 21
and 23.

Happiness is usually distinguished into Objective and Formal.

Objective Happiness is that Object or thing which renders us happy.

Formal Happiness is the union with, or enjoyment of that Object.

The supreme Objective Happiness of Man, his chief good, or last end, is the
ever blessed Deity.

His Formal Happiness is the enjoyment of the Object, which consists in the
knowledge and love of God, and that joy and delectation which naturally and
necessarily flows therefrom; John 17.3. And this is Life eternal, that they may
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, wh^m thou have sent.

You will say, If the happiness of Man consists in the love of God, how can
holiness of life be said to render a Man happy?

I answer, Because holiness or obedience to the Commandments of God, is in
effect the same thing with the love of God. By the Apostle John it is made to
be the very same, 1 John 5.3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his
C^mmandments. And Galat. 5.3. Love is said to ^e the fu^filli^g of the Law. Dr.
Hammond in his Note upon John 14.15. observes, that the Notion of loving God in
Scripture, but especially in the New Testament, seems most fitly to be taken
from one most eminent Act and Expression of Love amongst all Men; that is,
doing those things which are most grateful and acceptable to the beloved. Now
our only way of doing things grateful to God, is our performing what he
commands; and therefore it is consequent, that our obedience to the Will or
Commands of God, in the highest and most perfect manner, is styled the loving
of him; being indeed the prime, if not only way of demonstrating our love to
him, John 14.21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that
loves me: and ver. 23. If any man love me, he will keep my word: and 1 John
2.5. He that keeps his word, in him is the love of God made perfect, etc.
Another Notion there is of the love of God, viz, a desire of union and near
conjunction with him; but this but seldom looked upon in the Scriptures. Thus
far Dr. Hammond.

Love is by some Divines distinguished into Appreciative and Sensible, or
rather Passionate.

Appreciative Love is such an affection, whereby we prize or value any one
Object above another.

Sensible or Passionate Love is that which has a greater influence upon the
Body, and does more strongly move and affect it.

Our Love to God in this state is of the first kind, such an affection or
disposition of Soul, whereby we prize him above all things; so that neither
Father nor Mother, nor Wife, nor Child, though they may more sensibly and
passionately affect us, are so much esteemed by us, we can be content to part
with them when God pleases, and quietly to submit to his Will. No Worldly
advantage, much less the gratifying any Lust, can prevail with us to break any
one of his Commandments.

CHAP. IV. Of the Division of Happiness.
THough the supreme and chief Happiness of Man consists in the knowledge and
love of God, yet there are other things which contribute to the completion of
it, especially in this World, viz. Those which tend to the making our present
condition easy and comfortable to us; such as Health, Wealth, Friends,
Reputation: the contrary whereto; as Sickness, Bodily-pain, Hunger and Thirst,
Disgrace, etc. would render it grievous and unpleasant. The former of these are
eagerly pursued by a great part of Mankind, as their chief good and happiness.
Could we therefore demonstrate (and I think it not difficult to do) that
Holiness or obedience to God's Commands, is the most effectual means to procure
and secure these outward Enjoyments to us, so far as there is any good in them;
I think we should need no other consideration to recommend a Holy Life and
Conversation to all sorts and conditions of Men.

Which that we may do the more clearly and satisfactorily, it will be
convenient to make a division of Happiness according to the several states of
Man, and his several parts, and the particular ingredients, which make up the
happiness of each part, in each state.

And because I cannot think of a better, I shall make use of that of Dr.
Wilkins, late Lord Bishop of Chester, in his Treatise of Natural Religion.

The Happiness then of Man is either that of this present Estate, which
determines at Death; or that of a future Estate, which commences at Death, and
continues to all Eternity.

The Happiness of this present Estate may be divided into, 1. External, Or,
that of the Outward Man: Or, 2. Internal, Or that of the Inner Man.

External Happiness consists principally in, 1. Health. 2. Safety, Liberty and
Quiet. 3. Riches. 4. Pleasures. 5. Honor and Reputation. 6. Friends: Under
which Name I comprehend also Natural Relations: As Wife, and Children, and
Parents, who are usually called so in common Speech; as when we say, Such a Man
has good Friends, or his Friends are well to live.

Internal Happiness consists in the knowledge and love of God, manifested by
our obedience to his Commands; the improvement of all our Faculties; inward
peace of Conscience, Joy and Tranquillity of Mind.

The Happiness of the future Estate, is the clear Vision of God, likeness to
him, and union with him by perfect love: 1 John 3.2. We shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is. This differs chiefly in degree from the precedent.

Before I run over these Heads in particular, I shall premise two things in
general.

First, That keeping of God's Commandments is every way for the good, benefit
and advantage of the whole world, and Mankind in general. Sin, which is the
breach of God's Law, is the only procuring and productive cause of all the
Evils and Miseries, Troubles and Distresses that are in the world. Did Men
generally obey God's Laws, the whole Earth, which is now for the most part an
Akeldama, or Field of Blood, would be turned into a very Paradise, into a
Heaven: Men would then beat their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks. Men who now are Wolves and Tigers one to another, who bite and
devou^ one another, would then be a protection and defense, and mutual help one
to another. Whence come wars and fightings among you, (says the Apostle James)
come they not hence, even of your lusts, which war in your members? Running
over all the Commandments of God, I might easily deduce and demonstrate in
particular, that each of them conduces to the public good and benefit.

Secondly, The Commandments of God are not grievous or uneasy; his Law is holy,
and just, and good, his Precepts equal and reasonable; nay, so suitable and
agreeable to the Nature and Reason of Man, that I will be bold to say, They
ought upon their own account to be observed and obeyed by us, were there no
Heaven to reward our Obedience, no Hell to punish our Disobedience.

This is the foundation of that Stoical Doctrine, That Virtue is its own
Reward, and that Happiness consists in the very doing of Virtuous Actions: And
therefore a wise Man is satisfied with the Conscience of well-doing, and will
not do any dishonest or wicked thing, to avoid any Suffering or Torment
whatsoever. The reason is, because God has imprinted in our Nature an
aversation from Vice, and dislike of it; so that we cannot but condemn our
selves for doing any thing that is dishonest or unjust: Se judice nemo nocens
absolvitur: No ^^nocent person is absolved, himself being Judge. Nor can any
terror or torment acquit us from blame, if to avoid it we do any vile or
dishonest action. But on the contrary, if we resolutely stick to that which is
good, whatever we suffer for it, we satisfy our own Consciences, and rejoice
in having done so, and gain the approbation and applause of all Men. The Evil
of Sin is greater, and more to be avoided than the Evil of Pain or Suffering,
tho that be a great Evil too; and that man be far from being happy, who labors
under extreme Bodily Pain, especially if without hope of deliverance: Such a
Man's very Being would be a Burden to him; it being a true saying, Praestat
non esse quam miserum esse: Better not to be, than to be miserable.

But our gracious God has not put us off with such a Reward as this; (which
notwithstanding the Apostle says of the Christians of his time, That if in
this life only they had hope, they would be of all men the most miserable:) but
has promised to recompense our Obedience with Eternal Life and Happiness; and
particularly our Sufferings for his Cause, and for Righteousness sake, with a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And for our encouragement has
permitted us to have a respect to this recompense of reward; as Moses, that Man
of God, and others of his Servants mentioned Heb. 11. had.

CHAP. V. Of Health.
HEalth is a Blessing so necessary to our Well-being in this World, that
without it we cannot enjoy any thing else, no not our own selves: And therefore
the common salutation among us at every meeting of Neighbor or Friends is
this, How do you? that is, are you in Health or no? And the Answer Well, or
Ill; that is, in health, or not: As if Health were the chief or only good thing
worth the enquiring after, in the presence or enjoyment whereof we could not be
miserable whatever else we wanted: Nor in the absence, happy or well, whatever
besides we possessed. Indeed there is no taste or relish, no comfort or delight
in any worldly good, where health is wanting; and therefore it is by all Men
highly valued and purchased at the dearest rate, as Bishop Wilkins well
observes.

Health is such a just temper and constitution of all the parts of the Body,
both solid and fluid, as may enable the several Members and Faculties duly to
perform their natural Functions, from whence proceeds not only an indolency or
freedom from Pain and Sickness, but also vigor and activity, alacrity and
light-heartedness, a pleasant and delicious sympathy in the Soul. To this head
I refer freedom from Bodily Pain, the extremity whereof is altogether
inconsistent with Happiness: St. Augustine confesses, That he was compelled to
consent to Cornelius Celsus, who affirmed Bodily Pain to be the greatest Evil.
Neither (says he) did his Reason seem to me absurd, viz. That Man being
compounded of two parts, Soul and Body, of which the first is the better, the
latter the worser; the greatest good must be the best thing belonging to the
better part; that is, Wisdom: And the greatest Evil the worst thing belonging
to the worser part; that is, Pain. Whether this Reason be solid and conclusive,
let others judge; but I fully agree with him in the Assertion, That of all
Evils we are sensible of in this World, Bodily Pain is the sorest; It drowning,
as I may so say, and taking away the sense of all other Evils, and wholly
possessing the Soul. It is such an afflictive and tormenting Passion, such a
Vultur or Tiger, tearing and gnawing upon the Soul, so abhorrent to Humane
Nature, that an excessive degree of it must needs make a Man miserable and
unhappy; unless we can reconcile and unite extremes, the greatest Evil that Man
is capable of suffering, with the greatest good he can enjoy. Hence the
Torments of Hell are every where in Scripture set forth by consuming Fire,
unquenchable Fire, everlasting Burnings; and Hell it self called a Lake of
Fire, a Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone; because Fire produces the
greatest Bodily Pain; than which nothing is more terrible to Humane Nature, and
more likely to affright Men from Sin. On the contrary, St John in his
Revelation considering the absolute inconsistency of Pain and Happiness, tells
us, That in the New Jerusalem there shall be no sorrow, nor any more Pain.

There is indeed a degree of Bodily Pain, which may be said to be (...), not
exceeding the measure of Man's Patience; and there is a degree which we are not
able to bear, which takes up the whole Mind, not suffering it to divert its
thoughts one Minute to any other Object.

Away then with the foolish vaunts of the proud Stoics, who boast that their
Wise Man is happy in Phalaris his Bull; whom Epist, 52.
St. Augustine thus smartly and ingeniously checks and confutes, If Life may be
happy in extreme bodily torment, why do they advise a man afflicted with the
most grievous Pains to depart out of it? Why does not their Wiseman rather
continue in it, that he may enjoy the happiness of it? Is a happy life to be
forsaken and fled from? But if such a Life be really miserable, what else but
pride hinders them from confessing it to be so?

You will say, Did not the holy Martyrs endure the greatest Bodily Torments
with invincible patience, yea some of them with joy and exultation?

I answer, It Is true indeed they did so; but then I suppose, that as their
Temptations and Sufferings were extraordinary, so they were extraordinarily
supported under them; and that God (as the Apostle says) did not suffer them
to be tempted above what he enabled them to bear. It seems to me most likely,
that he did quite take away, or very much mitigate the sense of pain; possibly
by obstructing those Nerves which convey that motion to the Brain, which
excites such a sense, or how else it seemed best to his Divine Wisdom.

I proceed now to prove, that this Blessing is the portion of those who lead a
godly Life, who keep God's Commandments, and abide in his Love: And that, 1.
From the Promises of God: 2. From the natural consequence of several Virtues
commanded by him. Such are, 1. Temperance and Sobriety. 2. Labor and Industry.
3. A due government and moderation of our Passions.

1. Health and Long Life, (I put them together, the one for the most part being
the consequent of the other) are in Scripture promised as rewards to the
obedience of the Commandments of God. Exodus 23.25. Thou shall serve the Lord
thy God -- And I will take away Sickness from the midst of thee. Deuteronomy. 7.15.
And the Lord will take away from thee all Sickness, and will put none of the
evil Diseases of Egypt (which thou know) upon thee. Prove. 3.7, 8. Fear the
Lord, and depart from evil: It shall be health to thy Navel, and Marrow to thy
Bones. Prove. 3.16. It is said of Wisdom, That length of days are in her right
hand. Psalm. 34.12. What man is he that desires life, and loves many days,
that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that thou speak
no guile. Depart from evil, and do good, etc. repeated 1 Pet. 3.10. On the
other side Sickness and grievous Diseases and premature Death are often
threatened as Punishments of Sin and Disobedience: Deuteronomy. 28.60, 61. If thou will
not observe to do all the words of this Law, etc. He will bring upon thee all
the evil Diseases of Egypt, etc. also every Sickness, and every Plague which is
not written in this Law. Prove. 2.22. The wicked shall be cut off from the
earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it. Prove. 11.19. As
righteousness tends to life, so he that pursues evil, pursues it to his own
Death.

2. Health and Long Life are the natural consequents of some Virtues commanded
by God: As,

1. Temperance and Sobriety in the use of Meats and Drinks: That this is a most
effectual means to preserve Health, I appeal to the general consent of
Physicians, who are the most competent Judges in this Case, all unanimously
prescribing a moderate Diet, not only as a principal means to continue Health,
but also to cure many Diseases. Hence Hipocrates says, 6 Epid. Sect. 4. Aph.
10. (...): The exercise of preserving health is, not to eat to satiety, not to
be slothful in labor.

That a very spare and ascetick Diet conduces much to Health and long Life, may
be confirmed by many eminent Examples: St. Paul, the first Hermit (as St.
Jerome in his Life reports) arrived to the Age of 115 Years, an hundred whereof
he spent in the Wilderness, sustaining himself daily the first forty with a few
Dates, and a draught of Water; and when Dates failed, with half a Loaf of
Bread, which a Raven brought him. St. Anthony (as Athanasius witnesses) lived
105 Years, of which he spent 90 in the Desert, supporting his Body with Bread
and Water only, to which in his extreme old Age he added a few Sallet Herbs.
Arsenius, The Emperor Arcadius his Tutor, lived 120 Years, fifty five whereof
he spent in the Wilderness, in wonderful abstinence. Not long before our Times,
Ludovicus C^rnarus, a Venetian Nobleman, when he had lived unhealthfully to the
35th Year of his Age, being frequently afflicted with diverse Diseases, at last
by the advice of a certain Physician, he used a restrained Diet, whereby alone
he gradually cured them all; by little and little diminishing the quantity of
his Meat and Drink, till he descended to fourteen Ounces of Meat, reckoning
Bread, Flesh, Eggs, and other Edibles, and sixteen Ounces of Drink daily;
persevering in which Regimen, he produced his Life healthful, vigorous, and
free from Diseases above 100 Years, as himself witnesses in a Book he put
forth, entitled, The benefits and advantages of a sober Life. Whence we may
collect (says Riverius) out of whose Institutions I borrowed these Instances,
That a spare Diet does very much conduce, not only to the continuance of
Health, but also to the curing of contumacious Diseases, and of long
continuance. For though Natural Heat having suddenly concocted that small
quantity of Food taken in, is afterward employed about the superfluous
Humors, digesting, dissipating, and by little and little expelling them
through the several Emunctories of the Body, till at last the Body becomes pure
and free from the Causes and Seeds of all Diseases.

Moreover, It is very remarkable, which the same Riverius adds, That if an
exact Diet cannot quite take away some chronical and incurable Diseases, yet
does it much alleviate them, and render them more tolerable, so that the Sick
persons may live a long time under them. So we see not a fewdaily, who produce
their Lives many Years under an Ulcer of the Lungs, a Scirrhus of the Liver or
Spleen, a Stone in the Reins or Bladder. Aristotle in his Problems witnesses,
That there was a certain Philosopher in his time, named Herodicus, who ^^ough
he labored under a Consumption, yet by a strict observation of Diet, attained
to 100 Years.

The Benefits of Temperance will best appear from the Mischiefs and
Inconveniences the contrary Vices of Intemperance and Excess bring upon us;
especially as to the impairing and ruining of our Health, which is a natural
consequent thereof. For the Stomach by immoderate repletion being overcharged
or clogged, with more than it can digest, must needs slubber over its work, as a
Mill that is fed too fast, and instead of a well concocted and benign Chyle,
transmit to the other Vessels a Crude and impure Juice, full of many
heterogeneous and noxious Particles or Qualities, that breed an universal
Distemper and Discrasie in the Body, and lay the foundation of many future
diseases; an error in the first concoction (as the old Physicians well observe)
being seldom or never corrected in the subsequent.

That most diseases owe their original to excess in eating and drinking,
appears in that they are cured by blood-letting, purging, vomiting, sweating,
and other Evacuations, whereby the abundance of superfluous Humors is
exhausted. It is a Proverbial Saying, Plures occidit gula quam gladius: The
Throat has slain more than the Sword. Rioting and drunkenness offer such
violence to Nature, do so inflame the Blood, the vehicle of Life, waste and
dissipate the Spirits, that Men guilty of them seldom live out half their days:
Insomuch that (as Bishop Wilkins well observes) no Man of ordinary prudence,
who is to take a Lease for Lives, will be content (if he can well avoid it) to
choose one whom he knows to be vicious and intemperate.

It may be objected, that some who daily exceed all bounds in eating and
drinking, feeding themselves (as the Apostle says) without fear, do yet live
to an extreme old Age.

I answer, That there are but very few of these, and those of exceeding firm
strength of Parts and temperament of Body; who yet if they lived temperately,
might hold out much longer, and would be more fit for all the Actions of the
Mind and Understanding: For (says Riverius) Those who live intemperately, must
needs be filled with many noxious Humors, and often troubled with Sickness;
neither can they, without prejudice to their Health, be long intent on the
difficult Functions of the Mind; both because in them the whole force of
Nature, and of the Spirits is spent in the concoction of Meats; from which, if
by any contention of mind, they be violently withdrawn, concoction will be
depraved, and many crudities ensue; and also because they have need of frequent
Bodily Exercise to dissipate, or Medicaments to purge out their ill Humors
they daily accumulate. So that though such men seem to live long in the Body,
yet in effect they live but little to their mind, and to those ends for which
Life was given; being but a little while fit for the Functions of the Soul, the
greatest part of their time being necessarily bestowed on the Service of the
Body.

And yet even in these the Body is not made of Steel or Adamant, the strength
of their Natural Temper cannot always resist and hold out against the rude
shocks and batteries of so many excesses and debauches, but must needs by
degrees be weakened and impaired, and at last utterly marred and subverted.

I might add further in commendation of this Grace of Temperance, that it
conduces much to the preservation of the External form and comeliness of the
Body, an Endowment highly valued by all men: Whereas on the contrary, Vicious
Courses, but especially Intemperance, defacing the inward pulchritude of the
Soul, do change even the outward Countenance into an abhorred hue; as I have
elsewhere noted out of Dr. Moor.

I should now dismiss this Particular, did not the great prevalency of this
Vice of Intemperance, especially in drinking invite me to superadd something
further of the pernicious effects and consequents of it.

1. First, Then this Vice has a very ill influence upon the Spirit and Soul of
Man, degrading it, and subjecting it to the Body. The generality of Heathen
Philosophers (as Bishop Wilkins observes) agree in this, That Sin is the
Natural Cause of debasing the Soul, immersing it into a state of sensuality and
darkness, deriving such an impotency and deformity upon the mind, as the most
loathsome Diseases do upon the Body. I shall add, but especially Intemperance,
which clouds the Understanding, disabling it to any Studies of sublime and
subtle Speculation; the gross fumes of strong and inebriating Liquors, having
a like effect upon the Understanding, as thick Foggs and Mists upon our bodily
Eyes, hind^ing them from seeing things at a distance, or discerning clearly
Objects that are near. Neither does it only darken the Understanding, but
mightily weaken the Memory, dulling also and impairing all the Parts and
Faculties of the Soul; depressing and fastening down to the earth that Particle
of the divine Breath: Atque affigit humi Divinoe particulam aurae: Stupifying
and infatuating the Man by degrees, till at last there be little left of him
but the outward shape, and that too very much marred and deformed.

2. This Sin not only sows the Seeds of future Diseases, but very often is the
occasion of many present Quarrels, and Fightings, and Wounds, and even Death it
self. Prove. 23.19. Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? who has
bablings? Who has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? They that
tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. Nothing more frequent
than quarrelling and brawling at drinking Meetings, and sometimes challenging
and duelling. Some also we now and then hear of, who being in Drink, by Falls
from Horses, or other Casualties, have ruined or destroyed themselves; and
alas, in what condition must such men die!

3. It occasions an unaccountable expense of time, which by all Wise Men is
esteemed a most precious and inestimable Jewel; Cujus unius (says Seneca)
honesta est avaritia; which alone may honesty be coveted. Sometimes whole
Afternoons and Nights being spent in drinking bouts, and as much time more
before they can get clear of the evil effects of them. Time was not given us to
waste in the service of our Lusts, but to bestow on the duties of God's
Worship, or some honest Calling, whereby in our Places and Stations we may be
serviceable to our Generations, and do good in the World: No Man need want
Employment, and yet if he did, he were better be idle, than not well occupied,
as the Proverb is. He that has no bodily Labor or Exercise to busy himself in,
may find Work enough in cultivating his mind, in advancing and improving his
Faculties, in searching out the Mysteries of Nature, and Works of God; whereby
he may be induced to glorify his Creator, to admire and celebrate his infinite
Wisdom, Power and Goodness, and may probably hit upon something, which may be
of public use and benefit.

When at the great day of account, the Supreme Judge of all Men shall demand of
us, How we spent such an Afternoon, or such a Night, Think we, that we shall
have the confidence to answer him, in drinking, or vain talking; or rather that
we shall not stand mute, being ashamed to confess how we spent them; or that he
would be satisfied with such an account should it be given him? Let us then be
careful so to husband and manage, so to expend and improve our time, that we
may have a good account to make thereof at that day.

4. Intemperance is a chargeable and expensive Vice, unaccountably wasting the
outward Estate. Prove. 23.20, 21. Be not among wine bibbers, among riotous
eaters of flesh: For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty. Deer
it egentibus Aes laquei pretium: They shall not have Money enough to buy them a
Halter. No Vice has consumed so many Estates, and reduced so many of the
meaner sort to poverty as this; which being so, men given to it would do well
to consider beforehand, how unsupportable Poverty and Necessity will be to
them who have lived plentifully; especially seeing instead of being pitied and
relieved, they are like to be reproached and scorned by others. If Poverty
makes all men ridiculous, as the Poet says, much more then those who have
brought it upon themselves by their own default. Men who by riotous courses
waste Estates left them by their Ancestors, I look upon as injurious to their
Posterity; such Estates being not acquired by their industry, and consequently
not theirs to dispose of, or make away, but only to use for term of Life,
according to the intention of their Progenitors, by whom they were raised and
left them. However, all are accountable to God for the expense of their
Estates; Seneca could say, Tam expensorum quam acceptorum rationem esse
reddendam: We must give an account as well of what we spend, as of what we
receive or get.

5. Intemperance is a Vice contrary to Charity and Justice, disabling us to
relieve the Poor, or contribute to any good Work. Can we think that he has the
least spark of Charity, or indeed common Humanity in him, who will spoil and
destroy that, which would serve to support and maintain the indigent and
necessitous; who will rather mischief himself, than benefit others; who will
rather abuse and ruin his own Body, than refresh the fainting Spirits of his
Brethren. Surely God intended that all that are born into the World, should
have a portion in the World, not that one should devour and waste more than is
fit, and another starve for want of Sustenance. All came alike naked into the
World, and if Providence has divided to thee more than to another, it has
made thee but a Steward to dispense thy Estate among others; which if thou be a
good Man, possibly thou may do more to their advant^ge, than they would do
themselves, were they owners of it, or were it equally divided among them. And
this thou art to look upon as the main reason why God has given to thee more
than to them. The Scripture says, Withhold not good from him to whom it is
due; making relief a debt to the indigent; but to discharge debts is a piece of
Justice, and not of Charity.

But if he be unjust who relieves not the poor, though nothing related to him,
what shall we call them of the poorer sort, who spend that at the Alehouses,
which should serve to maintain their Families? who have Wives and Children at
home that want Necessaries, and they consume upon their Lusts what should
support them; these Men are something more than unjust, barbarous and inhumane.
We find them in the black List of those whom the Apostle, Romans 1. says, are
given up to a reprobate mind; (...), Men without natural affection.

6ly. I might add, That this Vice is injurious to posterity, entailing Diseases
upon them: Children do very often inherit the Distempers and Infirmities of
their Parents, as well as the Shape and Lineaments of their Bodies. And
therefore let men, as they love their Children, and tender their ease and
well-being in this wo^ld, have a care lest by their debauches and excesses they
contract diseases and ill habits of body on themselves, and derive them to
their Issue; which if of the more painful sort, as Gout or Stone, may give
their Children (I will not say just) cause to curse the day wherein they were
born, and the Parents which begat and brought them forth.

Lastly, This Vice blasts a Man's Reputation, Honor and Esteem in the World.
As Virtue is honorable in the sight of all Men, there being scarce any Nation
so salvage and barbarous, but pays some respect and veneration to it: So is
Vice reproachful and vicious persons despicable; and among other Vices,
especially Drunkenness, which makes a man a laughing stock, a scorn and
derision to the very vulgar, nay, to his own Companions; none being more apt to
deride him than they: It turns Reason out of doors, and transforms a Man into a
Beast, or something worse.

Here some may possibly demand, What measures of eating and drinking are we to
observe? I answer, What are most agreeable to the ends of eating and drinking,
those are the support of our Bodies, and preserving them in the most perfect
state of Health. I need give no more severe Rules than Physicians prescribe,
and therefore I shall borrow two or three out of Riverius his Institutions.

1. (...) before mentioned out of Hippocrates; Never eat to satiety, but always
rise from the Table with an Appetite; because in those who are in perfect
health, the Appetite is strong, and lasts till the Stomach be too much filled;
which repletion is very hurtful and prejudicial to Health.

2. If you ordinarily take so much Meat and Drink, that afterward you feel a
certain Torpor, heaviness and slugishness of body, when as before you were
active, brisk, and cheerful, it is a sign that you have exceeded the conveni^n^
measure of eating; and the quantity of Food is so long to be diminished, till
the foresaid inconveniences appear no more.

3. If after Meat you find your self unfit for Study, Meditation,
Contemplation, and other Functions as well of the Mind, as of the Body, it is
clear that you exceed the just measures of eating and drinking.

These Rules are to be observed chiefly by Scholars and Gentlemen, who are not
exercised in continual bodily Labor.

Secondly, Moderate Labor and Exercise conduces much to the maintenance and
preservation of Health, (...) as Hippocrates calls not being slothful in l^bor:
And Galen for that purpose prefers it before a spare Diet. It puts the blood in
motion thereby, increasing the natural heat, facilitating concoction and
^endring it more thin and fluid, less apt to stagnate or coagulate, and more
easy to pass the capillary extremes of the Veins and Arteries, and so to
irrigate and enliven all the Museles and Members of the Body; by which means
the Body becomes more robust, less obnoxious to external Injuries, and fit for
any Action.

Moreover, keeping the Blood in a due temper and degree of heat, it inables it
by insensible perspiration, to cast off any noxious Particles, which might
spoil its crasis, and put it into irregular motions, and breed diverse diseases:
Want of perspiration being the cause of almost all diseases. But of labor and
diligence in our Callings, I shall have occasion to speak further under another
Head.

I might add something concerning rest or sleep, the moderation whereof has
some influence upon bodily Health; ^hysicians telling us, That the excess
relaxes the tone of all the Members, oppresses the Head, and fills it with many
Vapors and ill Humors, dulls the Wits, mars the Complexion and Habit of the
Body, diminishes the native heat, and renders all the Parts and Members more
sluggish and inept to motion. Neither is it less prejudicial to Wealth than to
Health, bringing want and poverty upon those that give themselves up to it,
Prove. 20.13. Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty: Open thine eyes, and
thou shall be satisfied with bread. Prove. 6.9, 10, 11. How long will thou
sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? Yet a little slumber,
yet a little sleep, yet a little folding of the hands to sleep: So shall thy
poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man; which is
repeated Prove. 24.33.

Thirdly, A Third thing requisite to the preservation and continuance of
Health, is a due government and moderation of our Passions, the excess of which
has great force in altering the temper of the Body, and in bringing on
grievous diseases, and sometimes death it self. I shall instance in three.

1. Anger, which if not suppressed at first, but suffered to kindle in the
Breast, breaks out suddenly into a violent flame, bearing down all before it,
dethrones Reason, and turns the man into a Pherenetick: Ira suror brevis est:
Anger is a short Madness; and if it be indulged to, and becomes unbridled, it
may by the violent commotion of the Spirits, so alter and pervert the very
crasis and temper of the Brain, as to introduce a lasting and perpectual one.
The like happens sometimes also in other passions; as grief, fear and love,

2. Fear: What paleness and trembling does it often cause? subverting the whole
Economy of the Body: Fear of poverty or disgarce has driven many men to that
extremity, as to lay violent hands upon themselves. Fear of death has
sometimes brought upon men that they feared. But above all, fear has a very
bad influence upon the Body in infectious diseases, especially in the Plague;
in which a Reverend and Learned Person says upon experience* It is a mortal
Companion: (...) a late Famous Physician in his Treatise upon that Disease:
Pestis non est Pestis nisi adsit terror: The Pestilence is no Pestilence unless
it be attended with terror.

3. Sorrow and Sadness, the excess whereof is no less injurious to the health
of the body than the forementione^ Passions, abating the natural heat, and by
degrees introducing a general languor and wasting; or by incrassating the
humors for want of a due motion of the Blood, bringing on Melancholic and
delirous affects.

These and the like Passions the Scripture commands us either wholly to
extirpate, or at least to moderate and subdue. 1. Anger, Coloss. 3.8. But now
you also put off all these, Anger, Wrath, Strife. Prove. 16.32. He that is slow
to anger is better than the mighty; and he that rules his own spirit, than he
that takes a City: Suitably whereto the Poet says, Fortior est qui se quam
qui fortissima vincit. And doubtless whosoever shall subdue and master this
Passion, shall experience much joy and delight in the victory.

As for Fear, if of Poverty or Want, we have God's Promise for our security,
That provision shall be made for us of all thing necessary: Our Savior tells
us, That if we seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, these outward
things shall be added to us. Death we need not fear, as being to the godly but
a passage into a better Life; and consequently are forbidden by our Savior, to
fear men, the worst they can do to us being to kill the body.

Immoderate Sorrow even for our dearest Relations and Friends is forbidden us
by the Apostle, and yet this is an Affliction that wounds as deep as any. The
uselesness of sorrow for any worldly loss, setting aside the ill influence it
has upon our health, is sufficient argument against giving way to this
Passion: Sorrow being so far from helping us, that it does but add to our
burden. For what we bring upon our selves by our own default or negligence, so
much trouble may be useful as to make us more careful for the future, and no
more, -- Flagrantior aequo
Non debet dolor esse viri, Juve^al
nec vulnere major:


A man's Grief ought not to be immoderate, nor to exceed the cause of it.

CHAP. VI. Of Safety, Liberty and Quiet.
Secondly, SAfety, Liberty and Quiet conduce much to the Happiness of the
outward Man.

I refer these to one Head, because I find them linked together in Bishop
Wilkins his Treatise of Natural Religion; and before him in Bishop Andrews his
Manual of Devotions more than once, and because they are of near affinity one
to another.

1. By Safety I understand, 1. Freedom from force and violence, captivity, loss
of Goods by Enemies, Foreign or Domestic, by Pirates and Robbers For our
security from these we have many promises in Scripture, Levit. 25.18. If you
shall do my Statutes, and keep my Judgments, ye shall dwell in the Land in
safety. Prove. 1.33. Whosoever hearkneth unto me, shall dwell safely,, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil, Job 10.18.

2. Freedom from perils and dangers, and sad accidents; as Fire, Tempest,
contagious Diseases, Terrors by Night; for our security from these also we are
not without promises of the divine protection. Prove. 12.21. There shall no evil
happen to the just, but the wicked shall be filled with mischief Psalm 91.3. He
shall deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome
Pestilence. And v. 5. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for
the pestilence that walks in darkness. Prove. 3.23. Then shall thou walk in
thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble. Job 5.19, 20. In famine he
shall redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the Sword, etc.

2ly. By Liberty is meant, being at our own disposal, and not under bondage,
restraint or imprisonment; from which, obedience to the Commandments of God
secures us. For the most usual causes of Sufferings of this nature are neglect
of our duties, or vicious and illegal acts; as Murders, Adulteries, Theft,
Sedition, and the like, which are all contrary to God's Commandments: these
enjoining us to obey Laws to submit to Government, to do our own business, and
not to be busy-bodies in other men's matters, etc.

3dly. By Quiet is understood immunity from Troubles, and molestations
proceeding from Enmity, Contentions, Lawsuits, Immoderate Care and Anxiety
about worldly things; Obedience to the Law of God does in a great measure
secure us from these: That commands us to love even our Enemies. Now who can be
so barbarous and inhumane as to injure them that truly love him, and seek his
good? Moreover the Scripture tells us, That when a man's ways please the Lord,
he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.7. And the Apostle
puts the question. Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good? 1 Pet. 3.13. As for Contentions and Lawsuits, another Apostle
advises us rather to suffer wrong than molest our selves and brethren with
them. And for care and anxiety about worldly things, which is indeed a very
tormenting Passion, we are forbidden it often in Scripture: And our Savior,
Matthew. 6.25, etc. produces many Arguments or Considerations to arm us against
it.

CHAP. VII. Of Riches.
Thirdly, RIches are esteemed a great ingredient of our happiness and
well-being in this world; though some are of opinion, that they contribute
nothing thereto, but that a mean estate is the best; and therefore Agur prays,
Prove. 30.8. Give me neither poverty nor riches. And the Preacher, Eccles. 5.11.
Says of Riches, What good is there to the owners thereof, save the beholding
of them with their eyes? And the Heathen Poet Horace, -- Si ventri been, si
lateri est, quid
Divitiae possunt regales addere majus?


If we are well provided with Food and Clothing, what more can Kingly Riches
add to us? And the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.8. advises us, That having food and
raiment, we should therewith be content; because they that will be rich, fall
into temptation and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. It is clear that Riches do expose to the
temptations of Pride and Luxury, and the sad consequences thereof.

You will say, If Riches have such an ill influence upon Men's Manners, why then
are they proposed in Scripture as rewards to virtuous actions? why are they
made the effects and fruits of God's Blessing?

I answer, Riches if well used, and it is our own fault if we use them not
well, are real Blessings, enabling us to do much good in the World; to be rich
in good Works, to relieve the Necessities of others, to feed the Hungry, to
cloth the Naked, to redeem Prisoners and Captives, to deliver the Oppressed, to
minister to the Sick convenient Diet and Physic, etc. And our Savior tells
us, That it is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive; and consequently
to have whereof to give.

I should now proceed to show, That Riches are a Blessing promised to our
Obedience* and likewise a natural consequent and effect of it, and in the first
place to explain what is meant by Riches; but I find this so well done to my
hand by Treatise of Natural Religion.
Dr. Wilkins, late Bishop of Chester, that I shall spare my pains, and only
transcribe what I find upon this Head in his Treatise of the Principles of
Natural Religion, Lib. 2. Cap. 4.

The Word Riches is capable of a twofold sense.

Absolute, Relative.
1. In the more absolute sense it may be defined to consist in such a measure
of Estate, as may be sufficient to serve a Man's occasions and conveniences;
when his Possessions are so proportioned as fully to answer all the necessities
of his condition, and afford him a comfortable subsistence according to his
Quality, and the station wherein he is placed. In which sense men of all ranks
and degrees are capable of being rich. A Husbandman or an ordinary Tradesman
may as truly be styled a Rich Man, as a Gentleman, a Lord, or a King. Though
perhaps what these can very well afford to fling away upon their Diversions be
more than all the Estate and Possessions that the other can pretend to.

And upon this ground all men grant, that a man may be as truly liberal in
giving a Penny, or but a poor Mite, as another in giving an Hundred Pounds;
because these things are to be measured according to the different conditions
of the givers, or proportion of their Estates: And a Man may as well be rich
with a little, as liberal with a little.

Now though this be the true notion of Riches, yet in the opinion of Moralists
and Philosophers is it not enough to denominate a man rich; but there is
further required an acquiescence of Mind, contentment or satisfaction with such
a sufficiency: Dives est non qui plus habet, sed qui nihil cupit: He is not
rich who has much, but who covets no more. Aristotle affirms, That the true
nature of Riches does consist in the contented use and enjoyment of the things
that we have, rather than in the possession of them. Those that out of
penuriousness can scarce afford themselves the ordinary Conveniences of Life,
out of their large Possessions, have been always accounted poor: Such men may
be truly said to want those things they have, because lying by useless, it is
all one as if they had them not.

Moreover, That Man who is not content with what is in it self sufficient for
his condition, is not rich, nor ever will be so; because there can be no other
real limits to his desires, but that of sufficiency, whatever is beyond this
being boundless. less and infinite. And though men may please themselves with
an Imagination, that if they had but such an addition to their Estates, they
should then think they had enough, yet that is but a mere imagination, there
being no real cause why they should be more satisfied then than they are now.

2ly. Riches may be taken in a more relative sense, and so they may be
described to consist in having large Possessions, when a man's Estate and
Revenue is of such a proportion as is commonly esteemed great; whether with
relation to the generality of other men; and so only those at the upper end of
the world are capable of being counted rich; or else with respect to others of
the same rank and order; and so all such are accounted rich, who do in their
Possessions exceed the common sort of those that are of the same rank with
them; this kind of Wealth consisting properly in comparison; there being not
any one determinate sum or proportion of revenue to which the name of Riches
may be appropriated, but that it may be as much below the occasions of some
persons, as it is above the condition of others, who yet live plentifully.

Those that are rich in this comparative sense, may rather be styled
Proprietors of great Possessions, than truly Rich; because though such
Possessions be in themselves great, yet they may not be sufficient to free the
owner of them from want and poverty, whether in respect to his real or
imaginary occasions for more: And that is not Riches which cannot free a Man
from being poor; and want of Necessaries is as truly Poverty in him that has
much, as in him that has but little. He that in any one Condition of Life,
has enough to answer his Conveniences, such a Man is more truly rich than he
whose Revenue is a thousand times greater, if it be not equal either to his
Occasions or his Mind. Riches in this second comparative sense are no where
promised to our obedience to the Commandments of God, or to any particular
Grace and Virtue; nor are they the natural effects and consequents of such
Obedience; as if he that were godly, should be thereby advanced to the greatest
Possessions that any man else does enjoy; but only that Religion will be a
means to supply him with such a sufficiency as may denominate him rich, and
free him from such necessities, whether real or imaginary, as others of his
rank are liable to.

1. Riches are proposed in Scripture as a Reward or Blessing to them that fear
God, and keep his Commandments. It is said of Wisdom, that is the fear of God,
which in several places of Scripture is said to be the beginning of Wisdom, or
the chief Wisdom; nay, Wisdom it self, Job 28.28. And unto man he said, Behold,
the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.
Prove. 3.16. That length of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand
riches and honor, etc. c. 8.18. Riches and honor are with me; yea, durable
riches, etc. And again, v. 21. That I may cause those that love me to inherit
substance, and I will fill their treasures. Psalm. 34 9. They that fear the
Lord, there is no want to them. Levit 26.3, etc. God promises to the
Israelites, if they will walk in his Statutes, and keep his Commandments, a
confluence of all worldly Blessings; and the like in Deuteronomy 28. The Apostle tells
us, 1 Timothy 4.8. That Godliness has the promises as well of this life, as of
that which is to come.

2. The fear of God, and the practice of several Virtues commanded by him, are
the most effectual means to gain and increase Riches: As 1 Diligence and
Industry in our Callings, The hand of the diligent makes rich. Prove. 10.4. No
gains without pains. Man is born to labor, as the sparks fly upward. God has
not sent us into the world like Leuiathan, to take our pastime here, but to
bear our part of the Burdens of Mankind. Though a Man be born to an Estate
sufficient to maintain him without Labor, yet I look upon him as unjust, if he
lives upon the Sweat of other Men's Brows, and is not some way or other so
helpful and beneficial to them, as to compensate for his Food and Raiment:
Every man that has Riches is accountable to God for the expense of them;
being, as I said before, but a Steward to him who is the supreme Proprietour.

2. Justice and Honesty in our Dealings: It is commonly said, That honesty is
the best Policy; and so in this particular we find it in experience to be;
those Tradesmen having the greatest custom, and quickest returns, who are noted
for their just and honest Dealings.

3. Temperance and Sobriety: These conduce as well to the increasing of our
Estates, as the health of our Bodies, cutting off all superfluous Expenses in
gratifying our Sensual Appetites and Desires: Whereas the contrary Vices of
Voluptuousness and Luxury, to which we may add Idleness, Prodigality, Pride,
are known wasters of Estates, often bringing men to a morsel of bread, and
clothing them with rags, as Solomon says.

But besides the having a sufficiency of all things necessary and convenient in
reference to our rank and order in this world; to denominate us truly rich, as
I said before, there is required contentment and satisfaction of mind with such
a sufficiency, and a free use of the things we have, which is attainable only
by Religion; that teaches and enables us to be content with our Estates, and to
live comfortably without such things as others know not how to want, Heb. 13.5.
Be content with such things as ye have; for he has said, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee. The ability of being content with a little, may much
more truly be called riches, than the having of much without being satisfied
therewith: As it is better to be in health with a moderate Appetite, than to be
continually eating and drinking under the disease of a (...) [voracious
Appetite] or a Dropsy: And in this sense a little that the righteous has is
better than great riches of the ungodly.

Now that the fear of God, and practice of those Virtues he commands us, is a
real means of procuring and preserving a sufficiency of worldly Goods, and
contentment therewith, we find confirmed by experience: Let any man impartially
consider, what kind of persons those are, among the generality of Men, who in
their several degrees and orders are accounted most able, and most wealthy; and
it will appear that they are such as are most diligent in their Callings, most
just and honest in their dealings, most regular and sober in their
Conversations, most liberal toward any good Work: Upon which account it is
that such places, where men have the opportunity of being instructed in, and
excited to the Duties of Religion, do thereupon thrive and flourish most; it
being one property of Religion to civilize men, and make them more inquisitive
in Learning, and more diligent in practicing their several Professions. And as
for contentment of Mind, it is not to be obtained but upon the account of
Religion, Piety and Virtue: Such men need not fear future want, because they
have God's Promise for their security: Let them but do good, and put their
trust in him, and verily they shall be fed. They are also to consider, that
great riches cannot make them more happy than they are, but rather expose them
to Temptations.

But it may be objected, 1. That there are some kinds of Virtues which seem to
have a contrary tendency, as Charity to those that want, Bounty and Liberality
to any good Work. To which I answer,

That these Acts may very well consist with Riches in the most proper Notion of
it, as it denotes a sufficiency for our Occasions; the ability of contributing
in some proportion toward any worthy and charitable Work; being in the esteem
of every good man one of those occasions and conveniences required to such a
sufficiency, and cannot any more be a prejudice to i^, than it would be for a
man to lay up some part of his Estate in the safest place, to lend it out upon
the best interest, to part with it for the purchase of the same favor and
assistance from others in the like exigencies; to lay it out upon his pleasure,
with respect to that inward comfort and satisfaction which does accompany the
Conscience of doing worthy things. And besides all this, experience will assure
us, that there is a secret Blessing, which does for the most part accompany
such Actions; so that men grow the richer, not the poorer for them, according
to that Proverb, Giving to the poor, increases a man's st^re: And they that in
this kind s^w b^u^tifully, do often even in this world, reap bountifully.

Obj. 2. There are some kind of Vices that seem to have a tendency to the
enriching of men; as Fraud, Ext^rtion, Sordidness, all kinds of unlawful ways
of getting and keeping an Estate. But to this it may be said.

1. That these Vices may tend to the increasing of Men's Possessions, but not to
the making of them truly rich; and it is a plain argument that such persons do
not think themselves to have a sufficiency, who can apply themselves to such
wretched Courses for the getting more.

2. It Is commonly seen in experience, that there is a secret Curse attend such
Practices, a Canker that eats into such Gain, a Hole in the bottom of the Bag,
by which it insensibly drains out, and wastes away; Male parta ma e dilabu^tur:
He that shall carefully observe the usual course of things in the World, may
from his own experience find Instances enough to confirm those Sayings of the
Wiseman, Prove. 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there
is that withho^deth more than is meet, but it tends to poverty. Chap. 13.11,
22. Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished. The wealth of the sinner is
laid up for the just. Chap. 22.1^. ^e that oppresses the poor to increase his
riches, shall certainly come to want. Chap 28.8. He that by unjust gain
increases his substance, shall gather it for him that will pity the poor.

But if a man who by Extortion or unjust gain raises an Estate, happens to
transmit it to his Posterity, he usually entails upon them a Curse together
with it, it decaying by degrees, and coming to nothing: De male quaesit is vix
gaudet tertius haeres: The third Heir scarce ever enjoying an ill-gotten Estate.

Obj 3. It may be objected, That there are some good Men that are poor; and
that God has chosen the po^r of this world to receive the Gospel, and to be
rich in faith, James 2.5. To this it may be said,

1. That the Providence of God may so order it sometimes, as to reduce good Men
to great exigencies, to wander up and down in Sheeps-Skins, and Goats-Skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented: But then these are particular exempt
Cases, such as are not suitable to the most usual and general course of things.
But besides, such as are good Men may sometimes be defective in several of
those Duties which Religion does oblige them to, as Diligence, Caution, etc.
And the poverty of such may justly be ascribed to their defect in Religion.

2. As for that Scripture, That God has chosen the poor in this world; it is
not to be understood in the more absolute sense for such as want Necessaries,
because its plain from other Texts, That though some of the Primitive Believers
were by reason of the Persecution of those times, reduced to great exigencies,
yet the generality of the rest were very liberal in their Contributions toward
them. But it must be understood in the Relative Sense, concerning such as might
be styled comparatively poor; that is, such as were of a lower rank, and meaner
condition than others, and consequently had less Temptation to corrupt and
seduce them, than those that did more abound in these earthly things; of whom
our Savior says, It is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God.

It may further be objected by those of the lowest rank of Poor: We are as it
were condemned to perpetual Poverty; our condition is so mean, and our charge
so great, and the gain so small and inconsiderable, which comes in by our
utmost Labor and Industry, that it will scarce suffice to provide things
absolutely necessary for the support of our selves and dependents; so far are
we from any possibility of mending our Estates, or growing rich.

To These I answer, That we do not say, That all that are truly religious shall
certainly grow rich, let their Circumstances be what they will; but only that
obedience to God's Commands is the most likely way of improving and advancing a
man's Estate, that has means and opportunities of gaining; which though God
has denied thee, yet have thou no reason to be discontented with thy
Condition, or to complain that thou art hardly dealt with: Thou art not so
forlorn, destitute, neglected a Wretch as thou may im^gine. There is a great
Philosopher affirms. That there is no Man born into the World, and grown up to
years of discretion, but has received more good at the hands of God than evil,
more pleasure than pain; though he overlooks and considers not the pleasure, as
thinking it due to him, but fixes too much upon the pain, which is indeed due,
and for the most part deserved. Another great Bishop Wilkins.
Divine says thus, Suppose all manner of evils and afflictions, which are now
promiscuously scattered up and down in the world, whether they concern Soul or
Body; Spiritual Blindness and Obduracy, Poverty, Slavery, Reproach, Sickness,
Pain, Maimedness, Deformity, etc. I say, suppose all these were to be
distributed among Mankind, so as every one were to have an equal share of them;
would you be content to stand to this distribution? I suppose there are not
many persons in this Nation in so miserable and forlorn a condition, that upon
serious consideration of the special advantages they do, or may partake ^f,
above many other Millions in the World, would consent to it. But I shall add
further for thy encouragement, and the vindication of the goodness of God to
thee; That he has put thee into a near capacity of obtaining as happy an
Estate, as the Rich, or Learned, or Powerful: The Gate of Heaven is set open to
thee, Eternal Life and Immortality offered to thee, upon more easy terms in
some respect, than to the Rich and Mighty. Consider that God may on purpose set
thee in a low station, put thee into a mean condition to remove from thee the
Temptations to Pride, Luxury, and other Vices, which Riches or Honor would
have exposed thee to, and which he foresaw thou would not be able to resist.
Consider that he is Wise, and knows better what Condition is fit for thee than
thou thy self do; and likewise good, and has therefore chosen what is best
and most proper for thee. Bestir thy self then, and make a Virtue of Necessity,
and what thou must suffer, suffer patiently, resigning thy Will to the Will of
God: And seeing thou have not, nor art ever likely to obtain those things, in
the enjoyment whereof many men falsely place their happiness, labor after
durable Riches and Righteousness, an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
and that fades not away: Be not contented to be miserable here, and eternally
miserable hereafter, when thou need not: And seeing God has denied thee
these worldly Goods, to compel thee, as it were, to seek after better. This
course, if thou take, [of loving and fearing God, and keeping his
Commandments], thou shall not only obtain Eternal Life hereafter, but also
render thy condition tolerable, nay comfortable to thee here: Thou shall enjoy
inward peace and satisfaction of Mind, and for thy outward estate, God will, if
he sees it best for thee, rais^ thee up Friends to assist thee; or otherwise
make such provision for thee, that thou shall not want what is necessary for
thy support and maintenance.

CHAP. VIII. Of Pleasure.
Fourthly, I Proceed to Pleasure, which is either Bodily or Spiritual, Sensual,
or Intellectual. But first I shall endeavor to explain what is meant by this
Word Pleasure, what is the true sense and notion of it.

Pleasure is that agreeable and delightful Sense that is excited in the Soul,
either by an impression or motion made upon the outward Organs or Sensation, by
any suitable Object, and cenveyed by the Nerves to the Brain; or else by
internal consideration and reflection upon any Object or Action by the
Understanding. Those are called pleasant Tastes or Smells which are apt to
cause such a gentle motion of the Nerves belonging to the Organs of those
Senses, the Tongue and Nose; as is naturally destined to excite a grateful and
delicious sense in the Soul: Those delectable Sights, which in like manner
affect our Eyes, as curious Pictures and Statues, artificial Engines, elegant
and regular motions: Those agreeable Sounds which have a charming influence on
our Ears, as Music and Harmony. The Touch or Feeling is gratified and
delighted by various motions of those Nerves which do not minister to the other
Senses.

To the Senses of Touch and Taste, appertain those Pleasures, which by the wise
Providence of God are annexed to the satisfaction of our Natural Appetites.

These Appetites implanted in us, and all Animals, are to those Things or
Actions, which serve either to the support and preservation of the Individuum,
or each particular Animal; or to the propagation of the Kind. Those which serve
to the support and preservation of the Individuum, are the Appetites of Meat
and Drink, or the Actions of Eating and Drinking: To which the Divine
Providence has not only premised a painful Sense of Hunger to be a Monitor to
us when we have need of Meat and Drink, and compel us to the use of them; but
has also annexed Pleasure to the very Actions of Eating and Drinking, which
otherwise would have been no very grateful Exercise.

This Pleasure of eating and drinking abides no longer than till the
Necessities of Nature are satisfied, and so far Religion does allow of it. When
our Hunger and Thirst are well appeased, all that follows is but a faint kind
of Pleasure, if it be not rather to be styled Satiety, or Glutting: Yet does
not the use of Meats and Drinks consist in an indivisible point; there is a
more moderate and restrained use of them: When we keep within the bounds of our
Appetites, (...), as Hippocrates calls it, not feeding to satiety, nor of the
most delicate Viands. This ought to be our daily practice; and there is a more
free and liberal use of them in feasting, which is also allowed us upon
occasions of Joy; and on Days of Thanksgiving; as Marriages, Christenings,
Victory over Public Enemies, Commemorations of great Mercies to Mankind in
general, our own Nation, or our selves in particular: Such are the Festivals of
our Savior's Nativity, Resurrection, Ascension, Mission of the Holy Ghost,
etc. Our Savior himself was pleased to honor a Marriage Feast with his
presence: And he accepted of a great Feast from Matthew at his calling, Luke
5.25. But to speak in general, the Apostle says, God gives us all things
richly to enjoy. And the Wiseman, Eccles. 5.18. It is good and comely for one
to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor that he takes
under the Sun, all the days of his life, which God gives him; for it is his
portion: And in the next Verse he says, It is the gift of God. The same we
have, Chap. 3.13. So we see God allows us a free use, and cheerful enjoyment of
these outward Blessings. We are to serve God with joyfulness and gladness of
heart, for the abundance of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47. God does not prohibit us
the use and participation of these or any other sensible Pleasures, that are
agreeable to Reason, or our true Interests; but only our Mistakes and Excesses,
in and about them (as the Bishop of Chester speaks) teaching us so to regulate
our selves in the use of them, that they may truly deserve the name of Pleasure.

As for those Appetites and Actions which tend to the propagation and
continuance of the Species and the Pleasures that attend them, God has not
denied us a mo^erate and regular satisfaction and use of them; nay, in some
cases commanded it.

Now the most sincere Pleasure proceeds from such a moderate, regular,
seasonable, well circumstantiate use; such an enjoyment as may be reflected
upon without horror, fear of punishment, or consciousness of guilt, which
attends the excessive, irregular, unseasonable use, or rather, the abuse of
them, and renders the thought and memory of them very bitter and grievous: But
of this particular I have written in a former Dissolution of the World. page
^90.
Treatise.

But here it may be objected, That our Savior in the Gospel has abridged us
of some Pleasures of this kind, which are not in themselves sinful or unlawful,
as having been permitted by God to the Jews, and practiced by the Ancient
Patriarchs, and other men eminent for Piety, without reproof, I mean, the use
of many Wives.

To which I answer, That granting Poligamy not to be in its self unlawful, or
to have any natural turpitude in it; yet is our Savior's Prohibition grounded
up on good Reason, viz. because God at the first created Mankind Male and
Female; that is, one Female only, as well as one Male; and in effect he does so
still; there being as many, nay more Males than Females born into the World:
And therefore it is unreasonable that some men should have many Wives, because
they cannot have them unless others lack.

That there are more Males than Females born, appears, by the Catalogues in all
places, where accounts have been taken of the number of each Sex: And I doubt
not but the case is the same in all places where such accounts have not been
taken.

It may here be asked why these Appetites are so vehement and importunate?

I answer, To secure the great end of continuing the Species, and carrying on
the World: For had they been weak and languid, it might have come to pass that
through inadvertency, or to avoid the labor and trouble of bringing up
Children, and maintaining of Families, the greatest part of men might have
abstained from such Actions, and so the Race of Mankind by degrees have been
extinct, and the World dispeopled.

That these Appetites are so extravagant and irregular, and not without great
difficulty to be moderated and ruled, or kept within bounds, as an effect of
the Ap^stacy of Man: That God permits them so to continue, one cause may be,
that they may be matter wherein to exercise Virtue: For were these vicious
Inclinations, and inordinate Appetites taken away, were men left in absolute
indifferency to Good and Evil, there could be no such thing as Virtue and Vice,
nothing praise, or blameworthy, no place for Rewards or Punishments. For the
exercise of Virtue consists in resisting, and striving against viciuos
Appetites, subduing Passions, and mortifying of Lusts; and those that labor
herein, are Virtuous Persons. Those that are slothful, that lay the Reins upon
the Necks of their Lusts, and follow whither they lead and hurry them away, are
vicious.

You will say, Are not these Exercises painful and repugnant to our Natural
Appetites and Inclinations, and consequently contrary to Pleasure? Is not the
subduing of Lusts compared to the cutting off of Members, which cannot be done
without pain?

I answer, It must be granted, that there is difficulty at first in the New
Birth, in passing from one state to another, all excellent things being hard to
obtain, Difficiliae quae pulchra. The Heathen Poet tells us.

(...).

The Gods have set Sweat before Virtue, the way to which is long, steep and
rough at the first: But afterward that becomes easy and delightful, which was
at first difficult; and a great deal of pleasure and joy attends the very
contention with, and conquests of our Lusts and Passions; and that godly sorrow
that is required as one of the first acts in the change of our condition, is
always accompanied with secret pleasure: And as it is said of wicked men, That
in the midst of laughter their heart is sorrowful; so may it be said of good
men, That in the midst of their sorrow their heart is j^yful. On the other
hand, there are far greater difficulties and pains to be undergone in the
service and drudgery of impetuous Lusts. Bishop Wilkins.
The trouble of being cured is not so great as that of being sick; nor is the
trouble of being sober comparable to that of being debauched, and intemperate.
Non est (says Seneca) ut quib ^sdam dictum est, arduum in virtutes and
asperumiter; plano adeuntur. Non v^nae vobis auct^r rei venio, facili^ est ad
beatam vitam via, inite modo bonis auspiciis, ipsisque Diis been juvantibus,
etc. The way to Virtue is not (as some have written) steep and rough, but plain
and level. Let me become to you the Author of a new, and not frivolous thing.
The way to a Happy Life is easy, do but enter upon it with God's help: It is
much more difficult to do what the [wicked men] do. What is more facile than
calmness and quiet of mind? What more laborious than anger? What more remiss
and void of trouble than Clemency? What more busy and toilsome than Cruelty?
Chastity is vacant and at ease: Lust is always occupied and unquiet. He that
tells Lies is hard put to it to maintain and make them good: and yet for all
his shifts, is often detected, and put to shame: Whereas he that speaks truth
is void of all fear and trouble. The like may be said of other Virtues and
Vices compared together: So that Virtue is in it self more agreeable to Reason,
and more easy and eligible than Vice; and it proceeds from the pravity and
corruption of our Natures, that we do not choose it accordingly.

Besides, In all Pleasures we are to consider, whether the subsequent pain and
sorrow do not outweigh the present enjoyment; which if it do, the voluptua^y
Philosophers themselves advise to abstain from them. Now the Pleasures of sin,
(as the Scripture calls them) as Intemperance and Impurity do often bring upon
the committers of them Pain and Sickness, and sometimes noisome Diseases in
this Life, but, to be sure, Eternal Misery and distress in the world to come:
Between which, and a short and transient Pleasure, there is no proportion. I
might add hereto the Judgment of Seneca, concerning the filthiness and
unmanliness of these Vices of Intemperance and Lust: Nulli (says he) turpius
occupati sunt: No men are more sordidly employed. Etiam si vana gloriae imagine
teneantur, speciose tamen ^rrant: Licet avaros mihi, etc. If men be taken with
a vain image of glory, they err, but yet speciously. Should you enumerate to me
covetous persons, or angry men, or such as exercise unjust hatred, or war one
against another; all these virilius peccant, sin more manly: But such as give
up, or prostitute themselves to Gluttony, Drunkenness, and Lust, eorum
inhonesta labes est; their stain is dishon^urable and sordid.

Of the Pleasures of the Senses of Seeing, Hearing, and Smelling I shall say
nothing, b^t that if duly circumstantiated, and placed upon proper Objects,
they have no turpitude in them, but may lawfully be enjoyed. Of Seeing and
Hearing I have said something in a former Discourse.

As for those things which we call by the name of Sports and Diversions,
Religion does likewise admit of a moderate use of these: And what is beyond
such a use does rather tire men, than recreate them: Bishop Wil^ns.
It being as much the property of such things to weary a man, when he is once
sufficiently refreshed by them, as it is to refresh him when he is wearied by
other things.

Of Intellectual P^easures we shall speak when we come to treat o^ the
happiness of the inward man.

Here it may be objected, That the life of a Christian is a melancholy and
mournful life, and that we must take leave of all the Pleasures and Delights of
the World, when once we enter upon it. Does not So^omon s^y, Eccles. 7.2. It is
better to go to the horse of mourning, than to the house of feasting, etc. v.
3. Sorrow is better than laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance, the
heart is made better. v. 4. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning;
and the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.

This is a great prejudice against a holy Life, and deters many men from
venturing upon it. They are loath to part with all Mirth and Jollity and
Pleasure, which they esteem the chief Happiness of their Lives, and to live
more restrained and regular Lives; at least they desire to enjoy them a little
longer, till they are tired and glutted with them, deferring their Repentance
to Sickness or old Age.

To this I answer, That innocent mirth and joy, or even feasting it self, are
not absolutely forbidden. The same Author tells us, That there is a time to
weep, and a time to laugh: A time to mourn, and a time to dance: And that every
thing is beautiful in its Season; nay, Christians are commanded to rejoice
evermore. But in this place he compares Laughter and Sorrow, Feasting and
Mourning together, and prefers the latter, and upon very good reason; because
Feasting is oftentimes an occasion of temptation to intemperance and excess in
eating and drinking; idle and vain talk; scurrilous and profane jesting;
lascivious Songs, which tend to corrupt men's Manners, effeminate their Minds,
and bring them in love with sensual and brutish Pleasures. Where^s from sorrow
and mourning there is no such danger, whatever the occasion of it be; whether
public calamities, losses, death of Relations, or Friends. Thereby we are
brought to consider the uncertainty of all these outward Enjoyments, not to
overvalue them, or set our hearts upon them, that so we may not be overwhelmed
with grief at the loss of them; to bewail our own and others Sins, which for
the most part bring these afflictions and sufferings upon our selves, or them;
to condole with comfort and support those who are too much dejected and apt to
sink under their burdens.

CHAP. IX. Of Honor and Reputation.
Fifthly, A Fifth thing conducive to the happiness of the outward Man is Honor
and Reputation, a Blessing highly to be valued, and much to be preferred before
Riches or Pleasures, or even Life it self. Prove. 22.1. A good name is rather to
be chosen than great riches, and loving favor rather than Silver and Gold.
Eccles. 7.1. A good name is better than precious ointment. It is a Proverb
among the Vulgar, Take away my good name, and take away my life: Intimating,
that it is as dear to them as their Lives. Much more then will a generous
person choose rather to die, than to do any unworthy thing, that may expose him
to infamy, or blast his Reputation. And because it is a thing of so great
excellency, therefore we do pay it as the best service we can do, and return we
can make to God and his Deputies, Magistrates and Parents. Honor is a good
thing, whereby we not only reap many advantages while we live, but that does
also survive us, and abide after us when we are gone out of the World, Psalm.
112 6. The Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. There is in man a
natural desire to have a good Name perpetuated, and mentioned with honor when
he is dead and gone; which (as a learned A B^. Tillotson.
Prelate says) is a sign that there is in Human Nature some presage of a Life
after Death, in which they hope, among other Rewards of well doing, to meet
with this also, to be well spoken of to Posterity. Bishop Lo^d.
And another: Man among many tokens of immortality, has by secret instinct a
natural desire to be thought of and spoken of in aftertimes. Honor is a great
spur and encouragement to Virtuous Actions: Every man (says the forementioned
Author) that has any spark of generosity in him, is desirous of fame; and
though men care not how soon it comes, yet they will be glad to have it after
Death, rather than not at all. And (Bishop Wilkins says) The more wise and
virtuous any man is, the more care will he take to transmit a grateful Memory
of himself to future times, that he be well spoken of, that his Name may be as
a precious Ointment, leaving a Perfume behind it; that men may rise up at the
mention of it, and call him blessed. Nor (says he) can any man despise Honor;
but he that does either despair of it, or resolve against doing any thing that
may deserve it. And certainly (says the Archbishop) he that has no regard to
his Fame, is lost to all purposes of virtue and goodness. When a man is once
come to this, not to care what others say of him; the next step is to have no
care what he himself does. Quod Conscientia est apud Deum, id fama est apud
homine^: What conscience is in respect of God, that fame is in respect of men.
Next to a good Conscience, a clear Reputation ought to be to every man the
dearest thing in the world.

You Will say, What is Honor?

It is very well defined by the D^. Wilkins.
Bishop of Chester, often mentioned, to be, The esteem and good opinion men
have concerning the person or actions of another, together with such external
Expressions of respect as are suitable thereunto.

Now this so valuable a good is the peculiar reward of virtue and piety, 1 Samuel
2.30. Them that honor me, I will honor, and them that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed, Prove. 4.8, 9. Solomon says of Wisdom, that is* the fear of
God, Exalt her, and she shall promote thee, and bring thee to honor. She shall
give to thy head an ornament of grace, and a crown of glory, Prove. 10.7. The
memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prove.
3.35. The wise shall inherit glory. But shame shall be the promotion of f^ols.
Piety and Virtue command a respect from all sorts of men. Good men hold
themselves obliged to give it, by the Command of God, and the excellency of the
thing, it being a gift of God; and wicked men though they may deny that outward
respect that is due to good and righteous persons; yet even these cannot but
have an inward veneration for Goodness and Religion. It is very remarkable,
that even the rude and licentious Vulgar at Rome had such a reverence of the
Person of Cato, that though such lewdness was permitted by the Law in the
Festival of Flora, yet so long as he was present in the Theater, they could not
go on with their obscene sports, nor have the confidence to demand those:
Florales joci nudandarum meretricum, as Seneca calls them. The wicked indeed
hate the righteous, because his life is a reproof to them, and gives them some
check in their vicious courses, taking from them their great excuse of the
impossibility of God's Commandments; and demonstrating, that through the
assistance of Divine Grace, which is always granted to them who do what in them
lies, and pray for it; it is possible to obey them to such a degree as will be
accepted by God: Wicked men though they hate virtue in the Subject, yet simply
and abstractly they acknowledge it to be good; though in their practice they
prefer Vice before Virtue; yet never any arrived to that degree of sottishness,
as to say, it was better than Virtue: For example; better to be a glutton, and
a drunkard than a temperate person: to cheat and defraud, than to be just and
righteous in our dealings: And therefore, though they hate and persecute men
for being religious, yet they disguise the Subject of their hatred, pretending
it to be Hypocrisy, Heresy, Superstition, or the like, that they hate them
for. Whence it appears, that they are self-condemned persons. Seneca in his
Fourth Book, De Beneficiis, cap. 17. has much to this purpose, Adeo gratiosa
est virtus (says he) ut insitum etiam malis sit probare meliora: Virtue is so
gracious, that it is naturally ingrafted even in bad men to approve that which
is good. And again, Nec quisquam tantum a naturali lege descivit and hominem
exuit, ut animi causa malus sit. Neither has any man so far degenerated from
the natural Law, and put off man, as to be wicked for his minds sake, or only
because it is his pleasure to be so. And again, Maximum hoc habemus a natura
meritum, quod virtus in omnium animos lumen suum permittit, etiam qui non
sequuntur, illum vident: Nature has herein deserved exceeding well of us, That
Virtue sends its light into all men's minds, even they that do not follow it,
yet see it.

Against what is generally said, That there is nothing truly honorable but
Virtue, it may be objected, that Learning and Knowledge is honorable, and yet
it is not always accompanied with Virtue, there being some learned men vicious,
as St. Augustine also supposes in that Saying, Quid prodest esse peritum and
periturum? I answer, That the acquisition of Learning and Knowledge is by
something virtuous and commendable, viz. Labor and Industry in a Calling; nay,
Knowledge it self being that which all men naturally desire, and being some
participation of a Divine Perfection, viz. Omniscience; and being that which
distinguishes us from, and advances us above brute Beasts, and makes us capable
of virtue and happiness, a higher degree of it, exalting our Faculities,
enabling us to act in a larger Sphere, and to do more good, must be
acknowledged to be an excellent quality, and to merit some honor and respect;
and all men generally think so, and give it accordingly.

That it does so, appears further from the contrary, that is, Ignorance and
Folly, which is among all men very dishonorable, and reproachful; insomuch,
that men abhor nothing more than the imputation of Folly; esteeming it a
greater disgrace to be accounted Fools, than to be accounted vicious; though
indeed wicked men be the greatest Fools and on the contrary, godly men the only
wise men.

Here I cannot but wonder, that there should be such an unsatiable thirst after
Honor, implanted in the nature of man: Why men should be so jealous of losing
the reputation of any new Invention; so troubled and disturbed at having any of
their Observations or Discoveries, though by themselves communicated to others,
published without an honorable mention of them; so netled at the discovery of
any mistake in their Writings, though but Gramatical; and being upbraided with
it, why they should be willing to accept of false honor and undue praises: Why
they should think it a great matter to be praised by ignorant persons, and
incompetent Judges for such Abilities and Gifts, as they are not conscious to
themselves of; Does praise add any thing to them of real good besides conceit?

I cannot conceive any other reason than what I intimated before, that it might
be a powerful spur to incite them to the practice and exercise of religious and
virtuous Actions; If it be objected that men are as jealous of their Reputation
in point of Knowledge, as they are in point of Virtue; I answer, It is an
error, and a fault, and they ought not to be so; though for the reasons before
alleged, I deny not Knowledge to be an excellent quality, which enlarges and
advances the Understanding, and renders a man capable of greater Employments,
and doing more good than others of inferior Abilities and improvements.

And further, that it is not Virtue alone to which Honor is due; as appears in
that we are commanded to honor Parents, Magistrates, Ministers in general, as
such, without any restriction or exception of those that are vicious. It is
enough that they have an Authority derived from God, and a kind of Divine
Impress and Character upon them, to make them venerable.

CHAP. X. Of Friends.
Sixthly, FRiends are no small comfort and addition to our Happiness or
Well-being in this World: Scarce any outward Blessing so desirable, useful, and
beneficial as Friendship. Cicer^ says, Non aqua non igni pluribus in l^cis
utimur quaam amicitia: We have not more frequent use of Fire and Water, than we
have of Friendship. Nothing so agreeable to Nature as it, (says the same
Author) nothing so convenient either for Prosperity, or Adversity: Nothing more
pleasant and delightful than the sincere love and affection of a Faithful
Friend, and a reciprocal love of him; nothing more acceptable than his Society
and Converse.

But besides the pleasure and delight which Friendship affords us, we reap many
and great Benefits from it. As,

1. Faithful Counsel and Advice, which is of great moment in any doubtful
Matter; it being true, Plus vident oculi quam oculus: Many Eyes see more than
one: Or any Matter of weighty concernment, wherein it is not safe to trust to
our own Judgments, Prove. 27.9. Ointment and perfume rej^ice the heart; so does
the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel. How great comfort must it
needs be to have one whom we may securely unbosom our selves to, and trust with
a Secret? to whom we may open our Griefs? disburthen our Minds, and so find
ease and relief?

2. Seasonable Reproof: This (says the Author of the Whole Duty of Man) is of
all others the most peculiar Duty of a Friend. I might add, the greatest
benefit he can bestow upon his Friend, it being indeed that which none else is
qualified for. Such an unwilingness there is in most men to hear of their
faults, that those that undertake that Work, had need have a great
prepossession of their Hearts to make them patient of it. Of the absurdity and
unreasonableness of this unwillingness to be reproved, Cicero says very well,
Atque illud absurdum est, quod ii qui monentur, eam molest^am quam debent
capere non capiunt, eam capiunt qua debent carere. Pecc^sse enim se non
anguntur, objurgari m^leste ferunt: qu^d c^ntra oportebat, delicto dolere,
objurgatio^e gaudere. It is absurd, that they which are admonished receive not
thence the trouble which they ought to have, but that which they ought to want.
For they are not sorry that they have sinned, but they take it ill that they
are reproved. Whereas on the contrary they ought to grieve for their Offense,
but rejoice for their Reproof.

3. Condoleance and Consolation in any Adversity, Affliction, or Suffering; as
Sickness, the Death of any near Relation or Friend, loss of Worldly Goods by
Fire, Shipwreck, Innundation, Invasion of Enemies, or the like. He that
condoles with his Friend in such Accidents, does as it were bear p^rt of his
Burden, and by consolatory Considerations strengthens his Spirit, and enables
him to support it. And there is great need of this to some Natures, which
otherwise are in danger to be oppressed and overwhelmed with Grief, and even
distracted by such Calamities.

4. Relief and Supply of Want in case of Poverty and Necessity; a true Friend
as well as a Brother is born for adversity, and will rather rejoice in
contributing liberally to the support of his Friend, than desert him, or deny
his assistance. In this case Friends may be a snare to us, tempting us to put
our confidence in Man rather than God, and to think our Security greater in the
multitude of friends, than the providence and protection of God.

5. Prayers to God for us, recommending us to him for all Blessings, both
Spiritual and Temporal.

Now all true Friendship is grounded upon Virtue: Virtus amicitiam and gignit
and conti^et, nec sine virtute Amicitia ull^ pacto esse potest, Cic. de
Amicitia. Virtue does both beget and maintain friendship; nor can there
possibly be any frienship without Virtue. True friends are such as sincerely
desire and endeavor each others real good, both spiritual and temporal; but
such friendship cannot be contracted and continued but only between persons
truly religious, that love and fear God. We cannot expect fidelity and the
benefits before recited from any but those who are so qualified: And those that
are so, their friendship is courted by all Men, and who so happy as they that
can get an interest in it!

CHAP. XI. Of the Happiness of the Inward Man.
I Proceed now to treat of the Happiness of the Inner Man, the Soul or Spirit,
and that consists in the love of God, and of our Neighbor; whatever makes the
Soul happy, must be suitable and agreeable to the Nature of it. Now the Soul is
a spiritual substance, and therefore its Objective Happiness must be so too.
The Soul is immortal, and therefore the Object which makes it happy must be of
eternal duration. The Desires of the Soul are very vast and extensive; nay,
infinite; and therefore not to be satisfied but by an Infinite Good.

From the Love of God flows an universal Obedience to all his holy
Commandments, John 14.23. If a man love me, he will keep my words. It is the
nature of love to desire and endeavor to please and gratify the Party
beloved: And therefore he that loves God will labor to please him, by doing
those things that are acceptable to him, and right in his sight. The Love of
God will add Wings to his Soul, and constrain him to run the ways of his
Commandments, which will no longer seem grievous or burdensome to him, but
pleasant and delightful; yea, eligible, were they proposed to his chioce in
competition with the short and unsatisfactory Pleasures of Sin.

Now Holiness of Life, and Obedience to the Commandments of God, has the
pro^ises of all good things both for the Soul and Body; for this Life, and a
better, Psalm. 84.11. He will give grace and glory, and n^ good thing will ^e
withhold from them that li^e uprightly. Psalm. 34.10. They that fear the Lord
shall not want any good thing. Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together
for go^d to them that love God. 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable to all
things, having the promises of the Life, that now is, and of that which is to
come.

Moreover those that love God, cannot but be happy, because they that love him,
shall be beloved of him, both of the Father, and of the Son, John 14.21. He
that loves me, shall be beloved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self to him. And again, v. 25. If a man love me, my Father will
love him, and we will come to him, and make our abode with him. God is the
fountain of Happiness; whatever good is in the Creature, it came from him, and
is but a Beam of his Light: Whatever is in the Creature in a limited,
restrained, imperfect manner, is in him without limitation, without
restriction, without imperfection. He both can and will make them whom he loves
as happy as they are capable of being. God is the only Object that deserves the
highest degree of our Love, and he requires it: And therefore it is as well
against our Duty as our Interest to deny it.

As for the Love of our Neighbor, that is commanded us by God, Levit. 19.18.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, repeated Matt. 22.9. 1 John 4.21.
And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his Brother
also. From this immediately flows the performance of the Duties of the Second
Table. That great Rule of doing to others as we would they should do to us in
like case; and the contrary of not doing to others that we would not should be
done to us, are necessary consequences of loving our Neighbor as our selves.
If we loved him as our selves, we would wish him as much good, and do him as
much good as we do to our selves. We would willingly that other Men should do
their Duties to us, show us all kindness, and be helpful and beneficial to us
in all our Wants and Necessities; and why? because we love our selves. Had we
the same love to them, it would have the same effects. We would do the same
good to them, that we desire from them. To instance in the particular Commands:

Children, Subjects and Inferiors would yield to their Parents, Magistrates and
Superiors, all that Honor, Reverence and Obedience, which themselves would
expect and desire from their Inferiors, were they in the same Relations and
Circumstances.

No Man would willingly have his own Body killed, or wounded, or any way
tormented and put to pain; because no Man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, as the Ephesians. 5.29.
Apostle speaks. Did he then love his Neighbor as himself, he would be so far
from injuring him in that kind, that he would not suffer others to do so, if he
could help it.

Every Man is jealous of the Loyalty of his Wife, and impatient of having his
Enclosure invaded, and made common, because he sets a high value on her Love
and Fidelity, and looks upon it as a great dishonor, as well as an injury done
him, to be robbed of it. Think we then he would offer such an abuse and wrong
to his Neighbor, did he love him as himself, and were as tender of his
Reputation as his own.

Did Men love their Neighbors as themselves, there would be no need of Locks
and Bars to secure their Goods from rapine and surreptions by Thieves and
Robbers, because there would be no such; so that every Man might lie down
securely, and there would be none to make him afraid: Love is so far from
invading another's right, that it is liberal and communicative, and willing
rather to part with its own.

The like, if it were needful, might easily be shown in the rest of the
Commandments relating to our Neighbor.

It remains now that we speak of the Effects and Consequents of a Holy Life
upon the Soul or Inward Man.

They are, I. The regulating and exalting of our Faculties, and inabling them
for their proper Functions. II. The Peace, Tranquillity and Joy attendant to,
and consequent thereupon.


1st. As for the regulating and exalting of our Faculties, they are, 1. The
Understanding. 2. The Will. 3. The Affections.

1. The Understanding: As Sin and Vice does stupifie and blind it, and disable
it to judge aright; so the Commandments of God when obeyed do enlighten it, and
enable it to discern and approve things that are excellent, Psalm 119.98. Thou
through thy Commandments have made me wiser than mi^e enemies; for they are
ever with me, v. 99. I have more understanding than all my teachers; for thy
testimonies are my meditation. v. 100. I understand m^re than the a^cients,
because I keep thy precepts. Psalm 111.10. A good understanding have all they
that do his Commandments.

2. The Will: The Perfection whereof consists in a perfect resignation to the
Will of God, and true liberty; that is, freedom from the Bondage of Sin and
Corruption, from the slavery of Satan, from the dominion of every vile
Affection.

Wicked Men are real Slaves and Vassals to their Lusts: This the very Heathen
acknowledged; as Cicero and Horace, Juvenal, Persius, and others.

From this Bondage the Son of God delivers us, John 8.34. Our Savior says,
Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. And v. 36. If the son therefore
shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

3. The Affections or Passions: The Law of God requires and commands us to
moderate and rule them, to place them upon their proper Objects, and to keep
them within their due bounds; and good reason there is we should hold a strict
hand over them: Animum rege, qui nisi paret Imperat. If they be given way to,
and the Bridle let loose, they become the great disturbers of Men's peace,
quiet, and tranquillity; Anger, Hatred, Envy, etc. What storms and tumults do
they raise in the Breast? what mischievous imaginations do they excite? what
plotting, and counterplotting of revenge? breaking out many times into
railings, revilings, opprobrious Language, bitter Curses and Execrations; they
toss the Mind to and fro, as contrary Winds do the Sea, causing it to cast up
Mire and Dirt.

On the contrary; where the Passions are duly governed and moderated, kept
within their proper bounds and channels, the Soul is calm and serene, and fit
for any Employment or Exercise Civil or Religious.

2dly. The Happiness of the Inward Man consists in that peace, joy and
tranquillity that is attendant upon, or consequent to our obedience to God's
Commands.

1. Pleasure and Delight attends the performance of our Duties. Virtuous and
Pious Actions are agreeable to the Nature and Inclinations of good Men: It is
as grateful and pleasing to a good Man to do good, as to an hungry Man to eat,
or a thirsty Man to drink. It is as great a satisfaction to his Rational
Inclinations, as those other are to the sensual Appetites. Nothing can be more
delightful and welcome to a generous Mind, than an opportunity of showing it
self grateful, to Parents, Friends and Benefactors, and making ample returns to
those by whom he has been obliged for the favors received: Nothing more
acceptable than to be employed in worthy Actions, especially such as tend to
promote public good, the peace and prosperity of our Country, or Mankind in
general. The Heathen Poet could say, Dulce and decorum est pro Patria mori. It
is a sweet and comely thing even to die for ones Country: Which yet I suppose
is too high a flight or pitch of Charity for a Heathen to attain to; and that
there must be something of glory to carry them so far. To overcome Evil with
Good, and return Kindnesses instead of Injuries, thereby melting the Hearts of
our Enemies, and making them our Friends, is certainly a more pleasant thing,
and much more for our peace and ease, than revenging our selves of them. To
return good for evil is a Godlike quality; our Savior commanding us to love
our enemies, and to do good to them that hate us, etc. to engage us thereto,
proposes God's Example; who causes his sun to shine on the evil, and on the
good; and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. Who is kind unto the
unthankful and the evil. Cicero in his Gratulatory Oration to Caesar for M.
Marcellus, makes him that forgives Enemies, and restores them to their former
Dignities, like to God: Non ego illum summis viris comparo, sed Deo similem
judico.

2. Peace and joy, and confidence toward God is a necessary consequent of
Obedience to his Commandments, 1 John 3.21. If our hearts condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God; and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him,
because we keep his Commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his
sight. Delight and Pleasure, and satisfaction of Mind, inward Peace and
Tranquillity naturally follow Religious Actions: When a man has done his Duty,
and spent his time well, he can reflect upon his doings with comfort; he is not
afraid to review his Life past, and call himself to an account for what he has
done; Res severa est verum gaudium, says Seneca: Vnde sit interrogas? dicam;
ex bo^a conscientia, ex honestis consiliis, ex rectis actionibus: True joy is a
severe thing: Do you ask whence it comes? I Will tell you; From a good
^onscience, from honest Counsels, from just Actions. A good Conscience is said
to be a continual Feast: The Poet resembles it to a Brazen Wall, which secures
the Soul from all inward Trouble and Disquiet, Fear and Terror.

-- Hic murus ah neus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
I shall conclude this Particular with the Words of Dr. Wilkins, Bishop of
Chester, The most rational, solid, sublime, complete, durable Delights of all
others do flow from the Conscience of well-doing. It Is a chief part this, of
that Heaven we enjoy upon Earth; and it is a principal part of that Happiness
which we hope to enjoy in Heaven; next to the Beatifical Vision and Fruition of
God, is the Happiness of a good Conscience, and next to that, the Society of
Saints and Angels. Solomon says of Wisdom, that is the fear of God, Her ways
are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3.17. Peace
internal, Peace external, Peace eternal: Peace with our selves; Peace with Men;
Peace with God; as I have heard a Reverend Divine distinguish it.

On the other side, no Man can be happy that keeps not a good Conscience: But
without Holiness of Life, and Obedience to God's Commandments, a good
Conscience cannot be kept, Esaias 57.21. There is no peace to the wicked says my
God. Guilt is an obligation to Punishment; but an obligation to Punishment
infers an expectation of it; and whosoever expects it does really suffer it: as
Seneca excellently, Dat poenas quisquis expectat; quisquis autem meruit
expectat: That man does really suffer punishment, who expects it: But whosever
has deserved it, expects it. Were it not for diversion, and nonattendance to
his Condition, a wicked man would carry a continual Hell in his Breast; there
is therefore (as I have noted elsewhere) but a thought's distance between him
and Hell: His only security is in being a stranger to himself. This, (one would
think) should be the most powerful curb imaginable to restrain men from sin,
and the most effectual Persuasive in the World to a Holy life; That those that
live in Sin cannot think upon their Condition without fear and disquiet;
especially those who are guilty of secret Crimes, who are liable to those more
severe Lashes, and affrighting Rebukes of Conscience. These Men are not able to
hear such Sins reproved without blushing and confusion, and inward trouble of
Mind; -- Rubet Auditor cui frigida men's est
Criminibus, tacita sudant praecordiaculpa.
-- He whose Spirits feel
Cold guilt, his Crimes laid open,
Blushing hears
His conscious Intrails sweat.
Nay, sometimes they are in such distress, as to be a burden to themselve, as
holy Job Job 7.20.
speaks, and weary of their very Beings, so as to choose Strangling rather than
Life; or else to be their own delators, and publish their guilt. God has
impl^nted in our Natures (as I noted before) an aversation from, and dislike of
Sin: The Reason of Man cannot be reconciled to it, but must needs disapprove
and condemn it. We know (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.) that the Law and
Commandment of God is holy, and just, and good; and therefore he that lives in
Sin, is a self-condemned person, and can have no inward peace. You will o^ject,
Consuetudo peccandi tolli^ sensum ^e^cati^: The Custom of sinning takes aw^y
t^^ sense of Sin: And some men have their Consciences cauterized, being p^st
feeling, and go on securely in their viciou^ Cou^ses without check or remorse.
I answer, That such men indeed, who long r^s^st the Grace of God, he is pleased
^t ^^st to withdraw it from them, and g^ve them up to a reprobate Mind, to do
things not convenient; yet is not their condition the better for this: But this
senselesness or stupidity is a more dangerous and incurable Disease, answering
to a Lethargy, or Apoplexy in the Body.

Neither yet does the Troubles of Mind arising from an evil Conscience,
determine in Death, but continue for ever. This is that Worm which dies not; a
sad reflection upon our own desperate madness and folly in leading such wicked
Lives, as have brought this Misery upon us; and a perpetual indignation
against, and condemnation of our selves.

I have often wondered that the very Heathen, who had no clear Revelation of a
future Estate after this Life ended, nor any more than an ancient Tradition of
Rewards and Punishments then to be received or suffered, accordingly as Men had
lived virtuous or wicked Lives should be so terrified with a sense of guilt;
and that the consciousness of secret Crimes should be so grievous and
insupportable to them, arming their Minds against themselves, and making them
their own Tormentors, as the Poet expresses it, -- Quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere coedit,
Occultum quatiente animo tortore slagellum.
I cannot but think that this great terror and anxiety of Mind attending the
consciousness of any heinous sin, is more than the effect of an expectation of
punishment, grounded only upon an ancient Tradition; but that the sense of a
connection between Sin and Punishment is deeply imprinted upon the Soul of Man,
by the Finger of God; and is one great Argument of the existence of a Deity.

Against what we have said concerning the Happiness that attends the godly in
this present State, it may be objected: Is it not said in Scripture, Psalm.
34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous. And do we not read in the
Hebrews, Chap. 11.37. of some who had trial of bonds and imprisonments, who
were stoned, sawn in sunder, tempted, slain with the sw^rd, wa^dred about in
Sheeps skins and Goat^skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the
world was not worthy. And does not the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this
life on^y we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. And 2 Timothy
3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

To all this I answer, That we speak according to the natural and usual course
of things. But there are some exceptions from general Rules, peculiar and
exempt Cases; some righteous persons, whom for weighty and wise Reasons God is
pleased to permit to be exercised with great and sore A^llictions and
Distresses; either perhaps to manifest his own Power in supporting them; or to
set them forth as illustrious Examples of Fortitude, Faith and Patience. Did
not righteous Men sometimes conflict with adversity and Misery, there would be
no use of such a Grace as Patience; nay, it could not be known that there were
any such; or, to enhance their future reward. The Martyrs who seal the Truth
with their Blood, shall in the judgment of Divines, be advanced to a higher
degree of Glory than ordinary Christians, and ^e crowned with Aureolae suitable
to their deserts.

But those two latter places of the Apostle are to be understood of the
Primitive Times of Christianity, when all the Powe^s of the World were Heathen;
when God was pleased to make use of the Sufferings of the Pro^essors of it ^o
propagate the Gospel, after a strange and wonderful manner; So that Sanguis
Martyrum was said to be Semen Ecclesiae, the Blood of Martyrs, the Seed of the
Church. But now since the public reception and acknowledgment of the Truth:
Since Kings have become ^ursing Fathers, and Queens nursi^g M^thers to the
Church: The case is altered, and Religion instead of exposing its Professors to
Sufferings, does rather promote their Wor^dly Interest.

Those Afflictions which God is pleased to lay upon his Children and Servants
as fatherly Corrections for their Miscarriages, serving as Physic to purge out
the Relics of Corruption, and to embitter Sin to them, and quicken them to
the performance of their Duty; ^re no prejudice to our Assertion, because we
bring them upon our selves by our own default; and it is not holiness of Life,
but the want of it, and neglect of our Duties, which is always the procuring,
and often the productive cause of them. For God does not willingly afflict nor
grieve the Children of men, Lament. 3.33. Here we may note the great
imperfection of the Love of God even in the best Men, Afflictions being
oftentimes a more powerful Curb to restrain them from the commission of Sin;
and a more effectual Spur to quicken them to Duty, than the Love of God: as we
see in David, the Man after God's own heart, Psalm 119.67.

CHAP. XII. Of the Hap^iness of the Future Estate, or Of Eternal Life.
IT remains that we say something concerning the Happiness of the Future Estate
after this Life is ended.

The Happiness of this Estate is called Eternal Life and consists in the
Knowledge and Love of God, and his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and the joy and
delectation that necessarily results therefrom, John 22.3. And this is life
eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and ^es^s Christ whom
thou have sent. That is, know thee to be their God, know thee so as to love
thee. Knowledge alone is not sufficient to make us happy; the lapsed Angels
know the Excellencies and Perfections of the Divine Nature, but yet they are
never the more happy for that Knowledge, because they have no interest in God,
nor are like to reap any benefit or advantage by what they know of him. So in
Men here in this World, Virtue and Knowledge may be separated: A knowing Man
may be a vicious Man, and consequently unhappy. Again, Knowledge of the
Mysteries of Nature, and the Works of God, though there be in Man an eager
thirst after it, and some pleasure in obtaining it, yet if it terminates only
in Knowledge, and be directed to no further end, it does not contribute much to
our Happiness. It is a known saying, Scire tuum vihil est nisi te scire he
sciat alter; and truly I am apt to think there may be something of truth in it.
Those Men that exercise their Wits in curious Mathematical Speculations, could
they be assured that their Inventions and Discoveries should never come to the
knowledge of any Creature but themselves, I doubt whether the pleasure of the
Invention, would in their own esteem compensate the labor an^ toil of the
Inquisition. But yet even in this State thus much may be said in commendation
of Knowledge; that it does advance and enlarge the Understanding, and render
the Soul capable of a greater degree of Happiness, as I have said before.

But in the World to come the Vision of God cannot be separated from his Love.
Such a knowledge of God will transform the blessed Souls to whom it shall be
communicated into his holy Image; We shall b^ like him (says the Apostle) for
we shall see him as he is. None shall be admitted to this sight, but those that
are pure in heart; Without holiness no man shall see God. And to these the
clear understanding of all the Works of God, both of Creation and Providence,
will stir upt he most exalted Affections of Admiration, Love and Joy.

But I shall not proceed further in my own Words to describe the Happiness of a
future ^state, or Eternal Life, because I find it so fully and clearly done by
the Right Reverend Dr. Patrick, now Lord Bishop of Ely, in his Treatise of The
Witnesses to Christianity, Part 2d. that I have nothing material to add to it.
Therefore I shall transcribe thence what he has concerning the Love of God;
for the rest referring the Reader to the Book it self.

And if (s^i^h he) the Nature of this Life be furt^er ^x^mined, you will find
the Mind [o^ which he had spoken befor^] is not the only Faculty that shall be
(...), but the Will shall conceive a (...) a^ gr^^t as the Knowledge of which I
have (...). For as God is the hi^hest ^bj^ct of the Understanding, being the
prime Truth, so he is the chiefest Object of the Will, being the first and best
Good. And therefore as the Understanding then shall most clearly know him, so
the Will in like manner shall most ardently love him, and find perfect
satisfaction in that Love. There is a necessary connection between these thing,
and it cannot be otherwise, but that from the best Good clearly known, there
will flow the greatest Love, drawing along with it the greatest delight, and
the most perfect repose. And therefore to see God contains in its Notion both
Love and Delectation, with Rest and Satisfaction. Love naturally flows from
thence, as from its Fountain; and the other naturally flow from Love, which is
the highest Act of that Faculty which we call the Will, as knowing and
con^emplating is of the Understanding Desire indeed is the first motion of it,
when any thing is apprehended to be good for us: but that will there be
quenched in possession and enjoyment, and no more of it can be conceived to
remain than a longing for the continuance and increase of this Happiness, which
yet will be so certain, that we shall be rather confident than desirous.

The Will therefore having such a glorious Object always before it, will be
wholly employed in Love, and spend it self without any decay in flames of
affection toward this universal Good, which shines so fairly and brightly in
its Eyes. It will apply it self to the enjoyment of it, with as great a
vehemence as it can; and laying its Mouth* as St. Augustine teaches me to speak)
to the Spring of all Happiness, do more than taste the sweetness of it: We may
expect to have it filled with those delicious Pleasures which we know attend on
Love, and which in that State will be proportionable to the greatness of the
good that is embraced, and to the strength and ardency of the embracement.

And whereas, here in this World, Men are apt to love beyond all reason,
whereby their Love becomes adulterate, and is mixed with so many discontents,
that it proves but a bitter sweet; there our Understanding will be in its full
growth, and highest pitch; so that as nothing which is reasonable shall be
omitted to be done; nothing likewise shall be done that is unreasonable: This
Love will be grounded upon the clearest Judgment; this Flame kindled by the
purest Light; so that there shall be no trouble or disquiet in it, but perfect
rest and peace.

And whereas in this World, Men's Affections flow to things that are not near so
big as themselves ( i. e. as their own Desires) and so they languish, and
faint, and fall sick; even in the enjoyment of the best good it affords,
because they find it is not a supply proportionable to their want, or to their
expectation: There will be no such emptiness, or want of satisfaction in those
Celestial Enjoyments; because we shall embrace not only our proper good, but
that which is commensurate to our desires, and beyond our hopes: Our Affections
will not fall then upon that which cannot sustain the whole weight of them; but
feeling themselves born up to the greatest height of Love, by a good so full,
that it will leave no room for complaint or uneasiness, they will enjoy the
most solid rest and satisfaction.

Do but conceive them in your Minds, what a pleasure it is, here in this Life,
to love, and to be beloved; and you will have some notion whereby to take a
measure of the Life we are speaking of, which will consist in such mutual Love,
and delightful correspondencies. And they who have neither Father nor Mother,
Wife nor Children, near Kindred, nor Relations, whereon to place their
Affection, let them consider, if they have but a singular Friend, what the
pleasure is that two persons, who sincerely and purely love, take in the sweet
Company and Conversation of each other. Or if I must suppose any Man to be so
unkind, and so unhappy, as to have no love for any body but his own self, let
him think what contentment he has, and how he is pleased, if he can arrive any
thing near to a quiet enjoyment of his dear self. And such a delightful state
may be a small Image of Heaven, where holy Souls will love God with a far
greater flame than ever they did (or shall then) love themselves; because he
will appear infinitely more lovely, and to bear also a far greater love to
them, than it is possible for them to do to themselves.

Now none can tell how transporting it will be to a good Soul, when it f^els it
self the beloved of God, as well as full of love to him; because we cannot
think how great the Love of the Almighty is, unles^ we could know how great he
is himself. This is a thing that cannot fail to have a strange power over our
affections, and to master them; so that we shall be quite taken out of our
selves, for we all extremely love to be beloved.

If any Neighbor shows us an unexpected and undeserved Kindness, we are apt to
think he is the best person in the World: And the poorest Wretch in the World,
if we see in him the undoubted signs of an hearty love to us, we cannot choose
but requite it with some expressions of kindness back again; nay if a Dog, or
such a dumb Creature do but fawn upon us, or delight in our Company, and with a
great deal of observance follow us wheresoever we go, we cannot but be so far
pleased with this inclination toward us, as to make much of it, and to be
troubled to see any harm befall it, and to love to see it play, and be well
pleased. Judge then what a pleasure it will be to pious Souls to find
themselves beloved of him, who has put these kind Resentments into our
Natures. To what an height will the sweet breathings of his Love blow up the
Flames of theirs? Into what Ecstasies will they fall, when they feel by the
happy fruits what an exceeding great affection their heavenly Father bears to
them? It is above our present thoughts to apprehend the Joy that will then
overflow them: But we may conceive a little of it, if we remember, that God is
love, and that by our Love he will be in us, and by his Love we shall be in him.

He proceeds to speak of the love of Saints and Angels: The pleasure, joy, and
delectation that naturally and necessarily flows from this knowledge and love
of God, the Happiness which the Body shall be exalted to, and the eternal
duration of all these.

This Eternal Life our Blessed Savior has brought to light through the
Gospel, and has promised it to all those who by patient continuance in well
doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, Romans 2.7. 1 John 2.25. And
this is the promise that he has promised, even eternal life.

Some perchance may say, The great disproportion that is between the Services
and Rewards makes this Promise of Eternal Life difficult to be believed: For
who can think that God should recompense our poor and imperfect Duties and
Services, performed for a very short time, with such an immense and eternal
weight of Glory and Happiness?

To this I answer; That though indeed it cannot consist with God's Justice to
punish any Creature without, or beyond its demerit, yet nothing hinders but
that he may be as bountiful as he pleases, and in his Rewards exceed all the
deserts, and even expectations of his Creatures, an hundred or a thousand fold.

Let us then admire the transcendent and unmerited goodness and love of God, in
doing such great things for us, as sending his Son into the World to take our
nature upon him, to suffer Death for our Sins, and to give us the great Promise
of Eternal Life; and let us endeavor in some measure to answer this Love by
suitable Affections of the most ardent Love and Gratitude.

Let us also love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, which we have all the
reason in the World to do, considering the greatness of his Love to us,
manifested by the great things he has done and suffered for us, John 15.9. As
the Father has loved me (says our Savior to his Disciples) so have I loved
you. And v. 13. he proceeds to say, Greater love has no man than this, that a
man lay down his life for hi^ f^iends. Ye are my Friends, etc. By which Words
he intimates, that he was about to make the greatest demonstration of his Love
to his Apostles, and to all true Believers, by laying down his Life for them.
The Apostle Paul carries this yet higher, Rom 5.7 8. For scarce for a righteous
man will o^e die; yet, peradventure for a good man some would even dare to di^.
But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. This exceeds the highest degree of love Man ever attained
to, Ephesians. 5.2. As Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an
offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. Philip. 2 6, 7, 8.
Who being in the f^rm of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; But
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was
made in the likeness of man. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross That the
Eternal Son of God, equal with his Father, should so highly advance our Nature,
as to unite it to the Divine in one Person, that so he might be qualified by
the Sacrifice of himself to expiate our Sins, to make an atonement for us, and
to reconcile us unto God: The greatness of this Love, together with the
freeness and unmeritedness of it, there being not any the least Motive on our
part to invi^e him to it, is so matchless and stupendous, that it challenges
the highest degree of ^e^iprocal affection and gratitude Magnes amoris amor;
Love is the Loadstone of love. We cannot choose but love them again, in whom we
discern any Expressions of unfeigned love to us, as I have before noted: And
our love for the degree of it must be in some measure answerable to the
Dignity, and to the merit of the Person who loves us: For Favors done us, and
Benefits bestowed upon us, Gratitude is the most natural, I might say,
necessary ebullition of the Mind of Man.

To this purpose Seneca, Epist. 81. In hoc fidei populi credamus, Nihil esse
grato animo honestius. Omnes hoc urbes, omnes etiam ex Barbaris regionibus
gentes conclamabunt: In hoc bonis malisque conveniet. Erunt qui voluptates
laudent, erunt qui labores malint; erunt qui dolorem maximum malum dicant,
erunt qui; ne malum quidem appellent: Divitias aliquis ad summum bonum
admittet; alius illas dicet humanae malo vitae repertas; nihil esse eo
locupletius, cui quod donet Fortuna non invenit. In tant^ judici^rum
diversitate, referendam been marentibus gratiam omnes uno tibi, quod aiunt ore
affirmabunt; in hoc tam discors turba c^nsentiet.

In this let us believe what People generally agree in, That there is nothing
more honest and commendable than a grateful Mind. All Cities, all Nations, even
of Barbarous Countries; all Men, both good and bad, consent in this. There are
some who commend Pleasures; others prefer Labors: Some there be who say that
pain is the greatest Evil; others who will not grant it to be any Evil at all:
One will admit Riches to be the chiefest good; another affirms them to be the
Mischief of human Life; and that none can be richer than he upon whom Fortune
cannot find any thing which she may bestow. In such a diversity of Judgments
about other things, that thanks are to be returned to those who have deserved
well of us, all with one Mouth affirm: In this these Dissenting Parties are all
agreed.

We are by Nature inclined to requite kindnesses; non docti sed facti, non
instituti sed imbuti sumus: And if we cannot do that, to retain, at least, a
grateful sense and memory of them, and upon all occasions to acknowledge our
obligations to such Benefactors, as we are not able to recompense, to honor
and love them, and to do all we can to please and gratify them. Ingratum si
dixeris, omnia dixeris: You cannot say worse of a man, than that he is
ungrateful; Ingratitude being an unnatural Sin. Seeing then we cannot requite
this transcendent kindness of our Savior's to us, nor make him any amends for
that great Salvation he has wrought for us, and those inestimable Benefits he
has bestowed on us, let us not be wanting to do what in us lies, to express
our gratitude, by acknowledging, and celebrating his goodness to us, and the
great things he has done for us, singing with the holy Psalmist, Psalm 103.1.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. And by devoting our
selves to his Service, and doing always those things which are pleasing and
acceptable to him. Let his love constrain us not to live any longer to our
selves, but unto him who has died for us, and rose again, 1 Cor 5.16. Who has
redeemed us to God by his blood. Revel. 5.9. And made us Kings and Priests unto
our God. Let us have a care that we do not frustrate the Grace of God, as to
our selves, and render this great undertaking of our Savior in vain to us;
nay, an aggravation of our Condemnation; For how shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation? As the Ap^stle speaks, Heb. 2.3.

Let not the difficulty of obeying God's Commandments, and leading a holy life,
deter or discourage us from endeavoring it: We know that neither Learning nor
Riches, nor any thing that is excellent is to be obtained without painstaking.
Now nothing so excellent, so desirable, so worthy our utmost endeavors as
Eternal Life; this will abudantly recompense all our labor and travel; nay,
though we were put to suffer Persecution, Imprisonment, or even Death it self,
for Conscience sake* and bearing witness to the Truth, we should have no need
to r^pent it: Our Reward shall be answerable to, nay far exceed our Work, 2
Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

To sum up all in brief: Since then 1. A Holy Life and Conversation here
secures to us an interest in a Future State of Eternal Bliss and Happiness,
Glory and Immortality in the World to come, and thereby delivers us from the
fear of Death, that King of Terrors, as it is denominated, Job 1^.14 that
(...), as ^ristotle calls it, The most terrible of all terribles: Which the
wisest Philosophers by all their Argumentations could never either arm others
against, or secure themselves from the fear of; the very best of them, even
Socrates himself, being doubtful of the immortality of the Soul; our Savior
alone having brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel: Of which
[Death] wicked men cannot but have a dreadful apprehension, because of that
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, which is threatened against
those who obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, Romans 2.8.9.

2. Since also it conduces much to the well being and happiness of the outward
and inward Man in this present Life as I have endeavored to demonstrate in
this Discourse.

Moreover (3.) Since this Holiness and Obedience is even in the judgment, and
by the confession of vicious Persons themselves better and more eligible than
the life they lead.

And Lastly, Since it is more facile, easy and pleasant than the Slavery and
Drudgery of Sin and Satan.

Since I say all this is true and certain, surely it is the greatest folly and
madness imaginable, for a little false and transient Pleasure, and to gratify
some deceitful Lust, as the Apostle justly calls them, Ephesians. 4.22. to forego
not only our hopes of that Eternal Life and Happiness, which our Savior has
purchased for us, and upon our Obedience promised to us, those sincere and
solid Pleasures which are at God's right hand for evermore: Rev. 22.14. our
right to the Tree of Life, and of entering in through the Gates into the New
Jerusalem; which is their portion who keep God's Commandments; but also that
present comfort and satisfaction of mind, that inward peace and joy which
attends the Conscience of well doing here.

Mark what a Seneca, Epist. 27.
Heathen says of these sensual Pleasures, Dimitte istas voluptates turbidas,
magno luendas: non venturae tantum, sed and praeteritae nocent. Quemadmodum
scelera etiamsi non sint deprehensa cum fierent, solicitudo non cum ipsis abit,
it a voluptatum improbarum etiam post ipsas poenitentia est. Non sunt solidae,
non sunt fideles; etiamsi n^n nocent, fugiunt. Dismiss (says he) these
troubled, or muddy and imp^re pleasures, which you must pay dearly for, they
are hurtful not only when they are coming, but when they are past: As crimes
though undiscovered when they are committed, leave not the committers of them
without sol^^tude, so Repentance always attends unlawful Pleasures; they are
not solid, they are false and deceitful; and though they were not hurtful, yet
are they transient, only in motion, and suddenly gone.

As for Riches or Honors, or any other worldly good, they are also
unsatisfactory. We find our Expectations in the pursuit of them frustrated in
the acquisition and enjoyment; being presently full and weary of that which we
did most eagerly and impotently desire and long after.

And yet were there never so much worth and goodness in them, they are 1.
Uncertain, as the Apostle calls them, 1 Timothy 6.17. they may be taken away from
us before we die. 2. They are of short continuance; if they abide with us till
death, we must then necessarily part with them: For as the same Apostle says
ver. 7th of the same Chapter, We brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out.

FINIS.

