THE Christian Monitor, Containing an Earnest EXHORTATION TO AN Holy Life, With
some DIRECTIONS in order thereto.

Written in a plain and easy Style, for all sorts of People.

Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord.

Heb. 12. 14. Imprimatur.

C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Tidmarsh, at the King's Head in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange. 1686. Price 3 d.

THE Christian Monitor, etc.
CHAP. I.
Exhortation to an Holy Life, with Motives thereto.

It Is very sad to consider, not only how few Nations there are in the World
which profess Christianity, but also of those who do profess it, how few there
are comparatively that live according to their Profession. Wherefore it well
beseems all Christ's faithful servants, especially the Ministers of his Gospel,
to use their utmost endeavors, by Life and Doctrine, by public and private
Exhortations, by preaching and writing, and by all the ways they are capable,
to promote true Piety and Holiness amongst all sorts of Men, whether high or
low, rich or poor, without which no Man can be happy, either in this World, or
that to come. And though I well know that, thanks be to God, we abound with
multitudes of excellent Books written to this end; yet are not such short
Instructions as these that follow to be condemned as useless, since they will,
it is like, he more generally dispersed, and that amongst the very meanest of
the People, and may more easily be read and remembered by such as have neither
time to read large Books, nor Money to buy them. With such as these I have
occasion often to meet, and for their sakes chiefly it is that I publish this
little Paper; being encouraged thereto by some pious Persons, both of City and
Country, who intend to give some of them away to poor people about them, and
thought others might do the like. And may it please God to give a Blessing to
such a mean Undertaking as this, and succeed it to the good of Souls, I shall
little regard the Censures of the curious: Remembering the saying I have
somewhere met with of a devout Writer to this purpose, That he was desirous his
Books should be scattered abroad upon Pedlers Stalls, and thence come into the
hands of common People, for the increasing of Knowledge and Piety, rather than
be solemnly laid up and buried in the Libraries of the Learned.

Wherefore without any more Preface, I shall address my self to you for whose
sake I write these Lines, as a Persuasive to an Holy and Religious Life. Now in
order thereto let me beseech you to look back upon your Lives past, and call
your selves to account, whether it has been your care and study to live in such
a godly manner as becomes those who are baptized into the Name of Christ, and
after him are called Christians. Have you well considered what is the meaning
of this Name; and what Engagement you lie under to an Holy Life by taking it
upon you in Baptism? And do you keep well in mind your Baptismal Vow, wherein
you renounced the Devil, the World and the Flesh, and promised to be Christ's
faithful Soldiers and Servants, and so to continue all the days of your Life?
Have you so far understood and considered these things, that you have made it
your chief business to walk accordingly? Do you watch carefully and fight
manfully against your spiritual Enemies? Do you live as those that believe the
Gospel, sincerely endeavoring in all things to know the Will of God and do it?
Since you take Christ's Name into your mouth, are you careful to depart from
all iniquity? In a word, is this your greatest study and design to please and
glorify God, and to work out your own salvation? If your Conscience can truly
witness for you, that it is indeed so; and that wherein at any time you fall
short or do amiss, you are heartily grieved for it, and do daily labor to
amend and grow better: If it be thus with you; I say, then bless God for his
grace and mercy, hold on and prosper, and fear not but God will be with you, He
will own you as his Children, and for his Son Jesus sake, will both pardon your
sins and assist you by his Grace; he will guide you by his Counsel, and at
length receive you to Glory.

But pray deal faithfully with your own Souls and tell me, Has it not been
quite otherwise with you? Have you not contented your selves with the bare Name
and Profession of Christianity, and in the mean time led an ill course of Life,
directly contrary to your Profession? Have you not lived in wilful ignorance of
your Duty, or in gross sins against your Knowledge? Do not the temptations of
the Devil, the allurements of the World and the Flesh many times prevail more
with you than the Commands of Almighty God and the voice of your own
Conscience? Are you not wont to neglect God's worship and service, both in the
Church and at home? yea, do you not profane his holy Name by swearing and
cursing? Are you not often guilty of lying and slandering, of cozening and
cheating, if not of downright stealing? Do you not in your anger use railing
and reviling Language? Or do you not live in Envy and Malice, seeking for
revenge of those that have done you any injury? Do you not allow your selves in
Drunkenness or Whoredom, or some other known and wilful sin? To be short, Is
there not something or other in this World that you love more than you do God
himself and his Son Jesus? Are you not much more concerned for your Bodies than
for your precious Souls? And do you not more earnestly seek after Food and
Raiment, and the good things of this Life, than after that eternal Kingdom of
Glory which God has promised to his faithful Servants in the World to come?

If this indeed be your Case, I beseech you make a stand, and consider well
what you have been doing; what a sad and dangerous condition you have brought
your selves into, and what the end of it will be if you hold on in such evil
courses. Humbly beg of God to make you duly sensible of your sin and danger,
and to keep the sense thereof so close to your minds, that you may be brought
not only to mourn for your sins, but to loath and abhor them, and utterly to
forsake the same, henceforth resolving by the grace of God wholly to give up
your selves to his service, and to walk steadfastly in those holy and good ways
which he has appointed you. This is that to which I do most earnestly desire to
persuade you. And that I may do my utmost to prevail with you, I shall lay
before you some very weighty Arguments, which I request you seriously to ponder
of as you read them, and God grant they may have due effect upon the heart of
every Reader. Amen.

(1) That you may be prevailed with to become God's faithful servants,
consider, first, That this was the great end for which God made you, and keeps
you alive, and gives you so many mercies of all sorts. You can tell, I hope,
that God made you, and that he made you to serve him, by living according to
his Commandments. These are some of those first things which Children learn,
and it were well if when they are grown up to be Men and Women, they would use
seriously to think of them, and practice accordingly. The wise God has made all
Creatures for some good end or other, and he has fitted them all for those ends
and purposes for which he made them. To Man therefore has he given the use of
Reason, chiefly to fit him for Religion, and to render him capable of knowing,
loving and serving his great Creator and Benefactor: And it is Religion which
makes the great difference betwixt a Man and a Beast: for bruit Creatures have
no knowledge of God, no regard to him, but are wholly led by their senses, and
mind nothing else but what is before them here in this World. But the poorest
Man on Earth who has the use of his Reason, is near akin to the very Angels
themselves; his nature is like theirs, and but a little below them, so that he
may be much taken up in the same holy Works that they are employed in, even in
loving and praising, and adoring the great and good God. To this end he may
study both the Works and the Word of God, which reveal him to us, and should
continually put us in mind of him. And all the good things we enjoy should
still make us sensible of the goodness of God from whom they come: and fill our
hearts with love and thankfulness; and our mouths with blessing and praise.
This is the most proper use of our Reason, and this God most justly expects
from us Reasonable Creatures; and this even the poor man may render without any
hindrance to his daily labors; and may still keep such an awful sense of God
upon his mind as may restrain him from wilful sin, and make him careful always
to please his Maker. And so our Reason was given us to bridle and govern our
Appetites, our Lusts and Passions; that we should not be led away into gluttony
and drunkenness, into wantonness and uncleanness, nor into rage and fury like
bruit Beasts that have no understanding: but should live soberly and chastely,
quietly and peaceably with all Men, doing them all the good we can. For such
holy purposes as these chiefly was our Reason bestowed on us, and therefore in
this manner ought it to be employed. Certainly since God has made us of a
nature so much better than Birds or Beasts, he expects from us other works and
services than he does from them. They know nothing of God that made them, nor
have they any knowledge of another Life after this, but when they die there is
an end of them. But to us has God given immortal Souls of more value than the
whole World: and for this end has he created us, that we might serve and
honor him here in this Life, and so may live with him, and enjoy him for ever
in the World to come.

Now if this be the end of our Creation, ought we not to live up to it? Do we
not see all other things answer the end for which they were made? The Sun gives
Light by day, and the Moon by night. The Earth brings forth Corn and Grass, and
the Trees bear Fruit. The Horse, the Cow and the Sheep, with many other
Creatures, afford us much service and benefit. And shall Man alone be useless
and unfruitful, and live to no good purpose? When they are all so ready to
serve us, shall not we cheerfully serve him that made us for his own service?
Surely we cannot think that the wise God sent us into the World only to eat and
drink, to sleep and play, or to work hard for a poor Livelihood. If this were
all, we had better have been made bruit Creatures, or never have been made at
all. Much less can we think that the Holy God made us on purpose to sin against
him, to dishonor his Name, and provoke him to anger. He did not give us Reason
to make us crafty and cunning for the World, that we might know how to cozen
and cheat our Neighbors. He did not give us Tongues to swear and curse with,
or to talk foolishly and filthily; let us not then use them to any such ill
purposes. Since God has given us precious immortal Souls, let us not live like
Beasts that perish, wallowing in the mire of base sensual Lusts and Pleasures.
By this means we become worse than Bruits themselves, for we debase our own
Natures, we abuse our Reason to our own shame and hurt, and to God's
displeasure. Thus we cross the end of our Creation, and are more stupid and
ungrateful than the very Ox or Ass: for they know their owner, and do good
service to those that keep and feed them, Isa. 1. 2, 3. O let us not give God
cause to complain of us, as he there does of the Jews, that he nourished and
brought up Children, and they rebelled against him: Think how grievous it is to
you that have Children, after all your care and kindness, after all your cost
and labor, to have them p^ove stubborn and disobedient, loose and idle
Prodigals. O see then that you be not such toward your heavenly Father, who
made you and preserves you, and every day renews his mercies upon you. He keeps
us alive and makes our lives comfortable. He gives and continues to us our
Reason and Senses, our Health and Strength, Food and Raiment, and all the good
things we enjoy. He supplies our wants, and helps us in all our distresses. He
gives us light by day, and rest in the night. He enables us to follow our
callings, and gives a blessing to our labors, that we may provide for our
selves and Families. And does not this good God well deserve all the love and
service which we can possibly render him? O how can we find in our hearts
wilfully to offend him who thus delights in doing us good! Foolish and
unthankful Wretches we are thus ill to require the Lord for all his loving
kindness. We could not deal so with any Friend or Neighbor on Earth, that had
been always kind and loving to us. Are not Servants bound to work for them who
maintain them and pay them Wages? And ought not Children to obey their Parents
who begot them and brought them up? How much more then ought we to obey God our
Father, who gave us life at first, and still prolongs it from one day to
another, when he could in a moment cut us off in our sins, and throw us into
Hell. But in much mercy he spares us, and gives us space to Repent, and is very
unwilling to destroy us, and therefore waits long to be gracious to us. O then
let his patience and all his goodness at last have this happy effect upon us;
let it lead us to true Repentance, and ever hereafter engage us to diligence
and constancy in his service, Romans 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.

(2) To which purpose consider again that this was the end for which God sent
his Son Jesus into the World, even to seek and save us lost and miserable
sinners, to bring us to Repentance and newness of life, that so we might be
restored to the love and favor of God, which we had lost by sinning against
him. Our first Parents Adam and Eve were created in a very holy and happy
Estate, but they fell from it by sinning against God, and so came all misery
into the World. And then did our Heavenly Father take pity on us, and sent his
own Son out of his bosom to be our Savior and Redeemer, to reform us from our
Sins, and so to deliver us from misery: First he will make us Holy, and then we
shall be made Happy. For as man lost his happiness by disobeying Gods command,
so he must recover it by becoming obedient to his will in all things. To this
end has the Lord Jesus fully revealed Gods will to us when we were in
ignorance and darkness. He has given us holy precepts for the rule of our
Life: And made most rich and precious promises to persuade us to our duty, and
denounced dreadful threatenings to affright us from Wickedness.

And when we had deserved the Wrath of God for our sins, then did Jesus Christ
shed his most precious Blood to make Atonement for us, and to obtain our pardon
and forgiveness. He dyed for our offenses and rose again for our justification.
Romans 4. 25. And in his Gospel he has given full assurance of Gods good will to
mankind, that he will be merciful to us and pardon us, if we truly repent of
our sins and forsake them. Thus has Christ opened a door of hope for us, to
encourage us to return to God: For if there had been no hopes of mercy, we
should never have been drawn to Repentance, but even like the Devils themselves
should have remained full of hatred and malice against God, utterly despairing
of relief from him. But whilst the death of Christ does so much engage and
encourage us to forsake our sins, it gives not the least encouragement to our
continuance in them. Let us not think that Christ dyed for our sins that we
might have liberty to live in them, and yet be saved at the last. No, but he
came to save us from our sins, not in them. He makes us blessed by turning us
from our iniquities. He dyed to redeem us from a vain and evil Conversation, to
purify our Hearts, and reform our Lives, and make us a peculiar People zealous
of good works, Matt. 1. 21. Act. 3. 26. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18.

The death of Christ for us vile sinners shows the infinite love of God in
finding out this way for our Salvation: But then it shows also what an evil
thing sin is, and how hateful to God, since he would not pardon us without the
suffering of his own dear Son on our account. And therefore if the
consideration of all this does not bring us to hate and abhor our sins, and to
love and serve our God and Savior, we are never like to have any benefit by
Christ's death. All our professions of loving him and believing in him will
stand us in no stead without obeying him. True saving Faith in Christ is that
which works by love both to God and our Neighbor. Christ accounts none to be
his friends but those that keep his Commandments, and to such only will he
grant pardon and Salvation. Gal. 5. 6. Joh. 15. 14. Heb. 5. 9. 1 John 3. 8.

Since then the ever-blessed Jesus the Son of God came down from Heaven, became
a Man, and dyed a most painful death upon the Cross, that he might save us from
sin and misery, shall we not accept of him as our Lord and Savior, who comes
to deliver us from the power of the Devil and our own Lusts, to make us the
Children of God and heirs of Glory, which is a thousand times greater
deliverance than that of the Israelites from the Egyptian bondage. Will you
not be moved by all that Christ has done and suffered for you? Shall not his
love constrain you to love him, and to hate all sin which was the cause of his
sufferings? Will you tread under foot his most precious Blood, and even
crucify him afresh, and again put him to open shame? Thus in some sort do
wicked men use their Savior, whilst they go on in their sins which are so
displeasing to him. They that lie and cozen for a little gain, what do they but
with Judas sell away Christ for Money. They that live in hatred and malice, and
do mischief to their Neighbors, do in effect run the Spear into Christ's side,
and drive Nails into his hands and feet. And they that give themselves to Riot
and Drunkenness, do even mingle Gall and Vinegar for him to drink. They do all
that in them lies by their sinful pleasures to put him again into Agonies and
Pains. But on the other hand, it is a delight to our Savior to see us humbled
for our sins, and resolved to forsake them. He will readily and effectually
interceed for us with our heavenly Father, who is most willing to receive
returning Prodigals. There is joy in Heaven when sinners on Earth repent. Even
this our return to God by true repentance is the best recompense we can make to
our Blessed. Savior for all his pains and sufferings. When the pleasure of the
Lord prospers in his hand by the conversion of sinners, he then sees the travel
of his Soul, and is satisfied, Isa. 63. 10, 11. And shall we not afford this
satisfaction to our Redeemer, who has undergone so much for our sakes, and
still out of his tender love to our Souls follows us with such earnest
invitations to come to him for life and happiness? Could we deny him this most
reasonable request, if we saw him now in person standing before us, beseeching
us to turn and live? And this he now does by his Spirit and by his Ministers:
But that leads me to the next.

(3) Consider therefore that this also was the end for which the Holy Ghost is
given, and all the means of grace afforded, even to sanctify our hearts and
make us an holy and obedient People. God knows the weakness and corruption of
our Natures, and therefore in great mercy he affords the assistance of his holy
Spirit, to enlighten our minds, and purify our hearts, to renew and change our
natures, and guide us in ways of holiness here, that so we may be fitted for
eternal happiness with the most holy God in the life to come. Joh. 3. 3, 5.
Romans 8. 9. And for this end were the holy Scriptures written by men assisted
and inspired by the Holy Ghost, to be a light to our feet and a lantern to our
path, to direct us in the plain way to everlasting life, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
And the holy Sacraments were appointed for the increase of grace to all that
make a right use of them. And our Blessed Savior did at f^rst send abroad his
Apostles to Preach the Gospel to all the World, and has ever since continued a
success^on of Ministers in his Church, whose standing office it is to
administer the word and Sacraments, to watch over the Souls of the people, to
instruct and admonish them both in public and private, and to use their utmost
diligence to bring them to the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus.
And God is ever ready to accompany their endeavors with his blessing. Do you
not often find his good Spirit putting good thoughts and motions into your
mind, inclining you to that which is holy and good, checking and restraining
you when you are running into evil? But on the other hand it is the evil Spirit,
even the Devil himself, that tempts you to sin, and would hinder you from your
Duty. It Is the Devil that tempts Men to pride and malice, and to all manner of
wickedness. For he being a proud, malicious and most wicked Spirit, would have
Men to be like himself, that so they may be for ever miserable with him. Will
you not then resist the Devil, the great enemy of your Souls, and be led and
guided by Gods good Spirit, and follow his Motions and the directions of his
word which lead to happiness? O do not grieve this Blessed Spirit, who alone
can give us true comfort, do not resist and quench his motions, nor provoke him
to depart from you, and leave you to your own lusts, and to the power of Satan,
who seeks your ruin.

Moreover, as the Devil has his instruments to draw Men to wickedness, one ill
man tempting another, so Ministers are sent from God to draw you to
righteousness and holiness. They are the Ambassadors and Messengers of Christ,
and do in his name bescech you to be reconciled to God, who is most willing to
be reconciled to you, if you will but cast away those wicked works which
provoke him to anger, 2 Cor. 5. 20. O how will it rejoice the hearts of your
Ministers that truly love your Souls, to see the success of their labors, to
have you come to them enquiring what you must do to be saved, declaring your
repentance for your former evil Courses, and your resolution henceforth to
become new Creatures. Certainly we exhort you to nothing but what is highly
reasonable and for your own benefit, whilst we persuade you to return to the
favor of God. Why then will you not hearken to us? If a message of mercy
should be sent you from the King, when you were in danger of death for
Rebellion, would you not most gladly and thankfully receive it? And will you
not be as thankful and obedient to the King of kings, and as wife to save your
Souls as to preserve your Bodies.

And beside his Word and Ministers, God also pleads with you by his providence
to bring you to repentance. Sometimes he sends afflictions to correct you for
your faults, to show you the evil of sin, and draw you home to himself; and at
other times he sends many mercies, as I have told you, to soften your hearts,
to engage and allure you to his service: And such good use we ought to make of
all Gods dealings with us.

(4.) Consider further what engagements you ly under to an holy life by your
own profession, promises and vows. You profess and call your selves Christians,
the Disciples and followers of Christ: Ought you not then to follow his
example, and obey his Commands, if you will make good that name? You would
think it a great disgrace not to be taken for a Christian but for a Turk or
Jew. Beware then lest you bring this disgrace upon your selves by an
unchristian temper of mind, and ill course of life. If you are false or cruel,
Covetous or Lustful, like a Turk or Jew, it matters little what you call your
selves. He is not a Christian that is one outwardly, but he that has the same
mind and spirit that was in Christ Jesus. God will not at the last day judge of
men by their names and titles, but by their hearts and lives. Only it* will go
much worse with a man that calls himself a Christian, and yet lives like an
Heathen or Infidel.

And pray consider how by your Baptism you are solemnly listed under Christ's
banner, to fight against the Devil, the World and the Flesh: and by the keeping
this vow you show your selves to be Christians indeed. But if you are led away
by the temptations of Satan and do his works, and are ensnared by the vanities
of the World, the lusts and pleasures of the Flesh, you do in effect renounce
your Baptism.

Besides this, have you not renewed this same vow at the Holy Communion, there
openly professing your belief in Christ crucified, and promising obedience to
him? If you have not received this Holy Sacrament, though you have long been at
years of discretion, you then show your selves by this neglect to be no
obedient Disciples of Christ, since you do not obey his plain command to do
this in remembrance of him, Luke 22. 19. And indeed I fear that many careless
people will not come to the Communion, because they think it would bind them to
lead such a strict and holy life as they have no mind to. But do not they cast
off Jesus Christ from being their Master, who look upon his commands as too
strict and severe, and will not promise to obey him? Yea do they not thereby
even disown their Baptism, by which they were bound to this obedience? So that
the same reason which keeps them from the Communion, it is like would keep them
from being Baptized, if it were yet to be done. And what sort of Christians are
they that would reject Christian Baptism, because it engages them to an holy
life?

If you are not guilty of this neglect, but do sometimes come to the Lords
Supper, to keep up the remembrance of his death and sufferings: Then pray
consider that by receiving this holy Sacrament, you do solemnly renew your vows
to be Christ's faithful Servants and Disciples, and to walk in sincere
obedience to all his holy Laws, as you hope for Salvation by his death.
Wherefore may I not well beseech you to use all due care to live according to
this your promise and engagement. What a shame is it for a Man to be false to
his word, much more to his Oath? O do not then break that Oath which you have
made to God himself by taking this holy Sacrament. And call to mind if you have
not sometimes on a Sickbed, or in some great danger made the same promise and
vow: And has not God spared you to see how you would perform the same? Take
heed then of abusing his mercy and breaking your promise.

Moreover, I might show how your professing to believe the Creed engages you to
live well, according to the holy faith you profess, which is a doctrine
according to godliness.

But, lastly, the very prayers you put up to* God lay the same engagement on
you, even to serve and please this God whom you Worship. To instance briefly in
the Lords prayer, whilst we call God Our Father, etc. ought we not to love and
honor him, to obey him and submit to him as our heavenly Father? Whilst we
pray that his name may be hallowed, his Kingdom come, and his will done in
Earth as it is in Heaven, ought we not our selves to honor his name, and
advance his Kingdom, by obeying his Laws, and by doing his will constantly and
cheerfully as the Angels do in Heaven, to the utmost of our power? Praying for
daily Bread teaches our dependence upon God, and engages us to serve him by
whom we are maintained. When we pray God to forgive our Trespasses as we
forgive others, this strictly binds us to forgive those that offend us, as ever
we hope for mercy from God. And when we pray not to be led into temptation but
delivered from Evil, this should restrain us from running into temptation, and
make us careful to avoid all sin and the occasions of it. To the same purpose I
might also mention the Prayers of the Church, to which I hope you come
frequently. Therein you begin with the Confession of your sins, and ought you
not to forsake as well as confess them? And in the end of the confession you
pray God for Christ's sake to grant that you may lead godly, righteous and sober
lives. And almost in every prayer you will find somewhat to this effect. Now I
hope you are in good earnest in these your prayers, else you do mock God and
affront him, instead of worshipping and pleasing him. But if you do heartily
desire these things which you pray for, then you will do your part for the
attainment of them, and will diligently endeavor to live in so holy and good a
manner as you pray that you may do. And if you thus add diligence to your
prayers, Gods grace will never be wanting for your assistance.

(5.) Consider also how just and equal all Gods commandments are, such that our
own Reason cannot but approve of them, as being most agreeable to us as we are
Reasonable Creatures. To instance in the chief of them; is it not most just and
fit that we should love God above all, who is the best and most perfect of all
Beings, and from whom we receive all our good things? Ought we not to pray to
him who alone can hear and help us, and to give thanks and praise to him who is
the Father of mercies? Is it not most reasonable that Children should obey
their Parents, and Subjects their Rulers? and that all men should live in peace
and love with one another, and speak truly, and deal honestly as they would be
dealt with? Is it not most fit and decent for a Man to eat and drink
moderately, so as makes most for his health? To be modest and chaste in all his
conversation? Will not every Man's own Reason acknowledge the equity and fitness
of these and the like precepts? And for some that do seem more severe, there
may be given very good reason for them also. So that plainly all Gods commands
are the wise and wholesome counsels of a most tender Father, who forbids his
Children nothing but what is hurtful, and requires nothing of them but what
makes for their own good, even to deal justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with their God, Mic. 6. 8. Christ's Yoke is easy and his burden light,
Matt. 11. 30. Gods service is perfect freedom, as we daily style it in our
prayers. And his commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. Shall we not then
be so dutiful to our heavenly Father, yea so wise for our own good as to obey
these most reasonable and gracious laws which he has given us? So just and
equal they are, that we cannot break them without offering a kind of violence
to our selves, and going contrary to the reason of our own mind. They are light
to the eyes and joy to the heart, sweeter to a good Man than honey and the
honeycomb, as the Psalmist often speaks. As suitable are Gods commands to our
natures, and as useful and healthful to our Souls as the most wholesome food to
our Bodies. And for a Man to direct his whole carriage and behavior according
to the laws of God, is as much his wisdom as it is to go clothed in decent
Apparel, and to eat and drink what is good for his nourishment. But on the
other hand, for one to run naked about the Streets, to fill his mouth with mire
and Dirt, to cut and mangle his own Flesh, is not a greater sign of folly and
madness, than for a Man to live according to his own lusts, rather than after
the laws of God, which are so agreeable to our Reason, and do so plainly
conduce to our own truest interest and advantage, both in this Life, and that
to come, as will appear by what follows.

(6.) Consider therefore in the next place, that it is a most certain truth,
That the leading of an holy and good Life, is in all respects very greatly for
a Man's own benefit and comfort, even in this present World. Godliness is
profitable for all things. It makes for the quiet of our Minds, the health of
our Bodies, the increase of our Estates, and procures us much credit and
esteem, much love and good will among our Neighbors. Yea, it commonly brings
along with it all manner of Blessings, and makes the en^oyment of them more
sweet and pleasant, and keeps off a great deal of trouble which wicked men
bring upon themselves, and affords much support and ease under those
afflictions which the providence of God may lay upon us. Insomuch that no Man
of what rank and condi^ion soever, can lead a truly comfortable Life, except he
lead an holy and good life. All this is frequently taught in Scripture, and may
easily be manifested by clear Reason: Or if that be not sufficient, it is also
most plainly to be (...) by daily experience, that they who truly fear God,
have much more peace and comfort in this World, than wicked and loose livers,
that make no Conscience of their Ways.

If I should make the comparison only betwixt a sober Man and a Drunkard, which
do you think has the better of it in this Life? How often do the great drinkers
not only waste their Estates, but destroy their Health, weaken their Brains,
and shorten their Lives? How often do they fall into quarrels, get wounds and
bruises, and sometimes death it self, either by fighting or by one sad accident
or other. Sometimes the very Children in the streets run after them, shouting
and making sport with them. And if you follow them to their own Homes, what
disturbance and mischief do they make there? what swearing and cursing, what
brawling and scolding, what quarrelling and fighting is there? What outcries
and lamentations do Wife and Children make? who now perhaps are glad to get
away for fear of their Lives, as before they sat starving for want of that
Money which these ill Husbands waste in the Alehouse. (A sin and shame it is
to those that entertain them.) And after they have lived a while at this wild
and wicked rate, the next news commonly is, that either for Debt or for
Disorder they are laid up in Prison, and sometimes by those very People in
whose Houses they drunk away all they got. And now are they forced to live upon
Bread and Water, and linger out a miserable hungry Life, in a cold stinking
Dungeon, till either the Charity of Friends, or Death it self release them
thence. (And by the way, is this such a pleasant Life that it is worth being
damned for to Hell Torments to all eternity? of which afterward.)

Thus also I might tell of the sad effects of Whoredom, which is commonly
followed with poverty and disgrace, and many times with a filthy loathsome
disease, which makes Men rot above ground. And thus, angry, proud, malicious,
revengeful People are a continual torment to themselves and to all about them,
and seldom have any peace or quiet either with their Neighbors or in their own
Families. The like may be shown of all other Vices which are still wont to
bring their own punishment along with them; to say nothing of what is or ought
to be inflicted by the Magistrate. Especially such wicked People as Thieves and
Murderers, Traitors and Rebels, do seldom escape the hands of public Justice.
But who will hurt Men if they be followers of that which is good? Or what hurt
does a man bring upon himself by living soberly and chastely, by fearing God and
honoring the King? What mischief does a man get by minding his own Business,
and living quietly and peaceably amongst his Neighbors? Nay, how happily may
we see even some of the meanest sort of People live, that are diligent in their
Callings, and sober and temperate, and careful to please God, and keep a good
Conscience in all their ways. Very seldom it is that they are pinched with much
Want, or if they should fall into a low Condition, yet all good People that
know them, are ready to pity and relieve them: and will often trust them with
Money or Goods till they are able to pay. And every body is willing to employ
an honest industrious Man, so that he shall seldom want Work or Trading. But
idle, riotous People that follow whoring and drinking, gaming and cheating, and
stealing, that neglect God's service and profane the Lord's day, being often in
the Alehouse when they should be at Church; these are the People, if you
observe it, that do commonly fall into the basest beggary and misery; and Men
do but little pity them because they brought it all upon themselves. O how
happy might all sorts of People be, in a very great measure even at present, if
they would but become truly Religious and good. It is their own sin and folly,
their lusts and passions that occasion most of those troubles and miseries
which they meet, with; though I know they use to cry out of their hard fortune,
and to lay the blame upon others, and sometimes to murmr against God himself.
But they consider not how they provoke God to anger daily by their heinous
sins, and therefore may justly feel his heavy judgments for the same, beside
all the mischief which naturally follows upon wickedness. And this makes their
Condition to be sad indeed that they are always liable to the wrath of God, and
may justly expect his vengeance to fall upon them, and to strip them of all
their Comforts, and throw them into the sorest Calamities.

But on the contrary, herein above all lies the good Man's security and
comfort, that he enjoys the blessing and favor of Almighty God, and therefore
is sure to want nothing that is truly good for him. So it is promised, Psalm. 84.
11, 12. Matt. 6. 33. They that first seek the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness of it, shall have all that is needful added to them. So that a
poor Man can take no surer course to provide for himself and Family, than to
become truly Religious; though he may not have great things in the World, yet
he shall have Food convenient. And then, which is better than all, he shall
have God's blessing with what he enjoys; and this will afford him more true
content and comfort in that little he has, than a wicked Man can find in all
his great Treasures. Godliness with contentment is the greatest gain, Psalm. 37.
^6. 1 Timothy 6. 6. A poor Man that has only Jacob's Wish, Food to eat, and
Raiment to put on: if also he has Jacob's Piety, and takes the Lord for his
God, and lives in his fear and service, and enjoys the sense of his favor, how
blessed is the state of this Man? How cheerfully may he live at all times,
notwithstanding his Poverty? What though his Dwelling be mean, his Fare
somewhat hard and course, and his Clothing very plain; yet whilst he loves God
sincerely, and worships him duly and devoutly, he may even turn his poor
Cottage into a Palace, yea, a Temple: and the blessed God will visit him with
his presence, will accept of his services, and refresh him with the light of
his countenance. And upon this knowledge and enjoyment of God it is, that the
true comfort of a Man's life depends, whatever his outward condition be. It is
this alone which gives inward peace and satisfaction to his mind, and sweetens
all his mercies; and above all things, bears up his heart under those
afflictions he meets with. For the best of Men must expect their share of
outward troubles in this World, such as sickness and pain, loss of Friends and
Estate, with the like, these are calamities common to all. But here the good
Man has clearly the advantage, since he looks upon all that befalls him as
coming from the hands of a most wise and gracious God, who knows what is best
for him, and to whose Will he freely resigns himself, and all his affairs,
saying with his blessed Master, Not my will, O God, but thine be done. Yea; he
receives afflictions as sent in kindness, to correct him for his faults, to
exercise and increase his Graces, and so to prepare him for Glory. And here is
the great benefit of Religion, that it teaches a Man whither to go for Relief
and Comfort in all his straits and difficulties, even to this great and good
God, who is most able and ready to help his People in all times of trouble.
This we still read in Scripture was the course of holy Men, and they found it
was not in vain. And to this day will all God's faithful servants find the good
effects of thus devoutly applying themselves to God by Prayer. For his eyes are
ever upon the Righteous, and his ear open to their cry. He takes pity on them,
comforts and supports them. He Will lay no more upon them than he enables them to
bear: and in his good time he supplies their wants, and delivers them from
their afflictions, yea, he turns them into blessings, and makes all work
together for their good; as he has promised to them that love him, Romans 8. 28.
O what an happiness is it to be acquainted with God. to have a due sense of his
Providence, so as to live upon it and improve it, Job 22 21.

But how sad is the condition of a wicked Man, who has no such knowledge of
God, no love to him, nor any expectations of help and relief from him. Even in
his greatest prosperity he is a very miserable Man, whilst he lives without God
in the World: but he feels himself to be so indeed, when he falls into any
great calamity, and knows not which way to turn himself for help and comfort.
For as wickedness still brings Men into misery (as I have before shown) so
there it leaves them in the most wretched forlorn condition. And the ill temper
of their minds, adds weight and load to their calamities, and grievously
increases the smart of them. The sense of their own guilt sometimes torments
their Consciences: and fills them with fear and horror: Sometimes they rage
and fret against those that helped on their sufferings, and sometimes they even
blaspheme God himself, and murmur against his Providence. Whilst the good Man
with Job blesses God in all his afflictions, these are ready to follow the
counsel of his Wife, even to curse God and die. For being full of anguish and
despair, they are at their wits end, and weary of their very lives, as we read
of Cain and Judas, and such like, both in Scripture and other History. For my
part I do verily think, that next to the Devils and those in Hell, there are no
Creatures in the World more miserable than wicked ungodly People and whilst we
see what the common fruit of Sin is here on Earth, we may easily be convinced
that it leads to Hell and damnation hereafter. And all this do men madly and
wilfully run into by their own evil doings; even as a Man that thrusts his
hands into the fire, is like to feel pain and smart. By forsaking of God, they
forsake their own mercies, and by sinning against him, they wrong their own
Souls, yea, their Bodies too, and all their Concerns. Thus you see that an holy
Life is most profitable for us even in this present World, preventing much
evil, and bringing all manner of good along with it. Or if a Man should fall
into such hard times, as to suffer merely for Religion and a good Conscience,
he shall then commonly find such wonderful comfort and satisfaction of mind,
that he will even triumph and rejoice in the midst of his sufferings, as we
know the Apostles and primitive Christians did, and that especially in hope of
the glorious Rewards laid up for good Men in the Heavens. But that brings me to
the last Consideration I shall mention.

(Lastly) Namely, That an Holy Life through the rich mercy of God, will render
us perfectly and eternally blessed in the World to come, whereas a wicked
course of Life, leads to eternal misery and torment. According as we live in
this World, so must we fare in the next: for this Life is a state of trial in
order to Eternity. Even at Death a good Man has ground of much comfort, having
the testimony of a good Conscience, and the sense of God's love, so that with
Saint Stephen, he may commit his Soul into the hands of the Lord Jesus, who is
ready to receive him. But how sad is it with a wicked Man, when beside all the
pains of his body, his mind is tormented with the remembrance of his sins, and
with the fears of God's wrath. But the great difference will be made at the day
of Judgment, when the sheep shall be set at Christ's right hand, and the goats
on the left, as you have it described Matthew. 25. 31, etc. To those on the right
hand, that is the pious and good, will be pronounced that joyful Sentence, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World. And then shall they enter into that most glorious
Kingdom, where neither sin nor sorrow shall ever disturb them more; where they
shall never feel nor fear any manner of evil or pain, either of Soul or Body:
but shall be admitted into the immediate presence of God, where there is all
fullness of joy for evermore. They shall have such a clear knowledge of the
ever-blessed God, and such a lively sense of his infinite Perfections as will
fill them with Admiration, Love and Praise: and they shall feel the love of God
and their Savior so fully shed abroad upon them, as shall raise their Hearts
to the very utmost heights of joy and thankfulness, and their mouths shall be
filled with Hallelujahs and Songs of Praise: and in this most delightful
Employment shall they join with all the blessed company of Heaven for ever and
ever. That Is the perfection of all, that the joys of Heaven shall never have an
end. It Is both a most exceeding and an eternal weight of glory that is promised,
2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. For ever shall we remain with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. The
eternal God will be the portion of his people; and their joy in him shall never
be lessened or abated through all eternity. They shall be always blessing and
praising him, always satisfied and ravished with the beholding of his Glories
and the enjoyment of his love; always delighted with the most pleasant and
agreeable society of Angels and Saints: And never more shall dear friends and
companions be separated from each other, when once they are met in Heaven.
Death has now no power over them. They are become in some measure even like to
Christ himself, and there shall see him as he is in all his glory, Phil. 3. 21.
1 John 3. 2.

But what it is thus to be made like to Christ, to see God and enjoy him, we
are not able fully to express or conceive whilst we are here in the body, to
compare the glories of Heaven to all the riches and honor of Courts and
Palaces here below, were greatly to lessen and disparage them. So great are
those heavenly glories and joys, that they can never be clearly known till they
are enjoyed: As a blind Man can never well tell what light is, till his Eyes
are open to discern it. It Is enough for us that we have full assurance from the
promises of the Gospel, that such a state of unspeakable happiness there is
provided for good Men in the life to come. And as the Lord Jesus is gone before
to prepare it for them, so now by his holy Spirit he prepares them for that
blessed place, by working in them that grace which fits them for glory, and is
the very first fruits and beginnings of it in their Souls. True holiness is the
most certain pledge of eternal happiness, and makes us meet for it, Ephesians. 1. 13,
14. Col. 1. 12.

Since then such a glory there is, so infinitely great, so sure and certain,
shall we not all be persuaded to seek after it by walking in those holy ways
that lead thereto? Surely we shall, if we have any belief of Gods word, any
regard to our own interest. Must our Souls live for ever in another World, and
shall we not use our utmost care and diligence to make them happy for ever
there? Are they not our own Souls? And do they not then deserve our love and
care? If we be wise and good, is it not for our selves, for our own happiness?
And is there any other way to make our selves happy but by gaining the love of
God and eternal life? Do we not see that all worldly comforts are short and
uncertain; They wither in our hands, and perish in the using. Our Neighbors
and acquaintance are daily dying round about us; many of our dearest Friends
and Relations are already gone before us, and we our selves are swiftly
following after. We are just upon the borders of eternity, liable to a thousand
diseases and mischances that may soon stop our breath, and then we are gone.
Since then we cannot make sure of this life, nor the enjoyments of it, O let us
see to make sure of eternal glory; which we may do, by Gods assistance, even
the poorest Man on Earth, if he will become sincerely pious and good. For God
is no respecter of persons. Christ died for poor Men as well as rich; and they
that have no inheritance on Earth may be Heirs of the heavenly Kingdom, if they
be rich in faith and love to God, Jam. 2. 5. And methinks they that have so
much trouble and sorrow in this life, should be moved to seek after riches and
glory in the life to come. There the poorest Lazarus shall have a thousand
times more pleasure and joy, than any of the proud Dives's or rich Gluttons and
Epicures have now in their delicious fare and gorgeous Apparel. Nay, the very
hopes of this glory may fill the good Man's mind with so much joy, that he will
even forget his poverty, and not count his afflictions worthy to be compared
with the happiness he hopes for, nor would he change Estates with the greatest
Prince upon Earth, who is a stranger to these hopes. Thus it was with the holy
Apostles and their followers, 2 Cor. 6. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7, 8.

Thus have I briefly told you somewhat of the happiness of the godly in the
world to come: But on the other hand consider what will be the portion of the
wicked, who despise the mercies of God, and the offers and promises of the
Gospel, these will at last fall under his heavy Wrath and Vengeance, and there
must remain for ever in the most intolerable terments of Soul and Body, set out
by the most dreadful things, such as Fire and Brimstone, and a never dying Worm
that perpetually gnaws and stings their hearts. They are cast into outer
darkness, where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, not the
least glimmering of hope or comfort to all eternity, Matt. 25. 30. 41, 46. Mark
9. 43. to the end; 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. These are the Goats that being set on
the left hand must hear that doleful sentence. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. An heavy doom, and yet
most just. For they departed from God, and neglected his service here on Earth,
and therefore now must they depart from his presence, in which their corrupt
minds can take no delight. They preferred the Tavern and the Alehouse before
the house of God; and took more pleasure in Feasting and Drinking, in Roaring
and Revelling amongst their wicked Companions, than in worshipping of God in
the communion of Saints; they loved not prayers and praises in the assemblies
of his people, nor had any mind to come to the Lords Table, though often
invited thereto; and therefore must they now be shut out from such holy
company, and from such high and heavenly employments, for which they are
altogether unfit. They were many of them greatly given to Cursing, and now it is
come upon them: That curse of God which they in their rage often wished to
their Neighbor, is now fallen upon themselves. Nay did not many of these
profane wretches even call for this curse upon their own heads, in that
hellish Language of God damn me? And what wonder if their petition be now
granted, and they sentenced to that damnation which they thus called for? By
the Devil they were led and guided, and by his wicked instruments and their own
brutish lusts; and therefore now they must have the Devil and his Angels, and
damned sinners like themselves to be their companions in torment, who are so
far from pitying or comforting each other, that rather they curse one another
now in their misery, who before tempted one another to s^n. O sad, meeting of
the Drunkards, the Whoremongers and the Harlots there together in those
scorching flames. Where in vain they cry out for a drop of water to cool their
Tongue. It must not be granted; their good things are all past and gone: And
the remembrance of all their riot and lewdness serves but to increase their
torment. And now also they may remember how God did again and again call upon
them, and they would not hear; neither therefore will he now hear their cries,
when pain and anguish is come upon them, Prove. 1. 24. to the end. And though
they may cry out against their companions and accuse the Devil, and in their
rage blaspheme God himself, yet will their consciences fly with greatest fury
upon themselves, who in spite of all the warnings that were given them, did by
their own wilful and impenitent continuance in sin, plunge themselves into
this misery, from whence they must never be released. O dreadful word,
Everlasting fire! Eternal torment! How does the thought of this sink and break
their hearts, and fill them with deepest horror and despair! Who can dwell
with everlasting burnings? Who can? And yet the damned sinner must, though in
the most raging and impatient manner. After they have lain thousands and
millions of years in that place of torment, yet is there not a moment less to
come, there is a whole eternity still behind. The worm never dies: the flame is
never quenched. Nor is God to be accused of severity in all this, since it was
the sinners own doing, the fruit of their own choice: For they knew that sin
would sink them into Hell, and yet they would venture upon it. And indeed it
sinks them thither as naturally as a stone falls to the ground. Even here on
earth the proud and covetous, the malicious and revengeful, the profane and
sensual do kindle somewhat of Hell in their own Souls; and whilst they carry
along with them the same wicked temper of mind, it must still needs make them
most wretched and miserable in another World, as long as ever their Souls live,
and these vices stick to them, that is to all eternity. Let not him that
carries fire in his bosom accuse Gods providence for making the fire hot, when
he feels it burn him, but let him blame his own folly and wilfullness: And so
must self-condemned sinners be forced to do.

And now tell me I beseech you, Is there not all the reason in the World that
you should speedily repent you of your sins, and cast them from you with
loathing and detestation, and henceforward set upon a course of serious
holiness, that so you may escape all this misery threatened to the wicked, and
may partake of that glory which is promised to the pious and good. Does not a
thousand pound a year deserve the labor of one day? And will not all the joys
of Heaven that shall last for ever and ever, abundantly reward our diligence in
Gods service for this short life time? And are not the eternal torments of Hell
enough to restrain Men from a loose and sinful life, though it were never so
profitable or pleasant here for a little while? But you have before heard it
fully proved, that even at present an holy life is in all respects most for our
benefit and comfort. So that without doubt a good Man finds more sweetness and
satisfaction in the way to Heaven, than sinners do in the way to Hell. Our
gracious God appoints us an easy and honorable service, and gives glorious
rewards: But the Devil is a most cruel Master, and sets his slaves to the
vilest drudgery, and afterward paies them very sad wages, Romans 6. 21, 22, 23.
Whether then will you be Christ's freemen or the Devil's bondslaves? Whether
will you walk in the good ways of God, that bring peace and comfort here on
Earth, and eternal glory in Heaven: or in the crooked paths of sin, which now
bring sorrow and shame and pain, and hereafter will plunge you into eternal
misery and torment in Hell? Thus are life and death, happiness and misery set
before you: What choice then will you make? One would think there was no great
difficulty in the case to a Man that has the use of his reason, if he will at
all make use of it in the affairs of his Soul. A little thinking serves turn to
convince Men, that there is no reason why they should choose poverty and
reproach, pain and imprisonment (if they can honestly avoid them) rather than
Riches and Honor, ease and liberty. But I am sure there is a thousand times
less reason for a Man to disobey God and damn his Soul for ever, rather than to
please and serve him, and to make sure of eternal Salvation. Wherefore let me
again beseech you to take the matter into consideration, and think seriously
what is most reasonable and most for your own interest, and then choose
accordingly. And I pray God direct your hearts to make so wise a choice, that
you may never have cause to repent of it, either in this World or that to come.

Amen.
CHAP. II.
A brief description of an holy life, with some short Directions in order
thereto.

IF you now demand of me wherein consists this Holiness of life, to which I
have been thus long and earnestly exhorting you, that I hope you may in some
measure understand by reflecting on what I said at the beginning, and by
attending to what I have intimated all along my Discourse. Yet for your
assistance, I shall somewhat more plainly represent it to you, though but very
briefly; as no other can be expected in this little Paper.

In the general then (as I have before expressed it) I am only persuading you to
live as becomes true Christians, according to your Baptismal Vow, in the
keeping of which consists your Christianity. Now by your Baptism you are
engaged to believe in and obey God the Father, the son and the Holy Ghost. You
must sincerely and heartily own God the Father as your maker and Preserver, the
son of God as your Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost as your Sanctifier, Guide and
Comforter. And accordingly must you behave your self both in heart and life:
And therefore you must renounce the Devil, the World and the Flesh which would
draw you off from God, and must steadfastly believe the Articles of your
Christian Faith, and carefully keep Gods holy will and commandments all the
days of your life. Your faith is required in order to obedience: For if you do
not believe Christ's Gospel, you are not like to obey it. In these two things
then consists the Religion of a Christian, to which he is engaged by his
Baptism, viz. in Believing what Jesus Christ has revealed, and in doing what
he has commanded. In short, he is a good Christian who does firmly believe his
Creed, and carefully keep the Commandments.

The doctrines which we are to believe are indeed more largely and fully
delivered in the Holy Scriptures, which were written by Men inspired by the
Holy Ghost, and accordingly ought to be received as the word of God, and to be
diligently read and steadfastly believed. But the chief articles of the
Christian Faith are briefly sum'd up in that which we call the Apostles Creed,
I believe in God the Father, etc. This I hope you are well acquainted with, it
being so short and plain, and daily repeated in the Church Service; and
therefore I shall not set it down at large. And this also I hope you do believe
to be most true. You would take it ill, if I should question your belief of the
Creed, without which you are not to be reckoned as Christians. But let me
advise, you to consider seriously and frequently of these great truths
contained in the Creed, that you may more clearly understand them, and be more
affected with them. And pray see that your belief of them be very firm and
deep-rooted in your Soul, that so the fruit of your faith may appear in the
holiness of your life. Without this, the bare knowing of the Creed, and
repeating it never so often will stand us in no stead. For, as I told you,
obedience is the end of Faith. And all the Articles of our Belief do most
plainly tend to make us holy and good, if we will but carefully attend to them,
and consider well of them. To show it in few words. If we b^^ieve that God the
Father Almighty made us and all the World; then are we bound to love and honor
him, to worship and obey him, as our maker: and preserver, who is Almighty in
Power, infinite in Wisdom, goodness and all manner of Perfections. If we believe
that Je(...) Christ is the Son of God, and the Redeemer of mankind who died for
us and rose again, and ascended to Heaven, and will thence come to judge the
quick and the dead, and will grant to all penitent and obedient Believers, the
forgiveness of their sins, and everlasting life, but will sentence the wicked
to everlasting misery: Our belief of this, must lead us to true Repentance and
amendment of Life, and to an humble dependence on the mercies of God, and the
merits of Christ, for Pardon and Salvation. And if we believe, that it is the
Office of the Holy Ghost to sanctify us, and all the elect People of God; then
ought we to pray to God for his holy Spirit, and we must comply with his good
motions, and submit to his working upon our Souls, that he may sanctify us and
make us holy, that so we may be living members of Christ's Holy Catholic
Church. And in this Church are we bound to continue, that so in the Communion
of Saints, we may enjoy the benefit of the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer, by
which means the Holy Ghost works Grace in us, and increases the same, till it
be perfected in eternal Glory, to which good Men shall be advanced both in Soul
and Body at the Resurrection, as their Souls made entrance upon it presently
after their death.

Thus you see how a right Belief leads a Man to holiness of Life. And therefore
in holy Scripture do we find so much mention made of Faith, or of believing in
God and in Christ. This in many places is highly extolled, and most strictly
required of us, as the very sum of our Duty: insomuch that we are often said
to be justified or pardoned on account of our Faith, and to be saved by Faith,
and all this chiefly, as I suppose, because true Faith produces Obedience; and
makes a Man become an humble and sincere Disciple of Jesus Christ, and so makes
us fit for the mercies of God in and through our Blessed Savior. But when
faith does not bring forth the fruit of Holiness and good Works, it is of no
value with God, nor will stand us in any stead, as you may see at large in the
second Chapter of St. James, to name no other places. Wherefore you know we are
engaged by our Baptism, not only to believe all the Articles of the Christian
Faith, but also to keep God's Commandments, which I am to speak of next.

Now these Commandments are also plainly contained in the Holy Scriptures; and
therefore there is still more Reason why you should diligently read and study
the same, that you may know the Will of God and do it. And all that is to be
done by us, I reckon, is contained in the Ten Commandments, as they are
explained to us, and urged upon us, both by the Prophets in the Old Testament,
and by our Savior and his Apostles in the New: Especially in our Savior's
Sermon in the Mount, in the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of St. Matthew.
And therefore often read over these three Chapters. There you will find what
manner of persons the Disciples of Jesus ought to be, even like their Master,
of an humble, lowly Spirit, meek and gentle, pure and peaceable, merciful and
patient, and the like. Such as these he pronounces blessed in the beginning of
that heavenly Sermon, and these alone are they whom he will make most blessed
with himself for ever. But if you would have the sum of your Duty to God and
to your Neighbor, as required by the Ten Commandments, briefly represented,
take it in the very words of our Church Catechism.

My duty toward God is to believe in him; to fear him; to love him with all my
heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength; to worship
him; to give him thanks; to put my whole trust in him; to call upon him; to
honor his holy Name and his Word; and to serve him truly all the days of my
life.

My duty toward my Neighbor, is to love him as my self; and to do to all men
as I would they should do to me. To love, honor, and succor my Father and
Mother. To honor and obey the King, and all that are put in authority under
him. To submit my self to all my Governors, Teachers, Spiritual P^stours and
Masters. To order my self lowly and reverently to all my betters. To hurt no
body by word or deed. To be true and just in all my dealings. To bear no malice
nor hatred in my heart. To keep my hands from picking and stealing; my tongue
from evil-speaking, lying and slandering. To keep my body in temperance,
soberness and chastity. Not to covet and desire other men's goods; but to learn
and labor truly to get my own living, and to do my duty in that state of life
into which it shall please God to call me.

Here you have your Duty in a little room, which you may easily keep in memory:
but especially beg of God to write his Laws in your heart, that you may freely
and cheerfully obey them in your Life and Conversation. And for your further
assistance, I shall a little enlarge upon the chief of these Duties, especially
the love of God and your Neighbor, and so conclude with some short and general
Directions for the guiding of your steps more readily and constantly in the
ways of Holiness all the days of your Life.

To love God with all our Heart and Soul, is the first and great Commandment:
as our Savior himself teaches us, Matthew. 22. 37, 38. This makes us more
easily to obey all the rest of his Commands. For if we truly love God, we shall
be very fearful to offend him, and very careful to please him in all our ways.
And then do we truly love God with all our Heart, when we love him more than
all other things in the World, more than Riches, Pleasures, Honors, Friends,
or any other Enjoyments, yea, more than our very Lives; so that we will part
with all, rather than lose the favor of God, in which we account our happiness
chiefly to consist. This I take to be the very Essence of Religion, and it is
that without which our Savior tells us, we cannot be his Disciples, Matthew. 10.
37, 38. But when once we are got to this blessed temper, we shall find it no
very hard matter to deny our selves, and take up our Cross, and follow our Lord
and Master both in well-doing and in patient suffering.

Wherefore let us earnestly beg of God by his holy Spirit to work this love in
our Hearts. And to our Prayers let us add our own diligent Endeavors; and
especially let us be much in thinking of all the goodness and lovingkindness of
God, manifested to us and to all the World. Let us consider what he has done
for us already, both for Soul and Body, and what he has promised to do in the
Life to come. And never let our Hearts be at rest, till they are entirely fixed
upon the ever-blessed God as our chiefest good, and only satisfying Portion.
And let us earnestly seek his favor through the Lord Jesus, the Mediator, who
came into the World on purpose, to bring us into a state of Friendship with
God, that we might love him, and be loved of him, and live with him for ever in
love and joy. But always remember that obedience to God, is the only sure
evidence of true saving Love. He that loves God, will hate and abhor sin and
wickedness. Let the Son pretend what love and honor he will to his Father, he
does not truly love him, except he use all due care to please him.

And if you do thus sincerely love God as your Father, then may you always
comfortably trust in him, and depend upon him, which is another great Duty, and
brings great peace and quiet to our minds, Isa. 26. 3, 4. Whilst you live in
obedience to God's commands, you have a sure interest in his Promises, and may
safely rely upon his good Providence, for the performance of them. Wherefore
whatever your wants, your dangers, or sufferings are, do not distrust the
Providence of God, but wait patiently, and do your own duty, and be assured,
God in his good time, will succor and relieve you, he will direct, comfort and
strengthen you. Let all the experience you have hitherto had of his
loving kindness, engage you to trust in him as long as you live. And take great
care, that you never murmur nor repine against God under any affliction
whatever; when you meet with the heaviest crosses and disappointments, or lose
your dearest Relations and Friends, say with holy Job, The Lord gives, and the
Lord takes away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Beseech God to teach you that
excellent Lesson of Contentment in all Estates, Phil. 4. 11, 12, 13. Though you
may be low and poor in the World, yet consider, you have always cause to be
thankful, but never any reason to complain. God knows what condition is best
for us, and let us leave it to him to choose what we shall have. We that deserve
nothing but wrath and misery, ought to acknowledge the great goodness of God,
that we are on this side Hell. It is if the Lord's mercies, that we are not
utterly consumed, and that we do enjoy any measure of comfort. Think how poor
the Lord Jesus was for our sakes, who had not where to lay his Head, and was
ministered to by the substance of others: and in the same mean Condition did the
holy Apostles live. Your low Condition frees you from a great many snares and
temptations, and from a great many cares and sorrows that rich People meet
with. If you but truly love God, and have a treasure in Heaven, you are very
rich, though you have neither Gold nor Silver. Fear not, but God will give you
and yours Food and Raiment, and having that, let us be content and thankful.
Yea, let us put the very worst, that we should starve to Death for want of
Bread (which not one of a thousand does in times of Peace and Plenty) yet if
our Souls be fit for Heaven, and carried thither, we shall have no cause to
complain of the manner of our Death. I have heen a little the larger upon this,
for the sake of poor People, who are too apt to be discontent, and to murmur at
their Condition; though alas, they commonly bring themselves into it, or make
it much worse by their own careless and loose lives, as was before mentioned.

And yet before I proceed to the Duty you owe to your Neighbor, let me in a
few words direct you, as to the Worship of God in Prayers and Praises. This is
a duty most frequently enjoined in Scripture, and practiced by all good Men,
and the very Light of Nature may direct us to it. We have daily need of God's
mercy, and do daily taste of it, and therefore are we taught to pray
continually, and in everything to give thanks. To God alone must we offer up
our Prayers and Praises in the Name of Jesus Christ, as he himself teaches us,
Matt. 4. 10. Joh. 16. 23. We must not pray to Angels or Saints, nor make use of
them as our Mediators, for this is the peculiar Office of Christ, who died for
us, and is now interceeding at the right hand of God, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 7. 25.
Wherefore we mean, sinful Creatures must always come to God in the Name of
Christ, and for his sake alone, hope for the favor of God, the pardon of our
Sins, the acceptance of our Persons and Services, and the Salvation of our
Souls.

And our Savior teaches us to worship God in a pure and Spiritual manner with
our Hearts and Souls, because he is a Spirit, and searches the hearts of Men,
Joh 4. 23. Wherefore by no means, may we make any Image or Picture of God, nor
may we give Religious Worship to an Image, which is directly contrary to the
second Commandment. Neither may we frame in our minds any bodily shape or
likeness of God when we pray to him, but must conceive of him as a most pure
and glorious Spirit, most powerful and wise, and good, who fills the whole
World with his Presence, and is always near to us, though not to be seen with
bodily Eyes; and hears our Prayers, and knows our wants, and is both able and
willing to help us.

Our Savior has commanded us to pray in private, when we are alone, Matthew. 6.
6. And there he taught his Disciples how to pray, and has given us that most
excellent Form, which we call the Lord's Prayer, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc. which by the way, may assure us, that Forms of Prayer are very
lawful. And the Lords Prayer may both serve for a Pattern to direct us in all
our Prayers, and also is it self most fit to be used and joined to our other
Prayers. But it is not proper to use the Belief and the ten Commandments for
Prayers, as the manner is of poor ignorant People; though we ought often to
think of them, or rehearse* them, for the quickening of our Faith, and the
guiding of our Lives.

Upon all occasions, in all our troubles and distresses, let us be much in
Prayer to God, and still seek to him for mercy and comfort, who is always nigh
to them that call upon him in truth and sincerity. Would the poor Man seek as
earnestly to God for relief, as he does to his rich Neighbor, he would find it
the surest course to have his wants supplied. And let us also frequently be
lifting up our Hearts to God in Thanksgiving and Praise, for all his mercies
and favors which he bestows upon us. Thus may even the poorest Man have his
mind often employed when he is at his Work in the Shop, or in the Field, or
when he is walking in the way, or sailing on the Seas, which would not hinder,
but further his Labors, and make them more easy and pleasant. But be sure to
set some time apart every day for solemn Prayer.

Very fit it is to begin the day with Prayer to God, as soon as we rise out of
Bed; blessing his Name for our preservation and quiet rest, begging his
gracious Presence with us all the day, that we may be kept from all evil,
especially from sin, the worst of all. And at the Evening, let this be our last
work before we lie down to sleep, humbly to commit our selves to God by Prayer,
Psalm. 92. 1, 2.

Exceeding useful it is for those who have Families, to join together Morning
and Evening in Prayer to God, and in reading some part of his holy Word; for
which purpose there are many good Books of Devotion: and though they have none
of them, yet they may use such of the Prayers of the Church as are proper for
their purpose, which are to be found in the Morning and Evening Service, and in
other places.

Before you sit down to Meat, beg Gods blessing upon it, and afterward return
thanks for it.

But beside our Devotions in the Family or Closet, our great Duty is to worship
God in the public Assemblies of his People, which by no means we ought to
forsake, Heb. 10. 25. Suffer not your selves therefore by any Pretenses
whatever to be drawn away, either by Papists or Sectaries, from the public
Worship of God, as it is now by Law established in the Church of England. But
see that you duly resort to your Parish Churches, and that not only on
Holy Days, but on the Weekdays, when you have opportunity and leisure. More
especially, see that you constantly frequent the Church on the Lord's Day, if
not hindered by sickness, or some other very great and urgent Cause. Let not
that Excuse keep you from Church, which would not keep you from the Market.
Bring as many of your Family along with you, as can possibly be spared. Come to
the very beginning of Service, and stay quietly till the end of it, not running
away before the Blessing, as many careless People rudely do, as if they were
glad to get away, as from a Prison. Behave your selves with all due reverence,
both of body and mind, considering the Majesty of that God, in whose presence
you stand, before whom the very Angels vail their faces. Always kneel at your
Prayers, if there be convenience, or stand at least, Psalm. 95. 6. Above all,
look well to the temper of your Soul, and keep up an awful sense of the great
God to whom you are praying, and mind well what is said, as you go along with
the Prayers, and offer up your desires to God; otherwise, though you may speak
much, you do not pray at all. Avoid all vain and wandering thoughts, as much as
possible. When you join in the Confession of Sins, think of your own particular
faults, and be deeply humbled for them: and be unfeignedly thankful for all
God's mercies, whilst you are praising his Name; and earnestly long after that
Grace you pray for. Attend with care and reverence to God's Word, when it is
read from the Desk, and also to the preaching and explaining of it from the
Pulpit, that you may both be diligent hearers, and faithful doers of the Word.
Neglect not the Church in the Afternoon, though you should live where there is
no Sermon. Catechizing may be as useful to you, and this ought to be in all
places. And besides that, you will hear the holy Scriptures read, and have the
benefit of the public Prayers.

When you come from Church, spend not the remainder of the day in sports and
idleness, much less in drinking and gaming, as too many do: but if you have a
Family, let some time be spent with them, in praying, in reading God's Word,
and some good Book; and let Children and Servants be instructed in their
Catechism. Examine them about what they have heard, that so it may make them
more attentive; and do you meditate on the same, that it may sink into your
Heart. Works of mercy and necessity may be done on the Lord's Day; but by no
means allow your selves in any needless Labors, nor in traveling upon the
Road, or wandering about to make idle Visits. God allows us six days in the Week
for our own Employments, let us devote the Lord's Day to his service, readily
and cheerfully.

When the Sacrament of Baptism is administered, do you attend to it. Remember
your own Engagement by having received it in your Infancy, and resolve to live
answerably thereto. Join in Prayer for God's blessing on the Children then
received into the Church. And when you bring your own Children to be baptized,
see that you do most sincerely give them up to God, and devote them to his
Service, with firm Resolutions to bring them up in his fear, if God spare your
Lives and theirs, and earnestly pray for his Grace to be given in to their
Souls. And those to whom you stand as Sureties, you ought to do your utmost
toward their good Education in the knowledge of God and Religion, according to
the Charge given you, especially if the Parents die, or prove negligent. And
pray beware of a very wicked practice, which is common in some places, that
after a Child is baptized, the Neighbors that are invited, spend the rest of
the day in Riot and Drunkenness; forgetting, that even now they renounced the
lusts of the Flesh, those who stood at the Font, and all the rest, are under
the same obligation.

Whenever you are invited by your Minister to the holy Communion, do not
willingly neglect the Invitation: but come with a thankful Heart to keep up the
remembrance of Christ's love in dying for sinners, according to his express
Command, Luke 22. 19. Take care to prepare your selves by true repentance for
all your former sins, and steadfast purposes by God's grace thoroughly to forsake
the same. See that you be in perfect Charity with all Men, freely forgiving
those who have offended you, and offering satisfaction to those whom you have
offended. If after this, they will not be reconciled, that is not your fault,
but theirs, and therefore may not keep you from the Sacrament. Stay not away
out of a Pretense, that you want time to prepare your self. For a constant holy
Life, is the best Preparation. If you are fit for Prayers, you are fit for the
Communion. Do not think that the Communion is only for rich People. The Souls
of the poor are as precious as the rich, and as much concerned in Christ's
death; and they have as much cause to remember it, and seek after the benefits
of it. If you have not Money to offer at the Collection, see that you offer up
your selves to God, and that will be of more value. Complain not that you want
Clothes, and therefore you absent, both from the Church and Communion: but see
that you come in the Wedding Garment required in the Gospel, with humble,
penitent, thankful Hearts, and then you will be welcome Guests at Christ's
Table. For your direction, if you have no Books on this Subject, yet read
seriously the Office for the Communion in the Common Prayer, and you may find
very great assistance from it. It Is very fit also to consult with your
Minister, especially the first time you receive. Assure your selves, it is a
very heinous sin, to live one year after another, in the neglect of this
weighty Duty, and argues a very great contempt of our Savior's Authority, and
of his infinite love and kindness.

Before I leave speaking of your Duty to God, let me beseech you carefully to
abstain from that common heinous sin of Swearing. A most senseless piece of
wickedness, that brings neither pleasure nor profit along with it. When you are
called before the Magistrate in weighty Cases, you may lawfully swear, Heb. 6.
16. but take great care to swear the Truth, and nothing but the Truth: for
otherwise, you call the true God to witness a Lie, and do even call for his
vengeance upon your selves. In your ordinary communication, avoid all manner of
swearing, either by the sacred Name of God, or by any Creature, Matthew. 5. 34.
Jam. 5. 12. Use not such Expressions, As you hope to be saved, As you hope for
mercy, with others the like, which are great Oaths, though frequently used upon
every slight occasion. Do not so much as rashly and carelessly mention the holy
Name of God or Christ: but let your inward Reverence be manifested in your
outward Expressions.

And to this I may fitly join as earnest Caution against the sin of Cursing, in
which the Name of God is often dishonored, when men wish that God's Curse may
light upon others sometimes on their very Children and nearest Relations,
sometimes on their Neighbors, and sometimes on their Cattle. Some profane
wretches wish damnation to those they quarrel with, yea, even to themselves.
And how common is it to hear Men in their wrath, wish the Pox, or Plague, or
Hanging to their Neighbor, or bidding the Devil take them. Indeed they
themselves seem to be possessed by him, whilst they vent this Language of Hell,
and do take the ready way to bring all manner of Curses, both on their own Soul
and Body, Psalm. 109. 17, 18. This wicked Custom proceeds both from the want of
the true fear of God in Men's Hearts, and also from want of Kindness and
Charity to one another, of which I am next to speak a few words.

Next to the love of God above all, the loving of our Neighbors as our selves,
is the great Duty of a Christian, as our Savior teaches in that same place,
Matthew. 22. 39, 40. And Love is said to be the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.
8, 9, 10. Nothing more becomes a Disciple of Jesus Christ, than to live in love
and charity with all Men, doing all the good we can to others, but doing no
manner of evil to any, Read 1 Cor. 13. This is most frequently, and strictly
commanded in the Gospel, and made the very badge and character of a Christian,
Joh. 13. 34, 35. This makes us most like to our blessed Lord and Master, who
went about continually doing good, both to the Souls and Bodies of Men; even to
the very worst of Men, and his most bitter Enemies, did he show great charity
and kindness. And herein let us study to be like him to the utmost of our power.

If we have true love for all Men, we shall then easily and readily perform all
those Duties which we owe to them in the several places and relations wherein
we stand: of which I must not here go about to give a particular account. But
in general. Husbands and Wives ought most entirely to love each other, and
study to render one another's Lives happy here, and their Souls hereafter. For
if they live in discord and wrath, they have an Hell upon Earth whilst they
live, and have reason to expect the eternal torments of Hell when they die.
Parents ought to love their Children, and take due care of them, both as to
Soul and Body: and Children ought to honor and obey their Parents, and relieve
them, if they stand in need. Masters must be gentle and kind toward their
Servants; and Servants must be faithful and obedient to their Masters, even to
the froward and severe. Subjects must yield obedience to all the lawful
Commands of their Rulers, and patiently submit to what Punishments they
inflict; and upon no Pretense whatever, may they rebel against them: ^o^ it is
most expressly forbidden in Scripture, and damnation threatened to those that are
guilty, Romans 13. 1, 2. And commonly Treason and Rebellion, bring nothing but
ruin and misery in this World, as well as the next. The People ought to esteem
and love their Ministers, to follow their godly Admonitions and Examples, and
afford them due Maintenance.

In brief, we must carefully abstain from doing any injury to any Man of what
rank or condition soever, either in his Soul or Body, his Estate or good Name:
but must be ever ready to do all manner of good to all Men according to our
ability and opportunity. And hereby we are to show, that we love our Neighbors
as our selves, by dealing with all Men so truly and justly, so mercifully and
kindly, as we desire to be dealt with our selves. This is the great Rule of the
Gospel, Matt. 7. 12. And by this Rule ought we to govern our selves in all our
carriage toward others, both in buying and selling, and in our whole
Conversation. This is a very plain and easy Rule to walk by, and is most just
and equal, and very large and comprehensive; so that if a Man will honestly and
faithfully attend to it, he need not go far to seek for direction how to behave
himself in most Cases, that may happen betwixt him and his Neighbor. Would I
be reviled and slandered, cheated and cozened, beaten and hurt, or any other
way abused? if not, then let me not use another at this rate. Would I be
despised or derided for my faults, or for my poverty and misfortune? Would I
not rather in reason desire to be kindly instructed, assisted, and relieved?
Thus then, let me deal with my Neigbour, and according to my power, with
meekness and true kindness, instruct the ignorant, reclaim the vicious and
erroneous, comfort the sad, relieve the oppressed, feed the hungry, and clothe
the naked. Even those that are of a mean condition, must be ready to help such,
as are in greater want than themselves. The Man that lives by his Labor, is
not wholly excused from works of Charity, Ephesians. 4. 28. The Widow's Mite is very
acceptable to God; and a cup of cold water shall not lose it is reward. A
willing charitable mind it is that God chiefly looks at, and calls for, and
this the poorest may have, if it be not their own fault.

And our Charity and Kindness is not only to be shown to our Friends, but to
our very Enemies themselves. We may not render evil for evil, but must study to
overcome evil by doing of good. If another strike us, we may not strike again;
if he rail upon us, and revile us, we must not return the same ill Language,
but either by silence, or by gentle and soft answers endeavor to appease his
wrath. For the Rule is not, to deal with others, as they deal with me, but as I
in reason desire to be dealt with; and another Man's fault will not excuse
mine. If he do me an injury, I must not be judge in my own Cause, nor take upon
me to revenge it, but in weighty Cases, may fly to the Magistrate for relief.
But upon no account whatever, may we bear any grudge or hatred in our Hearts
against any Man, though never so wicked, or never so much our enemy: but we
must pity him and pray for him, that God would give him a better mind. If ever
we hope to find mercy with God, and have our trespasses forgiven, we must
forgive those that offend us, as we learn from the Lord's Prayer, and many most
plain places of Scripture. See Matthew. 5. 44, etc. Matthew. 18. 21. to the end.
Romans 12. 14. to the end. We must show meekness and gentleness to all men, and
never willingly say or do any thing to provoke another to anger: nor should we
be easily provoked, but very easily appeased and reconciled. It Is very sad to
consider, what wretched and miserable Lives many of the poorer sort lead, by
their continual brawling and scolding, quarrelling and contending with one
another: and sometimes when they have scarce Money to buy Bread, they will throw
it away in vexatious Lawsuits, merely out of Spite and Revenge.

And the People of this Rank, ought especially to beware of envying those that
are in better Condition than themselves. We ought to have that true kindness
and good will for all Men, that we should be glad of their prosperity, though
we our selves be in affliction; as on the other hand, we ought to have great
compassion for those in misery, though we be in prosperity.

And let such that are in want, take heed, that their Necessities put them upon
no unlawful Course for their Relief. Particularly, beware of stealing any
thing, though of a small value. By degrees, it is to be feared, you will go on
to greater matters, and so may bring your selves to shame and punishment in
this World, as well as that to come. The best way to avoid this, is to be very
diligent in your lawful Calling, as the Apostle directs in that place before
named, Ephesians. 4. 28. If you are not able to work, it is lawful to beg. But by no
means betake your selves to this lazy, unprofitable Life of begging, if you are
able to subsist by any other lawful course. He that will not work when he can,
deserves not to eat. But rather than either steal or starve, you may seek for
Relief from your Neighbor's Charity. But do not go about to deceive him, by
borrowing what you know you are never like to pay: for this is downright
cheating. Rather deal plainly, and make known your Necessities. If you trust in
God, and do your duty, he will take care of you: And though you may be in
straits sometimes, yet still you will find a supply. And to prevent your
poverty, let me especially warn you against that common brutish sin of
Drunkenness, which brings both this and many other mischiefs along with it, as
I have before told you. Indeed, it hinders every thing that is good, and leads
Men into all manner both of sin and misery. This Vice it is that makes more
Beggars than any other cause. Wherefore, if you have any regard to your
Families, any love to Soul or Body, avoid all riot and excess. Eat and drink
moderately, as may tend to keep you best in health, and make you most fit for
the service of God, and your own Callings.

And, lastly, beware of that filthy sin of Whoredom, which very often goes
along with Drunkenness, and as often brings the curse of God, both upon Men's
Bodies and Estates. And to keep you innocent, avoid idleness, as well as
intemperance. And fly from all lewd and wicked company, where you are in
danger of being enticed and ensnared: and do not so much as allow your selves
in any unclean thoughts or desires, nor in filthy Discourses, or in any wanton
carriage and behavior. For the preventing of all wickedness in this kind, God
has allowed Marriage, which is said to be honorable in all, but Whoremongers
and Adulterers God will judge, Hib. 13. 4. Wherefore let them who are in that
state keep strictly true to their Marriage Vow: And all both Married and Single
preserve both Body and Soul so chaste and pure that the holy Spirit of God may
now dwell in their hearts, and they may be fit to dwell for ever in the
presence of the most holy God.

And thus I have briefly given you an account wherein consists that holiness of
life, to which all Christians are obliged by the Precepts of our Blessed
Savior, and by their Baptismal Vow, which binds them to keep his Precepts and
to follow his Example, who himself lived in the same holy manner that he
taught; and has commanded all that say they abide in him to walk as he walked.
1 John 2. 6. The sum of all you have in few words which the Gospel teaches,
even that we should deny ungodliness and all wordly lusts, and live soberly,
righteously and piously in the World. Tit. 2. 11, 12.

And now let me again beseech you seriously to consider whether it has been
your care to live such holy and good lives, yea or no. And whereinsoever your
Conscience does accuse you that you have neglected the duties God has
commanded, or committed those sins which he has forbidden, do you humbly
acknowledge and confess the same to Almighty God, with true godly sorrow for
the same, earnestly begging Mercy and Pardon for Christ's sake, who dyed on the
Cross for sinners, and through whom all that confess and forsake their sins
shall find mercy. Wherefore do you henceforward resolve by his Grace that you
will forsake your sins and amend your lives, and make it your chief business to
keep Consciences void of offense toward God and Man, not allowing your selves
in any known sin, nor in the wilful neglect of any known Duty. Do not object
against this and say that it is impossible to lead such an holy Life: For
thousands in the World, of all Ranks and Conditions, have done it in all Ages,
by the assistance of God's Grace, which you shall never want if you seek it
earnestly, and improve it diligently. And though there may at first be some
difficulty in leaving an ill course, yet by degrees it will grow easy, and you
will then find nothing so sweet and pleasant as Religion and Virtue.

And do not, I beseech you, fancy that it is not for poor people to think of
being so Religious and godly; that this is only for the Rich, who have little
else to do. Why, will not you that are Poor have as much care of your own Souls
as the Rich, and study to be happy as well as they. By this means you will be
even with them, yea much happier than they even in this life, except they be
Good as well as Great. What is there in all I have said but even the poorest
may perform, if they have but a willing mind. May you not love God and your
Neighbor, be sober and chaste, meek and humble, pray to God and praise his
name, etc. Nay is not this the much better way to keep you from poverty, or to
help you out of it? Is it not much cheaper to live soberly and honestly, than
to live in Drunkenness and Whoredom and such like wastful sins? Does it not
cost you much more to go to Law for revenge, than to forgive an injury? One
vice costs more the maintaining than ten virtues. And I am confident more
Families are brought to Poverty by gratifying their Lusts than by providing for
their Children, how many soever they be. Is it not think you much better for
your selves and Families to spend the Lord's Day in Gods service both in public
and private, than to wast your time and money at the Alehouse? Daily experience
shows that it is not Religion, but the want of it that makes Men poor and
miserable. Besides that such good People have Gods blessing and favors, as I
have already showed, and therefore he will be sure to take care of them and
theirs.

And pray do not think that you shall be saved merely because you are poor: For
if you be Wicked and Ungodly, you will certainly be miserable in the next World
as well as this. Lazarus was not saved because he was poor, but because he was
a pious good Man: And on the other hand, Dives was not damned for being rich,
but because he was luxurious and proud, and wholly given up to pamper and adorn
his Carcass.

Let me further warn you against two or three dangerous mistakes that harden
many Men in their sins. Beware of thinking that it is enough for a Man to be
baptized and keep his Church, and go to Prayers and Sermons, and sometimes to
the Communion, and say his Prayers, in private, that this is enough to prove
him a good Christian and make sure of Salvation. All this is very good, but
this will not serve turn, except our hearts be so thoroughly sanctified by the
Grace of God that we do truly love God above all, and set our hearts on the
joys of Heaven, and love our Neighbors, and be true and just in our dealings,
Temperate and Chaste in our Conversation, as is before described. And this is
the great end of Prayers, Sermons and Sacraments, to make us more and more holy
in heart and life: without which we shall be rather worse than better for them.
Matt. 7. 21, 22, 23.

Be not so weak as to think you may be saved by a good belief alone, by your
faith in Christ, and trusting in God, without obedience to his Commands. It is
for Christ's sake only you are saved, but he will save none but those who obey
him. Heb. 5. 9. And that only is true saving Faith, which purifies the heart,
and produces obedience, as you have heard before. And since God has plainly
told us that we cannot be saved without holiness, if we take up a foolish
confidence that we may be saved without it, this is not trusting in God, but in
our own fancies and the Devils delusions. We may safely trust in Gods promises,
but then let us see to perform the conditions, and become such an humble, holy
people, as he has promised for Christ's sake to own and save.

Take heed also of mistaking the nature of Repentance, as if it were only being
a little sorry for our sins, and crying to God for mercy, and then all will be
well, though we go on still in our old ways. But this is a most dangerous
mistake. For a Man never truly repents till he forsakes his sin and changes his
course: When the Drunkard becomes Sober, and the Profane Man a devout
Worshipper of God, and so continues. True Repentance changes the heart and life
of the sinner.

And lastly, Do not think it enough to forsake some sins and keep others; to do
some good duties and neglect others, and then excuse your selves by saying it
is your failing. Every Man has his failing, and this is mine. So says the
Drunkard and the Whoremonger, and so says the angry Man when he Swears or
Curses, or gives bad language. But such sins as are committed against knowledge
and Conscience, and continued from time to time, when we have leisure to think
beforehand and prevent them, these are to be reckoned as wilful sins, not as
failings. Especially such gross sins as Drunkenness, Whoredom, common Swearing
or Lying and the like are not to be reckoned as failings. Indeed whatever sin a
Man loves and pleads for and allows himself in, is not a mere infirmity but a
wilful transgression. A good Man hates all sin as he does sickness, and
strives and watches and prays against it. He hates every false way, and has a
respect to all Gods Commands. A true Christian must be an entirely good Man,
all of a piece. A great matter I find it is with many people, that they do no
wrong to no body, nor have any malice in their heart, and therefore they think
themselves in good condition Godward. But though this is one good part of our
duty, yet it is but a part. We must also see that we do not wrong Almighty God
and our own Souls by setting our hearts chiefly on this World, by neglecting
his Worship and Service, by living in excess or uncleanness or any other known
sin. We must be both pious toward God, loyal to our Prince, just and charitable
to our Neighbor, humble and sober, every way holy and good if we will approve
our selves to be Christians indeed. He that wilfully offends in one point and
allows himself therein, is guilty in effect of breaking the whole Law: For he
despises Gods authority; and if he meets with the same temptation, will commit
any other sin. And as is commonly and truly said in this case, one Stab though
but with a Pen-kife may wound a Man as mortally, as twenty thrusts with a
Sword; so one sin loved and delighted in, may damn a Man's Soul as well as a
thousand, James 2. 10.

Having thus endeavored briefly to remove your Objections and Mistakes, I do
now again in the last place, come to enforce my Exhortation, that you would
seriously and steadfastly resolve to cast away every sin, and most entirely
devote your selves to the leading such a godly, righteous, and sober Life, as
you are bound to by your Christian Baptism. If you are in dispute with your
selves, whether you should resolve upon it, pray look over the Arguments before
laid down, and ponder them in your mind; and then certainly you cannot but own,
that I persuade you to nothing, but what is very just and reasonable, and every
way for your own greatest good. And if you are convinced of this, then proceed
forthwith to this pious Resolution, without trifling or delaying. The sooner
you do it, the safer it is, and the better for you. Do not go on in sin at
present, on a pretense, that you will repent hereafter, when you are older, or
when you come to be sick, and to die. Do not put off the great business of Life
to the end of your days, when you are not sure of time or strength, or of God's
assistance, or acceptance of you. Do not plead the Example of the Thief upon
the Cross: for this Case was nothing like yours, that have long enjoyed the
offers of grace and mercy. If now from this present time you will heartily and
sincerely return to God, you have no reason to despair of his mercies, how many
or great soever your sins have been: but if you still persist in sin, presuming
upon God's mercy hereafter, you have just cause to fear, that this bold
presumption, and horrid abuse of God's grace, may end in your eternal ruin and
damnation.

But if you are willing now speedily to enter upon this Resolution and Purpose,
then let me in a few words, farther direct you, by what means you may render it
firm and lasting, and may be best enabled to perform the same.

(1) And first, I would advise you to take the next convenient opportunity to
confirm this holy Resolution, at the Table of the Lord. There solemnly renew
your Baptismal Vow. Dedicate and give up your self to God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost; renouncing the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and all those
wicked ways they would draw you to, more especially those sins, which you have
been formerly most guilty of. Henceforth, let the Lord Jesus that bought you
with his Blood, be taken for your only Lord and Master, to govern you by his
Spirit, and by his Laws, as ever you desire and hope to be saved by his Death
and Resurrection. And use frequently to think of this solemn Engagement, after
you have made it: that it may have due force upon you, when you are tempted to
revolt to any wicked practice. Often repeat the same betwixt God and your own
Soul; and especially renew it by frequent attendance on the Holy Commnnion,
there seeking for grace and strength from God, to walk in his holy ways
steadfastly and constantly.

(2) But that brings me to a second Direction, that you should not resolve upon
all this, in a confidence of your own strength, but in the most humble
dependence on the grace of God, which he is ever willing to bestow on such as
seek it earnestly in the way he has appointed, by a due attendance on the means
of Grace, the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments. Wherefore, as you have opportunity,
attend carefully to the reading and hearing of his Word, and hide it in your
Heart, that you may not sin against him. And be very much in Prayer to God for
his holy Spirit, to be given you through his Son Jesus, who will powerfully
interceed for you, and make good his Promises, to humble and devout
Supplicants, Luke 11. 13. Joh. 16. 23, 24. Whenever you are in danger, and are
assaulted by any temptation to sin, or are backward to what is good, then
especially pray servently for quickening and strengthening Grace, and your
Prayers shall not be in vain

(3) To your Prayers, add constant watchfulness over your self at all times,
and in all places and companies. Watch over your thoughts themselves, and over
your words and actions. Satan is ever watching to deceive us, and there are
many snares and dangers in all our ways, and we have corrupt Natures and
treacherous Hearts, and therefore had need to be very watchful, to avoid all
occasions of sin, as much as possible, and to suppress the very first
beginnings. Think beforehand what Temptations you are like to meet with, and
fortify your self against what you cannot shun. Do not wilfully run into
Danger, especially, beware of bad Company, by which many are drawn back to
their former Looseness. Be not led away by their Counsel or Examples, nor be
discouraged by their Jeers and Censures. Use often to look back upon your
Actions, and if you have been drawn into any wilful sin, do not make a light
matter of it, nor yet despair of Pardon, if you be truly penitent. Wherefore,
speedily and earnestly betake your self to God by true Repentance, begging
mercy for Christ's sake, and more Grace to strengthen and assist you. Renew
your Purposes for amendment of Life, and set your Watch more strictly for the
future.

(4) To quicken and engage you to this Watchfulness, Remember, that Almighty
God is ever present with you, and observes all your ways, and takes great
delight in your Piety and Holiness, but is of purer Eyes, than to behold the
least iniquity with any pleasure. Wherefore, always walk as in the presence of
this Holy God, whether you are alone, or in Company.

(5) Think often, how near you stand to another World, and what an account you
must give to God, of all your Deeds done in the Body; and so live now, as will
be most for your comfort at Death and Judgment. When the Profits and Pleasures
of Sin entice you, compare them with the eternal Joys which they will deprive
you of, and with the eternal Torments they lead to. Think whether ever any Man
by sinning against God, did gain somewhat that is better than Heaven, or that is
worth going to Hell for. Let Eternity be very much in your thoughts, and the
fading Vanities of this World will have little esteem with you. Often ponder of
those weighty Words of our Blessed Savior, What will it profit a Man to gain
the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in exchange
for his Soul? Mark 8. 36, 37.

Lastly, In stead of more Directions, let me advise you to acquaint your self
with your Minister; and consult him in the great Concernments of your Soul, as
Men are wont to do the Lawyer and the Physician, in matters that concern their
Bodies and Estates Do not think it enough to hear his Sermons in public; but
take Advice from him in private, and open to him the state and case of your
Soul, so far as may enable him to give such Directions, as are most proper to
your Condition. This especially you ought to do, when you first make entrance
upon an Holy Life, and do first address your self to the Holy Communion; or
when you are under any great doubts, and trouble of mind; and are vexed with
sore temptations, either of one sort or other; or when you are set upon by such
that would draw you away from our Church, either to Popery, or to any other
Sect amongst us. Then presently betake your self to your Minister: And in these
or the like Cases, take Direction from him, and be sure to follow his wholesome
Counsel, and desire his Prayers to God for you. I know in large Parishes,
Ministers are not able to have a particular knowledge of every Person; but yet
all that know the worth of Souls, and the price that was paid for them, will be
ready to give attendance to the meanest of their People, that shall apply
themselves to them for Advice and Comfort, and will be glad of all
opportunities to promote the Honor and Interest of their Savior, and the good
of precious Souls committed to their Care.

And thus have I as plainly, and as fully as I well could in so little room,
directed you in that holy way which leads to eternal Glory; and have shown you
what great Reason you have to walk in that way, and to continue therein to the
end. As to those, who desire larger Directions, next to the holy Scriptures
(which I beseeeh you to read frequently with humility and seriousness,
especially the New Testament) next to them, I shall referr you only to that
pious and most useful Book, The whole Duty of Man. And heartily I wish, that
every poor Family in the Kingdom, was furnished with one of those Books,
together with a Bible and Common Prayer Book, which might all be purchased for
much less than five Shillings; and therefore it is great pity they should be any
where wanting. Though alas, I know, there are many Families of poor People,
where none of them can read, and so Books to them are useless. Great Charity
therefore it would be, for rich Landlords and Gentlemen, to see that the
Children of their poor Tenants and Neighbors, be put out to School; and then
to bestow at least, Bibles upon them, that the knowledge of God, and Religion
may be promoted amongst them; which would make greatly for the good and welfare
both of Church and State. For though Brainsick Opinions and false Principles
may make Men proud and headstrong, and troublesome to their Governors, yet
solid Knowledge, and sincere Godliness, will make Men humble and meek, quiet
and peaceable, obedient to Magistrates and Ministers, full of Charity to their
Neighbors, and ready to every good Work. And I am sure, an increase of this
truly Religious Temper, would be one of the greatest Blessings that can be
bestowed upon this Earth, and would settle Kingdoms and Churches, Towns and
Families in Peace and Concord, which almost every where are divided amongst
themselves, as well as against one another: And by such blessed effects of true
Religion, something of Heaven would be brought down upon Earth, and our Souls
would be well fitted for Heaven, when we are called off from this Earth, into
those happy Regions above, where there is nothing else but Peace and Holiness,
and Love and Joy. And may it please God to bless these plain and short
Instructions for the enlightening of any minds with that Wisdom from above,
which is thus pure and peaceable, then shall I obtain my Design, and have great
cause to be thankful. And that the Reader may join with me in these Wishes, I
have annexed hereto a Prayer for Grace, to lead an Holy Life. And if he will
but add diligent endeavors to frequent and servent Prayers, neither his Labor
nor mine will be in vain, through the Grace and Blessing of Almighty God, from
whom comes every good and perfect Gift, to whom be given all Honor and Glory,
both now and for ever.

Amen.
A PRAYER, Chiefly for the assistance of God's grace, in order to the leading
an Holy Life.
O Most holy, and ever blessed Lord God, I do humbly cast down my self before
thee, acknowledging and lamenting my own sinfulness, and earnestly begging thy
grace and mercy through the Lord Jesus, our only Mediator and Advocate. I
confess, O God, I am a vile sinner, polluted from the very Womb: but since I
came to the use of my Reason, I have defiled my self with many wilful and
heinous transgressions. I have sadly neglected thy Service, and dishonored thy
Name, and have been greatly wanting in those Duties which I owe to thee my God,
to my Neighbor, and to my own Soul; and have not lived in such a godly,
righteous, charitable and sober manner, as I ought to have done: But have often
acted contrary to my own Reason and Conscience, and to the plain Precepts of
thy Word, and contrary to my own Promises and Vows, for better Obedience. O
Lord, give me a clear sight of my sins, and such a deep sense of the evil of my
ways, that my Heart may be truly humbled, and broken in the remembrance
thereof. And for the Lord Jesus sake, who died for Sinners, be merciful to me,
O Father of Mercies, pardon all my Iniquities, and let them not be remembered
against me to my Condemnation, either in this World, or that to come. Nor is it
only Pardon that I beg, but most earnestly I beseech thee by thy Holy Spirit,
to sanctify me both in Body and Soul, that being made pure and holy on Heart
and Life, I may serve thee diligently all my days on Earth, and so may enjoy
thee for ever in Heaven. I am fully convinced, that it is both my duty and my
happiness to fear and serve thee, the great and glorious God, who have made me
and redeemed me, and hitherto graciously preserved me. I acknowledge thy
Service to be perfect freedom, and all thy Laws to be holy, just and good.
Wherefore I desire utterly to renounce and forsake every evil way, and most
entirely devote my self to serve and please thee in newness of Life. But thou,
O Lord, know the weakness and corruption of my Nature; and how by evil
customs, I have made my self more prone to sin, more backward to that which is
good. O do thou thoroughly change my Nature by thy Grace, that I may hate and
abhor all wickedness, and take delight in the ways of Piety and Holiness. Let
no unmortified just remain in my Soul: but do thou purify and cleanse me from
Pride and Covetousness, from Envy and Malice, and from all impure and sensual
affections and desires, and enrich me with all the Graces of thy holy Spirit.
Give me such a clear knowledge of thy infinite goodness, and of all thy
glorious perfections, that I may ever humbly admire and adore thee, and love
thee with all my Heart and Soul, and cleave to thee as my only portion,
preferring thy favor before all the enjoyments of this World. Help me always
firmly to trust in thee, and freely to leave all my Affairs to thy wise and
gracious Providence, absolutely resigning my Will to thy holy Will in all
things. Make me truly thankful for all thy mercies, and patient under
afflictions. By thy teaching, let me learn to be content in all Estates and
Conditions. And good God, suffer me not in the greatest difficulties and
dangers, to distrust thy mercies, or take any unlawful course for my Relief. I
beg from thee my daily Bread, and beseech thee to give me an Heart well
satisfied with what thou see most convenient for me. Give me such a Spirit of
Piety and Devotion, that I may take great delight in thy Worship and Service,
both in public and private. Fill me with such love to my Blessed Savior, and
with such thankfulness for his love in dying for Sinners, that I may go with
more delight to the Holy Communion, for the good of my Soul, than to the
richest Feast that is made for my Body.

Help me, O God, to show my love to thy blessed Self, by true love and charity
to my Neighbors. Make me tractable and obedient to my Governors, both in
Church and State, peaceable and gentle toward all Men, dealing with them so
justly and truly, as I my self desire to be dealt with. Make me tender and
compassionate, and ready to do all the good I can to others: and let thy Grace
enable me freely to forgive those that do evil to me, as I my self hope for
mercy and forgiveness from thee, my God. And help me always to live soberly and
temperately, purely and chastely in Heart and Life; and with great meekness and
humility in the sense of my own unworthiness and manifold imperfections.

O Lord, grant that my Heart may be filled with earnest longings and desires
after those Graces, which now with my lips I pray for: and help me to show my
sincerity, by diligent endeavors, daily to grow in all Grace and goodness, and
to perfect. Holiness in thy Fear. Make me watchful over my self, and all my
ways, that I may carefully avoid all occasions of sin, and may check the first
motions thereto in my own Heart. Keep me always deeply sensible of thy
Presence, that I may walk humbly with thee, my God, and approve my self to thee
in well-doing. Wean my, Heart from all things here below, and prepare me for my
departure hence, into a better World. Help me always to live in such a
religious and holy manner, as will be most for my comfort at Death and
Judgment. Strengthen my Belief of the precious Promises, and dreadful
Threatenings of the Gospel, and let this Belief rule and govern me in my whole
Conversation. O that I may never be guilty of so much folly and madness, as to
lose the eternal and unspeakable joys of Heaven, and throw my self into the
eternal torments of Hell, for any of the profits or pleasures of sin, that are
but for a moment. Do thou, O Lord, by thy holy Spirit, ever keep upon my mind
such a fresh and lively sense of the reasonableness of Religion, and of the
mischief and folly of all sin and wickedness, that no temptations of Satan, no
allurements of the World or the Flesh, may hinder me from my Duty, nor draw me
into any known sin: but do thou ever strengthen and assist me by thy Grace, and
guide me by thy Counsel, till thou shall bring me to thy self in Glory.

Neither do I pray for my self alone, but for all Mankind, beseeching thee, to
send the Light of thy Gospel into all the dark Corners of the Earth, and grant,
that they who do enjoy it, may walk in all holy obedience thereto. Be merciful
to these Kingdoms, pardon our sins, and reform us from them. Heal all our
divisions, continue our mercies, and make us truly thankful for them. Bless the
King's Majesty, with the Royal Family, and all those that are in authority
under him, and grant to me, and all his Subjects, grace to lead quiet and
peaceable Lives, in all godliness and honesty. Bless the Ministers of thy holy
Word and Sacraments, and make them very diligent, and very successful in their
Endeavors; Help us to bring forth such Fruit from the Blessings we enjoy, that
thy Gospel and the Ordinances thereof may be continued to us, and to the
Generations after us. Show mercy to all that are afflicted, whether in Soul or
Body, and preserve those that travel on their lawful Occasions, by Land or by
Sea. Bless all my Friends and Relations, particularly, all that belong to this
Family, and help us all to live in the fear and love of thee our God, and in
peace and charity one with another, Let thy blessing and good presence be with
me thy unworthy Servant, now and at all times, at my down-lying and up-rising,
in my going out and coming in, be thou my God and my guide, even to the death,
and my eternal portion, when time shall be no more,

And accept, O God, of my unfeigned desires, to bless and raise thy glorious
Name, for all thy Mercies and Favors to my self, and to all Men. I bless thee
for my Reason and Senses, my Health and Strength, Food and Raiment, and all the
Comforts of this Life; but above all, I praise thee for thine inestimable love
in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ, for all the means of
Grace, and for the hope of Glory. And I beseech thee, give me that due sense of
all thy Mercies, that my Heart may be unfeignedly thankful, and that I may show
forth thy praise, not only with my lips, but in my life, by giving up my self
to thy service, and by walking before thee in Holiness and Righteousness all
the days of my Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose most holy Name and
Words, I continue to pray as he has taught us in his Gospel, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the fellowship of the
Holy Ghost, be with me now and evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

