VOX LAICI: OR, THE LAYMAN'S OPINION Touching the Making Alterations IN OUR
ESTABLISHED LITURGY, In Answer to a Letter from a Member of the CONVOCATION.

With some Remarks on the (pretended) Answer of VOX CLERI

By J. R. in a Letter to a Friend.

Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day, and for ever,

Heb. 13.8. Hold fast the form of sound Words,

Tim. 2.1.3. Earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints,

Jude v. 3. LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London
and Westminster, 1689.

VOX LAICI: OR, THE Layman's Opinion, etc.
SIR,
I have Received yours; and according to your Request, I have likewise perused
the Letter from a Member of the Convocation, concerning the making Alterations
in our Establist'd Liturgy; and I shall (Sir) give you Impartially my true
Sentiments of it; though, at the same time, I must acknowledge my self (being
an Unlettered Layman) an unfit person to defend that Church, (of which I am a
true, though unworthy Member) from all those Imperfections which that Author
is pleased unjustly to charge her with; yet I cannot forbear to show a just
Resentment of so much Filth and Dirt without cause cast upon her, not only to
blacken, but (without all doubt) to stifle her quite. I have (Sir) read, or
heard of a Child that was Born Dumb, and at the sudden surprise of one going to
kill his Father, the Violence of his Passion (or an Instinct in Nature, call it
which you please) broke through all those Impediments that obstructed his
Speech, and forced him to cry out, Oh do not hurt my Father! which so
astonished the intended Murderer, that he forbore to execute the Horrid
Villainy, Whether true, or not, I dare not affirm; yet (if true) it confirms a
saying very usual amongst us, (viz.) Some things may be said or done, that will
make a Man speak that had never a Tongue: And that will I hope excuse my
(speaking something to the point in hand and) offering some few Considerations
to our Author's own, Touching the making any Alterations, etc. But before I
name them I must beg his leave to enquire into two Things in General, viz. The
Author, and his Design; as for Particulars, I shall refer him to Vox Cleri,
where both his Arguments and Reasoning is sufficiently Ridiculed; and of that
Piece, let who will be the Author, he deserves as great a Blessing for
defending the Honor and Innocence of his pure and chaste Spiritual Mother, as
Shem and Japhet for covering the Nakedness of their natural Father; and who was
cursed for the contrary, I presume our Author can inform us: But who, and what
he is, is the first of the two Things I craved leave to enquire. It Is true, he
calls himself a Member of the Convocation; I suppose a Worthy one; (or at least
one Worthy, etc.) but his Modesty would not give leave to style himself such:
But had he told us he had been an Unworthy Member, etc. I should have believed
there had been more Truth than Modesty in the Expression. But what if our
Author after all should be no Member of the Convocation, nor the Church
neither, but only makes use of those sine Terms, as Physicians do of Gold, to
gild their bitter Pills, that they may be the easier swallowed by their
Patient; but whether he be, or not, it is much the same; for if he be not, then
he is a great Cheat and Imposture, and consequently deserves the promotion our
Laws has provided for the Entertainment of such; and if he be a Member, etc. I
dare be bold to say, (whatever he appears outwardly) he is such a rotten
mortified one, that it ought to be lop'd off to preserve the rest from
Gangreen. For if we call that an ill Bird that defiles its own Nest, what must
that Bird be called, which not only defiles but joins with those of prey, to
destroy both Nest and all the rest of the Young, whom our Blessed Lord (like
the Pelican) nourished with his own most precious Blood? Sure if there be a
Name for such an Unnatural Bird, it ought to begin with a W -- for none but the
Son of a Wicked Father, would Reproach and Defame a Virtuous and Chaste Mother:
But our Savior has told us a Tree is known by its Fruit. And those that reads
our Author's Letter, will find but little there but what is forbidden: And so
much shall serve for the first general Enquiry, Who, and What (we may
reasonably suppose) our Author is. The next is his Design, and as to that (as
the Text says) He that runs may read; for by a Penny we may know how a Shilling
is made, and a skillful Refiner, by a small quantity of Gold or Silver, will
tell the goodness of the whole Lump; and any body that observes the Arguments
of our Author, must have but very little Judgment that do not perceive his
Drift, and what Mettle he is made of. Peace and Union in the Church are fine
Things, and our Author ('it is true) has bid as fair for it, as any of his own
Principles can wish, or the Papist desire; and tells the World (as well as his
Brethren of the Convocation) there is an absolute necessity for it: And truly
I should be of the same Opinion, did I hope, or long (as I suppose our Author
does) for such a through Reformation as is made in the Kirk of Scotland, and
their Brethren in England did enjoy by Virtue of their Unnatural Rebellion
against their Lawful Sovereign, Charles the First, which proved a through one
indeed, for our Hereditary Monarchy, as well as Episcopacy was doubly Refined;
for the Kingdom was turned into a Commonwealth, and the Convocation into an
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, of which possibly our worthy Author might
be one. And though interest (which never lies) has made him fall (a little)
away from the Faith, which was delivered (in these times) by the then Saints,;
yet to that bias he still leaves and improves all Occasions to oblige those
his old Friends, who long for nothing more then once more to have a scramble
(not for the good, but) for the Goods of the Nation, and to reduce both Church
and State to the same Modal again. And truly I think nothing can be more
conducing to it, than for the two Houses of Parliament and the Convocation to
Agree to what this worthy Convocation Author shall propose in Order to destroy
our Established Church, etc. But Blessed be God if this Author should be a
Member, etc. yet he is but one, and I hope there are but few (if any) more of
his stamp amongst them, that are for leading us out of the good Old way, under
pretense of showing us a better New one. It Is true Novelty may please Children
and Fools, but I hope our Author does not take the true Sons of the Established
Church to be such; if he does, I am sure he is mistaken: For the World knows
better, from their constant Loyalty and Obedience to the Crown, which they have
sucked in from the Breasts of their tender Mother^ the Church, and knows better
than to be decoyed and carried away by such Philosophical Kidnappers. And
therefore our Author may (as the saying is) Save his Breath to cool his
Porridge. For his Cobweb is spun so fine it will catch nothing but Insects, and
so much shall serve for the Second general Inquiry, viz. The Author's Design;
which is no less than under the pretense of Altering our Established Liturgy to
destroy it quite: But before he proceeds further, I would desire him and all
unbiased Persons to consider of these Seven following Considerations, touching
the making any Alterations in our Established Church, etc. Viz.

Whether 1. Needful. 2. Lawful. 3. Convenient. 4. Who it will Oblige. 5. Who
it will not Oblige. 6. Which are the most. 7. The Effects and Consequence.


I will begin with the First, Whether needful, etc.

When I consider the many trifling Arguments of the Disaffected Persons, to the
Government of our Church as by Law Established, with the unanswerable
Confutations of them all; and not only her Doctrines but Discipline proved
Apostolical, by a great many of her True and Pious Sons in all Ages since the
Reformation; I cannot but be amazed to hear it complained of now as if
defective. For those must needs think it so, that tell us their is an absolute
necessity to have it mended: but I would fain know, what security will these
nice Reformers (of Things indifferent) give us, (should they be trusted with
the matter, etc.) to make it better and more agreeable to the Scriptures than
now it is? Or can they give us any demonstrations that Almighty God is not well
pleased with it, but should like it much better if reduced to that Form, (which
in truth has neither Form nor Comeliness) it had Forty Years ago? If they can do
that, I shall quickly alter my Opinion, and with our worthy Convocation Auhor
think, it both needful and absolutely necessary to have our Established
Liturgy altered or mended as they please, and not before. For to me nothing is
a more convincing Argument of Providence, than the Beginning, Continuation, and
Preservation of our Church of England, notwithstanding the many Imaginations
both of Men and Devils to destroy it. And if comparisons may be allowed, we may
observe Almighty God was pleased to permit its first Propagators, as he did
those of the Gospel, to Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes as a Testimony of
the Truth of it. And I shall (knowing a Word to the Wise is sufficient
(conclude this first Consideration, with that complaint God himself makes in
the 5th. of Isaiah, v. 3.4. And now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Men of
Judah, Judge I pray you betwixt me and my Vineyard. What could have been done
more to my Vineyard, then I have not done in it, etc. But,

Secondly, Whether Lawful, etc. What I here mean by Law, is not our Statute
Laws, or the Political Customs of Countries, nor the Laws that proceeds from
Absolute Power, (though some will tell us, they that have it has the best
Right, etc.) but I mean the impartial Law of right Reason and Understanding
which the Apostle St. Paul tells us the very Heathens themselves had: Their
Conscience accusing and excusing them, according to their Actions. And this Law
very properly may be called Jure Divino; and ought to be a Pattern for all
humane Laws to be made by: And those that does not correspond with this just
Rule must needs be defective. And I dare appeal to the nicest Pretenders of
this Equitable Law, (provided he be not as our Author a prejuic'd Person)
whether, according to this Golden Rule, the making any Alteration in our
Established Liturgy can, at this time, be thought Lawful or Rational? It Is
true, they that make Laws, may without all doubt either Dispense or Alter them
when they please, or see occasion for so doing in Church or State: Yet at the
same time it is but reasonable to suppose they never do without Appealing to
this unalterable Law of Equity, for a just Decree in such a Case! And whether
the Case in dispute requires it, I shall likewise appeal to greater Judges than
my self, to judge of that matter, viz. Whether the making any Alterations, etc.
be Lawful. But,

Thirdly, The Third Consideration is, whether convenient? The Convenience of
Time, Place, and Circumstances, has often gained Advantage in matters and
affairs; which the contrary has as often lost. And I presume our hasty
Reformers have thoroughly considered of those three necessary things; yet
sometimes a Standerby may see more than a Gamster; and many times it happens
so, when he discovers the Mistake: But that there may be none in this great
concern, is not only mine, but I presume every honest Man's desire, and the
chief Reason of this important Consideration; And I heartily wish that those
that judge it (for Reasons best known to themselves) convenient to Alter those
few, yet desent, Ceremonies, which the Church retains and makes use of
(perhaps) for no other Reason, may not be mistaken. For I have Charity enough
to believe it is by some designed well and in tenderness toward some of our
Dissenting Brethren, in hope possibly to gain them to our Communion: But I am
afraid it will not have the intended effects, for by all that I can hear they
desire no such thing, and I think they are in the Right, for unless the
Alterations did amount to what they desire, (and what that is we may guess,
viz. the Abolishing Episcopacy) it will be no kindness to them at all. And
whether it will be any to those who are very well satisfied with the Discipline
of the Church as it is, I shall leave it to this worthy Author to judge. But
it may be objected that the intended Alterations, is not so much to please
those that are without the pale of the Church as some that are within; and has
already told us they cannot come up to its height, and therefore for that
Reason it may be thought convenient to make some Alterations, etc. fearing
these peevish Children should straggle from their Mother and be lost. To which
I Answer, Whether is it fit for the Parents to truckle and submit to their
froward stubborn (and perhaps) ignorant Children, than they (as becomes their
Duty) to their Parents? Or can it be thought convenient (or as our Author says,
there is an absolute necessity) for our tender Mother the Church, to cut off
her Breasts or dry up the sincere Milk, etc. because some peevish untoward
Brats (which deserves not the name of Children) complains they can find no
nourishment in them: If so, I shall then Confess this Consideration is
absolutely needless; and that Babes and Sucklings can better judge of what is
fit for them than the most wise and prudent Parents in the World. But what if
after Altering, etc. the froward and the peevish should remain so still? What
will be got by our breaking the Links of a strong and well compassed Chain,
when we have often seen the breaking but of one, has endangered the whole? For
these, and many more Reasons, too tedious here to recite, I think, and in the
words of our Author must say, there is an absolute necessity of considering of
this Consideration, (viz.) Whether making any Alterations, etc. be convenient?
But,

Fourthly, The Fourth Consideration is, Who will it Oblige? Methinks I hear
many Answer readily to this Consideration, before they have at all considered
of the matter, by telling us, it will Oblige a great many of (if not all) the
Dissenters, and truly I am of their Opinion; for, as the Author of Vox Cleri
wisely Observes, they would be glad of such an Opportunity to hold forth to
their Congregations, and tell them they may now plainly see the Truth of what
they had so often told them, concerning the Common Prayer and the sinfulness of
it; which they have now without our desiring Altered some few small matters,
but the chief points in Dispute they retain still. But for Argument, I will
suppose the Altering our Established Liturgy would Oblige some of our
Dissenters in another sense; I pray who are these Dissenters, (that some body
would so fain Oblige?) Are they Friends or Enemies to the Church? if the
former, small matters will do it; if the latter, it is to be feared great ones
will not. Our Blessed Lord it is true has Commanded us To love our Enemies, and
pray for them that deceitfully use us; but I do not any where Read of
Carressing, Obliging and Trusting them with those matters, which gives them but
the more Power to destroy us, etc. I cannot tell but the doing of such things
may be counted Politics in the Church; but I presume they never would be so
reckoned in the State: And I am apt to believe if a Governor of a well
Fortified City had but a suspicion of a few false Friends within the Walls, he
would be more afraid of being betrayed by those few within, than overcome by a
great Army without. If any body doubts the truth of this Assertion, I believe
the French King can solve the doubt; And by this time we may begin to suppose
who, and what they are that will (if any) be obliged; viz the Enemies of our
Church, who has endeavored as much as in them lay, to destroy it quite; and
fain would, if that they could, do the same again: And therefore (like Vermin
at the Cheese and Bacon) they begin with nibbling at the Ceremonies of our
Church; but if let alone they will devour it all. We have had Examples enough
of this kind, and of the difficulty of Obliging these sort of Men: As for
instance, in Charles II. time, when he granted them an Indulgence they gave out
he did it not so much through love as fear; because (as they always boasted of
their Numbers) they were so considerable a part of his Kingdoms; and when that
good King took (and not without cause) other Measures, it was called by no
other Name than downright Tyranny. Which Confirms the reasonableness of his
Fathers Advice to him concerning them, (viz.) Forgive them but never trust
them. And how much Reason that Royal Martyr had to say so, I will leave it to
our Convocation Author to judge: As for my part I cannot help thinking it was
very good and wholesome Advice, and when it was most Observed, both the Church
and the State was the less in danger, but however if the Governors of both are
of another Opinion and will try Conclusions, I shall not envy the happiness of
those that shall find them Obliged by it. But,

Fifthly, Who it will not oblige? There are some Men in the World, who tells
us, we know nothing but by Comparison; then by the same Rule of knowing who and
what sort of Persons the Altering our, etc. will oblige, we may have a shrode
Guess who and what sort they are it will not; which in plain Terms are the true
Sons of the Church, as it is now by Law Established, who is and always was
tender of any Affront or Dishonor put upon her, as well as being always
Obedient to her Commands, which by them was never thought Grievous; and what
Solomon says of Wisdom, may be truly said of her Doctrines and Discipline,
(viz.) All her Ways are pleasant and her Paths peace. Certainty was ever
preferred before an Uncertainty; and as the saying is, A Bird in Hand is worth
two in the Bush; therefore it is worth while to Consider, whither the lessning
(if not the losing) of one Party which the Church are sure of, to gain another
which they have not the least Reason in the World to hope they shall; besides
one Isaac ought to be valued before many Ishmaels, though some will tell us the
contray: Advice has not only been Given, but put much in Practice in the Two
last Reigns, (viz.) Oblige your Enemies, because your Friends you are sure will
never forsake ye, etc. Which Maxim (let who will be the Author) we have by
Experience seen it sufficiently Ridiculed, and looked upon as a weak piece of
Politics, for not only Enemies but Friends (at least pretended ones) when
Disobliged, (Nay, oftentimes without) has proved False and Treacherous, and (
Judas like) Betrayed perhaps the best of Masters; and though doing Good for
Evil is a Command of our Saviors, and is an excellent Character of a good
Christian; yet amongst the Sons of Men it is very seldom (if at all) put in
Practice; but the contrary we see very often, and private Peaks many times
prosecuted with more Zeal and Heat, than the general Good of a Kingdom; from
all which, it is no unreasonable Consideration, to consider as well who it will
not, as who the Alteration will Oblige. But,

Sixthly, The Sixth Consideration, which are most? Amongst the many Pamphlets
(some years since) that come out against a Sermon Preached before my Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen, by the learned Dean of St. Paul's, (now Bishop of
Worcester) by that Party that our Author would Oblige. I remember a pretty
Passage in Mr. A -- s in quoting of Expositors in which he tells the then Dean,
he believed he could carry it by the Poll at Guild Hall, his being more in the
Right in his Mischief of Impositions, than the Dr. in his Mischief of
Separation, (or to that effect;) which I confess was briskly offered, and did
carry with it a confident Assurance of their Numbers, which they ever use to
brag of, and their carrying all Things by the Poll: But I remember the Dr. in
his just Justification, did in its proper place Return Mr. A. this modest
Answer, (viz.) If he had no better Skill in Polling Nonconformists than in
Polling Expositors, he might possibly be mistaken, (or to that purpose;) And I
am easily persuaded, were our Convocation Author to put it to the issue of a
Poll whither our Established Liturgy should be Altered, etc. it would be
carried against him; unless by Mr. A -- 's Assistance he could get the Poll to
be taken at Guild Hall, and hardly then niether, unless some of that Gang
should, as they use to do at a Pinch, Poll those that has no Right, to gain the
Point. And yet I must confess, according to the manner of the World, they are
in the Right, for our Savior says, The Children of this World are wiser in
their Generation than the Children of Light: And it was ever observed that most
Designing Men, whose chief end is to gain something extraordinary, do seldom
Consider the Justice and Lawfulness of the means; but if they possess
themselves of the effects of their desire it is sufficient; though at the same
time it is a fault sufficient; and it is little less in those who through
Laziness and Sloth, sets them down content, not troubling themselves to oppose
the Enemy; but upon the Honesty and Justice of their Cause, presumes and
believes God Almighty can, and will do his own Work without any of their
Assistance; for which perhaps he is pleased to suffer his own People to be
severely punished, and his Judgments (as often they do) begin at his own House,
and permit the wicked and worst of Men to rule over us. But blessed be his Name
he has told us, If we repent and return he will return and deliver us from the
hands of our Enemies, let them be never so Strong and their boasted Numbers
never so Great; and then it will signify little which are most, they that by
Alterations, etc. are obliged or they that are not. But,

Seventhly, This Consideration is both the last and principalest of them all,
and therefore ought to be the most deliberately considered the better to be
Armed against it; for the Effects and Consequences of mistakes are very often
as various as they are dismal and dangerous; and we need not go far from home
for a Confirmation of it, for any body that will give himself the trouble to
take a short view of our Domestic Troubles, from Forty one to the happy
Restoration, may see a sad demonstration of the Truth of this assertion: And
it is possible the Intentions of a great many Persons, who was concerned in
those Alterations, both of Church and State in those Times, might be very
Honest and Innocent, for nothing was pretended at First (as the People was made
to believe) but a Reforming some small Matters in the Church and State. But we
all know those little beginings ended with no less than the total Destruction
of both: But perhaps some may say old Things should be forgotten, and truly so
they should, and therefore they are the more to blame that promotes such Things
as cannot but bring them a fresh into our Memories. And it cannot be denied had
those Enemies of the Crown as well as Church been capable, of being Obliged
that Pious and good King Charles I. had done it; for they asked and demanded,
and he gave till he had nothing lest, but a good Conscience, and because he
would not part with that too, they parted his Head from his Shouldiers. By
which we may perceive the dire effects of Zeal, especially when it is not
according to knowledge: But from such Zeal and sure Reformers, we ought (as our
Holy Church has wisely taught us to pray) Good Lord deliver us. For what with
the Papist on the one hand, and these (as they call themselves) true
Protestants on the other, the poor Church of England may be said to look like
our Savior on the Cross, when between the two Thieves, only with this
difference, one of them Repented of the Evil he had done, and begged our
Saviors forgiveness, but neither of these I presume ever did: But are still
contriving to undermind the Foundation of our Established Church in order to
destoy it quite. But I hope it is founded upon such a Rock, as the Gates of
Hell cannot prevail against it; and so we have the more Reason to hope, the
Weapons our Author (and his Associates) has formed against her, will not
prosper; unless those grievous Sins, this unhappy Nation has been guilty of,
should hasten those Judgments, which they justly deserve: Which the great God
of Heaven divert, and suffer not our Candlestick to be moved once again off its
place, is a Prayer very proper at this time, for all the true sincere Sons of
the Church of England, who us resolves to be Obedient to her as she is now by
Law Established without Alterations or Amendments: but what they may be
afterward, Time and the Changes that are made will produce their proper
Effects and Consequencies, but what those may be is the subject of this
Consideration; And I think we ought to look before we leap, least like the Dog
in the Fable we let go the substance for a shadow; which possibly may be the
Effect, and Consequence of Altering our Established Liturgy: And if there were
no other, that would be enough to satisfy any reasonable Person of the
reasonableness of this more then Important Consideration which I will end with
the words of a great Poet, (they being much to the purpose) in his Satyr
against Sedition. (P. 8.)

Too happy England, if our good we knew!
Would ye possess the freedom ye pursue!
The lavish Government can give no more;
Yet we repine, and plenty makes us poor.
God tried us once, our Rebel Fathers fought;
He glutted them with all, the Power they sought:
Till mastered by their own Usurping Brave
The Freeborn Subject sunk into a slave.
We loathed our Manna, and we longed for Quales:
Ah what is Man, when his own wish prevails!
How rash; how swift to plunge himself in ill!
Proud of his Power, and boundless in his will.
And such a will was in our former nice Reformers of things (as they themselves
call) Indifferent. And so I am come to the end of these seven Considerations,
which I intended should likewise have ended this Letter; but the Answer of Vox
Cleri falling into my hand before I had quite finished them, I have likewise
altered my intentions to speak a word or two to that (as he calls himself)
merry Author; And the merry pranks he would if he could play with our
Established Church. As for any particulars in his Book I think they are
Answered sufficiently by that worthy Author, whom he would have the World
believe he has sufficiently Answered; but an impartial Reader will easily
perceive (notwihstanding his great flourish at the beginning, and his
proclaiming himself a Conqueror at the latter end) the whole Army of Vox
Cleri's Arguments stands their ground both in Frunt, Rear, Right wing and left,
without the least appearance of disorder. And for, all that mighty Artillery,
that has been drawn up (by whose Command I know not) with design to batter down
the Walls of the Church; yet Blessed be God they have not as yet made in them a
breach big enough to reach to the Crown; and I do not question, but he that has
taken an Oath to preserve and defend both (from their known Enemies) will to
his utmost do it effectually. Notwithstanding those ridiculous Arguments, which
the Authors (or Author) of those three Pamphlets viz. The Letter from a
Country Minister. The Letter from a Member of the Convocation, and the merry
Answer to Vox Cleri. And that which makes me the more inclinable to think one
Author writ them all, is because I find one and the same design in them, and
one and the same way managed only with some few variations, as Musicians from
the different performances of particular graces, will make one and the same
tune appear different. But our Author I presume has as little Skill in Music,
as love for Harmony, and therefore (like the Fox that lost his Tail) would
persuade all others it is needless to have one: but they must change their
Cuckoo Note before they can gain any Proselyte, to be in love with their
confused Notions. Vox Cleri (says the Answerer P. 1.) writes as if he was Clerk
or Secratary to the Convocation, which certainly supposes him to be a Man of
some Abilities; though he would by his New Years Gift have the World believe he
is the most opposed Person living: But whether he be Clerk to the Convocation I
do not know, but I am apt to believe by this Authors Writing he may have some
hopes (if not a promise) of such a place when the Convocation is turned into
such an Assembly of Divines as we had once met at Westminster, for he says (P.
8.) no body Brews Ale without some body to Drink it, which is true indeed, and
I do believe no body Brews Sedition (though in Sanctified Tubs without a
prospect of being a gainer by it: but he tells us (P. 9.) of a great Man's
Proposals, whose Wisdom and Learning fits him to be Universal Bishop of the
Christian Church. But he does not tell us the great Man was Ordered by any such
Bishop to propose them. But if our Author has such a great Esteem of that
Learned Man, I hope he has the same likewise for his Writings (which claims no
less) and those speak him to be another sort of a Man than what we have Reason
to believe our Author is; for that Learned Man has told the World in a Sermon
the mischief of Separation, and notwithstanding he was attackt with such
unreasonable odds, he boldly entered the Field, and like a wise and valiant
Champion conquered the Enemies, as our Author may at his leisure see in his
Learned Vindication of his Sermon, called The Unreasonableness of Separation,
which is the same Book that our Author quotes for the great Man's Proposals,
etc. in which Learned Piece any body may see not only our Authors Picture, but
the whole Parties drawn so to the Life, that none that views it, but must needs
own, 'twas done by a skillful hand: and though but a Copy it is so alike the
Original (the Papists) that few or none can discover the difference, for
several of them (possible this Author might be one) did make use of the
Papists Arguments against him in their Writing (as they call it) against the
Churches Impositions: And our Author has taken up the Argument a fresh in
their Justification, and at one blow has knocked the Church down, with that
thorough Charge of laying the Schism at her own door; and yet he tells us, (P.
10.) he is not willing to pull down the Pillars of the Church to enlarge it;
and truly I believe the same; for if they once come to be pulled down, then
some body ought to take care of the Crown; for by Experience we know the taking
down of the one, is but for the more easy reaching to the other; and no body
doubts the pulling down of the Pillars, etc. can be for the Enlargment of
either; though at the same time it may be for the Advancement of something
else. Our Author believes (P. 10.) the Church would stand as well, though
Tobit and all the Apochrypha were taken out of the Calender, and some
Ceremonies out of the Rubric (I suppose he means a great some, if not all) I
confess some weak brained People, like our Author, has taken offense at Tobit
and his Dog, and has (their Talent lying no other way) talked wittily (as they
thought) about it. But there are a company of blind Puppies which do more hurt
by their continual Barking against the Church, then Tobit or his Dog, or Bell
and the Dragon either; but I hope it will be to as little purpose, as those
snarling Curs, that bark against the Moon. The Lunatic (he tells us of P. 12.)
that would not let the Barber cut his Beard, for fear he should cut off his
Head, I think is a sit Companion for our Author; and it is great pity one dark
Room with clean Straw, did not serve them both: For would any but a Lunatic
make any such Comparisons? As it is plain he means the Church which is in fear
of losing its Head, by reforming the Face. And is it not reasonable to fear the
worst, when we have already seen the effects of such notable reforming Shavers,
who under the pretense of clipping the Churches wings, looks into a more nearer
Geneva Form, lop'd all off, and at last the Head too? and therefore its both
Reasonable and Natural for a burnt Child to dread the Fire; but our Author
writes as if we were all Lunaticks, and indeed we ought to be counted so, or
worse, if he could persuade us to be drawn twice through a Ditch with a Cat and
a Cart-rope; once in an Age is sufficient to put that trick upon us: for should
we agree to it again, instead of bestowing a New Years Gift upon Vox Cleri, we
should every one of us deserve such a savor from our Author, and then he
might justly boast how many he had put into his own Livery. He says (P. 14.) he
is not for letting in Enemies into the Church, but surely by coming in they
become Friends, but this is such a piece of Philosophy I never heard of; for
if they be not Friends before their coming into the Church, their being let in
will not have much Operation to the Altering their Tempers. Besides I suppose
our Author may have heard of Enemies entering a Church with other designs
than to Receive the Sacrament, or to be supposed one of the Communicants, not
to mention any of our late Sacrilegious Church Robbers, but I have read (if I
be not mistaken) of one Titus Oats, who has told us, he went over to the
Church of Rome not with design to be a Friend to that Church, but upon some
other more Pious design of promoting the (true) Protestant Interest; and the
better to carry on his good Designs, Oaths, and Sacraments, was necessary for
him to take; so if they are Enemies I cannot help being of Vox Cleri's Opinion
they are better keept out than let in, whatever our Author says to the
contrary. But this Vox Cleri (as P. 20.) he says falling into his hand in a
time of Merriment, will in some measure be an Apology for its Impertinent. (I
had almost said Impudent) Answer. For what could be more boldly said than the
justifying of the Dissenters in their Separation, and laying the fault of it at
the Churches Door? But I perceive our Author thinks (from what encouragement I
know not) that now or never is the time to clip her Wings; and it is not long
ago, since they endeavored it by an overhasty complying with the late King
and his Papist Councils: Then happy was he, that could say or write any thing
to blacken Her; And the Cause of all those Laws against Nonconformity was laid
at her Door; and the Persecution, as they call it, which was promoted by a
prevailing Faction at Court, (as the B. of Salisbury says in one of his Papers)
was likewise laid at her Door, and all because she would not comply with the
Papists and Dissenters to destroy her self, and them too: For I presume no body
doubts, had the Church of England, (which was first Courted) Complied with what
was then by the late King desired, there might have been (before our high and
mighty Deliverance) another Face of Affairs, than now there is: But some may
object that it was the Churches own Interest, that hindered their Compliance,
etc. and if it were, I hope that does not lessen the Justice of the Act; and
the same Argument I hope is as good now for their not doing any thing against
their own Interest; and I am willing to believe the Wisdom of the Church is
such, that without being Instructed by our Author she knows, how to proceed in
those matters now in dispute. Those (he says P. 23.) that are against
Alterations are those that will not take the Oaths, nor own the present
Government: What does our Author pretend to be a Conjurer? I am sure those
that reads his Book will not take him for one: This is a merry conceit indeed,
I wonder what Relation has Alterations, etc. to taking the Oaths of bareing
Faith and true Allegiance to their Majesty's, who has taken an Oath themselves
to preserve and defend the Church as now by Law Established: sure our Author
has in his merriment taken a merry Cup too much, I suppose it it is Ale, for
Wine would have produced (from its inspiring quality) something more spritely
than what is came from this dull Tubman. I have heard of People being cut for
the Simples, but if there be such an Operator, I would advise this Author to
Consult him betimes, before the Distemper is to far gone; for if he, or some
body for him, does not take some speedy care of him, for ought I know there may
be Reason enough for Vox Cleri to return him his bountiful New Years Gift; and
because he may look like himself I will make a small Addition to it, (viz.) a
Cap and a Feather. And so I take my leave without troubling him with so much as
a hard word, because I found some of Vox Cleri's stuck so fast in his Throat,
he could scarce get them up; but if he please to leave Directions at Sam's
Coffee-House, how I may send to him, I will be so kind to procure him a Dose of
the Princes Powder, which will certainly discharge all that Filth and
Corruption which so clog his Stomach, and almost stifles his Understanding,
etc. And now Sir give me leave to beg Pardon for this tedious Letter which
(like some Tailors Bill) I Confess a good part might have been abated, had not
the merry Authors Answer of Vox Cleri, fell into my hand, just as I had
finished the Considerations, etc. touching the making Alterations in our
Established Liturgy, which I Sir humbly offer to your own and all unprejudiced
Persons Considerations: and if any think I have been to sharp in my
Reflections. In Answer to that I will Sir tell you a Story: A poor Traveller
going by a Gentleman's House, a great Mastiff-Dog came running with open Mouth
at him the poor Man having a Staff with a sharp spike at one end, in his own
Defense killed the Dog; The owner coming out at the same time, and seeing what
was done, got a Constable, and carried the poor Man before a Justice of Peace,
and required satisfaction for the loss of his Dog. The Justice did indeed chide
the poor Man, and told him he might have put off the Dog with the other end of
his Staff; yes, Answers the poor Man, so I would Sir, had he come running to me
with his other end foremost, etc. So if a Company of Bloodhounds come baulling
with open Mouth to worry and tear in pieces our Established Church, I think no
Weapons can be too sharp to keep them off, let who will set them on. Besides,

I would have them Consider to whom they are intended, not to any particular
Person, but pernicious Principles, (which are equally to be detested let them
come from Rome, Gen^va, or any other part of the World) that would soon (if
care be not taken to prevent it) Reform both Church and State to the Model of
Forty Eight. And where there is but the least fear of Danger, Common Prudence
will provide against it; for fore-warning is fore-arming; and doubting the
worst was ever reckoned the best Advice, for there can be but little harm in
being so well provided, but a great deal may happen for lack of it: And
therefore to conclude, I do here own to you Sir, (who knows me well, and I
presume believes the same) that I was not prompted to the Writing and
Publishing of this Letter, but through a just fear of a prevailing Faction
making a breach in our Established Church; and an honest Zeal (which I hope is
not contrary to knowledge) for her Doctrine and Discipline; which I look upon to
be more agreeable to the Holy Scriptures than any Christian Church in the whole
World. And had I as many Lives as there are Lines in this Letter, I would
Sacrifice them all in her just Defense; for our Savior has told us, Matthew
the 10. v. 32.33. Whosoever therefore shall Confess me before Men, him will I
Confess also before my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me
before Men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven. And it is
but reasonable they should be so served, that have served (as somebody on this
Day did) God and their King no better. And therefore to preserve the Church and
the Crown, from being once more tumbled down, I would if I had not a Sword,
sell my Coat to buy one; others may do as they please, and as often as the Moon
change their Opinions, or like a Sculler, look one way and Row another. For my
part, I thank God, I am fixed, and hope it is not in the power of Men and Devils
to Alter, or so much as shake the best Resolves of,

SIR, Your truly Obliged, etc. J. R.
Jan. the 30. 1689.
FINIS.

