LIGHT SOWN FOR THE RIGHTEOUS, AND GLADNESS For the Upright in HEART.

This is to go abroad among all people who are honest-hearted, especially
amongst the Inhabitants in Fourns Fells, in Lancashire, and among all who have
known me after the flesh, that all honest people may see what I was in
Profession, and also what I now am by the Grace of God.

From him which has come through great tribulations, who has even left all
for Christ, and has not whereon to lay his head, but is forsaken of Father and
of Mother, and of Kindred also, even for the Testimony of Jesus, and for the
Word of God, whom the world calls, Thomas Rawlinson.

Luke 14.26, 27. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother,
and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also,
he cannot be my Disciple.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1657.

This is to go abroad into my Country, amongst the Inhabitants in Fornes
Fells, and among all honest people that have known me after the flesh, that all
people may see what I was in profession, and what I now am by the Grace of God.
FRiends and Neighbors, ye know (if ye will but testify) how that I walked
from my youth upwards, after the straitest Sect of Religion, harmless and
blameless, insomuch that many did admire me, and was as touching the
rghteousness of the Law, acording to the Letter, blameless, as ye know, if ye
will testify; without boasting I speak it; for I exceeded many of my equals in
profession, with a show of righteousness, and was exceedingly zealous for the
chiefest Priests in this Nation of England; and some of you have said, Ye
thought that ye needed never desire to have been in a better condition then I
was in, when I was where ye are, without God, and without Christ in the World,
with a profession of his Name in my mouth, but did not know Christ in me, the
true Light, who lightneth every man that comes into the World, so was ignorant
of the Foundation of God, which stands sure, the Light, Christ, who lightneth
every man; the sure Foundation-stone, which is already laid for a Foundation,
that whosoever builds thereon, shall never be ashamed; and being ignorant of
the Righteousness of God, I went about to establish my own righteousness, so
did not submit to the Righteousness of God, but got up into a profession of
knowing the Lord, and so became a fair sayer, but not a doer of the will of
God, like unto the chief Priests, for they say, and does not the things that
they say; Woe unto them, blind guides, who turn the innocent and the poor out of
the way, and causes the people to err by their lies, and by their lightness,
and will not that any should turn from the darkness to the light. Woe unto them
who gather people into a profession of the knowledge of God, but not into the
light, life and power, ye all professing Christ to come, and knows not that
Christ is in you; so ye know not where he is, nor how he is in you; I speak
this to your shame, people of all professions.

And though I had reformed in many things, and had left off practicing many
Idolatrous and Heathenish Customs, which I saw to be evil in the sight of the
Lord, as my mind came to be turned to that of God in my conscience while I yet
followed the Priests; but being ignorant of that which did let me see my own
unprofitableness, and that all that is in the World is but vanity, I came
short, and did not follow on to know the Lord, but chose rather to follow the
Priests, and gave no heed to the Word of the Lord which call d behind, Return,
return, thou art but a dead man in the Earth; behold, lo, this is the way, walk
in it; turn in hither to the Word which is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in
thy heart; this is the Way; but while I followed the Priests, they never
directed me to this, To the Word which is nigh, in the mouth, and in the heart,
nor never exhorted people to the light which Christ has enlightened every man
withal: While I followed the Priests (I say) I never heard them bring this
Doctrine to the people, which the true Ministers of Christ bring, and brought,
who turn people from the darkness to the light, and from the power of Satan
unto God: For in the light of the Lord which did shine into my conscience, I
came to see the deceit of the Priests, the Messengers of Satan, who labor to
keep people in the darkness, in blindness from the light, who would persuade
the people that the light which Christ has enlightened every man withal, is
but a natural light, and not sufficient to give the knowledge of God, or to
convince of all sin, and so they wrest the Scriptures, and adds thereto, and
sets up their own Traditions, and makes the Commandments of God of no effect,
and void by their own Traditions, and cries against the Light with reproachful
and sensual words, lest the people should believe in the Light, and come to
the Light which gives the Knowledge of God; and so long as I remained
ignorant of that which did convince me of sin, and of unbelief, which did let
me see that I was also out of the way of God, with the Priests, in error and
in the darkness, so long I was ignorant of the living and true God, and knevv
not how he was in me so knew him not at all but by the hearing of the ear,
though I had got the Bible and Books, and a large profession, read the
Scriptures often, and Books many, and followed the chiefest Priests daily, and
would fain have gained the Knowledge of God by them, but could not find it
while I follovved the Priests, and had thought that they should teach the
people knowledge; but I now see that it is not so, and that the Lord has
cursed the Priests and their blessings, and that no people upon the Face of the
Earth, shall ever profit by them; the Lord has said it, (mark it) who cannot
lie nor repent: So let God be true and all men liars; for that which may be
known of God, is manifest in them, and God has shevved it to them, so it is
evident; That no man knovvs the Father nor the Son, but as he comes into
obedience to that of God in him, the Light; for the Letter without, nor the
Priests without, nor any thing without, can never make the comers thereunto
perfect, nor give any man the knowledge of God though he may get the Scriptures
into his Head, and shall read them often; for no man knovvs the Father but he
to whom the Son reveals him.

Yea, so desirous I was to find out the true knowledge of the pure God, that
I ceased not to seek it night and day with Tears, and cried out, How shall I
come to the living knowledge so God? which is the way where Christ may be found,
that I may come to know him, even as I am known of him and find him? The
Priests said, That reading the Scriptures and godly Books (as they called them)
and praying, and following them, and hearing them preach, that this was the way
where Christ is to be found: So I did run from one Priest unto another, to see
if happily I could find Christ among any of them, for several years together, but
did not whilst I followed the Priests; so all my labor was in vain; I spent
my labor for that which is not Bread, and my strength for that which could not
satisfy; yea, I did read the Scriptures often, and bought the best books I
could hear of, and read them, and prayed earnestly always, but did not obtain
nor prevail, though I cried and wept much, and the reason is, because I sought
(unto a people that cannot profit) for the Lord in a way where he is not to
be found, in the way of the ungodly; for God hears not sinners, and the prayer
of the wicked is sin, but the prayer of the righteoas is his delight; and
while I remained servant to sin, the Lord did not regard my prayer, for it is
his own that praises him, unto whom his ears is opened always, which he hears
and has regard unto. So I see that the Priests are liars, who would be
Teachers of others, and yet knovvs not what they say, nor whereof they
affirm, who would persuade you to follow them, and to uphold them in their
covetous practices, and tells people that hearing them is the right way, and
observing their traditions and customs is the right way, and believing in a
Christ without you, and looking for a Christ without you, is the right way;
so are those which Christ spoke of should come in the last days, saying, Lo
here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, but said he, Believe them n^r, nor go
not after them; for Friends, that which may be known of God, is manifest in
you; so til you return to that of God in you, the light, ye are in the
darkness, out of the good way, in an evil way, in a way that is not good,
whatsoever ye and your Priests may say of it; Neighbors and Friends, I speak by
experience what I have seen and known, that speak I unto you in the Name of the
Lord, that ye may take warning betime; for there is no other way to know
Christ, but in the light wherewith ye are enlightened; so if you will own the
right way where God dwells, and where he is to be found, ye must then return in
to the Light, to that which may be known of God in you, and be in love with the
Light, for God is Light; he that loves the Light, brings his deeds to the
Light, and comes to the light, Christ; Know ye not how that Christ is in you
except ye be reprobates? You that talk and prate, and say ye believe in a
Christ without you, who are professing a God and a Christ without you, and that
he saves his people from their sins, What is this to you who knows not that
Christ is in you? There shall ye find him, if ever ye know him a Savior to
you, who is come a light into the World, that all men through him might
believe; This is he who suffered and dyed at Jerusalem, and no other Christ I
own: I say, What is this to you who are yet in your sins, and does not believe
that ever ye shall be made free from sin while ye are here, but that ye shall
sin while ye live? Have ye not learned this of your Priests? for this is their
Doctrine which they bring you from their Father the Devil, and yet you be
believe it, and receives it: So what is this to you, for you to say Christ
saves his people from their sins? for ye bear vvitness against your selves that
he is not your Savior who are yet in your sins; for ye deny the Work of God,
and resist it in your selves, and denies the end of Christ coming into the
World, which is to save his people from their sins, who is come into the World
a light, and is manifest to destroy the Works of the Devil; and sin is the Work
of the Devil which Christ comes to destroy; and you that say ye must sin while
ye live, ye bear witness against your selves that Christ is not yet come to
you; so ye are the servants of sin, and are free from righteousness; so what is
Christ to you? and what is your profession vvorth?

So whilst I followed the Priests, I never knew the way how to come to Christ,
therefore I had no rest in my spirit day nor night from God, while I followed
the Priests, but Wrath, and Horror, and Judgment pursued me for disobedience
to that of God in my conscience and trouble on every hand; on the right hand
and on the left, was sorrovv and vexation of spirit and my heart within me did
faint for fear; I was even at my Wits-end, and had almost despaired of hope
and of comfort, had not God preserved me though I knew him not; for I could
find no assurance of the love of God to my soul, while I follovved the Priests,
though then I could (with the Priests) talk of high seize and could also
with them, and with professors, sometimes boast of experiences, and also of joy
and peace sometimes, when I was lifted up into the airie imaginations with
them; and so for a while I gloried in the flesh with priests and people and
made merry over the Witness of God in me; then was Satan exalted above all that
was called God in me; and then both Priests and people did love me, and and
spoke well of me; for the World loves its own; and the Devil who fills his
children with mirth and joy, with sports and pleasures, and with the glory of
this World; he will suffer his servants to have a profession of the truth, and
to boast of God to be their Father; and of Christ to be their Savior, and also
to talk of faith, and of righteousness, and the like so that he can but
maintain his Works in them; which is, To lie, and to swear; to be angry, to
envy, and to hate, and to be proud and covetous; and to oppress, to dissemble,
and to deceive, and to defraud, and to cozen; to fight, to rail, and to be
drunk; to be heady, and to be high-minded, being filled with all
unrighteousness, which be the Works of the Devil, as lust, murder, backbiting,
evil-speaking, and all deceit, which are the Works of the flesh: So I say, If
the Devil have but the heart, and can but keep his Seat there, he cares not
then what profession they be of; he knovvs them that they are his, though they
may say they defy the Devil and all his Works, whose minds Satan has blinded,
that they cannot see his Works in themselves brought forth, which bears witness
against them that they are of their Father the Devil, whose Works they do, yet
with their mouth, and with their lips and tongue will profess that they love
God, who have the high swelling Words of hypocrisy, so have a zeal without
knowledge, holding a profession of God in hypocrisy, until the day of sudden
destruction from God fall upon them for their Wickedness, to sweep them all
into the pit of blackness for ever, who are Workers of iniquity both Priests
and people.

All-along while I followed the Priests, there was something in me of God I see
(though I knew it not) which did witness against all unrighteousness, and did
reprove me if I did but swear, or tell a lie, which did not speak peace to me
in those things, but I was judged by that of God in me when I did any
unrighteous thing; so stood condemned in my self when I had but an evil thought
of doing Wrong, which was sufficient to have preserved me from all evil if I
had but been obedient; but being ignorant of it (what it was) gave no heed unto
it, but went on in a Way that is not good; so did not believe in the light,
though I had the light; neither was obedient to the light, though the light did
convince me: So I had no peace from God, though in the World I had peace, and
with the World was at peace, yet in Christ I had no peace while I was of the
World; for that of God in me cried against me Desolation, VVo, and Misery; for
God sees not as man, neither can thou hide thy self in secret and he not see
thee: So I came to see that notwithstanding all the show in the flesh I had
professed of knowing the Lord, I was but a hypocrite when I came in deed and in
truth to search and try my ways honestly, and to prove my self in truth and in
plainness, then I did see that I was out of the Way of truth, knew not the
truth, though I had the Words of truth in my mouth; so was ignorant of God, and
so the peace which I had did then fly away, it was as it were but for a
moment, the Worlds peace which the greedy Priests speak unto the people that
stop into their mouths; they cry peace, peace, when there is no peace from God,
where the Lord has not spoken peace; so would heal the hurt of the daughter of
my people (says the Lord slightly) who daub with untempered mortar; for from
the Prophet, even unto the Priest, every one deals falsely and deceitfully,
and all are given to covetousness, both Priests and people: So whilst I
followed the Priests, I see that I was but a fair sayer, made clean the outside
of the Cup and the Platter, and appeared righteous outwardly unto man, as
Neighbors and Friends ye know, who knew me after the flesh, That I was (as
touching the righteousness of the Law) blameless, and had a zeal for God
(though not according to knowledge) by fair Words, professing the Substance,
but had not the Evidence, the Seal of the Spirit of God to my Spirit; so being
ignorant of Gods righteousness, (as I said before) which is by the Faith of the
Son of God, knowing this, That without righteousness no man can enter into the
Kingdom of God; so I went about to establish my own righteousness, looking for
a righteousness without me, that I might appear righteous unto man, being
ignorant of the righteousness of faith, which says on this wise, (as it is
written) Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? That is to bring
Christ down from above; or who shall descend into the deep? That is to bring
Christ again from the dead: But what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in
thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it; that is, the Word of Faith
which we preach, said the Apostle, who was a Minister of God: But unto this
Word I was not obedient while I followed the Priests, neither knew I it, though
it was near; for none of the Priests (from the least even unto the chiefest)
did ever direct my mind unto the Word of Faith which is nigh, in the mouth, and
in the heart, to take heed unto, as unto a light that shines in a dark place
until the day dawn, and the day star arise in my heart: So they are the false
Prophets and Deceivers who is come in sheeps clothing, making merchandise of
souls for dishonest gain: And these are they which Christ said should come in
the last days; which John saw was come in his days, which all the World
wondered after, and that all the World is gone after them; so they run, yet
never was sent of God to turn people from darkness to the light, who divine
for money, and speak a Divination of their own brain, and not from the mouth
of the Lord. So I sought to find the living among the dead while I sought unto
the Priests; so followed a people which cannot profit, and wandered from
Mountain to Hill to find the living, even from one sort of Priests and people
unto another, that had the greatest show of godliness; one sort said, Lo here
is Christ; and another sort of professors said, Lo here; and glad would I with
all my heart to have found him among them, that I might come to find a rest for
my weary soul; but Christ I found not among any of them, though I did find that
some sort of professors could talk much more of Christ with their lips then
others could do, and had his Name in their mouth oftener then others, having
many good Words whereby they do beguile souls, even with the enticing Words of
men's Wisdom, pretending much toward Christ, but are as vain and wanton as they
who have not so great a show in Words toward Christ; and though in Words they
profess that they know him, yet in Works they do deny him; so are the greatest
Deceivers of all, who have the greatest show of godliness, when their Works
are as bad, and their lives too, as them who have no show of godliness at all;
for Christ said, Ye shall know them by their fruits; so when I came to prove
them, and to try them by their fruits, I did find them to be as bad as others
who have not so great a show of righteousness; so it is not every one that
says Lord, Lord; nor proud boasters in another man's line of things made ready
to their hand, who steal their Words from their Neighbor, that shall enter
into life, but he that does the Will of God; for they make themselves manifest
that they are without God, and without Christ, as by their Fruits; I knew them
then to be deceitful Workers, though with fair speeches and good Words they
deceive the simple, and so blinds the minds of them that believe not in the
light. And though I did like the chief Priests, and the chief Professors Words
then well, (so far as they was according to the Scriptures of Truth) yet I
would not rest satisfied so, but proved their Works, and labored to see what
lives they lived. Whether their Words and their Works agreed in one, yea or
nay; and when I tried both the chief Priests and the chiefest professors,
their Lives, Works, and Conversation, I then saw that they are not what they
professed themselves to be, so could not but for conscience sake deny them; For I
saw them to be hypocrites, liars cozeners and dissemblers, and how that a small
thing would even easily provoke any of them to anger, envy, wrath and malice,
and some to fighting; being heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then
lovers of God: So I could not but turn from them who have a Form of godliness,
but denies the power thereof, as by their Fruits I know them; For whosoever
seeks to be justified by Christ, and yet they themselves are found sinners, is
Christ therefore the Minister of sin? God forbid; For Christ comes to destroy
the Works of the Devil; he is manifest to take away sin, for in him is no sin;
he that abibeth in Christ, sins not. So Friends and Neighbors see where ye
all are, doteing upon a people which cannot profit you at all, nor help, nor
comfort, but shall be a shame and a reproach.

And when I was turned to the light of Christ, J came to see the Priests
deceit, who will not that any of you should come to the light, lest the people
should see their Wickedness, and so to turn from them: And though both priests
and professors have the Name of the Lord in their mouths, and seems to take
delight in drawing near to him with their lips, yet their hearts are far from
him: So in vain they Worship God, who live not the life of the Son of God, but
are alive unto sin; For all whose Words, and Life, and Conversation are not as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, are Hypocrites and falshearted ones, whose Words
and Works are not one, so are Workers of iniquity, and does not the truth,
both priests and people who live not unto Christ: So when J had found out the
wickedness of the priests, and saw them so filthy, J cried out for sorrow,
being filled with sorrow and grief that J could not find a righteous man
amongst them, not one that could direct me into the right Way, nor was able to
teach me the Knowledge of God, though J ran from priest to priest, and did
write to several of the chiefest of them concerning my condition, and have
thought that the priests lips should preserve the peoples Knowledge, and that
the people should go unto them for Knowledge; but miserable comforters are they
all, none of them could speak a Word of Comfort to my soul; so my weary soul
did even mourn, and cry out in pain for deliverance from under the power of
death and hell, and Satan. So J found no way of deliverance while J followed
the Priests, though they cried peace, peace unto me, and would persuade me to
be in a good condition, and the like, so would have healed me deceitfully, and
would have daubed me with untempered mortar, crying peace, peace, where the
Lord has not spoken peace, so my soul refused to be comforted by them and
cried out, None but Christ; None but Christ; and yet there was none among them
that could show me where he is to be found: So being weary in spirit, J
wandered with a sad heart and wounded spirit, from priest to priest, seeking
rest for my weary soul, but found none while J followed after them; woe, woe, woe
unto them may all people say, that ever such priests was born, who have made
the hearts of the righteous sad by their lies, and by their lightness, who
stands up amongst the people, pretending to teach them the way how that they
may come to the Knowledge of God, yet never was sent of God; nor none of them
unto this day (that ever J knew of) did ever direct people unto the right way,
to that of God in them, where they might come to the Knowledge of God, and so
to know him, whom to know is life eternal; neither do they know it themselves,
so are not able to teach others; nay they are so far from persuading people
unto the good way, that they stand up to resist it, and set themselves against
it: Jf any who have found the right way, and knows the Lord, be moved of the
Lord in bowels of compassion unto the people, to go to the Steeplehouse to set
before them the right way where God is to be found, a way wherein they have
found God; the priests they cry to the people, Away with them, Deceivers,
Deceivers, yet dares not stand to prove before the people who be the deceivers
by plain Scripture; so they are those which Christ said would neither enter
into the Kingdom of God themselves, nor will they suffer them that would to
enter: For that which may be known of God is manifest in them, and God has
showed it to them, and blessed are they that are faithful.

Oftentimes J even wept bitterly when J considered these things, and was even
pressed to the ground with sorrow and heaviness when J could not find any
satisfaction among no sort of people; so fear surprised me, and pain took hold
on me, as upon a Woman in travel; trouble without, and horror and wrath
within; for the wrath of God was revealed against me from heaven, for
disobedience to the pure light within me; and J was even afraid of the
judgments of God, lest the Lord would cut me off, and make me an example to
all about me, in that J continued so long following the priests after that he
had showed me how deceitful they all are, and that no people should ever profit
by them, and that they are altogether useless Vessels, in whom the Lord has no
pleasure, but his wrath is against them, and against all such who follow after
them: Yet after all this, though the Lord had showed them to me, J was somewhat
rebellious, and did not turn from them immediately after J was convinced of
their wickedness, and saw that they was never sent of God, and yet would fain
have continued following after them, though J knew J could not profit by them;
and notwithstanding all that the Lord had showed me concerning them, because J
knew that my Kindred according to the flesh would be sore set against me, and
rise up against me, and that J should suffer much from them, so J would feign
have followed them to please my parents, and so J began to distrust and
question what the Lord had showed me, J then being at that time a stranger to
the life of God so knew not the Lords voice, neither did J understand him
oftentimes when he spoke unto me in the spirit, being carnal; yet the love of
the Lord was so much toward me, that he gave me not over to a reprobate
mind, neither did he deal with me according to my stubbornness, but according
to the multitude of his mercies; so the long-suffering and patience of God led
me to repentance, and then J came clearly to see that it was the Lord indeed
that appeared unto me, and had set these things before me, and not man, that
had so long called unto me, though then J knew him not; but when J knew indeed
that it was the Lord that spoke unto me, J then gave up all willingly, and left
off frequenting all sorts of people, and their Assemblies too, and sat alone
in silence, waiting in the silence of my spirit for the Lord, and was as a
traveling Woman, pained to be delivered; yea, J was almost quite gone, and
had even despaired of hope, had not the Lord had compassion, and been very
merciful unto me, who drew near, and sustained me when the night of darkness
was over me; for it pleased the Lord while J was yet in patience waiting for
him, to reveal his Son in me, who has even appeared, and is risen with healing
in his Wings: So now in him my weary soul after long travel is come to find
rest and peace for evermore, which no man can take from me if J be faithful to
the end: Blessing, and praises, and honor, and glory, and dominion, and
thanksgiving to the Lord God of Sabbaths, and to the Lamb for ever, and ever,
who has given me the peace, and the victory (in measure) over death, hell, and
the grave; praises to the Lord, for his mercies fails not, but are renewed
every moment toward his servant, and such as fear him, who has not left my
soul in hell, neither has he suffered his holy one to see corruption, but has
ransomed my soul from death and the grave, into perfect liberty, even to joy
and gladness, and all sorrovv and sighing does fly away, for the years of
rejoicing is come; praises, endless praises, and honor and glory to him that
sits upon the Throne of Judgment and Mercy, who takes away the sins of
the world, and saves his people from their sins, that they may praise him
together with one accord in the land of the living, who has done
wonderfully for me that J even admire the goodness of God toward me in all
his works; everlasting glorious praises and blessing to him for evermore,
whose right it is, and whose works praises him; not unto me Lord, not unto
me, but unto thee, holy and wise God over all, be all the glory and the honor.
Let all that know the Lord, praise him above all, for his mercies endures for
ever, who now has brought me into fellowship with the Saints in light.

Neighbors and Friends, These things I write not unto you, to have praise of
you, for I receive not honor from man; but that ye may know and understand what
God has wrought, and what he has done for my soul, that all might come to
praise the Lord, and to admire him who has done great things in the Earth. So
this is a Warning unto every one of you, That ye rest not satisfied in any
thing short of Christ, but that ye may all even turn to the light, and believe
in the light, and walk in the light while ye have the light, lest any be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and so come short of the Grace of
God. So all be warned, that ye put not trust in a false confidence, in a false
faith, and in a vain hope, and so ye get up into a false joy, below Christ, for
the end of this is weeping, mourning sorrow and lamentation; so take heed how
ye choose to follow your Priests, lest ye also perish with them together, being
partakers with them in their sins; so choose not to follow your own Ways,
neither lean not to your own understandings, nor put no trust to your own
Righteousness, glory not in your own Wisdom and strength, but now even all of
you, come to the Light Christ, the Righteousness of God to put him on, and so
to put off your own righteousness, that ye coming to the light, and follow the
light, to have the righousness of the Law fulfilled in you, that every one of
you may prove your selves; so search and try your own Ways, and turn to the
true light (Christ Jesus) who enlightneth every man that comes into the World,
and see if ye can witness Christ in you; Know ye not how Christ is in you
except ye be reprobates? I say, if ye know not Christ formed in you, if ye feel
not the life of the Son of God moving and breathing in you toward God; I say,
if Christ be not raised, ye are yet in your sins if the dead rise not, and so
your Faith is vain, and your Profession also, For as many as receives Christ,
receives the Righteousness of God, in him receives Gods Righteousness; for
Christ is Gods Righteousness; and who has not Christ, their Righteousness is
of themselves, and so are ignorant of Gods righteousness, who knows not the
Light, Christ in them, who will not come to the light, so will not submit to
the righteousness of God, but would establish their own righteousness; yet will
not such people speak against self-righteousness, and against self-actings,
when as all their Righteousness and Works is of themselves? How blind are these
people, who out of their own mouth has condemned themselves, wherein all they
do is of themselves in their Will Worship to be seen of men, and would lay
these things to our charge whom they call Quakers, and says that we altogether
set up Works before Christ, always persuades people to Works, and to the
keeping the Commandments, and the like.

Answ. This is false; Though We persuade people to be followers of good Works,
and to the keeping of the Commandments according to Christ's exhortation, yet We
do not turn people to Works before We turn them to Christ; but We first exhort
them to believe in the light; so they are liars; for this is our Message, To
turn people from the darkness to the Light, Christ, who lightneth every man,
that they may have their works wrought in the Light Christ, who works all our
works in us, and for us; and he that loves the light, brings his deeds to the
light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God; but
what is this to them who are not come unto the light, neither has believed in
the light? have they not manifested their ignorance, and that all their works
of righteousness are of themselves, and that they have no other righteousness,
who are not come to the light; [mark, and take notice of this] That all their
deeds and works are only of themselves wrought in darkness, until such time as
they come to be turned from the darkness to the light; for that which is not
wrought in the light, is wrought in darkness. So how can such escape the
judgments of God who have so falsely accused us that have renounced our own
Righteousness, and has willingly submitted to the Righteousness of God, that
We might be found in Christ? There is but as it were two Righteousnesses, the
Righteousness of God, and man's Righteousness, so until man return unto God, and
comes to know how Christ is in him, who is Gods Righteousness, all his
Righteousness is of himself; and these are contrary the one to the other: So
the Way to know the one from the other, is, To believe in the light, and in the
light to know each from other; and walking in the light, comes to put on the
Righteousness of God, and put off their own, and to deny themselves, and then
comes to see their own Righteousness filthy and abominable. So here is the Way
of Righteousness, in the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, who lightneth every
man that comes into the World; and he that follows the Light Christ, puts on
Righteousness as a Garment; and he that does righteousness, is righteous, even
as he is righteous, and he that does not righteousness, is not of God: So We
who are come unto Christ our Righteousness, our Light and Life, We come to be
made the Righteousness of God in him, and so in the Light wherein We have
believed, comes to fulfill all righteousness; and for this end, That we might be
found in himn, ot having our own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God
by faith; many of us (who are called Quakers) have denied our selves, our
lives, and whatsoever was dear unto us, our Father and Mother, Husband, Wife
and Children, Brethren, and Sisters, and Kindred all, Houses, Lands and Livings,
and the World too, and all the Glory and the Pleasures of this life, who have
taken up the Cross of Christ, that We might be counted worthy to follow him in
the Regeneration as obedient children, not fashioning our selves unto this
World any longer putting off the former conversation which is corrupt, the old
man with his deeds, that We might be renewed in the spirit of our mind, putting
on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness,
without which no man shall see God, keeping the holy Commandment of our Lord
Jesus, who said, If ye love me, keep my Commandments; and if a man love me, he
will keep my sayings.

So Neighbors and Friends, it is not only a profession and talking of
Free Grace, and of Justification by Christ, this will not serve you except ye
come into the obedience of the Grace of God which brings salvation, and has
appeared unto all men; For the Grace of God is the Saints Teacher, which
teaches them to deny all ungodliness and Worldly lusts, and to deny the
Priests, to be taught of them any longer; For all the children of the Lord is
taught of the Lord, and in righteousness they are established, and great is
their peace. So ye who are not turned from your Priests, are not taught of the
Lord, who said, Cease ye from man whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein
is he to be accounted of? So Friends while ye remain under them, ye are not
come into the leadings and teachings of the Spirit of Grace and Truth which
has appeared unto all men, and teaches us to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present World: So take heed unto your selves, and hearken not
unto your Priests, nor to your Diviners, who divine for money, for they deceive
you; but all turn to the Light wherewith Christ has enlightened you, which is
truth and no lie; for there is no lie of the Truth: He that does Truth, comes
to the Light; and he that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the
light, least his deeds should be reproved; and this is the condemnation, the
Light, (said Christ) So see if all your Priests be not in the evil, under the
condemnation of the Devil who hate the Light, evil beasts, slow-bellies, hating
the light, reproaching and railing against it, because their deeds are evil,
and because that they know if the people turn to the light, they will then come
to see their deceit and covetousness, and will be ashamed of them. So Friends,
take not counsel of your Priests, for mischief is in their hearts, lest while
ye follow after them, ye come to be hardened in your sins, and your senses and
feeling after God be taken from you, and so ye become past feeling, having your
consciences seared, and your hearts hardened against God, and then ye be given
up unto a reprobate mind, to work all unrighteousness with greediness, even
with the Priests.

Consider Friends, Can the Priests satisfy you, and please you with vain Words
onley, to talk of Free Grace, and of the Righteousness of Christ imputed, who
are in the unrighteousness themselves, so holds the Truth in unrighteousness,
and will not come to the light; verily Friends ye are then far short of what I
was when I was where ye now are, with a profession of God and godliness, but
without the power and the life; for nothing then would satisfy me but Christ
only; None but Christ, None but Christ, was my continual cry, to have Christ,
how I might come to know Christ in me; Give me Christ, or I dye, to feel him
near, which justifies and saves his people from their sins, this was the daily
desires, and the longings of my weary soul; had I but hold on Christ, let them
take the world that will, (said I in my heart) so that I might but come to know
Christ, and to enjoy him, that I might come to live unto Christ, was the daily
desires of my heart and soul; yet though I sought diligently after him with
Tears and Weeping, and asked the Way to Christ from one Priest unto another,
to see if they could show me where Christ is to be found, yet none of them
could show me the Way, nor could tell me how to come to Christ. So I found no
comfort for my soul from them, therefore I had no rest day nor night from God
in my spirit while I sought unto the Priests lips for counsel; for Wicked
Counselors are they all who turn not people to the light from the darkness;
for Christ the light was condemnation to me whilst I remained in the old
nature with the Priests rebellious, and no Justification then, and
Sanctification, and Peace, sitting in the darkness, and vvalking in the
darkness and blindness with the Priests, being then ignorant of the light
which Christ had enlightened me vvithall; so shall all who comes to know what
God is, more or less, shall first feel the Wrath of God revealed from Heaven
against them for their unrighteousness, and shall see Wrath, and Horror, and
the Vengeance of God to come upon the Head of the Wicked, even the Judgments
of God coming upon that nature in them which has acted iniquity and
transgression, and the power of God shall make the Inhabitants of the Earth to
tremble; the Prison-Houses shall shake when the Prisoner comes forth to be set
free, and then captivity comes to be led captive, and the strong Man shall then
be cast out of the House, and his Goods too, when Christ who is stronger then
he comes to be revealed in them; all these things shall be before Gods
salvation, and peace which passes all understanding, be witnessed; I say, They
shall know a day of trouble, and of howling, and of bitter lamentation, (such
as never was) for their Wickedness and Transgressions against God, before they
come to know the Lord God as he is, who will render Vengeance in flames of
fire upon his Enemies, and upon the Head of all that do Wickedly; for Christ
comes to destroy the Works of the Devil. So blessed and happy they are that
abide faithful even unto the end, who are willing to bear the indignation of
the Lord because that they have sinned against him, until he arise and plead
their cause. But woe unto the Priests who daub with untempered Mortar, crying
peace, peace to the people that stop into their mouths, but prepares War
against us who cannot stop into their mouths; so upon them, and upon their
people, shall the day of the Lord come as a thief in the night, and no peace
shall then be to them, though they now cry peace, peace; even then when they
shall say peace and safety, shall sudden destruction come upon them, as Travel
upon a Woman with child, and they shall not escape; then shall they know that
their Faith was never imputed to them for righteousness from God; so what is
this to them, or to the r people, to talk of an imputed righteousness, who does
not believe in the light, but hates the light, and will not come to the light;
so what is this to them? for Abraham (unto whom righteousness was imputed)
believed God, and left his own country, and went out, not knowing whither he
went, and was obedient in following the Lord; so his Faith was imputed to him
for Righteousness: But what is this to the Priests and to their Followers, who
knows not Abraham's Faith, which was made perfect by Works; For Faith without
Works is dead; if a man say he has Faith, and has not Works, can Faith save
him? Was not Abraham justified by Works when be offered Isaac his son upon
the Altar? Here all may see how Faith wrought with his Works, who have an
eye to see vvithall; so by Works was Faith made perfect; for every Tree is
known by his Fruit; a good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can an
evil Tree bring forth good Fruit; so we know the Priests by their Fruits, who
are of that wicked one which cannot bring forth good Fruit, who are the evil
Trees which cumbers the ground; fruitless Trees, rendered of all people useless,
who out of the evil Treasure of their heart, brings forth that which is evil;
so they being evil, knows not to give good things unto their Followers; not
that I in any wise, out of ill will or malice, goes about to accuse the
priests, or any people else, God knows that I speak not in contempt unto any,
but would take people off putting trust in man, and that they might come to
know the Lord, and in him to trust that all might come to be taught of the
Lord, that he might teach them himself of his VVayes, who teaches his people to
profit: And this is my end, To turn all unto Christ the light, who lightneth
every man, and that people might try their Priests by their fruits; for if they
were of the good Tree, they could not bring forth evil fruit: And does this
offend either Priest or people, To exhort all to try them by their fruits, and
to turn from them that brings forth evil fruit, unto the light of Christ in
them, who lightneth every man that comes into the world, that they may come to
be engrafted into Christ, that in him they may come to bring forth good fruit;
if they abide in the light, and walk in the light as he is in the light, they
cannot bring forth evil fruit; for he that abides in Christ the light, sins
not, but out of the good Treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is
good. So I say, my end is, That all, both Priests and people, might come to
repentance, and every man come to be ashamed of his own way^s that they have
chosen, and so every one, both Priests and people, might return unto Christ the
light, who lightneth every man, and wills not the death of a sinner, but would
have all men, both priests and people, to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth, who is set for salvation to the ends of the earth, that
all people might come to the light, and to the brightness of his rising, both
priests and people, that so all might come to be taught of the Lord, who
teaches his people to profit, that so none might follow after a people which
cannot profit. The Priests if they were of the good Tree which cannot bring
forth evil fruit, would not be ashamed to be tried by their fruits; but they
being of the evil Tree, which cannot bring forth good Fruit, are ashamed to
have their deeds brought to the light, neither will they come to the light to
prove their calling and Minister-ship before the people, least they should have
shame of their doctrine and practice before all the people, their practice
being contrary to all the holy Prophets and Apostles of Christ: So it is plain,
They being of the evil Tree which brings forth evil Fruit, cannot profit the
people at all; so the people who follow them are ever learning, yet never able
to come to the knowledge of the truth by them.

So whilst I followed the Priests, though I diligently enquired unto them
after the Lord, yet I found him not, because I sought unto a people which could
not profit, therefore I did not attain to the thing which I sought for unto
them, so turned from them, finding no profit by them; and then within a little
while after this, the light of the Lord began to rise in obscurity, and my eyes
was opened, and then through the mercy and love of the Lord, I was turned from
the darkness to the light of Christ in me, and then my mind was turned from
following the priests, from doting on them, and my heart was changed; for now
in the light of the Lord I see light, and how I have wandered, walking in
darkness, without light; but now my light is come, the light springs, and the
day dawns, for the day star is risen in my heart, and the clouds of darkness
flies away; for the glory of the Lord is revealed, and the clear light now
shines out of darkness, and Christ is risen; so I have found him of whom Moses
in the Law and the Porphets did write; For God who commands the light to shine
out of darkness, has shined into my heart, to give me the light of the
Knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, even so has it
pleased the Lord to reveal his Son in me; blessing and glorious praises to the
Lord God everlasting, and to the Lamb whose right it is, and now I plainly see,
that in vain is the help of man, their counsels is naught but deceit and
hypocrisy, and shall be confounded, their Wisdom is foolishness with God, who
will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise: So I do deny all the teachings of the
Priests any longer, for it is only the Lord that teaches me to profit; for
through his Word of Truth which I have hid in my heart, am I become wiser then
all my Teachers; the Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want, who is now
appearing and risen in this the day of his glorious power, to teach his people
himself of his Ways, by his Eternal Infallible Spirit of Light, Life and Power,
which shines into their hearts, and gives them the Knowledge of God in the Face
of Jesus Christ, who enlightneth every man that comes into the World, that all
men believing in the light, may come to know both the Father and the Son,
whom to know is life eternal, all coming to the light; this is he that reveals
the Father. So Friends, the light is your Way if ye love it; I am the way,
says Christ the Light, who lightneth every man; No man comes to the Father but
by me; no man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals
him. But Friends, will a profession of Words and a talk of knowing the Father
and the Son, and a boasting of Free Grace in words, be sufficient to any of you
who are turned from the light within, into darkness, to follow the Priests and
blind guides which cannot profit you? so ye are not taught by Grace who heap up
Teachers unto your selves, having itching ears, ye have turned your ears from
the light, from the truth, so ye are turned from the Grace of God which brings
salvation, and has appeared unto all men; and what is the Free Grace of God
unto any of you, who turn the Free Grace of God into wantonness, who are not
taught by it to forsake your sins, and to deny all ungodliness and Worldly
lusts, and to live a godly and a gracious life? so are not come into obedience
to God, but are stiff-necked and rebellious, and are alive unto sin, and all
ungodliness and Worldly lusts, so ye are free from Grace: And so what such a
vain, foolish, rotten, stinking profession is this of yours, people, who cries,
Free Grace, Free Grace, nothing but by Free Grace are we saved? O blush for
shame, and be ye all horribly afraid for your impudency and lying against God,
as to say ye are saved by Grace, when as ye are yet in your sins, and will not
receive the Gift of Gods Free Grace, which has been so largely and so freely
tendered unto every one of you from the God of all Grace, and has even
appeared in you all, and to you all, and yet ye have refused to incline your
ear, and hear: For this is the Grace of God, and the great love of God toward
you all, That he has given you a light, which light in you all tells you that
ye should not lie, nor swear, nor be covetous, nor be drunk, nor that ye should
not envy, nor hate, nor dissemble, but lets you see that you should love the
Lord God with all your heart, and your Neighbor as your selves; so see if ye be
come to this: These things ye know, and happy are ye if ye do them, otherwise
ye are not saved by grace, but does come short of the grace of God, to be
taught of God, if ye be overtaken with lying, or swearing, or with
covetousness, or drunkenness, with envying, or hatred, or dissembling, and the
like, which are the Fruits of the flesh: So ye do despite to the Spirit of
grace (whatsoever your profession in Words to the contrary be) who are found
here: But unto us who have believed in the light, the grace of God which has
appeared unto all men, teaches us to deny all ungodliness and Worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World: And so by
grace are we saved, not of our selves, it is the gift of God; for by grace we
stand, and by grace we have obtained salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ:
And this in my measure I witness.

But Friends, Will ye sin because grace has abounded and has appeared in you
all? Consider, Is that the measure of the gift of the grace of God which
teaches ye to sin against God, and to be proud and covetous, to lie, and to
swear, to envy, and to hate, and to be drunk, and to sight, to be light, vain
and wanton, to lust, murder, and to destroy, and to live in all the customs and
fashions of the Heathen? God forbid: Nay, but that Spirit which brings forth
these things is the Spirit of Devils, and not from the Spirit of grace: So you
who are not subject to the Spirit of grace, but brings forth the like Fruits,
as abovesaid, are not come to grace, so cannot grow in grace, from grace to
grace, who are not taught by grace to deny all unrighteousness whatsoever: So
what have ye to do as to take my Words in your mouths, (says the Lord) who
talk and make a profession of free grace? What have ye to do to take my Name in
your mouths? for the Way of grace and truth ye have despised; yea verily, ye
have done despite to the Spirit of grace, and has cast my Law behind your
backs, says the Lord.

Truly Friends I cannot sow pillows under your arm-holes, or under your elbows,
as your greedy hireling-Priests do, who cry peace, peace; but I shall deal
plainly with you, whether you will hear or forbear: For this is the free grace
of God, and the love by grace, that God has given us of his Son, Has sent his
own Son a light into the World, that all men through him might believe and know
the truth, who enlightneth every man that comes into the World: And he that is
not faithful and obedient to the pure light in his conscience, which comes from
the Son of God, and lets him see his evil deeds, and that he should not sin at
all, he hears not God; so whosoever sins against the light, wrongs his own
soul. To the light in all your consciences (people of all professions) I speak.

And Friends and Neighbors, While I was one with you in profession, with a
profession of God and of Christ in my mouth, without the life and possession,
ye loved me, and did speak well of me, I being then one with you in the World;
for the World loves its own; and many of you rejoiced to see me; and Friends,
What am I now become your Enemy, because God has put it into my heart to
choose the better part, who has had mercy on me, and has chosen me out of the
World to be a Vessel unto honor; who has redeemed me from amongst the Sons of
men, to bear his Name among the Heathen in truth and righteousness, according
to my measure, who has given me life in the blood of the everlasting Covenant
of Light and Peace; who has plucked my Feet out of the mire and clay, and has
set them in a plain Way, that I may for ever walk in the Light of the Lord,
where no occasion of stumbling is? But now Friends, Where is all your love ye
had toward me? Is it all lost and gone? Do ye not love the World, and few the
things of Jesus Christ? for they that love the World, has not the love of God
in them. And since it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, who has chosen me
and called me by his grace out from my Fathers House, and from my Kindred also,
do not even many of you hate me without a cause, and even scorns me, and even
wags your heads at me, and gazes upon me, and says, Lo this is he? and some
says that they pity me, and are sorry for me that I should choose a Way that
is so contemptible and despised amongst men. Friends, To the Light of Christ in
all your consciences I speak; What evil have I done since I owned Christ Jesus
my everlasting Light, to be my Teacher, whereof I may be ashamed? Convince me.
Is it an unrighteous thing with you to choose to follow that which is good in
the sight of God, and of all honest men, even to follovv after righteousness
and truth, and to turn from darkness unto the light, and from the power of
Satan unto God? And was not the Way of God alvvaies despised and rejected of
men, even Christ Jesus, the Light, the Way, the Truth and the Life? Have ye
never read that the Stone which the Builders rejected and despised, that the
same is become the Head of the corner? A man of sorrovvs, despised and rejected
of men; and how that Herod and his mighty men of War set him at naught? So it
is possible, that that which is highly esteemed amongst men, may be abomination
in the sight of God; and that which is chiefly despised amongst men, and set at
naught with them, may be chiefly owned, and highly esteemed with God, and
precious; For my ways are not as your ways, neither are your ways as my
ways, says the Lord: So it is plain, That whosoever will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer persecution, and must be hated of all men; For whosoever
departs from iniquity, makes himself a prey to the Heathen, and becomes a
reproach and a byword among the people, for righteousness sake. So ye that say
ye pity me, and are sorry for me, this I say, Be not troubled for me, but
pity your selves and your children; so weep not for me because my Father
according to the flesh has shut his doors against me, who has despised and
forsaken his own child, contrary to nature, as one not worthy to inhabit under
his roof, who may be ashamed of his profession, a hard hearted man, even
without natural affections, who has exceeded the Heathen (who know not God)
in his rage and cruelty; I pray God that it may not be laid to his charge: For
my part I am vvilling to suffer the loss of all things, if the will of God be
so, rather then to turn from the righteous way of the Lord my God, choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season now when I am come to years: And now if God should even
deal with him who is my natural Father, according as he has dealt with me, as
to shut him out of his Kingdom for ever, were it not just and equal? but far
be it from me to desire any man's destruction, but rather desires that the
thoughts of his heart may be forgiven him, that he might come to repentance;
but truly this I know from the Lord, that if he come not to repentance, that
what he has done against me he shall find it heavy in the dreadful day of the
Lords Vengeance, when he comes to revvard him according unto his Works: Truly
when I think of this, my soul even mourns and vveeps for him, who now (
Dives-like) is feeding upon his many dishes, and has forgotten God that made
him; for I told him before that he put me from him, That I was willing to abide
with him, and to serve him faithfully, as it becomes a Son to honor his Father;
and said, that it was fitting for him to suffer me to stay with him in his
House until such times as he could find any unfaithfulness in me in what things
as he should please to commit unto my care, and then he might (after that he
could convince me of unfaithfulness) have some ground of cause why he would put
me from him; but to put me away without cause, for a thing of naught, this is a
thing altogether unjust, contrary to all reason and equity: And as for any part
of disobedience on my part toward him, I know of none, unless refusing to
follow after the Priests, as he would have had me; and I told him that I could
not find any profit by them, and why would he therefore have me to follow after
a people that cannot profit? For God has said, That they shall not profit the
people at all: And this shall all people find true by woeful experience, That
they shall never profit by them while they follow them; for I would as gladly
have profited by them as any, if it had been possible; but the Priests being a
covetous, wicked, lying people, a generation of Vipers, who never was sent of
God, how should they therefore profit the people at all? as by the Scriptures
of truth I can prove them to be liars and deceivers, all out of the Doctrine of
Christ, and of the Apostles, and it is not requisite that we should follow
liars, and deceivers, and blind guides; so I could not but turn from them when
I saw their wickedness and lying against God, and so in this thing it was
better for me to obey God rather then my parents according to the flesh, it
being a matter of conscience toward God; and it had been but fitting I should
have had my liberty of conscience toward God to worship; but my natural Father
would not suffer me to have this liberty, but has shut his doors against me,
and has put me from him upon this account, For not following the Priests any
longer: So has he not even hated me without cause? when as both before he put
me away, and since, I have proved the Priests to be liars and deceivers,
according to the Scriptures: therefore has he not herein exceeded the Heathen,
for a hardhearted man against his own child? let all honest men judge; for the
very first day I went unto a meeting of the people of God, the same day at
night I returned again unto my Fathers House, and the doors was shut against
me; and then I called unto my Brother William, and bad him let me into the
House; and he told me that he durst not let me into the House I asked him Why?
He said, That his Father had sent all his children and servants to bed, and
that he went throughout all the House himself to see that all the doors was
locked and bolted against me, and did charge them all that if I did come, not
any of them to let me into the House; if they did any of them, he said that he
would turn them also out of the doors with me. So William told me these things,
and that he durst not let me into the House; so unto this day I remain a
sufferer for righteousness sake; and truly I believe that I should not have put
pen to paper in reference as to all my sufferings from my natural Father, had I
not heard how he has reported it that I ran from him, and the like: So for the
right informing all peoples understandings, (as to the truth of this matter) I
have briefly in few Words declared something of what has been done by him
toward me, and of what Words passed between us; but I might have intimated
much more of his rage and cruelty, and sore usuage of me, but that I am against
laying open nakedness, and have only cleared my own innocence as touching
false reports of running from my Fathers House, and the like, as also his own
Family and others can witness against him to the contrary for me; if they will
but testify.

So let him consider, and look back, and see what he has done against the
innocent that seeks not his own, who seeks no revenge, but suffers all
things, endures all things, and envieth not, but in the peace which the World
cannot give nor take away, rests satisfied in his Fathers love from above, and
so refers his cause unto him that sees in secret, who rewards openly, and
takes vengeance; For vengeance is mine, says the Lord: So I have boldness
toward God in all my sufferings and tribulations, yea verily I have the answer
of a good conscience toward God and man herein; Gods Witness in me, even the
Spirit of truth, which bears witness to my spirit that I suffer for well doing;
and who shall then condemn me? And because I cannot for conscience sake worship
the beast, nor follow the blind guides any longer, I am persecuted and forsaken
of Father and Mother, and of Brethren and Sisters, and of Kindred too, and these
things have they done unto me that the Scriptures might be fulfilled according
to Christ's Words, who said, Ye shall be hated of all men for my sake; and
marvel not if the World hate you, for it hated me before it hated you; if ye
were of the World, the World would love you, for the World loves its own, but
because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you,
because ye are not of the world, even as I am not of the world, said Christ to
them that followed him in the regeneration, who turned people from the darkness
to the Light, Christ; And he that forsakes not Father and Mother, Brethren and
Sisters, Husband, Wife, or children, and his own life too, for my sake and the
Gospel, (said Christ) he cannot be my disciple; and he that takes not up his
Cross, and follows not after me, he is not worthy of me; but every one that
has left Father, or Mother, Brethren, or Sisters, Husband, Wife, or Children,
or House, or Lands for my Names sake, and the ^ospel, let him rejoice that he
is counted worthy to suffer it, (said the Lord Jesus Christ) for he shall not
lose his reward, but shall receive an hundredfold in this life, and in the
world to come everlasting life. So it is evident, That whosoever will ^ive
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer; For he that departs from iniquity, makes
himself a prey to the wicked, and to the unrighteous and sinners. So Friends,
think it not strange I run not with you to the same excess of riot into all
uncleanness and filthiness; and sorrow not for me, for the sorrow of the World
works death; so speak not evil of the things ye know not, least ye speak evil
against God; and though I am counted as the offscouring of all things unto
this day, and has not whereon to lay my head, being forsaken of Father and of
Mother, and counted as one not worthy to live, nor to inhabit under them, who
could not have so much as a servants place under them; for I told my Father
before he put me from him, That I was willing to abide with him, and to serve
him faithfully, and to labor with my hands in the thing that is good; yet
would he not suffer me to inhabit under him; but in all this what evil have I
done? So I have comfort toward God, notwithstanding all his cruel usuage of
me, and though Father and Mother has forsaken me, yet the Lord has not
forsaken me, neither left me comfortless, but has been with me in all my
afflictions to support me; and though they through the hardness of their hearts
has had no pity on me but I was even cast out for righteousness sake, as
though I had been some great transgressor; Where are my Accusers? If I have
done evil, let them bear witness of the evil; but if well, for cleaving unto
the Lord, why are they so offended in me? I could even desire that the Lord
would not reward them as they have rewarded me, who are even without natural
affections, and without any pity toward me; yet the Lord has had pity,
because his mercies fails not, who in his favor has redeemed me, and has had
compassion when no eye pittyed; for he has said it; Thou had a little
strength, and have trusted in me, therefore I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. Thou have hated iniquity, and loved righteousness, therefore walk before
me, and be thou perfect, and I will help thee, I will be with thee, and go
before thee all the Way that thou shall go. So in the Arms of his everlasting
Love does the Lord carry me, and in his hand does he hide me, that so in the
pure love of God I might remain under the shadow of his Wings for evermore, and
in his Name to trust, which is a strong Tower for the righteous to fly unto;
for God has given me an entrance into the eternal inheritance with the Saints
in light: Surely I have made a good choice, blessed be the Name of the Lord for
evermore, who has put it into my heart as to choose the good Way, and the fear
of the Lord, wherein dwells righteousness. So I am persuaded in my heart to
cleave unto the Lord my God with my whole heart, that the Lamb of God I may
follow wheresoever he goes, though I dye with him, bearing his reproach; for
through Christ that strengthens me, I am more then a Conqueror, and have in
measure conquered Death, Hell, and the Grave, and through Faith have overcome
the World, so has right to eat of the Tree of Life; glorious praises to God
for ever, whose Works now praises him: And though I am become a stranger unto
my Fathers House, and to my Kindred also, and has not whereon to lay my head,
yet God has prepared an House for me, and has brought me into his House of
Love, even into everlasting Dwellings, a spiritual house to worship him in,
has he even prepared eternally in the Heavens, which remains for ever; and
he will never shut me out of his House, but he has given me within his House,
and within his Walls, a place and a Name, better then of Sons and of Daughters,
an everlasting Habitation, and a Name that shall not be cut off; praises,
endless praises to God in the Highest. This has the Lord done for his Names
sake; and how can I forbear to tell of what God has done for my soul? If I
should not confess his wondrous Works before men, to tell of his wonderful
Works, it had bin better for me never to have bin born; Who has even filled me
with the Riches of his glory in Christ Jesus; who has taken me out of the
Olive Tree, which is wild by nature, and now has he grafted me (contrary to
nature) into a good Olive Tree; so in my measure I am come to know him that was
from the beginning; yea, I am in him that is true, who is the true God, and
eternal life, being planted into Christ, that I may bring forth Fruit unto God,
who in times past was an alien and a stranger to the Life of God; but am now
through the grace of God, no more a stranger, but a Fellow-Citizen with the
Saints, and of the Household of God, being built upon the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone, in whom all
the Building fitly framed together, growth unto an holy Temple in the Lord.

Therefore all Friends and Neighbors, having tasted that the Lord is gracious
and full of compassion toward them that trust in him, I cannot but even in
bowels of compassion beseech you even to return unto the Lord with your whole
heart, that ye may love him with all your heart; ye who hunger after
righteousness, ye who would eat of the bread of life, come in to the light even
ye who are ready to die and pine away with hunger for want of bread, turn in
hither, for in my Fathers house is even Bread enough for all that is hungry
indeed, that ye may freely eat of, and live for ever; if it were not so, I
would not invite you; but seeing and feeling that it is even so, I cannot but
beseech you. So every one that is a-thirst, come and take of the Fountain of
the Water of Life freely, whosoever will, and buy Wine and Milk without money
and without price; so spend not your money for that which is not Bread, and
your labor for that which satisfies not; my Father gives you the true bread,
and whosoever eats thereof shall live for ever, and be satisfied; and the
Fountain of the Water of Life is set open, that whosoever is a-thirst may
freely drink, and be filled. And the Bread of God is he that comes down from
Heaven, who lightneth every man that comes into the World, that all men
through him might be saved, who fills the hungry with good things, but the
rich he sends empty away. So all Friends believe in the light, come unto the
light, least ye dye in your sins; for the Lord has no pleasure that ye should
dye in your sins, but rather that ye should turn from your evil Ways, and live
unto him, that so ye might know the Way of life from the VVays of death. As ye
come to own the light of God in you, as ye love it, it will teach you the right
Way, wherein dwells righteousness; a wise man will first seek the Kingdom
of God, and the righteousness thereof, that he may come to know the Lord, and
find rest and peace in him, which the world cannot give. So Friends, if ye
would know those things, and come to have rest and peace in Christ Jesus, then
ye must come to the light wherewith ye are enlightened: Therefore all mind the
light of God in you which shines into your hearts, for the light is your way
if ye love it; so if ye choose to follow the Light, Christ, this is he that
reveals the Father, whom no man knovvs but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him; this is he in whom the weary comes to find rest and peace: So as
every one comes into the obedience of the light, he comes to see the Kingdom of
God, and has right to enter into the Kingdom; and if ye vvait in the light
but a while in patience, ye shall see that the Kingdom of God is come nigh;
Know ye not that the Kingdom of Heaven is within you? So all in the light wait
for the Kingdom of God to be revealed in you, which stands not in words, but
in righteousness, and in the truth; so if even ye know the Kingdom of God, ye
shall know it within you, a holy Kingdom holy and everlasting, into which
nothing that makes a lie, or is unclean, shall enter; For blessed and holy are
they that are counted worthy to enter therein, which have not defiled
themselves with Women. Now therefore Friends, as ye desire the salvation of
your souls, wait in the light, even in the holy and just principle of God, in
that which is holy, which convinces of sin, and of unrighteousness, and lets
you see your sins, and all that ever ye have done, if ye will but hear and
incline your ear; and as ye own the light, to be taught of the Lord, there
shall ye come to know Christ the Savior of your souls, who is come to save his
people from their sins, and to seek and to save that which is lost. So here is
the way of the Lord, in the light, even the true and living way; but if ye
draw back after the Priests, ye have rejected the Lord, to be taught of the
Lord, so ye cannot escape the damnation of Hell, so shall never witness to be
taught of the Lord in the measure of light, who have done despite to the Spirit
of grace, so it is like ye shall never know Gods salvation, profess what you
can in words of knowing him or his salvation; For God is light, and he is not
known but in the light; so they that are not in the light, who knows not the
light, are in darkness even until now, and so knows not the way of the Lord,
for darkness comprehends him not, nor his light and they that be in the
darkness, knows not whither they go, nor at what they stumble, because that
darkness has blinded their eyes.

Therefore all Friends and Neighbors, ye that have known me after the flesh, I
beseech you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, and even now while ye
have yet a little time in the body, have to meet the Lord in the manifestation
of the Spirit of Light from God: For that which may be known of God is manifest
in you, and God has even showed it unto you. So here is your way to know God,
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, if ever ye come to know him, whom to know
is life eternal; For there is no other way but by that of God in you: So if ye
will indeed own the right way, the good way, wherein dwells
righteousness, then come in to the light Christ, who lightneth every man, and
even now while ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be the
children of the light, and walk in the light, as he is in the light, that the
blood of Christ may cleanse you from all sin; and then if ye abide in the light,
ye shall continue in the Father, and in the Son, so shall ye have Fellowship
with the Saints in light, whom the World knovvs not, of whom the World is
not worthy, that henceforth ye may no more know me after the flesh only, but
in the spirit, as ye come to be faithful unto the Lord in your measures of the
light of Christ, where ye may feel me, and read me, and know me who am
unknown unto the World, yet well known to the children of light, who in
the light of the Lord Jesus Christ does continue, and abides with God, and
vvalks in the light, as he is in the light; For the children of light has
Fellowship one with another in the light which unites their hearts together
in one: But with the unfruitful Works of darkness we have no Fellowship;
and here in the light, in the truth, though ten thousand times ten thousand;
yet all one in the light, even in Christ Jesus, who walks not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit. So Friends, by this I shall know that ye love me, and
that ye love the Truth, as many as can receive my Testimony, and keeps my
Fathers Commandments; For the Testimony is not mine, but his who has chosen me
to bear vvitness of him unto many; but if I bear vvitness of my self, my
vvitness is not true; there is one that bears witness, and I know that the
witness that he witnesses is true; for I can of my own self do nothing, yet
through Christ that strengthens me, I can do all things; For I seek not my own,
but the things of Jesus Christ, that I may do the will of God who has chosen
me out of the World, to follow him in the regeneration, where the World sees
me not, nor knows me not; therefore the World hates me, and scorns me, Why?
because I am not of the World, so the World cannot receive my sayings, they
hear me not, because they are not of God; for I receive not Testimony from man,
but these things I speak that ye might believe the truth, not by way of
boasting, to exalt self, or to puff up, for all boasting is excluded, and
self ends condemned with the Light of Truth; so a VVitness in my measure I
stand eternally against all selfishness, for self is of the Devil, and all
proud boastings, which Christ comes to destroy. But,

These things (Neighbors and Friends) I write unto you that ye may come to
know where rest and true peace is, and not to exalt self, that ye might praise
me, but these things I declare, to the end, That ye may all be awakened toward
God, that ye might be saved, and believe what good things God has in store for
them that fear him, and love^ his appearance, and believing in the light, ye
may have life, and that every weary soul may be comforted, and ^ome to find
rest as he comes into the obedience of the light, that the righteous God over
all might have his glory, who is the Author and Finisher of every good Work the
first and the last, God blessed for evermore.

So all friends in the love of the truth receive this into your hearts with
meekness and fear, which was given me from the Lord in the spirit, to write as
a Testimony from the Lord to my Nation, Country, and People, for the Seed of
Gods sake throughout all the World where this may come, was I moved of the
Lord God from the love of the Spirit, which are the very breathings of my soul
for my Nation, Country, and People, that they might be saved and hid in the
day of the Lords wrath; but my desire is, That the wicked one in you may be
destroyed, and what soever works unrighteousness and deceit, unto which I say
Woe, that ye may be separated from all unrighteousness; therefore keep your
selves to that of God in you, that the wicked one touch you not, and from all
idolatry; and so will the old man with his deeds come to be put off, when the
Just comes to liberty, when Christ comes to have the pre-eminence, and rules,
whose right it is. So Friends, take unto you the whole Armor of God, even the
Armor of Light, as it comes to be put on, ye will be able to resist all the
fiery darts of the Devil; I say, As there is a watching and a waiting in the
light of Christ Jesus for the teachings of God in the Spirit, the lusts of the
flesh, and fleshly confidences withers and vanishes away, and the hidden man of
the heart comes to be felt and witnessed, as there is an abiding in the Cross
of Christ, so ye come to dye unto sin, and to be crucified to the World, and
to live unto God.

Therefore all wait, that ye may have Bread to feed upon which gives life to
the Soul, which is nourishment and health to every weary Soul who comes to
feed upon the living Immortal Bread which comes down from GOD out of Heaven,
shall live for ever. And blessed for evermore they are who hunger after this,
for they shall be satisfied: As many as comes to eat of this Bread, and
receives it into them, they shall grow up as Trees of Righteousness, the
planting of the Lord. So let every one that names the Name of CHRIST, depart
from Iniquity, and follow the Light, and believe in the Light while ye have the
Light, that ye may be established in Righteousness and Truth.

Thomas Rawlinson.

FINIS.

