GREAT NEVVS FROM SAXONY: OR A NEW and STRANGE RELATION Of the Mighty GIANT
KOORBMEP, OF His Devouring Men, and of the great Rebellion raised by him, and
his Confederates in the Midd SAXONY.
IN A LETTER sent over from NODNOL, to a Peer of the Realm of ENGLAND; Dated
the 10th Day of this Month of August. Now made Public for General Satisfaction.
My Lord,
IN Obedience to your Lordships Command, I continue my Correspondence, and I
think it especially my Duty so to do, as often as Accidents of any considerable
moment happen among us. I have formerly told your Lordship of the mighty Giant
living in these parts, so great of Stature, as it is thought no former Age can
parallel: He is about 15 Foot high, with Limbs in every part great, yet
beautiful and proportionable. He is not above 30 years Old, his Name KoorbmeP,
Count of Mount YremoG, one of the highest Mountains in the Empire, and Lord of
Notliw Castle in Mercia, the usual place of his Residence. He was born of right
Noble Parents, only one small blot lay upon the Family; for that his
Grandfather was a Senator, and sat in the Assembly of the Angli (a great
Nation of this Country) when they had murdered one of their best Princes, and
exiled another. This young Giant in his Youth, seemed to be one of the most
hopeful and towardly Personages in all the Land, and continued so many years,
till happening into the company of Ebrietas, a most notorious Strumpet and
Sorceress, she so bewitched him, that he fell in Love with her; and having
Carnal Knowledge of her Body, begot a Monster, or rather Devil, called Insania;
which to the Admiration of all People, spoke as soon as 'twas born; and excited
her Father to the perpetration of most unheard of Villainies. He, who before
seemed to be composed only of Courtesy and Goodness, Kindness and Affability;
was all on the sudden changed into a Brutish Monster and a Canibal. He
presently eat up one of his Friends, as a Commencement of his future Cruelties;
not out of need, but general Spleen to Mankind; together with wanton
Bestiality. He bought up hundreds of huge devouring Creatures, not much unlike
your English Mastiffs; and with the Carcasses of his slain Guests he fed them:
after he had first compelled them to accept the loathsome Embraces of his she
Ebrietas Devil. He bought a Lion for the self same purpose; and on a time,
being set on by Ebrietas his Whore, against his Virtuous Lady; he locked the
Lion into her Chamber, one whole day together; and coming home at Night he
killed the Lion, because the Lion had not devoured his Wife. These things being
told at Court, our Prince sent General Lex to seize this Giant, as a Murderer,
who took him by surprise, and made him Prisoner in Caesar's Tower. There was a
Beauteous Lady at our Court, of high Extraction, nearly allied to the Prince
himself; her Name Leuitas; and (as it is Natural for Handsome Women to love
great Men) she entertained so much kindness for KoorbmeP, that she procured his
Pardon and his Liberty, on his Paroll, ever after to live orderly, and obedient
to the Laws; and to shun the company of Ebrietas, to whom he owed all his
Faults and his Misfortune. But Liberty and Ease quickly persuaded this mighty
Man, to recant the Promises* he had made under restraint.

The very first time he met with his Baggage Ebrietas (the Bastard Insania
coming also into company; for they were seldom asunder) she prevailed with him
to devour Yenoc, a Person of Quality of his Acquaintance, in the very Suburbs
of this City; which so incensed the Prince, that he was again seized, before he
could reach his Castle of NotliW; and now all People did expect nothing less
than his Destruction, as a just reward of his Crimes. But it seems he was
familiar with Pecunia, another eminent Witch (for you must know there are
abundance in this Country) and she so intoxicated the Understanding of the
Evidence, and casts Mists before their Memories (as well as their Eyes) that
they had nothing material to say against him: And so upon a solemn Trial before
his Just Peers, he was forced to be Publicly Acquitted and Discharged, with
only a severe Reprehension. After this he lived indifferent quietly some few
years together, and might have done so his lifetime, if he could have excluded
his Old Whore from his Company. But she and her Bastard still insinuating
themselves into his Favor, raised an Army themselves; and prevailed with him
to join with them, in a public War against General Lex (the sole Administrator
of Affairs under our Prince) and on the 18th day of this present month of
August, they entered in Hostile manner, into the Country of MahnruT Green,
destroying all before them; Prince Noctis (under whose Government that part of
the Country was) with all the strength he could gather together, opposed* this
mighty Giant, Force against Force; but notwithstanding a brave Resistance,
KoorbmeP the Giant came unawares, and eat up Prince Noctis, and another famous
Commander, his Friend and Confederate, whose Name I have forgotten; which had
like utterly to have discumfitted our Party; till at last more Assistance
coming in, by downright Valor they forced the Giant to fly with his
Followers. Great search has been made after him, but without any effect
hitherto. Madam Lenitas is banished the Court, it being partly her fault that
all this Mischief has happened. And now General Lex is sent out with a great
Army, to take the Giant dead or alive; and to fight the Army of Ebrietas, which
we hear is grown very powerful; and most People believe will create a longer
and more dangerous War, than that which once happened between Spain and the
United Neatherlands; or that now depending between our Emperor, and his
Hungarian Rebels. Sir, By the next I expect to tell you, the Giant is made
Prisoner; but when the Rebellion of the Witch Ebrietas, and her Confederates
will be at an end, is out of my Prospect, and beyond the Skill of the most
cunning Astrologers in all our Country.

NodnoL August 20 th 1680. Your Lordships most humble Servant, B. R.


