REASONS WHY THE Church of England, As well as DISSENTERS, Should make Their
ADDRESS of THANKS TO THE King's Majesty, For His late Gracious DECLARATION FOR
Liberty of Conscience.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1687.

REASONS WHY THE Church of England, As well as DISSENTERS, Should make their
Address of Thanks to the King's Majesty, for His late Gracious Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience.
SIR,
THE Declaration of Indulgence was received by us with all imaginable
Expressions of Joy and Thankfulness; for we are well assured, that by it Relief
is given to the Body of the Nation, which of late Years has been exposed to
several sorts of Misery: And therefore we cannot but be amazed to hear, That
any of our Clergy (as you write) have expressed themselves indecently about his
Majesty's granting it, and reproachfully of the Dissenters thankful receiving
it.

When in the Declaration, we observed his Majesty in the First place, to
publish to the whole Kingdom his Royal Resolution to protect and maintain the
Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy, and all others of the Church of England, in
the free Exercise of their Religion as by Law Established, and in the Quiet and
full Enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any Molestation or Disturbance
whatsoever, we doubted not but that our Clergy, as in Duty bound, would have
made it their Work to possess the People with the Greatness and Transcendency
of His Majesty's Grace toward them, and of the necessity of their rendering to
his Majesty their humblest and most hearty Thanks; for it might be reasonably
expected, that as Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, on their ascending the
Throne, did immediately suspend the Execution of those Penal Laws that were
against Men of their own Religion, and made all the haste they could to
Establish the Church of England: So His present Majesty might not only give an
Indulgence to the Roman Catholic, but with the same speed make that Religion
the established Religion of the Nation.

But the King, as many of His Royal Predecessors of the same Communion with
him, being greatly concerned for the Welfare of all his People, is resolved to
do his utmost that they may live at Ease and Quiet under Him. And having the
Advantage of making his Reflections on the Conduct of the Four last Reigns, he
finds no means more likely to obtain this End, than an entire Liberty of
Conscience. And although our Clergy are so disturbed at the Thoughts of the
Dissenters Ease, yet, if they would impartially consider it, they must needs
see, that the King in giving Liberty to all, proceeds on the only Principle, by
which he can give it them. For had it not been His Majesty's Sense and Opinion,
That Conscience ought not to be constrained, nor People forced in Matters of
mere Religion, His Majesty must necessarily Judge it His Duty to Almighty God
to endeavor an Establishment of the Roman Catholic Religion, to the Subversion
of the Church of England. To this Principle then, viz. That Conscience ought
not to be constrained, are the Church of England owing for this Protection His
Majesty is pleased to give 'em, and this Principle is of such a kind, as
extends it self to every Man of Conscience throughout the Kingdom: So that the
Matter will at last issue here, The Clergy must Thank His Majesty for His
Granting to all His Subjects Liberty of Conscience, or, by their not doing it,
plainly intimate, That Conscience ought to be constrained, and consequently,
that it is the King's Duty to alter His Resolution of Protecting the Church of
England, which in His Majesty's Opinion is almost, if not altogether so
Heretical, as the Fanatics are.

Besides, it may not be amiss to observe, that the Church of England her self
dares not dissent from His Majesty touching Liberty of Conscience: For as King
James, and Sir Edward Coke, affirm, the Papists were never punished for their
Religion; nor, as others say, have the Fanatics, since 1662. suffered for
their Consciences; so that tho the Religion of the One Party has been made the
Overt Act of Treason, and that of the other of Sedition, yet none are punished
for Matters of mere Religion, whereby the Principle, that Conscience ought not
to be compelled, is yielded; and so long as the diverse Religions in the Kingdom
do not encourage, nor countenance a practicing on the Civil Government, no Man
ought to suffer for his Religion. And Experience assures us, that it is not
Liberty, but Restraints laid on Conscience, that has been most prejudicial to
the Nation and its Government. And if we do compare the Reigns of those Princes
that have been on the Throne since the Dissenters have been numerous, with the
Reigns of those that have been long before, we may see Reasons strong enough to
conclude, that the indulging Dissenters from the established Hierarchy, is
become an effectual Mean to keep the Mitre in Subjection to the Crown. It Is
well known, that anciently the Interest of Six and Twenty Bishops in this
Nation was so very great, that they were a Terror unto Kings. The Barons were
not then so Potent, but the Bishops made as great a Figure; and as the Barons
then having many Tenants, who all swore Homage to their Lords, did often raise
sturdy Rebellions; in like manner so the Bishops, to whom all the Inferior
Clergy swore Obedience. But it is the Alteration made on the Baronies that has
put an end to Baron-Wars; and seeing no Alteration has been yet made on the
Hierarchy, what, unless a great Part of the Clergy (now called Nonconformists)
had withdrawn their Obedience from the Bishops, thereby making it the Interest
of the Bishops to Submit unto their Prince, as well as by weakening 'em, put 'em
out of a Capacity of Resisting, what else has put a check to Prelatic
Insolence? For the conformable Clergy are as much obliged now to swear
Obedience to their Bishops, as heretofore; and had there not been Dissenters
from the Established Hierarchy, Six and Twenty Bishops, by the Help of their
Inferior Clergy, and the Aid of their Attendants and other Adherents, might
have been as able, and no doubt as willing, not only to confront the Nobility,
but even to Insult over their Prince.

And why must the Fanatic, of all Men in the World, be guilty of that
Ingratitude that is worse than Brutism? Has not the King, by His Indulgence,
brought 'em out of a Fiery Furnace, and made 'em Partakers of the Comforts of
sitting down under their own Vines? Let Us but consider the Usage they have had
from the Church of England since Sixty Two, and see whether they have not
reason to rejoice and be thankful for what the King has done for them.

You cannot but remember, that when we returned with His late Majesty, how
severe some of the Clergy were against the Fanatics, assuring us, that they
were but few, and these very illiterate, inconsiderable, and obstinate; though
since we find 'em to be Men of some Sense, Moderation, and Candor, and, in good
earnest, the Trading part of the Nation. However, we being possessed with an
Idea of their being unworthy of the least Favor of the Government, the Terms of
their Communion with our Church were made so very strict, that such as would at
first have submitted unto most of our Ceremonies, and to our Bishops too, as
the King's Ministers, were necessitated to become Nonconformists, for not
subscribing Assent and Consent to the Divine Right of Episcopacy; a thing our
Nobility and Gentry never liked: And because they could not absolve those, who
voluntarily took the Covenant, and still think themselves obliged in Conscience
by it, from the Obligation of that Oath, which no doubt was enjoined the
Clergy, not so much to secure our Church, as to make Fanatics; for, 'twas
exacted but for Twenty Years, and our Church, ever since that time expired,
firmly enough established.

And whereas these Nonconforming Ministers, either because they judged
themselves consecrated to that Holy Function, or because they being deprived of
all their Promotions, had no other way to preserve their Families from
perishing, continued to preach; an Act was made against their Conventicling, in
which that Sanguinary Law of the Thirty Fifth of Eliz. was declared to be in
force against them, and on the Third Conviction for Preaching at a Conventicle,
they were to be banished: And by the Oxford-Act these Ministers were actually
banished from all Cities and Towns Corporate; ay, and from the Houses of their
Friends or Relations, as well as their own Families, if convicted for Preaching
in either of those Places, and could not take that Test, which since has been
cast out of the House of Lords, when brought in with a Design of being more
universally imposed. Besides, the 22 Car. 2. by which one Man suffers for
another Fault, according unto which, Men have been convicted, disseis'd of
their Property, and impoverished without a Jury, or their being called forth to
speak for themselves. For, on these clandestine Convictions, Warrants have been
granted out for Six, Eight, Ten, or Fourteen Conventicles at a time; so that
many, before they could in the least imagine, that they lay exposed to the
Penalty of the Law, have had their Houses broken open by the Informers,
Constables, and other Officers, who, like so many Dragoons, have for a long
time kept the Possession, plundring and stealing, as well as distreining their
Goods, And what was taken under color of Law, though of greater value than the
Fine amounted to, yet no return has been made of the Overplus, nor were any by
the Statute required to do it. And after the Clergy had by their many
Pulpit-Invectives instigated the Inferior Magistrate to Severity, this Statute
is judged too mild, and the Meetings of the Fanatics, when only for a Civil
Visit, are by an Innuendo made to be with an intention to worship God, and that
Intention interpreted to be an unlawful Act at Common Law, and adjudg'd to be a
Rout or Riot, which has been contrary to what the Learned in the Laws have with
much boldness affirmed, who say, That to worship God, is no Fault at Common
Law; it is but malum prohibitum, and therefore cannot be made Routs or Riots.
But this is not the whole of these Men's Misery; for so common were the manifest
Perjuries of Informers, and so great the Reputation given 'em, that when the
Dissenters have been in a Journey from home, they have been convicted for being
at Routs or Riots several Miles distant. To all which let us add the many
Desolations that have proceeded from the prosecuting 'em on the 23 Eliz. under
the Lash of which, as many worthy Lawyers declared, they fell not, and (what
must not escape our Observation) when several great Lawyers were prepared to
argue on the Dissenters behalf, they were denied it, because one of the
Justices then on the Kings Bench told 'em, That he had seen an old Queen
Elizabeth's Proclamation that had fully decided the Case, and so without an
Hearing were overruled. And tho by this Law they were condemned to no less
^han 20 l. per Mensem for not coming to the Common Prayer, this was too little;
the Doctors Commons Gentlemen therefore must have an Hand too in this Matter,
who exceeding all Bounds, have been the Ruin of many Families. But these
Methods not ridding the Land of 'em, the 35 of Eliz. which issues either in the
Death or Banishment of all those who were convicted for being at a Conventicle
that Month in which they went not to Church, (notwithstanding the great Doubts
that many have of its being in force) is put afresh into Execution, and on it
many are Indicted, and some Banished.

Time would fail us to tell you of the many cast into Newgate in the Visitation
time, when the Contagion was within those Walls; that there perished; of the
several Hundreds, that in this and several other Gaols, have since miserably
ended their Days; as also to acquaint you with the Endeavors that our Clergy
have used to increase their Bonds; and when some in Parliament were disposed to
favor 'em, what Methods were taken to hinder a Bill of Comprehension and
Indulgence. To write an History of the Practices of some of our Zealots, the
fair Promises they made to ensnare the Presbyterian Parliament Men to a
Compliance with them, in opposing His late Majesty's Gracious Indulgence, and
their forsaking 'em as soon as the Declaration was recalled, the Crafts used to
cajole the poor Fanatic the last Parliament that was at Westminster in the
late King's Reign, by those who in the House, would speak as if their very
Souls were for the Relief of Tender Consciences, but yet would Boat it over to
Lambeth to consult how to spoil all: Even Shaftsbury himself was such an Enemy
to the Dissenters, that when he was desired by a Gentleman of that Parliament,
and from whom I had it, not to postpone the Bill of Comprehension and
Indulgence to that of Exclusion, his Reply was, Let the Fanatic alone, what
need we concern our selves so much for them? For if we first indulge them,
they will most undoubtedly relinquish us, and we shall hear no more of their
being for the Secluding Bill. To write a full History of all this, would
require more Paper than is now allotted us; and seeing these Hints are enough
to show the Misery the Fanatic has been exposed unto, we may with the less
regret wave it, and immediately draw to this Conclusion, That A Deliverance
from all these Miseries deserves the greatest Thanks. What less can the
Dissenters do? In a word, if they accept of His Majesty's Grace, are they not
worse than Brutes if they present not their Address of Thanks? And, unless they
accept of His Majesty's Grace, they must resolve to be fond of Misery. They
must not only submit to Church of England Severity, but must scorn and despise
all offered Relief, and be wheedled by one part of the Church of England into
the Sin of Unthankfulness, that the other part may have just cause of Complaint
against them to His Majesty; that, if possibly, while in this Life, they may
put themselves out of all hopes of Ease. Have they not sufficiently felt, in
His late Majesty's Reign, what it is to reject Royal Grace, that they must make
a fresh Experiment of it once more? If not, why trouble you them with the noise
of the Law, the Law? Must they all be good Lawyers, before they can be good
Christians, or good Men? Some of 'em remember, that within a few Years, some
Noble Lords, no Friends to Arbitrary Government, were for petitioning the King
to Suspend Penal Laws, rather than Repeal 'em; and, they have met with a Vote
of a late Parliament, That the Penal Laws ought not to be put in Execution
against Dissenters; and, for ought they know, on very good Reasons of State:
And, if they must be Suspended, who must do it, the King, or a Justice of
Peace? Think on these things, and consider them well, and we doubt not but
you will be of our Mind.

VALE.
FINIS.

