Reasons Humbly offered to the High Court for Parliament, for an Additional
supply of Wool for the Islands of Guernezey, Jersey, Alderney and Serk.
WHereas by an Act of 12 Car. 2. Entitled, An Act for Prohibiting the
Transportation of Wool, etc. there was liberty, given to Transport from
Southampton certain quantities of Wool to the said Islands; viz. to Guernezey
1000 Tods, to Jersey 2000 Tods, to Alderney 200 Tods, and to Serk 100 Tods. But
since the making of that Act the Inhabitants, and the Manufacture of Stockins
being very much increased, double that quantity will not be sufficient to carry
on the said Manufacture, by which alone the aforesaid Inhabitants do subsist.

Therefore it is Humbly desired, That to the Act which is now passing a Clause
may be inserted, to increase the Number of Tods to be Transported to the said
Islands, which is conceived may be fit to be granted, for the following
Reasons.

1. A further supply will appear to be necessary, if it be considered that
there are in the sole Isle of Guernezey at least 4000 Knitters, who making 4000
pair of Stockins a Week; do thereby weekly Manufacture about 60 Tods of Wool,
and consequently above 3000 Tods in the Year: Which being so, and the
Parliament taking now effectual care for preventing the Transportation of Wool
into France, from whence the said Inhabitants were necessitated to supply
themselves with English Wool, without which they cannot possibly work there
Stockins. It is from thence evident, that unless some greater quantity be now
allowed them out of this Kingdom, more than half of the said Knitters will
remain Idle; and not being able to subsist, must either Starve, or be an
Unsupportable burden to the rest of the Islanders.

2. The King's Service does require it; for otherwise the King must be at
extraordinary Charges to preserve those Islands, if through want of what is so
absolutely Necessary for their Subsistence, the Inhabitants should be reduced
to extremity of Want and Misery, which must render them incapable of making any
Defense against the Public Enemy.


