REASONS OF THE DECAY OF THE Clothing-Trade, Humbly offered to the PARLIAMENT:
With some Short Proposals of Redress.

By a Well-wisher to that Trade, and the true English Interest.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1691.

THE Woollen Manufacture of our English Nation being the chief Support of our
Foreign Trade, and the Master-wheel of all Trade at home (as will appear by the
due Consideration of the Multitudes of People that it directly employs,
afterward, by its immediate Effects of Raw-Silk, Grogerome, Yarn and the like,
and the many Trades that have their whole dependence upon this) does justly
claim our chiefest Care to its Encouragement and Reputation: Experience showing
us, that when this fails, it has a speedy Influence upon all others, and soon
upon the whole Nation; and I think I may add, without Ostentation, that no part
of the World does now equal us in the Curiosity of this Commodity either for
Cloth or Color, I wish I could add in general. And the exact making of a good
Piece of Cloth requires as great Care and Judgment as any Commodity in the
English Nation, there being so many Particulars belonging to it, a Miscarriage
in each of which spoiling the Curiosity of the whole design; and, being brought
to its due Perfection, (for its Beauty and Usefulness) is the best Commodity in
the whole World. And since Providence has seemingly afforded us this as our
particular Lot, with more Conveniences to bring it to its due Perfection, than
any other part of the World; as is evident by the Goodness of our Wool,
Fullers-Earth, Quick-Rivers and the like; we must be strangely stupid to our
own Interest, if we suffer the Reputation of it to be lost by any undue
Courses, the Price of it inhanc'd by any unnecessary Attendants, the Nation
being herein wounded in its tenderest Part, many other Nations being in
Competition, and as it were at a Contest with us in all our Foreign Markets,
with this Commodity; or that the Just and due Profit of it should be carried
away by any unreasonable Intruders Quis virtutem amplectitur ipsam, praemia si
tollas.
. The whole of this being sufficiently confirmed by those many good Statutes
formerly made to guard it against all Inconveniences; but as the worthy Makers
of those good Laws are now asleep, so are their Laws too, and every Man's Rule
is freely become his own choice; nay the greatest trial of skill, of late
Years, has been, who could make the worst Cloth, which I think does justly call
for the Inspection of this present Parliament.

1. The First Reason that I humbly offer, is the abundance of Pinions and Niles
that have of late years been made into broad Cloth transported abroad, and sold
with no distinction at all from Cloth that is made of good staple Fleece-Wool;
great Quantities of this Commodity being made of late years in this Nation, as
our Trade of Stuffs and Serges has increased: it is a sort of short Wool, of
the nature of Flax, which the Wool-Combers separate from the long staple Wool,
with which they make their Serges and Stuffs. This being made into Broad-Cloth
and well pressed will deceive a prudent Buyer, but not do above half the Service
of well made Fleece-Wool Cloth: many thousand Cloths in a year are made of this
Commodity in the Nation, which (to my own knowledge) has brought a great
Disreputation upon our Cloth abroad. By the Statute of King James the first,
Anno quarto cap. 2. Any such Commodity as this was strictly limited to narrow
Cloth, and indeed all sorts of Wool that was any thing of a worse Quality than
Fleece-Wool, I mean the best separated from it upon any account, and that
narrow Cloth to be distinguished with a plain List on one side, and the other
nothing but a Selvidge, that the Buyer of it might know what he bought. The
Quantities of this Commodity of Niles and Pinions being now grown so great,
it is a Question whether it is best to limit it to narrow Cloth or not, that sort
of Cloth being now more out of use than formerly. But it is most agreeable to
Reason and Justice, that it should be distinguished from good staple
Fleece-Wool Cloth, which I propose by making one plain black List not topt, and
the other white, in all sorts of Cloth that it is made into; which will be no
Hindrance or extraordinary Charge to the Cloth, only to show the Buyer what it
is made withal: That there may be a power lodged in the Overseers of the Poor
in every Parish in England to seize any such Cloth that is other ways made; to
distribute some part to the Informer, the Remainder to be divided by their
discretion amongst the Poor, any Charge that should happen, to be bore by the
Commodity. If any Question arise about the Cloth the Owner to be put to his
Oath, and this Act to be read once every Year in all Clothing Places: nothing
would more mend the Price of ordinary Wool than this, hereby this Commodity
would be known at all our Markets, and sold according to its merit; the Price
so much lessened, that it would come into many hands that wear no Cloth, being
not able to come to the Price of it; and certainly avoided by many that are now
deceived by it, and hindered from wearing good Fleece-Wool Cloth that they
expected: But, that which is chiefest, we shall secure the Reputation of our
Fleece-Wool Cloth abroad; which is no small Advantage to any Commodity, as
appears by our Colchester-Bays, which carry the whole Trade of the World (in
that Commodity) by their due preservation of the good making of them.

2. The next is the Excessive straining of our Cloth, which is become a general
practice in all Cloth that is exported, and indeed the common shelter of all
bad making of Cloth in general. A Cloth that is but five quarters wide, when
strained out, set and dry, will make as fair a show at Market as that of six,
and few but may be deceived by it; all Irregularities in Breadth and Length
being hereby in a great measure stifled: Besides, it frustrates the End of good
dressing of Cloth; the chiefest care being now to make the Cloth look well to
the Eye, after strained and fitted for a Market; which End being served, the
Cloth must needs wear too high after shrunk and made into a Garment; so the
true end of good dressing of Cloth lost to serve a false. Besides many other
Inconveniences that might be urged upon that score. How far the reputation of
our English Cloth is liable to suffer hereby, I leave to better Judgments, only
add, that it is too much encouraged and used by our Merchants. That there
should be a Statute made that no Cloth of what nature soever should be strained
above one Yard in twenty in the Length of the Cloth, and one Nail of a Yard in
Breadth upon forfeiture of the Cloth. That all Cloth-Drawers in the City of
London should be sworn to discover any Cloth that comes to their Hands that
shrunk any more than this, and to have some Reward for the Discovery. All Cloth
that is exported going through their Hands, and the Hot Iron that they usually
use to press their Work, the fittest Means to discover it. This being done, it
would have a good Effect upon Men's Care in making of good Cloth, and in great
measure answer those many Searches that have lately been proposed, by a Bill,
to the Parliament.

The goodness of Cloth in it self must, in great measure, be left to the
Judgment of the Buyer, if he plainly sees the Condition of it, his Price will
be justly guided; and there is nothing will quicken Men's care more in any
Commodity than a certain Loss in a Failure.

3. The next Inconveniency that our Clothing Trade suffers under, is, the many
Wool-Broghers, or Ingrossers of Wool that are sprung up these late Years,
calling themselves by the Names of Wool-Staplers, but never bring a Pound of
Wool to a Staple in a Year. They buy up great Quantities of Wool in several
Counties, bring it up to London, divide it into two or three sorts or more;
then sell it or send it down to Clothiers in all clothing parts of England;
they come down thirty or forty Miles toward clothing places, buy up the Wool,
bring it to London and divide it, and afterward send it through those parts
again; their breaking of this Wool into sorts, no real advantage to the
Clothiers, but very often the contrary, for little so exactly done but must be
parted again, in the exact way of making of Cloth: These Men buy their Wool in
different Counties, their design not to make it into Cloth, but to order it for
the advantage of sale, and are not careful to keep the different Counties Wool
apart, but rather the contrary, to make two Counties of good Wool sell off one
that is but indifferent, in pursuance of their interest; hereby these Counties
Wools being of differing proof and scouring, as most Counties are, many rowy
and cuckly Clothes are made, that the Clothier cannot possibly avoid, it being
the Clothiers greatest care always to use a Counties Wool by itself, this being
a great advantage by the equal proof of the Cloth in the Mill: And no Clothier
but may fit himself with any sort of Wool from the Breeder, that his occasion
requires, and have it directly to his own House, without any inconveniency of
more sorts than he has occasion for: or if so, he may spin it into Yarn and
fairly sell it again. These Men buy up most of their Wool in the Summer, and
send down a great part of it into the Country in the Winter, by which means,
through the wetness of the Ways, and the neglect of Carriers, the Wool most times
receives wet, which is very prejudicial to the working of the Wool, and the
making of good Cloth. By the Rules of Reason, and having Charity for their
Sellers, these Men should have a hard Task to get a Livelihood, but we too
plainly see the contrary, and that they carry away a great share of the profit
of the Clothing Trade, live very splendidly, and come to great Estates. What
Civilities the Breeders receive more from these Men, than they did formerly
from the Clothiers, is to me uncertain, but the whole Practice of their Trade,
is plainly against the Statute of Edward the Sixth, Anno quinto, chapter 7. And I
think more strictly to be made, if possible, as may yet a little farther appear.

4. These lead me directly to another sort of Men, that are their great
Assistants, called Factors, or indeed their Brethren in a higher Form,
Ingrossers of Spanish Wool. These at first set up, (or crept in unawares) and
their Original not quite out of memory, to assist the Clothiers in selling
their Cloth to the Merchants and Woollen-Drapers, and sending down their Money,
and to have a small Salery for doing it: But now, to admiration, become the
chief Masters of the Clothing Trade, they buy up and ingross into their hands,
almost all the Spanish Wool that comes into England, then sell or send it down
at their own Prizes to the Clothiers; their usual profit being two Pence in a
Pound in Price, and four Pounds in Tare, less in the Bag of Wool than the
Merchant allows them, which makes near three Pence; so that there is not a
Nobleman in the Nation that wears a Suit of Spanish Cloth (the most reputable
wear in the World) but does in effect pay two Shillings Factoridge. Their
Saleries afterward for selling the Cloth, as they set themselves, (who being
linkt by one common Interest, and the Makers of the Cloth in effect become
their Servants) are sure enough on their sides. But this as to Spanish Wool.
They find a way likewise to get a Salery out of most of the English Wool, that
these Wool-Broakers send down to their Clothiers, and usually five Shillings in
a Pack: The support of this Salery being partly upon this score, these Factors
have the whole management of their Clothiers Estates; these other cannot well be
secure of their Money, or know well whom to trust, but by these Factors
assistance. But here is a further cunning in the matter, As these Factors have a
certain advantage by this Wool, they will be sure to encourage the Cloth that
is made of it, and manage many of the Clothiers so, that they shall not be able
to buy any other way: And so their Interests jump. The Wool-Brogher to serve
the Wool at his price, the Factor to have half a Crown in a Clothier's Wool
down, five Shillings in a Cloth for selling the Cloth to the Merchant, and the
value of this Cloth about seven Pounds.

The Interest of these Men, thus joined, and being always at London, to observe
all Opportunities of Trade, and improve their Interest with Merchants, and the
Clothiers for most part in the Country, has prevailed so far, that there are
many thousand Cloths made in a Year, where (I dare affirm) the Makers of them
do not get one Shilling in a Cloth: And they easily find out such Men in all
Countries, that will catch at an empty reputation, and answer their ends, and
when the Wheel's once going round, there is no stop. And those Clothiers, that
will not follow this Pipe, have their Cloth laid by, and their Money possibly
used to encourage those that bring this extraordinary profit: And the command
of Blackwell-hall Markets being so much in their power, most of the Trade is
carried in this chanel; to change from one of these great Factors to another,
no remedy, being all governed by one Interest; nay farther, these Men are great
dealers in these Pinions and Niles, I think I may add, equal Promoters of our
English Interest, or as our Proverb, Like to like Similis simili gaudet.
. These, as the useless Cions of the Tree, draw away great part of the Sap, and
bear no Fruit, nay, which is worse, starve the Branches that would bear: the
one a Coach, a Country House; the other forced to come up in a Wagon to save
charges:

Si natura negat, facit indignatio versum. Juv.
This does certainly reflect upon the Clothiers themselves to be thus managed,
and possibly would not be so ingeniously owned, did not necessity require it,
and their interest so plainly overpowered; but think it the greatest wisdom to
make an Appeal before quite swallowed up, there remaining no possibility of
withstanding their force: Ne pars sincera trahatur. Ovid.
In your Account made up, in which you are usually brought something in their
Debts, you have so much Money standing out to such and such Men; if you are
uneasy, and go and ask any of these Men for Money, you disoblige your Factor,
and get nothing by it neither, for these Men buying a great many Men's Cloth,
and keeping a general Account with the Factor, will know no particulars; and so
you are forced to an implicit Faith; and their exact knowledge of the strength
of your Stock and Weekly Expense, is better to them than auricular Confession.
So that many of your great Factors manage some of their Clothiers as exact as
their Watches: The interest of Rome is plainly outdone; if uneasy, no help
for it: So where a War cannot be continued to advantage, it is good making the
best Peace a man can, and turn to the other point, and endeavor to become a
Favorite, and exercise the thoughts about a good Side of Bacon, or rather than
be outdone, the whole Pig, or to get the largest Collar of Brawn, a little
suitable to the quality of the Receiver. And, as well as outdone this way, we
are quite hindered from showing our own Cloth to Merchants at Blackwel-Hall,
unless in the open Court; for the whole Hall is so taken up with these Factors,
that there is no room but in their standings: we pay the Hospital all the charge
of taking in and keeping account in sending out, and are wholly shut out; if
you show any Cloth in any of their Standings, you must be sure to pay
Factoridge. Their right in a Standing, after Possession, (by the leave of the
Hospital) is not reckoned much less than a Fee simple, if they have Heirs, I
cannot tell whether disposable by Will; but we find (too often to our Loss)
that it is of a shorter tenure, but however still full, and many times such
contests for Standings, that it wants good Judgment to decide. These Factors
come to Market in their Morning-Gowns and Slippers, their Honor in the way,
proportionable to their Clothiers in Town, and the greatest Inconveniency that
is to them, is, many times our Country Wagons in Blackwel-Hall Court are much
in their Coaches way; and the poor Carriers often times (at their first coming
up) are so scared to make way and move their poor Cattle for this great
splendor and Gallantry, that they scarce recover their Senses until a Mile out
of town, and then bless themselves for their great deliverance from some
Nobleman's Coach; Quis coelum terris non misceat and mare coelo? Juven.
I must confess I have not yet heard much of their Heraldry: and hope we shall
have some Credit in the Harpalus a come, eques ab ore rupe. Erasm. Factors, --
so flat -- like the Swans black Legs to their Ladies; and so great a
Mortification that it must be changed, if by Act of Parliament.
Settlement. Thus much of Charybdis, but here is Ecce iterum Crispinus, and est
mihi saepe vocandus Ad parts, monstrum nulla virtute redemptum. Juvenal.
Scylla too.

The numbers of these Blackwel-Hall Factors are so much increased within these
ten or fifteen Years, by their taking so many Apprentices, that the Cloth Trade
is not able to support them, (had they not been out in their politics, in this
point, I should have thought they had engrossed all the Craft to themselves:)
and these often placed according to their Friends Ability in setting them up;
no more being required to set up a Factor than an Ink-box and two Quires of
Paper: And these Apprentices having as well learnt their Masters way of Living
as their Trade, begin accordingly, giving out at first that there is a good
Estate in the Country, or a fair Estate some other way, to encourage their
Credit; which has hitherto proved still reversional, when to help the
Clothiers at a dead lift; neither can it, in reason, be otherwise expected: And
going on as they begun (there being a necessity for that) and the Profit of the
Trade not answering, they begin to spend the Clothiers Money, (being ready at
hand) and, after some considerable time, make a Breach. Quae tam Festa dies ut
cessat prodere? Hor. Were it not to spoil the Poet's verse.
There has beeen lost to our Clothiers, (within this ten or fifteen years) by
the Blackwell-Hall Factors, I believe, 40000 l. besides, possibly, as great a
sum, that they have been the occasion of, that has been lost by other men; to
give an Account of the Practices that they have been guilty of, and the many
abuses they have used to our Clothing Trade, is a Task too difficult for me to
undertake, and so copious, that I know not where to begin Inopem me copia fecit.
: And our Clothing Trade decreasing, and these Factors increasing; I would not
insure (if capable) for so many years to come, for more Money.

This is the true and impartial Account of the best part of the Clothing Trade
of England, and its management; I know not now what to propose better in this
case, than the following of the good example of our Savior, in his turning out
the Money Changers out of the Temple, to drive them all out of Blackwell-Hall,
and overturn their Standings. Grex totus in agris, unius scabie cadit. suv.
And if they are excused from the Scourge, I think it a kindness beyond some of
their merits, (for should some of these receive but one single stripe from each
Clothier that they have cheated and abused, Jefferies would be outdone in his
Politics; for we have many poor Women in the Country, suffering under these
Calamities, that would charge their Husbands to strike home) Necessitas durum
telum.
sparing neither Agagite nor Amalakite; this County nor that; but putting us
all once more upon equal Terms, and our due possession of Blackwell-Hall into
our hands, whose right it is so long as we pay the Duty. And if it does appear
to be any kindness to our Trade, to have any the like Assistance, we can easily
find out such Men in the Country, that will be fit to manage it (the honest
mystery of the Factors Trade being easy to be understood) and limit them from
such practices, that we see the inconveniency of, now, whom the example of
these may a little scare for some years, and I think as much need of an example
as on Bagshot-Heath, it being wholly impossible to limit these Men's Interest
Canem vetulum loris assuescere difficile, Eras. Nothing but Hanging.
. Neither do I think the withdrawing of these Men's Stocks, will at present be
much inconveniency to the Trade, the Clothiers own will run the freer, and
possibly thrive the better, for being separate, and not so much credit given:
And any Clothier that is ingenious at his Trade, will find as much kindness
from some Merchants and Woollen-Drapers, the former of these possible as
willing to Credit the Clothiers as they do now the Factors, and be willing to
direct them in any particular of the Trade, as well as these Men do now.

And how far the Interest of the whole Nation does suffer by these Practices
(when there is not one yard of fine Cloth that goes abroad, but is advanced
hereby, six pence in a yard, where we shall meet the near Industry of the Dutch
and many others striving to outdo us) I leave to better Judgments.

But if the necessity of our Trade does require such Men, we had best send them
out of the Country, where we will be sure to follow the prudent and wary
Example of our good Father Jacob to his Son Joseph, who made him put his hand
under his thigh, and swear that he would not bury him in the Land of Egypt: and
should the good old Patriarch be thus careful that his Body should not remain
in so slavish a Land, it would strangely reflect upon us, in a greater
Deliverance, to be less mindful to secure our selves against a relapse; Nay,
farther, to pursue the simile (old wit being as good as new) to make these Men
put their hand upon the Key of Blackwell-Hall Door (before entrance) and swear
that they will never turn it, or enter, but to promote the Interest of their
Principals, according to the best of their Judgments, and to be abjured against
buying of Wool of any sort, directly or indirectly, or taking of any Money from
any Clothier for procuring any Wool, by the strictest Test: to take no
Apprentices, and their Saleries fixed; and not to be admitted upon these terms,
without a firm Testimonial of their Fidelity, under the Hand Writing of so many
Clothiers.

These, with many other good things that may be thought on, to be the Statutes
of the Hall, to be observed by the Governors.

5. The last reason that I humbly offer, is the Abundance of our English Wool
that has, of late Years, been carried into France and other Places (as I have
been credibly informed;) and it is thought, by many wise Men, that the
strictness of that Statute does not so well answer the End, as if the Interest
and full Advantage of any Wool that shall at any time be secured or discovered,
should come with all possible Ease into the Hands of those that secured or
discovered it, without much trouble; many Men making a scruple at the taking
away a Man's Life on that score, and that France has an Interest by that
Statute. But this is fitter for better Judgments, and I shall offer no more
than my own Knowledge.

Every Pound of Wool carried away unmanufactur'd, is the value of the Wool lost
that way to the Nation, in the common way of Trade: whatsoever worsted Wool,
above treble, that by the help of ours mixed with their own, it answers that
End that otherwise it would not do, which is our greatest Loss. That, some few
years ago, we had some French Men in our Parts that bought some Cloth of us;
but in all likelihood, their Design was chiefly to satisfy themselves in the
Curiosity of our Trade, as did appear by their exact notice of our Mills, and
curious Observations of many Particulars of our Trade; at the same time our
Sheermakers were altogether employed in making of Sheers for France: soon after
which our Woollen Cloth was stopped, by the extraordinary Duty imposed by the
French King, which has been a great stop to our Trade ever since.

Thus I have humbly offered, in matters of Fact, a true and unprejudiced
account of the Hindrances of our Clothing Trade, and the methods of its
Retrieve, to the best of my judgment, which I hope will be better seconded;
and humbly submit to this honorable Parliament, how far the Public Interest,
Honor and Reputation of our English Nation suffers hereby.

FINIS.

