REASONS Against making the RIVER DARWENT, in the County of Derby, NAVIGABLE.
I. THE Mayor and Burgesses of Derby, have Thrice heretofore attempted, without
Success, the making this River Navigable.

II. There is no Common Bridge over the said River, but many Fords, through
which Carts and Carriages daily, and Millstones frequently do pass. Now by
constant deepening the Channel to keep the River Navigable, no New Fords can
ever be cast up; and if the Old ones wear out, which often happens, all
Communication of the Inhabitants on the one side of the River, with those on
the other, will be lost; for the Undertakers are not willing to make Bridges.

III. On this River are diverse Corn-Mills and Fulling-Mills, which this
Navigation will often lay dry, and frequently interrupt their Working, to the
great damage of the Country thereabouts, and endanger the breaking of the
Wares, to the damage of the Owners.

IV. This intended Navigation will not, as is pretended, Advance the Trade of
any Market, or other Town lying near the said River, or the River Trent; but
instead thereof, it will much abate the Trade of Nottingham, Mansfield, Blyth,
Tuxford, Worsop, Bautry, etc. which is driven thence through Scarsdale by
Land-Carriage into Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Cheshire, and by this means
multitudes of Families will be utterly undone, who now get their Living by
Land-Carriage.

V. Nor can this intended Navigation be any ways commodious for the quicker and
cheaper conveying of Goods to the Port of London (which is the principal Reason
that all Navigators urge for such their Undertaking) for oftentimes the Stream
of this River for a Month or six Weeks together, is so small and shallow, that
it will scarce carry a little Fishing-Boat; all which time the greater Vessels
with their Lading, must lie still, and the Trader often lose the advantage of
that Market, which he might have been sure of by Land-Carriage.

VI. And as for the Preservation of the Highways, a Benefit which is pretended
will be wrought by this Navigation, this Navigation can only save five Miles of
Land-Carriage, viz. from Derby to Wiln-Ferry, and all who are liable to the
repair of those Highways, had much rather bear that Charge, than be barred the
convenience of passing the River Darwent when they have occasion.

VII. If this River were capable of being made Navigable, (as in the opinion of
all who know it well, it is not) yet it would be advantageous to none, besides
a few Tradesmen in Derby, but very prejudicial to many who live there, and get
a comfortable Livelihood by Land-Carriage from thence to Wiln-Ferry, yet dare
not, for fear of the Great ones of the Town, show their dislike of the
Navigation.

VIII. Now by this Navigation, to enrich some of the Town of Derby and
impoverish others, to subvert the Trade of all the Market Towns in
Nottinghamshire, and greatly to annoy all the Gentlemen's Estates on the Banks
of the River Darwent, is just as reasonable, as to rob all the Apostles to
enrich St. Peter.

THE CASE Of making the River DARWENT NAVIGABLE.


