Reasons humbly offered against the passing of a Bill, Entitled, A Bill for
Regulating and Encouraging the Art of Weaving.
I. IT is humbly offered that this Sealing of Foreign Silks and Stuffs as
proposed, tends to the destruction of Trade, and in it self is Impracticable.
For, can it be imagined that the owner of every Ship wherein such Silks or
Stuffs are imported (if compelled to come to London to have them Sealed before
their going to the Port to which they were bound) shall not receive great
damage thereby, inasmuch as Freight-mens Wages and Victuals must be paid for;
which with demurrage will necessarily inhance the price of the Commodity.
Besides such Sealing, (considering the great quantities that are commonly
imported together, and belonging to several Persons, and bound for several
Ports,) must necessarily take up a vast length of time, and tend to the vast
prejudice of those which stay last for their Seals.

First, By occasioning the loss of their Market, which will be supplied by
those who are first dispatched.

Secondly, By the great damage that such Silk must necessarily receive by lying
at the Custom-house, and being cut open, and unfolding each Piece, without
which they cannot come to the ends to Seal them, whereby such Silks and Stuffs
will be much cress's, sullied, and tumbled, which will much hinder the Sale.

And Thirdly, It may occasion the losing of the Fabrics, by which the
Merchants can only discover the length and quality of his goods, and what they
Cost, and thereby judge at what price to Sell.

Fourthly, This may occasion great damage to the Merchant by the loss of
several Pieces of Silks and Stuffs, which may amount to more than the advantage
he can reasonably expect by the Cargoe Imported.

And Fifthly, The charge of maintaining of Servants, and others who must be
employed to attend such Sealing, and the damage the Merchant sustains by his
Servants absence (all such time) from his employ at home, must without doubt be
great, considering the vast time that the unfolding and folding up every Piece
of Silks and Stuffs will take up.

II. Next consider the inconveniences that may happen by the making of every
Piece forfeited that shall be found unsealed.

Suppose the Merchant shall cause every Piece to be Sealed, such Seal is affixt
but at one end, and may by accident be lost off; or the Merchant afterward
sells to the Mercer, whose Customer makes choice to take some Yards from off
that end to which the Seal is affixt; or suppose a Country Chapman will buy
half a Piece of Silk, and make choice of that end which is Sealed, either the
Mercer must as often as the Seal is cut off the Piece, carry the remainder to
be new Sealed at the Custom-house, or at Weavers-Hall, or else he is liable to
have the same seized by any person, who under pretense of Searching for French
Ribbons and Laces, by the power in the seventh Paragraph of the Bill desired,
shall come into his House, Shop, or Warehouse, and to his great trouble and
damage unfold all his Silks and Stuffs, and if he find any Pieces unsealed,
seize and carry them away as forfeited (although but Remnants.)

This will beget multiplicity of Suits, occasion vast expenses, greatly
discourage Trade, hinder the importation of great quantities of those
Commodities which are the product of our manufacture of Wool, put the King to
a great charge to maintain Officers, to Seal, Stamp and Mark such Silks and
Stuffs; and instead of advancing the King's Revenue (which at present he has)
will prejudice the same above 20000 li. per annu^, by hindering the importation
of so great quantities of Silks and Stuffs as at present are imported, and
consequently the carrying (...) great quantities of Cloth, Stuffs, Searges,
Fish, Lead, and Tin, and oth^^ Commodities of the growth of our own Country
now exported, and which ^^ay the King a duty of Custom upon their going out;
the product of which (...) Silks and Stuffs imported as aforesaid, are.

Whilst all foreign Princes are contriving to facilitate and encourage Trade,
it is humbly hoped, nothing will be done in England to render the same
burthensom and difficult, if not altogether impossible to be carried on.

III. As to the Weavers desires, That all Silks and Stuffs made in London, or
within ten M^les, be brought to their Hall, there to be viewed, and Sealed, and
to pay for each Seal: and if any Piece be sold before Sealed, the Offerer or
Putter to Sale, or the Buyer, (if a Trader in that Commodity,) shall forfeit
for each Piece.

This, as is humbly conceived, is, under color and pretense of doing a public
good, a design of the Weavers to create to themselves a Monopoly by Act of
Parliament.

The end proposed by them, is to distinguish between foreign and our home-made
Silk and Stuffs, and to encourage the English to make better Work.

Will not every man make it his business to advance his own Interest and Trade,
by striving to make his Wares as good as he can, and if possible to exceed the
foraign-made, that so they being brought out of repute, he may himself have a
greater Trade?

The rather for that if he make not good Ware, he cannot sell, then must the
Silk-man never be paid; and what follows, but his Trade is thereby destroyed?

But they do not propose that the Seals shall not be affixed to any Pieces of
Stuffs or Silks that do not hold out the true length and breadth, or that is
otherwise deceitfully made; No, be they as false made, as slight, as short, as
narrow as they will, bring them but to Weavers-Hall and pay for a Seal, and
then a Stamp shall be put upon them equal to the best.

And it is to be feared, that in a short time the Weavers Seals and Marks, if
set up, will be sold by the like measures, and at as easy rates as the
Aulnagers Seals are, which at this day give a greater disturbance unto Country
people, and discouragement to the Woollen Manufacture, then any thing that is
on foot in England.

It is to be observed, That least the Weavers designs should be discovered, and
their intended Monopoly prevented, they have subtly taken off the Merchants
Objections by providing that all Foreign Stuffs and Silks shall be Sealed at
the Kings charge; but the home-made Silk, made by poor men that can hardly earn
bread for their Families, the sealing of these must be paid out of their
labors which design they had on foot in 1640. and having then got a Patent,
demanded sixpence a Piece for Seals; but that soon came to nothing.

It is humbly offered, that the inconveniency, charge and loss of time in
coming to the Hall with every Piece to be Sealed, will be great, and tend to
the poor Weavers utter Ruin.

For if this be granted, then let their Customer (as frequently now they are
forced to do) come to them for a Remnant of Stuff or Silk before the Piece be
fully wrought off, to match with any old Silk or Stuffs, or to Sell a pattern
for a Suit or Gown, he must not sell this before he goes to the Hall, and waits
(no man knows how long) there for a Seal; by means whereof he is hindered in his
work, and before he can return, the Mercer or his Customer is gone to some
other Shop; by which both Weaver and Mercer are greatly prejudiced, besides the
prejudice that a man shall sustain in discovering his inventions and patterns
too early.

IIII. As to the pains and penalties upon Counterfeiters of Seals and Stamps,
and Sealing of Foreign Commodities as Home-made, if the Seal be not
established, the penalties fall; if the Seals be established, the Law ought to
be obeyed. But it is prayed, that consideration may be taken of the severity of
the penalty imposed.

V. As to the desire that all Merchants in London, or within (...) Miles
thereof, having any Silks or Stuffs by them, should before (...) day of (...)
bring in each Piece containing ten Yards, or ^bove, to the Custom-house, or to
Weaver-Hall t^ be Sealed, without paying any thing for Sealing.

Th^^ is the most mischievous and unreasonable thing that can be imagined, very
hazardous and chargeable, and the greatest inconvenincy that can be invented to
fall upon Tradesmen.

For every man pays with a witness for Sealing, who shall be forced to send his
goods out of his Shop to Weavers-Hall, or the Custom-house, and pay for
carrying of them and bringing them back, and for Servants attending there till
they can be Sealed: besides the hazard and (which will be almost impossible to
prevent) the loss of many Odd Remnants, and disfurnishing his Shop, losing his
Trade for the time the goods are out of his possession, and perhap's his
Customers, for not having goods at home to furnish them with when they have
occasion; besides the damage that will come to their Wares by tumbling,
dirtying, sullying, and otherwise as aforesaid, it may prove greatly
prejudicial to the Creditors of such Tradesman who may of late have had great
losses, and are ready to fail; for how glad would such be of having an
opportunity, under color of carrying their Wares to be Sealed, to carry them
and themselves where they shall be out of their Creditors reach?

VI. The next thing desired, which relates to Canterbury, Norwich, Exeter,
Manchester, etc. their sealing their Wares, and Workmen that live far distant
in the Countries to bring their Wares to the next Corporation to be sealed.

How unreasonable and impracticable this will be, is left to Consideration. And
further, it is humbly offered, that it is utterly to destroy the poor Weaver
who lives remote from a Corporation; for now the Merchant or his Factor come to
their houses, take their Silks or Stuffs from them as they make them, and bring
their money home to their doors; but for the future, either the Weaver must be
without money till he has made a good number of pieces, or else ride to a
Corporation-Town with each piece he makes, there to be sealed; which may cost
him a days journey forward, and another backward, the Consequence is his ruin
by the loss of time from Work, the expense and charges of horse and man, and
the danger of lighting into Company, (which such poor men are too much addicted
unto,) and spending his money before he come home, to the impoverishing of his
Family, which by such means may at last come to be maintained by the Parish.

VII. As to the prohibition desired from the use of the broad great Tape-loom,
on pretense it hinders many people from Working which used to be employed in
single Loom, and make the Work the slighter, to the abusing and defrauding of
the Buyer.

It is humbly conceived, the Parliament of England will never pass an Act to
discourage Ingenuity, hinder Invention, or to prohibit a man from making use of
such Invention when found out, to confine one man that he shall do no more Work
than another, or that if a man can make 16 pieces of Tape or Ribbon together,
he shall make but one, whereby a young man that has no charge shall earn as
much as he that has a Wife and 12 Children to maintain: This seems
unreasonable, the rather for that by this Invention the Commodity may be made
as good and yet much cheaper, and enable England to furnish foreign parts
cheaper than they can make them. And with these Looms all Yarn from the Indies
is wrought off here, which otherwise must be sent into Holland to be
manufactured, from whence it would be returned at cheaper Rates then without
these Engines the same can be manufactured in England. These Looms have been
used above 60 years, many Families bred up to the use of them, that can use no
other.

If now put down, they and their Families are ruined, and great quantities of
the Yarn imported must be exported, to the great damage of the King in his
Customs. And which is worse, the English cannot transport the Manufactures
thereof, by reason they will be undersold by Foreigners.

When Printing was invented, did it not put an end too, or take much from
Writers employments; was Printing therefore prohibited?

Does not the Weaving of Silk-stockings take off from Knitting? is it therefore
(...) down?

VIII. As to what is desired, that a power may be put into any persons hand
suspe^^ing any French Lace or Ribbon in any House, Shop or Warehouse, that
trades in these Commodities by a Warrant from a Justice with a Constable in the
daytime, to come into s^^^h House, Shop or Warehouse, seize and take away such
Goods, deliver them to the Customhouse, there to be detained till the Owner
proves them made in England; which if he do, he shall have double Costs; if he
do not, the Goods to be forfeited.

If this should be granted, it would put a power into every Weaver or other
person that has any prejudice to a Shopkeeper, Mercer, Milliner or
Haberdasher, to ruin him at pleasure, come into his House upon suspicion
only, and without proving any thing against them, seize his Goods, carry them
out of his Shop, lodge them where it may not be in his power in four or five
months to have them back, because the Term may not come sooner; nay, perhaps
incapacitate him from ever having them, or being in a condition to prosecute
his right, by dis-furnishing his Shop, and thereby occasioning the loss of his
Trade and of his Customers for want of them; and when: he does recover them,
they may be out of fashion, and so lie dead on his hand. And it may go further,
namely to ruin him in his Credit and Reputation, and be the occasion that many
a man that lives by his Credit, his having all his Creditors fall upon him, to
his and his Families utter ruin.

It will be very hard to put this power into the hands of every Weaver or
Handicrafts Tradesman in London, and for their encouragement to give them two
third parts of the Penalties and Forfeitures, and the King only one, howbeit
it may have formerly been judged meet to be given to the Farmers and
Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs, persons of Credit and Reputation, that
cannot be imagined will do any ill thing out of prejudice to any particular
person.

And further this seems the harder, because it is put upon the Owner to prove
the Goods to be home-made; so that now every Shopkeeper whenever he buys a
piece of Tape or Ribbon, must put the Seller to prove and give Security that it
is not foreign-made; and if he should do so, that will not serve the turn,
unless he prove it so when it is seized. Suppose the Seller and the Buyer dead,
and the Commodities come to an Executor, how can they prove it? Milliners and
Haberdashers buy their Wares at their doors of the Weavers and Lace-men.
Suppose a Merchant employ English Weavers to sell French Goods, the Weaver
affirms them to be English Goods, the Shopkeeper buys them, they are
afterward seized, the Shopkeeper proving them to be bought of an English
Weaver, will not make them English Goods; the Weaver may be dead, or if alive,
he may upon his Oath swear they are French; the Buyer knew not of it, for that
he told (...) (^^king this to be the truth of the Case) must the Owner of those
Goods forfeit them. This seems unreasonable, and will tend to the destruction
of Trade, to the great disquiet of Tradesmen, and there can no way be found out
how a Shopkeeper shall deal safely with any Weaver or Lace-man for any of
those Commodities, if the Act desired shall be passed.

The pretense in the preamble of the Bills is, that Weaving is of great use to
the Kingdom, and so in truth it is. And that by frequent importation of
foreign-wrought Silks and Stuffs, (most of which are conveyed in without paying
of duty;) English Artists are impoverished, and the King of his duty defrauded.
This is a great mistake, for neither so many pieces of Silk, or so good, or of
such sorts as are worn here, can be made in England. And that the King is not
defrauded, will evidently appear by the Customs-books of London Dover and the
Out-Ports. If there be any discouragement to the Weavers, they are the
occasions of it themselves, in that notwithstanding they neither can make so
good Silks or Stuffs, or such sorts as are made beyond the Seas, yet they will
live higher and have double the Wages, and after all die poor, whilst
Foreigners by living upon hard Fare with half the Wages grows rich; and this is
the only reason that wrought Silk from beyond Seas are afforded cheaper then
home-made; So that upon ill these Accounts, it is humbly hoped the Bill will
not pass.


