REASONS Humbly offered to the Consideration of PARLIAMENT, why STOCK FISH and
Live EELS should be Imported into ENGLAND: Notwithstanding the same being at
present Prohibited by the ACT, which Prohibits the Importation of Irish CATTLE
and Foreign FISH.
Firstly,THE said Cod-fish, alias Stock Fish is Caught and Cured in Iseland,
which is in the King of Denmarks Dominions, and no where else; and is Cured
without Salt, by the Coldness of the Air and Frost; only which Fish is made use
of by all our Ships trading to the East and West Indies, Guinney, and other
parts, where no other sort of Fish will keep good, but decay. Secondly, The
said Stock Fish is never made use of in any other place then where our own Fish
spent, by the Stock Fish imported into the Kingdom; in as much as no Person
will Eat that if they can get our English Cod or Ling. Thirdly, This sort of
Fish is a bsolutely necessary for our Seamen; and is observed and allowed to
have been of great use and benefit to them, by preserving them in their long
Voyages from the Seurvey, which they are subject unto, by reason that all other
of their Provisions are extremely salt: So that diverse Commanders have affirmed
that for want of that sort of Fish, two thirds of their Men have in some
Voyages fallen down with the Seurvey, to that degree that they have hardly had
Men enough on Board able to stand on their Legs for managing their Sails.
Fourthly, If our Shipping cannot be furnished with Stock Fish here, they will
have it from other parts beyond the Seas, Holland, or some other places: And
therefore better for the English to Import it than Foreigners.
As for the Live Eels prohibited in the same Act, they are taken at or near
Copenhagen, within the said Kingdom of Denmark, and brought to London Market.

Firstly, The said Eels are taken in Fresh Water within the Land, and are of
the Natural Growth of that Country; and therefore no way prejudicial to the
Fishery of this Kingdom. Secondly, That the Trade of bringing Live Eels from
Denmark to London Market, is but for one Voyage in the year, which time is
about Michaelmass, and that but only for two Ships or Hoys which are built on
purpose for that Trade. Thirdly, That formerly (as Ancient Men Affirm) there
has been Fourteen Ships or Hoys at one time in the River of Thames (all
Foreigners) all which Eels were sold in London Market, although the number of
People then inhabiting in and about the City, not half so many as now; which
Places where those Ships or Hoys were Laden, are since drained, and great Towns
built in the room thereof. Fourthly, That our Fenns in England being now
drained also, there is not the hundredth part sufficient taken in England to
supply the Kingdom. And whereas there can be but two Ships employed upon that
Trade, if there were Lading to be had for more than twenty, they would be all
sold in London Market. Fifthly, That the aforesaid Trade of bringing live Eels
into London Market, has been Practiced time out of mind, as will appear by all
the Ancinet Mapps of the City of London, where you will find the Eel-Ships
always figured out in the River of Thames, lying at Anchor over against
Queenhithe. Sixthly, That the said Live Eels are Esteemed (as in Truth they
are) most Excellent Food (The Price being set by the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor of London) are bought and sold, at very reasonable Rates. Seventhly, That
the said Trade has heretofore been managed by Dutchmen who Sailed from Holland
to Denmark, and bought them there, and brought them to London Market, but is
now solely managed by the English, who are Fishmongers in London (No Forreigner
being concerned with them.) Eighthly, That the aforesaid Stock Fish and Eels
are the Returns and Effects of our own Manufactories and Growth of this
Kingdom, Our Woollen Cloth, Serges, Perpetuanes, Norwich Stuffs, Stockings,
Pewter, Cheese, and Spirits; going out of this Land in Exchange for the same.
Wherefore it is most humbly prayed, That the said Stock Fish and Live Eels may
be Imported, notwithstanding the Prohibitions aforesaid, or any new Act that
shall be made to perpetuate the aforesaid Acts.


