REASONS Humbly Offered for Placing his Highness The Prince of Orange Singly on
the THRONE, during Life.
I. IT will be a clear Assertion of the peoples Right, Firm Evidence of a
Contract broken, and a sure president of all Ages, when after a most Solemn
Debate, the Eftates of England Declare, That the King having Abdicated the
Government, and the Throne thereby Legally Vacant, They think fit to Fill it
again with One, who is not Immediate in the Line.

II. It will be a Caution to Succeding Kings of what Fatal Consequence a
general Derogation from the Laws may be, when they find, by this Instance, the
Exercise of the Kingly Office in danger, not only with the Reference to
Themselves, but precarious to their Family by the Mis-goverment. And
Generations to come shall praise our Conduct, when Reading the History of this
day, it appears we understood our Case: Had Honor and Honesty to maintain it,
and Wisdom enough to Transmit it perfect to our posterity.

III. It will be the highest Obligation upon the Two Princesses that can be
expected from sensible people; when, next to asserting our own Right, by a Fact
(which is absolutely necessary, and above other humane Arguments) They see
themselves of Inestimable Value with Us, by Recontinuing the Line in Remainder;
And that their own strict Adherence to the Protestant Religion and Interest,
out-weighs the Demerits of their Unhappy Father.

IV. The princess of Orange will share in all the Glory of a Crown, without the
trouble of it: Easy from popish Reflection, That She sits in her Fathers Throne
while he lives. And it concerns the Kingdom, as well as the Princes, to take
Care, That she be at Rest from those Solicitations on the behalf of Papists,
which under the Countenance of her Father, will perpetually Assault her Tender
Breasts: Nor is there any room for the Princes of Denmark to think Her self
neglected, the Exchange being attended with many Advantages, such as it would
be lost Time to Repeat, they are so very Obvious, and likewise too many for the
Compass of this paper.

V. If the Prince of Orange be not King in his own Right, His Interest cannot
be entirely Ours; For tho his Gallantry be an Assurance of Sincerity to Us;
yet, if there remain any probability of His returning into Holland, as upon the
Death of His Wife, if she only be Sovereign, His Interest must be divided; Nor
will it, according to the Art of Government, become the prudence of any Nation
to open the Secrets of their policy to One, whom they may be so Unfortunate, as
to part with into a Country that may possible Interfere with Us.

VI. It is dangerous to the Governmeet it self, to vest the Exercise of the
Sovereignty in Both; For they may differ in Sentiments of things, and if there
be a possibility of Division, it would be an unaccountable Weakness, and great
Oversight, not to secure our selves, in so important a point.

VII. It is Repugnant to grant the Crown to Both, and fix the administration in
one; for the Administration is an Incident inseparable from the Sovereignty. To
be a King or Queen, and not to have the Exercise of King or Queen, is a
Contradiction: a departure from all the Rules that were ever laid down in
Government, unless in case of Personal Incapacity, and therefore below a
Masculine way of Reasoning.

Lastly. It supports the noble Maxim. That a neighboring Nation may take Arms
to assist the Rescue of a people oppressed by Tyranny. And Foreign princes will
be apt to look into themselves, when they hear, by our Example of Gratitute,
That they are no longer Safe than Just to their Subjects.

Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


