REASONS OFFERED By a Well-wisher TO THE KING and KINGDOM, To some Justices of
the Peace Met at the Sessions in one of the Northern Shires, AGAINST ADDRESSING
to the KING WITH A PETITION For the Sitting of the Parliament. JANVARY ^6.
1679/80.
Now Published For the Justification of all those Loyal Persons, who opposed
the Petition in any parts of the Nation.
IF it be the undoubted Prerogative of the King to Call, Adjourn, Prorogue, and
Dissolve Parliaments at his Will and Pleasure; it is a high Impudence in any
Subject, or Assembly of men, to take upon them to Advise him (unasked) how and
when to execute his Power: for it concludes, that the Advisers or Petitioners
do believe that he is either so weak, as not to be able to judge when and how
it is fit for him to do it; or so ill a King, that he will not do it, when he
knows it is for the Advantage of himself and the Kingdom; and is in plain terms
to say, the King is either a Fool or a Knave: which if not High Treason, I am
sure is a violation of Duty, and a breach of good Manners. But to go on with
such an Advising Petition, when his express Proclamation does forbid any thing
of this nature, is a most superlative Insolence: Nor can all the formal words
used in such Addresses, of Humble, Dutiful, and Loyal, palliate for this
Wheedle, or make other construction, than that his loving, humble, and dutiful
Subjects do with all Modesty beseech him to permit them to share with him in
the most important Trust, and most eminent Mark of Sovereignty that God
Almighty has endowed him with.

Should the King, by any manner of Application, and with all the terms of
Kindness that words can express, send a gracious Message to the Parliament,
wherein he should advise them to part with any (though never so small a
Privilege) they would resent it to a strange degree. And is not the
Prerogative as dear to the King, as Privilege to the Parliament?

Let no Sophister say, that the Proclamation is not meant to intend this way of
Petitioning, by alleging, that it is the only lawful Means and Intercourse
'twixt the King and his People. It Is certain he meant this very way of
Petitioning; for till there was a previous Address from the Lords, and
Endeavors to get Hands to such Petitions, there was nothing heard of a
Proclamation: which when it appeared, did fully denote this very Method of
Petitioning, so fatal to his Father, and this Kingdom; and ought by all Loyal
Gentlement to be taken notice of as such.

I confess it is one of the worst things imaginable, to remember Injuries; but
it is as unpardonable a folly, to forget the Rock we have once shipwracked on,
and not to avoid it, when it is fully in our power so to do. It Is therefore
highly worth our note, what sort of men they are who first set this Business on
foot; not to reflect on any things they have done, but only to avoid being led
into a second Mischief.

Of the seventeen Lords, by whose order and in whose name the Address was
presented to the King, there is not one who either in himself or his Father,
can lay a claim to any honorable Service performed either to this King or his
Father, during the time of the late Rebellion; but on the contrary, I find
several of their Names subscribed to the Covenant; and have heard of most of
the rest under the names of Generals of Horse, Colonels and Commanders in the
late Rebellious Armies, or constant Sitters in the Rump, Committee of Safety,
and all Junctoes against the King. And if the late Wars were begun with
Petitions, and by these very men and their Fathers, it cannot but be advisable
by all Loyal Gentlemen what may be the end of their Petitions: And whether they
are set on foot for the Public Good by private men, or for private Ends with
the name of the Public.

An Enquiry were worth the while, Whereof some were old Officers, and others
Committee Men and Sequestrators, etc.
who they are that promote their Petitions in other Countries, and observe by
whom their Petitions are addressed from above to ours, or who are the men that
are most active in the prosecution amongst us; I am afraid we shall find as
few Loyal Gentlemen in the Country to better themselves, as we have found Lords
at London: And if any old Royalists appear, we shall find them either such as
are concerned in the late unheard of Vote about the Succession, or such as are
grown waspish that they are not better preferred for services bypast, and hope
to repair broken Fortunes by a public Ruin.

Since then this Undertaking is to Invade the Crown, Affront the Person of the
King, warranted by no President but such as begot Rebellion, nor led by any
body of eminent note for Loyalty, but rather on the contrary, expressly
forbidden by the King; (which is sufficient warning it self, were there no
other apprehensions of evil intentions;) it will become all persons who abhor
Sedition, and have an honor for the Royal Name, to obey the King's
Proclamation; the only way to secure the Peace of the Kingdom and their own.

FINIS.

