REASONS Humbly Offered TO HIS MAJESTY For His Dispensing with the OATH of
ALLEGIANCE As to his Highness The Duke of York: And for his Sitting in the
Council of Scotland Without taking the said OATH.

LONDON, Printed in Year 1680.

REASONS Offered to His Majesty for Dispensing with the Oath of Allegiance as
to his Highness the Duke of York, and for his Sitting in the Council of
Scotland without taking the said Oath.
BEcause First, It is certain that many positive Laws are dispensable, not only
in Cases not intended by the Legislators, which is the ordinary Interpretation
of Equity, but also where the Law is most express: this being that Relaxation
of Law which many supervenient considerations may plead for, and does in effect
as properly, and necessarily belong to His Majesty's Prerogative, and the due
Administration of the Government, as the power of Execution, which sometimes is
thereby more advantagiously superseeded.

Secondly, It is from this unquestionable Prerogative of Dispensing, that all
Respites, Remissions, special Privileges, Immunities, Indulgences, Non
obstantes, and the like, do clearly flow: These being as obviously given
without, nay, contrary to the precept of Law, as they are known every where to
be the most peculiar and reserved Marks of Soveranity.

Thirdly, Of these many Laws none known to be more dispensable than such as do
only enjoin an Oath, or Subscription for the greater public security, in as
much as His Majesty, Tanquam hic solus sustinens Personam et Authoritatem
Civitatis, is the only party, and consequently according to the undoubted
privilege of every party in whose favor any Law is conceaved and made, has as
absolutely the right of Dispensing, as that of Exacting.

Fourthly, The Laws commonly judged Indispensable are such as either are simply
Declarative, requiring no subsequent Execution, or concern the interest of
particular parties; so as their Contravention may prove a Grievance or Nuisance,
as English Lawyers term it. In which case no Dispensation can be validly
granted without the said parties consent; but so it is, that the Act enjoining
the Oath of Allegiance is no such Law, as is clear from its Tenor, and
therefore not Indispensable.

Fifthly, By the Fourth, and Seventh Acts of the Parliament 1661; It is
expressly Statuted and Declared, and that upon the ground of His Majesty's
undoubted Prerogative, and our ancient Laws establishing the same, That all
public Oaths concerning the Government of the Church or Kingdom, do depend
upon his Majesty's special Warrant and approbation: Now by all Law and reason
in the World, the power of approving, disproving, or dispensing are inseparably
connected.

Sixthly, The very Tenor of the Act for taking the Oath of Allegiance Act XI.
Parliament 1661. obtruded in this case to his Highness, offers a plain
solution of the Question, in as much as it is His Majesty alone, without
Concurrence of the States, conformable to His Royal Prerogative, who therein
declares that he will be careful that such as he shall think fit to call to
His Council shall be duly qualified, and that they shall give full assurance
thereof by their public Testimony: and all the part of the Estates in that
Act, is merely to consent for the Peoples Interest, whose liberty His Majesty
would not impose upon without such a consent, that the Oath of Allegiance shall
be that public Testimony: So that it is manifest, that by that Act His
Majesty's sole Prerogative of either approving or dispensing with this Oath of
Allegiance, or any other of that nature, is rather established than in the
least impeached.

Seventhly, His Highness is not so much as Comprehended or concerned in the
very terms of the Act; forasmuch as the Act is only made for such as His
Majesty shall nominate to be of His Privy Council: which clearly imports that
the Act was only intended for such as having no other right than his Majesty's
Call and Nomination to enter in Council, might very justly be required to give
the foresaid evidence of their Loyalty: But as to his Highness, whose Royal
Blood, Birth and Breath, do also Nearly, and mightily Oblidge Him, and assure
His perpetual Loyalty; It is very evident that to demand of him this Test,
would not be more derogatory to His Royal dignity than contrary to the very
intention of the Act. And thus every where it is observed, That Princes of the
Blood are exempted from all such Oaths.

Eighthly, This same Act impowers His Majesty's Council to require or forbear
all other Persons, as to the taking of this Oath, as they should think fit: And
shall so much be put in the Councils power, and yet His Majesty's power to
forbear His only Brother, Controverted?

Ninthly, All Histories almost tell us that the dispensing with Oaths of this
nature has ever been judged the Prerogative of Princes; wherein they have some
times gone so far, as for the more signal acknowledgment of some particular
Persons fidelity, to grant them the privilege of being admitted both Witnesses
and Jurours, etiam Injurati: how much more then ought His Majesty's pleasure in
the case in hand be received as an absolute determination.

Tenthly, His Majesty by virtue of His Royal Prerogative has in favor of
Nonconformists dispensed with a great many and most positive Acts of Parliament
made for Conformity and against Nonconformists: With what color then can His
Majesty's Prerogative in this case of his Royal Highness, every way infinitely
more favorable, in the least be called in question? Neither can it be said,
that by the same Acts power is given to His Majesty to suspend their Execution,
in respect that it is evident that His power of suspending is only expressed in
two particular Acts, and as to the special Pains therein contained; but has no
reference to any other Acts and things with which his Majesty has been pleased
to dispense, as said is, in behalf of that People. 2dly. It is yet more
apparent, that the reference made in the said Acts to His Majesty for
continuing or discontinuing the same, is not done by way of any addition to His
Majesty's power and Prerogative Royal: But clearly on the supposition, that as
the Execution so the Suspension or Dispensation with all such Acts appertains
to His Majesty, as an inherent and unquestionable Prerogative of the Crown; so
that this reference here expressed does rather import the same to be in every
such Act naturally implied.

Eleventhly, It is notoriously known, that even Magistrates of Edinburgh have
been Connived at by the Council as to these Oaths, albeit they be clearly
included in the Statute; How much less then can His Majesty's Prerogative of
dispensing therewith be called in question?

FINIS.

