REASONS FOR THE TRIAL OF THE Earl of Torrington BY IMPEACHMENT BY THE Commons
in Parliament, Rather than any other Way.
THat the Nation is Obliged in Honor, Justice, and Prudence, to have the
Miscarriage of our Fleet in the late Action at Sea, thoroughly Examined, and
duly Punished, I presume no Man will deny.

And as to the Question, Which way this May and Ought to be done?

That it May be done in Parliament, I conceive cannot be denied, without
supposing a very great Defect in the Constitution of our Government; as if it
were not sufficient to correct so notorious a Miscarriage: and I know none who
do deny it.

And that it Ought to be done at the Prosecution of the Commons, I am clear of
Opinion, for these Reasons:

I. That Way is Plain, and free from all those Doubts and Questions, which may
arise upon the Stat. of H3. C. 2. or and other Statute.

II. It being a Case, wherein not only this Nation, but many other States, viz.
all our Confederates, are concerned, it ought in Honor and Respect to them to
have the most Solemn Determination that may be; and not be left to the
Determination of any Inferior Authority; as if the Miscarriage of some
ordinary Officer, or some Cause of common or ordinary Concern was to be
determined.

III. It is notoriously known to be the Desire and Expectation not only of the
Seamen, but generally of the People of this Nation, that Justice be done in
this Case; and therefore their Representatives, who are Elected and Entrusted
to act for them, are obliged to demand Right on their behalf in a Case of so
great Importance: And the Neglect hereof may justly be resented by those who
chose them.

IV. The Hononur of the State and Government is concerned to express their just
Resentment of so great a Dishonor done to both Nations: And it might be looked
upon as a plain Indication of Unsettledness and Disagreement among our selves,
if both Houses do not declare their Unanimity therein.

To these may be added,

V. Whereas Punishments do principally respect the Future, to prevent the like
Mischiefs for the time to come; and it is more than possible that so great a
Crime was not committed without some Temptation from others; It is therefore
possible that the Admiral may be able by some Discoveries to do such Service to
the King and Nation, as may in part expiate his Crime, and deserve such
Mitigation of the Sentence, as is out of the Power of an Inferior Court, and
fit to be considered only in Parliament.

VI. It being a Crime of so great Public Concern, and He being a Person of
that Quality, it is fit the Trial should be, not on a Ship at Sea, where few
Persons can come, but as public as may be, in the View of all People, that the
Justice of the Proceedings may be visible to all; that so the People may have
no Cause to Murmur and Complain in case he be acquitted, nor He or his Friends
have the Confidence to do it in case he be Condemned.

VII. Of the Officers in the Fleet, those who fought not are generally
suspected by the Seamen and the People; and those who fought it is likely may be
suspected by him and his Friends: So that of them it will be hard to select
such as are free from all Suspicion of Partiality on the one side or the other.

VIII. The Motion in the House for Trial by Impeachment in the Name of the
Commons of England, may be of good Use to discover the Disposition of many
Members of Parliament to the Common Cause; and give tbe People, who are
generally well affected to it, occasion to make a better Choice of some of
their Representatives another time.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is Newly Published A Plain Relation of the Late Action at Sea, between
the English and Dutch and the French Fleets, from June 22. to July 5. last,
with Reflections thereupon, and upon the present State of the Nation, etc.
Price 1 s. Sold by J. Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey. 1690.


