A Real Demonstration Of the TRUE ORDER IN The Spirit of God, And of the GROUND
OF ALL Formality and Idolatry WITH A few words unto such as are concerned in it.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1663.

A Real Demonstration of the true Order in the Spirit of God, and of the Ground
of all Formality and Idolatry.
THe inspiration of the Almighty gives knowledge, and thereby man comes to
understand the things that are of God, and to be acquainted with the movings of
the Life which does produce the order of God, and so comes to know the times
and seasons, which the Father has in his own hand, and to observe them
according to the good pleasure of his will, and to his honor praise, and
glory; and such times and seasons so observed, as by the movings of the Life,
they stand in the liberty of the Life, and are not formal in practice; for as
the Author of them is God, so the observation is in obedience to his Will, in
which he orders his children according to his pleasure therein: So that
formality and Idolatry does not stand in this ground, though as to times,
seasons, and practice there be a diligent observation in the same manner, for
to meet together in the fear of God, according to the will and wisdom of God,
it is neither formal nor idolatrous, though a day, time, and place be observed;
neither is it like the traditional observations, which only stands in the vain
customs, for the Author is God, and the movings of his Life disposes in it, and
the children of light are ordered in his will and time, and not in their own,
and they are not limited to a day, time, place, or person, but as they are
ordered in the Fathers will, even so they are disposed, as their practice does
clearly manifest. So that neither formality nor idolatry can stand in this
principle which is of God, nor in this practice which stands in the order of
God, but he alone is served, worshipped and honored by the birth of his own
Life, which in his strength delights to do his will, and seeks his Glory alone;
and though there may be some who are not so fully acquainted with the leadings
and drawings of the Life, as to be wholly ordered and disposed by it in what
they practice, and so may give too much to the observation, and settle
themselves in what is practiced out of the feeling of the Life and Power, yet
this does not at all make the order in the Life to be either formal or
idolatrous, neither is any to withdraw from it, because that some in weakness
may fall short in understanding, and esteem the thing done above that which
leads to do it; for it is to be considered, that if a thing lawful in it self
be abused, yet such abuse does not make void the right use of it, neither is it
to be laid waste as a thing which in it self is evil, but the abuse is to be
removed by a clear information to the understanding of such as do abuse it, and
the thing to be kept unto (as good in its place) by such as know how to use it
aright. So that the assembling together in the fear of God, the declaration of
truth in the movings of God, putting off the Hatt in prayer, when performed by
the Spirit of God, giving the Hand in the Unity of the love of God, they are
not to be denied as they stand in the order of God, for in so doing it is to
lay wast and destroy such things as are ordained of God, and altogether void of
formality and idolatry, being observed as unto God, in the order of his own
Life, and nothing aimed at thereby, but simply his Glory alone; and it is most
certain, that being so observed, they that observe them are justified and not
condemned of God; and that they are so observed by all the children of light,
the witness of God does clear their innocence, and seals unto them everlasting
peace therein.

Now seeing that neither formality nor idolatry can be found in the holy order
of the Life of God, nor amongst the children and heirs of his Kingdom, then it
is to be considered from what ground all formality and idolatry does arise,
that so none may err from the Life, and the holy order in it, under pretense
of Forms and Idols. This therefore is to be understood, that every Form and
Idol has a beginning, and so has its rise and production from the ground of
its conception, and that ground is the wisdom below (mark) below the Life,
below the Power, below the wisdom from above, and the mind being taken with
that spirit, it ravins from the Spirit of God, and thereby the Imaginations are
let at liberty, and by a continual motion contracteth the airy property, and so
forms a likeness as the wisdom below inventeth, and then produces it in
various manners and several appearances, and always in its likeness it has
some show of godliness, and offers with it a higher attainment of more perfect
liberty: And this is the very ground of deceivableness, which stands in
darkness, out of the Light and Power of God; and hence arises all the various
appearances in practice; one has its form in one manner, and another differs;
some glory only in their appearance, others will have no appearance at all; and
all these things are closed with, as more excellent and of higher concernment
than what is practiced in the power of God. And here lies the deep deceit of
the transforming spirit, because it offers its likeness in a show of godliness,
and a higher attainment of liberty and innocence, when indeed the birth which
is formed by it, is the greatest burden and bondage to the birth of God; and
where this spirit is in motion, there cannot be any thing either formed
inwardly, and there only set up, or produced outwardly, and there set up, but a
bare likeness, altogether void of the nature and substance of the true Seed, in
which alone the express Image of the Father is made manifest, and the
brightness of his Glory revealed. And as this spirit prevails over any, and
persuades their minds that the order in Gods Spirit is formal and idolatrous,
and that they are attained, or waiting to attain a higher state of liberty,
either by laying all things inward, or producing something more excellent in the
outward, it does certainly turn their backs upon the Truth, and vainly puffs
them up under a show of humility: And this is the very spirit of all formality
and idolatry, of what nature soever, whether it be an Idol within, or an Idol
without, it always works and forms its likeness in a show of godliness,
and that is the Mystery, for if it was not so, it could not bring any thing to
pass, for none that pretends to godliness would close with any thing that has
not a show of it; and so this spirit will cry against the order in Gods Spirit,
as a Form, and as an Idol, and offer some other thing as more free or
unlimited, whilst in its very motion it has an Idol in conception, and cries
against that which is true to make way for its production; for whatsoever is
generated by Imagination in the airy contraction, it is nothing but a dead
Idol, and can neither help it self, nor those that trust in it; and it is most
certain, that where the minds of any are carried about by the motion of this
spirit and sets up the thing which is generated and formed by it, either inward
or outward, they set up an Idol, and come into captivity under the power of
formality, though in that very state they may pretend the highest liberty. Oh
that all who are concerned in this matter would lay it to heart, and ponder it
seriously; for certainly this information is tenderly manifested to you, and
happy will it be for such as take warning in time, and come to a due trial and
examination in the true spirit of Judgment, and look not over things slightly,
but sink to the witness of God, which will distinguish the birth born of God
from all Forms and Idols.

Friends, A necessity is laid upon me to speak plainly to you in the counsel of
the Lord; for the plain simple birth cannot heal any thing but that which is of
its own nature; it can neither feignedly nor slatteringly please the false
birth, nor insinuate into the affections of any by an uncertain message of
peace; it is the alone healer of the bruised indeed, but cannot strengthen that
spirit by which the Seed is oppressed; that which can do so is the manpleaser,
and creeps into the affection through a seeming condescension to the poor and
weak, by which the false birth is more encouraged, and the bruised more heavily
oppressed, and so the selfdenial man is strengthened in his selfish conceit,
under a show of selfdenial: This spirit has not the line of true Judgment, it
cannot fathom the depths where the poor lies afflicted, and the bruised
distressed, and the weak helpless, nor has no true oil to pour into the wound
of Israel, but only helps the Beast to heal his wound, which is to be wounded
unto death. Friends, The end of my labor is to restore the lost Sheep of the
House of Israel, who are led astray by the fair shows of feigned spirits; and
whether you will hear or forbear, I shall have a witness in you, for nothing is
in my heart but good will to your souls; and if so you can receive it, and come
to profit by it, let God have the glory over all, and the man's name be buried
in silence. Therefore let your ear be open to that of God in you, and consider,
is it not sad and grievous, when the love of God is so much professed, and that
which is of it denied and dis-owned, and that which is contrary to it, received
and nourished? I shall leave the particulars to be distinguished unto you by
the witness of God in you; but this is a certain truth concerning you, that you
are gone from the sure Foundation, and are become as waves of the Sea, which
have their course and motion which way the wind blows. What a sad captivity
are you fallen into, who are fallen from serving the living God in his own way,
to serve a painted Idol of your own making? and gives the honor and renown
unto it, as if it was the only son, when indeed it is nothing but an Idol born
of the flesh, and painted over with the choycest colors of that nature, and
being of that nature in the ground it is an Idol, though it will not be limited
to any outward observation. But the birth of the Royal Seed, is the Glory of
the only begotten of the Father, and in its order is without limitation, though
in practice it daily and hourly observes the same thing.

Well Friends, I have great heaviness and sorrow in my heart concerning many of
you, who in the day of your visitation did begin well, but how you are turned
aside, I believe you do not understand; and therefore my compassion is much
more toward you, who in your simplicity are ensnared, for the zeal of your
affections ran you out of the stayedness, and so you became enamoured with a
fair show, and eagerly closed in with it as some higher manifestation; and here
your eye became darkened with the enamoured part, and then the net you could not
see, and so was simply taken in the heat of your affections; and it being so,
you must submit to the power of God in the silence of all flesh, and if so you
do, the power will deliver you, and again restore you into the fellowship of
the Gospel.

So Friends, this is the counsel of the Lord God unto you, Make nothing to your
selves, but wait in stillness and quietness, not out of words only, but out of
thoughts and imaginations also, for there all flesh comes into silence; and in
so waiting upon the Lord God, he will abolish your Idols with all their glory,
and root out the ground of their conception; and if you so stand submitted to
his power, he will surely heal you, and freely love you: And be not so wise in
your own eyes, for you are below, and your intelligence and motions are from
that nature, and the birth of life sits sorrowing as a Babe without comfort;
let it give answer, and speak for it self, and then shall these sayings be
found true and faithful.

And Friends, What would you do by the things that you hold forth? would you
shadow the Sun from shining? or keep the showers from falling, and the Seed
from blossoming, and the Vine from yielding increase? would you so limit the
life, as the streams of it should not run, or so enclose the love of God, as
that it should not break forth? if you say, nay, these are the things that we
would have to be; then what means your crying out against the glorious
dispensation of God, and the order in it? and what means all your reflections
upon Gods chosen Heritage, as if death had swallowed them all up, and as if
they had lost the compassion and tenderness and virtue, which once they had,
and apprehends that you only have retained it? Nay Friends, that which was once
in the Life of God, is still the same amongst his children, and in the
resurrection of it they have a sweet increase, and to that of God in all it is
the same as ever, and they are not seeking themselves and their own glory, but
are seeking the good of all, and the Glory of God in all; but you have lost
your strength who are gone from the power of God, and so you savor not the
things that are of God, that when compassion is manifested toward you, yet you
cannot receive it, except it close in with you, and so you turn away your ear
from the counsel of the Lord, as if no compassion or tenderness did remain, in
his children; and thus you are drawn off from them, and entertains hard
thoughts of them, when their love and good will is the same to your souls as
ever: And this I am sure, that you have increased the travel of many, though
some of you do little regard it.

And Friends, the Seed is known in the inward, and the fruit of it is manifest
in the outward, and thereby the Father is glorified, and they that have taken
foot downwards, and are truly changed into the nature of the Seed, through the
dislolution and death of the first body, they again spring upwards in the
resurrection and life, and as the first born of life they show forth living
praise in perfect innocence. And Friends, I am not ignorant of that spirit
which has ensnared you, but certainly knows from whence it comes, and whither
it goes, and the end of it, and I know that it is not of God, nor never must
have any part in his Kingdom; and therefore I travel in the true Spirit of
love, which is the Spirit ofGod, that such of you as are turned aside may not
so turn your backs upon the Lord, as to cause him utterly to cast you off, but
that you may speedily return unto him, who in his long-suffering and patience
waits that he may be gracious.

Therefore let your diligence be improved in watchfulness, and wait that you
may be of understanding hearts, and publish no more than you perfectly
understand in the will of God, for that will neither profit your selves nor
others. You have given so much life to the false birth by some of your writings,
as that the beasts of the field rise up to trample upon the precious truth of
God; consider of this, for it will fall heavy in the latter end; for it is an
easy matter to get words, and to make a flourish in them, as though some more
excellent thing was attained, and it is as easy a matter to cry down words, as
a dispensation below the Life; but to declare words in the Life, or come to
silence in the life, and perfectly understand that it is so ordered by the Life
in both, this is such a secret as from the fleshly birth is hid, but the true
babes can sit and read it in the Fathers bosom.

Oh it is a grief to the good Spirit of God, to behold how words fly abroad, as
if people would prevail with their tongues, and host with words some are crying
down words, and endeavoring to lay aside that dispensation, as being come to
its period, not considering that the love and life of God has its passage
through the Vessel where he pleases, and that the words are from the Word
which is not to be limited. I only justify the innocent herein, who in the
Fathers will and time are ordered; but such of you as can allow your own
liberty in words, and through the same hold forth an attainment above them, you
have your time in your own hand, and whilst you speak of all the precious
virtues of the innocent life, which are many, yet with the same breath some of
you are not afraid to speak rashly (if not evil) of such as are born of it, and
are clothed with it, who as noble Plants and Trees of righteousness, which the
Father has planted, do bear ripe fruit to his endless Glory, unto whom you
must come again, who are gone from them, if ever you come to enjoy ^ue peace,
for there is no whither else to go, where true peace rest and happiness can be
found or attained. And herein I have cleared my Conscience in the Fathers will,
in whose will I speak, and in whose will I am silent, both lying down and
rising up in his pleasure, desiring that what is here manifested in his will,
may not be rejected in your wills, but that it may reach the meek and lowly in
you, and so be accepted by you as the loving kindness of the Lord, and be
entertained in that love from which it does proceed, which is the love that
bears all things, and thinks not ill in any thing.

WILLIAM SMITH.

IN the movings of pure love, I most earnestly beseech and entreat you all,
that in time you be warned, and take heed of that spirit which in time past
betrayed the innocent with a kiss, and in these days does take to it self a
term of general love to all, and also pretends a liberty in an inward ground,
which is not to be limited to any outward thing; which spirit from a good
understanding I do declare to be in the ground thereof the general and very
enmity unto the begotten of God in all, under which many tender hearts in their
simplicity may lie captivated, and as yet understand it not, even as once it
was with me, until I was so far benighted, that as that spirit transformed into
light, I in the darkness wandered after it, but finding that it led to no true
rest, the innocent cried unto its God, and his ear was open unto it, and by his
grace I now am that I am; and that I now am is the same which in measure I was
in the beginning, when the begotten of God in me simply breathed after him, and
I have now true unity in the Faith with the chosen of God, and with them do
partake of his virtuous life, in the sense of which, I desire that you may
speedily return unto your first love, in which is true joy (...) everlasting
peace, which no transformed spirit has to give, nor power to take away. I
could have spoken more fully in particulars, but a clear information is
manifested unto you, who have an ear to hear, and I am at present eased, and
rests in the will of God.

ELISABETH NEVVTON.

IN the unity of the love and life of God, we do give in our testimony for God,
having our selves been sometimes in bondage unto that spirit which leads into a
liberty out of the order of God; and in that state we looked upon our selves to
be in an inward ground, and looked upon such as with the true Light was guided,
to be more formal and legal in what they practiced, and to be no higher than
Moses administration; and here we had laid an inward g^^^d in a wrong spirit,
and our belief was placed in it, wherein we could allow to our selves the
liberty of using or not using such things as stood in outward practice, and
looked upon them all to be far below our liberty; but under our liberty the
innocent sat in sorrow, and such was the love of God unto us, as in due time
his own Arm reached to the oppressed, and his right hand has done valiantly
for us, and mighty things he has brought to pass, and in his Light we are
gathered amongst the Babes of his Kingdom, where we have a part and portion in
his peace and blessing: And therefore in faithfulness unto God, and in love to
your souls, we warn you all, who, with this spirit is taken, to submit to the
power and spirit of life, and fly from this spirit as from your deadly enemy,
that so you may obtain favor with the Lord whilst his love is to you, which we
tenderly desire, that so it may be with you.

Nottingham, the 11. mon. 1663. John Reckless Martha Plats. Sarah Watsone.
Hannah Reckless. Prudence Harding.


GOd in his everlasting love to man in the Fall, has sent his Son Christ Jesus
(and has made him manifest in man) to be the Light of man, and to lead man out
of the Fall, up to God, and this Son of God is the second Adam, the Lord from
Heaven, who is the quickening Spirit, by which eternal Spirit the souls of his
people are quickened and made alive unto God; and it is by the same Spirit that
they are fed and nourished, and kept alive unto him, in his own righteousness;
and this holy Spirit is their guide and leader into all truth, and whatsoever
this Spirit leads into, therein they are justified of God, and not in any
other thing; and when this Spirit leads the birth of its own begetting to
appoint a meeting, it is for God, and in what place soever it does appoint a
meeting, it is lawful for the people of God, who live in this Spirit, to go
thereunto, or for any others, if it be day after day, or time after time; it
being appointed by the Spirit of the Lord, it is justified by the Lord, and the
Power and holy Life which is in Jesus does accompany such meetings, for they
meet in the Name and Truth of the Lord. These are those who are born of the
Royal Seed, and God is feeding them with the holy Bread of life; and if any
find but so much as a hunger or desire in their souls after the living Bread,
they are to go to that blessed assembly where the living Bread is broken, and
where the Lords people is met together; for that Life which is manifested in
them cries come, to all the thirsty; and all that come, in-no-wise will he turn
them away unsatisfied: So all that come, although they be but weak, the Lord
will strengthen them; or hungry, yet he will feed them; or thirsty, he has
water to give unto them, for unto such his cry is. And when the Lord does
satisfy the soul in the assembly of his people, and meeting, then thy soul
will be zealous for that meeting, because thou have met with the Lord to
satisfy thee: And it is not the outward place, or time, or days, that thou will cry up, but thou will cry up that which has answered the desire of thy
soul, and that meeting in which God is so much manifested, for thy meeting is
in the Spirit and Truth, which was before days, or time, or place was; yet thou
cannot be against the time, or days (or place where the people of God meet)
because they are in the Fathers hand; and the people of God, who are led by the
Spirit of God, they know the place and day, which God has appointed for them
to live, and walk, and assemble in; and this is the heavenly place in Christ
Jesus, and they who live in this, they have the refreshing presence of God with
them, at all times, and in all outward places, wheresoever their gathering is;
and this is that standing meeting, which none (who knows it) are to withdraw
from.

And now Friends, you that know the travel of your souls, and have a sense and
feeling that Christ is formed in you, dwell and abide in him who is formed, and
in this form the Life and Power of God dwells and abides for ever; for as every
one does know Gods righteousness to be put on, so as that they feel themselves
to stand in it, and it to cover them, here they are in the thing formed, and so
take the form upon them, which is godliness, and the power of God is with them,
and does uphold them, and the Spi it of God is in them, and justifies them in
this form; and in this you will know what Christ took upon him, while he was in
the flesh, and thou must not be greater than thy Master, but thou art in all
things to obey him, and to do his will: So will thou feel the mind of Christ in
thee to lead thee into that form and path he walked in; for he went to one
place several times to preach and teach; and this was not a dead form, but that
form in which the power of God was manifested. And therefore, do thou not
know, that these backsliders, who now cry against our meetings as formal
(though the power of God is with us) would, if they had been in Christ's days,
have cried against him, when he took upon him the form of a servant? And is not
this the spirit of the Pharisees, who condemned Christ, and now his Disciples,
being they are turned against him, and would be set up themselves? and this
spirit is one with that spirit in the world against our meetings, the one with
reviling words, and the other with wicked actions, and they are both one in the
ground, and sees no comeliness in Christ the Truth, because they are out of the
Light, in which he dwells; but to all who dwell and walk in the Light, he is
very comely and beautiful, and very glorious, beyond what they can speak of him.
Therefore dear Friends, whose being is in Christ with God, unto you my love and
soul is much obliged, and my desire it, that you all may be preserved in the
precious truth, even to the end, and that it may ever be unto you beautiful and
delectable to your sight, and that you may faithfully meet in his Name, and
feel the God of all consolation and comforts amongst you, daily to stren^then
and refresh you with his living mercies, and that you in his grace may grow as
plants of his renown, to bring forth fruit to the glory of God for ever; and
beware of that spirit which would draw you from meetings, for it is an enemy to
the Church of the firstborn whose being is in God, and in whom my habitation
is, who am

Your Dear Brother, JOHN MOON.

THE END.

