Reasons humbly offered to be considered before the Act for Printing be renewed
(unless with Alterations) viz. for Freedom of Trade in Lawful Books, and
setting severe Penalties on Scandalous and Seditious Books against the
Government.
THE Trade of Printing has been an Ancient Manufacture of this Kingdom (and as
such) fit to be Encouraged for the public good; yet by that Act, and the great
Powers thereby given, or at least colourably thence taken, by the Masters and
Wardens of the Stationers Company and other Patentees, to the very great
Prejudice, and public Damage of the Nation, by inhauncing the Price of Books,
and also to the Impoverishment of the generality of the Members of that
Company, viz. Printers, Booksellers, Book-binders, Haberdashers and several
other considerable Traders, who have been thereby restrained from the most
beneficial part of their Ancient Trade and Right by their Apprenticeship.

King James I. about the thirteenth Year of his Reign, granted to the Master,
Wardens and Comminalty of the Mystery of Stationers, London, a Patent of
Privilege to Print, Utter and Sell all manner of Primers, Psalters, Psalms,
Almanacks, and several other Books, for ever, with a Clause of Prohibition to
all others; therein also giving Power to the said Master, Wardens and
Assistants to make Bylaws for the management of the said Patent; who have so
effectually contrived their own Profit therein, that for thirty Years last past
they have constantly divided above 12 l. per cent. yearly, besides other
frequent and more private Dividends, and extravagantly chargable Feastings, out
of the Profits of the thus monopolized Trade (excluding the generality of the
Members of that Company from any Benefit of the said Patent, though it was
granted to the whole Body.)

In the year 1662. they did, by the Solicitation of Sir R. Lestrange, obtain
the said Act, under the specious Color of Preventing Seditious, Scandalous,
and Treasonable Books, etc. which indeed was principally by them designed to
support their intended Monopoly; for in a very short Time after they purchased
into their Hands several other Patents, which they had set Agents on to beg of
the then King: To purchase which Patents they have engaged the Corporations
Inheritance, and brought a Rentcharge thereon to almost 600 l. per ann. to the
very great Injury of the Corporation in general, to serve a particular End. And
then confederating with other Patentees, Bibles and the generality of other
Books of public and general use were got into Patents, and that so
comprehensive, that near seventy several Books were got into one Patent, and
thereby advanced to above double the Price they were sold for before. And to
secure their Monopoly from expiring, and to tie up the Crown therein from
investing any others during that Time, they obtained two or three Patents for
the same Books, to take place in Reversion almost to an hundred Years to come.
Our own Printers being thus restrained, the greatest part of the Printing-trade
was carried hence into Holland, viz. English Bibles, Common Prayer Books,
Testaments, Psalters, Grammars, Almanacks, and multitudes of other Books of
general and perpetual use, and from thence exported to all our Foreign
Plantations, Ireland, Scotland, and also hither, for the gain of above cent.
per cent. to the Traders therein.

Vast Quantities of these Books have been seized by these Patentees, who
besides Seizure, did also prosecute the Persons in whose Hands they found them,
by virtue of the said Act; and thereby extorted exorbitant Sums of Money, beyond
the Penalty of the said Act, they having taken Care to have the Penalty of
their thus monopoliz'd Books ascertained by the said Act, the Penalty being 6
s. 8 d. per Book: But Seditious and Treasonable Books they were thereby only
charged as an Offense against the said Act, which was an Offense by other Laws
before that Act, and will be so when it is expired.

These Patentees, after having, as aforesaid, by Seizure amassed great numbers
of these Holland printed Books, they on purpose forbear to furnish the Market
with the same of their own Printing (all other Printers being by the said Act
restrained from that part of Trade) have to a thus empty Market sold again the
said seized Books; and have further reseized the very same Books themselves
sold, and likewise prosecuted the Persons again in whose Hands they found them,
extorting from them the Penalty of the said Act of 6 s 8 d. to the utter Ruin
of many considerable Merchants and other Traders. They having procured an Agent
of their own (whom, for his Encouragement, they made Partner in this their
Monopoly) to be made Messenger of the Press, under the specious Pretense of
serving the Government in suppressing Seditious Books; which was only a Color
to carry on the Ends aforesaid.

They joined together, and bought three Horses, and sent the Clark and Beadle,
the Servants of the Master and Wardens, and a Secretary's Messenger, to ride
all England over, to seize on the Books in their Patents, which they alleged
to be counterfeit; Who did seize accordingly, though on many of such as were of
their own Printing: And after two or three Months Ravage they returned back,
giving an Account to the said Master and Wardens, and the other Patentees, what
Books, and from whom they had seized them. These Patentees sent Writs out of
the Exchequer and King's Bench to prosecute the Persons from whom they had
seized, upon the Penalty of the said Act (many of which) Books, thus seized,
had been before sold by the Plaintiffs, in the Prosecution; and did force
exorbitant Compositions.

Mr. John Jekil stood Trial for about 25 Bibles, before Judge Hales, and was
cast upon the said Act, and paid 6 s 8 d per Book for the Bible to one
Patentee, and 6 s 8 d. per Book for the Psalms to the other Patentees; though
but one Book, yet thus divided, made two Penalties, Mr. Jekil paid about fifty
Pounds Costs and Forfeitures. How many Times these Bibles had been seized
before they came to Mr. Jekil's Hand, and how many times they have been sold
and seized since is worthy consideration; and this practiced under the
Authority of that Act.

The Noise of Mr. Jekil's Judgment upon his Trial, coming abroad into the
Countries, to the Knowledge of those prosecuted there, frighted them so that
some came up to Town, and others sent to their Correspondents and Friends here,
to compound with the Prosecutors at any Rate; whose Composition was usually 6 s
8 d per Book, and 40 or 50 Shillings for pretended Charge of Seizure and
Prosecution: But if a Bible had the Common Prayer in it, then there were three
times 6 s 8 d. Composition Money, viz. Bible, Common Prayer and Psalms; how much
of which has come to the King (half being his due) the Records thereof in the
Exchequer may show.

It is suggested in the said Act, That the Trade of Printing is overcharged
with Printers, and therefore fit to have their Number retrenched; which is
Enacted accordingly thereby.

To which is humbly supposed, That if the Manufacture of Printing were left
free, as other Trades, it would employ above double the number of Printers that
are in England, and that on Lawful Work too. For, since the Year 1662. (when
the Act was made) there have more English Bibles, and other English Books, been
printed in Holland, by one Athias a Jew, (among many other Printers there) than
have been printed by any four Printers in England in that Time; which
Holland-printed English Books have been merchandized to us, and to the King's
Subjects in our Plantations abroad, which might have been so done from hence,
had they been afforded here at the same reasonable Rates: Which they might have
been had the Trade been free. Freedom of Printing here would soon produce a
Manufacture to export as well to our Plantations as to those very Countries who
now furnish us and them, whereby the King's Customs would be advanced by Paper
imported and Books exported, the Merchant enriched, and the Printer and
Bookbinder, and many other Trades employed, which by these Monopolies have been
hitherto frustrated. These Books being prohibited are always imported by
Stealth, so that the King is always defrauded in his Customs.

The Government of all the Printing in England (except the two Universities) is
by the said Act vested into the Hands of the said Master and Wardens, who to
gain the Universities also into their Hands have farmed the whole Printing in
Cambridg: And in the year 1688. did petition King James (under pretense to be
enabled to suppress seditious Books, their old Stalking-horse) That they might,
in his Majesty's Name prosecute the Oxford-printing by a Quo Warranto, which
being granted by the said King, the Master, Wardens Assistants and the other
Patentees did solicit Father Peter's and other such fit Instruments, to promote
the same; And in return of this Service (besides Clusters of Guineas) they
suffered their publik Ware-house-keeper, to propagate to Sale their Popish
Books, which was notified to their Party all over the Nation, as a happy Omen
of its speedy Conversion to the Catholic Faith, their Books were now freely
printed and sold by the Governors of that Company at their Common Hall: Which
Prosecution was carried on at the joint Charge of these Patentees, who have
since used other means to get the Oxford printing into their Hands; for about
twelve Months since they did so far endear themselves to Dr. Edwards and Dr.
Aldrich, one Vice Chancellor of Oxford last Year, the other this, to whom they
gave Bond of many thousand Pounds Penalty to save them harmless in the
disposessing the University's Printers, and farming the same to these Patentees
(who had kept down the Price of Books to one third of what these Patentees sold
them at before) which the said Vice-chanchellors did undertake and effect,
though contrary to the general Inclination of that venerable Body, whereby
above 35000 Bibles, and many thousands of other Books three quarters finished,
were rendered waste Paper, And twenty or thirty Families, that for twelve or
fourteen years last past have been maintained by this Manufacture in Oxford,
are many of them now utterly ruined, to make way for present Sale of many
Thousands of their formerly seized Holland printed Books, and for the rise of
Books printed by these Patentees; which are already advanced one third Penny,
and are threatened to be raised double, if the Act be renewed: which Holland
Books (by the renewal of the said Act) may be re-seized, and Prosecutions made
again (though sold by these Patentees) as they formerly have done many times
over.

They are now Zealous to get that Act renewed, that they may be enabled to
continue these Practices, and to tax the Public, as they have done for 30
years past. They have thus long taxed the Nation 1500 l. and upwards yearly, in
the Almanac Trade only; and this is their aim in getting the Act renewed, they
do thereby sell that for three Pence, which at one Penny would be a sufficient
Trading price, and sufficiently gainful. They do likewise discourage Authors,
who, for Commenting or Expounding upon part of a Book, which is their Text (as
they use the Term) must be constrained to pay them a Premium for it, or be
forced to fell their Works to them, though but for one fourth of what others
would give, if they had the freedom to Print them; which none will dare to do
(if that Act be renewed.) Dr. Hammond, Mr. Pool, and many other Reverend and
Learned Authors have been compelled to pay them their extravagant Demands, for
using the Bible Text to Comment upon (though but a small part thereof, as the
Book of Psalms, etc.) The like practiced upon Virgil, Ovid, Terence, etc. or
any of the old Classick School-books which were got into their Patents; in some
of which the sole Printing of 50 or 60 were contained.

By the said Act it is Enacted, That a Book being Licensed and Entered into the
Register Book of the Company of Stationers, it is forbid to be Printed without
the Owners License (who by Virtue of that Entry is Owner) under the Penalty of
6 s. 8 d. per Book; which Register has (by the undue Practices of the Master
and Wardens) been so ill kept, that many Entries have been unduly made;
insomuch, that the true Proprietors both by Purchase, License and Entry, all
duly made of several Books, which afterward have been erased, or the Leaves
wherein they were written, have been cut out, and undue Entries made to others
who had no right; which is directly contrary to the plain words and meaning of
the said Act; whereby the Owners have not only been defrauded of their Right,
but also rendered liable to the Penalty of 6 s. 8 d. per Book, for all the Books
they Printed, Sold or Bound. Many learned Authors have been defrauded of their
Rights thereby, who, after many years Pains and Study, and afterward by a bare
Delivery of their Books to be Licensed or Transcribed, have been barred by
surrepitious Entries made in the said Register (to instance in the Book called
Regula Placitandi, among many others, written by a learned Lawyer and worthy
Member of this Parliament.) Wherefore, it is humbly represented whether the
Irregularities, aforesaid, may not have rendered the Act impracticable to be
executed, agreeable to Justice and Equity; and if the Act be renewed, if it may
not establish a wrongful Possession, unless that Register be first duly
rectified.

The Property of English Authors has been always owned as Sacred among the
Traders, and generally forborne, hitherto, to be invaded; but if any should
invade such Properties, there is remedy, by Laws already made, and no other
were ever thought needful till 1662. The Works of Homer, Hesiod, Horace, Ovid,
Virgil, Caesar, Lucan, Plautus, Tully, Florus, Curtius, and Multitudes of other
ancient Classick Authors, which were always free to all Printers and
Booksellers to Print, before the making of the said Act; but since are got into
Patents, and by that Act prohibited from being Printed, under the Penalty of 6
s. 8 d. per Book, to the inhansing the Prices, the hinderance of the Printer,
and are only an encouragement for Foreigners to import upon us; which are the
Grievances long endured, and now complained of; and humbly Prayed to be
considered, before the Act for Printing be continued.

It is said, The Charter to the University of Oxford, for Printing of all
manner of Books (which the Master, Wardens, etc. have now farmed into their own
Hands) is now proposed to be confirmed in Parliament: Which Charter (if
confirmed without a saving to every Man his particular Property) seems to
defeat all particular Properties; in Copies, both in respect to Booksellers and
Authors, and makes the Owners liable to the Penalties in that Charter, which
are very severe, besides the loss of their Property; the Patentees will agree
the saving of Patent-books, peradventure, well enough; but will readily consent
that particular Property may be gained into their Control.

Till the year, 1662. it was not thought needful, by any precedent Parliament
of England, to make an Act for to regulate or restrain Printing more than other
Trades, neither does that Act inflict any new Penalty for seditious Books, but
leaves them to the former Laws. About the beginning of the Popish Plot, this
Act was discontinued; and Sir Roger Lestrange, Surveyor of the Press, and the
Messenger of the Press, were both severely censured in Parliament, and that Act
was not thought fit to be renewed till the late King James's Reign; where Sir
Roger Lestrange, being a Member of Parliament, got the said Act to be renewed.

Now (if the Tables were turned) That scandalous and seditious Books, etc. were
forbid, under the Penalty of 6 s. 8 d. or 100 l. per Book; and Books thus
monopolized, by Patents, were left to the determination of the Law; it is
humbly presumed, the Government would be much less pestered with them than
heretofore; neither would there be need to charge the Government with two
hundred Pound per Annum for a Surveyor of the Press, nor fifty Pound per Annum
for a Messenger of the Press, as it was formerly to Sir Roger Lestrange (if it
be not still done so to others.) If Books Mechanical, Mathematical, Trade,
Cookery, Husbandry, Physic, Surgery, Geography, and the like, were not
required to be Licensed, the Bishops Chaplains would be so much the less
disturbed from their Studies; and it is humbly presumed the Government can
scarcely be harmed thereby.

By that Act Printers are restrained from setting up their Trades, to which
they served their Apprentiship; whereby Multitudes of them have been forced to
go to Holland and other Countries, to work as Journy-men there, in Printing
English Bibles and other English Books; vast numbers whereof, have been brought
over into England by Merchants, for gain; one Merchant (among many others)
importing near twenty thousand English Bibles yearly, besides vast quantities
of our English Books, that were got into Patents, and restrained by the said
Act, under the Penalty aforesaid.

All which Matters are humbly offered to be considered (before the said Act be
renewed) by many hundreds of Traders in the said Manufacture, who by having
freedom to follow their Trades on lawful Work, shall not be necessitated to
betake themselves (for a Livelihood) to unlawful Work, as too many have been
forced to do, or to turn Porters or some other servile Employments, which their
Parents and Friends little dreamed of when they placed them Apprentices to
their Trades.

FINIS.

