Reasons against petitioning the King for restoring the deprived Bishops
without Repentance.
By a Divine of the Church of England.
1. TO petition King William for restoring those Men to their Revenues,
Dignities and Functions who think him an Usurper, and the late King James to be
rightful King, and that all who have sworn Allegiance to King William, who h^^
formerly sworn to the late King James, are forsworn, is, in effect, to petition
for the late King James that he might be set in the Throne, and for the French
King his right Arm, and for the supposititious and feigned Prince of Wales, and
for idolatrous Father Peter's; it is to petition King William against himself,
and against the Parliament, and against the present Government, and to undo all
that has been done, and involve three Nations in Confusion, and establish
Popery and Slavery for all Generations: I say, to petition that they may be
restored without Repentance of this their wicked Error, is plainly so.

2. The Persons petitioned for, while they retain this their wicked Error,
cannot be restored without an essential Alteration of the present Liturgy,
which the Petitioners themselves are utterly against, and the Persons
petitioned for all along unto the present Change, have been utterly against
also; and must be supposed to be so still, unless Self-Interest, or some other
Reason has made them change their Mind. For the prescribed Forms of Prayer for
K. William and Q. Mary, are an essential part of the Liturgy, and no Man can,
without notorious Hypocrisy and dissembling, use them, and unfeignedly assent
and consent to them, and require of Persons to be ordained, instituted, and
inducted, unfeigned Assent and Consent to them, who thinks in his Conscience
that King William and Queen Mary are Usurpers, and that it is sinful to swear
Allegiance to them. So that if the King and Parliament had made no Law for
swearing Allegiance to their present Majesty's, but had left all Ministers free
to swear or not, as they saw good, of necessity the Persons petitioned for must
have been Non-conformists to the Church of England in one essential Point, and
to dissent in any one essential Point is instar omnium, as if they had
dissented in all.

3. The Persons petitioned for have made themselves infamous to the Nation, and
to all the Reformed Churches, and to the late King James, and all his
Adherents, by their own notorious self-contradicting and selfconfounding
Practices. For they by their published Declaration December. 11, 1688. (to which
I refer them) immedia(...) upon the late King's withdrawing himself, and real
Abdication, and leaving his People as Sheep without a Shepherd, and by
subsequent Acts pursuant to that Declaration, did indeed, tho ^^t in word,
renounce and disclaim all Allegiance to the late King James, and betook
themselves to the then Prince of Orange, as under God, the Savior and
Pr^tector of the Nation from Popery and Slavery. So that of all Persons in the
Nation none have so little reason to scruple Allegiance to their present
Majesty's as the deprived Bishops. Let them but reconcile themsel(...) to their
former Actions, and they must needs own and consent that his pr^se^^ Majesty is
most rightful King. For them now to stand off from Alleg(...) to their present
Majesty's, what is it but to play fast and loose with God and Conscience in
Matters which concern the Temporal and Eternal Safety of three Kingdoms, which
is very sinful and scandalous in a common Man, and much more in Bishops? They
please not God, and are contrary to all Men: 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15.

4. It is alleged that the Persons petitioned for, did in the Reign of the
late King perform an Act singularly meritorious, which cost them Imprisonment
in the Tower. Touching which, let these things be impartially weighed; 1. In
the Judgment of the present Bp of H. it was no meritorious Act at all, but
criminal, as his own published Paper does witness, and his sending abroad the
late King's Declaration to the Clergy of his Diocese to publish it, contrary to
the Judgment and Practice of the imprisoned Bishops: And therefore it is to be
wondered at, if his Lordship shall now in petitioning for the deprived Bishops
applaud that as highly meritorious, which some Years ago he did in Print
declare to all the World to be vituperable. 2. Admitting it to be singularly
meritorious, it could merit only Temporal Glory, and this they have had, the
Nation has applauded them for it. This can be no Atonement for future Crimes
and Scandals without Repentance. They have stained the Glory of their past
Merit for lack of Perseverance, and by their Disloyalty to the present
Government: For the late French Invasion, and the Rebellion in Ireland, and
united Endeavors of Papists, and other Sons of Belial, against their present
Majesty's and their Government, are the genuine Consequence of this wicked
Error and seditious Principle held by the deprived Bishops, that their present
Majesty's are Usurpers, and that it is sinful to swear Allegiance to them. 3.
The deprived Bishops about the time of their Imprisonment did in Print express
Tenderness toward the Dissenters, and promised them fair things, when they
should have opportunity in the next Parliament and Convocation: the generality
of the Nation, both Clergy and Laity, did approve this their Promise. They have
had the opportunity of performing this their Promise, but they have not had the
Honesty and Integrity so to do. For it is the deprived Bishops and their
Adherents, who refuse to come to reasonable Accord with the Dissenters, and
keep up the Breach between their Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and dislike the
Act for Toleration, and so render themselves dishonest and pe^fidious Persons,
who in time of Affliction and impending Calamity make just and equal Promises,
and when the Affliction is over, refuse to perform, and invent sinful Shifts
and Evasions to cloak their Hypocrisy.

5. To petition the King and Parliament for restoring these Disloyal Persons to
their Profits, and Honors, and Ecclesiastical Functions, without Repentance of
their (...) Error against the present Government, is plainly to petition the
King and Parliament that they will be unjust, and make themselves, and the
Laws, and Government, odious to God and all good Men, by affording equal
Honor, Countenance and Protection to good and bad Subjects, to loyal and
disloyal Persons, to the worthy and unworthy. Sontibus nimis ignoscendo in
sontibus fit injuria.

6. The present way of petitioning is not for mutual Forbearance and
Condescension toward all such as agree in the Foundation, and do but differ in
Circumstantials, and things indifferent, and variable Modes and Forms, no way
destructive of the Foundation; such a Petition we are no way against, but
greatly for. But it is that the King and Parliament will devise some way,
whereby those may be restored to their Profits, Dignities and Offices, whose
disloyal and seditious Principles strike at the Foundation, and unhinge the
Government, and tend to universal Confusion, and for which they stand justly
deprived by Law. And so it is not a Petition for Order, and Unity, and Concord,
and the common Good, but quite contrary, namely, for the countenancing and
encouraging and upholding of a Faction, Sect, and Party of Men in the Nation,
against Order, Unity, and the common Good, that they may have leave and license
by Law and public Authority to ridicule and libel the Government, to let in
the common Enemy, to make their own terms with him, and betray the Nation. For
this one Principle, that their present Majesty's are Usurpers, and that it is
sinful to swear Allegiance to them, and pray for them as rightful King and
Quen, is against the very Being and Foundation of the Government; it is
pregnant of a thousand seditious and disloyal Practices, it is as Fire in the
Thatch, and carries universal Desolation and Confusion in its Bowels. The
Petitioners do not at all desire an Act of Union and Comprehension for all such
of their Majesty's Subjects as agree in all Fundamentals toward God and
toward the King, and differ but in variable Rites and Forms, not necessary to
the Being of Church and State; such an Act would be a blessed Act; but thi^
they are against, this they dread: they only desire an Act for restoring a few
peccant Bishops to their Profits and Places, whose deluded Consciences will not
permit them to swear Allegiance to their present Majesty's; that so being in
Place; and having obtained the establishment of their wicked Principle by Law,
they may by Law undo the Government, and bring in Confusion.

7. The Petitioners are Men that have sworn Allegiance to their present
Majesty's, and in their public Prayers pray daily; From all Sedition -- Good
Lord deliver us. Now if this be not a seditious Principle, that their present
Majesty's are Usurpers, and that it is sinful to swear Allegiance to them,
there is no such thing as Sedition, neither can it be declared what Sedition
and Disloyalty is. Why halt ye betwe(...) (...)o Opinions, between Loyalty and
Disloyalty? If their present Majesty's ^e not rightful King and Queen before
God and all the World, why do you swear Allegiance to them? Why do you in your
public Prayers Morning and Evening each day, beseech God for them as rightful
King and Queen, and for their Prosperity and good Success against all their
Enemies, and thereby notoriously dissemble with God and Men, and give occasion
to all both Friends and Foes, both Protestants and Papists, to think and speak
of you as perfidious and false Men? If their present Majesty's be in your
Judgment rightful King and Queen, why are you not zealous for them and their
Government? Why do you lean to their Enemies? Why do you petition for the
countenance and upholding those, who by their refusal to swear Allegiance to
them, declare to all the World that they think them to be Usurpers, and that it
is horrible Perjury to swear Allegiance to them, and separate and divide your
selves from your dissenting Brethren, whom you acknowledge to agree with you in
all Fundamentals respecting God and their present Majesty's?

8. It will perhaps be said, That the Persons petitioned for, are Reverend
Fathers of the Church, Men of great Wisdom, Conscience, and Integrity; and if
they had not just grounds for their Nonconformity, we may well think they
would conform. To which, besides what is already said, I return these following
Answers. 1. It is a saying of Luther's, Nunquam periclitatur Religio nisi inter
Reverendissimos, the State of the Church is never in so much danger as from
those who are styled Most Reverend. 2. There be others of their Order, styled
Most Reverend Fathers of the Church, who do conform, and have given as good
proof of their Wisdom, Conscience and Integrity, as those that do not conform.
Now both cannot be in the right, of necessity one of the two must be in an
Error, and it is no small Error, it is an Error against the Foundation of the
present Government, both of Church and State. 3. As to Things Spiritual and
Eternal we know no Father, but our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 23. 9. and
as to Worldly and Temporal Government, the Nation knows no Father but King
William. No Bishop, no Apostle is more than a Member of Christ's Body the
Church, Jesus Christ is the sole Head, and the King is his Vicegerent, who
rules all Estates as to Temporal Rule by the Sword. 4. There are conscientious
Heathens, Jews, Mahometans, Papists, Arians, Socinians, Quakers, Heretics, and
Persecutors of God's Saints, who think they do God Service in killing God's
most faithful Servants, John 16. 2. such an one was Paul before his Conversion.
Error and Superstition, and false Zeal, has perverted and corrupted the
Consciences of the Persons petitioned for. Their Conscience will give them
leave to strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel; to be for an Oath of Obedience
from Presbyters to Bishops, but not for an Oath of Allegiance from all the
Subjects of England to their present Majesty's; to silence, anathematize,
suspend, imprison and undo multitudes of wise, and good, and useful Men for
Nonconformity to things indifferent, and in their own nature not necessary in
the Judgment of the most rigid Conformists: moderate Conformists confess them
to be inconvenient, tho not flatly sinful; and the Dissenters conceive them to
be flatly sinful. Their Conscience will give them leave to dispense with and
keep up Ministers, Non-residency, and Pluralities (which even the Council of
Trent condems) and selling Spiritual Pardons and Indulgences for Money in their
Courts, by Commutation of honest Repentance for filthy Lucre; it will give them
leave not to labor in the Word and Doctrine, and yet to expect and receive
double Honor, and to prefer Ordination by unlearned, ungodly, idolatrous,
persecuting Popish Bishops, before Ordination by learned, ancient, godly,
orthodox and most reverend Protestant Presbyters. From such a Conscience I pray
God bless me.

9. The Persons petitioned for, and their Adherents, have stood much upon their
Loyalty to the Higher Powers, and have boasted of it and gloried in it, as tho
they had been the only Loyal Persons: and now by God's just Judgment themselves
are fallen into the Pit of Disloyalty, and their deluded Conscience will not
suffer them to come forth, and so it is not in our power to help them. Let them
in God's Name repent, imitate Dr. Sherlock, shame themselves before God and the
World by honest and wholesome Repentance and Confession of their false
Principles concerning the Government, and then they will merit Pardon, and we
shall not need to petition Authority for them.

10. Whether King William be rightful King or no, is not lawful to dispute;
because such a Dispute in the nature of it, does suppose the matter doubtful
and questionable: Whereas it is unquestionably plain, that he is rightfully
King; for he is in full Possession of the Throne by common Consent, and
dis^enseth Law and Justice to all the Realm, and protecteth his Subjects in
their Civil Rights, and in the free exercise of their Religion, and it cannot
be proved that he is an Usurper. All that can be alleged is but Conjecture,
and uncertain Opinion, and doubtful Disputation, which in a Point of this
nature, signifies nothing at all: For unless it be plain and clear as the Sun
at Noonday, that he is not rightful Possessor of the Throne, if the Evidence
be not so clear and plain, as fully to convince the Consciences of all
impartial Men, sincerely studious of their Duty to God and the King; if there
be twenty Reasons for, and as many Reasons against King William, the
Consciences of all in the Nation are bound to own and submit to him as rightful
King, and to renounce and disclaim Allegiance to the late King James, as having
no Right at all to the Throne.

11. The Nation has not deposed the late King, but he has deposed himself,
and abdicated himself from the Government, by invading the Fundamental Laws of
the Nation, whereby the mutual Rights of Prince and People do consist,
particularly by going about to impose on three Kindoms a suppo(...) (...)ce of
Wales, in order to bring in the Papacy, and subjecting them to a Foreign
Ju(...)ction, as to Ecclesiastical Causes, and enslaving them as to their Civil
Rights, and excluding the right Heir. Against this Invasion of the Fundamental
Laws and Rights of the Nation, the Nation having no other Remedy, did, by the
Prince of Orange, their Head and Chieftain (whom it principally concerned in
right of his Princess) justly appeal to God the supreme Judge, with their Swords
in their Hands, and God received their Appeal, gave Sentence for them in
wonderful manner, and made the late King, by real Abdication, to quit all Right
to the Throne, and the whole Nation unanimously by their Representatives
lawfully and peaceably assembled, to fill the Throne with their present
Majesty's. Not they who fight for, but they who fight against the Fundamental
Laws of the Nation, by which the mutual Rights of Prince and People do con^ist,
are to be esteemed and judged Fighters against God's Ordinance and just
Authority.

12. Earthly Kingdoms and Monarchies are an Image and Resemblance of God's
Kingdom over all. Now God claims no Allegiance and Subjection from any Man, but
in consideration of those Benefits and Favors which he affords in common to
all Men, as their Creator and Upholder, and to all elect Men in special, as
their gracious God in Christ; and if he shall not perform his Oath and Covenant
to all Men in general, to all elect Men in special, he is contented that we
esteem him no God, and renounce all Subjection and Allegiance to him; and he
makes our own Consciences Judges between him and us: Isa. 5. 3. Genesis 9. 8, 9,
etc. and 18. 23, 24, 25. Heb. 11. 6. 1 John 1. 9. There is therefore a mutual
Covenant, tacit or express, in every legal Monarchy, whereby the mutual Rights
of Prince and People consist; which Covenant being broken and made void in the
substantial Branches of it, the innocent Party has ground of Appeal to God the
supreme Judge and Disposer of Crowns and Kingdoms, in whose Decision all Sides
and Parties are to acquiesce. But where this Appeal cannot be made by the Sword
without ruin of the State, and doing more hurt than good, it is not to be
attempted, no Remedy can be eligible which is worse than the Disease.

13. This is the true Mean between the Doctrine of resisting Authority supreme
and subordinate, and the Doctrine of not resisting those who pretend Authority,
but really have none, but are Cutthroats, Murderers, Assassins, and Invaders
of just and lawful Rights, having no Authority so to do. To resist Authority
supreme and subordinate, is not to resist Man but God; and they who resist him,
are guilty of Folly and Impiety, and can look for nothing but Damnation. Not to
resist those who pretend Authority, but really have none, when we are
sufficiently able to resist them, and to save our selves from their unjust
Violence, is not to be Martyrs, but Fools, unworthy of God, and those Blessings
and good things he does be^rust us with, which he will call us to account for,
and damn us if we have not been w^se and faithful Stewards thereof. Now the
Undertaking of the Prince of Orang^, and his Adheren^s, was not a resisting of
Authority, but a just V^^dication of those Rights which the late King James,
without all Authority, did seek by Force and Fraud to deprive them of. For the
Question between the late King on one side, and the Prince of Orange and his
Adherents on the other side, being plainly this, Whether the supposed Prince of
Wales was really born of the Queen or not? Here it is evident, that the late
King was not Judge, but a Party. And it is unreasonable, and against all Laws of
God and Man, for any Man, yea, for the Emperor himself, to be Judge in his own
Cause, as ^p Usher grants in his Book of the Power of the Prince, page 162. The
late King being no Judge as to this Point, he could have no Authority, his
refusal to give the Nation just and reasonable Satisfaction, was a refusal of
common Right, contrary to the Law of Nations, and to the Fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom, whereby the Throne is upheld, and upon which, as a Foundation,
the Crown stands; which F(...)tion falling, the Crown must needs fall with it,
and the Conscience of the Subject ^^ discharged from all Ties and Bonds of
Allegiance.

14. Admitting the Prince of Wales to be feigned, the Consciences of the late
King and all his Partakers, both Foreign and Domestic, will compel them to
yield, that it was a Complication of horrible Crimes against all Law, both
Divine and Human, that all the Subjects of these three Nations and Kingdoms
were bound in their several places, all that in them lay, to withstand and
hinder such a Villainy and Injustice from taking effect; and that all who fight
and take up Arms in defense thereof, are Fighters against God, against common
Honesty, against those Fundamental Laws of the Nation, which secure the mutual
Rights of Prince and People, and which the late King was sworn to observe
inviolate: and that they who fight against the Authors and Abettors of this
Villainy under the Conduct of the Prince of Orange, in right of his Princess and
the next Heir to the Crown, are fighters for God, and for common Honesty, and
have Law and Conscience on their side. Now the late King refused to give the
Nation just and reasonable Satisfaction, and put himself upon trial and
decision of his Cause by the Sword; and sinking in his Undertaking, withdrew
himself, left the Throne, and the Nation to shift for it self, and see to its
own Safety: which accordingly it did, by placing their Majesty's in the Throne,
and thereby securing public Peace, and laying a sure Foundation for future
Peace and Tranquillity to all Generations. As for those who think it is
sufficient for the saving their Consciences if they swear Allegiance to King
William, as King de facto, not de jure: I do very much question it, non tali
auxilio nec defensoribus istis tempus eget; this present Cause needs no such
Advocates. I see not how they can excuse and defend those of the Nobility,
Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty who did invite the Prince of Orange over, and
hazard their All in his Cause after his landing. Debile fundamentum fallit
opus; The Superstructure can be no stronger than the Foundation: and if the
Prince of Orange had no just ground for his Undertaking, I see not how his
Adherents can be justified. I say not that the business of the Prince of Wales
was the only ground for his now Majesty's Undertaking, but I think it was a
principal one, which considered in its Causes, Concomitants, and Effects, is
abundantly sufficient for Vindication of the present Settlement, and for ever
stopping the Mouths of all its Opposers. I do not build the Justice of his
Majesty's Cause upon bare Success; but yet a righteous Cause I hope is not the
worse for being blessed by God with wonderful and astonishing Success.

15. That which in my Observation makes the Enemies of the Government to bear
ill will to it, is Hatred to impartial Godliness. The Devil does not use to
envy Men Prosperity in Wickedness; but the more they prosper in Wickedness, the
more he is pleased, they may take their fill of it, he will not disquiet them.
And if the present Settlement were only Prosperity in Evil, Satan would not
envy and he so much against it, as it is visible he is, by his Agents and
Instruments. King David once said, ^ am this day weak, tho Anointed King; and
these Men, the Sons of Zervi(...) (...) too hard for me(...) the Lord shall
reward the Doer of Evil according to his Wickedness; 2 Samuel: 3. 39. There have
been among us, and yet are Sons of Zerviah, too hard for the Government; but
the comfort is, the Government is like the House of David, waxing stronger and
stronger, and these Sons of Zerviah, the Doers of Evil, wax weaker and weaker.
The Sons of Zerviah were those who adhered to David against the House of Saul,
and were Men of great Interest and Power, they were a Combination and Faction
in the State, who took advantage of the Weakness and Infancy of the Government,
to the compassing of their own Ends and politic Designs against the general
good of Prince and People. The like we have among us at this day, but the Lord
shall reward the Doer of Evil according to his Wickedness.

16. I see not how ^^y Man can be a good Man who is (...) peaceable Man, and I
see not how a Man can be peaceable, who governs himself ^^ unpeaceable and
seditious Principles. Loyalty and Allegiance to the higher Powers is an
essential Branch of the fifth Commandment, comprised in our Baptismal Covenant,
and taught to Children in the common Catechism. And tho many may be loyal to
their King and Country, who are void of holy Love and Loyalty toward God; yet
I see not how a Man can be truly holy and loyal toward God, who is not a good
Subject, a good Commonwealths Man, who is not zealous for the public Good,
who governs himself by Principles destructive of human Society.

17. Upon the same grounds that the Persons petitioned for, scruple Allegiance
to their present Majesty's, they might have scrupled Allegiance to those who
were last in the Throne, and the Subjects of any King now on Earth may scruple
Allegiance to their Sovereign. For I would ask them, what better Right to the
Throne had the late King James after his Brother's death, than their present
Majesty's now have? They will say, The Right of Succession. Very well. Now all
sides grant, that a successive (...) A certain Grand Jury were severely
reproved by an emi^ent Judge for offe^ing this Petition; which is a suffi^ient
E(...)ce of the Illegality thereof.
Kingdom is no Enlargement of Right, but a Continuation of what the Predecessor
had. For he that succeeds, succeeds in universum jus defuncti, into all the
Right of the deceased. Now because there cannot be processus in infinitum,
infinite proceeding, therefore of necessity we must come to some first, in whom
the Monarchy began. But no legal and just Monarchy can begin and be constituted
without mutual Compact and Covenant tacit or express between Prince and People.
It were easy to show this at large from Scripture, Natural Reason, the Custom
of Nations, and approved general Usage, and the Concessions of Adversaries. Now
this Right their Majesty's have, as good as Will. the Conqueror had, and as
good as Henry the 7th had. As for the grand Objection of a former Obligation to
the late King; the Answer is, that he was as truly and as strongly bound to us
as we to him, and we did not first forsake him, but he forsook us; we did not
resist lawful Authority, but only those who pretended Authority, but really had
none. For no Law, whether Divine or Humane, gave the late King Authority to
impose upon the Consciences of all in three Kingdoms a feigned Prince of Wales,
to the Exc^u^ion of the right Heir, and overthrowing the Right of Succession.
He by engaging in defense of this Villainy, did engage against God, against the
Law, against common Honesty, against the common Good, and made himself no legal
Monarch, but a Subverter of the Legal Monarchy, and so he did discharge us from
all ties of Allegiance o him, and it became our Duty, by force of Arms, to
stand up for the legal Monarchy against its Enemies.

FINIS.

