REASONS FOR A Limited Exportation OF WOOL.

Printed in the Year, 1677.

REflecting with great resentment on the just complaints of the Landlords and
Tenants of this Nation, who attribute one of the greatest originals of their
misery to the cheapnes of their Wool; I began to think of some remedy to this
disease; which tho it is not in my power to cure, yet to propose the means to
such as can, I am not forbid. But finding my design opposed by several
Pamphlets under the name of W. C. and chiefly by one he calls Englands
Interest. I have here endeavored to winnow his handful of Corn from the
abundance of chaff; and reducing his whole discourse to a few propositions,
with some objections and answers; I do willingly grant him those which follow.

1. SINCE the time of E. 3. (the founder of the Woollen-manufacture) the trade
of Wool has bin one of the chiefest riches of this Nation: it emploies many
persons, brings many profitable returns, increases the Shipping, etc.

2. On the contrary, the diminution of this manufacture is disadvantagious to
many families and to the Nation; by not making the greatest advantage of the
superfluity of a Native commodity, etc. and tho this be granted,

Yet I cannot acknowledge that a Manufacture makes fewer poor, but rather the
contrary. For tho it sets the poor on work where it finds them, yet it draws
still more to the place: and their Masters allow wages so mean, that they are
only preserved from starving whilst they can work; when Age, Sickness, or death
comes: themselves, their Wives, or their Children are most commonly left upon
the Parish. Which is the reason why those Towns (as in the Weald of Kent)
whence the Clothing is departed, have fewer poor then they had before.

3. The profit arising by the Transportation of a Manufacture is much greater
(supposing equal vent) then that of unwrought materials. Art increasing the
value so much as the thing wrought is more useful, and the working laborious.

4. The transportation of Wool is a benefit to others (as all things vented to
forreiners are, who else would not buy them) it increases their manufactures,
giving other Nations the advantages we wish to our selves; and particularly it
much profits the French, helping them to work out their own course Wool, etc.

5. It were therefore to be wished and all endeavors ought to be used, that
our superfluous wool (which we spend not our selves) might be vented in
Manufacture, and not in the Crude material. Tho I cannot be informed, this was
ever yet done in England, yet I wish honest industrious workmen would bring it
to pass.

II. But all these being granted, the question still remains; whether, since
the manufacture of our superfluous wool cannot be vended abroad, it were not
better to permit the Wool unwrought to be transported, with such limitations as
may be least detrimental to the Kingdom?

And this we affirm.

1. Because, otherwise a profitable commodity will be utterly wasted; and so
not the manufacturer only, but the Farmer and Landlord also, will be so very
much damnified; that the one cannot pay his rent, nor the other sustain the
Taxes. And is not this the chiefest, if not the sole, reason of sinking our
Rents, throwing up Farms, and the misery of the whole Country?

Now that it is the greatest concern and Interest of the Nation, to preserve
the Nobility, Gentry and those to whom the Land of this Country belongs, at
least much greater then a few Artificers employed in working the superfluity of
our Wool, or the Merchants who gain by the exportation of our manufacture, is
manifest. 1. Because they are Masters and proprietaries of the foundation of
all the wealth in this Nation, all profit arising out of the Ground, which is
theirs. 2. Because they bear all the Taxes and public burdens: which in truth
are only born by those who buy and sell not; all sellers raising the price of
their commodities, or abating of their goodness, according to their taxes. 3.
Because they maintain great families, which conduce much to the consumption of
our Manufactures, many People relying upon them: and perhaps as many as upon
Cloth-working. 4. Because they must of necessity bear all Magistracies and
public employments (how burden some soever) and are the only hindrances of the
confusion which would follow upon equality. Whereas ordinary working persons
may, if one employment fail, presently undertake another without any great
inconvenience or detriment. Now then suppose wool fall to 3d per pound (as it
must in a short time, if not prevented) the price of all Land in England must
likewise fall; there being not one Acre which produces not Wool
(ploughed-lands at least from Harvest to Seed-time and longer when they ly
fallow:) consequently the Taxes (which now are generally on Land, and ever
proportioned to the Rent, the ancient manner of taxing by tenths and 15s being
of late out of use, much to the advantage of the Usurer, but to the prejudice
of the Country Gentleman) will be also lessened when they come into the Kings
Coffers: yet the constant charges of the Kingdom do not lessen. Therefore our
Taxes must be still oftener renewed, and the Landlords charge yet more
increased, but his means of discharging diminished; and he must pay the more,
the more he is disabled. A hard case, yet inevitable, unless the King and
Parliament please to apply a speedy remedy. Thus must our Nobility and Gentry
be forced to live at a meaner rate (who live alas too meanly in their Countries
already) break up Housekeeping, maintain fewer Servants, less Hospitality,
etc. Which has already some what, and will in time, as eminently, lessen the
Kingdom as transportation of Wool, or perhaps any one thing can do.

2. By hindering exportation of Wool, pray y' consider the great loss this poor
Nation sustains. I shall instance in Romney and its neighboring levels, which
contain about 44000 Acres; each acre, one with another, in Romney-Marsh feeds
three Sheep (besides other Stock) at the least, suppose then we rate the whole
Level thus; there will be found 132000 Sheep; whereof 300 fleeces will at the
least make 4. Packs of good Wool (240. pound to the Pack:) so then there are
yearly shorn 1760. Packs, each of which were, formerly, constantly sold for 12
pound. In the year, 1647. (when exportation of Wool was first prohibited) it
was sold for 15. pound; the year after (by reason of the great Rot added to the
mighty destruction of Sheep in the Wars) it was sold for 16. pound per Pack.
but the mortality of Sheep being recovered, yet the prohibition continuing,
Wool has almost every year since abated of its price, and now there are diverse
persons, who have 4. and some 5. Years Wool upon their hands, not being able to
get above 4d or 5d per pound that is, 4 or 5. pound a Pack for it: and I hear
it has been sold this very Year in some places but for 3. pound 10s per Pack.
Thus by the most modest computation, and such as no Man can gainsay, there is
lost upon every Pack of Wool 7 pound. which, supposing all the Wool of that
Level sold, it is evident 12320. pound is quite lost every year in that little
place only: which is very near 6s per Acre throo the whole Level, lost in the
Rent. By which pray y' judge how many Millions are yearly lost throo all
England by this want of a limited exportation. Who then can show so much
cruelty as to blame poor People, who to prevent some of this damage do
adventure to help themselves by exportation? tho they had much rather be
content with a moderate price in their own Country.

And truly it is no wonder that W. C. complains of the difficulty and
impossibility of hindering Exportation, yet glories of his diligence in ruining
so many poor and industrious Persons for doing what he confesses impossible to
hinder. But our Superiors may conclude, since it is either impossible, or
extreme difficult, to hinder Exportation, and that there may arise troubles (as
some have been killed) for endeavoring it, it is much better and more natural
to permit Exportation under the most advantageous terms their wisdom shall
think fit. For in truth is it not very absurd to imagine, that because we
cannot make so much of our Woolas possibly may be made, that therefore we must
make nothing of it? like some perverse and obstinate Landlords, who choose
rather to loose all their Rent then abate the least part of it.

3. A limited Exportation will be more for the advantage of our own
Woollen-trade, and less for that beyond Sea, then the hindering of it has been.
For if strangers might come hither to buy the Wool, tho they bought greater
quantities, yet should they pay dearer for it then they do at present: and the
dearer their Commodities are, the dearer must they sell their manufacture,
consequently the more easily we may beat them out of their Trade. For when a
poor Man (none else now will venture to transport it) comes with a freight of
Wool into France or else where, they make him take their own price for it; his
necessities and his danger forbid him carrying home his Merchandise as well as
staying there to contend for a better price: but being slenderly paid for his
charges, and little or nothing for his pains and hazard, returning thinks he
comes off very well whilst undiscovered. (Yet to have the names of Merchants,
and to gain perhaps sometimes more then 12d a day to live with more ease tho
with greater hazard, possibly some may still be invited to continue this
traffic notwithstanding any the severest prohibition) After this manner
strangers now, and will hereafter, have our Wool almost as cheap as our-selves
can buy it. But were the Trade laid open, Englishmen might still buy their
wool at reasonable prices, but strangers must pay the dearer for it: as the
custom, Officers fees, freight, factorage, and other charges amount unto:
which will perhaps be equal to the first penny paid for the Wool it self. Thus
strangers shall pay twice-as-much for our Wool as the English clothier, who
therefore may undersel them, and make more advantage in the price of his Cloth
by the exportation of Wool, then ever he did by the prohibition of it.

4. My next reason against the hindering Exportation of Wool is, because by our
forefathers it never was prohibited, unless upon some great occasion, and for
some small time, till Anno 1647. and then also upon pretense, that there was
not Wool enough to furnish our own necessities. Which (if true) might be
because of the great destruction of Sheep by the Wars. Yet there seems to be an
other ground for that act: The government of that time, having been assisted in
the civil Wars by great numbers of the Wooll-workmen, (who liked much better to
Rob, and plunder for halfe-a-crown a day, then toil at a melancholy work for
sixpence a day) to encourage and reward them, I say, and to weaken the Gentry
they made this prohibition. But to make this reason good, let us run over the
whole History, or as much as we can find, either in our Acts of Parliament or
creditable Historians concerning this Wool business, with all convenient
brevity.

. 1. Tho there were several ordinances concerning Wool in other Kings Reigns,
yet the Prince did not seriously begin to set himself to make the best
advantage of Wool, till the ninth of Edward the third, at which time all
Wooll-workers were invited to come and settle in England, to have places
assigned them, many privileges and liberties granted, and wages from the King,
till they could gain a livelihood by their art etc. whereupon many Flemings and
others, chiefly Subjects to the Duke of Burgundy, repaired hither, and set up
the manufacture of Wool in England.

. 2. 11. E. 3. c. 4. It was made felony to carry Wool out of the Realm, till
otherwise ordained. This prohibition (says Speed) was made to show the
Flemings the necessity they had of leaguing with England, as soon after they
did; and the prohibition was taken off. or, as Walsingham says, to humble the
Flemings; qui plus saccos quam Anglos venerabantur. The same year it was
enacted (no doubt for the better vending their Wool, the Exportation whereof
being prohibited, made it of small value at home) that none should wear other
then English Cloth; Except the King, Queen, and their Children. But persons of
such degrees might use foreign furs, and face part of their garments with Silk.
Also that no beyond Sea Cloths should be brought into England; and that foreign
Cloth-workers should have several privileges. Whereupon (says Speed) many
presently came over.

. 2. 14. E. 3. Was granted to the King the 9th Lamb, 9th Fleece, and 9th Sheaf
for two Years: also 40s upon every sack of Wool and 40s upon every 300
Woolfels transported: (some say also that not long before this, was granted to
the King half the Wool of the Communality, and nine marks upon every sack of
Wool of the Clergy.) By these great subsidies it is probable, the King had
great quantity of Wool upon his hands: and about this time the King sent the
Bishop of Lincoln into Flanders with 10000 sacks of Wool; which he sold for 20
pound sterling a Sack. (Knighton.) And in his fifteenth year ordained, that no
Merchant or other should carry any Woolls out of the Realm till after
Michaelmas (by which time it is probable he had sold his own;) but after that
every Merchand, Stranger, or other, might freely buy and export his Wool,
paying the due customs; and that those, who had Woolls, should be compelled to
sell them according to the price and sort, in the Country; to accomplish the
Wools granted to the King, which afterward was disanulled.

. 4. 23. E. 3. The King stopped the Woolls in the land till the Merchants had
fined with him for the same. (Holinsh.) 26. E. 3. the staple was brought to
London, to the loss of the Merchands but advantage of the King who got by it
1200 pound that year. Knighton.

. 5. 27. E. 3. This year a great advantage befell the Nation; for (because the
young Earl of Flanders married not with the King's Daughter, as he had
promised; but with the Daughter of France: or because the Flemings observed not
the agreements, which the King made in the lifetime of Jaques de Arteville who
procured of the King that the Marts might be kept in several Towns in Flanders)
the King removed the Staples and Marts of wool from the Earls Towns,
establishing them in several Towns of England: Newcastle, Canterbury, etc. Some
of which, not being Port-Towns, he afterward changed for such: and withal
regulated the whole trade with certain ordinances; for which I refer you to the
Statutes.

. 6. 27. E. 3. 50s were given the King by Act of Parliament on every sack of
wool transported. By which grant it was thought the King received 1000 marks
per diem, Holin.

. 7. 37. E. 3. The Staple was removed to Callice; putting the Town into the
hands of certain Merchants, (that the Trade might be the more secure for them.)
And not long after it was again returned to Towns in England; but most of them
Port-Towns, for it was very usual to remove the Staples. Holin. 38. Ed. 3. was
granted to the King 26s-8d of every sack of wool transported for 3. years.

. 8. What was ordained by our succeeding Princes was either in conformation or
regulation of what was already established: according to the advantage of the
King and People. But that is very remarkable which is recorded by Hen. de
Knighton 14. R. 2. being a case somewhat like ours at this present. He,
describing a great dearth and calamity of the poor in this Nation, tho there
was Corn enough laid up in private hands to serve the whole Nation five years;
neither was the Corn then at any extraordinary price: at last gives the reason
of it to be want of money, and this he ascribes to the not vending our wool;
whereof he says some men had 3, others 4 years, wool upon their hands: tho
now there be many who have 5 years-wooll unsold. And this came to pass, says
he, because the English Merchants were forbid transporting wool: wherefore the
year following liberty was granted them to transport wool whither they
pleased. In those days, says he, wool was so cheap that a stone of the best
chosen wool was sold for 3s and in Leister for 2s or 20d pence. Now three
shillings in those days was as much as 9s at present; and therefore dearer by
3s a stone then it is sold for at present, 6s being a good price at this time.

. 9. 8. H. 6. An act was made to regulate the Merchandstrangers, who exported
our wool, and An. 27. H. 6. It was decreed, that till our Cloths were accepted
in Brabant, no marchandice growing or wrought there should be brought into
England upon pain of forfeiture.

. 10. 3. E. 4. An act was made concerning exportation of wool, and then it was
likewise ordered; that no cloth wrought beyond Sea should be brought into
England: none should buy woolls (except he wrought it himself) till after
Bartholmewtide: and 22. H. 8. not till after the Ascension of our Lady: nor a
stranger before the Purification; no woollen yarne or cloth should be exported
unfull'd; and 3. H. 8. none undressed. And an. 1 of Queen Mary, as also in the
first of Queen Elizabeth their Parliaments gave them 33s 4d on every sack of
wool, and every 240 woolfells transported by a Native: and 3 pound. 6s-8d on
the same transported by strangers; and this to continue during their lives.

. 11. An. 1. Jac. A subsidy upon wool transported was granted the King for his
lifetime: a denizen was to pay 33s. 4d. a stranger 3 pound 6s 8d for every
sack. And there has not been a Prince from Ed. 3. to Chapter 1. who have not gained
considerable revenues by the exporting wool.

III. Out of which collections you may observe:

1. That this wooll-trade beyond Sea was always accounted a very great
advantage both to the King and Subjects. Which was the reason, why it was so
carefully managed, and more laws about it then any one Subject whatsoever. Nay
scarce has there been any Parliament, since the beginning of E. 3. wherein
somewhat has not been established concerning it.

2. That no absolute prohibition of exporting it was ever enacted till the
Reign of Char. 1. nor then, till 1647. at which time neither could he be said
to Reign. Temporary ones indeed there have been; but those of ill consequence
to the Nation.

3. That sumptuary laws concerning wearing, vending our Cloth, and the like,
were always enacted pari passu with those concerning wooll-working. For it is
very advantageous to the Kingdom, that much of it should be spent here. Whereby
many workmen would be maintained, and less foreign unnecessary trifles imported,
which now take away much of our money.

4. That it was thought sufficient advantage to the Nation that they might buy
wool when and where they pleased; but whatsoever wool, was sold, by Strangers
especially:) was not sold till after a certain time fixed. That it was not to
be bought by Brokers; that what was bought by foreiners to be exported paid
greater duties then what was bought by the Natitves. which cautions alone, if
well regulated, would render the exportation at this day very advantageous;
certainly much more then to let it putrify and moth-eat in our storehouses.

5. My next reason for the permission of Exportation is, because it will better
his Majesty's customs: for it being impossible absolutely to hinder the
exportation, (Men naturally inclining to run any hazard rather then apparent
beggary, by suffering their goods to perish in their hands) the customs must of
necessity be lessened. What perishes un wrought, and what is exported by
stealth, pay no custom. But besides this, it was the frequent use of our
Fathers to help the Prince and ease the Subject by imposing taxes upon the
wool Exported. Sometimes 50s a pack; sometimes more, as occasion required,
which was the ordinary way; being also a most easy one, of gratifying the
Prince. If it be answered the customs would advance much more if the wool
were exported in manufacture; we confess, and seriously desire, that our wool
were manufactured, and so exported and sold. Tho this was never yet done in
England, nor do I think can be. But our question here is concerning our
superfluous wool: which remains after we have here made, or vended what we
can; after the Cloth-market is furnished; or our workmens hands all employed.

6. The reason of the decay of Clothing is not exportation of wool as W. C.
supposes, but the contrary. For the decay (if any be) is since this
prohibition: so that by hindering this we apply a wrong remedy to the disease.
But it proceeds from diverse other causes; as first, because other Nations have
of late improved their manufactures, as we did in Edward the thirds time: the
Dutch ever since 1616. the French now lately, both of them working very
acurately, if not more, then our selves, as well as more honestly, by the
confession of those of our own Nation. Secondly, Cloth is not so much worn in
these parts of the World as formerly. It not being now so convenient a wear, as
when our fashions were constant. Our Clothes then were made strong to endure
many years, and a great part of the great-mens inventories then were their
ward-robes left as Legacies to their best Friends, and Children, who did not
despise to wear the Clothes of their Ancestors. Whereas now the Mode hardly
enduring two months, slight stuffes are sufficient. Besides, when the custom
was for men to wear gowns, cloaks, and other loose garments, substantial Cloth
was more proper then now it is, for little breeches and a close coat. To second
which humor of the times Silks and Stuffs are imported in greater abundance,
sold at easier rates, then formerly; and manufactures of them set up in our own
Nation; by which the beautifullest and lightest garments are become all most
the cheapest also. Which I fear will render it difficult to reconcile the Mode
to Cloth, tho much to be desired. Thirdly, we have more Sheep in England then
formerly, because of the drayning the fens and other grounds; and the laying
down of Tillage, for the cheapness of Corn till these two late years. Fourthly,
Irish Cattle being prohibited, they breed more Sheep, and bring in more wool
into England, besides what they send beyond Sea: which will infallibly bring
our lands in England as low as those in Ireland, i. e. to as low a rent, and to
as few years value in the purchase, nay lower: if they be suffered, First to
glut England with their wool, and then to furnish the markets beyond sea; yet
we prohibited the same privilege: which is our present condition. And
undoubtedly the forbidding Irish Cattle has been of vast inconvenience, not
only to the best of England, the feeding-lands; but to it all in general. By
lessening the value of our Wool: in which even the breedinglands receive more
loss by the low price of their wool, then they reap advantage by this Act in
the price of their Cattle. this Act also is injurious to the Nation by sending
our own and foreign Merchant Ships to Victual in Ireland; by the want of returns
from thence; by loss of our Trade for Hopps, Hides, Butter, Cheese, etc. which
trades now are taken up by the Irish to the ruin of many Counties of England;
by discouraging Navigation for it is said 100 of our Ships were continually
employed in this Traffic of lean Cattle. And lastly by discouraging our
Clothiers and other manufacturers; who since they must live out of their
labors, the dearer they pay for their diet the more they must have for their
work. This Irish Act therefore making our Beef dear, yet the Dutch having it
from Ireland delivered in Holland for about a penny a pound, they may afford
their Cloth cheaper then possibly we can: which will speedily enable them to
get from us also our foreign Clothing-trade, and be an irreparable damage to
this Kingdom: if the Parliament in their wisdom do not prevent it. Thus this
Act, which in its preface designs the advancing our rents and enriching
England, has lessened and impoverished both; has compelled Ireland to seek a
way to live without us; has made it almost independent of England; has infine
almost ruined both Nations: but to our purpose. Fifthly, I omit the many
deceits in Cloth-making, which W. C. confesses to have been of late so very
much practiced, that our Clothes loose greatly of their ancient reputation
beyond sea to the infinite prejudice of our Trade: and I have bin informed that
this was the first occasion, which put the French upon making Clothes and
Stuffs of their own. But for the various abuses of this kind I refer you to a
little Book called the Golden Fleece by W. S. and I am informed that the Dutch,
taking occasion from our dishonest work-manship, have vended their own worst
Cloth for right English Cloth; and thereby have got from us much of our trade,
and great reputation to themselves. Sixthly, the Sword, Plague, foreign
Colonies, and repeopling Ireland have of late years much diminished our stock
of People: therefore the consumption of the commodities is less. for if we do
not vend our wooll-manufactures, the reason must be; either because we make
more of them, or because there is less of them used then formerly. If we make
more (as some with good reason think we do) the trade increases; and tho it
being in many hands, particular persons grow not so rich, yet the Clothing in
general flourishes, and the greater numbers are set on work. But the contrary
to this W. C. seems to affirm. He must therefore grant we want vent for our
Cloth when made. But will the prohibiting exportation cause more vent? if the
Dutch can work cheaper, better, and more honestly then we, will they not
undersel us, and steal away our trade? If the French can make stuffs of their
own (as both they and the Dutch do) without our wool, and prohibit our Cloth
to be sold amongst them, shall we force them to buy of us? If the Italians and
I French make and sell multitudes of fine and gaudy silks at a cheap rate, can
we persuade people not to prefer them? But if we want either hands to work the
vast stocks of our own wool, and that which daily over whelms us from Ireland,
or vent to dispose of it, what must become of the superfluity of our woo'l?
Must the Farmer and Grasier bear all the loss? No, the Landlord must abate of
his rent, or the farm thrown into his hands; the Tenant being poor, half ruined
by his losses, his Landlord takes the farm, and at length having to his
Tenants misfortunes, added those inconveniences of entrusting servants, etc.
He must split on the same rock; his wool lies on his hands till he comes into
debt; and in fine the farm must be sold, since the wool bears no price. But
the yearly value is so much fallen, and there is so much land to be sold on the
same score, that he despairs of a chapman, etc. And this is our present
condition.

7. This beating down the price of wool is prejudicial even to the
Manufacturers themselves; because if wool be cheap, the product of it must be
so too. Cloth must bear a proportion to the value of wool: or if it does not,
the disadvantage is on the Clothiers side. His commodity being ever cried down
beyond measure when wool is cheaper. Besides the less money a tradesman turns
for the same commodity, the less must be his gains. The Clothier then making
the same quantity of Cloth as formerly, and as good, selling it for less, has
none to revenge himself on, but the Grazier, and the poor workman, who must
then work harder or abate of his already too poor wages. Who then gains by this
cheapness? they only who are so eager against the Exportation of Wool; a sort
of Men, who call themselves Merchants of the staple, but are in truth only
brokers: (those Caterpillars of trade, and sworn Enemies to poor Men; who make
their chief gain of other men's necessities.) these are sure to get both by
buyer and seller, whosoever looses. To the Clothier they complain that there is
no vent for Cloth, that wool is so cheap they may have Cloth for nothing, till
they have bought it at their own rates: but when they come to sell it to the
Draper or Merchant, they then change their note. Wool so dear that poor
Clothiers can hardly go to the price of it etc. These and a thousand other
artifices they use to scrape from both sides.

IV. To some of these reasons W. C. pretends to answer, tho in such a manner as
it is hard to conceive what the Man would say. To what has been said concerning
the Farmer and Graziers not being able to pay their rent, etc. From which so
many ill consequences follow; I think he answers: that the principal comodity,
out of which they raise their rent, is not wool but the Carcas and corn; and
that the more Men are set on work, the more corn and flesh is spent; so the
farmers and graziers mouths are made up that way. To which it is easily
replied, that a Farmer makes not up his rent out of his principal, but all, his
commodities: and it is an ill argument, this is not the principal advantage or
profit, therefore you may part from it. Besides Farmers have families also,
which must be maintained, their Widows must not be starved, nor their Daughters
married without some portions. Suppose the smaller profits be laid aside for
these: yet let me tell you that a Grazier, whose stock does not consist more
then usually of beasts, must pay at least half, and in some Counties all, his
Rent with the price of his Wool; or he will live very uncomfortably. But in
that great rot which happened about 5 years ago, in most part of England (and
the like may happen again, for which some provision ought to be made in good
years) I beseech you, which was the principal comodity? What was the flesh
worth? And for Corn; the low price of wool has made so many apply to
husbandry, that usually corn does hardly bear any price wherewith to pay his
rent. What he says of the great number of people set on work upon the
superfluous Wool, that would make flesh and Corn dear, is surely in mockery of
the poor laborious Farmers and Graziers. Who presently imagine some great
Inundation of new men like Locusts, yet with money in their purses, that would
presently buy up and devour all the fruits of the ground: and even their wool
also for their backs, as well as victuals for their bellies. But upon
examination they will find no encreas of Men by this mighty manufacture; but some
few hands, now employed in other work, to turn to weaving, spinning, etc.
They Will find no more bellies nor backs then formerly, and their corn at as low a
price as it was before. Corn I say, for the Clothiers wages will not much
enrich either Butcher or Grazier.

2. Another objection against what has been said, is the great number
maintained by the wooll-manufacture: four fifts of the Nation, says W. C.
which except he take in the Farmers and Graziers is an extravagant proportion.
But this objection is wholly impertinent. It is not material to the point in
hand how many are maintained by wooll-work, but how many more would be
maintained by working up the superfluous wool, that, I mean, which either
perishes or is clandestinly exported. And these are not so many as the
maintenance ought, in any wise, to be put in balance either with the Farmers
and Graziers, or Gentry and Landlords of this Nation.

The Cloth for our own use we still spend, and the Merchants transport more to
some Countries then formerly: so that our loss is only what was usually sent
into France and Holland. W. C* says four fifts of the Nation are concerned in
the interest that wool be not exported. London it self contains about 5
Millions, do we think any Child so simple as to believe 4 of these 5 millions
are concerned about the Exportation of wool? If he says he means the whole
woollen-trade, that also is false. But what is that to our question about
superfluous wool? let there be strict laws, and severely executed, for the use
of wool in our own Nation: let the Irish Act for prohibiting importation of
Cattle be repealed, that we may be no more oppressed with wool from thence;
and it would be found neither the number of workmen, nor of People will be
lessened by exporting our superfluous wool. Nay I make a great question,
whether the number of workmen be lessened since the woollen-trade sickned,
unless by some accident. he that considers the great number of Silk-workers now
in the Nation, (a clothing not of that substance and duration as Cloth,
therefore requires more hands, to supply us with new) and that Cloth-working,
which was formerly confined to Corporations, is now frequent in Villages: will
either be of my opinion, or suspend his assent to the contrary: and then what
becomes of this great clamor of maintaing so many People, and so many poor?
Since there are not so many loose by exportation of wool, but they may easily
betake themselves to other callings.

3. But concerning maintaining the poor, I have said before; that where there
is most manufacture there is either allwaies, or for the most part, more poor:
the reasons are plain. It is true indeed that the first introducing a
manufacture emploies many poor, but they cease not to be so; and the
continuance of it makes many: and the departing of it to an other place caries
most of them with it. But the decay of it being insensible, the poor by degrees
are otherwise provided for, and rather mend their fortunes then make them worse
by the loss of their trade. But for the whole Nation, why is it not better to
set up such a trade as will employ all our working people, increase our
Shipping, and enrich our Men, then to endeavor a thing impossible, (hindering
exportation of wool?) force nature? ty up the Sea and winds? to strive against
the stream and current of the times? I mean the Herring-fishing, which will
both make amends for the small decay of our cloth-working, and revenge our
selves against the Dutch for stealing our manufacture; by fairly and justly
making use of our own liberty and power to which nature has by our situation so
long invited us. Our Cloth-working may again return, as all things and all
trades have their ebbs and flows. Were not our Archers in ancient times the
great glory of the Nation? renowned for gaining many signal battles against our
Enemies? what laws have we for importing bow-staves? and what great number of
Families were maintained by that trade, etc. whereas now neither are there
Archers, nor bowyers, nor bow-staves, hardly in the whole Kingdom. I wish we do
not too soon repent the disuse of those our famous weapons: to prevent which Q.
Eliz. used her endeavor both by laws and encouragement (and to second her, Sr.
Tho. Smith writ an ingenious book in commendation of Archery) the loss of which
weapon I rather lament then hope to recover. But those workmen doubtless
provided themselves other trades as Archery decayed: and this age feels no want
of emploiment from that decay: neither will the next from that of clothing. But
cloth may perhaps come again into request, and then the tentered, thin
Dutch-cloth, the light searges of France, and the effeminate Silks of Italy may
be despised. Perhaps also (which I see his Majesty most prudently endeavors)
some new trading place may be discovered, which may take off our Cloth in
greater abundance then France or Holland did. Or if this happen not, yet by
applying our selves to fishing, we shall in short time think our present
failure an happy increase. Our wool has ever been accounted the great riches
of the Kingdom. By Pol. Virgil England is called terra de lana, and our wool
the Golden-fleece; by reason of the great quantity of Gold and Silver which
came in yearly to buy it. Yet in the Sea at our doors lie greater treasures
then in our wool: if we were not so slothful as to suffer our neighbors to Rob
us of it, whilst we stand idle spectators of our ruin.

4. It is also objected that the French and Dutch may in time work us out of
trading in other parts by underselling us: they undermine us, it is true, not by
underselling us constantly, but by underselling us chiefly at first: and their
trading being in societies and companies their losses are shared amongst so
many, that a small one is hardly felt by any. wherefore if they find we have a
settled trade in any place, they sell first to their own loss, and when by this
means they have beaten us out, they raise their price higher then we did. Which
prohibiting exportation will not hinder: there being no way of blowing up this
mine of theirs, but by such a countermine of our own. If the Dutch have either
more skill in making Cloth; or by faring more hardly, or having provision
cheaper from Ireland, and taking less freight, can afford their Cloth cheaper;
they must of necessity in time beat us out of trade, unless we learn to work or
live as they do. But if all the superfluous wool had a good price, and good
custom set upon it, would it not be a good antidote against this underselling
us? I am sure it would against their underselling us by what they make of our
wool, and far better then endeavoring to force the stream and fighting with
Impossibility.

5. It has been demanded by some, since our Clothiers cannot work out our
woolls, what is become of the wool which lay on the Graziers hands in An.
1666. at which time, say they, there was as great quantity unsold as at
present. Tho this I might in part deny: yet I will grant, that great quantities
did then ly upon our hands; because during the War and the plague there was
little of it wrought in our own, and less exported into foreign Countries; the
King of France at that time commanded all the English wool which came into his
dominions (which was no small quantity) to be burnt for fear of infection. And
therefore the War and Plague ceasing, our wool was again in greater measure
transported to foreiners then before. It can not therefore be concluded that
our Clothiers can manufacture all the Wool of England, because at this
juncture we had more, and afterward less wool upon our hands. But we still
loose the point which is concerning superfluous wool only. if the Clothiers
can work it all, let them do it; we shall all rejoice at it: if they cannot, I
hope they will acknowledge themselves unreasonable if they oppose what we
request.

6. Lastly they urge that the French cannot make any, except very course Cloth,
without our wool. Which I deny and appeal to them, who know any thing of the
South parts of France, whether they make not good Cloth at and about
Carcassone, Bourge en Berry and diverse other places without the help of our
woolls? Some Turkey Merchants know also, that their Carcason Cloth finds good
prices, and many buyers in the Levant. But grant it true, that they can make
but little besides course cloth without our wool, and suppose it were possible
to keep our wool from them; yet if they will be content to wear their own
course Cloth (as most certainly they will and must) rather then buy ours, what
shall the not-exporting wool advantage the Clothier or the Merchant? I would
fain ask those who are so unwilling to have wool exported, whether they will
give security to take of all the wool yearly growing in the Nation at a
reasonable rate, suppose 10. pound per Pack: but if they refuse, let them not
think it reasonable the poor Grazier, and Farmor, or indeed the Landlord must
bear all the loss and damage. It Is too great a burden on them, who already
bear the chief and almost only burden of the Nation.

V. For remedy of all the disorders in this matter, I shall propose nothing but
what I conceive the laws of the Nation and Acts of Parliament enjoin. As,

1. That those, who work up our wool in England may buy when and where they
please, and as cheap as they can.

2. That no broker or forestaller shall be suffered to buy wool, but that it
shall be bought either by the Clothier himself, or the Exporter; but not by any
man to sell it again in England: unless in such Towns as Halifax, etc. Where
the poor workmen are not able to buy any considerable quantities, as formerly
it was.

3. That no Merchant stranger shall be suffered to buy any Wool till
All Saints or St. Martins-day: but then any may buy and export what they please.

4. That every sack of Wool, that is exported, shall pay such customs to the
King as the Parliament in their wisdom shall think meet.

5. That no Man under such a degree as shall be judged meet shall wear other
then woollen outward garments.

6. That all foreign woollen and Silk-manufactures whatever be confiscate.

7. That provision be made for vending our Cloth beyond Sea: and a prohibition
made of the Commodities coming from such Countries as refuse our Cloth; as the
Parliament shall think fit, according to the example of former times.

8. That the Irish wool be prevented from coming into England, unless in order
to its sale to strangers.

9. That the multitude of Acts for Cloth-working be reduced into one plain,
clear law remedying the innumerable abuses in mingling, Carding, Spinning,
Weaving, Scouring, Milling, Rowing, Tentring, Dying, etc. Which done, it 'twill
be easy to prevent exporting undressed and undyed Clothes. Of which Sr. Walter
Raleigh justly complains, as prejudicial to the Kingdom.

10. That the Aulnager may be countenanced in, and be put in mind of, duly
executing his office: not suffering his seals to be sold by dozens to Clothiers
and Shearmen to fix to their own Clothes at their pleasure, without being
measured or visited.

11. That no Englishman be permitted to set up for himself in relation to
clothing till he have served 7 years apprenticeship at the trade. Which will
lessen the outcry of Clothiers for want of work, encourage honest and skilful
work-wen, and give credit to the employment, which now is disgraced by those
whom ignorance, not an ill trade, reduces to necessity, and finally it will
give reputation to our Cloths) which for want of it have much lost their vent
beyond sea as well as in our own Nation.

12. That for increase of our People a voluntary register be permitted, and
liberty, given to all strangers to buy lands, to set up manufacture at their
pleasure, and to live with freedom, liberty, and the privileges, of
Englishmen. Following in this the excellent example of great King Ed. 3 that
there be care taken to prevent idleness, so frequent in this Nation since Queen
Elizabeth's Acts for releiving beggars: a thing most piously designed; yet
proving an encouragement to they- very and Idleness, a charge to the
industrious inhabitants of every Parish, and an injury to the whole Nation.

FINIS.

