REASONS Humbly Offered, why a Duty should not be laid on Sugars.
IN laying Taxes upon Trade, it is true that the heaviest Part of the Duties
ought to lie upon Goods Imported, because the Consumption being within Our
selves, the Consumer is supposed to pay the Duty: but Sugars Imported from Our
own Colonies have several just Exceptions from this Rule, which quite alter the
Case.

1. The Plantations are a Part of Ourselves, though they are placed Remote; the
Goods they transmit hither ought to be esteemed Our own Manufacture and Growth,
and to be used accordingly.

The Mistake in this particular Point has been a great Occasion of Our
Burthening the Plantations in America; by which they have been discouraged, and
their Neighbour-Colonies increased.

To speak of Our Sugar-Colonies in particular.

The Product of them (except what is spent in Our own Colonies) is wholly
transmitted to England. Here is their Market; here their Profits are made; and
here they, who get Estates there, retire to live and spend them: Here they buy
all their Necessaries; so much as the Cloths they wear, and great part of the
Food they eat: There is no One Argument which can be used to denominate the
Isle of Wight to be part of England, but what holds good for these Colonies,
the Distance of Place excepted; and that is an Article which makes it still more
Beneficial to us; for it is much more to our Advantage that those Islands stand
as they do, than if they lay in the Channel as the Wight does. The Employment
of Seamen and Shipping, and the great Price they give for Our Manufactures, is
a Demonstration beyond the Power of Argument to prove it.

If Sugar, Cotton, and Ginger, were the Product of the Isle of Wight, it is
presumed we should count them Our own Growth, and be very tender of them; it is
plain they are as much Our own now, and to much more Advantage, and ought
therefore as much to be valued and protected.

The Planters are Englishmen of our own People, they neither Buy nor Sell with
any but our selves, they Consume Ten times more of our own Product and
Manufactures, than the like Number of any of our own People in England, any pay
Three times the Price for it; they make the return of all their Industry and
Labor to us; this is the Center of their Wealth, the Place where they lay it
up, and where their Posterity spend it; therefore to Burden them, is to Ruin
the most Profitable and most Industrious part of our own Body.

But it is Objected, That though this be true, it does not appear that laying a
Duty on their Goods here can be a Burden or Ruin to their Trade, it being
raised here not there, and paid by the Importer, and to him again by the
Retailer, and at last by the Consumer, in the Prices of the Goods; all Taxes in
general being supposed to be paid by the last Buyer.

This were a good Argument, if sad Experience had not made it appear to be a
mistake; and to convince those who are of another Opinion, 'twill be necessary
a little to examine the History of the Trade, and of the last Duty imposed upon
it.

Our Sugar Trade, in general, is but a young Manufacture, and dates its
Original within the Memory of some Persons now living, and is, perhaps, the
greatest improved Trade, and the most Profitable to ^ngland, that is, or ever
was in the World. The first cause of its rise was from the Indiscretion of the
Portuguese, who presuming upon their being Masters of the Sugar-Trade in the
Brasills, laid a heavy Tax on their own Sugar, which encouraged our Island of
Barbados, to whom first the way of making of Sugar was discovered, to run into
the Trade; and it has been in vain that the Portuguese saw their Error, and
have since endeavored to retrieve it. This is so direct an Example, it is
needless to argue it. And whoever knows the Sugar-Trade, cannot be ignorant,
that it is not impossible to be lost by the same Error by which it was gained.

In the Reign of the late King James an additional Duty was laid upon Sugar,
notwithstanding all the Remonstrances of the Traders and Planters to the
contrary; and yet even then nothing but the pretense that the Duty would not
affect the Planters but lie on the Consumer, with a Promise of His Majesty to
remit it if it proved otherwise, could make it seem tolerable.

But when time demonstrated the sad effect it had on the Planter, and they
applied for Relief, they were answered, 'Twas an Unmannerly thing to put His
Majesty in mind of His Promise.

It Is true, if Sugar was Planted and Cured in England, the Duty might lie on
the Consumer, as in other Cases it does; but here the Case differs exceedingly.

The Planter is the Seller at our Market, the Merchant here is but the Factor;
when the Planter Ships his Sugars for England he consigns them to his Factor to
be Sold for him, and generally draws Bills upon his Factor for as much as he
supposes the Produce to be, and sometimes more.

Upon laying the Duty abovementioned, the Experiment was made; the Factor had
two ways to manage the Sugars and Bills, and no more.

1. To Accept the Bills absolutely. Or, 2. Conditionally.
If he accepted the Bills absolutely, he would then sell the Goods at the
Market-price, let it be what it would, to enable him to comply with the
Payment; and if the Produce did not make it good, the Planter remained Debtor
to the Balance, so the Loss returned upon him.

If he accepted the Bills conditionally, that is, to pay when the Goods are
sold: If the Goods did not sell in time, the Bills went back protested, or else
were Noted, and lay here at Interest and Charges. By both which the Planter was
a considerable Loser both in Money and Reputation.

The Buyers here knowing too well these Methods of their Trade, and that of
Necessity the Factor must sell for the Reasons aforesaid, refused to advance in
Price notwithstanding the Duty, and withheld buying by a General Consent, and
the Consequence soon answered their Expectation, for the Factors were forced to
sell at the old Price to support the Credit both of themselves and their
Principals.

But some of the most Considerable Factors being willing to try all possible
Ways for their Employers, shipped off great Quantities for Holland, Hambourgh,
and other Parts, but those Markets being not able to take off the Quantities,
and the Bills still following the Goods, to enable the Exporter to pay the
Planters Bills, as above, the very same thing followed Abroad, the Goods were
forced to be sold to raise the Money, and the Loss fell still upon the poor
Planter.

Thus, whoever pays the Money, the Planter bears the Loss, and is left in Debt,
and consequently Undone; for it is quite another thing to be in Debt in the
West Indies than it is in England.

That the Planter is not able to bear the Duty, at least, at this time, is the
next thing to be proved, and that is as plain as the other. The War which has
lasted now nine Years, has been a General Prejudice to all Trade, but to the
West India Trade in particular: And in the West Indies, the Islands of
Barbados and Jamaica have been as it were destined to be Ruined, having
besides the War had a Complication of Disasters, as the dreadful Earthquake,
and the Insurrection of the Negroes at Jamaica, the Loss of Three or Four
entire Fleets from Barbados, by Disaster of Weather and Hurricanes, together
with a Distemper brought amongst them by the Men of War, little better than the
Plague, which swept away great Numbers of their Inhabitants.

Also they have raised Forces, and fitted out Ships at their own Charge for
several Expeditions; and in short, besides their Losses at Sea by the French,
with the Ruin of great part of Jamaica, and St. Christophers, by their
Descents, have raised larger Taxes on their Estates than has been paid by us at
home; by which Means there is not half the Sugar planted in the West Indies
that was before the War.

After all this, now Peace is obtained and Trade revives, to lay a Tax upon
Sugar would be the same thing to them as a Continuance of the War, and the
whole Islands must fall under a visible Decay by it. Which ought to be esteemed
as a Decay of our own Strength and Trade, because it will of consequence lessen
the Consumption of our Manufactures, and abate the Number of our Seamen and
Shipping, which are the Wealth and Strength of the Nation.

There are many other Arguments to prove the nature of the Trade or Art of
Planting cannot bear it; as, The Soil requiring more Charge to Manure and Plant
it, than formerly it did; Sugars bearing a less Price than at first; the
multitude of Casualties and Miscarriages the Plantations and Management of
Sugar are constantly subject to, more than any other Manufacture or Plantation
in the world; with the more than usual difficulty and length of time required
to recover those Miscarriages; with the several high Duties and Taxes raised in
the Country, besides what they pay already in England, which together is not
less than 30 per Cent. on the real Value of their Sugars; with an Impossibility
of raising the Price, the Markets being absolutely governed by the Quantities,
not the Cost of the Sugars, which returns all Taxes on the Planter.

Nor are they relieved by the Exportation here, though the Duty be drawn back;
for all Exportations from hence, excepting what are occasioned by a Demand from
abroad, always returns a Loss, Foreigners being too well acquainted with the
reason of such forced Exportations; of which we had plain Examples in the time
of the Duties beforementioned.

We dare not say what effect this may have upon men who are put under desperate
Circumstances, as these must be, the Consequence being the complete Ruin of the
Trade. For if the poorer Planters, who are by far more numerous than the Rich,
are ruined, and the Rich come to live on their Estates, and abate planting
Sugar, which they do for gain, and will do no longer than they gain by it, the
Negroes will be sold off to other Nations, the Strength and Trade will decline,
the Inhabitants will decrease, they will Plant for Provisions, and must be
defended by a Garrison, or they will be taken by the first European Nation we
quarrel with.

There being such a Chain of fatal Consequences attending England, as well as
the Islands and Planters, it is hoped, That the Sum proposed to be raised on
Sugars, may be levied on Wines, Brandies, etc.; which will raise it more
effectually, and with much less Prejudice to England in general, those
Commodities being purchased chiefly with our Ready Money, and the less of them
we consume, the Richer we are: Whereas Sugar is our own Produce, raised by the
Expense of our own Manufactures, and the Industry of our own People, and we are
not the poorer for the Consumption.


