REASONS Against passing the BILL prepared, concerning Writs of CERTIORARI.
IT is alleged in the Bill, that by means of Writs of Certiorari, whereby
Indictments, etc. are removed into the Court of King's Bench, Offenders escape
Unprosecuted, and Unpunished, and the King loses the Fines which would be
imposed, were not such Indictments removed.

And also intended to be Enacted in the said Bill, That no Certiorari shall be
granted but upon Motion in Court, and the Cause for granting thereof, to be
specified in the Writ, and the Certiorari shall only be delivered at the
Quarter Sessions of the Peace in open Court, etc.

That all Indictments, etc. removed by Certiorari, shall be effectually
prosecuted and brought to Trial or Judgment; or otherwise determined within the
space of two Terms, and within the County Pallatines, within six months after
the Certiorari returned, or else Procedendo's ex Officio and gratis, shall be
made, and for default of making the Procedendo's; The Master of the Office to
forfeit for the first Offense, forty pounds, and for every other such Offense
one hundred pounds.

It is humbly conceived, That the Allegations in the Preamble of this Bill, are
grounded upon a mistake; There being no delay in the proceedings against
Offenders in the Court of King's Bench, process being duly made out, and
Offenders more speedily and duly punished then at the Sessions of Peace, or any
Inferior Court whatsoever: For that forthwith after every Indictment; is
removed into the said Court, Process are thereupon duly made out from Term to
Term against the Offenders, until they are Outlawed, if they do not appear; If
they do apear, they must plead the next Term after, or else Judgment may be
entered against them: If they do plead the Prosecutor may carry it to Trial, and
be allowed the third part of the Fine if they be Convicted, by virtue of a
Privy Seal enrolled in Court. If the Prosecutor does not try it, the King does
not lose his Fine, for unless the Defendent try it himself the next Assizes
after his plea, or submit to a Fine, Process are duly made out until he be
Outlawed; and after the Outlary is reversed, he must try said Indictment, or
otherwise legally discharge it.

That the King does not lose his Fines by reason of the removal Indictments;
For that more Fines come to the Kings use imposed upon Offenders in the
King's Bench, upon Indictments removed, then out of all the Inferior Courts,
though not one Indictment of a hundred, is removed into the said Court.

As to what is first intended to be Enacted by the said Bill: That no
Certiorari shall be made, but upon motion made in open Court, and delivered at
the Quarter Sessions of the Peace, etc.

It is Answered, Certiorari's be made in the Vacation time (without Motion in
Court) Persons can have little or no benefit by them: For that the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace by Law, are to be kept in the Vacation time, and before
Motion can be made in Court (in Term time) for the Writ, they shall be adjudged
an punished without remedy: And besides, the great charge and trouble the
persons will be put to in their Motions, etc. will prove a Remedy as bad, if
not worse then the Disease. As for Example, A man may be Indicted in the
beginning of a Summer Vacation, for forcible Entry or Detainer, by one who
pretends Title to his House or Land, and Turned out of Possession, and lose
all his Summer profit of his Land, and can have no remedy before Michaelmas
Term. Or if a man be Indicted at a Private Sessions for a forcible Entry, he
shall be turned out of possession, and have no remedy, unless he can have a
Certiorarie in the Vacation time: And further, the charge of a Certiorari by
Motion in Court upon cause showed, will be at least a treble charge to the
Subject; Nay probably, six times more than now it is.

As to what is next intended to be Enacted (viz.) That all Indictments, etc.
shall be prosecuted and brought to Trial within two Terms, etc. It is Answered,
That there are no Assizes between Easter and Trinity. Term, nor between
Michelmas and Hillary Term, for Trial of such Indictments; and Process cannot
be made out but from Term to Term; and if a special Plea be pleaded, it cannot
come to Issue, to be tried in so short a time.

As to the last Clause in the Bill for the making out Procedendo's ex Officio
and gratis. It is Answered, That after an Indictment is returned and filed on
Record in the Court of King's Bench, which is immediately done upon the return,
it cannot be sent back by Procedendo; for Process are thereupon immediately
made out, and the party may be Outlawed, and no Record to warrant it. And if
the Clerk of the Crown shall make Procedendo's ex Officio and gratis, and be at
the charge of sending Messengers into the several-Counties to the Justices,
etc. with the Indictments; It may prove a charge greater than the benefit of
his Office.

And it is further desired to be observed; That the issuing forth of Writ of
Certiorari, out of Court of King's Bench, for removing of Indictments, etc. from
the Sessions of Peace, and other Inferior Courts, has been always accounted
an undoubted Right and Liberty, belonging unto the Subject, as their Appeal;
and that no Certiorari is made, but by warrant from one of the judges of the
said Court; though anciently, and till of late, such Writ were made without any
warrants, as commonly as Writ of Latitat, and such like mean process.

That it is the undoubted Prerogative of the King, to sue and prosecute
Offenders in what Court he pleases; Especially proper in the Court of
King's Bench, where his Learned Council most usually attend, and where only
Writs of Outlary can be made against Criminal Offenders, for want of
Appearance, etc. And it is to be observed, that no Clerk of the Assize, or
Clerk of the Peace, do make out Process against Offenders upon Indictments to
Outlary* notwithstanding they do not appear; neither do any of the said Clerks
certify any Records of Outlary, into the Court of King's Bench, as by Law they
ought to do: Neither can they make out Process out of their own Counties, in
case the Offenders live or remove into other Counties which frequently happens;
but Process out of the King's Bench can be made against Offenders all the Realm
over.

That for want of Certiorari's, The Justices of the Peace, may if they please
assume an Arbitrary power whereby the people may suffer for want of their
Appeal.

That the Peers of the Realm, and their Tenants may suffer much for want of
these Writs: For though most of the Peers are in the Commissions of the Peace,
yet they seldom appear at the Sessions: Besides, their Lands lie dispersed in
several Counties. The Peers are like more especially to be prejudiced in case
of forcible Entries, wherein Justices of the peace have power to give
possession of Estates without control, except Certioraries be granted as well
in the Vacation, as in Term time.


