REASONS For Passing a General ACT for Reducing the Forfeitures, humbly offered
by the Persons Concerned.
THe persons Forfeited, with the Heirs of such as are Deceased and were
Forfeited during the two last Reigns, specially since the first of January
1665. Do humbly crave, that a general act may be past, Rescinding their
Forfeitures for the Reasons following, viz.

First, Because it is evident by His Majesty's Declaration, while Prince of
Orange for the Kingdom of Scotland: That the Oppressions, and violent
Persecutions, which these persons suffered, as well after as before their
Fofeitures, are there set down amongst the principal Motives that induced His
Majesty to undertake for the Relief of this Kingdom: And that his said
Undertaking was accounted by all good men no less just and Generous, then its
success was Happy and Glorious.

2ly. Because it is no less manifest, that the greater part of the Articles of
the Declaration of the Estates against King James; such as the imposing of
Oaths contrary to Law, the Oppression of a standing Army in time of Peace: The
imposing of Exorbitant Fines, the Imprisoning persons without expressing the
Reason: The employing the Officers of the Army as Judges with their Summar
Executions; and the like, were but continuations of what was begun in the
preceding Reign: And that the Claim of Right adding thereto many more
particulars chiefly ascribable to that Reign, such as the forcing men to Depone
in capital Crimes against themselves; The abuse of Torture, the sending of an
Army upon any part of the Kingdom in an Hostile manner in time of Peace. The
Charging the Leidges with Lawborrows at the Kings Instance: The Imposing of
Bonds without Authority of Parliament. The putting of Garrisons in private men's
Houses. The Fining Husbands for their Wives. The Imprisoning and Prosecution of
persons for Petitioning the King; does plainly hold forth, that both the Reigns
were Arbitrary, and Oppressive: So that to declare King James to have Forfeit
the Right to the Crown for the abovementioned Causes, and all other
Particulars above set down, to be contrary to Law. And yet not to restore the
persons who suffered thereby; and the sadest part of whose Sufferings it was to
be made Mad by the said Oppressions, and forced to the Extremity of rising in
Arms, would be very inconsequent.

3dly. Because the Relief of those thus Oppressed, and thereby forced to rise
in Arms, being really intended: To think to effectuate the same by Reductions
upon Specialities, is neither Advisable nor Practicable, as may easily appear
by what follows.

4ly. Because the persons Forfeited, and now expecting to be Restored, are
above five hundred: And all the Specialities that can be found by the greatest
stretch of the most subtle Invention, will not afford Relief to Fifty of the
said five hundred: So that above four hundred and fifty, and these of the
Poorest and most Distressed, must still remain in Misery. Besides, that by the
making and allowing of the foresaid stretches to find out Informalities. The
Rules, Forms and Practique of the Court of Justiciary, are like to be rendered
uncertain and doubtful; which is of far more dangerous Consequence, then any
Inconvenience that can be justly apprehended from a general Act.

5ly. Because when the Design is known and manifest, viz. To Relieve and
Restore the foresaids persons Forfeited, to go about to do the same under the
color of Informalities, which can reach but a few; and the greater part of
these few very lamely and constrainedly; is but to expose, both the Justice and
Prudence of the Kingdom, unless at the same time the Righteousness of these
Reductions be by a general Act fairly owned and declared.

6ly. Because it is well known that the first appearance of His Majesty when
Prince of Orange for our Relief and Deliverance, was Light and Joy, and as Life
from the Dead to all these Afflicted persons: And that in effect they still are
and will perpetually prove the persons most True and Faithful to His Majesty.
Whereas their former Persecutors did then sink into Grief and Dispondency, so
that it cannot be thought that any true Friend to King William will now offer
to oppose these poor Men's restitution.

But the great and common Objection, is, to restore persons who were Forfeited
for rising in Arms upon necessary standing Laws, and clear and evident
Probation, were to lay down the worst of preparatives to encourage Rebellions
for the future.

To which it is answered, First, That it is earnestly wished that the persons
that make this Objection may be well considered, whether they be Byas^ed by
particular Interest, or truly, and at the bottom approvers of the late
Proceedings against King James.

2ly. It is known Rule, That in Criminals, as to either Condemnations, or
Absolutions Precedents and Examples are of no force.

3dly. That whatever the King and Parliament shall now do by their Sovereign
power, upon consideration of particular Circumstances, as to things, can never
in Law or Sense be made preparative to hinder the Execution of standing Laws
for hereafter: It being most certain, that when ever these Laws shall be
transgressed, or contraveened, the alleging of things for a preparative, found
by King and Parliament to be distinguished by their Circumstances, would be of
no force.

4ly. As these miserable Attempts at Pentland and Bothwell-Bridge were contrary
to standing Law, so it is undeniable, that all the lesser attempts made through
out the Kingdom after the Prince of Orange his Arrival into England, against
King James before the meeting of the Estates; do fall under the same
construction: And that all the difference, as to this point that can be made
betwixt them, is that (Blessed be God) these had the far better success.

5ly. As in England they needed not a general Act, so we see that the late
Forfeitures have been Reversed and Rescinded upon such slender Reasons, that if
there had been need of a general Act, their Parliament had never stood to have
past it.

6ly. Can any man allege, that the Rescinding of Forfeitures for these former
Insurrections, can be a bad preparative to encourage Insurrections for the
future: But at the same time he must think, that the late great Revolution, may
likewayes be drawn into a far more mischievous consequence: A thought, which
certainly all honest Men must abhor.

And therefore seeing that the Oppressions of the Forfeited persons are clearly
acknowledged by the Claim of Right; their Relief more then insinuate by His
Majesty's Declaration, while Prince of Orange: Their Redress expressly assured
by the Meeting of the Estates: Their Restitution plainly Assented to by His
Majesty's printed Instructions; the manner of their Relief by Specialities
evidently impracticable and delusive: And that the Forfeited persons themselves
cannot fail to be amongst the truest Friends to King William. What reason can
be adduced to hinder their Restitution by a general Act; specially seeing, that
the alone publishing of this Representation, may and will undoubtedly cut off
the ill consequence of a supposed preparative, to the end of the World.

But it is farther objected, That as to many of these Forfeitures, there are
Donators; and where Donators are, Forfeitures cannot be Rescinded, unless the
Donators be particularly called, which at this time has been omitted.

To which it is answered. First, That if there were any weight in this
Objection, as there is none, It could only be Objected with any probability
against the Reductions of particular Forfeitures. But to say, That when the
King and Parliament proceeds by virtue of their Sovereign and Legislative
Power, to Rescind Forfeitures in general: And that in Prosecution of the States
Claim of Right, and after their having Forfeited the late King James for the
Causes, and in the manner, we have seen, is neither reasonable nor tolerable.

2dly. It is denied that Donators need be called to Reductions of Forfeitures
in Parliament, per modum justitiae, Because in effect, they have no proper
Interest, in as much as all their Interest is only founded in the Gift, which
is consequential to the Sentence of Forfeiture; and must of necessity stand or
fall as the Sentence is found to be just or unjust: And the Gift being a free
Gift of His Majesty, and the King and Parliament together, reviewing the
Sentence, whether just or unjust; and His Majesty's Advocate, the proper
Contradictor, being always present at such Reductions, to affirm that the
Donators must be called to a cognition of this nature to be made by King and
Parliament, is evidently unnecessary.

3 The proper case requiring Donators to be called is when either their gifts
are questioned; or there falls in a competition about them; but to think that
where the gift is free and gratuitous, as the Kings gifts are: That the King,
the Author of the gift, with the Parliament, having the Sovereign Authority of
the Kingdom: May not review the sentences upon which these gifts proceed: Is
obviously unjust and presumptuous.

4. Let search be made into the records, and it will be found that this point
was never before Controverted, for albeit that it may be found that some times
a Donator (and it may be two cannot be found) has been called Ex
superabundanti. And it is like for the particular repeating and stating of his
intromissions. Yet generally, it will appear that to reductions per modum
Justitiae. Donators were not called: Nor is their any ground here to
distinguish betwixt Reductions upon the head of irrelivancy, and reductions for
want of due probation; Seeing that on the part of these that gave sentence, both
are alike unjust. And if it be alleged, that the Donators in the second case
should be called: Because he may supply the probation It may be as justly
affirmed, that he may be called in the first, because he may add to the
accusation; which yet is by all denied. But the true reason of the Parliaments
practice in this Case, Is because that Donators have only gratuitous Gifts: And
as the King is their Author, so the King and Parliament have the Sovereign
Power, and only proper interests to Re-examine all such sentences, They being
only pronounced at the Kings Advocats instance, and the Authority of the
Parliament supplying all Defects.

But 5. To put this question out of doubt, the records of Parliament do afford
plain and almost parallel instances to the Case in hand, that our Parliaments
have rescinded forfeitures without calling the Donators, and that by a general
Act, where the Case appears to be rather less Favorable, as may be clearly
seen in the instance of that general reduction of Forfeitures that was in the
Year 1585. And in many other Instances extent in the records of Parliament.

There is another question here moved whether Transactions, and Compositions,
made by the Persons Forfeited, or their Friends for them, with their Donators,
can be declared void and the sums paid, or agreed to be paid in composition,
ordained to be restored, and some incline to think that this cannot be in
respect that here is a Transaction which is an express bargain on the account
of the Hazard, and the Faith of such Transactions is so established by Law,
that they cannot, be called in question, But on the other Hand it is to be
considered, That the difference of Transactions from other Bargains. Is that by
a Transaction some thing doubtful and litigious betwixt two parties is agreed,
and the pretense of the one party Remitted or Discharged for some consideration
to be given by the other, which being a method and expedient to terminate, and
put an end to pleas, the Law has been more careful to preserve and establish
such agreements. But by this it also plainly appears that the Bargains and
Compositions made with Donators, were in effect no Transactions. But plain
Bargains of purchass, for there being neither Res, not Lis Dubia in the Case,
both the sentence and gift of Forfeiture being cl^a^ according to the Law for
the time, It is evident that the Bargains that the Donators made, were direct
bargains of Sale, for as high a price as they could get. And that they were
alike ready, to make over their gifts, either to the Forfeited Persons, or to
Strangers which of them did bid most. So that if they sold these Estates within
the Worth, It was not on the account of any pretension the buyer might have
either to the Estate or the price of it, But merely from the common odium, and
uncertainty of all Forfeitures, which made them content to take what they could
get from any hand whatsomever. 2ly This may be yet farther cleared if the case
be put of the Donators selling and disponing upon a Forfeit Estate to a
stranger. In which case it cannot be questioned but if the Forfeiture came to
be reduced the Person Forfeited would be reponed to his Estate, and the
stranger purchaser have recourse upon his warrandice against the Donator: How
then the forfeit Person or his Friends purchass should be thought in this point
to differ from the purchass of a stranger is evidently inconceivable. Its
granted if the Bargain had been expressly made with this Condition that no
eventor revolution though reducing the Forfeiture should give ground of
repetition, that then condition should be kept, the Bargain in this case being
a plain Bargain of hazards as of a Jactus retis, or the like. But then what
composition in Scotland whether with friend or stranger was so concluded. 2ly
Suppose a Bargain had been so made yet it most be fairly and honestly made
without Fear, Force, or Concussion, which Leads to a third Argument viz.

3. Esto, That the compositions for Forfeitures had been made upon these
express terms (as yet we know none in Scotland were) that the parties Forfeited
should not repeat their money though the Forfeiture should come to be reduced,
yet even in this case if this Bargain was agried to out of extreme necessity,
The party Forfeited having no other remedy to prevent the starving and Ruining
of himself and his Family, can any rational man deny but that this extremity
going over by a happy change of times, the Person who was thereby forced should
be releived of his Bargain, and reponed against it. But so it is that this is
directly our present case, It being undeniable that the forfeit Persons or
their Friends who of late componed for their Estates with Donators did do it
meetly for preventing the utter Ruin of themselves, their Families and
Creditors, For being pressed with the severity of a Forfeiture and rigid
Donator that left them nothing, what stronger Fear, Force, and Concusion could
men be under, so that if Law restore against Bargains made throw fear and
Force, as we know it does, certainly Restitution in the case in hand is the
most Just that ever was heared of, specially if it be considered that this
Restitution is now demanded from King and Parliament, whose Sovereign power may
and ought in equity to grant it though in the strick Law, it were more doubtful
as indeed it is not.

4. Not to mention how at this time the whole Kingdom is most happily releived
and Discharged of Bonds and Subscriptions, and even of Oaths. (which in Law are
more binding than transactions) formerly imposed though by a necessity far
inferior to that whereby these compositions were extorted, do we not see how
that by the Act Debtor and Creditor 1661. The Faith of private bonds was upon
for less considerations altered and superceeded, and even express bargains
concerning proper wodsets clearly innovat. and Renunciations upon agreement
Discharged If then the Parliament did at that time think fit upon bare Reasons
of convenience to make such stretches upon private Bargains fairly concluded,
can any Rational Man think that compositions so visibly extorted upon such
unjust grrounds as the late Forfeitures were should now be sustained.

5. Was it not upon this most just Consideration, that his Majesty in his
printed Instructions allows his consent to be given to what the Parliament
should propose for restitution to be made of Fines, or Compositions for fines
or Forfeitures, from those who had the Benefit of them; so that indeed it may
Justly be wondered, how that after the Oppressions we have see, and the force
that men have been laid under to redeem their Estates, from them by giving
often more then the half to such as assisted to spoil them, any should have
the confidence either to call such compositions legal transactions, or to plead
that they ought still to be regarded as binding, specially after that his
Majesty has so clearly declared himself in this point.

But 6ly And lastly and for superabundance, it is certain that in many Cases
the Donators did compound or sell the Estats Forfeited without any consent of
the Party Forfeited, And farther it can be made appear in some Cases, that men
did always refuse to consent to the Bargain, so that to allege a transaction
in these Cases, to bar them or their Friends from Repetition were most absurd.

In Respect whereof the general Act ought to pass as it is conceived, and
unanimously voted by the Committee of Parliament.


