REASONS Humbly Offered by the GOVERNOR, Assistants, And FELLOWSHIP of
Eastland-Merchants.

Against the giving of a General LIBERTY to all Persons whatsoever to Export
the ENGLISH VVoollen-MANUFACTURE Whither they PLEASE.

LONDON: Printed Anno. Dom. MDCLXXXIX.

REASONS humbly offered by the Governor, Assistants, and Fellowship of
Eastland Merchants, against the giving of a general Liberty to all Persons
whatsoever to export the English Woollen-Manufacture whither they please.
IT was the observation of a great Man in his time, that the ill Success which
did attend Princes and States in their great Affairs, did generally arise
through the mistake of that which was their true Interest; and certainly of all
Errors in Judgment, that which relates to a Man's Interest, where it has been
mistaken, has been ever observed to be of a most fatal Consequence; for as it
is natural for every thing to tend to its proper Center, so it is as natural
for every Man to pursue (though by different ways and means) that which he
apprehends to be his proper Interest; wherein if he happen to be mistaken, what
can follow? But instead of applying himself to that which is his real
advantage, he manytimes persueth with his utmost Endeavors, that which in the
issue proves the direct contrary.

That they are under a mis-apprehension of this nature, who do assert that a
general Liberty to all Persons to export our Woollen-Manufacture where they
please, will conduce much to the interest of the Nation, under a supposition
that it will increase the vent thereof; we humbly apprehend will be clearly
evident upon the following considerations; which (as in duty bound) we submit
to the Judgment of our Superiors.

1st. We affirm, That a General Permission of Exportation (as before mentioned)
will be a means to debase the Reputation of our English-Manufacture, and
consequently render it less desirable and sought after abroad.

2ly. It will overthrow all the Incorporated Companies of Merchants in England,
as the Hamburgh, the Russia, (though established by Act of Parliament) the
East-Land, the Turkey, the East India, and the Affrican; the Mischiefs
consequential upon which, will be as follows, viz.

1. The Trade of England will thereby be lost as to the English, and come to be
all, or at least wise the greatest part, in the hands of Foreigners; as it
formerly was, before the said Companies were erected. 2ly. All the Privileges
obtained by the said Companies from the Princes, States, and Governors of the
places of their respective Residences (which are of great advantage to the
vending of our English-Manufacture) will be utterly lost. 3. The Navigation of
England by degrees will be very much impaired, and discouraged.
3. Lastly, to name no more, a general Permission will be so far from answering
the End proposed by it, of vending a greater quantity of our
Woollen-Manufacture than was before; that in all probability, it will in the
end prove the contrary, and be the occasion of vending a great deal less.

The proving of which several Particulars we shall undertake in Order, viz.

1. For the first, that a general Permission will be, a means to debase the
reputation of our Manufactures abroad, and render them less desirable; will
appear as follows, viz.

The trade of the Manufacture being now chiefly in the management of Regulated
Companies, it is both their Care and their Interest that the said Manufacture
be not debased in its worth, whereby it may come to a dis-esteem abroad; which
general Traders will never be mindful of.

The appointing set times of Shipping will be prevented, which (though now
dis-used) yet has sometimes been found necessary by regulated Companies, in
order to bring the Manufacture into an esteem again, when by an Exportation of
much more than the Market could take off, it became unvendible, and a Drugg.

A General Permission lets in all sorts of ignorant Traders, who for want of
Judgment in the said Manufacture, know not how to make choice of such which are
proper for the Market, and when they have them there, are forced many times by
their necessities to sell them to loss, whereby our Manufacture comes to be
undervalued, and our Nation greatly prejudiced, an instance of which, we find
recorded as follows, viz.

The English in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth had for a good while together, a
profitable Trade, and good Sales for their English Manufactures at Narve, in
the Baltic Sea, until at length, in the year 1565* a number of straggling
Merchants and unskillful* Traders resorted thither out of this Realm with their
Commodities; by which means, in a little while, the Trade which before was
good, was utterly spoiled, insomuch, that many of them went about the Town with
Cloth upon their Arms* and a Measure in their Hands, and sold the same by the
Arsine (a Measure of that Country) to the great embasing of that excellent
Commodity, the discredit of our Nation, and the final impoverishment, and utter
undoing of the said straggling Merchants; all which being made known to her
Majesty, and her Privy Council, Order was taken at the next Parliament, that
the Town of Narve (then under the jurisdiction of the Muscovite) should be
comprised within the Charter of the Russia Company, to prevent the like evil
kind of dealing for the future, and making vile the principal Commodity of the
Nation. And it was so done accordingly by Act of Parliament, which one instance
amongst others, is sufficient to evidence, that a general permission of
Exportation to all Persons, will be an occasion of bringing our Manufacture
into a dis-esteem; which was our first Reason.

2. A General Permission will overthrow all the incorporated Companies of
Merchants of England; the evil Consequences of which will be

1. That the trade of England will thereby in time be lost as to the English,
and come by degrees into the hands of Foreigners.

The Trade of this Nation was formerly (as it were entirely) in the Foreigners
Hands. viz. The Members of the Haus-Towns, who were incorporated into a
Society, by the name of the Merchants of the Dutch-Hans, and had many
Privileges and Immunities granted them by the Kings and Princes of this Realm,
and amongst others a Guildhall, afterward called the Steel-yard, for the
better carrying on their said Government, as appears by a Charter granted to
them in the twenty third year of Henry the Third; but more especially by
another Charter granted to them in the forty fourth year of the said King Henry
the third, and that General Charter to foreign Merchants, granted by King
Edward the First, in the 31 st Year of His Reign.

About the time of King Henry the 4th. the English began to Trade themselves
into the East-parts, at which the Easterlings or Merchants of the Dutch-Hans,
were so offended, that they took several of their Ships and Goods, and offered
them several other Injuries, which occasioned great Complaints and Differences
between the said King Henry the 5th. and Couradus de Junigen, then Master
General of the Dutch Order in Prussia, with the Hans Towns: And diverse
Embassies passed betwixt them, on that Account, the Result of which in short
was this, that the said King Henry the 4 th. finding by the said Privileges
granted to Foreigners, his own Subjects (to the great Prejudice of the Realm)
very much crippled in their Trade; did revoke such parts of the Privileges of
the aforesaid Dutch Company, as were inconsistent with the carryeing on of a
Trade by the Natives of this Realm, and for the better Encouragement of his
own Subjects, did in the 5th. Year of His Reign, grant his first Charter to
the Merchants Trading into the Eastland, containing many great Privileges, and
Immunities, as by the said Charter may appear; which having a good effect to
the bringing of the Trade much more into the hands of the Natives of this Realm
than was before, King Edward the 4th. for their more Ample Encouragement, did
in the Second Year of His Reign, grant another Large Charter, to the Merchants
of England; especially to those Residing in the Nether-Lands, with several
additional Immunities and Privileges, as by the Charter at Large may appear.

In the 1st. and 2d. of Philip and Mary, was granted the Charter to the Russia
Company, afterward confirmed by Act of Parliament, in the 8th. Year of Queen
Elizabeth.

Until whose time, though the Trade of this Nation was driven much more by the
Natives thereof, than had been formerly, yet had the Society of the Dutch-Hans,
at the Steele-Yard, much the advantage of them, by means of their well
regulated Societies, and the privileges they enjoyed, insomuch that almost the
whole Trade was driven by them, to that degree, that Queen Elizabeth Her Self
when She came to have a War, was forced to buy the Hemp, Pitch, Tarr, Powder
and other Naval Provisions, which She wanted of Foreigners, and that too, at
their own Rates; nor was there any Stores of either in the Land to supply her
occasions on a sudden, but what at great Rates She prevailed with them to
fetch for Her, even in time of War; they being strangers not regarding the
Interest of the Nation, and Her own Subjects, being as then but very little
Traders: To remedy which, She fell upon the consideration, how She might at
home have a well-grounded dependence, to have those necessary Commodities by
Her, that so She might not want them, when She most needed them; and after
great deliberation, no better Expedient could be found, by the said Queen, and
Her Council, than by encouraging her own Subjects to be the Merchants, which
She did, by erecting out of them several Societies; of Merchants, as that of
the East-Land Company, and other Companies, by which means, and by cancelling
many of the Privileges of the forementioned Dutch-Hans Society, the Trade in
General, by degrees came to be managed by the Natives of this Realm, and
consequently, the Profit of all those Trades accrewed to the English Nation;
Trade in general, and English Shipping was increased, Her own Customs vastly
augmented, and what was at first the great End of all obtained, viz. That She
had constantly, lying at home, in the hands of Her own Subjects, all sorts of
Naval Provisions and Stores, which She could make use of, as Her occasions
required them, without any dependence on Her Neighbors for the same.

And thus by the means of the Erecting the forementioned Societies, and
Preserving and Encouraging that of the Merchant-Adventurers, was the Trade at
first gained from Foreigners to the Natives of this Realm, to its Inestimable
Advantage; and by the same means has been hitherto in great measure preserved;
but if these Societies should be overthrown, as they will certainly be, by a
general Liberty granted to all Persons, both Strangers and others, to carry our
Woollen-Manufactures to the places of their respective Privileges, the Trade
will again by degrees be lost to the English, and fall into the hands of
Foreigners; since it is clearly evident, that the Trade of England, to the
Natives of this Realm, can by no other ways be preserved, than by the same
method it was at first obtained, viz. the Supporting the several and respective
Societies of Merchants, in their Privileges and Immunities.

2dly. The next Mischief that will follow upon the overthrow of the respective
Companies, consequential upon a General Permission, is this; that all the
beneficial Privileges obtained at the hands of the Princes and Governors of
the respective Places of their Residences will be utterly Lost, to the very
great disadvantage of the Vending of our English Manufacture, and this is so
apparent, that it needs no enlargement; for if the Companies fall, their
Privileges must necessarily fall with them, and though obtained at the
Intercession of our Princes, and at the great expense and solicitations of the
said Companies, yet if a General permission be granted to all persons to Trade
to the places of their Privileges, they will be forthwith looked upon, but
under the notion of general Traders, and their Privileges, which in some
Places are greater than those Princes own Subjects enjoy, will be by them
gladly celled, and reassumed, which is so apparent to every Man's reason, that
we shall add no more about it.

3. The last mischief mentioned arising by the over tbrow of the Companies, of
which a General Permission to trade to the places of the Privileges is a
necessary consequence, is this, That the Navigation of England will by degrees
be thereby much impaired, and this is almost as apparent as the former; for it
is a certain Maxim, that the increase of Navigation follows the increase of
Trade; and if the Trade of England fall into the Hands of Foreigners, as it
will in a little time do,) by the discouragement of English Merchants, the
Navigation of England must likewise in time decay; for it has been always
observed that the Forreigner will not make use of English Shipping if he can
have any other, for besides his National, his Personal Interest leads him to
the contrary, in as much as he can have his Goods carried at cheaper Rates in
foreign Shipping, who can, and do Sail at much easier Charge than our English,
and so our Navigation by degrees will be much impaired.

3. We come now to the third and last reason that a General Permission will be
so far from gaining the end proposed by it, that in all Probability it will in
the event prove the contrary, which if we make out, (as we hope we shall) by
reason, and that backed by the experience of former and latter times: It will
then (we presume) be satisfactory to all disinterested Persons, that a General
Permission will be no ways for the good, but much to the prejudice of this
Nation.

In order to the proof of which we shall lay down this as a sure Maxim, that it
is not the quantity of Woollen-Manufacture exported, but what the Markets
abroad are able to take off, and those Nations expend; which is the true Rule,
by which our measures must be taken, as to the expense of our English
Manufacture.

For instance, If in one year there should be twenty thousand Cloths sent unto
a Place whose Markets and expense will take off but ten Thousand; Will the
Expense of our Manufacture be ever the larger for that great Exportation? No,
for the other ten Thousand must lie undisposed of, for the expense of the next
year, so that by how much the more Manufacture was sent the first Year, there
will be so much the less sent the next, and so from year to year, accordingly
as the expense requires it; unless it can be supposed that the Merchant will
still be sending out, without consideration had of his selling abroad, which,
as it is irrational to suppose, so it is impossible to be, done without an
unexhaustable stock. By which it appears, and is clearly evident, That a
general Permission may well change the hands of the Exporters, but can never
increase the expense of the Manufacture.

Nor can the Companies of Merchants, as such, lessen; or the general
Permission, encrese, athe said Exportation, but in one of these three cases,
viz.

1. Either first, if the said Companies should make any Bylaws amongst
themselves, to limit the Exportation of the said Manufactures, in order to
advancing of it in Price. This we must confess, would be a hindrance to its
Expense; but we can, and do aver, that there is not, nor ever was, that we know
of in ours or any of the said Companies, any Bylaws to limit or restrain the
Exportation.

Or 2dly. If the Members of the said Companies, as particular Merchants should
make a combination among themselves, that they would not Transport above such a
number of Clothes in such a time, or sell them under such a rate, that so their
Price might be advanced: But this considering the great numbers of Persons in
the several Companies, and their different particular Interest, (all which must
be comprised in such a Combination) is Morally Impossible; and is that which
never was, nor can be done.

3. Or Lastly, if the Merchants of the respective Companies, have not
sufficient stock to take off as much of our Manufacture, and send it to the
respective places of their Residence, as those Markets are capable of Vending;
but that this is not so, we may with modesty affirm since it is well known,
that the Merchants of the respective Companies, have Stocks sufficient to carry
off five times as much of our Manufacture, as the several Countries to which
they Trade, can, or will vend.

So that the English Merchants, being neither dis-enabled through want of
Stock, nor hindered by any By-Law, nor enengaged in any combination among
themselves, to send less of our Manufacture to the places of their respective
Trades, than the Markets in those places will take off, and vend; it may
reasonably be concluded, that the Merchant would be glad to send double the
quantity they now do, if they could find a vent for it, it being so much their
Interest as to Profit, to increase their Trade: And that a General Permission,
(as was before intimated) may change the hands of the Exporters, but cannon in
any wise increase the exportation it self; but instead thereof by the means of
over glutting the Markets, they are many times put upon a necessity of selling
to loss, by which inconvenience, together with many other, if we will believe
the experience, both of former Ages, and latter times; a General Permission
has brought our Manufacture into such dis-esteem, as has much lessened the
exportation of it, to what it was before.

Two instances whereof, one of former Ages, and the other of latter times, we
shall crave leave to offer, which we presume will sufficiently clear up the
truth of what has been alleged.

In the 29th. Year of Queen Elizabeth, the Wool-Sellers Clothiers, and others
living upon the Woollen-manufacture finding themselves grieved for want of
sufficient vent for the same made their Complaint to the Queens Majesty, and
her Council, and did assign the same Cause as is now pretended, viz The
Monopoly of the several Companies, and by that a wan of Permission for all
Persons, both Natives and Foreigners to buy it up, and send it abroad; upon
which it was then supposed that the only Remedy to cure this evil, would be to
give Liberty to all Persons, both her Highness's Subjects, and Foreigners to
buy, and transport Cloth, and other Woollen-Manufactures when, and where they
pleased; and accordingly a general Permission was granted, and they were
enabled thereunto by Letters Pattents from her Higness, directed to the then
Lord-Treasurer, with a non obstante to the Companies Charter, and that the
Charter of the City of London might be no hindrance thereunto, (by reason that
unfreemen are thereby restrained from buying and selling at Blackwell-Hall
within the said City, which was the ordinary Marketplace for buying and
selling of Cloth) the sign of the George in Kingstreet in Westminster was
appointed in the said Letters Pattents, as a Marketplace for all Clothiers,
Merchants, and others, both free and unfree, to resort unto, as would take the
benefit of the said General Permission.

But did the vent of the Manufacture increase thereby? No, but rather grew
worse and worse. The Company being afraid to go on in their Trade under such an
Innovation, and the Forreigner not taking it off, the Manufacture lay on the
makers Hands to that degree, that the poor People in Wilishire, and
Gloucestershire in great numbers were ready to grow into a Mutiny; and when all
Men expected nothing less than the abolishing of the Company, as the only cause
of all this Grief; and the setting up the Merchants of the Steel-yard again,
and establishing that general Permission, as the proper Remedy: Nothing of this
followed, but the Lords of the Council sent for the Company, and after they had
been heard, and had made known to them the true cause of the present want of
Vent; they were so satisfied in them, as to Will the said Company to proceed as
formerly in their Trade, and gave them Promises of all the assistance, and
countenance for the future which they could reasonably desire; which, certainly
their Lordships would not have done, if that they had seen that the late
Innovation, or general Permission had brought forth, or was likely to bring
forth the promised Effect, or that without Trading under regulated Societies,
so great a quantity of Woollen-Manufacture could be vented, as was when they
were maintained, and defended in the Enjoyment of their Rights and Privileges.

The other Instance is of a much later Date, and fresh in Memory; when, in the
Year 1662, upon a complaint of the like nature, a temporary Liberty was granted
to all Persons to buy, and Ship out our Woollen-Manufacture; but so far was it,
upon Trial made, from answering the End proposed, that the very Clothiers
themselves did in the following Year 1663, Petition that the said liberty might
be revoked, and accordingly upon their Petition it was revoked, by his late
Majesty, King Charles the Second.

And if it be now objected to us, that after all our endeavors to prove that a
general Permission will not Increase the vent of our Manufacture, we have in
the mean time no where affirmed what will, we must declare, that at present we
know but one of these two, either to put a stop to its making in other Parts;
or of making it so cheap here, that we may be able to undersel our Neighbors.

The first of which we know to be impossible, the latter, we have reason to
believe might give offense to those who are the Sellers of its Materials, though
it is sufficiently evident to any common Understanding, that the cheapness of
the Materials is the most proper means of increasing the vent of our
Manufacture; for he that goes cheapest to Market with a Commodity of equal
Goodness, shall thereby be enabled to sell cheaper, and by that means be
assured of the first Market.

And now, though there be many other Arguments, and further Instances which might
set sorth the great National Mischiefs, and little benefit which will naturally
arise from such a general Permission; yet at present we shall add no more,
forasmuch as we humbly conceive what was before alleged, is sufficient to
convince all unprejudiced Persons, that a general Permission will bring great
Inconvenicies upon the Nation in general, as to its Trade, and when that is
done, no ways answer the end proposed by it.

All which is most humbly submitted, etc. Exam. per. Ince.
FINIS.

