To my Honored Friend Mr. M. T. one of the Committee chosen by the Common
Council of London, for the Insuring of Houses from Fire.
SIR,
YOurs I received, together with the Enclosed Papers about the Undertaking of
some private Persons for the Insuring your Houses in the City from Fire; and
according to your Request, shall give you my Sentiments concerning this matter;
which tho others that know to what a Master of Reason I write, may call it
Presumption, yet your Commands have made it Duty and Obedience. I could not but
wonder that when you and the other Magistrates of the City were consulting
about this Affair, what pretense a few Foreigners and private Men could have
to chop in, and set on foot the same Design which you were managing, not only
without, but also directly against your consent. For tho they pretend that they
were the first Inventers of it, and therefore please themselves with a fond
Conceit that the wisdom of the Parliament will allow them the sole enjoyment
thereof for a considerable time, if not for full Fourteen years; yet it is
sufficiently known that this Affair was propounded in your Common Council as
early as Febr. 1670. long before ever it entered into their thoughts, and ever
since from time to time continued under Consideration how it might be most
effectually put in Practice. So that it is plain, these Gentlemen have lighted
their Taper at your Fire, and that in more Senses than one they are building on
other men's grounds.

But if they had been the first Inventers of this Design, yet I doubt not but I
shall make it evident, that it is far more for the Public Good that the City
should be entrusted with the management of it, than these or any other private
men; Because, (1.) the City can settle a better Security; (2.) it is more
reasonable the City should enjoy the Profits arising from it; (3.) it would be
of ill consequence to entrust these private Persons and Foreigners with the
management of it; and (4.) it would be no prejudice to the City or Citizens to
have it in their own hands.

First, The City can settle a better Security or Fund for ensuring Houses than
these Persons have or can. It Is sufficiently known that the City of London is
already possessed of Ground-rents to a great value, of a clear Title, and free
from all manner of Encumbrances, and can when they will augment the same, in
manner and measure, far beyond what these or any other private men can reach
to. And whereas they propose Lands and Ground-rents to the value of but Thirty
thousand pounds, the City has resolved that Lands and Ground-rents, to the
value of One hundred thousand pounds at least, shall be forthwith settled; and
likewise the Praemium, as an additional Fund, shall be soon after settled to
ensure Houses subscribed for, upon Trustees of some of the Principal Citizens,
chosen by the Ensured from among themselves, which Trustees shall be obliged by
their Hand and Seal, each of them to the Ensured, for the payment of their
Losses and satisfaction of Damages, in case the same be not immediately
performed by the Chamber, where will always be a considerable Bank. The
division therefore of Securities into Real, Personal, and the Seal of a
Corporation by the Author of the Enquiry, etc. was very impertinent; for there
was no intention to practice the strength of the City Seal at all, but only in
settling the Ground-rents on the Trustees, as to which the Enquirer himself
will not Question its validity. But the Ensured are to have their Security from
the Trustees, for their Damages if their Houses should be burnt; for the
Recovery of which, there is no need (as the Enquirer pretends) of commenceing a
tedious Suit with the City, but they may immediately have Relief in Equity upon
the Fund, as in all other Trusts whatsoever. The clearness of which Fund, I
hope the Enquirer will not have the impudence to call in question. And sure
there is none but will believe it to be a better Security than any that can be
given, either by a person whose Chamber Door daily suffers an Assault and
Battery, from a whole posse of Bricklayers, Carpenters, Masons, etc. and who,
if one may judge by the several Actions of Debt that every Term are brought
against him, is in a fair way to Retire for Refuge into one of his own
Chambers, which he has built in the Temple; or by one, who tho he may be
thought to be shot up into some considerable height from a low and ordinary
Condition (as Rushes do from Mud) yet is every day liable to be called to an
Account for Maladministration of a Public Office: and if he should be found
to be in Arrears to his Majesty, even those Lands or Ground-rents which he
offers as a Security, would be seized in the behalf of his Majesty. I know
indeed the Enquirer pretends the Security would be better, as settled in
private Persons, than in the hands of the City. His Arguments I shall consider,
and answer, as

First, He pretends the Design will be better managed by the private Persons,
because men's Credit, Care, and Industry will be more concerned to preserve
Private Interest than Public, and so Fires will be better prevented and
extinguish't. But to this I answer, sad Experience shows us that Estates and
Public Revenues which have been committed to the care of a few private
Persons, have been miserably perverted; but where have any been more carefully
and faithfully applied, than those that have been entrusted with the Chamber of
London? It Is but too often seen, that a man by leaving his Children to the care
of two or three private Guardians, has in effect as fatally exposed them, as
some did of old to ravenous and devouring Beasts, that have made a Prey of
them; that have spent their Portions for them: or at best, when they have
bestowed them in Marriage, have made a Match for them, and a Bargain for
themselves. Those Hospitals, for the most part, that are in the hands of
private Gentlemen, are but sadly looked after; for they are usually made Lodges
for their Porters, Stables for their foundred Grooms, etc. So that the
Hospitals themselves are become the objects of Charity, whereas those Orphans
that are looked after by the City of London, have their Estates preserved and
duly paid; and the Revenues of those Hospitals which the City inspects, are
laid out for those Pious purposes for which they were given.

Besides, the Revenues for the maintaining of London Bridge are husbanded by
the City with all the care and prudence imaginable; but if they were in the
hands of these private Gentlemen, I am afraid the Decays of that Bridge would
not be so much repaired as those of their own Estates. Further, Late Acts of
Parliament have entrusted the Chamber of London with the Money for building of
Churches, Disbanding the late Army, etc. And if the choice of Trustees for any
of these purposes were now to be made, who would prefer these private Persons
before the City? I doubt not but the City would be as diligent, faithful, and
industrious in this Affair of quenching Fires, as it must be acknowledged to be
in all the forementioned Particulars.

But Secondly, The Enquirer pretends that the payment of Losses, and
satisfaction of Damages, will be easier and sooner dispatched by the Office of
these private men, than by the City, because of the Attendance on the Court of
Aldermen or Committees. But to this I answer; The City have erected an Office,
where there shall be constant attendance, and ready dispatch given. And I dare
say this Office, erected by the City, shall pay the Losses of those whose
Houses are burnt down sooner than this Enquirer shall the wages of those that
built his up.

Thirdly, Says the Enquirer, a private person must part with all to satisfy
his Debts, but in any great loss the City will rather have Private Concerns
suffer than the Public. To which I answer, There is more reason to fear that
these private Persons, in such a Case, will insure themselves instead of their
Creditors. They are more likely than the City to be reduced to such an
Exigence, as to be forced to break or compound. A little leaky Skuller sure is
more in danger of sinking in the wide Seas, than a large, beautiful and
well built Ship. Besides, the nature of the Security proposed by the City,
destroys the foundation of this Argument; which last Consideration will serve
as an Answer to the Fourth Argument also, That if the City refufe to pay the
Loss, the Remedy is not so Easy against them as against Private Persons; for
the Party aggrieved is not to sue the City, but may have Relief immediately in
Equity, upon the Fund, as aforesaid.

Thus it appears, that the City can settle a better Security or Fund for
Insuring Houses, than these Private Persons have or can.

The Second Reason why the City, and not these Private Persons should Insure
Houses, is, because it is more reasonable the City should enjoy the Profits
arising from their own Citizens, than these Foreigners or out-lying Deer. The
Enquirer indeed objects, That the Profit of Insuring will not be so
considerable as the City may imagine; but it is very well known, the Primary
intention of the City (though we may easily judge what the Inquirers) in
Insuring, is not to rake together a mighty mass of Money, but the Security of
every particular Citizens House, and of the whole City in general; and this
being effectually provided for, the City is content, let the Profit of this
Undertaking be as little as the Enquirer pretends, or less; but how little
soever it be, I am sure it is too much for one that has made it his business to
run up a multitude of Houses, in the adjacent parts, as if he were resolved to
drain the City of its Inhabitants and Trade. I think I may too truly say, He
has done almost as much prejudice to the City by building Houses, as the
Papists by firing them.

The Third Reason why I cannot grant these Private Persons should Insure, is,
because it would be very much to the prejudice of London if they should: For,

First, I am very well satisfied, that the City of London have under their
present Consideration the making of certain Engines, etc. for the quenching of
Fire; which, as they will be far more useful for the Public than any that has
yet been invented, so they will be by much too Chargable for these Private
Persons to provide themselves withal, and it is but reasonable the City should
have the Profit of this Undertaking, that so they may receive no prejudice by
the Charges thereof.

Secondly, For the Quenching of considerable Fires, a numerous Assistance
ordered by Authority is requisite, for otherwise the more Company the less
Help. Now the City have the Magistracy, who by Law are empowered to command
Constables, Officers, and Private Citizens, as they shall judge most useful.

Thirdly, If the City become the Insurers, not only the Magistrate, but every
Private Citizen will be more diligent and industrious for the Quenching of
Fire; for every man will then consider, That the spreading of the Fire will not
only be a loss to those particular Persons whose Houses are in danger, but the
Revenues of the City in General would be impaired by it, which potent Argument
would be lost, if Private men Insure.

Fourthly, The City has no reason to entrust a matter of this Consequence
within their own Walls, in the hands of Foreigners, and perhaps Enemies to the
City, tho indeed Friends to themselves.

Fifthly, The Chief Magistrates of the City are Sworn Surely and safely to keep
the City, it is therefore an affront to them for any to take their work out of
their hands, as if they were not sufficient to Secure the City, but Foreigners
must be called in to do it*

Sixthly, Suppose the Lord Mayor and other Magistrates, should think fit for
the Common Safety to blow up a House which happens to be Insured by Private
men, and these Private Undertakers minding their private Advantage should be of
another mind: on this Competition may ensue Quarrelling, Blows, and Bloodshed,
and the two Parties concerned be more zealous in opposing one another, than the
Fire.

The Fourth and last Reason, why I would have the City and not these Private
Persons Insure, is, because it can be no prejudice either to the Citizens in
particular, or the City in general to do it. Not to the Citizens, in
particular, for as to what the Author of the Letter concerning Insuring, etc.
objects about the Magistrates being liable to be byast in the exercise of their
Power in blowing up Houses. I shall only say, He reflects upon the Prudence and
Justice of the Magistrates of this City; besides, the Magistrates are empowered
to blow-up Houses when they see occasion, whether the City Insure, or no; and
though the City does Insure, yet the Magistrates will have no private Advantage
themselves by it: so that there is no reason to think they will be byast in one
case more than in another. And whereas the Author of the Letter Insinuates, as
if the City might hereafter put some unreasonable Tax upon Insuring Houses, I
shall only say, the City has already set bounds to it self in that case, by
giving the particulars of the prizes both of Brick and Timber-Houses, either
for a shorter or longer time, or for Ever (a thing which these Private
Undertakers are not capable of doing) whereby they have tied up themselves from
a possibility of enhancing their Prizes, if they had a mind to it: And that the
City should be supposed to make a prey of it self by screwing up the Prizes, is
to me as ridiculously as it is insolently objected.

Thus the Citizens in Particular will not be prejudiced if the City Insure,
neither will the City in General receive any damage by it. I know the Enquirer
indeed pretends a great difficulty in raising and settling the Fund. But the
City have already in their hands all the first Fund of Ground-Rents and Lands
to the value of One hundred Thousand Pounds, and can as easily make them over
to the Trustees, as any Private Person can make over his Estate. And all the
Difficulties mentioned by the Enquirer, as to the great number of Houses, that
must be Insured to raise Twenty Thousand Pounds for a further purchase of
Ground-Rents, the uncertainty of finding out a Purchase, or the Owners setting
too high a Price upon them, will lie as heavy upon these Private Gentlemen as
upon the City; and whatever good opinion they may have of themselves, I cannot
but believe that the City is far more able to conquer a Difficulty than they.

But further, the Enquirer objects, 'Twill be a matter, if not of difficulty,
yet of ill Consequence, for the City to Insure, which he endeavors to prove by
Three Arguments.

First, This will lessen the Security of the Chamber for the payment of the
Orphans Portions, and the same settlement of a Fund may be justly expected, and
cannot be justly denied them. But, (1) All besides this Enquirer know, that the
Orphans Portions are entrusted in the Chamber of London barely upon its own
Credit (which it has never forfeited) and that neither the Ground-Rents nor
any other of the City Lands, are, or ever were engaged for their Security;
neither, if the Chamber should fail, (which I hope our Enquirer will not be so
Insolent so much as to suppose it will) are they liable to make any
Satisfaction. And, (2) It Is as well known the Chamber of London never desired
the Orphans Money, the keeping thereof being a constant Charge and Trouble, but
no Advantage to them; and therefore if the Relations of the Orphans will but
give good Security, the Chamber never covets to have the Orphans Money paid in
to them, neither could they, if so minded, oblige the Relations thereto.

Secondly, The Enquirer objects, If the City ever should have occaston of
borrowing Money, those that lend it will expect as good Security as is offered
by the City in this Case of Insuring, and not be content with the Security of
the Seal only, especially when it is publicly known, that a great part of this
City Lands are engaged for this use. But I Answer, (1) Whatever occasion the
City had of borrowing Money as yet, these Ground-Rents were never engaged for
it, so that when these Ground-Rents are engaged upon this design; the City can
still give as good Security as ever yet it had need to give, (2) The raising
and settling this Fund will rather strengthen than lessen the Security of the
City, because it is agreed on by all hands, that this matter will be profitable
more or less to the Undertaker, or else it may reasonably be concluded these
Private Persons would never have engaged in it. But in the

Third and Last place, The Enquirer objects, That if the City should Insure, it
would be an Imitation of their Pattern. This I cannot but smile at, because
it is so notorious as I intimated in the beginning of this Letter, they have
borrowed this Design from the City, though they have the face to deny it, and
ascribe it to themselves. But when I consider the condition of the Enquirer,
the Principal of these Private Insurancers, I do not think it strange, that he
who refuses to pay what he is indebted to others, should refuse to acknowledge
what he owes to you. But whatever he or his Associates may do in this matter, I
shall never follow their Example, but on all occasions freely and thankfully
own and confess those many Obligations which Your Goodness has so often laid
upon him, who is, Honored Sir,

Your most humble faithful Servant, L.R.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1682.


