REASONS for a General Indefinite speedy Act of Oblivion.
THO some may fret, and huff, and bounce at every thing that is past; as if all
their Madness and Rage were founded on a true basis, yet it is apparent from
Reason and Truth; and the First and Second Vidication of the Magistracy and
Government of England, has made clear, that their Foundation is false, and the
Law is direct and plain in their teeth, and does and will justify in most of
the particulars, at which they foam their Curses and Execrations: Reason
therefore as well as necessity enjoins a silence as to what is past, for
otherwise the Kingdom can never have its desired satisfaction, for in points
justifiable or at least doubtful, the justice of inflicting Punishments can
never be vindicated: did I call them Punishments, I beg the Readers pardon for
the Impropriety, however I Will not name their proper term, but with calmness,
endeavor to Evince three things.

1. That it would be grateful to the Nation in general, and every good Man in
particular. 2. Conducing to the Settlement and Interest of the present
Government; and lastly, That it is consistent with and promotive of the highest
and truest Justice.

First, The Nation did and does expect it, for Revenge is never natural but
when freshly pursued, and time wears off the sense of Injuries, by the
Intervention of new ones either real or imaginary, which is all one as to this
purpose: the horror of any Crime, or at least the detestation of the Criminal,
grows faint and languid upon the removal of the Object, especially if time
interposes with the accession of present fears, which as present do more affect
us than greater if more distant, whether past or future. It can never therefore
be thought the desire of the People of England to have their Neighbors or
Acquaintance harrass'd and persecuted by Fines, Confilcations, Imprisonments,
Marks of Disgrace, or the like, for Actions done in the last or former Reigns,
about which the World has been so much divided, if lawful or not: Besides,
that this was the general Expectation of the Kingdom on the new Settlement or
at least the Coronation, of which nature there never was an Instance before
this without an Act of Grace; And it is mos^ plain, that none are Adversaries
to it, but the Republicans and the Jacobites, not for that they need it not, as
I shall show anon, but for different ends each drives at and wishes a Change,
it matters no^ to what, for if to the latter the other hopes a Commonwealth
will be the more desirable: I^ the Republican succeeds, then the other believe^
a Restoration the more easy, but both dislike the present, and therefore dread
a Settlement, and consequently dread the Peoples satisfaction and quiet under
Their Majesty's, and consequently dread an Act of Indemnity; it is true, the Cry
for Vengeance is loud, but it is only from these two corners; which leads to the
second particular, that

It will establish and promote the Interest of the present Government; for
while the popular Bully is full of his Damme's and Menaces, there is certainly
danger, and where there is danger there is fear, now fear causes an aversion, and
aversion begets hatred: and the Object of it is that from whence the supposed
danger arises, which is from the Government irritated by the Venom and Fury of
those hotheaded Animals, whatsoever has power and will to hurt a man, must
and will be abhorred by that man: And though none are immediate actual Patients,
yet the being possibly obnoxious to it, and the want of security for the
contrary does of necessity cool their respect to the present Power, under which
they are not safe; and this tempts them and their Friends upon contrivances and
attempts of Danger both to themselves and the Public; and danger by the
attempt is no discouragement where the like danger attends their forbearance:
and this is of weight, unless Cromwell's Politics be thought Christian, to
cherish and promote a Plot, as of advantage to Settlement, if seasonably
discovered and subtly managed; but however it is as true, that Enemies who are
desperate ought never to be thought inconsiderable, tho so in themselves; for
they may shake and batter what they cannot destroy, they may do mischief though
they cannot work ruin to their Adversaries, upon which account the temptation of
continual impending Danger is fit to be removed: Besides

The want of Security, and the fear of Danger, making Men uneasy in their
thoughts, replenishes them with Complaints and Murmurs at every awkard Action,
or supposed miscarriage of the Government feared; it makes them Mutineers at
public Taxes and Impositions, partly because they think it strengthens and
increases the power of hurting them, and partly because it sponges and bleeds
them of that, which they fear an occasion of themselves to bribe Blackrods,
Sergeants at Arms and other Goalers with; and in a conjuncture when
extraordinary Aids are indispensibly requisite, no temptation to complaint is
deserving of Countenance; besides, that it cramps Trade and discourages
Projects for Public Good, etc. but further, Its the living, not the dead, the
happy, contented, and cheerful, and free, not the oppressed, miserable,
forlorn, or imprisoned Subject, that does Service to the Crown and the Public.

It hinders all such as are thought to be so obnoxious from any bold Essays for
the use of the present Government, for that if success be the atten.+dant of
such their attempt, they continue unsafe notwithstanding; for no man in his
Wits will adventure an hazard to secure that Authority, which he is not sure
will make him safe, if he does undertake the present Adventure, and escapes
that danger, and performs the Service; so that Self-preservation renders it
their Policy to unhinge themselves from, or to shy of the present Power, of
which a considerable number might prove useful Friends; whice are now Newters
at least, if not Enemies.

Its observable in all foreign Policies either to work a total Extirpation of
the whole Party, or an universal Indemnity after so grand a Revolution as this
was: the former is not to be practiced here for two Reasons, 1. Because we want
People and can spare none. 2. Many of our Friends must be banished too; for
diverse of the supposed Criminals were instrumental to the present Change, etc.
Ergo, the latter only is and can be most advisable: for once I Will suppose
their numbers but small in comparison to the Saints and Innocents, (if any such
there are in the Nation) yet under our present Circumstances all are to be
obliged as Friends that possibly may; but if the thirteen Heads, with the
Surrenderers Clause, and all its and their Subdivisions had been reduced into a
Law in the designed Act of Attainder, one third at least of the Nation had been
involved, who with their disobliged Relatives and Dependants are not so
contemptible a Flock, tho but of Sheep for the slaughter: Besides

It Is impolitick as well as unjust to deny or delay it to those who have
submitted to the Government, yielded it Obedience, and quietly bore its public
Charges according to their Proportion and yet give a free, full and general
Pardon both in Scotland and Ireland, to all that took up Arms, for all their
Sins then past and present, upon their return to Quiet and Peace; it provokes
the former to repent their non-concurrence with the latter; for 'twas but
resuming their Quiet and Submission at pleasure, and then they were safe, which
now they are not, but under continued Menaces and Dangers both, as appears in
their being baited by every barking Cur, that can but write with Gall in his
Ink, or speak with a Damme in his Mouth.

Experience further tells us, that nothing turns or changes the humor of the
English Commoner, like Rage, Insolence, and Cruelty in their Fellow Subjects,
when made Superiors, and such is raking into old Sores thought to be; it
matters not whether justly or no to this purpose, the effect is generally such:
The Star Chamber in Car. 1. his time, the Major General in Cromwell's time; The
Tophamizing of Abhorrers in Car. 2. his time; The Western Campain, and the
other criminal Prosecutions in the beginning of Jac. 1. I say all the
Violences, used in these several periods (and yet they had their respective
Provocations) did most notoriously alter the Kidney of the Commons, and made
even their once beloved, first dreadful and terrible, then odious and loathsome,
they produced considerable Changes in their several Consequences. I could come
nearer home even to the tearing of Moor and North, and other Citizens of
London, which first turned the Stomach of that City, as is now apparent, but
Sat verbum, etc. but further,

The want of this, renders both the Policy and Honor of the great Bellowers for
Vengeance to be justly suspected, 1. Their Honor in taking care of their own
Servants for all their Excesses upon the Revolution, and opposing the Indemnity
of all others, as by the Act appears, 2. Their Policy, for that it is
observable in Story, that the Association in Queen Elizab. time was under a
Protestant Prince for the Protestant Religion, and no ill Success attended it;
yet those wise Ancestors of ours thought fit to secure themselves by turning
the Association into a Law, and a general Act of Indemnity: I do not say they
needed it, but the Associators in that Reign thought it needful, Came. Eliz.
300, 309. 27 Eliz cap. 30. and it is very considerable, that in no Reign was
there more Peace and Quiet than in hers, and in none were there ever more free
and general Pardons, and in truth the latter was the occasion of the former;
for when Men are once safe and quiet, no small. Temptation will provoke any
more adventures, tho they like another better, yet Men being easy are
generally contented: There was one free and general Pardon of the Queens at
first confirmed, 5 Eliz. cap. 11. another. 8 Eliz. cap. 18. 13 Eliz. cap. 28.
18 Eliz. cap. 24. 23 Eliz. cap. 16. 27 Eliz. 13. 29 Eliz. cap. 9. 31 Eliz. cap.
16. 35 Eliz. cap. 14. 39 Eliz. cap. 28. 43 Eliz. cap. 19. Eleven in number, and
never five Years without a Parliament-Pardon; and this made Parliaments and
Crowns the Darlings and Desire of the People: Besides, it is the Interest of
each Party amongst us, tho some don't see it: the Whig ought to promote it for
two Reasons; 1. Lest being the lesser part he chance to feel the want of it,
and for that he has given some Provocation: 2. That if he be the greater, the
Memory of his Vengeance and Fury may be forgotten. and himself restored to the
good Opinion of the rest of Mankind, by one Act at least of good Nature: The
Tory ought to pursue the same measures, and much for the same Reasons, for his
Top-gallantry has been, and if repractis'd will be again as odious and
loathsome to the moderate and good, as ever it was, or as the others could be:
Temper therefore is now the Game, and a Veil over all that is past is certainly
the most politic, especially considering the multitude of the supposed.
Criminals, and the justice of their several Excuses, which comes next; for

Lastly, It Is consistent with and promotive of the truest and highest Justice,
for in most of the Cases the Law was doubtful; and to punish Opinion in matters
of Law, is as unjust as to persecute Mistakes in matters of Religion is
unchristian, and new Laws for Government de futuro, are more agreeable to
natural Equity than a retrospective Fury: that it was so doubtful, is plain,
the modern Scriblers have sufficiently proved it. In two Cases they differ
among themselves; for Dr. Story's Case the Defender cries it is not Law, the
Remarker agrees it is, and that he was well hanged; for Plunket's Case the
Defender cries he was well hanged, for there was Treason enough in his Charge;
the Remarker insinuates as if he suffered hardly: Now what must be believed
between these two great Bodies of Learning? The like may be said of Soames's
Case, and some others: but what is more? In the Voluminous Argument against the
Dispensing Power the Author does concede that there are some Prerogatives so
personally and inseparably inherent in the Crown, that no Act of Parliament can
cramp or diminish it, or at least take away, and that some Statutes might be
dispensed with; and that being granted, I Am sure all that the rest of the Book
says can never make that a plain Case; and in truth his own Argument shows and
leaves it a disputable Point: and if that were doubtful, every Particular else
may well be buried in Oblivion; besides, in Cases of Construction the nature of
the thing admits of doubt, and then there is no color for Punishment.

In respect of Inferior Persons, by our Constitution they are obliged to submit
to and follow Westminster Hall, which is the lex loquens Angliae, and when all
these things are duly considered, there will remain but few grand execrable
Criminals, who are fit to be made Examples of, only to tickle some, aggrieve
others, and terrify none, for that will be the Consequence, for that is the
Case of all Violence where the Justice of the thing is not clear and undoubted:
Then for Exceptions,

Let us think a little; Is it reasonable that some should suffer for not being
afraid of Punishments never declared or promulgated, and others shall escape
because their Countenances are more fawning, or that by consent their Relations
have played on the other side, or that their swinging Fortunes enable them to
scatter Mice for their personal Indemnity, or that they have had the lucky
Principle of being faithful to all Changes, and true to nothing else, or that
they have been forward to subvert their old Master, after their fire and folly
had ruined him and endangered themselves: These and such like are no Pleas for
Justicc, and yet this is the Case: further,

The drift is to magnify and aggrandize Punishments by Bill, which by the
standing Laws and common Justice of the Realm, could not be inflicted; and they
urge two Reasons for it, 1. Their particular Pardons will otherwise excuse
them. To that I answer, Either they are valid in Law or not, if not, there is no
need of Bills: if they are valid in Law, the same Law and Justice of the Land
enjoin their Allowance; even the same Law by which the Countryman plows his
Land, the Gentleman receives his Rent, the Trader recovers his Debt, and the
Senator sits in the House; and by the same Reason that these enjoy their
Properties, the Criminal ought to have his Pardon allowed, for one's a Right
accrued by the Law as well as the other. 2. The common Channel is too smooth:
Severity is sometimes necessary, and that now if ever; and therefore the
Legislative Authority ought to exert its Power, and punish according to
Demerit: To answer that, I say, either they are no Offenses by Law, and there
needs a Bill to make them such, and inflict Evils upon them as such; or else
they are Offenses but deserve a greater Punishment than a common Court may
pronounce* now if the first be the Case, then I Am sure it is rank palpable
tyrannical injustice, and that is the plague of living under an Arbitrary Power;
for none can know what is not Criminal; If they mean the latter, as I suppose
they do, then I ask to what end were Punishments invented in Societies, but to
restrain Men from doing particular actions through the power and influence of
Fear; and how could that Consequence be expected, when the Penalty was never
known before it is inflicted; and to inflict an evil afterward which was not
known before, is to make a Man suffer that which he could not fear, because he
could not know it, and this because he did not fear it: and the Justice of that
is plain too.

I agree with the Satyrists that there are some Precedents of this last method
of proceeding, but most of them are repealed, I Will name two that are so, the
Earl of Strafford's, which the very Law it self did enjoin Posterity not to
observe, or follow, or do the like; I cannot forget one Expression of his to
this effect upon the Trial, if there be an Error in a Judge, so that he give a
Sentence otherwise than a Man of better understanding conceives Reason for,
there is no cause the offense should be heightened because he was not so wise a
Man as he might have been, nor so understanding as another, and if that be
allowed, it will make it more eligible to follow a Plow than serve a
Government, to dig in a Ditch than bear an Office, for all Men stand obnoxious
to the Constructions and Passions of succeeding Times: There Is one Instance
more, and that was Sir Thomas Haxey's who was attainted of Treason for bringing
in a Bill into the Commons House against the Prerogative, though while, and as
a Member: I suppose the Sparks will not much applaud the justice of that
Procedure for their own sakes; but as I said before, that and most others of
their Precedents were repealed, when a cooler Assembly met upon the next
Session, and so was Haxey's, Cott. abr. rec. 362, 393.

But if Vengeance be requisite, it ought to be without respect of Persons, The
Justice of it ought to be impartial, true and Catholic: and then come in the
Pensioners and Surrenderers, the Regulators and Promisers, the old High
Commissioners, and the New Creed makers, etc. and God knows quis non, etc, Nay
since the Revolution, some more must come in for a snack of Censure too, the
buyers and sellers of Places, the Members that took Offices contrary to their
own motion and vote in the Westminster Parliament: Cum multis aliis, etc. To
conclude, Our Savior's Rule if observed will be the most infallible Indemnity
that can be contrived, and that is, John 8. c. 7. v. Let him that is without
sin amongst you, cast the first stone. And in truth a Censor of the Manners of
others ought himself to be pure, clean and innocent, in omni re quacunque; and
if there be no danger but from such, I Am sure there is no danger at all, and
that it should be so, is the truest Justice in the World, quod fuit probandum.

I Will not mention the Argument from the Vacancy, that the Government was
dissolved, every thing reduced into its primitive state of Nature, all power
devolved into individuals, and the particulars only to provide for themselves
by a new Contract, for if so, there is yet no new consent for Punishment of acts
done before the Dissolution, and consequently Revenge, for that is at an end;
Indemnity therefore ought to be promoted by those who made that Vote, for
otherwise their truth may be suspected, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
SOme perhaps will blame the boldness of this Style, as provocative rather than
palliating; to which I say, Truth ought never to be shamefaced, for it will
prevail one time or another: and if it do not, but angers some, 'twill be only
those that were implacale before, who if they ha'nt good Nature enough to
pardon a bold Stroke or two with a Pen, they will never consent to an Act of
Indemnity, and then their Fury is not to be regarded, for the want of it will
inflame (as it has created) our present Divisions, and consequently run us at
last into a true Confusion, from which, Good Lords deliver us.


Licensed, April 7. 1690.
LONDON: Printed for Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1690.


