REASONS SHOWING The Absolute Necessity OF Large and speedy Supplys,
Proportionable to the Present Occasion.

HUMBLY OFFERED To the Consideration OF Both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1691.

REASONS SHOWING The Absolute Necessity of Large and Speedy Supplys, etc.
WE have chosen our Representatives in Parliament, and they being at the
Springhead of Business, must needs have a true Prospect of Affairs, and need
not to be told what is necessary to support the Government, in the present
Exigency. Therefore we ought to be concluded by their determinations, and
altogether acquiess in what shall be Enacted by this August Assembly, for the
peace and security of the Nation: And this we have reason to do with more
cheerfulness, since we have all the reason in the world to hope, that there
will be the same Harmony betwixt His Majesty and His Parliament this Sessions,
which we saw the last; wherein all seemed to conspire in the same public
design of promoting the true interest, safety, and prosperity of the Kingdom.

We seem now to have a King and Parliament after the old, honest, hearty way of
Q. Elizabeth's days; and may they, their Successors and Posterity continue so,
as long as Government shall have a Being in the world: And may all their former
interrupting Contests, turn to kindly Emulations, who shall be most
instrumental in promoting the General Good, and completing our Settlement.

When there are two considerable Parties in a Government, it is not to be
expected, but that they who chance to be uppermost, will endeavor to keep the
other down; and these will as naturally be struggling to get aloft, to the
perplexing, and embroyling the public Affairs.

But though this be the usual Practice, yet, our late experience may convince
us that it is not always so; for we have lately had a Sessions, of about three
Months continuance; wherein all things went on so smoothly, and with such an
universal Concurrence, as if the Contention only had been who should most
effectually carry on the public Concerns of raising Money, etc.

Both the one Party and the other, showed great Moderation, Wisdom and
Generosity, in waving their particular interests as Parties, and unanimously
joining to promote the General Good of the whole: And let the Men of Politics,
and deep Conjecture* assign what Causes they please, for all this calm and
quiet, I must needs think, that we ought to make the most favorable
Construction of such passages as produce the most kindly Effects.

It Is true, we never were more closely pressed, and as it were, driven
together, by Storms and Tempests from abroad; that so we may be united at home,
and every one of us put to his helping hand, to pump and ply the Oars, to
prevent a fatal Shipwreck.

But shall we unite and pack together only to Winter stormy Weather? Is there
no means to be used, no expedient to be found, to prolong this happy Union,
beyond the Time of public danger, and to six it so firmly, that it may descend
to our Posterity? Certainly such a Legacy would be more lastingly beneficial to
them, than all the Patrimony which we can bequeath unto them.

Many Attempts have been made to compose our Differences, but have all proved
ineffectual. Time and Rest alone have cured some diseases, which would have
been inexorable to the best Methodical Prescriptions that could have been
administered: And how happy should we be, if our disease of Division, would
yield to such an easy Remedy?

Let us hope the best: May not this Truce be a propitious Forerunner of an
happy Peace? This Cessation has given Men time to think cooly, and deliberately
to represent to themselves the Benefits and Advantages of Peace and Unity; and
the fatal Consequences of the contrary, especially at this Critical Conjuncture.

But whither am I going? I doubt the Reader will begin to despair, that I shall
ever well perform my intended Voyage, seeing me wander so far out of my way, at
the first setting out. I could not let slip such a favorable Opportunity,
without dropping this Votum pro Pace, this small Peace Offering by the way; and
I hope it will have no ill Influence upon that which follows; but rather give
it a more favorable reception with all the Lovers of Peace. For, if we were
united amongst our selves, we might upon much better Grounds, hope, that all
our Councils would be guided, and directed, so as to aim and center in the
general Good of the Community; and then also Taxes would be both more
seasonably given, and more faithfully applied, as also Punishments more
impartially inflicted upon Offenders.

But to return from this large digression, if it shall be accounted so -- There
are great Murmurings, and variety of Descants, and Censures upon the
mismanagement of Affairs; and who can reasonably expect, that upon any great
Revolutions of Government, public Matters should be managed so titely, and
with so much fidelity, as in more fixed and settled Times. All men think it
good Husbandry (though its Policy may have a very ill effect) to make Hay
whilst the Sun shines, lest Clouds should gather, and some sudden storms should
arise, and disappoint their designs. To search out such selfish Intreaguers,
and animadvert upon them, is all that human Prudence can do. But all the
difficulty lies in the proof; which yet People will not consider. And
supposing, that this Method of searching out, and punishing Delinquents, be not
taken, ought we therefore to be sullen, and backward in raising and paying
Taxes? Must we sit still, and let the ENEMY take all, because we suspect that
some part of our Supplies will be misemployed, and embezled?

If there be no other Remedy, we ought, in Levying Taxes, to make Allowance,
and reckon upon so much to be lost, and give so much the more upon that
Account. But now the Government having gained more strength and firmness, we
have, it is hoped, no need to make this Provision; but may be reasonably well
assured, that what we shall give, will be managed with all prudence and
fidelity. But to obstruct, and refuse the raising of Taxes, proportionable to
the Occasion, at this Time, upon supposition, that some part may be
misemploy'd, and diverted from its right Use, is just as if the Husbandman
should deny to sow his Land, because a Company of Rooks and Vermin, it is
likely, will come (notwithstanding all his Care to prevent them) and devour his
Corn. At this rate he would have no Harvest, but be ruined and starved for his
folly: But such Accidents do not discourage his Husbandry; but he sows
plentifully, in hopes to reap the Fruits of his Labor and Charge: And so may
we, if we will pursue the same Method in the public Husbandry.

Our last Years Seed has produced a plentiful Harvest in Ireland this Summer,
which may give us great Encouragement to go on: The vigorous and quick
Reduction of that Kingdom, this Campaign (to the everlasting Honor of the
General, and the Officers, and to the Praise of the Soldiery) is a sufficient
Return for our Expenses in that Service: Nay, it may stand for an ample
Recompense for the whole Tax of the last Year. It Is true, 'twas a great Sum,
but it is to be considered, that we have purchased no less, than a whole Kingdom
with it. This Conquest seems to be an Earnest of Success in greater
Achievements abroad, as well as it does enable and capacitate us to attempt
them the next Campaign.

And since the Levying Taxes is so indispensibly necessary for completing the
Work so fairly advanced; instead of murmuring and complaining against our
Senate for imposing them, we should be most sensibly affected, with all the
grateful Resentments, that were ever due to the most provident and vigilant
Patriots. And since (which is to be considered) we pay the largest share of
them, we ought to be convinced that the Exigency of our Affairs does require
them.

In the Two Late Reigns, I will not deny but that we had Cause to be uneasy
under Taxes; since they were either so vainly and profusely squandered away, or
so employed, as if they had been Contributions imposed, and exacted by our
Enemies, rather than Supplies for the necessary Support of the Government.

But now we have a King we can trust, (and it is not long since we could say so)
who both can, and will manage to the best Advantage; and is as indefatigably
intent in executing the Office of a just, wise, and valiant Prince, (and
performs it as well) as the best, and worthiest of his Predecessors. A Prince
who despises no Danger to do us good; who has freely exposed himself to the
greatest Difficulties for our sakes, and is at any time ready to venture his
Person for our Benefit, and the Honor of the Kingdom.

With what Cares and perplexed Thoughts, was His Majesty exercised? To how many
dangers was His Royal Person exposed? With what amazing Difficulties did he
Contest in the happy Enterprise of our Deliverance; (Difficulties, had he not
been conducted out of them by the Hand of Divine Providence)? And with what
Constancy, and vigorous Resolution; with what Intensness of Mind, and Fateigue
of Body, has His Majesty ever since persevered steady, and immoveably constant
to his first Generous Undertaking?

This is no strained Panegyric, but only a short, and transient Glance at bare
Matter of Fact, which His Majesty's greatest Enemies cannot but acknowledge.

And we be backward, and slow in Contributing the best Assistance we can give
to a Prince, who incessantly labors, both in Mind and Body to procure our Ease
and Safety.

If we would be frugal and thrifty Husbands of our Money, it is evident, The way
is, to be quick and liberal in giving, for some time, that we may Not be always
giving, (or at least that it may lessen by degrees) like as Physicians advise
to take Blood freely, to stanch such Haemorrhagies of frequent Bleeding, as
otherwise would endanger the Life of the Patient.

In the beginning of the Late Reign, the stream of Common Talk run, that every
Body was willing to have parted with one half, to have secured the other, and
still our Religion had been in danger, or at best, had been depressed and
insulted over.

And shall we not be more willing now, to Contribute a Share, competent for the
occasion, since it is hoped it will fall so many degrees below that. And sure we
shall thereby (in human probability) secure the entire Enjoyment of our
Religion, Liberties, and Properties.

To give plentifully now, is like searching a Wound to the bottom; which,
though it may cause some extraordinary pain and smart for the present, yet is
the most effectual Course, in order to a speedy and perfect Cure; whereas to
give sparingly, will but palliate, and only make an Anodine: The Pain will
again return with more acuteness. If we sow sparingly we shall reap sparingly,
is a Text, which I think, may without offense be applied to the present Case:
But if we sow bountifully, I dare promise, (without pretending to the Gift of
Prophecy) that we shall, by GOD's Assistance, reap a plentiful Harvest.

If any of us should have a Suit at Law of great Moment, and lose the Cause by
pinching the Lawyers, and Attorneys, in their Fees, it would be no great sign
of prudent Management: And is it not a much greater imprudence, and much more
liable to Censure, to starve the Public Cause, on which we do All together,
with all that we have, depend?

To spend to get, is such an obvious piece of Prudence, that no body scarce
will neglect: Gentlemen, and those of the higher Rank, if they have a probable
Prospect of Advancement into Offices and Places, they will spare no reasonable
Cost, as well as no Pains, to accomplish their Design. The Tradesmen too, will
Caress, and treat his Customers high, when he hopes it will bring in a Return
with good Increase.

And why shall not we, (for the same End and Design) spend freely upon the
Public; especially, since the omission thereof, is like to be so fatal to us.

When People are parsimonious, inclining to an extreme; if they have a hopeful
Posterity to reap the Fruits of their Cares, this is accounted an Error of the
Right Hand, a pardonable Fault, yet it is a Fault.

But when People take the same Course, of hoarding up Treasure, when they have
only a Fool, or they don't know who to succeed: This is by the wisest of Men,
ranked amongst the most unaccountable Follies of Mankind.

But now further; if Persons shall be sparing of a small part of their great
Substance, (for I Am now speaking to the rich Hoarders, best able to pay) when,
in a manner, the inevitable Consequence, of such saving, will be, to expose all
the rest, to the Mercy of a cruel and implacable Enemy: This is a much higher
Extreme of Imprudence still; for in the Instances above (besides other Reasons)
the Parties would have the possession (I cannot say enjoy them) for their own
time, of what they had so anxiously scraped together.

But now in our Case, the Enemy would make 'em put off their Shoes before
they are going to Bed, and strip them of all, whilst alive, and treat them like
Slaves, and account them Fools for their pains, for being so Penny-wise, in
sparing of that which would have secured the rest.

What would the Wise Man have said to all this? This sure, is (as one may say)
such an extravagant piece of Thrift, that he never thought the most penurious
Miser, could e're have been guilty of, and therefore left us no Reprimand nor
Censure in the Case: Like as some Law givers have omitted making Laws, against
such enormous Vices, as they could not think, would be perpetrated by the
wickedest and vilest of Mankind*

We have a good Government in time of Peace, let us mend the Defects it is liable
to in time of War, by good management, and quick dispatch. We see, to our
damage, how early our Enemy is in his Preparations: We are ready enough to
follow the French in their Vanities.

But if we must be their Imitators, let us not only imitate them in their airy
and lighter Part, but also in their solid and managing Part too, that by our
raising sufficient Supplies, and good Conduct, we may prosecute the War to
Effect.

There are few of the Nobility, and higher Rank, who have not unnecessarily
spent six or seven times as much, as they have paid in Taxes, (and in as short
a time too) without any Concern or Regret; and there are few of the Degrees
under them, who have not some time or other had Losses by Sea, trusting
Commodities, or lending to insolvent Persons, to the Value abovementioned; and
we find by experience, that after some little time, they bear those Losses well
enough, and rub on, and go about their Business, as cheerfully as before.

Why then shall not we bear a Payment to the Public (for Loss I cannot call it) of
like Value, with a more easy, and less anxious Concern; since thereby we hope
to secure the rest, and to relieve and rescue our Allies and Friends, from the
great Oppressions they lie under.

But perhaps, this dry way of reasoning, may grow somewhat tedious; to move the
Affections and Reason together, may be more prevailing with some: Suppose then,
we should hear the raging Sea had entered our Neighbors Countries round, and
how it bluster'd and swelled, and came rolling along, and threatened a general
Deluge; if instead of raising a speedy and plentiful Sum to repair the Banks,
to put a Check to its fury and rage, we should hang back and be slow, and each
one wrangle to pay his due share, and drill out the time, until the merciless
Waves come floating along and end the Debate, by tumbling us all in the Deluge;
Should we not in all this be more unadvised, than were the Jewish Zealots of
old? For they (notwithstanding their heats and their feuds) would join and
unite to repulse an Enemy, when at their Gates: And shall we be wrangling and
debating about paying our shares, for repairing the Breeches in the Walls, while
the Enemy enters the City by storm, and put all to the Sword?

This Allusion, I think, is not very wide and foreign from our present
Circumstances; for, though we shall not be all destroyed, and put to the Sword upon
a Conquest, yet, when we shall have lost our Liberties and Properties, and
which ought to be dearer to us, the free Exercise of our Religion too, how
insipid, nay rather, how burdensome would such a Life be to any true English
Spirit, or good Christian. -- Would an English Life be worth valuing or saving,
which cannot breath in a free Air, but be surrounded with the Checks, Insults
and Cruelties of a Conquering Tyrant?

But Instances and Examples, which lie fresh in Peoples Memories, especially
such as they have been most sensibly affected with of late, may make stronger
and more lively Impressions, than the best cold Reasoning, or the most hitting
Allusions that can be invented.

Let us instance then, in the late Irish Alarm, with what a Panick Fear was
the whole Nation struck at that time, and what Lamenting, what Skreeking and
Crying was there heard in our Streets (with the Women): And though the Men
showed all the Bravery of the Old English Courage, in mustering together to
encounter the Danger; yet, as Men of Common Sense, who would not be Foolhardy,
considering the Tumult and Confusion, and with what horror and dread the Danger
was represented, it cannot well be supposed, but that they too were in such a
Consternation, as that they would have been willing to have made a good large
Offering, toward the appeasing those supposed, fierce and ravenous Demons, if
that would have saved the rest, and also their, and their Wives and Childrens
Lives.

May we not reasonably suppose, every body would have given a Year or two's
Revenue, and so proportionable for Personal Estates: And herein I dare appeal
to every Man's private Thoughts, if they would but set themselves to represent
the danger, just as it appeared to them then, if they would not have been
willing, to have made such an Offering as above, and thought they had
compounded at an easy Rate.

Our danger now, (for ought I know) is as great as it was supposed to be then,
though not all out so near at hand; for though a Conqueror may not take away our
Lives (as abovesaid) yet such a Life as we should then have, would but be a
lingering Death. Why then should we not be as willing to give as good a Price
toward procuring our Safety now, as then.

Therefore let us every one set apart two Years Revenue (and so proportionably,
according to every ones ability) for the Public Service; besides what is
already past, let us account our selves Debtors to the Public, so much. It Is an
honest and just debt, and ought first to be paid: And those who have no Mind to
be in debt, may reckon upon it as an Adventure sent out, it may perhaps, make a
Return, with good Increase; at worst, there is good reason to hope, it will
ensure the rest of their stock: All this would arise to a very great Sum, and
not much hurt the wealthiest and richest sort, from whom ought to arise the
greatest part of the Taxes.

But if all this Proposal be a strain too high, yet at least, let it be like
bending a crooked Tree to an extreme, to make it grow strait: Let these
Considerations however, prevail and influence us, to contribute such
Proportions, as our Senate shall from time to time judge necessary or
expedient, without repining or desponding, perhaps much less than is proposed
may serve.

I confess, (if it were practical) it seems greatly necessary to lighten the
Burden of those, on whom Taxes lie most heavy, and place it on those who are
better able to bear it, by which means, such would hold out much longer, and
the great and rich ones too; and this should be done in time, before it be too
late: For the higher and lower Rank of Men, depend each upon the other. It may
be said of them, as of Old People much about an Age, that if one dye, the other
will quake for fear. When the meaner sort are sinking, they will go near to
catch hold of the Great Ones, and pluck them along: It ought always to be
remembered, that a Kitching is as useful (if not more) than a Parlour.

The Romans (a wise People) in their way of Taxing, had a regard to the
Circumstances of persons, and to their Usefulness in the Commonwealth; and the
Reason and Nature of the thing requires it: For, may not a single man, of an
Hundred Pound per Annum clear Estate, afford to pay, double or treble, to him
that has but an estate of like Value, who has a Wife and five or six Children
to maintain and provide for: There are great variety of Instances of this
Nature; to enumerate them, and propose fit Remedies, would make up a Treatise
of its self; and a very useful one too it might be, well worth the pains of any
such person, as shall have a Talent sufficient for the undertaking it: For, it
would require great Prudence and Consideration.

Methinks, to Tax people without any Consideration of their particular
Abilities, seems as unreasonable, as it is amongst the Good Fellows, to sorce
all Constitutions to drink alike; whereas some may be Sick, others Drunk, while
others again may scarce be Touched, nor so much as Merry. So in our Case, by
this unequal-equal-way of Taxing every ones Estate alike; some may be Weakened,
others almost Undone, while others ( viz. the Rich Ones) are not Hurt, nor can
scarce miss what they have Paid, (though it will reach 'em at last, if not
prevented, by the means aforesaid.)

In common times, when Taxes are Low and Easy, the necessity of an exact
Scrutiny, in distinguishing the Abilities of Persons, is not so pressing: But
now, that the Country - Trade sinks so Low, and Taxes rise so High, sure all
proper Methods ought to be taken in laying of Taxes, so as they may continue
Longest, and be least Grievous.

And if, at this Juncture, we contrive and manage to the best Advantage, and
most Ease, to all Parties concerned, and use all probable means; (since
Providence so signally favored His Majesty's Undertaking, in delivering us out
of our Distress; and since so many of our Neighbors labor under the like
Pressures, and depend upon our Aid and Assistance); Why may we not yet hope,
that the same Divine Hand will lead His Majesty on, to Enterprises of larger
extent, and more diffusive in their happy Consequences? Why may we not yet
hope, that the Almighty has Deputed his Majesty, as his Vicegerent, to put a
Check to the Ravages and Devastations of the great Disturber of Europe, and to
force him to Reason?

Many a seeming Topping Tradesman, who bears it off at a great Rate, and who so
much Talked on, on the Change, as they; yet such of them must needs have many a
sad Heart-ake, and fetch many a deep Sigh in private, who knowing the weakness
of their Condition, to be such, that in a very little time, they must slink off
the Stage, and vanish like an Apparition, or shrink into some low and mean
station; Why may it not fare thus with this great Trafficker that makes such a
Busle in the World? His Foreign, and chief Trade of buying Towns, fails him
already: We have heard no Returns in that kind of a long time; and his
Home-Trade must needs run very Low, since his highly-injured Neighbors refuses
all Commerce with him, for the Product of his own Country ever since he
endeavored to Monopolize and Engross.

These are probable circumstances to Conjecture, that things are worse with him
than most people suppose. If We and the Confederates hold together but for some
time, Why may not this Glorious Sun with the Pompous Motto, (Nec pluribus
Impar) be only like the splendour of the Sun when its going to set?

But as in Hawking, if the Cramp take the Hawk (a disease they are incident to)
it so hinders her Flight, she will scarce be a Match for a Crow: So, if we be
too sparing in our Supplies, we shall also be cramped in our Sinews of War; We
shall not be able to pounce and plume our Enemy, as we ought; at that rate
indeed the lurching Rook may well be too hard for the generous Hawk. And plume
our Enemy we must, if ever we hope to live peaceably under our Vines; for, if
We and the Confederates should make a Peace with Him, and permit him to Enjoy
his New Conquests, this would in effect show him the way how to gain all the
Rest: This Tame way of yiedling, would but make us Tenants at Will of our yet
Fee-simple Estate. We should then have no more Solace and Satisfaction, amidst
the plentiful product of our Country, than Damocles had, when placed at the
plentiful well-spread Table of Dyonisius, with the point of a Sword hanging
over his bare Head, only by one single Hair.

It may perhaps be Noted as a Defect, That I have not at large Vindicated the
Lawfulness and Necessity of procuring and bringing on the Revolution, and
carrying on this Expensive War; for they may say, if People were well Convinced
of that, it might be a powerful Argument to contribute more heartily and freely.

I have occasionally touched upon the Head (as to the necessity of it) but that
Part, and also the Lawfulness of it, has been so often, and so well treated of
(by some) that scarce any thing can be said, but what would prove Repetition,
which I endeavor to avoid.

It may also be Noted as an Omission, that in a Discourse of this Nature, I
have not showed and set forth particularly, how and wherein People may retrench
their Expenses, that so they may hold out the longer in paying Taxes: As for
Instance, People ought to deny themselves such Foreign Commodities, where such
Trade's a Loss and Damage to the Public in general, though some Particular
Persons may be enriched thereby; and many useful Instances may be given upon
this Subject of Entrenchment; but such Hints may, perhaps; come seasonable
enough from another hand, more fit for the undertaking, though some short ones
shall be given in the following Discourse.

First Objection: Some may say, That this earnest pressing for Taxes, when the
Nation's so low already (as if People were able in paying, to keep pace with
Fancy and Imagination) shows, as if the Author had been kept up in some
Retirement, or dropped lately out of the Clouds, and were altogether unacquainted
with, or at least, insensible of the State and Condition of our Nation: If he
had found some Mine of Treasure to pay Sessment with, he had done something to
the purpose.

I Answer: There Is scarce any discernable Retrenchment in the City, in such
superfluous foreign Commodities, which Trade's a Loss in general, both to the
Public, in wearing Ornaments, and things spent in Housekeeping; People treat
and spend, much as they used to do: Nor is there any great difference in the
Country, so that paying Taxes, pinches not so much as People complains. And
there is a Mine of Treasure sufficient for the Occasion, its wants but digging
out, and producing into public Use: What a vast Quantity of useless Plate is
there in the Kingdom, (as to public Use) which might be employed, if it were
come to that. What great heaps of Treasure are there in many particular Persons
Hands, who are best able to pay, and yet pay least of any sort of People
whatever? Perhaps, he that is worth 5000 l. pays after the rate of 500 l. (and
well too, as things are managed); in that Sum, there is 22 l. 10 s. Loss to the
Public, at the usual way of Taxing Money: And is there no Remedy, but that our
Laws must still be Cob-webs, to catch the lesser Flies, and the greater slip
through.

It seems also reasonable, that those of larger Estates in Lands, and great
Money'd-Men, and those who have great Stocks in Trade, should be taxed much
deeper in the Pound rate, and for their Money and Stocks, than those of smaller
substances; for the former have a Latitude and Scope to retrench, in such
superfluous things, as above; they may also retrench in the Number of their
Servants. A Person of Quality, that uses to keep ten Servants, may be served
with five, as to all things necessary; and People ought to deny themselves in
some things, when the good of the Public so requires: If such Persons, and
those of the richer sort, did so generally, it would be no diminution to their
esteem and credit; there wants but some Examples to brake the Ice: And such
discarded Servants, would be much more useful in the Commonwealth, by falling
to some sort of Work or Manusacture, or being Soldiers; for we want People.

But now as to those of small Estate in Land, little Money, and small Trade,
they ought not to bear pace, in paying with the other; for they have no room to
retrench in, for such keep only necessary Servants, for their Husbandry and
Trades, and spend little or nothing in the unnecessary things above mentioned,
and have but a bare Livelihood with their utmost Industry; whereas most of the
other sort, may pay as above, without retrenching: And if those of smaller
substance should retrench, it must be in Meat and Drink, and their ordinary
Clothing: Now all those are the Product of our own Country; therefore to
abridge themselves of such, (if they could) would be a damage to the Public,
in as much, as it would cause a less Consumption of our own Countries
Commodities, and so cause the Prices to sink lower still.

Second Objection: Some may say, what needs all this industrious Arguing, to
convince People of that which is so plain and evident, to every common
Understanding, viz. that raising Taxes is necessary at this Juncture.

I Answer: Though this be of no great Use to the wise, and prudent, yet
perhaps, there may be some reasonable hints to the second and third, if not to
the first rate of Readers: And yet I doubt, those who pretend to be most
convinced, are most in fault, in shuffling the Burden from themselves, when it
comes to the practical Part: If People could pay Taxes in Theory, by Talk and
Discourse, then no body would be slow and hang back.

Third Object. The Author all along goes upon a Supposition, that paying a part
will secure the rest: Now if he would propose any good security for that, then
People would be willing to pay the Revenue (as he hints) of a Year or two, and
so proportionably for Personal Estates: But as the Case is, notwithstanding
what he has said, we may pay as much as he proposes, and yet be forced to pay
as much more, and not then come to a through Settlement.

I Answer: If this be the general sense of most able and intelligent Persons
(as I believe it is) that they would be willing to pay Two years Revenue; and
so proportionably for other Estates; then it seems they can pay so much: And
why should People so heavily complain? For if they can, they ought: Because, as
it is said, in the Opinion of all the most Wise and Prudent, that is the most
probable way; nay, that (with good management) is the only Expedient to secure
the rest of our Estates, Liberties, Properties, and Religion it self: And if
so, then whether the Effect and Success be certain, or contingent; yet the same
Means and Method are to be pursued in hope of obtaining the end Designed. Why
then should we be so slow and backward in raising Taxes, and paying our due
Proportion, since it is but what the dictates and convictions of our Reason
prompts us to, if we would but Hearken to them?

Fourth Objection: All this busy promotion of great Taxes, and putting Power
into the Hands of Kings, is but to serve a Turn, and is a ready Way to throw us
into a Relapse (before Recovered) into the old Tory-Way of lavishing and
squandring away our Liberties and Properties.

Answer: That we may preserve our Religion, Liberties and Properties entire,
were the only Reason that induced me to be so Earnest in persuading People into
a Willingness to pay Taxes (though Great at present).

Besides, we have all the Assurance we can reasonably Desire, that His Majesty
is so far from stretching and enlarging the Prerogative beyond its legal
Limits; that His Wisdom and Justice is such, that He would throw back with the
highest Resentment, all such Overplus Prerogative, as Officious and Designing
Flatterers may heap upon Him.

To Conclude All: If we would continue our Long enjoyed darling Liberties and
Properties: If we would leave to our Posterities (on whom we usually Dote with
so much tenderness and passion) a peaceable Possession of that, which many of
us so Industriously have labored for. And above all,

If we would preserve the full exercise and enjoyment of that Religion, we in
Appearance so Zealously Profess; and for which we have so earnestly Contended,
We ought to take the most probable Methods, which (next to Imploring the Divine
Aid, and Living HOLY Lives) are, to Contribute Freely for a Time; and manage
Faithfully and Wisely what shall be so Contributed.

FINIS.

