REASONS Against the Taxing and Prohibiting New Foundations.
First, A Years Tax on New Buildings will be very burdensome and grievous to
the ruin of many Families; for they which Live on those Rents will have
nothing to maintain them that Year, and must starve if they cannot borrow,
which will be very difficult for those that have only Estates for Lives;
besides the trouble of getting the Money to pay the other Assessments already
laid on such Houses. Now, It has been the usual method of Parliaments, to make
their Taxes easy, and to take that part of every Man's Estate toward the
Support of the Government, which he could spare; not that which is all their
maintenance. II. Therefore if such a Tax should be laid, it must be accounted
a Fine, and the Buildings an offense; which must be either an offense against a
Law already made, or else such an offense that there ought to be a Law made
against it.

If the New Buildings are an offense against a Law already made, That Law has
declared the punishment, and the Builders ought not to be punished any other
way, since they are willing to abide the Trial and punishment of that Law;
especially at this time when they hope they are delivered from Judges and
Lawyers that would strain and wrest the words of a Statute quite contrary to
the genuine Sense and plain meaning of it.

But suppose the Builders had offended against the Law made against Cottages,
That Law was made for all England; why therefore should those that have Built
within the Bill of Mortality, be Fined and forced to commute their punishment,
more than those that have Built at Bristol, and other Towns which have greatly
increased, if not in equal proportion: Or in other places in the Country who
are probably more within the Words of the Statute, and not saved by the
exceptions?

III. If New Buildings are such an offense, that there ought to be a Law made
against it, (there being no Law already against them, as the Lord Chancellor
Nottingham declared in his Speech to the Parliament;) then the Builders ought
not to be punished for an offense committed before the Law made. IV. Such a Tax
would be very partial and unequal; For it will fall upon a great many that
never committed the supposed offense of Building; Such as have purchased and
have given the full value of the Improvement; and therefore will think it very
unreasonable they should pay a Years purchase more; besides, many of them are
Orphans and Widows, and unable it being their whole maintenance, and there may
seem as much reason that those have lent Money upon the New Building should be
Taxed, as those that have purchased, and somewhat greater; for were it not for
their Money, the Houses had not been Built. V. Such a Tax will produce very
little Money; For the Revenue of all the Ground Rents that have been Built upon
since 1660, taking in the great Houses that been altered and Built into
Tenements, do not amount to much more than Twenty one Thousand Pounds per
Annum, as may appear by this particular.

An Estimate of the Ground-Rents since 1660.
l. s. d. ESssex Buildings, 1100 00 00 Norfolk Buildings, 1200 00 00 Salisbury
Buildings, 0300 00 00 Beauford Buildings, 1100 00 00 York Buildings, 1500 00 00
Hungerford-Market, 0400 00 00 Downings Buildings, 0300 00 00 Albemarle and
Arlington-street, 1000 00 00 St. James's- square and Streets adjoining, 1200 00
00 Some Ground-Rent in St. Giles, 0350 00 00 Leceister-Fields and Streets
adjoining, 0600 00 00 So-Ho-Square and the Street adjoining, 1300 00 00 Exceter
Buildings, 0600 00 00 Southampton-Square and the Streets adjoining, 1500 00 00
Red-Lion-Fields, 1100 00 00 Brownlowe-Street, 0150 00 00 Brook Buildings, 0650
00 00 Hatton-Garden, 0600 00 00 Suffolk-Street, 0250 00 00 Newport-Ground, 0900
00 00 Rupert and Gerrard-street, 0600 00 00 As for the Ground-Rents about
Wapping, White-Chappel, Southwark, and that End of the Town, though there are a
great many Houses, yet do not amount to a fourth part of the value of the
West End of the Town, though it be agreed that the Town has equally increased at
both ends. -- 4500 00 00 in all 21200 00 00

Now the Houses of Essex-Buildings, Norfolk-Buildings, York-Buildings,
Beauford-Buildings, Exeter, Salisbury, Hungerford-Buildings, etc. do amount in
the Account, to above Six thousand Pound per Annum: Now, if all these Houses
ought to be excepted out of the Tax, yet so much Ground of them as was Built
before, ought to be excepted, or at least, as many Houses as was Built before:
As all those fronting the Strand, belonging to Essex, Norfolk, York, Beauford,
Exeter, Salisbury, etc. so that taking the whole Account, with these just
Exceptions, the Ground-Rents will not amount to much more than Fifteen thousand
Pound per Annum, and allowing three parts more for the Improv'd-Rents, the
Total will amount to Threescore thousand Pounds of Ground-Rent and
Improv'd-Rent; which when the Loss and Charge in Collecting is deducted, will
produce but a little Sum in the Exchequer.

VI. Such a Tax will be very tedious, chargeable, and uncertain in the
Collecting: Many Houses are empty, unfinished, mortgaged for more than they are
worth, and the Owners poor. From the smaller Houses the Tenants will remove,
for they are not able to raise a years Tax. Several Houses have Settlements and
Remainders upon them, which will require time to proportion what the several
Interests shall pay; so that such a Tax may create several Offices, which may
be beneficial to several private Persons, but will avail little to the Public,
as will appear, if the Accounts of the Exchequer be Examined, about the same
Tax raised in Olivers Days; It was a Years Tax upon Houses, which were as
numerous as the Houses built since 1660, yet the whole Account that was brought
in the Exchequer, was but Twenty seven thousand odd Hundred Pounds. It was Four
years in Collecting, and Seven thousand Pound was allowed for the Charge, which
was above a fourth part of the Money.
Reasons against Stopping of New Buildings.
First, TO stop Buildings in and about the Cities of London and Westminster,
will take away the Livelihood of several Thousands of Families. Who after they
have served seven years Apprentiship, to learn their Callings, will think it
very severe, that they should not have Liberty to use their Trades, as well as
other Traders, that do not belong to Building. II. There are but three-ways, by
which the generality of all Traders are employed; In providing Food, Clothing,
and Lodging for Mankind. So that to prohibit Building, is to stop one of the
three great ways by which the People that have no Land are fed; which may prove
of ill Consequence to the Government: It being contrary to the common reputed
Interest of the Nation, which is to encourage all lawful ways whereby the
People might get their Livings. III. Stopping of Building will lessen the Value
of Rents in the Country; for these many Families wanting Employ, cannot consume
so much in Eating and Clothing, which is the Product of the Country; for
according to the Consumption of the Growth of the Country, is the Value of the
Land: And it is much better for the Country, that these Families, which belong
to Building, are Fed and Clothed in London, than in the Country; for they pay
for the Carriage of the Goods to London, by which, another Party of Men and
Horses are maintained, which help to consume the Product of the Country; and
the Builders eat as much, where they now live, and wear out more Clothes.
Lastly. The Builders are in all Nations in the world Encouraged. The States of
Holland have risen to their Greatness, chiefly by Encouraging the Builders to
Enlarge their Cities: Therefore it were convenient that those that think it
necessary to prevent the growth of the City and Buildings, might publish some
Reasons to show how the Interest of this Nation differs from all the rest of
Europe, which perhaps might qulet a little the minds of those many Families
that are to lose their livelyhoods; when they are convinced that it is for the
good of their Country, that they should be ruined; For those Reasons that the
Sergeant uses, does not satisfy them. First. That the Air is Stagnalized by
the New Building, and the Health of their Majesty's Subjects endangered; For,
the Builders by making Large Streets, Squares and Piazzas, and their making
Watercourse and Dreins under ground, have contributed much to the Health of
the Place, having changed many noisome Lay-stals into wholesome Streets; and
London is now as healthy as any Metropolis in the World. II. The Confining of
the Air of His Majesty's Palace. This was not thought a Reason by former
Parliaments to Stop Building; for the Parliament in the 17th. of King Charles
the First, did Petition to the King as a Grievance, that the Subject was
hindered from Building upon his Freehold; for at that time some houses in the
Strand, for Building without a License, were pulled down upon such pretense.
III. By the Common Law, Buildings are so far from being reckoned a Common
Nuisance, that the Law takes care to preserve them; for it is wast, and a
forfeiture of the Estate to demolish a House. IV. If New Buildings do much
Inhance the Price of Victuals (as the Sergeant suggests,) It is for the
advantage of the Country, they having a better price for their Corn and Cattle;
and therefore is a contradiction to his other Argument, That the New Buildings
are the occasion of the fall of the Rent of the Lands in the Country.


