THE READERS SPEECH OF THE Middle Temple.

At the Entrance into his Reading, FEBR. 29. 1663/4.

Upon the STATUTE of Magna Charta, CAP. 29.

Bono servire principi optima libertas. LONDON, Printed for G. Bedell, and T.
Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in
Fleetstreet. 1664.

THE READERS SPEECH OF THE Middle Temple.
May it please your Masterships and Gentlemen,
SEnsible I am of my much unfitness for this Exercise.

Arguments I have used, many, to their Masterships, that they would please to
secure their own, and your honor, by a more pregnant choice.

What prevailed not with their Wisdoms to excuse, may it with your Candors to
interpret mildly.

First, My Memory is in disorder for want of use at the Bar, whence I was
excluded Fourteen Years.

Next, My Limbs are disjointed by the Gowt, a distemper I contracted by the
laziness of a long and close imprisonment.

My Estate has been impaired by Sequestration, Decimation, and those other
sufferings which deepliest oppressed Members, who withdrew to OXFORD.

Scandal'd also I have been, and so was Jesus Christ, and so are many more,
both Great and Good, (because they are so) I have hopes as they to conquer it
by Contempt; If not, by Moderation; yet that is my Crime.

As for my Ambition to be Great, I assure you it is no less than my desert and
hopes, and that's None at all.

These Considerations, as they discouraged, so they inclined me now in Age,
when the Clouds return after the Rain, and the strong men bow, to a retired
life.

BUT were it that Fate which has hitherto doomed me to a suffering condition,
or a mistake in their Masterships of some abilities in me, which I know not, to
the work I must, and which is worse, by another fayler, a full year before my
course.

Next to Obedience, That which disposed me most, was a due sense of the Debt
which we all in course owe to the Society.

A Society at this day observed to be highly Civil, Generous and Gentile,
Nobilium Filii; of which extraction, says Fortescue and Fern, persons ought to
be, that have the honor to be here admitted; A lower breed being not
proportionate to the air and ingenuity of this profession.

A Society so prosperous upon account of Learning, that a mess of our chief
Masters are worthily advanced for it to offices of honor, and we have in view
a flourishing recruit to improve the splendor of this Exercise, and with it
the Government.

And so hopeful in the fair branches growing up, that I have confidence to
aver, you will no way derogate from the Glory of your Predecessors, whose Arms
and Trophies you cannot but behold, if you look up to Heaven.

A debt so honorable, so just, though I engaged to others, I resolved to pay,
though perhaps not in weight, yet in number: And what is light, I have hopes
may be supplied by that weighty indulgence of their Masterships, favorably to
interpret my endeavors with respet to my sufferings, and surprise.

And that Gentlemen, from you, and persons of your deep Reason, I demand, as a
due to Justice, and I shall return you an acknowledgment as a due to Civility.

Where Excuses, you will say, are so near, Errors usually are not far, nor indeed
are mine.

Troth it is, I had advanced a Statute more useful in order to conveyancing, but
time straitning me, I found it too laborious.

Whereupon upon this Law I fixed, having somewhat pondered it in the late
Troubles that disputed it, which soon wiping off the gloss and varnish of
pretenses, made it demonstrative, That it is not only Duty, but Interest to
build high upon the old foundation.

You have here a Stature, which proclaims Liberty to the English Subject; a
liberty as far transcending that Imposture of a Free State, as the glory of the
Sun, the Prodigy of a Comet.

That Comet which our great Statesman prudently observed, to have influenced
men's spirits into the late Confusions.

Confusion unavoidably incident to that Model, without Wars or Garrisons; Wars
to keep up the great ones from falling down; Garrisons to keep down the lesser
from rising up.

Where no King is, there can be no Honor, no Degrees; and where all are equal,
every man thinks himself as fit to rule as any, and will put for all.

Therefore subsists it only, where there is a Head-City, to give name to it, to
awe and tax the adjacent Country, as of old, Rome, Carthage, Athens; with us,
Venice, Geneva, Ragusa, nay and the Swisse, and fatal Netherlands, who are
united and secured by a confederacy of Garrisons, and those chiefly managed by
no Gentry.

Hence is it, that England is inconsistent with that fiction, as well regard of
situation, being a large continent, not to be denominated or awable by one
City, as of the brave and sprightly temper of the Gentry, not to be inslaved by
Mechanics.

Peruse our Chronicles, and there shall we read, that the English are Gens
inclyta belli, audax and impatiens froeni; but in their highest tumults, not in
the least disposed to alter Kingship; not then, when they bandied Crowns, as we
do Tennis balls into Cross Hazard; no, not when the Smith Flammock, Wat the
Tyler, or Jack Straw revell'd it with their Clowns.

Did you not mark? when our late Riders, like Sots in Drink, reeled from this
to that, the unpliant Genius of the Nation (which will carry things in the long
Run) enforced their giddy Heads to a stand, even where we stood at first; even
there, where now we stand; And some that dared not stand it, to stand higher.

Don't you believe, that it was the courage of this Party, the contrivance of
that, or that compliance of a third! no it was the general Spirit, and Genius
of the Nation, that brought home the King, and it had an influence dextrous,
and powerful, and yet invisible.

Was it not strange! While the factions quarreled among themselves who shall
have the Rule, the King must be called in to save them against themselves, and
to take the Rule.

He that was their fear, must become their Refuge; Peace with the King, brings
peace among themselves; yea, and with all the world, and Parliaments, as at the
first,

Pacatumque regit patriis virtutibus orbem; Proh Dii! Not one drop of blood
runs out in the whole transaction, but only in the clar stream of Justice, and
that administered in such a stood of mercy, as designed rather to vindicate and
purge Religion from that putrid stain of King-killing, than to inflict
vengeance on the Workers of Iniquity.

If then his Enemies have cause, much more have his Friends to cry GOD SAVE THE
KING.

I stir not this to reflect, for I abhor it; but to evidence, not only their
disloyalty and lewd conscience, but their folly, that conspire a Change,
capable of no other issue but their own destruction.

And that not only in their estates and persons, but even in that liberty which
they so much labor.

For were it a scelus prosperum instead of Liberty, which from this Statute for
four Centuries under Kingship we have prosperously enjoyed, nay improved; they
advance only the lusts of some few, that get next in the Saddle, who were
heretofore not un-ominously instil'd Custodes libertatis; for they took so much
liberty to themselves, that they left none to other.

Liberty sage men covet, as well as factious; not that liberty for every man to
do that which is right in his own eyes, as it was when there was no King in
Israel; for that liberty, as it occasiond the Levite to quarter out his
Concubine, and scatter it among the Tribes, to take revenge, so makes it every
man a slave to him that has the longest sword.

True liberty is that, where the Rules of Law square out a man his right; where
the Law spurs on the good* and reins in the evil; where a man's Houses is his
Castle, because the Law is his Guard, and so is it of his Goods, neither to be
assailed without his own consent, in person, or by proxy.

Of liberty in this sense, (where of the just and honest, as Cato says, are
only capable) my Statute exalts to the English a proportion more triumphant,
than the freest State; yea, then that goodly one, which was begot out of the
mud, and brought forth the freedom of Excise; where free indeed they are, but
it is in purse, who excise their very Pot Herbs before they eat them.

Our liberty is built so high, that it cannot stand firm unless it be prop't up
by Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons; Consulere, and consentire, and
a Sovereign, with a L^ roy le veul to enforce; If those supporters fail, Suis
and ipsa viribus ruit, this rich Fabric sinks with its own weight: For it so
harmoniously intermixes the rights of Sovereignty with the liberty of the
Subject, that the one balances the other, nay, the least jarr in the one,
makes a loud discord in the other.

Lex facit ut ipse sit Rex, says Bracton well, and it is said as well, Imperii
majestas est tutelae salus, The support of power and awe in Majesty, secures
peace and safety to the people.

The unsteddy vulgar are not to be entrusted with their own security, without a
check; It Is for their advantage to be rid with a strait bridle, so that bridle
be the Law; If the reins of Sovereignty and the Law be let loose, like
headstrong Colts, they ll run cross-ways till they bogg themselves, or fall;
or if they get free, the next that comes impounds or backs them.

If the Logic of this were discreetly pressed, it might stead the King of
England in this Knowing Age, perhaps no less, than the Divinity we hear of the
rights of the Kings of Israel.

I have a home proof, but it is a sad one, when our late good King in his
pious hopes of a closure, let go his radical and inherent power to dissolve the
Parliament; thereby unwarily advancing two powers co-orinate, as two Gods in
Heaven, whose cross wills must needs inflame the Earth.

Which breach in that weighty fundamental, let loose the Government, and let in
a deluge of misery upon us his Subjects, as well as upon His Crown.

Without which Sarcasm in policy, our Laws are so regular, that a Civil War
could not swell up to that length, or height, nor could this Statute, and with
it, Liberty be so ore-flown, as it was, (we know the time) when the enforcing
it by some learned ones that now sit high on the Bench, enforced them to lie
low in the Tower.

But now that we have a Sovereign, who knows and builds his Government upon his
and our true interest, the Law, and which he has pleased so far to honor, as
to give this Exercise His Royal presence, I am emboldned to awaken this
Statute, which has so long slept, and therein to evidence his Majesty's
indulgence, and our happiness, by way of explanation.

In order whereunto, give me leave a little to ramble into History, and perhaps
the length of the Journey will be recompensed by the goodness of the way.

Some reach the Pedigree of this Stature from the old Britans, others from a
mixture with the Saxons; I take the Original like that of Nilus, dark and
uncertain, or rather as a flowing in of several streams into one grand Channel.

The Heptarchye being reduced under one Government, by that flout Prince
Edbert, the West Saxon (be it recorded to the glory of our West) and our St.
King Edward in time succeeding to the whole, He, with the Advice of his wife
Men, caused one Volume, Ex immensa legum congerie, as Hoveden has it, out of
all their Laws to be compiled, Optima quaeque elegit, says Gemitencis, which
seemed most equal and indifferent, Quos vocari voluit communem legem; And those
he enjoined to be observed through the whole as his own Law.

King Edward dying chaste, though married, and Edgar his Heir an Outlaw,
William of Normandy makes Title to the Crown, as Cousin to the Confessor, and
disposed by his will, and that appointment ratified by the Oath of the Nobility.

And to keep fair with the Clergy, he proffers to refer his Right to the
Arbitration of the Pope, whose Decrees in those days were Oracles.

Harold slights the Arbitration; and so at Rome from the Pope, he obtains a
sentence for his Title as more pregnant than that of Harold, who, Sine
Ecclesiastica Authoritate, says Hoveden, and against his Oath given to Duke
William, had usurped the Crown.

This dispute determines at one Battle, but it was a bloody one, there being a
carnage of Sixty thousand men, as the Monks report it; And the Duke, Potentiam
ex vulgi adulatione quaerens, simulque magnifica pollicitus, disclaims
Conquest, and taking his Oath to continue the good Laws of his Cousin the
Confessor, with free applause, Rex declaratur, is accepted King; as Mr. Seldom
notes upon Edmerus.

And that the people might the better observe their duty, and the King his
Oath, he caused Twelve of the most discreet men in every Shire to be sworn,
that without swerving either ad dextram, or sinistram; that is, nec
Prerogativae blandientes, nec Privilegia dilatantes, they should lay open
sanctitatem, the integrity of their Laws; nothing adding, nothing concealing;
Nil prevaricando mittentes; so writes Hoveden.

And Aldred the Archbishop that Crowned him, and the Bishop of London, by the
Kings Command, wrote that which the Jurats had delivered, and these, and says
Ingulphus his Secretary, made Abbot of Crowland, He proclaims to be Authentic,
and for ever to be inviolabiliter observed.

The Sum of this he composed, as Sir Edw. Cook conjectures in the Preface to
his 8th. Reperit. into some form of a Charter, closing it with this General,
That all men duly keep the Laws of Good King Edward.

Some Laws indeed of his own he added for the advantage of his Normans, which,
says Gervase of Tilbury, were Effficacissimae ad pacem regni faciendam; though
others say, They were somewhat too severe upon the Natives, the better to make
room for a new Plantation.

Dangelt an exaction not cleared from the Crown he Releases;

The Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and Civil, this King also s^ver'd; for before
his Reign, the Bishop and the Earl, or their Deputites, sat jointly in the
Counties, determining spiritual Causes in the Forenoon, and secular in the
Afternoon, according to the pattern of the Jewish Sanhedrim, which was imitated
by the Christians in times primitive; The Apostles and Elders which were no
other than Lay-Magistrates, deciding all controversies among Christians, who
voluntary submitted to their judgment; for this see the Glossary, 315. Lambert,
80. and Mr. Seldom on Edmerus, 166. and History of Tyths, chap. 14.

It Is only to be wished, that he had distinguished their Causes, as he divided
their Courts; for that omission has occasioned those justlings of Jurisdiction
which have since happened between the Ecclesiastical Courts, and the Courts and
Common Law.

But more violent was this Conflict, till by a Canon of the Counsel of
Clarendon, it was decreed, That Regis justiciarius mittet in curiam sanctae
Ecclesiae ad videndum quo modo res ibi tractatur; The ground of Prohibitions;
Mat. Paris. An. 1164.

This the Clergy endeavored to qualify by Petition in Parliament, 5.1. Ed. 3.
nu. 83. But thereto the King answered, that he could not depart with his right.
4. Just. 339.

King William in this Act designed a more regular dispatch of Causes; and
indeed as Pictaviensis says, he was a Prince of Courage, Spectaculum
delectabile, simul and terribile: He was, says Matthew Paris, Subjectis
humilis, but Rebellibus inexorabilis, and deserves a memory in our Chronicles
more illustrious; for though his Normans at his new establishment importuned
him to connive at some oppressions, yet the Law held out in title; And then,
may we interpret the mistakes of a Prince, to be his necessity, or at least but
as a step out of the way to avoid the Dirt; manifesting that he is but Man, and
not more privileged from Infirmity, than his Subjects.

Little of good fame (a revenge which bad Princes after their deaths cannot
provide against) in Rufus his Son have we upon Record; for then says Paris,
were their Malae consuetudines and exactiones injstae; And this appears by that
great Charter of his succeeding Brother King Henry the First, who, says
Hoveden, those evil customs penitus abrogavit, and restored to oppressed England,
the Laws of good King Edward; with those emendations which his Father had added
by the Counsel of his Barons; so Florentius, and Malmsbury. King Stephen by his
Charter confirms the good Laws which King Henry his Uncle had before granted,
with those of good King Edward, and enjoins, says Roger Bacon in his Book De
impedimentis scientiae, That none of the Laws of Italy, the Imperial Laws
should be retained; Henry the Second ratifies the same Charter; He grants what
his Grandfather King Henry had granted, and remits what he had remitted.

King John disputes it with his Nobles, but was prevaild with in the
Seventeenth year of his Reign, to contract those former general Charters into
one Grand one, and this says the Monck of St. Albons, Ex part maxima, leges
antiquas and regni consuetudines cortinebat, Paris 246.

But King John being (as the Moncks report him) of an unsteddy spirit, recalls
his Charter, when the Normans being ingrafted into the English Nobility, and
inheritable as they thought to the English freedom, contest it with their
Prince, and pray in aid of Lewis the French Kings Son; by whose powers King
John being worsted, he dies, being poisoned, as is supposed, in a Chalice. He
left his Heir of the Age of Eleven years, whose innocence had contracted no
malice, and in whom concentered not only the title of the Norman, but also of
the Royal Saxon blood; for he was Grandson to Maud the Empress, Daughter and
Heir of Henry the First, by Maud the Daughter of Malcolm King of Scots, and
Margaret his Wife, Sister and Heir of Edgar Atheling, true Heir to the
Confessor.

The English, who naturally abhor wrong, and without a strong byas, are just
loyal, forthwith desert the Forreigner, and adhere to the Royal Issue; The
French Prince affrighted at the fervor of that generous spirit, submits to
terms, and departs the Land.

King Henry the Third, the Infant, is Crowned, and in the Ninth year of his
Reign, being the Twentieth of his Age, upon payment of a Fifteen of all men's
movables, Cap. 37. in full Parliament, he gives and grants this Magna Charta,
whereof my Statute is a Chapter.

Afterward pretending Infancy, he declares this Charter Null, which revives
the Barons War, and issues streams of English blood.

Yet here give me leave to note what the French Comines gives for a Maxim, That
no Subject ever drew Sword against his Prince, but though his design prevailed,
he himself suffered in Life, Estate, or Conscience; And of this, gives
evidence, That Pardon for which the Lords Petition this King Henry in
Kenelworth, the same Castle where they had imprisoned him; Dictum de
Kenelworth. H. 3.

Yet the result in the long run was the re-establishment of this Charter, in
the Twenty fifth of his Reign, and in the presence of his Son the brave King
Edw. 1. Mag. chapter 37. and with such direful Ceremonies as were then Authentic
by way of cursing and execrations to the Infringers, as may astonish the
Reader, if he peruses Matthew Paris, An. 1253. And reflects as well on such as
violate the Kings Prerogative, as Intrenchers upon the Subjects liberty.

By some as ignorant as censorious, our Laws are scandal'd as introduced by
Conquest; whereas in truth this Charter is purely declaratory of the old Saxon
as aforesaid; so concludes St German. Fol. 12.

And in those captious points of Tenures, Wardships, and Purveyance, I can
demonstrate footsteps thereof before King William, though possibly by him and
his Issue improved with the honor of Kinghthood, and Knights service.

But were the quarrel at all a grievance, we have now a Prince, who derives his
Pedigree not only from the Norman, but more ancient and direct, from the Royal
Saxon Line, as well by Queen Margaret, Sister and Heir of Edgar in the Scotch
Descent, as from Maud her Daughter Queen to King Henry the First in the English.

And for those pretended Norman innovations of Tenures, Wardships, and
Purveyance, he has been pleased to unhatch these Royalties from his Crown upon
the Petition of the Parliament, which is a Court de Tesgrand honor and justice
de que null doit imaginer chose dish^nourable, as we are taught, in Plo. 388. In
whose wisdoms it becomes people to acquiesce, as their own choice and
Representatives, or to renounce all Rule, but their own.

Yet may it with all submission be aver'd, Those Royalties might possibly have
been so refined to the Saxon Model, as would have given an ornament and luster
to the Crown, yet no pressure to the Subject.

But be this Statute de novo, or declaratory, were it at first a Charter only,
or an Act, the matter is now without dispute, since the same King, and after
him his Son King Edward, a warlike Prince, and our Justinian, 25. Ed. 1. in his
full age and glory enacted it to be allowed as Common Law, for so are the
words; nay, that it should be read twice a year in all Cathedrals, chapter 2. as
the place where by the popes interest they were then most obstructed: And his
Royal Successors now Thirty and three times have confirmed it by Acts of
Parliament; Nay, we have an Act that declares all Acts void, that are against
it: But leges posteriores priores abrogant.

So that, what at the first erecting might be a Charter, is become a Statute,
and so St. German terms it, and so the Act of 5. Ed. 3. Cap. 8. And in
pleadings, what more usual, than to lay it Contra formam Statuti, in an Action
brought upon this Law?

A Statute then it is, and therefore not less proper for a Reading, than that
of Treasons, 25. Ed. 3. which was but declaratory of the old Law.

The old Statutes, says Chapter Justice Cook, Preface to the 8th. Rep. are the
Text of the Common Law; the Records and Reports are but Commentaries thereupon.

And if so, then this Law, and this Chapter chiefly, which is the Jewel in the
Ring, is the foundation of the whole, the rest but structures built upon it.

This the base, those the descant.

And now Gentleman, let us consider what sort of liberty is it, that a liber
homo, a man of Reason can design, which is not secured him by this Statute!

1. Desires he to have his person free? Nullus capiatur vel imprison^tur.

2 Desires he peace in the possession of his Land? Nullus disseisetur de libero
tenemento.

3. Would he not have his Franchises encroach'd? Nullus disseisetur de
libertatibus.

4. Favors he the old Customs which he has been bred in? Nullus disseisetur
de liberis consuetudinibus.

5. Desires he to live in the protection of the Law? Nullus utlag^tur.

6. Delights he in his old equaintance, and Country ir? Nullus exul^tur.

7. Would be not be oppressed by his potent neighbor? Nullus aliquo modo
destruatur.

8. Would be not be condemned before he be heard, nor chas is'd before he be
legally condemned? Nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittimus.

9. Would he not be judged at will, nor tried but by his Neighborhood, and the
Law? why none of these, or other grievance can surprise him. Nisi per judicium
parium vel per legem terrae.

10. Lastly, Would he have right done him, and that without delay, sine prece,
sine precio. Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut deferemus justitiam vel
rectum.

Lo here we have a Law for property in our Goods, for title to our Lands, for
liberty to our persons, for safety to our lives; In general, as my Lord Dyer
notes, fol. 104. here is a remedy for every wrong that is, and a prevention for
every wrong that may be: for no man shall suffer till he be condemned; none
condemned, but by a legal trial; and none tried, but is to be admitted to his
just defense.

If a Subject of England be not liber, who then is free? How is it, our
interest as well as duty to support the Royal Government, which shaken, leaves
us free to naught but the lusts of men? How are their contrivances to be
abhorred, who design, under a specious fallacy, to erect their own greatness
and revenge, on the hazard of our lives and souls!

What I have enforced in relation to Kingship, I suppose is cohaerent, and not
strained or impertinent to this occasion, and indeed no more than I (give me
leave to say not unseasonably) published before the Kings return, which may
acquit me of flattery or design. There remains only one scruple, which may
stick with some that are pre-possess'd, and that is, An acknowledgement that
our Laws are excellent, but they have been often violated, and are apt to be
obstructed in the execution.

For answer, know, that while we are here, because men, we are subject to
infirmity; nor is it possible to reap the more general fruit of the best
established policy, unless by compact we subject our selves to some possible
inconveniences.

Accidents and the artifices of men, are so various and uncertain, that no
Government is, was, or ever can be so exact, (no, not that Vtopian device,
which Mr. Wren so well asserted) as can secure against all casual emergents and
mischiefs.

Governments therefore are best weighed by comparisons; and comparing the royal
frame, with that of our late Model, which is the beloved of our Statists, it is
easily demonstrated, that Subjects are much more incident to oppression under
that than this.

In the Royal frame, the House of Commons are in a sort the Tribunes of the
Subjects liberty, and it has often interposed humbly, yet with success. Now
shall that House (we know when it was) become our Tyrants? To whom shall we
appeal in case of grievance? It Is a change but fatal to the sheep, when the Dog
that guards them becomes the Wolf; when such (as in Kingship) are entrusted
only to consent that the Purse be opened, shall (as then) put in their hands to
dispose and pay, and themselves only to account unto themselves.

It Is a wound in the very heart of Liberty, and the less curable, in that it is
driven by a knot of hands, a quarry of Sovereigns supporting one another like
stones in an Arch; every of whose dependants acts the Prince, and fortifies a
successive violation.

Whereas a Prince is but one, circumscribed by a known Law, and apt instruments
are not lightly raised, the terror of a House of Commons being too exemplary;
however though Rex the King dies not, and his Sovereignty cannot be divided
from himself, yet his person is mortal, and his posterity not so active, or
more indulgent, makes amends.

Upon this account it is, that ever since the Conquest at the long run, no
innovation had ever happened, but prerogative has been pruned (and perhaps too
hastily) in the branch thereof, which let in the opportunity. Search our
Statutes, and so you will find it.

I might instance the excellency of this Government, from the solemn and
profound order that we have in framing new, in revoking or altering old Laws,
which like Gold, must be seven times refined before they are in force.

In that other fiction, how hastily upon every new light did they make Laws,
even as boys do Squibs and Crackers, and as lasting; without a balance, or
other body, maturely to debate and ripen!

Which Laws, being absolute and without control, may be presumed to bias
toward their private interests, though not by an exemption of the Purse, for
that were too scandalous, yet by the invention or erecting of a new Office, or
employment, which sufficiently rep its the payment.

I might also instance in their severe and arbitrary imprisonments, and those
without hearing or appeal; and often inflicted at the will or their inferior
dependants in the Country, which (though I have too often felt) yet as to what
was so enforced by those persons that were owned as the Supreme Authority,
(admitting it legal) I cannot rationally condemn: for no Kingdom or State can
stand long unshaken, unless there be in the supreme Magistrate and Council, a
radical and inhaerent right, by power not altogether regular, to obviate
plottings and surprise.

Otherwise, while it stays the formalities of Law, the conspiracy may grow
lawless, too strong to be prevented by it: And though some that are innocent,
may suffer upon an undue suspicion, yet melius pereat unus quam unitas, better
is it that one innocently suffer a private and temporay mischief, than that we
run the hazard of a public inconvenience.

With this, that it subjects the disquition to the forms of Law, when it may be
safe and open, and with this, that it parts not this authority from the
Sovereign and his Council; and so see we it now executed, and not
unprosperously warranted by the Law of Nature, self-preservation, to which Lex
terrae cannot be contrary.

Whereas in those other days every dependant acted his passion, with this
power, and the trial we had was by a new red Court, where the culled person
were in a sort, Parties, Judge, and Juries, but no challenge, no pares, and I
may swear they had none.

Justitia firmat solium; which King James well understood, when he published,
That for a King of England to discountenance the Common Law, was to desert his
Crown; all persons are presumed to endeavor that which is for their advantage;
Certainly then the Prince is ill advised, who ruins the Law, which is his
chief support; If for no other cause, yet for this, we have no cause to fear.

However, better were it to time out a temporary evil, as we do showers in
harvest, than engage in that public hazard, which attends an undue remedy.

The Arms of Subjects (even as best for them) should be preces and lachrymae,
and those at the end will prevail, when it is grown to be the Genius of the
people; But, Si non fecerit, sufficit ^i ad poenam, says Bracton, quod Dominum
habet ultorem. He that has faith, will stay Gods time for payment; he that has
none, may take his own time, and possibly be paid himself.

Every word in this Statute has its weight, and I might aptly dissect it into
as many parts as words; For method I shall propose ten particulars, and each of
them an adaequate subject for a reading.

Within this Statute.
1. Who is the Liber homo intended. 2. What shall be an Imprisonment. 3. What
is a Disseisin of Franktenement. 4. What is a Disseisin of Liberties. 5. What
is a Disseisin of free Customs. 6. What is an Utlagury, exile or destruction.
7. What shall be said to be a passing or sitting upon a man. 8. What shall be
called a legal judgment of Peers. 9. What it is that is called the Law of the
Land. 10. What shall be said to be a selling, denying, or deferring of Justice.


Upon these divisions I shall proceed, as far as the time allotted me will
permit; however, I shall contrive to give you somewhat of my conceptions upon
every part; and herein I shall beg your patience and attention, and possibly
may make you some amends, by being brief and plain.

ERRATA.
Page 3 line 17. read ^n. Ibid line 24. for Hazard, read Hazards* Page 4. line
21. for o h^, read others. Ibid line ^. for Lords Spi^itual, Lords Tempo^ral,
^d, read a House of Lords, and a House of.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
More of this Subject may be read, in a Discourse published by the Reader,
before the Kings Return, and Printed by us,

G. B. and T. C.


