AN ANSWER TO A PAMPHLET ENTITLED, A Vindication of Sir Tho. Player, and those
Loyal Citizens concerned with him. In Defense of A REPLY TO A SPEECH made by
Sir Tho. Player.
By H. B. Citizen of London.
THe said H. B. for further Answer taken to the Exceptions in the said
Vindication, answers and says, That the said Sir T. P. might as reasonably have
taken H. B. for a Jew, as a Priest or Papist, there being nothing in his
Answer, from which any such Conclusion can be drawn from the Premises. But
it is observable, that any person that asserts the King's Legal Prerogative, and
the established Religion, must be a Papist, without any contradiction whatever.
And I must also observe, That the detecting and suppressing the Popish Plot,
(in the opinion of the Phanaticks) cannot be effected by the present
Government, without their assistance, (whether required or not.) But the Water
being disturbed, they put in their Hooks, Baits and Nets, to try whether they
can catch the Fish, (that is to say, the Government.) And it is observable, that
there is a Sect of men, whose Ambition, Jenkisme, Faction, or pretended blind
Zeal, will never be contented with the best of Governments, which ours is,
under a qualified Monarchy, unless they themselves be at Helm steering.

Surely this Vindicator cannot have so little Logic, as to suppose it was ever
understood, that Parliaments or Courts of Judicature could ever be intended as
Routs and unlawful Assemblies: He would make Sir T. P. leading up his men like
these; which not being according to Law, I affirm, may be reasonably accounted
so. But to make it not so, Sir T. P. had two designs in it; one, to show his
Attendants whom he would have to vouch Jealousies and Fears for him: the other,
to vote for Mr. J. to be a Pentioner-Sheriff, so as with that Authority to make
his Factious Party the stronger. But the true Loyal Citizens, not so in title,
as you title your selves, were the greater number.

I expected to have met with Sir T. P. at the Meeting of the Lieutenancy, on
the 18th of this Month, with half a score of his Men of Sense; but because he
was prohibited from bringing great numbers with him, he thought fit to wave it:
Or else Sir T. P. and those persons were so employed in writing a Vindication
for those Loyal Citizeus, that they could not spare time: It being better to
rail at a Church of England man, by calling him Saucy Jesuit, and more ill
Names than are yet invented at Billinsgate, than to be rendered Idle and
Officious.

I could wish that his Club would consider Law, as well as Faction, and they
might square their actions more discreetly. For how impudently does this
Vindicator affirm, that the City of London is not altogether tied up by those
Acts, etc. and that the City have the command of their Militia? and instances,
That Burgers of all Cities in the world have the command of them. This is
denied, for that there are no Cities, unless under Commonwealths (which we are
not under the Tyranny of yet) have that command. But if it had been so, what is
that to our Law established? Where by all the Acts, the Militia is declared to
be absolutely in the Power of the; King. And I am sure no person durst have
said the contrary, but one that would favor Rebellion, so soon as an
opportunity offers it self.

I must make bold once more to assert, that the keeping up the Guards of the
City is a vast expense to the poor of the City, and tends much to the
impoverishing of them. But our Vindicator says, Volenti non fit injuria, not
considering it is against Law. But if he considered the use of them, he might
find them useless, and against Reason too. But the Patriot, as he terms him,
could once affirm, That the King having Guards for his person, was against Law.
Let any man therefore judge of the Vindicator's Principles, Ex pede Herculent:
Not forgetting The good old Cause. It Is commendable in Sir T. P. to cloak the
old grudge so, to place his Revenge under a cloak of Public Safety, and for
the good of the City.

I must declare, it is some reflection upon the City, to have made choice of
Factious Persons to be our principal Officers in the City, and to place them in
the Public Offices. But it so happened, it might not appear so to us then: But
upon discovery, the City is ready enough to set such persons aside. Neither do
I know how to reconcile the matter, for one that is Chamberlain of London to be
a Parliament Man, because of the unlimitedness of that Privilege; which, if
made use of, may tend to the ruin of many Orphans and other persons, that are
forced to give credit to this Public Trust. Abundans Cautela non nocet.
Without that there is any matter or thing material for this Respondent to make
Answer unto, etc.

And this Respondent does demur in Law to the Vindicator, for that he being a
Freeborn Citizen, and one of the Church of England as now by Law established,
ought not to lie under the scurrilous Names in the said Pamphlet mentioned, and
hereto annexed; but ought to have them expunged, and ought to have his Cost and
Charges, etc.

N. R.

The Scurrilous Names mentioned in the said Pamphlet, to which the Answer has
relation.
Saucie and dangerous Pamphleter, Priesthood, Scurrilous Libeller, Ghostly
Citizen of Rome, Papist in Masquerade, Traitorous Make-bates, Popish Butcher,
Spawn of Judas, Infamous Incendiary, Impudent, His Mother the old Whore of
Rome, Unworthy Respondent, Daring Pamphleter, Incorrigible Libeller, and
villainous Varlet, Scavenger, Serpent, Rascally lurking Scribler, Petty Fogger,
Popish Ruffin.
FINIS.

