A LETTER OF FRANCESCO REDI Concerning Some Objections made upon his
OBSERVATIONS About VIPERS: Written to Monsieur BOURDELOT Abbot, and Lord of
Conde and St. Ledger.

And Monsieur ALEXANDER MORVS.

Printed in Italian at Florence, 1670.

Now made English.

Together with The SEQUEL of NEW EXPERIMENTS upon VIPERS, and a Dissertation
upon their Poison: Serving for a Reply to a Letter written by Signor Francisco
Redi to M. Bourdelot, and M. Morus.

Written in French by Moyse Charas. Now likewise Englished.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at the
Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

A LETTER OF FRANCESCO REDI, Concerning some Objections made upon his
Observations about Vipers.
Written to Monsieur BOURDELOT, AND Monsieur ALEXANDER MORUS.
SIRS,
FROM your liberality I have received the Book entitled NEW EXPERIMENTS upon
VIPERS, learnedly composed by those noble Virtuosi, who during some months had
met in the House of M. Charas for that purpose. I have read it over more then
once with great contentment, plainly finding that those Worthy persons have not
scrupled by their eminent labors to confirm the Truth of those Observations,
which I also had made touching VIPERS, until the year 1664.

And indeed I think my self much obliged to their ingenuity, and do frankly
acknowledge, that whatever worth that rude and plain piece of mine may have, it
has received it from the honorable testimonies, given to it in France, where
all the excellent Sciences and Arts do highly flourish, to the admiration of
those that profess them in the other parts of Europe.

I entreat you, Sirs, that you would do me the favor to represent upon
occasion these my candid and cordial sentiments, and withal to declare the
high esteem I have for that Book* the authority of which is so venerable with
me, that, having found therein some few things directly contrary to my own
Experiments, I have often doubted of my self, and been almost ready to believe,
that I dreamed when I made, and when I wrote them. But some of my Learned
Friends, that were frequently present at those my Operations, have laughed at
me for that proneness of my belief, and between jest and earnest assured me,
that those Experiments had by no means so succeeded with me in a dream.
Notwithstanding which, without any regard to their asseverations, I resolved to
iterate and reiterate them, and that with so great and careful diligence, that
I should greatly injure my self and Truth, if I should not freely and heartily
tell you, that all those four or five Experiments, which to those Gentlemen in
France have not succeeded, do succeed with me in Italy without fail, as they
were formerly recorded by me; on the contrary, those will not succeed with me
that have been made in France and are contrary to mine.

And since you may perhaps have the curiosity as to desire to know of what kind
they are, I shall here give you a brief account of them; assuring my self, that
it will be acceptable to all the Lovers of Truth, but especially to the Authors
of the Book of the New Experiments, who have been induced to write by no other
motive then the sole desire either to confirm or to find the Truth of a matter
so curious, of which so many understanding men have written.

In my Letter then of the Observations about Vipers, addressed to the
Illustrious Lorenzo Magalotti, speaking of the Poison of those creatures, both
what it is, and in what part of the Body it resideth, I affirmed (as I affirm
still) that the Poison of a Viper is nothing else then a certain yellowish
liquor, which lodges in the vesicles that cover the greatest teeth of the
Viper; and that that Juice is not only poisonous, when it is ejected by the
live Viper when she biteth, but also when it is collected from a dead Viper, and
even such an one that has been dead many days, provided it be made to pass
into a wound, and remain there. Moreover, I added, that this same liquor, when
taken down into the stomach, is not deadly, no not so much as noxious. And this
was my opinion, which has been confirmed to me by innumerable Experiments,
made with the greatest exactness I could employ.

But the Authors of the Book of the New Experiments do resolutely write, That
that above mentioned Liquor is not poisonous, but a mere and a most innocent
Saliva or Spitle. Thence they go on to affirm for an undoubted and experimented
Truth, that the Viper has no part of her body, neither limb nor humor, able to
poison; and that all her poison consists in the sole imagination of the Viper,
irritated and made angry by the Idea of vengeance, which she has conceived in
her head; by the means whereof the spirits being put into a violent motion, are
darted through the Nerves, and at times through the Fibers of the cavities of
the Teeth, by which cavities those spirits are carried to infect the blood of
the animal, by the opening made with the biting teeth. In short, they conclude,
that if a Viper be not angry, and have not that vindicative imagination, her
bitings do never poison, but are very innocent, causing no mischief at all to
him, in whom they are made. For these are their words;

Page 36. in the English Version, These considerations, supported by many
Experiments made by Us, and to be related hereafter, have induced me to call
these GlandsSalival, and to ascribe to them the very source of that yellow
liquor, which has been so much decried, and withal so little known; and it
nothing else, but a pure and a very innocent Spitle. I hope that those who
shall take the pains of examining after me, these Glands, and this Juice of the
Gums, will not stick to give me their suffrages.

Item p. 105. 106. But not to stay upon principles so slightly established, and
ill maintained, for as much as we have on our side a great number of
Experiments, upon which we are grounded: We say, that this Juice is nothing but
a pure and plain Saliva, of which we have already observed the use; and that
this Juice contributes nothing to the venomousness of the Biting, since being
tasted and swallowed (as we have often experimented) it does no hurt to man or
beast; and since also, being put upon open wounds, and upon incisions made in
the flesh, the same being rubbed therewith, and mingled with the blood, it
annoys nothing at all; notwithstanding the judgment of a Person very
intelligent, and particularly in this subject of Vipers, who assures to have
made a great number of Experiments, which being contrary to ours, the great
opinion we have of the abilities and the sincerity of that famous man, has
obliged us to employ the more care and exactness, and to confirm our selves by
a very great number of Experiments, which have always been found alike in the
truth we here assert, and of which we shall make evident and irrefragable proof.

Item p. cog. We conclude therefore, that the imagination of the Viper,
irritated by the idea of revenge, which she had framed to her self, gives a
certain motion to the spirits, which cannot be expressed, and pushes them
violently, through the Nerves and their Fibers, to the cavity of the teeth as
into a funnel, and that from thence they are conveyed into the blood of the
animal by the opening, which they have made, there to produce all those
effects, of which we endeavor to give a reason.

Item page III. However this be, we must herein agree, that this irritation in
the fancy or in the spirits of the Viper, is the main cause of the activity
and piercingness of its venom, and that without it the biting would not produce
such surprising effects, as those are, of which we have related so many
examples.

Item page 138. These Experiments will prove on the one hand, that the yellow
liquor contributes nothing to the poison; and on the other, that these incensed
spirits, assisted by the openings, which the great teeth had made for them, are
the sole and true cause thereof.

These sentiments they confirm by some Experiments, all which consist in this,
that they had dropped a quantity of that yellow liquor into the wounds of a
Pigeon, a Dog, and some Pullets, which yet dyed not of it; and that having
caused a Pigeon to be bitten by a Viper not enraged, the animal received thence
no hurt at all. For they say page 115. We also made a trial upon a Pigeon,
which we wounded under the wing and in the Leg in the same moment of time; and
we let into each wound some of this yellow liquor, which just before we had
drawn from the gums of two enraged Vipers; then we rejoyned the skin well, to
enclose the said liquor, and we bound both wounds over with a band, that
nothing might run out. We can assure, that the Pigeon felt not any
inconvenience from it, and that we even found upon the wound, made in the Leg,
a coagulated drop of the juice, round, and of the same color as we had put it
there, and the blood of the wound dried, and that, soon after, both wounds were
dried up, and healed of themselves.

Page 116. We also made the like Experiment upon a Cat, which we purposely
wounded in the Leg, but he received no harm at all by it: We have also often
experimented it on Pullets, and other Pigeons, but always with the like
success, and without any offense to the Animals.

Ibid. The same Trial has been thrice made at three several times, and even
twice in one day upon a Dog, whom we had wounded on purpose toward the bottom
of the Ear, where he could not lick his wound; and no mischief at all followed
upon it.

Ibid. We cannot but add here an Experiment of the mortal effect of the Enraged
Spirits, without any intervention of the yellow liquor. We made a Viper several
times to bite upon a slice of bread, by pressing every time its jaws against
the bread; and we did this so often, that not only that juice was altogether
exhausted, but the blood began to come out of the Vessicles. At the same time
we vexed the Viper, and made her bite a Pigeon in the most fleshy part; and we
observed that indeed the effects of the venom of the biting were not so quick,
the Pigeon not dying but an hour and an half after it had been bitten; but then
we found also, that the teeth of the Viper were in a manner covered with the
crumbs of the bread, from the force of her having bitten at it, and that that
had hindered them from making a deep entrance; and that having half stopped up
the pores of the teeth, a good part of the angered Spirits could not come forth;
so that the death of the Pigeon could not follow so fast, though yet it happened
without any mixture of the juice, which had been altogether emptied.

Page 138. The wound made by a Viper not vexed, whose Jaws were held in, and
whose teeth were at the same time thrust into the body of a Pigeon, which also
was accompanied with store of the yellow juice, and yet not attended with any
ill accident.

To these Experiments I have nothing else to oppose, but those very many ones,
that were made by me in the year 1664. and recited in the abovementioned
Observations of mine about Vipers, and those also that I shall recite
hereafter, made likewise by my self, not with a desire to confirm the first,
but indeed to discover the Truth. And, that I may not be put often to repeat
some things, I shall premise some General Observations, made by me at the time
when I dealt in Vipers.

1. A viper more easily kills a Pigeon, a Pullet, a Turky-cock, a Squirrel, a
Dormouse, and generally all small Birds and Animals, than a great Animal, as a
Sheep, a Deer, a Horse, a Bull; yea these greater ones and those that are of an
hard skin, very often a Viper kills not at all.

2. According to the bigness of the Animal bitten, and according to the place
where the Viper biteth, death follows sooner or later; especially according as
the place wounded is a clear texture, or thick set with veins and arteries; or
those veins and arteries are very small or big.

3. If from the wound of a Viper much blood issues, it sometimes happens, that
the Animal nor only dies not, but does not so much as feel any great
inconvenience.

4. It does also not seldom fall out, that an Animal bitten by a Viper suffers
grievous Symptoms from the poison, which bring it near death, but yet kill it
not; but the creature without any help of Physic and by the sole work of
nature recovers.

5. Those Animals that are bitten of a Viper dye a little sooner, than those,
into the wounds of which has been on purpose conveyed that yellow liquor,
which by art has been fetched out of the baggs of the teeth of that Viper.

6. It Is necessary, that great dexterity be used in making the said liquor to
penetrate into the wound; because, if the wound be narrow, it pierces
difficultly; if large, it cannot be otherwise but it will bleed, and with that
blood the said liquor will turn back, and so the poison come out again.

I had then provided a good number of Vipers which I caused to be brought me
cut of the Kingdom of Naples* and having in this month of May, 1670 wounded
ten Pigeons of the bigger sort in the thighs, I put into them some of the
yellow liquor freshly taken out of the mouth of the live Vipers; and all these
Pigeons, some within the space of one hour, some in half an hour, and some in
two hours, died. This Experiment I repeated upon ten Chickens, likewise wounded
in their thighs, with the same event that had befallen the Pigeons.

Then I cut off the heads of twelf Vipers, and all the heads being cut off, and
the Vipers quite dead, I thence extracted the poison, and caused them to be put
into the wounds of eight Turtle-doves, all which died in the space of half an
hour.

In the month of June, having killed many other Vipers, and gathered out of the
bags of their teeth and their gums all the yellow and viscous Juice that was
there, I anointed therewith some beesom-rods, sharpn'd like arrows, and
immediately I pricked with them ten young Pigeons in the more fleshy part of
their chest, leaving them fixed in the wound; and the Pigeons survived not
above two or three hours. But lest it should be doubted; whether these Pigeons
died not of the wound it self, enraged by the punctures of those rods, I made a
trial upon four other Pigeons with rods not infected with that poisonous
liquor; but none of them dyed, though the wounds became purulent.

I also took eight heads of Vipers, cut off six hours before, and, the Vipers
being quite dead, I caused eight Turtle-doves to be bitten by them in the
thigh, and not one of them escaped.

Moreover I made the heads of fifteen Vipers to be cut off: and put them into a
glass-vessel well covered, having laid them upon one another, that so they
might remain moist. Four days after, I struck with those heads five young
Cocks, and five great Pigeons in the thigh, and they all after a little while
died. The like fell out with other Viper-heads, which having been killed six
days before, had in all likely hood lost all choler and thoughts of revenge.
And to prevent all Objections that might be raised on this occasion, I shall
not omit to relate to you, that about the beginning of August when two of my
Vipers, that alone were left me in a box, died of themselves of sickness, I
caused two Turtle-doves to be struck by them, which also, like the former, dyed
in less than an hours time.

But I may go further. I had collected in a glass all the poisonous liquor of
the heads of two hundred and fifty Vipers, to make various Experiments
therewith upon occasion. But being by much business hindered, I delayed to
accomplish my design: Whence that liquor turn't first into a glue, colored
like amber; then in 30 days it became altogether dry and friable, so that it
could easily be reduced to powder. Being pulverised, I had a mind to try,
whether that powder, let into a wound, did keep the force of poisoning; and I
found that really it did so, all those Pullets, Pigeons, and Turtle-doves, into
the wounds of which I had put some thereof, dying of it in a little while.

Having made this Experiment, I began to doubt, whether that poison of the
arrows of the King of Macassar in the Island of Celebes, which commonly are
called the arrows of Bantam in Java Major, were not the poison extracted out
of the mouth of some Viper, or of some other Viper-like serpent, and perhaps of
a more malign nature because of the diversity of the Climate. I am not much
averse from believing this to be so; and it may be confirmed by what I have
read in Pliny, viz. That the Scythians did infect their Arrows with a Viperin
poison. His words are, Scythae sagittas tingunt Viperina sanie and humano
sanguine: irremediabile id scelus mortem illico levi tactu assert. And this was
perhaps extracted by Pliny out of Aristotle, who in h^s Book, intitul'd (...),
soon after describes the process of preparing it, which I dare not affirm to
be the true one, or to requi^e so many circumstances and cautions. And who
knows, whether the Arrows of Hercules, of which the Fables allege that they
were imbued with the blood of an Hydra, were not infected with this poison of
Vipers? So it is believed by Diodorus Siculus, when he says, (...). And Ovid
gives the name of Viper to the Hydra, when in his ninth Book of Metamorph. he
says; Pars quota Lerneae serpens erit unus Echianae. And afterward; -- Capit
inscius heroes,
Induitur que humeris Lerneae virus Fchidnae.
To which may be added, that Philoctetes, the Heir of the Bow and Arrows of
Hercules, being gone in the Grecian Navy to the Trojan War, and having unawares
wounded himself (as Servius Grammaticus relates, l. 3. Aeneid) with one of his
Arrows in the foot; was left among the Grecians in the Isle of Stalimene, by
reason of the violence of the pain, and the intolerable stench of the wound.
Whence Sophocles, alluding, it seems, to the kind of poison, in a Poetical way
and phrase relates, that Philoctetes was left in that Isle, because he had
been bitten by a Viper. His words are; (...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...): That is
O Son of Achilles, I am he, whom thou may have heard to be the possessor of
the Herculean Arrows, the Son of Paean Philoctetes: whom the two Armies and the
King of the Isle of Cephalene shamefully left lying here, pining away by a
cruel disease, struck by the fierce bite of a murdering Viper.

And Cicero himself in his second Book of the Tusculan Questions, and in his
Book De Fato, and many other Writers do follow this opinion, viz, That
Philoctetes was bitten by a Viper. And possibly all of them had an eye not only
to this place of Sophocles, but also to what Homer said before, in his
sixteenth Book of Iliads.

And though against this conjecture it may be said, that the poision of Vipers
is inconsiderable in respect of what Poets do write of the Arrows of Hercules,
which by them are said not only to have the force of killing without fail,
whether the wound be small or great, as happened to the Centaure Chiron and to
Nessus; but also that the blood of their wounds was become so pestiferous as to
infect any live body whatsoever, touched thereby, and that with such violence,
as to make the flesh fall off from the bones: which, they add, was experimented
by Hercules to his great mischief, when his Shirt was tinged with the blood of
Nessus; whence Ovid says, Victa malis postquam est patientia, reppulit aras
Implevit que suis nemorosam vocibus Oeten;
Nec mora, letiferam conatur scindere vestem;
Qua trahitur, trahit illa cutim (faedumque relatu)
Aut haret membris, frustra tentata revelli,
Aut laceros artus and grandia detegit ossa:
This is a Poetical Fable; whence, I am apt to believe, is raised that relation
concerning the Arrows of Macassar, of which it is said, that they kill one in
that very moment he receives the slightest wound thereby, and that also in the
space of half an hour the flesh of the killed person becomes so putrisied, that
it falls off from the bones in many pieces, whence do exhale such virulent
steams, that if they light upon any ordinary and not envenomed wound, they
mortally infect it, and without fail kill the Patient.

I do here affirm, that I have made many tryal's with those Arrows of the
Indians; but have not found them in Tuscany of so fierce and malignant a
nature, as has been related. The Dogs I wounded with them, dyed some of them
in six, others in seven, others in twelve, others in twenty four hours. And
their flesh was not putrisied, nor fallen in pieces, nor did their blood or
exhaled steams at all kill other wounded Animals. But I have often observed,
that, if one intends to ki^l with these Arrows, it is not enough to make a
simple incision of the flesh, but he must by art make them stick a while in the
wound (which is like to what happens in putting into wounds the powder of the
dried yellow liquor of Vipers:) Whence it is that those Savages make of Wood
the sharp ends of those Arrows, imbue them with poison, and then join them to
the Arrow stick in such a manner, that those ends ever remain in the wound,
whether the Arrow do break or be drawn out; as came to pass in the Siege of
Jerusalem to those Heroes of Flandres, Godofred and Robert, of whom that great
Florentin Poet thus sings: Sospingeva il monton, quando e percosso
Al Sig. de Fiaminghi il lato manco,
Si che travia s' allenta, e vuol poi trarne
Lo strale, e resta il ferro entro la carne:


That is, The Engine discharged* the left side of the Flandrian Princes was so
struck, that they were thrust out of their way, and when they would draw out
the Arrow, the Iron stuck within their flesh.

It is therefore necessary, that the Arrows do stick for some time in the
wound, if they shall kill: Whence I understand not, how the vulgar comes to
fansy, that the Blades of Swords may be envenomed. I do well remember, that
with the yellow liquor of Vipers, and with other things esteemed venomous, I
have sometimes slightly tinged Lancets for letting of blood, and with them have
cut the vein of some Animal or other, but death has not followed upon it. Let
suspecting men rather beware of the Tents of Chirurgions; for it is too hard to
cause death by poisoned Lancets or other such Iron instruments. Hence it seems
to me to savor of the fable (though the case be different) that Parisatis the
old Queen of the Persians, did poison her Daughter-in-law by the hands of her
Carver, poisoning the one side of the Knife, and therewith cutting asunder a
Fowl, of which he gave to the young Queen to eat that part, which the poisoned
side of the Knife had envenomed, eating the other part himself.

I could never see the truth of what is related of poisons killing by a mere
and momentaneous contact, or by vicinity alone; as that Stirrups, Sadles, and
Benches have been poisoned, and thereby proved mortal. Let him believe it that
will; I cannot. And what a certain modern Writer relates for a great truth,
concerning a prodigious accident happened by a kind of Serpents bred in the
Indies, I must leave to himself, who says, After I have spoken of these
Serpents, I presume it will not be unacceptable to give an account of the
strange effect they produce. If perchance it happen, that they pass over a
cloth or shirt dried in the Sun, there is wont to be bred in the Kidneys of
those that use this cloth, a certain kind of Serpents, which little by little
growing up do encompass the whole body, and when their tail reaches their head,
to conjoyn the circle, then death is unevitable: Wherefore, to avoid this
mischief, they kill them with Razors and Lancets, to prevent their growth.

You have found above mentioned three persons, wounded by the Arrows of
Hercules, namely Chiron, Nessus, and Philoctetes. The two first dyed suddenly;
the third, after a long sickness escaped. If the caufes of this difference were
to be given (whether it be an History or a Fable) I should say, that Nessus and
Chiron dyed, because they were wounded whilst Hercules was yet living, by
Arrows freshly envenomed; besides that Nessus was pierced through his heart, as
Ovid has it, Jamque tenens ripam missos cum tolleret artus,
Conjugis agnovit vocem, Nessoque paranti
Fallere depositum; quo te fiducia, clamat,
Vana pedum violente rapit? Tibi, Nesse biformis
Dicimus, exaudi, nec res intercipe nostras.
Si te nulla mei reverentia movit; at orbs
Concubitus vetitos poterant inhibere paterni.
Haud tamen effugies, quamvis open fidis equina,
Vulnere, non pedibus, te consequar. Ultima dicta
Re probat, and missa fugientia terga fagitta
Trajicit; extabat ferrum de pectore aduncum:
Quod simul evulsum est, sanguis per utrumque foramen
Emicuit, mistus Lernaei tabe veneni.
But Philoctetes was wounded long after the death of Hercules; whence it is
credible, that those Arrows had lost much of their poisonous force, even as the
powder of the yellow liquor loses of its force, and the Arrows of Macasser by
length of time grow languid; which though they poison and kill if one be
wounded therewith, yet do they no hurt at all, if their poison be swallowed and
taken into the stomach. Which Experiment I have tried upon two Dogs, to whom I
gave to swallow two pieces of flesh covered with the powder of the scrapings of
such Arrows; as also upon several Chickens, to whom I gave the water to drink,
wherein those shavings had been a long time infused.

But, to return after this long digression to the main thing; you may by the
above related and often repeated Experiments, see, that the po^son of the
Italian Viper consists not in an imaginary idea of anger raised to revenge, but
rather in that yellow liquor, which is voided out of the bags of the bigger
teeth of Vipers; which juice if it chance to be spilled in the mouth and upon
the Pallat of those animals is able to envenoin the spittle which moistens
their throat.

I should think it very well worth while for those learned Authors of the book
of the New Experiments, that they would please to make their Experiments anew.
And if they shall find them conform to those they have already published, and
really contrary to mine, then we may unanimously conclude, that we have lighted
upon a truth hitherto unknown; which is, That the Poison of the French Vipers
consists in an imaginary Idea of a revengeful anger; but that of the Italian
ones has its seat in that yellow liquor, so often mentioned by me. But if on
the other side, the French Experiments should not hold, then it may be
affirmed, that the French as well as the Italian Vipers are of one and the same
nature; and have the same kind of poison.

Wherefore if in Italy the Viper in poison certainly lodges in that yellow
liquor, it will be no untruth in me to affirm, that if by biting, a Viper
should have lost all that juice residing in those bags, and that also which may
be furnished by the neighboring parts, it will, I say, be no untruth in me to
affirm, that the subsequent bitings will not be mortal: which is the thing I
have these many years asserted, and do still assert, although the abovesaid
Authors deny it, giving out that one only Viper, being vexed and swelled with
choler, is able to kill as many animals as she bites; they trusting to one
Experiment, in which they say there died five young Pigeons by the biting of
one only Viper. We hope (say they, p. 137.) that among the many Experiments
those of the five Pigeons, bitten one after another, by one and the fame viper
exasperated every time, and of which the last bitten died first of all, when
the viper was most vexed, and most exhausted of its yellow liquor, etc.

I am willing indeed to believe the fact to be true; but for the confirmation
of it I wish they had caused many more such Pigeons, and many other animals,
of different kinds and bignesses, to be bitten of the self same Viper, which
had killed those five ones, to see whether that angry and choleric poison had
an infinite power. For when I examined this matter, I chose about the beginning
of May a Female Viper, one of the biggest and lustiest, and vexed her to bite
ten Chickens one after another, in the right thigh; of which the first, second,
and third died almost in an instant; the fourth seemed only to be sick; but the
fifth and all the rest did not only not dye, but were not at all sick; and yet
every time the Viper did bite, I angered and madded her exceedingly. In the
month of June I repeated the experiment in five tame Ducks, bitten by one and
the same Viper, which also immediately after bit three young Turtle-Doves. The
first wounded Duck dyed three hours after; the second, five hours after; but
the rest escaped. It Is true, that the first wounded of the Turtles dyed, but
not the other two. Of twelve Ring-Doves at one time there dyed but four; but
the next day of twelve others there dyed six. Of five Rabbets there dyed three*
and of three Lambs the two last lived, the first of them dying two hours after
it had been bitten.

I should be too tedious, if I should relate to you all the other experiments:
Wherefore I shall go on to add, that having written in my Observations, that
that yellow liquor was not conveyed to the bags of the teeth from the bladder
of gall, I did suggest, whether it might not be disgorged there by certain
several Ductus's, that might be inserted at the head of them: which did appear
the more probable, because that in all Vipers at the bottom of those vesicles I
had always found two glanduls, which had not, that I knew, been observed or
described by any body. Whereupon the Authors of the New Experimentsdo affirm,
that they could never see such Glanduls as I had named; but that instead of
them they had found two others, which they call Salival, thus by them
described, p. 31, 32. I believed at first, following Signor Redi, that there
might be Salival vessels in Vipers, as there have been lately found in Man and
diverse other Animals; so that after many re-searches made with sufficient
attention and patience, in many Vipers heads I discovered at length such
Glands, proper to form this juice, and to convey it to the Bags; and after I
was well persuaded of it my self, I showed them to diverse of those knowing
Physicians, that had met at my house the last year. These persons had a mind to
see them with their own eyes; and after I had well examined the parts which I
showed them, they not only found them true, but they also saw there a greater
number of smaller vessels then had appeared to me, of which some that are
Arteries and Veins pass above the Glands, and others that are Lympheducts run
below; so that they judged, that I could confidently assert and describe these
Glands which I call Salival, and which they had acknowledged together with me;
though Signor Redi durst not speak positively of them, because he had not
discovered them; neither had they been described by any Author of their
knowledge, nor by any one of mine.

And page 35. As to the small Glands, whichSignor Redi has observed at the
bottom of the Vesicles that contain this juice, I can say, that I have with
great care and diligence searched after them, and that it is true, I have there
found the appearances of Glands, but having opened them, I saw nothing in them
but small teeth that were fastened there, without finding any thing of a
Glandular nature there, nor that did in the least approach to the shape,
substance, or qualities of the Glands which I have been describing,etc.

I do not at all wonder that those Writers have not found those Glanduls I
named, I seeing they went about to search them within the Vesicles of the
teeth, and at the bottom of them: Whereas I never said that they were to be
found within them, I said they were to be found Sotto'l fondo (under the
bottom) of those bags, and in good Tuscan language, it is another thing to say
nel fondo, (in or at the bottom) another Sotto'l fondo (under the bottom.) And
therefore when they ^ought them where they are to be met with, they easily
found them, and they are the same which they describe, neither are there any
other considerable glanduls to be discovered in the heads of Vipers. Nor could
I at all write that those Glanduls lay in the bottom of the Vesicles, if I was
of opinion that the yellow liquor did run into them after it had passed through
the Salival Conduits, which yet I imagined might have their origin from, or
connection with those two Glanduls seen by me, and therefore must needs be in a
situation a little distant from the Vesicles, and not in the bottom of them.
Now whether these Glanduls have this office and this use, I intend not now to
speak of, let it be what it will, it is too inconsiderable a matter to make any
more words of it.

I confess, that the dangerous experiments which Vipers have, made them so
displeasing to me, and even so odious, that I resolved not at all to meddle any
more with them; but that I was tempted thereto by a great desire I had
experimentally to learn, whether the volatile Salt of Vipers, Chymically
prepared, were endowed with that present and infallible virtue of curing the
bitings of Vipers, as the said Writers affirm. For my Genius keeps me from much
trusting to those things, that have not been made out to me by Experiment;
although I do not presently reject them as false before Experiment, but rather
being desirous to know whether they be true, I put them to trial: But neither
do I acquiesce in one or a few experiments, but I love to see more and more,
being ever apprehensive lest I should be deceived; as it often has happened to
me, when I have been ready to confide in one hasty experiment. And to say truth
in the month of June there wanted not much but that I had imposed upon my self
in the trial of an experiment, which I am going to relate to you, and which
done I shall ease you of further trouble.

Having read them in the Book of the New Experiments, that the Head of a Viper,
being eaten of an animal, bitten by another Viper, did certainly cure the
wound; and the thing being by me looked upon as very useful, excellent, and
admirable, I had an eager desire to try it my self, that I might speak of it
with more confidence, although those learned men had made these two following
experiments of it, viz. page 120. We had also a desire to find whether a Viper
being eaten by an animal, which she had bitten before, would be cured of that
biting. We therefore caused to be slightly broiled the head of a Viper, which
had on it a part of the neck, newly severed from the body; and we caused a Dog
to be thrice bitten at the ear, by a well enraged Viper, in such a manner that
the blood came out at the three pricked places. We soon cast before him the
head and neck; broiled, and yet hot. The Dog, that was hungry, and felt not so
soon the effects of the bitings, immediately seized on the head, bruised it
between his teeth, and swallowed it down. After which we stayed a pretty while
to see, whether the three bitings would prevail over the devoured head and
neck* but the Dog was free, except some blewness and a little Tumor he had at
the places bitten, but which little by little vanished in three or four days. We
made also a Dog to be bitten three times in the same place, and without
broiling the head of the same Viper that had bit him, we cast it before him,
hoping that he would eat it, because he had not eaten any thing for many hours
before; but the Dog would not touch it. Upon that we bruised and stamped that
head in a mortar, and so crammed it down the Dogs throat, rubbing also the
bitten places with the blood of the same Viper; which done, we expected the
success, which was* that this head, raw and bruised, and if you will, assisted
by the blood of the Viper, being applied to the part bitten, had produced the
same effects with the former, which had been slightly broiled; in regard that
this Dog was safe, excepting those inconveniences the former suffered, and was
after that as sound as if he had never been bitten. If these two Experiments
had been made before that Gentleman, above discoursed of, was bitten by a
Viper, we should have been in much less anxiety for his preservation.

And a little before (page 119.) they had said: We have tried, that having
caused to be bitten at the thickest place of the ear, by a sufficiently vexed
Viper, a young Cat, very lean, that had but just before eaten the Eggs, the
Matrix, and all the Guts of a Viper; the biting had almost no effect, and there
appeared nothing but a very little swelling, and a very inconsiderable
lividness in the part bitten.

And page 154. It is very certain, that the Head of a Viper, broiled and
swallowed, heals the biting of that Animal. The Heart and the Liver may do
the same. Reason and Experience have confirmed it; and therefore in an urgent
occasion these parts may be very beneficially employed.

And page 156. We believe, that the Liver swallowed is capable to heal the
biting of a Viper, like the heart, flesh and other parts, of which we have
spoken; and that it may much facilitate the delivery of Women with Child, as
does the Liver of Eeles.

Hereupon I resolved to imitate those Gentlemen, and having given a Vipers head
half boiled to a chained young Dog, I caused him immediately to be bitten by an
other Viper in the right ear, but the Dog dyed not, nor did he appear to me to
have any other inconvenience than that he stood as 'twere amazed, and looking
grim, and melancholy, for four or five hours space. I soon reiterated the same
Experiment upon another Dog, which having been forced to swallow the head of a
Viper, raw and bruised in a Mortar, gave no sign of any great poison, and had
very little and almost no ill ensuing. Whence I was ready to reckon this
Experiment among things proved and true, when a doubt coming into my mind,
obliged me to cause two other young Dogs to be bitten in their ears, who
although they had not eaten the counter-poison of a Vipers head, yet dyed not.
Whence the suspicion being increased in me, I caused to be brought me the raw
head of a Viper, and crammed it into the throat of a young Pullet, and then had
its left thigh bitten by a Viper; whereupon it presently fell to the ground,
and in a little more then the eight part of an hour died. Whence the suspicion
growing still greater, about ten a clock in the morning I made a Capon to eat
two raw heads of Vipers, and afterward about twelve a clock I made him swallow
two others, and without losing any time* I caused him to be once bitten by a
Viper in the thigh, and the Capon immediately dyed, without finding any good in
the four swallowed heads. The next day I prepared for two young Dogs a dish of
Viper-heads parboiled, but they would not eat them, and we were forced to cramm
them down: Soon after, the lesser of the two Dogs was bitten in the thigh near
the groin, and the bigger in the tongue; and they both dyed. And in the like
manner dyed eight Chickens, two Kitlings, two young Hares, and six
Turtle-Doves, likewise bitten by Vipers, and Physiqued not only by their heads,
both raw and boiled, but also having their wounds washed with the Viper-blood.
And I remember, that I caused those 6 Turtle-Doves to be bitten not by the
heads of live Vipers, but by those of dead ones, and such as had dyed two days
before. Moreover, I continued for three days successively to cram two such
other Doves with Viper-slesh, and gave them no other drink then the broth of
that slesh; and yet they could not escape death, being bitten by a Viper.

Whence I am inclined to believe, that in Tuscany the slesh of Vipers is no
help or remedy, at least no considerable one, to Animals bitten by Vipers. Mean
while I refer my self to the Learning, Experience, and Authority of those noble
persons, to whom I do most willingly submit this or any other opinion of mine,
and with whom I would never entertain a controversy. For I should apprehend
lest it might befall me, what Marcus Tullius was wont to say of Cato, viz. That
it was not less troublesome to him to answer to the authority of Cato, then to
his strongest arguments.

For the rest, I earnestly entreat you, Sirs, that you would pardon the
rudeness of this my Letter, sufficiently appearing to have been written by a
person full of business, rather then enjoying leisure; and that you would
please only to regard the naked truth, which without any passion I did
undertake to relate.

A CONTINUATION Of the NEW EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING VIPERS: TOGETHER With a
Discourse touching their Poison: By way of Reply, to a Letter written by Signor
FRANCESCO REDI, to Messieurs BOURDELOT and MORUS; Printed at Florence, 1670.

By MOYSE CHARAS. Englished out of French.

LONDON,Printed by T. R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at the
Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

A CONTINUATION Of the NEW EXPERIMENTS CONCERNING VIPERS.
Finished in the Press at Paris, August 4. 1671.
I Believed, I had sufficiently established my opinion touching the Poison of
Vipers by abundance of Experiments, supported by Reasons, heretofore made
public: But there has since appeared at Paris a Letter of Signor Redi, in
which he opposes my sentiments: And he being a person, whose merit has
acquired him a great reputation among the Learned, that Letter of his has not
been without making some impression in the minds of many, and in some even of
those, that had relished my opinion, in favor of which they seemed to have
already declared themselves.

I might indeed have defended my self as to that which is against me in that
Letter, soon after it appeared; having reasons strong and numerous enough to
maintain and justify all I had advanced in my writing: But I thought it better
to deferr it till Spring, to the end that after I should have made New
Experiments, and the more assured my self of all, I might, by a renewed
knowledge of the truth, afterward the better persuade the public thereof. It
will therefore appear by this Sequel of Experiments, here set down, that I am
so far from changing my Opinion, that I have reason to be more strongly than
ever confirmed in what I embraced at first.

I do herewith sincerely declare, that when I published my book, my chief aim
was, faithfully to relate all the truths I had discovered, and not to offend
Signor Redi, whom I exceedingly esteem and honor for his rare Talents, and
whose friendship I hope to have a share in; so far was I from pretending to do
any thing that might make him write against my Book, or from foreseeing that
ever I should have occasion to labor to defend my self against him: Which yet
I since found otherwise, by the Letter he has written against me, and even
without honoring me with a Copy of it, wherewith he has gratified many persons
at Paris and elsewhere, even after I had had the advantage of some Letterary
Commerce with him, as I might easily justify.

I can besides protest, that when I resolved to contradict certain points of
his first Letter, it was in a manner against my will, and because I could not
at all dispense with it, except I would have baffled my senses, and that light
I saw my self, together with a great number of witnesses. I can also assure,
that I should now be very ready to un-say what I have affirmed upon this
subject, and to agree with him, if I were not altogether persuaded of the
contrary in the main things he has written against my Sentiments.

After these Protestations, being well assured as well by Reason, as by many
new Experiments newly made, that I have asserted nothing but what is true; I
found* my self indispensably obliged to maintain it, and to render a good
office to the public, by endeavoring to show that it is very difficult
reasonably to oppose any thing to the contrary.

The difference between Signor Redi and me consists chiefly in this, That he
Pretends, the Jellow Liquor contained in the Vesicles of the Gums of Vipers, to
be the only and true seat of their Poison; That this juice is not venomous when
taken at the mouth, but that it is so when let into the wounds made by a Viper
whilst she is alive, and even in those, which she may be forced to make several
days after she is dead, provided that yellow liquor do intervene; That the same
liquor drawn from a live Viper, as well as that of a dead one, is always
venomous if let into wounds, and mingled with the blood of the Animal wounded,
whether it be used when liquid, or after it is dried and reduced to powder; and
that it generally kills all kind of Animals into the wounds of which it shall
have been intromitted.

But I, who of all these points can admit of none but that of the innocence of
the yellow liquor when taken at the mouth, and opposing my self to all the
rest; do say, That the Poison of a Viper is no where but in her enraged
Spirits; that the yellow juice as well of a live Viper, and even a vexed one,
as of one that is either newly dead, or has been so for several days, contains
in it no poison at all, neither in the biting, nor taken inwardly, nor put into
wounds, nor mingled with the blood, nor any other way wherein it may be used;
that it kills nor infects any kind of animals; and that it is nothing but a
mere and innocent Saliva.

The question must principally be decided by matter of Fact; though it may also
be cleared by very pertinent reasons. I am far from accusing Signor Reds of
unfaithfuless in his Experiments; though they were not made in public as mine,
and that some thing might be said as to the formalities of the biting, and the
using of the yellow liquor: His reputation is too well grounded to be blamed;
and this is the consideration which troubles me most. Mean time I see the
contrary to what he has advanced against my Book; and the truths which I there
oppose are so clearly seen in my Experiments first and last, as well in those I
have made only in the presence of some curious persons, as in those I have
lately made in public, and before a great number of Physicians and other
persons very intelligent in these matters. So that I can no^ ought any longer
to hide those truths, which are the chief inducement of writing this discourse.

We need not wonder that Signor Redi, having made all his Experiments by order
and at the expense of so great a Prince, who is as curious as he is Munificent,
had Vipers and all sorts of Animals in far greater number than I had; I, who
did all from my self, at my own charges, and with a mere desire to discern
truth from falsehood. Nor do I think, I was obliged to multiply expenses when
the truth was found sufficiently cleared up, and all the bystanders
acknowledged, that I had made sufficient trials for every Experiment. For since
he has contented himself with having made some of the yellow liquor to be
swallowed by one only Man, one only Duck, one only Kid, thence to know and to
assure himself of its innocence when swallowed, without making a greater number
of Experiments; He must not blame me for having heartily bounded my curiosity,
after I had in diverse things made many more Experiments, then he mentions he
has made upon this subject; as appears by what he writes p. 17, and 18. of
his first Letter. I find therefore, that he has no great cause to complain of
me (as he does, under the name of those Illustrious Authors, to whom he
ascribes my Book in his Letter) for not having vouchsafed to make Experiments
enough to confirm the truth of the Observations about Vipers, contained in his
first Letter of 1664. He had not, I say, great cause to speak of it after such
a manner, since I did do so but in imitation of him, and because he had in the
same Letter advanced and assured particulars, which required not I should make
more trials then those I have described in my Book: Although I can assure to
have made more then I have recited. He knows very well, that about the end of
page 23. of his first Letter he used these words.

Equel veleno shizza tutto fuora, se non al primo, almeno al secondo morso; si
che il terzo (epiu volte l'ho esperimentato) non e velenoso:That is, And that
poison issues all out, if not at the first, at least at the second biting; so
that the third (which I have often experimented) is not venomous.

And if, because of the respect I bear to the writings of a person of so high a
reputation, I thought among diverse other Experiments, that having made one and
the same Viper, every time vexed, to bite five several Pigeons, which all died,
and even the last of them sooner then the rest, I might stop there; I think
Signor Redi has nothing to reproach me with. He had assured in his first
Letter, and assures the same in his latter, That all the poison did lodge in
the yellow liquor, and that this poison was all exhausted if not at the first,
yet at least at the second biting, and that he had often experimented that the
third was no more venomous: So that, if I was persuaded, that all the yellow
Liquor must be come out by the second biting made upon the second Pigeon, and
if, after that, I have seen dye three other Pigeons by the fresh bitings of the
same Viper that had bitten the two first; I do not think that Sign. Redi has
right to accuse me for not having done enough: He might rather have done me
that justice as to acknowledge, that I had done more then enough to maintain my
Reflections, and that I was obliged from that time to seek the poison elsewhere
then in the yellow liquor, in regard it did no longer intervene, according to
him, in the three last bitings, and that the three last Pigeons were as soon,
yea sooner, dead then the two first, of the death of which he could charge the
yellow liquor. If I could not find, no more then Sign. Redi, in all the body of
the Viper, any other visible or palpable part that was venomous, and that might
justly be declared to be the seat of the poison, and the true cause of the
death which ensued upon the three last bitings; he must not wonder, if I have
sought and found it in the vexed Spirits, and if I have grounded my self upon
the best evidence, I could get from Experiments and Reason.

But since the chief motive of my trials has been the desire of exactly
knowing the Truth concerning those matters; having seen that Sign. Redi, page
31. of his last Letter has desired I would make new experiments after his
Objections against me: To be the more assured of all, I have been willing to
give him that satisfaction, in giving it to my self. For, in the month of May
last, in the Chemical Laboratory of the Royal Garden, in the presence of two or
three hundred by standers, both Physicians and others, capable to judge of it,
and worthy to be credited; from amongst many live Vipers, sent me out of
Dauphine, and diverse parts of Poitou, I chose a great Femal-Viper, that was
lusty enough notwithstanding the great way she came, and having opened her
jaws, I very carefully cleared and squeezed out of them at several
repetitions, all the yellow liquor contained in the bags of her gums, and that
also which might be diffused about the neighboring parts, with a fine piece of
linen cloth wound about the handle of a pen knife: Which done, I took the same
Viper with Pincers about her neck, and angered her in making her to fasten her
teeth into the end of her tail, and in pressing from time to time her neck with
those Pincers; and immediately after I presented to her five Pigeons and two
Pullets one after another, to bite them in the most fleshy part of their Chest,
having irritated her every time of her biting. I purposely wounded also six
Pigeons and Pullets in diverse places, in the presence of all the company, and
let into the wounds some drops of the yellow liquor, drawn from the Vesicles of
newly enraged Vipers. I laid both sorts a part; and the company parted about an
hour after, before which time, five of the Pigeons and Pullets, that had been
bitten, were dead, and the two remaining died about an hour after; but the
Pigeons and Pullets, which I had wounded, and in whose wounds I had put in some
of the said juice, ailed nothing, but that there appeared some lividness, at
the place wounded, and such an one as might have been there from the sole
wounding them, and without any concurrence of that liquor. Two days after, I
showed the company the same wounded Pullets and the same Pigeons, which were
very well, and had their wounds almost perfectly healed up, only there remained
a little blewness about the wounded parts. I would then have wounded the same
animals again in other places, and intromitted fresh yellow liquor: some also
of the bystanders proposed to let into one of these creatures some of this
yellow liquor by that way of Transfusion, that has lately been made in diverse
parts of Europe, of some stranger blood into the veins of men, that so this
juice being mingled with the blood by the ordinary circulation, it might be
able to discover what ever it could do. I readily complied with their motion,
whereupon the intromission of this liquor was attempted upon one of the same
Pigeons that had been wounded two days before. One Physician and two
Chirurgions did the work one after onother, in making both the incision and the
ligature of the most discernable vessels of the right wing: But they let the
Pigeon loose so much blood, that it dyed soon after. Seeing this, I said, that
the Pigeon dyed only from the loss of its blood, and not from the letting in of
the yellow liquor; and that it would be necessary, one only Surgeon of the
Company should make a new operation upon another of the same Animals, that had
been wounded 2 days before, and upon whom that yellow Juice had also been
tried. The Operation was made accordingly at the same time upon a Pullet, which
did not only escape again, but was seen the next day and the following days by
the whole company to be very well; as were also the other animals that had been
wounded again at the same time, and received of the yellow liquor, though
without the way of transfusion. Yet true it is, that one of the Pigeons, that
had been the second time wounded, was found dead some time after its being
wounded, in a close earthen Furnace, very hot, and standing close by such
another, where I then distilled some spirit and oil of Tobacco, and the death
of which ought to be imputed to the piercing vapors of this distillation, or to
the excessive heat of the Furnace in which it had been shut up, which was found
so hot, that the heat of it could not be endured by ones hand; besides that
being closed, almost no air could enter.

Which being thus passed, yet forasmuch as the reputation of Sign. Redi had
acquired him much esteem and favor from many persons in Paris, I perceived
some of the company yet inclined to doubt, whether this yellow Juice were
always innocent. Whereupon, having by me 4 Dogs of different bigness, I pressed
those that seemed most to doubt, that they would transfuse or cause to be
transfused some of that reputed poisonous liquor into all those Dogs, or at
least into one or other of them; but how instant soever I was, no body would
undertake it. It was alleged, that those Animals were too Robust to Succumb
under such an operation, since the Pullet, that had endured it, and twice felt
the yellow liquor, had escaped as well as the other Animals, that had been
wounded again at the same time with it, and that had also received into them
some of that liquor. Which obliged me to protest, it was not my fault that it
was not experimented a fresh, and to pray the company to take the refusal of
those persons for an acknowledgment of the innocence of the yellow liquor.

But not being satisfied herewith, I referred the matter to the next day, and
promised to have ready new Animals, of a lesser size than those Dogs; the more
amply to verify the innoxiousness of that Juice by new intromissions thereof
into wounds.

I had then prepared six Pigeons, and two Carlings; and engaged a person whom I
knew most favorable to Signor Redi, to make himself the incision, and intromit
the yellow liquor as he should think best. He made such wounds as he pleased,
and he did even sever the skin of the flesh round about the wounds he had made,
and so far, that I could not hold to tell him smiling, he did more than Signor
Redi himself said in his Letters he had done; and added, Boni esse pastoris
tondere, non de glubere, A good Shepherd did Sheer, not Flea his Sheep.

One of the Catlings was bitten in the Cartilagineous part of the Ear, without
any appearance of blood at the place of the biting; and it escaped. The other,
which was much less, and a very noted one by the blackness of its color and by
having her ears cut off, was purposely wounded on the upper part of her neck
behind, and also at the lower bone of the hinder part of the head; its skin
alsowas separated from the flesh round about the wound, and on both sides,
almost as far as to the fore part of the neck: And then as much of the yellow
liquor as they would was put into both sides as well as into the wound. This
Cat held down her head, by reason doubtless of the pain she endured by having
in a manner been flead alive; feeling also some pain in two other places, where
she had been wounded and flead. Some of the bystanders began already to
mutter, and said, I should be cast, and the Cat would certainly dye; yet
notwithstanding the Cat did not dye, though she was very little and taken out
from under her dam; and she was showed to the company 24 hours after, sound and
safe, although she had neither sucked nor eaten any thing all that time. And
it is remarkable enough, that this very Cat, having been returned to a Friar to
whom she belonged, and being grown big, has yet to this day the hind-part of
her skull unclosed at the place of her wound; and notwithstanding all that, and
the falling off of some flesh and skin, that were severed from the places where
she was flead, she is very lively and full of play, and very divertising mimick
gestures.

The six latter Pigeons, that had been wounded at the same time, and received
of the yellow liquor, were likewise produced; and they were yet kept five or
six days with the other Pigeons and Pullets that had been twice wounded before;
among which was that also on which the transfusion had been imitated. At last
they were killed, roasted, and eaten, in good company, of which were some of
those that saw them wounded; and that found them very good and savoury meat.

Amidst all those Experiments I omitted not to try, whether the heads of Vipers
newly dead, having yet their necks on, with all their yellow liquor, would be
able to kill Animals, by making them to be bitten by them. I tried it upon
Pigeons and Pullets, by thrusting the teeth into them as deep as I could. I
employed also to the same purpose some whole Vipers, which I had found dead
among the live ones in the barrils, and which abounded in the yellow liquor.
But this was always without any inconvenience to the Animals bitten, so far was
it from killing them.

I here pass by many other Experiments made at my house, in the presence of
several Physicians, that did all agree in making out the innocence of the
yellow liquor, and in ascribing the poisonousness to the enraged spirits.

Yet I must not leave here un-mentioned, what was done by three young
Physicians, who being persuaded of the truth of my Experiments, as well
concerning the innocence of the yellow liquor, as that of bitings made without
the angered spirits, caused their fingers to be bitten, to strifes, by a dead
Viper having yet all her yellow liquor, and that so deep, that the blood of it
appeared to all: But they found no other inconvenience by it, but what they
might have felt from prickings made by a needle.

I had certainly made a far greater number of Experiments if I had not
observed, that Sign. Redi himself had already made many for me, and for the
maintaining of my Sentiments; and among others that of page 26. of his first
Letter of Observations, where he says,

Si mori un pollastro morsicato, etc. That is, There dyed a Pullet bitten by a
Viper, the points of whose teeth I had cut off; and out of whose vessicles I
had squeezed out all that ill juice that it there.

For, since by his own confession, there dyed a Pullet by having been bitten by
a Viper, the points of whose teeth he had designedly cut off, and all whose
yellow liquor (which he calls the ill juice, and will have to be the only seat
of the poison) he had carefully pressed out of the vesicles of her Gums; He
has no more ground then I, to charge the death of the Pullet upon a liquor,
which was there no more, nor upon the points of the teeth, which he had cut
off. And he cannot avoid to accuse with me the vexed spirits of the Viper, and
to fall into my opinion, viz, That the venom of the Viper is not a gross
matter, but something invisible and spiritual.

And to show again, that Signor Redi has labored, without being aware of it,
to justify my Sentiment, and that at the same time he manifestly contradicts
himself, by destroying in his last Letter his first Propositions, which is,
That all the venom of the Viper issues at the first, or at least at the second
biting, and that the third is venomous no more, as he assures to have often
experimented; to show that, I say, I shall allege the words of page 33, 34,
and 35. of his last Letter, viz.

Su'l principio di maggio scelsi una vipera, etc. That is, About the beginning
of May I chose a Femal-Viper, one of the biggest and lustiest, and vexed her to
bite ten Chickens, one after another, in the right thigh; of which the first,
second and third died almost in an instant; the fourth seemed only to be sick;
but the fifth and all the rest did not only not dye, but were not at all sick;
and yet every time the Viper did bite, I angered and madded her exceedingly. In
the month of June I repeated the Experiment in five tame Ducks, bitten by one
and the same Viper, which also immediately after bit three young Turtle-Doves.
The first wounded dyed three hours after; the second-five hours after; the rest
escaped. It Is true, that the first mentioned of the Turtles dyed, but not the
other two. Of twelve Ring-Doves at one time there dyed but four; but the next
day of twelve others there dyed six. Of five Rabbets there dyed three; and of
three Lambs the two last dyed; the first of them dying two hours after it had
been biten.

These several Experiments directly contrary to the first assertion of Signor
Redi, were capable to perplex any other head but ^is. For first, he has seen,
that of ten bullets bitten one after another by one only Viper, the three first
dyed suddenly, and the fourth was somewhat sick; He has seen, that of five
Ducks and of three Pigeons, bitten one after another by a single Viper, the two
first Ducks dyed, as also one of the Pigeons, which had been bitten even after
the five Ducks: He also saw once, that of twelve Pigeons bitten, four dyed;
that another time of twelve there escaped but the moiety; and that of five
Rabbets, likewise bitten, there were but two that evaded dying.

I cannot but be amazed, that all these Experiments have not been able to
change his opinion, or at least to suspend it. Nor do I doubt but that the
number of Animals that d^ed would have been much greater, if the bitings had
been made in other places but the legs. For, besides that they have their
bones, nerves, and tendons, that are able to blunt the point of the teeth at
the first biting; they have also their Muscles, which are very viscous, and
therefore fail not to imbue the teeth of the biting Viper, thereby stopping in
part their Pores, and even hindering them by that v^scosity from entering far in
the ensuing bites, and I likewise doubt not, but that will come to pass more
and more in the reiteration of their bitings. Nor do I wonder, that the Ducks
did not dye so soon as the Pullets or Pigeons, nor that there dyed less of
them; for, besides the reasons just now alleged, they have their skin, bones,
and all parts much harder, and far more difficult to be pierced by the Vipers
teeth, than those of Pigeons or Pullets. Now I do not find any part mo^e proper
to try diverse bitings, then the fleshy part of the chest, which has neither
Nerves, nor Tendons, nor bones near, nor that Viscosity found in the Muscles of
the legs.

Mean time these Experiments made by Sign. Redi himself, must oblige him, as
far as I can judge, to relinquish his first Assertion: And if he will persist
to maintain, that the yellow liquor is the true seat of the poison, he must
needs believe that liquor to be inexhaustible, and that always there succeeds
some fresh, in all the bitings of a Viper; or, if he will abandon his opinion,
and ascribe the poison no more to the yellow liquor, he must find out some
other subject to assign it to, except he please to take mine, and to lodge it
in the irritated spirits; in regard that he cannot find it in the yellow
liquor, which is no more there, after the second biting (as himself assures;)
and which must yet more evidently be wanting there, when designedly he had with
care taken it out of the bags of the gums of the Viper that bit the Pullet, and
the bite of which was followed by the death of the Animal bitten.

But if Sign. Redi should now be in an humor to alter his opinion, and to judge
the yellow liquor to be necessary in all the bitings of a Viper (though that be
an impossible thing;) his opinion would never be received by disinteressed
persons, that have seen my first and last Experiments; among which persons
there are some, even of the most able, who, having heretofore examined the
Salival Glanduls upon the description I gave them of it after I had discovered
them, did there observe also some small Lymphatic Vessels, more numerous then
those that had first appeared to me; and who, having seen the last Letter of
Sign. Redi, were willing to suspend their Judgment until the making of my new
Trials, which have altogether confirmed them in my first opinion.

For, not to speak of this, that in the presence of diverse persons, even of the
best quality, at several times and places, in diverse assemblies, and even in
the Conferences of the Abbot Bourdelot; I have swallowed some of the yellow
liquor taken out of the bags of the gums of many live and enraged Vipers,
without finding the least inconvenience from it, no more then the Viper-catcher
of Sign. Redi: I can boldly assure all the world, that at no time, in no place,
there ever dyed any animal of all those I have wounded, or seen wounded on
purpose, and into the wounds of which that liquor has been intromitted,
although it had been drawn hot out of the Vesicles of the gums of Vipers
exceedingly vexed; so far is it, that the Juice of dead Vipers was able to
annoy any animal. I can also assure, that never any head of a dead Viper,
whether the Animal were who^e, or that head only with its neck, and though it
abounded with that yellow liquor, has done any harm to man or any other
Animal, bitten by it.

The yellow liquor, which I swallowed in one of the conferences of the Abbot
Bourdelot, puts me in mind of Letter, which M. Des Tapieres, a very curious,
sincere and able Apothecary of Bourbon l' Archamband, had written to him, which
was there read, and among other things did relate, That in the year 1630. he
had taken a Viper, whose crook'd teeth he had cut, and that he carried her in
his bosom; and that after two or three days, a fancy taking him to approach her
to his face, pressing her a little, she bit him in his lip, and thereby caused
great pain to him; whereupon he flung her to the ground and in his anger crushed
her in pieces; that his lip and face swelled; that a Ligature was made upon
him; that Treacle was given him, and some of it applied to the bite; that at
the place of the wound there appeared a little bladder, whence issued two or
three drops of liquor of a dark yellow color, and that his face remained very
pale for a month.

If my opinion be asked about this Experiment, I declare that there is nothing
in it, which I ought not to believe; and I add also, that there hapn'd nothing
in it, which agrees not with the principles by me established and maintained.
For, although the great teeth of that Viper had been cut, which might have gone
further, and mingled the enraged spirits of the Viper with the blood of M.
Tapieres; yet they had not cut the point of the small teeth, which I showed in
the same conference together with the other neighboring parts in the teath of
a live Viper, sent to Monsieur Bourdelot by the same Apothecary that had been
bitten: of which small teeth I have heretofore given the description and
figure, as well as that of the upper and lower Jaws, in which they are
fastn'd, as may be seen in my Anatomy of Vipers, in the Section of the teeth,
and the third Cut of that Pook. For, although those little teeth have not the
length nor thickness of the great ones; yet they have the same shape and the
same matter; for they are bony, crooked, transparent, and very sharp; so that
the vexed spirits may pass into them as into small Funnels, and through their
Pores, as they do thorough those of the bigger ones: But they cannot go very
deep, because their smalness permits them not to carry their openings as far as
into the flesh; and all they can do, is, to open the skin. Now to reason upon
the accidents that befell M. Des Trapieres by this bite, as they are set down
in his Letter; I see nothing in them that is not very natural, and very
credible. For, although the angered Spirits had entered by the openings made by
the small teeth; yet they could not penetrate the flesh, nor mingle with the
blood, because those apertures were not deep enough, and they could do no more
but to make their effort 'twixt the flesh and skin; whence followed the
swelling of the lip and face, and the impression of the pale color, which
appeared there during a month; which accidents might at first have been easily
prevented by one only dose of the volatile Salt of Vipers, which would have made
the enraged Spirits to transpire, that lodged between the flesh and the skin,
and could find no entry to pass further. As to the little bladder, which was
formed at the place of the bite, and the two or three drops of dark liquor that
issued afterward, that was nothing but a little serous moisture that had been
gathered there from the neighboring parts, and that had been caused by the
compression of the Ligature, and by the bruising made by the teeth and Jaws at
the time of the biting, and without any intervention of the yellow liquor,
which besides its innocence, could not have entered through such small apertures.

After so many Experiments, and upon so many Reflections which I have made, as
well on the yellow liquor, as on the irritated spirits of Vipers, I cannot
comprehend, how the Animals of Sign. Redi could dye all and without any
exception by the intromission of the yellow liquor into the wounds, he had made
in them, and by the biting of heads severed, or by that of entire Vipers that
had been dead several days. I have too many experiments to the contrary, and
too many witnesses, to put it out of doubt, and to fix me in my first opinion.

But, to the end that among the Truths by me advanced, and consisting in matter
of fact, the public may find wherewith to be satisfied; I thought my self
obliged to explain my sense upon these matters, and to form to my self the
Objections, that may be made against me.

I say therefore concerning the Tellow Liquor, That nothing can act from it
self, but according to its nature, the disposition of the matter of which it is
composed, and the force of its activity. For example, you will not find in
River Water, the taste, strength, nor particles that are found in Wine, nor
will that inebriate like this: it has not the acrimony nor penetrancy of
Urine, neither the color not bitterness of Gall: The Spirit of Wine, that is
freed from the aqueous parts, which hindered the Wine from producing the effects
it was capable of, is much more subtle and strong, then the same wine whence
it has been drawn: The Volatile Salt of Wine has quite another penetrating
force than the Urine which contained it before its sublimation: And not to go
from my subject; the volatile Salt of Vipers is very different from the flesh
and bones of them, whence it has been extracted; and, though in small
quantity, it will work more in a moment as well by its odor as its piercing
virtue, than ten times as much of that matter, whence it has been drawn, could
effect in many hours: The bileous, sharp, salt and spirituous serosity, that is
often formed in our bodies, will suddenly produce inflammations in the eyes,
tumors in the cheeks, gums, throat, and many other parts, as also Pustuls, St.
Anthony fire, and the Gangrene it self; and all that it does by the composition
of its parts, and the force of its activity; whereas the thick and viscous
Phlegm will do no such thing, but charge nature only by its weight, cold,
and tenacity: This Phlegm, I say, will ever be incapable of working with
quickness, and it cannot produce any effect out very slowly, and in proportion
to its power, which is extremely confined.

So then, it is not the nature of the yellow liquor, to pass swiftly to remote
parts, and there to act with vigor and violence; which is observed in the
poison of a Viper. I say, that a tough, viscous, and in a manner insipid
Saliva, cannot make any great progress in a moment. I affirm besides, that it is
impossible, it should corporally enter into the holes made by the teeth, which
are very small and almost invisible, and that it should also pass through the
cavities of the teeth, and much less through their Pores, if any would have
them pass that way. I say further, that although the teeth of a Viper should be
all over imbued with that Juice at the time of her biting; the skin of the
Animal bitten, and the flesh it self, if need were, would keep it out of the
bitten place, and hinder it from entering there; That though it should be able
to enter, it must have a fit place to receive it, a great passage to go
through, and a long time to arrive to the parts remote; I say also, that though
it were arrived there, (if that were possible,) it could never act beyond the
forces, which nature has restrained it to.

Besides, if this yellow liquor were capable of any considerable operation, it
would not fail to discover it either in whole or in part, when it is swallowed
and got into the stomach; where the place, the heat, and all things would seem
to concur either to make it ferment, if its matter were disposed for it, or to
reduce its power into action: For, by passing out of the stomach into the
intestins it would infect the Chyle, and make of it a poison, which would be
carried jointly with it through the milky vessels, and through the Thoracique
Ductus' s, so happily discovered by the illustrious M. Pecquet, to descend into
the Heart with the blood, the which is the matter, on which the poison of
Vipers does so particularly exert its dominion. And this way is much more easy
and large, than that of the opening, made by the teeth, by which this juice
cannot so much as enter. I say this further, that, if it were such as Sign.
Redi makes it to be, it would, being taken at the mouth and let down into the
stomach, impress upon the places of its passage, and those of its stay, some
mark or other of its power, especially if it did contain any Arsenical Salts,
which would not fail, soon to manifest themselves either by their taste or by
some other effects: And yet all those that shall taste or swallow this yellow
liquor, shall never perceive any malignity whether great or small, neither in
the mouth, nor in the stomach, nor elsewhere. I conclude therefore from all
these considerations, that this juice contains in it no part at all, that is
able to dissolve, or coagulate, or discompose any part of our body; and that it
has not any quality, manifest or occult, to show that it is capable of doing so.

I add moreover, that this juice, as flat and salivous as it is, is always
found so yellow in all parts of France, that it can hardly be less colored
than it is in Italy; and that they both must have altogether alike qualities,
or, at least, very near such. And it would be to no purpose, to allege in
favor of Sign. Redi, that the diversity of places and climate, or that of
aliments might be able to change the nature of Vipers, and cause that manifest
difference, there is between his Experiments and mine. For, although some
diversity may be observed in other things, there can be found none in this; and
if there could be some difference, it cannot be that the nature of the yellow
juice, and that of the Spirits should be quite changed; since we find in France
the same marks in that liquor, which Sign. Redi has found and described in
that of Italy, and since our Vipers, without any intervention of that juice, do
kill as nimbly as his can do.

But I think it would be much, if in the yellow liquor, or in the enraged
spirits, there could be observed any small degree of quality, stronger or
weaker in Italy than in France. For, I have by a great number of experiments
made it out, that all the Vipers of France, though taken in very different
places, and often such as are six score Leagues distant from one another, have
their poison altogether alike, and do kill equally. Whence I infer, that the
difference of the Vipers of Italy and France, cannot be considerable; since
Dauphine, which is a Province in France that furnishes us with many of them,
and is very mountainous as well as Italy, borders upon Picmont, which is the
beginning of Italy; and that the same Dauphine, abounds in Vipers in its utmost
extremity; and since also all Vipers, we get from thence, have their yellow
liquor always very innocent, though high colored. And I can truly say, that
those Vipers, that have served me most both in my first and last experiments,
were most of them sent me out of Dauphine, and that I was willing to make use
of such, as being commonly bigger than most of those that were sent me out of
Poictou; that, at least, which served me to bite the five first Pigeons, which
I spoke of in my first Experiments; and that which bit the seven last Pullets
and Pigeons, were of those of Dauphine, and even of the bigger sort that could
be procured.

And it would have been to no purpose to have used any tooth of a Viper severed
from the head, and much less to wipe it dry with some bread crumbs, in hopes it
should kill any Animal by pricking it therewith; seeing the teeth, that had of
the yellow liquor upon them, without being separated from the dead heads, were
not able to do any harm, no not those of live ones, without the concurrence of
the enraged spirits. And if sometimes I have made use of bread-crums, sometimes
of a sine linen ragg, to wipe away all the yellow liquor of the vesicles, that
was never but in live Vipers; to show, that it was not that liquor which did
kill, but the vexed Spirits only, entering by means of the biting.

We are not to imagine neither, that a Viper teareth by biting, unless having
made her to thrust her teeth into the flesh of some animal, you do immediately
after draw her away by the rest of her body: We are not, I say, to pretend,
that a Viper does, by biting of her own accord, make any great opening, at
which the yellow liquor is able to enter. For, she does no more but thrust in
her teeth far enough, and presently draw them out again, with as much ease as a
Cat draws out his claws when he will. Besides, you cannot perceive but two very
little holes, which do also seem as 'twere closed again by the flesh, and which
would hardly be discerned, if the pain of the bite, or the accidents ensuing,
did not oblige us to look very narrowly to it.

We also never see, that the poison fastens it self to the part bitten, nor
that the evil begins by a mortification, or by a gangrene there. For, if that
were so, and if the venom did lodge at the entry, it would be much more easy
to master it. I know also by many Experiments, that the poison never stays at
the place where it enters, but insinuates it self very nimbly into the Veins,
to mingle with the blood; especially if the bite has opened for it a passage
free enough to arrive there. I know, that there it produces afterward those
troublesome accidents, which ensue upon the biting; and that lastly it causes
death, if it be not prevented by a quick relief. Which clearly shows, that a
poison of this nature must needs have dispositions to penetrate, very differing
from those that appear in a yellow liquor, that is incapable of all sudden
motion and operation.

It would also prove an useless labor, to suck at the place of the biting, in
hopes of getting out from thence a Juice, which could not enter there. And
though I do not disprove this way of succors on such occasion; yet I know,
that all what the sucking can do, is, to fetch out again part of the enraged
spirits, that had entered by the openings of the bite. I know also, that a
specifique remedy, taken at the mouth, is far better.

I would be in vain, to object unto me the example of the seed of Animals,
which, notwithstanding its viscosity, serves daily to propagate that Species
which produces it; and that it could in like manner come to pass in the yellow
liquor to convey the venom in the biting. For besides that the seed is the
purest and most elaborat part which an animal can produce; it is also
accompanied with store of Spirits; and there needs, besides, the concurrence of
many other means as well to introduce and to receive it, as to form and perfect
the Foetus: There is moreover necessary an assistance of abundance of spirits
from the mothers side; a juice proportionate and proper for its nourishment and
increase, and a sufficient time for the same. Whereas the yellow liquor, that
can pass for nothing but a juice excreted out of the Salival Glanduls, after it
had been sent thither from the brain and the neighboring parts, and that is
destitute of spirits and of all disposition to act; wants also a passage
sufficient to intromit it, and a place proper to lodge in. And if you should
grant it an entry, and a place to sojourn in; it must have a much longer time
than the seed, of which I was speaking. But with all this time and all the
other circumstances, it would still be incapable of working any thing at all
perfect, and perish of it self; without any remarkable production.

If any should say, That this yellow liquor may have spirits proper and
proportionate to its nature, and that they are not wanting to make the poison
work at the moment of the biting; but that, being drawn out of the vesicles,
and exposed to the Air, those spirits are dissipated, and thereby render it
incapable of all action: I answer, That, without staying upon what I have amply
made out of its innocence in all kind of uses, Signor Redi himself contradicts
it, as I have mentioned above; since he pretends, that the Juice even of such
Vipers as have been dead for several days, and that is dried to boot, cease
not to insinuate its venom without any intervention of spirits, when it is put
into wounds. But, besides all that, many Experiments have evinced to me, that
death follows the biting without any intervention of the yellow liquor, and
then when it has been perfectly wiped away. Moreover, it is well known, that
it is the nature of spirits, to be in motion, to fasten themselves to, and to
follow the parts that have most of them, as for example, the blood. It is also
to be noted, that the spirits, that do insinuate the poison, are not of the
nature of those that follow the ordinary motion of the blood of the animal;
that they do not join themselves to it, as those; and that neither of them have
any union with the yellow liquor; which is but a mere excrement: But that the
Spirits, I speak of, do form themselves in the moment that the Viper conceives
the Idea of revenging her self; and they need not the embarasment of such a
dull and viscous juice, which is not qualified to follow them, nor to pass
through the imperceptible pores of the teeth, which the spirits only can
penetrate, no more then they can any ways enter through the holes, which the
teeth have made. In a word; the nature of a gross, tough and viscous juice is
not, to act, penetrate, and be wiftly carried to the most remote parts of the
body; but that belongs to spirituous substances, to go and come where gross
corporal ones cannot. These are the only spirits, that can subvert the whole
Economy of the body; they are they, that disturb the circulation of the blood,
and that corrupt it; they are they, that stop the natural and animal spirits,
and hinder them from passing to the parts of the body as they were wont to do;
and lastly, it is by the let of them, that the death of the Animal usually
ensues the biting.

As to what may be objected, that it is very difficult, so exactly to evacuate
the yellow liquor, that there remain none at all; and that it may very well
come to pass, that a little of it intervenes in all bitings: I answer, that
besides that this is also against the opinion of Sign. Redi, and which he has
renounced in his first Assertion; the Salival Glanduls, though many in number,
yet are too small and have too little capacity to contain juice enough to
furnish for that purpose; and that that cannot be expected but from great
animals, that have those Salival glanduls and the other parts far bigger: And
though it were possible, they should sufficiently furnish, I do maintain, that
the impossibility of intromitting that juice, and its evinced innocence, ought
to suffice for confuting this Objection.

Yet this I shall here say in favor of Sign. Redi, That I doubt not but that
this yellow liquor, as Salivous and Excrementitious as it is, contains its
Volatile Salt, as well as all the other parts of a Viper, and all the parts of
Animals, and even all their excrements, and that consequently it is to be
reputed spirituous. But then, besides that these spirituous substances are
never hurtful, they are yet too intimately mixed and locked in with their
matter, and they cannot produce their effects without being separated from it;
which cannot be but by a violent heat, and in vessels fit for it. I say
therefore, that by art there may be extracted a true Volatile Salt out of this
yellow liquor, and even without any addition or mixture of other matter; which
may be proved to be of the same nature with that of the other parts of a Viper;
and that it is so far from being able to work like poison, that it is very proper
and effectual to master all the ill accidents, which the bite of a Viper may
cause; of which I do accuse the enraged spirits alone. Since therefore Sign.
Redi has dried and laid aside the yellow liquor of two hundred and fifty
Vipers, and may easily obtain much more of it; it is in his power to extract
such a salt out of it, when he pleases, to verify what I was just now saying:
And if, to save himself that labor, by reason of his other important
occupations, he shall please to send me a competent quantity thereof, I do with
all my heart offer my self to prepare it for him, thereby to let him see not
only the innocence of this juice, but also the great benefit, that is hid in it.

Concerning the Bilious Breath of a Viper, that may be charged to intervene
with this yellow liquor, and to envenom it; I am of opinion, that that is
nothing but a disguise of the enraged spirits. I assert, That the true Breath
of a Viper is ever innocent, how bilious soever it be represented; that there
issues not any ill scent out of her throat, nor out of her guts, nor from the
parts made to void the excrements; That Vipers among other marks are in this
different from Snakes, that these have their excrements and the parts
containing them very fetide and of a smell of stinking Urine; whereas you
cannot perceive any ill smell in any part of a Viper; that the Spirits which
carry the venom are quite another thing than the breath coming from the Lungs;
that those spirits have no union nor correspondence with the Bilious humor;
that they are not formed but at the instant of the irritation; and lastly, that
they need no such thing as an excrementitious and useless liquor, pretended to
intervene, fit for nothing but to guard the passage of the place, through which
the vexed spirits have entered.

But the better to show the impossibility of the intervention of this breath,
and to make it appear, that it never contributes any thing to the poison; you
may take notice, that a Vipers head cut off, separate from the Lungs and all
communication with the Gall, and incapable to yield any breath, and deprived
even of all that yellow liquor; yet fails not to kill by its biting as long as
it is alive, if the animal have been provoked; just as would come to pass, if a
bite were made by the head of a Viper that is whole and alive, if no remedy
were applied.

Touching the Communication, that may also be pretended to be between the
bladder of Gall and the yellow liquor, by reason of some resemblance of color;
I say, that, besides that my Sentiments in these matters are very conform to
those of Sign. Redi; that we have both of us justified the innocence of the
juice contained in the Bladder of Gall; that we have denied, there is any
vessel carrying this better juice into the vesicles of the gums, to make that
yellow liquor which is found there: and lastly, that we have unanimously
contradicted the errors of the Ancients about this pretended channel; besides
this; I say, the truth of what we have affirmed is very easy to prove, by
tasting the yellow liquor of the Gall, which is very bitter and very sharp,
though very innocent, and by comparing it with that of the vesicles of the
Gums, which is very flat, though equally innocent. The same may be yet better
made out by dissecting one or more Vipers; where, no more than in Serpents and
all other animals, you will never find any vessel, that carries* this bile of
the Bladder of Gall to the Gums; and you will there see nothing but veins and
arteries filled With true blood. Of this there will be no doubt, if you please
only to taste it; for you will find nothing but the ordinary taste of blood. To
be yet more assured of it, you may taste all that runs out of the body of a
Viper when the head is severed from her; for you shall find no bitterness at
all, nor other taste but that of blood. And besides, having amply verified, that
the yellow liquor comes from the Salival glanduls alone, and having given a
very exact description of them; I think it needless to say any more of it, what
ever the Ancients may have written, or the Moderns may say of that subject.

To come now to the enraged Spirits of a Viper, which I do assure to be the
true and only seat of the poison; methinks Sign. Redi has no reason to oppose
my opinion, when I do interess in it the imagination of the Viper, or her Idea
of revenge, for the formation of those Spirits. I might here allege what Van
Helmont says in his Chapt. De Tumul^ Pestis, viz. That not only the Idea and
the Imagination of terror are formed in the inward Archeus of the person
invaded by the Plague; but that the Toad, which has, as he says, a perpetual
hatred against man, finding himself taken, and hanged by one of his hind-legs,
and in a condition of dying, conceives an Idea and an imagination of terror by
the sight of the man, that often presents himself before his eyes, and whom he
looks upon as his capital enemy, and that the same Idea or the same fancy of
terror, which the Toad has conceived by this means, forms in him such
impressions and qualities, as are permanent even after his death. Then this
Author will, that of this body, that dyed in those Ideas of terror, mingled
with the parts that have issued thence, and with the wax that shall have
received them, you shall make Trochesque's, which being taken inwardly, and
carried about you, or applied, shall have the virtue of curing as well as
preserving from the Plague, by mortifying by their Specifique quality the
terror which the inward Archeus of the person may have conceived of this evil.
Now since this Sentiment of Van Helmont has found place in the minds of many
men, yery capable to judge of it; who have been thence induced even to make
exactly that preparation of Toads, which he has taught in the same Chapter,
and which I can assure I have my self made to satisfy the desire of very able
Physicians; having also known many persons giving great credit to it, and
carrying continually about them of those Trochesques whilst there was talk of
the Plague; methinks, that the formation of the enraged spirits, which I
ascribe to the Idea and imagination of revenge, conceived by the Viper when she
is vexed, is incomparably more maintainable, and much easier to be
comprehended, as well as the entry of the angered Spirits through the Openings
made by the Teeth; because not only these Apertures are wont to be deep, but
also because the teeth being hollow, serve for a Funnel to intromit those
spirits, that accompany the biting, and that produce afterward in the body
bitten those dismal effects of vengeance, which the Viper had conceived when
she felt the ill done her; And the letting in of those Spirits through the
cavity of those teeth is so much the more easy, because there is also at the
end of each great tooth a hole, which, though very small and almost
undiscernable by the eye, may yet be discerned by a Microscope, and has
accordingly been lately seen in some public Assemblies at Paris, in the
presence even of persons very affectionate to Sign. Redi.

What shall we say of the imagination of Fright and Constraint, that a Toad
also impresses in a Wecsel, which having seen and been seen by that ugly
animal, at a certain season of the year, and always in summer, can not avoid to
run a pretty while round about it making a continual shrill noise, as if she
cried for help, whilst the Toad remains moveless with his throat open; and
which after a long troublesome motion is constrained to come and render her
self into that throat. The thing is too well known in diverse places of France
to doubt of it; and I can assure to have heretofore seen it my self; and that
after I had well observed and withal wondered at the force of those Idea's,
appearing in the agitation of the Weesel, and in her being constrained to fall
into the mouth of the Toad, I had the satisfaction to kill the Toad in that
moment, and so to save the Weesel, which quickly run away, finding her self
delivered by the death of the animal, which was followed by the extinction of
those Ideas, that before had had so much power over her. This effect cannot be
adscribed to the foam, nor to any material part of the Toad, since the Weesel
flies from him naturally, and falls not into his mouth but in spite of her
teeth. Besides that the foam of the Toad, which the Weesel failed not to meet
with in his throat, can work nothing, seeing the Weesel saved her self
immediately after the death of the animal. We therefore must needs seek for the
cause of all these effects in the Spirits.

More-over, what will Sign. Redi say of a mad dog, which, in the pervertion of
all his senses and of all the ordinary functions of his body, breaths after
nothing but mischief, and makes it his business to reduce into the same
miserable condition all men he sees, and even his own master, as well as all
animals he can come near and bite? If then the mad Dog has the power to make
pass the same Idea's and the same imagination, which have seized on him, into
all the creatures that he can come to bite, and into man himself, though of a
very different soul and nature from his, by doing no more than with the edge of
his teeth to touch the superfice of the skin, and that through his coaths that
may retain and wipe off all the foam adhering to the teeth, and liable to be
accused of having a hand in the mischief; as is very well observed by Van
Helmont in the same Chapter? If, I say, this dog has the power of
communicating his evil to all sorts of animals, from one to another, without a
limit, and without excepting any kind; Why should he think it incredible, that
a Viper is able by her biting to carry her enraged spirits into the bodies of
such men and other animals as she can light upon; That these spirits are
capable to kill the animal bitten; and that they effect this by the
perturbation and corruption, they introduce into the whole mass of blood;
forasmuch as they do manifestly hinder its circulation, and the communication
of the natural spirits, that were wont to be conveyed into all the parts?
Considering withal, that they do not extend themselves as far as those of the
bite of a mad Dog; seeing none of the Animals bitten by a Viper, have any venom
diffusible either by their biting, or otherwise, as long as they live, and that
they may be safely handled, and even without danger eaten after their death.

I say besides, that if it be true, that a man, who has at all times the same
spitle and the same teeth, and who has them not pointed nor shaped like those
of a Viper, is capable to introduce the Gangrene, and to cause death it self by
a bite made by him in a rage; whereas another and longer bite, made by the same
man not enraged, is not accompanied with any ill accident, and is healed like a
simple wound; This being true, I say, we ought to think it neither strange nor
impossible, that a Viper, which has long and piercing teeth, and which shows
the force of her being vexed by the nimbleness of her biting, should be able,
by biting when enraged, to make animals feel the mortal effects of her vexed
spirits.

What shall we say of the pricking of a Tarantula how slight soever? shall we
declare it to be exempt from the idea and imagination of this little animal,
since it impresses it so strongly and differently upon persons that have been
pricked therewith, insomuch that it perverts in part the senses and spirits,
conforms them to his stirring and skipping nature, and constrains them at
certain and set times to continual dancing for several days, and which having
left a contumacious leaven of the same idea's, fails not to produce the same
effects every year, and, if you may believe Authors, as long as the Tarantula
lives, and until the same idea's be extinct by its death. And though I doubt
not but that Sign. Redi has seen very many examples of persons pricked by
Tarantula's, there being store of them in Italy; yet I shall not forbear here
to recite that of a Neapolitan Soldier, who has been these four years among
the French infantry. This Soldier, whom his Camarads called Tarante, because
he had been pricked by a Tarantula, is still to this very day in the Royal
Regiment of Roussillon. He never failed to feel every year at a determinate
time (viz. about the 24 th of July) the effects of that sting, which he had
received before he came into France. He was always sure of the time about two
or three days near it. And when the ideas of the sting were found exalted to a
degree capable to produce their effects, he began to dance, and desired to hear
without interruption the Violins, which the Officers of that Regiment caused to
be played for him out of charity; to which he answered continually, keeping
time very well, without being tired, for three days, eating and drinking,
without interruption of his dance; and being very impatient of any
discontinuance of the play of the Violins, and that the more, if the
intermission was any thing long; for then he became altogether livid, and fell
into grievous swoundings. He pleased himself whilst he danced, to have in his
hands several naked swords, one after another; to see about him many
Looking-glasses, to behold himself in them dancing; to be environed with much
people, and, that he might hinder them from going away, to take from them their
Gloves, Ribbons, and such other things; being very careful to keep all he had
taken from them unto the fourth day, which being come, his eagerness to dance
abated, and at length quite ceased; he remembering all he had done, and knowing
all that were about him, to every one of whom he rendered very exactly and
without any mistake all he had taken from them, though he had to do with a
thousand people. After which time, he passed the remainder of that year, and
the whole interval of his Paroxysines without any inclination to dance. He was
naturally melancholic, in appearance of no great parts, neither had he learned
to dance. He has been seen thus dancing every year by thousands of people, and
particularly in the Camp Royal Anno 1670. where the King himself and the whole
Court saw him. And this has been so beneficial to him, that the ordinary time
is past this year without any assault of this evil, which he had great
apprehensions of, finding himself at that time engaged in a march, and fearing
he should want Violins at the time that the sit should take him.

Now since the pricking of this Animal, though very small, and in a manner like
that of a small fly, being made even thorough stockings or clothes, is able to
act equally upon the body and the mind of the person stung; as leaving behind
such long and strong impressions, and causing such irksome returns; To what can
we adscribe all those different effects, if it be not to the idea or
imagination of the animal stinging, or of the person stung. It Is needless, to
allege here the effects of the idea or imagination of Women with Child, nor of
that of Jacob's Sheep. I think I have said enough to justify the possibility
of the idea or imagination of a Vipers revengefulness, for the forming of angry
spirits, sufficient to impute unto them all the venom, and to exclude from it
the yellow liquor.

After this, Sign. Redi must not wonder, if I, who make profession of
Chemistry, (of which I have the honor to read public Lectures in the Garden
Royal) who do every day exercise my self in separating the spirituous parts
from the gross ones in mixed inanimat bodies; and who have not been able to find
in any corporeal and sensible matter the true cause of the strange and sudden
productions, observed in the biting of a live Viper; If I, after all this, I
say, have thought my self obliged to seek for it in the Spirits; if having
found it there, I have abandoned his party, and communicated to the public the
discovery I have made.

Yet I am not overmuch surprised, that Sign, Redi, being in this matter
prepossessed by corporeal gross things, still persists in his sentiment, since
in the preparations, that do altogether depend of my profession, and which I
ought to know well, he rejects spirituous substances, which he relishes not,
sticking only to the more material, which are the least, and in very small
quantity; which does not keep him from believing them to be the best. You may
see, what he writes of it about the end of page 76. and at the beginning of
page 77, of his first Letter of Observations, in these words.

In queste nue naturali Osservationi ho consuinato gran quantita, etc. That is,
In these my natural Observations I have spent a great quantity of Vipers,
making of them daily a very great slaughter; and, to extract the subtle from
the subtle (if I may so speak) I always laid aside and kept all their flesh and
bones, which being dried in a Furnace, and afterward by a quick fire with long
and great labor burnt and reduced to ashes, I thence drew the Salt with
Fountain Water, and purified it, and reduced it into a kind of Crystal, etc.

Those that know all the parts of which the body of a Viper is composed, will
certainly wonder, that a person so judicious and knowing has not found, that
the chief and best part of a Viper consists in its volatile Salt, and that that
Salt would not fail to avolate and to be wasted by that preparation or rather
destruction, which Sign. Redi has used to extract the Salt of Vipers. They
will quickly see, that when he would draw the subtle from the subtle (as he
speaks) he did quite the contrary, and expelled and dissipated the volatile and
better parts, returning only the gross, the fixed and the least. They will soon
judge, that he should not have given himself all that labor and pain, which he
says he has taken, to succeed so ill in his work; and that he had done much
better, with silence to pass over his process, then to publish it. The way, by
him taken, will be found, I think, received from the Ancients, who knew not,
that all Animals abound in Volatile, and have little of Fixed Salt: And his
preparation, which is very easy, would have pleased better in those times,
especially in Italy, then that great and laborious Preparation of the Salt of
Vipers, which was made with so great an Apparatus, and of which I have already
given my thoughts, when I discoursed of the Remedies drawn from Vipers.

I also foresee, that Sign. Redi will not receive any greater advantage by
striving to attribute to himself the first discovery of the Salival glanduls,
which I found on both the Temples of both Male and Female Vipers, and which I
have described and delineated in my Anatomy of Vipers: For, he will not be able
to persuade it to those, who shall see page 44. of his first Letter of
Observations the discourse following;

Se non stimassi vergogna scriver senza altra riprova, etc. That is, If I did
not think it a shame, to write, without other proof, what came into my fancy,
I might say perhaps, that that yellow liquor is by no other way intromitted
into the above said gums of the teeth but by those Salival Conduits, found out
by the famousThomas Wharton, and shown in this Court by Lorenzo Billini, a
learned young man and of great expectation, in other Animals besides Man, and
particularly in Staggs, and Wood-peckers: Moreover that under those Gums there
are two small Glanduls, found by me in all Vipers. Yet I would not have you
rely upon this thought of mine, because it may prove a Chimera, as I believe it
to be one,etc.

I cannot comprehend, how Sign. Redi, after he has spoken of the Salival
Conduits as of a thing that came into his fancy, and by a perhaps, that is to
say, not knowing it; and who declares, that he was ashamed to write of a thing
without verifying it; who exhorts his friend to whom he writes, not to rely on
his thoughts, and who adds, that it may prove a Chimera; I know not, I say,
how, after he has written all this, he can pretend to be the inventor of the
Salival Glanduls, and their Pipes: For page 55 and 56. of his first Letter
speaking of the yellow liquor, he adds,

E questo veleno altro non e, etc. That is, This venom is nothing else but that
liquor, which humects the Palate, and stagnates in those gums that invest the
teeth, not transmitted thither from the Bladder of Gall, but bred in the whole
head, and conveyed perhaps to the gums by some Salival conduits, which perhaps
are there inserted.

Where the word perhaps, yet twice again repeated, does sufficiently show, that
Sign. Redi did speak of the Salival conduits no otherwise than as of a thing he
was not at all assured of. And though he may say, that he has had thoughts of
it sooner than I, (who have not meddled with Vipers but some years after his
first Letter,) that what he had written of it gave me from that time occasion
and a desire to seek for those Pipes and the Glanduls that might convey thither
the yellow liquor; that the belief, he had of the Generation of this juice in
the whole head, induced me to search for the Salival Glanduls higher and
farther off than the place under the bottom of the vesicles; and that I doubt
not, that himself might have found these true Glanduls, if he would have taken
pains for it. I answer, that, since he has not done it, he ought not to be
offended at my having labored for him, and succeeded in so doing: Neither has
he any right to deny, that I have first found, described, and to the life
represented the two heaps of Salival Glanduls of a Viper with all their
Vessels, as well for forming, as conveying the yellow liquor into the Vesicles
that cover the great teeth.

As to what Sign. Redi says of me, speaking of the Authors of my Book, that I
have changed the words, under the bottom, into those, at the bottom of the
vesicles of the gums, and there sought in vain for the two small Glanduls,
which he assures to have found there in all Vipers: I answer, that whilst he is
critical as to the letter of the words, I keep to the truth of the matter of
fact: And I can assure, to have searched with much care, not only in the whole
bottom of the vesicles, but every where under the bottom of them, but have not
found any, whether great or small Glanduls, nor any thing of the color of a
Glandul, nor that came any way near to their form.

I put it then for a truth, that there is not to be found any Glandul neither
in nor under the bottom of the vesicles, and that under the bottom there is
nothing but the gristly bone that gives the shape to the nose of a Viper; the
two sharp ends of the two advanced bones of the skull, to which the two great
teeth are firmly annexed; the conduit of the smell, that of the hearing; some
small vein, some little Artery, some little Nerve, the extremity of a Muscle,
and the two ends of the Salival Channels that discharge into the vesicles; as
you may see it in a manner described in the Anatomy made of it by me.

After this, Signor Redi himself shows, that it was impossible, there should be
Glanduls under the bottom of the vesicles, since he says, page 38. of his last
Letter.

Ne io poteva may scrivere, etc. that is, Nor could I at all write, that those
Glanduls lay in the bottom of the vesicles, if I was of opinion, that the
yellow liquor did run into them after it had passed through the Salival
conduits, which yet I imagined might have their Origin from or connection with
those two Glanduls seen by me, and therefore must needs be in a situation a
little distant from the vesicles, and not in the bottom of them.

For since he says, to have meant, that the yellow juice took its course
thorough the Salival conduits before its coming into the vesicles; He cannot
find a way long enough, nor a distance great enough, for the need of long
conduits, from the place under the bottom unto that which is in the bottom of
the vesicles: For, there would have needed nothing but a little opening in the
same bottom, to receive the juice issuing out of the two little Glanduls he
has spoken of. And he shows sufficiently, that he cannot maintain those two
small Glanduls under the bottom, where he would have them to be, since now he
will needs have them a little distant from the vesicles, that he may find, in
the intervall, a space sufficient for the vessels that are necessary to the
course of this yellow liquor. Besides, that it is altogether impossible for two
small Glanduls to furnish all that yellow liquor, which presents it self in the
vesicles; since the two great heaps by me found in the two Temples and behind
the Orbits of the eyes of a Viper, can hardly furnish each about a drop in the
space of 24 hours, after the vesicles have been well voided. Moreover, it is
very easy to judge by what Sign. Redi says in his First Letter, that he
understood not, the Salival Glands were seated, as they are, on the two
Temples, nor so near the skull; since he says, that what came into his fancy,
was, that the head of a Viper did not convey that yellow juice but by certain
salival conduits. For if he had been of another mind, he would not have spoken
but of glands; or, at least, he would have begun with them before he had spoken
of the conduits, which shows also sufficiently, that by this means he has as
'twere inverted the order of nature: For, instead of placing the Glands close
to the skul, and afterward the salival conduits; he has begun with these, and
would have them immediately to receive the juice of the Brain, and to carry
them to the vesicles of the gums; and that his two pretended glanduls are
seated between the extremity of these conduits, and the bottom of the vesicles;
though none be there, and it would be altogether useless, they should be there,
because there are none but they that can at the beginning suck and digest the
humidities of the brain and the neighboring parts, and send them into the
vesicles of the gums by the conduits appointed for this office.

But when Sign. Redi accuses me of having taken the bottom of the vesicles for
that which is under the bottom of them, and of not having rightly understood,
as he speaks, the Toscan tongue; I may say, that himself has not very well
apprehended, nor duly explained the French terms, used by me; since he says at
the end of page 35. and at the beginning of p. 36. of the same last letter.

Sovra de chi gli, Autori delle novelle experience affermano, etc. That is,
Whereupon the Authors of the New Experiments do affirm, that they could never
see such Glanduls as I had named; but that instead of them they had found two
others, which they call Salival, thus by them described, p. 31.

For neither in all that he has afterward taken the pains to transcribe out
of my book on that subject, nor in all the rest of my Section upon the Salival
Glanduls, he can have read; that I say to have found two Glanduls, but,
Glanduls; there being a great difference in good French, between Deux Glandes,
and Des Glandes, two Glands, and, Glands. And when, describing the Glanduls, I
say, that they are seated on the two sides of the Craniuns, I say afterward,
that there are many small ones joined together, which may be called
Conglomerate Glanduls. And yet more; I speak of an Heap of Glanduls; so far am
I from speaking only of one or two Glanduls, as Sign. Redi has represented me
to have done.

And since, in hopes of better maintaining his cause, he has given himself the
trouble of copying word for word, in his last Letter, only the most general
place of my Book, and that which was the least contrary to it, in my Section of
the Salival Glands. To show therefore on my part, that the Glands, found by me,
are very different, and that even they are quite another thing, than the two
small ones spoken of by him; I thought my self obliged to transcribe hither out
of my book what he thought not necessary for him. For in the same Section, p.
30. (in the English version, p. 33) I speak thus of the salival Glands.

These Glands are found in all the heads of Vipers, both Males and Females;
they are seated on both sides, and joining to the skull, in the hind-part of
each round of the eyes, and at the same height with them. There are many small
ones joined together, which may be called Conglomerate Glands, that are easily
distinguishable by their form and color, which is different from the Muscles,
neighboring to them, and of which there is one, that may be called Temporal,
which in part covers them by its extremity. This heap of Glands appears there
of the bigness of the neighboring eye, and extending it self in length,
continues its progress in the Orbite of the eye, below and in part behind the
eye. Each Gland has its little Lymphatique vessel, which parts from it as from
a little Teat, and goes disgorging it self into a greater vessel, that runs all
along and under these Glands, and passes into the Vesicle of the Gum, and
terminates in the midst of the Articulation, which the root of the great teeth
makes with the advancing corner of the said Orbite, and with the little Bone,
which by its other end is articulated in the middle of the upper jaw. This
principal vessel, which being considered alone, is very little in appearance,
but is not so in effect, seeing it receives the discharge of all the small
vessels that come from each Gland, empties it self into the bag of the gums,
and carries thither that Salival juice, which may have qualities approaching to
those of the Saliva or Spitle of man, or of the foam or drivel of diverse other
Animals.

The Nerve, which serves in the Nostrils to the faculty of Hearing, runs for
some space along these Glands, which are also, as I have already said, small
Veins and Arteries.

But having well considered the substance, quality and situation of these
Glands, we judged their formation not to be in vain; but that their Use, in all
likelihood, was, to receive the humidities both of the Brain, the Eyes, and the
neighboring parts; and that their discharge was very convenient, and even very
necessary to the parts, which receive that liquor; as well for moistening the
ligaments of the great teeth, and to keep them in a condition of bending at
such time when the Viper will bite, as for bedewing and increasing the teeth,
which Nature has formed and set in the midst of this Juice.

For the rest, examining and tasting the Glands as well as the Juice, we found
a taste altogether like that of the Gums, which Sign. Redi has described;
namely, very near the taste of the Oil of Almonds, without all bitterness,
though it leave, a while after, a little acrimony in the mouth, such as may be
discerned in all kind of Spitle.

I could add here, what I said of the Salival Glands of Snakes, their
difference from those of Vipers; and I could allege, that I believe my self to
be likewise the first Discoverer of them. But because so prolix a Citation
might prove tedious, and that those that desire to have more light therein, may
easily find the rest in the above cited Section of my Book, I shall not
transcribe it hither.

Mean time it is very easy to judge from my whole Discourse, and from the exact
Description, made by me, of these Glands, and their neighboring parts, that
they were not known to me by Fancy. Their situation very distant from that
place under, and even from the sides of, the bottom of the vesicles of the
gums, shows sufficiently, that they are neither in nor under the bottom of
those vesicles, as Sign. Redi has pretended; and their great number makes it
appear, that it is quite another thing, than the two little Glanduls he speaks
of, and which are not to be found neither.

I entreat the Reader, well to consider those I have discovered, as they are
represented in my third Cut, as well in that part where the Temples are of a
Head cut, marked C, (where their shape and situation is represented to the
life, as they show themselves before they are severed;) as in the enclosure of
a Vipers sceleton, which is there also exhibited; where he may see them in
their upper and lower appearance, drawn out of the Head, and by their ligaments
fastened to the hind-part of the Eyes, and to the body of the Brain. I came not
to the full knowledge of them till after much pains, and a very long and
particular search. I did not content my self to seek a great while in the
bottom, and under the bottom of the vesicles of the gums; but, to find these
Glands, I have flead and dissected a great number of Vipers heads, as
dexterously and nicely as I could; and I have used all means well to examine
them; among others, I caused many heads to be gently boiled in a little water,
as well to consider the diverse sutures of the skull, and to separate all the
parts from it; as to remark well the form and the connection of these Glands, to
draw them out whole, and joined, as they are, to the Eyes, and to diverse bodies
of the Brain, to which the marrow of the Spain is annexed; and to have all
these parts entire, and such as I have caused them to be engraven.

Me thinks, that all these cares, followed by so good success, may well
deserve, my Discovery of this great number of Salival Glands with all their
vessels, should not be envied me by Sign. Redi; considering I do sufficiently
appear to him incapable of envying him any of those sine things, he has
already found, or may find hereafter in his curious re-searches.

There remains no more for me to do, me thinks, than to satisfy Sign. Redi as
well concerning the Uncertainty, wherein he is touching the Power of the
Volatile Salt of Vipers for the curing of their bitings; as about the
Objections, by him made against my Experiments of the Head and Neck of a Viper,
for curing Dogs bitten by it, and which I have also thought should be
efficacious to cure men in the like case.

He opposes nothing to the Virtue of this Volatile Salt, but that he remits the
Reader to the time he will take, Chymically to prepare this Salt, and to make
the Experiment therewith. But he says, that he has made many trials with the
Heads and Necks of Vipers, and found first; That, having made two great Dogs
aforehand to swallow, each the head and neck of a Viper, and, afterward caused
both of them to be bitten by other Vipers, those Dogs dyed not: And that,
having caused to be bitten two other Dogs of the same bigness, that had eaten
neither head nor neck of a Viper, they dyed neither. He says further, that
having made a Pullet to swallow one head of a Viper, and a Capon two, and
caused them to be bitten, they both dyed soon after. He adds, that having the
next day made ready some heads of Vipers, he caused them to be forced down the
throat of two little Dogs, of which he caused the least to be bitten in the
leg near the anus, and the other, in the tongue, and that they both dyed; That
he made the same Experiment upon eight Pullets, two Kitlings, two small
Rabbets, and six Pigeons, even with rubbing the place bitten with the blood of
the Viper; That also the six Pigeons were bitten by the heads of Vipers, dead
several days before, and that all these animals dyed; That lastly, he had fed
two Pigeons for there days with the flesh and broth of Vipers, and being
bitten thereupon, they dyed likewise, this aid notwithstanding.

For Answer to all these Experiments, I make use of the same Generals, that
Sign. Redi has done against mine, which are to be found page 16. of his last
Letter; where he says: That a Viper more easily kills lesser Animals by his
biting, than great ones; that, according to the bigness of the Animal bitten,
and according as the place wounded is more or less provided with veins or
arteries; that, if from the wound of a Viper much blood issues, the Animal not
only dies not, but does not so much as feel any great inconvenience; that it
also falls out sometimes, that the Animal bitten escapes, after it has
endured many mortal symptoms; and that this may come to pass by the sole
assistance of Nature.

As to the two other Generals, which he alleges in reference to the letting
in of the yellow liquor; I did not think fit to allege them here, both because
I agree not as to the possibility of the fact, and that I have elsewhere
declared my self sufficiently about it; as also that they make not to this
purpose. But I think it more material, to add here two other Generals to those
of Sign. Redi, and to say: That the biting is more or less noxious, not only
according to the place bitten, but according to the degree of the Vipers being
vexed when she is to bite, and according as her teeth have more or less
penetrated. And reasoning particularly upon these experiments, I say, that the
dogs which I had caused to be bitten every one thrice, and were cured by making
each of them swallow the head and neck of a Viper, were of a very midling size,
that it is very difficult to found a certainjudgment upon the great ones, which
Sign. Redi has used, as it is also, to pass it upon them that had swallowed the
head and neck of a Viper, and those, that had not done so, that all the other
little animals, which he employed, as well the Pullet and the Capon, as the
Pigeons, Catlings, Puppies, and little Rabbets, had not of themselves strength
enough to resist for a time the enraged spirits, nor to find the effect of the
remedy; especially that which was bitten in the tongue. For, I firmly believe,
that there is no animal, great or small, which being fiercely bit in the tongue
by a Viper well vexed, can avoid death, what aid soever you minister to it,
because of the nerves, veins and arteries, disseminated through the tongue; and
because that the angered spirits finding a free entrance, produce there all the
effect they are capable of, with so much violence and nimbleness, that nothing
is able to stop them. But in all curable bites I shall not easily be induced to
renounce the help, which may be given by the head, neck, heart, liver, and
diverse other parts of a Viper (especially of her that made the bite) for the
cure of the animals that have sufficient strength to resist a while, and to
expect the benefit of this kind of remedy. I believe also to have great cause
not to exclude from it man himself; as also to prefer the parts of the same
Viper that has bitten, to those of others; because they must needs have
greater cognation and more consent with the vexed spirits, that issued from
her. Concerning which I think it not amiss, to impart to the public an
accident that hapn'd in the Royal Laboratory of this City, whilst my last
experiments were making.

A young man that had made a good progress in his studies, desirous to perfect
himself in both ways of Pharmacy, and chiefly addicted to my course of
Chemistry, was near me, in the midst of a great Assembly, on the 2 d day of my
experiments. After I had made some, whilst I was entertaining the company, the
fancy took him, in imitation of me, yet without my knowledge, to take a Viper
with his hand, and to seize on her head: which he did not with that caution
that is necessary, as not holding her so fast but that the Viper took her
opportunity, and struck one of her great teeth very deep into the middle of the
upper part of his left forefinger. Having been made acquainted therewith, I
removed, as much as I could, all fear from his spirit, and advised him to
betake himself to the necessary remedies. The credit he gave to the truths
contained in my book, often read by him, induced him to say, that if I thought
well of it, he would eat the head and neck of the Viper that had bit him.
Commending his courage, I seconded his good inclinations; for, I caused
slightly to be broiled on coals the head and neck of the said viper, and made
him eat and swallow it hot, in the midst of the company, adding to it the heart
and liver broiled likewise. After which I said, I doubted not but what he had
done would be sufficient to cure him; yet to be the surer, I would give him
some volatile salt of vipers, especially he being a person whom I did much
esteem, and for whose health I had and ever should have a great concern. I
thereupon immediately gave him a dose a fifty grains of this volatile salt,
dissolved in four ounces of water, and assured him there was not any danger
after this. The young man remained in the midst of the company, and stirred not
from the place, till the meeting ended, and then he took a little fresh air. He
was afterward a couple of hours in the Royal Garden and the Laboratory; during
which time he now and then found some little sickness about his heart; but
being come to his own lodging, he was ready to sup as he was used to do, and
would have done it, if I had not thought it better for him to take another dose
of the same volatile salt, which had so good effect, that the next day, after he
had dined well, he came again to our meeting; which did much surprise all those
that had been witnesses of the bite. Since that time he has ever been very
well. Now though his wound appeared much deeper then that of the German
gentleman, that was bitten the 1 st day of my former experiments; yet had he
none of those grievous accidents, that befell him, and were by me described in
my book: for he had no other pain but that of the hole of the bite, nor had he
so much as a Fever. The wound only rendered some drops of blood, by means of the
ligature, I caused to be made on the top of his wounded finger, which did never
swell, and healed up as if it had been made by the prick of a pin, without any
Cicatrice appearing; so far was it from a Gangrene, or Scar, as some fancied he
would have.

The thing has been too public, not to be credited every where; and I think
not, that Sign, Redi himself will doubt of it; but rather that all things have
concurred together to verify all I had advanced in my book, of which he has
contested some particulars, and could not resolve himself about others.
However, if he have by him any remedies, more quick and more sure for the cure
of the bites of Vipers, the public will be much obliged to him when he shall
please to impart them, as I very willingly communicate these I have
experimented. I shall not speak here of diverse Experiments lately made upon
Vipers by very able persons at Paris, which confirm not only the perfect
innocence of the jellow liquor that is in the vesicles of the Gums, but which
warrant at the same time my adscribing the venom to the enraged spirits. These
truths will be better received from their hands, and they will be much more
advantageous to me, than if I did attempt to publish them now. For doubtless
there will be found in them very curious things, and they are like to be of
more importance than what I might be able to say of them. Besides that I am far
from usurping the honor due to others, and from attributing to me the
obligation, which the public will owe them for it.

For a conclusion of this discourse; since Sign. Redi has not found in the
whole body of a Viper any other part but the jellow juice to which he can
assign its venom; since on my part by the new experiments, he has desired of
me, I have sufficiently justified the innocence of the jellow liquor in the
Vipers of France, and the great conformities, there must needs be in the same
with that of the Vipers of Italy, asserting withal the venomonsness of the
angered spirits causing the death that ensues the bite; and since lastly the
Vipers of France do kill as soon and in the same manner as those of Italy do,
and even without any intervention of the jellow liquor: These things being so,
I esteem, that Sign. Redi would do very well, if, to satisfy on his part the
expectation of the public, and without adhering any longer to the jellow
liquor, which is so reasonably contested, he would take the pains to labor to
find out some new subject, that might be common to the Vipers of France and
those of Italy; that might have the same disposition of matter, and the same
power of acting nimbly; and that might with reason be equally declared the true
seat of their venom; to the end that afterward he might as justly exclude from
it the enraged spirits, as I now exclude from it the jellow liquor. But if on
the contrary it comes to pass, that he can find none other, I believe not, that
for the future he has any ground to maintain his opinion, no more than to
contest mine.

Concluding this dissertation I shall say, that the contrariety of opinions,
which is between Sign. Redi and me, in the most essential things of the Vipers
poison, may also be observed upon another account about the same animal: For,
the more he expresses p. 39. of his last letter, the aversion and hatred he
has against it, the more I esteem it, and the greater pleasure I take to
handle, to examine, and to prepare it. Nor can I sufficiently praise the
excellent qualities, which so rare a subject possesses, nor the admirable
remedies which it furnishes: Which are the considerations, that have
heretofore induced me, and oblige me still to call the Viper one of the chief
Pillars of Physic.

It may be, that for this once Sign. Redi will not doubt but that a discourse
as rude as this, composed among coals and furnaces, which I have seldom quitted
of late, is mine. He will doubtless judge, that, if more understanding men had
put their hands to it, the reasonings thereof would be more subtle, the style
more polite, and the expressions more elegant; and the Greek and Latin
quotations would not have been spared therein, both to strengthen the arguments
thereof, and to adorn and enlarge the volume. But for all the contrarieties,
which the different conceptions have bred between Sign. Redi and me, I shall
always have a very great and a very disinterress'd esteem for him; and so much
the more, because I have great reason to conceive some good opinion of my book,
since it could deserve that so intelligent and famous a person has vouchsafed
to read it again and again with pleasure, as he says himself, that he has
taken the pains of transcribing many pages out of it word for word, and has
made it famous by his answer, and by that also which a person of great parts,
and a high reputation has made to it, addressed to himself on this subject. I
cannot but much glory in it, and highly declare my self his obliged. And if it
should come to pass, that the diversity of his experiments, the force of his
arguments, or the esteem he has acquired among the Learned, should carry the
bell from me in the spirits of all the world; the victory, which he should
thence obtain, would not be much less advantageous for me, then if the truth of
my experiments, accompanied by my reasonings, had been able to balance or even
to prevail over his Sentiments and the writings of so Illustrious a Person.

FINIS.

