AN ADVERTISEMENT.
REprinted the last Michaelmas Term, The Works of Francis Osborn Esquire Divine,
Moral, Historical and Political, in 4 several Tracts, Viz. 1. Advice to a Son,
In two parts. 2. Political Reflections on the Government of the Turks, etc. 3.
Memoirs on Q. Elizabeth and K. James. 4. A Miscellany of Essays, Paradoxes,
Problematical Discourses, Letters, Characters etc. The seventh Edition in
Octavo, price bound six shillings.


REFLECTIONS ON Marriage, AND THE Poetic Discipline.

A Letter, By the AUTHOR of the Remarques on the TOWN.

LONDON, Printed for Allen Bancks, at the Sign of St. Peter, at the West end of
St. Paul's, 1673.

To the READER.
IT has not only been the Fashion, but esteemed a Justice in every Age, to
assist those Theams that have been run down by a Popular practice and contempt:
Marriage appeared so to the Author of the following Paper; which suffers too
much in the loss of its Veneration and Esteem; had any more Dexterous, found
that Generosity about them, as to have performed an act of so much Justice,
they had prevented this attempt of the Author, who writes not out of
affectation nor a busy humor. But it seems the wits are revolted, and have
taken employment under a Tyrannick, and prosperous vice: whilst those who are
best able to appear for so excellent a Subject, have deserted it, the
assistances of meaner Persons, though they may want the applauses of Success,
yet they lose not the Character of Kindness. And when others are strangly
employed in heaping Reproaches upon Marriage, and in ascribing disadvantages to
it, whilst they affront it with their new Wit, and their modish Vices, nothing
can appear more Just, then to vindicate it, by Recapitulateing those benefits
that it has produced in the world: it is a witness great enough of its
misfortunes, that it needs to be Harangued; since its practical Esteem and
Veneration, had 'till now preserved it from the want of Elogies: but when it is
reduced to that condition it is high time to erect it Monuments, whilst the
world is so fast forgetting its Reputation and its Grandeur. But whilst the
Author has attempted this, he must say in his own Justification, that he has
only interessed himself in the Subject, without reflecting upon any that have
procured it injuries: and indeed every Writer, should proclaim like the Roman,
Pacem cum Hominibus, Bellum cum vitiis. It Is far from his humor to show a
disrespect of that nature to any Person, and as far from his belief, that the
way to reclaim others, were to expose them by severe Reflections. they will do
him an injustice who think so of him; and equally traduce him, who should take
his taxing the Crimes of some, for a Censure on the whole Community: he only
designs to show the vanity and the fault of those who becoming enamoured on a
fatal humor, must yet make their addresses to it in so strange a manner, as
to impose it on the belief and practices of others; and in ascribing the
concurrence of the whole Town to the efforts of a private Humor. We are well
assured, that those vices have found impregnable more Persons then they can
pretend to have Conquered. Though at the same time, since all Vice is
progressive, and especially when it is pusht on, by so strange a confidence and
affectation, it is but necessary to fix some Accusations on that Practice,
whose noise and daring temper, may in time, make more considerable devastations
in the possessions of that Virtue, which yet is left secure and uncorrupted.
And the Author designs this Declaration not only as an excuse for the
following Paper, but also as a Justification of what he has formerly written,
in which he finds himself censured as taxing the whole Town with those
blemishes, which he only affixed to the affected and imposing humor; though he
can esteem that reproach as no other then an Evasion and an Artifice in the
faulty, since those whose innocence is assured, never concern themselves in any
Reflections which belong not to them.

-- Thus far I had written, when I received an Answer to my Remarques; but it
was neither with Trouble nor Surprise; since I very well know, that it is
impossible for the most modest Adversary to defend himself from the present
briskness of the Town wit: which spares neither a Friend nor an Enemy: the
trade of Poetry and Raillery [must] go on, or else all the Town wit [must] be
starved. I received no disorder in the least from any thing in his Book; only
his Preface put me into a little heat, in which I [must] tell him, that amongst
all the bad Company he beleives I have kept, I yet never met with any thing so
disingenuous and ill-bred as his odious Epistle: and I can assure him, that I
have given the World greater proofs then himself of contrary Impressions: but
the anger is over, and I am his most Humble Servant; and though he beleives me
to be a Pedant, a Tutor, a Secretary, and Squire Clodpate. I will yet imagine
him to be a great Wit, a Gentleman, and if he pleases a Person of Quality: for
I always find it more easy, as well as more civil, to give Elogies, rather
then reviling: as for his design, it was brave, and not at all Dangerous; for
what could he do less, when he was perpetually egged on by a fair Lady who was
resolved not to admit of his Courtships, except he appeared prodigiously
Ingenious, as he is otherwise sweetly accomplished: she appearing of a Capricio,
like that Princess, who would have refused for her Gallant, the handsomest man
in Europe, if he had not been also at the same time, the greatest wit of the
Conclave. I congratulate you Madam, in the choice you have made, of a Servant;
he has acquitted himself well of your Lady-ships Commands; and I hope, when you
have any others, you will not bestow them else where: but yet if at any time,
you should request him to write your Life, let me beseech you, to forbid him to
put an Epistle before it, for he has the worst faculty that way, of any
Gentleman I know All that I shall say to his Book; is, that it is throughout
one great mistake; and that first, in taking those Reflections to be intended
for all the Town, which were only directed to a very few Persons. And then to
affirm that the words of Age, Nation, Town, Societies, etc. were General, since
it is so plainly to be seen, by the Censure, and the Character, that none but a
fool would have treated them in that manner: an Age, a Nation, a Town, in
which are so much Learning, Bravery, and Virtue; and particularly, those
Societies that are by all the world honored and revered, for those endowments
the Gentleman has mentioned in them. All that I prosecuted was a vain and
enterprizing humor, which having (upon occasions apparent) found amongst some
of the Wits; I after followed where it had took refuge in graver Communities,
the former received the research, like those who are justly esteemed the
greatest Wits of our Nation: but amongst the latter, it met with the Haloo, and
the (...) for the Country: this it is to have any thing to do with those
Gentlemen, for my part I disclaim them, and shall hereafter be as unwilling to
Note their Imperfections, as I have ever been to admire their sort of Virtue.
Another great mistake is, that I designed Sir, T. L. for a Hero: what was
intended in him, was only to show that a Gentleman who had arrived at all the
perfections of a good Education, might live more prudently on his Estate in the
Country, then to spend it in the Town, only on women, Plays, Garniture, and
Fricacies: and this Gentleman knows (who must be a man of the Law by his
frequent Quotations.) That his Majesty's Father of Glorious Memory, Commanded
by Proclamation, all Country Gentlemen to reside on their Estates, and not to
come to the Town, to Hero-fie in eating of Ragoo's, and Fricacies: and in
short, next to those whose affairs lie in it, it is properly a place for
younger Brothers, who may raise their Fortunes, by Arms, Letters, or
Conversations. I think I have in these few lines, answered all that the
Gentleman has Objected. There is only a great deal of Divertisment, Reviling,
hard Words if not Pedantry too, behind: for which I shall say in the Gentleman's
behalf, that as for the former, he endeavored to imitate the present mode of
Writing, and he does excellently well for a beginner, and he may easily be
excused if he has reached but few of those perfections required in that
critical Style: and as for the latter, having to do with a Pedant, and a
Tutor, he could not but forget that Civility and Respect, which without doubt,
is (otherwise) natural to him: and he thought it needless, to use any of the
Laws (which he found not in his study) of Writeing-Mascarade; since he thought
himself not at all obliged to show any respect to one in a Vizzard. But I
resolve, for my own part, to be more careful, and wish heartily his friendship
and reconcilement; and if the Gentleman, who has succeeded so well in Letters,
should also make his applycations to Arms, if Sir, T. L. and his Tutor, meet
him in the spring, on board his Majesty's Fleet. I know that Person, will
endeavor a friendship betwixt this worthy Gentleman, and his Mothers
Secretary: but I would not willingly defer it so long; but rather perfect now
so Important an affair. Come Sir, you are out of humor; I wish we might enjoy
you a little in our Country; where you should have good entertainment, though
you might not meet Astraea there, (whose allusion you so unkindly mistook) my
Lady will treat you with extraordinary Magnificence, and her Secretary shall
serve you with great officiousness: you shall Drink, Hunt, Hawke, Course, nay
you shall stay on Sunday, and hear our Parson, who is an honest Gentleman,
though possible he cannot Preach so Divinly as Maximin. I have now done with
the Gentleman. I have only a word to say to the Town, and particularly the
vindictive Ladies; as for any thing in the Remarques, I do affirm on the
reputation (with my Answerers good leave I would say it) of a Gentleman, that I
never intended it in the least, to impair the reputation of excellent Persons;
or the Conversations of the Town: and I hope no other will be guilty of so
unkind a mistake, as to think I meant Age, Nation, and Town, any otherwise,
then as they are frequently applied to particular humors: Nay I will say
further to prevent any other Essays; that the Remarques was in a manner
Printed against my desire, (though I will not accuse a Gentleman who had eat,
and drank, and slept in an Inns of Court.) And besides, that there are some
things in it which were not my own. I know there is no Person of Justice and
good Nature, but will be satisfied with this Apology: and as for others, I am
wholly careless of their Censure.

To Antonia.
NOthing is more just then the Dedicating this following Paper to you: neither
could any consideration oblige me to forbear it: and even whilst it seeks a
shade, it yet desires so illustrious a patronage. What ever censure it receives
in the world, will soon be forgot in the kindness you will show it; and the
favor of so excellent a Person, will sufficiently reinforce it against all the
assaults of custom and prejudice. And in the privacies where we now are, I may
assume the liberty to say, we are the votaries of the neglected Theme; and
acknowledge the Divinity of that Altar which the Irreligion of the Age has
abandoned: all our regret is the difficulty we have found in making that
sacrifice, which is now esteemed the degenerate Devotion of the World. Though
Virtue has lost its Train, yet it receives the most obsequious respect from
us; and it has not been our hearts but our conditions, that have refused its
conduct in the track of Ages. We are not yet become Atheists to a Hymen, nor
deserters of a fidelity which is laden with reproaches: Neither do we recount
these things in a shade, because we blush to avow them in the Sun beams. No
Antonia, we have deposited those resolutions in faithful assurances, which we
would at any time be willing to lay out for so fair a purchase: in which also
we have preserved our Virtue, like snow, that is in cold houses saved from the
Estive seasons of a rageing vice: the age has no propitious sentiments from us,
nor do we value the reproach of being singular in our virtue, the ancient
Idea's, though the world may pretend they are faded, are yet more charming to
us, then the gayness of their present Images: All their Paint and
imbellishments cannot enamour us on these; nor has the dirt they have flung
upon the former, prevented us from admiring an unequalled beauty in them. We
have given them the Ascendant of our souls; and they have fashioned there that
fidelity and justice, which will be for ever the ornament of our breasts:
neither do those qualities appear less fair and agreeable to us, whilst their
habilements are out of mode. Now the popular fury and practice has proscribed a
virtuous love, it receives a protection in our hearts; and we can boast, that
it shall never be refined but with our lives: we are sorry to give it no larger
a Territory; and we would gladly lead it farther into the affairs of our lives:
we are not stopped in th^se designs by the Platonic precaution, nor a fear to
try our Idaeas by action: we have took other measures of a just and happy life:
and prefer the example of generous Ages, before the fictions of Romance: it is
not because we love their beautiful wanderings, that we are kept in a
perplexing Labyrinth, and know not how to come at what we love; Since it is not
our humors, but our affairs, conceal the Clue. In the mean time, our
inclinations and our wishes will appear a justice to that design; and a respect
to the memory of our Fathers: Nay, we rather see our selves deprived of some of
the felicities, then cut off from the generuos interests of that State: we have
erected votive Altars to Hymen; and pay the more disinterested part of the
Devotion: our Piety has nothing in it of Mercenary, whilst the mind is the only
Devote. We have surpassed the Poetic Chymaera 's, by a truth that has out done
their Fables; and yet that passion which has equaled their flights, shall ever
keep it self above those loathsome places where they rest their Geninius: it is
not grown giddy by the height; nor will its flight ever become the Paecipice of
its ruin. No Antonia, we have always maintained the limits of Fidelity, and
Justice; nor can we ever allow our love that fatal Sovereignty, as to be above
the Laws of our Virtue. We have seen too much of their misfortune, who assist a
Tyrannick Passion; whilst they unhappily help it to acquire, a Felicity and
Grandeur, to which it mounts on the ruins of their Repose and Honor: in our
united hearts our Love has room enough to reign; and the management of those
just affairs will allow it no leisure for Ambition. I have entertained you
Antonia, in a manner unusual: but it cannot appear unhandsome to the Age, since
it is but to imitate their divertisments in Mascarade. And to the rest, it will
only show a covetousness like to theirs, who hoarded under ground their
Treasures; esteeming that to be yet their Wealth, which they did not dare to
own. And we have moreover, exceeded their felicity; who have on wounded Trees,
or Marble, saught an immortality for their Love: since we have now committed
ours to more perpetual abiding Letters; and though we have set it in a shade,
and a Character unknown, yet we will expect that propitious time, that shall
both reveal, and interpret it.

REFLECTIONS ON Marriage, etc.
I Did not think* that when we entertained our selves with the little Modern
Philosopher, you would after have demanded those things from me in earnest,
which were then our divertisment: but since you have been so inclined, I obey
you readily, both, as I should blush to refuse any satisfaction to a Person who
has so grandly obliged me; and also, as I have a repugnance to quit my declared
opinions. But, I hope you consider, that you desire these things from a young
man, who is incapable of doing right to so great, and so important a Subject;
and one, who besides, can furnish the discourse with no experiences of his own;
and moreover, the distresses of that Theme, require the assistances of the most
dext'rous and generous Pen, whilst it lies bleeding in the arms of a barbarous
Age; who perfectly forgetting the respect it has received from all Generations;
and the brave assistances it gives to humane nature; together with the
particular obligations it has laid on themselves, are upon the point of
finnishing its being in the world, without the least ceremony or show of
regret. Such a Prospect, requires the assistances of the noblest Pen, which can
do no less then purchase to the owner the immortal fame of a Hero; since
Marriage is not now assaulted from the Ambushes of Cloisters; nor from a
lustful Friar; But by the fairest pretenders to generosity and nobleness, whose
Protection have in all Ages been sought by those distressed Interests, which
have fled from the fury of Pedants. Whilst I thus represent to you the
importance of this Action, I show you my inability to do it. But, since it is
for the satisfaction of a Friend, I think your Ingenuity and candor are too
great, to expect a sufficiency from a man he has not about him. Neither, can I
believe, that you want any Motives to assist you in your just resolutions; that
condition appearing too lovely in it self, to want the imbellishments of
Eloquence: besides the glories of the object you caress, whose perfections and
accomplishments are so great, as hardly to be equalled within the compass of
our Isle. And were there not as much of pride as inclination in the present
humors, we might very well question whether the most hardy of our Gallants,
did they every day converss with those beautiful endowments which She possesses
would not willingly despise the glory of contemning Marriage for such an
enjoyment, and even be contented to be virtuous, rather then not be happy: this
we have reason to believe would be their resolution, were they not strictly
tied up to the high Rules of their Ambition and Glory; starving their
judgments, whilst they feed their pride and affectation. Your design wants
none of the following Arguments to justify it, nor to keep your reason from
submitting to the fantastical definitions of the self-conceited Malmsbury
Philosopher. And I must reminde you of one thing more; which is, that as in
Pictures, so in such considerable draughts of humane Interests and Affairs,
there must still be wanting those graces and that lovelyness, which no
Description nor Account can reach; it being impossible for the glorious life to
be rivalled by the sweetest Paint; and we can only lay the colors, and a
simetry of parts, whilst the beauty and the charm are above the reach of Pens.
It will yet be necessary, to keep your thoughts together, to pursue a Method,
and to decline the hunting-mode of writing now in use, of running Remarques
here and there, as the fancy of the Author leads him: Marriage is our Theme;
and the justness, necessity, and advantages of it, the Subjects to be inquired
into. It is now the opinion of those which will pretend to understand most,
That the world has been fooled in nothing more, then in an idle and a tame
submitting to the fetters of Marriage, that some one, unknown to them, did most
injuriously inslave so many Generations with this dull institution; which did
upon that account, lose the freedom and the vigor of generous actions, and
miscarried in those Essays, that would have showed a greater bravery and glory
of Mind. All Ages being left such imperfect draughts of Haeroick virtue,
because the Genius was captived that drew them, which if it had known a just
liberty, former Generations would have been as perfect as the present is like
to appear. They think that if such a company of Hero's, had been born into
these parts of the world, who had been free of this Clog, Europe had never sat
so long slumbring with its Arms a cross, whilst the Turk plundered it of its
beautiful Provinces; but that its Moons had been Eclipsed by those, who with
the quickness of Caesar, had ranged the numerous Regions of the East; carrying
their victories so far upon the Traverse till they had found no day light to
conquor by: but the World has wanted these Heroic flights, whilst it has been
the impediments of Wedlock, that made it sit so long ingloriously still* and to
paint the Scenes of its adventures with so much imperfection and dullness. But
when we shall find that the world has received not greater benefits by the
Idolaters of Liberty, then from the votaryes of Wedlock; and when it will
appear that nothing is more just to mankind then that condition, we shall be
able to return so criminable a Charge. Those Ages defind more prudently, and
with greater moderation, who made not bravery of mind a Knight errant humor,
submitting to all the risques of Fancy and Appetite; the world has suffered by
nothing more then in this useless noise, nor could there have been an act of
greater prudence, then to put the shackles on this mad and wild Liberty, which
would more then any other thing, have disordered humane Affairs. True nobleness
and glory, is regular and managed; and not like that Goddess born on the brain:
an infinite number of benefits and public kindnesses, sat long in Counsel
how to define it; nor have they passed its Character without many correctings
and emendations; they have drawn together different perfections; and then tried
them all (like Emmas Purgation) by the vigor of humane affairs, our
Ancestors conferred not their favors so readily, nor did they admit those
into the family of Hero's, who were considerable only, for a peculiar wildness
and frenzy of mind: the present managers of Genius's, may try their offspring
by their Poetic fire, but they ought not to do that injustice to their
Fathers, as to affirm they adored no other light. They have introduced
Chymaeras then, and have exploded excellent Realities, who have dislodged
braveries of Mind from the circles of Marriage; and with them they have robbed
the world of great advantages; of which I shall give you a prospect in this
following Paper. To oblige mankind, by an obligation sacred, and unaltered, to
the affairs and interests of one Love, was an act of that prudence and wisdom
against which none can justly dispute: They could with no equity, have raised a
Title to more; since the Law of nature proclaims that [Loving of one should be
for one enough] and that Sex must have been left in a condition wholly base and
mercenary, to have took the pay of every Amor; they would have set up a
Tyranny in Love, which must have been the most cruel and insupportable of all
others, because exercised on the best interests of Life. Marriage puts the
world into Discipline, and a happy government; incloseing the common enjoyment,
that none might lay claim to the portion of an other: had beauty, and the
possession of that Sex, been left a prey to the Conqueror, and subject to be
borne away by the most forceible courtships, mankind must have ever dwelt
jealous of each other, proclaiming an enmity against all the World; and have
judged their power alone, a sufficient defense: but by the fore of matrimonial
Laws, and the allotments made us from above, we live in quiet and security with
each other, who must else have stood perpetually on our guard, and secured what
we had loved from the wandering Lusts of others, the world must have been
perpetually involved in Quarrels; since Love is more restless, and more
impatient then Ambition: and whilst a charming object had many claimers, she
must at last have yielded to the Conqueror; and not have gratified the passion
of the most deserving, but the most happy, being without the exercise of that
Empire which Halcion Laws had gave her, that must have been wholly lost amidst
the animosities of Rivals. Or if mankind had been wearyed into a more Friendly
way of living, and yielded that to indifference, which they pretend would have
been the effect of Saciety: yet still the world must have lost its Glory to
preserve its Peace: and like those despised Regions, who are therefore quiet
because they bannish all things that would invite a Conquest. The use of
excellent things must have been laid aside, and the World must have practiced
the wisdom of a prudent Consort, who disbands her beauties to cure the
jealousies of a Husband. And as the great Cato urged the preserving of
Carthage, to keep up the vigor of the Roman virtue which would languish when
it had nothing to emulate; so such an indifference, must have yielded up all
things of a generous concernment. Most actions of bravery and glory, receive a
motive and original from without; and as we have seen, that all Ages have
applied themselves to those things that procured the esteem and the reward,
Virtue presently fading, when it wants the Sunshine of applause and emulation,
and the showers of recompense: so no consideration of particular concernments
in Love, and the studdy of appearing grateful and accepted, had brought a
greater dullness on the world, then a present reflection can readily discover,
neither shall we affirm a thing at all unjust, to say, that the world owes not
inconsiderable benefits to a virtuous Love; and that, not so much as it has
brought upon its bosom so many Hero's, but also, as it made vigorous and
strong the beginning of that virtue, which had possible sat down wearied with
small acquirements, had it not been supported by a generous passion: a truth
that has found more excellent experiments, then what are met with in foolish
Romances. And whilst thus the excesses, and the indifference had done the world
equal prejudices, what could be more propitious to it, then the moderation and
the middle way of Marriage? it removes on one hand what is violent, furious and
Rapacious, and overcomes on the other a degenerate indifference and sloth: and
as it is not our inclinations but their irregularity that makes our Crime, so
every thing is happy in its moderation: thus the assistances of fire to the
occasions of life are very happy and necessary, it is only dreadful when it
grows unruly; we sail with pleasure on that Ocean, and trace its yiedling
bosom with remotest wealth, from which yet we fear an inundation. So Love
preserved in happy bounds by the institutions of Marriage; its excellencies and
advantages remain to the world, its childish and troublesome qualities are cut
off by Laws: ^its made tame and gentle, which would else have devoured the
fairest concernments of the Universe: should the world be without the society
of this governed Passion, it might want a heat to vigourate, and render
serviceable all its parts, which must else have submitted to dull
languishments, nothing then appears more just then Marriage, since the love it
cuts off and regulates, the world could not have borne; and the love it manages
it cannot spare, without parting with the foundation of its best Affairs:
neither have any appeared dissatisfied with this conduct, but only the Bravo's,
and Furioso's of Ages, who think that the satisfying of an ungoverned appetite,
is more important, then the being kind and oblieging to common nature; whilst
only such politiques as their own, can make it be thought expedient to destroy
the good of the whole, for the unreasonable satisfaction of some in particular.
The highest wisdom took the prospect of all the Species, and established what
was the benefit and the good of all; and not what might please the humor of
some individuals, who starting up in particular Generations, and making a noise
amongst those with whom they lived, could yet with no Justice, reproach the
prudence that governed their Fathers; with which they are displeased, through
the capriciousness of their own folly, and not the defect of the precept; which
like Beds and Couches, are not to be accused, because they are uneasy to the
Sick and distempered. We have found how prejudicial the small experiment they
have made of their new way, has been to the world; they have practiced on it
but a little while, but yet, like bold Empericks, they have so altered and
spoiled its constitution, that a long course of better experiments will hardly
recover it; they have boasted of their Skill and Dexterity, but those
inconveniences that they pretended suddenly to remove, they have opened into
an impetuous torrent of peccant Humors; and had not former times who submitted
to the interests of Marriage, done more then they for the prosperity and good
of the world, it had possible known scantier Allowances of health and
tranquillity: had the Genius of the Universs been fashioned by them, we might
hardly have seen produced all those monuments of Virtue, Glory and Nobleness,
which now are extant in those who are like to do nothing but satisfy their
humor and appetite, and quarrel with those things they cannot mind: and the
world ought to look upon them as no other, but such who in Countries lying low,
let in the Sea upon them, to drown all the possessions of greatest Value;
thinking such an extravagancy sufficiently recompensed, by having thereby an
opportunity, to row the small Pinaces of their fancyes, trimmed with the Flag
and Sail of their Poetry, over the buried magnificencies and honors of their
Fathers.

Marriage laid the foundation, and first principle of civil Society; it was a
Yoke for which the neck of innocence was not too soft and delicate; and a
condition governed by unerring virtue, had yet need of these allotments, as to
the advantages and improvements of Society. And that which Marriage
appropriated, was the first proclaiming of Mine and Thine; the Earth was
common* and the enjoyments of it had an undistinguished right, whilst the
concernments of the Bed were sacred and separate: and even in those natures,
the most ruined and decayed, there are yet the remains of this old
inclination, which show themselves in jealousies, and a desire to possess alone
the fancyed objects; and in all things else we can allow a sharer, but in the
interests of our Love: conquest, repine, and violence divided the portions of
the Earth, but nature separated Marriage; against which it is the highest crime
to complain of so just an institution, and of such equal allowances. That
condition through the Ages it has traveled* has often met with those
rudenesses and unkindnesses, as have made it suffer, and lost its respect, but
if mankind would reassume that obsequiousness and observance which it ought to
receive, we should find it again restored to all its former renown and
veneration: that Institution, like Power, owes its glory to the respect is paid
it, whilst every thing that is neglected, is by that scorn rendered cheap and
contemptible; and any disesteem which Marriage lies under, is not from the
inconveniences that are found in it, but only arises from the incivility of
those times that forbear to respect it: if some Persons would studdy to do it
Justice, we should find it again with the same votaryes about it, and not like
dethroned Monarchs, without its state and unattended. Some not generous as they
ought, have put affronts upon Marriage, and a desire of their reputations, have
produced in others the fellowship of their crime; scrupling not at all to share
in their Vices, so they might but participate of their glory: these are the
Factions bandying against Marriage, who loses the memory of their Fathers,
that minded nobler things, can think of nothing better then the most
disingenuous and dishonorable divertisments. But I believe, I have said enough
to vindicate the justness of Marriage; and there is that in every man's mind
that will assist the endeavor.

As the principle which continues nature, is of all things the most excellent
and generous, so that which makes the continuance happy and advantageous, must
not be contemptible: the seeds of being in other Creatures are as powerful, as
Lions and Tigers, who leave their young to inherit their quitted beings, and
the Deserts where they governed: The Stag communicates to his Offspring, his
swiftness, and a long life, but the Rational beings, are not only continued in
their kind, but in their use and glory by the discipline of Marriage: and it has
not only perpetuated Generations, and the variety of Ages, but conveyed along
with succession the pleasures and the interests of it; it has not only laid the
foundations of vast and puissant Empires, of lesser Signories and States; but
rendered them useful, civil, and excellent, it has given births to succesfull
and flourishing Arts; and not only fixed their constellations, but also pointed
the circles where they shed their Influence, it has managed the high-Mettle,
and feirceness of Wit, and made that easy to be governed, which might else
have proved too unruly for them that used it. To this we owe the original and
excellency of Learning, which has taught wisdom and civility to barbarous
Nations; whose wilder influence, like that of Comet, had pointed nothing but
ruin and disorders to the world, had it not rose in the circles of Marriage.
He was once rocked in the Cradle, whose Philosophy and Science, after traveled
to the confines of night and day; who riseing in the sphere of Marriage, shed a
quiet influence, over all that Land and Water knew. An indulgent Mother in her
lap, first bound the tender head of a famous Conqueror, who after wore the
Laurels of so* many victoryes, conveying with her milk and her caresses, a
sweetness that charmed the fury of his blood. Whilst Ambition, War, and
Distempers still emptyed the world, Marriage supplied it with other
inhabitants, who took up, through the track of the same Education, the affairs
and interests of their Fathers. When by the death of some excellent Person,
mankind have been deprived of great advantages and blessings, some others have
rose up, and equaled if not excelled the virtue of their Fathers. When
Countries have been widdowed and drooped over the loss of anindulgent Prince,
they have had restored in a successor, the freshness of their withered joys:
and the designs of a vast Empire, left in an imperfect draught, has been
finnished by the succeeding hand with all the beauties and imbellishments of
Power. An increasing Nation, living too straight in narrow Regions, have under
the conduct of some Hero, sought more commodious places, whoes generous
designs have been so far perfected by his successors, as to become one of
the fairest Empires of the world: and it has been found, that mingling Nations,
whose Lines have been perplexed with other communions, have never done any
thing whereby to be renowned: those places that have suffered incursions, where
they have not bravely distinguished and united their own blood, have presently
lost the sense and name of glory; which sacred title of blood, has been the
great motive to the most Heroic atcheivements; how did the world behold and
admire an invincible obstinacy in the resolutions of the Capuan, because he
could not betray the glory of a Roman: the respect and dignity of blood, is
preserved no where but in the Channels of Marriage; and the Child only reveres
the virtue of a just Parent. The sense of glory, not bounded in those sacred
Spheres, had wandered till it had spent its influence, and fallen shot upon
the Earth. Marriage holds the Idaea nearer, and inbellisht with that sense
which makes it sacred; Emulation sees it a far off, and viewes it only with
indifference, to which the inclination is but fortuitous and uncertain; but we
carry it in our bosom, when we have received it from our Fathers.

He that looks upon the four great Empires of the World, will find that they
flourished then with greatest bravery, when they were most virtuous, and that
their greatuess declined with their Morals: the Assyrian Empire was succeeded
by the Persian; which by its strange Luxuries and Effeminacies, became so easy,
a Prey to the arms of Alexander, and by effeminate Ages, are no where meant
the Uxorious, for they were ever manly and gallant, but those that gave
themselves up to the dishonours of that Sex, when the Persian Empire was
destroyed, he that put out its light, was too careless of preserving his own;
whose successes and a bold spirit, being all that was remarkable in him, found
not in his Riot and his Wantonness, the leisure to think of continuing what he
had acquired; by which means that Power, being left without an Heir, but what
was suspicious, and not respected by himself, the violence of its after
Administrators, soon laid it low; who shareing of their Masters temper, as they
did of his Successes, were only the pursuers of a mad glory; few of them
leaving a name in Power, who had yet the possibility to have done so much to
acquire it. After this rose the Roman, the best built, and supported, and of
the largest extent: spreading the wings of its dreadful Eagles over the face
of the whole Earth, being the noblest and most exact draught of Power, that the
memory of Man has known: its virtue was the most useful and generous; its Arts
the most pleasing and excellent, and its Spirit the most persevering and great,
that any times have shown, that were barely Virtuous, with its religious
Respect amongst other things, to Marriage, and by the gravity of its Morals, it
stood in a long succession, at once the terror and the delight of the world:
all Nations, either courting its friendship, or trembling at its Arms, but
when it was governed by such Princes as Nero, and Caligula, it yielded to those
Vices from which it could never recover it self; but by little and little
declined, till that greatness on which the world had waited, and which it had
served, laid it self down ingloriously in the languishing arms of Austria;
where it remains, with none of its mighty Qualities about it; and though in the
times of Silla, and Caesar, it suffered much by Ambition, yet it had then still
a remedy to equal the disease; and whilst its peace was boldly assaulted by one
Hero, it was as bravely defended by another: by which is easily raised a
confutation of their vain opinion, who maintain softness and effeminacy to be
the great security of a Nations Peace, since nothing can more discourage the
attempts of the most skillful virtue, against the p^ace of Kingdoms, then the
Reflections which it makes upon the vigor of those (...) qualities. So
Alexander despaired of Persia, whilst the Rhodian lived, neither has any Nation
assisted an Heroic perfection to its own loss, since though some of it may be
employed ungratefully against it, yet it always at the same time receives the
effects of the others acknowledgement.

If we should quit this great Ocean, we have traced, and take a view of all the
lesser Currents of dominion, that have run through every Age, we shall find
that Marriage was the Fountain from whence flowed that Virtue, which was
assisting and propitious to them. But we will leave that stream, and open a
prospect into the affairs of Learning, which as it has rose in times serious
and modest, so it did only receive respect and encouragement from those ages:
Philosophers governed Republiques in Greece, but they lost not only their
raputation, but their blood in the effeminate days of Nero. Sciences never
took birth but in grave and prudent times, whilst the scurrilous and wanton
wit, was ever esteemed in idle Ages. In those days, Poetry and the looseness
of the Theater, the debauches, and the excrements of Wit, were only valued and
admired; and they received Elogies and Laurels, who invented new ways of
Debauchment, or that could express themselves with the greatest smartness on
Letchery and Extravagance: Wit and Beauty, have ever shared one Fare in the
world; when they are happily espoused to noble and illustrious Subjects; or
else given up to prostitution and dishonor; neither have the lustful Ages of
the world dealt more barbarously with that blushing Sex, then with this virgin
quality: and in how many productions transmitted from several times, shall we
see the most excellent and vigorous fancyes, prostituted to the most base and
detested Subjects, which infelicity they received from those times in which
they lived, and they might have been more happy, had they conversed with nobler
Theams. Thus the reputation of Learning, and excellent Arts have fell and
declined for want of Estimation; whilst all applied themselves to those things
that procured the fame and applause, nothing is since the corruption of nature
so pernicious and extravagant as Wit; neither has any thing done the world
greater mischief then that quality: it has put Nations into flames, filled with
wounds the bosom of the Church; whether it has presided in Camps, managed
designs in Courts; or hatched errous in low-rooft- Cloisters: in all which
places, the world has felt the smart of its cruelty: it has sometimes ruined by
boisterous and bloody actions; at others by softness and flatteries: it has
wound it self into all Interests and Affairs; and when it is not permitted to
insult, to brave it, and to manage important concernments; it conceales it
self, by a peculiar subtilty and bashfulness, from whence unsuspected it ruins
and devours: but this quality, thus pernicious and unruly, becomes much more
sober and useful in the temperaments of Marriage. And that which they call the
dulling of the fancy, and the checking of the happy vigor, is but a casheiring
of that madness, which all Ages have been bound to curse. When the world was
busied in matrimonial Concernments, Learning opened it self in all the
flourishes of a happy Knowledge; spreading to Heaven its Branches, and through
Earth its Roots: the easy and effeminate Wit, was put out of countenance by
the gravity of that appearance, and submitted willingly to more excellent
affairs, to gain esteem and reputation. Some men might have the fame of greater
Learning, but the Oracle pronounced Socrates the wisest Man of Greece. And to
come nearer our to times, where shall we find in any ages, so much sottishness
and a dark ignorance, as in those, that first a^lowed the solitary lives of
Priests, in which they gave a Proof not of their continence, but their vices.
Those dareing men, who with their inhumane Decrees, controled the influences of
Nature; and could at their pleasure stem the Rapid Humidity: which dull
Subjects of their bold experiments, they deposited in Cloisters, those Stoves
(too many of them) of wretched Lusts; which by the practices of beastly Crimes,
appeared no other then the Jaques of the world. In those Ages the Sun of
Learning suddenly clapped in, and that duller day oppeared little better then a
night of knowing nothing; whilst the world seemed led by idle Phantasmes and
foolish Illusions; preferring dreams full of unprofitable Aenigma's, before
the sentiments of waking ages. Those who were not serious were mad and unruly,
those whose interests it was to appear solemn, were dull and blockish; as if
with the opinion, they had lost the learning of their Ancestors; and justly
were those times infatuated, that gave so great a wound to the noblest affairs
of Nature: neither could so bold an injunction have dared to appear in times
less dark and sooty. So that Learning seems only to have loved the society of
Uxorious and modest ages, and to have received increase and favor from them.

Marriage was moreover a model of the after governments of the World: the
dominion of a Parent in his Family, is a true representation of the government
of a just Prince, who is the father of his Country: men in this mirror might
have seen the agreeableness of Power and Empire; and with better inclinations
might become obedient to an universal head, whilst they plainly could perceive
the advantages of order and subjection in particular Families: had there been
no distinction in Societies, in which by the respect and obedience paid to some
Persons, the advantages of Rule might be approved, men would never have been
willing to have parted with the most extravagant parts of their Liberty, but
all desires of Sovereignty would have been opposed as Injustice and Tyranny;
but by Marriage, and the issue of the Bed, men had within themselves a Lordship
and Dominion, and the advantages of that evidently appearing, the intention of
some excellent Person, and his desires to protect Countries and Provinces, and
to be their universal Head and Parent, was not received with that aversion, as
they must have been, had they wanted those advantageous Presidents: and I know
not how to believe, that all the Dominions of the Earth were founded in
absolute Tyranny: and that they had at first no design of the good of Nations,
which was accidental, and found necessary for the security and quiet of Power;
since it is impossible for any Country to enjoy Peace, Riches, or Profit,
without the superiority of some or other. Marriage drew the Idaea of Power, and
imbellished it with those advantages that made it more pleasant to mankind,
then had it been the rough draught of command, laid only in black and bloody
Colors: with what abhorrance had they took the prospect of Dominion, if they
had only seen it designed by ambition, with all the furies of Death and
Battles; with a sullen and imperious look, having nothing about it propitious
and affable, but ravenous and injurious: but in the frame of Wedlock, it
appears friendly and obligeing, reconcileing the thoughts of subjection, whilst
it flourishes in all the sweetness of security and profit. It represents to us,
that the thoughtfulness and the cares of Rule, are not in themselves so
excellent as the repose and pleasures of obedience, and he which injoyes his
benefits secured to him, has rather what he should acknowledge with gratitude,
then emulate in the industry and cares of his Governor; who though he wears
more splendid Titles, yet his watchings and his thoughtfulness, cover with
paleness the tempting beauties of the other; none would desire to rule, that
see the Luxuries of Power cut off by Laws, and presidid over by the wakeing
designs for the common good: and like the Children of a Family, they willingly
allow the Parent his command, whilst they receive a maintenance and protection.
In shor^, it affords to mankind a convincing Proof, that command and
subjection are dispositions that may dwell together with great friendlyness and
advantage; and that the world could not tell how to be without their mingling
Interests; except not only all respect and decorum was thrown out of it, but
also, every thing of profit and repose, and the thirst of all command took
place.

Neither has Marriage been less propitious to Kingdoms in particular, then to
the whole world in General. Whilst it brought in the grant foundation of their
peace and quiet. For this (yet with no injury) fixes a man to a settlement, and
a contented condition of living, who if he should obey the force of no other
arguments, yet the just consideration of his Family and Relations. would
dispose him to peace and subjection: many men are sometimes tempted to be the
instruments of fatal disorders to a Nation; whilst they have nothing to suffer
but themselves in the calamities of ill success: few are so brutish, as to have
no regard to the welfare of those they love; who would by Treason cut from his
Children a brave Estate, and leave them nothing but Poverty and the reproaches
of his Crime to inherit: and we find that those who have ye^ been misled to
these actions, did dye with no thoughts more tender about them, then what were
took from the calamities of their Children; and though some have broke through
all these considerations and have neglected their dearest interests, yet that
dos not disprove the force they usually have upon our minds: it is providing for
those that come after us, which makes us industrious, and sometimes peaceable
and virtuous too; what man would not be shook, and feel some remorse in his
defignes and projects of Ruin, that has a loving Wife leaning on his bosom,
and innocent Children hanging about his knees; but he that lives alone, what
design soever he drives at, he receives none of these Regrets and Remorses, but
setting all things in himself, cries, let the world stand and fall with me, and
we have good reason to believe, that the unmarried lives of the Romish Priests,
have been the causes of great calamities and disorders in Kingdoms, who are
entertained in all Cabals of that nature, like the Jews in the Turkish
Councels, for the peculiar aversion which they bear to the tranquillity of
Nations. Men who have too much leisure, and too little dependence on a common
interest, will freely play away their own share in any Kingdom, by its ruin,
whilst there are so many Cloisters in other places to protect and receive them:
which appear the black Treasuries of fatal Events their Guardians and Superiors
flinging about those kindled Firebrarnds, to inflame the world, who if they had
a Family, and an interest settled to mind, would with less facility be disposed
to act the Papal designs; and would take a great deal less pleasure in the
disorders of Christendom. Marriage makes men look upon the peace and
prosperity of the world with more concernment and delight* then those do who
care only for themselves and their present satisfaction: Nay, there is a
peculiar wandering humor, and a disposition of unrest in the single life; and
whilst the thoughts have no certain aim to which to direct them, they are ever
feeting and unconstant: and the wo^ld from shaded Cloisters, has seen emitted
the most unquiet and restless Principles, whilst men dwelling in a perpetual
tranquillity themselves, knew not how else to employ their leisure, cursed from
above, as lazy and unworthy, but by intangling and perplexing the affairs of
the Earth: from these disguized men, have Empires felt Convulsions and doleful
Changes, which like fire disguized in Snow, insensible destroyed their peace;
whilst the veneration of their dissembled Sanctity protected them from the
suspicion of such devouring Principles. Marriage made men intent on the
business of a Family, and endeavor to themselves that tranquillity and repose
which a just Government affords them; because they may by those advantages
enjoy the contentments and the interests of their families. But the single
life, is usually inclined to innovations and shiftings of Power; because that
variety whilst it pleases, it also injures none of those concernments bound up
in a single Person: they may defend themselves from the wound aimed at a
solitary breast, who could not so well protect the bosom of many; which under
the conduct of a just care, and affection, would partake of an equal
tenderness. Whilst War desplayes its bloody Enfignes to trembling Regions,
whilst it covers with the Menaces of many deaths the bosom of a Nation, what
tragique Scenes are presented to the tender and affectionate, who whilst they
are immortal in their own resolutions, yet dye often for their relations in
cruel apprehensions; and dread the roling Torrent, as bringing so unusual and
so unkind a fate, in the losing of more lives then one; whilst they endure a
death, must be survived by sense. And for the other advantages of Power, which
are union of minds the Uxorious man opposes errors with the greatest force,
and extravagancies (those blandishing and soft destroyers of Nations) with a
passionate industry, because though he may himself withstand the assault, yet
he fears their prevalency on those he loves; those cruel opinions, that have
set Nations on flames, and those Cyrcean vices that have charmed and devoured,
have been by none so resolutely opposed, as by him who protects a Family from
all their assaults.

It afforded moreover to mankind, the honor and delight of a hopeful Issue:
nothing was esteemed of old, more an honor then many Children, the issue of a
lawful Bed: the promising youth of a Child, returns a reputation to the
Father; and many men had been forgotten in the Histories of Ages, had they not
been the Parents of Children, who were famous; every Parent receives an honor
from the Virtues, and the celebrated qualities of his offspring; it is a
reputation to have been the root that bare those Flowers, whose fairness and
sweetness were pleasant to the whole World: and if one Age like an unkind
spring has but weakly assisted the births of a Family, possible the next, has
recompensed the defect by a double propitiousness; causing that Race to be
renowned in the following Generations, that was not valued in the former,
whilst all those Honors and Applauses, are not bestowed without a just
Reflection on the Parent that bare them: neither is the delight any thing
inferior, if the excellent endowments of a Stranger are pleasing to us, (as
they doubtless are to every ingenious mind) what must be the accomplishments of
them, whom we have brought into the world our selves? to be the Parents of
those that may prove succesfull instruments for the good of Mankind, are
blessings and contentments, not to be equalled by little things: and the
actions of many men that have lived in the world, would have none of the
Reputation they have yet acquired, if it had not been for the consideration of
their Families: next to those interests which we owe above, nothing is so
noble, so good, and so commendable, as to prosecute in ways of Justice and
Honor, the interests of our Family: in the pursuit of which has also been
raised, all or most of the glorious Triumphs of virtue, Courage and Industry
that the world has known; at least they have on that account received a more
excellent and valued name then any other Interests could have given them; and
who only for the flashes of a short fame, would with the hazard of his own
life, have altered the government of Kingdoms, have added remote as well as
neighboring Provinces to the tribute of his Throne; who would have exposed
himself to the various accidents of the Deep, and have sought unknown Treasures
in Countries barbarous unconquered and untraversed, if he had not hoped to have
left them as the Patrimony of his Family? and thus on Deathbeds, have great,
as well as serious men, left such excellent instructions to their Children of
keeping up the honor and reputation of their Names, as if the interest they
should take in it remained beyond the Grave: Agrippina doted so much on the
Imperial dignity of her Son Nero, as to cry out, Occidat modo imperet: let Me
Dye so He may Reign. Neither have those who by rashness and ambition, fell into
calamity, received more mournful apprehensions, then what they took from a
reflection on their Families. And nothing is more remarkable, then that Tragedy,
which the wretched Gamester acted on himself; to which he was transported by
the torment of such Reflections. Who sees not with an agreeable pleasure, his
name spread and flourish in a virtuous offspring, errected there by living
Monuments to serve the immortality of Ages, whilst others have vainly contrived
it, in actions of their valor; or in magnificent Graves: the first slumbering
in the imbellishments of History, where it is only admired; the other is
sometimes resorted to by the curious Wanderer, who observes the workmanship
without appearing concerned for the shaded Ashes: the noble Greek, who wanting
Issue, was forced to adopt his Victories, to perpetuate his Name, knew well
enough, that they were a barren and distressed offspring, and which must be
forced to live on the benevolence of Pedants, and the charity of Ages: whilst a
Son might have maintained through succession, that glory in the Sunshine of
generous actions, which was forced to retire to a shade. Neither do they urge
any thing important, who object the miscarriage of some men's Issue, since that
is a precaution not at all allowed in the concernments of the world: and never
to attempt for fear of a miscarriage, is a distrust only prevalent with the
ignoble: if at any time the glory of a Race may be under a cloud for one
Generation, it may yet in the next shine out with a charming luster and
brightness. That Parent is just and wise, who leaves the Principle, and
Providence to fashion the increase; and he takes the conduct from a better
hand, who is unreasonably fearful of the Events to come: neither would any
truly studious of the interests of Nature, and the advantages of an offspring,
impede both, by such vain fears. Who neglects the rich Voyages of the Indias,
because some have suffered Ship-wrackes? neither do any decline to reap Laurels
in the Field, because they grow with Cypress. To be guided by the present just
and pleasing inclination, and to leave the success to the conduct above us, is
the only management can give contentment and pleasure to mortal men. Children
are the most excellent way of pertuateing our memory, and to afford us the
delight of seeing our selves preserved from a sudden forgetful, and we may
well submit to the satisfaction of such thoughts, without troubling our selves
with future miscarriages.

Marriage does also perpetuate the memory and dignity of virtue. It is true it
sometimes happens that a Son is not only unlike his Father, but so different, as
to be a shame and reproach to his memory; but yet usually, the great qualities
of the Parent live in the Children, having the advantages of their examples and
instructions; and at least, if their virtue is much the weaker, yet supported
by the Fathers memory, it becomes strangely useful beloved and respected in
the world: the Children of some Men, who have been the Authors of great
benefits and good offices to Kingdoms, have served many happy occasions in the
world, who yet have had no great Merit of their own to boast off: nothing is so
much idolized, nor respected by the generality of People as a mighty Name; and
a virtue possible in it self much the greater, found in a Person not famous,
cannot yet do those things which the bare reputation of some others is able to
perform: In the Civil Wars of France, the authority of a Prince of the Blood,
could easily hush those commotions, and produce that obedience to Discipline,
which all the courage, arts and persuasions of inferior Captains could never
do. He that erects triumphs of Glory and Honor, does not only inshrine himself
where he is adored, but sets his Posterity in a sacred place: and with his only
Name, appeases the mutinyes of Armies, presides in Courts, and keeps the
affairs of the world in order. How had the world suffered, if a Person, who by
many generous actions became the darling of Mankind, neglecting to transmit a
Copy, from so beloved and glorious an Original, had set at once, in his Being,
and his Race. In ancient Wars, Infants have been carried to encourage Battles,
thereby, with their unactive blood strangly animateing the veins of others. And
it has moreover, been found to work much upon the disposition of humane nature,
a kind of gallant affection, for the memory of some glorious Person, left to
the guidance of a tender hand: such Efforts served the Race of the African, and
the Gothic Hero: procuring to the world this, believe and benefit together,
that he which leaves his virtue an Orphan, may have erected for it, the
Hospitals of stately Tombs, and the Panegyricks of History; but he that would
have it lasting and useful, as well as admired must leave it to his Issue,
where in the active Torrent of generous performances, it may accumulate, the
same glory and esteem it found in the days of an Ancestour, to be only admired
is a barren advantage, to be useful and to be beloved, is what the truly noble
rather covet: which is found in the virtues and good offices of our Race.

Marriage did also enlarge the Sphere, and establish occasions of practical
Virtue. He that is married has more campass, and a larger field of Action: he
usually procures more benefits to the world, at least more substantial and
better grounded; he that is alone lives to this age, but he that is married (by
the force of embraces causes) lives to those Generations which stand next, the
worlds last Calenture and burning fit. Pompey did not only fight himself for
the Liberty of Rome, 'till he was its greatest and mighty Sacrifice, but left
also those gallant Sons, who bravely endeavored to revive it when faint and
dying. The practical virtues that belong to this life, as they are more, so
they are more considerable in the married State; Speculation how ever pleasing
to some tempers, yet if it be not altogether Divine, is a thing of little
advantage; especially to the world, and that is the measure of every excellent
quality, the benefit of the general world: infinite thinking, that designs no
other advantage but the private satisfaction of him that is busied in it, is
but an ingenious sort of idleness; and moreover, the mischief the world has
received by those strange opinions, invented by men who enjoyed a perpetual
Vacation from affairs, remain too great a reproach of idle Speculation: the
thoughts of men are perpetually working, and wanting the entertainments of good
and useful objects, pursue pleasant and agreeable Idaeas, that were never yet
altered by action; and which are equally unprofitable to themselves and others.
But he that has the interests of a Family, to mind, and more substantial
concernments then a name, which like the Camelion, lives on Air, bounds with
those happy limits the extravagancies of his fancy. And the things he has to
manage, consist in most particulars of the best virtue, and the most practical
advantages that are found in humane Society. How many glorious actions, and
instances of bravery of mind, have took their Original from the calamities of a
Parent, or the distresses of a Child; and without doubt, the world had wanted
the greatest part of its illustrious Presidents of virtue, had not the
affections and tendernesses of these Relations, been the Motives and powerful
Inducements to them: many indeed, (but unjustly) cry out of Marriage, as a
condition of care and perplexities, and celebrate single living, for its
freedom and repose: but first, let us ask them, who ever found in a mortal
State, that tranquillity they have pretended to admire: perplexities and
troubles have as well invaded the shades of the most quiet Recesses as the
affairs and activities of Families: and who can show us that condition of life
under the Sun, that is even and undisturbed? If Marriage has caresit has no
more then other conditions; Nay possibly they are more supportable in the
gravity and charm of those concernments, then where they assault mad and wild
humor, weary of every thing. But then let us tell them, moreover, that it has
advantages, blessings, and societies that they have not attained: if they can
show us the life of some rude Philosopher, who in his retirements from the
World, boasted of quiet and repose, (though that has appeared not Gallantry,
but Sullenness in him) we can show them many examples of glorious men, living
not only contentedly, but admired and beloved in the ties of Matrimony,
spreading their useful qualities over the Universe; whilst the Stoic has
permitted his virtue to droop and wither, in the shade of his own humor:
besides difficult and hard acquirements are the triumphs of virtue, that mind
shines with no Lustreat all, which has not been brightned with difficult
affairs, owing (as the Body) its vigor and strength to motion and labor.
Moreover, the triumph is the sweetest that is purchased with the most industry;
the ambitious looks on those acquirments with contempt which are easily got,
and loves the highest steps, because it is the hardest coming there. And such
Motives have we received from above, to procure advantages to the world, that
nothing relishes better to the mind; nor is received with greater esteem and
applause, then difficult Services: the Romans ever loaded those with Triumphs,
at their return home, and erected them Statues, who had served the
Commonwealth in the greatest dangers and toils: so that to speak ill of
Marriage, only out of a humor of repose and sluggishness, is to own the
greatest reproach and scandal in the world. When they passed by the house of
that great Senator, who retired from the gallant affairs of the Republique, and
spent his time in a dreaming idleness, they use to say, here Vatia lies buried*
whom have all Ages allowed for Heroes? whom have they Deified and served with
Altars? not the lazy and the speculative, not the boisterous and injurious, but
those who applied themselves to court humane Race with kindnesses and benefits:
and they have met with the most lavish Elogies and Praises, who were the most
lavish of their Blood and Abilities to oblige the world. Now he that acts with
the multiplicity of Instruments, is capable of effecting more, then he that
contrives one end; how great soever the sufficiency of one man may be, yet he
shines but with a solitary Virtue, without the erradiations of an offspring:
Neither has the Coat of Nobleness been perfectly blazoned, but with our Issue.

An excellent person may do much for the world with his own sufficiency, but he
doubly obliges it, who in a Seminary of Heroes, is continually propitious to
it; and then as for the particular Exercises of virtue in that condition, we
shall find them no where to have such powerful Motives: For whom was reserved
the Conquest of Latium, and the foundations of an Empire, which Phoenix like,
rose richer from the Ashes of Ilium, but for that Aeneas, who with so exemplary
a Piety, bore his Father through the Flames; by which he became more Renowned,
then Hector that defended, and Achilles that assented Troy. Rome once owed its
being and its safety, to the authority and persuasions of a Mother, and that
Hero received from his duty a temperament of mind, hard to be found in
successes, and at the head of Armies: Neither could the present Conquest and
Revenge, have so much served the glory of Coriolanus, as that famous Act of his
duty; nothing is so noble as the pity which presides on the power to ruin, and
Rome had doubtless wanted its effects, had it not been inspired by a revered
Eloquence. The Barbarian though no death unwelcome, but accompanied with the
assassination of his Brother, and he could support without regret the company
of his own fate, who would willingly have fled from that of his Relation. If
the Poets have not framed artificially the Scene of the generous Corinthian,
she owed all those charming Actions they have celebrated, to the Idea's of her
duty; neither was her Rival defective in the beauty and life of those
performances, but only by the want of the ascendant: And there are infinite
other Instances in the occurrencies of Ages that acknowledge particular
Obligations to the Matrimonial Relations.

It did moreover assist Mankind with a mind vigorous, and constant in its
Circles. Virtue loses its luster and strength, when it is obliged to wander in
various entertainments; Marriage gives the thoughts a Home, and an Employment,
that would else be traversing the ends of the Earth. Neither shall we find any
men of a more manly Gallantry, nor a nobleness all of a piece, as amongst those
who have been happy in this Relation, and great Lovers of the Interests of it:
Some men may have exceeded in politic Arts, and in the Stratagems of Conquest;
but I very much question, whether ever any Age (in the Heathen world) brought
forth any thing more excellent or more beloved, then the virtue of Pompey, and
Brutus; men not only Religiously prizing the Married state, but such as were
blessed with the Society of those women, that for the returns of love and
kindness were famous in every Generation. We choose Friendship, as a Field for
virtue to reap advantages, in, and none but retired and treacherous Natures will
be without the blessings of that; but beyond all question, that Friendship is
the noblest, bound in the surest Ligaments, and penetrates more the recesses of
the Heart, that is commenced in Marriage, then any took up on other Scores:
Some are pleased to cry down that Sex, as foolish and unfit for the
conversation of men; but they seem in that too much to overvalue themselves,
and to set strange prizes on their own worth: what if there are not sound
women, whose heads are filled with the crabbed notions of Philosophy, who have
no great insight into insignificant and unsociable Arts, the knowledge of these
things could constitute nothing but barren and ridiculous friendships; that
which is more generous, more pleasant and useful, is as well to be found in
that Sex, as in our own; who that is wise, expects in this Relation, a jumping
of Knowledge and Capacities, or an agreement with all our Chimera's and
Punctilio's, is she unfit for that society, who cannot chop Logic with the
Scholar? that cannot please the Historian with giving him an account of the
Original of Empires where the Sun rises, no^ the affairs of Kingdoms, where the
Sun goes down, or that cannot name him the Fields where have been fought
famousest Battles, nor tell those Conquerors, that there swept into their Lap,
the mighty stakes of the worlds Monarchy; or that though she can love as well
as Portia and Cornelia; yet they cannot recount him the particular Gallantries
of those Roman Ladies, they must surely make a very fantastic Standard, who
measure the fitness of that Relation by such an odd agree ableness: Humane Race
is to be supported and rendered happy by a substantial virtue, and not by little
Punctilios and affectations; It has been such Whimseys that have lost the
excellent affairs of the world, and men placing their contentments in such idle
likenesses, have neglected, to pursue what were the most, useful concernements
of humane Life. Nature has set out the measure by which that Sex is found fit
for our Society, which consists of something more important then the pleasing
of our vain humors: the Interests of the world were at first common, and men
intended the good of the whole; but the envy, the capriciousness and sullenness
of aftertimes, made infinite enclosures, and men laid out all that stock on
the little portions of their sa^y, which should have been employed in the
public Bank of the Universe: And whilst they have pretended to refine humane
Society; They have made its profitable Affairs evaporate into nothing; neither
have they left any thing of those grave and prudent Interests; but some wild
and thin Idea's, which they have in sport, hunted through the barren Regions of
Philosophy, and along the fairy Traverses of Poetry.

Marriage has also appeared excellent for the education of Mankind, which was
the next thing important to his being; without that, as his Affairs now stand,
he had come into the world an Extravagant, abhorring Laws, and the Regularities
of Society, and his Reason rising at an Age after his mind had been rude and
barbarous for want of discipline, it would not easily have been able to subdue
the wildness of his youth: Nay, all its performances, had been but ill and
imperfect Draughts, whilst it wanted completed Images and Idea's to draw by,
its natural propensities would have designed something, but the world could
never have known what to have called it; but Marriage has been in all Ages the
Repository of discipline, and excellent Idea's: in its School, they are not
only taught but revered; heat is learned modesty, respect and subjection,
affectation and stubbornness are betimes cashiered, the fleeting and inconstant
fancy directed to an aim, and kept steady by a peculiar authority; Marriage is
the Garden where the Flowers of Youth are preserved in their freshness and
vigor, whereas the open discipline of the world is like the rudeness of a
desert, where they grow wild, and neglected, the sense of shame, and the fear
of vice are preserved under this management, and influenced from this lower
Sphere, whilst the general defection had made them difficult to be seen above;
but besides, this condition has laid an Obligation on the Parent, to look after
the Education of his Children; and if there had not been such an instition, in
which, it was both our duty and our reputation too to look after our Issue, the
Children of many had been neglected, and perished without a name, or any
considerable acquirements; but now, those persons who have strangely overcome,
and worn out the impression of what they owe to God, and their own affections
are yet so careful of their reputation, and the esteem of their Race, as to
Educate their Children in those ways by which they may be capable of serving
the Commonwealth, and live with credit; had not Marriage been instituted, when
the lustful youth had satisfied his appetite, it is likely he would have
abandoned the wretched Mother with her Infant, to the incoumers of various
sorrows, and the Children of the great and the Noble, had been Rocked in
Cottages, and all their days followed the Plough; but now there are sacred
Channels cut, in which one stream of peculiar and distinguished Blood,
perpetually runs from one Generation to another; and we find, that even the
most extravagant and voluptuous, are yet careful of that current; using all the
industry imaginable to make it noble and imbelished; thinking it not enough to
continue their greatness, but their virtues also; They endeavor to fashion and
to sweeten youth, that it may be grateful and accomplished, when it comes to be
opened in the Affairs of the world, to this purpose are the severity of
Chastisements, the variety of Instructions, and the representing of differing
Examples; not only those that have rendered virtue fair and agreeable; but such
also that show a loathsomness, a degeneracy and abhorrency in vice, by such
variety of Ways, fashioning them into the habit of excellent qualities; which
performances have set so many accomplished Persons into the world, who if they
had met with Parents less careful, they might have missed that esteem and
veneration which Ages have paid them: It is true, that the force of a Genius
sometimes supplies the defect of a Parent; but where they both assist, are the
most excellent pieces of humane perfection; and though Nature often does much,
yet we many times find, that those persons are to seek in the turns of Humane
Affairs, and in the artful Traverses of Glory, who have not been very well
furnished with great variety of Images: and from hence has rose the defect that
spoiled the whole frame of an Heroic virtue, designed by some persons. In some
Men we have observed a strange assiduity in the quest of glorious Atchievments,
whilst yet a diligent Reminder, will see more of affection and earnestness,
then a handsome dexterity in that pursuit. There is a slight in all Humane
Affairs; which though Nature may sometimes happen on it, yet can never hit it
with so much certainty and success as Art; and hence it is, that a great
draught of an Heroic virtue is fain to be taken from so many, because no one
person appears furnished with all those various Colors. Some men have excelled
for the number and Art of their Conquests; but the world has seen them subdued
by a power from the Rostra. Achilles's Shield was after won by a virtue,
different from that in which its owner excelled: the crafty Italian, with his
single Conduct, wound about the bravery and vigor of the French Affairs, which
perfection in any endowment, has arose from a happy Education, meeting with a
good Genius, and where it willingly declines an accomplishment, it yet submits
to the force of the discipline. So that to Marriage the world ows the Education
of Mankind, and by consequence their fitness and usefulness to Humane Affairs,
which is a great advantage, because the security of having our Issue well
educated, is thereby established, and that care taken for the coming
Generation, which our fathers had of ours; which is so important a reflection
in the Series of succession. Marriage did moreover prevent the inconveniences
and extravagancies of a rambling Love; for what disorder and distraction had
there been in the world, if an impetuous and lawless appetite had been subject
to no Conduct; but that the fancy placing it self upon any Object, had
presently transported the owner to all manner of violent actions; To serve its
mad desires; Cities had been consumed to Ashes, Houses left desolate, or filled
with groans, only for the ravishment of a beauteous Prey: The Affairs of the
State had been neglected, or readily wounded for the acquirements of an idle
Love, for such is the violence of that Passion, and such its extravagancies,
when it is taught no moderation by Religion, and excellent Laws: The power of
Conquest had been a sufficient Title to the Objects we had coveted, and we had
felt no remorse, to have taken them from between the Arms where they had spent
many years in endearments of Love: No Nation could have flourished, nor have
been successful in its Affairs, if a wanton Flame had thus consumed the manly
temper and vigor of the Youth; or if their passions had not transported them
to such violent Actions, yet the gentlest concernments of those Flames, had
made them incapable of serving the Commonwealth, and the Interests of Humane
Society, and what with running to public Houses of Lust, the contriving secret
Cabals, and private assignations, the Animosities and Jealousies of Rivalship,
the prodigality of amorous addresses, had took up all that time, and bafled all
those advantages with which they should have served their Generations: Whilst
they had followed these designs, ill humor, restlesness of the thoughts, and
inconsiderate Actions had been the necessary Companions to them; therefore
there was great wisdom in that Law amongst the Jews, that none should live
unmarried after such an Age: All wise and prudent Governments knew they should
have little Order and less Industry, where the affairs of an idle passion
possessed the Hearts and Heads of their Subjects. Marriage more inclines the
mind to serious and necessary business, then the wandering Lusts of Stews and
Concubines; and even in those Countries, where Poligamy and many Loves have
been allowed, the serious and the wise are grown weary of their liberty, as
producing those distractions, which unfit the mind for other things; Neither
would the disorders of that passion have only been injurious to the present
times, but have extremely wronged posterity; which we may perceive by the
Extravagants of this Age, who live in a strange neglect of those that come after
them: They care not what becomes of the next Generation* so they may Riot and
live voluptuously in this; they have received by succession a traveling
Interest; which they are to transmit downward, it being to journey through all
the Ages of the world, but by their Extravagancies and excesses by their new
wit, and their modish vices, they forget its affairs, they affront its gravity,
they stop its progress, and it is like to be known by after years with less
esteem and veneration; and this is that Age which is like to be branded amongst
all the Lustres of succession, as the most disingenuous that ever was, who have
answered the Remonstrances of the worlds important Interests with Rialdry, and
a lasciviou Song; they have affronted them by the most unworthy practices, and
gave them to understand, that the divertisements of Drolls and Buffoons were
more valued by them, then the gravity and prudence of their Fathers: and these
sottish incounters appear the consequences of the neglect of Marriage, by which
the bosom of civil Affairs has received those wounds, which the dexterity and
skill of coming Ages will not easily Cure: that neglect and lightness, that
preposterousness and inadvertency in our concernments, as have brought upon the
world so much disorder and inconveniece: No man makes it his business to be
serious in any thing, but to railly with diversion and mockery, even his
poverty and want, which are all deplorable effects, of that injustice that the
present times have done to Marriage. In fine, that condition has applied the
minds of men to that industry and care, which as they have contributed to the
peace and the repose of the universe; so they have produced those excellent
things, that became pleasant and dear to humane Race; the productions that have
been besides it, were rather for splendor then use, and a gay show, without
the company of real profit: The world has been diverted with pleasant Idea's,
with a fair arrangment of amiable things; but the performances of this
condition, have exhibited what was useful and necessary. The wanton humor, and
the airy fancy may be pleased by the solitary Hero's, but the uxorious have
intended the good of mankind; and if we diligently survey the Interest of the
world, we shall find them fitted for the Society of the married life, and that
they must receive a stop and a prejudice by the introducing of other
concernments; the constitution of them must be changed, and a new habit
introduced, before the world can look well under the practice of different
opinions: How happily it has succeeded with these Experiments, what it has come
to under the Discipline of such a practice, will sufficiently appear, by
looking backward; the Powers it has established; the mingling Interest it has
confirmed; the mutual stock of benefits it has settled; and the great
tranquillity of all things; sufficiently prove, that nothing could have been
more propitious to the world then that condition: Neither does it serve less
effectually our particular Affairs; if we look beyond the contentments of a
present and a fading appetite to those which arise from a long succession,
stretched with esteem and reputation: to live when we are dead and gone, in a
happy issue, is much better, then only for some Moments to be renowned, to set
in the Circle of Marriage, agreeable Objects always to entertain our affection
and our thoughts, is much happier, then by the little Artifices of time, to be
ever subject to delusions; who does not, that pretends to reason, take more
pleasure in managing the Interests of a Family, and a lasting name, then in
humouring a short lived inclination: and such Affairs have happily assisted the
virtue of many persons, who thus diverted an injurious leisure; and as the Poet
ascribed, the effeminacy of the Greek to his idleness; so the want of a just
Interest to manage, has brought in most of those inconveniences that are found
in the world; and that pleasantness and gayness, which is childishly called
good humor, so much idolized in the single life, what is it but a trifling and
strange impertinence! a thing without all conduct and prudence, and after the
follies of youth are over, even insupportable to those who have the most
admired it: All excesses in nature usually produce the other extremes; so the
most aspiring Monarchs have often turned Friars, shrouding the glories and
lustres of Regal Majesty in the Sables of a Cloister, and men excessively
voluptuous, grow strangly neglectful and solitary when they are old: What
judgment can we pass on this, any otherwise then that they lavishly spend the
prudent stock of Nature, which becoming bankrupt by excessive practices, they
are after forced to yield to those humors, which speak the wants and poverties
of Nature. Marriage is suited to the just temperament of things; whilst the
other practices consist in those excesses that exhaust and debelitate nature;
which like ground too much used, grows languid and unfruitful, the mediocrity
is that which was designed in the Affairs of the universe: And he who takes
them out of that Channel, makes them overflow all things of prudence and
advantage, neither will they be any longer useful and excellent when they grow
irregular: It is enough, that by the allotments and discipline transmitted to
us, we may live with solace and advantage; but if we neglect those Rules, we
can expect nothing but disorder and confusion. Marriage has hitherto defended
the Interests and the repose of the world from an extravagancy that in all Ages
has endeavored to assault them: And whilst Mankind grow weary of so brave and
successful a defense: It is well if they find out another equal to it, though
it is very much to be feared, that those little Arts on which they rely, will
soon let them see the error of that fancy, when they must call to their
assistance a greater force, then what their Poets, or their new Philosophers
can bring them, and the sad effects of this gayness, and those Chymera's, will
easily be resigned for the other useful and practical seriousness, then their
modish humors, their refined and elevated fancies, their careless and
unaffected fashioning of things, together with their courageous and profound
searches into Nature, will appear the sleights of those Empericks that have
undone the world, and if we shall not be capable of so much repentance as to
curse our selves, our posterity will do it for us, for sending them into the
world, rather fit for Hospitals, or for Bedlam, then the Affairs of a just and
happy life: To whom the good nature of their fathers, for being so easily
abused, will appear a horrid crime to their Issue, whilst they take to
themselves what they called a wild pleasure, but left to these a serious smart,
and they must apply themselves to that Marriage, that was injured and affronted
by their Fathers, which can only free them from the Tyranny of those practices,
to whom they had given the Dominion, whose novelty and great liberty so far
prevailed upon them, as to forget their Obligations, and their own Affairs, and
without any remorse to see Sacrificed the being of many Families, and the
prosperity and contentment of others, whose wastes and ruins declare by whom
they have been plundered* Neither will that fantastic Discipline, under which
they foolishly endeavor to put their extravagant practices, bring any security
and benefit to the world, which besides its standing on an unjust foundation,
can reach to nothing but a security from Bravos. Marriage knows all the
Traverses and Turns of Humane Affairs, and stands on a foundation of Natures
laying: Neither will that be transmitted down for right, that has been wrong
and injustice in every Age: But we may imagine, they endeavor not to bring
their designs to perfection, least they should too near resemble the abhorred
Wedlock: they can hardly invent any thing wild enough, and debauched enough for
their own practices, their appetites call upon them for new extravagancies; and
those who furnish them with variety, are at a loss to contrive fast enough to
please them. Whilst we have thus Sir, drawn the Portrait of Marriage, and
reckoned up its advanages, if we reflect upon it, we shall find the injustice
that some men have done it: As for those who admire unsociable and solitary
tempers, they can have but slender Pleas to an excellent mind: Nature designed
no man to that vanity, as to be taken up with the contemplation of his own
endowments, like the fantastic youth, who made love to, and died for himself:
The only way to take a right view of our own good qualities, is to see them in
less flattering Mirrours, and to have them drawn by those advantages and
benefits we communicate to others: He that gathers all, his great endowments
into his own Breast, and keeps them there, like Roses that grow in Deserts, he
dies uncommended and uninjoyed* all virtue is diffusive, and loves occasions to
exercise its vivacy and vigor; and what we carry about us, sufficiently
declares that we were not designed to be happy alone, whilst both the solace of
the mind, and an endeared life, consist in an union with something different;
the brightest Colors owe their vivacy to the shade, and Nature has set Virtue
like Diamonds in Jet, within the Circle of difficult services: And I cannot
remember, that ever the Cloister, that great Receptacle of the drowsy life, did
ever oblige the world by many excellent performances; we know very well what
poisoned Arrows have been shot from those Coverts, that have pained and enraged
the bosom of many Ages; but they are yet to give a proof their kindness to
Humane Nature, and their present carelessness and vices, have put us beyound all
hope of expecting it. But yet, it is another sort of speculation, which we are
to accuse in these reflections. Some there are, who with great folly and
injustice, make Marriage the subject of their reproaches; we do not accuse any
for embracing the single life, whose Virtue is strong enough to bear them
through all the hazards of youth and inclination, but yet, those who do this,
ought to let it be with less pride and affectation: But that is the strange
rudeness of the present sentiments, to mock at all practices that are different
from their own; and though such light discourses will weigh very little with
wise and prudent Persons, yet unexperienced youth is apt to be affected with
things confidently delivered, though there be sometimes little sense in them,
but this is not only the matter of conversation, but the admired Theme of some
writings, and being a subject capable of keenness, and something of novelty,
men endeavor to raise the reputation of wit on that foundation: But I wish
they would consider with how much disingenuity and unworthiness they do it:
Never did any Age so thirst after the same of being Wits, yet no Age has
acquired so ingloriously that Title; It is not sure impossible for men of such
great abilities as they give themselves out to be, to please and instruct the
world at once, and not to build the Triumphs of their Eloquence, on the ruins
of their Morals? How little reason has Mankind to admire them, who furnish it
with wit at so dear a rate: They may tell us, that affected Pedants, capable of
no generosity, have for a silly fame wounded the bosom of sacred and civil
things, but we are astonished to see those who pretend to be Gentlemen of great
breeding and nobleness to exceed their crime, and how unhappy ought they to
esteem themselves, that the first proof which they give of their injustice to
humane Affairs, and their ingratitude to their Fathers, should be on the most
important, and most excellent concernments of the universe: They have
introduced infinite Punctilio's of respect, and observance, they pretend to
correct the bluntness, and in obsequiousness of past Ages; but they wound the
substance, whilst they adore the shadow, and we expect from them to show that
respect, which is so powerful a part of their Genius, to the most important
concernments which have been so revered in the world, and so beneficial to
Humane Race* If they must exercise that doated on wit of theirs, let them
choose a subject more agreeable to the Interest and complexion of Mankind, and
let them think it to be a little rude, to reproach the practice of their
Fathers, and the greatest part of the world, which they do in speaking against
Marriage: But never any Age had more trifling Gallantries, and yet none was
evermore in love with them; great capacities use to be serious, modest and
unaffected; but now he that owns a little wit, makes such a noise with it, as
to disturb the quiet and the serious Affairs of the world; If they would have
us admire their great abilities, let them give us a more excellent proof of
them; let them again rescue those Interests which they have betrayed, or else
pretend to merit nothing, but the reproaches and curses of the world. But that
which is yet a more important injury to Marriage, is a certain humor and
opinion taken up by some people, that it is a piece of Gallantry and good
Breeding, to divert our selves with sacred Wedlock, as an extraordinory proof
that we have overcome the Phlegm of a degenerate complexion; if we spend all our
life in frolic Amors. There is another accusation, that belongs to these
reflections; and that is, of those who are of this Condition, whose affection
to it ought to be commended; but their follies and indiscretions ought to be
accused: It is not always found, that a good intention can free it self from
the blemishes of an ill conduct, and the follies of many Persons, have rendered
some things ridiculous, that would have supported their gravity in a better
management in this enquiry, the subject is extreme nice and critical, and so
ought to be made with great wariness and circumspection; besides, to pry into
the miscarrages of others in so close an union is a little imprudent; but yet
our ordinary conversation and notice will furnish us with this belief, that
many commit those follies in Wedlock, that become matter of divertisement to
some Persons, and and an extreme scandal to others. One great cause to be
ascribed of this, is, that men live narrowly, and to their particular
inclinations, and humors, forgeting that they are to support a common
concernment; and we may very well believe, that men may find as much ease, and
a great deal more generous contentment, if they tied up their inclinations to a
severe discretion, then in permitting them to wanton in all the liberties of
their little freedoms; How few live with a careful respect to their reputation,
and fewer consider the importance of a public aim; which neglects giving birth
to perpetual follies and affectations, amongst other things that they
prejudice, Marriage suffers in the opinion of the indifferent or prepossessed;
Any thing that is uneasy in Wedlock should be concealed, and supported with a
gravity, that might cover it from the spectators; No man should gad abroad with
his complaints, which as they render his condition nothing the more easy, so
they either importune, or divert those to whom they are communicated; it is
tiresome to the serious man to be entertained with the follies of another; and
it is Comical to the Frollick; So that we receive no advantage by such sallies
of great weakness and indiscretion, and yet, though the satisfaction be so
momentary, as only the easing of a present fullness, yet the revelation of such
Matters spread in conversation, and remains long enough as a blemish on that
Condition; this open temper, has in some made an injurious progress;
reproaching with the worst treachery the intimacies of Marriage; the first
Espousals proclaimed that two were one, thereby to unite all their
concernments: The gallant Portia, tried her secrisy on her wounded Arm, to make
an experiment of her Sexes sufficiency; which whilst she bravely rescued from
the reproaches it had suffered, she retorted the blushing scandal upon ours:
Friendship is of all other blessings the greatest solace to humane Life, and it
is not only intimate, but sacred in the Circle of Marriage: To communicate our
troubles, is to lessen them; and the Philosopher advised us, not to eat the
Heart, which he meant of secret and concealed griefs: The great distrust of
some men has appeared in hiding under ground their wealth, and this Age has in
part reason to have the same care of their thoughts, which those had of their
Treasure: Mankind were at first distinguished into particular dwellings, that
they should have separated Interests; and enjoy their contentments in an
undiscovered shade; we call it good humor to use all manner of freedom in our
conversation; but how seldom is it found, that others will well interpret,
what we well design, It were easy Sir, to lead this Current further, but it
would be no discretion to do it, and many times we decline a safe Conduct,
because we fantastically love our own management. It Is moreover certain, they
best see their errors, who discover them by their own light, And that not
only, because we find our selves in some disorder to have them revealed; but
also, from a certain pride that puts us upon justifying all we do; and besides,
all the dexterity of another, can never fit the Perspective to our own sight:
But yet, there are somethings so remarkable, that there is no need of these
Glasses to discover them, and there are some crimes committed against that
Relation, which none will attempt to extenuate, that respect would be very
injurious, that should forbear the censure of the great scandals that are flung
upon Marriage: The incontinence of the Espoused, is that Crime whose Bowels are
filled with many others: Neither can we readily say, the influence it has had
in the world; since it is evident that the sacredness of this Institution, has
kept the Power above us with respect upon our minds: Other things have (though
unjustly) been accused of Art, but the great Antiquity of Marriage declares its
divine original: And it has received the same respect in diversities of
Nations, and Religions, its Honor is so tender, that the least blot reproaches
it; and besides, incourages the hardyness of after attempts, which take them
for a President, who were the first Invaders of this separated state; by whose
attempts not only that condition, which appeared the principal foundation of
the most excellent advantages, became shaken and infirm, but a way was opened
to that liberty, which after made its incursions into all revered concernments.
The sacredness of an Oath, and Protestations uttered where Heaven and Earth
were the Witnesses, became the trifles of Custom and design; which being made
so by a wandering appetite, that crime became the encouragement to a freedom in
other things: What assaulted the first innocence we very well know; and we have
reason to believe, that this Crime was one of the first that attempted the
concernments of the world! And it is like to be that, which will give one of
the last wounds it must feel before its ruin; this impiety awaiting it with a
strange desire, that it might owe the fate of its noblest affairs to its
inhumanity alone, and no reproaches are keen enough for those, who have made
these attempts, either from the solitary life, or within the sociable: The
latter is the more prodigious instance of treachery and baseness, because he
strikes at the Heart and the Vitals; he breaks that faith on which Marriage is
built, and destroys that fidelity which is so much of its Essence, he leaves it
none of its reputation, but lays it under the reproaches of Artifices and a
Juggle, he withholds others from applying themselves to it, whilst his
practices persuade them, that it cures no appetites, nor practices any
sincerity: He unworthily suffers them to think, that it is the Trap of youth,
and a Gin in which Policy has caught our forward Inclinations: He Incourages in
them a fancy, that it is better to practice those Liberties before we vow, and
assure then to loose an Innocence in our restraint: He that draws the Adulterer
with these Colors, will soon find his amazement at so horrid a spectacle; and
justly believe that nothing is known so odious in Africa, is this Monster of
Society; since he that devours the sincerity and the candor of any thing,
shows a worse cruelty then the sucking of its Blood, and the generous at any
time, loose their reputation with more regret then their lives: He has made
Marriage to survive its Honor, and to remain a scandalized Institution: He has
put the affront on the first founder; and mocked at the Limits of Nature; he
has endeavored to persuade the world by his experience, that Marriage is
incapable of its designs, and that the Ranges of lust were to no purpose
enclosed, whilst the appetite is as ungoverned even in that Condition, which
was designed to cure it, as in a common enjoyment. We will only say further to
these Persons, that they stand in the first Rank of Criminals, and that it had
been better they had never come into the world, then only to have lived to have
done so much mischief in it; and that they must one day be called from their
Graves, to be confronted with the injured Affairs of the universe, and not
expect ever to sleep without the Specter of those wounded Interests. And now
Sir, after we have been serious so long, it is agreeable to our youth, to
divert our selves a little, with the pleasant and the beautiful Scenes of Love,
it would be but just something to loosen a mind bound up to grave and serious
considerations, by celebrating that Passion, which is as well the Vigor as the
Imbelishment of Marriage; But we are to remember, that the Theory which has
been exhibited to Ages of this Inclination, is very much different from that
Practick that has assisted the Affairs of the world; and we must go another
course then what we have already took, if we will follow the Current, where the
Poetic fancy has led it: for those are the men who have pretended all along to
extol and refine it: Though the Discipline under which it was put by the
Ancients, was very unlike to the modern Regulations. They made it seek the
society of Shepherds, and confined it to the Woods and the Mountains, it spent
its time in weaving Corollas, and was busied in fashioning the address that
merited the Garland: It appeared bashful and unsociable, shunning the guilt of
ambition, with the noise and Artifices of Cities: It could divert it self with
telling the murmurs of a Fountain, with reposing under the Myrtle, or in
weaving about the Pine with aamorous Characters: It only signalized it self in
the victories of May: and preserved no greater marks of its State, then the
Tabor, and the Oatpipe: It valued it self upon its sincerity, and knew no other
bravery then to accompany in Death the valued Object: It affected a mind as
free from Artifice, as that beauty to which it vowed, and opened its Soul, as
well as spent its Caresses in the Sunbeams, but this affected life, was yet
judged too inglorious and solitary for it, by the briskness of after Poets, who
believed that it should value less its innocence then its glory; which made
them lead it to those places where it might signalize it self in braver
exploits, their Predecessors had fashioned it too rude and simple, and had
armed it with a Power that could purchase it no Renown, whilst it was busied in
a sorry Chase, on the Lawnes and the Mountains. They therefore took it from so
trifling a Discipline, they led it to Courts, and gave it the command of
Armies: They disrobed it of the Habiliments of a Shepherd, and changed the
Oat-pipe for a Trumpet; they made it feel its vigor, and experiment the force
of its Nature: A distrust of its strength had made it live ingloriously, and
they taught it what great things it was able to do; They made it not only to
despise the Sheep-hook, but to make a trifle of Crowns: but it was necessary
that it should accommodate it self to a disposition suitable to its
enterprises, which made them exchange its sincerity and plainness, for
dissimulation and hollow Caresses: Neither did it ill manage these endowments,
if we may credit their Records. It brought in the faithless Greek the fire that
burnt Ilium to Ashes; and destroyed what was then the fairest Dominion of the
Earth: but yet it was not altogether intent upon one design; whilst it stopped
the Glory and Victories of Achilles, and sent him invisible Chains, from a
captived* Town. It triumphed over Regal Author^^y, Duty, and the care of a
Patrimony in the violent Scylla Eliza left not only her Tire, but a glorious
life imperfect, whilst she became a Sacrifice to the Love of spruce Aeneas. It
has gone through the Blood of the Innocent to reach a Throne, where it might
appear in Royal imbelishments to its Object. It has managed Intelligence in
Glances, and communicated Plots by the Character of Looks: It has been a spy
in Armies, and fashioned the Intrigues of Court. These their Poetic fury
reckoned brave, but they have not at the same time withheld it from odd
performances: They have made it leap Precipices, swallow Daggers, made Brothers
burn for Sisters, and invaded the Fathers right of Love by the ardour of the
Son. The inhumane Greek Bedded his Sestian Maid, in the cold Sheets of Water,
and left them to consummate in the Hellespont, those loves he had so painfully
extolled, The fantastic Roman, made Narcissus burn for the shadow of himself,
with so feirce a Flame, as could only be quenched in that Fountain where he
viewed his Image. It has turned the Issue of Kings to Pilgrims, and transported
the Daughter of a Caesar, to despise a brighter Immortality, whilst she
affected the shade of a Corinna. Nay, under these managers, Love has sought an
Empire beyond the confines of Nature, and carried the remains of Rational
beings, to Vegitables, and inanimate: It has turned Mortals to Fountains, to
Trees, to Eccho's, and to Wall-flowers, preserving only in the note, the
murmur, or the fragrant Character, the remembrances of a former state, the
wantonness of the Poetic fancy, have in these instances appeared very
extravagant; though they designed in all, to show the invincible Power of Love,
whilst changing Natures could not change Desire: Neither could all the
cruelties of a Metamorphosis disoblige a faithful Passion; Echo though grief
has worn her to a shadow, preserves yet strength enough to answer to an amorous
Call, the Heliotrope yet linkes the presence of the cruel Sun, and appears
Melancholy, when he forsakes its Company. But yet, after all these cruelties
and strange Experiments, the Poetic fancy could not otherwise atone for so
much barbarousness, but by obliging Love to shave, and retire to the Cloister:
The reflection on so much Blood as it had spilt, could not but naturally
produce in it so great a Melancholy; But yet here, whilst it pretended to be a
Devote, it proved a Monster; and could not forget the exercise of its former
Tyranny; It is true, it grew more Circumspect, but not less guilty; it ruined
equally though in a different way: It formerly invaded the life and the
felicity, and now the Innocence and the Honor: It was more open and plain in
the former attempts, but now it affected privacy and Arts: The world had felt
enough of its force and it therefore applied it self to Stratagems, and
dissimulation, so long a War as it had he would with humanity, had taught them to
reinforce and fortify themselves, and therefore undermined what it could not
assault; It took the habit of a Recluse, and it made many of their orders
appear but Fratricelles; It showed to the world a mortified look, and an
Innocent Habit; But its Altars burnt with as brisk a Flame, and were thronged
with lascivious Votaries; it grew weary of open cruelties, but strangely
enamoured of those private sleights: Here with a show of great humility it
devoured the portions of an excellent Virtue, and consumed the Innocence of the
world, with Fire disguized in Snow-balls: It whispered Intrigues through the
Monastic Grate, and made assignations at the foot of an Altar: it coma'd
amorous sentences with Beads; and vigourated a lascivious Song with the Airs of
an Anthem: It bore it self disguized into the Palaces of Magnificos, and
practiced dishonor, whilst it proclaimed a Shrist: It resorted to the Chair of
confession only to ease an amorous bosom, and demanded from the Father, not
absolution but assistance: It kept Leigers in Republics of Virgins, and held
Intelligence with fidelity and Honor: It was adored wherever it came, and
prevented jealousy by the reputation of sanctity. But though the successes of
Love were great in this shade; yet it participated so much of a natural
inconstancy, as to grow weary of so easy a prosperity, and left its recesses
for more public incounters: Its Elogies here blunted the Poetic fancy, whose
flights whilst they were happy were yet regular and confined; they resolved to
make it a mad Cap, that it might better serve the Rhiming reach, that has been
so much the Idol of present Ages, here it acknowledged a Divinity, and showed a
respect to Piety and Altars: But they better affected its old Ethnic
profaneness; they liked it only when it was too vigorous for Earth, and too
extravagant for Heaven: They gave it a power above Immortality, and fashioned
it a quality that should Paramount the Universe. And no sooner had they thus
took it from the Cell, but they furnished it out a Knight Errant, and made it
traverse Deserts, they inured it to hardship, and often forced it to take up
its Lodgings at the foot of an Oak, or the Banck of a Rivulct, whilst it was
fed, Cameleon like, on the Air of sighs and reproaches, it exercised its
courage in hunting of Ravishers, in rescuing distressed Damsels; in obtaining
the freedom of captived Knights, and in putting an end to enchantments; whilst
sometimes again it affected the killing of Dragons, the incountering of horrid
Visions; and in appointing assignations in the dark apartments and Residence of
Spirits. But succeeding Poets declined these Melancholy fancies; whilst they
took Love from that Discipline, and applied it to the Affairs of Grandeur and
Society: They adopted it into the Family of Atoms, and made it the Captain of
those Numerous Legions: They gave it an extravagant and unlimited Commission,
and made it equal with that appetite which they believe to be the Genius of the
Universe; and the Trace they have led it, has been agreeable to their Idea's,
they have brought it on Theaters, to inspire those Bravo's whom they call their
Hero's: They have thought fit that it should signalize it self only in
prodigies of valor, and miracles of Council: It has bestowed a sufficiency on
a single Person to rout Armies, to look Kings out of their Thrones, and to make
Conquests more facile then Ruin, and more easy then Traverses: It has bafled
all the Stratagems of an Adversary, and wound about at pleasure the fidelity
and courage of numerous Armies; all which are found but mean Exploits in the
Records of their Dryades. But yet it does not always keep constant to the point
of this elevation; neither does it ever affect to be so Heroic; it is often
pleased to divcrt it self with meaner Actionfs: And to fashion the fooleries of
Comedy: It can make Experiments on the Groom, and is not averse from an
Intrigue with the Landress; It is pleased with the small incounters, and the
fallacies of Mascarade, and delights in being Cajoled, and in committing
Errors: Its Principles speak it an Epicure, and declare its abhorrance to be
bound up to the high Rules of its Glory, whilst it finds the sweetest Pleasures
in the most extravagant Liberties; though it can sometimes despise Crowns, and
toss them from one head to another, yet it is not always pleased with so hardy
an exercise: It can with as much pleasure, manage the designs of the
Chambermaid, and receive Propositions from the brawny Clown, that greatness is
uneasy to it, which stands above the divertisments of ordinary men, and it now
less affects Glory then good Humor. But though this passion appears active and
vigorous, yet it seems but the effects of its Age; whilst it pleases it self in
odd and fruitless performances: It studdies infinite researches, and the
Punctilio's of a Genius weak and defective, it grows hard to humor, and is
pleased with niceties and Criticisms, before things brave and substantial: The
Poetic Lawgivers have formed it a State, and designed its observance; but it
is weary of that troublesome greatness, and they are forced to indulge it in
little Frolicks, and childish divertisements. It has reached its Climaterical
Year, and forgets its Grandeur so fast, that all the lofty nonsense of its
ablest Ministers, cannot preserve it from a sottish Lethargy, they have carried
it to the Magnificent Palaces of Command, they have showed it the state it
should preserve, and remonstrated it with an Eloquence, more charming and
refined then their Fathers ever knew; But it see's not the force of these
splendid Harangues; and its glorious managers must lament their misfortune,
that they were born in an Age, when Love was so unable to comply with those
precepts, which they are so capable of giving; So Rich and Magnificent a sense
in the days of its Youth, had found it an abode in Stars, (from which some of
its Directors pretend it to have come) and it had used no more these mortal
divertisements: But unhappy Poets, they practice in a time, when its Nature is
unfit to comply with the Excellencies of their Art; and yet they are resolved
not to be altogether unsuccessful, they will accompany it to another world;
Nay, they have sent their Poetic* fancies before it, to prepare an Elysium, to
furnish it with Grotto's, with shady Groves, and Rivers; They have designed it
an Eternal business, to repeat a past fidelity, and the Triumphs of mortal
incounters; They have put it into the Arms of a perpetual Spring of Beauty,
leaned it on a fragrant bosom, and under the influence of bright and shining
Eyes; wherein so sweet a recess, it must entertain it self for ever with
repeating its humane Atchievments; yer if it find these Pleasures too luscious,
they will permit it that varity in Heaven, which they allowed on Earth; They
have formed it assignations in withered hollow Trees, and weary Traverses in
Sooty Regions, They can imagine a perfect tranquillity in nothing, and have
framed their Elysium according to the Color and Figure of its Atoms; which
they esteem a happy thought, since it would dull so vigorous a Passion to be
confined to one enjoyment: It would be tired with sitting for ever still; and
therefore they resolve it shall be perplexed in innumerable Labyrinths, that it
shall grow Melancholy, and delight to behold the purple Current of a Wound,
that it shall encounter the Specter of jealousy, and fright it self with its
own shadow, that it shall Tilt in Tournaments of fancy, overthrow Rivals, and
win Garlands: Thus have the Poets ploted an Immortal business to themselves in
the managements of Love, But yet they will not leave its languishing Affairs
upon Earth, though they accompany its lofty Genius to Elysium; yet they will
not quit its Earthly part, whilst it rots in dirty Actions, they will force a
freshness from that withered Trunk, and persuade the world, that it is still as
lovely, and as charming; as in all the vivacity and sweetness of its Life: But
it is high time to leave them, when they grow so Extravagant. Thus Sir, have I
given you a Prospect of the Poetic Image, which you will find very unlike to
that which has the ascendant of Marriage: The busy world has all along lain
below this Romantic Passion, and would have nothing to do with its Chimera's:
Sometimes it received a wound from those Fantasms; But it endeavored to cure
it as fast as it could: They have often made it propositions for a Commerce,
but they were always strange and extravagant: Sometimes they were too rude and
simple, and of a Melancholy below its active Affairs: Otherwhile they were too
Heroic, and flew above their humility. Its reality was too sordid, and its
imbelishments altogether useless and Romantic; It therefore with great
justice, excluded them all from its conversation, and took those Idea's that
were the product of Actions, and not of the Brain; It entertained nothing above
its Affairs, and preserved those benefits in vigorous Actions, whilst it
refused to refine them by idle Harangues; It saw too plainly, in other
concernments, that their imbelished Theories had ruined their plactice, and
therefore would not admit of the leisure to be flourisht and extolled; It
despised Artful and fine Records, whilst it only valued an active and vigorous
tradition; which it has conveyed to this Age, in spite of all the attempts
have been made upon it; and if it must be its Doom to suffer now, it will not
only fall a Victime to the injustice and sottishness of barbarous men, but
stand a mighty instance of the approaching Catastrophe of the world; which will
even before its dissolution, grow too like that Chaos it must be at last;
whilst all its virtue and glory will be darkened, and grow a place frequented
only by a savage appetite, in all its horrid shapes, a youthful Virtue must
Traverse it with abhorrency, whilst it incounters so many frightful
representations of vice, and the Ghosts of murdered Honors, and it must at the
same time preserve it self from the Cyrcean Poetic Note, whose harmonious
blandishments will lead it upon the Precipices of ruin and dishonor, and are
the great procures of the Prey for monstrous vices. And thus that frame which
began with innocence and Marriage, will end with Crimes, and with the contempt
of it, it rose with peaceful and amicable virtue; but must fall with cruel and
warring vices, and those Flames in which it shall suffer, will like burning
Glasses, be a mirror to show the monstrous attempts of this Age; The Atheist
must behold with horror a confutation of his bold Philosophy, in the Period of
that world, to which he had given so fantastic a beginning, and the Poet, will
with the same surprise, see it the Stage of that Tragedy, that will outdo all
the dolours of his Dramatick fancy.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 49. l. 1. for errous r. errors. p, 51. l. 6. for our to r. to our. p.
52. l. 10. for oppeared r. appeared. p. 58. l. 16. or presidid r. presided. p.
65. l. 4. for feeting r. fleeting. p. 66. l. 1. for insensible r. insensibly.
p. 98. l. 1. for assented r* assaulted. p. 124. l. 10. for Rialdty r. Ribaldry.
p. 131. l. 9. for have the most r. have most.


