Reflections UPON THE NEW TEST, AND The REPLY Thereto WITH A LETTER OF Sir
FRANCIS WALSINGHAM's, Concerning the PENAL LAWS Made in the REIGN of Queen
ELIZABETH.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCLXXXVII.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE New Test, AND The REPLY thereto.
THE design of the Test is to attack the Church of England's Loyalty, and the
substance of it is, That she owns the King Supreme Head in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, that she began under Ed. 6. and at his Death endeavored to set up a
Brat of her own, and exclude Queen Mary the only Legitimate, because she was a
Catholic; after her Death Queen Elizabeth, a known Bastard, raised this Church
again to support the weakness of her Title, and no sooner was this Church under
her reestablished, than those Cannibal Laws were Enacted of Hanging the
Priests of the living God, together with other penal Laws; that she Murdered
the Queen of Scots, who was the undoubted Heir to the Crown, that to Charles I.
this Church was faithful, but on the other hand, to force an Universal
Uniformity to her Liturgy, etc. was the occasion of that War, and she now
refuses to repeal the Test, and penal Laws; that the King will no longer trust
her, and that she should learn obedience from her Catholic Neighbors. Thus
far the Test.

To this is replied, That the Church of England does own the Kings Supremacy;
and therefore thinks her self more Loyal than the Romanists, who rob the King
of that part of his Prerogative, that after Ed. 6. Death, the Kingdom was
divided about the Title to the Crown; some for Queen Mary, some for Lady Jane,
and Protestants on both sides, and while the Title was to them dubious, neither
party could be charged with Disloyalty: That if Queen Eliz. was a known
Bastard, the Romanists were the disloyal Party in setting her upon the Throne,
and excluding the lawful Heir, which they did by a Popish Parliament, sitting
at Queen Mary's Death, so that it appeared by their own Parliament, that Mary
Queen of Scots was not lawful Heir, and therefore it could be no disloyalty in
Executing her for Treason. That 'twas not the Church of Englands Ambition from
whence that War in Charles I. time ensued, but from the division the Romanists
had wickedly made amongst Protestants, by one called Faithful Commin, and
others of the Fraternity; then the Author recriminates, shows it to be the
declared opinion of the Church of Rome, that she has power to Depose Princes,
and gives several instances where very often they have put that opinion into
practice. Thus far the Replyer.

The Replyer, though he has sufficiently answered the Pamphlet; yet since
Loyalty is almost the only thing, which at this time recommends us to our
Princes's Favor; he might, and ought to have given a more ample account of our
Fidelity to Princes: I shall now therefore take both the Test and the Reply
into particular Examination, and show the defects of both.

But, first, I would willingly know, what prospect the Author of the Test could
have by publishing such a Pamphlet? Was it to oblige his Party by drawing us
out to expose both their Principles and Practices in point of Civil Obedience?
which may be with as great ease justly done, as we can through off that malicious
and false charge of his; or was it to oblige the King by blowing up these Fears
and Jealousies, which his Majesty, a gracious Father of his Country, has used
means to allay: His Majesty tells us we are Loyal, and assures us of his
Protection, the Test tells us, we are Snakes in his Bosom, and the King will
not protect us: for my part, let this Fellow stare and brazen as he pleases, I
shall believe the King, whatever he would have us think of him.

When so heavy a charge was laid upon our Church, me thinks in reason the
Author should have showed the World what Convocation, or at least what private
Doctor of our Communion ever acknowledged it as a Principle of our Church, that
disobedience to the supreme Magistrate, was upon any score whatsoever
allowable, that is, that we might refuse both active and passive obedience: for
else, admit he could instance, that some of our Communion have acted
Disloyally, it proves no more, than that some who have in outward appearance
professed themselves to be with us, were not really so, nor did keep up to the
Principles of our Church. What Is more common than to see a Romanist drunk upon
a Fasting Day, but unless I hear them justify the thing as allowable, shall I
reason from their bare practice, that their Church allows Debauchery upon those
days she has pointed out for Mortification. Wherefore the Tests absolute
silence herein demonstrates, either that he is a great Dunce at Argument, or
that there is no such thing to be found in our Principles, no, not from the
Testimony of any single Doctor. And of this defect the Replyer takes no notice.

The Members of the Church of England, says the Test, were faithful to Charles
I. but on the other hand their ambition to force Uniformity, etc. was cause of
the ensuing War. He means, if to the purpose, That an ambition to force an
Uniformity in Religion, is Disloyalty; which is a most admirable Discovery!
especially since the Church of Rome can so easily clear her self from the guilt
of that Ambition. If what he alleges were true, his Reprehension is just like
an old Drunkard in a drunken Fit railing against Drunkenness. But the Replyer
has showed him a more probable and natural cause of that War, and has well
referred to that Book of Foxes and Firebrarnds, which will give a reasonable
Enquirer full satisfaction; and further, from thence well observes what
excellent Subjects Romanists make to Protestant Kings. We are not now to be
surpised with their Tests, and suchlike Pamphlets; we are sensible the
glorious Luster of the Church of England does so offend and dazzle their weak
Eyes, that it must be darkened, though the Fog be raised from Hell; and
therefore thus goes on the Test: After Edward the Sixth's death, Protestants
endeavored to set up a Brat of their own to exclude Queen Mary, because she
was a Catholic, at whose death Queen Elizabeth raised this Church to support
the weakness of her Title; and then they Murdered the Queen of Scots, who was
the undoubted Heir to the Crown.

A Brat, to exclude Queen Mary, because a Catholic: Nay, we were more wicked
than this: for we set this Brat up too, to exclude Queen Elizabeth, because she
was a Protestant: for in excluding one, we excluded both, And if we thought we
had power to pull down, and put up, as the Popes assume, why did we not as well
put up Elizabeth as Lady Jane? The Index Expurgatorius has not yet done the
honor of a Visit to our Modern Histories, and therefore in them we find, that
by a Cabal only of some of King Edward' s Council, he was prevailed upon by
his last Will, and Letters Patent, to settle the Crown upon the Lady Jane.
This by the Procurers of the Settlement, was declared to the People, and she
was proclaimed Queen. Queen Mary also she puts up her Title. Upon this the
Kingdom was in a general distraction; but the greatest part of Protestants were
with Queen Mary, and 'twas through their means she ever reached the Throne. But
I shall forbear mentioning how nobly she rewarded their Services; it is enough
to my purpose, to prove they were Protestants, and that they were so, is clear,
because the Protestant Party were so considerable in the Kingdom at that time,
that they might have carried whatsoever Interest they had espoused: But it
appears further by the Queens promise at that time to her Army, which was, That
she would never alter the Religion established by Edward the Sixth; and 'twas
very likely she should think to engage a Popish Army by a Promise never to
alter the Protestant Religion. This then is the truth of the Case: The Lady
Jane was put up by a small designing Party, who had got several ignorant people
to believe that the deceased King had made her a good Title; but the body of
Protestants were faithful to Queen Mary, and forced her way to the Crown. To
whom succeeded Queen Elizabeth, whom this modest Gentleman honors with the
Title of Known Bastard. If it be so, yet these things fall out a little
unhappily: for the Protestants set up the Legitimate Queen Mary; and as the
Replyer truly observes, The Members of a Popish Parliament, setting at Queen
Mary' s death, were the first that moved in proclaiming the Known Bastard Queen
Eliz. Thus it is taking it for granted what he affirms; but now for truth: By
regular proceedings in this Kingdom, Katherine Mother of Queen Mary, and Hen.
8. were divorced a vinculo Matrimonii, then he takes to Wise Ann B. of whom is
born Q. Eliz. This Divorce was just, or not; if just, there is no question of Q.
Eliz. Legitimation; if not just, it must be either because there is no Power in
this Kingdom to determine in such cases, or that in this they had not justly
determined. If these cases are not determinable here, they must be determined
by a Foreign Jurisdiction, or nowhere; and to Appeal to a Foreign
Jurisdiction, in any case, is a Praemunire, by a Statute made in Popish times.
That they made a just Determination, they have the warrant of most of the
Universities beyond Sea, for whose Opinions H. 8. sent; and the perpetual
standing Law of the Nation, which in this case was always judged to be grounded
upon the Law of God: for which, see Harrison and Dr. Burnwell's use in Lord
Vaughan's Reports. Now let the Reader judge: But why should we be forced to
dispute this matter, when by Act of Parliament tricess. quin. H. 8. it is settled
that both Mary and Elizabeth shall inherit? What more then had we to do, but to
pay our Obedience to our Lawmakers? which I hope will something excuse us, if
'twere true, as it is not, that Mary Queen of Scots, before that Act, had right
to be Successor to our Queen Mary: But the Test will have the Queen of Scots
Title preferable; yet has not so much as endeavored to give us a reason for
that opinion: To this his Magisterial Affirmation we oppose; first, The
Arguments already offered for Queen Elizabeth's Legitimation: Secondly, The Act
of Parliament, just before mentioned: Thirdly, As the Replyer has urged, the
unanimous Opinion of a Popish Parliament, sitting at Queen Mary's Death; and
indeed he might have said, the unanimous consent of the whole Nation? For I
defy this Test Writer to produce, one that publicly dissented to proclaim
Queen Elizabeth: So universally then was her Title allowed, and her Person
esteemed. I have yet this further reason, That at Queen Mary's Death, the Queen
of Scots did not so much as put in any Claim to the Crown; but on the contrary,
in the first of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, there was a very indearing, and
Sisterly Correspondence between the two Queens, every Week Letters of Kindness,
and Civility passed, which was very unlike the carriage of Competitours for a
Crown; of the truth of this, any one will be satisfied, that so much as looks
into the Memoires of Sir James Melvill, the Queen of Scots great Minister.

But if after all this, you will have it that this Queen did pretend to the
Crown; then you have given a very good reason for her Execution; if she did
not, then certainly 'twas possible for her to be guilty of Crimes deserving
Death: Wherefore, if we are chargable for that Action, it is our Justice, not
our Loyalty, must receive the blemish: But to excuse our selves herein, let it
be considered. That when the Queen of Scots was forced by her own Subjects, to
fly to England for Protection, she was received by Queen Elizabeth, and her
Council, with intention to restore her to her Crown, and Country, as is evident
by two Papers; one is the Advice Sir Henry Mildmay gave about it; the other, a
Letter of the Earl of Leicester's to the Earl of Sussex; both which may be seen
copied immediately from the Originals in Dr. Burnet's Hist. Reformation. And it
cannot be supposed, that 'twas for nothing that our Queen's intentions received
this turn: The Queen of Scots officious Friends had a great mind to see an end
of Elizabeth's Reign, nor did they leave any thing unattempted to effect it,
either by secret Attempts, or public Rebellions; the Queen suspected from
whence all this came, and at last was satisfied, when she sound the Queen of
Scots own hand to a Letter wrote to Babington and Ballard about their Plot; and
then our Queen thought 'twas high time, both for the safety of her self, and
the Kingdom, to bring the Queen of Scots to her Trial, upon which she was found
guilty of Treason.

I shall now sum up this matter. Under Edward you say we first began, during
whose Reign you have nothing to say, as to the point of Loyalty, against us:
and I have fully proved we brought Queen Mary his Successor to the Throne. To
her Successor Queen Eliz. you your self own we were a Prop, and we did indeed
help to defeat the disloyal attempts of Romanists against her. I have proved
that Mary Queen of Scots was not deprived of any present Right, and of a future
Right she might be deprived, without any Act of Disloyalty. Under King James,
Elizabeth's Successor, the Test does not so much as affirm we were disloyal:
To King Charles the First, King James's Successor, our Author acknowledges we
were faithful in all his Troubles: Nor does he in the least blame us in Charles
the Second's time. Thus, without the least appearance of Disloyalty, have we
brought our selves to this present King, who has seen our forwardness to be as
Loyal to him as to his Predecessors: It Is well known what sort of a Lower
House that was which brought in the Bill of Exclusion; but when it came to the
Lords House, (from whence the Popish Lords were excluded) they showed their
Fidelity by throwing it out. How readily, at Monmouth's appearance did the
Parliament protest to stand by the King, and how freely did diverse Protestant
Gentlemen venture themselves in the Kings Cause, and this they must always upon
occasion do, if they measure their actions either by the Principles, or
Practices of our Church.

Our Author therefore is a great Friend to the King, in calling us to learn of
our Catholic Neighbors, which is to debauch this good Principle; and I shall
expose to the World some of the Lessons they would teach us: at our entrance we
must learn that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (which is a glorious part of the
Kings Prerogative) belongs to the Pope; so strongly does the Test fancy, that
their Church of right assumes this Power; that he ridicules the contrary
Opinion, as a particular Revelation to the Church of England. In answer to
this, the Replyer has well referred to Dr. Barrow, and Lord Cook, but because
some may not have these Books, I shall give one or two plain instances: Greg.
1. 15. Ep. 11. 56. does allege diverse Laws of diverse Emperors, concerning
Ecclesiastical affairs, as obligatory Rules of practice; and diverse Laws
concerning things Ecclesiastical, made by the Emperor, are extant in the Codes
of Theodosius and Justinian. The Christian Emperors took upon them to depose
Bishops and Popes, (tho since the Popes are even with them) Constantius
banished Pope Liberius, and put another in his room: Otho put out John the
Twelfth, Justinian deposed Pope Silverius, and banished Pope Vigilius; and the
same Emperor prescribed Conditions and Qualifications concerning the
Ordination of Bishops; and subjoyns, Si quis autem citra memora tam
observationem Episcopus ordinetur, jubemus hunc omnibus modis Episcopatu
depelli. Justin. Novel. 123. Ca. 1. But if any Bishop be Ordained without using
our forementioned constitution, we Command, that by all means he be removed
from his Bishopric. Omnes, says Leo 1. to Theodocius the Emperor. Partiam
Ecclesiae nostrarum, omnes mansuetudini vestrae cum gemitibus and Lacrymis
supplicant Sacerdotes, ut generalem Synodum jubeatis intra Italiam celebrari:
Leo 1. Ep. 42. nor was this power usurped by the Emperors, as sometimes loyal
Catholics pretend. No, quite contrary, Semper fuit Orthodoxis, and piis
Imperatoribus, etc. This is what the Pious and Orthodox Emperors did. Justin
in Syn. 5. Collat. 1. p. 209. but what is yet higher, Haec (says the Council of
Arles) Domino Imperatori praesentanda decrevimus, poscentes ejus Clementiam ut
si quid hic minus est, ejus prudentia Suppleatur, si quid secus quam se ratio
habet, ejus judicio emendetur; si quid rationabiliter taxatum est, ejus
adjutario divina opitulante Clementia perficiatur. Council. Arel. 4. ca. 26.
Ann. 813. Sub Carolo M. These things we have Decreed to be presented to our
Lord the Emperor, desiring his Clemency, that if any thing be defective, it
may be supplied by his Prudence; if any thing be unreasonable, it may be
corrected by his Judgment; if any thing be reasonably ordered, it may, by his
help, the Divine Grace assisting, be Perfected. So that it seems
notwithstanding the blustering the Popes make now, it was a revelation to all
the Churches of the World in the first Ages, that the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was in the Temporal Magistrate. This also have Papist Kings and
their Lay-Subjects justified in England. Xenulphus by his Letters Pattents, did
grant to Abbot Ruchin, Quod praedictus Ruchinus, etc. That the said Ruchin
should for ever be free from all Episcopal Jurisdiction whatsoever. This was
pretty well for a Temporal Prince without Ecclesiastical Power; and to
demonstrate that he was not singular in assuming this Power, this Charter was
confirmed by King Edwin, and pleaded the 1 H. 7. and allowed and continued till
the dissolution of that Abbey in H. 8. When H. 1. founded the Abbey of Reading,
the Charter run thus: Henricus Dei, etc. Statuimus tam Ecclesiasticae quam
Regiae prospectu potestatis, ut, etc. We appoint as well by our Ecclesiastical
as Temporal Power, etc. In the 25 Ed. 1. by a Parliament held at Carlisle, it
is declared, That the Holy Church of England was founded in the State of
Prelacy by the King, and his Progenitors, the Popes Usurpations complained on;
and enacted they should not be suffered. By a Statute made 16 R. 2. ca. 5. It
is declared, That the Crown of England is Subject to none but God. Of this
opinion was Bracton, who wrote in H. 3d's time, Omnis, says he, quidem sub Rege
and ipse sub nullo, sed tantum sab Deo. Lib. 1. ca 8. nu. 5. Every one owes
Obedience to the King, but he to none but GOD. I must give one instance more,
if it be only to show the nature of a Begotted Papist. Ed. 3. much concerned,
that his Subjects would deprive him of his right by Appeals to Rome, by a
Statute it was made a Praemunire, the hearty Begots did so rail and curse at
the Executors of that Law, that the Kingdom was obliged to make a Statute on
purpose to prevent such defamations. But when after many struglings the Popes
did begin to finger this Jurisdiction, as if poisoned with their touch, it
immediately swells to such a prodigious magnitude, as quite to over shadow, and
crush all other Powers; now it is Hunc unum, etc. Pope Pius the Fifth, in his
Bull that Excommunicates Queen Elizabeth, Him alone (says he, meaning himself)
he made Prince over all People, and all Kingdoms, to pluck up, destroy,
scatter, consume, plant and build, etc. So that Temporal Princes are but as so
many Pagents to be set up, and pulled down as the Infallible Head shall see
cause; and an Emperor is no more to a Pope now, than a Pope was to an Emperor
heretofore: To prove this, the Replyer has given several very true examples, to
which I shall add, That in King John's time, the Loyal Popish Barons were in
open Rebellion; The Pope instead of using his pretended Authority to reduce
them to their Allegiance, he takes advantage of the King's necessities, and
will by no means permit him to nominate a Successor to the deceased Archbishop
of Canterbury; but for so doing the King was Excommunicated; this, with the
King of France his appearing in the Pope's defense, encouraged the Barons to
continue in their Rebellion, and to calumniate their King with the most
approbrious language, as Infidel, etc. that no King ever endured the like;
finding himself on all hands thus oppressed, his submission to the Pope was
absolutely necessary, and therefore now tenders him his Crown, which the Pope
by his Legate received; upon this (and all but reason) the King is Absolved,
but still the hardy Barons refuse their duty, till the King had ratified their
Privileges, etc. which he was forced upon his Oath to agree to. But the King
being now a good Child of the Church, is discharged by the Pope from these
condescentions to the Barons, the whole compact is declared Null, the King's
Oath Dispensed with, and the Barons Excommunicated till they submitted to the
Sentence. This is something like, to whip and stroke them by turns! Thus the
Heaven Door is opened and shut in a breath, that no man alive can be sure
whether he shall go in or out.

When Queen Elizabeth came to this Crown, Sir Edward Karn was by her direction
to inform the Pope thereof, who made this humble and obliging return, That
England was held in fee of the Apostolic See, that she could not succeed,
being illegitimate; nor could be contradict the Declarations made in that
matter by his Predecessors, Clement the Seventh and Paul the Third: He said it
was great boldness in her to assume to the Crown without his consent or which
in Reason she deserved no favor at his hands; yet if she would renounce her
Pretensions, and refer her self wholly to him, he would show a fatherly
affection to her, and do every thing for her that could consist with the
Dignity of Apostolic See; so far the Servus Servorum. In this haughty speech
it is not so much the Queens illegitimation is complained on, as her great
boldness to assume the Crown without consent of his Holiness: for if she will
at last submit, here is great hopes for her, notwithstanding her Illegitimation.
But his Successor Pius IV. leaves her in no manner of doubt. He sent one
Parpalia to her to promise, that if she would join her self to the Sea of Rome,
he would disannul the Sentence against her Mother's Marriage, etc. Hence I
observe, that the Popes what e're they said, did not believe Q. Eliz.
Illegitimate, or else what is worse, they declare that for their Temporal
Interest they would make that lawful which the Law of God had made unlawful for
if Q. Eliz. was a Bastard, she was so, because Hen. the 8's. Marriage with his
first Wife was lawful, who was living when Eliz. was born of another woman; if
so, nothing is plainer than that this second Marriage was against the Law of
God. But it is all nothing, there had been no harm done, no rightful heir
disseiz'd, no title of a Bastard set up, had Eliz. made her acknowledgments
that England was held in fee of the Apostolic See. So speaks the Shepherd, and
the sheep know his voice.

In fine, the King deposing Doctrine is not only practiced by one or two wicked
Infallible Heads; but it is the settled Doctrine of their Church; it is that their
Lateran Council, and a long Succession of Popes have declared, and that which
their best men have employed their Pens to maintain; for which see the Bishop
of Lincoln's Brutum Fulmen.

Whether the Test or Penal Laws ought to be abolished is a subject more proper
for the King and Parliament than us: But when you call us Cannibals for making
them, you speak like a man of sense, and ought to be considered, tho the
Replier has taken but little notice of it: their words are these And they
(meaning the Church of England) no sooner found themselves re-establisht, then
they Enacted those bloody Cannibal Laws to hang, draw and quarter the Priests
of the living God: Imprisonment, Banishments, and Confiscation of Goods were
the moderate Church of England's Laws, etc. No sooner, he says, were they
reestablisht, etc. Now one would think by this representation, that this Law he
so abhors, was made the next hour after the Queen was proclaimed, and yet in
truth, 'twas the 27 year of the Queens Reign before this Law had birth. Well,
but if Cannibals they must be, who Enact Sanguinary Laws against those that
purely dissent in matters of Religion, I know no Church deserves the honor of
that title but yours: your lenity toward Heretics (and all are Heretics with
you, that are not of your faith) is so universally known, that it is in vain to
trouble the world with particular instances: however if you please, you may
look in Qu. Mary's days, look into the Bishop of Lincoln's Book, and when you
are looking, look into France: But why do I cry look here, or look there, when
it is impossible to look amiss? However, since to recriminate is no
justification, and since we hear that you pride your selves to talk of our
Penal Laws, endeavoring to render us extremely cruel, I should apply my self
particularly to show the reasons and steps of those Laws, did I not find it
incomparably well done to my hands by a Letter, which it is great pity the whole
Kingdom has not read; and tho it be long, yet there being not a sentence in it
not full of weight, I will for the public good transcribe the whole, which
fully vindicates us in this point.

Sir Fr. Walsingham's Letter to Monsieur Critoy, concerning the Queens
proceedings against both Papists and Puritans.
SIR,
WHereas you desire to be advertised, touching the proceedings here in
Ecclesiastical Causes, because you seem to note in them some Inconstancy and
Variation, as if we inclined sometimes to one side, and sometimes to another;
and as if that Clemency and Lenity were not used of late, that was used in the
beginning: All which you imputed to your own superficial Understanding of the
Affairs of this State, having, notwithstanding Her Majesty's doing in singular
Reverence, as the real Pledges which She has given unto the World of her
Sincerity in Religion, and of the Wisdom in Government, well meriteth.

I am glad of this occasion, to import that little I know in that Matter unto
you, both for your own Satisfaction, and to the end you may make use thereof,
toward any that shall not be so modestly and reasonably minded, as you are.

I find Her Majesty's Proceedings to have been grounded upon two Principles.

The one, that Consciences are not to be forced, but to be won and reduced by
force of Truth, with aid of time, and use of good means of Instructions and
Persuasion.

The other, That Causes of Consciences, when they exceed their bounds, and grow
to be matter of Faction, lose their Nature, and that Sovereign Princes ought
distinctly to punish their Practices and Contempt, tho colored with the
Pretenses of Conscience and Religion.

According to these Principles, Her Majesty coming to the Crown, utterly
disliking the Tyranny of Rome, which had used by Terror and Rigor to settle
Commandments of men's Faith and Consciences; Tho as a Princess of great Wisdom
and Magnanimity, She suffered but the Exercise of one Religion; yet her
Proceedings toward the Papist, was with great Lenity, expecting the good
Effects which time might work in them; and therefore Her Majesty revived not
the Laws made in the 28th and 35th of her Fathers Reign, whereby the Oath of
Supremacy might have been offered at the Kings pleasure to any Subject, so he
kept his Conscience, never so modestly to himself, and the refusal to take the
same Oath, without further Circumstances, was made Treason. But contrariwise,
Her Majesty not liking to make Windows into Men's hearts and secret thoughts,
except the abundance of them did over flow into overt and express Acts or
Affirmations, tempered Her Law so as it restrains every manifest Disobedience
in impugning and impeaching; advisedly and maliciously, Her Majesty's Supreme
Power, maintaining and entolling a Foreign Jurisdiction: And as for the Oath,
it was altered by Her Majesty, into a more grateful Form: the hardness of the
name and Appestation of Supreme Head, was removed, and the Penalty of the
refusal thereof, turned only to disablement to take any Promotion, or to
exercise any charge, and yet of Liberty to be reinvested therein, if any man
should accept thereof, during his Life. But after, when Pius Quintus
Excommunicated Her Majesty, and the Bulls of Excommunication were published in
London, whereby Her Majesty was in a sort prescribed, and that thereupon as
upon a principal motive or preparative, followed the Rebellion in the North,
yet because the ill humors of the Realm were by that Rebellion partly purged,
and that she feared at that time no foreign Invasion, and much less the
attempt of any within the Realm, not backed by some potent power and succor
from without, she contented her self to make a Law against that special Case of
bringing in, and publishing any Bulls, or the like Instruments; whereunto was
added a Prohibition, upon pain, not of Treason, but of an inferior degree of
punishment, against the bringing of the Agnus Dei's, and such other Merchandise
of Rome, as are all known, not to be any essential part of the Romanists
Religion, but only to be used in practice, as Love tokens, to inchant and
bewitch the peoples affections, from their Allegiance to their natural
Sovereign. In all other points her Majesty continued her former Lenity: But
when about the Twentieth year of her Reign, she had discovered in the King of
Spain an intention to invade her Dominions; and that a principal part of the
Plot, was to prepare a Party within the Realm, that might adhere to the
Forreigner; and that the Seminaries began to blossom, and to send forth daily
Priests, and Professed men, who should by Vow taken at Shrift, reconcile her
Subjects from their Obedience, yea, and hind many of them to attempt against
her Majesty's Sacred Person; and that, by the Poison which they spread, the
humors of most Papists were altered, and that they were no more Papist in
Conscience, and of Softness, but Papist in Pactiou: Then were there new Laws
made, for the punishment of such as should submit themselves to such
reconcilements, or renunciation of Obedience. And because it was a Treason
carried in the Clouds, and in wonderful secrecy, and come seldom to light, and
that there was no presuspicion thereof so great, as the Recusancy to come to
Divine Service, because it was set down by their Decrees, that to come to
Church before Reconciliation, was to live in Schism; but to come to Church
after reconcilement, was absolutely heretical and damnable. Therefore there
were added Laws containing punishment Pecuniary, viz. such as might not enforce
Consciences, but to infeeble and impoverish the means of those about whom it
rests indifferent and ambiguous, whether they were reconciled or not: And
when, notwithstanding all this provision, the Poison was dispersed so secretly,
as that there was no means to stay it, I ut by restraining the Merchants that
brought it in: Then Lastly, there was added a Law, whereby such seditious
Priests, of new Erection, were exiled; and those that were at that time within
the Land, shipped over, and so commanded to keep hence upon pain of Treason.
This has been the proceeding, tho intermingled, not only with sundry Examples
of her Majesty's Grace toward such as in her wisdom she knew to be Papist in
Conscience, and not Faction and Singularity, but also with extraordinary
mitigation toward the offenders in the highest Degree, committed by Law, if
they would but protest, that if in Case this Realm should be invaded with a
Foreign Army, by the Popes's authority, for the Catholic Cause, as they term
it, they would take part with her Majesty, and not adhere to her Enemies.

For the other Party, which have been offensive to the State, though in another
Degree, which named themselves Reformers, and we commonly call Puritans, this
has been the proceeding toward them. A great while, when they inveighed
against such abuses in the Church, as Pluralities, Non-residence, and the like;
their Zeal was not Condemned, only their Violence was sometimes Censured. When
they refused the use of some Ceremonies and Rites, as Superstitions, they were
tolerated with much Connivency and Gentleness; yea, when thy called in
Question the Superiority of Bishops, and pretended to a Democracy in the
Church; yet, their Propositious were here considered, and by contrary Writings
debated and discussed; yet all this while, it was perceived that their Course
was dangerous, and very popular: As, because Papistry was odious, therefore it
was ever in their Mouths, that they sought to Purge the Church from the
Relics of Papistry; a thing acceptable to the People, who love ever to run
from one extreme to another.

Because multitudes of Rogues, and Poverty, was an Eyesore, and a dislike to
every man; therefore they put into the Peoples head, that if Discipline were
planted, there should be no Vagabonds nor Beggars, a thing very plausible: And
in like manner they promised the People, many of the impossible wonders of
their Discipline; besides, they opened to the People a way to Government, by
their Consistory and Presbytery; a thing, though in consequence no less
prejudicial to the Liberties of private men, than to the Sovereignty of
Princes, yet in first show very Popular. Nevertheless this, except it were some
few that entered into extreme contempt, was born with, because they pretended in
Dutiful manner to make Propositions; and to leave it to the Providence of God,
and the Authority of the Magistrate. But now of late years, when there issued
from them that affirmed, the consent of the Magistrate was not to be attended;
when under pretense of a Confession, to avoid Slander and Imputations, they
combined themselves by Classes and Subscriptions, when they descended into that
vile and base means of defacing the Government of the Church by ridiculous
Pasquils; when they began to make many Subjects in doubt to take Oaths, which
is one of the Fundamental parts of Justice in this Land; and in all places,
when they began both to vaunt of their strength, and number of their Partisans
and Followers, and to use Comminations that their Cause would prevail, tho
uproar and Violence; then it appeared to be no more: Zeal, no more Conscience,
but mere Faction and Division: and therefore, though the State were compelled
to hold somewhat a harder hand to restrain them than before, yet was it with as
great moderation, as the Peace of the State or Church could permit. And
therefore, Sir, to conclude, consider uprightly of these matters, and you shall
see Her Majesty is no more a Temporizer in Religion: It is not the success
Abroad, nor the Change of Servants here at home, can alter her; only as the
things themselves alter, She applied her Religious Wisdom to Methods
correspondent unto them; still retaining the Two Rules before mentioned, in
dealing tenderly with Consciences, and yet in discovering Faction from
Conscience, and Softness from Singularity. Farewell.

Your loving Friend, F. Walsingham.

FINIS.

