A Letter presented unto Alderman Fouke, Lord Mayor of London, from the two
Witnesses and Prisoners of Jesus Christ, in Newgate, as an eternal witness unto
him; with a Declaration unto the Recorder Steel, and the Lord Chief Justice
Rowles, with the whole Bench and Jury; and in general unto all Civil
Magistrates and Juries in the World. John Reeve, and Lodowick Muggleton, the
two last Spiritual Witnesses, and true Prophets, and only Ministers of the
everlasting gospel, by Commission from the holy Spirit of the true God, the
Lord Jesus Christ, God and man, in one Person, blessed to all Eternity.
BY virtue of our Commission received by voice of words from the glorious mouth
of the only true God upon the Throne of Glory the Lord Jesus Christ; we shall
make manifest unto men, what the foundation is of the power of the Civil
Magistrate, and that he ought not to meddle with spiritual things, which God
has reserved himself, not allowing any man to touch them upon pain of eternal
death, but those only by him anointed for that purpose: First, we declare that
the Scriptures were given by Inspiration of the Holy Spirit; therefore except
the Mag^strates were inspired with the same Spirit as those that speak the
Scriptures, they ought not to judge any man by them, but ought rather to yield
obedience themselves unto Holy Writ, or they must perish to eternity. Again, we
declare from the Holy Spirit, that since God became flesh, no Civil Magistrate
has any Authority from above to be the Judge of any man's faith, because it is
a spiritual invisible gift from God, that gives a man assurance of everlasting
life; but the Magistrates Authority is to judge the Civil Laws of the Land,
which is grounded only upon Reason; but the things of Eternity are from God,
who is from Eternity to Eternity, therefore Faith is the Evidence of things
hoped for, and reason is judge of things that are visible: As for you that are
skilful in the Law of Reason, as soon as you hear an Action to be a breach of
the Law, you understand presently what punishment belongs to the Fact;
therefore the Apostle says, the Magistrate is the Minister of God for good to
them that do well, and a terror to the evil doer: Again, we declare from the
Lord, that no Magistrate by his power from the Law of Reason, ought to usurp
the Law of Faith into his Authority, because the Law of Reason is utterly
ignorant of the Law of Faith, the one being carnal, and the other being
spiritual; therefore what Magistrate soever takes upon him to be the judge of
us, who are the Messengers of Faith in the true God, they are enemies to the
Lord Jesus Christ, and shall surely perish to eternity: Again, from the Lord
Jesus we forewarn you that are Magistrates, before it is too late, that you
tread not in the Lord Mayors steps, presumptuously to take upon you to judge
this Commission of the two edged sword of God put into our mouths, which if you
are left so to do, it will cut you in sunder from the presence of our God to
all eternity; for our God is a consuming fire, who did pronounce us cursed to
eternity, had we not obeyed his voice; therefore we perfectly know who ever is
left great or small to speak evil of this Commission, which God has put unto
us, by calling it blasphemy, delusion, a devil, or lie, in so doing, they have
sinned against the Holy Ghost, and must perish soul and body from the presence
of our God, Elect men, and Angels, to all eternity; for God has chosen us two
only, and has put the two edged sword of his Spirit into our mouths, as
beforesaid, that whom we are made to pronounce blessed, are blessed to
eternity, and whom we are made to pronounce cursed, are cursed to eternity, and
this power no mortal can take out of our hands, neither will our God any more
give such power unto men whilst this World endures: Therefore you that are
Judges of this Earth, be wise and learned and meddle with those things which
you know in this World only, and call not your God to account at your bar; for
who ever arraigneth a Prophet at his Judgment Seat, it is all one as
arraigning his God, for a Prophet comes in the name and power of his God;
therefore he that despises the Prophet, despises him that sent him. Again, we
declare from the Lord Jesus, if any Magistrate pretends to be a Preacher of the
Gospel, be having no Commission from our God so to do; if he preach any more
after we forbid him, then we have full power to pronounce the sentence of
eternal death upon him, and it is so unrevocable: Again, we declare from the
Lord Jesus, that the cause why so many Magistrates and Ministers must suffer
the vengeance of eternal death, is because with one consent they fight against
the true Messengers of God, with the temporal Law invested upon them by men:
Again, woe would have been unto us, if we had come in our own name; but we
know that God sent us, as sure as he sent Moses, the Prophets, and the
Apostles, and that great Authority, as to be Judges of blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, we only are invested withal: Wherefore you Magistrates that are
not yet under this sentence of eternal death from the Lord Jesus, our counsel
is, if you desire blessedness in the life to come, that you would not meddle to
be the Judges of spiritual things, knowing you have no Commission from the
Lord; remember the counsel of Caiphas the High Priest, if it be possible, and
prevent the Lord Mayors eternal curse.

SIR,
THe 15. of September, 1653. you may remember by virtue of your Warrant we
were brought before you, not being guilty of the breach of any civil Law, the
man Jesus our only God, elect men and Angels, will bear us witness too: but we
being accused of words only in relation to a Commission received from our God
by voice from Heaven; it was your pleasure to commit us unto Newgate, as the
only offenders in this world, notwithstanding I gave you a full account of the
Lord Jesus speaking unto me by voice of words, three morning together,
commanding me to deliver this his wonderful and strange message unto
Magistrates, Ministers, and people, concerning his blessing or cursing them to
eternity, according to their obedience or disobedience unto this dreadful
message of the Lord: and Sir, you may remember that I told you, that I desired
the Lord Jesus that I might not be his messenger of such sharp tidings unto
men; and but for this my desire the Lord Jesus by voice of words did say, that
my body should be my hell, and my spirit should be the Devil that should
torment to eternity, if I did not obey his command, in declaring his pleasure
unto men: and who was I, poor mortal clay, that I should withstand the great
and glorious Potter of Heaven and Earth, the Lord Jesus Christ my God alone
blessed to all eternity?

Again, Sir, You may remember, you did ask us diverse questions concerning our
God, and our answer un^o some of your questions were judged as blasphemy; but
we told you that you had no Commission from our God to be the judge of
spiritual things, that are eternal in the world to come; but you by Commission
from m^n are the judge of temporal things, only in this perising world: and we
only are the judges, of spiritual things, that are eternal in the world to
come, by a Commission from the Throne of Glory, from the glorious mouth of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Sir, if there were any spark of heavenly light shining in your understanding
from the Holy Spirit of Christ Jesus, then you should know in due time that
what I have been made to write in this paper, is as true as God is Truth; but
now it is too late, your time is past, because my God has no delight in your
person, therefore he has left you, as he did King Saul, to commit that
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, or Spirit that sent us: First, by
your denying the Lord Jesus to be the only God: Secondly, you may remember,
like a cursed Blasphemer against the Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man in one
person blessed to eternity, you denied that ever the eternal God became flesh,
man, or creature, or that God is in the person of a man at this time in Heaven
or Glory.

Again, Sir, you may remember when you were questioned by us, what your God
was; your answer was, that he is an infinite Spirit; but you could not describe
him to be in any essential form or person: Truly I do not marvel at your
ignorance, because you are the seed of the Serpent Reprobate Angel that was
cast out of Heaven, reserved in Chains of darkness or unbelief, that you may
worship a God of words only, instead of the true personal God, until the
Judgment of the great Day: my God, the Man Jesus in glory has given you your
portion already, the penny of this world, your souls chief delight: make your
life that is put a moment as pleasant as possible you can, seeing it is all the
Heaven you are like to enjoy, as sure as there is a God.

Again, Sir, this I know, by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that in the world
to come, you shall never see the glorious face of our God the Man Jesus:
because before many Witnesses you said that God has no face at all. Sir, once
more unto your own person, because you have blasphemed against the glorious
person of our only wise God the Man Jesus, and against the Sacred Scriptures
that renders all glory from elect men and Angels to him alone, both in Heaven
and in Earth, and against the Holy Spirit that sent us, and for your unjust
committing of us unto your prison of Hell, to satisfy the malice of cursed
accusers of your spirit, that you might prevent (if it were possible) the very
purpose of God: Wherefore in obedience unto our Commission received from the
Holy Spirit, from the presence of our only wise God and everlasting Father, the
Man Jesus, elect men and Angels, we pronounce you cursed and dammed soul and
body to eternity: this is a seal unto you from the Lord Jesus, and a warning
unto all persecuting spirits; until the great and notable Day of the eternal
vengeance of my God, then shall your own body be your prison of Hell, and your
Angelical proud and envious spirit shall be the Devil that shall burn within
your body more intolerable then any natural fire in this World, and your body
shall burn more fiery then any natural brimstone; your spirit and body being
barred close prisoners together in utter darkness, never seeing the face of
God, men, or Angels, nor your own face or person, for everlasting, as aforesaid.

FINIS.


