Directions Left by a GENTLEMAN TO HIS SONNS: FOR THE Improvement Of Barren and
Heathy LAND, IN ENGLAND and WALES.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, MDCLXX.

TO HIS Honored Friend, KENRICKE EYTON Esquire, Of the Inner Temple.
SIR,
I Have (upon assurance of your excellent Candor) presumed to invite you from
your more fertile Studies to the Barren Heath, where you will find the Air
wholesome, though the Soil be sterril. Frustra salubris est locus, ubi peritur
fame. Frustra fertilis ubi non licet vivere. The richest Seats are not healthy:
Health and Wealth seldom meet in the same Place. The Design of the ensuing
Directions is to render the Barren Earth fruitful, and provide for the Profit
as well as Pleasure of those whose Lot is fallen into a Heathy Ground. The wise
God, who justly Cursed the Earth for Man's sake, has yet left Means of
Redemption by the Sweat of his Brow, and Labor of his Hand. Humane Industry,
with the Blessing of God upon it, will faecundate the Earth, which Man's sin
made unfruitful. The admirable Production of Art out of Natures dull and
unweildy Womb are the Subject of many Discourses; and the new Experiments of
every Day allure the Ingenious to renewed Essays. Amongst the various Trials
of this kind, none is more profitable than this of Improving Barren Ground, and
the good Husbandry to turn the parched Desert into a Fruitful Field, and to
render the unfruitful Hills as pleasant Valleys. The Pleasure of this may be
more than guessed at, Illi etiam praedivites, qui ab aratro accersebantur, ut
consules fierent Voluptatis causa sterile atque aestuosum Pupiniae solum
versabant.
when we consider the Prisca Gens, and Greatest Men of the first Age were
enamoured with Agriculture: When Quintius Cincinnatus, and Marcus Curious, after
they Triumphed in the Field, ran hastily to their Farms, and counted themselves
more Happy, and no less Honorable, with the Mattock and Spade in their Hand, as
when they had the Sword and Scepter. The many Encomia of Poets, Orators, etc.
of the Blessedness of a Rural Life, and pleasant Divertisements of a little
well til'd Spot, confirm this.

Now Sir, if you shall please to remit a little while your graver Studies, lay
by your Plouden and consult Columella, and shall honor these Directions with
your experiment, you will find sensible Arguments of Profit and Pleasure,
strong enough to oblige you to spend a good part of your Vacation on the Plow.

I have been emboldned to prefix your Worthy Name to this Little Book, knowing
you a Person able to Protect and Vindicate both It and the Author, and one who
will Pardon the little Errors that your piercing Eye shall find, and will
accept kindly of the Endeavors for Public Good, of

Hackney, April 14th. 1670. Sir, Your Obliged Friend, Gabriel Reeve.

To my Sons.
My Sons,
I Leave this short ensueing treatise to you as a Legacy, if I shall not live
my self, to show you (what is therein written) by examples, which I know
instruct far more, than precepts, yet precepts from a dying Father instructing
of his children what he has seen, and known, and received credible information
of, from witnesses free from all exceptions, should make such impression on
them, as at least to believe, their Father writ what he thought was true, and
therefore suppose those things worthy to be put in practice by them which he
himself would have done if it had pleased God to have granted him life, and
liberty; especially seeing the matter it self which is required by him to be
done is in show so profitable, and so easy to be effected, and with so little
charge, considering the great gain that is proposed by it, as that not any
thing can restrain a rational man from trial thereof, but not giving credit to
the relator.

The whole discourse shows you how to improve Barren and Heathy Land, and how
to raise more than ordinary profit thereof, by such ways, and means, as are
not practiced in England, but as commonly in some parts of Brabant, and
Flanders, as the Husbandry of Wheat, and Rye is here. By that means you may
nobly augment your estates, and will receive so much the more profit and
praise, by how much with more industry and diligence you govern your affairs,
and will not only be imitated but also honored by your neighbors, when they
shall see your labors prosper so far, as to convert Barren and Heathy Ground,
left unhusbanded for many ages, into as commodious arrable Land, rich Pastures,
and Meadows, as any be in the Kingdom. And certainly that man is wrthy of
praise, and honor, who being possessor of a large and barren demeans,
constrains it by his labor and industry to produce extraordinary fruit, which
redounds not only to his own particular profit, but also to the public benefit.

Cato says, it is a great shame for a man not to leave his inheritance greater
to his Successors than he received it from his predecessors; and that he
despises the liberalities of God, who by sloathfulness loses that which his
land may bring forth, as not seeming willing to reap the fruits which God has
offered him. Nay he threatens the crime of high treason to those that do not
augment their Patrimony, so much, as the increase surmounts the principal. It
is a thing much celebrated by antiquity, and thought the noblest way, togather
wealth, for to employ ones Wit and Money, upon his Land, and by that means to
augment his estate.

If you observe the common course of things you will find, that husbandry is
the end which men of all estates in the World do point at.

For to what purpose do Soldiers, Scholars, Lawyers, Merchants, and Men of
all Occupations and Trades, toil and labor with great affection but to get
Money, and with that Money when they have gotten it, to purchase Land, and to
what end do they buy that Land, but to receive the fruits of it to live, and
how shall one receive the fruits of it but by his own husbandry, or by a
Farmers: So that it appears by degrees, that what course soever a man takes in
this World, at last he comes to husbandry, which is the most common occupation
amongst men, the most natural, and holy, being commanded by the mouth of God to
our first Fathers.

There is care and diligence requisite in husbandry, as there is in all the
actions of the World; and therefore as a Captain has a Lieutenant to command
his Soldiers in his absence, or for his ease, so must you provide some honest
able man to whom you will commit the execution of such things as you your
selves cannot do without too much labor, whereof you must often take an
account, and confer with him as occasion shall require about your business,
that nothing may be left undone, for want of providence; to such a man you must
give good wages, with intent to advance your own gain, and take the more ease
by reason of his honesty and knowledge.

You will find this Husbandry (after you have once had experience of it) to be
very pleasing to you, and so exceeding profitable, that it will make you
diligent: For no man of any art or science, except an Alchemist, ever pretended
so much gain any other way as you shall see demonstrated in this ensueing
treatise.

The Usurer doubles but his principal with Interest upon Interest in seven
years, but by this little treatise you shall learn how to do more than treble
your principal within the compass of one year.

And you shall see how an industrious man in Brabant and Flanders would bring
five hundred acres of barren and heathy Land, that was not worth at the most
above fifty pound a year to be worth seven thousand pound a year, in less time
than seven years. I know no reason why the like may not be done in England, for
we are under as good a Climate, as they are; Our Heathy Land that is neither
Sand, nor Loam, is as good a soil, as their barren ground is; We have not only
Dung to enrich our Land, but also Lime, and Marle, of which they know not the
use (where they sow their gainfullest Commodities mentioned in this ensueing
treatise,) nor of any other Manure, but only dung. In fine, I am certain there
is none of their Commodities but grow in England as they do in Brabant, and
Flanders, but ours are not of the same kind as theirs, nor put to the same use,
what cannot be vented at home may as well be vented from hence into Holland, as
the like commodities are from Flanders thither. I will say no more of this
subject in the preface, only it remains to tell you that you must not expect
either Eloquence, or Method in this ensueing treatise, but a true story plainly
set forth in the last Will and Testament of your Father, which he would have
you execute; but before all things to be sure you lay the foundation of your
husbandry, upon the blessing of Almighty God, continually imploring his Divine
Aid, and assistance in all your labors; for it is God that gives the increase,
and believing this, as the quintescence and soul of husbandry, Primum quaerite
Regnum Dei, et postea haec omnia adjicientur Vobis. These things being briefly
premised, I will leave the rest to this short ensueing Treatise, and commit you
all with a Fathers blessing to the protection and providence of Almighty God.

(...) Directions FOR IMPROVEMENT Of Barren and Heathy Land.
IT is a certain thing that the chiefest and fundamentallest point in
husbandry, is to understand the nature and condition of the Lands that one
would till, and sow it with such seeds as it will produce, either naturally or
by art, which may turn a man to the greatest profit, and advantage.

I did think I had understood that point (when I went out of England) after 30
years experience in husbandry, and having improved my Land as much as any man
in this Kingdom had done both by Water, and Fire.

But after I had been a while in Brabant and Flanders, I found I was to learn a
new lesson in point of husbandry, for that the barrenest, heathy and sandy
Lands in those Countries did produce richer Commodities by an ordinary way of
husbandry there in practice, than the strongest and richest grounds that were
in both those Countries.

When I first arrived at Dunkirk and went to Bridges, which was near forty
miles, I saw as rich a Country as ever my eyes beheld, stock't with goodly
wheat and barley, and excellent meadows and pastures; The soil began to alter
into worse midway, between Bridges and Gaunt, which were 24 English miles
asunder, and so soon as I was past Gaunt in my journey toward Antwerpe, I did
see such Land for about twenty miles together, that I cannot compare to any
ground more like than the Land by Sandy Chapel three miles distant from
Kingston upon Thaines, a great part of the highways out of the road and track
of Horses, and Carts, did bear heath, and such enclosures on the inside of the
ways which were not kept in tillage, did either produce heath or broom, of
their own natures.

The soil did not much amend until I came within two miles of Antwerpe, which
was thirty English miles from Gaunt. There I saw a goodly Marsh or feeding
ground for Cattle, which was kept with a strong bank for being overflowed by
the river of Sceld, under which notwithstanding there lay sluices to let in the
water when they pleased, and ditches were made in the Marsh to convey it back
into the River at low tides when they thought fit.

On the other side of Antwerpe was contribution land lying in Brabant, which
naturally was as barren and apt to heath as any land betwixt that City and
Gaunt: I staid not long at Antwerpe before I returned to Gaunt, and diligently
reviewing of the Country as I went back, I could find no other corn to grow
there, than rye, Oats and French wheat, which seemed a sufficient testimony to
me of the barreness of the soil, which would neither bear wheat, barley, or
Pease, and for that the former Grains did usually grow in England upon the edge
of forests and heathy grounds.

A few days after my return, I fell into discourse with a dutch Merchant then
living at Gaunt, but had lived some years in England, and told him that I did
not think all Flanders had yielded so much barren ground, as I had seen between
Gaunt, and Antwerpe.

He answered me, that that Land was the richest part of all Flanders.

I smiled to hear him say so, thinking at first he had jested, and I replied
that I believed that one acre of Land between Bridges and Dunkirk, was worth
ten acres of any land I saw there between Gaunt and Antwerpe; (excepting the
Marsh land and some little straps of Meadow by the river side) for the one did
bear goodly Wheat, Barley, and Pease, and was in many places naturally
excellent meadow and pasture, and the other would carry no other Corn but Rye,
French Wheat and oats, and would never bear any considerable grass, but turned
presently after it was laid down to heath or broom.

The Merchant told me again that their best commodities were pulled and cut
before I went that way, but he would prove that that Land did yield more profit
yearly than the best Land in Flanders, and that the Boores (for so they term
their Farmers) were richer there than in any part of the Country.

I must confess at first, I thought his discourse to be some kind of riddle,
but seeing him earnest in affirming that which seemed strange to me, I desired
him to explain himself, how it was possible, that that Land should yield more
profit than the other.

I will tell you said he the reason; why it yields more profit is, because
that Land is natural to bear Flax, (which is called the wealth of Flanders)
and one acre of good Flax is worth four or five acres of the best corn which
grows between Dunkirk and Bridges, and after the Flax is pulled, it will
presently bear a crop of turnips, which may be better worth, acre for acre,
than the best corn in the Country.

After that crop is off, about April following you may sow the same land with
Oats, and upon them Clover-grass-seed only harrowing it with bushes which will
come up after the Oats are mowed, and that year yield you a very great pasture
till Christmas; and the next year following you may cut that grass three times,
and it will every time bear such a burden, and so good to feed all sorts of
cattle, as the best meadows in the Country do not yield the like, and will
continue good four or five years together without sowing it.

After this we parted, at first I wondered much at his discourse, but much more
at the ignorance or sloathfulness of our Country, which being near to Flanders;
and many Merchants and Gentlemen traveling thither daily; none should
understand, or at least put in practice these husbandries, there being so much
barren and heathy Land in England of very little value, which might by
following their example in these husbandries be made more profitable than the
best land in this Kingdom.

I after pondered what the Merchant said, all that day and the next, and then
began to imagine with my self, what a huge improvement I might make of my own
estate, if these things were true which he had told me, and if God almighty
pleased to permit me quietly to enjoy it.

And to be further satisfied, I sent to another dutchman in the Town that had
been in England, with whom I was grown acquainted, and desired him to inform
himself from some of the Boores in the Country, whether those things the
Merchant had affirmed to me were true; he returned me an answer from three or
four whom he said he knew to be honest men and understanding in those
husbandries; that a gammet of flax, which was their acre, but somewhat more in
quantity than ours, might well produce 40 or fifty pounds worth of flax, if the
land were well dunged and husbanded, and sowed with good east-Country seed, and
that it pleased God to send convenient rain after it was sowed, and a
seasonable time till harvest; these were no other conditions, than I conceived
all other seed and grain to be subject to, either for to prove good or bad.

And for the other questions wherein I desired to be satisfied, concerning the
Turnips and Clover-grass, he told me, they did concur in all with the Merchant
without any other condition or limitation.

The Winter after, I did examine diverse persons upon like questions, which I
thought did understand that business, and found very little difference in their
relations.

And in April following, which was the chiefest time for sowing of flax and
clovergrass-seed, I did often walk into the fields, a mile or more out of the
Town, and expostulated the business with the Boores, when they were sowing of
flax and clover-grass-seed, and afterward observed that these things did
prosper very well on such ground as I conceived to be extreme barren of its own
nature.

But further to inform my self more fully what an acre of flax might be worth,
I bought an English Rod of flax when it was grown up, neither the best nor
worst, and caused it to be pulled, watered, and dressed by it self, then valued
it as flax was sold the week following in the Market at Gaunt and the seed
likewise; afterward I cast up what eight rod, which was an acre, would rise
unto according to that valuation, and I found that it came to 36 pounds 14
shillings 6 pence; and though by that rate an acre did not come to forty
pounds, yet it made me believe that an acre of good flax might be worth forty
pounds and more; for that which I tried was but indifferent flax.

I went presently afterward to Antwerpe, and saw almost every third or fourth
field by the highway-side for 25 miles together stocked with goodly flax, far
beyond that which I bought to make my trial off, whereof some was pulled, and
the rest was ready to pull.

The similitude of a great quantity of land I had in England unto theirs in
Flanders and Brabant which I saw did bear their richest commodities, and my
loss in England both of Personal and Real estate, made me enquire after all
husbandries of those Countries, of such as I conceived could any way instruct
me that I might learn something or other whereby to repair my fortunes, if
hereafter it pleased almighty God to give me leave to enjoy my own estate in
peace again.

And being one day in company of some Merchants, it happened that discourse
fell out about improvement of their barren ground, I said that I had a great
quantity of barren and heathy land in England that I thought might easily be
brought to bear flax, turnips, and clover-grass, as well as their barren lands
did in Flanders and Brabant.

To which a Merchant answered, that he would carry me to a man within three
miles of Antwerpe who had taken a Farm upon improvement, which was just such
Heathy Land as I described mine to be, for he was about five years since to
have bought it, and when he saw it all Heath he would not meddle with it, but
the Farmer had so improved it already, that he had now growing upon it a
Nursery of twelve acres of all sorts of trees, as Pear Trees, Apple Trees,
Cherry-trees, Ches-nut and Walnut-trees, Oaks, Ashes, Elms and the like, he had
there also growing both Flax, Turnips, and Clover-grass, Roman-beans, and most
sorts of Corn, and he had planted a hop-ground and an Orchard, he said he would
tell me what husbandry he used to make such a strange conversion, and that I
could not please him better than to come see it and applaud his husbandry, and
he did assure me that it was worth my Journey and to be informed from him, for
never a man in that Country could better instruct me than he, and I will (said
he) go thither with you when you please.

I thanked him very kindly for his offer, and told him I would wait upon him
thither to morrow morning, it was agreed between us, and some others that were
there said, they would wait of us both to see this wonder.

But I asked him before we parted what that taking a Farm upon improvement was
which he before did speak of, he answered, that when another had bought the
Land, this man offered more rent than he could make of it at that time, to have
a Lease for twenty one years, upon condition, that whatsoever four indifferent
persons, whereof two to be chosen by the one and two by the other, should judge
the Farm to be improved above the rent, at the end of his lease the owner was
to pay so much in value to the tenant for his improveing of it.

I told him it was a way of letting land I never knew of before, he answered it
was an ordinary way with them of letting such barren land as men could not tell
how to manage themselves.

The next day we went thither, and the first thing we saw was his Nursery of
trees which did grow and prosper very well, and he made account they would
yield him ten thousand pounds before his lease was expired, and as I remember
he valued them one with another but at two shillings a tree.

Then I saw a little close of Flax, which I esteemed to be about three English
acres, of which Flax he told me the Merchant that brought me thither before I
came from Antwerpe, that he had made one hundred and fifty pounds which was by
computation fifty pound an acre.

I also saw growing there very good turnips, and excellent clovergrass which he
valued to be then worth 12 pounds an acre.

I after saw it cutting the first day of June one thousand fix hundred fifty
four being then two foot long and very thick, and went thither again the twenty
ninth day of the same month, and saw the same grass grown up, and then cutting
again, being twenty inches long.

I saw it cutting again, in August following being then eighteen inches long, I
viewed the grounds round about and found the skirts of the closes left
unplowed, to be heath, and both he and the Merchant affirmed, all the rest
where his flax, and clover-grass grew, was heath but three years before.

I was very inquisitive of him to know what husbandry he used to the Land for
to convert it from Heath, to bear such rich commodities.

He told me, first he broke it up with a strong Teem of Horses, then plowed it
cross afterward tore of the Heath with a great Harrow, then gathered it up and
burnt it, and laid about twenty loads of dung upon an acre, and spread it upon
the land, then plowed it again, and sowed the first crop with Rye, the next
with Oats, and when he had harrowed his oats, he sowed clover-grass-seed upon
them, which he harrowed with a bundle of bushes, under his harrow, and that
came after the oats was of, to be a very good pasture before Michaelmas, and
this third year he had mowed the clover-grass thrice as I had seen, and it
would come to a very good pasture quickly to feed till Christmas, and the same
he thought he should do for three years more, but afterward the ground would
turn to an ordinary grass, he said he used his ground where his flax grew as
his other, but first again about half the quantity of dung he did at first, and
then sowed it with flax, and upon the flax, clovergass-seed, as he had done
before upon the oats: his Roman beans, his hops and orchard thrived very well,
and all with the same quantity of dung proportionably used, for there they know
no other Manure.

I asked him how he could make twelve pound of an acre of this clover-grass, He
said either by feeding Cattle or keeping Kine, or laying it for feed, after the
first out, for an acre of it being made part into Hay, and the rest fed green,
would keep four Kine Winter and Summer, and an acre laid for seed might carry
five bushels, which valued at six pence a pound came to eight pound sterling
besides the first and second cuts (...) grass, and hay, and the after-pasture:
He said the best time for sowing flax, and clover-gras-seeds was about the
beginning of April presently afer a shower of rain, some continue sowing of
flax until the end of May, and some sow after, though I know no cause to
commend their slowness in sowing of it so late.

I was not very inquisitive after his other Commodities, I saw by his Turnips
which he sowed upon his Heathy Land at his first breaking up, that he differed
in that point from all other Husbandmen in those Countries, who sowed them
immediately after Rye, or Flax, but those things are left to every ones
experience to proceed therein as he thinks best according to his own
observation.

Now what I had observed here, and between Gaunt and Antwerpe; my reason told
(...) (groundded upon some former experience) that there was no land that
naturally bore Heath, being it her of a Sandy or Loamy mould, but might by
devoushi^^ing first, which I prefer before their husbandry in Flanders,
whereunto adding some thing, or lime, or marle in fit proportion as shall be
hereafter expressed, may be made better than the best land that Flanders or
England does afford* For no man with reason can deny, but that land is best
which will bring forth such commodities as will yield money to make one
wealthy, and rich.

For though Wealth, and riches, may consist either in cattle, corn
household stuff, or plate, jewels, yet when those things are valued, we commonly
say they are worth so much money; So Regina pecunia, money is the Queen that
commands all.

Now if the same quantity of acres of poor Heathy land, by producing flax,
turnips, and clover-grass will yield more money than the rich Land which
bears Wheat, Barley, Meadow, and good pasture; then by consequence it
follows that the poor land is better than the rich.

And I suppose that they find by experience in Flanders, that their rich Land
will naturally bear those Commodities, otherwise they could not be ignorant
that they do so far exceed their best Corn, and Meadows, in matter of profit,
which appears clearly by their own valuations, for they value an acre of flax
may be worth forty or fifty pounds, an acre of Turnips worth eight or ten
pounds, an acre of clover-grass worth 10 or 12 pounds; whereas they value their
best Barley may be worth ten or twelve pounds an acre, their best Wheat may be
worth five or six pounds an acre, and their best Meadow worth four or five
pounds an acre.

Now if you compare the value of these commodities together, supposing the rich
Land will not bear the other which are the richer commodities so well as the
poor, you must needs conclude the Poorer Land to be the better.

And it is a strong argument to me, that their rich Land will not bear those
rich commodities so naturally as the Heathy and Sandy Land does, for though I
went often between Bridges and Dunkirk, which is thirty nine miles being the
richest Land in Flanders, and where there is goodly Wheat, Barley, and Meadows
as ever my eyes beheld, yet I never saw in all that ground to my remembrance
one acre of flax, turnips or clover-grass; whereas on the contrary between
Gaunt and Antwerpe which is thirty miles, and the poorest Land in all the
Country, much like Sandy-Chappel in Surrey, or some part of the Heathy Land in
Windsor Forest, I have seen many hundreds of acres of goodly flax, turnips,
and clover-grass, close by the highway side, and their corn there not any
thing but Rye, French Wheat, and Oats.

It is not only dung that causes the fertility in those barren Heathy and
Sandy Lands for to bring forth those rich commodities, but partly the nature of
those seeds which do delight to grow rather in a light and gentle Land, than in
one too stiff and heavy, though it is true that dung is of that virtue, that it
heats, fattens, sweetens and reclaims all barren grounds, and unslack't Lime
and Marle are of as great an efficacy, being proportionably tempered with earth
and ashes, and of longer continuance to enrich Land, as I will show hereafter.

But because some will say that the burning of the turf, (which we call
devonshireing,) will make the ground the worse after three years, I do most
confidently affirm upon my own experience, that with the addition of dung, or
lime, or marle, in fit proportions, that there is no such husbandry in the
world perfectly to prepare any Heathy land, and make it nourish, receive, and
ripen seeds.

For the earth is as it were renewed by the fire having no other roots in the
entrails of it, produces nothing for many years but what one sows upon it, and
shall remain vigorous enough to serve as long as one of knowledge and
understanding will desire it.

And therefore I shall advise you to prefer this husbandry upon your Heathy
land before any other, though they have no other manner to mend their land but
dung, in the barren and heathy land in Flanders and Brabant, yet they have a
very fine way in Brabant to raise a great quantity of dung, the practice
whereof may much advance the improvement of St. Leonards Forest: They that
keep sheep there upon the Heaths, houze them every night, and in the summer at
noon, first having laid three or four inches of sand at the bottom of the floor
whereon they lodge their sheep for a night or two, which tread their dung and
piss into the sand, and so daily they use more sand to be used in the same
manner, until the quantity be grown so great, that the sheep cannot
conveniently go in or out.

Then they cast that out of the house, and put in more sand, and so proceed
throughout the year, and by this means three or four hundred sheep will raise a
thousand loads of dung in a year, and eight hundred sheep, two thousand loads,
which allowing twenty loads to an acre, will dung an hundred acres yearly, and
this dung by experience does mightily improve such Heathy land as St. Leonards
is.

Besides there is marle in most parts of the forests, I account any Mine that
is free from stones, and lies so thick as it is worth the digging, and near
and convenient to carry to your land, and of a clammy substance when it is wet,
though it seem only Clay, or Loam, yet to be Marle, and very good Manure for
sandy and heathy land, be it of what color it will, as either gray, yellow, or
blue, and forty loads of it laid upon an acre in summer and presently spread,
and so let lie all winter, to incorporate with the earth, then devonshired the
next March, and spread upon the Land and sowed, will mightily improve it.

I did use six acres thus, that was nothing but heath, and had two crops of
Corn from it and the third year it came of it self to be as good grass as ever
I saw grow in any Meadow in England.

I saw another great improvement in Clement Stokes his Farm adjoining to the
Forest, he had Land that he let out two years together for twelve pence an
acre, at last he devonshired it, and caused his hills before they were burnt to
be set a just rod square one from another, and when they were burnt, he put a
peck of unslacked lime into every Hill, which being eightscore Hills upon an
acre took up just a load of lime which was forty bushels, this lime being
slacked in the Hills with the first rain was mingled together with the ashes,
and then spread upon the land, and after sowed with wheat, and brought as good
as any was in the Country, brought next year a very good crop of Oats, and the
year following came to as good Grass as any he had to his Farm.

This I hold to be the cheapest husbandry, because four or five load of Fernes
of which there is store in the Forest being cut from the beginning of July to
the middle of August, will burn off twelve loads of chalk to lime, and though
your chalk cost dear the bringing thither, yet the lime will not stand you in
twelve shillings a load, and by this way you save much carriage, and so by
consequence may compass to Manure yearly much more Land.

As for example, you carry but one load of lime to your land, whereas by the
other ways you must carry twenty loads of dung, and forty loads of Marle; so
as by the lime, if that will do as well, you may lime twenty acres as soon as
you can dung one acre, and forty acres for one with Marle.

But I advise you to make trial your selves of all these several husbandries,
and then to follow that which you find cheapest and best. I have set down at
large how I came first to know these husbandries, and how I was satisfied in
the partiuclars.

I have also set down three several ways to improve your land, now I will lay
down the charge of each in severalty, then cast up the profit from one acre to
five and twenty acres, then to fifty, and so to an hundred acres, by which it
shall appear, that by an ordinary way of husbandry according to the value which
they make of like commodities in Flanders, how that by improving a hundred
acres of Heathy land every year, as namely of St. Leonards Forest, and sowing
the seeds of Flax, Turnips, and Clover-grass; you may in 5 years improve five
hundred acres to be worth above seven thousand pounds a year, the particular
Charge of an acre of Flax is as follows.

First the devonshireing of an acre 1. l.

A Load of Lime to put into the Hills 12 s.

The Plowing and Harrowing of an acre 6 s.

Three bushels of Flax-seed at 13 s. 4 d. the bushel 2 l.

The Weeding of an acre 1 s.

Pulling and Binding an acre 10 s.

Graffing the seed from the Flax 6 s.

Watering, Drying, swingling, and Beating the Flax of 9 hundred Weight upon an
acre 4 l. 10 s.

This is the utttermost charge that I could learn. So the whole comes to 9 l.
5 s.

Nine hundred pound Weight of flax upon an acre at 8 stivers the pound, which
was an ordinary price in Gaunt when I was there, together with the seed, valued
to be worth 40 l.

Now if you deduct 15 s. an acre more toward charges, or losses the account
being already 10 l. an acre, short of the value of their best flax, yet remains
above all charges clear for an acre 750 l.

By the same account you will be at 500 l. charge for 50 acres, and then
receive at 40 l. an acre 2000. but clear above all charges but 1500 l.

The like account of 1000 l. charge for 100 acres, you receive upon the account
of 40 l. an acre 4000 l. but clear above all charges 3000 l.

This thousand pound charge for 100 acres is only supposed in case you lay out
all the charge before you receive any money for part of your flax, but before
you are out 700 l. some money will come in for flax continually, so as indeed
you shall not go out above seven hundred pound at all in stock, and after the
first years profit is come in, you cannot account that you are out any thing
from your purse, because you have your full stock again, and three thousand
pound more.

But this is not all the profit you are to expect from your hundred acres the
first year, for after the flax is pulled which will be either in July or
August, the same land may be sowed with turnips and prove according to the
Flanders account worth eight pound an acre over and above all charges, so
twenty five acres comes to two hundred pounds, fifty acres to four hundred
pounds and a hundred acres to eight hundred pounds.

They sow in Flanders but two pound and a half of Turnep-seed upon an acre,
which was worth when I was there, but twelve pence, and plow it once after the
flax is pulled, they harrow it, and weed it if there be cause, and that is all
their charge concerning that business.

Both these crops are sowed, ripe and ready to be pulled within eight months;
that is between the beginning of April and the end of November, so the profit
of one hundred acres the first year comes to besides all charges and this
account unto 3800 l.

And the hundred pounds allowed for charges may very well come into your purse
again within the other four months.

When the turnips are pulled I would have the same hundred acres made ready
again to be sowed with Clover-grass-seed alone, about the beginning of April
then next following (therein altering the custom of Brabant and Flanders, which
is to sow it immediately either with or after corn, for I found by experience
in Hereford-shire, that it will thrive much better the first year and turn to
more profit alone, than a crop of Oats, and it sowed together will do.

The charge of an acre is first plowing and harrowing about 5 s.

Ten pound of seed as it cost me at Antwerpe 1645 but 6 d. a pound 5 s.

Cutting the grass twice making the Hay and threshing out the seed about 1 l.
10 s.

So the whole charge is 2 l.

The second years Profit.
Which being deducted, there remains clear for one acre according to the
Brabant and Flanders account 10 l. which for 25 acres comes to 250 l. for 50
acres to 500 l. and for 100 acres to 1000 l. Then 100 acres more must be
devonshired, and sowed with flax, and turnips as is before expressed which with
Gods Blessing may yield the like profit 3800 l. whereto the 100 l.
abovementioned for clover-grass being added, the whole profit of the second
years from 200 acres amounts to 4800 l.

The third years Profit.
Then the last 100 acres sowed with flax, and turnips, must be sowed as before
with clover-grass-seed, which according to the former account coming to 1000 l.
and 100 acres more devonshired as formerly, and sowed with flax and turnips
yielding the like profit of 3800 l. as is before specified, adding thereunto
the 200 acres of clover-grass; the whole profit of the third year is 5800 l.

The fourth years Profit.
That tbe 100 acres sowed before with flax, and turnips, must be sowed as
formerly with clover grass-seeds, which yielding 1000 l. according to the
former accounts, and another hundred acres devonshired as formerly and sowed
with flax and turnips, and yielding like profit of 3800 l. and adding thereunto
the 300 acres formerly sowed with clover-grass-seed makes the whole profit of
the fourth year 6800 l.

The fifth years Profit.
Then the last 100 acres sowed with flax and turnips must be sowed as before
with clover-grass-seed, which yielding like profit of 1000 l. and another 100
acres devonshired as formerly and sowed with flax and turnips, yielding the
like profit of 3800 l. thereto adding the 400 acres formerly sowed with
clover-grass-seed, makes the whole profit of the fifth year 7800 l.

Thus have I plainly showed what I promised in my Preface, that was, how an
industrious man in Brabant and Flanders would convert 500 acres of barren and
heathy Land from little value, in 5 years to be worth above 7000 l. a year.

You see you have better means to mend your Land than they have, your Land
lies in a manner under the same Climate, for Chicester and Mecklin are in one
degree, the soil is much alike as I have showed; you may have as good a vent
for your commodities as they have for theirs, if you please, and therefore I do
not know what reason can hinder you from putting these things in practice, you
may continue this yearly profit of 7800 l. a year upon this 500 acres, if you
will, by liming, dunging, or marling, and devonshireing: again the first 100
acres laid down with clover-grass, and sowing it with flax and turnips, as
before, and so go round with every hundred acres as formerly in its course, but
having great store of barren and heathy ground, you were better improve that,
and let the clover-grass continue as long as it will.

And if after 5 years continuance it turns to a mingled grass, yet that will
be as good as most meadows and pastures that I know in England, for it turns
commonly from a red hony-suckle to a white, which we repute the sweetest grass,
although it does not carry the greater burden, and I am persuaded it will
continue longer, if it be kept for seed, and cut but twice, whereas they
commonly cut it thrice a year in Flanders, always in the Sap, which will kill
Fern.

Now I will show you how they vent those Commodities, that you may learn the
better how to vent yours.

First they make great store of Linen themselves, and sell it most for London;
what they make not in Cloth they have a Market of every Thursday at a place
called S. Nicholas, almost midway between Antwerpe and Gaunt, whither Merchants
come of purpose to buy it, and send it into Holland, and there sell it at dear
rates.

I met with a Linnen-Draper of London when I was at Gaunt, and questioning him
what vent there was for flax at London, he told me that before these
troublesome times, if I had had a very great quantity he could have helped me to
chapmen to have bought it off at dearer rates at London, than usually they sold
it at in Flanders, for he said he did believe there was no less than 100000 l.
worth of flax brought yearly into England from foreign parts, a great part
whereof to his knowledge, was sent from London into Lancashire, there made into
Cloth, and afterward brought back in cloth and sold in London, and if times
grew peaceable again in England, he told me I need not doubt the venting of
more flax at London than ever I would have to sell. And two honest English
Merchants of my acquaintance did assure me, that if I could not sell my flax at
London to my content, they would transport it for me into Holland, where I
might sell it dearer than they sold their flax in Flanders; for Merchants
usually sent for flax out of Flanders, and sold it again in Holland at dearer
rates than they paid for it there.

But if you find that these commodities thrive with you, and you grow rich by
them, I would advise you to send for some workmen out of Flanders that
understand the Manufacture of linen cloth, and make your own flax in
linen cloth, you cannot choose but gain by it exceedingly, when you are
aforehand with the world, if they live by it who fetch it first from London
into Lancashire by land being made in cloth, recarry it up; and besides, you
shall do a charitable deed, by bringing in that Manufacture into the Kingdom,
for it keeps a very great number of poor women and children at work in Flanders
and Holland, that otherwise would not have means to live; So by this way you
should be sure to vent your flax, and withal procure a public benefit to the
Kingdom.

The Husbandry of Turnips is as common between Gaunt and Antwerpe as that of
flax, for as there is more flax sowed there, than of any other grain or corn,
so commonly after the flax is pulled, immediately they sow Turnips, and
presently after, their Rye, what they do not eat themselves, they give unto
their cattle, they will feed Oxen, and Kine, as fat as Hay and Oats, the roots
being clean washed, and then roots and leaves being put into a trough, and
there stamped together with a spitter, and after boiled in water and given to
Kine, will make them abound with milk, yet grow so fat withal, that you would
wonder at it.

The only difficulty is to make your cattle eat them at first, but breed them
up by hand, as they do there: others do the same already; in many parts in
England they will take turnips and eat, or any other thing that you will give
them.

To encourage you the more to sow turnips, I will demonstrate to you what an
acre of them transplanted may be worth by calculation, as they are sold in
London. They commonly there sell four or five turnips in a bunch for a penny. A
rod square being sixteen foot and a half may bear 1089 turnips, being set at
half a foot distance the one from the other.

Now suppose that 1000 comes to good, and five sold for a penny; then a rod of
them amounts to 16 s. 8 d. and an acre of them being eightscore rod by the same
account comes to above 30 l. and therefore certainly 100 acres sowed, may very
well be valued at 8 l. an acre one with another, when you have brought your
Cattle to eat them as theirs do.

I told you before how in Brabant and Flanders they made twelve pound an acre
of their Clover-grass, either by feeding Cattle, keeping Kine, or by the seed,
which commonly increasing to 5 bushels upon an acre, was worth 8 l. when it was
sold but at 6 d. a pound, but being sold for 2 s. a pound (which price I my
self now paid for it) the value of the seed quadruples from 8 l. to 32 l. an
acre, and the man that sold me seed this year for 2 s. a pound, desires to buy
all that I can spare the next year at the same price, if you get but into the
best kind of those they use in Flanders.

For when your neighbors see your labors thrive and prosper, so far as to
convert your land which bore nothing but Heath for many ages, first into
excellent flax, then into such delicate turnips as they never saw before, or
tasted, and to end with such Clover-grass, as they will admire, when they once
see your Crops, and somewhat understand that you do reap some benefit by them,
they will come to you as to an Oracle to ask your Counsel, and be instructed,
and desire it from you as a favor at first, to buy your seed at any reasonable
price.

But if you find that you have more seed of flax and turnips, (if you will let
them grow to seed) than you can vent, you must then set up either a Water-mill,
or Windmill, as they do in Flanders, and make them into Oil, both which seeds
make good Oil, which you may be sure to sell in London at good rates.

And for your Clover-grass-seed, if you find you cannot sell it to your
content, you may choose whether you will let it grow to seed or not, and if you
do not let it grow to seed, you may cut it once more in a year than otherwise
you could do.

You must change your flax-seed, though never so good at first, after four
years, the other seeds do not so much require it.

I doubt not but these things will seem as strange to you at first, as they did
to me, and therefore I desire you nothing, but to try what I propose, upon such
profitable terms, as no man that is well in his wits, but will venture at them,
being laid down so plainly to you, as a child may understand them.

You may observe that flax, turnips, and clover-grass already grow in England,
but there is a much difference between what grows there and here, as is
between the same thing which grows in a garden, and that which grows wild
in the fields.

To prevent what may be strange or troublesome to you at first, for want of
knowledge, I would advise you to send to Tom or Robin to Gaunt, where, by means
of some of their old acquaintance there, they may provide you a servant who
understands these several Husbandries, as well as any of ours do the Husbandry
in getting Corn, and by observing of his practice, you your selves, or whom you
will appoint, may be sufficiently instructed in a year or two; so far as to
command such things to be done by others, a^ are not fit and necessary to be
done by you your selves.

Besides the excessive profit you will reap by sowing those Commodities,
imagine what a pleasure it will be to your eyes and scent, to see the Russet
Heath turned into Greenest Grass, which does produce most sweet and pleasant
smelling Hony-suckles, and what praise and reputation you will gain by your
examples, first introducing that into your Country, which being followed by
others, must needs redound unto the general benefit of the whole Kingdom.

I do by my Will Command you for to execute no more, than what I would my self
to morrow put in practice if I had liberty.

You should then learn these things I have set down by examples, which now I am
enforced to leave you as a Fathers Precepts, and with a Fathers blessing to you
all, desiring God Almighty for to guide you, and direct you in all your
Actions, I will leave you to His Divine Protection and Providence.

To make Rushie Ground bear Grass.
BReak the Rushie ground, and rake the roots and the Rushes together, and burn
them or carry them away, then spread upon that Ground turf, ashes, or pigeon
dung, chalk, or lime, according to your ground; try of every one of these upon
a little plot of your ground, you may use other ashes, marle, or dung for
experiences; and that which you find does kill the Rushes and the other Weeds
best, use it: you are to make gutturs, or drayns to carry away the water from
the ground, you may destroy Rushes, or Fern, if you will but cut, and mow them
down, in the beginning of June, and so use to do it two or three years in June.

For Planting and Sowing Walnuts.
In the season when they are full ripe, on the trees, a few days before they
will fall, as near as can be guessed, let them be gathered or beaten of; and in
the green husk, or without it, put them into good ordinary earth, in a barrel,
or basket: so let them continue until the beginning of March following; as soon
as that month begins, get as much warm milk from the Cows, as will steep them,
twenty four hours after they are steeped, set them in ground well dug, and
judged natural for such fruit, with their little end, or their prickled sharp
end upwards about three or four inches deep in the earth, and not one of twenty
will fail, as has appeared by experience.

This may make dry Walnuts also prove trees. The Nuts used as abovesaid, as far
as may be: Set them near one foot asunder, and in a right line, to weed them,
the Walnut breeds good timber, good shadow, good smell, good fruit. At four
years growth transplant them.

Note that Clover-grass-seed will be ripe about a Month after it appears in the
husk.

FINIS.

